evaporated and dried. The ash was taken in each case, and the alkalinity 
 of the water-soluble ash was calculated as potash (K_{2}O). The quantity 
 of water which could be poured off was with the German lentils, half as 
 much more than the original weight of the pulse; not quite as much could 
 be poured off the others. 

 The loss on soaking in cold water, unless the water is preserved, is seen 
 to be considerable. The split lentils, having had the protecting skin 
 removed, lose most. In every case the ash contained a good deal of 
 phosphate and lime. Potatoes are rich in important potash salts; by 
 boiling a large quantity is lost, by steaming less and by baking in the 
 skins, scarcely any. The flavour is also much better after baking. 
  
 The usual addition of common salt (sodium-chloride) to boiled potatoes is
no proper substitute for the loss of their natural saline constituents. 
 Natural and properly cooked foods are so rich in sodium chloride and other 
 salts that the addition of common salt is unnecessary. An excess of the 
 latter excites thirst and spoils the natural flavour of the food. It is 
 the custom, especially in restaurants, to add a large quantity of salt to 
 pulse, savoury food, potatoes and soups. Bakers  '   brown bread is usually 
 very salt, and sometimes white is also. In some persons much salt causes 
 irritation of the skin, and the writer has knowledge of the salt food of 
 vegetarian restaurants causing or increasing dandruff. As a rule, fondness 
 for salt is an acquired taste, and after its discontinuance for a time, 
 food thus flavoured becomes unpalatable. 
  
 Organic Compounds are formed by living organisms (a few can also be 
 produced by chemical means). They are entirely decomposed by combustion. 
  
 The Non-Nitrogenous Organic Compounds are commonly called carbon 
 compounds or heat-producers, but these terms are also descriptive of the 
 nitrogenous compounds. These contain carbon, hydrogen and oxygen only, and 
 furnish by their oxidation or combustion in the body the necessary heat, 
 muscular and nervous energy. The final product of their combustion is
containing none. A moderate quantity favours digestion and the bodily 
 health. In cold weather more should be taken. In the Arctic regions the 
 Esquimaux consume enormous quantities. Nuts are generally rich in oil. 
 Oatmeal contains more than any of the other cereals (27 analyses gave from 
 8 to 12.3 per cent.) 
  
 The most esteemed and dearest oil is Almond. What is called Peach-kernel 
 oil (Oleum Amygdalæ Persicæ), but which in commerce includes the oil 
 obtained from plum and apricot stones, is almost as tasteless and useful, 
 whilst it is considerably cheaper. It is a very agreeable and useful food. 
 It is often added to, as an adulterant, or substituted for the true Almond 
 oil. The best qualities of Olive oil are much esteemed, though they are 
 not as agreeable to English taste as the oil previously mentioned. The 
 best qualities are termed Virgin, Extra Sublime and Sublime. Any that has 
 been exposed for more than a short time to the light and heat of a shop 
 window should be rejected, as the flavour is affected. It should be kept 
 in a cool place. Not only does it vary much in freedom from acid and 
 rancidity, but is frequently adulterated. Two other cheaper oils deserve 
 mention. The "cold-drawn" Arachis oil (pea-nut or earth-nut oil) has a 
 pleasant flavour, resembling that of kidney beans. The "cold-drawn" Sesamé
oil has an agreeable taste, and is considered equal to Olive oil for 
 edible purposes. The best qualities are rather difficult to obtain; those 
 usually sold being much inferior to Peach-kernel and Olive oils. 
 Cotton-seed oil is the cheapest of the edible ones. Salad oil, not sold 
 under any descriptive name, is usually refined Cotton-seed oil, with 
 perhaps a little Olive oil to impart a richer flavour. 
  
 The solid fats sold as butter and lard substitutes, consist of deodorised 
 cocoanut oil, and they are excellent for cooking purposes. It is claimed 
 that biscuits, &c., made from them may be kept for a much longer period, 
 without showing any trace of rancidity, than if butter or lard had been 
 used. They are also to be had agreeably flavoured by admixture with 
 almond, walnut, &c., "cream." 
  
 The better quality oils are quite as wholesome as the best fresh butter, 
 and better than most butter as sold. Bread can be dipped into the oil, or 
 a little solid vegetable fat spread on it. The author prefers to pour a 
 little Peach-kernel oil upon some ground walnut kernels (or other ground 
 nuts in themselves rich in oil), mix with a knife to a suitable 
 consistency and spread upon the bread. Pine-kernels are very oily, and can
be used in pastry in the place of butter or lard. 
  
 Whenever oils are mentioned, without a prefix, the fixed or fatty oils are 
 always understood. The volatile or essential oils are a distinct class. 
 Occasionally, the fixed oils are called hydrocarbons, but hydrocarbon 
 oils are quite different and consist of carbon and hydrogen alone. Of 
 these, petroleum is incapable of digestion, whilst others are poisonous. 
  
 Vegetable Acids are composed of the same three elements and undergo 
 combustion into the same compounds as the carbohydrates. They rouse the 
 appetite, stimulate digestion, and finally form carbonates in combination 
 with the alkalies, thus increasing the alkalinity of the blood. The chief 
 vegetable acids are: malic acid, in the apple, pear, cherry, &c.; citric 
 acid, in the lemon, lime, orange, gooseberry, cranberry, strawberry, 
 raspberry, &c.; tartaric acid, in the grape, pineapple, &c. 
  
 Some place these under Class III. or food adjuncts. Oxalic acid (except 
 when in the insoluble state of calcium oxalate), and several other acids 
 are poisonous. 
 
noticed that the wheatmeal bread is not made from the same flour as the 
 whole-meal. D.--B. Dyer, average of 19 fine and coarse oatmeals. S, from 
 U.S. Cons. Reports, 1899. C.--A.H. Church. The walnut kernels are in the 
 dried condition as purchased; originally of the same composition as shewn 
 in the fresh kernels. C.D.--Cavendish or Figi variety of banana, analysis 
 by D.W.M. Doherty, N.S. Wales. P.--A. Petermann, U.S. Cons. Banana flour, 
 _musca paradisiaca_ variety. This is widely used in Central America. The 
 flour is from the unripe fruit, and contains starch 45.7 per cent.; on 
 ripening the starch is converted into sugar. K.--Konig, mean of 90 
 analysis. Milk:--Average of many thousand analyses of the pure. 
 Butter.--Made without salt. L, from the "Lancet," 1903, I, p. 72. Oysters 
 at 2/6 per dozen. The 8.09 per cent. includes 0.91 glycogen (animal 
 starch). The shell was of course excluded, also the liquid in the shell. 
 Apples.--The refuse includes seeds, skin, &c., and such edible portion as 
 is wasted in cutting them away; the analysis was made on the rest. 
  
 Cookery.--Flesh is easier to digest raw. A few, on the advice of their 
 doctors, eat minced raw flesh, raw beef juice and even fresh warm blood. 
 Such practice is abhorrent to every person of refinement. Cooking lessens 
 the offensive appearance and qualities of flesh and changes the flavour;
thorough cooking also destroys any parasites that may be present. Raw 
 flesh is more stimulating to the animal passions, and excites ferocity in 
 both man and animals. If the old argument was valid, that as flesh is much 
 nearer in composition and quality to our own flesh and tissues, it is 
 therefore our best food, we do wrong in coagulating the albuminoids, 
 hardening the muscle substance and scorching it by cooking. 
  
 Fruits when ripe and in good condition are best eaten raw; cooking spoils 
 the flavour. Food requiring mastication and encouraging insalivation is 
 the best. Food is frequently made too sloppy or liquid, and is eaten too 
 hot, thus favouring indigestion and decay of the teeth. The cereals and 
 pulses can only with difficulty be eaten raw. When cooked in water the 
 starch granules swell and break up, the plant cells are ruptured, the 
 fibres are separated and the nutritious matter rendered easy of digestion. 
 The flavour is greatly improved. Cooking increases our range and variety 
 of food. The civilised races use it to excess and over-season their 
 dishes, favouring over-eating. 
  
 If baking powders are used they should only be of the best makes. They 
 should be composed of sodium bicarbonate and tartaric acid, in such
much pleasanter, more satisfying, and better flavoured than white; indeed, 
 the latter is described as insipid. Most bakers  '   bread is of 
 unsatisfactory quality. Flour and bread contain very little fat, the 
 absence of which is considered a defect. This is remedied by the addition 
 of butter, fat or oil, or by nuts, &c., which are rich in oil. These may 
 be mixed with the flour prior to cooking, or used afterwards. 
  
 Oats contain a substance called avenin, apparently an alkaloid, which has 
 an irritating action; the quantity is variable. It is to this that the 
 so-called heating effect of oatmeal on some persons is due. 
  
 Prepared Cereals or Breakfast Foods.--Analyses were made of 34 of these 
 cereal preparations by Weems and Ellis (Iowa State College Agricultural 
 Bulletin, 1904). They report that the foods possess no nutritive value in 
 excess of ordinary food materials; that the claim made for many 
 pre-digested foods are valueless, and no reliance can be placed on the 
 statement that they are remedies for any disease. 
  
 Oatmeal and other cereals are sold in packets as being partially cooked. 
 We do not doubt that they have been subjected to a dry heat, but this has
scarcely any effect on their starch and other constituents. The difference 
 is a mechanical one. In rolled oats the grains are so cracked and broken, 
 that on boiling with water, the water readily penetrates and more quickly 
 cooks them throughout. There are other prepared cereal foods, but we doubt 
 whether they are thoroughly cooked after the short boiling directed on the 
 labels. They are a great convenience where it is difficult to get the time 
 necessary for cooking the ordinary cereals. Coarsely ground wheat is too 
 irritating when made into porridge, but there are some granulated wheats 
 sold in packets, which are quite suitable. The Ralston breakfast food is 
 excellent. They are rich in the phosphates and salts, found in the outer 
 part of the grain. One cereal preparation called Grape Nuts, has had its 
 starch converted into maltose and dextrin (maltose being a sugar), by a 
 scientific application of the diastase of the grain. It is consequently 
 easier of digestion and requires no cooking. It is beneficial for some 
 forms of indigestion. There are several competing foods of less merit, the 
 starch being less perfectly changed; one at least of which is 
 objectionably salt. Properly cooked starch is readily digested by healthy 
 persons, and for them malted food is of no special value. 
  
 Pulse, or Legumes, includes haricots and other beans, peas and lentils.
The proteid contained is that variety known as legumin, which is either 
 the same, or is closely allied, to the casein of milk and cheese. Pulse is 
 very rich in proteid, the dried kinds in general use, contain 24 or 25 per 
 cent. The richest is the soy-bean, which is used in China and Japan, it 
 contains 35 per cent., besides 19 per cent. of fat. Pulse requires 
 thorough cooking, haricots taking the longest time. Split lentils are 
 cooked sooner, and are better digested; this is chiefly due to the removal 
 of the skins. The haricots, bought from small grocers who have a slow 
 sale, are often old, and will not cook tender. Pulse is best adapted to 
 the labouring classes; the sedentary should eat it sparingly, it is liable 
 to cause flatulence or accumulation of gas in the intestines, and 
 constipation. Haricots are easier to digest when mashed and mixed with 
 other food. Pulse was formerly stated to leave much undigested residue. 
 Recent experiments have shown that it is satisfactorily digested under 
 favourable conditions. Strümpell found beans in their skins to leave a 
 large proportion of proteid matter unabsorbed. Lentil meal mixed with 
 other food was digested in a perfectly satisfactory manner. Another 
 experimenter (Rubner) found that when even the very large quantity of 
 1-1/8 pound of dried split peas per day were eaten, only 17 per cent. of 
 proteid matter was unabsorbed, which compares very well with the 11 per
cent. of proteid left from a macaroni diet, with which the same man was 
 fed at another time. Had a reasonable quantity of peas been eaten per day, 
 the quantity undigested would probably have differed little from that of 
 other foods. 
  
 Nuts are, as a rule, very rich in oil and contain a fair proportion of 
 proteid; when well masticated they are a very valuable food. Walnuts are 
 one of the best, and the kernels can be purchased shelled, thus avoiding 
 much trouble. They can be finely ground in a nut-mill and used for several 
 purposes, mixed in the proportion of about two ounces to the pound of 
 wheatmeal they produce a rich flavoured bread. They can also he used in 
 sweet cakes and in rich puddings to increase their food value, lightness 
 and taste. Pine kernels being very oily, can be used with flour in the 
 place of lard or butter. 
  
 Fruits are generally looked upon as luxuries, rather than as food 
 capable of supplying a meal or a substantial part of one. They are usually 
 eaten only when the appetite has been appeased by what is considered more 
 substantial fare. Fresh fruits contain a larger proportion of water than 
 nearly all other raw foods, and consequently the proportion of
nourishment is small; but we must not despise them on this account. Milk 
 contains as much or more water. Certain foods which in the raw state 
 contain very little water, such as the pulses and cereals when cooked 
 absorb a very large quantity; this is particularly the case in making 
 porridge. Cabbage, cauliflower, Spanish onions and turnips, after cooking 
 contain even 97 per cent. of water. Roast beef contains on an average 48 
 per cent., and cooked round steak with fat removed 63 per cent. of water. 
 It is customary at meal times to drink water, tea, coffee, beer, wine, &c. 
 When a meal contains any considerable quantity of fresh fruits there need 
 be no desire to drink. Notwithstanding that fruits contain so much water, 
 a dietary consisting of fruits with nuts, to which may be added bread and 
 vegetables, will contain less water than the total quantity usually 
 consumed by a person taking the more customary highly cooked and seasoned 
 foods. An advantage is that the water in fruits is in a wholesome 
 condition, free from the pollution often met with in the water used for 
 drinking purposes. Raw fruits favour mastication, with its consequent 
 advantages, whilst cooked and soft food discourages it. Plums and what are 
 termed stone fruits, if eaten in more than very small quantities, are apt 
 to disagree. Persons with good digestions can take fruit with bread, 
 biscuits and with uncooked foods without any inconvenience. Fruit is more
parents are often most evident in the children or grandchildren. There 
 are many persons who cannot eat of some particular food, although it may 
 be quite wholesome to others. Sometimes it is a psychological rather than 
 a physiological disability, which may he overcome by an effort of the 
 will. At other times it seems to have no connection with the imagination, 
 although it is not always possible to give a sound reason for it. In the 
 main, of course, there are principles of dietetics applicable to all 
 alike, but in regard to details, everyone should make rules for himself, 
 according to his experience. When there appears no real reason for an 
 idiosyncrasy, a little humouring of our taste and digestion will often 
 overcome it, to our advantage. It is generally those of delicate 
 constitution who are most sensitive. Some cannot eat oatmeal except in 
 small quantity. Olive and other vegetable oils, even when of good quality 
 cannot be taken by many people, whilst others find them quite as 
 wholesome, or even better than butter. Vegetarians can generally detect 
 lard in pastry both by its taste and its after effects, although those 
 accustomed to this fat do not object to it. It is also surprising how some 
 individual  '  s tastes and habits will vary at different periods of their 
 lives. 
 
One form of dyspepsia is due to undigested starch remaining in the stomach 
 and causing an excessive secretion of hydrochloric acid. As long as 
 proteid food is present, the pepsin and acid expend themselves on it, and 
 are removed together. The undigested starch continues to stimulate gastric 
 secretion, and the acid residuum causes pain, heartburn and flatulence. If 
 there be also any butyric acid, or some other fatty acid, derived from 
 milk, butter, cheese, &c., there will be acid eructations. For this form 
 of indigestion there are several methods of treatment. First; the very 
 thorough cooking of all starchy food, and it is an advantage to take a 
 little good extract of malt, either at the time of eating or directly 
 afterwards. The diastase of the malt has the same action on starch as the 
 ptyalin in the saliva. It is better, scientifically, to have the 
 farinaceous food at about 130° F. (as hot as the mouth can bear will do), 
 and then to add malt extract. On keeping the mixture warm, from a few 
 minutes to half an hour or more, the starch is digested and rendered 
 soluble. Such food is not very pleasant to take. The food known as Grape 
 Nuts has been treated in a similar manner. The use of malt extract, 
 however, seems a clumsy substitute for salivary digestion. Second; the 
 eating of starch in the form of hard and dry biscuits, crusts and other 
 hard food, which demand thorough mastication and insalivation, and the
keeping in the mouth for a long while, during which the saliva has time to 
 act. This is the best plan. Third; the taking of sodium bicarbonate 
 towards the end of the period of digestion, in order to neutralise the 
 acid in the stomach. This gives relief, but does not cure, as the dose has 
 to be repeated after each meal; in course of time the quantity of soda has 
 sometimes to be increased to an alarming extent. Fourth; the abstention 
 from starchy foods and the substitution of an exclusive flesh dietary. In 
 the "Salisbury" treatment, raw minced beef is given. This method often 
 gives immediate relief, but its ultimate effect on the kidneys and other 
 organs is very bad. 
  
 No hard and fast rule can be laid down as to the number of meals into 
 which the daily amount of food required should be divided. The stomach 
 appears to work to the best advantage when it is full, or nearly so, and 
 the appetite is appeased. Three approximately equal meals seems to be a 
 convenient division. Dr. Dewey and his followers advise only two meals a 
 day, and it seems incontestable that many persons find the plan 
 advantageous. These are generally adults with weak digestions, or elderly 
 persons who, on account of their age and the sluggish action of their 
 assimilative functions, require comparatively little food. Children, on
comparatively insipid character of the food and want of appetite. In 
 making a change to a vegetarian diet, such foods had better be taken that 
 are rather rich in proteid, and that approximate somewhat in their flavour 
 and manner of cooking to that used previously. A further change to a 
 simpler diet can afterwards gradually be made, according to conviction, 
 tastes and bodily adaptability. It must not be expected that a change, 
 even an ultimately very advantageous one, will always meet with an 
 immediate and proper response from digestive and assimilative organs which 
 have been accustomed for many years, perhaps by inheritance for 
 generations, to another manner of living. There are several preparations 
 produced from centrifugalised milk--that is milk from which the butter fat 
 has been removed, which consist chiefly of proteid. These have a value in 
 increasing the proteid contents of foods which may be thought deficient. 
 The addition of these manufactured products appear unnecessary, as most 
 of our food contains an abundance of proteid, and we can easily limit the 
 quantity or avoid altogether those that are thought defective. 
  
 The later apologists for a flesh diet have had to admit that it is not a 
 physiological necessity; but they have attempted to justify its use by a 
 theory somewhat as follows. It is admitted, that any excess of proteid
sustained effort and clearness of mind. The children and grandchildren of 
 such high livers are usually common-place, intellectually, and of 
 deteriorated physique. The aristocracy who are generally high livers, 
 notwithstanding their great advantages of education, travel and leisure, 
 are not as a rule famed for their intellectual gifts. In the recent war 
 the frugal living Japanese soldier has proved himself the most enduring 
 and bravest in history; whilst the Japanese officers are more resourceful 
 and tactful than the wealthier, high-fed Russian officers, with their 
 aristocratic lineage. What is called high-feeding, is of the greatest 
 benefit to the doctors and the proprietors of remedies for digestive and 
 nervous disorders. 
  
 Food Adjuncts and Drugs.--In addition to the nutrients and the small 
 quantity of indigestible fibre of which we have already written, food 
 generally contains small quantities of substances which are difficult to 
 classify, and whose action on the body is but imperfectly understood. Many 
 of these possess pungent or strong odours and flavours. To them, various 
 fruits, meats, etc., owe much of their characteristic differences of 
 taste. When pure the proteids and starches are devoid of taste. Such oils 
 and fats as are generally eaten have also but little flavour, providing
they are free from rancidity and of good quality. The sugars differ from 
 the other nutrients in possessing a more or less decided taste. The free 
 vegetable acids also strongly affect the sense of taste, but they are only 
 consumed in small quantities. 
  
 A drug may be defined as a substance which modifies the functions of the 
 body or of some organ without sensibly imparting nourishment. This action 
 may be one of stimulation or of depression. A drug is taken for its 
 medicinal action, a food adjunct for its modifying action on food. It is 
 impossible to give a quite satisfactory definition, or to draw sharp 
 distinctions. For example, tea, coffee, alcohol and tobacco are sometimes 
 placed in one group, and sometimes in another, according to opinion of 
 their action and the definition of the terms food adjuncts, drugs and 
 poisons. The difference of grouping often depends upon intensity rather 
 than of kind of action. If taken frequently and not in quantity sufficient 
 to have a markedly medicinal action, such things are generally called food 
 adjuncts or supplementary foods, although much may be said in favour of a 
 different view. The volatile oils of mustard, caraway, cloves, etc., are 
 used in medicine; also the alkaloids of coffee and cocoa. Even honey is 
 used as a mild laxative for infants; that is, as a drug. The difference
cereals, wheat, oatmeal, etc., and fruit. On the other hand there are 
 races who enjoy stronger flavoured food, including such things as garlic, 
 curry, pickles, pepper, strong cheese, meat extracts, rancid fats, dried 
 and smoked fish, high game or still more decomposed flesh, offal and 
 various disgusting things. The Greenlanders will eat with the keenest 
 appetite, the half-frozen, half-putrid head and fins of the seal, after 
 it has been preserved under the grass of summer. In Burmah and Sumatra a 
 mess is made by pounding together prawns, shrimps, or any cheap fish; this 
 is frequently allowed to become partially putrid. It is largely used as a 
 condiment for mixing with their rice. Numerous examples of this sort could 
 be given. There is scarcely anything that it is possible to eat, but has 
 been consumed with relish by some tribe or other. The strongest flavoured, 
 and to our minds most disgusting foods are eaten by the least intelligent 
 and most brutal races. It is hunger that compels the poor African bushman 
 to eat anything he can get, and the Hottentot not only the flesh, but the 
 entrails of cattle which die naturally, and this last he has come to think 
 exquisite when boiled in beast-blood. All this shows a wonderful range of 
 adaptability in the human body, but it would not be right to say that all 
 such food is equally wholesome. The most advanced and civilised races, 
 especially the more delicately organised of them are the most fastidious,
whilst it is the most brutal, that take the most rank and strongly 
 flavoured foods. Even amongst the civilised there are great differences. 
 The assimilative and nervous systems can be trained to tolerate injurious 
 influences to a remarkable degree. A striking example is seen in the 
 nausea commonly produced by the first pipe of tobacco, and the way the 
 body may in time be persuaded, not only to tolerate many times such a 
 quantity without manifesting any unpleasant feelings, but to receive 
 pleasure from the drug. Opium or laudanum may be taken in gradually 
 increasing quantities, until such a dose is taken as would at first have 
 produced death, yet now without causing any immediate or very apparent 
 harm. Nearly all drugs loose much of their first effect on continued use. 
 Not only is this so, but a sudden discontinuance of a drug may cause 
 distress, as the body, when free from the artificial stimulation to which 
 it has become habituated, falls into a sluggish or torpid condition. For 
 the enjoyment of food two things are equally necessary, a healthy and keen 
 appetite and suitable food; without the first no food, however good and 
 skilfully prepared, will give satisfaction. The sense of taste resides in 
 certain of the papilloe of the tongue, and to a much less degree in the 
 palate. Tastes may be classified into sweet, bitter, acid and saline. 
 Sweet tastes are best appreciated by the tip, acid by the side, and bitter
by the back of the tongue. Hot or pungent substances produce sensations of 
 general feeling, which obscure any strictly gustatory sensations which may 
 be present at the same time. To affect the taste the food must enter into 
 solution. Like the other senses, taste may be rendered more delicate by 
 cultivation. Flavours are really odours, and the word smell would be more 
 appropriate. For example, what we call the taste of an onion, the flavour 
 of fruit, etc. (independent of the sweetness or sourness of the fruit) is 
 due to the nose. 
  
 Much has been written on the necessity of making food tasty, so as to 
 stimulate the appetite and digestion. It is urged that unless this is done 
 food will not be eaten in sufficient quantity. Innumerable receipts (some 
 very elaborate) have been published for this purpose. All this is supposed 
 to increase the enjoyment of food. The Anglo-Saxon race--the race whose 
 dietary is the most elaborate--is especially subject to digestive 
 derangements, and without good digestion and the consequent healthy 
 appetite, no food will give full gustatory pleasure. The most wholesome 
 food, and that which can be eaten most frequently without weariness, is 
 mildly flavoured and simply prepared. Plain bread is an example; whereas 
 sweet bread, currant bread, etc., though agreeable in small quantity, or
as an occasional delicacy, soon palls on the appetite. Rice is the poorest 
 and mildest flavoured of the cereals, it is therefore often, perhaps 
 generally, made more tasty by the addition of fish, curry, etc. The bulk 
 of the Chinese live on rice, with the exception of only 3 or 4 ounces of 
 fish per day, and they are a fine, big and strong race. The Japanese 
 labourer lives on similar food. In India rice is the food most in use, 
 though many other cereals are eaten there. Other races live chiefly on 
 fruits. It appears that the digestive organs will perform their functions 
 perfectly with the mildest flavoured food. There is nothing surprising in 
 this. The strongest, most intelligent, and largest animals are those which 
 feed on grass, herbs and fruits. Even the African lion is no match for the 
 gorilla. The lion and tiger are capable of great strength, but they cannot 
 put it forth for long periods as can the herbivora. Our most useful 
 animal, the horse, can exert much more muscular energy, weight for weight, 
 than any of the carnivora. The cost of feeding one of the herbivora is 
 much less than that of one of the carnivora of the same weight. This is so 
 whether we take the cost of purchasing the food; or the expenditure of 
 time, labour and energy on the part of man or of natural forces in the 
 production of the food. Herbs, roots, corn and fruit are produced much 
 more abundantly and freely than the corresponding quantity of sheep, deer,
etc., on which the carnivora feed. 
  
 The restlessness, craving for novelty, and love of excitement, so 
 characteristic of the Anglo-Saxon, and to a less extent of some other 
 European races, has its correspondence in the food of these races. 
 Highly-seasoned and nitrogenous foods act as a stimulant and favour 
 spasmodic, and for a time perhaps, great intellectual and physical 
 exertion, with a succeeding period of exhaustion. Simpler food favours 
 long, sustained, uniform muscular strength, clearness of intellect, and 
 contentment. Let no one misunderstand us; we do not assert that all who 
 live on simple food have either clear intellects or are contented, because 
 there are other factors besides food, but that such qualities are more 
 easily retained or obtained under that condition. It is well known that 
 the over-fed and badly fed are the most irritable and discontented Those 
 living on a stimulating dietary consisting largely of flesh have their 
 chief successes in feats of short duration. Simple and abstemious living 
 individuals or races excel in laborious work requiring endurance over long 
 periods, such as long walking, cycling, and other athletic feats and long 
 military campaigns. 
 
left, the same kind is not equally suitable to everyone, nor even to the 
 same person at different periods. 
  
 A delicately balanced, fine-grained, high-toned mind and body responds to 
 every tender influence, and is painfully jarred by that which is coarse. 
 To such, fruits and delicately flavoured and easily digested foods are 
 doubtless best and conducive to purity and clearness of thought. A 
 coarse-grained, badly poised, roughly working body and spirit, is 
 non-responsive except to loud or coarse impulses; and such a one  '  s 
 appetite is gratified, not by simple but by coarsely seasoned foods. 
  
 A person who is accustomed to a stimulating dietary of flesh-foods, 
 especially if well-seasoned, finds a simple diet unsatisfying. Should such 
 persons dine off simple vegetarian food, there is a tendency to 
 over-eating. The less stimulating food fails to rouse the digestive organs 
 and to appease the appetite; although an ample supply of nourishment be 
 consumed. This is the reason why so many imagine that it is necessary to 
 eat a larger quantity of food if it be vegetable. Should a distressing 
 fulness and flatulence result from their over-feeding, they lay the blame 
 to the vegetarian dietary instead of to themselves. Most persons, on
changing to a vegetarian dietary, commence by imitating flesh dishes in 
 appearance and flavour and even in the names. There is the additional 
 inducement that the food may be attractive and palatable to friends who 
 lack sympathy with the aesthetic and humane principles of the diet. After 
 a while many of them incline to simpler flavoured foods. They revert to 
 the unperverted taste of childhood, for children love sweets, fruits, and 
 mild-flavoured foods rather than savouries. One who loves savouries, as a 
 rule, cares much less for fruits. By compounding and cooking, a very great 
 variety of foods can be prepared, but the differences in taste are much 
 less than is usually, supposed. The effect of seasoning instead of 
 increasing the range, diminishes it, by dulling the finer perception of 
 flavours. The predominating seasoning also obscures everything else. The 
 mixture of foods produces a conglomeration of tastes in which any 
 particular or distinct flavours are obscured, resulting in a general 
 sameness. It is often stated that as an ordinary flesh-eater has the 
 choice of a greater range of foods and flavours than a vegetarian, he can 
 obtain more enjoyment, and that the latter is disagreeably restricted. 
 Certainly he has the choice, but does he avail himself of it to any 
 considerable extent? No one cares to take all the different kinds of food, 
 whether of animal or vegetable that are possible. Of edible animals but a
very few kinds are eaten. A person who particularly relishes and partakes 
 largely of flesh-foods will reject as insipid and unsatisfying many 
 mild-flavoured foods at one end of the scale. The vegetarian may abstain 
 from foods at the opposite end of the scale, not always from humane 
 reasons, but because they are unpleasant. Thus there may be little to 
 choose between the mere range of flavours that give enjoyment to each 
 class of persons. The sense of taste is in its character and range lower 
 than the sense of sight and hearing. The cultivation of the taste for 
 savouries seems to blunt the taste for fruits and the delicate foods. The 
 grass and herbs on which the herbivora subsist, seems to our imagination 
 of little flavour and monotonous; but they eat with every sign of 
 enjoyment, deliberately munching their food as though to get its full 
 flavour. In all probability they find a considerable range of flavours in 
 the great varieties of grasses commonly found together in a pasture. 
  
 Our elaborate cooking customs entail a vast amount of labour. They 
 necessitate the cost, trouble and dirt from having fires in great excess 
 of that required for warmth: the extra time in preparing, mixing and 
 attending to food which has to be cooked: and the large number of greasy 
 and soiled utensils which have to be cleaned. Cooked savoury food is
generally much nicer eaten hot, and this necessitates fires and attention 
 just previous to the meal. We have already said that soft cooked food 
 discourages mastication and leads to defective teeth. Our elaborate 
 cookery is mainly due to our custom of eating so largely of flesh, whilst 
 the eating of flesh would receive a great impetus on the discovery of the 
 art of cooking. Flesh can only be eaten with relish and with safety when 
 cooked. Such a large proportion of it is infected with parasites, or is 
 otherwise diseased, that it would he dangerous to eat it raw, even were it 
 palatable in such a state. In those countries where man eats flesh in a 
 raw or semi-cooked form, parasitic diseases are common. There is not the 
 least doubt that our habit of eating so much cooked food is responsible 
 for much over-eating, hasty eating, dyspepsia and illness. In regard to 
 the making of bread, porridge, and many other comparatively simple 
 prepared foods, the advantages of cooking seem overwhelmingly great. With 
 our present imperfect knowledge and conflicting opinions, it is 
 impossible to arrive at any satisfactory conclusion, and the whole 
 question requires careful and impartial investigation. Experiments have 
 been made with animals, chiefly pigs, with cooked and uncooked clover, 
 hay, corn, meal, etc. (U.S. Department of Agriculture). It was found that 
 the food was more or less diminished in digestibility by cooking. At least
13 separate series of experiments with pigs in different part of the 
 country have been reported. In 10 of these trials there has been a 
 positive loss from cooking the food. The amount of food required to 
 produce in the animal a pound gain in weight was larger when the food had 
 been cooked than when it was given raw. In some cases, the increased 
 quantity of food required after cooking was considerable. 
  
 Those who live on uncooked food contend that a smaller quantity of 
 nourishment is required. As uncooked food requires more mastication and is 
 eaten more slowly, there is a better flow of saliva and time is given for 
 the digestive organs to be gradually brought into complete action, and 
 finally for the appeasing of the appetite. In the case of the members of 
 the fruitarian family, whose food was uncooked, and of whom we have 
 previously written, the quantity of nutriment taken was much less than 
 that thought necessary, even after making full allowance for their small 
 stature and weight. 
  
 Meat Extracts.--Justus von Liebig, the great German chemist, was the 
 first to attempt to make these on the commercial scale. He described a 
 method in 1847, and this not proving satisfactory, another one in 1865. He
you are really hungry and are not pampering false appetite. If true 
 appetite that will relish plain bread alone is not present, wait for it, 
 if you have to wait till noon. Then chew, masticate, munch, bite, taste 
 everything you take in your mouth; until it is not only thoroughly 
 liquefied and made neutral or alkaline by saliva, but until the reduced 
 substance all settles back in the folds at the back of the mouth and 
 excites the swallowing impulse into a strong inclination to swallow. Then 
 swallow what has collected and has excited the impulse, and continue to 
 chew at the remainder, liquid though it be, until the last morsel 
 disappears in response to the swallowing impulse. In a very short time 
 this will become an agreeable and profitable fixed habit. Mr. Fletcher has 
 been under the observation of several eminent scientific men. Professor 
 R.H. Chittenden, of Yale University, in his report refers to the 
 experiments of Kumagawa, Sivén, and other physiologists; who have shown 
 that men may live and thrive, for a time at least, on amounts of proteid 
 per day equal to only one-half and one-quarter the amount called for in 
 the Voit standard (see p. 32), even without unduly increasing the total 
 calories of the food intake. Such investigations, however, have always 
 called forth critical comment from writers reluctant to depart from the 
 current standards, as extending over too short periods of time.
 
 Dr. Chittenden writes that he has had in his laboratory, for several 
 months past, a gentleman (H.F.) who for some five years, practised a 
 certain degree of abstinence in the taking of food and attained important 
 economy with, as he believes, great gain, in bodily and mental vigour and 
 with marked improvement in his general health. The gentleman in question 
 fully satisfies his appetite, but no longer desires the amount of food 
 consumed by most individuals. For a period of thirteen days, in January, 
 he was under observation in Professor Chittenden  '  s laboratory. The daily 
 amount of proteid metabolised was 41.25 grammes, the body-weight (165 
 pounds) remaining practically constant. Analysis of the excretions showed 
 an output of an equivalent quantity of nitrogen. In February a more 
 thorough series of observations was made. The diet was quite simple, and 
 consisted merely of a prepared cereal food, milk and maple sugar. This 
 diet was taken twice a day for seven days, and was selected by the subject 
 as giving sufficient variety for his needs and quite in accord with his 
 taste. No attempt was made to conform to any given standard of quantity, 
 but the subject took each day such amounts of the above foods as his 
 appetite craved. The daily average in grammes was, proteid 44.9 (1.58 
 ounces), fats 38.0, carbohydrates 253.0, calories 1,606. The total intake
of nitrogen per day was 7.19, while the output was 6.90. It may be asked, 
 says Professor Chittenden, was this diet at all adequate for the needs of 
 the body--sufficient for a man weighing 165 pounds? In reply, it may be 
 said that the appetite was satisfied and that the subject had full freedom 
 to take more food if he so desired. The body-weight remained practically 
 constant and the nitrogen of the intake and output were not far apart. An 
 important point is, can a man on such food be fit for physical work? Mr. 
 Fletcher was placed under the guidance of Dr. W.G. Anderson, the director 
 of the gymnasium of Yale University. Dr. Anderson reports that on the four 
 last days of the experiment, in February, 1903, Mr. Fletcher was given the 
 same kind of exercises as are given to the   '  Varsity crew. They are drastic 
 and fatiguing and cannot be done by beginners without soreness and pain 
 resulting. They are of a character to tax the heart and lungs as well as 
 to try the muscles of the limbs and trunk. "My conclusion, given in 
 condensed form, is this: Mr. Fletcher performs this work with greater ease 
 and with fewer noticeable bad results than any man of his age and 
 condition I have ever worked with." "To appreciate the full significance 
 of this report, it must be remembered," writes Professor Chittenden, "that 
 Mr. Fletcher had for several months past taken practically no exercise 
 other than that involved in daily walks about town." Sir Michael Forster
writes:--"Our results, obtained with a great variety of subjects, justify 
 the conviction that the minimum proteid requirements of the healthy man, 
 under ordinary conditions of life, are far below the generally accepted 
 dietary standards, and far below the amounts called for by the acquired 
 taste of the generality of mankind. Body weight, health, strength, mental 
 and physical vigour and endurance can be maintained with at least one-half 
 of the proteid food ordinarily consumed." 
  
 From these and other considerations, we see that it is not only 
 unnecessary, but inadvisable to diet ourselves according to any of the old 
 standards, such as that of Voit, or even to any other standard, until they 
 have been very thoroughly revised. We shall probably find that as the body 
 becomes accustomed to simpler food, a smaller quantity of the food is 
 necessary. The proportion of proteids to other constituents in all the 
 ordinary, not over manfactured vegetable foods, such as are generally 
 eaten, may be taken as sufficient. Several cookery books have been 
 compiled in conformity with certain proteid standards and also with some 
 more or less fanciful requirements; these give the quantities and kinds of 
 food which it is imagined should be eaten each day. Theoretically, this 
 should be calculated to accord with the weight, temperament, age and sex
of the eater and the work he or she has to perform. The dietaries that we 
 have seen have their proteid ratio placed unnecessarily high. This high 
 proteid ratio can be got by the use of the pulses, but except in small 
 quantities they are not generally admissible, and in some of the dietaries 
 they are ruled out. The difficulty is got over by the liberal use of eggs, 
 cheese and milk. To admit a necessity for these animal products is to show 
 a weakness and want of confidence in the sufficiency of vegetable foods. 
 Some of these cookery books are of use in sickness, especially as 
 replacing those of the beef-tea, chicken-broth, jelly and arrowroot order. 
 They provide a half-way stage between flesh and vegetable food, such as is 
 palatable to those who have not quite overcome a yearning for flesh and 
 stimulating foods. The liberal use of animal products is less likely to 
 excite the prejudice of the ordinary medical practitioner or nurse. 
 Possibly, also, a higher quantity of proteid may be required on first 
 giving up flesh foods. 
  
 The Use of Salt.--One of the most remarkable habits of these times is 
 the extensive use of common salt or sodium chloride. It is in all ordinary 
 shop bread, in large quantity in a special and much advertised cereal 
 food, even in a largely sold wheat flour, and often in pastry. It is added
to nearly all savoury vegetable food, and many persons, not content, add 
 still more at the time of eating. No dinner table is considered complete 
 without one or more salt-cellars. Some take even threequarters of an 
 ounce, or an ounce per day. The question is not, of course, whether salt 
 is necessary or not, but whether there is a sufficient quantity already 
 existing in our foods. Some allege that there is an essential difference 
 between added salt and that natural to raw foods. That the former is 
 inorganic, non-assimilable and even poisonous; whilst the latter is 
 organised or in organic combination and nutritive. The writer is far from 
 being convinced that there is a difference in food value. Some herbivorous 
 animals are attracted by salt, but not the carnivora. This has been 
 explained by the fact that potassium salts are characteristic of plants, 
 whilst sodium chloride is the principal saline constituents of blood and 
 of flesh. In their food, the herbivora take three or four times as much 
 potash salts as the carnivora. Of course, the sodium chloride in the flesh 
 of the herbivora and frugivora is obtained from the vegetable matter 
 forming their food, and very few of them have the opportunity of obtaining 
 it from salt-licks and mineral sources. They must have the power of 
 storing up the sodium chloride from plants in sufficient quantity, whilst 
 the potash salts pass away. There is no justification for saying that they
are worse off by being deprived of salt. If the ape tribe can thrive 
 without added salt why should not man? Bunge considers that a restriction 
 to vegetable food causes a great desire for salt. Opposed to this, is the 
 fact that certain tribes of negroes who cannot obtain salt, add to their 
 vegetable food wood ashes or a preparation of wood ashes; this is chiefly 
 potash. One preparation used in British Central Africa was found to 
 contain about 21 per cent. of potassium chloride to only 0.5 per cent. of 
 sodium chloride. It has been said that vegetarians consume more salt than 
 those who take flesh food. We doubt this; we know of many vegetarians who 
 have a strong objection to added salt, and have abstained from it for 
 years. Some find that it predisposes to colds, causes skin irritation and 
 other symptoms. At many vegetarian restaurants the food is exceedingly 
 salty; the writer on this account cannot partake of their savoury dishes, 
 except with displeasure. Nearly all who patronise these restaurants are 
 accustomed to flesh foods, and it is their taste which has to be catered 
 for. Flesh, and particularly blood, which of course, is in flesh, contains 
 a considerable quantity of sodium chloride; and most flesh eaters are also 
 in the habit of using the salt cellar. These people are accustomed to a 
 stimulating diet, and have not a proper appreciation of the mildly 
 flavoured unseasoned vegetable foods. Only those who have, for a time,
discontinued the use of added salt, and lost any craving for it, can know 
 how pleasant vegetables can be; even those vegetables which before were 
 thought to be nearly tasteless, unless seasoned, are found to have very 
 distinct flavours. It is then perceived, that there is a much greater 
 variety in such foods than was previously imagined. It is commonly urged 
 that salt and other condiments are necessary to make food palatable and to 
 stimulate the digestive functions. We, on the contrary, say that 
 condiments are the cause of much over-eating; and that if food cannot be 
 eaten without them, it is a sign of disorganisation of the digestive 
 system, and it is better to abstain from food until the appearance of a 
 natural and healthy appetite. An excess of salt creates thirst and means 
 more work for the kidneys in separating it from the blood prior to its 
 expulsion. Even should it be admitted, that certain vegetables contain too 
 little sodium salts, a very little salt added to such food would be 
 sufficient; there is no excuse for the general use of it, and in such a 
 great variety of foods. It is thought that some cases of inflammation of 
 the kidneys originate in excessive salt eating; certain it is that 
 patients suffering from the disease very soon improve, on being placed on 
 a dietary free from added salt and also poor in naturally contained sodium 
 and potassium salts. It is also possible to cause the swelling of the legs
potassium salts, on the contrary, do not, they may even increase the 
 action. Although nearly all the medical experience recorded has to do with 
 diseased persons, such cases are instructive; it is only reasonable to 
 suppose, that more than a very small quantity of salt in excess of that 
 natural to the food, is a source of irritation in the body, even of the 
 ordinarily healthy individual. 
  
 Summary.--Enjoyment of food is dependent upon appetite quite as much as 
 upon the nature of the food. Better a simple repast with good appetite 
 than sumptuous fare with bad digestion. There is indeed a causal 
 relationship between simplicity and health. The savage likes the noise of 
 the tom-tom or the clatter of wooden instruments: what a contrast this is 
 to the trained ear of the musician. Uncivilised man has little enjoyment 
 of scenery or of animal life, except as in respect to their power of 
 providing him with food, clothing or other physical gratification. What an 
 enormous advance has taken place. In the case of the painter, his eye and 
 mind can appreciate a wide range and delicacy of colour. Man has improved 
 on the crab-apple and the wild strawberry. From a wild grass he has 
 produced the large-grained nutritious wheat. Vegetables of all kinds have 
 been greatly improved by long continued cultivation. In tropical and
sub-tropical climates, where wild fruits are more plentiful, high 
 cultivation is of less importance than in temperate regions. In sparsely 
 inhabited or wild, temperate and cold regions, in times past, when deer 
 and other animals were plentiful, and edible fruits few, flesh could be 
 obtained at less labour; or such intelligence and industry as is required 
 for the cultivation of fruits, cereals, and other foods scarcely existed. 
 Flesh almost requires to be cooked to be palatable, certainly this much 
 improves its flavour. The eating of flesh tends to produce a distaste for 
 mild vegetable foods, especially if uncooked. In process of time, not only 
 flesh but vegetable foods, were more and more subjected to cooking and 
 seasoning, or mixed with the flesh, blood or viscera of the animals 
 killed. Next, food was manufactured to produce a still greater variety, to 
 increase the flavour, or less frequently to produce an imagined greater 
 digestibility or nutritiveness. Man has taken that which seemed most 
 agreeable, rarely has he been intentionally guided by scientific 
 principles, by that which is really best. Only of late years can it be 
 said that there is such a thing as a science of dietetics; although 
 cookery books innumerable have abounded. Of recent years many diseases 
 have enormously increased, some even seem to be new. Digestive 
 disturbances, dental caries, appendicitis, gout, rheumatism, diabetes,
