8. Hyssopus moschata vel de Cilissa. Musked Hysope. Gesner in Hortis Germaniae remembreth this Hysope to dif∣ferre nothing from the ordinary Hysope, but in the sent, which is so gratious and pleasant, that it commeth neerest to the sent of Muske. 
9. Hyssopus Arabum floribus rubris vel albis. White or red flowred Hysope. The red or white flowred Hysope differ but a little from the garden sort, yet are distinguished from it, in that they both doe usually beare red or white flowers, all on one side of the spike, yet continue not constant in that forme, but change in∣to the forme of the ordinary kinde. 
10. Hyssopus minor sive Hyspanica. Dwarfe Spanish Hysop. This Spanish kinde is a smaller and lower sort, whose bran∣ches rise not so high as the garden Hisope, but bend a little downewards, the leaves also being smaller and thicker, and of a sadder greene colour, and the heads or spikes are also shorter, but the flowers are purple like the garden sort. Lobel calleth this, Hyssopus parva angustis folijs. 
11. Hyssopus Coronata sive Comosa Clusij. Tufted Hysope. Tufted Hysope is in leaves, flowers, and manner of growing somewhat like the common garden kinde, but a little smaller and lower, the leaves being of a paler greene colour, and the top branches spreading a little broader, have shorter spikes of leaves and flowers growing as it were in tuftes, which hath caused the name, and noted it for a difference. 
12. Hysopus folijs crispis. Curld Hysope. Curld Hysope hath the leaves curled or crampled at the edges, that each leafe seemeth to be composed of many: and herein consisteth the chiefest difference. 
13. Hyssopus montana. Mountaine wilde Hysope. Mountaine or wilde Hysope is very like unto the garden kinde, for the manner of growing: but that the leaves which are not so many at a joynt, are somwhat harder and rougher, and a little hairie, and somwhat narrower also, which (as Matthiolus saith) being brought into gardens, and there cherished; will by time put off that roughnesse, and become more milde and gentle, the taste whereof is much more bitter, and nothing so hot or sweete as the common kinde: the flowers and seedes are like the garden sort, both for forme and colour. 
14. Hyssopus angusti folia spicata. Narrow leafed Hysope. Narrow leafed Hysope is a fine kinde, and hath many slender hard stalkes, whereon are set at distances, as in the common Hysope, many small greene leaves, but longer and nar∣rower 15. Hyssopus folijs Origani. Round leafed Hysope. 
14 Hyssopus augustifolia spicata Narrow leafed Hysope. 
than they, and ending in a longer point: the flowers like∣wise grow at several distances, as it were in roundles, almost from the middle of the stalke up to the topes, of a blewish purple co∣lour like the ordinary kinde, but much smaller and so is the seede also: the branches hereof will take roote and grow being laid in∣to the ground, the roote spreading much in the earth. 
15. Hyssopus folijs origani. Round leafed Hysope. This Hysope hath divers hard woody stalkes, whereon grow sundry small and almost round leaves, one against another, but pointed at the endes, the heads or spikes of flowers are like un∣to the common sort, of a blewish purple colour; the sent also diffe∣reth little from it. 
Gerard hath set forth an Hysope with the leaves of Nummula∣riae, Monyworte, which peradventure might bee this kinde, Hyssop folijs Nummu∣laria. yet I never saw such an one with him. 
The Place. Pena saith that our common Hysope, groweth on the hills of Romania about Verona, and neere unto Mount Raldus: the dwarfe kinde in Spaine, and the mountaine wilde kind, on the hils in ma∣ny places of Germany, and as Matthiolus saith on the hill Salvatin in the Country of Goritia: the rest, with these also when they may be gotten, are noursed up in the garden, of the curious. 
The Time. They doe all flower in the summer moneths of Iune and Iuly, and their seede is ripe in the beginning or middle of August. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , sic dici putant quasi (pro ) , quia super vultus affunditur, in Latine Hyssopus &amp; Hyssopum, of the Arabians, Cyfe, Iufa and Iaves, of the Italians and Spaniards Hissopo, of the French Hissope, of the p, of the Dutch Jspen, and of us Hysope. The names of every one of them, are sufficiently expressed in the titles and descriptions of them. But there is a great controversie among our later writers, what hearbe should be the true Hysope of Dios∣corides; and other the Greeke authours; for that our common Hysope is not it, but is the true Hysope of the Ara∣bians, as all doe acknowledge except Matthiolus, who doth earnestly contend, that our garden Hysope is the same of Dioscorides, whose arguments are too weake, to perswade any to be of his opinion, for the description of Dios∣corides his Hysope hath no face or true resemblance with ours, his bearing tufted heads like Chrysocome or Gol∣dilockes, as he compareth it, and ours in spikes: the leaves also of his are like unto the Origanum Onitis, which are somewhat round like Marjerome, as you may see heere shortly after, and are not narrow and long, as those of our Hysope are: therefore Lugdunensis setteth forth a round leafed Hysope, which he taketh to be the true Hysope of Dioscorides, but neither are the leaves thereof whitish, as those of Onitis, nor doe the heads much differ from the common Hysope: Lobel also propoundeth another, that is our pot Marjerome to be the right, in that it hath roundish leaves like Organum, and tufted heads of flowers that are spread abroad like it also, this he saith, is the likeliest hearbe, comming neerest unto the true kinde, unlesse as he saith, it may be referred unto an Origanum: but Fabius Columna confuteth that of Lobel and Pena, as well for that the tufted heads, are more like unto wilde Mar∣jerome, then unto Chrysocome, or garden Marjerome, as Crapevas, Serapio, Isaack, Mesues and others doe compare them, as also that the leaves of Dioscorides his Hysope, are whitish like unto Origanum Onitis which those of Lobels Marjerome is not: besides this, that it is a kitchen hearbe, fit for meate and sawce, and so is our ordinary Hysope also, and not a Physicke hearbe as Dioscorides maketh his to be: and lastly, that neither Lobel his Marjerome, nor yet our Hysope, are equall in the properties unto that of Dioscorides and others, howsoever it is usually received in the steede thereof: thus saith Fabius Columna, and therefore by many reasons would perswade us to beleeve, that our ordinary Polium montanum is the true Hysope, as well for that the leaves are white, and the heades of flowers like unto Origanum and Chrysocome, as he saith, as also for that his vertues and properties by the bitternesse there∣of, are more effectuall in all the disease, whereunto Plinye applies his Hysope, which are not remembred of Dio∣scorides; and that although Dioscorides maketh no bitternesse in his Hysope, yet Serapio doth as he saith: thus much Columna. But let me say, seeing he himself saith, that our Polium is answerable in all the parts thereof, unto the Poli∣um of the auncients, I see no good reason, why it should be their Hysope also, and therefore I think, we may as well refuse his Polium, as he doth Lobels Marjerome. Others also would make Gratiola to be the true Hysope, which hath lesse likelihood than any of the former. Bauhinus in his Pinax would make our ordinary Rosemary, to be the Hysope of the Hebrewes, taking peradventure his ground from the Scripture, in Saint Johns Gospell, the 19. chap. and 29. verse, where the Souldiers bound a sponge wet in vinegar, to the end of an Hysope stalke, to put it to our Saviours mouth when he was on the Crosse, in that our ordinary Hysope hath not so long a stalke, as might reach up so high: but both the Evangelists, Matthew and Marke say it was a reede, and it may bee that the Hysope stalke was bound therevnto, for Saint Iohn as an eye witnesse of what was done, calleth it as before: Now it is not likely that the Iewes had an other Hysope, divers both from the Greekes &amp; Arabians; but rather that their Hysope was the same of the Arabians, being their neere neighbours, and as it should seeme, was so familiar to their Coun∣trey, that it grew on mudde-walles, as the Scripture saith that Salomon spake of it; which I verily thinke Rosemary doth not. But Hysope is often mentioned in the Scripture, to bee used in the Iewes ceremonies, which was not without materiall signification; for as Saint Paul saith, all was done among them in types and figures, and to bee rightly understood and well applied, were worthie of much observation and good use. Now although the true Hy∣sope of Dioscorides, and the other Greekes, is not yet certainely knowne, yet assuredly this which is knowne, and generally receaved, may safely be used in the stead thereof, untill the true Hysope may be knowne. 
The Vertues. Dioscorides saith, that Hysope boyled with Rue and Hony, and drunke doth helpe those that are troubled with Coughes, shortnesse of breath, wheesing, and rheumaticke distillations upon the lungs; taken also with Oxymel, it purgeth grosse humours by the stoole, and with hony killeth the wormes in the belly, and taken also with fresh or new figges bruised, helpeth to loosen the belly, but more forcibly, if the roote of the Flowerde∣luce and Cresses (yet some copies instead of Cardamon have Cardamomum, which I never knew put into any pur∣ging medicine in our times, and Macer his verse doth intimate Cresses thus; Cardama si jungas his solves fortius al∣vum ) be added thereunto: it amendeth and cherisheth the native colour of the body, spoyled by the yellow-jaun∣dise, helpeth the dropsie and the splene, if it be taken with figges and nitar: being boiled with wine, it is good to wash inflamations, it taketh away the blew and blacke spottes, and markes that come by strokes, bruises, or falles; being applied with warme water; it is also an excellent medicine for those, that are troubled with the Quinsie, or swelling in the throate, to wash and gargle it, being boyled with Figges; it helpeth the tooth-ach, being boyled in vinegar and gargled therewith; the hot vapours of the decoction, taken by a funnell in at the eares, easeth the infla∣mations of them, Mesues saith the singing noyse of them; Pliny addeth, that it is an enemy to the stomacke, and provoketh casting being taken with figges: being bruised, and salt, hony, and cumminseede put to it, it helpeth those that are stung by serpents. Galen is very briefe herein and onely saith, it is hot and dry in the third degree, and of thin parts. Matthiolus saith, that our Hysope is of thinne parts, and that it cutteth &amp; breaketh tough flegme, it rarifieth or maketh thinne that which is thicke or groste, it openeth that which is stopped, and clenseth that which is corrupt, the oyle thereof being annoynted killeth lice, and taketh away the itching of the head, it helpeth those that have the falling sicknesse, which way soever it be applyed, but more especially being made into pilles in this manner. Take of Hysope, Horehound and Castoreum, of each halfe a dragme, of the roote of Peonye (the male kinde is most proper in this disease) two drammes, of Assafaetida one scruple, let them all bee beaten as they should be, &amp; made into seven pilles (or more if they be too great) with the juyce of Hysope, and one of the greater, or two small ones, taken every night going to bed is appointed; the best Physitians of our tymes, assuredly doe ac∣count it, to be hot and dry in the third degree, and of thinne parts; for being sharpe and a little bitter withall, they apply it effectually, for all cold griefes or diseases of the chest and lungs, helping to expectorate tough flegme, that stuffeth or oppresseth them, being taken either in a lohoc or licking medicine, or in a Syrupe, or any other way, and in a decoction thus; Take an handfull of Hysope, two ounces of figges, and one ounce of Sugarcandy, boyle them in a quart of Muscadine, untill halfe a pint be consumed, which being strained, &amp; taken morning and evening, avai∣leth much for those that are troubled with an old cough, by causing the cough flegme the more easily to be avoided: it helpeth also to provoke vrine being stopped, or that is made by droppes: it helpeth to breake winde, and to cause womens monethly courses, and easeth the sharpe fitts of agues; the greene hearbe being bruised and a little sugar put thereto, doth quickly heale any greene wound or cut in the hand, or else where being applied thereto. 
CHAP. II. Thymbra sive Satureia. Savorie. T Here are Foure or five sorts of Savorye, two most usually to be seene in many gardens, but there are three others that are more rare. 
1. Satureia vulgaris, Winter Savorie. The common Winter Savory, is a smal &amp; low bushie herbe, very like unto Hysope, but not much above a foote high, with diverse small hard branches, &amp; hard darke greene leaves theron, as thicke set as Hysope, &amp; some∣times but with foure leaves set at a joynt, of a reasonable strong sent, yet not so much as the Sommer kinde: the flowers are of a pale purplish colour, set at severall distances at the toppes of the stalkes, and leaves also under them: the roote hath divers small strings thereat, and abideth with greene leaves all the winter, and is more usu∣ally encreased by slipping then sowing. 
2. Satureia Hortensis. Sommer Savorie. This also is a small tender herbe growing up with divers brittle branches, slenderly or sparsedly set with two long narrow leaves at each joynt, soft in handling, and of a stronger and quicker sent and taste: the flowres are small and purplish, set at the joynts with two leaves under them up to the toppes of the stalkes: the seede is of a darke colour, bigger then Tyme seede by the halfe: the rootes have fewer strings and perish every yeare, and must be new sowne every yeare. 
3. Satureia Spicata S. Iuliani. Rocke Savorie. Rocke Savorie hath many slender, hard, and woody brownish stalkes about a foot long, whereon doe grow at se∣verall spaces, many very small and narrow leaves, very like to the leaves of the true Tyme, but somewhat longer, of a sharpe quicke taste, and of a strong sweete sent: at the toppes of the branches, come forth many spiked heads of small leaves, &amp; out of them thrust forth purplish flowers, which afterwards give a small, brownish seede, more like Tyme then Savory, the whole plant will be sometimes of a sad purplish colour, dasht over with a white mealines, as for the most part all Sea plants are: this doth seldome endure a winter with us. 
4. Thymbra sive Satureia Cretica legitima. The true Savorie of Candie. The true Savory of Candie brancheth forth from the ground like Tyme, with many purplish square branches, 2. Satureia hortensis. Somer Savory.
3. Satureia spicata S. Iuliani. Rocke Savory. 
4. Thymbra sive Satureia Cretica legitima. The true Savory of Candy. 
coverd over with a rough or hayrie downe: from the lower joynts of the stalkes come alwaies two branches, and two leaves set at them, and so in like manner all along the bran∣ches two at every joynt, one against another on the contra∣rie side, and are very like unto the leaves of the true Tyme, but somewhat hairye, of a sweete sent and sharpe taste be∣tweene Tyme and Savory; on the toppes of the branches at certaine distances one above another, grow forth heads or tufts of greene leaves, from among which start forth many purplish flowers like unto Tyme, standing in brownish huskes: the seede is of a blackish browne colour, very like unto Tyme; the roote is somewhat long, hard and woody, with some small blackish fibers growing from it, and will as hardly winter with us as the last, although the lower branches that lie on the ground are apt to take roote, which sheweth, that in the naturall place where it feeleth no cold winter, it speadeth and increaseth. 
5. Satureia Cretica spinosa. Prickly Savory of Candy. Pona, in his Italian description of Mount Baldus maketh mention of this Savory, but without any description or fur∣ther relation; whereby I gather that there is small diffe∣rence betweene it and the last, saving that as in the Chama∣drys spinosa, the branches have small prickes on them at the ends, and therefore I cannot yet give you any further know∣ledge of it, having not seene it. Bauhinus also hath made mention of another, received from Contarenus for Thymbra, and as he saith is the Satureia Dioscoridis by Matthiolus; but because I doe not thinke it to be a Savory, I forbeare it here. 
The Place and Tyme. All these Savories are with us onely noursed in gardens, but they are as wilde hearbes in divers parts of Europe, especially in Groves very plentifully, and are intituled to their places; flourishing in the end of summer, some not abiding the winter. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke, &amp; forte ob fragrantiam, in Latine Satureia, aljis a saturando dicta, alijs, a Satyris nomen traxisse putant, eo quod, coitus marcessentes stimulat: some also call it Thymbra in Latine, and some take Satureia &amp; Thymbra to bee differing plantes. The Arabians call it Sahuter or Sahutar, the Italians Savoreggia Coniella &amp; Peverella, the Spanyardes, Axadrea &amp; Segurella, the French, Savoreè, Sauriette &amp; Sadreè, the Germanes, Kunel, Zwibe Hysope, &amp; Sature, the Dutch, Kenle, and winter Kenle, and we in English, Savorye. There is much controversie among our moderne writers, what hearbe should certainely be the Thymbra of Dios∣corides, which in his time as it should seeme was most familiarly known, &amp; therfore giveth no further description thereof, then that it was like unto Tyme, but lesse and more tender, having heads of greene flowers, and that it grew in rough and stony places. Matthiolus giveth us one, Lobel another, Clusius a third, and each entitle theirs to be Vera &amp; legitima: Matthiolus, because it was sent for it, Pena because he founde it growing on Saint Iulians Rocke in the Florentine dominion, and Clusius, because Honorius Bellus sent him the seede from Candye, who saith, that the Candit Greekes call it to this day usually Thrubi &amp; Thrumbi: but it is certaine, that neither our winter or summer Savory doe answere unto the Thymbra of Dioscorides, for that neither of them is like, or lesse then Tyme, although they are familiarly eaten by divers nations being put into brothes, meates, &amp;c. as Dioscorides saith of his garden Thymbra, which as he saith is much lesse then the wilde sort of Thymbra. The first is generally called with us Satureia hyberna, Winter Savorye and by Camerarius, perennis; by Lobel Satureia sive Thymbra altera; by Caesalpinus, Satureia Hortensis. By Brunfelsius, Hyssopus Agrestis; but Thymbrasyl. by Anguilara, by Gesner in hortis, Thymbra a∣grestis, &amp; Satureia montana, by Bauhinus: The second is generally called Satureia sativa &amp; hortensis, or Thymbra sativa, by most writers, but Tabermontanus &amp; Caesalpinus only call it Cunila, and Thymbra agrestis: Gesner in hortis, Thymbra vera, and Bauhinus, Satureia hortensis sive cunila Plinij: but I somewhat doubt whether Pliny meant this Satureia to be Cunila in his 19. booke and 8. chap. or some of the other sorts. And for the name Cunila, it is by him referred to divers other plants; for Origanum Heracleoticum is called by him Cunila gallinacea, Lib. 20. c. 16. and Origanum sylvestre Cunila bubula (as Dioscorides hath it also, as shall bee shewed hereafter) Levisticum also otherwise called Panaces, is falsely called Cunila bubula by Cratevas, as Pliny sheweth both in the 8. chapter of his 19. booke, and in the 15. chap. of his 20. Againe, in the 10. chap. of his 32. booke, he nameth an other herbe Cunila capitata, which in the fourth chap. of his 24. booke hee seemeth to name Policnemum, whereof also Di∣oscorides maketh mention; in an other place he saith, that Cunila is called Cunilago: Columella also calleth Satureia, Cunila, but he maketh Thymbra and Satureia to be two sundry herbes, lib. 9. chap. 4. de re rustica; as also in this verse, Et Satureia Thymi referens Thymbrae{que} saporem: but Pliny in his 19. booke and 8. chap. maketh them to bee both one. The third sort is called by Lobel and Pena, Thymbra vera S. Iuliani, Lugdunensis and Tabermontanus, Thymbra vera Penae; Bauhinus in his notes upon Lugdunensis saith, that the Saxifraga vera Dioscoridis of Matthiolus; is this Thymbra vera of Lobel and Pena; which it is very probable to be, both figure and description answering well thereunto, as any that will compare them may see. The fourth is called by Clusius, Thymbra legitima, Prosper Alpi∣nus, Thymbra Cretensis, and Pona, Thymbra Legitima Dioscoridis, and so doe I thinke also, no other that wee know comming neerer thereunto. 
The Vertues. Our Savory of both sorts is hot and dry in the third degree, especially the summer kinde, which is both sharpe and quicke in taste, expelling winde in the stomacke and bowels, and is a present helpe for the rising of the mother procured by winde, provoketh Vrine and womens courses, and is much commended for women with child to take inwardly, and to smell often thereunto: Some that from Satyris thinke Satureia to be derived, say it helpeth the disease called Satyriasis or Pryapismus, and to helpe dull or decayed coiture: others taking it to bee derived a saturando, say it is in familiar use with many to procure a good appetite unto meate, and to take away all man∣ner of loathing to the same: it cutteth tough flegme in the chest and lunges, and helpeth to expectorate it the more easily: it helpeth to quicken the dull spirites of the Lethargye, the juice being snuffed or cast up into the nostrills: the juice also is of good use to be dropped into the eyes to cleare the dull sight, if it proceede of raw thinne colde humours distilling from the braine: the juice also heated with a little oyle of Roses, and dropped into the eares, easeth them of the noyse and singing in them, and deafenes also: outwardly applyed with white flower in manner of a poultis, giveth ease to the Sciatica or hippe gowte, or paralyticall members, by heating and warming them, and taking away the paine: it taketh away also the stinging of bees, waspes, &amp;c. 
CHAP. III. Thymum &amp; Serpillum. Tyme, and Mother of Tyme. I Have joyned both these sorts of Tyme in one Chapter, for the neere vicinity they have together, both in name and nature, yet eache by themselves they having many sorts apart. 
1. Thymum legitimum capitatum. The true Tyme of the ancients. The true Tyme is a very tender plant, having hard and hoarye brittle branches, spreading from a small woody stemme about a foote and a halfe high, whereon are set at severall joynts, and by spaces many small whitish or hoary greene leaves, of a quicke sent and taste▪ at the toppes of the branches stand small whitish greene heads, somewat like unto the heads of Stoechas, made as it were of many leaves or scales; out of which start forth small purplish flowers, not having any other seede (as Theophirastus and some other of the old authors have set it downe,) and therefore appoint the flowers only, to be sowne as if there were no seede in the heads, thinking it to spring of the flowers alone, which was an errour in them by tradition not experience, for we have found it otherwise. 
2. Thymum durius vulgare. Our common garden Tyme. Our ordinary garden Tyme, is also a small low woody plant, with brittle branches, and small hard greene leaves on them, well knowne to most, having small white purplish flowers, standing with some leaves in roundles round about the toppes of the stalkes; the seede is small and browner then Marjerome seede; the roote is woody and abideth well divers winters, if they be not too violent, and the plants not growne too great or woody, which then will perish therein. 
3. Thymum durius Candidius. Hoarye Tyme. Among the seedes of the last recited Tyme, which I sowed in my garden, came up this hoarye Tyme, which is in forme like it, but that the branches are smaller, and the leaves whiter or more hoary, a little also more thinly or spar∣sedly set on the branches; the flowers, seedes, and rootes are like the former, and so are both sent and taste, but ra∣ther more quicke. 
4. Thymum latifolium. Masticke Tyme. This Tyme groweth not so upright as the former, but rather lyeth and spreadeth upon the ground, small but many more branches, nothing so woody; the leaves also are not so hard but broader; the flowers are of a purplish white colour, standing in roundles as the two first sorts: this better endureth the winters, and longer, yet giveth no seede, but is propagated by slipping: the taste and sent is not altogether so quicke as the ordinary garden kinde. 
5. Thymum inodorum. Vnsavory Tyme. This is a lowe small shrubby plant, very like unto the first kinde, with hard branches and hairy more then it: the 1. Thymum legitimum capitatum. The true Tyme of the ancients. 
2. Thymus durius Common garden Tyme. 
leaves are set at distances, many growing together, but without either small or taste utterly: The flowers are of a pale purplish colour, and grow like the common sorts, at the toppes round about the branches. 
6. Serpillum Narbonense. French wilde Tyme. This wilde Tyme groweth with many hard or wood∣dy 6. Serpillum Narbonense. French wilde Tyme. 
7. Serpillum maius. The greater mother of Tyme. 
branches, somewhat upright, leaning a little downe∣wards, somewhat like unto our garden Tyme, set with many leaves together at spaces, which are somewhat longer then the rest, lesse sweet, &amp; more strong and heady in sent, somwhat like unto Southernwood, &amp; lesse hot or sharpe also in taste: the flowers grow in wharles or roun∣dles, by p towards the tops of the stalkes, with some leaves at them being of a purplish colour, very like unto garden Tyme: both stalkes and leaves are of a whitish hoarines, and abide all the winter. 
7. Serpillum majus. The greater mother of Tyme. This greater Mother of Tyme groweth more upright then the common wild kinde doth, with two leaves for the most part at a joynt like the other, but greater and not of so darke a greene colour, but rather resembling Marjerom leaves; the flowres grow at the toppes of the stalkes, of a redish purple colour like unto garden Tyme, but som∣what larger as the whole plant is and of a small, but somewhat hot sent and taste. 
There is another of this kinde, that beareth white flowers and fresher greene leaves, else in other things like the former.
1. Origanum Heracleoticum verius. Organie, or bastard Marjerome of Greece. This bastard Marjerome riseth up with divers hard, round, red∣dish 1. Origanum Heracleoticum Verius. Organy, or bastard Marjerome of Greece. 
4. Origanum Sylvestre sive vulgare. Wilde Organy. 
greene stalkes, spreading forth into other smaller branches, whereon are set sundry leaves by couples at the joynts, being somewhat round, and of a whitish greene colour, very like unto Marjerome, but larger, whiter, and harder, or rougher in hand∣ling: at the toppes or the branches stand such like scaly heads or knots, as Marjerome hath, but longer, from whence come small whitish purple flowers, and afterwards small brownish seed. The whole plant riseth with us not much higher than Marje∣rome, but of a hotter and sharper scent and taste, yet somewhat pleasant withall. 
2. Origanum Onitis Matthioli. White Organie of Greece. This Organy differeth somewhat from the former, for it hath whiter and narrower leaves: the flowers also are white, and the heads more divided or separated into smaller tuftes: this is rather more tender to keepe than the former, hardly abiding the sharpnesse of our winter, although it be as well defended. 
3. Origanum Onitis aliudmajus. The greater White Organy, This hath larger and whiter leaves than the former, the umbels or tufts of heads are larger also, and more spread abroad than they, which beare white flowers in the like manner. This kind is somewhat more hardy, and will better abide a Winter, if there be any care used to preserve it. There is also another with somewhat longer leaves than this. 
4. Origanum Sylvestre sive vulgare. Wilde Organy. This kind of wilde Organy (which is the ordinary kinde brought from Candy, and other places, and usually kept in our Apothecaries shops) riseth up with divers round hard stalkes, whereon are set somewhat broader, lesser, and rougher leaves than the former; the flowers stand at the toppes of the branches in manner of an umbell, that is in smaller heads, and more disper∣sed than the former, of a reddish purple colour, after which come small brownish seed: the root perisheth when it hath gi∣ven seed, most especially with us. 
The Place. All these kindes of Bastard Marjeromes have come to us from divers places, but which of them is more proper to this or that place, hath not beene truely signified vnto us; for some have named that Creticum which others have Hispa∣nicum, so that it is likely to be naturall in both those places. 
The Time. They flower or at least beare their toppes or heads about the end of August, or middle of September with us, so that their seed scarcely commeth to maturity in our Country. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke vel montem &amp; gaudium, quod clivosos montososque locos amat, vel &amp; id est quod visum illustret &amp; acuat vel a &amp; redundante o, per antiphrasim, natura enim caelidum est, in Latine Origanum. The first is called Origanum Heraclioticum, by Matthiolus, Gesner, Castor Durantes, Lobel, Lugdunensis, Camerarius, Tabermontanus, and Dodonaeus, &amp; hath been sent me by the name of Creticum, and also Hispanicum. Bauhinus saith it is the Cunila Galli∣nacea of Pliny, and Dioscorides calleth it Cunila. The second Matthiolus calleth Onitis, and so doe Gesner, Castor Duran∣tes, Bauhinus, and Lugdunensis, who saith also that some cal∣led it Marum, and came to me by the name Italicum. The third Camerarius calleth Onites, whom Bauhinus follow∣eth. The fourth is the common Origanum as I said we have in shops, and is thought by Ruellius to be the Cunila Bubula of Pliny, whom Bauhinus followeth. Dioscorides saith that this (if it be his wild kinde) was called also in his time Cu∣nila. But to discusse how fitly each of these sorts answere unto those of Dioscorides, I think it fittest to prefixe the text of Dioscorides, by which they may be compared. Origanum, Heracleoticum, (saith Dioscorides ) which is also called Cu∣nila, hath leaves like unto Hysope, the toppes or umbels are not fashioned round, but as it were divided into many parts: the seed in the toppe branches is not great. That Origanum that is called Onitis, hath whiter leaves, and doth more resemble Hisope: it beareth seed in tusts, as it were joyned together, the force or vertue although it be like, yet is lesse effectuall by much. Wilde Origanum, which some call Panax, Heracleum, and others Cunila, (as Nicander Colephonius ) hath leaves like Origanum, and small branches not a foot high, bearing white flowers at the toppes in umbels, like unto Dill: the root is small, and of no use. These bee the words of Dioscorides, whereby comparing his first two sorts, we verily thinke, that howsoever some Authors doe vary in their judgements con∣cerning them, the first of them here set downe is the true (at least the truest hath beene knowne to be) Origanum Heracleoticum of Dioscorides. The two next that follow, the one of Matthiolus, the other of Camerarius, are both in resemblance so neere his Onitis, that we may truely say, that either of them are the same, and that both of them differing but in largnesse of leaves, (which the fertility of the soyle wherein it grew might bee the cause) are but one Onitis. But that wild Origanum of Dioscorides, that hath an umbell like unto Dill is not to be found, unlesse the wilde Origanum, that is to be had at the Druggists and Apothecaries be his for it is the neerest thereunto, being the strangest and quickest in taste, which by Galeus judgement is the best. The Arabians call it Fandenigi, or Fandenegi: the Italians Origano; the Spaniards, Oreganos: the French Origan, and Marjolaine, bastarde: the Germanes Volgemuth, quasi dicas animi bonitatem vel laetitiam &amp; Rott Dosten, or Costent: the Dutch Orega: and we in English, Organy, or bastard Marjerome. 
The Vertues. The decoction of Organy or bastard Marjerome with wine, is good for those that are bitten with Serpents, or venemous beasts, and to be taken with sodden wine, for such as have taken Hemlocke, or Opium: with Oxymel it is good for those that have taken poison, or the root of Colchicum Ephemerum. It is given with Figges to those that are bursten, or have a rupture, convulsions or cramps, or have the Dropsie. The dryed hearbe taken in honyed water, purgeth downwards, blacke or melancholick humors. It helpeth to procure womens courses, and taken with Honey, is helpfull to those that have a cough. It profiteth those that have an itch, or are scabbed and mangy, and those that have the Iaundise, are much holpen by a decoction thereof taken when they are in a bath. The juyce of the greene hearbe healeth the swellings of the almonds of the throat, and the ulcers of the mouth; it draweth forth fleagme by the nostri s, if it be infused in the oyle of Flower-de-luces. It easeth the paines of the eares, being used with milke. A medicine purging by vomit is made with it, Onions, and Sumach, (such as is used to be eaten) being set in the Sunne for 40. dayes, in a copper vessell, whilst the Dogge-starre lasteth. All Serpents will avoide the place where the hearbe is strowed. The wild kinde especially, healeth all bytings of venemous beasts, if the heads and flowers be taken in wine. And to this purpose Antigonus an ancient Greeke Author, in his Rhapsody or huddle of memorable reports, relateth a pretty fable of a Tortois eating Origanum, when hee goes to fight with the Serpent, which when one had heedfully observed, he cut up the Origanum where it grew, and took it away; whereof when the Tortoise was deprived, he perished by the venemous force of the Serpent; which fa∣ble Plutarch in his naturall questions, relateth somewhat otherwise: that is, that the Tortoise having eaten of the flesh of a Viper, by eating the hearbe Origanum, was free from the danger. The same Antigonus setteth downe there also another fable of Ring-doves, who by putting Origanum into their wounds, were thereby cured. As also that if the hills of Ants were stopped up with Origanum and Brimstone, they would quickly flie away: which thing also Palladius reporteth. Galen saith all the sorts are of a cutting, rarefying, or thinning faculty, and that in the third degree, and that the Heracleoticum is of more efficacy than Onitis, and the wild stronger than either. The decoction of Origanum with a few Cloves and Sugar, helpeth those that have the Hickock exceedingly. The powder thereof mixed with a little Salt-peter and honey, made into the manner of a thin Electuary, and there∣with the teeth being rubbed for sundry times, will make them whiter and firmer. 
CHAP. VII. Tragoriganum. Goates Marjerome. B Ecause the Tragoriganum is joyned next unto the Origanum, I thinke it fitting for to shew you them in the same manner, yet in a distinct chapter by themselves, for that their face and property is a little dif∣fering. 
1. Tragoriganum Creticum. Goates Organy of Candy. This small low Tragoriganum of Candy hath divers small low branches, not above a foot high, somewhat wood∣dy, whereon are set at severall joynts two leaves, and sometimes more, which are somewhat broader, rougher, and harder than the leaves of Candy Tyme, and somewhat like unto Summer Savory, but of a sadder greene co∣lour, the small hooded gaping flowers stand at the top of the branches, in severall distances about the stalkes, of a purplish red colour, the whole plant and every part thereof tasteth very hot and sharp, and smelleth very sweet, but somewhat strong and quick, soone piercing the sences, and abideth greene all the Winter if it be carefully pre∣served, but left without defence, it seldome abideth, the roote spreadeth with many small fibres thereat. 
2. Tragoriganum latifolium sive Marum Cortusi Matthiolo. Broad leafed Goates Organy, or Marjerome. This other Goats Marjerome is a fine small bushy plant, little above halfe a foot high, whose stalkes are not so wooddy, but tenderer like Marjerom, with many small smooth gentle leaves, two for the most part set together at a joynt, somewhat broader than our Mastick Tyme, of so strong, hot, and quick a scent, that being a little brui∣sed and smelled unto, it pierceth the sences more than the former, and commeth somewhat neere unto the scent of Calamint or Pennyroyall; the flowers are small and purple, growing up to the toppes of the branches, from be∣tweene the joynts; this bideth greene also like the former, but requireth as much care in the preserving it in the Winter, as the former: the root is a blackish bush of many fibres set together like Marjerome. 
3. Tragoriganum Hispanicum. Spanish Goates Marjerome. This Spanish kinde riseth up somewhat higher than the former, with whiter and harder stalkes, the leaves are whiter also, smaller, narrower, and longer than they, and more store usually at every joynt, smelling somewhat sweet, but nothing so strong or quick, nor tasting so hot as they: the flowers are white, and grow at severall di∣stances towards the tops of the stalkes, but larger and more gaping, standing in brownish greene huskes: this also a∣bideth green in the winter, but is more hardly preserved than either of the former: the root is more wooddy, and lesse bushy than they. 
4. Tragoiganum Creticum. Goates Organy of Candy. 
2. Tragoriganum latifollum sive Marum Cortusi Matthiola. Broad leafed Goates Organy, or Marjerome. 
3. Tragoriganum Hisponicum. Spanish Goates Marjerome. 
4. Tragoriganum Matthioli. Goates Marjerome, with wilde Tyme leaves. 
 
4. Tragoriganum Matthioli. Goates Marjerome, with wilde Tyme leaves. Matthiolus first set forth this plant, calling it Tragori∣ganum, which he saith he doth assume to be so, having divers stalkes from a bushy root, and small leaves grow∣ing thereon at severall distances, which are like unto the ordinary wild Tyme, or mother of Tyme: the flowers are purple, standing in rundles, at the toppes of the branches. This smelleth somewhat like Pennyroyall.
The Place. This first groweth in Candy and in Spaine also, as Clusius saith. The second is not knowne (being not set down by Cortusus, which sent it to Matthiolus ) where it groweth. The third Clusius saith he found in the Kingdome of Valentia in Spaine. The last, Matthiolus saith groweth in the Country of Forojulium. 
The Time. They all flower very late with us, and some so late, that we hardly see any flowers untill October, if we see any at all. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke (and in Latine Tragoriganum) quasi hircum origanum dicas, quod pubulo gratum sit hircis, ut Onitis asinis, potius quam, quod hircum faeteat. The first is called by Pena and Lobel in their Adversaria Tragoriganum Cretense apud Venetos, by Clusius Tragoriganum 3 Hispanicum; by Caspar Bauhinus in his Pinax, Tragoriganum Creticum: and it is likely to be the greater Tyme of Candy, that Prosper Alpinus setteth downe in his Booke of Aegyptian plants. The second is called by Gesner, Tragoriganum alterum, and so doth Lobel, which is that Marum that Cortusus sent unto Matthiolus for Thymum Creticum, and by that name of Marum, Durantes, Lug∣dunensis, and Tabermontanus doe call it, and Bauhinus, Tragoriganum latifolium. The third is the second Spanish Tragoriganum of Clusius, bearing white flowers, whom Dodonaeus and Camerarius in his Epitome of Matthio∣lus upon Dioscorides, Lugdunensis and Tabermontanus doe follow. The last is the Tragoriganum of Matthiolus, whom Durantes, Lugdunensis, and Tabermonianus doe follow, and Bauhinus calleth Tragoriganum Serpillifolium. To show you likewise how aptly these plants are called Tragorigana, and how they disagree, it were not amisse to give you the text of Dioscorides thereon. Tragoriganum (saith he) is a small bush or shrub, with leaves and stalkes like unto Serpillum, or Origanum, in some places it is found more fresh and greene, with broader leaves, and somewhat clammy. Another sort is found with slender branches, and small leaves, which some have called Prassium. All these Authors have delivered us these hearbs here mentioned, under the name of Tragoriganum, as supposing them to come neerest unto one or other of those of Dioscorides, both for their forme, sweetnesse of scent, and hotnesse in taste: and Lobel saith that among all the plants that are entituled Tragoriganum, hee could finde none that came neerer to those of Dioscorides, than those two sorts he alloweth of, and are the two first here set downe, the one called by the Venetians Cretense, and that other small low plant that Matthiolus setteth forth, under the name of Marum, which he saith he had from Cortusus. But because they are more hot and sharp than I suppose Dioscorides his to be, for he saith the drinke made of them is both mild and pleasant, or delectable; fit to be taken of those that have loathing stomacks; and moreover, that Galen saith that Tragoriganum, besides the quality of Origanum, hath some astriction or binding property in it also, which in my judgement abateth of the heate of them, making it the milder, but although I cannot absolutely subscribe unto them herein, yet I deny not any of them their due praises, nor their first founders their befitting honours. Bellonius at the latter end of the 62 chapter of his first booke of observations, saith that those of Candy and Cythera, doe call our Winter Savory by the name of Tragarigoni, which is Tragoriganum. 
The Vertues. Dioscorides saith they doe heate or warme the parts whereunto they are applyed, provoke urine, and are profi∣table to move the belly downewards, by purging choller, if the decoction thereof be taken inwardly; as also, that a decoction made thereof with vinegar, helpeth those that are troubled with the spleene; and taken in wine, hel∣peth those that have taken the venemous Ixia (which is the roote of the black Chamaeleon Thistle, having as he saith, the taste and smell of Basill) procureth womens monethly courses, and given with honey in an Electuary, helpeth those that have a cough, and are short winded: the drinke thereof is milde and delectable, fit to be given to those that loath their meate, and have weake stomacks, or such as have sowre belchings, and for those vomitings that are procured by the tossings and aire of the Sea, and also for the heart-burning. Galen saith in his eighth booke of simple medicines, that it hath the same properties that the Origana have, but withall, hath a little astri∣ction. Pliny in a manner hath the same things, for he saith, it provoketh urine, dissolveth tumors or swellings, and is especially good for those that have taken the poison of Viscum, (for so he termeth the Ixia of Dioscorides ) in drinke, and for the biting of a Viper: for sowre belchings of the stomack, the heart-burning, and for coughes, Plurisies, and shortnesse of breath. 
CHAP. VIII. Ocimum. Bassill. T Here are divers sorts of Basill, the most whereof are very great strangers to our Nation, and but en∣tertained by a few that are curious and industrious. 
1. Ocimum vulgare majus &amp; minus. The great and small common Bassill. The greater ordinary Basill riseth up usually but with one upright stalke, diversly branching forth on all sides, whereon are set two leaves at every joynt, which are somewhat broad and round, yet a little pointed, of a pale greene colour, but fresh, a little snipt about the edges, and of a strong heady scent, somewhat like a Pome∣citrion, as many have compared it, and therefore called it Citratum: the flowers are small and white, standing at the tops of the branches with two small leaves at the joynt, in some places greene, in others browne, after which come black seed: the root perisheth at the first approach of winter weather, and is to be new sowne every yeare, Minus. if you will have it. The lesser kinde called small, fine, or bush Basill, groweth not so high, but is thicker spread with branches, and smaller leaves thereon, closer set together, and of a more excellent plea∣sant sweet scent by much: the flowers are white, and the seed black like the other, when it giveth seed with us, which is more seldome, for it hath not beene knowne to give ripe seed in our Country often, because it neither springeth nor seedeth so early as the former. Vnto these sorts of Basill I must adde the third, which is as it were the meane betweene them, Mediū. being greater than the small one, and lesser in leaves than the great, and not grow∣ing so high, in other things differing not. 
2. Ocimum maximum Citratum. The greatest Citron Basill. This kinde of Basill differeth not in the manner of grow∣ing 1. Ocimum vulgare. Ordinary Basill. 
7. Ocimum Minus. The small Basill. 
2 Ocimum Maximum The great Basill. 
6. Ocimum Indicum. Indian Basill. 
from the greater ordinary garden Basill: but brancheth forth like it, with leaves set by couples at the joynts, but much larger, and of a reddish colour in the hotter Countries, but not so in the colder, a little dented about the edges, of a very sweet scent, resembling a Citron pill, and therefore called Citratum; the flowers are white like the ordinary Basill, and the seed black like it, perishing also after it hath flowred and seeded. 
3. Ocimum caryophyllatum maximum. The great Clove Basill. There is another also of these greatest Basils that differeth not from the former, either in growing, or largenesse of leaves, or colour of the flowers, except that sometimes they are a little purplish, but in the smell of the whole plant, it hath a stronger and quicker scent, more neerely re∣sembling Cloves, then the former, and is thereupon named Caryophyllatum. 
4. Ocimum Anisatum. Aniseed Basill. This Basill is of the kind of our ordinary garden Basill, and of a middle kinde, whose leaves are neither so great as the greater, nor so small as the small kindes, but of a middle size betweene them both, the difference whereof consisteth chiefly in the smell, which is like the smell of Aniseed. 
5. Ocimum Indicum. Indian Basill. The Indian Basill hath a square reddish greene stalke, a foot high, or better, from the joynts whereof spread out many branches with broad fat leaves set thereon, two alwayes at a joynt one against another, as the Basils have, but somewhat deepely cut in on the edges, and oftentimes a little crumpled, standing upon long reddish foot stalkes, of a darke purple colour, spotted with deeper purple spots, in some greater, in others lesse: the flowers stand at the tops of the stalkes, spike fashion, of a white colour, with reddish stripes and veines running thorow them, set or placed in darke purple coloured huskes: the seed is greater and rounder than any of the former, and somewhat long withall: the root perisheth like the rest. The whole plant smelleth strong like unto the ordinary Basill and Camfire put together. 
6. Ocimum Crispum. Curld Basill. This curled Bassill is of the kinde of the Indian Bassill, having such like large leaves cut in somewhat deepely on the edges, and curled or crumpled as they are sometimes, as also with swelling bunches like bladders on them, but wholly of a greene colour, without any spot on them, as the stalkes are also: the flowers hereof are likewise wholly white, without any spot in them: the smell hereof is somewhat strong, resembling the spotted Indian kinde, and is very likely to be but a degenerate kinde, risen from the seed thereof, being gathered in these colder Countries, 
7. Ocimum minus angustifolium. Small dented Basill. This small Basill groweth not so like any of the former Bassills, or the small fine bush Bassill, in the bushing branches thereof, but rather somewhat resembling the wild Bassill, or Clinopodium, ha∣ving fewer stalkes and branches, with small narrow leaves, a lit∣tle snipt or indented about the edges, two alwayes set together at a joynt, but more sparsedly on the branches; the flowers grow at the tops of the branches, somewhat like unto Bassil of a white colour, but bending a little more backward, the smell hereof is smaller than any of the other Bassils. 
The Place. These plants grow onely in Gardens with us, as also in Italy, and other places where they are cherished; their naturall being not knowne to us: onely the Indian and curld Basill are said to come first from the West-Indies into Spaine, and from thence in∣to other places. 
The Time. They all flower in the heate of Summer, and some of them latter. 
The Names. There is some controversie among Writers concerning this plant, in three or foure particular matters: first, for the etymologie or derivation of the word, some thinking it to be derived from the Greeke word , and the Latine ocyus, that is, a celeritate crescendi, from the speedy springing of the seed (which is usually within three or foure dayes, if it be a hot and dry time without raine, for moysture turneth it into a gelly, as any one may see, that will looke on it after it hath taken wet) which is written with . Secondly, as some thinke, from the Greeke word oleo, which signifieth, to smell, or give a savour, as commonly taken in the worst sence as in the best; and so would have the word to be Ozimum, of the sweet smell thereof. Thirdly, whether it should be Ocymum, as it is to be found in divers ancient Writers, or Ocimum. Fourthly, what Ocymum is of the ancient Writers, for by divers it is taken to be that kinde of graine called Fagopyrum, or Tragopyrum, in English Buckwheate, or else a kinde of medley of Corne or Pulse sowne together, as many ancient Writers have set it downe, as shall be shewed in his proper place, whereunto I shall referre you. And lastly, about the vertues as shall be shewed presently. It is called by the latter Greeke Writers, . Basilicum, because the smell thereof being so excellent, is fit for a Kings house. The first two sorts of these Bassils are by all Authors so called, as I doe. The second is the same Ocymus that Prosper Alpinus saith groweth in the Gardens of Alexandria in Egypt. The third is so called by Lobel and others. The fourth is onely set forth in the great Booke of the Bishop of Eystot his garden: the fift is called Hispanicum, by Camerarius and Tabermontanus, and Indicum, by Chusius and others. The sixt is as is said in the description, a degenerate kind of the last before it. The last is so called by Estetensis, as is here expressed. The Ara∣bians call it Berandaros, and Badobrog, the Italians Basilico; the Spaniards Albahaca; the French Basilic; the Ger∣manes Basilgen, and Basilgram; the Dutch Basilicom; and we in English Bassill. 
The Vertues. Bassill in all Countries for the most part is of little use in Physick, but rather used as a sweet smelling hearbe to sweeten or perfume any thing, or else used outwardly to comfort and warme cold members. Dioscorides saith that being eaten in any plentifull manner, it dulleth the sight, maketh the belly soluble, stirreth up wind, provo∣keth urine, with-draweth the mill e, and is of hard digestion. Galen also saith it is accounted among those things that are hot in the second degree, but because it hath an excrementitious moysture joyned with it, it is not fit to be taken inwardly: and in another place, that it is an hearbe for sawce, or meate, hurtfull to the stomack, breeding ill juyce, and hard to be digested. It is held by Crysippus (as Pliny saith) who inveied bitterly against the use thereof, to be hurtfull both for the stomack, urine, and eye-sight: and besides, causeth a kinde of madnesse and le∣thargie, and other diseases of the liver, &amp;c. And that those of Affrica say, that if any have eaten Bassill, that day he is stung by a Scorpion, that he cannot be saved: which saying is quite contrary to that of Dioscorides, that saith, from those of Affrica, that he shall have no paine or danger, that is stung by a Scorpion, if he have eaten Bassill before. Pliny setteth downe, that in his time it was defended from such calumnies as Crisippus cast upon it, and was commended to be profitable against the sting of Scorpions, and some other venemous Serpents; and found to be helpfull and wholsome for those are given to swouning, used with vineger, and smelled unto: used with oyle of Roses, or Mirtles, and Vineger, is good against the paines of the head, it is profitably applyed to those are troubled with the lethargie, the jaundise and dropsie. It is good to be put into the eares of young children with a little goose-grease, to helpe them of paines thereof: the juyce o the seed bruised put into the nostrils, procureth neesing: it is good also for the trembling of the heart, it provoketh Venery, and therefore was given to horses to make them apt to breed. Some of the ancient Writers likewise have set downe, that the seed is good to kill the wormes of the belly, to lessen the spleene, and that bruised and mixed with Oxegall, it taketh away the foule markes and scarres of ulcers, and other sores. And used with honey, it taketh away the discolourings and spots of the face. The Arabian Authors and Mesues chiefly have used the seed among other Cordiall Spices, for the comforting of the heart in the trembling thereof, and the expelling of Melancholy or sadnesse, that riseth without manifest cause. And for these causes chiefly the seed is used by our later Physicians for the most part: the fragrant smell of this hearbe so comfortable to the sences, reviving them as it were, when they are dull or distempered, may evidently declare a singular efficacy to be therein, and therefore not to be smally regarded. Theophrastus in his first booke, and eighth Chapter de causis plantarū, saith that Bassill growing in a place too much exposed to the heate of the Sunne, changeth into Serpyllum, or wild Tyme, by the overmuch drynesse thereof, for the leafe becommeth smaller, and the scent the stronger thereby: but these Metamorphoses or changes of hearbs one into another, is very frequent both with him, Pliny, yea, and Gallen too, as well as divers others of the ancient Writers, which sheweth in what errours men of judgement and learning have beene conversant and confident in. Let me yet be∣fore I leave, relate unto you a pleasant passage betweene Franciscus Marchio, an Advocate of the state of Genua, sent in Embassage to the Duke of Millan, and the said Duke, who refusing to heare his message, or to agree unto the conditions proposed, brought an handfull of Bassill and offered it to him, who demanding of him what hee meant thereby, answered him, that the properties of that hearbe was, that being gently handled, it gave a plea∣sant smell, but being hardly wrung and bruised, would breed Scorpions: with which witty answer the Duke was so pleased, that he confirmed the conditions, and sent him honourably home. It is also observed, that Scorpions doe much rest and abide under those pots or vessels wherein Bassill is planted.
CHAP. IX. Clinopodium. Field Bassill, &amp; Acinos. Wild or Rough Bassill. I Have as you see joyned both these together for the affinity, both of their name and nature unto the for∣mer Bassils, and betweene themselves, for that divers of our latter Writers doe confound them, the one calling that Alcinos, that another doth Clinopodium. 
1. Clinopodium minus sive vulgare. Field Bassill, or Beds foote flower, That Clinopodium that is taken by the best Writers and other Herbarists in these dayes, to come neerest unto the description of Dioscorides, is a small low hearb not above 1. Clinopodium minus sive vulgare. Field Basill, or Beds foot flower. 
2. Clinopodium Austriacum. Austrian wild Basill. 
3. Clinopodium Alpinum. Mountaine wild Basill. 
halfe a foot high, having divers hard round branches, ri∣sing from a small wooddy root, with two small leaves set at every joynt, being somewhat like the small or fine Basill, a little dented about the edges; and in some plants, and places a little hairie and rough, and in other lesse, or not at all; the flowers grow at spaces with the leaves, like as Horehound doth, standing in small greene rough cuppes, which are of a purplish colour, and parted as it were into foure equall short pieces at the end, like the foure square foote of a Bed-stead, and not hooded or open with severall leaves, like other hooded flowers: the seed is small and round, growing in small swollen huskes: the plant hath some small heate, but more drynesse in the taste thereof, sweet also in scent, betweene Basill and Calamint. 
2. Clinopodium Austriacum. Austrian wild Basill. The Austrian wild Basill hath divers slender hard foure-square stalkes, not a foote high, whereon are set two greene leaves at every joynt, somewhat like the former Field Ba∣sill, but smaller, being a little dented about the edges, which is forgotten in the figure: the flowers stand at the toppes of the stalkes, somewhat like unto the flowers of the former, but much larger, and of a violet purple colour, somewhat sad for the most part, (but some plants are found with white flowers) hanging downewards, and bending also backwards for the most part, in like manner as the former: the seed is enclosed in such like swollen huskes, blacke and round, three or foure together like Calamint, or somewhat resembling the other: the rootes are many, hard and black, with divers fibres annexed unto them. 
3. Clinopodium Alpinum. Mountaine wild Basill. The Mountaine wild Basill groweth with divers low and creeping foure-square rough branches, having two small rough leaves at every joynt, and some smaller also between them, growing all along the stalkes: the flowers are many growing in a head together, with the leaves among them; at the toppes of the branches, very like unto the flowers of the first, but of a darke red colour: the rootes are ma∣ny small blackish strings, which shoot forth under ground new sprouts, thereby creeping about and increasing plentifully, abiding with his greene leaves, which perish not. 
4. Acinos sive Clinopodium majus. Great wilde Basill, or Stone Basill. 4. Acinos sive Clinopodium majus. Great wild Basill, or Stone Basill. 
6. Acinos latifolia Columna. Broad leafed wild Basill. 
This wild Basill hath foure-square hard, hairie, and hoary stalkes, a foote high, or more, set with two hairie greene leaves at a joynt, being covered also as the stalks, with an hoary downe somewhat larger than any of the former, comming neere unto the bignesse and fashion of the leaves of Origanum: the flowers grow in rundles, in more plenty than the former, of a pur∣plish colour, and sometimes white, the husks whereof are some∣what larger and rougher: the roots are a bush of many strings set together at the head, which shoot forth suckets round a∣bout. 
Aliud Of this kinde there is also another, whose stalkes are lower, the leaves lesser, and the huskes of the flowers smaller than the former, not differing in any other thing from it. 
5. Acinos Anglica Clusij. Our English wild Basill. The English wild Basill hath a few slender foure-square bran∣ches, not a foote long, lying on the ground, whereon grow di∣vers small grayish greene leaves, two alwayes at a joynt set to∣gether, which are not much unlike the first Field Basill, but smaller, shorter, and fuller of juyce, and not dented about the edges at all, very like unto the last wild Basill, but smaller, of a certaine sweet scent, but not heady: from the middle of the branches up to the toppes, grow the flowers in rundles or spaces about the stalkes, being very like unto the first Field Basill, but of a more bluish purple colour, with a white eye or circle in every flower, and after they are past, come three or foure small seeds like the first, in the huskes where the flowers stood: it perisheth every yeare in my garden, and rayseth it selfe from its owne sowing. 
6. Acinos latifolia Columna. Broad leafed wild Basill. The great leafed wild Basill riseth from a bushy roote, with a rough or hayrie stalke, spreading forth into divers other bran∣ches, whereon grow larger leaves below, and smaller upwards, two together; at the setting on of the leaves, which are also rough or hairy, very like unto the leaves of the greater Basil, but somewhat smaller and longer, endented about the edges, and each of them standing on a long stalke, towards the tops the flowers grow much, and are many, spike fashion, of a pur∣plish colour, very like unto the flowers of the garden Basill, after which come the seed vessels, containing within them small round blackish seed. 
The Place. The first groweth most usually in the borders of fields, even among the corne, as at Sutton in Kent, not farre from Dart∣ford, at Thetford in Norfolke, and in other dry sandy and un∣tilled grounds: The second groweth upon the hills that are neere the Baths at Baden in Austria, as Clusius saith, and up∣on Mount Baldus, as Pona of Verona saith. The third also groweth upon Mount Baldus in Italy, as the same Pona set∣teth downe, in the description of the hearbes growing there∣on. The fourth is found sometimes in the corne fields of our owne Countrie, but more often in the more open Woods, and in Copses that have beene feld in many places of Eng∣land. The fift Clusius saith he found likewise in Kent, while he stayed a while at the Lord Cobhams, wayting for his pas∣sage over Sea, but it is found in divers other places of Kent, and other parts besides. The last Fabius Columna saith, grow∣eth plentifully at Naples in their Gardens. 
The Times. They doe all of them flower about the beginning of Iune; and their seed is ripe in August, and sometimes sooner. 
The Name. Clinopodium is called in Greeke quasi lectipes quod surculi (alijs ut Plinio, orbiculati florum ambitus) speciem pedum lecti praebeant, in English Bedsfoot flower, because the branches say some (but Pliny saith, the round compasse of the flowers) doe resemble the feet of a bed, whereupon I have so entituled the first, as most agreeing thereunto , by Dioscorides herba odorata coronaetia, ocimo similis. Acinus is a sweet hearb fit for Garlands, and is like unto Basill. Pliny saith Acinos that is called Epipetron never flowreth, therein confounding the Epipetron of Theophrastus, which he saith never flowreth with Acinus, but Di∣oscorides saith no such thing, and therefore Pliny was much mistaken herein, as he was in many other things. The first is called Ocimum Silvestre, and Clinopodium minus or vulgare by Lobel and Clusius: and Acinos by Fuchsius in Iconibus, and by Dodonaeus: Clinopodium of Turner, and Anguillara: Clinopodium majus of Camerarius: Pulegium petraeum of Gesner, Clinopodium alterum, or pseudo-clinopodium of Matthielus. Ocimastrum of Fuchsius. Bauhinus calleth it Clinopodium arvense ocimi facie, it is the Basilicum 3. of Tragus, who calleth it also Calamintha montana, but of all other most improperly; in English, Field Basill, because it is chiefly found in the Fields, the Country people call this as well as the fift where it groweth, Horse Time, and Poley mountaine. The second Clusius calleth Clinopodium Austriacum, and saith he might as well call it Acinos Austriaca. Bauhinus calleth it Montanum, in En∣glish Austrian wild Basill. The third, Pona calleth Clinopodium Alpinum, having found it onely upon Mons Bal∣dus, not farre from Verona, but why Bauhinus should call it Teucrium Alpinum coma purpurocaerulea in his Chapter of Teucrium, having called it Clinopodium Alpinum hirsutū, among the other sorts of Clinopodium, I see no reason, in English mountaine wild Basill. The fourth is the first Clinopodium vulgare of Matthiolus, and called Clinopodi∣um majus of Camerarius: Lobel and Dalechampius call it Acinos, and Guilandinus Betonica Pauli, it is the first Calamint of Turner, Pulegium montanum of Lonicerus, and Polycnemon of Gesner. Bauhinus calleth it Clinopo∣dium Origano simile, in English great wild Basill. The fift is thought by Clusius to be the true Acinos of Dioscorides, Bauhinus calleth it Clinopodium ocimi facie alterum. The last is called Acinos of Fabius Columna, in his Phytobasanos, and saith it is generally called Vrtichella of the Neapolitans, because it hath such like roughnesse and hairynesse, al∣though not stinging as nettles have, and is an annuall plant to bee new sowne every yeare. But it is much to bee doubted whether any of these hearbs be the right Acinos or Clinopodium, that Dioscorides and Theophrastus have set forth in regard their temperature and qualities doe not agree as you shall heare presently, although Pena and Lo∣bel thinke their Clinopodium to be the right. The Italians call it Clinopodio, the Spaniards Albahaca Sauvage, the French Basilicq Salvage, the Germanes wild Basilich, the Dutch wild Basilicon, and wee in English wild Basill, Field Basill, or as beforesaid. 
The Vertues. Of these hearbs I know no author hath set downe any tryed remedy found by them, for in regard that Galen saith Clinopodium is of thin parts, and may be accounted to be in the third degree of heate and drynesse, being somewhat sharpe in taste, and a little bitter withall, neither of which as saith Matthiolus can be found in these, yet because they doe so neerely in face and shew resemble the true plants, they may beare their names untill they gaine truer and that the vertues are found out, whereunto they may be applyed. Dioscorides saith that his Clinopodium is applyed to those that are troubled with convulsions or crampes, ruptures or burstings, or strangury, that it is a remedy against the sting or byting of venemous Serpents, and that it bringeth downe the courses of women, and expelleth the dead child, and taketh away those warts that are long, and hang downe, if it be drunke for certaine dayes together. It stayeth the loosenesse of the belly, if it be given after it hath beene boyled to the thirds in wine, to them that have no feaver, and in water to them that have a Feaver. Of Acinos, Dioscorides writeth, that being drunke it stayeth both the fluxe of the belly, and the courses in women, and healeth hot swellings, and those are called Saint Anthonies fire. Where you may observe that Acinos should not be Clinopodium, both in regard Dios∣corides maketh them two distinct plants, and besides giveth them contrary qualities, for Acinos he saith stayeth the loosenesse of the belly, and the overmuch flowing of womens courses, whereas hee saith Clinopodium procureth the courses, and expelleth the birth, yet he saith also that it stayeth the loosenesse of the belly, and as Galen saith, is hot and dry in the third degree, and of thin parts. 
CHAP. X. Polium, Poley, or Polemountaine. A Lthough Dioscorides, Galen, and Pliny have remembred but two sorts of Polium, yet our later Writers have found out divers other sorts, which they referre thereunto, some of them grow naturally neere the Sea, and therefore called of some Polium maritimum, others not onely neere the Sea, but upon the hills also, and therefore may as well be called montanum, as maritimum, and others farre off from the Sea, upon hills and mountaines, and therefore called more properly Polium montanum, as shall be shewed in this Chap∣ter following. 
1. Polium montanum vulgare. Our ordinary Poley mountaine. This kind of Polium or Poley mountaine, that is most frequent in our gardens, is a small low plant, having di∣vers white or hoary round and hard branches, (rising from the root, which is somewhat long and hard, with a few fibres hanging thereat, not above a foot high.) whereon are set divers long and small hoary leaves, overlayed as it were with a yellowish white downe, somewhat dented about the edges, and somewhat broader or greater than any of the others that follow, two alwayes set together on the stalkes as they grow up, at the top, whereof grow forth whitish or hoary yellowish heads, thrusting out many small pale coloured flowers, and in some places more yellow, standing in hoary huskes: the seed is small and blackish: the whole plant smelleth sweet, somewhat strong and quick withall, the branches whereof being slipt and set will grow very well, thereby sufficiently to be encreased, because in our Land it seldome giveth perfect seed to bee sowne: yet Clusius saith, that hee had some plants raised from the seed of this kinde, that brought forth flowers more pale than the mother plant, and some more white, especially on the outside; being pale on the inside: but Bauhinus in his Pinax addeth, that it gave some plants whose flowers were of a whitish purple colour, and is to bee accounted the fourth sort of Clusius, which I am sure is not to be found in Clusius, who in that place maketh no mention of any with a purple flower raysed from seed. 
2. Polium montanum minus. Small Spanish upright Poley mountaine. This second or small Poley mountaine, riseth up with many small slender branches standing more upright than 1. Polium montanum vulgare. Our ordinary Poley mountaine.
2. Polium montanum minus. Small Spanish upright Poley mountaine. 
the next, and not leaning downewards to the ground like it, nor much higher, whereon are set many hoary leaves, smaller than the next that followeth, and some small ones together with them, a little dented about the ends onely, and as hoary or rather more than it, at the toppes whereof stand longer and smaller heads of whiter flowers than the next, comming forth of hoary cuppes, larger and more spread than it also: the seed is blackish and small, yet greater than the forme, although the plant be smaller; the roote is hard and wooddy like the for∣mer; the smell hereof is much more sweet than it. 
3. Polium montanum Monspeliacum. Small French Poley mountaine. This third and small Poley mountaine is very like the former, but that the branches stand not so upright, but leane more downewards, the leaves likewise are not fully so large, but as white and hoary, dented a little more about the edges: the hoary heads of flowers which are white, are smaller, and more closely compact, in other things this differeth not from the last. 
4. Polium maritimum Supinum. Creeping purple Poley mountaine. 
5. Polium montanum Supinum minimum. The smallest creeping white flowred Poley mountaine. 
 
4. Polium maritimum Supinum. Creeping purple Poley mountaine. Creeping Poley mountaine hath divers small weake hoary branches lying upon the ground, which as they spread take roote at the joynts, being not a foot long, whereon doe grow many small and long leaves, as white and hoa∣ry as any, a little dented also about the edges, but not easily to be seene, unlesse one marke them well, and in the younger growne not at all: at the toppes of the branches grow smaller heads of hoary huskes, out of which come purplish flowers, and after them small and blackish seed like the former. 
Of this kinde there is another found, bearing white flowers, not differing in any other particular from it. Flore albo. 
5. Polium montanum Supinum minimum. The smallest creeping white flowred Poley mountaine. This small kinde hath many small weake branches, not halfe a foot long, lying creeping on the ground shooting forth fibres at the joynts as they spread, in the same manner as the last doth, whereon are set in the same order, two leaves one against another, all along the branches, being smaller, harder, narrower, and greener than any of the rest, without any denting at all about the edges: at the ends of the branches come forth, three or foure small white flowers, like unto the other for forme and fashion, but much smaller: the seed is not unlike the other: this hath little or no scent at all. 
6. Polium montanum lavendulae folio. Spike leafed Poley mountaine. This Poley mountaine from a hard woody roote, spreading out 6. Polium montanum lavendulae folio. Spike leafed Poley mountaine. 
many small fibres sendeth out divers weake branches, not fully a∣ble to stand, but rather lying downe, whereon are set many small long leaves, two together, one against another, as in al the former, which are somewhat greene on the upper side, and hoary under∣neath, somewhat like unto the leaves of Rosemary or Lavender, and not a whit snipt about the edges; at the toppes of the branches stand forth many flowers, not bushing as in many of the former, but loosely spread, which are of a white colour, not differing in forme from the other, but comming forth of a grayish huske, not so hoary as some of the former: the seed is black like the rest; this kinde hath a small sweet scent, nothing so pleasant as most of the other: Lobel saith it hath little or no scent at all: Matthiolus saith that it smelleth well, though not so pleasant as his former, and that it is of lesse vertue and efficacy than it. 
7. Polium latifolium incanum Creticum. Candy Poley with hoary broad leaves. The branches of this Poley are round and hoary, about a foote high, spread into other smaller branches, set with two leaves at each joynt, which are somewhat broad and round, and dented at the edges like Germander, or the Ivie leafed Chickweed, of a yellowish greene on the upperside, and hoary underneath, with∣out any manifest taste: the flowers have not beene observed. 
8. Polium angustifolium Creticum. Vpright narrow leafed Candy Poley. This Candy Poley groweth almost two foote high with up∣right hard round wooddy stalkes, whereon are set small and long leaves almost round pointed, very like unto the common Polium, but much smaller, &amp; not dented about the edges at all: the flowers and seed are like the common sort, the whole plant is very sweet. 
9. Polium montanum pumilum tenuifolium Africum. The small African dwarfe Poley. This small creeping Poley, hath many very small and hoary white leaves, set together at a joynt all along the stalkes by distances, the flowers are small and yellowish growing at the toppes: the roote is somewhat wooddy as all the rest of the plant is, and somewhat sweet also. 
The Place. The first as I said being the most common in this Land, Clusius saith he found in the Kingdomes of Granada and Valentia. The second Clusius saith he onely found growing upon the hills in Spaine. The third he likewise saith groweth as well in the Kingdome of Valentia in Spaine, as at Mompelier in France. The fourth groweth also in a Province of Spaine, and neere unto Venice also, upon the Adriatick shore. The fift groweth neere Vienna in Austria, and on the hills in Savoy, neere the Lake Lemanus. The sixt groweth in divers places of Germany, as upon the hills of Hamborough, the hills neere Turin, and neere Noremberg also, as Camerarius saith. The seventh as Bau∣hinus saith came to him from Honorius Bellus out of Candy, where the eight also groweth all along the Sea side, and upon Mount Baldus also, as Pona saith: the last was gathered neere Tunis in Barbary, by Boelius, and brought to Doctor Lobel and us. 
The Tyme. They doe most of them flower in Iuly and August, yet some later than others. 
The Names. Polium is called in Greeke sic dictum propter canitiem enim canitiem vel canum significat, quia capitulum habet canorū hominis instar capillatum: because it is like unto the hoary haires of a mans head: but this is referred to the toppes or heads, and not so directly to the leaves as Pliny would have it, although the leaves also are somewhat white and hoary; in Latine Polium, &amp; thereafter all other Nations call it according to their dialect. The first is called Polium montanum vulgare, and Polium montanum luteum by Lobel and Pena in their Adversaria, as also in his ob∣servations, 8. Polium angustifolium Creticum. Vpright narrow leafed Candy Poley. 
9. Polium monta um p nilum tenulsolium Africum. African dwarfe Poley. 
for they answer one another, so that by the name of Lobel (where I name him alone thorowout all this booke) I doe not drowne the name of Pena, nor the name of Lobel, when I name Pena alone: but for brevi∣ties sake name one in stead of both. It is the first of Dod naus in his History or Pemptades in Latine, which I use onely here also. And the third of Clusius in his History of more rare plants, which I chiefly meane, when I cite him through all this worke, because both his Spanish and Pannonick observations are included therein, unlesse I recite his particular observations. The second is the second kinde of Clusius, in his Spanish observations, and the first with Matthiolus. The third is the first with Clusius, and the second with Dodonaeus, called minus and modi∣terraneum of Lobel, and montanum album of Bauhinus in his Pinax. The fourth is the fift and sixt kindes with Clusius, the one with a purple, the other with a white flower, and called of Lobel also Venetum, of Bauhinus in his Pinax, Marit mu sup um vonetum. The fift is the eight sort with Clusius, the fourth with Dodonaeus called repeus, and so likewise by Bauhinus, and montanum supinum minimum of Lobel. The sixt is the seventh with Clusius, and called Polium recentiorum faemina lavendulae folio of Lobel, and is the second of Matthiolus, and called Polium laven∣dulae folio of Bauhinus. Bauhinus first mentioned the seventh, and Pona in his Italian Baldus the eighth, and taketh it to be the second Polium of Dioscorides, the last is not mentioned by any Author before. Fabius Co∣lumna, as I shewed you in the first Chapter, would faine make Polium to be the true Hisope of Dioscorides, but I know not that any doth consent unto that opinion, for by the judgment of the best, this hearbe is the true Poli∣um of all the ancients, as well in face as qualities, and therfore cannot be Hisope, besides, the taste hereof is very loathsome to the stomack, which Dioscorides also remembreth, but Hisope as he saith doth helpe to expectorate flegme, &amp;c. and no pectorall hearbe that I know doth trouble the stomack, by the loathsome bitternesse thereof, as this doth. 
The Vertues. The decoction of this hearbe drunke while it is warme, as Dioscorides saith, helpeth those that are stung or bit∣ten by venemous creatures, yea as he saith, the fumigation or smoke thereof driveth them away, and so doth the hearbe being strowed or layd in Chambers: and although it trouble the stomack, and cause some paines in the head, yet it helpeth the Iaundise, and those that are hydropick, or are troubled with the diseases of the spleene, it moveth the belly, and bringeth downe the feminine courses, and doth consolidate or soder, or cloze the lips of cuts or wounds. Galen thus saith of Polium, in his eighth Booke of simples. It is bitter in taste, and sharpe or quick on the tongue also, and therefore it fre th the inward parts from all obstructions, and provoketh both urine and the feminine courses: being greene and applyed to great cuts or wounds, it closeth them, especially that greater kinde; and being dry, it healeth grievous sores or ulcers, and this the lesser kinde doth best performe. The lesser Polium which we use in Antidotes, or Counter-poysons (as Mithridatum, Venice Treakle, and such like) is the more sharpe and bitter, and is accounted to be dry in the third degree, and hot in the second.
CHAP. XI. Dictamnus. Dittany, &amp; Pseudodictamnus. Bastard Dittanie. I Have thought good in writing of the true Dittany, to make mention of the Bastard kindes thereof, in the same Chapter, both because the face of them, that is the forme and colour of the leaves are very like, and that other good Authors doe the like, reckoning them as kindes thereof. 
1. Dictamus Creticus. Dittany of Candy. Dittany of Candy hath divers hard and brownish, yet 1. Dictamnus Creticus. Dittany of Candy. 
somewhat hoary stalkes rising from the roote, set full of leaves, two standing together one against another, all along the branches, whicn are broad and thick, and almost round, so hoary, white, and covered over with a woolly downe, that they have no shew of greenesse in them, as most other hoary or woolly hearbes have, at the toppes of the branches come forth scaly heads, made as it were of many thin leaves like unto scales, purplish on the outside, and paler on the in∣side, from among which come forth gaping flowers, of a pale purplish colour, and after them small brownish seed: the root consisteth of many blackish strings or fibres, from a harder long root: the whole hearb is of a quick or firy scent, especially if it be fresh, and likewise of a hotter taste, being new, then old, for it much decayeth in keeping: this is very tender, and hardly to be kept a winter in these colder Coun∣tries, so that it seldome commeth to shew any flower, but if you doe transplant some of the branches by slipping and setting them in August, they will better endure the follow∣ing winter, with a little coverture, and may happen to give flowers the yeare following. 
2. Pseudodictamnus. Bastard Dittany. Bastard Dittany riseth up much higher than the former, the branches are a foote and a halfe long many times, as I have observed in mine owne Garden, whereon are set such like hoary and round leaves, as the true hath, but neither so thick in handling, nor so thick set on the branches, but more sparsedly, yet two alwayes together one against another: from the middle of these branches to the toppes of them, come forth the flowers round about the stalkes at the joynts with leaves, which are gaping like the former (and as Pen∣ny-royall, Mints, Calamint, and divers the like hearbs have) of a delayed purplish colour, standing in hoary huskes, after which come the seed, which is greater and blacker than the former, the root hereof is not so black, but more hard and wooddy, shooting downe deepe into the ground, with divers sprayes spreading from it: this hearbe is somewhat hot and sharpe, but not by halfe so much as the former: this doth well endure with us in our Gardens, if the Winter be not too violent sharpe and long, or if there be some care taken of it at such a time; it groweth very well also of the slips being put into the ground about the middle of Aprill, and a little defended from the heate of the Sunne, for a time after the setting, and now and then watered in the meane time. 
3. Pseudodictamnus alter Theophrasti Pona. Another Bastard Dittany. This other bastard Dittany riseth up with many square hoary stalkes more than a foote high, set with two leaves at a joynt like the other, but somewhat larger and longer, toward the toppes whereof with the leaves come forth hoary huskes, like unto those of Melissa Molucca laevis, the great Assirian Balme, but shallower, out of which starte gaping flowers mixed of white and red: the foote spreadeth many fibres: this smelleth reasonable sweet, and abideth the Winter as the other, and is in like manner encreased by slipping. 
As for that hearbe which is called by many Dictamnus albus, and Dictamnum album, and by Matthiolus, Bauhi∣nus and others, placed with these kindes of Dittany together, although they doe all acknowledge that it hath no face or resemblance unto them, and is called Fraxinella, which hath some diversitie therein, as I shall shew you in another place. 
The Place. The Ile of Creete or Candy hath beene thought by the elder Writers, to be the onely place in the whole world, where the true Dittany did grow, and that not generally through the whole Ile, but in one corner of Mount Ida, called Dictaea, which supplyed the uses of all parts, as Theophrastus at large hath set downe, in his ninth Booke, and sixteenth Chapter, the knowledge whereof was utterly lost, and perished with our fore-fathers, and but within a small space of time, or few yeeres since revived and restored to us againe: for Monardus of Ferrara writeth, that in his time it was not knowne, as he setteth it downe in his ninth Booke and third Epistle: his words are these, Dictamno nisi rursus Venus ab Ida sylva deportet omnino deficimus: but Clusius saith in his Appendix altera (which is joyned with his bookes of Exoticks) that it was signified unto him, that it was found also in the Ile of Sardinia, having lesser and whiter leaves than that of Candy, and exceeding sweet 2. Pseudodictamnus. Bastard Dittany. 
3. Pseudodictam nu alter Ponae. Another Bastard Dittany. 
withall. The first Bastard Dittany groweth in many places, as Dioscorides saith, and as Lobel saith he understood by some Italians on Monte negro neere Pisa and Ligorne in the Florentine Dominions. It is sufficient frequent in ma∣ny places of Italy in their Gardens, for we have had the seed thereof among others very often from thence, and abideth well in our Gardens also: the last, as Pona in his Italian Baldus saith, groweth in the Iland Cerigo, and brought from thence to Signor Contareno to Padoa to furnish his Garden. 
The Time. The true Dittany (as I said) hardly flowreth with us at all, and when it doth, it is very late, not bringing any seed, but Dioscorides (as it is found in the old Copies extant) writeth that it beareth neither flower nor seed, even as he had said before of Nardus montana, but Matthiolus defendeth him, saying, that it was most likely to be the slippe or errors of the Writers that set downe for that is fert or profert, for confert, as thus, nec flores, nec fructum, vel semen fert, or profert, for nec flores, nec fructum, vel semen confert, for Theophrastus saith, lib. 9. cap. 16. Vsus foliorum non ramorum nec fructus est, and Virgil and others (although Pliny following the corrupted text of Dioscorides, saith it beareth no flowers, nor seed, nor stalke, whereof it is a wonder, having borrowed so much out of Theophrastus, which acknowledgeth it) doe remember the flowers of Dittany, and so doth Galen also in the Emplastrum de Dictamno, whereof Damocrates, as he saith gave him the receit. The first Bastard Dittany flowreth with us all the latter part of the Summer, but seldome giveth us any good seed. The last hath not as yet beene seene in England. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Pulegium sylvestre, by Dioscorides , by Theophrastus , some also and , in Latine also Dictamus and Dictamnum, Cornario dici videtur, quod mulierum faciles partus promittat, aut dolores penitus sedat Dioscoride &amp; Theophrasto: the first is called by all Writers Dictamus or Dictamnus Creticus, or Dictamum, or Dictamnum Creticum: the second like∣wise is called by all Writers Pseudodictamnus, or Pseudodictamus, or Pseudodictamum: Anguilara saith it is called by the Greekes now a dayes Calixi mathia: Pona would make it to be the Gnaphalium of Dioscorides: the last is one∣ly set out by Pona, who taketh it to bee the Dictamnum alterum, of Theophrastus and Dioscorides. The Arabians call it Mescatramsir Anegen Araba or Buri, the Italians Dittamo, and other Nations much thereafter according to their Dialect, and we in English Dittany, but not Dittander, as some too foolishly would make it. 
The Vertues. It is availeable as Dioscorides saith, for all the purposes that the planted or garden Penny-royall is used, but with farre more efficacy, for it not onely expelleth the dead child being drunke, but being applyed unto the place (as in a Pessary) or the fumes thereof taken hot, or burnt, and taken underneath: the juyce hath a purging quality apply∣ed with Barley meale: It draweth forth thornes out of the feete, or any other part of the body being applyed to the place: for as it is reported that the wild Goates in Candy, being wounded by the Hunters with arrowes, doe by eating this hearbe drive them forth, and are thereby cured. It is hold to be very profitabe for those that are troubled with the spleene, by lesning the swelling thereof. It hastneth on the birth, and as Theophrastus saith, causeth spee∣dy delivery, or at least easeth much of the paines in travaile: and the juyce thereof drunke in Wine is a present re∣medy for those that are bitten by any venemous Serpent. The hearb is so powerfull against the poyson of all beasts that are venemous, as that it doth drive them away by the very smell, and killeth them if they touch it where it is hung: the juyce thereof is also a present remedy for all wounds made with Iron, if after the putting of it into the wound, some of it also be taken in drinke. The Bastard Dittany is used for all the purposes that the former is, but with much lesse effect. Pliny setteth downe in a maner all that is formerly said in severall places of his books: that it procureth the monethly courses of women, and is so effectuall to expell the dead birth, that it is dangerous to bring it into the chambers of women that are with child. 
CHAP. XII. Pulegium. Penny-royall. T Here are divers sorts of Penny-royall, some that grow wilde in many places of this Land, yet are nur∣sed every where in Gardens; the other more rare, and therefore preserved onely by those that are curious. 
1. Pulegium vulgare. Common Penny-royall. This common Penny-royall is so well knowne to all, that 1. Pulegium vulgare. Common Penny-royall. 
I shall not need to spend much time in the description of it, having many weake round stalkes divided into sundry bran∣ches, rather leaning or lying on the ground, than standing up∣right, whereon are set at severall joynts small roundish darke greene leaves: the flowers are purplish that grow in Gar∣dens for the most part, yet some that grow wilde are white, or more white than purple, set in rundles about the toppes of the branches: the stalkes shoot forth small fibres or rootes at the joynts as it lyeth upon the ground, fastning it selfe there∣in quickly, and overspreading any ground, especially grow∣ing in the shade or any moist place: and is increased by brea∣king of the sprouted stalkes and thrust into the earth. 
2. Pulegium regium vulgare majus. Great Penny-royall. There is a greater kinde than the ordinary sort, found wild with us, which so abideth being brought into Gardens, and differeth not from it, but in the largenesse of the leaves and stalkes, in rising higher, and not creeping upon the ground so much; the flowers whereof are purple, and growing in run∣dles about the stalkes like the other. 
3. Pulegium densis surculis. Thick or double Penny-royall. This sort differeth little from the former, the leaves are somewhat smaller and thicker set on the stalkes, and the branches grow closer together. 
4. Pulegium mas flore albo. White flowred Penny-royall. This Penny-royall groweth more upright with his stalkes than the former, and sometimes a foot higher also, having leaves thereon set by couples like it, and in some places other smaller leaves likewise growing with them, the flowers also grow in rundles or wharles round about the stalkes at seve∣rall joynts, but are wholly white, and so abide being planted in gardens, the smell whereof, the taste and use is altogether like the other: the rootes likewise creepe under ground, as the former. 
5. Pulegium angustifolium sive Cervinum. French or Harts Penny-royall. This fine Penny-royall hath creeping rootes under ground, but shoot forth longer sprouts than the former, from whence spring forth many tall upright hard stalkes, whereon are set at equall distances many small long and nar∣row leaves, all along the branches up to the toppes: the flowers grow round about the stalkes at the joynts with the leaves, at many spaces up to the toppes, of a pale purplish colour; the smell and taste hereof is much more plea∣sing and stronger also. 
6. Pulegium folijs Nummularia. Round leafed Penny-royall. This round leafed Penny-royall groweth almost as upright as the last, with slender stalkes, having the leaves set by couples at each joynt, and are small and round like unto those of Hearb two pence, but farre lesse: the flowers stand in rowes compassing the stalkes as the other doe, of a pale bluish colour: the smell hereof is much more pleasant than the common sort.
6. Mentastrum nivcum Anglicum. White Mints, or Party coloured Mints. 
. Mentastrum montanum sive Pannonicum. Hungarian Wild Mints. 
are, which are more green than the last, &amp; dented about the edges also: the flowers are more white than the last standing about the stalkes at several spaces, and ending in small long spikes: the root is hard, shooting forth many strings, more like unto Nep than Mint, as the whole face thereof doth resemble, according to the minde of Clusius, and is of an hot and sharpe taste, smelling somewhat like the wild Mints. 
9. Mentastrum tuberosum Clusy. Clusius his knob∣bed Wilde Mint. This kinde of wild Mint hath square hairy greene stalkes full of joynts, with two leaves set thereat, which are long rough dented about the edges, and somewhat hoary, or of a whitish greene colour, and of an unpleasant smell, the toppes of the branches doe end in spikes of hoary leaves, among the which the flowers stand at distances, with two leaves at a space, of a whitish colour, after which followeth small black seed, the root is somewhat like a reddish root, brownish on the outside, having certaine tuberous heads joyned thereunto, which being separated, will grow into plants. 
10. Mentastrum geniculata radice. Wilde Mints with joynted roots. This kinde of Mint hath his roote somewhat thick, and set with joynts or knees at certaine spaces, and shooting foorth fibres thereat; the stalke riseth not a foot high, being somewhat hard, rough and square, whereon are set at the joynts two long darke greene leaves being soft in handling, but a little wrinkled and dented about the edges: the flowers stand at the tops of the branches in short tufts or spikes like unto Nep, of a pale purplish colour: after which come small round sweet smelling seed like unto the whole plant. 
11. Mentastrum hirsutum. Hairy wild Mints. 9. Mentastrum tuberosum Clusij. Clusius his knobbed wild Mints. 
This wild Mint hath square hairy stalkes with many branches rising from the roote, higher and greater than the ordinary wilde Mint, having hayrie long leaves set thereon at a joynt, and many purplish flowers at the tops. 
12. Mentastrum rotundifolium minus. Small round leafed wild Mints. The stalke hereof is square, hairy, and reddish, about a foote high, having two leaves at a joynt, somewhat long and round, soft, hairy, and dented about the edges, of a sad greene on the upper side, and hoary under-neath: from the joynts rise some branches set with the like leaves, and round heads of flowers at the toppes, of a purplish colour: the scent hereof is not very pleasant, but rather strong and heady. 
The Place. The first foure sorts are onely found planted in Gardens with us, and the fift found first wilde both with us, and elsewhere, but for especiall respects brought into gardens. The other sorts were likewise wild by nature in their places, but now are cherished with the lovers of plantes in many places. 
The Time. All the sorts of Garden, as well as wild Mints, flower not untill the beginning of August for the most part, but the garden Mints for the most part seldome doe give any good seed, but recompence the defect by the increase of the root, which is so plentifull, that being once planted in a garden, they are hardly rid out againe, every small piece thereof being left in the ground increasing fast enough. 
The Names. Mentha was called by the old Graecians as Pliny recordeth, but of the later Greekes ab odoris bo∣nitate vel jucunditate, because it is so sweet. The Arabians call it Nahat naho: the Italians Mentha: the Spaniards Yerva buena: the French Menthe: the Germanes Muntz: the Dutch Mint, and so doe we. The first of these garden Mints is called Romana angustifolia sive Cardiaca, and called by Bauhinus Mentha hortensis verticillata ocimi odore, (but how truely I cannot see, because it beareth spiked heads) who saith also, it is the Ocimoides repens that Gerard hath set out, for that no other Ocimoides of any other Author agreeth thereunto. The second is called Cru∣ciata of Lobel, &amp; rotundifolia altera spicato flore, in English Crosse Mint. The third is usually in our gardens by the name of red Mints: the fourth is called Mentha crispa, and Balsamita of Camerarius, and Sisymbrium hortense of Matthiolus, and called by Bauhinus Mentha crispa verticillata, and is the vulgata serpens rotundiore folio Pulegij flore of Lobel, in English Curld or Crispe Mint. The fift is the best and truest Curld Mint, which Lobel shewed, but did not set forth. The sixt is that kinde of wild Mints which is planted in gardens, and called of some Horse Mint; (from whence hath come our white or party coloured Mints, to be seene in many gardens) and as I thinke is called by Lobel Sisymbria Menta agrestis, for it answereth very well thereunto, although Lobel saith, it is all one with the Mentha cruciata. The seventh is called by Lobel Mentastrum aliud &amp; Mentastrum Campense of Lugdu∣nensis, it is the Sysimbrium sylvestre of Matthiolus, very well set forth in his small Ico es. The eighth and ninth Clusius hath set forth, calling the eighth Montanum, or Pannonicum, and the other Mentastrum tuberosa radice, but referreth it rather to a kinde of Cattaria tuberosa, and by that name I have often received it among other seeds from Italy and other places, whereunto it doth most fitly agree. The tenth Bauhinus hath written of, and set the description thereof in his Prodromus, by the name of Mentha geniculata radice, and saith, hee received it both by the name of Mentha tuberosa, and Nepeta angustifoliá odorata, from severall places. The eleventh is called by Lo∣bel Calamintha tertia Dioscoridis, &amp; Mentastrifolia aquatica hirsuta, by Lugdunensis Mentastrum minus spicatum, by Camerarius Mentastrum aliud hirsutum, and by Bauhinus Mentha palustris folio oblongo: The last is called by Bauhinus Mentha rotundifolia palustris minor. 
The Vertues. The garden Mints in generall, yet the sweeter sorts, that is, the Speare Mint, and Hart Mint, are more usually taken for all the uses whereunto Mints doe serve; Dioscorides saith it hath an heating, binding, and drying quality, and therefore the juyce taken with vinegar stayeth bleeding. It stirreth up venery or bodily lust, and as hee saith killeth the round wormes, which hath not usually beene knowne to take effect with any, two or three branches thereof taken with the juyce of sowre Pomegranats staieth the hickock, vomitings, and allaieth choller, it dissolveth impostumes being layed to with barly meale: it is good to represse the milke in womens breasts when they are swolne therewith, or otherwise, for such as have swollen, flagging, or great breasts, applyed with salt, it helpeth the byting of a mad Dogge, with Meade or honied water it easeth the paines of the eares: applyed to the privie parts of a woman before the act of generation hindreth conception, which is contradicted as you may read a few lines below, and rubbed upon the tongue, taketh away the roughnesse thereof. It suffereth not milke to curdle in the stomack, if the leaves hereof be steeped or boyled in it before yee drinke it. Briefly, it is very profitable to the stomack, and in meates is much accepted. It is of especiall use to stay the feminine courses when they come too fast, as also to stay the whites, for which purpose no other hearbe is more safe and powerfull, for by taking it of∣ten it hath cured many. Applyed to the forehead or the temples of the head it easeth the paines thereof. It is also good to wash the heads of young children therewith, against all manner of breaking out therein, whether sores or scabs: and healeth the chaps of the fundament. It is profitable also against the poison of venemous creatures. The distilled water of Mints is availeable to all the purposes aforesaid, yet more weakely: but if a spirit thereof bee rightly and chimically drawne, it is more powerfull than the hearbe it selfe, in regard the spirit and strength of a great deale is brought into a small proportion; foure ounces thereof taken as Matthiolus saith, doth stay blee∣ding at the nose, which may be thought incredible to a great many. It is much commended to be available in vene∣reous causes, although Pliny in his lib. 20 cap. 14. doth write to the contrary: but Galen in his sixt Booke of Simples, doth render a reason of the faculty hereof very worthily, where he saith, some doe call that Mentha odorata, sweet Mint, which by others is called Hedyosmos: but there is another Mint which is not sweet, which they call Calamintha: both of them are sharpe in taste, and hot in quality, yea even in the third degree of heat, but Mentha odorata is weaker and lesse heating, so that I may well say that the one seemeth to be as it were the tame, and the other the wild: wherefore by that humidity it hath gained by manuring, it provoketh to Venery, which thing is common to all hearbes that have in them an humidity halfe digested and windy: by reason of which tem∣perature being mingled with Barley meale it is used to ripen impostumes, which you cannot doe with Calamint, because it heateth and digesteth more, then such things as should ripen impostumes doe require. It hath also in it a little bitternesse, and some tartnesse, by reason of the bitternesse it killeth the long wormes of the belly, and by the tartnesse it stayeth the vomiting of blood: while it is fresh, if it bee taken with Oxycratum (which some take to be sower milke, and others to be Posca, that is vineger and water mingled together.) It is of as great tenuity as any hearb whatsoever: these are Galens words. Simeon Sethi saith it helpeth a cold liver, and strengtheneth the stomack and belly, causeth digestion, stayeth vomitings and the hickock, is good against the gnawings of the heart, and stirreth up the appetite, it taketh away the obstructions of the liver, and stirreth up bodily lust; but thereof too much must not be taken, because it maketh the blood thin and whayish, and turneth it into choler, yea, and causeth the blood which is of very thin parts, after it is separated, to become thick and melancholick: and there∣fore cholerick persons must abstaine from it: it is a safe medicine for the byting of a mad Dogge, being bruised with salt and laid on; the powder of it being dryed and taken after meate, helpeth digestion, and those that are splenetick, taken with wine it helpeth women in their hard and sore travels in child-bearing: it is also thought to be good for bleare eyes applyed to them; and that the decoction of them being drunke, doth helpe the bleedings at the mouth speedily, or presently. It is good against the gravell and stone in the kidneys and strangury. It is also comfortable for the head and memory, not onely to be smelled unto, but chiefly to be applyed unto the head and temples, and easeth the head-ach: the decoction thereof cureth the gums and mouth that is sore, if it bee gargled therewith, and mendeth an ill favoured breath, as also with Rue and Coriander, causeth the uvula or palate of the mouth that is downe, to returne to its place againe, the decoction thereof being gargled and held in the mouth. Aristotle and other in the ancient times forbade Mints to be used of Souldiers in the time of warre, because they thought it did so much incite to Venery, that it tooke away, or at least abated their animosity or courage to fight. Divers have held for true, that Cheeses will not corrupt, if they be either rubbed over with the juyce or the deco∣ction of Mints, or they laid among them. And some againe, that if the juyce of Mints be put into the milke where∣of you meane to make Cheese, that although yee put rennet thereto, it will never draw to curds whereby to be∣come Cheese. The vertues of the wild Mints are more especially to dissolve winde in the stomack, to helpe the chollick and those that are short-winded, and are an especiall remedy for those that have venerous dreames and pollutions in the night, used both inwardly, and the juyce being applyed outwardly to the testicles or cods; the juyce thereof dropped into the eares easeth the paines, and destroyeth the wormes that breed in them; they are good against the venemous bytings of Serpents, and as it is said, killeth them by the fume thereof, or by the scent of them being layd in any place, the juyce laid on warme helpeth the Kings-evill, or kernels of the throat, the de∣coction, or the distilled water helpeth a stinking breath, which proceedeth from the corruption of the teeth, and snuffed up into the nose purgeth the head. Pliny saith, that in the time of Great Pompey, it was found out by ex∣perience of one, to cure the Lepry by eating the leaves, and applying some of them to his face, and to helpe the scurfe or dandroffe of the head used with vineger. 
CHAP. XIIII. Calamintha. Calamint, or Mountaine Mint. A Lthough divers Authors doe confound Calamint (calling it Catmint) with Nep, which is more properly called Catmint, yet I thinke it better to intreat of them a part, then to joyne them both in one Chapter. 
1. Calamintha vulgaris. Common Calamint. 1. Calamintha vulgaris. Common Calamint. 
The ordinary Calamint that groweth usually abroad in the dry grounds with us, is a small hearbe seldome rising above a foot high, with square hoary, and wooddy stalkes, and two small hoary leaves set at a joynt, about the bignesse of Marjerome, or not much bigger, a little dented about the edges, and of a very fierce and quick scent, as the whole hearb is: the flowers stand at severall spaces of the stalkes, from the middle almost upwards, which are small and gaping like unto those of Mints, and of a pale blush colour, after which follow small round blackish seed: the root is small and wooddy, with divers small sprigs spreading within the ground, and dyeth not, but abideth many yeares. 
Altera minor. There is another of this sort which is like unto it in all things, but somewhat lesser, differing chiefly in the flowers which are not so large by the halfe, which noteth it to be a differing species. 
2. Calamintha montana praestantior. The greatest Calamint, or Mountaine Mint. This sweet Calamint riseth up to be a foot and a halfe high, with his square hard, and hoary stalkes, which are many, and slen∣derer than those of the wild Mints, whereon are set at every joynt two small and somewhat round leaves deepely dented a∣bout the edges, yet larger than those of the former wilde kinde, being somewhat hairy, and not so hoary, but rather of a sad greene colour, of a very sweet scent, not strong or heady as the other: the flowers are gaping, and like the other, but larger, and of a purple colour, after which commeth the seed, which is black, small, and round, somewhat like unto Purflan seed, the root is wooddy, but abideth and shooteth forth new branches every yeare. 
3. Calamintha altera odore Pulegij folijs maculosis. Spotted Calamint. This spotted Calamint differeth not much from our ordinary wild Calamint, but that it groweth not so great and high, having square hard hoary stalkes, and hoary leaves thereon like it, but spotted here and there, and of a strong scent like unto Penny-royall: the flowers grow in the same manner, but smaller, and of a pale purplish colour. 
4. Calamintha minor incana. Small Calamint. This hoary small Calamint hath small low and slender hoary stalkes not above a foot high, whereon are set two leaves at a joynt, as in the other sorts, but smaller and more hoary, even smaller than the least bush Basill: the flowers are very small, but like the last and of a lesse heady scent. 
5. Calamintha arvensis verticillata sive aquatica Belgarum Lobelij. Field Calamint with whorled coronets. This small Field Calamint sendeth forth divers square hoary stalkes full of joynts, and two small and almost round hoary leaves set thereat up to the toppes, somewhat like unto leaves of Penny-royall, of a quicke and sharpe, yet sweet scent like thereunto also: towards the toppes of the stalkes and branches stand with the leaves many purplish flowers divers set together in a whorle or coronet: the root is small and abideth long, not pe∣rishing after seed time.
The Names. The ordinary garden sort is called of some Cataria, and Cattaria, and of others Mentha Cataria, and Mentha felina, because as I said before, Cats delight both to smell and eate thereof, and gladly rub themselves against it, but of most with us Nepeta. Gerard saith that our Nepeta is called Pulegium sylvestre, but hee is therein much mi∣staken, for Dioscorides saith that the Latines did call that in his time Nepeta, which he calleth his second Calamint, and was called also of some Pulegium sylvestre, but Dioscorides his 2. Calamint is not our Nepeta used in these dayes, as any of judgement may soone perceive, that readeth and marketh Dioscorides his description thereof. And Matthiolus also taxeth Brasavolus who fell into the same errour, he being chiefly deceived by the mistaking of the name; for the Italians call that manured kind of Calamint Nepotella, as Matthiolus saith, which was derived from the Nepeta, and Brasavolus would fasten it upon this hearbe which they call Herba Gattaria. The first of these is the Herba gattaria of Matthiolus: Gesner in hortis tooke it for a kinde of Calamint, Tragus, Cordus, and others call it Nepeta. Lobel Cattaria, and Mentha Cataria, and generally with us Nepeta, in English Nep, or Cat Mint: the second I doe not finde mentioned by any Author, but it is continued in my Garden to this day under that name. The third Clusius calleth Cattaria tenuifolia Hispanica, and Camerarius Nepeta minor. Bauhinus Men∣tha Cattaria minor, in English small Neppe, or Catmint. The fourth he calleth Mentha Cataria minor Alpina, in English Small mountaine Nep or Cat Mint. The fift is called by Lobel Mentha Cataria peregrina latifolia of Taber∣montanus Mentha felina satvia latifolia; of Gerard Cattaria altera, and of Beslerus in his garden of the Bishop of Eystot, Nepeta peregrina, in English strange Neppe with broad leaves. The last is called by Lobel Mentha Cattaria peregrina angustifolia, of Dodonaeus Cattaria folio longiore: of Gerard Salvia Romana, for the figure thereof answe∣reth thereunto, and not unto any Cattaria: of Bauhinus himselfe Mentha Cataria angustifolia minor, in English as it is in the title. 
The Vertues. Neppe is generally used for women to procure their courses when they are stayed, to use inwardly, or outward∣ly, to bathe them in the decoction of it, with other hearbes convenient for the purpose, or with it alone, or to sit over the hot fumes thereof, for it not onely warmeth and comforteth the coldnesse, but dryeth the overmuch moi∣sture of the mother, which may be one cause of sterility or barrennesse, and by the frequent use of it, to cause them to be more fruitfull that were hindred, and also for the wind and paines of the mother, or rising of it. It is also used in paines of the head that come from any cold cause, as catarrhes and thin rheumes, and for swimmings and gid∣dinesse thereof. It is also of especiall use for the windinesse of the stomack or belly. It is effectuall for any cramps or cold aches to dissolve the cold and wind that affecteth the place, and to bring warmth and comfort thereunto afterwards, It is used for colds or coughes, and shortnesse of breathing. The juyce thereof drunke in wine is pro∣fitable for those that have caught some bruise by any accident. The greene hearbe bruised and applyed to the fun∣dament, there abiding for two or three houres easeth the sharpe paines of the piles, the juyce also is effectuall for the same purpose, being made up into an oyntment and applyed. A Decoction thereof also is commended to wash the head, to take away the scabs thereof, and may be effectuall for other parts of the body also. Lobel saith the two greater sorts of strange Neppe are more effectuall to all the purposes than the ordinary kinde is used for. The ver∣tues of the former two lesser sorts are not certainely knowne, but are thought to conduce to the like effects. 
CHAP. XVI. Melissa. Balme. B Esides the ordinary which usually groweth in all our gardens, there are some other sorts of Baulme, as they are entituled by divers Authors for the sweet scent of them comming neerest, is that of our ordi∣dinary Baulme, of all which I meane to entreate in this place. 
1. Melissa vulgaris. The common Garden Baulme. 1. Melissa vulgaris. The common garden Baulme. 
The common garden Balme hath divers square greene stalkes, with round hard darke greene leaves pointed at the ends, and a little dented about the edges, set by couples at the joynts, of a sweet smell, comming neerest to a Citron or Lemmon, the flowers are small and gaping, growing at the toppes of the stalkes, of a pale Carnation colour, almost white: the rootes fa∣sten themselves strongly in the ground, and endureth long, the leaves and stalkes dying downe yeerely. 
2. Melissa Turcica flore coeruleo. Turky Baulme with a blue flower. This Baulme riseth up with one square brownish greene stalke, two foot high at the least in any good ground and higher sometimes, spreading with two branches from every joynt where the leaves are set, up almost to the toppe: the leaves are narrower and longer than those of the ordinary Baulme, and more dented in about the edges, of as sweet a Lemon scent, or rather more than it, rough also, and of as sad a greene colour: the flowers are gaping or hooded, growing at the toppes of the branches, at certaine distances, of a blue or purplish blue colour, standing in rough sharpe pointed huskes, after which commeth the seed which is black and roundish, with a white spot in eve∣ry of them, plainely to be seene while they are fresh, but not so easily discerned when they are dry. The root perisheth every yeare, and must be sowne a fresh in the Spring time, if any bee desirous to have it. 
3. Melissa Turcica flore albo. Turky Baulme with a white flower. This other Baulme differeth not from the former, either in growing, or height, or forme of leaves and flowers, or in the good smell thereof, or in the durability, for it is equall there∣unto in all these properties: the onely difference is, in that the leaves hereof are of a fresher greene colour, and that the flow∣ers are of a perfect white colour; the seed whereof doth not degenerate as in many other hearbes it hapneth, but keepeth constantly his kinde, for any thing I could observe in it these twenty yeeres and upwards, since I first had it and sowed it. 
4. Melissophyllum Fuchsij. Vnpleasant Baulme. Vnto the kindred of Baulmes I thinke good to adjoyne this plant more for the formes sake of the leaves from whence Fuchsius first gave it the name, then for any other correspondence it hath therewith, but as it is at this time, take it with this description, It hath divers hairy square browne stalkes rising from the roote, halfe a yard high, whereon are set two leaves at severall spaces, at the contrary sides of them, ever up to the toppes of the stalkes, which are broader and somewhat longer than the ordinary Baulme, and of a sad greene colour, betweene which leaves at every joynt with them, from the middle of the stalke upward on each side thereof, commeth forth larger flowers, and longer than in Baulme, more like unto those of the yellow Lamium, or dead Nettles, as some compare them, or unto those of mountaine Calamint, as others doe, of a pale purplish colour on the lower part, 2. 3, Melissa Turcica flo. Coer. &amp; albo. Turky Baulme with blue and with white flowers. 
4. Melissophyllum Fuchsij. Vnpleasant Baulme. 
and whitish above, this hath no such good scent therein as the Baulme hath, but is rather of a stronger unpleasant scent, for which cause I have so entituled it. 
5. Melissa Molucca laevis sive Syriaca lavis. Great Assirian Baulme. This hearbe Matthiolus and others make a kinde of Baulme from the forme of the leaves chiefly: it riseth from seed with a round hollow stalke out of the ground, to bee two foote high or thereabouts, branching forth di∣versly on all sides up to the toppe, whereon are set shorter and rounder leaves, at the end of long foote stalkes, somewhat lesse dented about the edges then in the common Baulme, and not at all sharpe on the edges, as in the next: at the joynts of the stalke from the middle thereof upwards, come forth round about it, certaine hard whi∣tish skins small and round at the bottome, and wide, open at the brims like unto a bell, having five corners for the most part: from the bottome of each of these commeth forth one flower somewhat small, and like unto the flower of common Baulme, almost white, or with a small shew of blush therein, and after they are past, in the bottome of the same skinny bells grow the seed (but seldome one of ten commeth to be ripe with us) which is whitish and cornered: the smell hereof is nothing like Baulme, but rather fulsome, the taste thereof is bitter: the roote peri∣sheth every yeare. 
6. Melissa Molucca asperior sive Syriaca asperior. Prickly Assirian Baulme. This other Assirian Baulme riseth a little higher, and groweth somewhat greater than the former, but after the same fashion; the leaves hereof are somewhat longer and sharper on the edges, the huskes likewise in which stand these skinny bells, at the corners of them are sharpe pointed, and of a paler white colour: the flowers and seed are all alike, and perisheth likewise at the first approach of any cold night: this hath a little better scent to commend it than the former. 
7. Cardiaca. Motherwort. As these three last had little likenesse with Baulme, more than in the forme of the leaves, and the properties as you shall heare anon; so this, besides the properties answerable to the rest in comforting the heart, hath no shew of affinity, no not in the leaves: but because some have put it to the kindred of the Baulmes, and others to Net∣tles, and others to Horehound. I have thought it best for the vertues sake (whereunto none of the Nettles or Horehounds are answerable) to set in the end of the Baulmes, and to be as it were a bridge to passe from them to the Horehounds, whereunto in face it hath the more resemblance. It hath a hard square brownish rough strong stalke, rising to bee three or foure foote high at the least, spreading into many branches, whereon grow leaves on each side with long foote stalkes, two at every joynt, which are somewhat broad and long, as it were rough or crumpled, with many great veines that shew themselves therein, of a sad greene colour, and deepely dented in a∣bout the edges, and almost torne or divided: from the middle of the branches up to the toppes of them, which are very long and small, grow the flowers round about them at distances, in sharpe pointed rough hard huskes, which are more purple or red than in any of the former Baulmes, or in any Horehound, but in the same manner and forme, and roughnesse as the Horehounds: after which come small round blackish seed in great plenty: the roote 5. Melissa Molucca levis sive Syriaca lavir. Great Assirian Baulme. 
6. Melissa Molucca asperior sive Syriaca asperior. Prickly Assirian Baulme. 
7. Cardiaca. Motherwort. 
sendeth forth a number of long strings, and small fibres, ta∣king strong hold in the ground, of a darke yellowish, or brownish colour, and perisheth not as the other, but abideth as the Horehound, the smell likewise is not much differing from it. 
The Place. The first is onely to be found in gardens: the two next growes naturally in Moldavia, which is under the Turkish Dominion. The third at the foote of divers hills both in Germany and Narbone in France. The fourth and fifth as Matthiolus thought in the Molucca Ilands which are in the East-Indies, but therein he was much mistaken, yet he saith they came from Constantinople, others and that more truely say, that Martinellus Sequinus an Italian sent them to Ve∣nice out of Syria. The last groweth among rubbish, and by the sides of walls and hedges in many places beyond the Seas, but not with us that I have knowne or heard, but one∣ly in Gardens where it hath, beene once sowne or planted. 
The Time. The three first and the last flower somewhat earlyer in the Summer, than the two Assirian kindes, which flower very seldome before the middle of August, so that it hardly giveth any good seed, although the two former and the last doe plentifully. 
The Names. Balme is called in Greeke Melisso∣phyllum, or Meliphyllum, id est apum folium, quod apes eo valde delectantur, in Latine Melissa, &amp; Citrago, ab odore Citri, Api∣strum quod apibus sit gratissima, &amp; Melissophyllum, of the effect being good for Bees. The first is called Melissa, or Melissophyllum generally by all writers: the second and third are called Melissa Moldavica &amp; Turcica by most Writers; Bauhinus calleth it Melissa Turcica peregrina fo∣lio oblongo: the third Cordus and Fuchsius take to bee the true Melissophyllum, &amp; thereupon it is generally called Melissa, or Melissophyllum Fuchsij by most writers, although it have not the smell of Baulme, nor good to rub hives withall, as the true Baulme: Lugdunensis saith it is the Ca∣lamintha praestantior which Pena and Lobel have described and set forth more exactly: but he is therein much decei∣ved, for Fuchsius saith his hath blacker and larger leaves than Baulme, &amp; that Calamint hath smaller and whiter: only Bauhinus and Clusius referre it to the Lamia, Bauhinus calling it Lamium Montanum Melissae folio, and saith withall, that the varying thereof may be referred, to the variable sorts of the Lamia Pannonica of Clusius: it is cal∣led in English as it is in the title, untill a more exact or truer name may be given it, for I cannot consent to Bau∣hinus and Clusius, to call it Lamium, seeing so many Authors call it Melissa. The fourth Matthiolus calleth Melissa Constantinopolitana, or Melissophyllum Constantinopolitaenum &amp; laeve is added by Dodonaeus, for hee maketh no mention of any prickles in that, which grew in the Emperours Garden, but that which Alphonsus Pantius of Ferrara sent him as he saith, the leaves were prickly: assuredly that kind that I have had growing in my garden at severall times, had no prickles either on leafe or huske, although Bauhinus saith hee never saw any that was without some sharpe thornes, and therefore it should seeme, that Lobel maketh the one kind lesse sharpe or thorny than the other, and calleth it Cardiaca Melica sive Molucca minus aspera, &amp; Molucca Syriaca. Bauhinus calleth it Melissa Moluccana odorata, as he doth the fifth Melissa Moluccana foetida, making the one to be sweet, and the o∣ther stinking. Lobel calleth it Molucca asperior Syriaca, and saith moreover that it is called Maseluc of the Turkes: Caesalpinus would referre both these kindes unto the Alissum of Dioscorides and Pliny; and Bauhinus saith they are like to the Alissum of Galen. They have their English names over their heads. The last is called Cardiaca of most of our later Writers, for it is likely it was not knowne to them of ancienter ages, yet Dodonaeus formerly tooke it to be a Sideritis. Tragus to be a wilde Baulme. Brunfelsius to bee Marrubium mas. Anguillara to bee Licopsis or Branca lupina, &amp; Bauhinus calleth it Marrubium forte primum Theophrasti: Caesalpinus thinketh that it is the Alissum of Galen and Aetius. We doe call it Motherwort in English, as truely from the effects to helpe the Mother, as they call it Cardiaca from the effects to helpe the heart, as you shall heare by and by: the Arabians call Baulme Bederengie, Bedarungi, Cederenzegum, Turungen or Trungian and Marmacor: the Italians Melissa, Codro∣nella, and Aranciata: the Spaniards Torengil &amp; yerva cidrera: the French Melisse &amp; Poncirade: the Germanes Melissen, Binenkrant: and the Dutch Melisse &amp; Honichbaum Consille degreyn, and we in English Bawme, from the singular effects therein, in imitation of the true naturall Baulme. 
The Vertues. The Arabian Physicians have extolled the vertues of Baulme, for the passions of the heart in a wonderfull maner, which the Greekes have not remembred: for Serapio saith, it is the property of Baulme, to cause the minde and heart to become merry, to revive the fainting heart falling into swounings, to strengthen the weaknesse of the spirits and heart, and to comfort them, especially such who are overtaken in their sleepe, therewith taking away all motion of the pulse, to drive away all troublesome cares and thoughts out of the minde, whether those passi∣ons rise from melancholly or black choller, or burnt flegme, which Avicen confirmeth in his booke of medicines proper for the heart, where he saith that it is hot and dry in the second degree, that it maketh the heart merry, and strengthneth the vitall spirits, both by the sweetnesse of smell, austerity of taste, and tenuity of parts, with which qualities it is helpfull also to the rest of the inward parts and bowels. It is to good purpose used for a cold sto∣mack to helpe digestion, and to open the obstruction of the braine. It hath a purging quality therein also saith Avicen, and that not so weake, but that it is of force to expell those melancholly vapours from the spirits, and from the blood, which are in the heart and arteries, although it cannot doe so in the other parts of the body. Di∣oscorides saith that the leaves drunke in wine and laid to, is a remedy against the sting of Scorpions, and the poison of the Phalangium, or venemous Spider, as also against the bytings of Dogges, and commendeth the decoction thereof, for women to bathe or sit in to procure their courses, and that it is good to wash the teeth therewith when they are full of paine, and that it is profitable for those that have the bloody flixe. The leaves also with a little Niter are taken in drinke against a surfet of Mushroms, it helpeth the griping paines of the belly, and is good for them that cannot take their breath, unlesse they hold their necks upright, being taken in a Lohoc or licking Ele∣ctuary: used with salt it taketh away wennes, kernels, or hard swellings in the flesh or throate, it clenseth foule sores, and is an helpe to ease the paines of the gowt. Galen saith in his seventh Booke of Simples, that Baulme is like unto Horehound in qualities, but weaker by much, and therefore few will use Baulme when Horehound is so plentifull, and neere at hand to be had every where. Pliny saith in lib. 20. cap. 11. that in Sardinia it is poyson, wherein it is very probable that he was much mistaken, and for Sardonia herba, which is called of some Apium ri∣sus, and of Apuleius Apiastellum, he tooke this Apiastrum or Baulme: the juyce thereof used with a little honey is a singular remedy for the dimnesse of the sight, and to take away the mistinesse of the eyes. It is of especiall use among other things, for the plague or pestilence, and the water thereof is used for the same purposes, It is also good for the liver and spleene. A Tansie or Caudle made with egges, and the juyce thereof while it is young, putting some Sugar and Rosewater unto it, is often given to women in child-bed, when the afterbirth is not throughly avoided, and for their faintings, upon, or after their sore travels. It is used in bathings among other warme and comfortable hearbes for mens bodies or legges in the Summer time, to comfort the joynts and sinews, which our former age had in much more use than now-adayes. The hearbe bruised and boyled in a little wine and oyle, and laid warme on a Bile will ripen and breake it. There is an ordinary Aqua-vita or strong water stilled, and called Baulme water used generally in all the Land, which because it hath nothing but the simple hearbe in it which is too simple, I will commend a better receit unto you. Take two pound of Baulme while it is young and tender, of Mints and Sage, of each one pound, bruise them well in a stone-morter, and put them into a pot or Lim∣beck, and put thereto of Aniseeds foure ounces; of Cloves of Nutmegs, of Cinamon, of Ginger, of Cubebes, and of Galanga, of each one ounce, being all a little bruised and put into two gallons of good Sacke if you will have it excellent good, or else into foure gallons of Ale, and so still it as Aqua-vitae is distilled, and let it distill as long as you shall finde any strength in the water, yet so that the latter water bee not so weake, to make all the rest white: whereunto put a pound of Sugar, shaking it well before you set it away, and after it hath rested so one moneth, you may use of it as occasion shall require: for it is of especiall use in all passions of the heart, swounings and faintings of the spirits, and for many other purposes, whereunto the hearbe is here declared to be availeable. The hearbe is often put into oyles or salves to heale greene wounds, and it is very probable the name of Baulme, was given to this hearbe, from the knowledge of the healing properties of the true and naturall Baulme. It is also an hearbe wherein Bees doe much delight, both to have their Hives rubbed therewith to keepe them together, and draw others, and for them to suck and feed upon; and is a remedy against the stinging of them. The Turkey Baulme is of as good effect to all the purposes aforesaid, as the ordinary. The Assirian Baulme is of excellent vertue to expell any poison or venome, as also against the plague or pestilence used inwardly and outwardly, it kil∣leth the wormes, and helpeth the jaundise, and the paines of the Mother, for it openeth obstructions, warmeth the cold parts, rarifyeth and clenseth. Motherwort is held of the later Writers, to bee of much use for the trem∣bling of the heart, and in faintings and swounings, from whence it tooke the name Cardiaca: the powder thereof to the quantity of a spoonefull drunke in wine, is a wonderfull helpe to women in their sore travels, as also for the suffocations or risings of the Mother, and from these effects it is likely it tooke the name of Motherwort with us. It also provoketh urine, and procureth the feminine courses, clenseth the chest of cold flegme oppressing it, and killeth the wormes of the belly. It is of good use to warme and dry up the cold humours, to digest and disperse them that are settled in the veines, joynts, and sinewes of the body, and to helpe crampes and convulsions, &amp;c.
This lesser Sage groweth like unto the first great white Sage, but that the branches are long and slenderer, the leaves also whitish, and never red, and much smaller or narrower, having for the most part at the bottome of each leafe, on each side a small piece of a leafe, which maketh it seeme like finnes or eares: the flowers also are of a bluish purple colour, Flore albo. but lesser. Of this kinde there is one that beareth white flowers, differing in nothing else from the o∣ther. 
5. Salvia minor aurita odoratissima Hispanica. The sweetest small Spanish Sage with eares. This Spanish small Sage is in most things so like the ordinary small Sage with eares, called Sage of Vertue, that unlesse it bee well heeded or marked, it will bee thought all one with the other, but herein consisteth the difference, it seldome groweth to be so great, the leaves are somewhat smaller and greener, or not so white, it is more tender to keepe, and doth quicklier perish in the Winter, unlesse it be better defended than the other; and the smell hereof is farre more milde, sweet, and pleasant, yet somewhat quicker withall than the former, which is easily discerned by any that can judge of scents; and lastly, some kinde hereof beareth white flowers, an o∣ther blue. 
6. Salvia Cretica angustifolia non aurita. Small Candy Sage without eares. This small Candy Sage riseth up with divers hard stalkes, of a brownish colour, having the leaves set thereon by couples, which are much narrower than in any other Sage, and without any eares at all set unto them, of a whitish greene colour like the small Sage, and a little dented or crumpled about the edges; this brancheth forth plentifully, bearing purple flowers at the toppes in spikes, without any leaves among them, the roote is hard and wooddy, spreading under ground diversly. 
7. Salvia minor altera flore rubente. Small red flowred Sage. This small Sage differeth little in the forme of growing or bignes, or colour of the leaves from the ordinary small Sage, but that it hath not eares so frequently with the leaves as it hath: the chiefest difference from all others is that the flowers are red, and that both smell and taste are like unto Woormewood. 
8. Salvia lanuginosa angustifolia. Small woolly Sage. This woolly Sage hath divers round stalkes a foote and a halfe high, so hoary and woolly, that they are soft therewith, though underneath they be wooddy, which spread into many branches, with leaves set thereon like the other, which are thick, narrow, short, and very hoary, white and rough, of two inches long, and halfe an inch in breadth, smelling like unto Tansye: the flowers stand in spikes at the toppes of the branches, of a purplish colour, like unto the flowers of dead Nettle or Archangell, with many small long threads in the middle. 
9. Salvia folio subrotundo. Round leafed Sage. This Sage hath many square hoary stalkes with leaves set thereon in such manner as the others are, which are rough or crumpled like the leaves of ordinary Sage, but thinner, and much whiter, round also like unto the leaves of Violets, or round rooted Birthwort, yet ending in a point: in other things it differeth not from the ordinary com∣mon Sage. 
10. Salvia fruticosa lute a angustifolia, sive Phlomis Lychnitis Dioscoridis Clusio. The greater yellow wilde Sage with narrow leaves. This kinde of Sage (for thereunto I thinke it fittest to referre it, and not to any Mullein as others doe, for which I shall shew you the reason presently hereafter) hath many very hoary and woolly leaves, the lower sides especi∣ally more than the upper, and narrower also than those of the small Sage, among which rise up square hoary and hairy stalkes about a foote high, whereon doe grow such like long hoary leaves as grow below, two alwayes set together one against another at the joynts; where the flowers stand at spaces, about the toppes of the stalkes with two leaves under them, broad at the bottome, and compassing the stalkes, being shorter than the rest: the flowers are large, open, and gaping, like unto Sage, or somewhat more like unto those of the dead Nettle, or Archangell, 6. Salvia Cretica angustifolia non aurita. Small Candy Sage without eares. 
10. Salvia fruticosa lutea angusitfolia sive Phlomis lichnitis, &amp;c. Yellow wilde Sage with narrow leaves. 
of a yellow colour comming forth out of hoary woolly huskes, covered with pale coloured haires, the toppes by reason of the length and weaknesse bending a little downewards, after which come brownish seed inclosed in woolly huskes: the root is blackish and wooddy. 
11. Salvia fruticosa lutea latifolia sive Verbascum sylvestre quartum Matthioli. French or yellow wilde Sage with broad leaves. Although divers Authors doe account this hearbe a Mullein, and so doe number it among the kindes thereof, yet I thinke it more proper to put it among the Sages: for Lobel and Pena in their Adversaria say, that it is called wilde Sage in the Gardens of Italy, France, England, and the Netherlands: and in regard that the leaves and flowers both of this, and the precedent doe rather resemble Sage than Mullein, this the greater Sage, and the former the lesser, I see no reason why these should be called Mulleins, or referred unto them rather then unto Sage, seeing none of the Mulleins that are properly so called, have hooded or gaping flowers like unto Sage, Archangell, and the like: but all of them are composed of five leaves, laid open like unto the Campions, and many other such like flowers. Take therefore the description thereof here in this manner. It hath divers square wooddy hoary stalkes, whereon grow at severall spaces, rugged, hoary, broad, and almost round pointed leaves, many set together, very like unto the great Sage, but greater: the flowers grow likewise in rundles or spaces towards the toppes of the stalkes, very like also unto the flowers of Sage, or Archangell, but of a yellow colour: the seed is greater than of any Sage, some∣what brownish and round like the last: the root is wooddy, with divers strings and fibres fastned unto it: the whole plant smelleth somewhat strong and heady. Gerard setteth downe another sort hereof, which hee saith is more sweet, but I mervaile where he had any relation of another, there being but one sort that ever I could heare of, or know. 
12. Salvia minor lutea Cretica. Small yellow Sage of Candy. This small Sage groweth with three or foure stalkes that are hard, square, and hoary, about a foote or more high, parted into other smaller branches, at whose joynts being separate farre in sunder, come usually two, and some∣times three or more, rough small hoary leaves, very like unto the small Sage leaves, and at them likewise towards the toppes of the stalkes, stand divers small gaping flowers very like unto those of Sage, but of a gold yellow colour, the seed is small, black, and somewhat long: the roote is wooddy and slender, the whole plant is of little sweet scent, but stiptick or astringent in taste. Alpinus calleth this Verbasculum Salvifolium, and differing in the smalnesse from the other Salvifolium, which is foure times bigger, and would referre it to Dioscorides his Verbascum sylvestre, amending the text which is somewhat faulty, in saying ramos habet circum virgas veluti Marrubium: but Marrubi∣um hath not ramulos, but flores circum virgas; and so it is most likely the text should runne, but I suppose it is most like unto a small Sage, whereunto I therefore referre it, because no Verbascum hath gaping flowers. 
The Place. The first groweth in Spaine and Narbone, &amp;c. and so doe the fourth and fift. The second groweth well in England 11. Salvia fructicosa lutea latifolia sive Verbascum sylvestre, &amp;c. French or yellow wild Sage with broad leaves. 
12. Salvia minor lutea cretica. Small yellow Sage of Candy. 
with many that have it, and is likely to be that sort which Clusius saith he found in Austria with white flowers, and may also be Gerards his Alpina, but that the figure doth better represent an Horminum than Sage. The third as is said, is naturall to the hot Countries of Egypt, Candy, &amp;c. but will not abide with us, not ever beare those apples. The fourth is in many of our gardens, and as Clusius saith, groweth plentifully in Spaine, and so doth the fift. The fift came out of Spaine, and is the sweetest of all other, yet it differeth as I said, from the former small Sage, which groweth in Spaine likewise abundantly. The sixt was raised from the seed that came out of Candy, whereof Clusius maketh mention, that he received the figure thereof set forth to the life in colours, from Iacobus Plateau, as it grew with him. The seventh Bauhinus saith he first saw in an Apothecaries Garden in Bassil, and afterwards in the Duke of Wittenbergs Garden at Mont Belgard, but from whence it was brought to them, he doth not declare. The eighth Bauhinus saith he received from Doctor Neudorfferus, and saith no more. The ninth hee saith likewise hee had from an Apothecarie at Smalcald: the two next throughout Spaine and Portugal plentifully: and the eleventh a∣bout Mompelier also: the last grew in Candy. All these sorts will grow by the slippes taken from them, and planted in March or Aprill. 
The Time. Most of these sorts of Sage doe flower in Iuly, or about the time of the ordinary Sage, yet some of them flower not untill August. All of them also doe beare seed, but the small ordinary Pigge Sage, or Sage of vertue, which al∣though I doe acknowledge to give seed in some places, and in some yeares, yet most commonly, and with many it doth not, nor the smeet small Spanish kinde. 
The Names. Sage is called in Greeke . The pale ash-coloured dry and withered deformity of the leaves of Sage, espe∣cially on the dry and burnt hills in the hot Countries where it groweth naturall, was the cause to give it that name, as if you should call it, scorched or consumed by blasting, for doth signifie intorquere, and contrahere to bee drawne together, or wound within it selfe, and or rather doth signifie that disease in plants, which the Latines call sideratio, a blasting, that is, when the hearbe or tree by the extreame heate of the Sunne in the Dog-dayes, or otherwise piersing into it, and drying up the moisture that nourished it, seemeth to grow faint and dry, or as it were scorched. It might saith Pena be fitly so named, from the helpe this hearbe giveth to those parts of a mans body, that seeme to be as it were dead by some blasting, in restoring the naturall heat and vigour to the part, in which quality it excelleth, giving a friendly and beneficiall comfort to the vitall spirits; and therefore the La∣tines called it Salvia, quia salvos homines &amp; incolumes efficiat, because it maketh men safe and sound in health. And the Latine versifyer from hence tooke his occasion to say, Cur moritur homo cum Salvia crescit in horto. And Sage in English, from the property in comforting and strengthening the head and memory, to make men sage or wise, of the French word Sauge; or from the Latine Salvia, to say safe, and altered into Sage. Pliny in his 21. Booke, 16. chap. hath foulely erred in mistaking the Greeke word , and translating it which is Lens, for he there saith, that Elilisphacos, with the Greekes is phacos with others. The one is more gentle than the manured lentell, with a lesser, dryer, and sweeter leafe; and the other kinde that is wilde, is of a more grievous scent, &amp;c. too much here to recite and set downe, and to little purpose. The first is generally called Salvia major &amp; latifolia, by almost all Au∣thors: the second Clusius saith he first saw in Austria, and Bauhinus that he had it first from England, and called it Salvia latifolia serrata: the third is called Salvia pomifera &amp; baccifera, or baccata &amp; Cretica, or Cretensis, to shew the kinde, Lobel calleth it Coccifera, Matthiolus Salvia fructum instar gallae ferens, and Anguilara Salvia Graeca, which he saith they usully call Phlascomelea: the fourth is called Salvia nobilis by Gesner &amp; minor, by Matthiolus and divers others, angustifolia, and tenuifolia by some others, aurita also, or auriculata, or pinnata by o∣thers: the fift Camerarius calleth Salvia Hispanica odoratissima, but Bauhinus Salvia folio tenuiore, the old Gerard calleth it Salvia Indica, but his Correcter confoundeth it with the seventh following as you shall heare: the sixt Clu∣sius setteth forth with this title, Salvia Cretica angustifolia, and Bauhinus Salvia angustifolia serrata: the seventh Bauhinus onely hath remembred unto us by the name of Salvia minor altera, and I adde thereunto flore rubente, to make it the better knowne, for it is scarce knowne to many: this is that Sage that I said before Master Iohnson that corrected Gerard hath erred exceedingly, in confounding this with the fift, which is the same that Master Cannon shewed him and gave me, whose scent is farre sweeter than the small Pigge Sage, and much differing from the scent of Wormewood, if he had as duely enformed his smell thereof, as hee did his sight of the flower: the eighth Bauhinus also giveth the name of Salvia angustifolia lanuginosa, and in English small woolly Sage: the ninth like∣wise hath his name in the title, Bauhinus giving the Latine, and I the English: the tenth is called by Clusius Phlo∣mis Lychnitis, and referreth it to the Lychnitis called also Thryallis by Dioscorides, and by the Castilians in Spaine Candilera, and those of Granado Menchera: Lobel calleth it Verbascum sylvestre folijs salviae tenuifoliae, and Bauhinus Verbascum angustis salvia folijs, who saith it is also called of some Angarathi: but Gesner in hortis Germaniae calleth it Salvia sylvestris Monspeliensium, and therefore I have placed it in the number of the Sages, and altered the title in Latine, and call it thereafter, in English, the greater yellow Sage with narrow leaves: the eleventh is called by Mat∣thiolus also Verbascum sylvestre, being his fourth, and from him Anguilara, Castor Durantes, Clusius, and others do call it Verbascum 4. Matthioli: Camerarius Verbascum sylvestre folijs salviae, and Lobel Verbascum fruticosum lignosum &amp; flore luteo, who saith as I shewed you in the description, that it is called a wilde Sage in Italy, France, the Low-Countries, and England, for we call it French Sage, and why then he and they should call it, as the next going before this, Verbascum Mullein, I see no cause more than that the leaves in both are woolly like Mullein, and may serve as a weeke for Lampes, as the Spaniards doe with the last before this, and as Mullein leaves may doe, but that is not a sufficient cause in my judgement, to make them of the tribe of Mulleins, other things not concurring as the flow∣ers whereof I have spoken before. Let others of knowledge bee judges herein. It is called in English as I said, French Sage, and wooddy Mullein, and this may as fitly bee called the great yellow wilde Sage with broad leaves, as the former is called the greater yellow wilde Sage with narrow leaves; The last is called Verbascum salvifolium by Prosper Alpinus in his Booke De plantis exoticis, but because the flowers of this are more like a Sage than a Mullein, as in the former I have rather referred it to these than to them. Bauhinus would seeme to make our ordinary Sage to bee the Sphacelus of Theophrastus, (for Dioscorides maketh no mention of Sphacelus ) set downe in his 6. Booke and 2. Chapter: whereof he speaketh in this manner, Sphacelus &amp; Salvia, differ one from another; as if you would call the one the tame manured Sage, and the other the wilde: the leafe of Sphacelus is smoother and narrower, and lesse unseemely, or not so ill-favoured: but Sage is more rough. Lugdunensis doth make the ordinary small Sage to be it, and Matthiolus seemeth to say the same: Guilandinus as is set downe in the Chapter going before, thinketh the great Stachys to be it. Dodonaeus judgeth the Salvia agrestis, or Scorodonia, Wood Sage to be it, and some others thinke Colus Iovis, or Jupiters distaffe, a kinde of wild Clary set downe in the next Chapter to be it. So that among such variety of opinions among learned men, it is very hard for me to set downe which is the truest: yet I will make bold to scan them all a little, and lastly shew you my judgement. First, for Bauhinus that seemeth to judge our ordinary Sage to bee the Sphacelus, which if it should be so, I would faine have him set downe; what sort should be his Sage, that must be by Theophrastus judge∣ment more rugged than Sphacelus; for I thinke none of the Sages is more rugged than the ordinary: For Dale∣champius and others that thinke the small Sage to bee Sphacelus, and say it is peculiar to the Sphacelus to have eares; surely I thinke that if Theophrastus had meant that Sage, he would not have forgotten to specifie the eares, which is such a manifest distinction from the other, and from all other hearbes almost, that he might soone have put it out of all question, if he had but so set it downe, besides his Sphacelus hath a smoother leafe, and not so ill-favoured as the Sage, but the leafe of the small Sage, is almost as unsightly for the smalnesse as the greater: for Guilandinus that ta∣keth the great Stachys or base Horehound to bee Sphacelus, the greatnesse of the leaves and whole plant, and the resemblance more neare an Horehound than a Sage, will make any the more to decline from this opinion; for it seemeth by Theophrastus that Sphacelus should be a kinde of Sage, in that it should no otherwise differ from it, but in the seemelinesse, smoothnesse, and smalnesse of the leafe. For Dodonaeus who would make the Scorodonia or Salvia agrestis to be Sphacelus, and strengthneth his opinion with these reasons, that the leafe of the Sphacelus Is more narrow or small, (for so I translate the word contractius ) and lesse unseemely than Sage, such as the wooddy Sage hath, and maketh the Greeke word to signifie a more grievous smell, as well as a more rugged or crumpled leafe, that he might make the wood Sage to bee answerable unto Sphacelus, and to be lesse grievous in smell, as well as lesse rugged in forme to the Sage: but although it be called Salvia &amp; agrestis with him, and sylve∣stris with Tragus and others, yet it is also referred by the best Authors unto the second scordium or scordotis, water Germander of Pliny, and of Valerius Cordus, called Scorodonia, of the smel of Garlicke, whereof this wood Sage hath a smack, which even Dodonaeus himselfe describeth to have larger, but shorter leaves than Sage, both which I thinke cannot agree unto Sphacelus, for it is said to have smaller leaves than Sage, and the smell hereof cannot be said to bee lesse grievous than that of Sage. Now for those that would have Colus Iovis to be sphacelus, their opinions have farre lesse shew of reason than any of the other going before, for the forme and largenesse of the leaves and stalkes is greater than Sage, and is differing from any good scent, drawing neerer unto a wild Clary, (whereof good Authors make it a kind) than to any Sage. Now to shew you my opinion, which of these come neerest to the truth, I must a little before hand scan the words of Theophrastus, which you may read in the same Booke and Chapter within a few lines after it; for in describing the next hearbe Marrubium, Horehound to be of two kindes; when hee hath shewed you the first, he saith of the second, alterum rotundius squallensque vehementer sicut Sphaceli, &amp;c. which is, the other kinde, hath a rounder leafe than the former, and of an exceeding foule unseemely, or ill-favoured forme or colour (for the word squallens may be referred to both) like unto Sphacelus: so that it seemeth that the leaves of the other Horehound should be as unseemely in shew as the Sphacelus, which words seeme to contradict the former concerning Sphacelus, to be smoother, smaller, and lesse unseemely than Sage, for thereby the leaves of Sphacelus should have a neater forme and colour than Sage, and hereby they should bee worse, or as bad in shew as Hore∣hound, which all know to be of no good colour or shew: to reconcile these descriptions it is necessary, seeing an Author of so great learning and judgement, should not vary in his owne writing (but this is not observed or re∣membred by any Author that I have read) therefore it is the best way to say, that even Sphacelus is very deformed and unseemely, but in comparison of Sage, which is more dry and deformed, Sphacelus is smoother and lesse defor∣med. So that considering all these hearbes that the severall Authors doe make to be Sphacelus, I find none that can be more fitly referred thereunto than the Salvia minor, the lesser Sage: notwithstanding that Theophrastus hath omitted the eares, and that Dodonaeus contrarieth it, for that it is as deformed as the greater Sage, for both Matthiolus in his last Edition upon more mature deliberation no doubt, and Dalechampius, or the Author of Lugdunensis hath ex∣presly set it downe so, and Theophrastus may be excused for not remembring the eares, and Dodonaeus answered that by Theophrastus judgement even Sphacelus according to the Greeke name before shewed, which is Sideratio in La∣tine, is exceedingly deformed, or unseemely, as well as the great Sage, though in comparison of the one with the other, the greater Sage is the more dry and rugged. Sage is called by the Arabians Aelisfacos and Elifacos, by the Italians Saelvia, and Salva by the Spaniards, as well as Salvia: by the French Saulge: by the Germanes Salbey: of the Dutch Saevie, and by us in English, Sage. 
The Vertues. A decoction of the leaves and branches of Sage made and drunke, saith Dioscorides, provoketh urine, bringeth downe the feminine courses, helpeth to expell the dead child, and is a remedy against the prickes of the Puffen or Forkfish, and causeth the haires likewise to become blacke: it stayeth the bleeding of wounds, and clenseth foule ulcers or sores: the decoction of the leaves and branches made with wine, doth take away the itching of the cods, if they be bathed therewith. Gallen saith it is of a manifest heating quality, and a little binding, and Aetius saith the same also, but he further saith, that some report that the fumes thereof being taken when it is burnt, doth stay the immoderate fluxe of womens courses, and all other fluxes of theirs: Agrippa saith that if childing women whose wombes be too moist and slippery, not able to conceive by reason of that default, shall take a quantity of the juyce of Sage, with a little salt, for foure dayes before they company with their Husbands, it will helpe them to conceive, and also for those that after they have conceived, are subject often to miscarry upon any small occasion, for it cau∣seth the birth to be the better retained, and to become the more lively: therefore in Cyprus and Aegypt, after a great plague, women were forced to drinke the juyce of Sage, to cause them to be the more fruitfull. Orpheus saith, that three spoonefuls of the juyce of Sage taken fasting with a little honey, doth presently stay the spitting or cast∣ing up of blood: For them that are in a consumption, these Pills are much commended. Take of Spiknard and Ginger of each two drammes, of the seed of Sage a little tosted at the fire eight drammes, of long pepper twelve drammes, all these being brought into fine powder, let there bee so much juyce of Sage put thereto, as may make it into a masse, formable for pills, taking a dramme of them every morning fasting, and so likewise at night, drink∣ing a little pure water after them. Matthiolus saith, that it is very profitable for all manner of paines of the head, comming of cold, and rheumaticke humours, as also for all paines of the joynts, whether used inwardly or out∣wardly, and therefore It helpeth such as have the falling sicknesse, the lethargie or drowsie evill, such as are dull and heavie of spirit, and those that have the palsie, and is of much use in all defluxions or distillations of thin rheume from the head, and for the diseases of the chest or brest. The leaves of Sage and Nettles bruised together, and laid upon the impostume that riseth behind the eares, doth asswage and helpe it much: also the juyce of Sage taken in warme water, helpeth an hoarsnesse and the cough: the leaves sodden in wine and laid upon any place affected with the Palsie, helpeth much, if the decoction be drunke also. Sage taken with Wormewood is used for the bloody fluxe; Pliny saith it procureth womens courses, and stayeth them comming downe too fast; helpeth the stinging and bytings of Serpents, and killeth the wormes that breed in the eares, and also in sores. Sage is of excellent good use to helpe the memory, by warming and quickning the sences, and the conserve made of the flowers is used to the same purpose, as also for all the former recited diseases: they are perswaded in Italy that if they eate Sage fasting with a little salt, they shall be safe that day, from the danger of the byting of any venemous beast; they use there also never to plant Sage but with Rue among it, or neare it, for feare of Toades and other Serpents breeding under it, and infecting it with their venemous spittle, &amp;c. the danger whereof is recorded in Boccace, of two Friends or Lovers, that by eating the leaves of that Sage under which a Toade was found to abide, were both killed thereby, and therefore the Poet joyneth them both together to have wholesome drinke, saying; Salvia cum ruta faciunt tibi pocula tuta. Sage hath beene of good use in the time of the plague at all times, and the small Sage more espe∣cially (which therefore I thinke our people called Sage of Vertue) the juyce thereof drunke with vineger. The use of Sage in the Moneth of May, with butter, Parsley, and some salt, is very frequent in our Country to continue health to the body: as also Sage Ale made with it, Rosemary, and other good hearbes for the same purpose, and for teeming women, or such as are subject to miscary, as it is before declared. Gargles likewise are made with Sage, Rosemary, Honisuckles, and Plantaine boyled in water or wine, with some Honey and Allome put thereto, to wash cankers, sore mouthes, and throats, or the secret parts of man or woman as need requireth. And with o∣ther hot and comfortable hearbes to be boyled, to serve for bathings of the body or legges, in the Summer time, espe∣cially to warme the cold joynts or sinewes of young or old, troubled with the Palsie or crampe, and to comfort and strengthen the parts. It is much commended against the stitch or paines in the side comming of winde, if the grie∣ved place be fomented warme with the decoction thereof in wine, and the hearbe after the boyling be laid warme also thereto. 
CHAP. XX. Horminum. Clary. THere are divers sorts of Clary, some manured onely, called Garden Clary, others growing wilde whereof I shall here shew you many, collected from sundry parts. 
1. Horminum sativum vulgare sive Sclarea. Garden Clary. Our ordinary Garden Clary hath foure-square stalkes, with 1. Horminum sativum vulgare sive Sclarea. Garden Clary. 
broad, rough, wrinckled, whitish, or hoary greene leaves, some∣what evenly cut in on the edges, and of a strong sweet scent, growing some neare the ground, and some by couples upon the stalkes. The flowers grow at certaine distances, with two small leaves at the joynts under them, somewhat like unto the flowers of Sage, but smaller, and of a very whitish or bleack blue colour: the seed is brownish, and somewhat flatt, or not so round as the wild, the rootes are blackish, and spread not farre, and perish after the seed time: it is most usuall to sow it, for the seed seldome ri∣seth of it owne shedding.
7. Staechas Citrina sive Coma aurea. Golden or yellow Cassidony. 
 
7. Chrysocome sive coma aurea &amp; Staechas citrina vulgaris. Golden tufts, or golden Cassidony. This golden Cassidony hath sundry hoary branched stalkes, with long and narrow whitish leaves, dispersedly set thereon unto the toppes, where the flowers appeare in umbels, each branch bearing a large tuft of scaly yellow flowers, like a loose or sparsed umbell, keeping their colour long before they wither, and being gathered in a fit dry time when they are in their perfection, will so abide, and be kept a long time after: the seed is red, smaller than Marjerome, and sharper: the roote is small and black: the whole plant is of a strong sweet scent, not un∣pleasant. 
8. Chrysocome sive Staechas Citrina Cretica. Candy golden Cassidony, or Goldilocks. This Candiot groweth very like the former, but with smaller long leaves, all hoary, the flowers are in larger um∣bels, greater also, and of a more shining pale gold colour, which will abide, being gathered in the beauty as the o∣ther. There is another sort called Elichrysum Orientale by Bauhinus, differing little from this last sort, Elichry∣sum Ori∣entale. but in the scaly heads of flowers, which are greater and longer than they, and in the whole plant which is taller and more hoary. 
9. Chrysocome Cretica altera sive Hispanica. Spanish golden Cassidony. This other Candior or Spaniard, which you will, groweth 9. Chrysocome Cretica altera sive Hispanica. Spanish Golden Cassidony. 
sometimes but with one stalke, or else with more, halfe a yard high, covered with an hoary downe, having sundry long and narrow leaves on them, sometimes dispertedly set, and some∣times more together, greene on the upperside, and hoary under∣neath: at the toppes grow small branches, bearing one or two scaly long heads of yellow flowers, somewhat like to those of Maudeline, consisting of many threds or thrums. 
10. Staechas citrina altera odora. Sweet yellow Cassidony. The yellow sweet Cassidony is a small low plant, not rising above a foote and a halfe high at the most, with divers slender branches somewhat hoary, whereon are set small long and nar∣row leaves, of a darke or more sullen hoary colour, then those of the former golden Cassidony, at the toppes of the long divi∣ded stalkes, stand single heads of yellow scales, nothing of so lively a yellow colour as they, nor so round, but a little longer than round, with a few threads or thrums at the tops, which bring forth small browne seed, wrapped in some downe: the roote is black, but smaller and slenderer than it: this hath a lesse heady scent than the other, yet not unpleasant. 
11. Staechas Citrina modora. Vnsavory yellow Cassidony. This small Cassidony hath divers low hoary stalkes, not aboue a foote high, whereon doe grow small long hoary leaves, broader and larger than the last: at the toppes of the stalkes stand most commonly two heads, yet sometimes but one, which are greater and longer than the last, and the scales likewise longer, and somewhat of a brownish greene with the hoarinesse, from whence rise many pale yellow threads or thrums, which when they are past, the seed ripening, is inclosed in downe, and blowne away with the wind: the roote is lesse than the last, and blackish, but not lesse wooddy: this whole plant and every part is utterly without any scent to bee perceived in it. 
12. Staechas Citrina sylvestrior. Wilde yellow Cassidony. This wilde Cassidony (for thereunto I referre it) hath a round hairy stalke, stored with most pure white wooll, divided at the toppes into severall short branches, the leaves that stand on them are somewhat longer and larger than the last; greene on the upperside, and grayish, hoary, and woolly underneath, and a little endented about the edges, the ends of the branches are naked without leaves, for foure inches long, bearing at the toppes of every of them one scaly head, with divers yellow threads or thrums in the middle, like unto the last, but somewhat larger. 
13. Staechas Citrina Cretica flore amplo. Candy unsavory yellow Cassidony with large flowers. This brave silver-like plant groweth very high and tall, having a straight round stalke that is white or hoary, and of a fingers thicknesse, spreading sundry branches, so thick set with small long and hoary leaves, many together at spaces, that they cover and hide the branches almost wholly, and are more like unto Cassidony than Lavender-cot∣ton leaves, whereunto Alpinus doth liken them, but not dented about the edges: the upper part of the stalkes di∣vide themselves into small sprigges, bearing each of them, on a long slender stalke, a large yellow flower, like unto a single Marigold standing in a greene huske, wherein after the flower is withered and past, groweth small long seed like unto Sow-thistle seed: the roote is long, white, and tender: this plant hath neither scent or taste much to be perceived in it, saving a little bitternesse, whereby the Natives finde it effectuall to kill the wormes, to pro∣voke urine, to open obstructions, and to helpe the jaundise, and the powder of the dryed hearbe, or the juyce there∣of, to cleanse and heale foule ulcers and sores. 
14. Staechas purpurea odorata. Sweet purple Cassidony. I doe acknowledge that I doe not please my selfe, but others, in the placing of this plant in this place, and by this name, for although it hath a face or shew in some things like unto the yellow unsavory Cassidony, yet in other things it so farre differeth, that I might in my judgement, more truely place it with the Iaceas Knapweeds, than with these, as the description following will shew to any that will duely consider it, which is thus. It riseth to the height almost of a cubite, leaning or bending downe the branches, whereby it spreadeth in compasse more than in height, from a long hardblackish root, shooting forth wooddy and hoary branches, whereon doe grow many long and narrow leaves, of a darke greene colour on the upperside, and a little hairy withall, but of an hoary white on the underside, and very woolly, and a little dented about the 13. Staechas Citrina Cretica flore amplo. Candy unsavory yellow Cassidony with large flowers. 
14. Staechus purpurea odorata. Sweete purple Cassidony. 
edges: at the toppes of the branches come forth sometimes but one, but more often two long heads together, compo∣sed of many scales, at the toppes whereof stand the flowers, which are nothing but long threads or thrums, of an excel∣lent purple colour, as sweet in scent, as pleasant to the sight after the flowers are past, in those scaly heads grow the seed wrapped in downe, which is somewhat like unto the small Pine Thistle seed. 
The Place. The first Cassidony or Staechas which is used by Apothe∣caries and others in Physick, groweth in Arabia, as well as in France or Spaine, or upon Mount Garganus in Italy, which is called in the Italian tongue Monte Sancto Angelo. The second was found in Morena, a place in Castile or Spaine. The third is found in many places, both in France and Spaine promiscuously among the other common sorts. The 4. Clusius saith is very rare to meet with, for that he onely found naturall on the toppe of the Calpe. The fifth Dalechampius only hath set forth, without naming the place where it grew. The sixth as Lobel saith groweth in the Pro∣vince of France, in Spaine also, and nigh the Rhine in Germa∣ny, but lesse sweet: the seventh and eighth in Candy and Spaine likewise: the ninth and tenth Lobel setteth forth to grow about Mompelier in France, and Clusius saith hee found them in Spaine and Portugal. The eleventh grew on the Hills neare Terraeinum in Italy: the 12. was found a∣mong the low Skarlet Okes and Strauberry trees in the Mountaine Coetius neare Mompelier: the 13. in Candy: and the last in France. 
The Time. Although divers of these have beene observed to bee in flower in March and Aprill, according to the climate where they grow naturall, yet in our Gardens of these more Northerly coun∣tries, the former three sorts flower not untill May or Iune, and the rest flower not un∣till August for the most part, if they doe abide, for they are all of them very tender, and must bee kept with great care and looking to. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke, and Staechas in Latine, and most com∣monly Stichados by the Apothecaries, and Stae∣chas Arabica, because the best was brought out of Arabia. Diosco∣rides saith it tooke the name Staechas from the Ilands called Staechades where it groweth, which are over-against Marselles, yet Marselles is two dayes journey from the Sea, and those Ilands doe lye neare unto the Country of Olbia. Galen saith it groweth in every Country, and as well in Candy, as the Ilands Staechades, in English it is called Sticadove, Cassidony, and French Lavender, but the Staechas Citrina is so called upon the correspondency and likenesse of the properties and temperature, as well as of the forme of leaves and heads: it is also called Coma aurea, Chrysocome, and Tinearia. Old Gerard was very confused in the figures of the two chapters of Elichrysum, and Staechas Citrina, or Chrysocome. For his Coma aurea, is Matthiolus his Elichrysum verum, and his Staechas Citrina Matthiolus his Elichrysum Italicum, which is Clusius his Stratiotes Millefolia flore luteo: his Crysocome, or Amaranthus luteus, is Staechas Citrina vulgaris: his Amaran∣thus Galeni, is Staechas Citrina altera odorata of Lobel: the description of most are according to Lobel: in English also they have divers names as golden Tufts, Goldilocks, Golden flower, gentle Golden flower of life, and yellow Cassidony, by which I rather entitle these plants, then by the others. The first is called Staechas purpurea, and Ara∣bica, or Staechas by Matthiolus, the second Bauhinus onely mentioneth, Clusius calleth the third Staechas longioribus ligulis, and Lobel Staechas nudis cauliculis summis, Lugdunensis Staechas capitulis foliatis, and Bauhinus Staechas cauli∣culis non foliatis, in English Cassidony with long leafed heads. The fourth is called by Clusius Staechas crispo folio, by Dodonaeus and Bauhinus Staechas folio serrato, of Gerard and his Corrector Staechas multifida, but the figure is that of Lavendula multifido folio, as Clusius giveth it, for there are not two Staechades with divided leaves. Lugdunensis setteth it downe for Succudus of Avicen, according to Myconus judgement, in English Cassidony with dented leaves. The fift besides the name in the title, is called by Bauhinus Staechas viridis capitulo oblongo. The sixth is cal∣led by Alpinus lib. de plantis exoticis Rosmarinum Staechadis facie, but because it doth come nearer to Staechas than to Rosemary in my opinion, I have referred it thereunto. The seventh is called Staechas Citrina by most Authors, by Lobel Chrysocome, and Coma aurea sive Amaranthus luteus by Fuchsius and others, and taken by those of Mompelier to be the right Chrysocome of Dioscorides, excepting one small word wherein there might be a fault also, Caesalpinus, and Bauhinus entittle it Elichrysum, whereas Dioscorides his Helichrysum, differeth from his Chrysocome, in having Southernewood like leaves, (and therefore I referre Heli∣chrysum rather to the Milfoiles, as you shall finde it there among them. The eighth is cal ed Eliochrysum by Hono∣rius Bellus, and the other sort thereof, Elichrysum Orientale by Bauhinus, and by Camerarius in Epitome, Staechas Citrina comis grandioribus. The ninth may be as well the Chrysocome peregrina secunda of Clusius, as his quinta Cre∣tica, for he saith they are very like. The tenth is the Staechas Citrina altera, and altera odora of Lobel, by Clusius Chrysocome peregrina prima, by Lugdunensis Ageratum aliud quorundam, and by Bauhinus Elichrysum sylvestre angusti∣folium capitulis conglobatis. The eleventh Lobel calleth Staechas Citrina altera inodora, and is Clusius his Chrysocome peregrina tertia, which Lugdunensis setteth downe, for Gnaphalium marinum Dalechampij, and Bauhinus calleth Elichryson sylvestre flore oblongo. The twelfth Bauhinus calleth Elichryso sylvestri flore oblongo similis, in English it wild yellow Cassidony. The thirteenth Alpinus lib. de exoticis plantis, calleth Santulina Cretica, but I, as it is in the title, for the reason expressed in the description. The last was sent by Pilliterius from Mompelier, by the name of Staechas purpurea odorata, who said it was to be referred to the Staechas Citrina altera inodora, because it was so like it, but yet was a differing sort from it: the causes that make me discent from that opinion, whereof I said something before in the description, I will here set downe: by the description you finde it hath a scaly head, and purple thrummes rising in the midst of it, which is the flower (and such have the flowers of all the Iaceas ) and the seed likewise inclosed in the heads among the downe, are like unto the seeds of the small low Pine Thistle, which are like the seeds of other Thistles, that is flat, hard, and shining, and such are most of the seeds of the Iaceas Cyanus, and some others: but none of the Staechades have thrummes for their flowers, and none of the other Staechades pur∣purea, or Citrinae, have such like seeds, and these two things cause me to thinke it fitter to be referred to the Jaceas whereunto it is like both in flower and seed. There is a controversie betweene Molineus the Author of the great Herball named Lugdunensis, and Pena and Lobel which should be the true Chrysocome of Dioscorides. Lobel and Pena in their Adversaria, striving to make Staechas Citrina vulgaris, called Coma aurea, and of some Tinearia and Ama∣ranthus luteus, and taken of Dodonaeus to be Eliochryson of Theophrastus, and Ageratum of Dioscorides, to bee the true Chrysocome of Dioscorides: and Molinaeus, in folio 780. contradicting and confuting them. Lobel and Pena in the description of Staechas Citrina, say that the golden yellow toppe or head of tufted flowers thereof hath caused the name of Chrysocome, which our age could not hitherto know, in wanting the knowledge of the true Hisope, unto whose tufted toppes it was by Dioscorides compared: but now that the true Hisope is declared and set forth (which they make to be the Winter or Por-Marjerome of our Country, as I have shewed you in the first Chapter of this Booke) with whose tufted toppes or umbell of flowers, they compared the flowers of the yellow Cassidony, they are perswaded that the Staechas Citrina is the true Chrysocome of Dioscorides, but yet afterwards they say that one word or two in Dioscorides description of Chrysocome doth hinder it, and that is that the rootes of Chrysocome (saith Dioscorides ) are small like unto the rootes of Black Hellebor, and the taste thereof resembling Cyperus, of a sweet, but austere taste, for which they think there may be some fault in the text of Dioscorides. Thus you see the scope and drift of their reasons to be, that because few did know what hearb was the true Chrysocome of Dioscorides (who cōpared the tufted heads of flowers thereof unto Hisope) &amp; that thereby it was manifest, that our Hisope not having any tufted head or unbell of flowers, but a spiked head was not the true Hisope of Dioscorides, and therefore they having shewed what was the true Hisope, would also declare this yellow Cassidony, whose tufted head of flow∣ers is like unto that of their Hisope, to be the true Chrysocome of Dioscorides: Vnto all which allegations Molinaeus thus answereth. That first he would examine whether our ordinary Hisope be the true Hisope of Dioscorides, and what part thereof is compared or referred to the Chrysocome, and then whether this Staechas Citrina bee the true or no. There are saith he, two sorts of Hisope well knowne to us, the one tame, or of the garden, with a spike of blue flowers, which is the more bitter: and the other wilde with a red flower, which is lesse bitter. Now they that de∣ny either of these to be the true Hisope of Dioscorides, are led by this reason: that the leaves of each of them are long and narrow, not like unto any of the kindes of Origanum, which are round, and by Dioscorides compared to the leaves of Marjerome, Pennyroyall, and Dittany. This saith he, hath troubled many that did not know a third kind, (which is the round leafed Hisope (declared in the first Chapter of Hisope) set forth by him, and like the o∣ther two sorts, but that the leaves are round like unto Origanum or Marjerome. If this kinde of Hisope had beene knowne to them, they would not have called for an hearb out of England, to supply the place of the right Hisope, seeing it hath a place of it owne, even among the sorts of wild Origanum or Marjerome, whereunto it is like, but somewhat altered by manuring from that which is common. But this their Hisope or Pot-Marjerome hath no corymbi tufts or umbells, they are rather a heape of flowers gathered together, as the wild Origanum or Marjerome hath, for no man did ever attribute any such heads or tufts as are called corymbi, unto any of them. This knot being untied, it followeth (saith he) that we try whether the Staechas Citrina be Chrysocome. In this their plant there is no likenesse of leaves, of neither of the sorts of Hisope to bee seene, to wit, either of the long or of the round leafed sort, besides the bushy toppe of leaves and stalkes of flowers of this Staechas Citrina, loosely set together, is not a close tuft of heads, such as Corymbus (which is a close umbell or tuft of heads or seeds, such as the Ivie hath) is usually said to bee; but are onely a few yellow golden round shining bullets, or heads at the toppes; the roote also thereof hath no thicke and small strings as Helleborus niger hath; nor is like to Cyperus, nor hath an austere sweet taste, all which Chrysocome hath: He therefore (I meane the foresaid Molinaeus ) saith that hee hath often in revol∣ving these doubts, suggested to those Herbarists that have knowledge in plants, that hearbe which the French call Targon, and some in Latine Targun, Tarchon, Tragum, and Dracohortensis, in English Tarragon, and which Ru∣ellius too credulous of fables, thought was produced from the seed of Flaxe put into the roote of an Onion to bee very agreeable to the description of Chrysocome, in the toppes set with many corymbi or tufted heads: in the leaves like unto the ordinary long leafed Hisope: and in the roote branching as Helleborus niger, of the colour of Cyperus, of a taste not unpleasant, which is somewhat austere with the sweetnesse, by which quality it is profitable to the dis∣eases of the liver and lungs. This (saith he) seemeth probable to me, and therefore I could not bee silent therein, setting forth the nature of Chrysocome, leaving it to the judgement of those that are more learned. I have, I con∣fesse beene a little too prolixe or tedious in this narration, but I was rather willing to set forth the whole minde of the man, then to abridge any of his reasons, that comparing both his negatives and affirmatives, yee may agree or discent from them: For my owne part seeing Clusius and others, doe account the Staechas Citrina, to be Chrysocome of Dioscorides, and mis-like of this opinion of Targum; I can doe no lesse, and thinke there is farre lesse reason in any to suppose Targum to be Chrysocome, than Staechas Citrinae, for Dioscorides in the description thereof, mentioneth no likenesse of leaves, but of the toppes of tufted heads to be like unto Hisope, and the small rootes unto those of Helleborus niger, equalling Ciperus. The Arabians call Staechas Astochodos, and Astochodes: the Italians Staecha and Staechade: the Spaniards Cantuesso: the French Stichades: the Germanes Stichas kraut: the Dutch Stichas cruijt: and we in English Sticadove Cassidony, and French Lavender. The Staechas citrina is called by the Italians Ama∣rantho giallo, by the Germanes Motten blumen, and Rhein blumen. 
The Vertues. The decoction of our garden Cassidony is as effectuall as Hisope for the diseases of the breast, that is, for coughs and colds. It is put into Antidotes, that is such medicines, as are remedies against infection and poison. It is of a mixt temperature, as Galen saith, to wit, of a small earthly cold essence, from whence it hath the quality of bind∣ing; and of another more earthly extenuated, from whence it is bitter, by the mixture of both which, it openeth obstructions, and freeth the body from them, it extenuateth, cleanseth, and strengthneth all the inward parts and bowels, as also the whole frame of the body. Mesues saith it cleanseth, purgeth, and resolveth all obstructions of the liver, spleene, and of the other inward parts; it hindereth putrefaction, and correcteth their intemperature: by that small astringent quality that is in it, it strengthneth the braine and sinewes, the heart, and all the other in∣ward parts: It purgeth black choller and flegme, as well from the head and braine, as the sinewes, and other the instruments of the sences, and comforteth them also. It is very effectuall in all cold griefes, used in drinkes, baths, or fomentings, An oyle made therewith and fomented, giveth as it were life to the braines and sinewes, by war∣ming and comforting them. Taken with vineger of Squilles, it helpeth the falling sicknesse, and swimming of the head, and is helpfull for all other paines of the head and stomack; with Lapis Cyaneus, or Sal Indicum, it helpeth those that are melancholick, whom feares and terrours doe accompany. Taken with the juyce of Buglosse and of Pipins, it helpeth the sadnesse of the heart, and melancholy; it easeth the paines of the sinewes, arteries, muscles, and joynts, taken in what manner you will: the fumes thereof taken into the nostrils, openeth them when they are closed: Taken in a Syrupe or any other forme, it helpeth the quartane ague, and all other day agues, especially in those that are flegmatick. It is especially hurtfull to those that are hot, dry, and cholerick, because it troubleth the stomack, and provoketh both thirst and fainting: but because it worketh slowly, some Sal gemma is added unto it to quicken it, or else sometimes the Myrobalani Indi, or Chebuli, to make it the more forcible, and sometime Squilles are added, especially in the griefes of the head; It is made the stronger, if it be steeped or boyled in whey: it is the lesse hurtfull if it be boyled with wine, the juyce of Pipins, and a few Raisons of the Sunne. Cassidony and a little Spike or Lavender, steeped in old oyle, is of much good use, and of great effect for all the cold causes afore∣said. The heads of Cassidony are of more force than the leaues; Pliny saith it provoketh womens monethly cour∣ses and urine: It is of especiall good use for the cold griefes of the mother, and for women with child. The other yellow Staechas or Cassidony, is much about the same temperature and vertues, serving very well for most of the affects before specified, as you shall heare: It is somewhat bitter and binding, and therefore it warmeth, dryeth, o∣peneth and cleanseth, where cause requireth. The toppes or flowers steeped or boyled in wine, openeth all obstru∣ctions of the liver and gall, and therefore helpeth the jaundise and dropsie; and is very profitably taken of those that have the falling sicknesse, and for all other the diseases of the braine, proceeding of a cold cause, as catarrhs; rheumes, and distillations, and also all old griefes of the head, that are continuall; and the Palsie also, whether yee take the decoction of the hearbe, or the powder thereof in Oxymel or Rhodomell; it likewise killeth the wormes of the belly. It being boyled in lye is very profitable for all those diseases of the head, to wash it there∣with, and besides cleanseth the head of scurffe, dandraffe, and such other things as offend it, and killeth lice therein. The decoction of the hearbe openeth and cleanseth the reynes, and uritory parts, causing abundance of urine, espe∣cially in them whose urine was stopped before. The flowers are very profitably used in all those bathings, that are applyed to the obstructions, and cold griefes of the mother. Pena saith he hath by good experience found it effe∣ctuall in the diseases of the liver, which proceed from the bad concoction therein, by reason of clammy humours, and thick vapours, that passe thorow the tunicles thereof; it is not without danger given to those whose lungs are enflamed: but is especially good for all thin, sowre, and salt flegme oppressing them. Clusius saith that they of Spaine used the decoction of the Spanish sort against the wind collick with good effect. 
CHAP. XXIIII. Lavendula. Lavender. T Here are two sorts of Lavender or Spike, or Lavender Spike, that is a lesser and a greater, of each where∣of there are some diversities, as shall be shewed. 
1. Lavendula major sive vulgaris. Garden Lavender. Our ordinary Lavender riseth up with a hard wooddy stemme above the ground, parted into many small bran∣ches, whereon are set whitish long and narrow leaves by couples, one against another, from among which rise up naked square stalkes, with two leaves at a joynt, and at the toppes divers small huskes standing round about them, formed in long round heads or spikes with purple gaping flowers springing out of each of them: the roote is wooddy, and spreadeth in the ground: the whole plant is of a 1. Lavendula major sive vulgaris. Garden Lavender. 
4. Lavendula folio multifido. Iagged Lavender.
strong sweet scent, but the heads of flowers much more, and more piercing the sences, which are much used to bee put into linnen and apparell. There is also a kinde hereof that beareth white flowers, and somewhat broader leaves, but it is very rare, Flore albo. and kept but with a few with us, being more tender, and not so able to endure our cold Winters. 
2. Lavendula minor sive Spica. Small Lavender or Spike. The Spike or small Lavender is very like unto the former, but groweth not so high, neither is the head or spike so long, but shorter and smaller, and the flowers of a deeper purplish blue co∣lour: the leaves also are a little harder, whiter, and shorter than the former: the scent also is somewhat sharper and stronger. This is nothing so frequent with us as the first, and is nursed up but with few, that take delight in rare hearbes and plants, and kept in a warmer place. 
3. Lavendula minor flore albo. Small white Lavender or Spike with a white flower. This small Lavender is in all things like unto the other small La∣vender, but that the whole plant is smaller, and the flowers are white, which maketh it to differ from the other. 
4. Lavendula folio multifido. Iagged Lavender. This small Lavender riseth up with square rough and hoary branches, to the height of a foote and a halfe, bearing thereon many hoary whitish leaves, very much jagged or torne on the edges, into many parts unto the middle ribbe, and each part cut or jagged, of a sharpe taste, and a pleasant scent, yet much weaker than in the other small Lavender: from among which rise foure-square hoary stalkes, without any leaves on them unto the toppes, where they beare small spikes of purple flowers, like unto the small Lavender or Spike, but that the flowers seeme to stand square, or in foure parts or corners: the roote is hard and wood∣dy like unto the other. 
The Place. The three first sorts are found naturally in many places of Spaine and Narbone in France, where the other groweth, although both sorts with white flowers, are much more rare, and seldome, and nursed up as I said with us in their Gardens that are curious. The last was found by Clusius both about Malaca in Spaine and Mur∣cia in the Realme of Granado: it groweth also sometimes in the gardens of those that are curious of all rare hearbs and plants. 
The Time. These all flower about the end of Iune, and beginning of Iuly, and although Clusius saith hee found the last about Malaca in flower in February, and in March about Murcia, yet it doth not flower in these colder Countries untill Iune at the soonest, or Iuly. 
The Names. Lavender is called in Latine Lavandula, and Lavendula, and of some Lavanda, quia lavacris expetitur, because it was much used in washings. The ordinary great Lavender is called by Matthio∣lus, Nardus Italica, and Pseudonardus. Tragus calleth it Spica, Nardus Germanica, but most other Authors Lavendula major mas; as they doe the smaller, minor &amp; faemina. Dalechampius upon Pliny would make it to bee Cassia alba, as hee would also have Rosmary to be Cassia nigra, and of some to be the Iphium of Theo∣phrastus. It is thought of many, to be the Cneorum that Pliny saith Higinus called Casia, which was frequently planted in the gar∣dens of Italy for their Bees to feed on, and was also used in gar∣lands, whereof Virgil in his Georgicks and Bucolicks, maketh men∣tion, before Higinus or Plinies time, in these verses. 
Tum Casiae, atque alijs intexens suavibus herbis Mollia luteola pingit vaccinia caltha. and againe Vix humiles apibus casias, roremque ministrat, and Nec circum casiae virides, &amp; olentia latè Serpylla, &amp; graviter spirantis copia thymbrae Floreat, irriguumque bibat violaria fontem. Anguillara is of opinion that Lavender should be the Cneorum album of Theophrastus, and that Rosmary should be his Cneorum nigrum, which Matthiolus confuteth sufficiently, from the description of the parts, which can bee no wayes like them; viz. that both sorts of Cneorum have flexible branches, fit to binde other things withall, which neither Lavender nor Rosmary can doe; that the one sort of Cneorum hath a good scent, and the other without scent, although Anguillara would pervert the word, to make the blacke have a good scent, as well as the white, which cannot stand with the scope of the text; and that both of the Cneora doe flower after the Autumne quarter, which Lavender doth not; and Rosmary, although it doe so, yet it flowreth first in the Spring; and lastly, that the rootes of Cneorum descend deepe into the ground, whereas neither Lavender nor Rosmary doe so. The Iagged La∣vender is called by Clusius, as it is in the title, and others since his time, doe so entitle it likewise, yet, as I said be∣fore, the figure of Staechas multifida in Gerard, both old and new, is the true figure of this Lavendula folio dissecto, as Bauhinus calleth it, and therefore I mervaile that Master Johnson did not see, or would let passe such an error, that had corrected farre lesser. 
The Vertues. Lavender is of especiall good use for all the griefes and paines of the head and braine, that proceed from a cold cause; as the Apoplexie, falling sicknesse, the drowsie or sluggish malady, crampes, convulsions and palsies, as also those that are given to faint often. It strengthneth the stomack, and freeth the liver and spleene from obstructions, provoketh womens courses, and expelleth the dead child, and the secondine or after-birth. The flowers of Laven∣der steeped in wine, helpeth them to make water that are stopped; as also that are troubled with the winde or col∣lick, if the places be bathed therewith. A decoction made with the flowers of Lavender, Horehound, Fennell, and Asparagus rootes, and a little Cinamon, is very profitably used, to helpe the falling sicknesse, and the giddinesse or turning of the braine. It is good to garble the mouth with the decoction of the flowers, against the paines of the teeth. Two spoonefuls of the distilled water of the flowers taken, doth helpe those that have lost their speech or voyce, resto ing it them againe. It helpeth also the tremblings and passions of the heart, and the swounings and faintings thereof likewise, not onely drunke, but even applied to the temples, or to the nostrils to be smelt unto, as also tyed to the arteries: but where the body is repleate with blood and humours, it is not safe to use it, because of the hot and subtill spirits wherewith it is possessed. The lesser Lavender is much commended in all the diseases of the mother, as the strangling or suffocation, the dislocation or displacing, &amp;c. for women to be bathed therewith, as also to helpe forward their travaile; The oyle chimically drawne from Lavender, which is usually called oyle of Spike is of so fierce and piercing spirits, that it is to bee used with great respect, and but some few drops used with other things, either for inward or outward griefes. 
CHAP. XXV. Rosmarinum. Rosmary. THere was formerly but one sort of Rosmary knowne, but we have now more diversity, than hath beene extant before, which shall be declared in this Chapter. 
1. Libanotis coronaria sive Rosmarinum vulgare. Ordinary Rosemary. 1. Libanotis coronaria sive Rosmarinum vulgare. Ordinary Rosmary. 
Our ordinary garden Rosmary is so well knowne I thinke, to all manner of persons being continually in their hands, that I shall scarse need to describe it, yet not to passe it over so slightly. It is well observed in our owne Land in divers places (as Noble∣mens gardens, &amp;c.) where it hath stood long, as well as in the na∣turall places, that it groweth in time to a great height, with a great and wooddy stemme, of a close firme substance, and whitish (fit to make Instruments of, &amp;c. being cut into long thin boords for the purpose) branching forth into sundry armes, and from them againe into many other smaller branches, at the joynts whereof, are set at severall distances, many long and very narrow leaves, greene above, and grayish underneath, and with them all all along the stalkes towards the toppes, divers small gaping flow∣ers, of a pale bleake bluish colour, standing in whitish huskes: the seed is small and reddish, but seldome doth any that is sowne in our Country endure the first Winter without extraordinary care, and therefore is usually encreased by slipping: the whole plant doth smell exceeding sweet. 
2. Rosmarinum stiatum sive aureum. Gilded Rosmary. This Rosmary differeth not from the former in any thing but in the leaves, which are edged or striped, or pointed with a faire gold yellow colour, which so continueth all the yeare through∣out, yet fresher in Summer than in Winter. 
3. Rosmarinum latifolium. Broad leafed Rosemary. This also groweth like the former, but wee have not seene it growne so great in our Country, nor with such wooddy branches, and is more tender to keepe: the leaves are larger, and of a more deepe shining greene colour on the upperside, and little or no∣thing whitish underneath, more thinly also or sparsedly set on the stalkes: the flowers likewise differ not from the precedent. 
4. Rosmarinum flore duplici. Double flowred Rosemary. The double flowred Rosemary thus farre differeth from the former, that it hath stronger stalkes while it is young then the last, or not so easie to breake, fairer also, and larger leaves than the first, and the flowers double like as the Larkes heele or spurre: and all this narration is but by information, not sight. 
5. Rosmarinum silvestre Matthioli. A ttniolus his wild Bohemian Rosmary. 
5. Ledum Silefiacum clusit. Wilde sweete Silesi Rosemary. 
 
5. Rosmarinum sylvestre Bohemicum Matthioli sive Ledum Silesiacum Clusij. Wild sweet Silesia Rosmary. This wild sweet Rosemary of Silesia riseth with wooddy ash coloured branches, two foote high or more, which shoote forth other branches of a purplish colour covered with a brownish yellow hoarinesse, on which are set many narrow long greene leaves, like unto those of Rosemary, but covered with the like hoarinesse as the stalkes are, especially in the naturall place, but not so much, being transplanted and folding their sides so close together, that they seeme nothing but ribbes or stalkes, of an excellent pleasant and sweet scent: at the ends of the branches grow certaine brownish scaly leaves, out of which spreadeth a tuft of many flowers, consisting of five white leaves a piece, with ten white chives or threads in the middle, and in some plants with sixe leaves and 12. threds or chieves, after which follow long and five square heads, spotted with silver like white spots while they are greene, but grow brownish when they are ripe, and turne downe their toppes, opening their huskes at the stalkes, lest the seed which is as small as dust, should suddenly fall out: the roote is wooddy with short sprayes. 
6. Rosmarinum sylvestre . Vnsavory wild Rosmary. Because this plant doth so nearely resemble Rosmary, I have thought it meete to joyne it with the rest, al∣though it be not sweet like them: It groweth above a foote high, having divers reddish branches which divide them selves into other smaller, of a whitish colour, set confusedly with long and narrow leaves, greene on the upperside, and hoary underneath, like those of the dwarfe willow, of no pleasant scent at all, but of an astringent taste: at the toppes of the branches stand divers heads, composed of many short scales, out of which thrust forth sundry flowers, standing on long foote stalkes made of five leaves a peece, of a fine delayed reddish, or flesh-colour, after which rise short five square heads with blunt points, containing small pale coloured seed.
7. Rosmarinum sylvestre minus nostras. Our wild Rosmary. Our wilde North-Country Rosmary groweth not so high, with smaller leaves, nothing so great and long as Rosmary leaves, but thicker and shorter, of a darke greene shining colour above, and somewhat yellowish greene underneath, set very sparsedly on very slender and pliant blackish greene twigges, at the toppes whereof grow the flowers, not out of scaly heads as in the former, as farre as I could perceive by those plants, that were sent me and others out of Lancashire, of a reddish colour; the whole plant hath as little scent as the last, which is none at all that I could perceive. 
6. Rosmarinum sylvestre . Vnsavory wilde Rosemary. 
7. Rosmarinum sylvestre minus nostra . Our wilde Rosemary. 
 
The Place and Time. The ordinary Rosemary groweth in Spaine abundantly neare the Sea side, the scent whereof is many times felt by those in the Shippes that passe by, many leagues off from the Land, in Province also of France, and sundry other those hot Countries, but will not abide (unlesse kept in stowes) the Winter in divers places of Germany, Denmarke, and those other Northerly Regions: the fift in Silesia, Bohemia, and the parts there abouts: the sixt in the same places with the fift, the last in divers places of Lancashire, and Yorkeshire, bordering there. The first flowreth in Aprill and May with us, and sometimes in August againe, the others not untill August. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Libanotis, &amp; Stephanomatica is added thereunto, to distinguish it from the other Libanotides, that are umbelleferous plants; in Latine Rosmarinus &amp; Rosmarinum quasi Rosamarina, Cordus on Dioscorides calleth it Libanotis Coronaria according to the Greeke: Dalechampius on Pliny taketh it to be the Casia nigra of Theophrastus, and Anguillara to bee the Casia of Hyginus acceptable to Bees, and therefore fowne neare their Hives, as also to be the Cneorum nigrum of Theophrastus, and Lavender to be his album, but Mat∣thiolus hath confuted that errour, as is shewed in the Chapter before: some as Bauhinus noteth it, would make it to bee the Hebrewes Hisope, as if their Hisope differed from the Hisope of all other Nations, but without true judgement. Gesner in hortis calleth the first Rosmarinus minor sive tennifolim, as he doth the third Rosmarinus alter ignobilior, and Cordus in historia, Rosmarinus syl. seu major: the fift is called Rosmarinum sylvestre &amp; Bohemicum, by Matthiolus Rosmarinum sylvestre; by Dodonaeus in his Dutch Herball, Ledum Silesiacum by Clusius; Ledum folijs Ros∣marini alterum by Lobel, and Chamepence by Cordus on Dioscorides, and in his History also, because the narrow long leaves being folded together, do represent the Pine or Pitch tree leaves. The sixt is called by Clusius as it is in the title: the last is not remembred by any before. The Arabians call it Elkia gaber, the Italians Rosmarino, the Spaniards Ro∣mero, the French Ronarim, the Germanes Roszmarin, the Dutch Rousmarijn, and we in English Rosmary. 
The Vertues. Rosmary is an hearbe of as great use with us in these dayes, as any other whatsoever, not onely for Physicall, but civill purposes: the civill uses as all know, are at Weddings, Funerals, &amp;c. to bestow upon friends: the Physicall remedies, both for inward and outward diseases are many and worthy, for by the warming and comforting heats thereof it helpeth all cold diseases, both of the head, stomack, liver, and belly: the decoction thereof in wine help∣eth the cold distillations of the braine into the eyes, &amp;c. and all other cold diseases of the head and braines, as the giddinesse or swimming therein, drowsinesse or dulnesse of the minde and senses like a stupidnesse, the dumbe palsie, or losse of speech, the lethargie and falling sicknesse, to be both drunke, and the temples bathed therewith: it helpeth the paines in the gummes &amp; teeth by rheume falling into them, or by potrefaction causing an evill smel from them, or a stinking breath: it helpeth also a weake memory by heating and drying up the cold moistures of the braines, and quickning the senses: it is likewise very comfortable to the stomack in all the cold griefes thereof, and to stay the pronenesse to casting, causing the stomack the better to containe and to digest the meate, either the de∣coction or powder taken in wine: it is a remedy for the windinesse in the stomacke or bowels, and expelleth it powerfully, as also the hypochondriack passion, and winde in the splene: it helpeth also those thot are liver-grown, by opening the obstructions thereof, by warming the coldnesse, extenuating the grossnesse, and afterwards binding and strengthening the weaknesse thereof: it helpeth dimme eyes, and to procure a cleare sight, if all the while it is in flower, one take of the flowers fasting with bread and salt: both Dioscorides and Galen say, that if a decoction be made thereof with water, and they that have the yellow jaundise, doe exercise their bodies presently after the ta∣king thereof, it will certainely cure it, the flowers and the conserve made of them, is singular good to comfort the heart, and to expell the contagion of the pestilence, to burne the hearbe in Houses and Chambers in the time of the infection to correct the aire in them: both the flowers and the leaves are very profitable for women that are trou∣bled with the whites, if they be daily taken: the dried leaves shred small and taken in a Pipe like as Tobacco is ta∣ken, helpeth those much that have any Cough or Tisick, consumption, by warming and drying the thinne distilla∣tions, which cause those diseases: the leaves are much used in bathings, and made into oyntments or oyles, is sin∣gular good to helpe cold benummed joynts, sinewes or members. The chymicall oyle drawne from the leaves and flowers, is a soveraigne helpe for all the diseases aforesaid, to touch the temples and nostrils with a drop, two or three for all those diseases of the head and braines, spoken of before, as also to take a drop two or three, as the cause requireth for the inward griefes, yet must it be taken with discretion, lest it doe more harme than good, for it is ve∣ry quick and piercing, and therefore but a little must be taken at once. There is another oyle made by insolation in this manner: take what quantity you will of the flowers and put them into a strong glasse close stopped, and digest them in hot Horse dung for 14. dayes, which then being taken forth and unstopped, tye a fine linnen cloth over the mouth, and turne the mouth downe into another strong glasse, which being set in the Sunne, an oyle will distill downe into the lower glasse, to be preserved as precious for divers uses, both inward and outward, as a soveraigne Baulme to heale the diseases before spoken of, to cleare a dimme sight, and to take away spots, markes and scarres in the skin. The Rosmary of Silesia is by often experience found to bee good for the shrinking of the sinewes, for the Patient to sit often in the decoction thereof, and to bathe the affected parts. 
CHAP. XXVI. Ledum Alpinum sive Rosa Alpina. The sweet Mountaine Rose. B Ecause both Clusius and others, referre this plant for 1. Ledum Alpinum sive Rosa Alpina. The sweet Mountaine Rose. 
the sweetnesse thereof, to the family of the Cistus Le∣dum, as he did the last in the foregoing Chapter, and called it Silesiacum, neither of which I dare doe, not thinking them (although sweet) to belong thereunto, else I had not placed them here, but with the other sorts of Ledum. I thinke it meet to speake hereof among the sweet hearbs, whose description is thus. It hath sundry slender hard stalkes, 2. foot long or thereabouts, lying for the most part on the ground, covered with an ash coloured barke, at the ends whereof are set without order many hard leaves, like unto those of the Italian dwarfe Bay of a shining greene colour on the upperside, and paler underneath, sometimes pointed, and sometimes round at the ends, and some∣what hairy about the edges as the young shot ones are likewise, of an astringent taste; at the ends of the branches breake forth a tuft of hollow flowers like Bells hanging downe their heads, and di∣vided at the brimmes into five parts, of a deepe red colour on the outside, sprinckled with many silver-like spots, as the stalkes of them are also, but of a paler red colour on the in-side with divers threads in the middle, and of a pretty sweet scent, after which come five parted heads, containing within them very small brow∣nish seed like dust, which being rubbed while they are greene, are of so strong a scent that they offend the scences: but Lobel saith his beareth red berries like Asparagus, which Clusius saith his doth not: the root is long, hard, and wooddy: the branches doe often take roote as they lye on the ground, and abide greene all the Winter. There is another of this kind, as Clusius saith he observed, that had fewer, but greater leaves, harder and longer pointed, not hairy on the edges, and of a yellowish darke rusty colour underneath, and the like flowers, not else differing: Vpon these branches &amp; the leaves sometimes are found certaine small excressences or knots, like Pease, or sometimes as bigge as Hasell Nuts, rugged or un∣even on the outside, of a reddish or sometimes paler colour and spongie, white within, astringent in taste, which supplieth the office of galls. 
The Place and Time. Both these sorts are found on the toppes and on the declining of sundry Hills in Germany and Austria, among the stones as Clusius saith, and on the Hills neare Trent and Verona, as Lobel saith. They flower in Iune and Iuly, their seed is ripe in the end of August. 
The Names. These plants being lately found and made knowne to us, have received sundry names, as every one in his opini∣on thought fittest, Vlisses Aldrovandus calleth it Nerium Alpinum, Gesner and Camerarius in horto, Balsamum Al∣pinum, and so doth Lobel also, who also calleth it Chamerhododendros Alpina odora, as hee doth the other sort hereof Chamalaeae folio; sive leutisci folia minus odora; Clusius Ledum Alpinum: Caesalpinus Rhododendron Alpina quibusdam. Gesner himselfe calleth it in his Booke de lunarijs Nereum Alpinum, in hortis Germaniae, and in Descriptione montis fracti, Rosa Alpina from the vulgar, who call it Alprosen and Bergrosen, he maketh it also in the Chapter of Chanae∣rium, to be his third sort. Lugdunensis would referre it to the Evonimus of Theophrasti, but Clusius sheweth the error of that opinion: but it is very likely that Lobel his, differeth from this of Clusius, as I shall shew you in the Chapter of Boxe. 
The Vertues. Clusius saith he could not understand, of any other use that this plant might be put unto, then that the Diers there, used the small galles that grow on it, to dye a black colour like unto other galles. 
CHAP. XXVII. Costus hortorum major. Coastmary. And Costus hortorum minor seu Ageratum. Maudeline. I Must joyne both these sweet hearbes together, both for the likenesse of their flower, and neerenesse of their names: of the former there is but one sort, but of the other there are divers, whereof I doe intend to shew you the knowledge in this place. 
1. Costus hortorum major. Costmary or Alecoast. 1. Costus hortorum major. Costmary or Alecoast. 
Costmary or Alecoast hath many broad and long pale green leaves, dented or nipped about the edges, every one upon a long foot-stalke, among which rise up many round greene stalkes, with such like leaves thereon, but lesser up to the toppe, where it spreadeth into three or foure branches, eve∣ry one bearing an umbell or tuft of gold yellow flowers, somewhat like unto Tansie flowers, but lesser, which after∣wards are the heads containing small flat long seed: the roote is somewhat hard and stringie, which being divided with the heads of leaves, may bee replanted in the Spring for in∣crease. 
2. Ageratum vulgare sive Costus hortorum minor. Common Maudeline. Common Maudeline hath somewhat long and narrow leaves snipt about the edges, the stalkes are two foote high, bearing at the toppes many yellow flowers set round toge∣ther, and all of an equall height, in umbels or tufts like unto Tansie, after which followeth small whitish seed, almost as great as Wormseed: the whole hearbe is sweet and bitter, being as well gained by slipping as sowing. 
3. Ageratum flore albo. White Maudeline. This Maudeline hath wooddy stalkes, and many small leaves thereon like the other, but somewhat smaller and lesse dented or notched in on the edges, at the toppes of the stalkes grow many flowers, as it were in a tuft together, like unto the common Maudeline, but wholly white, except a little shew of yellow in the middle; the scent of the whole plant is not so strong as the other; the roote is small and string it like the other also. 
4. Ageratum minus. Small Maudeline. This other small Maudeline hath divers hoary stalkes, not rising much above a foote high, beset as thick with leaves as the former or fuller, upon all sides of the stalkes, which are smaller, longer, narrower, and whiter than the other, and not dented at all about the edges, somewhat like unto the leaves of yellow or golden Cassidony, here before de∣scribed: at the toppes of the stalkes stand many yellow flowers, thicke thrust together, in an umbell or tuft, very well resembling the first or common garden Maudeline, of a reasonable good and quicke scent, which turne into downe, and is carryed away with the winde, the roote is small and white with many fibres annexed unto it. 
5. Ageratum purpureum. Purple sweete Maudeline. This rare and dainty plant hath many small leaves lying upon the ground, round about the toppe of the roote, somewhat like unto the leaves of the first Maudeline, here set forth, nicked on the edges towards the points of them, and not backwards, somewhat bitter in taste, yet not so much as the common, from among the leaves arise many small stalkes, beset with such like leaves as grow below, but somewhat smaller unto the very toppes, where ma∣ny flowers stand one above another, every one upon a short foot-stalke, consisting of five small greene leaves, of an excellent violet-like purple colour, comming forth of small greene huskes, of so excellent a dainty sweet scent, that it passeth the Violet in scent, and to be compared with Muske: after the flowers are past, there arise small long seed vessels, bearing small seed therein: the roote is yellow, small and short, bushing forth many small fibres, whereby it taketh fast hold of the ground. 
2. Ageratum vulgare sive Costus hortorum. Common Maudeline.
4. Ageratum minus. Small Maudeline. 
5. Ageratum purp reum. Purple sweet Maudeline. 
6. Ageratum Ferulateum. Fennell leafed Maudeline. 
 
6. Ageratum Ferulaceum. Fennell leafed Madeline. This rare hearbe is to be joyned with the Maudelines, for that the flowers decay not being gathered, and kept for a long time. It hath many Fennell-like leaves lying upon the ground, round about the roote, which shooteth forth divers crested or cornered stalkes, a foote and a halfe high, whereon doe grow at certaine distances, on each side one above another, such like leaves compassing the stalke at the foote of them, as Fennell doth: at the toppes of the stalkes stand large umbels of flowers, some of the stalkes rising lower than others, yet all making a round com∣passed tuft of yellow flowers, very like unto the flowers of Groundsell for the forme, but of a more excellent gold yellow colour, which being gathered before they grow to full maturity, will abide a long time in their perfect beauty, which hath caused the name, and to be joyned with them: the roote is somewhat long, black and wooddy, rugged also, and a little writhed with divers fibres growing to it. 
The Place. The first three sorts have beene found naturall in divers rough untilled places of Tuskaule in Italy, and Narbone in France, but in gardens onely with us. The fourth groweth on dry grounds, and often out of old mud and stone walles. The fift groweth upon the rockes in clifts, where it hath but a small crust of earth upon it, the roote growing sometimes into the chinkes, and moistned onely by the vapours of some waters, passing neare it, or the dew and moisture from the rockes. The last groweth in dry and hungry grounds, and among the Pine tree-woods. 
The Time. They doe all flower in Iune and Iuly in most places where they are planted and prosper. 
The Names. Coastmary or Alecoast in English, is called in Latine by some Costus hortorum major, and by others Balsamita major, Mentha Graeca, Mentha Romana, Mentha Corymbifera major, Mentha Saracenica, O by Gesner in hortis, Herba Mariae by Casalpinus, and Lassulata by others as the Italians doe, the Germanes Frauwen muntz, the French Coq &amp; Baume, as the Dutch doe Balsome. But Ageratum is called in Greeke; quasi non senescens, or senectutem non sentiens, because i ( scilicet the flowers gathered in a fit time) waxe ot old or decay by age: Matthiolus, Gesner, Lacuna, Castor Durantes, Lugdunensis, Camerarius, and Tab call it Ageratum, Dodonaeus Balsamita faemina &amp; minor, and Costus hortensis minor by Gesner, Mentha ory rk minor by Cordus, by Caesalpinus Camphorata, Herba Iulia by Auguillara, Gesner in hortis Germaniae; and E ium Mesues by Tragus Gesner in hortis, Matthiolus and Lonicerus; in briefe most of the best later Writers, u o be the true Age∣ratum of Dioscorides, though some would disprove it: and likewise the true Eupato of Mesues, although Dodonaeus denyeth both the one and the other: For the Eupatorium of Mesues and Av (saith he) differ not, and that of Avicen and Dioscorides; are both of them but one plant, even the ordinary ony, but Matthiolus hath answered both these controversies in my judgement so sufficiently, in his answere Marinus, as no∣thing can be better; And in conclusion saith, they are no Practitioners in Physicke, that shall deny▪ the Eupatorium of Mesues, to be the Ageratum of Dioscorides. The second Ageratum with white flowers, is the second Ageratum with Matthiolus and Lugdunensis, and called Ageratum floribus candidis by Lobel, Tabermontanus and Camerarius: the third is the third Ageratum with Matthiolus and Lugdunensis, and called Ageratum minus by Lobel Camerarius, and Tabermontanus, and by Bauhinu, Ageratum folijs non serratis: the fourth is the Ageratum purpureum of Lugdu∣nensis, which as he saith some Germanes called Moschatella caerulea, yet is not the Moschatella of Cordus, Bau∣hinus calleth it Ageratum serratum Alpinum: the last is called by Lugdunensis Ageratum ferulaceum, but Bauhinus referreth it to the Achillaea montana Arthemisia tenuifoliae facie of Lobel, to the Achillaea montana of the same Lugdu∣nensis and Tabermontanus, and to the Chrysanthemum Alpinum secundum of Clusius (but y opinion it is not that Chrysanthemum of Clusius, for we have had it growing in our gardens from the seed, sent us by the name of Chry∣santhemum tennifolium ) and therefore hee himselfe calleth it Chrysan h Alpinum fol A ros multi∣fidis. 
The Vertues. The ordinary Costmary as well as Maudeline (as some of the other are sure of the same quality) provoketh urine abundantly, &amp; mollifieth the hardnes of the mother. Galen saith it is hot in the first degree, &amp; dry in the second that it digesteth, and after a sort gently dissolveth inflāmations, it gently purgeth choler and flegme, that it extenu te to that which is grosse, cutteth and divideth that which is tough and glutinous, cleanseth that which is soule, and th putrefaction or corruption, it dissolveth without attraction, openeth obstructions, and healeth their will a ts nd is a wonderfull helpe to all sorts of day agues; It is astringent to the stomack, and strengthneth the liver, and all the other inward parts, and taken in whey it worketh the more effectually. Taken fasting in the morning, it is very profitable for the paines in the head, that are continuall, and to stay, dry up, and con u e all thin, di ions or rheumes from the head into the stomack, and helpeth much to digest raw, humours that are gath therein; It is very profitably applyed to those that are fallen into a continuall evill disposition of the whole body called Ca∣chexia, taken especially in the beginning of the disease. In briefe it is an especiall friend and helps evill, weake, and cold livers. The seed is familiarly given to children for the wormes, and so is the in sion the flowers in white wine, and given to them to the quantity of two ounces at a time. It maketh an excellent alve to cleanse and heale old ulcers, being boyled with Oyle-olive and Adders tongue with it, and after it is stra , to put a lit∣tle Waxe, Rossen, and Turpentine, to bring it into a convenient body. 
CHAP. XXVIII. Tanacetum. Tansie. T Here are two sorts of Garden Tansies, whereof the one is called ordinary or common Tansie and the other curld or double Tansie: but there are some others also to be spoken of here in this Chapter. 
1. Tanace vulgare &amp; crispum. Ordinary and curld Tansie. Our garden Tansie hath many hard greene leaves, or rather wings of leaves, for (although they bee two sorts, yet one description may serve them both) they are 1. Tanacetum vulgare &amp; crispum. Ordinary and curld Tansie. 
many small ones set one against another all along a middle ribbe or stalke, and snipt about the edges; in one sort the leaves stand closer and thicker, and somewhat crumpled, which hath caused it to be called double or curld Tansie; in the other sort thinner and more sparsedly set: it riseth up with many hard stalkes, wherein grow at the toppes of the branches gold yel∣low flowers like buttons, which being gathered in their prime, will hold the fresh colour a long season: the seed is small, and as it were chaffie: the roote creepeth under ground, and shoo∣teth up againe in divers places: the whole hearbe both leaves and flowers are of a sharpe strong bitter smell and taste, but yet pleasant and well to be endured. 
2. Tanacetum versicolor. Party coloured Tansie. The party coloured Tansie is in roote, leafe and flower, alto∣gether like the other common garden Tansie; the onely diffe∣rence betweene them, consisteth in this, that upon the first shooting up of the heads of leaves, they are almost all white, and after they are growne great, there will bee many leaves, remaining white, among the greene, which maketh it the more delightfull, seeming like unto a party coloured Feather, in regard of the fine cut leaves of white and greene. 
3. Tanacetum lanuginosum. Woolly Tansie. Woolly Tansie from a thick blackish spreading roote, sen∣deth forth divers winged leaves, somewhat like unto the for∣mer Tansie and neare unto the leaves of Yarrow, (whereof some would make it a kinde) of a very sweet scent, and with∣all very woolly, set close together about the roote, among which spring up divers woolly stalkes, having a few such like leaves upon them, and at the toppes many tufts of yellow flowers. 
4. Tanacetum minus flore albo. Small white Tansie. Small white Tansie hath divers winged leaves lying upon the ground, round about the toppes of the roote, very much cut or divided into parts, somewhat resembling both Tansie and Yarrow, of a pale greene colour, being both lesse bitter in taste, and lesse hot, or strong in smell than Tansie: from among which leaves rise divers low stalkes, beset with smaller leaves up to the toppes, where the flowers stand in tufts, the borders being of a white colour, and the middle thrum yellow, the roote is long and wooddy, shooting divers wayes. 
5. Tanacetum Alpinum. Mountaine Tansie. The Mountaine Tansie hath many winged leaves lying upon the ground, compassing the toppe of the roote, very like unto the ordinary Tansie, in the division of the leaves, and of a deepe greene colour, as bitter in taste, but more pleasant in scent than it: from whence rise up the stalkes, little above a foote high, here and there set with the like leaves, but smaller; the flowers at the toppes are like unto Camomill flowers, with a border or pale of white leaves, and a yellow thrumme in the middle: the roote is small and short, somewhat thicke at the head, and smaller downewards, with divers small fibres thereat. 
6. Tanacetum inodorum. Vnsavory Tansie. Vnsavory Tansie hath his large winged leaves, very neare resembling Tansie, lying upon the ground, and among them round hard greene stalkes, with very few and shorter leaves thereon, at the toppes whereof stand divers flowers, upon short foote-stalkes, very like unto the flowers, of the great white Daisy, and as large, consisting of foureteene or sixteene leaves, as a pale or border, about a yellow thrumme in the middle: the roote spreadeth un∣der the upper part of the earth, and goeth not farre downe: the whole is altogether without any scent therein at all, yet the leaves are of a hot and sharpe taste, quickly piercing the tongue. 
There is another of this kinde of unsavory Tansie, whose leaves are more loosely spread, although as much divi∣ded, and the flowers being white, are as small as Feverfew. 
The Place. The ordinary Tansie groweth in some places beyond Sea by the hedges and ditches sides, and in the borders of fields, the curld Tansie is peculiar to our owne Land, and so is the second, and likely to be a degeneration from the ordinary sort by accident, and nursed up in our owne Country, where the flips doe often loose, and sometimes keepe their kinde. The third groweth about Mompelier in France, and in other places. The fourth groweth as well in Germany as in Italy, in divers places. The fift groweth on the high and snowy Hills on the Alpes, among the Swit∣zers. The last groweth in Hungary, Austria, Germany, and about Valentia, and in the Country of Daulphine in France. 
The Time. They doe all flower in the Summer Monethes of Iune and Iuly.
The Names. Tansie is called Tanacetum, corruptly taken, as Fuchsius thinketh, from Tagot , or Ap leius his Arthenisia Traguntes, and Athanasia peradventure of Athanatos sine morte, or non m ri s, because the yellow flowers gathered in due time, dye not of a long time after, like as divers of the other hearbes last remembred; Tabermon∣tenus 3. Tanacetum lanuginosum. Wooly Tansie. 
4. Tanacetum minus flore albo. Small white Tansie. 
5. Tanacetum Alpinum. Mountaine Tansie. 
6. Tanacetum inodorem. Vnsavory Tansie. 
calleth the ordinary Tansie, Arthemisia Dioscoridis, and the double Tansie Arthemisia sativa Anglica. The se∣cond hath no other name then is in the tilie, except that some doe cail it white Tansie, because many of the leaves will bee white. The third is called Tanace∣tum Lanuginosum of Lugdunensis; Bauhinus in his Pinax would referre it to the Stratiotes Mille∣folia flavo flore of Clusius, and Millefolium luteum of Lo∣bel, but I thinke he is therein mistaken, for the leaves of Stratiotes being much smaller, and having no scent declare it so. It may be also the Heliochrysum Italicum of Matthi∣olus, but not any Achillea, whose descriptions yee shall have in another part hereafter. The fourth is called by Dodonaeus Tanacetum minus flore albo, of Lobel Tanacetum minus candidis floribus: (but it is not likely to be the Achyl∣lea of Matthiolus, Castor Durantes and others, who fol∣low the description of Dioscorides and Matthiolus; the flowers of whose Achyllea are of a whitish purple, with some yellow spots in them) for that it hath both the forme and the smell of Tansie, but somewhat weaker. The fift by Lugdunensis is called Tanacetum parvum Alpinum, and saith that the people in the Mountaines where it groweth, call it Iva Moschata, and some Anthemis Alpina: Gesner in hort calleth it Tanaceto cognata herbula, in English Mountaine Tansie. The two last are called Tanacetum i odorum of most, yet some doe adde Bellidis, majore flore, and some Bellis Tanaceti folio: some have thought it to bee Sideritis Italorum, but Pena contradicteth it, Clusius shew∣eth the differences of the greater and the lesser. Wee call it in English according to the Latine, Vnsavory Tansie, and I place it here among the rest of the sweet Tansies, for the names sake, raysed from the likenesse of the leaves, al∣though it hath no scent. The Italians call it Tanaceto, and Daneda: the French Tanaisie, and Athanasie: the Ger∣manes Reinfarn, because the leaves resemble Ferne, and the Dutch thereafter Reyn vaer, wee in English Tansie. 
The Vertues. The decoction of the common Tansie (and some of the rest come neare in effect thereunto) or the juyce drunke in wine, is a singular remedy for all the griefes of the urine, to provoke it being stopped, to helpe those that have the strangury, and have weake reines and kidneies, and that cannot make their water but by drops. It is also very profitable to dissolve and expell winde, whether in the stomack belly, or bowels; and to procure women moneth∣ly courses, and to expell windinesse in the mother. If it be bruised and smelled unto often, as also applyed to the lower part of the belly, it is assuredly found to be profitable for such women as are given to miscarry in childbea∣ring, to cause them goe out their full time, without danger or losse; it is used also against the stone in the reines with good successe, especially to men. It is much used both in Lent and in the beginning of the Spring, while the hearbe is young and tender, to make cakes thereof with egges fried, which are called Tansies, and are very profita∣ble for those stomackes, that are troubled with bad humours cleaving thereunto, both to helpe to digest them, and by clearing the stomack of them, to carry them away downeward. The seed is much commended and very profita∣bly given to children for the wormes; and the juyce in drinke is as effectuall; being boyled in oyle, it is very pro∣fitably applyed to comfort the sinewes that are shrunke by crampes, or are in paines through cold: It is said also, that the roote preserved in Sugar, is a remedy for them that have the gowt, if they take thereof fasting for a certaine time together. 
CHAP. XXIX. Matricaria. Featherfew. T Here are divers sorts of Featherfew to bee entreated of here, as shall hereafter follow. 
1. Matricaria vulgaris simplex. Common Featherfew. Common Featherfew hath many large fresh greene leaves, very much torne or cut on the edges: the stalkes are hard and round, set with many such like leaves, but somewhat smaller, and at the toppes stand many sin∣gle flowers, upon severall small foot-stalkes, consisting of many small white leaves, standing round about a yellow thrumme in the middle: the root is somewhat hard and short, with many strong fibres at it: the scent of the whole plant is very strong and stuffing, and the taste very bitter. 
2. Matricaria flore pleno. Double Featherfew. This differeth very little from the former but in the flowers, which are very thicke and double, with white leaves, so that onely a little yellow spot is to be seene in the middle. 
3. Matricaria bullatis floribus aureis. Naked Featherfew. This kinde differeth not from the former, but that it hath 1. 3. Matricaria vulgaris simplex &amp; bullatis floribus aureis. Ordinary &amp; naked Featherfew. 
2. Flore pleno. Double Featherfew. 
his flowers, without any of the pale or border of white leaves about it, and therefore being naked, and without those leaves, I have named it naked Featherfew, as an especiall difference from the former. 
4. Matricaria grati odoris. Sweet Featherfew. This other Featherfew differeth not from the first, ei∣ther in roote, leafe, or flower, being in all things so like, that there can be no difference perceived betweene them, untill you smell thereunto, and then it is soone found to bee of a more pleasant softer smell, which so abideth in the kind, and is not so made by art, or degenerated by any casualty, but the worke of nature onely. 
5. Matricaria inodora. Vnsavory Featherfew. The Vnsavory Featherfew is a small low plant, rather spreading than rising high into many branches, whereon are many leaves set, here and there without order, every one be∣ing smaller, shorter and thicker than the leaves of the com∣mon Featherfew, but cut in on both sides, somewhat like un∣to it, of no smell at all: the flowers are white with a yellow thrumne in the middle like the other, which have a certaine heavie dull scent, but very weake, the roote is bushy like the former. 
6. Matricaria sive Parthenium tenuifolium. Fine-leafed Featherfew. This Featherfew hath a few leaves below, rising from the roote, as small and fine as Fennell, and very like unto Sothern-wood, but smelling so like Featherfew, and bitter withall, that even thereby it may easily be knowne, to what stocke or tribe it doth belong, from among which rise divers brow∣nish round and hard stalkes, to the height of halfe a yard or more, whereon grow dispersedly such like leaves: at the toppes of the stalkes stand many small white flowers, in an umbell, thicke set, or close together, very like unto the flow∣ers of Yarrow, that they may soone deceive him that heedfully doth not marke them: the roote is small, white, and wooddy, with foure small fibres at it, 7. Matricaria sive Parthenium Alpinum Clusij. Mountaine Featherfew of Clusius. 
8. maritinum. 
6. tenuisolium. 
 
7. Matricaria sive Parthenium Alpinum Clusij. Mountaine Featherfew of Clusius. Mountaine Featherfew hath many slender weake greene branches trayling on the ground, and taking roote as they creepe thereon, very like unto Camomill, and not rising a∣bove a foote high, about which are set many leaves, almost as fine as Camomill, but cut in after the manner of Mayweed or Featherfew, and very neare of the same smell as Feather∣few, being of a hot taste, but not unpleasant: at the toppes of the stalkes stand many flowers together, very like unto the former, but that the middle thrumme is smaller and paler, and the circling leaves not altogether so white, but as large, and somewhat rounder or closer set, of the same scent with the hearbe: the roote is composed of many small fibres shoo∣ting downe from a small head. 
8. Parthenium maritinum minimum. Small Sea Featherfew. I have thought fit to place this Sea plant, with the rest of the same tribe, as I meane to doe with as many as will abide the culture and manuring, to prosper in this garden, entending to shew you the rest in their convenient places: The roote is small spreading abroad many long fibres, from whence rise up slender weake branches lying upon the ground, diversly set without order, with many small whitish greene leaves, cut in or dented on the edges, very like in forme, unto the leaves of the great white Daisie, but much lesser and more full and fleshy, or thicker, of a strong fierce scent, somewhat like unto Featherfew, or rather unto stinking Maithes or May∣weed: at the toppe of every branch stand one or two flowers, somewhat like unto those of Featherfew or Mayweed, but smaller, and the bordering leaves also smaller, having a whi∣tish greene head or huske of leaves under them.
4. Abrotanum inodorum. Vnsavory Sothernwood. 
and small as the former, but yet a little quicker, and nearer resembling Wormewood, as it is also in the taste, and more aromaticall than Sothernwood: the flowers stand at the toppes of the branches, being more plentifull and larger than the former, but yellow like them, after which come the seed, which likewise is somewhat larger: the roote is wooddy, spreading many strings and fibres: the plant is more tender than the others, and will require some care to preserve it in the Winter more than they. 
4. Abrotanum inodorum. Vnsavory Sothernwood. Vnsavory Sothernwood springeth up with many slender, but wooddy whitish stalkes for the most part, leaning or lying upon the ground, yet sometimes standing somewhat upright, upon which at severall places, come forth many small whitish leaves, not so small or finely cut or divided as the common Sothernwood, but greater, of little or no smell at all, but of a hot taste, drawing rheume into the mouth, to bee spit forth: from among which spring forth small greenish purple branches, set with the like leaves, but smaller, and many small pendulous greenish pur∣ple heads, along the sprigges to the toppes, which when they open, shew out small pale purplish flowers; the roote is somewhat wooddy, and brancheth forth divers wayes, with many small strings or fibres. 
5. Abrotanum humile odoratum. Small sweet Sothernwood. This small Sothernwood shooteth forth many small wooddy branches, rising seldome above halfe a yard high, but very thickly spreading into other smaller sprigs, set full of small leaves, somewhat longer, greater, and greener than the last: the toppes of the stalkes are stored with many small round heads, which shew forth small yellow greenish flowers: the roote spreadeth like the other: the whole plant as well leaves as flowers, and the sprigges yeeld a very good scent and pleasant favour, more than the other, somewhat inclining to Wormewood. 
6. Abrotanum campestre. Field Sothernwood. The Field Sothernwood hath many small fine leaves, rising from the roote, very like unto the leaves of com∣mon Sothernwood, but of a darke greene colour, and likewise many wooddy stalkes, about a foote high or more (yet sometimes but one) divided diversly, having such like leaves growing thereon, as are below: the slender sprigges are stored with plenty of small round greene heads or buttons, which containe small yellowish flowers like Sothernwood, and plenty of small seed following them: the roote is long, thick, blacke, and wooddy, with divers fibres annexed thereunto: the smell hereof is more neare unto Mugwort, than Sothernwood. 
7. Abrotanum campestre incanum. Hoary Field Sothernwood. This other Field Sothernwood, is in all things like the last described wild Sothernwood, but that the leaves are of a whitish or hoary colour, and of a sweet aromaticall scent and taste, and that the roote is of a darke reddish co∣lour on the outside, with divers small fibres growing from it. 
The Place. The first is usually found in gardens but his originall is not set downe. The second groweth in Germany, and brought into their gardens. The third came out of the Levant into Italy, from whence it hath beene sent to divers other places, as well here, as to Germany, the Low-countries, &amp;c. The fourth Clusius saith he found in Austria, 5. Abrotanum humile odoratum. Small sweet Sothernwood. 
6. Abrotanum campestre. Field Sothernwood. 
7. Abrotanum campestre incanum. Hoary field Sothernwood. 
Hungaria, and other parts thereabouts. The fifth is onely found in the gardens of Herbarists that are curious. The sixth groweth in Harcynia sylva Sazonothurungica, as Iohannes Thalius setteth it downe. And the last about Lintz in Austria, from whence, Bau∣hinus in his Prodromus saith, it was brought to him. 
The Time. Most of them doe flower in Iuly and August, yet some later, so that we seldome see them beare seed, especially the greatest. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , hoc est quod conspectu tenerum melle &amp; delicatum appareat: aut quod gravem acremve &amp; difficilem hali∣tum spirat: in Latine after the Greeke Abrotonum, but more usu∣ally Abrotanum. Pliny calleth this mas Campestre, and the faemina montanum. The first is called generally by all Authors Abrotanum mas, and by Cordus nigrum, except Dodonaeus in French, and An∣guillara who call it faemina, in English common Sothernwood. The second is called by Camerarius Ambrotanum magnum campho∣ratum quibusdam Jncensaria, and by Bauhinus Abrotanum mas an∣gustifolium maximum: in English great Sothernwood. The third is called by Anguillara Absinthium del Comasco, and Absinthium arborescons of Lobel, Lugdunensis, Tabermontanus, and Gerard: but Dodonaeus calleth it Abrotanum faemina arborescens, and Bau∣hinus in his Pinax, Abrotanum latifolium arborescens, in English Tree Sothernwood. The fourth is called by Dodonaeus Absinthi∣um inodorum &amp; inspidum: by Lobel, Lugdunensis, and Gerard, Abrotanum inodorum: but Clusius calleth it his second Arthemisia tenuifolia: all these Authors doe give one and the same figure for this plant: Dodonaeus for Absinthium, Lobel and others for Abrota∣num, and Clusius for Arthemisia. Bauhinus calleth it Abrotanum latifolium inodorum: in English Ynsavory Sothernwood; for we have a Wormewood that is unsavory, differing from this, as shall be shewed you among the Wormewoods. The fift is called by Dodonaeus and Lobel Abrotanum odoratum humile &amp; dense fruticosum: by Tragus Abrotanum tertium, and by Bau∣hinus Abrotanum mas angustifolium minus: in English Small sweet Sothernwood, The sixth is called by Matthiolus in his later Edition Ambrosia altera; whom Lacuna, Lonicerus, Castor Durantes, Lugdunensis and Camerarius doe follow, and Lobel Ambrosia tenuifolia. Gesner calleth it Ambrosia Leptophyllos, and Clusius Arthemisia tertia tenui∣folia, it is Tragus his Abrotanum sylvestre quartum: and Tabermontanus, Gerard, and Bauhinus Abrotanum campestre, in English Field Sothernwood. The last is called by Bauhinus Abrotanum campestre incanum Carlinae odore: in En∣glish Hoary field Sothernwood. The Arabians call it Cathsum Kesum, or Gaissum: the Italians and Spaniards Abro∣tano: the French Auronne &amp; bois de S. Iean: the Germanes Stabwurtz: the Dutch Averonne: and wee Sothern∣wood. 
The Vertues. Dioscorides saith, that the seed bruised, heated in warme water and drunke, helpeth those that are bursten, or are troubled with crampes, or convulsions of sinewes, with the Sciatica, and with the difficulty in making water, and to bring downe womens courses: the same taken in wine, is an antidote or counterpoison against all deadly poison, and driveth away Serpents, and other venemous creatures, especially against Scorpions and poisonfull Spiders; as also by the smell of the hearbe being burnt, or laid in places where they come: the oyle thereof being annoynted on places convenient, especially the backe bone, before the fits of agues taketh them away: it is profitably laid to the eyes to take away the inflammation of them, if it be put with some part of a roasted Quince, and boyled with a few crummes of bread: boyled with barly meale, it taketh away pimples, pushes, or wheales, that rise in the face, or other parts of the body. The seed as well as the dryed hearbe, is often given to kill the wormes in children: the hearbe bruised and laid to, helpeth to draw forth splinters, and thornes out of the flesh: The ashes thereof dryeth up and healeth old ulcers, that are without inflammation, although by the sharpnesse thereof it biteth sore, and putteth them to some paines, as also the sores that happen in the privie parts, of men or women. The ashes likewise mingled with old Sallet-oyle (for we have neither the oyle of the seed of the Mastick tree, which is much commended, nor the oyle of Cherua, or the great Spurge, called Palma Christi, nor some other that are used in o∣ther Countries) helpeth those that have their haire fallen, or their heads bald, to cause the haires to grow againe, either upon the head or beard: Some say the juyce thereof with oyle doth the same. Durantes saith that the oyle made of Sothernwood, and put among other oyntments, that are used against the French disease, is very effectuall, and likewise killeth vermine in the head. The distilled water of the hearbe is said to helpe them much, that are troubled with the stone, as also for the diseases of the spleene and mother. It is generally held by all both old and new Writers, that it is more offensive to the stomacke than Wormewood, because it hath not that astriction in it. The Germanes commend it for a singular wound hearbe, as their name of Stabwurt given unto it doth testifie. 
CHAP. XXXV. Abrotanum faemina. Lavender Cotton. T Here are divers sorts of Lavender Cotton, to be here remembred. 
1. Abrotanum faemina vulgare. Ordinary Lavender Cotton. The ordinary Lavender Cotton hath sundry wooddy brit∣tle 1. Abrotanum faemina vulgare. Ordinary Lavender Cotton. 
hoary branches, whereon are set many long foure-square hoary or whitish leaves, dented about the edges: at the tops of the branches stand naked stalkes, bearing every one a large yellow head or flower, like unto Tansie or Maudeline, but greater, of a gold yellow colour, abiding so a long time upon the stalkes, and being kept dry likewise: after which com∣meth small darke coloured seed: the roote is wooddy, and spreadeth sundry hard fibres: it is of a strong sweet scent, but not unpleasant, 
2 Abrotanum faemina magnum. Great Lavender Cotton. This Lavender Cotton is very like the ordinary Garden kinde, but not bushing so thicke with stalkes, growing to have a great high and thicke stemme or stalke, not set with so many branches thereon, but somewhat bigger than the o∣ther, whereon grow foure-square dented leaves like there∣unto, but somewhat larger, thicker and greener: the flowers stand in the same manner every one upon his long stalke, be∣ing as yellow and large as they, which give the like seed: the roote spreadeth in the ground with hard wooddy bran∣ches, like the other, and endureth the extremities of Winter as well as the other: the smell of the whole plant, and every part thereof is strong, but not so pleasant to a great many, as the other: this will be propagated by slipping, as well as the other. 
3. Abrotanum faemina Narbonense magno flore. French Lavender Cotton. The French Lavender Cotton groweth not to bee so high as the ordinary garden kinde, but hath many wooddy short little branches, not above halfe a yard high, diversly spread into many other small ones, whereon are leaves like the o∣ther, 3. Abrotanum faemina Narbonense magno flore. French Lavender Cotton. 
but somewhat smaller, and more thinly or sparsedly set on the branches, of a greenish white colour, neither so green as the last, nor fully so white as the ordinary, of a strong scent, somewhat like the ordinary kind: the flowers stand upon the toppes of the smaller sprigges, every one by it selfe, upon a bare or naked stalke, without leaves for a good space, which are of a paler yellow colour than they, and much lar∣ger, which give seed somewhat of a darker colour than it: the roote is as great and wooddy, and spreadeth much in the ground. 
4. Abrotanum faemina Ericae folijs. Fine Lavender Cotton. This Lavender Cotton groweth not so great or high, as the French kind, but hath many short wooddy branches, where∣on doe sparsedly grow smaller, shorter, and finer whitish greene leaves, very like to the leaves of common Heath: the flowers are yellow standing in the like manner as the o∣thers doe: this hath a fine small scent to commend it, some∣what resinous, not very faintish or weake.
5. Abrotanum faemina folijs Rorismarini majus. Rosmary leafed Lavender Cotton. This kinde of Lavender cotton, shooteth forth from his wooddy roote, many slender hoary stalkes, little above a foote long, whereabout grow many very narrow small and flat leaves, like unto the leaves of Rosmary, which while they are young are more hoary white, and have but a small shew of denting about the edges: but when they are grown old, they are more greene, and the denting about the edges is more apparant, of a sweet scent, and bitter taste: from these stalkes come forth divers short sprigges, with very few leaves on them, on the toppes whereof stand severall yellow flowers, like unto Lavender cotton, but much larger, which die downe to the stalkes every yeare, after it hath borne seed, as the other kindes doe. 
6. Abrotanum faemina folijs Rorismarini minus. Small Rosmary leafed Lavender cotton, There is no difference betweene this and the last, in the leaves and flowers, but in the smalnesse thereof, being more slender, low and small in every part, which is not by reason of the place (as being more dry and barren) where it groweth, but growing in the same place, with the former, is smaller, and the seed being sowne, retaineth still the same forme it had, in the naturall place. 
7. Abrotanum faemina viridis minor. Small greene Lavender cotton. This small kinde of Lavender cotton is very like unto the last small kinde, but that it groweth somewhat greater and higher, having greene and not hoary stalkes at all, as the leaves also are, and a little longer, being as bitter in taste as it, but not of so sweet a scent: the flowers stand in the same manner upon slender stalkes, and of the same fashion, but of a paler yellow colour: the roote is wooddy like it, and full of small fibres. 
8. Abrotanum faemina repens. Creeping Lavender cotton. This creeping Lavender cotton also, is a small low hearbe, whose branches stand not upright, but lie downe, or as it were, creepe upon the ground, and are as white and hoary, or rather more than the ordinary, and so are the small dented leaves also, but they are somewhat thicker and fuller: the flowers likewise are yellow like thereunto, but somewhat smaller; and the smell is not much unlike unto it also. 
9. Abrotanum peregrinum Lobelij Cupressi folijs. Strange Lavender cotton. This strange plant I have here inserted among the rest of the Lavender cottons, presuming it to be his right place, although Lobel giveth it the name of Sothernwood, with the face of Cypresse: but hee maketh no mention of any flowers, whether they are answerable thereunto, which might assure us of the truth, and put the rest out of all doubt: but as he setteth it downe, so doe I give it you here, the description thereof, untill I see the face thereof my selfe, to contrary or confirme the title. From a small roote riseth up many black hard slender stalkes, about a foote, or a foote and a halfe high, bearing many long, narrow, and flat leaves, interlaced or brayded like unto the leaves of the Cypresse or Savine tree, and dented about the edges: the flowers as I said, he doth not expresse, nor can I give you any further knowledge hereof as yet. 
The Place. The first groweth in Germany. The second in divers places in Narbone in France. The third is not knowne to us, whence it is naturall. The fourth, fifth, and sixth, Clusius found about Salamanca in Spaine. The seventh is un∣knowne whence it is: and the last it is likely by the title whereby it was sent, came out of Egypt. Many of them grow in the gardens of those that are curious Conservers of rare plants. 
The Time. They doe all, or most of them flower in Iuly and August. 
The Names. There is some controversie among Writers concerning the true Abrotanum faemina of Dioscorides, some holding that which others refuse and confute; but by Matthiolus, and the most judicious of the later Writers, this is taken to bee the true Abrotanum faemina of Dioscorides, although Fuchsius and Dodonaeus doe deny it, unto whom also Clusius doth agree, saying that it cannot be that of Dioscorides, which hath as hee saith, divided leaves like unto Sea Wormewood, and yet setteth downe both it and the rest of that kinde, under the name of Abrotanum faemina, which I thinke he would not doe, if he thought they had not some neare resemblance; but Matthiolus doth shew against Fuchsius, that the plant which he setteth forth for Abrotanum faemina, is farre unlike it (being the Absinthi∣um Ponticum of Dodonaeus and others, whereof I shall speake in the next Chapter) and that although Fuchsius doth set forth the true Abrotanum faemina of Dioscorides, yet it is under the name of Chamaecyparissus, not knowing it to be the right: Dodonaeus also (whom Gerard followeth in translating his words, and his Corrector letteth them passe as currant) contesteth that this Lavender cotton cannot bee Dioscorides Abrotanum faemina, but would make his greatest and his smallest Sothernwoods to be it: which as all may well observe, differ very little either in leaves or flowers, from the ordinary mas; and therefore I the more mervaile that hee should refuse this, for the flowers sake onely, seeing his mas and faemina are so like in flowers: but Dioscorides in describing his Abrotanum faemina saith, floribus referta est, comantibus in summo fulgore auri, which doth most lively expresse the flowers hereof, and cannot be referred to either of his Sothernwoods, and therefore he setteth forth this plant, and the divers kindes thereof, under the name of Santolina, which he would referre to Eliochrysum, and Staechas Citrina, but how truely let others judge. The first is the Abrotanum faemina vulgare by Matthiolus and divers others, and Santolina by An∣guillara, as they call it in some places of Italy, and Crespolina by Caesalpinus, as they call it in other places of Italy. Some of the later Writers would make it to be the Chamaecyparissus herba of Pliny, which may well be doubted of, seeing he is so briefe therein, giving onely the bare name, and a few properties: the second is called by Camerari∣us Abrotanum faemina folijs magis viridibus; whereunto Clusius seemeth to agree, making it his second Abrotanum faemina. Fabius Columna maketh it to be an other sort of Polium, but not so hoary as our ordinary Lavender cotton, in English great Lavender cotton. The third is called by Cordus Santonicum majus, by Tabermontanus Absinthium marinum primum: by Pena and Lobel it is taken to bee the true Seriphium of Dioscorides, yet say it hath the face of Abrotanum faemina. Dodonaeus calleth it his first Santolina: it is Clusius his third Abrotanum faemina, which he cal∣leth Narbonense: Columna his Polij altera species major, and Bauhinus his Abrotum faemina flore majore: in English French Lavender cotton. The fourth is Dodonaeus his third Santolina and Bauhinus his Abrotanum faemina folijs ericae, and called by some Vnguentaria Lutetianorum, Bauhinus judgeth it to be Chamaecyparissus Dalechampij, as it is set downe in Lugdunensis, but by the comparison of the description thereof, I finde that that Chamaecyparissus doth bet∣ter agree with the second Spanish Abrotanum faemina of Clusius, called Salmanticensis secunda, in his Spanish obser∣vations. The fift is Clusius his fourth kinde of Lavender cotton, and the first of his Spanish kindes, and called by Bauhinus Abrotanum faemina folijs Rosmarini majus: the sixth is the second Spanish Abrotanum faemina of Clusius, which Bauhinus calleth Abrotanum faemina Rosmarini folijs minus: the seventh is the third Abrotanum faemina Salma∣ticensis of Clusius, called by Bauhinus Abrotanum faemina viridis. The eighth is Dodonaeus his fifth Santolina, which Bauhinus calleth Abrotanum faemina repens canescens, in English Creeping Lavender cotton. The last Pena and Lobel in their Adversaria say, they received both the plant and seed from Bolonia, under the name of Sabina Aegyptia, and referring it hereunto, call it Abrotanum peregrinum Cupressi folijs, which Bauhinus thinketh to bee Dodonaeus his fourth Santolina: but there is some doubt thereof, as I said before in the description, for Dodonaeus giveth flowers to his fourth Santolina, with the leaves of Cipresse: but Bauhinus maketh two sorts of this plant of Lobel, the one he calleth Abrotanum faemina folijs Cupressi, and the other Abrotanum Sabinae folio, and quoteth Lobel for both, when as Lobel doth acknowledge but one plant, although it be set downe in two severall places of the Adversaria, but not in his observations, as Bauhinus saith: Gerard his figure of Chamaecyparissus, which he calleth Lavender cotton, is utterly false, being the figure of Muscus terrectris clavatus, and his whole Chapter a meere transcript of Dodonaeus in most things thereof. The Italians call it in some places Santolina, and Crespolina in others, as is before said; the Spaniards Yerva lombrignera: the French Petit Cyprez, and Cyprez de jardin, and Guarde robbe: the Germanes Gar∣ten Ciprez: the Dutch Cipres, and we in English Lavender cotton. 
The Vertues. Dioscorides, and so all other Writers doe generally say, that the vertues hereof and of the former Sothernewood are alike, working the same effects, and applyed to all the diseases it is appropriate unto: but particularly it is ob∣served by Matthiolus, that halfe a dramme of the pouder of the dryed leaves of Lavender Cotton, taken in a lit∣tle of the distilled water of Fetherfew, every morning fasting, for ten dayes together at the least, and afterwards every other day, is a very profitable medicine for women troubled with the whites to stay them. Pliny saith that his Chamaecyparissus (which as I said before, is taken by some to be this Lavender cotton) is good against the poison of all venemous Serpents and Scorpions being taken in wine. The seed is generally in all our Country given to kill the wormes, either in children or elder persons, and accounted to be of as great force as Wormeseed: the leaves also are good when seed cannot be had, but are not of so great vertue. Clusius saith, that in Spaine they use the de∣coction of the Spanish kindes, to take away the itch and scabbes, in whomsoever have them, but he adviseth, there should be caution used in giving it. 
CHAP. XXXVI. Absinthium. Wormewood. A Lthough Dioscorides (and Galen also) make mention but of three sorts of Wormewood, the one a com∣mon sort, well knowne as he saith, the best growing in Pontus and Cappadocia. The other Sea Worme∣wood or Seriphium, and the third Santonicum of the Country beyond the Alpes in France, yet there hath since beene found out many hearbes, accounted to be kindes or sorts of them, for some likenesse of face, or vertues, or both, as shall be declared hereafter. 
1. Absinthium vulgare. Common Wormewood. Common Wormewood is well knowne to have many large whitish greene leaves, somewhat more hoary un∣derneath, much divided or cut into many parts, from among which rise up divers hard and wooddy hoary stalkes, 1. Absinthium vulgare. Common Wormewood. 
3. Absinthium Ponticum sive Romanum vulgare. Common Roman Wormewood. 
two or three foote high, beset with the like leaves as grow below, but smaller, divided at the toppes into smaller bran∣ches, whereon grow many small buttons with pale yellow flowers in them, wherein afterward is conteined small seed: the roote is hard and wooddie, with many strings thereat: the stalkes hereof dye downe every yeare; but the roote holdeth a tuft of greene leaves, all the winter shooting forth new againe, which are of a strong scent but not un∣pleasant, Arbores∣cens. and of a very bitter taste. There is a Tree Worme∣wood like hereunto, but growing greater and higher in the warme Countries. 
2 Absinthium Ponticum verum. True Roman Wormewood. This Wormewood hath more slender and shorter stalkes, by a foote at the least than the former, and reasonable large leaves, yet smaller, and more finely cut in and divided then it, but as white and hoary both leaves and stalkes: the flow∣ers also are of a pale yellow colour, standing upon the small branches in the same manner; so that, but that it is smaller in each part, it is altogether like it: the rootes likewise are smaller, lesse woody and fuller of fibres: the smell thereof is somewhat aromaticall sweete, and the bitternesse is not so loathsome to taste: Vnto this answereth the Absinthium Ponticum Creticum of Bauhinus, but that it is in his owne Country more sweet in scent, and little or nothing bitter in taste, but somewhat altereth in another soyle. 
3. Absinthium Ponticum sive Romanum vulgare. Common Romane Wormewood. This is a small low hearbe (if I may call it a Wormewood) with much more slender &amp; short stalkes than the last, where∣on grow very smal and fine short hoary white leaves, smaller and finer than those of the fine Sothernwood, which grow at severall joynts, many comming forth together, at the tops of the stalkes grow small yellowish flowers, neither so ma∣ny nor so great as the last: the roote from a short head shoo∣teth forth many long fibres, whereby it is nourished in the ground, sending forth divers sprouts round about it, where∣by it is much encreased: the smell hereof is faint, and farre weaker than the other, &amp; the taste thereof much lesse bitter. 
4. Absinthium tenuifolium Austriacum. Five leafed Wormewood of Austria. This small Wormewood, hath many small hard and stiffe hoary stalkes, whereon are set without order, small and somewhat long hoary leaves, very like unto the leaves of Sea Wormewood: which stalkes are divided towards the toppes, into many other small and slender branches rising from the joynts, where the leaves doe grow with many small heads, which shew forth many small whitish flowers. 
5. Absinthium inodorum. Vnsavory Wormewood. The Vnsavory Wormewood is in leafe so like the first common Wormewood, both for the whitenesse, largenesse, and divisions thereof, that it cannot be knowne from it at all, unlesse you make your nose the judge of the scent, which in this is so small, that it is generally said to be without any at all: yet it hath in the heate of Summer, a small weake smel, such as is found in some of the Sothernwoods: the flowers and all things else are alike: but this is somewhat more tender to be preserved in the Winter than the former. 
6. Absinthium album sive Vmbelliferum. White tufted Wormewood. This white Wormewood hath his roote composed of ma∣ny small blacke fibres, which shooteth forth many heads, of long somewhat thick and broad hoary white leaves, cut in about the edges, in some places more than in others, nar∣rower at the bottome, and broader at the point, made some∣what like unto the leaves of the great field Daisie, but smal∣ler: from some of these heads doe shoot forth, slender hoa∣ry stalkes, about a foote and a halfe high, set here and there with such like leaves as grow below, but smaller: at the tops whereof stand many scaly silver white and greene heads, in a tuft together, out of which breake forth silver white small 4. Absinthium tenuifolium Austriacum. Fine leafed Wormewood of Austria. 
6. Absinthium album sive Ʋmbelliferum. White tufted Wormewood. 
7. Absinthium umbelliferum tenuifolium. White tufted Wormewood with fine leaves.
flowers, made of many leaves standing in a double row, in the middle tipt with a little yellow (the whole tuft of flowers doth somewhat resemble the flowers of Yarrow: but much more pleasant to behold) which stand a great while in flower, and afterwards turne into small chaffy seed: this holdeth some heads on the leaves all the Winter, but are very small untill the Spring begin to come on, which then shoote forth, and become as large as is expressed before, having little or no smell at all, but exceeding bitter. 
7. Absinthium umbelliferum tenuifolium. White tufted Wormewood with fine leaves. This other white Wormewood, hath much smaller and finer cut leaves than the former, but as hoary white as the other: the stalkes are shorter, not rising so high: the umbell or tuft of flow∣ers is somewhat smaller also, but as white, so that it differeth in nothing from the former, but in the smalnesse of the plant, and in the small and fine divisions of the leaves, neither hath it any more smell or lesse bitter taste Bauhinus maketh two sorts more of this kind, when as himselfe saith in his Prodromus, that all the differences arise onely from the soyle and climate, which he hath observed both by sight of the divers plants, and exami∣ning of them. 
8. Absinthium album Vallesiacum. The Vallesians white hearbe or Wormewood. This white Wormewood hath many soft woolly and very white leaves, small, long, and narrow, made very like unto our Sea Wormewood, in so much that Camerarius in horto, taketh it to be the very same, but that it hath a sweeter scent, and not so ungratefull a taste: the flowers are yellow that grow towards the toppes of the stalkes, which afterwards give small seed like the other small kindes. 
9. Absinthium Alpinum incanum. Hoary Mountaine Wormewood. From a reddish fibrous roote ariseth divers small bending stalkes about a spanne high, set very sparsedly, with very fine cut hoary leaves, like both for forme and colour to our ordinary Romane Wormewood: from the middle whereof upwards to the toppes, at the severall joynts with the leaves shoote forth slender stalkes, bearing at the ends of them scaly heads, out of which come pale coloured flowers, and after them small blacke seed, smelling like Tansie, the whole plant smelleth and tasteth like Worme∣wood. 
Bauhinus setteth forth another sort, which he calleth Absinthium Alpinum candidum humile, which should bee here inserted, but that I thinke it rather a species of the Absinthium umbelliferum, because hee saith it beareth heads like the Staechas lutea, or citrina, and therefore I forbeare to recite it. 
The Place. The first groweth as plentifully in England, in many places wild, as in other Countries. The second is found up∣on divers high Mountaines, and not elsewhere wild, but is nursed up in many gardens, both in Italy and Germany, and with some lovers of rare plants with us. The third Clusius saith groweth plentifully in many places of Hunga∣ry and Austria, and in other places also, as other Writers doe set downe, it is much esteemed in our Country, and therefore found in many Country gardens of our Land. The fourth Clusius saith, he onely found in Austria, where women gather it and bring it to Vienna, for the use of the Apothecaries, or any else, promiscuously with the other Ponticke or Romane Wormewood. The fifth is not knowne whence his originall was, but is onely kept in gar∣dens as a rarity, and variety among others. The sixt Clusius saith he first found, onely on the high cliffes of Austria and Stiria, and afterwards on the Mountaines. The seventh groweth on Mount Baldus, and on Serva one of the Belluni Mountaines. The eighth groweth on the hills, among the Valesians, as the last doth also. 
The Time. They doe all for the most part flower in August, yet some earlier, or later than others. 
The Names. Wormewood is called in Greeke quasi impotabile ob amaritudinem, vel ingustabile, quia illud non tangunt animalia in depascendis herbis. Dioscorides calleth it also a profundo amarore. The first is generally called Absinthium vulgare, and of some latifolium, yet Ruellius calleth it Ponticum, and Bauhinus saith it is the Pon∣ticum sive Romanum officinarum, meaning his owne Country: for I am sure it is not so called by any of our Apothe∣caries in their shops. The second is scarce knowne to any in our Land, Gesner in hortis calleth it Absinthium commune minus sive Alpinum, Camerarius upon Matthiolus Absinthium montanum, and so doth Tabermontanus who calleth it also Romanum, Bauhinus calleth it Absinthium Ponticum Montanum, and Gerard Absinthium tenuifolium Ponti∣cum Galeni. The third is more frequent as I said before, and usually called Absinthium Ponticum, or Romanum, of most Writers, judging it to bee the true Absinthium of Pontus, that Dioscorides and Galen doe commend: yet Gesner and Lacuna call it Abrotanum faemina, and so doth Fuchsius, for which as I said in the Chapter before, Mat∣thiolus taxeth him of an error. Tragus calleth it Abrotanum minus, and Cordus upon Dioscorides Abrotanum album. Ruellius and Caesalpinus take it to be Absinthium Santonicum: and Lobel and Pena in their Adversaria set it downe for the Absinthium Gallatium Sardonium of Dioscorides, in English every where almost, Romane Wormewood, or Cypresse. The fourth is called by Clusius Absinthium tenuifolium Austriacum, and by Lobel and Lugdunensis Absin∣thium Ponticum Tridentinum herbariorum, by Dodonaeus Absinthium Seriphium, but his figure is the same, with Clu∣sius his Austriacum, Lobel his Tridentinum, and Gerard his tenuifolium seu Romanum, in English fine leafed Worme∣wood of Austria. The fift Gesner in hort. and Lobel in his observations call Absinthium insipidum, and Bauhinus Ab∣sinthium insipidum Absinthio vulgari simile, in English Vnsavory Wormewood. The sixth Clusius calleth Absin∣thium Alpinum umbelliferum. Camerarius Absinthium Pannonicum flore albo, and Lobel and others Absinthium album; in English white tufted Wormewood. The 7. is another kind hereof growing in other places, as Bauhinus hath well observed, and so setteth it downe in his Prodromus, for Pona setteth forth a 3. species in his Italian Booke, differing in nothing but the smalnes of leaves and flowers, Lobel calleth it Vmbelliferum alterum Italicū. The 8. is called by Gesner in hortis, Absinthium Seriphiū faemina, &amp; in his Appendix Absinthiū album e Valesia: for he saith in the said Country of Valesia it is called herba alba, Weisskraut: Camerarius saith it is called by some Absinthium Santonicum, &amp; thinketh it may better be called Santonicū faemina Vallesiana, than Seriphium as Gesner doth, Bauhinus calleth it Absinthium Seri∣phium montanum candidum. The last Bauhinus calleth Absinthium Alpinum incanum, and saith it is the Alpinum 2. of Pona, in his Italian Baldus, because Pona there saith it is very like that of Gesner &amp; Camerarius, which is the last before this, but I cannot so thinke, for that of Pona is a species of the umbelliferous kinds. There is a controversy among many learned men and Writers, as you may here well perceive, by their names they give to the severall Wormewoods are extant: which should be the true Absinthium Ponticum that Dioscorides preferreth, and Galen so much commen∣deth and preferreth before all others, both for the good smell, and aromaticall taste, others being excessive bitter and lothsome, and that it hath lesser leaves and flowers, but especially for the astriction it hath more than others, which is so effectuall for the liver and stomacke. Lobel and Pena in their Adversaria have scanned the matter, and answered all objections as I thinke at large, the summe whereof in briefe I will here set downe for all to under∣stand. First, for the kindes. Dioscorides and Galen make but one kinde of Absinthium, and not many, and but onely say, that the best in property groweth in Pontus, as they doe in divers other hearbes, shew in what place the most vigorous of that kinde doth grow, which property it obtaineth, more by the goodnesse of the place, injoying the commodity of a free and cleare ayre, and other things correspondent, then by the nature of the hearbe it selfe. Then for the scent, that it is more aromaticall than others, yet hereby they intimate that others are sweet, although not so much, which is well knowne likewise to be the benefit of the place where it groweth, for some hearbes are more or lesse sweet, or more or lesse stinking, which transplanted doe alter; as Agrimony and divers others are sweet in some place, and nothing at all in others. Then the leaves have troubled many learned men, for they thinke it is a fault in the transcribers, to set downe lesser for greater or longer, as it often hapneth in Theophrastus. But more often in Dioscorides, as in the Chapters of Helenium Meum and others, &amp; may be also in Galen, not by his owne fault, but by the transcribers: but Galen himselfe in his Chapter of Abrotanum taketh away all these doubts, where he saith thus, there are three species or differences put under the name of one kinde of Wormewood, that which is called Ponticum, the second Santonicum, and the third Seriphium: Seriphium and Santonicum are enemies to the stomacke, and trouble it: Wormewood onely among them named Ponticum, that is growing in Pontus, is plea∣sing to the stomacke. From which place we may well gather that the strife is appeased, concerning this matter, that our common Wormewood is that Wormewood of Dioscorides, the best whereof as he saith, is that which grow∣eth in Pontus, without naming either species or genus: so that it is for certaine that our common or Romane kinde, is not another from the Ponticum, and by reason of the place is more vigorous and effectuall, but not differing in property. Galen acknowledgeth that in this there is bitternesse, and an astriction gratefull to the stomacke, neces∣sary for cholericke vometings, and to clense it from obstructions, by which it giveth strength and comfort thereun∣to: which things we see by infinite and daily experiments, even of the common people, as well as of Physitians, to, be effected by our common Wormewood, used either inwardly or outwardly: none findeth fault with the smell for it is of an aromaticall scent, and is very fit and apt to refresh the spirits of any: Galen in appointing that of Pon∣tus to be used, doth it rather to exclude the Santonicum and Seriphium then that which he simply calleth Absinthium: Thus much I thought good to relate out of Pena and Lobel, referring the rest to the learned, to be further satisfied, if they please to read the whole tractate: but by this is said you see, that the vertues of our common Wormewood are so excellent, that we need not seeke for another kinde to performe those, that are commended in Wormewood; and therefore I the more mervaile at our Apothecaries, that take the Sea Wormewood, in stead of the Romane or Ponticke, and use it rather than the common, onely because there is lesse bitternesse therein, than in the common, and therefore more pleasing to the taste, when as the properties are no way answerable. Neither can I commend the use of that fine leafed Wormewood, which is commonly called Romane Wormewood, to bee used in stead of the Ponticke, not having either that bitternesse or that astriction, which are both so comfortable to the liver and stomacke. Our common Wormewood hath beene observed to grow in Pontus, and the Countries there abouts, by Bellonius in his travels, as he setteth it downe in his 76. Chapter of his first Booke of observations, and elsewhere, and brought to Constantinople for their use there. And it is generally held, that the Arabian Physitians did first name it Romane, which Dioscorides named Ponticke, and from them, all others since have held it in so great account, imagining it to be a sort differing from the common. The Arabians call it Affinthium, the Italians Assenzo, the Spa∣niards Assentios, the French Alvine and Absinse, or Absinthe: the Germanes Wermuet, the Dutch Alssem, and wee Wormewood. 
The Vertues. Dioscorides saith that Wormewood is of an heating and binding property, that it purgeth choller, that cleaveth to the stomacke or belly: that it provoketh urine, that it helpeth surfeits, and that taken with Seseli and Spica Celtica, it easeth the paines of the stomacke, and the hard swellings of the belly: the decoction or the infusion thereof taken, doth take away the loathing to meate, and helpeth those that have the yellow jaundise: (for which purpose Camerarius in his hortus medicus, giveth a good receite. Take saith hee of the flowers of Wormewood, Rosemary, and blacke thorne, of each alike quantity; of Saffron halfe that quantity: all which being boyled in Renish-wine, let it be given after the body is prepared by purging, &amp;c. A small draught thereof taken for some few dayes together, bringeth downe womens monethly courses: being taken with vinegar, it helpeth those that by Mushroms, are almost strangled: being taken in wine it is a remedy against the poison of Ixia (which as I said before, is the roote of the blacke Chamaeleon, and with Pliny translated viscum, Misletoe or Birdlime) of Hemlocke, the biting of that small beast or Mouse which we call a Shrew, and of the biting of that Sea fish called Dracomari∣nus, which is called a Quaviver: it helpeth the Quinsie being annointed with it, and Niter mixed together: and taketh away wheales and pushes used with water: it taketh away the black and blue markes in the skinne, that come after bruising or beating, if it be mingled with honey and annoynted; as also it helpeth the dimnesse of the eyesight being used in the same manner: it helpeth sore and running eares, as also easeth the paines of them, if the hot vapours of the decoction, bee taken in thereat by a funnell or otherwise; it easeth the toothach: a decoction made thereof with cute or boyled wine, and annointed, easeth the paines of the eyes; it helpeth the paines of the heart and liver, being beaten and mixed with the Ceratum Cyprinum, and applyed to the place affected; as also ap∣plyed to the stomacke with Rosewater, it giveth much comfort to those that have lien long sicke: it helpeth those that are troubled with the swelling and hardnesse of the spleene, or those that have a hot sharpe water, running be∣tweene the flesh and the skin, if it be used with figges, vineger, and the meale of Darnell: The wine that is made thereof, called Wormewood wine, is availeable for all these purposes, restoring many to health that have beene troubled with those diseases; so that they have no agues that take thereof. Being put into Chests, or Presses, or Wardrobes, it preserveth them from wormes and mothes, &amp;c. and driveth away Gnats or Waspes, and such like, from any part of the body, if the skin be annoynted with the oyle thereof: the juyce is of like effect, but is not used so much in drinkes, for it troubleth the stomacke, and causeth headach; being put into the Inke wherewith Bookes are written, (or printed) it keepeth them from being eaten with Mice. Galen in his sixth Booke of simples ma∣keth mention of Wormewood in this manner. Wormewood hath a binding, a bitter, and sharpe quality, it like∣wise heateth, cleanseth, strengthneth, and dryeth. It therefore purgeth downewards the cholericke humours of the belly, and avoideth them also by urine, especially those that are in the veines: but helpeth no flegme that is contained therein, or in the chests or lungs: for the astringent quality therein, is stronger than the bitter: but by reason of the sharpnesse it partaketh more of heate than of cold, so that the temperature thereof, is hot in the first degree, and dry in the third, yet the juyce is farre better than the hearbe it selfe: and speaking of Sea Worme∣wood called Seriphium, he saith it is like unto Wormewood both in kind and in taste: which qualities Dioscorides giveth to Santonicum; for of Seriphium he saith it is more agreeing to Sothernwood, than to Wormewood: whereby it is thought by divers, that the place in Dioscorides, or in Galen, is perverted by some Writers faults, for they cannot be so farre differing in judgement one from another: It is often used, and by most, either inwardly gi∣ven, or outwardly applyed for the wormes, in children or elder persons: Pliny saith, it healeth old sores or ulcers in the head, and cureth the itch also: the decoction thereof with Cumminseeds taken warme, easeth the paines of the belly and chollicke by winde: the seed thereof helpeth the bloody flixe, and all other fluxes; it is said, that if a few leaves of Wormewood be eaten, it defendeth one from surfeiting and drunkennesse. The vineger wherein Wormewood is boyled, is especiall good for a stinking breath, that commeth either from the gums or teeth, or from corruption in the stomacke. It is likewise much commended in tertian and other lingring agues, by opening ob∣structions and purging by urine, and by strengthning the liver and stomacke: The conserve thereof much used, preserveth them from the dropsie that are fallen into it, or are in danger to fall thereinto, so as there be a fit course held before, by purging the offensive humours, and such other helpes as the learned Physitian may appoint. The distilled water is somewhat effectuall, but is much weaker to all the purposes aforesaid: yet the temples being ba∣thed therewith, it helpeth the paines of the head that come of a cold cause, and dropped into the eyes helpeth to cleare the eyesight. The other Wormewoods, although they have some properties, yet by how much they want of the bitternesse and astriction, by so much weaker they are for the diseases aforesaid. 
CHAP. XXXVII. Absinthium Seriphium sive marinum, &amp; Santonicum. Sea Wormewood, and strange Wormewood. B Ecause I would not overburden one Chapter with too many sorts of Wormewoods, I thought it conve∣nient to entreat of the Sea kindes, and other strange sorts, in a Chapter by themselves which are as fol∣loweth. 
1. Absinthium Seriphium sive marinum Anglicum. English Sea Wormewood. The English Sea Wormewood riseth up with many hoary round wooddy stalkes, three or foure foote high at the least, having thereon divers hoary white long and narrow leaves, broader and longer than any Sothernwood leaves, or the common Romane Wormewood, but nothing so large as the true Romane Wormewood, of a kind of saltish, but not bitter taste, and of a kinde of unpleasing savour: the flowers are small and yellow standing at the joynts with the leaves, towards the toppes of the branches, as the former common Wormewood doth, and give the like small seed: the roote groweth somewhat deepe and wooddy. 
2. Absinthium Seriphium Narbonense. French Sea Wormewood. The French Sea Wormewood groweth not so high as the former, nor so white and hoary, the leaves are small long, and finely cut like them, but thicker, and of an evill coloured greene colour, and strong unpleasant savour, and evill taste: the flowers are yellow, growing as the former doe, and the seed that follow in the small round heads alike. 
3. Absinthium Seriphium Germanicum. Germane Sea Wormewood. This Germane Sea wormewood is also very like the last, but with fine hoary white leaves, somewhat finer or smaller, and groweth not so high: in other things there is little or no difference. 
4. Absinthium maritimum Lavendulae folio. Lavender leafed Sea Wormewood. 4. Absinthium maritimum Laven ule folio. Lavender leafed Sea Wormewood. 
This Wormewood shooteth forth many slender weake wooddy and brittle stalkes, bending a little downewards, whereon doe grow divers hoary white long leaves, somewhat broader than Lavender leaves, having sometimes some cuts or divisions at the bottomes of them, which is but seldome seene, and in a very few of the lowest next to the ground: those that are set on the stalkes are smaller, and sometimes are cut or divided at the ends, of a reasonable weake scent, betweene Lavender and Sothernwood, but unpleasant taste: the flowers grow after the same manner that the common Wormewood doth, and of a yellow colour, and the seed is not unlike thereunto also. 
5. Absinthium Santonicum Aegyptiacum. Egyptian Wormewood. I must here remember also this plant (that is set forth by Matthio∣lus first, and from him Dodonaeus, Lugdunensis, Tabermontanus, Gerard, and Bauhinus, doe all number it among the Wormewoods, as I Lobel and Pena likewise doe, yet much doubt whether it be a Wormewood or no, for that they say they saw it growing with Gesner about a fin∣gers height, and the dryed plant with Valerandus Donrez, was in shew like unto Maidenhaire, with white leaves set on both sides, of a middle stalke) rather to incite others to obtaine it, that it may bee bet∣ter knowne, than that I have any knowledge thereof my selfe, whose descrption Matthiolus who had it from Cortusus, setteth forth in this manner: it is (saith he) a small low hearbe, growing in Egypt, with small leaves, almost like unto Lavender cotton, and many slender short branches set full of leaves: the seed is small and bitter in taste, but not extreme: some saith he would make it an Abrotanum mas, but they might better, as he saith, call it a faemina: Some also thought that the Wormeseed that commeth from the Levant to us, should be gathe∣red from this plant, but as he saith, he is doubtfull thereof himselfe, yet withall saith, that it hath all the vertues that the Italian Worme∣wood hath. 
6. Absinthium Santonicum Alexandrinum sive Sementina &amp; Semen Sanctum. Wormeseed Wormewood, or Levant Wormewood. This Wormewood likewise is a plant set full of branches, and with very few, and those very fine small leaves on them, at the bottome like unto the finer sorts, of an ash colour, but stored so plentifully with seed upwards, that it seemeth to be there without leaves, and wholly to consist of seed, which as Ranwolfius saith, are somewhat bitter in the naturall places, and of a reasonable good and quicke scent with us, especially if they be fresh and not 5. Absinthium Santonicum Aegyptiacum. Egyptian Wormewood. 
6. Absinthium Santonicum Alexandrinum sive Sementina, &amp;c. Wormeseed Wormewood, or Levant Wormewood. 
Absinthij Seriphij sive marini diversa genera. Divers sorts of Sea Wormewood. 
old, but much stronger, as it should seeme by his relation that tasted it, where it grew and moved one to cast very forci∣bly.
The Place. The first groweth neare our Sea Coasts in many places of our Land, as also of the Low-countries: the second neare the Sea at Marselles, and by Venice also: the third in Misnia in Germany: the fourth about the Coasts of the Venetian Gulph, and in the Iland of Sio likewise: the fifth is said to grow in Egypt, but Pena and Lobel doubt thereof: the last groweth in Syria and Arabia, from whence being brought into divers Christian Countries, it hath there sometimes growne, and there from the figure taken and set forth. Rauwolfins as it is set downe in the Appendix to Lugdunensis saith, hee saw it growing about Bethlehem, in the Land of Jury. 
The Time. These all flower and seed when the former sorts doe, sa∣ving the two last, which comming out of warme Countries are later than the rest with us. 
The Names. The names of Seriphium &amp; Santonicum are confounded by many Authors; for the first is called Absin∣thium Seriphium, or marinum by the best Authors, who call it either Belgicum, or Anglicum, yet Camerarius in horto calleth it Absinthium Santonicum; the second is called by Dodonaeus and Clusius Absinthium Seriphium Narbonense, but Lobel his Absinthium Xantomicum in my judgement is the same, al∣though Bauhinus make them different, calling the one Absin∣thium Seriphium Gallicum, as hee doth the other Absinthium Santonicum Gallicum: the third Clusius saith hee saw in the garden of Aicholtzius in Vienna, being sent him from Misnia, and thereupon he calleth it Absinthium marinum Misnense, and Bauhinus Absinthium Seriphium Germanicum, and saith it is the Absinthium Seriphium of Gesner in hortis: the fourth is called by Lobel, Tabermontanus, and Gerard, Artemisia marina, by Clusius Artemisia folio Lavendulae, by Dodonaeus Absinthium angustifolium, but Camerarius wondring why he should so doe, calleth it Absinthium latifolium marinum, and by others Absinthium Seriphium &amp; marinum, Camerarius thinketh it is Matthiolus his Absinthium marinum, but surely his figure doth much differ from it: the fifth is called by Matthiolus and Lugdunensis, Absinthium Seriphium Aegyptium, by Dodonaeus and others Absinthium Aegyptium, by Lobel Absinthium aliud sive peregrinum Aegyptium, and by Bauhinus Absinthium Santonicum Aegyp∣tiacum: the last is called by Anguilara Abrotanum mas, not knowing that Wormeseed was gathered from it, by Mat∣thiolus Sementina, (as the Italians call it, and the French Barbotim ) and so doe Dodonaeus, and Tabermontanus, and Semen Sanctum by him, Lobel, Lugdunensis, and others, Scheha Arabum by Rauwolfius and Lugdunensis in Apendice, Santonicum by Lonicerus, Semen Zedoariae by Lobel, and Absinthium Seriphium Alexandrinum, and Zine semen by Cor∣dus upon Dioscorides, and in his History of plants also, by Bauhinus Absinthium Santonicum Alexandrinum &amp; Indai∣cum, for they are both but one plant, although he setteth them downe for two by divers others Semen Lumbricorum &amp; ad Lumbricos, whose seed is generally called Wormeseed, and therefore I have called the plant rather Worme∣seed Wormewood, than Holy Wormewood, not thinking any more holinesse in this than in others. 
The Vertues. The Sea Wormewoods are of nothing that goodnesse in quality, as the common and aromaticall bitter sorts are: they are as Dioscorides and Galen say, adverse and hurtfull to the stomack: yet because it hath not that bitternesse therein as the common sort, it is more accepted and used by many, that rather desire to please their palate, than to be cured of their diseases by bitter medicines, our Physitians and Apothecaries feeding this humour for their owne profit, and to please their patients. The Wormeseed is chiefly, and as I may almost say, onely spent for the wormes in children, and to smaller effect if elder persons take it. 
CHAP. XXXVIII. Chamaedrys. Germander. I Might have joyned both Chamaedrys and Teucrium in one Chapter, because divers Authors both ancient and moderne have not distinguished them, some naming that Chamaedrys which others call Teucrium, and contrarily some call that Teucrium that others call Chamaedrys: yet I thinke it fit to sever them into two Chapters, and speake of them both true and false, as they are now generally received. 
1. Chamaedrys vulgaris. The common Germander. 1. Chamaedrys vulgaris. The common Germander. 
Common Germander shooteth forth sundry stalkes with small and somewhat round leaves, endented about the edges, the flowers stand at the toppes of a deeper purple colour than the next, the roote is composed of divers sprigges, which shoote forth a great way round about, quickly overspreading a ground. 
2. Chamaedrys major. Great Germander. The great Germander riseth up with bigger and harder square stalkes, halfe a yard high, spreading into divers bran∣ches from the very bottome, whereon are set two leaves at a joynt, somewhat larger than in the ordinary, and more den∣ted about the edges, greene above, and somewhat grayish un∣derneath: the flowers doe stand in a longer spiky head, and are larger, but of a paler purple, and gaping like the other: the roote is more bushing with threads, and creepeth lesse than the other. Maximus Prosper Alpinus saith in his Booke of Egyptian plants, that in Corcyca, hee saw a Germander almost two cu∣bits high, with leaves twice or thrice as bigge as any that grew in Italy. 
3. Chamaedrys Apula unicaulis. Germander of Naples. The Germander of Naples never riseth up with more than one whitish square stalke, about a foote high, at each joynt whereof grow two long and narrow hairy thicke leaves, den∣ted about the edges, round at the ends, and of a whitish greene colour: the flowers grow at the toppe in a long spike with smaller and rounder leaves set with them, and are hooded as the former are, with whitish beards, and a long yellowish point in the middle, but standing in prickly huskes: the seed is small, long, and round headed, yet greater than the propor∣tion of the plant would seeme to give. 
4. Chamaedrys laciniatis folijs. Iagged Germander, or with fine cut leaves. This fine Germander riseth up usually but with one weake slender square stalke, divided into other smaller branches, ri∣sing not above a foote high, whereon doe grow divers leaves, two alwayes set together at a joynt, on each side of the stalkes, which are very much cut in on both sides, making no shew of the forme of any Germander leafe, unlesse one heed it very well: from the middle to the tops of the stalkes, 4. Chamaedrys laciniati folijs. Iagged Germander, or with fine cut leaves. 
5. Chamaedrys spinof tica. Thorny Germander of Candy. 
at the joynts with the leaves, come forth purplish flowers like the former, after which follow small blackish seed: the roote is small and fibrous, and dyeth every yeare after it hath given seed, but will come oftentimes of it owne sowing and shedding. 
5. Chamaedrys spinosa Cretica. Thorney Germander of Candy. This Thorney Germander is a small low plant, having many square hairy and hoary stalkes, not above a cubite high, full of joynts, whereat grow forth divers somewhat round and long leaves, dented about the edges, in the lower much more than in the upper, which seeme to be without any denting at all: at each joynt with the leaves stand forth most usually two thornes, and sometimes more, which are in some small and short, in others bigger and larger, and sometimes shooting forth from those joynts small branches, which end also in a thorne: from the mid∣dle of the stalkes upwards, come forth the flowers at the joynts among the leaves, standing in small hairy and hoary huskes, very like for forme unto the flowers of Germander, but of a yellowish red or brownish colour: after the flowers are past the seed grow∣eth in those huskes, which is blacke and round. 
6. Chamaedrys spuria montana Cisti flore. Mountaine Germander. The Mountaine Germander riseth up with many weake and slender brownish wooddy stalkes, about a foote high; whereon are set without any order as in the former, many small leaves den∣ted about the edges, very like the leaves of the common German∣der, but somewhat smaller, greene on the upper side, and gray or hoary underneath: at the end of every stalke of leaves, there shooteth forth a long slender and hairy foote-stalke, without any leafe thereon: on the toppe whereof standeth one large white flower, consisting for the most part of sixe leaves, yet sometimes it will have eight or ten, according as nature listeth, and the fertility of the soyle is ready to produce, with many small threads in the middle: after the flowers are shed, there come up in their places large tufts or bushes, of long hairy seed, like unto those of moun∣taine Avens, but greater: the roote is hard and wooddy, shoo∣ting long strings and fibres under ground, and divers strings like∣wise above the ground, which take roote as they lye, the stalkes that bore seed dying downe to the ground every yeare, and the roote renewing then againe in the Spring: it hath little scent to be perceived therein, but of an astringent or drying taste. 
7. Chamaedrys Alpina saxatilis. Rocke Germander. From a hard knobbed roote shooting forth many blackish fi∣bres, spring up divers round stalkes, about a foote high, not branching forth at all; whereon grow two thicke leaves toge∣ther, in order up to the toppe, the lower being larger than those above, somewhat dented about the edges, but not so much as those of Germander, of a shining greene colour on the upperside, and yet covered as it were with a little hoarinesse or downe, but very grayish, almost white underneath: the toppes of the stalkes end in a long spiky head of flowers, with leaves among them, every one consisting of foure or five, and sometimes of sixe or seven small pointed leaves, of a pale blue colour, with some threads in the middle: after which come small round blackish seed in small huskes: this loseth not his greene leaves or stalkes in Winter, but being of small or no scent at all, but of an austere and harsh taste. 
8. Chamaedrys spuria major frutescens. The greater bastard Germander. This Bastard Germander (for so I esteeme all of them, rather than true Germanders, which have not hooded and gaping flow∣ers, as the true Germander hath, but consisting of foure or five, or more leaves as these doe, however their leaves bee like to make them beare the names of Germander) hath many square and some∣what hairy stalkes rising from the roote, beset with two large leaves at a joynt, somewhat like unto Germander leaves, but lar∣ger, and deeper dented in at the edges; towards the toppes bran∣ching forth into spiky heads of blue flowers, consisting of foure leaves a peece, whereof the uppermost is the largest, with some stripes or veines therein, and two small threads and a long pointell in the middle: after which arise small flat two forked huskes, containing small seed: the roote creepeth a little under ground, sending forth here and there some stalkes; but the stalkes also as they lye on the ground, will take roote and shoote forth fibres: the taste of the leaves are bitter. 
6. Chamaedrys spuria montana Cisti flore. Mountaine Germander. 
7. Chamaedrys Alpina saxatilis. Rocke Germander. 
8. Chamaedrys spuria major frutescem. The gre bastard Germander. 
9. Chamaedrys spuria minor latifolia. The smaler bastard Germander.
CHAP. XLI. Baccharis. Bacchar. A Lthough sundry Writers have set forth divers hearbes, for the true Baccharis of Dioscorides, and other learned men have refused them: yet these hearbes come nearest thereunto, the one the learned of Mom∣pelier account the truest, and with them many others doe agree: the other Rauwolfius setteth forth, which are therefore here proposed unto you. 
1. Baccharis Monspeliensium. French Bacchar. 1. Baccharis Monspeliensium. French Bacchar. 
This hearbe hath divers somewhat long and large leaves lying upon the ground full of veines, which make it seeme as if it were crumpled, soft and gentle in handling, and of an overworne greene colour, seeming to be woolly: from among which in the Summer time, riseth up a strong stiffe stalke, three or foure foote high, set with divers such like leaves, but smaller up to the toppe: where it is divided into many branches, at the ends whereof come forch divers flowers, three or foure for the most part, at the end of every severall branch, and every one on a small, foote-stalke; which flowers consist wholly of small threads or thrums, standing close and round; and never laid open like other flowers, that consist of leaves, of a dead or purplish yellow colour, out of greenish scaly heads, which thrums turne into a whitish downe: at the bottome whereof is the seed, small and chaffy, which together with the downe a car∣ried away with the winde, and riseth up in sundry places of a gar∣den, where it is once planted, and beareth seed: the roote con∣sists of many strings and fibres, bushing somewhat thick, not run∣ning deepe into the ground, but so taking hold of the upper face of the earth, that it may easily be pulled up with ones hand: the smell whereof is somewhat like unto Avens, but lesse in gardens, than growing wild, even as Avens doth in gardens, and divers other sweet hearbes that are of thin parts and subtile. 
2. Baccharis Dioscoridis Rauwolfio. Syrian Bacchar. The Syrian Bacchar, brancheth forth from an hoary stalke, about a foote high, into many smaller sprigges; bearing somewhat long and narrow leaves thereon, as white, hoary, and woolly as Mullein leaves, without any foot-stalke at the bottome, but com∣passing the stalke about: these being larger below, yet lesse than Mullein, and those above smaller, and smaller to the tops: where∣on stand the flowers very thicke set together, somewhat like un∣to golden Tufts, or Mountaine Cotton weed, called also Cats foote, of a pa e purplish colour: the roote was not fully observed, but seemed by some parts thereof, to be fibrous like blacke Hellebor, and sweet also. 
The Place. The first groweth plentifully neare Mompelier, and nany other places also. The other in Syria. 
The Time. The first flowreth with us about the end of Iuly, or beginning of August. The other time is not ex∣pressed. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , Baccharis, or as some would 2. Baccharis Dioscoridis Rauwolsius. Syrian Bacchar. 
have it , Paccharis, as though it should bee named Pancharis, from the excellent smell it hath. Pliny saith that some in his time called it Nardus rustica; but saith hee, they were in an errour that did so call it, for Asarum is most truely and properly called of the Greekes Nar∣dus rustica, and therefore Gerard in following the old error re∣prehended so long agoe, giveth it the English name of Plow∣mans Spikenard, whereunto it hath no resemblance, neither for forme nor vertues, and his figure also is rather the figure of Matthiolus Baccharis, then of this: and although in former times divers did thinke, that Asarum and Baccharis in Dios∣corides were all one hearbe, and thereupon came the name of Asarabaccara; some taking Asarum to be Baccharis, and so contrarily some taking Baccharis to be Asarum; for Cratevas his Asarum is not Dioscorides his Asarum, but his Baccharis, as any may plainely see, that shall read his description, yet now time and diligence have expelled those errours. The first of these is called Baccharis Monspeliensium, whereunto it doth more fitly agree, than any other hearbe that others have set forth; as Pena and Lobel, Clusius, and others doe agree; al∣though Dodonaeus calleth it Conyza major altera, and saith it hath little or no likenesse unto Dioscorides his Baccharis. Mat∣thiolus his Conyza major, is said by the Author of Lugdunensis, to be this Baccharis Monspeliensium: and Lobel and Pena say that the plant which Matthiolus set forth for Baccharis, cannot agree unto that of Dioscorides, but is a kind of sweet Mullein, or a kinde of Moth Mullein: yet Bauhinus in his Pinax, cal∣ling this Conyza major vulgaris, shewing thereby that many did call it so, referring it as well to Matthiolus his Conyza ma∣jor, as to his Baccharis; which Lugdunensis saith, are so con∣trary one unto the other, as that they cannot be accounted both one plant, as in the Chapter of Baccharis he sheweth. They of Salmanca in Spaine, as Clusius saith, called it Helenium, and di∣vers both women and Monkes, used both the roote and the hearbe, for scabs and itches, which is one of the proper∣ties whereunto the true Helenium serveth. The other Rauwolfius onely finding in Syria, seemeth to referre unto Dioscorides his Baccharis; which Clusius thinketh rather to bee a kinde of that Mountaine Cotton weed, which Fuchsius calleth Pilosella minor, and therefore Bauhinus calleth it Gnaphalio montano affinis Aegyptiaca. 
The Vertues. Dioscorides saith, that the rootes of Baccharis boyled in water and drunke, helpeth those that are troubled with convulsions and crampes, as also those that have ruptures and are bursten, such as have bruses by falls or otherwise, and those that can hardly draw their breath, or are short-winded, as also for old coughs, and the difficulty in ma∣king water: it also procureth the feminine courses, and is very profitable against the bytings of venemous crea∣tures being taken in wine: the greene roote being bound or hanged to, expelleth the birth, and is good for women in travell to sit over the warme fumes of the decoction thereof. For the sweet smell thereof it is put into Ward∣robes to perfume: and the smell thereof procureth sleepe: But the greene leaves by reason of their astriction are good to ease the paines of the head, the inflammations of the eyes, and the watering of them in the beginning, the hot swellings of womens breasts after childing, and those hot inflammations called Saint Anthonies fire, being ap∣plyed to the places affected. Pliny saith further, that it helpeth to breake the stone, and to take away nes and prickings in the sides. Paulus Aegineta saith moreover that the decoction of the roote openeth obstructions, and that the leaves are helpefull by their astringent quality to stay fluxes: Virgil in his seventh Eclogue saith, that is was used in his time as a garland to secure one from witchery and charmes, in these verses. 
At si ultra placitum laudarit, Bacchare frontem Cingite, ne vati noceat mala lingua futuro. CHAP. XLII. Nardus. Spiknard. A Lthough it is not my meaning to shew you the Indian Spiknard in this place, in that it is a plant peculiar to the Easterne parts of the world, and was never brought to grow in these Christian Countries; yet there is a bastard kind thereof found nearer hand, very like unto it, which I must set forth unto you, and some others also, that for the affinity either of scent or property, or both, have beene called Nardi. 
1. Nardus Gangitis spuria Narbonensis. Bastard French Spiknard. In imitation of the true Indian Spiknard (which Pena saith doth grow in divers places of Syria and Egypt, which relation is his onely; for we never could understand by any of our Merchants that trade into those parts, that it 1. Nardus Gangitis spuria Narbonense. Bastard French Spiknard. 
was a commodity so neare at hand, but brought further of; as I shall here∣after further declare) this bastard kinde hath beene observed to grow an∣swerable in a manner to all the parts thereof. For it hath a few small hard fibres, which thrust themselves into the ground: from which spring forth di∣vers hairy round spiky heads or beards, of the bignesse of ones finger, and of an hand breadth high, of a pale browne colour, which are not pointed at the toppes but flat or blunt, through each of these heads, even from the lowest part next the roote, shoote forth divers long rough greene rushes, scarce a foote high, many of these growing close one unto another, so that they make the forme or shew as it were; but of one plant; and after this manner hath hee set forth the figure thereof: but hee further addeth afterwards, (which Lugdunensis pretermitteth, although he setteth downe all the former part) that it is altogether without smell, except those hairy spiked heads or beards, which being bigger than the Indian kinde, doth smell somewhat like unto that Mosse that groweth upon Oakes, or that other that groweth upon the ground, and that these heads being halfe way within the ground, doe send forth each of them in the middle of those rigid rushes, a tall slender and smooth stalke, rising about a cubite higher than the rushes: from the middle whereof up to the toppes of them on each side, come forth many small greene cods pointed at the ends standing in cuppes like unto those of Cranes bill. The whole forme hereof doth so neare resemble the true Spik∣nard, as it hath beene observed by Pena and others, who as he saith among a numher of bundles, found some that had the parts both of fibres heads, rushes, and leaves distinctly, to be seene as this is here described; that it is not to be doubted that it is a species thereof. 
2. Nardus sive Spica Celtica. Mountaine French Spiknard. This Mountaine Spiknard creepeth upon the ground under the loose leaves and mosse, &amp;c. with small long and hard slender rootes (for so I call them rather than stalkes, as some others doe, because in these rootes consi∣steth the whole vertue and efficacy of the plant, and are by the best Apothe∣caries used onely in Mithridatum, &amp;c. and no part else) covered with many short small dry leaves like scales: sending forth in divers places as it cree∣peth and spreadeth, here and there small blackish fibres into the ground, whereby it is nourished: at the head whereof stand sundry small buttons or heads, from whence spring many small narrow, and somewhat thicke greene leaves, not divided or dented at all, smallest at the bottome, and broad toward the end, which change yellow in the end of Summer, or beginning of Autumne: among these leaves rise up sometimes more, and some∣time but one slender stalke, without any leaves thereon, at the toppe whereof stand many small whitish flowers, like unto the smaller sorts of Valerian, every one on a slender foote stalke: which afterwards bring small seed like unto them also; the whole plant is sweet and aromaticall, more than the Indian Spiknard, hotter also, and sharper in taste, than either of the other. 
3. Nardus Celtica altera. Mountaine French Spiknard with tufted flowers. This other French Spiknard differeth in nothing from the last but in the stalke with flowers, which is branched at the toppe, bearing three or foure flowers in a tuft together, on the end of every small branch. 
Bauhinus in his Prodromus setteth forth another sort hereof like thereto in most things, but that it is wholly without scent. 
4. Saliunca Neapolitana sive Nardus ex Apulia. Italian Spiknard. This small plant hath a thicker and yellow roote than the last recited, somewhat rugged, but not scaly like it, and somewhat resembling the garden Valerian, but lesse, having fibres at the bottome, and in divers other places at se∣verall spaces, where it shooteth forth also upwards divers heads or small knobs, and from them many small long leaves, somewhat larger than the other, narrower likewise below, broader upwards and pointed at the ends, what flowers, stalkes, or seed it beareth is not expressed: it hath the sweet scent of garden Valerian, and likewise the sharpe taste thereof, and this is all is declared of it: but that they of Naples use it in their medicines, in stead of the Malabathrum of Dioscorides, for the excellent sweetnesse of the leaves. 
5. Hirculus veterum Clusij. Vnsavory Spkinard. This small plant (being found dry amongst many bundles of Spica Celtica, or French Spiknard, by Clusius in Antwerpe ) is set forth to have a blackish hairy roote, like unto it, but without any smell at all, and smaller, shorter, and whiter leaves, rather grayish, and of an ash-colour: it was found without any stalke, and so Dioscorides and Pliny say it was found in their time: but theirs (as they say) had a strong scent, but not sweet, and growing with it was uttered among the true; and by the smell as well as colour and taste was to be knowne from it; for it tooke the name or Hirculus, of the smell thereof like unto that of a goat. 
6. Nardus montana tuberosa. Knobbed mountaine Spiknard. This kinde of Valerian or Spiknard, call it which you will, hath his first leaves lying on the ground, without any division in them at all, being smooth and of a darke greene colour, which so abide all the Winter: but those that spring up upwards, when it runneth up to flower, are cut in on the edges, very like unto the jagged leaves of the great garden Valerian, and so the elder they grow, the more cut and jagged they are: the stalke and flowers are very like the stalke with flowers of the garden Valerian, but of a darke or deep red colour, and more store of them thrust together: the seed also is not unlike it: the roote is tuberous or knobbed, both above and below, and round 3. Nardus Celtica altera. Mountaine French Spiknard with tufted flowers. 
4. Saliunca Neopolitana. Italian Spiknard. 
5. Hirculus Clusii. Vnsavory Spiknard.
6. Nardi montanae tuberosae summitater. The tops of the knobbed mountaine Valerian. 
6. Nardius montana tuberosa primum germinani. Knobbed mountaine Valerian, the first leaves. 
7. Nardus Montana longiori radice. Long Tuberous Mountaine Spiknard. 
about it, with some fibres shooting from them, whereby it is encreased, and smelleth very like the roote of the garden Valerian, or Setwall, or not alto∣gether so strong, being greene, as when it is dry. 
7. Nardus Montana longiori radice. Long tuberous Mountaine Spiknard. This other Mountaine Spiknard or Valerian is very like the last, but hath a longer round white roote, shooting forth many long knobs, and small fi∣bres underneath, which may be separated, and grow for increase: it hath ma∣ny small long and somewhat darke greene leaves like it, but smaller: the stalkes are not above halfe a yard high, in any that I have observed, bearing some finer cut and divided leaves thereon than any below, two alwayes stan∣ding together at a joynt; at the toppes stand reddish flowers, thicke thrust together in an umbell like the other, which passing away, leave small seed behind them naked upon the stalkes: the whole plant is of a faint weake scent, but the roote is much stronger, and much more when it is dry, than when it is fresh and greene. 
The Place. The true Nardus is said by Garcias to grow onely in India, whatsoever o∣thers have said thereof. The first here was found upon that pleasant high hill in Narbone, called of the French, L ' hort de Dieu, and Dei Faradisus, both for the pleasantnesse of it, and for the excellent hearbes that grow thereon, as Pena saith, in the mossy moist places thereof, facing the South and Mediter∣ranean Sea, which is not farre from a small village called Gange. The second is found upon the Alpes in Germany in divers places, as also of Liguria in great plenty, and sundry other places. The third is found on the same hills, and on others also. The fourth was found upon the Hills in Apulia, which are in the Kingdome of Naples. The fift was seene as is aforesaid dry, but never seene growing greene: but that we may well conjecture, that it grew where the French Spiknard was gathered, as Dioscorides also and Pliny imagined. The sixth was found by Pena as he saith, on the hills neare Mindenum, and on the hills of Veganium: Clusius saith hee had it from Ferrantes Imperatus of Naples, and gathered from the hill Virgineo. The last is likely, being a kinde of the other to bee found in the same places with the other. 
The Time. They all flower and florish in the Summer moneths of Iune, Iuly, and August, some earlier or later than others. 
The Names. Nardus is called in Greeke , a Naardo urbe Cyriaca forte saith Lobel, Euphrati contermina &amp; quasi Nardus spica, and so the Indian kinde is generally called Spica Nardi, and of some Nardus Indica, for a di∣stinction betweene it and Celtica: The first of these Pena calleth Nardus Gangitis spuria Narboae, both for the like∣nesse thereof unto the true Nardus Gangitis of Dioscorides; and that the next Towne of any note unto that Hill whereon it groweth, being about seven miles of, is called Gange; and by that name of Nardus Narbonensis, and Nardus spuria Narbonensis, it is called by all other Writers. The second is called Nardus Celtica of Dioscorides, and of all other Writers since, and Caesalpinus following Pliny Nardum Gallicum. It is in shops called Spica Celtica, and by the most and best, is judged to be the Saliunca that Virgil in his Bucolicks maketh mention of in these Verses. Puniceis humilis quantum Saliunca Rosetis, Judicio nostro, tantum tibi cedit Amyntas; in English thus: As the Mountaine Spiknard unto the purple Rose tree, So (if I judge) Amyntas yeelds to thee. And is thought by them also, that the name is corruptly put for in Dioscorides: for the Valesians call it in their tongne to this day Selliga, as savoring of Saliunca, as Pena saith also: yet Matthiolus findeth fault with Fuchsius and Leouiconus for taking them to be both one; and the Germanes also, who were reckoned a part of the Celtes, call it Selinuck: Some would have it called Nardus ligustica, because it groweth so plentifully on the Alpes of Liguria, and yet Matthiolus saith, that the Physitians of Genua which is a City in Liguria, did not know it before his time, and that he had published his Commentaries upon Dioscorides in the Italian tongue, which cau∣sed many both Physitians and Apothecaries, to be more inquisitive into the knowledge of hearbes, than they were before. Some also following the Arabians doctrine and words call it Nardus, or Spica Romana, because they call it in their tongue Camb l R i i. The third is called by Camerarius in his Epitome upon Matthiolus Spi a eltica fastigiato florum ordine, by Clusius Nardus Alpina seu Celtica, but Bauhinus maketh this of Clusius to be the former, when as Camerarius saith it is not the same with Matthiolus and others, which is the first here, and Bauhinus him∣selfe calleth it Nardus Celtica altera. The other is remembred by Cordus upon Dioscorides, and Bauhinus in his Pro∣dromus and Pinax, and called by him Nardo Celticae similis inodora. The fourth is called by Lugdunensis Saliunca Neapolitana, by Tabermontanus Phu minus Apulum, and by Bauhinus Nardus ex Apulia. The fifth as is before said, was thought by Clusius to be the Hirculus of Dioscorides, although it smel not strong as he saith his doth: Anguillara taketh it to be the Nardus Samphorite of Dioscorides, although Matthiolus findeth fault with him for that opini∣on; Gerard calleth it V wort in English, whereunto it hath no correspondence: for not having smell or taste, it cannot have the properties of Nardus, which hath both. The sixt is generally called Nardus montana, and also thought by all Writers, to be Dioscorides his Nardus montana, notwithstanding hee saith it hath neither stalke nor flower, nor seed, for Matthiolus freeth him from that fault, (first both because in the forepart of his owne descrip∣tion he saith, it hath the stalke and leafe of Eryngium, and therefore could not be so forgetfull, as within two or three lines to contrary his owne Writing) in laying the errour in the writers of his copy, in the same manner as he set downe in Dictamnus, and is declared in the Chapter thereof going before: that is, for , profert for confert, it beareth not, for it profiteth not, the roote onely and no part else being to be used: as also that the leaves hereof doe not agree with the leaves of Eryngium, wherein it is most likely an errour is committed also, in mis∣writing and mistaking one word for another, for all other things agree sufficiently thereunto. Dioscorides and Ga∣len say also it was called Thylacitis, because it was brought out of Ciliciae in leatherne bagges, which were called and Niris, as it is in Dioscorides copy, but called Pyritis, as it is in Galen, because it was used as a perfume in their sacrifices. Bauhinus, Camerarius, and others make two sorts thereof, one that hath but one two or three round small rootes like unto Olives, which thereupon he calleth Nardus montana radice olivari, and the other hee calleth Nardus montana radice oblonga, and Camerarius Nardus montana longius radicata, when as it may be the place onely, where they naturally grow, that causeth the difference of forme in the rootes, as it hapneth in Anthora, Napellus, and many other things, too long here to recite: for being transplanted and manured, they grow much greater, and somewhat alter that forme it formerly held in the naturall places, yet I have given you the figures of both to see the difference. 
The Vertues. Dioscorides saith that the true Indian Spiknard is of an heating and drying faculty, and that it provoketh urine. It is profitable to stay the loosenesse of the belly, and all fluxes both of men and women, and thin watry humours, being taken in drinke or applyed to the places affected: being drunke with cold water, it is profitable to those that have a loathing of their meate, or having swellings or gnawings at their stomacks, as also for them that are liver-growne, that have the yellow jaundise, or the stone in the reines or kidneys. The decoction used as a bath for wo∣men to sit in, or over it, taketh away the inflammations of the mother: It helpeth watering eyes by repressing and staying the humour, and thickning it also. Galen saith the same things and addeth withall, that it dryeth up the fluxe of humours, both in the head and breast. It is an especiall ingredient into Antidotes, against poison and venome, as Mithridatum, &amp;c. There had need be caution taken in the using of it, for it often provoketh vomitings, being either put with Rubarbe, as sometimes it is appointed, or in other cordiall medicines: and therefore our London Physitians in their Pharmacopaea, have appointed it to bee left out of many cordiall medicines. It is also with great caution to be forbidden to women with child, because it procureth them much disquiet, and may force their courses beyond either their time or conveniency. The oyle made thereof according to art, doth both warme those places that are cold, maketh the humours more subtill that were thicke or congealed before, digesteth those that are crude and raw, and also moderately dryeth and bindeth those that were too loose or fluxible: and hereby worketh powerfully in all the cold griefes and windinesse of the head and braine, of the stomacke, liver, spleene, reynes and bladder, and of the mother: being snuffed up into the nostrils, it purgeth the braines of much rheume gathered therein, and causeth both a good colour and a good savour to the whole body: Being steeped in wine for certaine dayes, and af∣ter distilled in Balneo calido: the water hereof is of singular effect, for all cold indispositions of the members, used either inwardly or outwardly: for it comforteth the braine, helpeth to stay thin distillations, and the cold paines of the head, as also all shaking and paralitick griefes: it helpeth also in all sudden passions of the heart, as faintings, and swounings; and for the collicke, two or three spoonefuls thereof taken upon the occasion: The first of these which is the bastard kinde, being almost without smell or taste, doth declare it to bee of small vertue and efficacy: but the mountaine French Spiknard, is reckoned to be effectuall, for all the purposes that the true Spiknard serveth for, but is weaker in operation; and moreover by reason it is somewhat more heating and lesse drying than it; it is more pleasing to the stomacke, and provoketh urine more effectually: the decoction thereof with Wormewood being drunke, helpeth those that are troubled with the swellings and windinesse of the stomacke, and being taken in wine is good for them, that are stung or bitten by any venemous creature. It helpeth also to dissolve all nodes and hard swellings, and is profitable for the spleene, reines, and bladder. It is also an ingredient of no small effect in Mithridatum, and others; and is used outwardly in oyles and oyntments, to warme and comfort cold griefes wheresoever they be. The Mountaine Spiknard is weaker than the Celticke or French Spiknard, by the judgement of Dioscorides, Galen, and others. 
CHAP. XLIII. Valeriana. Valerian. T Here are many sorts of Valerians to be remembred in this Chapter, some naturall, others strangers to our Country; and yet have beene free denizons in our gardens along time, others but of late. 
1. Phu majus sive Valeriana major. The great Valerian. The great Valerian hath a thicke short grayish roote, lying for the most part above ground, shooting forth on all sides other such like small peeces or rootes; which have all of them many long and great strings or fibres un∣der them, in the ground, whereby it draweth nourishment: from the heads of these rootes spring up many greene leaves, which at the first are somewhat broad and long, without any division at all in them, or denting on the edges: but those that rise up after, are more and more divided on each side, some to the middle ribbe, being winged, as made of many leaves together on a stalke, and those upon the stalke in like manner, are more divided, but smaller toward the toppe than below: the stalke riseth to be a yard high, or more, sometimes branched at the toppe, with many small whitish flowers, sometimes dasht over at the edges with a pale purplish colour; of a small scent which passing away, there followeth small brownish white seed, that is easily carried away with the winde: the roote smelleth more strong than either leafe or flower, and is likewise of more use in medicine. 
There is a Mountaine kinde hereof, as Camerarius saith, found in Savoy, which is more sweete than this, Altera odoratior. even of the smell of a Pomecitron, but it is more soft or gentle than it. 
1. Phu majus sive Valeriana major. The great Valerian. 
2. Valeriana Cretica tuberosa. Knobbed Valerian of Candy. 
 
2. Valeriana Cretica tuberosa. Knobbed Valerian of Candy. This Valerian of Candy hath his first leaves, that spring up and lie upon the ground round about the roote greene, thick, and round, like unto the leaves of Asarabacca, and sometimes greater; the next that come after them are somewhat longer, and somewhat divided or cut in on the edges, and those that follow more and more divided, so that those that grow upon the stalke, are very like unto the divided leaves of the former Valerian: the stalke is hollow, and riseth to be two foote high at the least, having here and there two smaller leaves set at a joynt: at the toppe whereof, which is divided into some smaller branches, stand many white flowers in an umbell, thick thruft, somewhat larger than those of the former, which turne afterwards into small and flat seed with a little downe at the head of them, like thereunto also: the uppermost roote from whence the leaves and stalke doe spring, is small round short and tuberous, from whence shoot forth round about it, divers other smaller rootes, fastned thereunto by long strings, like as the rootes of Filipendula are, the scent whereof is very like unto the former great Vale∣rian. 
3. Valeriana Alpina major sive latifolia. Broad leafed wild Valerian of the Alpes. This wild Valerian hath many large and somewhat round pale greene leaves, and in some they will be yellowish, rising from the roote, lying upon the ground round about; every one having a long foote-stalke thereunto, some whereof are very like unto Ivie leaves, but lesser and gentler, and others longer like unto the leaves of Canter∣bury Bells, but lesser also, and not so hard; in some a little dented, in others more dented about the edges, but not divided at all: the stalke is round, and about a foote and a halfe high, in some greene, in others somewhat reddish, having few leaves thereon, which are smaller, longer, and deeper cut in on the edges, than any below, and at the toppe is branched, whereon stand divers small purplish flowers, like unto the other Valerians: after which come small seed like unto the rest: the roote is large, round, and whitish, set with divers knots or joynts, and long fibres under them, of a reasonable good smell, like unto wild Valerians, and of a bitterish binding taste. 
4. Valeriana Alpina minor. Small wild Valerian of the Alpes. This small Valerian hath foure or five small long, and somewhat narrow leaves, with one or two dents onely at the edges, lying on the ground next the roote, and are somewhat like unto the leaves of the great wild white Day∣sie, especially those that grow highest, and are the smallest, but with fewer dents or notches about the edges: the stalke riseth not up above a foote high, having very few leaves thereon, which are smaller, longer, and narrower than those below, with as few dents or notches on the sides as the other: the toppe of the stalke is divided into a few small branches, on every of which grow a few white flowers, like unto the Valerians, but smaller: the roote is small, and creepeth a little under ground, sending forth fibres, but no lesse sweet than the former. 
5. Valeriana annua sive Aestiva Clusij. Summer Valerian. This annuall Valerian, hath divers long leaves lying on the ground, all of them deepely cut in or gashed on the edges, somewhat like the leaves of the Starre Thistle, among which rise up round hollow stalkes, two or three 3. Valeriana Alpina major sive latifolia. Broad leafed wild Valerian of the Alpes. 
4. Valeriana Alpina minor. Small wild Valerian of the Alpes.
The Vertues. Dioscorides saith that the garden Valerian hath a warming faculty, and that being dryed and given to drinke, it provoketh urine, and helpeth the strangury, and the decoction thereof taken doth the like also, and doth take away paines of the sides, procureth womens courses, and is used in Antidotes. Galen saith that the rootes of Phu or Va∣lerian are sweet, and like unto Nardus in quality, but much weaker to all purposes almost, yet it provoketh urine more plentifully, than either the Indian or Syrian Nardus, and is like unto Celtick Nardus therein. Pliny saith that the powder of the roote given in drinke, or the decoction thereof taken, doth helpe all stranglings or choakings in any part, whether they be because of paines in the chest, or sides, and taketh them away. The roote of Valerian boy∣led with Liquorice, Raisins, and Aniseed, is singular good for those that are short-winded, and for that are troubled with the cough, and helpeth to open the passages, and to expectorate flegme easily. It is given to those that are bitten or stung by any venemous creature, being taken in wint: it is of especiall vertue and property against the plague, the decoction thereof drunke, and the roote being used to smell unto: it helpeth also to expe wind in the belly. The greene hearbe with the roote taken fresh, being bruised and applyed to the head, taketh away the paines and prickings therein, stayeth rheumes and thin distillations, and being boyled in white wine, and a drope thereof put into the eye, taketh away the dimnesse of the sight, or any pinne, haw, or w be therein. It is of excellent property to heale any inward sores or wounds, as also for outward hurts or wounds, and draweth any splinter or thorne out of the flesh. The decoction of the roote of the lesser Valerian, is stronger to resist poisons and infections than the greater, as Matthiolus saith. It is very profitably applyed to asswage the sw ings of the cods, caused of cold or of winde, if the fumes or vapours of the decoction thereof, made with wine, applyed warme unto them. The water distilled from the greater Valerian both hearbe and roote, in the moneth of i singular good to be taken fasting for all the purposes aforesaid, and is a good and safe medicine in the time of the plague: it killeth also the wormes in the belly, and is singular good to wash either greene wounds, or old ulcers. It is generally called in the Countries of this Land, the poore mans remedy, to take the decoction of this root and drinke it, when by taking cold after swea ing, or over-heating their bodies, they be troubled with the cholicke or winde, or are otherwaies distempered: or to use the greene hearbe bruised and laid to any cut or wound, or to draw out any thorne or splin∣ter, and heale it after. 
CHAP. XLIIII. Conyza. Fleabane. D Ioscorides se eth forth three sorts of Conyza or Fleabane, a greater and a lesser, and a third which is be∣tweene both. Theophrastus and Pliny that followeth him, make but two sorts, a male and a female: others have added a fourth, the least of all: but there are divers other hearbes referred unto them by Clusius and others, as they have found them in their travels; some of these sorts are found wild in our Country in some places, but because they are not very frequent to meet with, I thinke it not amisse to ranke them with the rest of their Tribe in this place. 
1. Conyza major verior Dioscoridis. The truest great Fleabane. This great Conyza which is accounted the truest and nea∣rest 1. Conyza major verior Dioscorides. The truest great Fleabane. 
unto that of Dioscorides, hath divers hard rough, or hairy round wooddy stalkes, two or three foote high; whereon are placed without order, many long and somewhat narrow pale greene leaves, dented a little about the edges, very clam∣my as the stalke is also, but much more in the hotter Coun∣tries, than in , and are somewhat like unto the leaves of the Italian Starrewort, but larger, and more pointed at the end toward the toppes of the stalkes come forth at every joynt with the leaves a yellow flower, somewhat large, like unto the flower of Hawkweed or Groundsell; which when it is full ripe, turneth into downe, and flyeth away with the seed: the smell hereof is somewhat strong, but somewhat sweet withall, and not athsome: and is so glutinous and clammy, that what small thing soever as Flyes, &amp;c. lighteth upon it, is held thereon. 
2. Conyza major mon na Germanica. Great Mountaine Fleabane of Germany. This kinde of Conyza hath divers round greene stalkes, a∣bout two foote high, nothing so clammy as the former, having many long pointed leaves set thereon without order, of a sad or darke greene colour, each whereof is foure or five inches long, and an inch and a halfe broad: the flowers are yellow, somewhat larger than the other, every one standing at the toppes of the branches, upon a long stalke, in the same manner that the former doe, that is with a pale or border of leaves, and many small thrums in the middle, passing into downe; and is carryed away with the winde, even as they doe. Longifolio There is another of this sort with longer leaves, and lesser flowers. 
3. Conyza Helenitis mellita incana. Hoary sweet Fleabane Mullet. This Fleabane Mullet riseth up with divers long and some∣what broad leaves, neare unto the forme of Fox-glove leaves, but that these are hoary or gray on the upperside, and of a brownish greene on the underside, herein somewhat like unto the leaves of Rha Helenij folio, or Bastard Rubarbe with Elecampine leaves: the stalkes are hoary likewise, rising to be two or three foote high, set with the like leaves as grow below, but smaller and smaller up to the toppes, where many flowers stand together, like unto the former Fleabanes, and much greater than Groundsell, which turne into downe and flie away with the winde: the roote is composed of many blackish strings and fibres, whereby it taketh fast hold of the ground, the whole plant is some∣what clammy, yet much lesse than the first, and much sweeter than it. 
Lobel giveth us the figure of another sort, whose chiefe difference consisteth in that the leaves are jagged or cut in on the edges. 
4. Conyza Helenitis pilosa. Hairy Fleabane Mullet. This Fleabane is both in forme of leaves and flower, and other things so like the last recited Fleabane Mullet, that there is no other difference to be found; but in that both leaves and stalkes are besides the hoarinesse, more hairy and rough than it, which causeth it to be held as a differing sort. 
5. Conyza montana pilosa. Hairy Mountaine Fleabane. This kind of Fleabane is also a differing kind from the last, in that the leaves as well as the stalkes, which are round, firme, a foote high or more, are hairy and rough, being smaller than the former, and not much bigger than the leaves of Hisope, but as glutinous and clammy (which may be by reason of the hot climate wherein it groweth) as the first, of a strong virulent scent like to the smell of a Goat: at the toppes of each of these stalkes, which are ma∣ny, standeth one small pale yellow flower, somewhat like unto the flower of a Sow-thistle, which turneth into 2. Conyza major montana Germanica. Great Mountaine Fleabane of Germany. 
3. Conyza H ni mel a in . Hoary sweet Fleabane Muller. 
Fol lacinia . 
4. Conyza Helemitis pilosa. 
6. Conyza odorat carule . Sw et purple Fle ne. 
downe, and is carried away with the winde at all the rest are the roote is blackish without, but white within, hard, dry and wooddy, of an harsh taste, astringent or binding; the whole plant else is somewhat bitter, with a little cerimony also to be tasted therein. 
6. Conyza oderata caerulea. Sweet purple Fleabane. From a short whitish root with many fibres , spring∣eth up many small short leaves; somewhat like unto the leaves of the garden Daisie, but somewhat wri ed: among which riseth up a stalke two foot high sometimes, brownish at the bottome, set here and there up to the toppe with lon∣ger and narrower leaves, where it is divided into small and short branches; whereon stand many flowers, one above an∣other, in small skaly greene heads or huskes, composed of many small and narrow bluish purple leaves, somewhat white at the ende or tippes, with a small yellow flat drum in the middle, and in the middle thereof, there riseth up divers white threads, whereby each flower consisting of three co∣loure, white, purple, and yellow, maketh it se e the more delectable to the Spect after these flowers are , there commeth in those huskes or hands that h ld them, small long seed lying in the downe, each having some thereof at the head, which together therewith is blowne abroad with the winde, if it be not gathered and kept: the whole plant is of a sharpe taste, but the roote re, almost as much as pepper, and of a strong but not pleasant sc . 
7. Conyza carulca Alpina major. Great blue Mountaine Fleabane. The roote of this Fleabane is small, woddy, and reddish, from whence riseth a thicke l iry stalke, about a foote high, divided at the halfe way into three small branches, each whereof hath other small stalkes, and one flower at the head of them, which is of a purplish blue colour, like unto the last, and likewise turning into a downy matter, easie to be carryed away with the winde: the leaves on the stalkes are thinly set thereon, being hairy thicke, long and narrow, about three or foure inches in length, and about an inch in breadth. 
8. Conyza caerulea Alpina minor. Small blue Mountaine Fleabane. This small plant is scarse an hand breadth high, and sometimes lower, having a small round slender stalke, some∣what hairy, whereon groweth onely one bluish flower; like unto the greater kinde of Mountaine Fleabane, but three times smaller, with many threads in the middle flying away with the wind, when it is ripe as the other: it hath many small leaves at the bottome of the stalke, and the toppe of the roote, which are of a pale greene colour, and about three inches long, but shorter as they grow higher upon the stalke, every one having a short foote-stalke at the bottome thereof: the roote is blackish and fibrous. 
9. Conyza minor vera Penae. The truest small Fleabane. The little Fleabane is seldome found with more than one stalke rising from 9. Conyza minor vera Penae. The truest small Fleabane. 
the roote, which is a foote and a halfe, or sometimes two foote high, and some∣times lower than a foote, somewhat hairy and clammy also, but greener than the great kinde, as the leaves are also, which are long, narrow, and fat or clam∣my, somewhat like unto the leaves of Linaria or Toade-flaxe, set thereon up to the top, where it sometimes brancheth forth, or from the middle thereof up∣wards; with the small leaves come small pale yellow flowers, like unto the great kinde, which turne into downe, and are blowne away with the winde, as the others are, the roote is small and slender, with a few fibres thereat, but the whole plant smelleth sweeter than most of the former, and dyeth every yeare, and either raiseth it selfe of its owne sowing, or must bee new sowne every yeare. 
10. Conyza minor Rauwolfij. Small Syrian Fleabane. The small Syrian Fleabane hath many small low branches about a foot or more high, whereof few stand upright, the most of them leaning or lying downe up∣on the ground, and taking roote againe, in severall places as they lye; the leaves that are set thereon are small and long, somewhat like unto the leaves of the Olive tree, being fat or clammy, and hairy also, of a strong scent, yet somewhat sweet withall: the toppes of the stalkes are garnished with small yellow flowers like unto the last, which when they are ripe flye away with the winde as they doe.
There are other sorts of Fleabanes which because they grow in moorish watery, or wet places, shall be remem∣bred hereafter among the marshy or warry plants. 
The Place. The first groweth naturally onely in the warmer Countries of Spaine, Italy, Narbone of France, and the like, and will hardly endure the cold of these Countries, and therefore must be carefully kept in the Winter, if any would have it. The second is familiar to Germany, and therefore will better abide, having beene found by Joannes Thalius and others in Harcynia sylva in Saxony, and we in many places of our owne land, as toward Hampsted, &amp;c. The third and fourth Lobel saith were found upon the hills in Artois. The fifth was found by Mycon on high hills in Spaine. The sixth is found in divers places in the Kingdome of Naples, in moist fields that are in the Mountaines, as Colu a saith, as also in the sand pits or places, neare the River of Rhosne by Lions in France, and the Alpes in Au∣stria, as Clusius saith. The seventh was found on Saint Bernards Mount in Switzerland; and the eight on the Hill of Saint Goth rd, as Bauhinus saith in his Prodromus, The ninth groweth not farre from Madrid in Spaine, as Clu∣sius saith, as also in the woods of Gramunts neare Mompelier, as both he and Lobel say. The last Ra wolfins found growing about Tripoly in Syria. 
The Time. They doe all flower in the Moneths of Iune, Iuly, and August, some earlier or later than others; the first and the ninth for the most part flower latest. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and in Latine also Conyza sic forte dicta quia n as, id est culices suo lentore capiat, because as is said in the Description, the glutinous clamminesse both of leaves and stalkes, holdeth fast whatsoever falleth upon them, yet Dioscorides saith it is so called, because Suffitu vel Substratu culires abigit &amp; culicus necat. Gaza translateth it Pulicaria, and we in English Fleabane accordingly, because being burnt or laid in Chambers, it will kill Gnats, Fleas, or Serpents, as Dioscorides saith, and not Fleawort, for that is another hearbe as shall bee shewed in his place. The first is the truest great Conyza of Dioscorides, by the judgement of Camerius odonaeus, Lobel, Pena, Lugdunensis, and others. The second Iohannes Thallus, as I said, first called Can d montana, who hath also another which he calleth major alterae, both of them being very like one unto another, whereof Ca∣ rarius hart. setteth out the figure, and Bauhinus thereupon calleth it Cony folijs oblon is. The 3. of both sorts and 4. are so called, as they are in their titles, by Lobel in his Dutch the scent of them is not strong like the other Conyzas, but sweet like Honey. The fifth is called by and Myconi, and Bauhinus Conyza montana folijs glutinosis pilosis. The sixt is called by divers Co L gd nsis saith, and of Coli ia A llus montanus, because hee saith it is so like unto the Amellus Vir . Gasner in his booke De Collections S irpium, and Cor us also, calleth it Conyzaides caerulea, Tabermont anus it is called also Deutelaria of the effect to cure the toothach. Bauhinus calleth it Conyza caerulea it, and saith it is the same that Dodona s in his French Booke calleth Erigerum tertium, and in his Latine Booke Erigorum quartum: but Dodonaeus in those places maketh no mention, of any blue or purple colour in that Erigorum, but onely saith it hath a pale yel∣low flower, so quickly fading, that it abideth not a day, but even almost the same houre that it is blowne, it doth fade, which I am sure this Amellus doth not, and is not wholly yellow, as that of Dodonaeus is. The seventh and eight Bauhinus calleth Conyza caerulea Alpina major &amp; minor. The 9. is called Conyza minor vera, both by Pena, Clusius, Gesner, &amp; others, because it differeth from the more common sort. The last Pau olfius referreth to the Conyza minor of Dioscorides, which Clusius rather thinketh is a species of his greater kinde, yet Bauhinus calleth it Conyza major altera, and quoteth both Rauwolfius and Clasius to call it Conyza major Dioscoridis. The Italians call it Conyza: the Spaniards Attadegua: the French Conyza: the Germanes Hundsang and Durwurtz: the Dutch Donderwortel. 
The Vertues. The leaves of Fleabane as Dioscorides saith, are fitly applyed to the bytings or hurts of all venemous creatures, as also for pushes and small swellings, and for wounds: the leaves and flowers boyled in wine and drunke, is good to bring downe womens courses, and to helpe to expell the dead child: taken also in the same manner, it is good to procure urine, or when one maketh it by drops: it helpeth also those that have the yellow jaundise, and the gri∣ping paines of the belly: it is also good for the falling sicknesse, taken in vineger: the decoction is good to helpe many griefes of the mother, if women be bathed therewith, or sit therein: if the juyce bee put into the Matrix it causeth aborcement, that is to be delivered before the time: the oyle made of the hearbe, and annoynted, is very effectuall to take away all shaking fits of agues, and those tremblings that come of cold. The small kinde helpeth the paines in the head. Galen saith that both the greater and the lesser are hot and dry in the third degree, and there∣fore powerfully warmeth any place whereunto they are applyed, whether used of themselves, or boyled in oyle, and anoynted; the leaves bruised and bound to any greene wound or cut, being first well washed or cleansed, hea∣leth in a short space: applyed also to the soles of the feete, it stayeth any laske or fluxe, and bound to the forehead is a great helpe to cure one of the frensie: it openeth the obstructions of the liver, if the decoction thereof made in wine be drunke: If either Goats or Sheepe eate hereof it will kill them by any extremity of thirst. The lesser is effectuall to all the purposes aforesaid, but is more powerfull to helpe any fluxe, or the bloody fluxe. The sixth as is said before, helpeth the toothach. 
CHAP. XLV. Aster. Starrewort. T He likenesse in many things that the Starreworts have with the Fleabanes, enforceth me to place them next thereunto, whereof we have such a number, as well of those that were formerly knowne to ma∣ny, as those which our later times have made knowne to us, and from Virginia, New-England, &amp;c. have come not the least store unto us. And although Dioscorides hath set forth but one kind, which he calleth Aster Atticus of the place no doubt, where it grew most plentifully, or was or greater force, which was the Country of Athens, yet later Writers having found out divers other hearbes, somewhat like unto it, have referred them thereunto; all which I meane in this Chapter to declare unto you. 
1. Aster Atticus luteus verus. The true Aster Attick, or yellow Starrewort. 1. Aster Atticus luteus verus. The true Aster Attick, or yellow Starwort. 
This Starrewort riseth up with two or three rough hairy stalkes, a foote and a halfe high, with long rough or hairy brownish darke greene leaves on them, divided in∣to two or three branches: at the top of every one where∣of standeth a flat scaly head, compassed underneath with five or sixe long browne rough greene leaves, standing like a Starre, the flower it selfe standing in the middle thereof, is made as a border of narrow long pale yellow leaves, set with brownish yellow thrums, the root dyeth every yeare after seed time. 
2. Aster cernuus Columnae. The soft Starrewort of Naples. The soft Starrewort is very like unto the former yel∣low Starwort, but that the leaves hereof are somewhat broader, larger, and not so rough or hairy, the stalke is in like manner branched toward the toppe, which is not slenderer there than below, but groweth thicker where the flower standeth, and bendeth downeward; on the toppe of every branch standeth one flower, somewhat like the other, consisting of many yellow leaves, with brownish threads or thrums in the middle, and compas∣sed about with many more greene leaves, which are soft and gentle in handling, and not prickly or rough as the o∣ther: the seed is hitter in taste, long and norrow, some∣what flat withall, yellowish, clammy, crested, and sweet in smell: the root is composed of divers bigge yellow∣ish strings, of an aromaticall taste. 
3. Aster supinus. Low creeping Starwort. This low Starwort riseth up with many slender wea crested, and somewhat hairy stalkes, leaning downe∣wards, and not standing upright, whereon are set many long and narrow leaves, a little round at the toppe, very like unto 3. Aster supinus. Low creeping Starrewort. 
the former, but smaller and greener up to the toppe; every stalke beareth one flower which is yellow and large, like unto the flower of a corne Marigold, contained in a very hard huske, made of small greene leaves, which the flower is past, becommeth so hard and wooddy that one can scarce open or breake it, to take out the seed which lyeth close sticking therein: the roote is long and slen∣der, having a few fibres set thereof, and abideth divers yeares, if it be a little defended from the extremity of Winter. 
4. Aster luteus major Austriacus. Great yellow Starrewort of Austria. This Starwort hath many long and narrow leaves, of a pale greene colour at the ground, somewhat like unto the leaves of that kind of Scabious, that is called Divels bit, whose leaves are not jag∣ged at all, but are sometimes covered with a little downe, the stalke is about two foote high, brownish and round, whereon are set sparsedly long narrow pointed leaves, a little dented about the edges, at the toppe whereof it is divided into a few small and short branches, every one bearing a large yellow flower, compo∣sed of many small flowers, consisting of five leaves a peece, set to∣gether in a round head, compassed about with many long, some∣what broad and flat leaves, of a most excellent yellow colour, of a weake scent or none at all: after the flower is past, the seed is con∣tained in the heads, cornered as if it were three square, lying di∣spersed in a downy substance: the roote is somewhat thicke and blackish, growing aslope in the ground, sending forth many strings, &amp; shooting forth many heads, wherby it may be encreased. 
5. Aster montanus folijs Salicis. Starwort with Willow leaves. This Starwort from a long creeping roote, wonderfully sprea∣ding under ground, and encreasing: shooteth up divers crested strong greene stalkes, two foot high, plentifully stored with leaves thereon, being longer, harder, and greener than the last, without any downe or woollinesse on them, and a little dented about the edges, somewhat sharpe and hot in taste: the toppes of the stalkes are divided into two or three small branches, each sustaining divers small greene heads, composed of many small leaves set together, one about another, which in time open themselves into flowers, of as large a size as the last, but with a smaller thrum in the middle, and nar∣rower leaves compassing them, parted or divided at the end. 
6. Aster luteus lanuginosus, Starwort with woolly leaves. This woolly Starwort hath divers small and strong greene or browne stalkes, somewhat woolly, rising from the roote (which is spead under ground, and fastned with many long and strong fibres, shooting yearely new sprouts for encrease, but nothing so much as the last) beset without order, with many long and narrow greene leaves, bowing to the ground, and covered over with a soft woolly downe, compassing the stalkes at the bottome of them; of a sharpe hot taste, and somewhat bitter: at the toppe of the stalke standeth a large head, made as it were of many scaly leaves, which sustaineth a large round flower, consisting of many long, narrow, and pale yellow leaves, as a border to the middle, which are a number of small mossy flowers set together, of a deeper yellow than the bor∣der; the whole flower doth resemble that of Elecampane, and without any scent to commend it: the stalke bran∣cheth forth from the joynts below, into three or foure branches, rising higher than the middlemost, every of them bearing such a flower: which when they are past, the seed contained in those heads, with the woolly or downy substance therein, is carryed away with the Winter. 
7. Aster luteus angustifolius. Narrow leafed Starwort. This narrow leafed Starwort hath as great a creeping running roote as the fourth, and giveth as plentifull en∣crease, from whence spring up many small hard greene stalkes, not much above a foote high, whereon grow many long and narrow leaves, without any order one above another, not dented at all about the edges, but else very like unto the leaves of the wild Pellitory or Ptarmica, up toward the toppes, where they are divided sometimes into two or three small branches, every one bearing a greene scaly head, and out thereof a yellow starrelike flower, as the others have, but lesser than any of the former: these branches doe seldome over-toppe their middle or master branch, as the last recited doth; the seed that followeth is very like unto the other: and carried away with the wind in the same manner. 
Pena and Lobel in their Adversaria have set forth two sorts of Aster, which they call Aster montanus, and hirsu∣tus: Bauhinus maketh them both of the number of his yellow Asters, but because that, as Clusius seemeth to say they are comprehended under the others here set downe, I make no further mention of them. 
8. Aster Virgineus latifolius luteus repens. Yellow creeping Starwort of Virginia. This Starwort riseth up with a strong round stalke, two or three foote high, bearing at the joynts two faire broad leaves like the leaves of a small Flos Solis, but more pointed at the ends, and being harder in feeling, full of veines: at the toppe of the stalke (which seldome brancheth) standeth one large flower (rising out of a greene huske made of nine or ten greene leaves) composed of many long and narrow yellow leaves, with a brownish thrumme in the middle: which being past, there followeth seed like unto a small Flos solis as it is said, for I never saw it beare seed: the roote is stringy, creeping under ground, and spreading much: it loseth both stalke and leafe every yeare, and springeth a new from the roote. 
6. Aster luteus angustifolius. Narrow leafed yellow Starwort. 
5. Aster luteus lanuginosus. Starwort with woolly leaves. 
8. Aster Virgineus latifolius luteus repens. Yellow creeping Starwort of Virginia.
oftentimes branched againe, at each joynt whereof stand single leaves, but much smaller and thicker set than below, the flowers stand singly also at the joynts and toppes of every stalke and branch, which are small and Starre fashion, of a pale white co∣lour, with a single purple thrum in the middle, rising out of a small greene huske which turne into downe like the former: the roote is composed of sundry long white strings, which live long, and encreaseth much, losing all the stalkes in the Winter, and holding a tuft of greene leaves, untill it shoot new stalkes the next yeare: this flowreth much later than the other, some∣times not untill the end of October, or beginning of Novenber, yet a moneth sooner in a warme yeare. 
The Place. The first kind of Starwort growet in Province and Narbone in France, in Lombardy also. The second on the Mountaines in the Kingdome of Naples. The third in New Castile in Spaine. The fourth at the foote of the Alpes of Austria and Stiria, and on Leytenberg, and other hills neare Vienna. The fifth in Mo∣ravia, and on the hills neare Vienna. The sixth likewise neare Vienna, at the foote of divers hills, and on the woods that were felled there. The seventh likewise in the fields neare Vienna, and in a small Wood neare the River Donaw or Danubius. The eight hath beene many yeares grow∣ing in England, since it was first brought out of Virginia, and so hath the ninth also, but the tenth we have had scarse time enough to observe it thorowly since we got it from Virginia, by the meanes of Master George Gibbes Chirur∣gion of Bathe, who brought in his returne from thence, a number of seeds and plants hee gathered there himselfe, and flowred fully only with M. Tradescant. The eleventh groweth in many places of our owne land, in moist or sha∣dowy places. The twelfth Guillame Boel many yeares agoe brought out of Barbary with him. The thirteenth in many medowes both in Italy and France. Tne fourteenth in many places of Hungaria, Austria, and Moravia. The fifteenth in the grassy fields on the Alpes of Austria. The sixteenth groweth about Crenisum in Austria, and other parts of the Alpes there, as also on the Mountaine Iura in Switzerland neare Geneva. The seventeenth on the dry Rocky hills and Olive yards about Mompelier and Castrum novum. The eighteenth and last were sent us from France growing first in Canada. Some of them are hardly nourished up in gardens, especially the eighth and ninth, which are unwilling to change their naturall habitation. 
The Time. They doe all flower in the Summer moneths of Iune and Iuly, some earlier or later than others. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke &amp; : in Latine Aster Atticus, Bubonium &amp; Inguinalis, both for that the flower is like a Starre, and that as it is likely, it grew plentifully about Athens, and of the effect to cure the sores that hapned in Inguine, the groyne, Herba Stellaria also of some. The first is called by all Aster Atticus legitimus, but Bauhinus to distinguish it, added foliolis ad flore in rigidis. The 2. is called by Fabius Columna Aster Cernuus, be∣cause the flowers bend downe their heads, and by Bauhinus Aster Atticus folijs circa florem mollibus. The third is called by Clusius Aster secundus supinus, and so doe Dodonaeus, Lobel, and Lugdunensis, and Camerarius, Aster Atti∣cus repeus. The fourth is called by Clusius Aster tertius, Austriacus primus, or Aster Pannonicus tertius, of Bauhinus Aster luteus major folijs Succisa. The fifth is Clusius his Aster Austriacus secundus; of Tabermontanus, Bubonium lu∣teum: of Gerard Aster Italorum but falsely, of Lugdunensis Bellis lutea: of Bauhinus Aster montanus luteus Salicis glabro folio. The sixt is Clusius his Aster lanuginoso folio sive quintus: of Tabarmontanus Aster luteo flore: of Gerard Aster hirs us: of Bauhinus Aster luteus hirsutus Salicis folio. The seventh is Clusius his Austriacus quartus: of Bauhinus Aster luteus linaria, rigido glabro folio. The eighth came first to us by the Virginian name Aquascomense; some thinke that the Virginian name of the ninth is Wisanck, but falsely: but the tenth and eleventh without names, and therefore we have given them such names as seemed to us most convenient, and as are in their titles, untill some fitter may be given by other. The eleventh Lobel in his observations calleth Aster Conyzoides, as I and all others doe, but the twelfth was so entituled by Boelius, as it is here set downe. The thirteenth is called generally Aster Atticus Italorum purpureo or caeruleo flore. The fourteenth is a species of the last Atticus Italorum flore purpu∣reo, whereof both Clusius and Camerarius make mention. The fifteenth is Clusius his Aster Austriacus quintus, which he saith may be called Amellus Alpinus, in that it doth resemble the Amellus of Virgil. Lugdunensis calleth it Aster purpureus montanus. Bauhinus Aster montanus caeruleus magno flore folijs oblongis. The sixteenth Bauhinus onely remembreth by the name of Aster hirsutus Austriacus caruleus magno flore. The seventeenth Lobel calleth Aster minor Narbonensium Tripolij flore, linariae folio medio purpureus. The two last have their names given by us, as we thinke sittest for them. There hath beene formerly some controversie among Writers, what plant should bee Aster Atticus of Dioscorides, divers allowing of that Aster Atticus flore luteo, which is set forth in this &amp; my former Booke, whereof the 2. here set forth, as I said, is a kind nearest thereunto, others refusing it utterly, because it hath no purple colour in the flower, which that of Dioscorides hath, both in the description thereof by him, (as many doe translate that part in the description of the flower, to be purpureum &amp; luteum, whereas the new Editions have Purpureum luteumve ) and in the vertues, where he saith that divers say, that the purple of the flower, or in the flower, is good to heale the sores of the groine; and rather allowing of the 13. kinde here set forth, as likewise in my other Booke (whereof those with purple flowers here described are species) to be both the true Aster Atticus of Dioscorides, and the true Amellus of Virgil, which he describeth in the fourth Booke of his Georgicks, and that most plainely in these Verses. Est etiam flos in pratis, cui nomen Amello Fecere agricolae, facilis quaerentibus herba: Namque uno ingentem tollit de cespite sylvam. Aureus ipse, sed in folijs, quae plurima circum Funduntur, viola sublucet purpura nigra. Sapè deum nexis ornatae torquibus arae. Asper in ore saep r: tonsis in vallibus illum Pastores, &amp; curvae legunt propè flumina Melle. Yet Guilandinus misliketh hereof, and although he allow of it, to be After Atticus, yet not to be Amellus, whom as I take it, Matthiolus doth convince: he nameth no man, but saith, that some would make that hearbe, which by the judgement of all men, is Chelidonium minus, to be the Amellus of Virgil; which neither the flower, being all yellow, though standing like a Starre, not having any purple colour therein, which Virgil saith Amellus hath; for his words Aureus ipse, which is the flower, hath in folijs quae plurima circumfunduntur, the purple colour of the vio∣let, but not so faire, and cannot be referred to the leaves of that plant: neither the stature or forme of Chelidonium, which is low lying upon the ground, and Amellus rising high, and bearing a bush of flowers at the toppe of his stalke, as Virgil saith, uno ingentem tollit de cespite sylvam: neither the time of the flowring, for Chelidonium flow∣reth in the Spring, and Amellus in the end of Summer, when the fields are mowed, as he saith, Tonsis in vallibus ill , Pastores legunt prope flumina Melle. Pena and Lobel in their Adversaria also, would make Tripolium to be the nea∣rest unto Amellus of Virgil, because the flower is purple, starre fashion, and yellow in the middle, and that it usually groweth in moist places, neare unto Rivers, as Virgil saith of his: which hath the greatest probability next unto this, of any other hearbe, but Virgil his words, asper in ore sapor, which is harsh or binding, agreeth not unto Tripolium: and because I find no other Author agreeing thereunto, and that this is most commonly received of all, I dare not forsake so great reasons, and so many judgements, and adhere to this one of Pena and Lobel. 
The Vertues. Dioscorides saith, that the purple leaves of the flowers boyled in water, was held to bee good for the paines and sore in the groine, as also the use of the fresh hearbe in oyle to anoynt the place, and likewise the dryed flowers, to be taken into the right hand of the patient, bound to the place that is grieved, it taketh away inflammations in those places, it helpeth children also that have the falling sicknesse: and those that are troubled with the Quinsie. It hel∣peth an hot stomacke, the inflammations of the eyes, and the fundament when it is fallen downe, if an oyntment be made of the greene hearbe, and old Hogs grease; it helpeth them that are bitten by a mad Dogge, as Cratevas saith; it consumeth the swellings of the throat, and driveth away Serpents if it be burned. Galen saith it is called Bubo∣nium, not onely because, that being anoynted, but also that being hung or tyed to the places, it healeth the sores in the groine: for it hath not onely a digesting, but also no small cooling quality, and repressing, being of a mixt pro∣perty like the Rose. Pliny addeth that being bound to the place, it is profitable for the paine in the hippes. 
CHAP. XLVI. Ruta. Rue, or Hearbe grace. T Here are foure or five speciall sorts of hearbes called by the name of Rue, having little likenesse thereun∣to, but onely some shew in the leaves, which are these. First Ruta Canina, whereof I meane to speake among the Scrophularias. The second is Ruta pratensis, called also Thalictrum, which you shall finde in the next Classis. The third is Ruta Muraria, which shall bee spoken of among other Capillare hearbes, and the fourth is Ruta Capraria sive Galega, which shall be declared among the Alexiphari Counterpoisons. Divers other hearbes have beene entituled Ruta, by singular Authors, as you shall finde among the names of them, whereof to make mention here were needlesse; I rather referre you to the places specified. But of our ordinary or garden Rue, common enough through all this Realme, there are some other sorts thereof, which are here to be remembred with them, although not usually bred, or to be easily kept in the gardens of our land. 
1. Ruta hortensis major. The greater ordinary garden Rue or Hearbe of Grace. This ordinary garden Rue groweth up with hard whitish wooddy stalkes branching forth on all sides, and bea∣ring thereon sundry long leaves divided into many small ones, being somewhat thick and round pointed, and of a darke bluish greene colour: the flowers that stand at the toppes consist of foure small yellow leaves, with a greene button in the midst, compassed about with sundry small yellow threads, which growing ripe, containeth within it small blacke seed: the roote is white and wooddy, spreading farre in the ground, and abiding many yeares. 
2. Ruta Hortensis minor. The lesser garden Rue. This Rue is so like the ordinary garden kind, that it will deceive many that doe not heedfully regard i , and I my selfe am halfe perswaded that it is the next sort of Rue, which is the greater sort of wild Rue, transplanted and a∣nured in gardens. It riseth not up so high, neither beareth so great stalkes; the leaves are very like the common garden kind, but that they are smaller, and of a blacker or darker greene colour: it doth more seldome give any flower with us, and the smell thereof is not so strong, nor the taste altogether so bitter as the other; and herein con∣sisteth the difference betweene them. 
3. Ruta sylvestris major. The greater wild Rue. This wild Rue, is in all things like unto the garden Rue, but that the leaves are somewhat longer and narrower, and the colour of them are darker, more tending to greene: the stalke is strong and wooddy, in the naturall places, much more than in these colder climates, but riseth not fully so high as our garden kinde, where it scarse attaineth to any wooddinesse: the flowers also are yellow, composed of foure yellow leaves like unto it; and small seed in 1. Ruta hortensis major. The greater ordinary garden Rue of Hearbe or Grace. 
3. Ruta sylvestris major. The greater wilde Rue. 
foure square heads (and sometimes in three square heads) like the other. This is of a more strong and virulent scent and taste than the garden kind. 
4. Ruta sylvestris minor. Small wild Rue. This small Rue, is also like unto the former, but that the leaves hereof are much more finely cut than it, both shorter and smaller, but as strong, or rather more than the other, both in scent, taste, and quality: the stalke here∣of riseth not so high as the other, but brancheth at the toppe, bearing yellowish small flowers, and small seed in foure-square heads, like thereunto: the roote is long and wooddy. 
5. Ruta montana. Mountaine Rue. This Rue is the smallest of all the rest, whose leaves are the finest cut, and divided of them also, so that it hath scarse the face or forme of any leafe of Rue; they are also much whiter in colour than any of them, and the most virulent and pernicious of all the rest, both in scent and taste: the flowers and seed are like unto the other sorts, but the smallest of them. 
6. Ruta sylvestris Syriaca sive Harmala. Wild Assirian Rue. The Assirian wild Rue riseth up with many darke round greene stalkes, about a foote high or more, whereon are set divers long leaves, divided into many parts, each whereof is longer, thicker, and greener, than the small wilde Rue, but not of so strong or virulent a savour as it, yet somewhat strong, and a little sharpe and bitter: at the tops of the stalkes stand many flowers, consisting of five white leaves, larger than in any of the other sorts of Rue; in the middle whereof riseth up a greene three square head compassed about with many yellow threads: in which three square head when it is ripe, is contained small brownish cornered seed: the roote is thicke, and somewhat yellow∣ish, with divers small fibres annexed to it. 
The Place. The two sorts of Garden Rue are onely nursed up in gardens in all places, yet the second is not so common as the first, but onely kept by a few. The other two wild sorts grow upon the Mountaines in Spaine and Italy, and about Mompelier in France; but how we should beleeve Gerard, who saith some of them grow on the hills in Lancashire and Yorkeshire, you may easily gesse by their abiding our Winters, in gardens, for being of so hot and burning qualities, and growing in hot Countries, not enduring any cold; how should they be naturall to our climate, espe∣cially the more Northerly parts: the fifth in Spaine also, France, and other hot Countries. The last groweth in Syria, from whence it was sent into these Countries: as also in the fields, and about the hedges neare unto Constan∣tinople, as Bellonius saith, in the fifth Chapter of his third Booke of observations. 
The Time. The garden kindes especially the lesser, doth seldome flower in our land, and therefore scarse ever beare good seed. And the wild or Mountaines kindes doe the like. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , Peganum quia caliditate semen genitale coagmentat, the roote of the fifth kinde, as 4. Ruta sylvestris minor. Small wild Rue. 
5. Ruta Montana. Mountaine Rue. 
6. Ruta sylvestris Syriaca sive Harmala. Wild Assirian Rue. 
Dioscorides saith, was called in his time, Moly montanum: and the roote of the Assirian wild kinde, was also as hee saith, called Moly, for the likenesse thereunto, being blacke with∣out, and white within: and Ruta in Latine, of Ruo, for the violent fierce vapours it sendeth forth, causing itching bli∣sters, &amp;c. in English Rue, and Hearbe Grace, or Hearbe of Grace, for the many good properties whereunto it serveth: for without doubt it is a most wholesome hearbe, although bitter and strong, and could our dainty stomacke brooke the use thereof, it would worke singular effects, being skilfully and carefully applyed. The first is called Ruta sativa, or do∣mestica, hortensis, or latifolia &amp; major by all Authors. The se∣cond is called by Tragus Ruta hortensis minor, and by Cordus Ruta sativa minor tenuifolia, Dodonaeus calleth it grave oleus. The third is called Ruta sylvestris of Matthiolus, Lobel, Lug∣dunensis, and others, and is the first of the wilde kindes with Dodonaeus and others, as the fourth is the second wilde with him. The fifth is the smallest wilde Rue, called of Lobel Rutula and Feganum Narbonensium: of Dodonaus Ruta sy∣lvestris minima: of Clusius Ruta montana legitima: of Camera∣rius, and others Ruta sylvestris tenuifolia. The last is called Harmala even in Dioscorides his time, as he saith, and Bafa∣san of others, and so it is called still with most Writers, Harmel, yet some Ruta sylvestris, and Syriaca. The Arabians call it Sadel: the Italians Rutta: the Spaniards Arruda: the French Rue: the Germanes Rauten: the Dutch Ruytte: and we in English Rue, or Hearbe Grace.
The Vertues. Being accounted by the latest best Writers (as I said before) to be the Geum of Pliny, it is as hee saith, not onely good for the diseases of the chest or brest, but good also for stitches or paines of the sides, and to expell crude or raw humours, from the stomacke and belly, by the sweet savour, and warming quality, for which purposes Avens is found by all to be effectuall. It also dissolveth the inward congealed or clotted blood, happening by falls or bruises, or the spitting of blood, the rootes especially either greene or dryed, being boyled in wine and drunke; as also all manner of inward wounds, or outward if they be washed, and bathed therewith, or if they be fistulous to bee inje∣cted. The same decoction also drunke, comforteth the heart, and strengthneth the stomacke, and a cold braine, and therefore is good in the Spring time to open the obstructions of the liver, helpeth the winde collicke by dissolving the wind, and stitches and paines in the sides, and being of a binding quality, helpeth also those that have fluxes, or are bursten, or have a rupture. If foule spots or markes in the face, or other parts of the body be washed therewith, it taketh them away, and leaveth the skin well coloured. The powder of the dryed rootes, or the juyce of them when they are fresh, worketh the same effects that the decoction doth: and in callous ulcers, with the juyce of the rootes, if a little vardigrease be added, it worketh a singular good effect. Some use in the Spring time to put the roote to steepe for a time in wine, which giveth unto it a delicate savour and raste, which they drinke fasting every morning, to comfort the heart, and to preserve it from noysome and infectious vapours of the plague, or any poi∣son that may annoy it; as also to helpe digestion, and to warme a cold stomacke, troubled with grosse or foule humours, and to open the obstruction of the liver and spleene. Some doe use to lay the rootes dryed among gar∣ments, to perfume them with the smell thereof, and to keepe away Mothes, &amp;c. from them. The Cinque-foile Avens, because it participateth with the other, both in smell and taste, although weaker, cannot but likewise par∣take with them in the qualities aforesaid, yet not so effectuall, although I know not any Author hath made mention of any experimentall effect thereof. The Mountaine Avens, as Matthiolus saith, is found to be as good as the ordi∣nary, for all the diseases whereunto it is applyed, and worketh more forceably and speedily in them all. 
CHAP. XLVIII. Calamus Aromaticus. The Aromaticall Reed; and Acorus legitimus Dioscoridis, sive falso Calamus odo atus offici ∣rum. The true Acorus of Dioscorides, or sweet smelling Flagge, untruely called Calamus in the Apothecaries shoppes. I Have joyned both these plants in one Chapter, for the transposition of the names, and the sweet smel∣ling properties the one doth enjoy, although falsly appropriated to the other, &amp; much differing both in face and manner of growing. 
1. Calamus Aromaticus Matthioli. Matthiolus his Aromaticall Reed. This Aromaticall Reed groweth with an upright tall stalke, set full of joynts, at certaine spaces up to the toppe, (not hollow as divers other Canes and Reeds are, but stuffed full of a white spongious pith, which is of a gummy taste, somewhat bitter, and of the bignesse of a mans finger) and at every one of them, a long narrow leafe, of a darke browne greene colour, smelling very sweet, differing therein from all other kindes of Reeds: on the toppes whereof groweth a bushy or Featherlike panicle, like unto those of the common Reed: the roote is knobby, with divers heads thereat, whereby it encreaseth and shooteth forth new heads of leaves, smelling also very sweet, ha∣ving a little binding taste, and sharpe withall. This is the description thereof extent in sundry Authors since Mat∣thiolus, which because it so neare resembleth the common Reed, is supposed by divers to bee but first feined by Matthiolus, although all others follow him therein, therefore I give you not their figure: but the figure of the dry∣ed stalkes that Camerarius and Clusius set forth, that all may see what manner of thing that Calamus is, and the whole figure of the plant, as Alpinus setteth it forth, in lib de plantis exoticis. 
1. Calami Aromatici Syriaci ut fertur veri stipites siccae. The dry stalkes of the true Aromaticall Reed as it is supposed. 
2. Calamus Aromaticus Syriacus vel Arabicus supposit tius The supposed true Syrian or Arabian Aromaticall Reed. 
 
2. Calamus Aromaticus Syriacus vel Arabicus supposititius. The supposed true Syrian, or Arabian Aromaticall Reed. This plant which is supposed by many to be the true Indian Calamus aromaticus, (but much suspected by others) riseth up from a thicke unprofitable roote, three or 4. inches, long, bigge at the head, and small at the bottome, with one, and sometimes more stalkes, two cubits high (saith Bauhinus, who describeth it from the sight of the plant he received from Doctor Doldius: but halfe a cubite high, or somewhat more, saith Alpinus lib. de plantis exoticis ) being straight, round, smooth, and easie to breake into splinters, full of joynts, and about a fingers thicknesse, hol∣low and spongy within, of a whitish yellow colour (like the pith of an elder, saith Alpinus, or like other Reeds, as Bauhinus saith) the stalke is divided into other branches, and they againe into other smaller ones, two usually set together at a joynt, with two leaves under them likewise, very like unto the leaves of Lysimachia, the Willow hearbe, or Loose-strife, but lesser, being an inch broad, and an inch and a halfe long, compassing the stalke at the bottoms, with sundry veines running all the length of them: from the joynts rise long stalkes, bearing sundry small yellow flowers made of leaves, like also unto Lysimachia, with a small pointell in the middle, after which follow small blackish long heads, or seed vessels, pointed at the end, containing within them small blackish seed: the stalke hath little or no scent, yet not unpleasant saith Alpinus, being bitter, with a little acrimony therein: but Bauhinus saith, it is of an aromaticall taste, and very bitter. This (saith Alpinus ) the Arabians and Egyptians doe use and call it Caessabeldarira, that is Calamus Aromaticus, &amp; from them all other Christian nations have so accepted it: but how improbable let any others judge that will beleeve, Theophrastus, Dioscorides, Galen, Pliny, and others who doe all call it a Reed, when as this you see is none, and as Theophrastus &amp; Pliny say differeth not in forme from other Reeds: for Pliny reckoneth up 29 sorts of Reeds, whereof this is one in their times, and for the sweetnesse thereof, onely used in sweet oyntments: for the taste also; Dioscorides saith it hath some astringency, and a little acrimony therein, but mentioneth no bitternesse, when as this hath more bitternesse in it than any other taste, which could not be forgotten by Dioscorides if his had any in it. This plant groweth both in sundry moist places in Egypt, as also by the lake Gennasareth in Iudaea, and in divers places also of Syria and Arabia: and for ought that wee can perceive, is rather a kinde of yellow Lysimachia than any other plant. 
3. Acorus verus sive Calamus officinarum. The sweet smelling Flagge. This sweet smelling Flagge hath many flaggy long and narrow fresh greene leaves, two foote long apeece, or more, yet oftentimes somewhat brownish at the bottome, the one rising or growing out of the side of the other, in the same manner that other Flagges of Flower-deluces grow, which are thin on both sides, and ridged or thicke in the middest, the longest for the most part standing in the midst, and some of them as it were curled or plaited to∣wards the ends or toppes of them, smelling very sweet, as well when they are greene and fresh, as when they are dryed, and so kept a long time; which doe so abide in a garden along time, as though it never did, or never would beare flower: the leaves every yeare dying downe to the ground, and shooting out fresh every Spring, but after two, three, or foure yeare abiding in a place without removing, besides the leaves it shooteth forth (not any stalke as other Flower-deluces doe) a narrow long leafe by it selfe, 3. Acorus verus sive Calamus officinarum. The sweet smelling Flagge. 
flat like unto the other leaves, especially from the middle thereof upwards; but from the bottome to the middle it is thicker, narrower, or founder, where it beginneth to grow flat, at which place commeth forth one long round head, very seldome two, in forme &amp; bignes like unto the Catkin or Ag∣let of the Hasselnut tree, growing upright, and of the length thicknesse of ones finger, or rather bigger, set with severall small lines and divisions, like unto a greene Pine apple, of a purplish greene colour for the most part, out of which bunches, shoote forth small pale whitish flowers, consisting of foure small leaves a peece, without any so good scent as the leaves, falling quickly away, and not giving any seed, that ever I could observe or understand: the roote is thicke and long, lying under the upper face of the ground, shooting forward, and with small rootes as suckers on all sides like unto the garden Valerian, whitish on the outside, or greenish if it lye above the ground; and more pale or whitish on the inside, with many joynts thereabouts, and whereat, it hath or doth shoote forth, long thicke fibres underneath, whereby it taketh strong hold in the ground, of a firme or fast substance, yet not hard or wooddy, but easie to be cut, of a sweet scent, and somewhat bitter taste. 
The Place. The first is thought by Matthiolus and others, to grow in India, Syria, &amp; Iudea. The dry stalkes of the a are said to grow at the foot of Mount Libanus in Syria, not far from Tripoli, in the wet grounds there: the other as is said before. The other Calamus of the shops, or true Acorus groweth in many places of Turky, (in moist grounds, for so with us it joyeth and flou∣risheth better than in dry) from whence the largest roots, the firmest, whitest, &amp; sweetest are brought unto us: but it grow∣eth also in Russia, and those other places thereabouts, in very great plenty: but the rootes being dryed, are more lanke or small, not so firme or white, nor of so singular a good scent. 
The Time. These Reeds are strangers not growing with us, we having no further knowledge of them: the sweet smelling Flagge beareth his catkin in the beginning or middle of Iuly and August. 
The Names. The first and second have their names in their titles, as their Authors have called them, but whether either of them be the true Calamus Aromaticus of Dioscorides, Galen, and others, it were worthy the knowledge; for although it be commonly so taken to be, yet Clusius in part improving it, and I shewing more doubts, doe make it the more improbable: and it is very certaine, that we have no true Calamus Aromaticus brought unto us in these dayes, for even thorow all Turkie, with both Physicians and Druggists, or Merchants, (for they have no Apothecaries such as are in Christendome) it is not seene or knowne, for the Arabian word of Cassab eldherira, which is Calamus Aromaticus, they understand not what it is, and being demanded for it by that name, (although the Arabian tongue be very frequent among them) they still will give contrary things for it, as Matthiolus in his Epistles, and Bellonius in his observations doe declare. Now whether it should be called Calamus Aromaticus, or odoratus, it is worth the scanning also, because very many doe thinke the word aroma, from whence commeth Aromaticus, is the same with odor and odoratus; but I finde Garcias a very learned Writer, and others also to contrary that opinion; saying that the Arabian words, derire or dherira, signifying aroma, (as Cassab doth Arundo or Calamus ) is properly a drogue or drugge, whether they be spices that smell sweet, or any other thing used in medicine, that hath either a strong or no smell, for so the Hebrew word deror signifyeth also, as Mor deror, Myrrha aroma, or aromatizans, the best Myrrhe, in the Scripture Exod. the 30. chapter, and 23. verse, was appointed among other spices to make the holy anoynting oyle, and in the 34. verse of the same Chapter, with Galbanum which hath no sweet scent, as I thinke every one knoweth, and other gums to make perfume to burne: and Myrrhe although it be reckoned with Aloes and Cassia, as a sweet thing, in many places of the Scripture, yet it is not sweet to us, as wee account sweet things in these dayes, and Myrrhe and Aloes are called Aromata, in the 19. chapter of Saint Iohns Gospell. Garcias saith Calamus aromaticus he knew well, and was of much use in India, both with himselfe, and other Physitians, as also with many persons of high and low degree, but any to be odoratus sweet, he knew not, but onely Iuncus odorat , and I thinke Pliny first broached that errour in numbring up his sorts of Reeds, calleth one odorotus, and therefore judged to be this, and therefore Hippocrates calleth it Myrepsicus, that is unguentarius or unguentis petitus. And againe whether that roote that is generally called, Calamus odoratus and Aromaticus of the Apothecaries and others now adayes, be the true Calamus Aromaticus of the ancient Writers. Brassavolus Ferrariensis, and Fuchsius in their Writings, doe hold that opinion, that the Calamus odoratus of the shops, which is a root and not a Reed, or a stalke of a Reed, is the true Calamus aromaticus of the Ancients: which, that it cannot bee so, let us first scan the name, which is Calamus, or Arundo a Reed, which the Ancients alwayes speake of, and name no roote thereof to bee used, but the stalke or reed it selfe, and which Theophrastus and Pliny say, differeth not, but is like unto other sorts of Reeds; although it groweth in Arabia and Syria, as well as in India, and all men plainely see, that this roote of Calamus so called in shops, is neither a reed, nor the root of a reed, for being seene growing greene, as it is now adayes in many places, and as it is described before, there is no correspondency of it with a reed, (and truely to see the face of things growing, hath brought many things to knowledge, which else would have lien in perpetuall ignorance and darknesse: how much therefore the world is indebted to those that are diligent searchers out of the genuine plants of the Antients, both by their face or forme, and by their properties and vertues, let the good and honest acknowledge, let the vile or base neglect or contemne.) Secondly, the Ancients declaring the other notes, whereby it may be knowne say in this maner, that which is the yellower and fuller of joynts is the best, (the thicker and shorter saith Pliny, somewhat pliant) breaking into long shivers, (not brittle or breaking short) the fistula cane or pipe being plena araneorum, or as Pliny saith, inest fistulae araneum or araneus quod florem vocant, raestantior est cum numerosior or numerosus, which can be no otherwise interpreted, then that the pith in the middle of the cane or pipe, which they call the flower, the more the better, is like unto a Spiders cobweb, (that is full of threads) and clammy in chewing, of an astringent taste, somewhat quicke, and biting upon the tongue: now although some of these notes or markes may be found in that bastard Calamus of the shops; yet that is not enough, (for that hath deceived most men, to judge a thing to be right, because of one or two notes agreeing, the rest being not answera∣ble,) but all the notes must agree, for the false Calamus breaketh short and not into shivers, it is not clammy in chewing, nor hath it any fistula or pipe full of that cobweb like pith: by which comparison all men may plainely see, that our Calamus is not that of the Ancients, and that we are utterly destitute of the true Calamus aromaticus of Dioscorides, and the rest of the ancient Writers: and yet so perverse are many in these dayes, that they will still persist in their old errours, because they were bred in them, and will know no other, although they bee told them: but what may be the best substitute thereof in medicines, many have thought diversly. In that booke of sub∣stitutes that is falsly attributed to Galen, Sphagnum: that is Muscus arboreus, the mosse that groweth upon trees) is appointed, which divers have accepted, and Matthiolus among the rest, but as he saith examining, and considering the matter more seriously; he is not ashamed to retract that opinion, and condemne it quite, as erronious, judge∣ing no correspondence, but rather a meere contrariety, to be betweene Calamus Aromaticus, a simple of that worth, rarity, and quality, and the mosse of trees, which although it be a little sweet in smell, yet of no other quality equall thereunto. Some therefore appoint the seed of Nigella Romana, both for the scent and sharpe quicke taste, and o∣ther properties incident thereunto. Others would have the Galanga major to be the substitute, for the heating and opening qualities, they thinke it hath; but both the one and the other are hotter in their degrees by much, than the Calamus of the Ancients is: Matthiolus judgeth they shall not doe much amisse, that take the rootes of Angelica in the stead thereof, because it expelleth both urine and womens courses, and besides the many other good properties therein, it is found by manifest proofes to be singular good to expell any poison of venemous creatures, or other∣waies, and a soveraigne remedy against the plague, and pestilentiall ayres. But the most and best doe agree, that the Squinant or Iuncus odoratus commeth nearest both in degrees and qualities unto it, or else that false Calamus of the shops, is the next best and nearest substitute thereunto, although it doe exceede it in heate, the lesse being to be ta∣ken, agreeing in many qualities therewith, and may also safely be used, untill the true Calamus bee better knowne, and brought in use. Acorus is called in Greeke , because , id est, pupillis sive aciei oculorum caliginosae medeatur, it helpeth to cleare a dimme eyesight. Monardus, Tragus, Matthiolus, Cordus, Gesner, Came∣rarius, Lugdunensis, Lobel, and Clusius, doe all call it Acorus or Acorum, and perperam Calamus Aromicticus officina∣rum. Anguillara calleth it Calamus noster Iridis species. Amat , Caesalp s, Brasaevolus and Fuchsius Calamus aro∣maticus vulgo. There hath beene formerly great ignorance of the true Acarus of Dioscorides, for in that it was ge∣nerally taken and used for Calamus, it did amuse them the more, not imagining it to be Acorus, untill some more in∣dustrious and diligent, finding it growing in Turkie, and comparing it with that they had read thereof, perswaded themselves certainely to be the true and right Acorus; and Matthiolus, first after them that so sound it, as I thinke published it to the world, and Lobel and Clusius after him, have now so well perswaded most men except onely the most unlearned, or the most wilfull, that few make any doubt or scruple thereof; yet some still would make the Galanga major to be the true Acorus, but it is knowne certainely, that the Galanga major groweth in Syria, and hath neither leaves or rootes like unto a Flower-delu e, as Dioscorides describeth his Acorus to have, but rather hath leaves like unto Reeds, nor doe the rest of the faculties of Galanga answer these of Acorus. 
The Vertues. If this Calamus aromaticus be the right Calamus of Dioscorides, then he saith it hath these faculties. It provoketh urine, and boyled with grasse rootes and smallage seed, it helpeth those that have the dropsie. It helpeth the defects of the reines, is profitable against the Strangury, or making water by drops; as also for those that are bursten bellied: it provoketh womens termes or courses, other drunke or applyed to the place: the sumes thereof taken thorow a Reed or Tobacco-pipe, either by it selfe, or with some dryed Turpentine, cureth them that have a cough: it is put into bathes for women to sit in, as also into Glisters to ease paines. It is used in mollifying oyles and plaisters, that serve to ripen hard impostu s, as also for the sweet scent thereof. Galen saith that because it is temperate, be∣tweene heate and cold, somewhat astringent, and having a very little acrimony, it is profitably used among other things, that helpe the liver and stomacke, doth gently procure urine, and is put with other things into omentations for the mother, when it is troubled with inflammations, and gently to procure the courses; it is as he saith, hot and dry in the second degree, but is more drying than heating, and hath therein a little tenuity of parts, as is in all sweet smelling things. The Acorus or sweet smelling Flagge as Dioscorides saith, is good to provoke urine, if the decocti∣on thereof be drunke: It helpeth to ease the paines of the sides, liver and breast; as also to ease the g ping paines of the coll e and crumpe, and good for those that are bursten: It helpeth likewise to waste the spleene, and to bring helpe to them that have the strangury, and ceth those from danger that are bitten by any venemous Serpent. It is very profitably used among other things, in bathes for women to fit it, as the Iris or Flower-deluce rootes are; the juyce dropped into the eyes, dryeth rheumes therein, and cleereth the sight, taking away all filmes or such like that may offend them. The roote is of use in Antidotes against all venome or poison, or infection: thus saith Dioscorides: furthermore, it is a speciall remedy to helpe a stinking breath, if the roote be taken fasting every mor∣ning for some time together. The hot fumes of the decoction made in water, and taken in at the mouth thorow a funnell, are excellent good to helpe them that are troubled with the cough: a dram of the powder of the rootes of Acorus, with as much Cinamon, taken in a draught of Wormewood wine, is singular good to comfort and streng∣then a cold weake stomacke. The decoction thereof drunke is good against convulsions or crampes, and for falls or inward bruises. An oxymell or Syrupe made of Acorus in this manner, is wonderfull effectuall for all cold spleenes, and cold livers. Take of the fresh rootes of Acorus one pound, bruise them after they are cleane washed and pickt, steepe them for three dayes in vinegar, after which time let them be boyled together, to the consumption of the one halfe of the vinegar, which being strained forth set to the fire againe, putting thereinto as much honey as is sufficient for the vinegar to bring it into a Syrupe: an ounce of this Syrupe taken in the morning with a small draught of the decoction of the same rootes, is sufficient for every dose. The whole rootes preserved either in Su∣gar or Honey, is effectuall also for the same purposes: but the greene rootes preserved are more desired than the dryed rootes that are steeped, and afterwards preserved. The rootes bruised and boyled in wine, and applyed warme to the testicles that are swollen, dissolveth the tumour, and easeth the paines; it likewise mollifieth hard tu∣mours in any other parts of the body. It is verily beleeved of many, that the leaves or rootes of Acorus tyed to a hive of Bees, stayeth them from wandring or flying away, and draweth a greater resort of others thereunto. It is also affirmed, that none shall be troubled with any fluxe of blood, or paines of the crampe, that weareth the hearbe and roote about them. The rootes of Acorus or Calamus, as it is usually called, are used among other things to make sweet powders, to lay among linnen and garments, and to make sweet waters to wash hand, gloves, or other things to perfume them. 
CHAP. XLIX. Juncus odoratus sive Schaenanthos. The sweet Rush or Camels Hay. B Ecause through all the sorts of Grasses and Rushes, I finde none sweet, fit for this Classis, but this which I bring here to your consideration, let me, following the like method of Dioscorides, insert this Rush, and the other that shall follow in the next Chapter, in the end of this part of sweet hearbes, as a comple∣ment to the same. Of this sort of sweet Rush, I finde two sorts, a finer and a courser, or the true and a bastard kinde, although the ancient Writers have made mention but of one sort, which is the fi∣nest and truest. 
1. Juncus odoratus tenuior. The finer sweet smelling Rush. 1. Iuncus odora us tenuior. The finer sweet smelling Rush. 
This finer Rush hath many tufts or heads of long rushe-like leaves, thick set together, one compassing another at the bottome, and shooting forth upwards, the outermost whereof are bigger or grosser than those that grow within, which are a foote long and better, small, round and stiffe, or hard, and much smaller from a little above the bottome of them, than any Rush with us) of a quicke and spicy taste, somewhat pleasant, and of a fine sweet gentle or soft scent: thus it hath growne with us, but bore neither flower, nor shewed any appearance of stalke, by reason the Win∣ter deawes perished it quickly: but in the naturall places it beareth divers strong, round, hard joynted stalkes, having divers short brownish or purplish huskes on the toppes, containing within them mossie whitish short threads or haires, wherein lyeth a chaffie seed: the roote is stringy or full of long fibres, which are very hard as they are brought to us, from their naturall habitati∣ons, which have the smallest scent or taste, of any other part thereof, for so much as ever I could observe, either by the greene or dryed leaves that have beene brought unto us: yet Matthiolus saith, he had some plants, that rose with him of seed, whose rootes were-sweet, some losing their scent; but the leaves and rushes of his were bigger than ours here described; having as hee saith leaves like Sedge, which is Carex or Sparganium, or like Zea, which is a large, or great kinde of wheat; whereby I guesse it was of the greater or grosser kinde next hereunto following. 
2. Iuncus odoratus crassior. The grosser sweet smelling Rush. This greater or grosser Rush, groweth in the same manner, that the former doth, but is greater in every part thereof, and lesse sweet also, as well as lesse sharpe and hot in taste; whereby it see∣meth to be a kinde of it selfe, that groweth so great in the naturally, as well as forraigne parts; or that it being the same kinde, by growing in moister places, acquireth thereby the larger habi∣tude. 
The Place. They grow naturally in Arabia, Syria, Mesopotamia, and all that Tract of the Easterne Countries, as also in some places of Africa. 
The Time. As I declared in the description it commeth not to flowring in these colder Countries, and therefore Clusius and others have thought it to be an annuall plant: but assuredly it dyeth not every yeare in those hotter parts, and flowreth in the Summer time. 
The Time. It is called in Greeke a loris &amp; funibus dicitur: odoratus, and of some unguentarius, quia unguentis dicatur, in Latine Iuncus, a jungendo. Some doe call it Sch nanthos quasi Schae∣nianthos flos Iunci, and corruptly in shops Squinanthum. Some also call it Iunc odoratus rotundus, to put a diffe∣rence between unc vulgaris rotundus, and the sweet Cyperus, that is called ncus odoratus angulosus vel triangularis. It is called also Palea Mecha and Pastus Chamelorum: in English the sweet smelling Rush, or Camels H , ace ng to the L tti e ames, or Squinant if you will. There hath beene much diversity among the later Writter concerning the nan , some thinking it not to be true which we have in shops, some making the great Galanga to be the roote of the sweet Rush of Dioscorides, as the Monkes that wrote Comentaries upon Mesues; Fuchsius likewise and Anguillara alleadge many reasons, why they thinke that those small Rushes that are used now adaye Apothecaries shops, are not the true Iuncus of Dioscorides and others, both for that they are small peeces of ru trawes as it were, and not flowers or stalkes, or rootes, which Dioscorides saith are to be had in use, and th ey have (they say) not any quicke biting taste, nor sweet scent of a Rose, all which Di∣oscorides saith plainely may be found in his Iuncus: concerning whose reasons this I say, that the flowers are truely seldome brought over unto us, and when they are brought, they are found of little quicknesse in taste, or sweetnes in smell: and Galen complaineth that in his time they were very scarsely to be heard: and indeed it seemeth proba∣ble, that because those small Rushes, which are how usually in the Druggists and Apothecaries shops to be had, are found to be more quicke and hot in taste, than either the other stalkes, flowers, or rootes that are brought us, these are and have beene received into more use, and the other flowers are left of, or quite neglected to bee used, which hath caused the Merchants likewise not to aske or seeke for them to bring them.
The Vertues. Dioscorides saith it provoketh urine and womens courses, discusseth all swellings and wind, but troubleth the head a little: it gently cu etly or breaketh humours, and digesteth them, and loosneth the breathing places of the veines; the decoction of the flowers (saith he) drunke, stayeth the spitting of blood, and is conducible to the griefes and diseases of the stomake, lungs, liver and reynes. It is also put into Antidotes against poison and the venome of Serpents. The roote hereof is held to be of an astringent property, and therefore is more effectuall for those that have a loathing in their stomackes to their meate, a dram thereof taken with the like quantity of pepper every morning fasting for certaine dayes together, is a very good remedy for those that have the dropsie, and for convul∣sions or crampes: the decoction thereof is profitable for women to sit therein, that are troubled with the mother, for as Galen saith it openeth obstructions, digesteth crudities, expelleth corrupt humours, cutteth tough flegme, and consumeth congealed matter in the body, and therefore it is of excellent good use, for the stopping of urine or wo∣mens courses, taken either in drinke or by fomentation, it allayeth the inflammations of the liver, stomacke, and bo∣dy: the rootes doe binde more, and the flowers are more hot, but in all the parts thereof there is astriction, in some mere, in others lesse, and therefore it is very profitably mixed with those medicines that serve to stay blee∣ding. It is used to be boyled in the broth of a chickin (I meane the whole plant) as very helpefull to ease the paines of the wombe, that women feele after their childing, the powder thereof is singular good for the sores of the mouth, and for all creeping ulcers; and taken with wine and vinegar, it is effectuall for those that have an ulcer in their stomacke, if the stomacke or belly be fomented with the decoction thereof, it taketh away all inflammations therein, and easeth the paines. 
CHAP. L. Cyperus. Sweet Cyperus, or English Galinga. T O finish this first part of sweet hearbes, I have some sorts of sweet Cyperus to describe unto you, others which are not sweet, I shall speake of in their proper place: yet unto these I thinke good to adjoyne the Trasi dulce, for the neere resemblance in face and forme unto the others, and for the pleasantnesse in taste, though not in smell. 
1. Cyperus rotundus odoratus vulgatior. The more common round rooted sweet Cyperus. This round rooted sweet Cyperus shooteth forth many heads of long and narrow leaves, somewhat ridged in the middle, every leafe seeming thereby to be three square, and somewhat hard and rough in handling, and sweet in scent: among these leaves rise many smooth square stalkes, about three foote high, stuffed with a white pith, and not hollow) without any knot or joynt therein, unto the toppes, where there stand a few short leaves, and many small panicles, or chaffie greene spikes or eares of small leaves above them, which after containe within them the seed: the roote is composed of many long and round blackish browne small rootes, fastned together by long strings, of the bignesse of small Olives, or the greater Filipendula rootes: of a sweet scent even while they are greene, but more when they are dry, and of a bitter taste, somewhat like unto Galanga. 
We have had a smaller sort hereof brought us from Spaine by Boelius, not differing from this, Alter Hu∣milus Hi∣spani us. but i the lownesse of the stalke, not being a foote high, and in being smaller also in leafe and roote. 
2. Cyperus rotundus odoratus Syriacus major. The greater Assirian sweet Cyperus. Of this kinde also there hath beene one brought out of Syria and Egypt, whose rootes and leaves were somewhat larger than the former, the stalke being somewhat shorter, the scent of the rootes somewhat stronger and quicker, and of a browne colour, on the outside else not differing in any thing. 
3. Cyperus rotundus odoratus Syriacus m nor. The lesser Assirian round rooted sweet Cyperus. There is also another lesser sort brought both from Syria and Candy, being more rough, whose rootes and leaves are lesser by the halfe than the last, the stalkes also shorter than the small Spanish, but not differing in any other thing. 
1. Cyperus totundus odoratus vulgatior. The rare common round rooted sweet Cyperus. 
3. Cyperus rotundus odoratus Syria minor. The lesser Assirian round rooted sweet Cypen 
 
4. Cyperus longus odoratus. The ordinary sweet Cyperus, or English Galinga. This ordinary sweet Cyperus hath his leaves long, and as it were three square like the former, and as roughe hard in handling also: the stalkes are smooth, stuffed with a white matter, like as the others are, and three-square like the other, rising somewhat higher, and having some short narrow leaves at the toppes of them, and small long panicles like unto the other in all things, so that they are hardly discerned asunder above ground; the onely diffe∣rence consisting in the roote, which in this is long and round, of a blackish browne colour on the out-side, and whi∣tish within, full and firme, creeping under the superficies of the earth round about, whereby it is quickly increased, and hath also a very good sweet scent, as well greene as dry, yet more being dry than when it is greene and fresh. 
5. Cyperus dulcis rotundus esculentus, Trasi dulce vocatus. The most delicate sweet Cyperus, or Rush Nut. The leaves hereof are long and narrow like the other, with a thicke ridge in the middle, and sharpe pointed, a foote and a halfe in length; among which rise up the stalkes, smooth, without joynts, three-square, and a cubi high, or more; at the toppes whereof stand five or sixe short narrow leaves, compassing the stalke, and standing like a starre, from among which come forth pale yellowish spiked eares, which are flowers, wherein lyeth the seed, when their colour is thorowly wasted and decayed: the rootes are small, long and round, and many of them smaller at the one end, than at the other, hanging or growing at the ends of long strings, somewhat like unto the manner of growing of the Virginia Potatoes, of a pale reddish colour on the outside, and white and firme within, of the bignesse of beanes; of no sweet scent, nor bitter or aromaticall taste like the other, but pleasant to the taste, eating like Chesnuts, or rather more delicate. 
The Place. The first is found in moist and moorish grounds, both on Mountaines, and at the foote of them, in sundry places in Italy and Spaine, as also by Nilus, and other places in Egypt, as Alpinus saith, but is not to bee seene but in ∣dens of the curious, either in France, Germany, the Low-countries, or England, where they hardly endure the wa∣ters, without great care. The second groweth in Syria and Egypt. The third in Syria and Candy. The fourth grow∣eth in many Countries, and as well in Spaine and other hot Countries, where the rootes are sweeter, although smal∣ler, as in these colder Northerne parts on this side the Alpes: it groweth well in our gardens, especially if they bee somewhat moist and not too dry. The last is reported by many Writers to be found naturally growing no where, but neare unto Verona in Italy, but Amatus Lusitanus saith, they are brought out of Aethiopia and S. Thomas Iland. And it is probable by Drepanum in Sicilia, for Baptista Cortesius in his Miscelania Medicinalia meaneth this, as I take it: but are planted in Spaine and other hot Countries for their delight and use. It hardly groweth with us 5. Cyperu dulcis rotundus esculentus Trasi dulce vocatus. The most delicate sweet Cyperus, or Rush Nut. 
5. Cyperus esculentus sive Trasi cu flo . The Rush-Nut flowring. 
to any perfection, neither will it abide the extremities of our Winters; for as Camerarius saith it will rot, if it bee not taken up before Winter, and new set againe in the Spring, after it hath beene well steeped in water. 
The Time. All these round rooted Ciperi doe flower or carry their bushy toppes in August with us, but the ordinary long rooted kinde, giveth his tufted head in the end of Iuly for the most part. 
The Names. The Greeke word Cypirus, Cyperus, and Cyperis, are taken by divers good Authors, to be one and the same plant, others to be different, especially Cypirus from Cyperus, because that Pliny lib. 21. cap. 18. maketh Cyperus to be Gladiolus, whom Gaza in his translation of Theophrastus doth in all places follow, and Pliny in another place calleth the long rooted sweet kind Cyperida: but if I might shew my opinion, I would say that Cyperus, is the sweet round rooted kinde, then which no other was knowne to Dioscorides, and that Cyperis is the long sweet kind as Pliny doth take it: and that Cypirus is the water or marsh Cyperus, my opinion herein be∣ing confirmed by Aristophanes in Dialogo de canis, where he maketh the quire or company to say Saltavimus per Cy∣pirum &amp; Phleum gandentes cantibus: so that hereby Cypirus must of necessity be here understood to bee a water or marsh hearbe, as Phleum is also, among which the Frogges are conversant: , is so called from the round forme of the roote, which is like a small boxe or vessell, in Latine also Cyperus and Iuncus triangularis &amp; angulosus, to distinguish betweene it and the Iuneus laevis or vulgaris, ordinary Rushes, yet Cornelius Celsus calleth it Iuncus quadratus, because at it is likely in those places where he observed it, it did peradventuer beare foure-square stalkes, but it is not so in many other places: in English many doe call it Gallinga or Gallingale after the name the Dutch give it, because the round rootes are somewhat like unto the rootes of the small Gallinga, and yet that kinde with round rootes, is not so frequent in our land as the other with long rootes, to be so called for the likenesse thereof betweene them, I thinke the name is transposed from the one to the other. It is called also as commonly Cyperus, and sweet Cyperus, after the Greeke and Latine names. The first is generally by all Writers, called Cyperus rotun∣dus, and odoratus is added for a distinction betweene this kind that is sweet, and another that hath no scent, which shall be declared in his place. The second Lobel and Camerarius upon Matthiolus, call Cyperus major rotundus Sy∣riacus, and Prosper Alpinus saith the Egyptians call it Hodveg. Rauwolfius calleth it Cyperus Orientalis major vel Babylonicus. The third is called by Lobel Cyperus rotundus Syriacus minor: and Camerarius on Matthiolus calleth it Cyperus minor Creticus. Bauhinus calleth it Cyperus rotundus orientalis minor. The fourth as I said before, is called by Pliny Cyperis, by Matthiolus Cyperus, and by others Cyperus longus. Lobel and Lugdunensis Cyperus longus habi∣tior. Cordus upon Dioscorides calleth it, Cyperus Romanus sive longus. The last is called by Camerarius and Taber∣montanus Cyperus duleis; and so it is probable Theophrastus doth in his 6. booke de causis plantarum, 16. &amp; 17. chap. reckoning Cyperus, (which Gaza translateth Gladiolus in all places following Pliny herein, as is above said) among other sweet rootes to be eaten, Dalechampius upon Pliny, Caesalpinus, Clusius, and Fabius Columnae, take it to bee Malinathalla of Theophrastus, and Anthalium of Pliny. The Italians generally call it Trasi, and Trasi dolce, Dolza∣lini, and Dolceguine as Clusius saith, from Bellonius lib. 2. cap. 25. and thereafter divers Writers doe call it so, and Dulcichinum, as Matthiolus, Gesner, Dodonaeus, and others; it may fitly bee called Rush-nuts, from the Spanish Iuncia avellanada, of the forme of leaves and rootes. Baptista Cortesius saith it (if this bee his) is called Fu rosium and Azulinum, and by the Sicilians Castanalos, because the rootes taste like Chesnuts. Pona in the description of Mount Baldus saith confidently, that he hath found it by experience in suffering the rootes to grow unremoved for three or foure yeares, that it beareth neither stalke, nor flower, nor seed. But Matthiolus, Caesalpinus, Lobel, Dodo∣naeus, and Columna, doe all say, that it hath both stalkes, flowers, and seed, and so doe give the figure thereof in all their Workes: and Clusius in his annotation upon Bellonius, lib. 2. cap. 40. giveth a figure without flowers, as if it bore none: but assuredly both he (if he thought so) and Pona might be as much deceived herein, as they that wrote the Colocasia never bore flower, which Columna disproveth. There remaineth one thing more to be spoken of, and that is, that many of our Apothecaries, are not onely so ignorant, that they doe not know, that onely the round sweet Cyperus, is that Cyperus and no other, which all the ancient Authors have appointed to be put into the me∣dicines that they appoint; but are without care also, or desire to be furnished with those things, that are the gen∣uine drogues of the Ancients; because the false is better cheape, and easier to be had, and put into their choisest and chiefest medicines, as well as others, the common long rooted Cyperus in the stead thereof; which although in an extreme necessity, may supply the want thereof; yet as we all know, no substitute can bee so effectuall to all purposes, as the genuine is. The Arabians call it Saharade: the Italians Cypero: the Spaniards Juncia de lor: the French Souchet: the Germanes Wilder galgan: the Dutch Wilde Galigaen: and we in English as I said before, Gal∣lingall, and sweet Cyperus. 
The Vertues. It is of a warming quality saith Dioscorides, and giveth breathing to the veines: It provoketh urine, and helpeth to breake the stone in the bladder, and to consume the water in the dropsie, if the decoction thereof be drunke: and is a remedy against the sting of the Scorpion: it provoketh womens courses, and is good for the fretting paines and stranglings of the mother, if the parts be bathed with the decoction thereof, or they sit over the fumes thereof, or in the decoction. The powder thereof is a most especiall remedy for all foule sores and ulcers of the mouth, although they be spreading and devouring cankers. It is also used in sweet oyntments and salves that are warming and com∣forting. Galen saith the rootes of Cyperus are of greatest use, being of an heating and drying quality, without sharpnesse: whereby it wonderfully helpeth all ulcers, that by their over-much moisture doe hardly admit any cure, and by the astringent quality it hath, it helpeth all manner of sore mouthes. It hath a cutting quality also, whereby it helpeth those that are troubled with the stone, and provoketh urine and womens courses. The rootes of Cyperus and Bayberries, of each a like quantity beaten to powder, and made up with the urine of a Boy under yeares, and laid upon the belly of those that have a dropsie, doth helpe them very much: and both of them boyled in wine, and drunke often while the other is used outwardly, doth worke effectually. Alpinus saith the Egyptians doe much use both the powder of the rootes, and the ashes of them when they are burnt, to cure the ulcers both of the mouth, and secret parts, and the decoction of them to be drunke, to comfort and warme the stomacke, braine, lungs, sinewes, arteries, and the wombe; and if it be taken for some time together, it warmeth and strengthneth the naturall vigour of the spirits, it is also an especiall remedy for cold and moist braines, and the distillations thereof, by warming and comforting the braines and the sences: it conduceth helpe to the crudities, humidities and windinesse of the stomacke and belly, and to helpe the shortnesse of breath and coughes: as also for all cold and moist wombes, and the griefes and diseases comming thereby. It bringeth much comfort to those that by long sicknesse are much spent in their strength of body, and weaknesse of their stomacks, and faintings of their spirits, by warming, quickning, and comforting them, by helping and strengthning the digestion, and procuring warm to the blood, and good colour to the face: it helpeth those that have strong or stinking breaths, drinking the deco∣ction thereof made in wine. The long sweet Cyperus commeth somewhat neare to all the faculties formerly ex∣pressed, yet performeth them not so effectually. There is much hereof spent in sweet powder, and sweet washing waters, and to perfume Garments, Gloves, &amp;c. as also into Perfuming-pots with vinegar and Rosewater, a few Cloves and Bay-leaves to perfume Chambers. The Trasi or Rush-nuts, are for the most part spent, as junkets to be eaten for pleasure, rather than used Physically for medicine: yet it is found to bee good, both for the pain of the breast and sides, if a creame bee made thereof and drunke; and therefore very profitable for those that have a cough, to helpe to expectorate the flegme: the same also drunke mitigateth the heate of urine, and allaye the sharpnesse thereof: it helpeth also the sharpnesse of humours in any disentery, or fluxe, and stayeth it, if hot steele be often quenched in the decoction thereof and drunke. It is also thought by many to further venerous acti∣ons, by taking the creame thereof, when it is steeped, stamped, and strained with the broth of fat flesh: for it is a little windy and nourisheth well, as by the sweetnesse thereof may bee perceived, and the qualities of heat and moisture conjoyned therewith. 
Having thus shewed you the chiefest of these sweet hearbes and plants that grow with us, it is time to convert my s to another forme, that you may therein heare what will be intreated of. PLANTAE CATHARTICAE SIVE PVRGANTES. PVRGING PLANTS. CLASSIS SECVNDA, The Second Tribe. CHAP. I. B Eing to shew you here the chiefest sorts of purging plants that may grow with us; I must as well speake of them that worke upwards, as downewards, as also of those that are conducing or helping thereunto, although they be not so forcible in working as the others, I say the chief∣est or most, because, that as in the former Classis some are omitted that are dispersedly related of in other places of this Worke, so likewise it will fall out in this and some of the other follow∣ing Classis, and begin with the hearbe Aloes, whose bitter juyce is so frequent in use every where knowne by the name of Aloes and Aloes Succotrina. 
1. Aloe vulgaris Herbe Aloes, sive Sempervivum marinum. Sea Housleeke. This hearbe hath divers long fleshy pale greene leaves, of the 1. Aloe vulgaris Herbe Aloes, sive Sempervivum marinum. Sea Housleeke. 
thicknesse of ones finger, with divers hard dents or points on both sides of them, and pointed at the end likewise, the one enclosing the other at the bottome, and standing round, the outward-most bending for the most part backwards, especially in those wee see are brought to us; but in the naturall places standing all of them outright and stiffe, or rather bowing inward than backward, whose leaves are nothing bitter in taste in the places either natural or plan∣ted, but rather cold: in the middle of these leaves riseth up a short thick stalke, branching forth into 2. or 3. parts; little more than a foot &amp; a halfe, or 2. foot high, bearing many small bottle-like flow∣ers, of a whitish colour with us, &amp; so Dioscorides saith also, but in the hotter Countries yellowish, as we are certainely informed, divi∣ded at the ends, into five or sixe parts, every one hanging downe round about the stalkes, from the middle thereof up to the top; it beareth seed in huskes like unto an Asphedill, after the flowers are past: the roote is thicke, and about a foote long or lesse within the ground, shooting out some thicke fibres at the end, and some small ones round about the sides, especially in the naturall places, but are seldome seene to give any with us, as they hang up in our houses, but may better be discerned, if any of them be put into the ground in the Summer time: the stalkes next to the roote will have the markes of the withered leaves when they are past and fallen away, as may plainely bee discerned in many of those that are brought from Spaine hither: and shoot forth a number of heads round about it, whereby it may be easily encreased.
4. Rhabarbarum &amp; Ponticum genuinum officinarum. The true Rubarbe and Rhapanticke of China, and the Shops. Matthiolus hath given us a figure of Rubarbe, which he setteth forth for the true, but from whom or whence he had it, he declareth not, and it might be a figment out of his owne braine, as some others of his are: although hee seemeth to say that he learned from Persian Merchants, that it did grow in the Country of Succuir, which is sub∣ject to the Great Cham of Cathay, in the Mountaines, nigh the chiefe City thereof, called also Succuir, whose figure and description divers other Authors have followed. Trincavell in his first Booke and 12. Chapter, of the composition of Medicines, relateth also, that a Merchant who had formerly beene an Apothecarie, and resident in Persia a long time, did report unto him, that there grew true Rubarbe in great abundance, upon the hilly places in Persia, and that it was carried from thence into Syria and Egypt, and from thence into divers other Countries of the world: but assuredly that Rubarb, which is used now adayes in all the world, I am sure in all the Christian Countries of this part of the world, commeth chiefly from the Country of China in the East-Indies, and hath beene brought by Arabian, Turky, and other Merchants, in former times from thence over land by Caravans: (as they call them, that is a number of Merchants and others, having Camels laden with it, 4. Rhabarbarum &amp; Ponticum genuinum officinarum. The true Rubarbe and Rhapantick of China, and the shops. 
5. Rha Ponticum Enulae folio latiore, The broader Elecampane leafed Rubarbe. 
and all other manner of drugges and spices there to be had, wherewith they served all this other part of the world) unto Cairo and Alexandria in Egypt, Damasco, and Tripoli in Syria, and from thence (as from the Store-houses) in∣to other Countries: but now since the passage into the East-Indies by Sea hath beene knowne, and that it hath beene brought unto us that way, there hath little or none beene brought by the Caravans over land, as in the for∣mer times. The forme of the roote, as all know that have seene and observed it, is somewhat great, round, and long withall for the most part, yet there are smaller and shorter peeces, as well as the greater that come together: whose colour on the outside is not all alike, no more than the substance within, for still some is better coloured and sounder than other: the best is firme and somewhat heavy, not spungy and light, somewhat browne, but fresh on the outside, without many blackish (which are suspitious places, where oftentimes being broken it is rotten, cor∣rupted and naught, I say many, for the best peeces have sometimes some) spots, which doe not runne farre inward, and if they doe yet notwithstanding, the rest is excellent good, and not to be refused for a little bad, which must bee cut away as not fit, or at least not so fit to be used as the better, which is very much discoloured with fresh-coloured veines running thorow it, bitter in taste, and somewhat aromaticall in smell, especially if it bee fresh, and causing the spittle to be yellow, being a little chewed in the mouth. These properties belonging to the true Rubarbe, being so manifestly to be seene and discerned in the rootes of the former kinde, (excepting onely those things which the nature of the Climate produceth) may so reasonably perswade any of reasonable ingenuity, that the former is the same true Rubarbe with this, and a very Dock proper to the Country of China, and peradventure to some other Countries besides also. And if tryall were made thereof in some hotter and dryer Countries, of our forraine Plan∣tations abroad (as I have of late to divers of them put it in practise) I verily beleeve, it would come much nearer to the other qualities of the true China Rubarbe than it doth, and is wanting in ours, according to the heate and cli∣mate thereof, wherein it is planted. This I thought good to intimate here, both to shew the correspondence of this Rubarbe of our English groweth, with that of the Indies, which is more probable to be a Docke of that Country, than any such plant as Matthiolus setteth it out for, both by figure and description: and besides further to excite some more of our Nation, if there be any ingenuity in them, to make the tryall by planting it in sundry other the hotter Countries, what effects it will procure, and how much it will better our English breeding: The true Rhaponticke which hath formerly come to us with Rubarbe (and not that false kind of the great Centory rootes) is onely the lesser and longer peeces of the rootes of the true Rubarbe, whose figure is set forth with the other. 
5. Rhaphonticum Enuliae folio latiore. The broader Elecampane leafed Rubarb. I have adjoyned this and the next plant, for the names sake onely (as I said before) because Lobel hath so named and referred them: but to another place they might be more truely referred in my judgement, and that is unto the Iaceus Knapweeds, or Centaurium majus great Centory, both for the likenesse of flower and seede, although the scales of the head be different; yet at this time take the description of them in this place: It hath diverse leaves ri∣sing from the roote, somewhat large and long, yet nothing so large as the leaves of Elecampane, greenish on the upperside, and grayish or white and woolly underneath, like therein unto the leaves of Elecampane, every one standing on his owne stalke, broadest at the bottome, and pointed at the end, and dented about the edges; from among which riseth up, a reasonable bigge round stalke, about halfe a yard or 2 foote high, bearing at the toppe thereof one great scalye head, consisting of very broad and loose or open browne scales; at the first shew representing a small Artichoke head, but that the scales doe not stand close together, but are much more open and loose, especially after the flower is past; which standeth in the middle, composed of many blewish red or purple threades or thrumes, very delicate to behold: after 6. Rhapo ticum angusti folium. The narrow Elecampane leafed Rubarbe. 
which come blackish round and long seede, very like unto the seede of a Iacea or great Centorie, but a little longer and not altogether so thicke: the root is somewhat long and thicke, blackish on the outside, and of a deadish colour on the inside, more loose and spongye than either any Docke or great Centory, which hath in former times beene used among the Apothecaries for Rha Ponticum. 
6. Rha Ponticum alterum angustifolium. The narrower Elecampane leafed Rubarbe. There is small difference betweene this and the last descri∣bed, but onely in the leaves, which are a little narrower and longer then it, being as hoary white underneth and greene above as the other; and a little unevenly waved on the edges: the head and flowers are a like but a little larger, and so is the roote, so that it is very likely, the naturall place of their grow∣ings, causeth the chiefest difference betweene them. 
The Place. The first groweth about Lausanna in Savoy as Tragus saith, but only in gardens with us: the second naturally upon the hils not far from Caria in Germany, as also nere Friburg in Switserland, and on the mountaines in Austria. The third as it is reported grew in Thracia, and from thence brought to Prosper Alpinus, at Padoa, from whence some Apothecaryes in Venice had it: and Master Doctor Matthew Lister, one of the Kings Physitions being in Venice, obtained 3 or 4 seedes, which he sent me with some other seedes that he procured; and with me (as I thinke the first in this Land) they sprung up grew and seeded within two or three yeares, and from them, both I, and many other my friends, as well in England as beyond Sea have bin furnished, The fourth groweth chiefely as I sayd in China, or Cataya (for they are held to be but one Countery) as Matthiolus his Persian Merchant saith, and in the Mountaines of Persia, if ye will be∣leeve Trincavel his Apothecary, turned merchant, as is before declared: The fift groweth both on Mount Baldus, as I am enfor∣med, neere Verona in Italy, and also upon the hils in Switserland, and in some craggie places in Savoy; though Lobel saith the seede thereof, was first brought out of Turkie, and that the last was brought out of Italy. 
The Time. All these sorts of Rubarbe doe grow with us in our gardens and doe flower, about the beginning or middle of Iune, and the seede is ripe in Iuly. The rootes that are to be dryed and kept all the yeare following, are not to be taken up, before the stalke and leaves be quite withered or gone, and that is not untill about the middle or end of October; for if they be taken either a little before the leaves doe spring, or when they are sprung up, the rootes will not have halfe so good a colour in them. 
The Names. The Greekes doe call the Dockes Lapathum, from , or , exinanire, quod foliorum de∣coctum alvum emolliat, lenit &amp; exinaniat, in Latine Rumex, which is rather attributed to those Dockes are sowen, than to those are wilde, and chiefely unto Sorrell, because the leaves are used to be eaten or sucked, to coole the heate and quench the thirst, even as children doe sucke a teate, which was called among the old Romans Rumem. Galen in 2 Alimentor, saith Lapathum might be called a wilde Beete, it is so like unto the garden kinde, but be∣cause the Beete is more pleasant than the Docke, no man but will more willingly eate the Beete. The first here, is called of most men Lapathum sativum, Patientia &amp; Rhabarbarum Monachorum, meaning those that commen∣ted upon Mesues: The second Hippolapathum rotundi folium, to put a difference betweene it, and the former gar∣den Docke, which is also called Hippolapathum, it is also called of Lobel and others Pseudo Rha recentiorum, of Clusius and Camerarius, Lapathum rotundifolium, and of Cordus in histor. Plantar. lib. 4. fol. 201. Rhabarbaricum, in English great round leafed Dock, or bastard Rubarb. The third Alpinus calleth Rhaponticum Thracicum, because as is aforesaid, it was brought him out of that Country of Thracia, and in his tractate thereupon he will by no meanes bee perswaded that it is true Rubarbe, but so entituleth it, and the rather because be onely saw the rootes while they were young as his figure sheweth, but not so great as the true Rubarbe, such as I have expressed: neither do I think he pared away the outer barke or skin of the rootes to make the inside appeare the fairer, but as a great many with us also have done, dryed the roots as they tooke them out of the ground, and then they shewed both blacke and small. Master Doctor Lyster also sent it me by the name of Rhaponticum verum, but because the roote is so like, both in colour, forme, and quality unto the true Rubarb, and the smal long roots unto the Rha Pon∣ticum or Rubarbe of Pontus, I account it true Rubarbe and Anguilara saith they are both one, the difference consi∣sting chiefely in the greater or lesser long peeces, and to the climate, which giveth the true Rubarbe, or Rubarbe of Pontas, a more solid and firme substance, a more bitter taste and aromaticall smell, and an astringent or cor∣roborating quality after the purging, all which are the effects from the climate, as being hotter and dryer, and therefore giving unto the rootes firmenesse bitternesse and astriction, which are all wanting in some sort in the rootes of this Rubarbe growing with us: yet it hath the purging quality, onely in a double proportion and the forme and colour so like the true as may be, which causeth it to be had in respect and good use, besides the beau∣ty of the plant it selfe, and may well be called English Rubarbe, to distinguish it from that which cometh from China. The fourth is thought by the most and best writers to be the Rha or Rheum of Dioscorides, Galen and the other ancient writers, which was diversly named in our former times, as Rha Barbarum, Rha Turcicum, Rha Ponticum, and Rha Scenicum or Sceniticum many thinking them to be severall things, because of the names impo∣sed, as comming from severall places, when as the goodnesse or badnesse, newnesse or oldnesse of the rootes might cause this variation. For the Arabians did call it Raved or Raiwand Sceni, or Seni as some write, but I finde it should be rather Cini, which corruptly the Portugalls, first pronounced Chini, according to their Language, and from them all our parts of the world, doe call that Country China, which was formerly called Sinarum regio: Much controversie there is among writers, concerning the name Rhabarbarum or Barbaricum: First for the name Rha barbarum the Rha of Barbaria, what this name of Barbaria should signifie, some thinking it to be that part of Africa, where old Carthage stood, as Fuschius who saith lib. 1. de compositione medicamentorum, that the souldiers that went with the Emperour Charles to Tunis, brought true Rubarbe of that Country home with them: others thinke that it was brought from Barbarum a City in India, above the River Indus, and that Rha-Indicum and Barbaricum were all one: and others thought that it came from an Island in the red Sea called Barbaria, whereunto shippes for Merchandise doe much resort: but Matthiolus refusing all these opinions, would faine induce his owne, that Barbaria being often mentioned in Galen as lib. 4. c. 6. de tuenda sanitate, that Ginger was brought out of Barbaria, which Dioscorides and Plinye say groweth among the Troglodites, and from them brought to us: and againe he saith that Glans Vnguentaria or Nux Ben, is brought out of the Coun∣try of Barbaria, which Dioscorides saith groweth in Aethiopia, in which Country the Troglodites doe inhabite, and Plinye lib. 12. c. 21. saith it groweth with the Troglodites. Plinye also in the same booke and 19 chapter shewing the causes of the scarsity of Cinamon in his dayes, saith it was because the Barbarians in their furie burnt the woods where it grew: whereby as Matthiolus saith, it may plainely appeare, that the name Barbaria, can signifie no other Country than the Troglodites of Ethiopia: which as Strabo in his fifteenth booke of Geogra∣phy saith, is as plentifull in spices as the South parts of India: but by the trafficke of our Merchants in these times, there is no Rubarbe growing in those parts that they can heare of; and if I might ghesse as formerly others have done, I would say that the name Barbarum was joyned with Rha, in that both Graecians and Romanes ac∣counted all remote nations from them to be Barbarians. Now for the names, Scenicum and Sceniticum; Mesues saith it is all one with Indicum, whose saying Matthiolus contradicteth, saying it should be rather Sinicum which is a Country of India, for the Scenitae be a people of the desart of Arabia, and are utterly destitute of all man∣ner of Spice and drugges of worth. The name of Rha Turcicum and Ponticum, is thought also to be all one, because some Turkish Merchants brought it from Pontus: and for the word Rha, it tooke the name as some suppose from the River Rha, now sayd to be called Volga in Pontus, where those rootes did grow: but I rather thinke it came from the Arabians Reiwand or Raiwand: whether the Rha Barbarum and Rha Fonticum, be one thing or diverse, is next to be spoken of: Matthiolus contendeth against Ruellius and others, with many words and reasons to proove them differing: First that Rha Fonticum as Dioscorides and Galen describe them, are without sent; then that Rubarbe hath in it a purging quality by nature, which Rha Ponticum hath not, being sayd by Dio∣scorides and Galen to have rather an astringent quality therein: and that it is not bitter as Rubarbe, but rather somewhat sharpe &amp; quicke; it is not solide and heavie but spongie and light; it is not drye but tough or pliant; it is not yellow as Rubarbe, but blacke: by which reasons he is perswaded that they differ, and that Ruellius was in a great error to say, that they differed onely in the sent, which hapned by the coldnesse of the Country, where Rha Ponticum grew: Matthiolus also saith that Manardus Ferrariensis, having beene formerly of that opi∣nion, was afterward otherwise perswaded, upon sight of the true Rha Ponticum, that was brought out of Musco∣via, agreeing in all things with that of Dioscorides, as the sayd Manardus relateth, in the last Epistle of the first booke written to Leonicenus; Surely this we may well say, that Dioscorides and Galen never saw or knew such Rubarbe, as we have brought us now a dayes, and I am halfe in doubt that wee in these times cannot well tell what sort of Rha Phonticum that was of Dioscorides and Galen; for if we scanne the text of Dioscorides a little, we shall finde him to say, that the Rha or Reum called by the name Rha Ponticum, is a roote like unto the roote of the great Centory, (and if it be but like, it cannot be the same) but smaller, on the outside of a blackish red colour spongie, light and without sent, and that it grew in the Countries beyond the Bosphorus: the best as hee saith is that which is sound, without rottennesse or worme holes, and doth sticke in the mouth with a little astriction in the tasting, and giveth a yellow colour in the chewing, tending to a Saffron colour: this comparison of the roote to be blacke like the roote of great Centorie, but lesse, and of a redder colour, spongie and without sent, cannot agree with any of the qualities of that Raphonticum, we have formerly seene brought unto us, much lesse unto the Rubarbe that wee have now, and for the rootes of the great Centory, they are very long and great, almost like unto a great Parsneppe roote, but blacke on the outside and very rugged; which made those in ancient times, and unto our dayes still obstinately to take the very rootes of great Centory, and use them as if they had beene true Rha Ponticum: So that to assoyle this doubt wee may well say that it is probable, that those rootes which were usually brought in those times, when Dioscorides and Galen lived, were the small rootes, or the long branches of the greater rootes of Rubarbe, and not dressed or pared, that is the outer skinnes taken away, which are blackish being dryed, and not such great thicke rootes as we have now a dayes, and that they were adulterate, as Galen mentioneth some were in his time, that is, that the rootes were boyled or steeped in water for sometime, to take out the strongest juyce, and the rootes dryed up againe, which then it is probable, might be of a blackish red colour and spongie, light, and without sent, not having any purging quality, but onely an astringent left in them: for I doe verily thinke that Rha Pon∣ticum (such as I have seene, hath beene brought over to us, being in colour taste and qualitie, the same with Ru∣barbe, but in smaller and longer pe ces) is either but a small kinde of Rubarbe, growing not bigger in those places, from whence it is brought, or that it is but the bigger branches of the great rootes of Rubarbe, the colour and properties as I sayd being so like. The fift and last, Lobel and Pena have onely set forth, under the ti∣tles before expressed, whom all other writers that have mentioned them have followed: and it is probable that the Turkes, with whom as it should seeme it is called Rhaponticum, used it in steede of the true Rhaponticum of Dioscorides, and to note the difference betweene them, Lobel addeth Helenii folio. But some of latter times have called it Centaurium helenii folio, for by that name, I received the seedes thereof from beyond Sea: but that quality yellow, in the true Rhaponticum of Dioscorides, and not to be found, either in this or the great Centory, doth easily convince their obstinacy, that will still persist in an opinion so contrary to truth. 
The Vertues. The leaves of these kindes of Dockes, boyled in broth, doe a little (some more, some lesse) mollifie or loosen the belly; but the rootes have a more opening or purging quality in them, and some more or lesse also according to their quality. The first round leafed one, somewhat more than the garden Patience or Monkes Rubarbe, al∣though weaker than the next thereunto by much: The Bastard Rubarbe hath almost worne out the use of the Pati∣ence or Monks Rubarbe, it is grown so common &amp; plentiful; so that unlesse some that are wilful &amp; will not use it, but Patience, or that are too gripple, not to be at any cost to have the best, or have little care what they use, but take what commeth next to hand, there is (or should be) none, but will use it in their diet Beere, or Ale, or in decoctions to purge the Liver, and clense the blood, before the other; yet that I may relate the properties that are found therein (that thereby you may be assured this Bastard Rubarbe, will doe the same more effectually) are these. Tragus saith, a dramme of the dryed rootes of the first sort called of some Monkes Rubarbe, with a scru∣ple of Ginger, made into pouder, and taken fasting, in a draught or messe of warme broth, purgeth choler and flegme downeward very gently, and safely without danger; the seede thereof contrarily doth binde the belly, and thereby helpeth to stay any sort of laske, or bloody flixe: the distilled water thereof is very profitably used to heale scabbes, as also foule ulcerous sores, and to allay the inflammations of them. The juyce of the leaves or rootes or the decoction of them in Vinegar, is of very many used as a most effectuall remedie to heale all scabbes and running sores. The round leafed Docke or Bastard Rubarbe, hath as I sayd all the properties of Monkes Ru∣barbe, but more effectuall, both for inward and outward diseases, and moreover healeth the sting of Scorpions; and as Dioscorides saith, he that shall take the roote thereof, shall feele no paine after the stinging: the decoction thereof with Vinegar, stilled or dropped into the eares taketh away the paines, gargled in the mouth, taketh a∣way tooth-ach, and being drunke healeth the Iaundise: the seed thereof taken, easeth the gnawing and griping paines of the stomacke, and taketh away the loathing thereof unto meate, which commeth by vitious sharpe hu∣mors gathered to the mouth of the stomacke: the roote thereof, helpeth the ruggednesse of the nayles, and being boyled in wine, it helpeth the swellings of the throate, called the Kings Evill, as also when the kernells of the eares be swolne: and helpeth them that are troubled with the stone; provoketh Vrine, and helpeth the dimnesse of the sight. The rootes of this Bastard Rubarbe, is used in opening and purging Diet drinkes, or in Diet Beere or Ale, with other things, to open the Liver, and clense the blood, and to allay the heate thereof. The properties of the other round leafed Docke, which we have entituled English Rubarbe, are the same with the former, but much more effectuall, and hath all the properties of the true Indian Rubarbe, excepting the force in purging, which is but of halfe the strength thereof, and therefore needeth, as I sayd, to be taken in double quantitie, and likewise hath not that bitternesse or astriction, in other things it worketh almost in an equall quality: The true Indian Rubarbe is an excellent and safe medecine, to purge the body of choler and flegme, being either taken of it selfe, made into powder, and drunke in a draught of white wine, or steeped therein all night, and taken fa∣sting, or put among other purgers as shall be thought convenient, clensing the stomacke and Liver, and thereby the blood, opening obstructions, and helping those griefes that come thereof, as the Iaundise, the Dropsie, the swelling of the spleene, tertian and day agues, and the pricking paine of the sides, as also stayeth the spitting of blood, comming as well from the Lunges, as any other part: the powder taken with Cassia dissolved, and a little washt Venice Turpentine, clenseth the Reines, and helpeth to strengthen them afterwards, and is very ef∣fectuall to stay the Gonorrhoea or running of the reines. It is also given for the paines and swellings in the head, for those that are troubled with melancholy, and helpeth the Sciatica and Goute, and the paines of the Crampe: for which purpose one dramme or two, of the extract thereof, made in this manner, and given in broth doth work effectually. Let a sufficient quantitie of Rubarbe be steeped in Cinamon water, which being strongly pressed forth, let it be stilled in a glasse Limbeck in balneo, untill the water be drawne forth, and the substance remai∣ning, be of the thicknesse of honey, which keepe in a close covered pot or glasse, for the use aforesaid. The powder of Rubarbe, taken with a little Mumia and Madder rootes, in some red wine, dissolveth congealed or clotted blood in the body, happening by any fall, or bruise, and healeth burstings, and broken parts, as well in∣ward as outward; the oyle likewise wherein it hath beene boyled, being anointed worketh the same effect: It helpeth the yexing, or hickocke, and all fluxes of the belly, if it be toasted or dryed a little by the fire, but much more if it be more roasted to be halfe burnt, and taken in wine after this manner: Take a pint of good Claret wine, and burne it with some Sugar, and a toppe or two of Rosemary, into which put a dramme and a halfe of Rubarbe torrified, or roasted by the fire as is aforesaid, and one dramme of Chebul Myrobalanes, a little broken or bruised, let these stand in the burnt wine all night by the fire, and straine it forth in the morning, giving this at two times fasting, which will in three or foure dayes stay any scowring or laxe, strengthning the stomack and inward parts afterwards. It is used to heale those Vlcers that happen in the eyes, and eyelids, being steeped and strayned, as also to asswage the tumors and allay the inflammations, and applyed with honey or cute, that is to say boyled wine, it taketh away all blacke and blew spots, or markes that happen therein. This Rubarbe is so gentle a medicine, that it may be given to all sorts of gentle constitutions, (but in robustions or strong bodies it purgeth little or nothing) whether they be children or women with childe, and that safely at all times of the yeare: the whey of milke, but especially of Goates milke, is the best and most accommodate liquor, wherein it is to be steeped &amp; taken, or else in white wine, and it worketh thereby the more effectually in opening obstructions, and in purging the stomacke and Liver, from choler and flegme; and most doe use a little Indian Spiknard as the best corrector thereof: The other two last sorts of Rubarbe are not much or often used, and their qualities are more astringent then opening, little experience having beene made with us, to shew you more of them. 
CHAP. III. 1. Colocynthis Vulgaris. Coloquintida or the bitter Gourde. T His bitter Gourd runneth with his branches upon the ground, as a Gourd or Cowcumber doth, ha∣ving diverse rough hairy leaves thereon, every one by it selfe, which are lesser and somewhat lon∣ger, than those of the Cowcumber, and more divided or cut in at the edges, most usualy into five or seaven parts, each partition also dented in, or notched round about, the leaves of the forme doe ve∣ry much resemble those of the Citrull Cowcumber; at the joynts with the leaves come forth the flowers which are yellow, of the same fashion with them, but somewhat smaller, and also small tendrells or twining stalkes as the Vine hath, wherewith it windeth about any plants, or other things that stand next unto it, thereby strangling or killing them: the fruite that followeth is small and round as a ball, many of them not much bigger than a great Crabbe or Peare-maine, greene at the first on the outside, and afterwards growing to be of a browne yellow, which shell is as hard as any Pompion or Gourde; and is usually pared away while it is greene, the substance under it being white, very light, Colocynthis Pomiformis &amp; Pyriformi . The round and Peare fashioned bitter Gourde. 
spongie, or loose, and of an extreame bitter taste, almost in∣durable, and provoking loathing or casting in many that taste it, having therein sixe orders or rowes of white hard seede, of the bignesse of Cowcumber seede, but fuller harder and rounder; and nothing so bitter or forceable in working, as the white pulpe or substance is: the roote is not very great but stringie, and quickly perishing with the first cold approach of win∣ter. 
2. Colocynthis major rotunda. The greater Coloquintida, or bitter Courde. This sort of bitter Gourde differeth not from the former, ei∣ther in leafe or flower or manner of growing, but onely in the fruite, which groweth to be twice as big as the former, and as round; greene at the first, but of a pale yellow when it is ripe, whose pulpe or inner substance is also white and spongie, and in a manner as bitter, with such like seedes as are in the former, and disposed for the most part into eight rowes, or partitions: the roote perisheth as the former. 
3. Colocynthis oblonga. The long bitter Gourde. This kind or Colloquintida differeth not from the last great sort, for either manner of growing, forme of the leaves or flowers, but onely in the fruit, which is as great almost as the last, but is not so sphericall or round like a ball, but somewhat long with the roundnesse, and being a little flat at the head; the shell or outer rinde thereof, is greene at the first, and after∣wards groweth to be whitish, with many spots thereon: th is also bitter but not so extreame as the first. 
4. Colocynthis pyriformis. Peare-fashioned Coloquin∣tida or bitter Gourd. This Peare-fashioned kinde, hath many trayling rough branches like the first, and such like long and round pointed leaves, cut in also on the edges but not so deepely, neither so large or great, and of a darker greene colour; at the joynts with the leaves, come forth the flowers, being yellow, but smaller than the first, and likewise small twining claspers as the other, which taketh hold on every thing, that it may comprehend: the fruite is small, not bigger than a large Catherine Peare, and many smaller, yet all fashioned like a Peare, the head whereof is somewhat rounder than a Peare; the shell or outward rinde whereof is greene, but whiter when it is ripe with many long lines or strakes thereon; the inner pulpe or substance, being almost as white, light, and spongie but lesse bitter than any of the rest, at the least in those have growne in my garden, having but foure rowes or rankes of white seede like the rest. 
The Place. The first commeth as a Merchandise to us from Arabia, Egypt, and Syria, yet is nourished up in the gardens of those that are curious. The other sorts some have beene found in Spaine and Italy, but we sow their seede every yeare in our gardens, if wee be desirous to see them, for they never come up of their owne sow∣ing. 
The Time. They flower late, and so doe they ripen with their fruit, which unlesse the yeare proove kindly, hardly come to perfection, untill it be very late: but the first worst of all. 
The Names. The first as that which onely was knowen, or at least mentioned by the ancient writers, is called i Greeke Colocynthis, and of some Sicua picra quasi Cucumis amarus, the bitter Cowcumber: Hippocrates calleth it &amp; , of the Latines Colocynthis, and Cucurbita sylvestris, in the Apothecaries shops Coloquintida; and we in English, either Coloquintida, or the bitter Gourde, which you will. The rest of them have their names in their titles, as most writers do cal them, that mention them, and as much as can be said of them, onely Tragus calleth the Pyriformis, Colocynthis Germanica, because it is lesse dangerous, and more easie to grow in these colder Countries. Beslerus that set out the Bishop of Eystot in Germany his garden, calleth both the Peare fashioned Colloquintida, and the greater that beareth round fruite like an Apple Pseudo colocynthides. It is the same that in the Scripture in the 2 of Kings and the 4. chapter, is called a wild Vine, whereof one gathered wilde Gourds: the Arabians call it Chendell and Handal, and thereof Trochisci Alhandal quasi ex Colocynthide came. 
The Vertues. The inner white soft spongie substance, under the outer shell or rinde, is that onely without any seede, which is used; and being extreame bitter purgeth violently, even to excoriation and blood oftentimes, especially in tender bodies: but the dose or quantity which was given by the ancients, and is yet continued in the hotter climates of Europe, (their dry constitutions better enduring it) doth farre exceede the proportion, that our moi∣ster bodies, are possible able to endure without manifest danger, unlesse it be in those that are robustious, and used to continuall strong labour: for Dioscorides appointeth 4. oboli, that is 2. scruples or 40. graines, of the in∣ner substance to be made with honey, Myrrhe and water into pills, when our Physitians, dare scarse give one obo∣lus, that is 10 graines or halfe a scruple; yea they thinke halfe this quantity, mixed among other purgers, is a strong purgation, and it is so found by dayly experience, and therefore to avoyd the danger that often happeneth, being a great enemy to the stomacke and bowels, although Pliny saith the contrary, it is best to correct the vio∣lence thereof with oyle of Roses, Gum Tragacantha and Bdellium, as it is appointed in the Trochisci Alhandall, which lenifieth the sharpenesse thereof by the gummes, and causeth it by the lubricity of the oyle, to passe the sooner away: This is the safest way to take it inwardly at the mouth, the substance of the seede in powder, or the decoction, is not of halfe that force, as the pulpe it selfe, so found by Lobels experience, and others; if the seedes be taken forth out of an apple, and it overcrusted with loame or clay, and some Vinegar and Niter put to be heated therein, the liquor doth ease the paines of the tooth-ach, and fastneth loose teeth, if they bee washed therewith: and if in an Apple so ordered, some old sweete wine, or new boyled wine, be put to steepe for a day and a night (which some have falsely interpreted that the Apple, should be steeped in the wine) and the wine strayned forth to be brunke warme, purgeth the body more gently. Dioscorides order was to boyle the wine or honied water, in the Apple, and let it stand open all night to coole in the ayre: It purgeth strongly flegme and choler, and other tough or clammie grosse humors, from the further or more remote parts, as the braines, sinewes, muscles and joynts, as also from the lunges and breast, and from the veynes also; and is therefore very helpe∣full (if it be wisely applyed) to all the diseases that happen to those parts, as all old paines in the head, the mea∣grime that is inverate; the falling sicknes, the apoplexie, the turning or swimming dissines in the head the watring of the eyes, the could Gout, the Sciatica or hipgoute, and other paines of the joyntes and sinewes: it is helpfull also for the Iaundise, and for putride or rotten fevers, for an old cough, the straightnesse of the chest, shortnesse of the breath, and above all these, it helpeth the cholicke, whether it proceede from flegme or from winde, as also the dropsie, being taken either in glisters, or suppositories: it is not good to be given to the aged or weake, but to the strong, young, and lusty bodies; neither to women with childe, for if it bee applyed to the wombe it de∣stroyeth the childe. Being steeped in vinegar, it taketh away all discolourings of the skinne, as morphew, and leprye, dry scurfe and scabbes, if the places affected, be often rubbed therewith. Pure oyle being put into an hollowed or clensed apple of Coloquintida, and set upon warme ashes or embers, to be throughly heated, both maketh the haire blacke, that was not so afore, stayeth it from falling that is disposed thereunto, and keepeth it long from growing gray: the same oyle dropped into the eares, taketh away the paine, and singing noyse of them: and mixed with a little Oxe gall and anointed, on the belly warme, killeth the wormes and causeth them to avoyde, and oftentimes purgeth the belly, being onely so applyed: Galen saith, that the bitternesse thereof, which might be availeable for many griefes, suffereth it not to exercise them, but is overcome by the vehement purging quality it hath: If when it is taken it should worke overmuch, and bring forth excoriations and blood, to the danger of the patient, a decoction of Raysins of the Sunne, given with Oyle of sweete Al∣monds, or the Oyle of Walnuts, mittigateth the violence thereof. Rats and mice doe much delight to eate seedes, and the seede hereof also: if therefore they be set, or layd, in diverse corners of the house, troubled with them, it will kill and destroy them all: The decoction of them also sprinkled in Chambers is sayd to kill fleaes: The other sorts of Coloquintida are seldome or never used with us, yet Tragus commendeth the use of Co∣locynthis Pyriformis, as being lesse bitter and violent in purging, and therefore safer to bee taken in∣wardly. 
CHAP. IIII. Cucumis agrestis sive Asininus. The wilde or spirting Cowcumber. T His wilde Cowcumber (as well as the former wilde or bitter Gourde, differing from all the rest of their families) is fit to be entreated of apart by it selfe, as also to be next remembred, being as violent in all the qualities thereof, as the former, or rather more: It creepeth on the ground like unto the former, with many rough trailing branches, whereon are set very rugged and rough ill coloured greene leaves; somewhat whitish underneath; little or nothing divided or parted at the edges; at the joynts betweene the branches and the leaves, come forth small pale yellow flowers, opening into five leaves, at the end of small greene heads for the most part, as all other sorts of Gourds, Cowcumbers, &amp;c. doe: but those that have flowers onely without such heads, fall away quickly with∣out fruite; for that greene head, as in all others, groweth to be the fruite, which is small, rough, round and long, and somewhat of a grayish greene, when they are ripe; the short rough foote stalkes, being crooked, and bending the fruite downewards, which with a little touch, when they are throughly ripe, will quickely open at the end next the stalke, and sprirt out the juyce, and some seede, into their faces or hands, or other places against it that touched it: the seede being ripe, is blackish and some∣what Cucumis Sylvestris. The Wilde Cowcumber.
rugged, but otherwise white, lying in a greene moyst substance, very bitter and loathsome to taste: the roote is white, and firme, thicker, and shorter, than in any other sort of Gourde or Cowcumber, with some fibres thereat, very bit∣ter as is all the rest of the plant. 
The Place. It groweth naturally wilde in Italy, as Matthiolus saith, in many places by the way sides; and in untilled and moorish pla∣ces, we onely preserve it in gardens, throughout the whole Land, where it is used. 
The Time. The roote hereof doth often abide in the ground, all the win∣ter long, if it stand reasonably defended, or the ground be rich with soyling, shooting then forth leaves betimes: in other col∣der grounds not defended, they perish every yeare: the fruite is usually ripe in August. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , in Latine Cucumer &amp; Cu∣cumis agrestis, or asininus, as many writers doe, or anguinus, as Turner and Cordus, but not properly: Matthiolus, Trag , Dodonaeus, and some others, call it Cucumis sylvestris. The dryed or hardned juyce of the fruit, is called, Elaterium, Gaza translating Theophrastus calleth it Agitatorium. 
The Vertues. The rootes hereof and the dryed juyce of the fruite, artifici∣ally and not rudely prepared, which is called Elaterium, are chiefely used in medicines and scarse any other part: Concer∣ning Elaterium, there is difference betweene Theophrastus, and Dioscorides, of the age, and durability, and in extinguishing or encreasing the flame of a lampe or candle. Theophrastus in the ninth booke and foureteenth chapter of his history of Plants, saith Elaterium is the most durable medicine of all others, and that the best, is the eldest; for as he saith, a Physition of sufficient credit, kept by him some Elaterium, that was 200 yeares old, which he received of one as a gift; which notwithstanding the age, was of wonderfull vertue, and untill it was 50 yeares old, it was so aboundant in humidity, that put to the flame of a lampe or candle, it would put it out. And Dioscorides saith that Elaterium, is fit to be used as a purging medicine, from two yeares old, untill it be tenne, and that is the best, which being put to the flame of a lampe or candle, will make it burne the more bright. Vnto Theophrastus, Pliny subscribeth the same thing, and saith that it is found true by experience, that untill it be 50 yeares old, it will cause a lampe or candle, to spertle hither and thither, before it put it out; whereupon Matthiolus giving credit to the testimonies of Theophrastus and Pliny, is perswaded that the text of Dioscorides is corrupted, but I verily beleeve they both say true, the reconciliation of their re∣pugnancy, being onely in the manner of making of Elaterium. Theophrastus his Elaterium being greene, as I suppose, and made of the substance of the inner pulpe of the fruite; yet in the tenth chapter of his fourth booke, he saith it is made of the seede, which I never saw, or heard of any to be so made with us; and that of Dioscorides being white, (which as he saith himself is the best, and condemning the greene,) made onely of the more thinne watery, and wheyish part: Mesues also saith that the best is white: my selfe having made of both sorts can te∣stifie, that Elaterium, made of the substance of the fruite; although very gently pressed through a fine five, will be greene, and continue moyst many yeares, after it is evaporated and dryed up hard, relenting with the ayre, and will require many yeares to consume the humidity therein, when as the other sort, made of the whitish, wheyish liquour, that droppeth through the sive of it owne accord, in the cutting of the fruite, without any touch of pressing, will be white when it is dryed, and so remaine white, hard and drye, for many yeares, unlesse it be left open to the moyst ayre, or stand in a moyst place to cause it to relent: the greene sort likewise is not of halfe, that force or violence, to purge either upward or downeward, as the white Elaterium; whereof one graine weight dissolved in liquor, worketh forceably in any tender body; yea I have oftentimes seene, that halfe a graine weight put into a purging medicine, to quicken the weakenesse thereof, hath troubled the stomacke very much by castings, and much disquiet, and working also downeward with more violence, then it could bee thought the whole graine given of it selfe could doe. This narration although somewhat tedious, I was the more willing to declare, because I thinke none hath shewed it before, and my little experience may set an edge unto others, to polish that which I have here shewed you, but rough hewen. The dose or quantitie thereof ta∣ken at a time, Dioscorides saith is a whole obolus, and the least quantitie halfe an obolus, (some take the obolus to weigh 12 graines, but the most usuall is but 10 graines,) which sheweth as I sayd before, the great doses, which the ancients were wont to give of purgers in their medicines, which we dare not follow: It purgeth choler and flegme from all parts of the body, and as he saith, is the best medicine to purge those that are pursie and short winded: to procure a vomit, he adviseth to dissolve it in water, and with a fether dipped therein, to touch the lower part of the tongue, as low as you can; but milke or rather creame which is more unctuous, is fitter to give it in, for it will not suffer it to sticke to the tunicles of the stomacke, but will cause it slippe away the more spee∣dily: it helpeth also the falling sicknesse, being put into the nostrels with milke, and mixed with honey and old oyle, it cureth the Kings evill, being annointed therewith: It bringeth downe womens courses that are stayed, and killeth the birth if it be applyed to the secret parts: It purgeth clammie and watery humors from the joynts, and that strongly: the juyce of the roote doth the same likewise, and therefore used in glisters, or layd as a plai∣ster or pultis, upon the place payned with the Sciatica, easeth the paines thereof, the same juyce of the roote, boy∣led with wormewood in water and oyle, cureth an inveterate megrime, if the temples be often bathed there∣with, and some of the leaves and rootes, be beaten together, and layd as a pultis thereunto afterwards; the juyce of the roote with a little milke, cast up into the nostrels doth the same: for it wonderfully purgeth the braine from excrements, and healeth the evill savour of the nostrills caused thereby: It cureth also the old paines of the head and the Epilepsie: and being mixed with Goates dung, and layde as a plaister upon any great or hard swellings, or kernells, it resolveth them: The juice of the roote, as well as of the fruite (and so doth the decoction of them also, saith Mesues ) being drunke doth helpe the dropsie, for they mightily draw forth watery humors, and the yellow Iaundise, and all obstructions both of the liver &amp; spleene: Dioscorides also sheweth this medecine to cure the dropsie. Take saith he halfe a pound of the rootes hereof, and being bruised, let it be put into three quarters of a pint of strong wine, giving thereof three ounces, for 3 or 4 dayes together, untill the tumour be discerned, to be aboundantly wasted and fallen; which thing it worketh saith he, without any troubling of the stomacke: A few graines of Elaterium mixed with conserve of Roses, and some thereof taken will doe the like, and herewith Castor Durantes saith he cured many: The powder of the roote mixed with honey, and layd up∣on any fowle scarre in the skinne, doth attenuate it, and taketh away the markes or blew spots, that come upon bruising or blowes: the roote boyled or layde to steepe in strong Vinegar, cureth the morphew and clenseth the skinne of all foule spots, freckles, and other discolorings thereof; and the powder of the dryed roote saith Dioscorides, clenseth the face and skinne from all scurfe, and taketh away the blacke or ill colour from any scarre: the juyce of the leaves dropped into the eares, easeth them of the paines and noyse therein, and helpeth the deafenesse: the decoction of the roote gargled in the mouth, taketh away the paines of the teeth; the powder of the roote mixed with honey, and put into old sores and ulcers, clenseth them throughly, and thereby furthe∣reth their healing wonderfuly: Our Apothecaries doe most usually take the roote of this wilde Cowcumber as a substitute for the roote of Coloquintida or the bitter Gourd, that not being so frequent or easie to be had as this. 
CHAP. V. Scammonia. Scamonye. H Aving shewed you in the two last Chapters, some purging plants that runne, or spread upon the ground, or clime up by those things that are set by them: let me conjoyne some other the like, part growing naturally in our owne, and part in other Countries, and first of Scamonye, which is pro∣perly a Convolvulus or winding Bell flower, which we call Bindeweede: I will comprehend in this Chapter also, those onely that in forme and force in working, come neerest unto the true; the rest that differ shall follow. 
1. Scammonia Syriaca legitima. The true Scammonie. 
3. Convolvulus major albus. The great white Binde weed. 
 
1. Scammonia Syriaca legitima. The true Scammonye. The true Scammony hath a long roote, of a darke ash-colour on the outside, and white within, and of the big∣nesse of an arme, (for such hath beene brought us from Tripoli ) with a pith in the middle thereof, and many fibres thereat, (which being dryed as Matthiolus saith, the pith taken out, seemed so like unto the rootes of Tur∣bith, which are brought us, from the farre remote Easterne parts, none knowing what plant it is, nor whereunto it is like, some thinking it to be the roote of Tripolium or Sea-Starre-worte, which Matthiolus confuteth; o∣thers a kind of Ferula or Ferulaceous plant, altogether improbable, but that they are not so tough, but more brit∣tle, that otherwise it might be thought, to be the right Turbith of the Apothecaryes shoppes) from whence arise many long, round, greene, branches, winding themselves like a Bindeweede about stakes or trees, or any other herbes or things that stand next unto it, unto a good height without any clasping tendrells, like the true or wilde Vine: from the joynts of the branches, come forth the leaves, every one by it selfe, (yet I have seene dryed plants that have had two leaves one against another,) upon short foote stalkes, somewhat broad at the bottome, with two corners next thereunto, and some also round that I have seene, and then growing long and narrow to the end, being smooth, and of a faire greene colour, somewhat shining: towards the tops of the branches at the joynts with the leaves, come forth large whitish Bell flowers; with wide open brimes and narrow bottomes; af∣ter which come round heads, wherein are contained 3 or 4 cornered blacke seede; for such I have had given me, from whence hath sprung plants, which perished quickely, not abiding a winter with me: if any part of this plant be broken, it yeeldeth forth a milke, not hot or burning, nor bitter, yet somewhat unpleasant, provoking loathing, and almost casting. 
2. Scammonia Macrorhyza Cretica. Long rooted Scammonye of Candye. Prosper Alpinus, in lib. de exoticis, saith, that he in his former times received from Candie, another sort of Scammonye, differing nothing from the true Scammonye here before described, but in the fashion of the roote which is long and slender, of about a fingers thicknesse, but purging as strongly as that of Syria, and this in my judgement doth very neere resemble, our common white greater Bindeweede, that shall follow next the Coun∣trey making the difference onely as I thinke. 
3. Convolvulus major albus. The great white Bindeweede. Our great Bindeweede commeth as I think so neere unto the former Scammonye, that excepting the largenesse of the rootes, and the greater force in purging, which may both proceede from the climate; you would say this were altera eadem, whose many slender winding stalkes, runne up and winde themselves upon hedges, or whatso∣ever standeth neere unto it, having diverse large leaves growing severally thereon, somewhat long, and pointed at the further end, and parted into two points at the broad part, next to the stalke, making it seeme almost three square, being smooth and of a pale greene colour, yeelding a milke being broken, but not so plentifully as the Scamonye: at the joynts with the leaves towards the toppes of the branches, come forth large white Bell flow∣ers, without any division in them, after which rise round skinnie huskes, or heads, conteining within them di∣verse blackish, three cornered seede, like the former, but lesser; the roote is whitish, and small, of the bignesse of Couchgrasse, or somewhat greater, running much under ground, and shooting forth in sundry places: both stalkes and leaves perish every yeare, the roote living in the ground, and shooting a fresh every spring, which yeeldeth milke, being broken. 
4. Scammonia Monspeliaca dicta. French Bastard Scammonye. 4. Scammonia Monspeliaca dicta. French Bastard Scammonye. 
The neere resemblance of this plant, unto the former is many particulars, but especially in the seede, shewing it to be a Bindeweede, hath caused me to joyne it likewise in the same Chapter, which hath sundry twining branches ri∣sing five or sixe foote high, twining or clasping the trees or other things that it can reach, whereon are set two broad and almost round, yet pointed leaves at a joynt, of a blewish greene colour: from betweene the leaves and the branches, as also at the toppes of them, come forth many small white flowers, 5. Virginia. clustering together starre fashion, consisting of five narrow pointed leaves with threds in the middle: after which succeede such like heads, and black cornered seede, as in the former sorts: the roote hereof is small, of the big∣nesse of ones finger, with many fibres thereat, brownish on the outside, and pale within, this yeeldeth more plenty of purging milke than the last, comming somewhat neerer therein unto the first. 
5. Scammonia rotundifolia Virginiana. We have had a kind of Volubilis from Virginia, very neerely resembling this kinde of French Scammonye, both in growing and forme of leaves (as you may perceive by one set by the plant) but the flowers being small and white doe open like a Bindeweede, and not like a starre, into five leaves, like unto the last, the seede groweth not in pods, but in small heads, being small and blackish like other Bindeweeds, and therefore if not to the family of Bindeweeds, I know no better place than to insert it here. And peradventure this may be the Indians Hololuichi, that Aldinus mentioneth in his Farnesian gar∣den to be so dangerous. 
The Place. The first groweth in Syria, and the farther Easterne parts, where no frosts are felt in the winter, for it quickly perish with the first approach thereof, and therefore to be kept safe in these cold climates, it requireth some vault, or stove, or other such convenient place. The second groweth in Candy as Alpinus saith. The third is frequent in sundry places of the Land, growing by the hedges sides and running thereon. The fourth groweth neere the Sea side, as well by Mompelier, as the kingdome of Valentia in Spaine, where Clusius saith he found it: and the last in Virginia. 
The Time. They flourish in these Countries in Iune, Iuly, and August, but the first, and two last, doe seldome perfect any seede with us. 
The Names. The first, is called in Greeke , and in Latine also Scammonia: the dryed juyce which is most in use, is called Scammonium, both in the Druggists, and Apothecaries shoppes, as also with most writers, yet some call the plant so too: the same being prepared, that is, baked in a quince, under the embers, or in an Oven, or any other way, is called of the ancient writers Diagridium, which should onely be used in medicines, accor∣ding to the appointment of all Physitians, who are led by the tradition of their elders: but all Apothecaries in generall, doe use the Scammonye it selfe, as it commeth, without any other preparation, so as it be of the pu∣rest, and best, which by their dayly experience, they finde to worke more certainely, and more safely, than the Diagridium, which is much dulled in the baking or other preparation: and besides, whereas the ancient writers doe appoint it to be dissolved, and so mixed with their medecines, or to be boyled in the Electuarie, so to bee dissolved, wherein it is appointed to be put: the dayly experience of Apothecaries, who are chiefe masters in their professions, or should be, if they be worthy of their name, doth testifie there against; finding that if Scam∣monie come to never so little heate almost in the mixing thereof, it will curdle together and lye in knots in the medicine, beate yee it almost never so long after it is mixed; and therefore they alwayes in their Scamoniate medicines, rubbe it finely into powder of it selfe, without other preparation, and so put it last of all other things into any medicine, that hath beene boyled or heated, and that when it is almost cold, for feare of curdling or gathering together in knots, as I sayd before; and being thus mixed, the medicine shall worke more safely with∣out perturbations of the stomacke, &amp;c. and more surely without tediousnesse or procrastination, than if Diagri∣dium, were put into it: let not this be imputed as an errour in our profession, or a setled wilfulnesse to contra∣ry so great and ancient authority, for we know that true experience hath mastered reason and antiquitie, and we also know, that the experience and diligence of our times, hath in many more things, not onely taught us to vary from the Methode and order, appointed by the ancient writers of Physicke and hearbes, but to contrary them al∣so, when we have found either by reason or experience, that there is cause so to doe, as in the dose of this Scam∣monie is plainely to be observed. For Dioscorides appointeth a dramme to be given at once, when no Physitian with us, dare scarse give halfe a scruple, or not above. The second Alpinus so calleth, as is in the title, and that is as much as can be sayd of it: the third is called Volubilis major &amp; Convolvulus major, by diverse, as also Smilax levis major by others, Helxine Cissampelos by Cordus on Dioscorides, and Malacocissus Damocratis by Anguila∣ra: the fourth Gesner in hortis calleth Scammonia Monspel, and Lobel Scammonium Monspeliense, but Clusius who in his Spanish observations, first calleth it Scammonea Valentinas doth in his history entitle it, Apocynum 4. latifolium, yet referreth it to that of Mompelier as both one: Camerarius and Lugdunensis doe call it Scammonia maritima Monspeliaca as the learned of Mompelier doe, and use it accordingly: the last is remembred onely by my selfe, who suppose it by being like in forme to the last, to be neere also in quality thereunto. 
The Vertues. Scammonye being the basis as I may so call it, of those medecines wherein it is put, there had neede of espe∣ciall care to be taken in the choise thereof, that onely that which is sincere and pure, without drosse or adulterati∣on be used in Physicke; which may be knowne if it be not heavie, or close compact together, but that it be mo∣derately light, with some small holes or hollownesse heere and there therein; and that it be smooth and plaine in the breaking, and not in grumes or knots, or having small stickes or stones in it; somewhat cleere and blackish also, but not of a deadish darke or evill favored colour, and that will be made quickely into a very fine and white powder: this I mention comparatively, for it will be a very hard matter, for any to know the best by relation, but by inspection; and chiefely by comparison of the good and bad together, that so you may learne to know ei∣ther of them at the first sight. The dosis hereof as it is appointed by Dioscorides and others, doth so farre exceede the proportion of our moderne Physitians, that it hath made Pena to doubt, that the Scammonye in Dioscorides time, was more corrupt, and encreased with other things than ours is, because he gave so much, and we doe give so little; and Matthiolus on the otherside to doubt, whether wee have any sincere Scammonye brought unto us at all, or else that the text of Dioscorides is corrupt, where he appointeth a dramme or foure obolos, that is, two scruples to be taken at a time; and he setteth downe also, that if a purging medicine be required to be effectuall; you should take 3 aboli, that is halfe a dram, of Scammonye, 2 oboli, that is one scruple of blacke Hellebor, and one dram of Aloes, all these to be taken together at one time: but the greatest dosis now adayes exceedeth not halfe an obolus to astrong body, and lesse to the weaker, or more tender. Pena in his diligent observations, and declara∣tions hereof set downe in his Adversaria, hath caused all whom it may concerne, both to understand the choyse of this Scammonye, as also thereby to bethinke them of the sincerity of other drugges; and that as he guesseth the quantity of Scammonye is so great, that is spent in all countries, which is made onely in one, that unlesse the quantity were augmented by mixture, there could not be sufficient sincere and pure juyce, to serve them by much: and although in former ages, and even in our former times, there hath beene much false and corrupt Drugges, brought into Europe, and all the countries thereof farre and neere: yet the skill and curiositie of these times is such, that our Merchants taking onely the best for us of all sorts, and refusing the course, hath I thinke lessened, if not worne out, that sophisticating art in the masters thereof, when they see that none but true and sincere is affected and bought: the worst to lye on their hands untill it grow better: It purgeth both flegme, yellow choler, and watery humors very stongly: but if it bee indiscreetly or carelessely given with∣out due respect, it will not onely trouble the stomacke more than any other medecine, but will also scowre, fret and rase the gutts in working too forceably, oftentimes unto blood, and oftentimes causing faintings and swou∣nings: Our Physitians therefore doe seldome give, to any tender and gentle body any Scammoniate Electuary, and but in pills seldome any at all, to avoyd the dangerous symptomes that often happen thereupon; for Plinye, Paulus Aeginata, and others shew the dangers thereof, and Mesues also declareth three severall hurts or harmes that come to the body thereby, and the remedies of them, which is not from the purpose to bee here set downe. The first is saith he, that it engendreth certaine gnawing windes in the stomacke, so much offending it that it pro∣cureth a disposition to vomite. To be baked therefore in a quince, and some parslye, fennell, or wilde carrot seed, or Galanga mixed with it, is the remedy hereof: The next is that it enflameth the spirits, by the overmuch sharp∣nesse or fiercenesse therein, whereby it readily induceth feavers, especially in those that are subject to obstructions &amp; repleate with putrid humors; which inconveniences are taken away, by putting those things into your decocti∣ons, that doe coole and quench the heate thereof, and such are the muccilage of the seedes of Psyllium, or Flea∣wort, Prunes boyled or rather the pulpe of them, the juyce, or the Iulep, or the water of Roses or Violets; or if before the boyling thereof, (that is the Scammonye ) you steepe it in the oyle of Roses or Violets, or in the juyce of a sowre sweete quince, and mingle with it a little Sumach or Spodium. A third is that having a strong opening and drawing faculty, it causeth immoderate fluxes of the belly, by opening the mouth of the veines more than is fit. This harme also is taken away, by mixing astringent and restraining things with it, such as Masticke is, and especially yellow Myrobolanes and quinces, or the juyce of them. Againe, it raseth or shaveth the intrales and guttes, by reason of that sharpe juyce wherewith it doth abound, and by which it procureth tor∣ments and paines therein, the disease called Dysenteria which wee call the bloody flixe, and Tenas s, which is a disease, when one desireth to goe often to the stoole, and can doe nothing; but this danger is remedy∣ed, if moyst, fat and slippery medecines be used, as gum Tragacantha, bdellium, and oyle of Almonds and Roses, as also the pulpe of prunes, made up with Sugar, the muccillage of Psyllium or Fleaworte seedes, Masticke and quinces taken afterwards, and warme water last of all; all which cause it to passe the quicklier from the sto∣macke and bowels, and thereby stay it from doing harme; whereby those that are wise, are taught to give the broth of barly, sweetned with Sugar, to drinke to those that have taken thereof: This fault also is helped, if cold medicines as well as hot, being mixed together be given, thereby to yeeld helpe to the heart, liver, and sto∣macke: thus farre Mesues. The juyce saith Dioscorides applyed to the wombe, destroyeth the birth; being mix∣ed with honey and Oxe gall, and rubbed on wheales pimples and pushes taketh them all away: and boyled in Vinegar and annointed, taketh away the Lepry or outward markes in the skinne: being dissolved in Rosewater and vinegar, and the head moystned therewith, easeth the continuall paines therein. A dramme or two of the rootes of Scammonye purge in the same manner that the juyce doth, if some of the things appointed therewith be given with it: the rootes boyled in water, and made into a pultis, with barly meale, easeth the Sciatica, be∣ing layd thereon: it taketh away scurfes and scabbes, if they be washed with the Vinegar, wherein the rootes have beene boyled, and also healeth apostumes. Our English Bindweede hath beene experienced to be purging, the rootes especially being boyled, and the decoction thereof taken in a reasonable proportion. That of Candy is mentioned in the description. They of Mompelier have often used the dryed juyce of the fourth, in stead of the true Scammonye when it was wanting, but in a double quantity, which yet did not worke so effe∣ctually. 
CHAP. VI. Scammonia supposititia. Supposed or Bastard Scammonyes. T Here be some other plants to be joyned next unto the true Scammonye for the strong purging quality in them, but not either deadly or dangerous, as the Apocynam is, which else for the outward like∣nesse might be referred unto them.
2. Convolvulus major purpureus sive trifolius. The greater purple Bell flower with cornered leaves. The growing of this Bellflower is all one with the former, the chiefest difference consisting in the leafe which is three cornered, and in the flower which is deeper, tending to a deepe purple violet colour, and more reddish in the plaites and bottome. 
3. Convolvulus trifolius Virgineus. Blew Bell flower of Virginia. This Bell flower or Bindeweede climeth and spreadeth on pales, &amp;c. like unto the former, having leaves very 1. 2. 3. Convolvulus caruleus major folio rotundo sive Ni Avicen ae, trifolio vulgaris &amp; Virginaus. The great blew Bindweede, with a round and triparted leafe vulgar, and that of Virginia. 
5. Convolvulus pennatus Americanus. The red Bell flower of America. 
like unto the last, but smaller, and cut rounder in the division of the leafe on each side, and one side also a little longer, bending downewards: the flowers also are much smaller, of a watchet or pale blew colour, changing upon the fading thereof to be of a reddish purple: the seede is like the former but smaller, and the roote peri∣sheth like the rest. 
4. Convolvulus Arabicus sive Aegyptius. The Arabian or Egyptian Bindeweede. The Arabian or Aegyptian likewise climeth and spreadeth like the other, with a leafe at every joynt, standing on a long foote stalke, parted sometimes into five small long leaves, sometimes into more, each one ending in a small pricke, and the one or the other lower peece of the leafe, divided into two parts; at the joynts with the leaves, come forth such like Bellflowers, as are in the former, of a purplish blew colour. 
5. Convolvulus tenuifolius sive pennatus Americanus. The red Bell flower of America. This Indian kinde riseth up at the first with two double forked leaves, abiding a long time without fading, be∣tweene which springeth up a stalke, three foote high in some places, branching forth diverse wayes, being of a brownish colour, and spreading it selfe as the others doe: the leaves that are set at each joynt, are winged; that is, sundry small, narrow, and long, darke greene leaves, but fresher being young, set on both sides of the middle ribbe, and one at the end, from the joynts likewise rise long stalkes, with two or three or more small long hollow flowers at the ends of them, of the fashion of Tobacco, or the white Iasmin flowers with five points, and not so much layd open as the other Bell flowers, being of a bright red colour, and plaited like the Bell flowers, with five chives or threads in the middle, tipt with so many pendents which turne into long pointed pods, contei∣ning long and blacke seede, tasting hot like Pepper, the roote is small and stringie perishing every yeare: the leaves taste a little sweete and nitrous, and yeeldeth a thinne pale milke, when it is broken. 
The Place and Time. All these are strangers, the two first are thought to come out of the East Indies or the East Countrey towards it, the rest are specified in their titles from whence they came: They all flower late, and therefore we can very seldome get ripe seede from any of them. 
The Names. The first is taken by most, to be the Nil of Avicen and Serapio, which they call granum Nil, and Habal Nil, for there is another Nil or rather Nir, because of the blue colour, which is the Anill or Indico of Dioscorides and our times, which shall be spoken of in his place, it is called by some Flos Noctis, because his chiefest beauty is in the evening, night, and morning; others call it Convolvulus Azureus &amp; coeruleus, as they call the second trifolius &amp; pupurocaeruleus: the third and fourth have their names in their titles, as much as can be sayd of them; the last is called Quamochlit by the Indians, and Iasminum folio Millefolii by Caesalpinus, who was the first as I take it that wrote of it, Camerarius next unto him in Horto Medico saith, it may not unfitly be called Convolvulus te∣nuifolius: and Fabius Columna saith, it cannot be more fitly referred to any tribe, or family of plants, than unto the Convolvuli, and therefore calleth it himselfe Convolvulus pennatus exoticus rarior; he that set forth Clusius his Curas Posteriores, referreth it to the Iasmines, calleth it Iasminum Americanum, and so doth Bauhinus also: but in the flowers onely is the likenesse of the Iasmine, and in no other part of the plant, or manner of growing, all the Iasmines being wooddy and perennes plantae, and this as the other Convolvuli herbaccous &amp; annuall; some have ta∣ken it to be the Ligustrum nigrum, that Columella speaketh of, but with little judgement in mine opinion: the Ita∣lians call the first and second, Campana Lazura, that is, Campana caerulea, the Arabians in Syria and Egypt Hasmisea. 
The Vertues. The seede of the first and the second also (for they are congeneres ) doe purge very strongly, but slowly and oftentimes with great trouble to the stomacke, causing vomitings, yet it avoydeth raw indigested flegme, and melancholy humors, from those that can endure it, and killeth the long flat wormes of the belly. 
CHAP. X. Convolvuli sive Volubiles minores. The smaller Bindweedes. T He lesser sorts of Bindeweedes remaine to be intreated of in this Chapter, whereof there are many and sundry varieties, all of them having a purging quality, more or lesse, as you shall presently heare in this Chapter. 
1. Convolvulus Althaeae foliis: Mallow leafed Bindeweede. This small Bindeweede groweth not high, nor climeth much upon any thing, but for the most part, lyeth with his small slender hayrie branches upon the ground, having diverse leaves very thinnely or spar∣sedly set on them; somewhat broade and long, like unto the leaves of Marsh Mallowes, but smaller, crumpled and cut in on both sides at the lower ends, dented about the edges, and of an hoarie or dusty grayish greene colour, clammye or sticking like gumme to the teeth, sharpe and somewhat bitter in taste, when they are chewed in the mouth: the flowers come forth one by one, at the joynts with the leaves, all along the stalke up to the top, every one upon a long stalk, which are very like the small wild Bindweede, that groweth upon the ground: con∣sisting of one whole leafe yet plaited, as it were before the opening into five plaites, and being open have five cor¦ners, as if it had five leaves, broad like a cup or Bell at the brims, and small at the bottome, of a fine delayed purple colour sometimes, and sometimes deeper: the roote is small and brownish, creeping under ground, and shooting up heads in other places. 
2. Convolvulus minor albus Vulgaris. The common small Bindweede. The common smal Bindweed that groweth every where in fields, by the wayes and hedg sides, sometimes riseth up and windeth it selfe, but usually spreadeth on the ground, with long trailing and winding branches, one within another, and leaves set thereon somewhat like unto the greater white Bindeweede, but much lesser, the flower is for forme like the other white Bell flower either wholly white or the plaites purplish but lesse, made of one leafe plaited as it were into five fouldes, and opening wide at the brims, after which come small blackish seede, in small long and round heades: the roote is small and slender, running both very deepe downe into the ground, and spreading farre abroad likewise, especially if it get into garden mellow grounds. 
3. Convolvulus spicae folius. Lavender leafed Bindeweede. This small bindeweede is as great a plague to the fields, where it naturally groweth as the last: the leaves are long and narrow, resembling Lavender, and the flowers of a deepe purple colour, wherein it differeth from others, for else it is like the last. 
1. Convolvuls Althaeae foliis. Mallow leafed Bindweede. 
2. Convolvulus minor albus vulgaris. Common small Bindweede. 
 
4. Convolvulus minor purpureus. Small purple Bindeweede. This Bindweede is in all things like the second, saving that the flowers are either of a pale purplish, or bluish co∣lour, the foulds being white or of a deeper purple, without and white within, and the bottome so likewise, which is of much beauty. 
5. Convolvulus minor Africanus. The small African Bindeweede. There is small difference in this from the former for the manner of growing, the leaves onely make the variety, which are not divided at the bottome, but whole, and the flowers purple, but bell fashion like the rest. 
6. Convolvulus Africanus minimus. The least African Bindeweede. This sort creepeth not as the former, but standeth a little upright, or leaneth somewhat downe upon the ground, like the next Spanish kinde, the smalnesse both of leaves and flowers from the last maketh it noted to bee a severall species. 
7. Convolvulus minor Hispanicus caeruleus. The blue Spanish Bindeweede. This Spanish kinde shooteth forth sundry small branches three foote long or more, from the small threddie roote which dyeth every yeare, having sundry leaves set singly thereon, small and long at the bottome, and broader, and almost round at the end, somewhat hayrie as it were all over: at every leafe for the most part, from the middle of the stalkes upwards, commeth forth a flower like unto the common sort, folded into five plaites, which open into so many corners, of a most excellent faire skie coloured blue (so pleasant to behold, that it amazeth the spectators) with white bottomes pointed upwards and yellow in the middle, which turne into small round white heads, con∣teining within them small blackish cornered seede to be new sowen every yeare.
The Names. The word Smilax is diversly taken and with diverse significations among writers; it is taken for two sorts of trees, it is likewise taken for three sorts of herbes. Theophrastus maketh mention of one of the trees, in the 3. booke and 16 chapter of his history, calling it Smilax Arcadum a soft Oake, which is like unto an Ilex or Holly Oake. The other which the Grecians call Smilax simply, is called in Latine Taxus, the Yew tree: the herbes, are first, this here expressed, as well as the other more gentle sort, which is the common Bindeweede, this the Grecians call Smilax aspera, as they call the other Smilax laevis sine lenis, and the other the Grecians call Smilax hortensis, which is Dolichus or Phaseolus, the French or Kidney Beane, as shall be shewed in their severall places. This Smilax aspera is called also of Galen in his seventh booke of simples Milax aspera. Theodorus Gaza the translater of Theophrastus, interpreteth it Hedera Cilicia, following Plinye, who saith in lib. 26. c. 35. that the herbe called Smilax which is like unto Ivye, and came first out of Cilicia, but is more frequent in Greece, hath thornie branches, &amp;c. Plinye also calleth it Nicophoros lib. 24. chap. 10. It is called generally of all Smilax aspera, onely Lonicerus calleth it Volubilis aspera, and Clusius as I thinke first of all distinguished it by the berries, calling the one rutilo fructu, and the other nigro, when as they might as well be distinguished by their leaves, the red berryed as I take it having thornie leaves, and the other smooth and without thornes or prickles, yet Gerards figures have both of them prickles on the leaves, calling the one Lusitanica and the other Germanica, whereas it is but one and the same plant, growing in severall Coun∣tries: Tragus seemeth to bee doubtfull of Dioscorides his Smilax aspera, thinking Lupulus the Hoppe to be it; Lobel calleth that with blacke berryes Smilax aspera altera faciae-Sarsaparilla aut e congener. And it is very likely to be that kinde that Alpinus saith, he found with so large and great rootes, as is before expressed, and others so much commend to be used instead of Sarsaparilla. The Zarsaparilla or Sarsaparilla it selfe, is a Spanish word, which the Spaniards imposed upon this, when they first saw it in the West Indies, because they judged them to be both one thing, that is Smilax aspera: for so they call it in their language Zarsa, or as some write it signifying Rubus a Bramble, and Parilla viticula, the diminitive of Vitis, a Vine, as if one should say a small Vine∣like Bramble, and yet Garcias Lopes Lufitanus saith, the name the Indians call it by, doth signifie as much. Some call it Salsaparilla and some Smilax Peruana. Matthiolus giveth us a figure of Sarsaparilla, neither branches nor leaves, having any shew of thorne or prickles at all upon them, which as he saith he received from Cyprus; and hath no knot or head, from whence the long smooth roots should spring, such as is in the true Sarsaparilla; which as I sayd before I have often seene my selfe in diverse bundles thereof: but assuredly there are diverse sorts of Sarsaparilla, the best being very large &amp; full, with a white pith in the middle, which will rend or slive in the middle very easily; and this most commonly is brought without head or knot, but with a number of fibres on all sides thereof, which must be taken away before it can be used, another sort is not so full and great, yet rendeth or cleaveth reasonably well, and is the most spent, because the most store thereof is brought: the third is a hungry sort, and is of least respect and use, this being usually brought with the heads or knots, to be seene from whence the rootes sprung, I say usually, for sometimes you may finde a head or two among the middle sort. 
The Vertues. This prickly Bindweede saith Galen if the leaves be tasted they have some sharpenesse in them, and being used any way they heate. Dioscorides saith that both leaves and berryes being drunke, before or after any deadly poy∣son is taken, are a remedy there against, serving to expell it. It is sayd also saith he, that if to a new borne childe, some of the juyce of the berryes hereof be given, it shall not be hurt by poyson ever after: It is given as an An∣tidote against all sorts of poysonous or venemous things. If a dozen or sixteene of the berryes being beaten to powder, bee given in wine, it procureth Vrine when it is stopped. The distilled water of the flowers being drunke, worketh the same effect, and clenseth the raines, and aswageth inward inflammations. If the eyes be washed therewith, it taketh away all heate and rednesse in them, and if the sores of the legges be washed there∣with, it healeth them throughly. The rootes as you have heard before, are used by diverse learned and judicious men in stead of Sarsaparilla with as good successe, as if they had used the true: for Sarsaparilla doth not purge the body of humours manifestly as other purgers doe, being generally held not to heate, but rather to dry the humors, yet it is wel perceived that it spendeth the humors, by a secret and hidden property therein, whether by purging, or wasting &amp; consuming them much wherof is performed by sweating which it provoketh notably: It is much used now adays in many kinds of diseases, namely in all cold fluxes from the head &amp; braine, rhumes and catarrhes, as al∣so all cold griefs of the stomack, and expelleth winde very plentifully, both from the stomacke and mother: It hel∣peth not onely the french disease, but all manner of aches in the sinewes and joynts, all running sores in the legs, all flegmaticke swellings, tetters, or ringwormes, and all manner of spots and foulenesse of the skin: it is not conveni∣ent to be given to those whose livers are over hot, nor to such as have agues. The manner of using it, is diverse ac∣cording to mens severall opinions, for in former times it was used beaten to powder and so drunke: others againe boyled it so long untill it became tender, which being beaten or broken, was afterward strayned into the decocti∣on, making a kind of thicke drinke like a creame. Some againe and that most usually boyled it in water, to the halfe, or to the consumption of the third part, as they would have it stronger or weaker, and that either by it selfe, or with other things meete for the disease attempted: and others also put it among other things into drinke, either beere or ale new tunned up, to drinke after it hath stood three or foure dayes for Physicke drinke, for the remedy of those griefes, it is conducible as aforesayd. 
CHAP. XII Lupulus sive Lupus salictarius. Hoppes. T He Hoppe is found to be of two sorts, one manured for the use and profit of the toppe heads, the other wilde growing in hedges, and other such like places of it owne accord; and was no doubt by ordering and manuring brought to be larger in every respect, and more fruitfull for use, such as the manured is: I thinke it not amisse to speake of them both in this place, being so neere in forme and quality the one unto the other, and not separate them, or trouble two places with them. 
1. Lupulus sativus. The manured Hoppe. The manured Hoppe riseth up at the first, with diverse great browne heades, like unto Asparagus but larger, which afterwards spreading into rough branches, clime upon great high poles, that are set for them to runne on, having many hard and rough darke greene leaves on them, cut into three or five divisions, somewhat like unto Bramble leaves, and dented also about the edges: at the toppes of the branches, which hang downe againe, for the most part come forth many scaly heads, being as it were a number of small yellowish greene leaves, growing thicke together; from among which come forth the flowers; of a whitish yellow colour, which being past, and the heads changing their colour, to be somewhat whitish yellow, they are sit then to be gathered to keepe: and then there is a small round seede found therein: the roote is great at the head, shooting forth many blackish strings, taking fast hold of the ground. 
2. Lupulus sylvestris. The wilde Hoppe. The wilde Hoppe groweth up in the same manner, ramping upon trees or hedges, as standeth next unto them, with rough branches and leaves like the former: this giveth both smaller heades, and in farre lesse plenty, than the manured doth, yea many times, there is scarfe a head or two scene in a yeare upon diverse, and herein con∣sisteth the chiefe difference. 
The Place. These plants are more frequent in these colder, than in the Lupulus salictarius. Hoppes. 
hotter countries, which sheweth the goodnesse of God unto us, to provide for every Country, such things as are fit for the sustentation of life; for where Vines grow not, and the water too cold and raw, to drinke simply of it selfe, there are these Hoppes chiefely bred to make drinke to serve instead of wine or water: They delight chiefly, or rather onely to grow well, in low moist grounds, where they may have moysture enough, and yet not too much; for therefore where they are planted on hil∣lockes, as it were, there are trenches made to receive any great quantity of water, and bee conveyed away, that the plants stand not drowned therein. 
The Time. These spring not up untill Aprill, and flower not untill the latter end of Iune, the heads are not gathered, untill the middle or end of September. 
The Names. It is observed and much marveiled at, by our ordinary wri∣ters, that this plant should not be remembred by Dioscorides, Galen, or any other of the ancient Greeke or Latine writers except Pliny, who doth but onely name it and, number it among those herbes that grow of themselves, and that are used for meate with diverse nations, calling it Lupulus salictarius. The Arabians have not onely remembred it, but commended the use of it highly for many diseases, as you shall heare by and by. Mesues maketh it his third kind of Volubilis with rough leaves, among his purging plants: the Greekes at this day call it , Bryon and Bryonia it is likely for the forme of the leaves and running of the branches. It is called Lupulus &amp; Lupus salictarius, &amp; reptitius (quia salit &amp; reptat per arbores, vel quia scandit salices ) of all our moderne writers, onely Lobel calleth it Vitis septentrionalium, the Vine of the Northerne re∣gions, and Tragus as I sayd before thinking it to be Smilax aspe∣ra: the Italians call it Lupolo; the Spaniards Hombrazillos, the French Honblon, the Germaines Hopffen, the Dutch Hoppe, and we in English Hoppes. 
The Vertues. The first buds of the Hoppes, being layd a while in sand, maketh them the tenderer, and being boyled are used to be eaten, after the same manner that the buds of Asparagus are, and with as great delight for the taste, yet they have little nourishment in them: their Physicall operation therefore is to open, the obstructions of the Liver and spleene, to clense the blood, to loosen the belly, and to clense the Raines from gravell, and to cause them to make water in whom it is stayed: the decoction of the toppes of the Hoppes, of the tame as well as of the wilde, and so also the rootes doe worke the same effects, but that they are somewhat hotter than the young buds, which have more moysture in them: in clensing the blood, they helpe to cure the French disease, and all manner of scabbes, itch, and other breakings out in the body, as also all tetters, ringwormes and spreading sores, the mor∣phew likewise and all discolourings of the skin, and are used in Agues: the decoction of the flowers and tops, are used to be drunk, to helpe and expell poyson that any one hath drunk: half a dram of the seede in powder taken in drink, killeth the worms in the body, it likewise bringeth down womens courses, &amp; expelleth Vrine. The flowers and heads, being put into bathes for women to sit, in, take away the swellings and hardnesse of the Mother, and is good for the strangurie, or those that very hardly make their water; the juyce of the leaves dropped into the eares, clenseth the corrupt sores, and stench arising from the corruption in them; Mesues saith they purge cho∣ler, but worke more effectually, being steeped in whey of goates milke: A Syrupe made of the juyce and sugar, cureth those that have the yellow jaundise, easeth the headach that cometh of heate, and tempereth the heate both of the liver and stomack, and is very profitably given in long &amp; hot agues, that rise of choler and blood: Those bakers that will use the decoction of Hoppes, to mould up their bread, shal make thereby their bread to rise better, and be baked the sooner: Clusius recitetn the manner of a medecine used in Spaine, by women leeches, to cure the falling of the haire, caused by the french disease, in this sort. A pound of the roots of Hopps, wel washed &amp; boyled in 8 pints of faire water, to the consumption of the third part, or a halfe if they see cause; whereof they give half a pint to drink in a morning, causing them to sweate well after into the decoction they put sometimes, two or three roots of parsly, and as many of couch grasse, with a few Raysins of the sunne. The Ale which our forefathers, were accustomed onely to drinke, being a kinde of thicker drinke than beere (caused a stranger to say of it, Nil spissius dum bibitur, nil clarius dum mingitur, unde constat multas faeces in ventre relinquit, that is, there is no drinke thicker that is drunke, there is no Vrine cleerer that is made from it, it must needes be therefore that if leaveth much behinde it in the belly) is now almost quite left off to be made, the use of Hoppes to be put therein, altering the quality thereof, to be much more healthfull, or rather physicall, to preserve the body from the repletion of grosse humors, which the Ale engendred. The Wilde Hoppes are generally used Physically more than the manured, either because the Wilde is thought to be the more opening, and effectuall, or more easily to come by, or that the owners of the manured, will not spare, or lose so much profit, as that which would be taken away might yeeld; yet assuredly they are both of one property, take which you will, or can get. 
CHAP. XIII. Bryonia sive Vitis sylvestris. Bryonie or Wilde Vine. V Nder this title of Bryonye I must comprehend diverse and sundry plants, some whereof are of our Land, and found plentifully therein: others are strangers comming from other parts: Among which I must remember the Mechoacan of America, a plant neerest resembling the white Bryonie, as you shall heare when we come to it, and some others also that are strangers of those parts. 
1. Bryonia vulgaris sive Vitis alba. The common white Bryonie or wild Vine. The white Bryonie or wild Vine that groweth commonly abroad, ramping up on the hedges, sendeth forth many long rough, very tender branches at the beginning, growing with many very rough broad leaves thereon, cut into five partitions for the most part, in forme very like a Vine leafe, but smaller, rougher, and of a whitish or hoarie greene colour, spreading very farre upon trees or bushes, or whatsoever standeth next it, and twining with his small claspers, that come forth at the joynts with the leaves: at the severall joynts also with the leaves and claspers come forth, (especially towards the toppes of the branches) a long stalke, bearing thereon many whitish flowers, together in a long tufte, consisting of five small leaves a peece, layd open like a starre; after which come the berries, standing more seperate one from another then a cluster of grapes, greene at the first, and very red when they are through ripe, of the bignesse of Nightshade berries, of no good sent, but of a most loathsome taste, provoking vomit: the roote groweth to be exceeding greate, with many long twines or bran∣ches growing from it, of a pale whitish colour on the outside, and more white within, and of a sharpe bitter loathsome taste. 
2. Bryonia alba vulgaris fructu nigro. Common white Bryonie with blacke berries. This Bryonie differeth from the former white kinde, neither in the running rough branches or in the leaves, or in any other thing from it, but in these two particulars: the berries hereof are blacke and not red, when they are through ripe, and the roote is of a pale yellow colour on the inside, and somewhat brownish on the out∣side. 
3. Bryonia Cretica dicoccos. Candie white Bryonie with double berries. The white Bryonie of Candy, shooteth forth many long rough trayling branches, in the same manner like the former in all respects, with clasping tendrells winding it selfe upon any thing as the other doth; bearing broad leaves with such divisions therein, as it hath, but that they are somewhat smaller, greener, and striped with white lines thorough the middle, as likewise in the veynes that goe to the corners: the flowers likewise are somewhat greater than the former, of a pale whitish colour, standing every one, upon a little longer foote stalke, which give berryes in their places, greene at the first, but red when they are ripe, and formed in a differing manner from the others; for standing semicircular upon the stalkes, they are joyned at the bottome, as if it were but 1. Bryonia alba vulgaris: White Bryonie. 
6. Bryonia Sylvestris nigra. Common blacke Bryonie. 
one berrie, but are parted at the toppes into two parts, wherein are conteined two seedes, from whence rose the name: the roote is very long, but never growing to be bigger than a mans arme, of a browner colour on the outside, and not so white within as the common. 
4. Bryonia nigra Dioscoridis. Blacke Bryonie with blacke fruite in clusters. This blacke Bryonie sendeth forth many long greene branches, whereon are set diverse broad leaves, some∣what long pointed and not divided on the edges at all, of a sad or darke greene colour, having at the joynts with the leaves clasping tendrells, whereby it windeth it selfe about whatsoever it meeteth with, towards the toppes come forth likewise long bunches of whitish mossie flowers, which afterward turne into berryes, greene at the first, and blacke when they be ripe: the roote is somewhat great and blackish on the outside, but of a yellowish colour on the inside, full of a clammie moyst humour or juyce, that will cleave to your fingers. 
5. Bryonia nigra baccifera. Blacke Bryonie with single red berries. This kinde of Bryonie hath many long and square branches, more hard or wooddy than the last, winding themselves about every thing that standeth next unto them, but hath no claspers at all, the leaves are some∣what like unto the great white Bindeweede, of a shining colour, a little unevenly dented about the edges, and standing upon long foote stalkes: towards the toppes of the stalkes, at the joynts with the leaves, come forth white flowers, every one standing on a short stalke, which afterwards give single berries, greene at the first; and red when they are ripe, little lesse than Cherryes, wherein are contained foure or five somewhat large round and blacke seede: the roote is great thicke and long, somewhat like the last, and having such like clammie juyce within it as it hath. 
6. Bryonia nigra sylvestris, sive Sigillum Sanctae Mariae. Common blacke Bryonie or our Ladies signet. This kinde of Bryonie hath also long trayling branches, without any clasping tendrills, (in all places that I have seene) whereby it might fasten and winde it selfe, the leaves are somewhat broade and like unto the leaves of the rough or prickely Bindeweede, ending in a sharpe point: the flowers come forth at the joynts upon long stalkes, many clustering together, in long thinne or sparsed clusters, every one consisting of five small white leaves, and after they are fallen, there come in their places, small berries, red when they are ripe for the most part, or changing somewhat blackish, in some places by standing long: the roote is brownish on the outside, and white within, somewhat great if it grow in moyst grounds, but much smaller or whiter, in hard drye or stonie places, as Dalechampius saith; of a little hot and sharpe taste. 
7. Bryonia alba Peruana sive Mechoacan. The Mechoacan of Peru. The Mechoacan of Peru that hath growen in these parts, sendeth forth divers darke grayish long branches, winding themselves about Poales that are set for them, or any other things that are next unto them, whereon doe grow faire broad leaves, pointed at the ends, very like in forme, unto the leaves of the last recited Ladies seale, but of a darke greene colour, thinner and harder in handling, seeming so dry as though they had no juyce in them: the flowers are many, standing in long clusters, yet every one 7. Bryonia alba Peruana sine Mechoacan. The Mechacan of Peru.
Mechoacani vadix. The roote of Mechoacan. 
bigger than any of the former, (of a sullen yellow colour in the Indies as Monardus saith, and as large as an Orenge flower, with an umbone in the middle, which afterwards becommeth the fruite, and being ripe is as big as an hasell nut, divided by a thin skinne in the middle, in each side whereof lye two blacke seedes of the bignesse of pease) of a darke whitish colour in the war∣mer Countries of Europe, but not with us, yeelding berries and seede but not so large: the roote groweth to be as great as any Bryonie roote, being not bitter or loathsome to taste, as it is, but rather altogether without either taste or smell, having many circles in it, as may be discerned in the dry rootes, that come over to us, and may easily be brought into powder. 
8. Mechoacan sylvestris. Wild Mechoacan. This wild kind of Mechoacan is altogether like the other, both in manner of growing, with branches, leaves, flowers and rootes, but lesser in every particular, and the roote (wherein is the chiefest difference) being sharpe and loathsome, procuring vomiting and troubling the stomacke, when it is taken, as mch as any ordinary Bryonie can doe. 
9. Mechoacan nigricans sive Ialapium. Blacke Mechoacan or Ialap. Although we have not seene this Ialap grow with us, or have heard it to grow in any these parts of Europe, neither are assured that the plant thereof is of this family, more than by conjecture, and sight of the dryed rootes. (brought unto us as a Merchandise and a purging roote) being somewhat like in vertue and in forme unto the smaller peeces of the former Mechoacan: yet I thought good to make mention of it in this place, among the rest of this kinde, both to let it be knowne to the world, and to excite some one or other to get the seede, or the greene roote, that by sight thereof growing fresh, we may know to what tribe or family it doth belong: It com∣meth to us in small thinne peeces, some greater some smaller, yet nothing so large as the greater, but rather as the smaller peeces of Mechoacan, of a brownish blacke colour, somewhat more solid, hard, compact, and gummie withall, for out of it will rise a black gum, being layd on a quick or burning coale, but not (flame in any that I have seene or tryed) and of no unpleasant taste; but sticking a little, in the teeth when it is chewed. 
The Place. The first groweth on bankes or under hedges, throughout this whole Kingdome. The second groweth in some Countries of Germany, Bohemia, &amp;c. where the former white doth not. The third groweth plentifully in Candy, from whence Honorius Bellus sent the seed thereof to Clusius and others. The fourth Gerard saith groweth in bushes and hedges, almost every where, but herein I am sure he is much mistaken, thinking that our ordinary blacke Bryonie is this of Dioscorides for I have neither found it my selfe in any place, nor understood of a cer∣tainty from others, that they have found any with blacke berries and a blacke roote; and I finde some good au∣thours doe doubt, whether the right be to be found or no. The fift Bauhinus saith was found in the woods by Huningen a village in Germany. The sixt is found wild in many places of our owne Countrie as well as in Italy: as Matthiolous saith, or in France and Germanie as Lobel saith. The seaventh as Monardus saith, groweth in the Province of Mechoacan 40 miles beyond Mexico, from whence it was first brought into Spaine: but afterwards, both more plentifully, better conditioned and of more effect, was brought from the firme or maine land of Nica∣ragua and Quito. The eight Monardus saith was brought from the promontory of S. Helen, which is on the same continent with Nicaragua. The last is likewise brought from a place in the Indies, called Chelapa or Calapa, from whence also it tooke the name. 
The Time. They doe all flower in the monthes of Iuly and August, some earlyer or later than others, as their originall is from colder or warmer countries, and their seede if they give any ripe with us, is perfect soone after. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Vitis alba &amp; Vitalba sic dicta non quod sit vitis sed quod ei similis, as also forte quod est pullulo, extollo, exalto, quod in vicinos frutices scandens se extollat at{que} late pullulet: it is likewise called , psilotrum quod ex ejus acinis coria depilari ac confici possunt, in Latine of some Vitirela, of others Rorastrum, of Apuleius Apiastellum &amp; Vva Taminia, but of most Vitis alba, Bryonia, and Bryonia alba. The second is called Bryonia nigra, Vitis nigra, &amp; Vitis alba baccis nigris, and onely distinguished from the first, by the colour of the fruite and roote, for that it is but one kind, differing by the nature of the climate where it groweth. The third is called Bryonia Dicoccos of Honorius Bellus, who as I sayd before, first sent it from Candy, Bauhinus calleth it Bryonia Cretica maculata. The fourth is called in Greeke , in Latine Vitis nigra, (ita dicta ab acinis radiceque nigris, &amp; quod vitis similitudinem habet) Bryonia nigra &amp; Vitis Chironia, the true kinde of Dioscorides, whose branches having tendrels, whose leaves being Ivye like, the berries and roote blacke, is knowne to very few. The fift is called by Bauhinus in his Prodromus Bryonia syl. baccifera, in his Pinax, Bryonia laevis sive nigra baccifera. The sixt is taken of most writers to be Vitis nigra, or Bryonia nigra of Dioscorides, as Matthiolus, Anguillara, Lacuna, Gesnar, Castor Durantes, Lugdunensis, Tabermontanus, and Lobel. Dodonaeus calleth it Tamus &amp; Vitis sylvestris, but saith it differeth from that Vitis sylvestris, that is called Labrusca, which differeth little from the true manured Vine; but that it groweth wild and beareth few or no grapes: Some as Dodonaeus call it Vitis Taminia, and the berries Vva Taminia, yet some would appropriate that name to the Bryoni alba: it is in most of the Apothecaries shoppes in Italy, France, and Germanye called Sigillum Sanctae Marie or Beatae Mariae: Some likewise would have it to be the Cyclaminus Cissanthemos of Dioscorides, which it cannot be, for he saith the roote is unprofitable, which this is not, and others to be Pliny his Salicastrum; both which are more truely referred to the Dulcamara or Solanum lignosum. Gerard is much deceived in thinking Cyclaminus altera Dioscoridis, to be a kinde of Cyclamen. The seaventh is called of most men Mechoacan, from the place where it grew, yet Monardus saith the Spaniards that used it, called it Rhabarbarum from the effects, and to distinguish it, called it Mechoacanum Indicum, &amp; album Rhabarbarum, and Rhabarbarum Mechoacanum: Bauhinus saith it doth neerest resemble the Bryonia sylvestris, and therefore calleth it Bryonia Mechoacana dicta, Dodonaeus rather taketh it to be a kinde of Scammonye calling it Scammonium Americanum but not rightly. The eight is called Me∣choacana sylvestris, as a wild and worse kind of the former, and as Monardus saith, they that do once use it, will ne∣ver use it againe, in regard of the violent paines and symptomes it doth procure, and therefore Monardus thought it to be rather a Scammonye, and is called of Bauhinus Bryonia Mechoacana sylvestris. The last is called Ialapium, Ialap, and Gelapo, in different places. Bauhinus calleth it Bryonia Mechoacana nigricans. The Arabians call the white English Alfesera, the Italians Vite bianco &amp; Zucca salvatica, the Spaniardes Nueza Blanca Bryonia and Norca blanca, the French Coleurees and Feuardent, the Germanes Stick wurtz Hunds raben &amp; Teufels Kirsche, the Dutch Witte Bryonie, and we in English Bryonie, White Bryonie, White wild Vine, and Tetter berries. 
The Vertues. The roote of the white Bryonie purgeth the belly, with great violence, troubling the stomacke and hurting the liver, wherefore it is not rashly to be taken, but as Mesues adviseth, some spice is to bee added to it, or some Masticke, Quinces or other such like astringent and strengthening thing. The first and tender shootes, as Diosco∣rides and Galen say, were used in their times to be eaten in the spring, both to purge the belly and to provoke urine, and is sayd to be also used in our times in other parts, but not in our countrie, who delight not in so bitter, but in more pleasant sallets: By the strong purging quality of the roote, it may bee profitable for the diseases of the head, as the falling sicknesse, the dissinesse and swimmings in the head and braine, by drawing away much flegme and rheumatick humors, oppressing those parts, as also the joynts and sinews, and is therefore good for pal∣sies, convulsions, crampes, and stitches in the sides: in purging the belly of waterish humors it is good also, as same say, against the dropsie, and in provoking Vrine: it also clenseth the raines and kidneyes from gravell and the stone, by opening the obstructions of the spleene, and wasteth and consumeth the swellings &amp; hardnes thereof. It clenseth the mother wonderfully, in helping those that are troubled, with the rising and suffocation thereof, by drinking once a weeke, of the wine wherein the roote was boyled, going to bed, and expelleth the dead childe, and afterbirth in those those that are delivered, but is not to be used by women with childe, for feare of abortion: it bringeth downe also their courses when they are stopped, by taking a dram of the roote in powder in wine or sitting in the decoction of the rootes; it clenseth the chest of rotten flegme mightily, and therefore an Electuary made of the rootes and honey, doth wonderfully helpe them that have an old and strong cough, or that are rea∣dy to be strangled with flegme oppressing them, and that are troubled with shortnesse of breath: the same also is very good for them that are bruised inwardly, to helpe to expell the clotted or congealed blood, Dioscorides also saith that the roote being taken, helpeth those that are bitten with a viper or an adder; the Foecula or white hard∣ned juyce, is often used to be taken to the weight of two or three graines at the most, in wine or broth, to all the purposes of purging aforesayd. For outward applications, Dioscorides saith, that the leaves, fruite, and roote, by the sharpe quality that is in them, doe clense old and filthy sores, are good against all fretting and running can∣kers, gangraenes and tetters, and therefore the berries usually called of the Country people. Tetter berries, are with good successe, and often experience applyed to them: the roote also clenseth the skinne wonderfully, from all blacke and blew spots, freckles, morphew, leprie, foule scarres, or any other deformity of the skinne what∣soever, as also all running scabbes and manginesse, either the powder of the dryed roote, or the juyce thereof rudely taken, but especially the foecula, or fine depurate and hardened white juyce, to be used at all times of the yeare. The distilled water of the rootes worketh the same effect, but more weakely; yet the water is often used to cleere the skinne from spottes, &amp;c. the roote being bruised and applyed of it selfe to any place, where the bones are broken, helpeth to draw them forth, as also splinters or thornes in the flesh: and being applyed with a little wine mixed therewith, it breaketh byles and helpeth whitlowes on the joynts: it is sayd that Au∣gustus Caesar, was wont to weare it with bayes, made into a roule or garland, thereby to be secured from light∣ning. The rootes of the blacke Bryonie are of the same effect with the white, but much weaker in purging cho∣ler and flegme and other humors, and provoking Vrine, in helping the falling sickenesse, the palsie, the passions of the mother, and the other diseases before mentioned: it doth in some sort clense the skinne of spots and markes, but the white is both more used, and more effectuall; the juyce hereof or the roote it selfe, boyled with wine, and honey, and drunke, and the roote also bruised and applyed with honey, to the Kings Evill, is very effectuall to heale it, and all other kernels, knots, or hard swellings, either in or about the necke and throate especially, or in other parts: being applyed also in the same manner, to any place out of joynt, is good both to ease the paines, and to consolidate and strengthen the sinewes, that they be not easily againe put out of their place: it is often used also with good successe, being fresh, bruised and applyed to the shoulders or armes, that are full of paine and ach, as also to such hippes or hucklebones, as have the Sciatica, or paines therein: the leaves bruised with wine and layde upon the sore neckes of Oxen, that are wrung with the yoake helpeth them. Matthiolus saith, it was reported unto him, that the roote of our sixt Bryonie (which I say is called beyond Sea, Sigillum Beatae Mariae, our Ladies seale or signet, and which he thinketh to be the blacke Bryonie of Dioscorides ) being roasted in the embers and eaten, is a powerfull medecine, to helpe forward the acts of Venerie, and addeth withall, that it excelleth all other medecines, taken for that purpose; which yet he saith he can hardly beleeve; yet Lobel doth yerke him for that report. The Mechoacan is a familiar medecine used of many, especially when we first had it, as all new things are, but now is much neglected, although it be the same, and worketh the same effects: it is given to all ages young and old, and to young children, yea women with childe without any harme or danger, as also at all times of the yeare, for being without any evill taste or smell it may be the better taken of the most de∣licate, and tender stomacke, that doth loath all other medecines: it is most usually being made into powder taken in wine, or if any refuse that manner, the roote may be boyled either in a little broth, (as it was to Queene Eli∣zabeth in her last sickenesse, without her consent or sence in the taste) or wine, and so taken: the dose whereof in powder, is from halfe a dramme to a whole dramme, or a dramme and a halfe or two drammes, as there is cause, respect being had to the age and strength of the patient: It purgeth cholericke and flegmaticke, yea grosse viscous and putride humors, whatsoever in the body, as also the yellow waterish humors of the dropsie, with much ease and facility: it clenseth also the liver and spleene, and like the true Rubarbe strengtheneth the sto∣macke, corroborating the inward parts, after purging and opening the obstructions of them, it helpeth also all diseases that come from them, as the dropsie: the Iaundise, &amp;c. for it rectifieth the evill constitution of the Liver, by opening and dissolving the hardnesse thereof, as also of the spleene and stomacke, dissolveth also the windi∣nesse and expelleth it; it taketh away also all old, or inveterate paines of the head, by clensing the braine and the nerves, and purging those rheumaticke distillations, and humors that are in them; it helpeth also all paines whatsoever in the joynts, in particular or generall, as the joynt aches or gout, and those of the bladder and raines, in procuring one to make water, and the collicke also, by expelling the wind wonderfully; it helpeth the paines of the mother, by tempering the cold humour, and expelling the windinesse which are the causes thereof: it helpeth the shortnesse of breath, and the old cough: It is also availeable in the French disease, by taking it often as there is cause, and purging the old peccant humors, especially if the disease be not of any long continu∣ance. It taketh away also the cause of old and long lingring agues, whether they be tertian or quotidian or other intermittive agues, caused by obstructions. The Ialap is in working and purging somewhat like unto the Me∣choacan, but exceedeth it, in working more strongly, and a little more churlishly upon both flegmaticke and wa∣tery humors, yet strengthening both the liver and stomacke: the manner to take it is, being made into powder, to drinke it in white wine fasting, yet some take it in the distilled water of Cichorie or Borrage, or else in broth made with cold herbes. 
CHAP. XIIII. Ricinus sive Palma Christi. Palma Christ, or great Spurge. B Ecause there be many sorts of Spurges, and that this kinde of great Spurge doth much differ from all the other sorts, hereafter set forth, I thinke it fittest to ranke it in a chapter by it selfe before the other, as a captaine to all the rest; for although the properties be conformable to the Spurges, yet so are not, either forme of leaves, flowers, or seede, of any of the foure or five sorts, I shall here shew you: Take this therefore as the first kinde. 
1. Ricinus sive Cataputia major vulgatior. The more ordinary Palma Christi, or great Spurge. This great Spurge, (which doth grow in the warme and hot countries, of Europe and Asia to be as great in the body as a man, and as tall as a reasonable great tree, and is used to be lopped every yeare, whose seede cannot be gathered without a ladder set thereto, and whose leafe falleth not away in the winter as Bellonius saith in the first booke of his observations, the 18 chapter) springeth up in our countrie, to be eight or neere sometimes tenne foote high, whose stemme will be hollowed as bigge almost as our ordinary canes, of a brownish colour, with an eye of blew hoarinesse upon it: the leaves that stand both upon the stemme, and upon the branches it sendeth forth, every one severally, on all sides upon long foote stalkes, are very broad, and divided into five or seaven or into more divisions (representing the hand of a man, with the fingers spread abroad) of a darke or deepe greene colour on the upperside, and whitish greene underneath; the flowers are many round buttons, shoo∣ting forth together, and stand all along upon a long stalke, at the toppes of the stem and branches, consisting of many pale yellow threads, which fall away without bearing any seede: but lower upon the stemme or maine stalke; and sometimes also upon the branches, breake forth other heades, which are the seede upon long foote stalkes, being three square or three seedes joyned together, rough and ash coloured on the outside, or outer shell, which opening it selfe, or being opened, there lyeth within it the seede, whose outward huske is discoloured, or as it were spotted and shaped like unto a ticke, which conteineth within it, a pretty large, shining round some∣what long and flat seede, of a browne colour, having a white pulpe or kernell within it; of a fiery hot taste, bur∣ning the mouth and throate, of whomsoever shall taste it, but very unctuous or oylie; whereof an oyle is pressed which is onely used for outward remedies, for as Dioscorides saith it is cibis foedum; but serveth to burne in lampes, in those hot countries, where it is naturall and plentifull, the roote consisteth of many long and great strings, and small fibres, which perisheth with us quickely, after it hath felt the first frosts, and must be new set every year by them will have it, but abideth in the warme countries, as I sayd in the beginning of the description many yeares. 
1. Ricinus sive Cataputia major vulgatior. The more ordinary Palma Christi or great Spurge. 
4. Ricinus Americanus &amp; follum novellum, Palma Christi of America, and one of the first leaves. 
 
2. Ricinus major Africanus Syriacus vel Aegyptius. Palma Christi of Syria, &amp;c. Camerarius in his hortus medicus, maketh mention of another sort whose seede was twice so bigge as the for∣mer, the colour whereof was not so pale or spotted, and came as he saith out of Syria. This is very probale to be that hot violent sort, that Aldinus in his Farnesian garden remembreth, being brought from Aegypt, the halfe 4. Fructus Ricini Americani. Palma Christi of America seede. 
part of whose seede being taken by a strong young man of twenty yeares, mightily troubled with the headach, purged him very forcibly and eased his paines, but in that he chewed the seede in his mouth (and did not swallow it whole without chewing as it should have beene) it in∣flamed his throate and mouth of his stomacke so violently, that after he had endured an ague, in∣tolerable thirst, and fainting of the spirits, nine dayes after the taking thereof he dyed, notwith∣standing the care of three Physitions with all the remedies they could use. Of the seede be∣ing, set sprung up a plant greater than the for∣mer, whose leaves were larger more crumpled and redder in other things little differing. 
3. Minor. There is another kinde also but lesser in every part thereof, although it grow in the same ground, whose seede being ripe is evidently ob∣served to be much lesser: This is not remembred by any Authour that hath written thereof, before Clusius in the second booke of his Exotickes and 21 chapter, and Beslerus that set forth the Bishop of Eystot his garden, in a great large volume, whose seede that we first saw came from the Bermudas, where they made oyle thereof, and grew with us in that manner before expressed. 
4. Ricinus Americanus, Palma Christi of America. The Palma Christi of America differeth from the first, and second sort, not onely in the greatnesse, for as Mo∣nardus &amp; Aldinus say it groweth to be a much greater tree, than any growing in Spaine, whose first leaves were al∣most round, &amp; bigger than the first; but those that follow are broad and torne on the edges, into sundry corners, in the seede there is some difference also, which although they be three alwayes joyned together, yet the outer huske is not rough or prickely, but smooth and of an ashcolour, the innermost seede it selfe, being somewhat like the other, but more blacke and not spotted at al, and is as oyle as the first, for thereof as I here, there is made good store of oyle which serveth in the steede of oyle for any outward uses. Clusius remembreth a very small sort of this Indian kind, whose seede is the smallest of all other, even smaller than the former small kinde, which was brought from America. 
The Place. The first groweth in Spaine as Clusius saith, to a great largenesse as is before sayd, and in Candy as Bellonius saith, the greater kind, whereof Camerarius maketh mention, groweth in Syria, &amp; Africa, and as Aldinus saith in Aegypt. The first lesser sort in America, and Guinea as Clusius saith, in the place before remembred. The great kind of America, Monardus saith groweth in Gelisco a province of new Spaine, from whence an oyle made of the seede thereof is brought, of much use as you shall heare by and by: and the last and least of all other, was brought from Brasill as Clusius saith in the 25 chapter of his 2 booke of Exoticks the ninth fruit. 
The Time. Those that grow with us flower not untill the beginning of August, and their seede doth seldome come to per∣fect ripenesse in this Country. 
The Names. It is called by Dioscorides in Greeke , Cici &amp; Croton, a Crotonis sive ricini animalis similitudine, quod refert semen. Arias Montanus in his Commentaries upon Ionas, saith that the hebreW word Kikajon (which is neere the Greeke Kiki ) doth signifie this plant, although S. Ierome did translate the word to be Hedera, and our English bibles have it, a Gourd that was raysed up by God to shelter Ionas from the heate of the Sun. Ionah c. 4. of some Pentadactylus, by Mesues Granum Regium; Caesalpinus from the Italian name Girasole tooke it to be Heliotro∣pium Dioscorides, but most commonly it is called Ricinus &amp; Palma Christi, and in the Apothecaries shops Cataputia major, the oyle whereof is known to the most of them, by the name of Oleum de Cherva, yet it is also called Oleum Cicinum, as well as that oyle made of the Indian seed, brought from thence: In Spaine they call the seede of the ordinary as well as the Indian sort, Figuo del inferno, and thereafter some call it Ficus infernalis. The lesser kinde Clusius saith in the same place before mentioned is called Eraway by the Indians. The great Indian kinde, Clu∣sius saith is called Curcas in America, and we to distinguish it from the former kind, do call it Ricinus Americus, or Americanus, Palma Christi of America. The Arabians call it Cherva, the Italians Mirasole, Girasole, &amp; Cataputia maggiore, the French Palma Christi, the Germanes Winderbaum, the Dutch Molenkruit and Wonderboome, and we in English Palma Christi, or great Spurge.
There is another of this kinde lesser in all parts thereof, else not differing from it. 
5. Tithymalus Leptophyllos. Small annuall Spurge. This annuall small Spurge hath many slender weake stalkes, bushing forth into many branches, and spreading farre upon the ground, whereon grow very small long and narrow leaves, standing upright, the uppermost whereof are somewhat broade at the bottome, and compasse the stalkes, ending in a long sharpe point or end: the flowers are yellow, like unto the other and very small, after which come three square heads, but very small, wherein is conteined very small round grayish seede, not much bigger than poppy seede: the roote is small long hard and woody, perishing every yeare as soone as it hath given seede. 
6. Esula rotunda sive Peplus. Round headed Spurge, or Vineyard Spurge. This Spurge shooteth forth round about the roote many small weake reddish upright branches with small leaves set by couples for the most part, somewhat like the leaves of Sun-turning Spurge, but rounder pointed and smaller, of a grayish greene colour on the upperside, and a little reddish or purplish underneath, oftentimes which will change to be wholly purple, in the Sommer time; the flowers are very small and yellow standing more round, or close together, as it were in an umbell, otherwise like unto the rest: and so is the seede also very small, conteined in three square heads: the roote is small and long, with many small strings and fibres at it, peri∣shing also every yeare, and rising againe of it owne sowing. 
7. Peplis. Small purple Sea Spurge. This small purple Sea Spurge, spreadeth his small purplish branches upon the ground more plentifull than the other, and somewhat lesser; whereon doe grow many small leaves like the other, but not so round at the ends; and purplish likewise both underneath and above oftentimes, especially in the beginning of the heate of the yeare: the flowers are small and yellow like the other, and so is the seede, but somewhat bigger and standing two toge∣ther for the most part, not onely upon the toppes, but here and there upon the branches also: the roote is small and slender and of no use. 
8. Chamaesyce. Petty Spurge or time Spurge. The pettie Spurge is one of the smallest Spurges that is, having very small slender branches, lying upon the ground, divided oftentimes into other smaller, with smal pale green leaves set thereon, smaller than those of Tyme, 6. Esula rotunda sive Peplus. Round headed Spurge. 
7. Peplis. Small purple Sea Spurge. 
or as Pena compareth them unto Rupture wort: the flowers are the smallest and so is the seede of all the rest, set in heads by couples like the last: the roote is small and long, consisting of nothing but threds, and is of no use. 
9. Esula exigua foliis obtusis. Petty Spurge with broad pointed leaves. This Petty Spurge likewise groweth close upon the ground, the small round branches not exceeding an hand breadth in length, with small long and narrow leaves, broad at the points or ends, as if they had beene cut off, set without order on them, yeelding milke as the others doe: the flowers and seede is like the last, and so is the roote also. 
10, Tithymalus exiguus saxatilis. Rocky pettie Spurge. This is the smallest Spurge of all the rest, the small branches not extending two or three inches in length, with the smallest and narrowest leaves of any set thereon: the flowers are small and somewhat reddish: the seede is agreeable to the plant, and the roote as small as threds. 
11. Apios sive Tithymalus tuberosus. Tuberous or knobbed Spurge. Tuberous or Knobbed Spurge, hath diverse small reddish branches, lying upon the ground, with many small leaves, somewhat like unto those of Saint Iohns wort set thereon without order, every one having the middle ribbe white therein: some of those beare a few small flowers at the toppes of them like unto the other Spurges, and seede likewise in three square heads; the roote is tuberous in his naturall place, blackish without white within, and formed somewhat like a peare or figge, from whence the name thereof rose: but a little differing in our climate, not keeping so proportionable a figure as it hath come over to us, even as the blacke Raddish hath done likewise; and therefore we may thereby plainely perceive the nature of the soyle, doth alter much the forme of rootes, and leaves also in many things. 
12. Apios sive Tithymalus tuberosus, oblonga radice. Long rooted Tuberous Spurge. This other Tuberous Spurge, the figure whereof Clusius had sent him from Plateau, is so like the former, that I verily beleeve (as I sayd before of the former) the soyle and climate was the cause of the alteration therein, yet briefely to shew you what he saith thereof, is this, it hath five or sixe branches rising from the roote lying upon the ground, somewhat reddish towards the bottome of them, divided into other smaller branches: the greene leaves, that are set thereon by couples on both sides are small like the other, but a little rounder: the flowers that grow at the toppes are of a yellowish red colour, after which come three square heads somewhat rugged or set with knobbes, wherein is conteined small round seede, like unto the other, the roote is long and round, having many other small and long thicke rootes, issuing from the lower end thereof, with many small fi∣bres thereat, blackish on the outside and white within, like the former. 
13. Tithymalus tuberosus Germanicus. Knobbed Spurge of Germany. The knobbed spurge of Germany, differeth from the former two sorts of Apios, first in the rootes which con∣sist of many reddish knobs, set together with diverse long fibres among them, like unto the rootes of Scrophula∣ria, or great Figgewort: the branches are small and tender, whereon grow the leaves which are small and nar∣row, 8. Chamaesyce. Petty Spurge or Tyme Spurge. 
10. Apios sen Tithymalus tuberosus. Knobbed Spurge. 
11. Ischas sive Apiosoblonga radice. Long rooted tuberous Spurge. 
somewhat like unto the leaves of Mesereon but smaller: the flowers are yellow, and the seede small and round, growing in three square heads, like unto the other sorts of Spurges. 
The Place. The first and third sorts, grow in some places of Germanie and France, both by the Rivers side and borders of fields, but no where naturall in England that I can heare, but in the gardens of those that are lovers of plants; the third is often∣times found in the Country gardens of poore folkes in many places with us. The second is found in some Herba∣rists gardens in the low Countries; Ioannes Thalius remembreth the two sorts of the fourth kinde, which hee found in cragged stonie places, lying open to the sunne, and in the borders of some fields, that were dry in Saxo∣nie neere Turin in Germanie. The fift also is found in the fields in the same places of Germany, that the last are, but neerer the villages. The sixt groweth in the Vineyards of France in diverse places, as also in ditches and borders of fields there. The seventh groweth neere the Sea side in Narbone and about Marseilles. The eighth groweth about Mompelier, in the dry sandy Vineyards and Olive grounds, neere the Sea also. The Ninth and Tenth, grow about Mompelier and Marseilles, as also Padoa as Bauhinus saith. The eleventh groweth on Mount Athos as Bellonius reporteth, in Apulia and the Kingdome of Naples, as Ferrantes Imperatus affirmeth, who sent some of the rootes thereof unto Clusius, in Candy also and diverse other the warmer Countries, but they are all nursed up onely with us in the gardens of those that are curious. The twelfth is not expressed where it is na∣turall. The last is remembred by Camerarius, who saith it was found in certaine woods about Lypsik in Germanie. 
The Time. They doe all flower in the Sommer Months of Iune, Iuly, and August, some earlyer and some later than others; but the third kinde is often found in flower in May. 
The Names. Pityusa is called in Greeke , in Latine and in shoppes Esula, or Esula minor, because there is a greater as hath beene shewed before; it seemeth to have taken the name from Pityusa, being derived thereof, and made adiminitive, as if it were Pity usula, and short Vusula or Esula, as a small Pityusa or Pine Spurge. The first is ta∣ken to be the Pityusa of Dioscorides, and called Esula minor generally in most Countries, although the seede an∣swere not to the description of Dioscorides; yet is often confounded with the third, which is called Cyparissias by most authors, and therefore Tabermontanus maketh the first to be his second Tithymalus Cupressinus: that the roote hereof is taken by Actuarius and others for Turbith, I have shewed before. Nicolaus Myrepsicus in some me∣decines and purging pils, doth appoint to be put thereinto Esula, by the name of Chamaepitys: whereupon Fuchsius thinketh, that Nicolaus his Chamapitys, is the ordinary ground Pine and not any kind of Tithymall, being deceived by the Etimologie and double sense of the word: for Chamaepitys signifieth a low Pine, which Pityusa doth also: but Chamaepitys doth resemble a Pine, as wel in the resinous smel, as in the forme of the leaves, which Pityusa doth not, and also that Pityusa is a strong purger, fit for such medecines, and pills, as Nicolaus appointeth it an ingredient, and therefore by Chamaepitys there he only meaneth that Esula with Pine tree leaves. The second is by Lobel in his obser∣vations set forth under the same title, is here expressed, and I have adjoyned unto the first as most likely to be a spe∣cies thereof, rather than of the Esula dulcis Tragi, as I have shewed you in the next chapter save one before this, as Bauhinus would make it. The fourth Bauhinus referreth as I sayd before to Camerarius his Tithymalus arven∣sis, and to that which Ioannes Thalius in his Harcynia Saxanothuringica calleth . Bauhinus in his Pinax calleth it Tithymalus Cyparissias foliis punctis croceis notatis. The fifth is Matthiolus his Leptophyllos, whom Ca∣merarius and Thalius doe follow. It is Tragus his Esula exigua, and Peplis minor of Dalechampius. The sixt is called , Peplus &amp; Syce, and Mecon aphrodes as Dioscorides saith, in Latine Esula ro∣tunda, from the forme as well of the branches, growing up round about the rootes, and the umbell of flowers which are round, which names hold withall writers. The seventh is called , Peplis &amp; Peplies, of the red colour of the leaves, and Andrachne agria, i. Portulaca sylvestris, of the face and forme of the whole plant: it hath no other Latine name than Peplis, yet Bauhinus calleth it Peplis maritima folio obtuso, and Caesalpinus Peplium, and is Dalechampius his Peplion. The eight is called Chamasyce, quasi humilis vel terre∣stris ficus generally of all writers. The ninth and tenth Bauhinus onely remembreth, and giveth the names as they are in the titles. The eleventh is called Apios of Dioscorides, and Ischas of Theophrastus, from the forme of the roote, which is like unto a peare or figge; in Latine Tithymalus tuberosus, by which names ei∣ther the one or the other, all writers call them; but there is an errour in Fuchsius and Tragus, in mistaking a small wilde kind of Vetch, with small tuberous or clogge rootes, growing in woods and fields to be Apios, which Matthiolus thereupon calleth Pseudoapios, and is the plant that Gerard doth call in English Pease Earth Nut, i Latine terrae glandes, and of Tabermontanus and others Chamabalanus: Turner also is in another errour supposing the Bulbocastanum or Nucula terrestris to be Dioscorides his Apios. The twefth Clusius saith he had the figure onely sent him from Plateau, and thereupon calleth it Ischas altera. Bauhinus translating the name to Tithyma∣lus oblong a radice, and I to Apios sive Tithymalus tuberosus oblonga radice, but I verily thinke it to be, but a lu ∣rious kind of the former Apios. The last Camerarius onely hath made mention of in his Hortus Medicus, and calleth it Tithymalus tuberosus alter, and Bauhinus Tithymalus tuberosus Germanicus, as it is in the titles. 
The Vertues. All these spurges are of the nature of the former, yet some more, some lesse violent in purging, and conducing better to some speciall diseases, as you shall heare in particular. The first Pityusa which is accounted the tru Esula minor, (although the Cyparissias be taken of many for the same, and so used but with lesse successe, yet neerest thereunto) is accounted of force to heale the bitings or stingings of venemous serpents: it purgeth strongly downewards both choller and flegme, and taketh away the hardnesse and paines of the belly, and swel∣lings of the breasts: the seede and roote prepared helpeth the dropsie, being carefully and with good advise taken: the leaves (sleeped a while in vinegar, and afterwards dryed and made into powder, which is the preparation of them) may be given to the weight of three drammes saith Dioscorides, (which I hold proportionable, to the re of the great quantities of purgers, given by the ancients whereof I have spoken before, which is over large to be given to any in our time, or at least nation) the roote (prepared in the manner aforesaid) is given likewise to the weight of two drammes saith Dioscorides, in meade or honeyed water: but one dramme is so strong, that it is not fit to be taken but with caution, and by a strong body) the seede saith Dioscorides may be taken to the weight of a dramme: but seeing 9 or 10 seedes, of the garden Spurge is a sufficient strong medicine, I thinke so many of those seedes are too many by much: and of the juyce or milke a spoonefull Dioscorides appointeth, being made into pills with flower, which is the strongest of them all: an extract made artificially out of the rootes is much commended by many in the dropsie, and other diseases before named, but it had neede of an artist, as well in the preparing as giving. The Pills of Esula set downe in the 16 chapter before, doe properly belong unto this place, being to be made more properly, of this Esula than of that. The small annuall spurge is in purging like the other sorts, but is not so strong for the diseases aforesaid as the former are. The seede of Peplus or the round Esula, be∣ing beaten and drunke in hydromel or honyed water, purgeth flegme and choller. The leaves are used to bee pickled up, and kept to be used in meates, and the powder of them saith Dioscorides, strewed upon meate trou∣bleth the belly: The small purple Sea Spurge hath the same properties, and is used to be pickled and eaten, with the like effect that the former is. The Petty or Tyme Spurge, is used for paines of the mother, if the young branches and leaves be bruised with a little wine, and put up as a pessary: The same boyled and taken doe purge the belly even as the milke or juyce doth also, and is good against the stinging or biting of serpents, and taketh away all manner of warts and excrescences of the like nature. It is very effectuall for the dimnesse or mistinesse of the eyes, to cleere the sight, and also for watering or running eyes, and to take away filmes or scarres that grow upon them, used with a little honey. The tuberous or knobbed Spurge saith Dioscorides, purgeth downe∣wards, if the lower parts be taken, and upwards if the upper parts be taken: but the juyce to the quantity of halfe a dramme, purgeth both wayes, and so doth the plant being taken wholly together. The manner of drawing out the juyce thereof (is somewhat rude in regard of the exquisite manner of preparing extracts chymically in our dayes) as Dioscorides setteth it downe is thus. Beate the rootes and put them into a vessell full of water, stirre them well therein, and with a fether gather the upermost upon the water, which being dryed and kept, serveth for the uses aforesaid, and for those that have the dropsie. All these clense the skinne from discolouring, even as the former doe, and with as good successe. There is none of them but are strong and violent, and therefore great caution and advise is to be had, in taking of them inwardly, and therefore some appoint to put diverse cold hearbes to them in the taking: but for outward applications there is the lesse feare of danger, because if the skinne be any thing exulcerated, and the parts inflamed, helpe may sooner be had and applyed thereto, than with∣in the body. 
CHAP. XIX. Hippophaes, Hippophaestum &amp; Hippomanes. Thornie Milkewort or Fullers thorne. B Ecause Dioscorides speaketh of Hippophaes and Hippophaestum, making them both Thornie plants, yeel∣ding milke and purging, before Ricinus and the Tithymales, and Theophrastus in his ninth booke, and fifteenth chap. saith that Hippomanes is made of Tithymalus, or lactaria Milkewort, the best as hee saith, was knowne to be made in Tegea and was held to be of great worth; yet my Theophrastus in Latine, which is very ancient without name of the Printer or yeare of the Printing, hath in that place Hippophaes although I confesse I have seene Greeke copies which have had Hippomanes, but surely Hippomanes being declared by other authors, to bee a kinde of poyson made of the nature or thinne sperme of Mares, as you shall heare by and by, could not in my minde be so unknowne to Theophrastus, that he should say, it was made of the Tithymalls or Milkeworts, but rather that Hippophaes was a Milkewort, or made thereof; for in his 6. booke and 4. chapter, at the latter end he numbreth Hippophyon which Gaza transla∣teth lappago, among those plants that beare thornes at the leaves, and in the same booke and 5. chapter he nameth Hippopheos which Gaza translateth lappago likewise, to have gentle smooth leaves, not like unto the Capers, which have sharpe leaves as well as stalkes, and in his 9 booke and 15 chapter, maketh no mention either of forme, ha∣ving declared it before, or of purging or poysonfull quality therein; but numbreth it among other things, the best whereof grow in Arcadia, and nameth it next after the Elaterium, made of the Wilde Cowcumbers, so that it is probable his Hippophyon, Hippopheos, Hippophaes, or Hippomanes, whether you will, for diverse doe thinke diversly, was an herbe or roote, that bore thornes as is before declared, whose condensate milke or juyce, was of much worth being made in Tegea: I thinke it not a misse somewhat to declare both what I thinke Dioscorides his Hippophaes and Hippophaestum are, and the derivation of the name: and what Anguillara and others say of it also, that say they have found it, to incite some industrious to attaine it also, if that which I shall shew you in my opinion be not it, and likewise to shew what diverse authors doe report of Hippomanes, that thereby the di∣versity of things might cleere Theophrastus from imputation of want of knowledge, what Hippomanes was, or variety from others, and that his Hippopheos and Dioscorides Hippophaes, was one and the same thing: This there∣fore is the text of Dioscorides concerning Hippophaes. Hippophaes wherewith fullers doe refresh garments, groweth in gravelly grounds and neere the sea. It is abushing plant thicke of leaves, or well spreade, having long leaves like unto the Olive tree, but smaller and longer, and betweene them many whitish hard thornes di∣stant one from another. The flowers stand in clusters like unto those of Ivye, but smaller and more gentle, somewhat reddish or blush out of a white: the roote is thicke and tender full of juyce, like milke and bitter in taste, from whence as from Thapsia, a juyce is taken, which being dryed up either by it selfe simply, or with the flower of Orobus (or the bitter vetch) is kept for their use that neede it: Hippophaestum (saith Dioscorides ) which some call Hippophaes, groweth in the same places, and is a kinde of Fullers thorne also. It is a low herbe having thornie small leaves, without either stalke or flower, with empty heads, it hath thicke and tender rootes: a juyce is drawne out of the rootes, leaves, and heads, and dryed up to be used: Thus farre Dioscorides: In comparing therefore Dioscorides and Theophrastus, I doe not finde them to vary more than in a letter or two of the word. For as you heare Dioscorides saith Hippophaes hath many branches full of leaves, and some thornes also, and Theo∣phrastus doth intimate the same, saying that Hippopheos hath smooth leaves, and thornes by the leaves, or is a thor∣nie plant as Phleos (of which you shall heare in that part that speaketh of thornie plants) Capers, Caltrops, and Restharrow are: Dioscorides saith the roote of Hippophaes is thicke and full of a milkie juyce, and Theophrastus saith Hippophaes (as I sayd my booke hath it, and Columna in his chapter of Hippophaes hath so also, or as others have Hippomanes, which as I sayd before cannot be) is made of a Tithymall or Milkewort, the best being made in Te∣gea, and is of great worth, Pliny maketh mention of Hippophaes in one place, and of Hippophues in another, as of one and the same plant, as likewise of Hippophastum in severall places, which as yet in one place he calleth Hip∣pape, but in that he doth but relate what he hath out of Dioscorides, yet somewhat different: it is probable he never saw the plant, but did deliver what he sayd onely upon the credit of the author, we shall not neede to insist more upon him. The Greek name commeth either of which is interpreted equarum salus aut lux, aut ab equis genita, for so Plinye in his 22. book, and 12. chap. saith, Debent accommodatae esse &amp; equorum natu∣rae, ne{que} ex alia causa nomen accepisse: and &amp; quia equorum maniam sive furorems anabat: but because Dioscorides saith it was called Spina fullonia, and that garments were clensed thereby, it seemeth the Etymon of the word was rather derived from taken pro adverbio accrescentis, &amp; sic pro valde or multum, &amp; pro lumine or nitore, of the clensing quality: for so Plinye saith of Hippophaestum in his 27 booke and 10 chapter Hippophaestum nascitur in spinis ex quibus fiunt pilae fulloniae: for with the plan r roote made into bals, those times of his used to scoure garments, like as if it were done with sope. Anguillara saith he found Hippophaes in the Island Peloponesus, in the sandy grounds by the seaside, which had a roote of the length of ones hand or better, yelding a thinne juyce, being either broken or wounded, like in colour to milke, of a very bitter taste (but saith he saw then neither flower nor fruite) and strong smell, which the inhabitants call Acantha Nacatharise, Spina purgatrix, the purging Thorne, which Bauhinus setteth downe in his Pinax for a kinde of Rhamnus Cathartei∣cus folio oleae, and thinketh the Hippophaestum quorundam of Lugdunensis to be the same; Fabius Columna refusing the opinion of others that tooke the Rhamnus primus of Dioscorides, as Lobel supposeth that purging thornie plant to be, growing by the sea sides of Italy, France, and Holland, supposeth that that kinde of Rhamnus which grow∣eth in Campania and Apulia, by the sea shores, called by the Italians in those places Spina santa, and which is the second sort of the first kinde of Rhamnus, set forth by Clusius, doth more neerely resemble the Hippophaes of Dioscorides: but in my minde neither of both these shrubbes, wanting milke at the roote can be the Hippophaes of Dioscorides called also Spina fullonia. Ruellius likewise saith that Hippophaestum, was brought from Narbone in France, which had small whitish leaves among the thornes; by Lugdunensis it is said that Hippophastum was sent to Dalechampius from Melita or Malta, and was a plant, spread full of thornie branches or rather the branches being wholly but thornes themselves, with small white flowers, standing close to∣gether at the joynts and partitions of the branches; but whether it were purging was not signified: this declara∣tion, being onely taken from the dryed plant was sent: but if I may be bold to give my censure, what Hippophaes is, and whether it be to be found or no, I would surely conjecture, that the plant called Galastivida Cretica, which I have set forth in the 15 chapter of this part, under the title of Tithymalus maritimus Creticus spinosus, and as I say there, is sayd by Honorius Bellus to be a kinde of Tithymall, or Spurge having thornes, and giving milke, whose roote is thicke and fleshy, might as neere resemble Hippophaes, both for forme, for giving milke and purging qua∣lity, as any other plant whatsoever, and even the relation of the leaves and flowers set downe in that place, is not greatly differing, let others judge hereof as they see cause. Now concerning Hippomanes let me shew you also, what diverse authors have written thereof. First it is imputed to Theophrastus to say, as some corrupt (as I thinke) greeke copies have it as I sayd before, and Camerarius as I thinke was the first that did so cause it to bee read, that Hippomanes is made of Tithymall, but is mistaken for Hippophaes as I sayd before. Theocritus saith in Pharmaceutria, that Hippopmanes is a plant whereby horses are made furious madde. Collumella saith that Hippomanes is a poyson, which kindleth lust in horses like to that of men, but what it is, or whereof it is made or taken, he doth not expresse. Plinye also in his 28 booke and 11 chapter affirmeth, that Hippomanes was of so strong power or force in witchery or sorcery, that being but layd to the brasen figure of the mare at Olympus, it would drive the horses in extreame fury to cover it: which Pausanias before Plinye his time, doth set downe more at large in his fift booke: but Aristotle in his 6 booke and 18 chap. of the nature of beasts, saith that the mares doe let passe from them a certaine thinne humour, like unto their sperme, when they are inflamed with lust to be covered, which is called Hippomanes by some, and in the 22. chap. of the same booke he saith, that there sticketh to the forehead of the foale, new fallen, a certaine round, and somewhat broad blacke peece of flesh or skinne, of the bignesse of a small dryed Figge, which the mare licketh up with the secondine, as soone as shee hath foaled, which if any shall take away before she hath devoured, and afterwards offer it her to smell there∣unto, she not knowing the sent thereof, will be stirred in to great fury or madnesse, but will not suffer her foale to sucke her that hath it taken therefrom; which thing Iunius Solinus Polyhister confirmeth in the 48 chapter of his booke, onely he varyeth from Aristotle, in saying it is of a brownish yellow colour, which hee said was blacke. And Plinye writeth also the same thing in his 8 booke and 42 chapter, although he said also, it was an other thing as you have heard before. Virgill in his third booke of Georgickes hath these verses, to shew what it is, and whereto used, taken as it should seeme from Aristotle.
Hinc demum Hippomanes, vero quod nomine dicunt Pastores, lentum distillat ab inguine virus Hippomanes, quod saepe male legere novercae. And Tibullus the Poet in his 2. booke and 4. Elegie, hath the same also in effect in these verses: Et quod, ubi indomitis gregibus Venus afflat amores Hippomanes, cupidae stillat ab inguine equae. 
Anguillara is of opinion that the Hippomanes of Theocritus is the lesser Stramonium, or thorne apple, and the Cratevas, whom Theocritus his interpreter doth cite saith, that it is a plant whose fruite is like the wilde Cow∣cumber fruits, but full of thornes: Now if the ancients have left these doubts, whether Hippomanes be an herbe or made of an hearbe, and shew not certainely what the hearbe is, or doe not all agree that it is the sperme of mares, how shall we in these times compound the controversie. 
The Vertues. Dioscorides saith that the pure juyce of Hippophaes it selfe being dryed, and the weight of halfe a scruple thereof taken, or the weight of two scruples, if it be made up with the meale of the bitter Vetche, taken in meade or honyed water, purgeth downewards flegme, choller, and water: the whole plant rootes and all being bruised and put into meade, and about a quarter of a pint thereof taken, worketh in the same manner: the juyce taken from both the plant and the roote, as it is used to be done with Thapsia, a dramme thereof taken at a time, is a purgation of it selfe for the same purposes. The juyce pressed out of the rootes, leaves, and heads, of Hippo∣phaestum, is to be dryed and halfe a dramme thereof given to whom you will, in meade or honyed water, draw∣eth forth flegme and water: principally and chiefely this purgation is fit or convenient, for those that are trou∣bled with the falling sickenesse, shortnesse of breath, and aches in the joynts and sinewes. 
CHAP. XX. Alypum Monspel sium sive Herba terribilis Narbonensium. Herbe Terrible. B Ecause this herbe is of a most violent purging quality, sharpe and exulcerating withall, very like unto the former Tithymalls. I thinke it fittest to joyne it next unto them and another with it, which by Pena his judgement is very like thereunto, both for face and quality. 
1. Alypum Monspeliensium. Herbe Terrible. This terrible herbe hath many wooddy stalks, rising two or three foote high, dividing itselfe into smaller branches, covered with a thinne barke, the elder branches being, of a darke purplish colour, and the younger more red, thicke set with small hard and dry leaves without order, from the bottome to the toppe, which are somewhat long and small at the setting on, broader in the middle, and sharpe pointed, some∣what like unto small Mirtle leaves, of a greenish colour on the upperside, and whitish underneath: at the top of every branch standeth a round flower in a scaly head, consisting of many purplish thrummes or threds, paler in the middle than round about, somewhat like unto the head of a Scabious or rather Knapweede: the roote is of a fingers thicknesse, long, wooddy and of a brownish colour, somewhat salt, if it grow neere the sea shore, where it may drinke any of the Sea water, or else not salt at all, but bitter if it grow further off: the leaves also tasting after the same manner. 
1. Alypum Monspeliensium sive Herba Terribilis. Herbe Terrible. 
Hippoglossum Valentinam Clusie. 
2. Tarton raire Massilicusium. Gutworte or Trouble belly. 
 
2. Tarton raire Massiliensium. Gutwort or Trouble belly. The herbe Gutworte or Trouble belly, hath very many hoa∣ry, or silver white slender and very tough branches, two foote high, divided into many other smaller, whereon grow many small white hoary leaves round about them, smaller than those of Alypum: the flowers are white and small, set close together, in a long tuft, but so covered with the white wool∣linesse that they can scarse bee perceived: after which come small blacke seede, bitter and unpleasant, and so fiery hot, that if any shall either chew of them or the leaves, a little in their mouth, they will so heate the mouth, lippes, and jawes, that no washing will for a long time take it away: the roote is small long and wooddy, with many fibres at it, yello∣wish on the outside and white within, nothing so hot, bitter or unpleasant as the leaves or seede, yet leaving a small hot taste at the end, without any sent, and not giving any milke: it is saith Pena, very like unto the Turbith of Alexandria, or of the shoppes, in the forme thereof. 
The Place. The first groweth on the mountaine or hill, called Cestius or Cap de ceste, and in other rockes and stony places, hard by Marseilles in France, as also in diverse places in Spaine as Clusius saith. The second doth likewise grow neere Marseilles by the Seaside, on a small hill neere thereunto, called Mondrond, as Pena saith, and all a long the coast of Liguria, and the Isles of Corsica, and Sardinia, as Lugdunensis saith. 
The Time. They flower not untill it be late with us; but Clusius found the first in flower, in the moneths of February, and March, as he saith in Spaine. 
The Names. in Greeke, quasi indolens inoffensumque remedium , per contrarium enim se habet, quemadmo∣dum in aliis; Grace scilicet fella sive dulcia , Holostium tota ossea, cum herba sit tenera appellans: except it might rather be said to come from , id est, salsum vel maritimum, because it groweth neere the sea: in La∣tine it is called also Alypum &amp; herba terribilis, according as the common people of Provence doe call it, from the effects it worketh. It is called also Alypias by Actuarius, yet some thinke that his Alypias, which as he saith purgeth flegme, doth differ from his Alypum, which purgeth blacke choller: but Paulus reconcileth this doubt in his seaventh booke; and fourth chapter▪ where hee saith, that the seede of Alypum, purgeth downewards blacke choller, taken with a little salt and Vinegar, in the same quantity that Epithymum doth: but if we credit Dioscorides, saith he, it doth lightly exulcerate the guts: but is the same in my judgement saith Paulus, which is now called Alypias: the roote hereof, as I sayd in the chapter of Tithymalls, is called by Actuarius Turpetum album, as that of Esula minor, Turpetum nigrum: There is some doubt with many, whe∣ther we have the true Alypum of Dioscorides or no, for that some copies differ from others in the description of the forme of the plant, some having the word that is like fennell, and somewhat red say others, whereupon Lobel and Pena are bold to affirme in their Adversaria, that our age knoweth no herb, that may so wel or more truely, both in the forme and purging vertues, resemble Dioscorides his Alypum, (except the Ferulas ) then this herbe here set forth, altering that word onely, which as he saith may be a fault (such as is common in many other places of his worke) in the transcribers: and hereupon as it is probable Mesues grounded his opini∣on, that Turbith was the roote of a ferulous plant. Clusius saith that diverse professors in the Vniversitie at Va∣lentia, did call an herbe which he therefound Hippoglossum, supposing it to be the true Hippoglossum of Dioscorides; whereunto it can as he saith be nothing like, the properties being so differing, except in a little appearance of like∣nesse in the leaves: Clusius also doth not acknowledge it to be Alypum but misliketh of their judgement, that doe referre it thereunto, because the leaves are so dry, that they seeme to be without any juyce in them; where∣upon the Spaniards call it siempre enxuta, and from the round head of flowers, which is paler in the middle than round about, doe call it Coronilla de frayles, Coronula fratrum the Friers Crowne, and of some as he saith Segul∣hada, but others of good judgement doe hold them, to be both but one plant, the diversity, if any be, to consist in the climate. Dalechampius as Lugdunensis setteth it forth, was of opinion, that it might be Empetron of Diosco∣rides, which others as he saith called Phacoides, onely led thereunto, by the purging quality and growing neere the Sea, as Empetron doth; and because that the Crithmum or Faeniculum marinum, is disprooved by most not to be Empetron, which many heretofore thought to be so, (and among the rest Pandulphus Collinutius, in his defense of Plinye against Leonicerus, for it is certainely seene, that Plinye hath confounded that Empetrum, which is a Saxifrage, with the other which is a purger) because it hath no purging quality in it at all: but seeing we hold this Alypum, to be the right or neerest it of Dioscorides, I cannot see what reason can move any, to thinke it to be Empetrum also, seeing Dioscorides maketh them two distinct herbes in severall chapters, and placed the one the very next unto the other: some also as Lugdunensis saith, take it for Ptarmica, or for the third sort of Conyza. Bauhinus in his Pinax, calleth it Thymelaea foliis acutis, capitulo Succisae, sive Alypum Monspeliensium. The other is called Tartou raire by Lugdunensis, and Lobel, and is so called as hee saith, in the Isles of Corsica and Sardinia, and all along the Sea coasts of Liguriae and Marseilles. Dalechampius saith that many doe referre this to the Sesamoides magnum of Dioscorides, which he hath mentioned in his fourth booke, and 147 chapter, with leaves of Groundsell or Rue: and therefore Dalechampius in the description hereof saith, the leaves are like R e, which in my judgement doth very hardly agree thereunto, but much lesse unto Groundsell, whereunto they are also compared. Furthermore he saith also, that peradventure this may be that Helleborus of Theophrastus, whose seede is like Sesamum, and wherewith in Anticyra as he saith they used to make purgations: but the extreame purging quality herein, shewing it as Pena saith, to be a new plant of our ages finding, and not well knowne to be mentioned by any of the ancient writers, Greekes, Arabians or Latines, hath caused diverse to referre it, as I say, some to Sesamoides, and others to Theophrastus his Helleborus, with the fruite of Sesamum, and yet whosoe∣ver will advisedly consider, the seede of all the sorts of Hellebores, both the white and the backe, shall not finde them much unlike the seedes of Sesamum it selfe. Alphonsus Pontius of Ferrara tooke it to be Cneorum of Theo∣phrastus: the roote hereof as Pena saith, is like unto the Turbith of Alexandria, and hath not so much heate or bitternesse therein, nor other evill taste as others have. Bauhinus calleth it Thymaelea foliis candicantibus sericii∣star mollibus. 
The Vertues. The seede of Alypum (saith Dioscorides ) or herbe terrible, purgeth downeward blacke choller or melancholy, if it be taken in the like quantity with Epithymum and a little salt and Vinegar put to it in the taking, but he saith it doth a little exulcerate the bowells: the common people in Narbone, but especially the Quacksalvers and wo∣men leeches, as Pena saith, notwithstanding they find the effect to purge with such violence, yet doe often gives, making a decoction with the leaves flowers or seede, or otherwise make them into powder, and give it then with wine or broth; the smallest quantity thereof, to be taken in chicken broth, saith Plinye is two drammes, a meane quantitie is foure drammes, and the greatest portion to be given at once is sixe drammes: Clusius saith that the Landlopers in Spaine, doe usually give the decoction hereof unto those, that are troubled with the French disease, and that with good successe as it is reported: the other Gutworte or Trouble belly is as violent in wor∣king as the former, or rather much more, for the violence thereof is so unlimited, that it oftentimes causeth im∣moderate fluxes, even to blood and excoriations; especially if the dryed leaves be given unadvisedly in powder, and mixed with some potable liquor, and driveth forth cholericke, flegmaticke, and watery humors in aboun∣dance; the roote likewise worketh powerfully for the same diseases, which if it were Theophrastus his Helleborus, or Dioscorides Sesamum, were unprofitable or of no use; the seede onely with them and not the roote, having the propertie and power of purging. Advice therefore before taken, and preparation both of the physicke and body, the quantity also, the disease and strength of the patient considered, it may be admitted to be given where better and safer things cannot on the suddaine be had. 
CHAP. XXI. Thymelaea. Spurge Olive. T Here remaine yet some other violent workers, which shall be declared in this and the next Chap∣ters following, and first of the Thymelaeas, and then all the sorts of Chamaelaea and Sanamunda of Clusius, because they are so like both in forme and nature: and let me also adjoyne the small Sesa∣moides of Dalechampius, for the neere affinitie with them. 
1. Thymelaea. Spurge Olive. This Spurge Olive hath diverse tough stalkes, rising to the height of two or three foote, sometimes in the naturall places, and much lower in some other, of the thicknesse also of ones thumbe, covered with an ash co∣loured barke, and spread into many branches; whereon grow many small, clammie, flat, pointed leaves, somewhat like unto Mirtle leaves, or rather unto the narrow leaves of the Olive tree, for they are larger and broader than the leaves of Flaxe, whereunto many doe compare them, and doe continually abide on the branches without falling off, as the Chamaelaea doth; at the toppes of the branches, grow many small starlike flowers, consisting of foure white leaves a peece; after which come small berries greene at the first, and of a very red colour, like un∣to Corall when they are ripe, being a little more long than round, of the bignesse of a Mirtle berrie, with a pulpe or substance like unto a Cherry, wherein is one kernell covered with a blacke soft and brittle shell: the roote is soft and tender while it is young; very like unto a Raddish roote as Clusius saith, but wooddy when it is growne elder, coverd with a tough thicke barke. 
2. Thymelaea minor sive Cneorum Matthioli. Small Rocke Roses. This plant hath diverse long weake and slender but tough branches lying upon the ground divided usually into other smaller ones whereon grow many small long and somewhat thicke leaves neere unto those of Mesereon, set without order to the tops where it shooteth forth a tuft of many flowers together, consisting of foure leaves a peece, of a bright red or carnation colour, and in some plants white, very sweete, which turne into small round whitish berries, conteining small round seede, of a grayish colour: the roote is long and yellowish, spreading di∣vers wayes under ground, and abideth many yeares shooting forth new branches. 
3. Chamaelaea Germanica sive Mesereon vulgo. Dwarfe Bay or flowring Spurge. There are two sorts hereof, the one having a pale, and the other a deeper red coloured flower, they both rise up with a thicke wooddy stemme, five or sixe foote high or more, and of the thicknesse (if they be very old) of a mans wrest at the ground, spreading into many flexible long branches, covered with a rough grayish barke, beset with many small long leaves somewhat like unto Privet leaves but smaller and paler and in a manner round poin∣ted, falling away every yeare: the flowers are small consisting of foure leaves, many growing sometimes together at a place, and usually before the leaves appeare, after which come small berries, greene at the first and very red afterwards, but blackish red being suffered to abide long on the bush, the roote spreadeth into many long and tough branches covered with a yellow barke. 
4. Chamaelaea Alpina incana. Mountaine spurge Olive. This mountaine Laurell hath a small wooddy stemme three or foure foote high or more, branching forth to∣wards the upper parts, into many slender and tough branches, covered with a rough hoary greene barke, beset at the ends thereof with flatter fuller and smaller round pointed leaves than the former, of a grayish greene co∣lour on the upperside and hoary underneath, which fall away before winter as the last doth: the flowers are ma∣ny, set together at the ends of the branches, greater than the last, consisting likewise of foure leaves a peece of a light blush colour, standing in small grayish huskes, of as little sent as the other: the berries are small long graines of an excellent red colour, which afterwards turne blacke: the roote is long and spreadeth about under the upper part of the earth. 
5. Chamaelaea tricoccos. Widdow waile. This triple berryed Spurge Olive hath no great stemme at all, but spreadeth from the ground into many flexi∣ble tough greene branches, whereon are set diverse narrow, long, darke-greene leaves all along them, which 1. Thymelaea. Spurge Olive.
2. Thymelaea minor sive Cneorum Matthio i. Small Rocke Roses or Spurge Olive. 
3. Chamaelaea Germamca, sive Mesereo . Dwarfe Bay. 
4. Chamaelae Alpina incana. Mountaine Spurge Olive. 
5. Chamaelaea tricocco . Widow Waile. 
7. Sanamunda tertia Clusii. The third Spanish Spurge Olive of Clusius. 
10. Sanamunda Africana. Spurge Olive of Africa. 
abide greene all the winter; the flowers are very small, scarce to be seene, and come forth betweene the leaves and the stalke, of a pale yellow colour, consisting of three small leaves, after which come small blackish berries three usually set together: the roote spreadeth not much in the ground but is hard and wooddy, dying often∣times if it be not well defended in the extremitie of winter. 
6. Sanamunda prima Clusii. The first Spanish Spurge Olive of Clusius. This kind of Spurge Olive hath diverse flexible pliant branched stalkes, rising up to a foote and a halfe high, covered with a blackish barke, and under it with a gentle smooth one, which may be easily separated into long threads: having many small and somewhat long hairie leaves thicke set on them, smaller sharper and thicker than those of Chamaelaea or Dwarfe Bay, and commeth somewhat neere in likenesse to the Sea Tithymall, or Sea Spurge, but somewhat hayrie, of a bitter sharpe and burning taste, somewhat clammie or gummie in chewing: the flowers grow with and among the leaves on the branches, consisting of foure small yellow leaves a peece: after which come small blackish berries somewhat like unto the last: the roote is thicke long and wooddy. Clusius mentioneth another hereof with shorter leaves, and whiter or downie, and small yellow flowers in tufts. 
7. Sanamunda 3 Clusii. The third Spanish Spurge Olive of Clusius. The third Spanish kind of Spurge Olive, hath whiter and more pliant stalkes, covered with a thicker barke, very hard to breake, the smaller toppe branches being almost wholly white with doune, which bend againe to∣wards the ground, whereon are thicke set a number of whitish leaves, and thicke, covered as it were with cot∣ten or doune, smaller than the last, and very like to those of Stonecroppe of a sharpe hot burning taste: the flowers are small and greenish or pale (saith Clusius like unto the others, the roote is thicke and wooddy like the former. 
8. Sesamoides minus Dalechampii. A different Spanish Spurge Olive. There is another sort of this plant as I thinke, that Dalechampius as Lugdunensis saith, used to call Sesamoides mi∣nus, that is in comparison of the greater kind, was set forth by him a little before, not understanding the minus of Dioscorides, which is a farre differing plant: but this Sesamoides minus Dalechampii, hath small pale greene leaves, set about the woolly stalkes: the flowers come forth at the joynts with the leaves, which are small and white, and not yellow, very sweete in sent, farre differing from all the rest in sweetenesse. 
9. Sanamunda Monspeliaca glabra. Smooth French Spurge Olive. This greene or smooth spurge Olive, hath a thicke white wooddy roote, covered with a pale coloured gentle pliant thicke barke, from whence shoote out many small slender branches, full of joynts, and of an hand breadth high: on each side whereof are placed diverse small short and narrow greene leaves, seldome round pointed, somewhat like unto the leaves of Polygala Milkewort or Gangflower: the flowers are small and yellow stan∣ding with the leaves and amongst them: the seede hath not beene observed. 
10. Sanamunda Africana. Spurge Olive of Africa. This African plant hath diverse pliant stalks rising from the roote full of joynts, and two small and almost round leaves at them, which sometimes lye so close to the stalke, that they seeme to be onely thicker joynts than the other: the flowers are yellowish growing at the toppes of the stalkes: the roote is long and tough, with a rugged barke. 
The Place. The first groweth in many places in Spaine, as also in Jtaly in Hetruria and about Trent as Matthiolus saith, and likewise in Narbone of France. The second in Germanie, Bohemia, and Austria: The third in many places of Germa∣nie also: The fourth in the mountaines of Savoye: The fift in Provence and Spaine: the sixt in the Countries of Granado and Valentia in Spaine as Clusius saith. The seaventh both upon the hils, and neere the sea in some pla∣ces of Spaine. The eight by the Sea side in the Island of Corsia, and is seldome scene, either in Spaine, Italy, or France. The ninth was found upon the hill neere Mompelier called Hortus Dei. The last by Boetius often remem∣bred in this and my former worke in Barbery. All of them are very tender, loving onely the wormer Countries, and will not without extraordinary care be kept in ours. 
The Time. The first flowreth hot in Spaine untill Iuly and August, but the rest some in Ianuary or February, and some in March and Aprill, in their naturall places, and many with us not untill Iune or Iuly, if they be preserved in the winter. 
The Names. in Greeke is called Thymelaea in Latine also with all writers, quasi Tithymelaea, ex Tithymalo &amp; Olea deducta. The Arabians call this Mesereon promiscuously with Chamaelaea Germanica, and Tricoccos, the Greekes call the berries hereof, properly Coccum Cnidium or gnidium, as some have it, but as Dioscorides saith, are not those of Chamelaea, yet assuredly the properties are not so farre differing, but that the berries of Chamelaea may very well be used in the want of the other: Dioscorides saith that the leaves were called Cneorum in his time, whereupon Guilandinus tooke this to be Cneorum nigrum of Theophrastus, as he doth the Chamelaea to be Cneorum album (which Gaza translateth Casia ) for hereof they made two kinds, the one white the other black. Cordus in his history of plants calleth the Cneorum Matthioli Thymelaea minor whom Bauhinus followeth (and so doe I) calling it Thymelaea affinis facie externa. But if I should in this place, upon this occasion, to save the often repetitions in other places, shew you all the opinions of other writers concerning Cneorum, whereunto they doe referre them, and their contraries, I thinke I should not doe amisse: Aguillara maketh Lavendula to be Cneo∣rum album, and Rosmarium to be nigrum, whom Matthiolus refuteth thus, that Theophrastus saith both sorts of Cneorum, send downe long rootes into the ground, and the branches are pliant and gentle, fit to binde things withall, neither of which properties can be found in Lavander or Rosmary, Matthiolus in his last Latine editi∣on, setteth forth 2 figures of Cneorum, the one in the chapter of Cinamon, which he saith hath the true notes of Cneorum album Theophrasti, and the other in the chapter of Thymelaea, which he thinketh to be nigrum: and in his third booke of Epistles, in that unto Ioannes Crato, and in his fourth booke of Epistles, in that to Bartholomaeus Maranta, as well as in his Commentaries upon Dioscorides, in the Chapter of Cinamon he is perswaded that Theophrastus his white or sweete Cneorum is the Casia whereof Virgill in his Bucolicke and Georgickes maketh so often mention, and which Plinye also from the testimonies of Higinus, calleth Cassia the sweete herbe and not the Aromaticall tree, which is like to Cinamon: Lugdunensis by correcting the greeke text of Theophrastus in divers places where he thinketh it is faulty, sheweth the figure of a Plant, accounted of divers, as he saith, to be the Cneorum album of Theophrastus, which Bauhinus judgeth to be the Dorychnium Imperati &amp; Plateau, mentio∣ned in Clusius his History of Plants. But Bauhinus, both in his annotations upon Matthiolus as he hath published them, and in his Pinax referreth both these Plants of his, the first unto Ocymoides repens Polygoni folio of Lobel, and the other unto the Ocymodes repens of Camerarius. Myconus, as Lugdunensis saith, referreth his Cneorum album, un∣to Avicenne his other Oleander, which he calleth wild Oleander, for as he saith it is like common Oleander, both in leafe, flower, and sent. The third is called Chamaelaea &amp; Mesereon usually now adayes, and so likewise by Tragus: Dodonaeus and Camerarius call it Chamaelaea Germanica: by Fuchsius and others, Daphnoides, Gesner in hortis Daph∣noides nostrum vulgare: Lugdunensis, Laureola faemina, Anguillara Pipermontanum, and Lobell, Lauras pusilla, and Mesereon Germanicum: some also take it to be Chamaedaphne Dioscoridis. The fourth is called Chamaelaea Alpina inca∣na by Lobell, &amp; Chamaelaea altera by Clusius, and Italica by many with us, because Clusius said it came to them only from Italy. The fifth is the true Chamaelaea &amp; Mesereon of the Arabians, &amp; generally called now adayes Chamaelaea tricoccos. The sixt is called Sanamunda, by the Spanish Mores in Granado, as Clusius saith, and of the professors of Herbarisme, or Herbarists there also, though the countrie people call them, as he saith, Mierda cruz, of the pro∣pertie of the strong purging. Bauhinus calleth it Thymelaea folijs Chamaelaea minoribus subhirsutis, and is the Thy∣meleae species Myconi of Lugdunensis, &amp; the second Sanamunda of Clusius, which Bauhinus calleth Thymelaea folijs Kali lanuginosis salsis. The seventh is the Erica Alexandrina of Lobell; and the 3. Sanamunda of Clusius. The eight is called Sesamoides minus Dalechampij by Lugdunensis, who in my mind much confoundeth both himselfe and his readers herein, for he referreth this both to Clusius his second Sanamunda, which he saith is hot, sharpe, and somewhat salt, even as he saith his Sesamoides is: and also to the Cneorum nigrum Myconi, which he shew∣eth after the description thereof, that the taste of the leaves is somewhat binding, with a clamminesse or gleuish∣nesse therein also, which is quite differing in propertie, and yet he maketh them to be all one Plant: and Bauhi∣nus following him herein, so setteth it downe in his Pinax: but both this description, as I have before given it you, differeth from Clusius his second Sanamunda, which as Clusius saith, hath his flowers in clusters at the top , and from the other which hath them at the joynts, Clusius again giveth unto his yellowish flowers, like unto those of the Olive tree, and Dalechampius saith, it beareth small white flowers, very sweete: so that it may seeme to be a species thereof, and not the very same, but it cannot be also his Cneorum nigrum Myconi, if the tastes be so different: let others judge hereof after they have considered them both well. The ninth Bauhinus setteth downe in his Pinax, with the title Thymelaea folijs polygalae glabris, in his Prodromus with the title Sanamunda viridis, vel glabra, and referreth it to the Thymelaeae species Myconi of Lugdunensis, who saith it doth best agree with Clusius his first Sanamunda. The last is not remembred by any before. 
The Vertues. The first Spurge Olive worketh very churlishly with whomsoever, and in whatsoever manner you give it, viz. the leaves prepared beaten to powder, and taken in wine or broth, or the berries swallowed whole or brui∣sed and taken by themselves; for as Dioscorides saith, if twenty foure of the berries be taken in drinke (this pro∣portion is answerable to the rest of the phisicke in those times as I have often said) or the inner pulpe of them onely, it purgeth downewards very strongly, both Choller, Flegme and water, but as he saith, they will burne the jawes and throate, and therefore they had neede be rowled, or otherwise given with flower or barley meale, or swallowed in meale, or in raisins, the stones taken out, or taken with purified honey, being beaten with niter and vinegar, it is applied to them that are given to over much sweating. He that will give the pon∣der of the leaves, had neede first to take away the strings that runne in the leaves; which may be done while it is grossely beaten, before it be beaten finer, which prepared in this manner may be made into Trochisces or balls, to keepe all the yeare, the leaves being gathered in Autumne: It is a remedy also for them that have eaten and drunken Hemlocke, the poysonfull herbe. All the Sanamunda ' s likewise are violent purgers, for halfe a dramme of the juyce of the berries taken in wine, or in broth, which is the better, and the safer way, purgeth watery humours aboundantly; and therefore if it be taken with good advise warily, it may doe good in Dropsies, Gouts, Joynt-aches, the Sciatica, and the like: in Spaine they usually give a dramme in the decoction of red Cicers, which purgeth flegmaticke and melanchancholy humors wonderfully, and consequently is availeable to all such diseases, as rise from such humours, Lugdunensis recordeth a cure of one in the Hospitall at Lions, who was grievously tormented with the Crampe, performed by Dalechampius, by giving him a dramme of the leaves of the fourth kinde here set downe in pouder, in a little barley water, which wrought as forceably as if he had taken Colocynthis, and thereby was restored to his health. The country people, as Matthiolus sheweth, doe often take of those berries to purge themselves, thinking to be their owne Physitions herein, and deceive them of their fee due for their counsell, but as he there saith, they often deceive themselves, by their unskilfull foole-hardinesse, and make more worke for the Phisitions to cure them of the paines and torments, and other dange∣rous diseases that follow the taking of these violent purgers, if they free them not of further trouble by their owne deaths: Pliny is justly to be taxed for writing in his 27. booke and 9. Chapter that the Coccognidium (which as I said before, is called by the Grecians the fruite of Thymelaea ) doth stay or bind the belly ( Sistit alvum, is the word in the generall Copie, which yet some would impute to be the errour of the Writer out thereof, when it should be Ciet alvum ) when Galen and all other Authors acknowledge it to be a strong purger. Mesues adviseth that Mesereon (which I said before the Arabians doe confound, and is to be understood this Thymelaea, as well as that Chamaelaea, &amp;c.) is not to be given without the correctors appointed for it, and yet not, but unto strong able bodies: All these therefore are not safe to be given to weake bodies or stomackes, to women with child, or to children that are not strong, except they be strongly infected. 
CHAP. XXII. Laureola. Laurell or Spurge Laurell. T His Laurell or Spurge Laurell (that it may be knowne from the Bay tree, which is of divers, called the Laurell tree) riseth up usually but with one stemme, yet sometimes with more, very tough and pliant, covered with a whitish thicke tough barke, branching forth into divers parts toward the toppes, whereon are set many long, smooth, thicke, somewhat broad and shining darke greene leaves, somewhat like unto Bayleaves, but longer, smoother, softer, and not with hard veines therein as Bayleaves have; the flowers come forth towards the toppes of the stalkes and branches, and at the joynts with the leaves many set together, which are somewhat long and hollow, ending or spreading into foure small leaves, of a whitish, yellow, greene colour: after which come small round, and somewhat long blacke berries when they are ripe, wherein lieth a white kernell; the roote groweth downe deepe into the ground, and sprea∣deth likewise tough long white strings, somewhat woodie: both leafe and flower, both barke and roote are ve∣ry hot and sharpe in taste, heating and burning the mouth, and throate of any that shall taste them: it keepeth the greene leaves all the Winter, and doth not shed them. 
2. Chamaedaphnoides sive Laureola Cretica. Candie Laurell. From a crooked small white roote, rise up three or foure crooked and bending blackish stalkes, thicke set with leaves without order, covering them allmost wholly, which are long and small towards the bottomes, and grow broader to the ends, being thicke and hard, greene above, and grayish below, tasting very hot, and burning both mouth and throate very notably; what flowers or fruit it beareth, hath not beene seene, but referred unto this Laurell for the forme and propertie, and groweth very low. 
The Place. The first groweth wild in many places of this realme, as well as beyond the seas, and being brought into gardens will there abide, and flourish sufficiently well, the other was sent out of Candie to Prosper Alpinus, who hath given this remembrance of it. 
The Time. The first flowreth very early in the yeare, even in Ianuary or February, and sometimes before, if the Winter be milde, the berries are ripe about June; the other hath not floured, as is before said.
The Names. It is called in Greeke a Lauri foliorum similitudine, and the Latines accordingly, Laureola quasi pusil∣la Laurus. Some doe appoint two kinds of Laureola, mas &amp; faemina, some accounting this to be mas, and Cha∣malaea Germanica to be faemina, others this to be faemina and Chamaelaea to be mas; so variable are divers in their opinions: Matthiolus taketh this to be Chamaedaphne of Dioscorides, and the Chamaelaea to be Daphnoides, but in both 1. Laureola Flo ens. Lawrell in flower. 
2. Laureola cum baccis. Laurell with berries. 
he is much mistaken: Lobel and Lugdunensis doe take this Laureola which he calleth Mas, to be Daphnoides, and the Chamaelaea Germanica to be Chamaedaphne or Laureola foemina. Tragus also is much deceived in mistaking this plant, for Dioscorides his Thymelaea. Most of other writers doe call it Daphnoides, or Laureola, Dodonaeus as I said before, would make it to be Cneorum nigram of Theophrastus, and the Chamaelaea his Cneorum album. In my former booke I was partly perswaded, that Chamaeadaphne of Dioscorides, was the Chamaelaea Germanica, or came somewhat neere thereunto; but upon better thoughts, I thinke that Chambdaphnae may be more truely referred, to the Laurus Alexandrina of Matthiolus, whose leaves are small like unto Bay leaves, and the berries red when they be ripe, standing upon the leaves: and if you would aske me then, which is the Laurus Alexandrina of Dioscorides, I would answere you, that it is that Laurus Alexandrina legitima, that Lobel hath set forth in his Ap∣pendix, to his Adversiaria, whose branch I communicated to him, to set forth, as I had it from Pisa, whose leaves come neerer unto Dioscorides his description, than either that of Matthiolus, or of any other as you shall fur∣ther understand in his proper place; the other is called Chamaedaphnoides, id est, Laureola Cretica by Prosper Al∣pinus, lib. de plantis exoticis. 
The Vertues. The leaves and berries hereof are as violent a purger, and do heate and inflame the throat, bringing the stomack, of whomsoever shall take thereof, and drive them into as many dangerous diseases, as any of the former; yet ta∣ken advisedly it purgeth flegme from the stomack and oftentimes by vomit also, it procureth womens courses, and being chewed in the mouth, it draweth down from the head and braine much corrupt matter that would offend it. Many Emperickes do give the berries sometimes, but the leaves more often, to evacuate the watery humors in the dropsie, and think they finde good successe thereupon, as also to ease the paines of the collick, doe give the powder of the leaves in a little broth: the berries and leaves hereof when they are fresh boyled in oyle and afterwards strayned forth: this oyle being annointed on the belly looseneth the belly, and helpeth the collicke, and being anoin∣ted on the backe and raines provoketh urine and helpeth the piles. 
CHAP. XXIII. Laurus Tinus sive sylvestris. The Wilde Bay tree. I Shall in this chapter shew you the wilde Bay trees, and joyne it next unto the Laureola, both for the name and nature thereof. 
1. Laurus Tinus Lusitanicus. The first wild Baye of Clusinus or of Portingall. The wilde Bay tree riseth up to the height of an hedge bush, or the Dog-berrie tree; having diverse long square stalkes, full of branches, and faire large broad leaves, somewhat like unto Bay leaves, set in or∣der 1. Laurus Tinus Lufitanica caerulea bac a. The first wilde Bay of Clusius or of Portingall: 
2. Laurus Tinus alter vel 2. Clusii. The second Wilde Bay of Clusius. 
thereupon, two alwayes set together at a joynt, one against another, but of a darke greene shining colour, of no sent at all in them, and of a bitter sharpe unpleasant taste, troubling the stomacke, causing loathing, and casting withall: as the toppes of the branches and twigs, stand many small sweete smelling flowers in clusters, consisting of five white leaves a peece: after which succeede small berries, being somewhat long flat and corne∣red, of an excellent pale bright blew colour, inflaming and burnig the mouth and throate, of whosoever shall taste it, that it is almost insupportable, and not but in a long time, and by drinking milke, and holding it in the mouth, to be taken away or eased; this abideth greene all the winter. 
2. Laurus Tinus alter vel 2. Clusii. The second wilde Bay tree of Clusius. This other wilde Bay tree, riseth to be a bush, much about the same bignesse with the former, having stronger stalkes, and more plentifully branching forth, which are reddish being young, and more greene with the red∣nesse when they are older: whereon grow the leaves in the same order, but somewhat longer, narrower, and more full of veines than it: the flowers stand at the toppes of the twigs and branches, in the same manner that the other doe, but are more purple and lesse sweete than they; which afterwards give smaller, fuller, and blacker berries, than the former: this so holdeth his greene leafe all the winter without shedding. 
3. Laurus Tinus sylvestris alter sive tertius. The third wilde Bay tree. This wilde Bay groweth seldome to be a tree of any height but abideth low shooting forth many slender bran∣ches, covered with a darke greene barke, with sad greene smooth leaves, set by couples thereon, somewhat resembling Bay leaves without any smell: the flowers grow in tuftes or clusters at the ends of the branches, some∣what reddish while they are in bud, but whiter being open with reddish edges consisting of five leaves a peece, smelling sweete: there seldome followeth any fruite but are blacke round berries when it beareth, yet not perfect to spring againe in any that I have seene. 
4. Laurus Tinus Cretica fruticosa. The shrubby wilde Bay of Candye. This Bay tree groweth low and shrubby, bearing many slender round short branches covered with a black bark with knotty joynts, wheron are set 5 or 6 or more leaves like the former, but smaller upon short foot stalks which are wholly without sent, but heating the mouth and tongue with a little astriction: the fruite or seede is as small as a pepper corne, with a thin rind opening into three parts like a Spurge seed, containing within each part a small long whitish kernell like to a graine of wheate, smelling strong and tasting somewhat bitter and heating or bur∣ning the mouth and tongue. 
The Place. The first groweth in Portugall and Spaine in diverse places, as Clusius saith, in Italy also on the hils of Florence and Romania; and in the wood Valena in Narbone, and among the dwarfe scarlet Oakes, in many places of Mount Cetus or Sestius neere Mompelier in France. The second as Clusius saith he found in the Monestery of Pera longa in Portugall, and neere the Seaside also, in other parts of Spaine: the third he saith he onely saw in Boysot his gar∣den, raysed from Italian seede, which afterwards communicating the suckers thereof, became familiar in many other Herbarists Gardens there, as it doth also with us in our Country: and the last in Candye. 
The Time. The first flowred in Iuly and August, and the fruite was ripe in October in some places of Portugall; when as in other places, Clusius saith he found it in flower in November, with the fruite on it then also: the second flow∣reth also and beareth ripe fruite much about the same time: the third flowreth with us onely in December and continueth flowring Ianuary and February, if the winter be not too early or too extreame. 
The Names. It is called by Theophrastus in Greeke Laurus sylvestris, in his first booke and 15 chapter, among those trees that are ever greene, which Gaza translateth onely Laurus, not naming sylvestris at all, for it is not remembred by Dioscorides or Galen, or other of the Greeke writers. Plinye maketh mention thereof, in his 15 booke and 30 chapter, and in other places, calling it Tinus, which some understand to be this Laurus sylvestris, wilde Bay. M. Cato also remembreth it in l. de re rustica, by the name of Laurus sylvestris and no other ancient Latine writer besides: all the later writers doe call them Tinus, Laurus Tinus, and Laurus sylvestris as Clusius doth. The Italians call it Lauro salvatico, and as Lobel saith Lauro regio if he be not mistaken; the Spaniards and Portingalls Vna de perro, Follado and Durillo; the French Laurier sauvage; the Germanes wilde Lorbeerbaum; the Dutch wild Laurus Boom; and we in English, the Wilde Bay tree. 
The Vertues. There is nothing recorded of them by any Author, to be used either inwardly or outwardly; but our late ex∣perience hath found the berries, as I sayd before, to inflame and burne the mouth and throate, in as violent man∣ner, or rather worse than Laurell or Chamaelaea, and worketh downewards likewise with trouble and perturba∣tion of the whole body. 
CHAP. XXIIII. Sambucus. Elder. A Mong the number of these strong purgers, the Elders must not be omitted to be spoken of, whereof there are many kindes, and the Ebulus Wallwort or Danewort, is to be reckoned with them, for the likenesse both of forme and qualitie, as all Authors doe. 
1. Sambucus vulgaris. Common Elder. The common Elder tree groweth up sometime, if it stand alone and in good ground, to a reaso∣nable great height, otherwise standing thicke together, as for the most it is found to be, it is a shrubbe of meane height, spreading his branches farre and wide, covered with a grayish barke for the outside, but underneath it hath another that is greene, having a pith in the middle even of the Elder branches, but the young ones much more: at the joynts of the branches come forth on both sides winged leaves, consisting of 7 or 9 upon a stalke, a little nicked or dented adout the edges, of a faire sad greene colour, but smelling somewhat rancke and strong: the flowers stand at the toppes of the severall branches and twigs, many growing together in broad tufts or umbells, of a white colour, smelling more strong than the leaves, which being past, there rise up in their places 1. &amp;. 3. Sambucus vulgaris &amp; Laciniatis folijs▪ The common and the jagged Elder. 
4. Sambucus racemosa rubra. Red Berried Elder. 
small round berries greene at the first, and blackish when they are ripe, full of a purplish juyce within them, wherein lie some small flat seedes or graines: the roote is great and thicke spreading farre about. There is a kinde of Fungus or excrescence growing at the foote of the body, and on the branches of this tree, called Iewes eares, which I shall further declare among the other sorts of Mushroomes. 
2. Sambucus fructu albo. White berried Elder. This Elder is so like the former, both in growth, barke, pith, branches, sent, leaves and flowers, that untill it come to beare fruit, it is very hard to be discerned from the other; the chiefest difference hereof, is that the ber∣ries are not blacke, but of a pale whitish yellow colour in most places, yet in some they abide greenish; and hereby onely it is distinguished from the former.
3. Sambucus laciniatis folijs. Jagged Elder. As the former Elders were distinguished onely by their berries, so the onely difference in this from the first, is the forme of the leaves, which are so much jagged, and divided even to the middle ribbe, that unlesse the smell thereof declared his descent, no body by the present face would deeme it an Elder: in all other parts thereof as well flowers as fruite or berries, it differeth not from the common Elder. 
4. Sambucus racemosa rubra. Red berried Elder. The Mountaine Elder also differeth little from the first sort, for but that it groweth seldome so great, and that the flowers being somewhat yellowish, grow not in large spread tuftes, but in small long branched clusters, like unto Privet, and that the berries following them are of a scarlet red colour, pleasant to be eaten and not of∣fensive to any: it is like it in the growing, rugged white barke in the body and Elder boughes, and somewhat reddish in the young leaves, as also in the rootes the wood being not so soft nor so pithy. 
5. Sambucus palustris sive Aquatica. Marsh Elder. The Marsh or Water Elder, hath his body and branches covered with a whitish barke, but they are smaller and more brittle than any of the former: the leaves also differ much from them, being broad and smooth divi∣ded at the edges, into three, or sometimes into five divisions or incisures, and dented round about, being very like unto a Vine leafe, and comming somewhat neere unto the great Maple or Sicomore leafe, as we use to call it: the flowers stand in tuftes or umbells like the first sorts, but they are smaller and whitish, the outermost being larger by much than any of the innermost, or of the former Elders, consisting of five leaves a peece, round poin∣ted, which compasse the middle flowers round about, but have no threds in the middle, of a reasonable sweete sent: after which follow very red berries, somewhat flat and full of a red juyce, bitterish in taste, ready to pro∣voke casting. 
6. Sambucus Roseae. The Gelder Rose. Of this kinde is this Elder or Gelder Rose, growing after the same manner with such like leaves, but the flower is composed as it were of many white, or pale blush flowers, set together in a round tuft or ball. 
7. Ebulus sive Sambucus humilis. Walewort, Danewort, or Dwarfe Elder. Wallwort is but an herbe every yeare dying downe with his stalkes to the ground, and rising againe a fresh every spring, and is like unto the Elders both in forme and qualitie, that deservedly it hath the name of a dwarfe Elder, which riseth up with a foure square rough hairy stalke foure foote high or more sometimes: the winged 6. Sambuc s Rosea. 5. Et Aquatica sive palustris. The Gelder Rose and the Marsh Elder. 
7. 8. Ebulus vulgaris &amp; latin atis foli s. Ordinary Walwort and with fine cut leaves. 
leaves, are somewhat narrower than the Elder, but else so like that it might soone deceive one not very well exercised or cunning: the flowers are white with a dash of purple, standing in umbels very like those of the Elder, but more sweete in sent; after which come small blackish berries, full of juyce while they are fresh, wherein there lye small hard kernels or seede: the roote doth creepe under the upper crust of the ground, springing a fresh in diverse places, being of the bignesse of ones finger or thumbe sometimes. 
8. Ebulus foliis laciniatis. Iagged Wallwort. This Wallwort is in all other things save the leaves, so like unto the ordinary kinde, that there can be knowne no difference: but the forme of the leaves, doth so deforme the whole face of the plant, and bring it out of knowledge, like the Iagged Elder, that none almost would thinke it should belong unto the former: the flow∣ers and fruite and sent, onely leading us to judge of the species, and whereunto to be referred, for the leaves are almost as much jagged and divided as the Iagged Elder, which is the onely difference in this from the for∣mer. 
The Place. The first or common Elder groweth not wilde but is planted in all places, to serve for hedges, and partitions of grounds, vineyards, &amp;c. to hold up the bankes by ditches and water courses, and to bee planted in places where Conies breed for shadow: every sticke or branch being thrust into the ground, serving as a stocke which will easely take roote and grow. The second as it seemeth Tragus first found in the woods of Germany. The third is found wild on hills in watery woods. The fourth is not knowne certainely from whence his originall came, but is found planted in the gardens of those that are curious, and lovers of rare plants. The fifth is found by water sides and moorish grounds of Germany, France, England, Italy, and Piemont in Savoye as Pena hath set it downe. The sixth is nursed up onely in gardens, but best delighteth in moist grounds: The seventh grow∣eth wilde in many places of England, where if it be once gotten into a ground, it will so creepe and runne there∣in, that it will hardly be gotten forth. The last is a stranger in England as yet, and nursed onely in that curious garden of that Venetian Magnifico Signior Contarini. 
The Time. All or most of the Elders flower in Iune, the Wallwort somewhat late, as his fruite is likewise later ripe, even not untill September, when the others are ripe for the most part in August. 
The Names. The Elder is called in Greeke , quasi littoralis dicta videtur: in Latine generally Sambucus, of Sambix as it is thought the first finder thereof; but Quintus Serenus calleth it Sabucus in his verses, and thought to be derived from Sabucus or Sambucus as Hermolaus saith, which is an hollow instrument of Musicke, called also Pectis &amp; Magadis: The excrescence growing on the Elders is usually called Fungus Sambucinus of Dodonaeus Gummi Sambuci, and of some Auriculae Inda, in English Iewes cares. The first is called Sambucus urbana domestica, cam∣pestris, and vulgaris of all writers, and of Bauhinus Sambucus fructu in umbellanigro. Tragus calleth the second Sambuci aliud genus. Dodonaeus Sambuci altera species. Lobel Sambucus fructu albo. Bauhinus Sambucus fructu in umbella viridi. The third is called Sambucus Montana of Matthiolus, Gesner, Castor Durantes, &amp; Camerarius: of Tragus and Lonicerus Sambucus sylvestris, and because he saith it hath beene certainely observed, that the Hindes and Does doe greately affect the leaves thereof, when they are great with young, Tabermontanus cal∣leth it Sambucus cervina, and Gerard after him Sambucus racemosa vel cervina; of Lobel Sambucus montana race∣mosa, and Ioannes Thalius, in the description of Harcynia Saxono-thuringica, Sambucus montana, sen . Bauhinus calleth it Sambucus racemosa rubra, putting a doubt whether it be Sambucus montana of Plinye, which he saith groweth on Mountaines, and thinking it also to be of Theophrastus, whereof he maketh mention in his 3 booke and 4 chapter, among those trees that onely delight to grow on hills, and will not grow in the champions, and which Gaza in the Latine translation hath omitted and left out: but the Greeke Theophrastus hath not pygus as Bauhinus setteth it downe, but Phagus, as Gaza hath it in other places, he and Plinye before him, being the cause of many mens errours, in mistaking the Latine Fagus a Beech tree, for this Phagus of Theophrastus, which is a kinde of Oake as you shall understand in his proper place, when I shall speake of all the sorts of Oakes. The fourth Lobel in his Dutch herball, first made knowne to all, having found it plan∣ted in the gardens of the low countrie Apothecaries, and others that were lovers of rare and strange plants, and called it Sambucus laciniatis foliis, whom all others have followed. The fift is called Sambucus aquatica of Mat∣thiolus, Tragus, Lobel, Castor Durantes, Lugdunensis and others. Sambucus palustris of Dodonaeus, Caesalpinus and Camerarius; Cordus in historia calleth it Lycosta phylos faemina. i. Vna lupina; Ruellius tooke it to be Opulus but that is a kind or name of Maple, as Lugdunensis hath it. Anguillara calleth is Plantanus aquatica: (and so do the Italians for the most part) which is the third kinde of Maple as he saith, Gesner calleth it Sambucus palustris vel aquatica syl∣vestris, and saith some also called it Chamaeplatanus: Lugdunensis first and Bauhinus after him, doe take it to bee Thraupalus of Theophrastus in his third booke and seventh chap. and in his fourth booke and 1 chap. Bauhinus calleth it himselfe Sambucus aquaticas flore simplici, as hee calleth the Gelder Rose Sambucus aquatica flore globoso pleno. The Wallworte or Daneworte or dwarfe Elder, is called in Greeke , id est, humilis Sambucus, in Latine Ebulus, by which names all other Greeke and Latine writers have called it: and the last from the Noble Contarenus his garden, receiveth the name of Ebulus laciniatis foliis as it is in the title. It is sup∣posed it tooke the name Danewort, from the strong purging quality it hath, many times bringing them that use it unto a fluxe, which then we say they are troubled with the Danes. The Arabians call it Infacti, the Italians Sambuco, the Spaniards Sabuco, Sauco &amp; Canivero, the French Susean Susier &amp; Suin, the Germanes Holder &amp; Hol∣ler, the Dutche Vlier, and we in English Elder. 
The Vertues. Both Dioscorides and Galen doe attribute to the Wallworte, as well as to the common Elder, (for they account their properties both one) an heating and drying quality, purging watery humors aboundantly, but not without trouble to the stomacke: the first shootes of the common Elder boyled like unto Asparagus, and the young leaves and stalkes boyled in fat broth, draweth forth mightily choller and tough flegme; the tender leaves also eaten with oyle and salt doe the same: the middle or inner barke boyled in water, and given to drinke, worketh much more violently; and the berries also either greene or dry, expell the same humors, and is often given with good successe to helpe the dropsie, by evacuating great plenty of waterish humors: the barke of the roote also boyled in wine, or the juyce thereof drunke, worketh the same effects but more effectually, then either leaves or fruite doe; the juyce of the roote taken provoketh vomit mightily, and purgeth the watery humors of the dropsie; the same decoction of the roote cureth the biting of the viper or adder, as also of a mad dogge, and mollifieth the hardnesse of the mother, if women sit therein, and openeth the veines and bringeth downe their courses; the berries boyled in wine performe the same effects; the haire of the head or of other parts wa∣shed therewith, is made blacke; the juyce of the greene leaves applyed to the hot inflammations of the eyes, as∣swageth them: the leaves boyled until they be tender, then beaten and mixed with barly meale, and applyed to hot inflammations asswageth them, and helpeth places that are burnt either by fire or water, cureth fistulous ulcers being layde thereupon, and easeth the paines of the goute, being beaten and boyled with the tallow of a bull or goate, and layd warme thereon: the juyce of the leaves snuffed up into the nostrills, purgeth the tuni∣cles of the braine; the juyce of the berries boyled with a little honey, and dropped into the eares, easeth the paines of them; the decoction of the berries in wine being drunke, provoketh urine: the powder of the seedes, first prepared in vinegar, and then taken in wine, halfe a dramme at a time, for certaine dayes together, is a meanes to abate and consume the fat flesh of a corpulent body, and keepe it leane: the berries so prepared, and as much white tartar and a few aniseede put to them, a dramme of this powder given in wine, cureth the dropsie humour, by purging very gently: the dry flowers are often used in the decoctions of glisters to expell winde and ease the chollicke, for they lose their purging quality which they have being greene, and retaine an attenuating and di∣gesting propertie being dryed: the distilled water of the flowers, is of much use to cleare the skinne from sunne burning, freckles, morphew, or the like: and as Matthiolus saith both the forepart and hinderpart of the head, being bathed therewith, it taketh away all manner of the headach that commeth of a cold cause. The Vinegar made of flowers of the Elder by maceration and insolation, is much more used in France, than any where else, and is grate full to the stomacke, and of great power and effect to quicken the appetite, and helpeth to cut grosse or tough flegme in the chest. A Syrupus acetosus made hereof, would worke much better than the ordi∣nary, for these purposes. The leaves boyled and layd hot, upon any hot and painefull apostumes, especially in the more remote and sinewie parts, doth both coole the heate and inflammation of them, and ease the paines. The distilled water of the inner barke of the tree or of the roote, is very powerfull to purge the watery humors of the dropsie or timpanie, taking it fasting, and two houres before supper: Matthiolus giveth the receipt of a me∣decine to helpe any burning by fire or water, which is made in this manner; take, saith he, one pound of the in∣ner barke of the Elder, bruise it or cut it small and put it into two pound of fine sallet oyle, or oyle Olive, that hath beene first washed oftentimes with the distilled water of Elder flowers, let them boyle gently a good while together, and afterwards straine forth the oyle, pressing it very hard; set this oyle on the fire againe, and put thereto, foure ounces of the juyce of the young branches and leaves of the Elder tree, and as much new wax: let them boyle to the consumption of the juyce, after which being taken from the fire, put presently thereunto, two ounces of liquid Vernish, (such as Ioyners use to vernish their bedsteeds, cupboords tables, &amp;c.) and afterwards of Olibanum in fine powder foure ounces, and the whites of two egges being first well beaten by themselves, all these being well stirred and mixed together, put it up into a cleane pot, and keepe it for to use when occasion serveth. The young buddes, and leaves of the Elder, and as much of the rootes of Plantaine beaten together, and boyled in old Hogs grease, this being laid warme upon the place, pained with the gout doth give present ease thereto. The leaves also burned and the pouder of them put up into the nostrills, staieth the bleeding being once or twise used. If you shall put some of the fresh flowers of Elders into a bagge, letting it hang in a vessell of wine, when it is new made, and beginneth to boyle (I thinke the like may be tried with a vessell of ale or beere new tunned up, and set to worke together) the bagge being a little pressed every evening, for a seaven night together, giveth to the wine a very good rellish, and a smell like Muscadine, (and will doe little lesse to ale or beere.) The leaves of Elders boyled tender and applied warme to the funda∣ment, easeth the paines of the piles, if they be once or twice renued growing cold; The foule inflamed or old ulcers and sores of the legges, being often washed with the water, of the leaves or of the flowers distilled in the middle of the moneth of May, doth heale them in a short space. The distilled water of the flowers, taketh away the heate and inflammation of the eyes, and helpeth them when they are bloud shotten. The hands being washed morning and evening with the same water of the flowers, doth much helpe and ease them that have the Palsie in them, and cannot keepe them from shaking. The pith in the middle of the Elder stalkes, being dried and put into the cavernous holes of Fistulous ulcers, that are ready to close, openeth and dilateth the orifices, whereby injections may be used, and other remedies applied for the cure of them. It is said that if you gently strike a horse that cannot stale, with a sticke of this Elder, and binde some of the leaves to his belly, it shall make him stale quickly. The Mushromes of the Elder called Iewes eares, are of much use being dried to be boyled with Ale or Milke with Columbine leaves for sore throates, and with a little Pepper and Pellitory of Spaine in powder, to put up the uvula or pallet of the mouth when it is fallen downe. Matthiolus saith that the dried Iewes eares steeped in Rosewater, and applied to the temples and forehead, doe ease the paines of the head or headach. The Mountaine or red berried Elder, hath the properties, that the common Elder hath, but weaker to all pur∣poses: the berries hereof are taken to be cold, and to procure sleepe, but the frequent use of it is hurtfull: It is said that if a branch of this Elder be put into the trench that a moale hath made, it will either drive them forth, or kill them in their trench. The Marsh Elder is of the like purging qualitie with the common, especially the ber∣ries or the juyce of them. Mens and birds doe feede upon them willingly in the Winter. The Wallwort or Danewort, is more forceable or powerfull than the Elder, in all the diseases and for all the purposes whereunto it is applied, but more especially wherein the Elder is little or nothing prevalent; the Wallwort serveth to these uses. The young and tender branches and leaves thereof taken with wine, helpeth those that are troubled with the stone and gravell, and laid upon the testicles that are swollen and hard, helpeth them quickly: the juice of the roote of Wallwort applied to the throate, healeth the Quinsie or Kings evill: the fundament likewise is stayed from falling downe, if the juyce thereof be put therein: the same also put up with a little wooll into the mother, bringeth downe womens courses; the same juyce of the roote is a mighty purger of watery humours, and held most effectuall for the dropsie of all others herbs whatsoever: the dried berries or the seeds beaten to powder, and taken in wine fasting, worketh the like effect, the powder of the seeds taken in the decoction of Chamaepitys or ground Pine, and a little Cinamon, to the quantitie of a dramme at a time, is an approved remedy, both for the gout, joynt aches, and sciatica, as also for the French disease, for it easeth the paines by withdrawing the humors from the places affected, and by drawing forth those humors that are fluent, peccant and offensive: the pouder of the roote worketh in the like manner, and to the same effect. The roote hereof steeped in wine all night, and a draught thereof given before the accesse and comming of the fit of an Ague, prevaileth so effectually there against, that it will either put off the fit, or make it more easie, and at the second taking seldome faileth to rid it quite away. An ointment made of the greene leaves, and May butter made in the moneth of May, is ac∣counted with many a soveraigne remedy, for all outward paines, aches and crampes in the jointes, nerves, or finewes, for starcknesse and lamenesse by cold and other casualties, and generally to warme comfort and streng∣then all the outward parts ill affected: as also to mollifie the hardnesse, and to open the obstructions of the spleene, the grieved parts anointed therewith. The leaves laid to steepe in water, and sprinkled in any chamber of the house, as it is said, killeth Fleas, Waspes and Flies also, if you will credit the report. Tragus saith, that the tender branches boyled in wine, whereunto some honey is put, and drunke for some dayes together, is pro∣fitable for a cold and drie cough, cureth the diseases of the breast, by cutting and digesting the grosse and tough flegme therein. Briefely whatsoever I have shewed you before in relating the properties of Elder, doth Wall∣wort more strongly effect in opening and purging choller, flegme and water, in helping the gout, the piles, and womens diseases, coloureth the haire blacke, helpeth the inflammations of the eyes and paines in the eares, the stinging and biting of Serpents or a mad Dogge the burnings or scaldings by fire and water, the wind collicke, the collicke and stone, the difficultie of urine, the cure of old sores and fistulous ulcers, and other the griefes before specified, which for brevitie I doe not set downe here, avoiding tautologie as much as I can. 
CHAP. XXV. Helleborus niger. Blacke Hellebor or Bearefoote. O F the Hellebors there are two primary sorts, white and blacke: Of the white sort we will speake in the next Chapter, and of the blacke in this whereof there are sundry sorts as you shall heare. 
1. Helleborus niger verus. The true blacke Hellebor, or Christmas flower. The true blacke Hellebor (or Bearefoote as some would call it, but that name doth more fitly agree unto the other two bastard kinds) hath sundry faire greene leaves rising from the roote, each of them standing on a thicke round stiffe greene stalke, about an handbreadth high from the ground, divided into seven, eight, or nine parts or leaves, and each of them nicked or dented from the middle of the leafe to the pointward on both 1. Helleborus niger verus. Blacke Hellebor or Christmas flower. 
2. 3. Helleboraster minor, &amp; trifo iusspinosus. Bastard blacke Hellebor or Beares foote, and with trefoilae prickly leaves. 
3. Helleboraster maximus sive Consiligo. The greatest bastard blacke Hellebor or Beares foote called Setterworte. 
sides, abiding greene all the Winter, at which time the flowers rise on the like short stalkes, as the leaves grow on, without any leafe thereon for the most part, yet some∣times having a small short pale greene leafe, resembling rather a skin than a leafe a, little under the flower, and grow but little higher than the leaves: each stalke also beareth usually but one flower, yet sometimes two, con∣sisting of five large round white leaves a peece like unto a greate single white Rose, changing sometimes to be ei∣ther dasht with a purple about the edges or to be wholly purple without any white in them, as the weather or time of continuance doth effect, with many pale yellow thrums in the middle, standing about a greene head, which after groweth to be the seede vessell, divided into se∣verall cells or podes like unto a Colombine head or Aco∣nitum hyemale, but greater and thicker, wherein is contained somewhat long and round blackish seede, like the seedes of the bastard kindes: the rootes are a num∣ber of brownish blacke strings, which runne downe deepe into the ground, and are fastened to a thicke head, of the bignesse of ones finger. Of this kinde there is an other whose flower is red from the first opening, Florerub o. which Bel∣lonius remembreth in his observations to have seene in the woods of Greece. 
2. Helleboraster minor flore viridante. Bastard blacke Hellebor or Bearefoote. The smaller bastard Hellebor or Bearefoote is in most things like unto the former true blacke Hellebor, for it beareth also many leaves upon short stalkes divided into many parts, but each of them are longer and narrower, of a darker greene colour dented on both sides, and feele somewhat hard, perishing every yeare, but rise againe the next Spring: the flowers hereof stand on higher stalkes, with some leaves on them also, yet very few, and are of a pale greene colour like the former, but smaller by the halfe at least, having likewise many greenish yellow threads or thrummes, in the mid∣dle, and such like heads, or seede vessells and blackish seede in them, the rootes are more stringie blacke and 5. Helleborus niger ferulaceus. Fennell leafed bastard blacke Hellebor. 
6. Helleborus niger Saniculae folio major. The greater purging Sanicle like Hellebor. 
8. Epipactis Matthioli. Matthiolus his bastard blacke Hellebor.
8. Elleborine angustifolia. Variable wilde white Ellebor. 
fashion with small short leaves at the stalke of every flower, which consisteth of five small white leaves with a small close hood in the middle without any sent at all: the seede is alike and so are the rootes but smaller. 
5. Elleborine minor flore purpurante. The small wilde white Hellebor with blushflowers. The leaves hereof are narrower than the last, the stalke and flowers are alike but smaller and of a pale purplish or blush colour. 
6. Elleborine flore viridante. Wild white Hellebor with whitish greene flowers. This differeth not much from the last, but in the colour of the flower which is greenish on the outside and somewhat white within. 
7. Elleborine flore atro-rubente. Wilde white Hellebor with darke red flowers. This wilde kinde groweth somewhat bigger and higher, and with larger leaves than any other of these small wild sorts, the flowers likewise are more in number and of a deepe purple colour. 
8. Elleborine angustifolia spicata versicolor. Variable wilde white Hellebor. This also riseth somewhat high, having narrower leaves on the stalke, yet ribbed somewhat like unto the rib∣wort Plantaine: the stalke endeth in a long spike of fine purple coloured flowers, in fashion like the rest, but the opening hoodes with their labels are white spotted on the inside with purplish spots: the leaves and rootes are alike. 
The Place. Both the first sorts grow in sundry places of Germany and Austria as Clusius saith, as also in some of the Ilands about Russia where a good ship might be fraighted with the rootes of the ordinary sort as Master Tradescante the elder affirmed; the other sorts grow many of them in our owne land as well as beyond sea, namely the third fourth and sixth; especially the third in a wood called the Helkes in Lancashire neere the border of Yorke∣shire. 
The Time. The first flowreth before the second, although it spring earlier out of the ground, being not in flower untill the end of Iuly, the rest flower about May, some earlyer or later than others. 
The Names. I have shewed you in the chapter before that it is called Elleborus or Helleborum, &amp;c. The first is generally called Helleborus albus, and by Dodonaeus, Cordus upon Dioscorides and others Veratrum album, Guilandinus took it to be the Helleborus candidus of the Grecians, but is assuredly the Consiligo of Vegetius, Absyrtus, Columella and Plinye, Gerard tooke this for the next to call it praecox. Bauhinus to distinguish them calleth this flore subviridi, and the second flore atro-rubente &amp; other writers ex purpura nigricante, &amp; Lobel addeth praecox vnto it: the third is called by Clusius Elleborine recentiorum, and of others Calceolus Mariae or Marianus, and Lugdunensis, Elleborine ferruginea Dalechampii; Gesner in hortis Germaniae taketh it to be Alismatis species, and so doth Thalius likewise, and some Da∣masonium nothum &amp; Pseudodamasonium; the fourth is taken by some to be Epipactis, by others Alisma or Dama∣sonium, but generally is now adayes called Elleborine flore albo: the rest have their names in their titles, as they are most usually entitled by others: the controversies hereabouts I have touched in the foregoing chapter, and therefore will not here againe recite it: the Arabians call it Charbachem, the Italians Elleboro bianco, the Spaniards Verdegambre blanco &amp; yerva de balastieros, the French Veraire and Helleboire blanc, the Germanes Weiss Nieswurtz, the Dutch witte Nieseruyt, and we in English white Ellebor or Neesewort. 
The Vertues. The roote of white Hellebor or Neesewort is of most use (neither the leaves flowers not seede being used at any time with us that I know) and worketh very strongly and churlishly with any that shall take, it pro∣curing strong vomitings: yet being taken with convenient preparation of the body aforehand, and dieted by ad∣vise as Dioscorides warneth it, may doe much good to strong constitutious that can endure the working of it, by causing much tough viscous clammy and corrupt humours that offend the stomacke to be avoyded, to be taken not fasting but for sometime after one hath eaten, for which purposes the Oxymel Helleboratum is a medecine prepared to your hand and fit to be used: it provoketh womens courses and will kill the birth if it be taken in∣wardly: halfe a dramme of the roote prepared with Oxymel and given in wine, to those that are so deepely pos∣sessed with melancholy that it causeth fits of fury or madnesse, doth much abate the peccant humour giving much ease to the party: being likewise steeped and afterwards boyled in broth and given, helpeth those that are trou∣bled with the falling sicknesse, the leprosie, and all other breakings out in the skinne, as scabbes, &amp;c. quartane, agues, the ptisicke or pining consumption, an old cough, the dropsie, ruptures, sciatica, goute, crampes, paines in the joynts and sinewes, and paines and swimming in the head: the best preparation of it is to be infused in the juyce of a Quince, or to be put into a Quince, and either baked in an oven, or roasted under the embers, and halfe a scruple thereof given at a time; and this was as Matthiolus saith, the ancient manner of curing these diseases: but being so dangerous a medecine though sometimes taken with caution, that it putteth many in hazard of stran∣gling, and is onely remedied by eating Quinces, or taking the juyce or the Syrope made thereof, hath made the use thereof wholly almost to be given over and left: the roote saith Dioscorides is put with other things to helpe the dimnesse of the sight: the juyce of the roote dropped into the eares taketh away the noyse and singing in them: being boyled in lye and the head washed therewith it killeth lice and helpeth the running scabbes and sores thereof, being mingled with flower and a little honye or butter, or else boyled in milke and set where flies gnats, &amp;c. doe much resort, doe kill as many as touch it: if hens, duckes, or geese doe chance to drinke thereof it will kill them likewise: being moulded up with meale and honye, and put into moale holes or the burrowes of field or dormise, or any other such small Vermine will quickly destroy them: the powder or scraping of the roote by it selfe, or with a few leaves of Marjerome put up into the nose, purgeth the head and braines by neesing: being boyled in vinegar and the decoction gargled in the mouth, easeth the paines of the tooth ach: the same de∣coction likewise helpeth the itch and scabbes in the hands, and clenseth foule sores and ulcers in the legges and other parts. The Spaniards and Navarrois doe make a certaine poyson of the juyce of the rootes of white Helle∣bor which after it hath fermented in a horne or earthen leaded vessell (the time when it is readie to be used they know by this tryall: having thred a needle with thred, and wetted it therein, they draw it through a frogge which if it presently dye, then it is good, and ready) they dippe their arrow heads therein, and then what beast shall be wounded therewith shall suddenly dye: which thing Matthiolus saith, hee also tryed on dogges and chickens, which dyed presently after they were wounded with a weapon dipped therein, in that the venome had peirced the blood, against which poyson no other antidote can be found more fit and speedy, than the eating of Quinces, for even the smell of them being in a house where that poyson is, taketh away the whole force thereof: but is restored againe (as it is said) if ripe grapes be mixed therewith or some pepper cast into it: this poyson is onely used while it is fresh, for it loseth the strength, if the juyce dry upon the arrow heads, and therefore to keepe them the better they use to keepe them in a case, the iron heads being wrapped in wooll and clothes wet therein: but this is the most wonderfull as it is related, that this poyson being drunke, procureth almost no harme to them that drinke it, unlesse they take too much and as it is sayd the hunters often take it themselves to purge them: it is sayd also that the flesh of those beasts killed by this poyson, is more tender and pleasant in eating than of other not killed therewith, and especially that part about the wound. Pausanius in Phocicis recordeth a notable stra∣tagem that Solon used in beseidging the Citty of Cyrrheus, viz. That having cut off the River Plistus from run∣ning into the Citty, he caused a great many of those rootes to be put into a quantity thereof, which after they had sufficiently infected the water, he let passe into the Citty againe, whereof when they had greedily drunke they grew so weake and feeble by the superpurgation thereof, that they were forced to leave their wals unmand, whereby the Amphyctions their enemies became masters of their Citty: the like stratagems are set downe by di∣verse other authors performed by the helpe of other hearbes. The lesser wilde sorts are not knowne with us to be used in Physicke: but if either of these Elleborines be his Epipactis, he saith it is good in the defects of the liver and against poysons and to procure vomiting; Theophrastus saith the same. 
CHAP. XXVII. Gratiola. Hedge Hyssope. O F the true Gratiola or Hedge Hyssope, I doe know but one kinde as all the best authors doe agree, but yet unto it there are added two or three other hearbes, as neerest thereunto, either in face or qualitie, some reckoning the one and some the other; and I in this place bringing them all as fit to be ranked under this title. 
1. Gratiola vulgaris. True hedge Hyssope. This hearbe is but a small low plant, seldome growing with his slender bending foure square branches, above a foote high; having diverse small leaves set thereon, very like unto those of the ordinary garden Hyssope, but a little shorter and broader, and of a pale greene colour, of a very bitter unpleasant taste: from about the middle of these branches, at the joynts of the leaves up to the toppes of them, come forth the flowers, every one at a place, standing upon very short footestalkes, which are somewhat long and hollow, ending in foure leaves, two of the lowest standing out as it were lippes, and the other two above, shorter by the halfe, of a whitish yellow colour, tending to a blacke blew, and sometimes more blewish or purple: after which come small round heads, wherein is conteined small seede: the roote shooteth forth too and fro under ground very much, with many joynts and small fibres at them, thereby encreasing and quickly spreading largely, especially if it stand in any moyst place, because it will hardly hold long in any dry ground. 
Flore lu∣teo. Camerarius saith he found by a brooke side, not farre from Geneva one of this kind with a yellow flower, not differing in any thing else. 
2. Gratiola minor sive Hyssopoides. Small hedge Hyssope. This small hedge Hyssope, shooteth forth sometimes many, and sometimes but one or two round reddish stalkes halfe a yard high, branched toward the toppes; whereon are set one above another, and sometimes one against another, diverse small and somewhat long leaves, somewhat smaller than the former, and neere resembling Hysope leaves, of a pale greene colour, joyning close unto the stalkes and branches, and without any foote stalke at all: at the joyntes with the leaves come forth flowers, every one by it selfe, standing in a long huske, consisting of foure leaves of an excellent blew colour: after which succeede small browne seede, conteined in long round pods: the roote is white and shooteth forth many fibres, whereby it comprehendeth well in the ground: the hearbe and every part hereof is utterly without any smell, and almost without any taste, yet some hold it to have a nitrous or little salt, and some a little sweetish taste: Sometimes and in the moyster grounds, this is found with larger leaves, and growing higher; sometimes with smaller and longer leaves, which scarse riseth an handbreadth high, and that in the dry grounds. 
1. Gratiola Vulgaris. The true hedge Hyssope. 
2. 4. Gratiola angustifolia minor: Et latifolia nostra . Small hedge Hyssope. The lesser broad leafed hedge Hyssope. 
 
3. Gratiola caerulea, sive latifolia major. The greater broade leafed or blew flowred hedge Hyssope. This hearbe also is referred unto Gratiola, for some resemblance it hath, both for place, and manner of growing, and especially for the bitternesse thereof, so like it, which by Lobel and Pena their judgements was thought at the first likeliest to be a kinde of Lysimachia, and so entituled it galericulata for distinction sake, but others of good judgement since, have otherwise thought as you shall heare anon: I have placed it, with the Gratiola, partly led by the authority of others, and partly by the common vote of these times, who as frequently call it Gratiola latifolia, as Lysimachia galericulata: take the description thereof, therefore in this manner. It is a smooth low plant not rising above a foote high, with many square stalkes diversly branched from the bottome to the toppe, set with diverse joynts and two small leaves at every one, which stand upon short foote stalkes, being broad at the bottome and smaller to the end, a little dented about the edges, (which is not remembred in Lobel and Pena their description) and full of veines, of a sadder greene colour than the former, longer also and broader: the flowers are gaping, somewhat like unto those of Dead Nettles, of a faire blewish purple colour, with some white spots therein, every one standing at the joynts with the leaves up to the toppes: after which come forth small seede vessels, formed somewhat like unto the toppe of the thigh bone of a man or beast, wherein the small nut or hucklebone is set; the upper part whereof doth first open, when the seede is ripe, and falleth away when it is touched, shewing within it small yellow seede: the roote spreadeth much, and with many branches under ground, quickely thereby possessing a large circuite or compasse. 
There is a lesser sort hereof found in the like places as the former, differing onely in the smallnesse of the plant. 
4. Gratiola latifolia sive nostras minor. The lesser broad leafed hedge Hyssope. There is also another small hearbe growing in our Land onely, for ought I can either heare or learne which Gerard first found and called Gratiola latifolia, as referring it thereunto, and so doe I also, yet more for the re∣semblance of the flower unto the last (which was not knowne to him, or at least not mentioned by him) and bit∣ternesse, than any thing else: Out of the wet boggie ground from among the grasse &amp;c. that groweth about it, springeth up one or more small stalkes, scarse halfe a foote high, round but crested as it were all the length, which spread forth other smaller branches; whereon doe grow many small leaves, set by couples one against ano∣ther, being somewhat broade, but very short withall, seeming almost round, and ending in a point, a little den∣ted about the edges: at the joynts with the leaves come forth the flowers, every one by it selfe, on a small foote stalke, being in forme somewhat like the last, a gaping flower but shorter, of a pale reddish colour, spotted in the middle of the lower leafe, with many small white spots: after the flowers are fallen come in their places small seede vessels, in shape somewhat like unto the nut of a crossebow; wherein is conteined small yellowish seede: the roote is small long and white, spreading it selfe under ground diverse wayes; which perisheth not in the winter, neither runneth like the last, but spreadeth new branches every yeare; the taste hereof is as extreame bitter as the last.
5. Polygala Valentina clusii. Evergreene Bastard Sene of Valentia. The neare resemblance of this plant unto the former, hath caused me to joyne it with them, whose description is this: It hath many small weake, but lithy and tough slender greene stalkes, rising scarce a foote high, whereon are placed with∣out order, such like wings of leaves as are in the former, but much smaller, thicker and of a blackish blew greene colour; like as the leaves of Rue are, of an unpleasant and binding taste, abiding on the branches all the winter, as well as sum∣mer without shedding: at the tops of the stalkes and branches, which are bare without leaves for a good space, come forth many small yellow flowers, very like unto the flowers of Mellilot, hanging downe round about them in manner of a crowne, after which succeed small long and round podds, with three or foure divisions or bunches on them, wherein lie the seede, being somewhat long hard and black; the roote is long and somewhat thicke, hard and tough withall: Of this kinde Clusius maketh mention of an other larger in every part, Major montana &amp; mari∣tima. which he found also in the wooddie hills of Valentia in Spaine, and a third sort with slender greene branches full of pith, with fewer softer and thicker leaves thereon, growing on the sea coasts by Valentia. 
The Place. The two first sorts grow about Trent plentifully, and are kept in many gardens with us especially; the third groweth at the foote of certaine hills that are neare the Alpes, among the hedges and the borders of the vineyards about the Danowe or Danubins. The fourth groweth neare the Sea shore by Teracinum, and for the raritie of it brought into Cardinall Bembus his garden at Padoa. The last Clusius saith he found in the fields of Salamanca, as also in the kingdome of Granado and Valentia, in the sundry bottomes of the hills. 
The Time. They doe all flower with us in June and July, or thereabouts, and give their ripe seede the next moneth after, except the fift which being more tender seldome abideth a yeare with us. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and in Latine Colutaea, The ordinary Colutaea Vesicaria is taken of most Writers since Matthiolus, to be the Colutaea Liparae that Theophrastus mentioneth, lib. 3. c. 1. but I doe rather thinke the Colutaea Scorpioides should be it, because it properly beareth siliquas poddes, when as the other hath rather vesicas tumentes, swolne bladders, and not properly podds or cods, and that Theophrastus would have given some proper note of difference from other sorts of siliquae cods, if he had meant these thinne transparent skinnes or bladders, and not the other which are the more formable; even as his Colytea and Cercis, which are arbores si∣liquosae or siliquatae, and by some thought to be Arbor Iudae and Laburnum; if I be mistaken herein let others of better judgement be umpeeres in this case. The other sorts received the name Scorpioides, from the forme of the pods, which are distinguished into bunches or joynts, as a Scorpions taile, and may also be called Siliquose, as a distinction from the first or greatest: they are called in English Bastard Sene, because the leaves are so like unto the leaves of the true Sene tree; Ruellius as I take it being the first that called it Sene. The first is by most Authors called Colutaea yet Cordus in historia calleth it Sena, Ruellius, Sena Mauritanorum, and Gesner in hortis, saith it called Sena sylvestris quibusdam sed male, but others Colutaea vesicaria, Caesalpinus calleth it Emeri alterum g , the second Emerus vulgo, but by all others Colutaea scorpioides major, and by Bauhinus Colutaea siliquosa major; the third being called humilior or minor by all; the fourth is so called as it is in the title by Bauhinus: the last is called by Clusius Polygala Valentina, of the people in Valentia Coronilladel Rey that is Sertula regia, where as he saith the Apothecaries use the flowers for Melilot, and because he found it plentifully in divers territories of Spaine, as also in Valentia, and that the learned there (as he saith) did referre it to the Polygala of Dioscorides and Pliny: Lobell calleth it Colutaea minima, and therefore I have you see referred it to the Colutea ' s, as being in face or shew most like unto them, and as I thinke not much differing in vertue or propertie, as by the unpleasant taste, both of leaves and seede may be gathered, I have therefore given it an English title as I thinke not unfitting it. 
The Vertues. The leaves of the greater bastard Sene with bladders, as also of the other with Scorpion pods, doe both pro∣voke strong vomitings and purgings downewards, but very churlishly and with some trouble to the stomacke and bowells; avoiding tough flegme and choller: the seede is more forcible in each of those qualities, and work∣eth more turbulently in the body, and from the joynts: it is therefore seldome given to any but to strong bodies, and where any better or other purgers are not at hand: Let not therefore any take this to be good Sene, or use it instead thereof. Theophrastus saith it doth fatten sheepe wonderfully, and therefore much used in those countries, but seldome proved in ours: the qualities of the other sorts of bastard Sene, are not set downe by any, but sure∣ly their taste being unpleasant like the other, declare them to be not much differing. 
CHAP. XXXII. Genista &amp; Spartium. Broome. T Here are many sorts of our ordinary Broome as well as Spartum, Spanish Broome, reckoned a∣mong those plants that doe purge, as also divers others smaller sorts called Genistella; of all which I meane to entreate in this Chapter. 
1. Genista vulgaris sive Scoparia. Our common Broome. Our common Broome shooteth forth many woody stemmes or stalkes, of the bignesse of a mans finger oftentimes (especially if it be suffered to grow long) at the bottome, rising to the height of a reasonable tall man spreading into divers the like wooddy branches, covered with an hard and thin e darke grayish greene barke, which shoote forth a number of slender pliant square, or cornered small twigges or branches, like rushes; whereon appeare small darke greene leaves, three or foure sometimes set together at a place, abiding but a small time, so that it is seldome seene with leaves on it: the flowers are large, and of a gold yellow shining colour, growing one above another for a good space at the toppes of the branches, which turne into hard and flat small cods, almost blacke when they are ripe, wherein is contained small and shining brownish seede: the roote is long and woddy, yet tough withall, spreading many wayes under the ground, never perishing but sending forth new shootes every yeare, and more especially when the old stalkes are cut and takes away: From the rootes hereof in many places (but more often where no Broome groweth, namely by fields and hedge sides and upon heathes) groweth another plant, whose stalke is of the bignesse of a finger or thumbe sometimes above two foote high, Rapum Genistae. having a shew of leaves on them, and many flowers at the toppe, somewhat like unto the flowers of Orchis, but larger and of a deadish yellow colour, as the stalkes and leaves are also: which perisheth without seede, or encreasing the roote, being somewhat round and scaly. 
2. Genista minor folijs Hyperici. Small or low Broome. This differeth from the former chiefely in not growing so great or high, and that the slender branches are thicke stored with leaves like unto Saint Johns wort: the flowers, seede, &amp;c. are like the former. 
3. Genista Iluensis. Iland Broome. This Iland Broome shooteth forth many stalkes, divided into many branches full of great joynts or knees, with divers small and narrow leaves set round about the joynts, of a pale yellowish greene colour as the stalkes are also, this hath yellow flowers and seede like the common. 
4. Genista alba tenuifolia. White Broome. This Broome is very like the former, but that it groweth not so great, having many twiggie branches; which in time grow to wooddy stalkes, whereon are set many smaller leaves then the former, somewhat greene on the up∣perside, and of a gray and shining colour underneath: the flowers, are in forme like the others but somewhat smaller, and of a whitish colour: the seedes and pods are also like the former. 
5. Chamaegenista. Dwarfe Broome. This low or Dwarfe Broome never groweth very great or high, neither come his slender greene pliant bran∣ches to be hard or wooddy, but alwayes abideth low, rising little more than a foote in height: on whose greene pliant twigges are set small and somewhat long leaves, of a darke greene colour on the upperside and gray un∣derneath, abiding on them all the summer long, and at the toppes grow small yellow flowers, not so yellow nor so large as the first, but like unto them for the forme, and so are the pods and seede but smaller: the roote is long, tough, and much spreading in the ground, and long lasting. 
6. Chamaegenista Cretica. Dwarfe Broome of Candy. The Candy dwarfe Broome hath low small hoary branches lying upon the ground, not exceeding one hand in length, yet divided into branches of two or three inches long, having very small and very narrow leaves set there∣on, two or three growing together, one being longer than the rest, all hoary as the stalkes are: from the joynts with the leaves come forth three or foure yellow flowers like the other. 
7. Genista tinctoria vulgaris. Common Greeneweede or Diersweede. Our common Diers weede hath a number of small tough greene stalkes, two foote long or thereabouts, rising from a roote very much dispersed under ground, and wooddy; whereon grow without order many small long leaves of a sad greene colour, and many yellow flowers at the toppes, very like unto Broome flowers, but lesser and somewhat paler, after which come small pods lesser than Broome, and seede therein not much unlike. 
8. Genista tinctoria Hispanica. Spanish Greeneweede. The Spanish Greeneweede hath more woddy stalkes, rising much higher than the former, and bare without either leafe or branch for a good space above the ground, and then spreadeth forth may small short and brittle branches, stored with many long and narrow leaves, somewhat like unto the leaves of Flaxe or Spurge flaxe, greene on the upperside, and of a glistering white or silver colour underneath, somewhat harsh and bitter with∣all in taste: the flowers are many and yellow, that stand at the toppes of the branches, like unto the former: the whole plant is very beautifull to behold, either in flower or out of flower. Vnder this herbe when it was in 1. Genista vulgaris &amp; Rapum Genistae. Ordinary Broome, and Broome Rape. 
7. Genista tinctoria vulgaris. Common greene weede, or Dyers weede. 
4. Genista alba tenuifolia. White Broome. 
8. Genista tinctoria Hispanica, Spanish Greene weede. 
9. Genistella montana Germanica. Base Broome of Germany. 
10. Genistella pinnata altera Hispanica. Spanish base Broome. 
flower, Clusius saith he found growing in his naturall place, such another Broome rape, as is before specified, Alterum Rapum Genistae. a∣bout a foote high, stored with many large and long gaping flowers, from the middle of the stalke upward, both stalke and flowers being of a yellow colour, and full of an unctuous or oylie moisture.
The Time. The first flourisheth chiefely in Iune, and the fruite hanging upon the tree all the yeare, are gathered much a∣bout the time of the flowring: for the tree holding his greene leafe all the Winter, hath usully both blossomes and greene fruite, and ripe all as it were at one time. The other hath not beene hitherto further described or knowne. 
The Names. Casia or Cassia is a word of divers significations, for it is either the Aroma of the ancients, Theophrastus, Dios∣corides, Galen, &amp;c. like unto Cinamon called Cassia lignea in the Apothecaries shoppes, or this Cassia fistula, or else a shrubbe called Cassia poetica or Monspeliaca, but it is very likely that this tree, nor his fruite was knowne to any of the antient Greeke Writers, unlesse as Cordus saith it might be the Faba Indica of Aristobulus and some o∣thers; but the later Greeke Authors, as Actuarius, and others since his time, called it , Cassia nigra, from the Arabians, who first brought in the use thereof, and called it Cassia fistula: and because it was not knowen where else it did grow then in Egypt, it was called by many Siliqua Egyptia, and is thought by divers that it may be the Siliqua called Ficus Egyptia by Theophrastus in his first Booke and 18. Chapter: and of others Cassia solutiva: the usuall name is Cassia fistula in all Apothecaries shoppes: but why the name of Cassia should be given to this treee or his fruite, is not easie to know or learne: Pena and Lobell in their Adversaria thinke it might come from the Greeke word quod coriaceum vocant, because the cods or canes are like leather; but I verily beleeve the Arabians (and it may be those from whom the Arabians had it) called it Cassia in regard of the sweetenesse of the flowers, like unto the Cassia aromatica or odorata; and Solomon in the 4. Chapter and 14. verse of the Cantieles, maketh mention of this Cassia tree, as I take it, for in the Latine Translation of Saint Ie∣rome; I find it is fistula, which the Translators make to be Calamus in English: And it is not improbable that the true Cassia aromatica, or odorata, was called Fistula, because the peeces of the barke were rowled together, and hollow like a pipe, even as Cinamon (which is congenor if not idem ) is, which in some countries is called Ca∣nella; and I finde that the people both in Italy and in Spaine, doe call the Cassia aromatica by the name of Canella, yet to this day, either from the forme of Cinamon, which is like unto a pipe, or from Canna, a reede or Cane, as I thinke rather, and the diminitive thereof, is Canella a small Cane reede. They are much deceived that thinke the barke of the pipes or fruite of this Cassia fistula, is of any more force than a dry chippe, to procure womens courses, &amp;c. as some in former times did, for the error is grosse: The other is called by Lobel Cassia siliqua Brasi∣liana purgatrix compressa, who first gave us the knowledge thereof in his Pharmacopaea Rondeletiaa. 
The Vertues. The inner blacke substance or pulpe, clensed from the shells, seeds, and skins that grow together with them, is the onely medecinall part that is used, taken by it selfe in balls, or bits, or in potions or drinkes, and is very effectuall to purge the reines, kidneyes and bladder, for it tempereth the heate of them, cleanseth the humors that lie therein, both by urine and the stoole, and thereby giveth much ease to those that are troubled with the stone, if they use it often: taken with Rubarbe and a few Anniseed and Licoris to correct the windinesse thereof, it is an especiall good medecine in gonorrhaea to clense the reines, that other helpes may be the more availeable afterwards, as also to clense the liver, the stomach and mesentery veines, from choller and flegme, clea eth the bloud and quencheth the heate thereof, and is therefore profitable in all hot agues: it is very effectuall against all Rheumes and sharpe distillations, and against chollericke and melancholike diseases: it is often used in all the kindes of pectorall diseases, as old coughes, shortnesse of breath, wheesings, and the like, if it be taken with Agaricke as some advise: it is not so convenient for those that have moist, weake and slippery bowells, unlesse it be given with Mirobalans, Rubarbe, Spicknard, or Masticke: else it may be safely given to all sorts of people, ages and conditions, and to prevent the danger of such lubricitie, divers doe use to give it with Hiera picra: The young cods taken while they are small and greene, boyled a little and then laid in the shadow a while to drie, and after boyled in Suger or Hony, doth purge the body, as the pulpe or blacke substance, and is a delicate mede∣cine fit for tender and weake stomackes, that abhorre all manner of Phisicke; and here of the usuall quantitie is three or foure ounces to be taken at a time for elder persons, and one ounce for the younger: the use of Cassia outwardly either in ointments or plaisters, is much commended of many for all hot pimples, and other erupti∣ons in the skinne, and also to ease paines of the gout and hot inflammations, and paines in the joynts. The other sort of Cassia is more effectuall in purging, for it hath beene tryed by experience, that one ounce hereof, is as forcible as two ounces of the other, and is effectuall to all the diseases aforesayd. 
CHAP. XXXIIII. Siliqua dulcis sive Ceratonia. The sweete Beane or Carob tree. O F this kind of sweete Beane or Carob tree, there hath beene one other also lately found out, and made knowne to the world by Pona: for the ordinary sort, being well knowne to most, especially i Spaine and Italy, and other the hotter Countries of the East, is remembred by the ancients. 
1. Siliqua dulcis sive vulgatior. The ordinary sweete Beane or Carob tree. The Carobe or sweete Beane tree that hath beene of longest knowledge to all, groweth in the hot Countries, as Spaine and Italy, to be a very great tree covered with an ash coloured barke, spreading very much in breadth with very faire great branches, the younger being reddish at the first, whereon doe grow sparsedly winged leaves, very like unto the leaves of the purging Cassia tree, but that they are rounder at the ends or points, and somewhat harder in handling, of a darke greene colour on the upperside, and of a paler greene under∣neath: it beareth a long cackin in the winter, like unto that of the Wallnut, which in the spring time openeth into many darke purplish flowers, and afterwards bringeth crooked cods, of the bignesse of a large beane cod, in some larger in others smaller, greene at the first, and of a brownish colour, when they are ripe; wherein are flat and round seedes, very like unto those of Cassia, and are of an unpleasant taste, while they are fresh, but ga∣ther more sweetenesse being kept to be dry: the shell thereof although hard is eaten, aswell as the inner sub∣stance; which that I may use the words of Plinye, is neither of a fleshie wooddy or skinnie substance, but of them all as it were mixed together. In the hotter countries of India &amp;c. as Strabo in his Geoghraphie writing of the trees of India doth report, there is a certaine thicke substance lying within these cods, which being taken forth serveth the Indians, and those other people where they grow in stead of Sugar or Honey, to preserve the young cods of Cassia, Gingar, Mirobalans, and other fruites withall. 
2. Caroba sive Siliqua ex Guinea purgatrix. The Carob or purging Beane of Ginnye. The Carob or purging Beane of Ginny, groweth no doubt in his naturall place, to be a great tree, but in the lesse warme Countries, as Italy whereunto it was first brought, it cannot doe so: but sheweth by the growing that it much differeth not from the former, bearing his leaves after the same manner; the fruite (for we have no knowledge of the flower as yet) is crooked thicke and short (and as Pona saith, somewhat like an Anacarde or Cajous ) about three inches long, of a browne colour on the outside, very like unto the other, having a bowing or roundnesse all the length of the backe, and an eminence or list as it were in the hollownesse: within which is Siliqua dulcis vulgatior. The ordinary sweete Beane or Carob tree. 
1. Flores &amp; fructus Siliquae dulcis vulgaris 2. Et ex Guinea. 
foure or five somewhat rounder and not so flat seedes, more pointed below and round at the head: the taste is more sharpe and quicke, even almost burning the throate, which peradventure is but from the nature of the hot Country, where it grew and may grow more milde, after it hath beene inured unto a more temperate climate. 
The Place. The first as is before sayd groweth in all the South and East Countries, as India, Armenia, Syria, Arabia, Egypt, &amp;c. and in Greece, Spaine, Italy, &amp;c. frequently in many places, as both Matthiolus and Clusius make mention: the other is originally from Ginny, and is set forth onely by Po∣na of Verona, in his Italian booke, who had it from Signor Contarni of Venice. 
The Time. The first flowreth in the very beginning of the spring, and the fruite is riper in the hot time of the Sommer onely: of the other there is no further knowledge as yet, than of the fruite. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , Ceratia of Dioscorides, id est, siliqua, &amp; &amp; Ceratonia &amp; Ceronia, quasi cornuta Siliqua, of Galen, Aegineta and others, because the cods are crooked, or bowing inwards like a sithe or horne: But that siliqua whereof Theophrastus maketh mention in his fourth booke and second chapter, and which the Ionians called Ceronia, and some as he saith ficus Aegyptia, but falsely, with a white flower and fruite growing from the body of the tree, more plentifully than from the branches, cannot bee this siliqua, but some other, even as Lugdunensis and others affirme also: Plinye calleth it Siliqua dulcis and so doth Alpinus and others: in some Apothecaries shops beyond Sea Xylocaracta or rather Xylocaratia, the Ara∣bians call it Charnebium, in Italy they call it Carobe and Carobole, and in Naples Salequa, corruptly, from siliqua as Matthiolus saith, the Spaniards call it Algarrovas, the Germaines and Dutch call it Saint Ioans brot, that is, Saint Iohns bread, supposing that Saint Iohn fed upon these fruites, and wilde honey, while he did abide in the wilder∣nesse of Iudea, as in Matth. 3.4. but they are much deceived, for the word in the Hebrew text (as Junius and Tremellius doe note upon the 22 vers. of the 11. chap. of Levitticus is Arbis, (whereof there were foure kindes, of each whereof it was lawfull for the Israelites to eate) translated into Greeke , in Latine Locustae, which are kindes of grashoppers, peculiar to those Easterne Countries, much differing from ours: but this siliqua or sweete Beane tree, is the same mentioned in the 15 chap. and 16 vers. of the Gospell according to Saint Luke, whereof the swine fed themselves, and the prodigall child would faine have eaten of them to stay his hunger, but could not have them: for in all these Countries where they grow, the poorer sort of people doe often eate them, and the hogges for the most part consume the rest: the seede of this Beane, was that kinde of weight in ancient times called Karat, and among the goldsmithes a Carret, weighing sixe graines formerly, although in these dayes they account it to be but foure. 
The Vertues. The fruite while it is fresh and new gathered, helpeth to purge the belly, but being dryed doth rather binde it, and is then more beneficiall to the stomacke, than while it is fresh, because it somewhat troubleth it with the evill taste, and hard digesting thereof: the sweete substance within them, is often also used as honey, both to loosen the belly, almost as much as the extracted pulpe of Cassia, and is also good for the inflammations of the reines and backe to temper the heate, and is effectuall in the diseases of the chest, as coughes and shortnesse of breathes as Cassia is, which things also the decoction of the cods, performeth very well: Galen in his second booke of Aliments, condemneth the use of them for meate, saying they are hard of disgestion, and are not easily avoyded forth of the body: and in his seventh booke of simple medicines, hee saith they are of a drying and binding quality, although they conteine in them some sweetenesse, and that they are somewhat like unto Cher∣ries, that being fresh they loosen the belly, and being dry binde it, because the moyst substance being consumed, the thicker essence remaineth. 
CHAP. XXXV. Tamarindus. The Tamarind or sower Beane tree. T He Tamarind or sower Beane tree groweth to be as great as a Plum tree with many branches thicke set with pale greene winged leaves, that is many set together on both sides of the middle rib but smaller, then either those of the Cassia or Carob tree, having alwayes an oddeone at the end, which usually close themselves together, both at the setting of the sunne, and upon raine, and open againe at the rising thereof, and faire weather, of a sower or acide taste: the flowers are somewhat large and white, like unto flow∣ers of the Orange tree, consisting of eight leaves, smelling very sweete, having foure small white threds, standing in the middle about the umbone, which after groweth to be the fruite, and when it is ripe, is much larger, than any kidney beane cod, some greater and lesse than others, as in all sorts of fruite, somewhat bending or croo∣ked, wherein is contained a blacke substance, not distinguished into cels, as the Cassia solutiva is, but the seede lying dispersed among the pulpe, hath diverse bigge and long strings running through it, of a very acide sowre or sharpe sweete taste, very pleasing to the palate and stomacke: the seede or kernels are greater than those of Cassia, and as it were square and somewhat flat also: the tree never looseth his leafe, but will endure no cold, as hath beene often tryed in those colder Countries. 
The Place. This tree naturally groweth in many places in the East Indies as Garcias saith, it is onely nourished as a stranger both in Arabia and Egypt in their Orchards. 
The Time. We have no certaine knowledge of the time of flowring or the bearing of ripe fruite. 
The Names. It is called by the Arabians (for none of the ancient Greeke writers hath made any mention of it) Tamarin∣dus that is the Date tree of India, for Tamar signifieth a Date with them, and of the later Greeke writers Oxy∣phaenicon, that is the sower Date tree; but both of them very unfitly, for it may very well be perceived that it is nothing like unto any kinde of Date tree, Lacuna following Mesues, calleth it Dactylus Indicus, of the Greeke word ctylus that signifieth a finger, which the fruite doth very well resemble, being bowed or crooked like unto a bowed or bended finger: some take it to be Pala of Pliny, whereof he maketh mention in his 12 booke and 6. chap. some againe thinke that it differeth nothing from the Palmulae Thebaicae of Dioscorides, the Dates of Thebes: and because it should not want an English name, according to the property thereof, I have called it the sowre Beane tree, for that the fruite or cod is so like a great kidney Beane cod. 
The Vertues. The inward pulpe of the Tamarind is very effectuall to purge choller, and therefore is of great good use in all hot or pestilentiall agues, it openeth the obstructions both of the liver and spleene, and therefore is profitable a∣gainst Tamarinda. The Tamarinde or sower Beane tree. 
Tamarind fructus cum sem ne. The cod and seedes of the Tamarinde tree. 
all breakings out of the skinne, which come of the heate of bloud, or of a sharpe or salt water, running be∣tweene the flesh and the skinne, as itches, scabbes, leprye, and the like, and helpeth those that are troubled with the Jaundies, and the stopping of the Spleene: it doth exceedingly helpe to asswage the thirst, if an ounce there∣of be dissolved in faire water, and a little Sugar mixed therewith, or taken of it selfe; for the people of the hot countries, doe usually eate thereof in their long travells to quench their thirst, which they were never able to indure without it, to refresh themselves in the great heate, both of the Summer, and of those drie places, where no water is to be had. It cooleth all inflammations, both of the liver and of the stomacke, as also of the reines and backe, and helpeth the Gonorrhaea, or running of the reines: taken with Burrage water, it quickneth the dulled spirits by melancholy, and somewhat mittigateth the fits of frensie and madnesse: it doth stay all rheumes and distillations, being taken with some Suger and the water of Maiden haire: if a small quantity of the pulpe of Tamarinds and Cassia, and the pouder of Rubarbe be mixed together, it maketh a delicate medicine to purge the stomacke and liver, and is very effectuall to helpe to expell all hot or burning agues, and procure an appetite: it staieth also vomitings, and taketh away the loathing of meate: the leaves as well as the pulpe serve instead of vinegar, with many of the Indians, Ethiopians, Arabians and others, they give the leaves also to children for the wormes, and both leaves and pulpe serve outwardly to coole all hot inflammations, and wheales, pimples, and such like. The young cods of the Tamarinds are preserved in Arabia with the hony of the Carobs, or with Su∣gar, which serve for all the purposes before recited. 
CHAP. XXXVI. Nux Ben sive Glans unguentaria. The oyly Nut Ben. T His oyly Nut Ben hath undergone much controversie, and contrarietie among those Authors that have antiently written thereof, as namely Dioscorides, Theophrastus, Pliny and Galen: for Dioscorides saith that the tree is like unto Tamariske, Theophrastus saith it hath leaves like unto Mirtle leaves, Pliny saith like unto the leaves of Heliotropium or Turnesole: but that I may com∣pose this controversie and end this contrarietie betweene them, I will show you here the true des∣cription and figure thereof, such as Doctor Tobias Aldinus the Cardinall Farnesius his Phisition at Rome hath set it forth being well growen, for that which Honorius Bellus a famous Phisition, living long in Candie had growing with him from the Nuts, which he planted, (and sent the figure thereof to his friends in divers places, &amp; especially to Iohannes Pona, an Apothecary in Verona, who in the description and catalogue of the names of those plants that grow upon Mount Baldus, which he set forth himself, hath inserted the figure hereof, as Nux Ben sive Glans unguentaria cum siliqua integra, &amp; nux exempta seorsim. The oyly nut Ben with the whole cod, and the nuts taken out and set by themselves.
he received it from the said Bellius ) was but a young plant, of not above a yeare or two ' s growth. Theophrastus in de∣scribing the tree growen great, saith it groweth crooked, and not straight upright spreading rather in breadth than in height, whose leafe is like those of Mirtles, but longer as by this figure that you here see you may well perceive, and nothing like unto those of Tamariske, and that the comparison of Pliny in the leaves like Turnsole, is not much amisse, for if they be both compared they will not be found much to differ in the forme, I meane Turnesole leaves, from the larger Mirtle leaves, but the difference betwixt Dioscorides, and Theophrastus riseth as it is thought from the errour in the Writers out of the coppie of Dioscorides; the Greeke word in Dioscorides and Theo∣phrastus, being so neare and like the one unto the other, that it might easily be mistaken, which are in Dio∣scorides Myrica, sive Tamariscus, &amp; Myrtus in Theo∣phrastus, yet it is more probable that there is no errour in the Text of Dioscorides, in that his comparison of this tree unto Tamariske is not unto the forme of the leaves, as Theophrastus his is, but unto the forme of the whole body, and growing thereof: the true description therefore here∣of, as Aldinus hath most acurately set it downe is thus. The first two or three yeares saith he, it sprang up and withe∣red or perished downe every Winter to the roote, and rose againe a fresh every Spring, but after it became three or foure yeare old, it grew more woddy and more likely to abide without decaying: it rose up yearely after the first, with one stemme shooting forth branches of winged leaves, or rather winged branches of leaves, the barke be∣ing whitish as the leaves are also, but they are composed after such an order as no other tree doth the like; for the branches rise up with the stemme or body, divided into sundry other smaller twigges no bigger than rushes, set with two leaves at severall spaces distant farre in sunder, ending in small long points like haires, but have no eyes or buddes at the feete of the leaves, as the small branches of all other trees have, which sheweth that the whole branched stalke or divided branch, is but as one winged leafe: the leaves first falling away, leaving the branches bare, which then shew like unto ordinary or Spanish Broome when it hath lost the leaves; and after the leaves the stalkes likewise perish that held the leaves wholly unto the very stemme, and therefore sheweth to be but as one winged leafe of a tree, as in the Ash, Wallnut &amp;c. the lowest of these leaves are somwhat round pointed like the herbe Heliotropium Sunturner, those on the middle of the branch more sharpe pointed like unto Myrtle leaves, and the uppermost smallest somewhat like unto Knot-grasse: it hath not borne either flowers or fruit in our Christian countries as yet so far as I can heare: the roote is thicke, long, white and tuberous as it were, yet ending in some sprayes being not much wooddy but rather fleshie and tender: but the nuts or fruits, such as have been brought over to us enclosed in their husks, as also out of their husks are expressed here by themselves: that is, that many, of them grow single in the husks &amp; some two together, and that the nuts enclosed in every huske each by it selfe have their place bunched forth where each of them lie, and straightned betweene them both, the lower and upper end of the huske being small and sharpe pointed, and about an handbreadth long, round and of a darke ash colour on the outside, and somewhat reddish on the in∣side, of the substance of leather, lither or easie to bow, rugged on the outside with many long streakes in it, but smooth on the inside: the nuts themselves are three square, for the most part, covered with a whitish soft and somewhat tough wooddy shell, wherein the white kernell lieth, which is not altogether insipid, but somewhat sharpe in taste and oylie withall, causing a kind of loathing upon the tasting almost ready to provoke vomiting; out of which is pressed an oyle, as Dioscorides and Galen affirme, like as is pressed out of Almonds; and not from the shells or husks as some formerly supposed, for it is commonly knowne to many here in our owne land, and to my selfe also, who have pressed as good oyle out of the kernells of the nutts, as any hath beene brought from be∣yond seas: and therefore Theophrastus was herein much mistaken, or at least misinformed, that said the oyle that served for sweete oyles and ointments, was drawne from the huskes and shells and not from the Nutts them∣selves, and Pliny also who saith the same doth erre in that, although he saith that an oyle is drawen out of the nuts, which the Physitions doe use: for the oyle to both uses is one and the same. 
The Place. These trees grow in Syria, Arabia, Aethiopia, and India, and although some say in Egypt also, yet I thinke Pros∣per Alpinus, who was curious to set downe all the rare trees, and plants unknowne in Italy that grew there, would have given us some knowledge thereof, among other Egyptian plants, if they had beene there in his time. 
The Time. We have as I sayd before, no knowledge of the time of flowring hereof. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke by Dioscorides, Galen and others Banar &amp; Bulanut Myrepsica, that is Glans Vu∣guentaria, and by Lobel Glans unguentaria cathartica siliquata: by Theophrastus onely, and by Pliny Myrobolanus Trogloditis, in his 12 booke and 21. chap. but why the Grecians should call it Balanos an Acorne, being like unto none of the kindes of Acornes, nor the fruite it selfe, nor shell or huske I know not, for if they that doe so call it, had ever seene the huskes, wherein the Nuts are enclosed, they would surely have given it a more proper name. Monardus tooke them to be the Avellana purgatrices of the West Indies, because the fruite is more like an Hasell nut than an Acorne, and called them Ben Magnum, but he was much mistaken therein, and therefore the Arabians called it Ben and Habben, which signifieth a Nut with them, yet Pena seemeth to make the name and forme to agree together. Rauwolfius called it Machalep album saying it is three square, and like a Beech mast or fruite of the Beech tree, for which cause onely as it is likely, Bellonius compared the tree to a Beech, it is called either Balanus myrepsica or Glans Vnguentaria, after the Greeke signification of most wri∣ters, but we in these dayes more usually call it Nux Ben, and the oyle Oleum de Ben, or as the ancients called it Oleum Balaninum, I have given the English name to it, according to the most proper signification as I thinke, cal∣ling it rather a Nut, than an Acorne as Gerard doth after the Greeke name. 
The Vertues. The kernells of the nuts bruised and drunke with Posca posset (that is water and vinegar mingled together) doth purge the body from grosse and thinne flegme also, and thereby is helpefull to those are troubled with the wind collicke, if a few Aniseede and Fennelseede be put unto it: the oyle that is drawne out of the nuts doth the same also, and provoketh vomiting, clensing the stomacke, of much foule matter gathered therein, yet it doth much trouble the stomack in the meane time: but the nut being toasted at the fire loseth much of that evill quality, often∣times causing them to purge downewards only: it is with very good effect also put into glisters for the same pur∣poses, the oyle dropped into the eares, helpeth the noise in them, and the deafenesse also: a dragme of the kernell taken in posset, doth soften and dissolve the hardnesse of the spleene and liver. Mesues commendeth the drie pres∣sing after the oyle is taken from it, being of a clensing as well as of a cutting qualitie, &amp; by reason that the moisture is taken from it, of a drying effect also, for to helpe the itch, the lepry and running sores, and to take away the ruggednesse of the skin, morphew, drie scabbes, scarres, freckles, wheales and pimples, from the face or body; es∣pecially if it be used with vinegar and niter, with which it well agreeth, and performeth the cures much better: It is also used with the meale of Orobus the bitter Vetch, or the meale of Darnell in manner of a plaister, to be laid to the side to consume the spleene; It helpeth the gout also used in the same manner; used with barly meale, it comforteth the sinewes, that are pained with cold, and all spasmes or crampes, and used with hony dissolveth all knots and hard swellings, the shells or huskes are of an exceeding binding propertie, fit to be used when occasion serveth for such purposes: The oyle that is pressed forth out of the nuts is much used of Perfu∣mers▪ although it have no sweete smell of it selfe to commend it, yet it is of so excellent a qualitie, that being kept never so long, it will not grow ranke, and therefore it doth both preserve the sweete sents of Muske, Civet, Ambergrise and the like mixed with it, and keepeth that the gloves, leather, or other things, shall not gather spots or staines in them, nor ever grow mouldy, as those things that are perfumed with oyle of Almonds will doe, This oyle likewise is much fitter than oyle of Almonds, to receive any sweet thing to be stieped in it, and to keepe the sent thereof in it, for being utterly without sent of it selfe, neither growing ranke by any time, the sent of any thing will be the sooner infused, and the longer also retained and kept therein. 
CHAP. XXXVII. Frangula sive Alnus nigra baccifera. The blacke Alder tree. T He black Aller or Alder tree, riseth seldome to be Alnus nigra baccifera seu Frangula. The blacke Alder tree. 
of any great bignesse, but for the most part abideth like a hedge, bush or tree, spreading into branches, the wood of the body being white, and of a darke red at the core or heart, the outward barke being of a blackish colour, whereon many white spots are noted to be seene; but the inner barke next unto the wood is yellow, which being chewed will turne the spittle yellow, as much or more than Rubarbe, neare unto a Saffron colour, the leaves are somewhat like unto those of the ordinary Alder tree, or those of the female Cornell or Dogge berry tree, but blacker, and not so long but rather rounder, the flowers are white comming forth at the joynts with the leaves which turne into small round berries, greene at the first, and red afterwards, but blackish when they are thorough ripe, divided as it were into two parts, wherein is contained two small round and flat seedes: the roote runneth not deepe into the ground, but spreadeth rather under the up∣per crust of the earth. 
The Place. This tree or shrubbe groweth in woods in many places of our land, as in Saint Iohns wood by Hornsey, in the woods upon Hampsteed heath, &amp;c. 
The Time. It flowreth in May, and the berries are ripe in Septem∣ber. 
The Names. It is called Frangula quia cito frangitur, that is, the branches be brittle and easie to breake, and Alnus nigra baccifera, that it might be knowne from the Alnus vulgaris, whose barke is whitish and the wood more red, and beareth not berries as this doth: Tragus calleth it Faulbaum that is foule tree, of the evill sent and taste, the Idaea ficus nostra sive Frangula vulgo of Lugdunensis, differeth not from this, although he would seeme to make it. The Italians call it Frangola, the Germans, as is before said with Tragus Faulbaum, the Dutch Sporrekenhout and Hondtsboom, and we in English the blacke Aller or Alder tree. 
The Vertues. The inner yellow barke hereof as Matthiolus saith, purgeth downewards both choller and flegme, and the watry humors of hydropicke persons, and strengthneth the inward parts againe afterwards, even as Rubarbe doth: if the barke hereof be boyled with Agrimonie, Wormewood, Dodder, Hoppes, and some Fennell and Smallage, Endive and Cichory rootes, and a reasonable draught taken every morning for some time together, is very effectuall against the Iaundise, the dropsie, and the evill disposition of the body, so as some especiall purging medicine, have beene taken before to avoyd the grosser excrements, and then it will the better loosen the belly, and keepe it soluble without trouble or danger to the stomacke, purging and strengthning the liver and spleene, in so good manner that diverse have beene cured by this onely medicine, who have had their livers and spleenes swolne with humors and hardnesse; by opening all obstructions in the inward parts, and clensing them from such evill humors as they were full of before: the dried barke is onely fit for those purposes, for the fresh or greene barke being taken inwardly, provoketh strong vomitings, paines in the stomacke, and gripings in the belly; yet if the decoction thereof may stand and settle for two or three dayes, untill the yellow colour be chan∣ged into blacke, it will not worke so violently by much as before, and in not provoking vomiting or purging, it will strengthen the stomacke, and procure an appetite or desire to meate: the outer barke contrariwise doth bind the body, and thereby is helpefull for all laskes and fluxes thereof; but this should be given after it hath beene dried also, to worke the better: the inner barke hereof boiled in vinegar, is an approved remedy to kill lice, to cure the itch, and take away scabbes, and drie them up in a very short space: the same also is singular good to wash the teeth, both to take away the paines, to fasten those that are loose, to clense them from corruption, and to keepe them sound: the leaves are said to be good fodder for Kine, to cause them give the more abundance of milke. 
CHAP. XXXVIIII. Evonymus. The Spindle tree or Pricke wood. A Lthough the former ages, were content to know but one sort of this Evonymus, or Spindle tree, yet Clusius in his Panonicke travells, hath set forth two other sorts, not knowne before to any, which I will here shew you together. 
1. Evonymus vulgaris. The common Spindle tree. Our ordinary spindle tree, is also but a shrubbe or hedgge bush, rising up with many stemmes, or sometimes 1. Evonymus vulgaris. The common Spindle tree. 
3. Evonymus Pannonicus latifolius Clusii. Broad leafed Spindle tree of Hungary. 
but with a few, the elder boughes, having a whitish barke, and the younger greene, with foure brownish lines like lists, running all the length of them, which make them seeme foure square, the wood is somewhat whitish, hard, and yellow, it hath diverse branches, whereon doe grow faire and darke greene long leaves, broadest in the middle, from among which come forth long stalkes, whereon stand foure or five white flowers, clustering toge∣ther, consisting of foure leaves a peece, with some threds in the middle, after which come round hard huskes or red berries, divided into foure parts, in each whereof lieth a white hard seede, covered with a yellow skinne, which will give a yellow colour, if it be put into water: the rootes are many, not running deepe into the ground, but spreading rather under the upper face thereof. 
2. Evonymus Pannonicus. The Spindle tree of Hungarie. The Spindle tree of Hungary, hath diverse gentle and pliant stemmes, rising from the roote, which grow to be three or foure foote high, and of the thicknesse of ones thumbe, covered with a thicke greene barke, with many blacke spots therein, divided into many other lesser branches, set in a seemely or comely order one above another, about which grow many leaves, set opposite one unto another, somewhat likeunto the greater Mirtle leaves, but more gentle in handling, lightly dented about the edges, of a drying taste at the first, but afterwards somewhat bitter, and hot, from among the leaves at the joynts of them come forth small long stalkes, with two or three flowers on each of them, consisting of foure leaves apeece, of a shining purplish colour hanging downe their heads, and with a square umbone in the middle, which grow into a foure square head or berrie, like i forme unto the former, somewhat spongie or light, of a faire yellow colour on the outside, wherein lie shining round seede, blacke on the outside, two or three lying in one cell or partition, which are very like unto the seedes of bastard Dittany. 
3. Evonymus la tifolius. Broad leafed Spindle tree of Hungary. This broad leafed Spindle tree, riseth up (if it be manured) to be higher than any man, spreading his slender pliant branches, uneasie to breake, whereon doe grow many faire broad greene leaves, set by couples, and as large as the leaves of Laurocerasus, or Cherry Bay tree, lightly dented about the edges, and of an unpleasant and bitter taste: at the joynts betweene the leaves and stalkes spring forth long stalkes, with diverse flowers at the end of them, hanging downe their heads, consisting of foure white broad leaves, tending to a flesh or blush co∣lour, very like unto the common Spindle tree. which turne into foure square heads of berries, and sometimes in∣to five square berries, but much larger, having certaine lists like to winges on every of them, wherein are con∣tained white graines or kernells, covered with a yellow skinne as in the first. 
The Place. The first groweth in many places of this Kingdome, in woods and untilled places, and serveth among other shrubbes for hedges; the second Clusius found both in the upper and the lower Hungary, upon those hills that runne to the Alpes, as also in Moravia in the woods there. The last was found by Clusius also, in a wood in that part of Hungary that is called Interamnis, and which the Germanes call Windeschlandt beyond the rive Dravus. 
The Time. They doe all flower about May, and their berries are ripe in September. 
The Names. This is generally by most Writers called Evonymus, and taken to be the true of Theophrastus, q boni nominis in lib. 3. cap. ultimo, and which hee calleth Tetragonia translated Quadratoria by Gaza in his third Booke and sixt Chapter; but there are diverse, and Lugdunensis with them, that have rather judged an other shrubbe to be Evnonymus, which Gesner in his Epistles, and Clusius in his history of Plants, thinke to be a kinde of Ledum, and is by Clusius called Laedum Alpinum, (which I have remembred before in the former Classis) by Vlisses Abdroandus Nerium Alpinum, as Gesner in descriptione montis fracti doth record, and is probable to be Chamaerhododendros Alpina odora of Pena and Lobel in their Adversaria, and which Lobell in his Observations calleth Balsamum Alpinum: but Clusius sheweth plainely, that it cannot agree therewith, not having a foure square head or huske. It hath beene corruptly called Anonymus of diverse, instead of Evonymus, as Cordus i Hist. saith, Tragus mistaking it called it Carpinus. It is called also Fusanum and Fusoria, because the Italians cal∣led it Fusaro, as being used by Turners and others, to make spindles for spinning wheeles and other things, and by Bauhinus Evonymus vulgaris granis rubentibus. The second is called by Clusius Evonymus alter, vel secundus, by Camerarius and Tabermontanus Evonymus Pannonicus, and by Bauhinus Evonymus granis nigris. The last is called Evonymus sive latifolius by Clusius and all others. It is called in English Spindle tree, Pricke timber tree and Prickwood, and in some countries of this land Dogge wood, and might from the forme of the berries, as well be called Square berried tree. The Jtalians call it Fusano, the French Fusin, and bonnet deprestre, the Germans Spindelbaum, the Dutch Papenhaut.
The Vertues. The leaves as well as the seede of the first Beane trefoile, are a strong vomit, especially in the hot Countries, where it groweth, and Honorius Bellus writing thereof to Clusius, saith that in Candy, where that kind groweth with rounder leaves, if the Goates or sheepe do chance to feed thereon, the milke which they give will cause any that shall take it, to fall as well into extreame scouring downewards as strong casting upwards, and that many thereby have beene brought in danger of their lives: the young leaves saith Dioscorides applyed unto tumors or swellings, discusseth and represseth them; and if a dram of the powder of them, be drunke in wine, as he saith also, it expelleth both the dead birth, and the secondine, and likewise bringeth downe the monethly courses of women; if some of the leaves, be bound to those that have hard and uneasie travell in child bearing, it causeth a speedy delivery of the birth, but they must bee taken away presently afterwards; they are likewise given in wine to those that are short winded, and to such as are often troubled with the head-ach: the barke of the roote hath a digesting ripening and discussing quality: both the other sorts here set downe, have the same properties, for they are also of the same temperature, but Matthiolus saith, that he hath knowne, that some that have taken ignorantly of the seede of the lesser Beane trefoile, have had strong vomitings even unto blood: Solerius in sch ∣liis in Aetium saith, that by certaine and undoubted experience it hath beene found, that a dramme either more or lesse, of the dryed bark thereof made into powder, and taken in any kind of drink, purgeth very strongly both up∣wards and downewards, but in a diverse manner; for if as he saith, (which I take rather to be but a conceite) the barke be pulled off from the tree upwards, it will cause vomitings, if downewards great purging of the belly downewards: the Bees saith Pliny, refuse to touch the flowers of this Laburnum, which is the lesser Beane Trefoile, but it hath beene truely observed, that both in the naturall places where it groweth, as also with us, that the Bees doe not refuse to feede upon them: the Graecians have an usuall proverbe with them, Anagyris commovere when they would signifie one, that worketh as wee say his owne woe, or is the cause of his owne harme. 
CHAP. XLI. Myrobalani. Myrobalans or purging Indian Plummes. A Lthough there be none of these Myrobaland trees (whereof are 5 sorts of fruites well known &amp; distin∣guished in the Apothecaries shops) growing in any of these Christian Countries of Europe, as far as ever I could learne, yet I could doe no lesse than make mention of them here, both because the fruites are often used in Physicke among other purgers, and to make it knowne to all that might be mistakes by the name, and thinke that the Myrobalane Plummes, the red and the white that I have remem∣bred in my former book, be some of these kindes: but so they are not, neither for forme nor quality; as also to stir up some ingenious mind among our Merchants, that trade to Aleppo &amp; Cairo, &amp; into Persia and the East Indies, to give order to their factors, if they doe it not themselves, to enquire and seeke out such of the sorts that are to be found in the places of their abode, and either to plant the stones of these severall kinds in those warmer countries, if they abide any time in them, that when they are a little growne they might then send them hither: or send the fresh stones over hither to us (for those are too dry that are brought for physicke use) that wee may plant them here to try if they will not growe and abide with us, that at least, having but a sight of the forme of the leaves of any sort, we might compare them with the descriptions that writers have made of them, whether they are answerable thereunto: I must in the meane time therefore but shew you them as Garzias and others before me have done, with such descriptions as they gave of them, and are extant, not knowing whether they be true or no. 
1. Myrobalanus Citrina. The yellow Myrobalane or purging Indian Plum. The tree that beareth these yellow Myrobalanes is said to grow as great as a Plum tree, having many bran∣ches and winged leaves on them like unto the true Service tree: the fruit is for the most part as bigge as reaso∣nable Plums, somewhat long and not fully round, but having many faire ridges on the outside, especially when it is dryed, shewing it to be five square though round, of a yellower colour on the outside then any of the rest; the flesh or substance being of a reasonable thicknesse, yet not so thicke as the Chebuli, or Emblici, nor so thin as the Bellerici; the stone is white, thicke, and very hard to breake, with emniences and ridges also therein, and a very small long kernell lying in the middle, of an instringent taste as the dryed fruit is also, but much more then it: this hath no such kernell that thereout may be pressed an oyle, as Bellonius noteth of the kernells of that fruit that hee tooke to bee the yellow Myrobalane tree, in the plaines of Hiericho as he noteth it, in lib. Observationum 2. cap. 86. 
2. Myrobalanus Chebula. The purple Myrobalane, or purging Indian Plum. This kind of Myrobalane tree growing in stature and branches like a Plum (as Garzias saith all the sorts are) bearing leaves on the branches like unto the Peach tree: the fruit hereof is the greatest and longest of all the five sorts, of a blackish purple colour on the outside while it is fresh, which it holdeth in the dry fruit; (which Matthiolus commended for the best) being five square as the former, of the thickest substance, and more fleshy than any other, and with the smallest stone in the middle, not fully so hard to breake as the former, but with the smallest kernell therein. 
Myrobalanorum 5. Genera. 
Fructus Emblicorum cum nucleo interiore barbato. 
 
3. Myrobalanus Bellerica. The round Myrobalane, or purging Indian Plum. The round Myrobalane is like the rest for growth, but bearing leaves like the Bay tree, yet of a paler greene colour, and somewhat ashcoloured (underneath peradventure) withall; the fruit is of a meane bignes, round and smooth, yet being as it were three square in many, and of a pale russettish colour when they are fresh, but of a darke or dusty whitish colour on the outside, being dry, of the thinnest substance or least fleshy of any of them: the stone whereof is thicke greater then any other, proportionable to the fruit, very hard to break, with a kernell within of a reasonable bignesse. 
4. Myrobalanus Emblica. The bearded or six square Myrobalane or purging Indian Plum. The tree that beareth this Myrobalane or delicate Plum, being like a Plum tree for height and manner of growing (as you have heard before that Garzias saith so of them all) hath leaves of a palme or handbreadth long, very finely cut in or divided on the edges: the fruit is round in shew, but doth separate or will be broken into six parts, as both we have observed in the dry fruit, alwayes brought unto us, broken into small peeces, without any stones; and more plainely in the fruit preserved, whereof good store hath beene brought over many times unto us, which will be divided into many parts: the stone whereof within it is six square, with three greater rid∣ges, and three lesser lying betweene them, and bearded at the head of the three greater ridges, the kernell with∣in it being separated into the three severall divisions, having each of them two calls, wherein the parts of the ker∣nell lye almost three square. 
5. Myrobalanus Indica. The blacke Myrobalane or purging Indian Plum. The blacke Myrobalane tree is like the rest; whose leafe (as Garzias saith) is like unto a Willow leafe: the fruit saith Garzias is eight square, which may be when they are fresh, but they cannot be so plainely discerned in those that are brought over unto us dry, the smallest of all the rest, somewhat long, altogether fleshy, with∣out any stone in the middle, and the blackest of any. 
The Place. All these fruits grow in the East Indies wild and not manured, but in divers provinces, as some in Goa and Batecala, others in Malavar and Dabul. Yet Garzias saith foure sorts grow in the kingdome of Cambaya, and the Chebuls in Bisnagar, Decan, Guzarate (which we call at this time Surrate ) and Bengala: Bellonius saith in his booke of observations that the yellow Myrobalanes grow in Arabia and Syria, and also in the plaines of Hic∣richo, but I doe much doubt of the certainty thereof and thinke rather that he was mistaken. 
The Time. We know so little of the trees, that we know lesse of their time of flowring or bearing fruit. 
The Names. These kind of fruits were not any of them knowne unto any of the antient Greeke writers, as Dioscorides, Theophrastus or Galen, neither unto Pliny, for although hee maketh mention of a Myrobalanus, yet hee addeth Troglodytes, which is the Nux Ben, Balanus Myrepsica, or Glans Vnguentaria, as I shewed you a little before, yet both Balanus Myrepsica and Myrobalanus have but one signification in the Greeke tongue. The Arabians were the first that made them knowne to the world, and called them all in generall by the name of Delegi, as by the writings of Mesues and Serapio doe appeare; but the Greekes that translated these Arabians, gave the names of Myrobalanes unto these fruits, because (as it is likely) they thought the fruit was like unto an Acorne, and therefore gave the name Balanus; but why they should give the other word Myros, which signifieth an oynt∣ment, cannot be understood by any, for none of these were ever used in any pretious or sweet oyntment, and Myrobalanos signifieth as much as Balanus Myrepsica Glans unguentaria, the Acorne for oyntments. Actuarius among the latter Greeke writers maketh mention of them, but that none of these did grow among the Arabians their ignorance of their growing declareth plainely: for Mesues writeth that the Citrini Chebuli and Nigri doe all grow upon one tree, and for that they beare twice in a yeare, the Citrini are the unripe, and the Nigri are the ripe of the first bearing, and the Chebuli the fruit of the later bearing, which how contrary unto truth it is, Garzias doth declare, in his booke of the Drugges of the East Indies, where hee plainely sheweth that all the five sorts, grow severally each upon a severall tree, as I have shewed you before: the Indians call the Citrini or Flavi Arare, but the Physitions Aritiqui, and the Indici or Nigri they call Rezenvale, the Bellerici Gotimi or Gotni, the Chepuli or Chebuli Aretca, and the Emblici or Amuale as Garzias hath it, or Anuale as Acosta. I have you see intituled them all purging Plums, as most proper for them in my judgement, and given them their sundry Epithites according to their quality as I thinke. 
The Vertues. All these sorts of Myrobalanes have a gentle purging quality, some more and some lesse then others, some also purging choller, some flegme, and some melancholy; but they have in them also an astringent quality, much more then is in Rubarbe: the Citrines and Bellericks, that is the yellow and the round Myrobalanes doe purge choller gently: the Chebules and Emblici that is the purple and six square Myrobalanes doe purge flegme: and the Indies or black ones melancholly: the decoction or infusion of them all doth purge better then any wayes else, yet so gently that in evacuating the humors, they strengthen the stomacke, the liver and the heart, but given in pouder they binde the body more then purge it, and indeed the binding quality in them all, especially in the dryed fruits, is more prodominant, and as Garzias saith, the Indians wholly use them for that purpose; and therefore they are the best medecines to be mingled with Scamony and all other violent purgers, to restraine their violence and to correct their fiercenesse, and yet as Mesues saith they are often put with Cassia, Manna, &amp; Tama∣rind, to helpe the working of them, as a most safe medecine: the Bellericks and Emblicks by purging the stomack from rotten flegme lying therein, and strengthning the braine and joynts, the heart and liver, and binding all other loose or fluent humors in the parts of the body, are very effectuall, as also for the trembling of the heart, and to stirre up the appetite, stay vomiting and restraine the fury and belchings of choller, to increase the power and facultie of the spirits, to qualifie the excessive heat of the inward parts, and the thirst is raised thereof, and doe helpe and give ease to those that are truobled with the hemorrhoides or piles, by restraining the fiercenesse of choller flowing unto them, and for this last effect, the Citrines are most used: also for all hot constitutions, and in all hot agues where there are no obstructions, for (they as all the other sorts also) doe rather cause obstructi∣ons, and therefore in all such when they are to be used they are to bee corrected with Wormewood, or the juice of Fumiterry, or with Rubarbe, Agarick, Spiknard and the like, as also with other opening and diureti∣call things: the Chebules in especiall doe purge flegme, sharpen the memory, cleare the eye sight, clense and strengthen the stomacke, and are very effectuall against the dropsie, and all old agues: the Indies or blacke My∣robalanes in speciall, doe purge melancholy, and blacke or burnt choller, and thereby are availeable for the quartaine Ague, the Lepry or foule evill, and all paralaticke diseases: the Embliks and Bellericks in especiall purge flegme and comfort the braine very much, as also the heart and stomacke, stay vomiting and stirre up the appetite. They all of them in generall are of especiall use in all Fluxes both of the stomack and belly, by gently purging the maligne fluxibilitie of the humors, and strengthning and binding the parts afterwards; but as an especiall receit to binde or stay an old continued Laske, I have knowne this medicine doe much good. Take and burne a pint of Claret wine, with a little Rosemary and Sugar, whereinto put to steepe all night one dram of Rubarbe, first sliced and tosted at the fire, and halfe a dram of Chebule Myrobalanes, which standing by the fire all night, and strained forth in the morning, is to be taken at two severall times, a draught in the morning fasting, which if it helpe not sufficiently the first time, being renewed and taken two dayes more, will certain∣ly stay the laske wholly, if the malignity and sharpenesse of the humors bee not so strong that scarse any mede∣cine will cure it. The Chebule Myrobalanes broken and steeped in Rosewater, or in the clarified juice of Fen∣nell for two or three dayes, and after strained forth; this water dropped into the eyes doth clere the sight, and a fine cloth wet therein and often applyed, taketh away the heat and inflammation in them, and stayeth rheumes and distillations into them: the pouder of any of the Myrobalanes and Masticke, put into running Vlcers and sores, dryeth up the moysture and consolidateth them: The Chebules and the Emblicks are often brought over unto us preserved, whereof the Chebules are more used Physically for such purposes as are before set downe, then the Emblicks are, which being nothing harsh in taste as the Chebuls, but being very pleasant, are more of∣ten used as a delicate preserved Plum, among other junckets, then for any Physicall respect. 
CHAP. XLII. Agaricus &amp; Terebinthina ex Larice. Agaricke growing on the Larch tree, and the fine cleare Turpentine taken from it also. B Ecause the Rosin or Turpentine of the Larch tree doth gently open and purge the belly; but more es∣pecially the Agaricke that groweth thereon, I must to shew you the manner of growing of Aga∣ricke, give you also the view of the body of the tree, from whence it is taken, and some branches and leaves thereon to be knowne by: but the description of the tree it selfe, shall be shewed you among the other Coniferas &amp; Resiniferas arbores, trees that beare Cones or Pine apple like fruit, and out of which is extracted a cleare liquid Rosin or Turpintine, called in shoppes Agaricus ex Larice. Agaricke growing on the Larch tree. 
Venice Turpentine, by boring the tree to the heart, and recei∣ving it into vessells, and from the body of the tree when it is growne great and old in many places, and from the greater armes and boughes also, groweth certaine excressences like Mushromes but greater, called Agaricke of divers and severall sises, that is from the bignesse of ones hand lesse or more, to be as bigge as any mans head, and sometimes greater, covered with a hard blackish barke, which being cut and pared away, the substance under it appeareth very white, and if it be of the best sort, very light also, easie to breake, loose or spungie and without strings through it, somewhat sweete in taste at the first, but very bitter afterwards, and not having any hard barke on the outside; the blacke, heavy, and hard, is utterly unfit to be used in Physicke. 
The Place. The Larch tree groweth in many woods about Trent and Brixia in Italy, and neare the rivers Benacus and Padus, and in Galatia a Province of Asia, as Dioscorides and Galen doe record, and in Agaria a country of Sarmatia, from whence the Aga∣ricke tooke the name; in Silesia also Moravia, Lusatia; And the Agaricke is gathered in most of these places, so is the Turpen∣tine likewise, but especially from the woods about Trent, &amp;c. 
The Time. The Rosin or Turpentine is gathered in the hottest time of the yeare, and the Agaricke at the latter end thereof, that is Novem∣ber and December especially. 
The Names. This tree is called in Greek and Larix or Larice in Latin. Pliny hath in no one thing in all his History, shewed his incon∣stancie and repugnancie, more than in this one tree, not onely in not knowing that whereof he writeth, but denying that which is found true by good experience, and saying that in one place, which hee contrarieth in an other, as in his 16. Booke and 21. Chapter, hee reckoneth the Larch tree among those wild trees, that doe not shed their leaves, and are sharpe pointed, where it seemeth he tooke the Larch tree, for the Pine tree, as hee doth in the 30. of the same 16. Booke: and whereas Theophrastus in his third Booke, and tenth Chapter, speaking of the difference betweene the Pine and Pitch tree, saith, that the Pine tree being burnt downe to the rootes sprin∣geth not from them againe, but as some say the Pitch tree doth as it hapned in Lesbos, when the wood Pyrrheus was fired, which was stored with Pitch trees. This very narration Pliny lib. 16. cap. 139. in citing, applieth to the Larch tree, which Theophrastus doth to the Pine tree. And in another place Theophrastus saith, that a kinde of femall Pine is called Egis or Egida; and Pliny saith the femall Larix is called Egida, by all which places it may be plainely seene, that Pliny mistooke the Larch tree for the Pine tree. For Theophrastus hath not made men∣tion of the Larix, in all his History, whereby many did judge that it did not grow in Greece for else he would have knowne it, and spoken of it. In one place againe Pliny maketh the leaves of the Larch tree to be soft, woolly, thicke and fat, and in another place hard &amp; drie: againe he saith that the Larch tree hath not flowers nor any cones to commend it, when as they have cones, and the blossomes on them are very beautifull: and lastly Pliny saith (it should seeme following Vitruvius, who before him said the same) that the wood of the Larch tree, will not burne, nor make a cole, nor will consume in the fire, any otherwise than a stone, when as himselfe saith and ac∣knowledgeth, as Vitruvius also doth, that it yeeldeth forth a Rossen; and how could any man thinke, that a tree yeelding Rossen should not burne, when as the very earth and stones that have any bituminous or resinous qualitie in them, will burne exceedingly, as is plainely seene in our turfe, in pit and sea coales which maintaine our fires, in many places of our Land, and elsewhere also. This I thought good to set downe, not so much to declaime a∣gainst Pliny, as to forewarne others that translate or write others opinions, to be judicious and examine by reason, whether that which others have written agree with the truth of the matter, and not hand over head either be∣leeve or set downe, whatsoever others have written, be it true or false. Concerning the cleare Turpentine, of this tree called Venice Turpentine, there is some controversie among Writers, some alleadging it to be taken from the Firre tree, as Fuschius and others, and Matthiolus contending there against, that of his owne knowledge and experience, it is onely taken from the Larch tree and no other, for no other Turpentine was to be had in the for∣mer times for many ages, because the Merchants neglected to bring the true Turpentine of the Terebinthus Tur∣pentine tree, and therefore this onely was used: and no other sort of Turpentine was fit to be taken inwardly in¦stead of the true from the Turpentine tree, which we doe usually call Cipresse Turpentine, because as it is thought the best is gathered in the Iland Cyprus, those about Trent as Matthiolus saith use to call it Larga, derived as is likely from Laricea, yet Pliny, Galen, and others of the ancients have set downe, that the Larch yeeldeth whitish yellow Rossen, like unto the hony of Athens or Spaine, but in little quantitie and soone waxing drie, which is that Gumme or Rossen that sweateth out of the tree in Summer of its owne accord without boring: There is also some controversie and contrarietie both in the ancient and moderne Writers, concerning Agaricke, Dioscorides and Galen thinking it to be a roote, like unto that of Silphium, yet doubting somewhat thereof. Dioscorides saith that some hold it to be a Mushrome, or Excrescence engendred from the rottennesse of the trees, as Mushromes are from the earth. Pliny writeth, lib. 16. cap. 8. that it was said that those trees, that bare Acornes in the coun∣tries of France, did beare Agaricke: and in his 25. Booke and 9. Chapter, he saith that Agaricke was but a Mush∣rome of a white colour, growing upon a tree about the Bosphorus, and in another place that it groweth upon the Cone-bearing trees, among the which the Larch tree is the chiefest: whereby it is plaine, that the ancients did not well know it. Brasavolus saith, that in riding neare Comalch, he found Agaricke upon diverse Oakes, and in especially upon Ilex or evergreene Oake, which saying Matthiolus contradicteth, saying that in all Tuskany, and other places of Italy, as also in diverse countryes of Germany, Carniola and Dalmatia which abound with all the kindes of Oake, he could never see, nor so much as heare that any Agaricke grew on them; but that he saw diverse other hard dry Mushromes, both white and blacke called touchwood growing upon diverse, wherewith the people use to take fire, that the steele and flint doe give, and use it in stead of Match to discharge their fow∣ling peeces with all. As also that he never saw Agaricke growing upon any tree, but the Larch tree onely, in all the mountaines of Trent and Anania, where there be many Oakes growing, as well as Firres, Pines, and Pitch trees, and Larch trees abundantly: yet many doe affirme there is growing in many places upon the bodies of many trees a kinde of white Mushrome, so like unto Agaricke, that many mistake it for Agaricke. 
The Vertues. There is in the leaves, barke, and fruit of the Larch tree, the same temperature that is in the Pine tree, the Turpentine thereof taken to the quantitie of an ounce will gently open the belly, and move to the stoole, provoke urine, clense the reines kidnies and bladder, and helpeth to breake and avoid the gravell and stone, and to give case to those that have the gout: if it be first washed with Plantaine and Rose water, then made into pills, with the pouder of white Amber, red Corall, Masticke, and a little Camphire, it doth wonderfully helpe to stay the Gonorrhea or running of the reines, if they be taken for certaine dayes together, and taken simply rowled in Sugar it helpeth it well; it is profitable also for the Ptisicke or Consumption of the lungs, being taken with hony in an Electuary, it helpeth to expectorate rotten flegme, from those are troubled with a continuall cough: the Turpen∣tine as it is the clearest for inward uses, and serveth in stead of the true Turpentine, so is it the best also for out∣ward salves, and doth both draw, clense and heale all sores or ulcers, either new or old, and greene wounds also, and therefore there is scarce any salve made for ulcers and greene wounds, wherein Turpentine is not put, there is likewise an oyle drawne chimically from Turpentine, which is singular good to be used in wounds, being more drying and consolidating than the Turpentine it selfe, as also to warme and ease the paines of the joynts and si∣newes caused of cold: the water that is distilled with the oyle, is used for freckles and spots in the face, a scruple in waight of that water, taken in white wine procureth a vomite, thereby giving much ease to such as have their stomacks overcharged with flegme, the oyle is profitably used in hollow ulcers, being dropped into them, or a tent dipped in it and put into the ulcer: it is good also for the wormes and deafenesse of the eares used with a little Oxe gall: some use to mingle bay salt and Turpentine together, and therewith spread a girdle of leather, and tie it about their wastes that have an itch, which by wearing some small time, will cure the itch that is spread over the bodie, as well as the hands. Agaricke is a medicine of frequent and familiar use, often by it selfe, but most commonly with other purgers, to open obstructions of the liver, spleene, and intralls, purging flegme in es∣peciall, but in generall all other vitious humors, offending any member of the body, and because it doth some∣what trouble the stomacke, and procure casting, it is usually corrected with Ginger, and given with Oximell that is syrupe made with vinegar and hony: for it purgeth both thinne and rotten tough flegme, both yellow, hard, blacke, and burnt choller from the head and braine, from the breast and lungs, from the stomacke, liver, and spleene, from the reines and blacke, and from the wombe, as also from the joynts, sinewes and muscles, and here by helpeth to cure the diseases that proceede from them, that is such as are troubled with the gout, dropsie and fal∣ling sicknesse, jaundise, the chollicke and hardnesse to make water, the sciatica or paine of the hips, the pale colour in women caused by the staying of their courses, the shortnesse of breath, the cough and consumption of the lungs, the spitting of bloud, the paines of the mother, the sharpenesse of urine and the wormes: it is helpefull also to cure all sorts of agues, either tertians or quotidiaus, to ease the griping paines of the stomacke and belly, or such as have had falles or bruises, or are bursten bellied, all which actions it chiefely performeth, by purging those grosse and vitious humors that trouble the parts and members of the body, and are the causes of all these diseases: it is an antidote against all poisons, and cureth the bitings of Serpents very quickly, halfe a drame, or two scruples being taken in wine, either by the infusion or the pouder; for the other diseases afore specified, a dramme sliced, and put into a gentle purging decoction but not violent, or into an infusion, is the most generall manner of preparing it to be given; if it be boyled in lye with other Cephalicall helpes, it much comforteth the braine and memorie, and giddinesse of the head to be washed therewith, as also helpeth to stay the rheumes and catarrhes thereof, and clenseth it much from scurfe and dandraffe.
6. Iris bulbosa latifolia prima Clusii. The first broad leafed bulbed Flowerdeluce of Clusius. This kinde of Flowerdeluce hath diverse long somewhat broad and hollowish leaves not stiffe like the other sorts but soft, greenish on the upperside, and whitish underneath: among which riseth up one stalke and some∣times 6. Iris bulbosa prima latifolia Clusii. Clusius his first bulbed Flowerdeluce with broad leaves. 
8. Iris bulbosa minor sive angustifolia. The lesser bulbed Flowerdeluce. 
more, not above halfe a foote high, bearing at their toppes one flower a peece, and seldome more, some∣what like unto a Fowerdeluce, consisting of nine leaves, whereof those three that stand upright are shorter, and more closed together than in others, the three that fall down turne up their ends a little, and those three that in o∣thers doe cover the falls at their bottomes, stand like the upright leaves in other Flowdeluces, and are parted into two ends like unto two eares: the colour of the flowers is blew, either paler or deeper, or white, which is more rare, smelling very sweete; the roote is round and white under the blackish coates that cover it, having sundry long white rootes in steede of fibres like unto an Asphodill. 
7. Jris bulbosa major Anglica. The greater bulbed Flowerdeluce. This hath five or sixe long hollowish or guttured whitish greene leaves, broader than in any of the lesser sorts, among which riseth up a stiffe round stalke two foote high sometimes, at the toppe whereof, out of a skinnie huske breaketh forth one or two flowers consisting of nine leaves likewise, standing in the same manner that the former sorts doe, but each of the falling leaves have a yellow spot neere their bottomes, and the three upright leaves are small, and narrow at their bottomes but broad upwards: the colour whereof is all blew, purple, or white, or mixed very variably, as is in my booke expressed: the heads for seede are smaller than the former, and so is the seede, and not so flat: the roote of this is usually greater than in the other smaller bulbous sorts with long haires or threds, in the outer browne coates which are not in the others. 
8. Iris bulbosa minor sive angustifolia Hispanica. The lesser bulbed Flowerdeluce. This lesser sort groweth in the same manner that the greater doth, but hath narrower long pointed leaves: the flowers likewise are smaller, shorter and rounder than in the other, but of the same fashion, and vary much more in the diversitie of their colours than it: the seedes are smaller, and the pods longer and slenderer, and the roote also smaller, but more encreasing in bulbes. 
The Place. The Flagges or Flowerdeluces here mentioned as well as the bulbous kindes grow in diverse Countries as Africa, Greece, Italy, and France, and some in Germanie, and in our owne Countrie, but are chiefely nursed up in their gardens that are lovers of such delights; the Gladwin groweth as well upon the upland grounds, yet in moyst places, as in woods and shaddowie places by the sea sides in many places of this land, and is continually nur∣sed up in gardens; yet in paticular you may finde it growing, by a foote path, not far from the hither end of Dart∣ford towne in Kent; as also neere to Kentish towne, which is hard by London, if it be not digged up and carryed away, for I doe verily thinke, it is not naturall in that place, but some seede by chance, hath beene brought a∣mong the soyle, whereby it grew there. 
The Time. The dwarfe kinds of Flagge Flowerdeluces flower in Aprill, the greater in May, and the bulbous sorts not un∣till June, the Gladwin flowreth later than any Flowerdeluce doth, that is to say not untill Iuly, and the seede is ripe in the end of August, or in September, yet the huskes after they are ripe opening of themselves, will hold their seedes within them for 2 or 3 moneths, and not shed them. 
The Names. The greekes call it as also Iris and Hieris, quasi sacra, which made Gaza finding it so written in some coppies of Theophrastus, to translate it Consecratrix; but it was called Jris, a caelestis arcus similitudine, quam flores ejus representant, from the Rainbow whose various colours the flower thereof doth imitate, the old ignorant age made a difference betweene Iris and Ireos, according to the Latine verse extant thereof, which is this, Iris par∣pureum florem gerit Ireos album. The Iris tuberosa, which is a peculiar kinde, as you shall finde it in my former booke, is called of Matthiolus Hermodactylus verus, because the rootes are like unto fingers, and from him diverse did so call it, but most erroniously: for a while Dodonaeus tooke it to be a kind of wild Flowerdeluce, and that tru∣ly: yet some did take it to be Lonchitis prior of Dioscorides: the Arabians call it Asmeni juni or Ajersa, the Italians Iride &amp; Giglio azurro &amp; celeste, the Spaniards Lirii cardeno, the French Flambe, the Germanes Gilgau and Himmel∣schwertol; but why Lobel should call the Iris bulbosa Anglica by the name of Hyacinthus poetarum, I see no reason for it hath none of those mourning markes are in the Iris, nor is it of the forme of a Lilly. Gladwin is called in Greeke , Xyris ob folii similitudinem quasi rasorium cultrum, aut novaculum di eris, and in Latine Spatula or Spathula foetida, for Spatha is taken for a sword as Gladium is, and for that the leaves being bruised smell very strong, his denomination in Latine and English, hath risen sutable thereunto: Theophrastus calleth it Iris agria, Tragus in mistaking it, did take it to be Gladiolus, the Arabians call it Casoras, the Italians Spatola foetida, the French Glarent puant, the Germanes Wendeleufkrant. 
The Vertues. All the Flowerdeluces especially the Flagge kindes are very neere of one quality, but of the bulbous kindes I finde no Author to write, or experience to teach whether they be of the same or differing propertie. The juyce or the decoction of the greene rootes of the Flag Flowerdeluce, with a little honey drunk, doth purge and clense the stomack of grosse &amp; tough flegme and choller that lyeth therein, which might be the cause of diverse agues; it helpeth the Iaundise also, and the dropsie, by evacuating those humors both downwards and upwards; and be∣cause it doth somewhat hurt the stomack, it is not to be given but with honey &amp; Spiknard: the same being drunk, doth ease the paines and torments, or wringing of the belly, and sides, the shakings of agues, the diseases of the liver and spleene, the wormes of the belly, the stone in the raines, convulsions or crampes that come of cold humors, by warming them and comforting the parts; as also helpeth those whose seede passeth from them una∣wares or unwillingly, yet as one saith, it doth consume and waste it very much also; and is a remedy against the bitings and stingings of venemous creatures, being boyled in water and Vinegar and drunke: the same rootes being boyled in wine and drunke provoketh urine, helpeth the collicke, bringeth downe womens desired sick∣nesse, and made up into a pessary with honey, and put up into the body, draweth forth the dead childe: it is much commended against the cough, to cause tough flegme to be the more easily extenuate, and to be expectorate and spit forth; and therefore the Diaireos in the Apothecaries shoppes, either in the powder, or made into a Loh c or licking Electuary, is effectuall for the same purpose; it conduceth much to ease the paines in the head, and to pro∣cure sleepe and rest: being applyed with rosewater rosecake and vinegar, to helpe watering eyes, by clensing the moyst sharpe humors, and drying them up: being put up into the Nostrils, it procureth neesings, and thereby also purgeth the head very much of flegme: the juice of the root applyed to the Piles or the Hemorrhoides, giveth much ease: and for the Dropsie, an Electuary made of the juice thereof, with other things in this manner, is held very effectuall: Take of Galangae, and of Zedoarie, of each two drams, of Cinamon and Cloves of each one dram and a halfe, of the leaves of Sea Bindweede called Soldanella in the Apothecaries shoppes, halfe an ounce; make these into pouder, and with so much hony, wherein three drams of the juice of the rootes of Flower∣deluces hath beene boyled, and is sufficient, make them up into an Electuary; whereof halfe an ounce taken in the morning fasting, for divers dayes will doe much good: it doth also wonderfully helpe the paines and swellings of the cods in this manner, Take foure drams of the pouder of the rootes thereof, of Cinamon and of Dill, of each two drams, of Saffron one scruple, mix these well together and apply them to the cods, being first laid upon a scarlet cloth, moistned in whitewine, and warmed in a dish, over a Chafing dish with quick coales there∣in: the decoction of the rootes gargled in the mouth easeth the toothach, and a strong or stinking breath: the oyle called Oleum Irinum, if it be rightly and truly made of the flowers of the great broad Flagge Flowerdeluce, of what colour I thinke it greatly mattereth not (but not of the flowers of the greater blew English bulbous Flowerdeluce, as I know some Apothecaries have and doe use) and rootes of the same sorts of Flowerdeluces, is very effectuall to warme and comfort all cold joynts and sinewes, as also the Gout and Sciatica, and mollifieth, dissolveth and consumeth tumours or swellings, although they be scrophulous in any part of the body, as also of the matrix: It helpeth the Crampe and Convulsion of the sinewes, warming them, and helping to extend them; the head and temples annointed therewith, helpeth the Catarrhe or thin Rheume distilling from thence; and used upon the breast or stomack helpeth to extenuate the tough cold flegme, making it easie to be spit out; it helpeth also the paines and noyse in the eares, and the stench or evill savour of the nosthrills; it giveth also much ease unto the painefull Piles: The roote it selfe either greene or in pouder, helpeth to clense, heale and in∣carnate wounds, and to cover with flesh the naked bones, that ulcers have made bare, and is also very good to clense and heale up Fistulaes and Cankers, that are hard to be cured: divers doe use to beate the greene rootes, and so apply them to the face or other parts, but it is better tyed in a faire linnen cloth, and laid for a day and a nigh in faire or Rose water, with which water you may wet or moisten the skin of the face, hands or neck, that are sunburned or deformed with the Morphew, black or blew markes or scarres, or any other discolouring of the skinne, but they that use it had neede to take heede that they use it not too strong, nor let it lie on too long, but rather wash it off againe with faire water, within two or three houres after it hath beene used: The dryed rootes called Orris, being beaten either alone of themselves into pouder, or with other sweete things, are used to be layd in presses, chests and wardrops, to sweeten and perfume garments of linnen, and silke especially, and all things that you will put it to, and thus much of the Flowerdeluce. But there are but few that have written of the Gladwin, or that have remembred the purging qualitie therein, yet many of our country people in many places, doe with the decoction of the rootes purge themselves, and thereby avoyd much corrupt tough flegme and choller: yet some that will not have it worke so strongly, doe but infuse the sliced rootes in Ale, and some take the leaves which serveth well for the weaker and tender stomacks: the juice hereof procureth sneezing, be∣ing put up or snuffed up into the nose, and draweth downe from the head much corruption, and the pouder thereof doth the same: the pouder also drunke in wine helpeth those that are troubled with Crampes and Con∣vulsions, or with the Sciatica or Goute, and giveth ease to those that have any griging paines in their body or belly: and helpeth those that have the Strangurie, that is, that cannot make their water, but by drops: it is with much profit also given to those that have had long Fluxes by the sharpe and evill qualities of humors, which it stayeth having first clensed and purged them, by the drying and binding propertie therein, even as Rubarbe and some other such like things doe; the roote procureth womens monethly courses very effectually, if it bee drunk after it hath beene boyled in wine, and some of them shred and boyled in wine and vinegar, in equall parts, that shee may sit over the hot fumes, being close covered untill it grow neare cold: the roote used as a pessarie, worketh the same effect, but in women with child it causeth Abortion, that is, the delivery afore the due time: the seed beaten to pouder and taken to the quantity of halfe a dram in wine, helpeth those that cannot make water very effectually: the same taken with vinegar disolveth both the hardnesse &amp; the tumors of the spleene; the root is very effectuall in all wounds, and specially of the head, as also to draw forth any splinters, thornes, broken bones, or any other thing sticking in the flesh without causing any paine, used with a little Verdigrease and hony, and the great centory roote: the same also boyled in vinegar and layd upon any hard tumors, doth very effectually dlissolve and consume them, yea even those swellings of the throate, called the Kings Evill: the juice of the leaves and rootes is profitably used to heale the itch, and all running or spreading scabs or sores, and blemishes or scarres in the skinne: some doe suppose by the sharpenesse of the taste in the roote (especially more then in the seede, which is more drying) that it hath as well a corrosive as opening quality therein: some also doe appro∣priate it to the effects of the chests and lungs, for which the Iris or Flowerdeluce is more proper and effectuall: some also to stay the involuntary passage of the sperme, following Pliny therein: and some also to heale the he∣morrhoides, and others the diseases of the fundament: It is thought also to bee effectuall against the poyson of Serpents; and thus much for the stinking Gladwin. 
CHAP. XLVIII. Cnicus sive Carthamus. Bastard or Spanish Saffron. A Lthough these sorts of Cnicus might well be placed among the Thistles, as other Authors doe, and with these that other wilde kind, called Attractylis, but because these onely have purging quali∣ties; I thought it best thus to separate them and intreate of these in this place. 
1. Cnicus sive Carthamus sativus. The manured bastard Saffron. The manured bastard Saffron hath sundry large leaves lying next the ground, without any pricks, or with very few white ones at the corners of the leaves and divisions, among which riseth a strong hard round stalke three or foure foote high, branching it selfe up to the top, bearing shorter leaves, sharpe poin∣ted, 1. Cnicus sive Carthamus sativus. The ordinary Spanish Saffron. 
2. Cnicus alter Creticus. Wilde or bastard Saffron of Candye. 
3. Cnicus alter perennis Clusil. Clusius his everliving bastard Saffron. 
and prickly at the edges, and at their ends a great open scaly head, out of which thrusteth forth many gold yellow threds, of a most orient and shining colour, which being gathered in a dry warme time and kept dry, will abide in the same delicate colour that it bare when it was fresh for a very long time: the seed when it commeth to maturity, is white and hard, somewhat long and round, and a little cornered: the roote is long white and wooddy, perishing yearly after seede time. This hath beene found with a white flower but very bare. 
2. Cnicus alter Creticus. Wild or bastard Saffron of Candy. This other bastard Saffron of Candye, from a thicke and long blacke root riseth one straight round stalke, halfe a cubit high, set here and there with long sharpe pointed leaves, thicke set with prickles at the dentes of the edges, at the toppe whereof standeth a scaly head compassed with prickly leaves, of the bignesse of the Attractylis or Distaffe Thistle, out of which breake forth divers thicke yellow Saffron like threads thicke thrust together, after which the seede groweth therein being white, and as great as the greater Centory seede. 
3. Cnicus alter perennis Clusii. Clusius his everli∣ving bastard Saffron. This bastard Saffron riseth up with divers hard strong and round stalkes, without any branches at all from them, to the height of three or foure foote, bearing thereon at severall places somewhat large and long leaves, dented about the ed∣ges, of a sad or duskie greene colour: at the top of every stalke, standeth one great close hard scaly head, but not prick∣ly at all, not so great as the other Cnicus or bastard Saffron, ne∣ver opening the scales of the head as it doth; from the mid∣dle whereof commeth divers threds, yet nothing so many as in the other, of a sad blewish ashcolour, and whitish at the bottome of them, the seede which lyeth among the downe in those heads is greater, (although Clusius saith smaller, for I set you forth the plant as it groweth with us) then of the other thick and short, but not white, and in lesser quan∣tity then it: the rootes runne downe deepe into the ground, and being there encreased doe runne and spread themselves, taking up a great deale of roome. 
The Place. The first is generally sowen in Spaine, Italy and other places, for the especiall use thereof: The second Alpinus saith was brought out of Candye: The last groweth wilde in Spaine, as well about Sevill as Cordula, and in other places as Clusius saith, Pona remembreth it to grow upon Mount Baldus. 
The Time. They flower in the end of Iuly, or about the beginning of August, and the seede is ripe about the end thereof. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and , Cnicus and Cnecus, either quod est pungere vel mordere, or , quod pungendo pruriginem excitet, but is more properly to be understood of the wilde kind: or ra∣ther a floris colore, cum exponatur croceus vel rutilus: it is called Cnicus and Cn cus, also in Latin, and Car∣thamus in the Apothecaries shops, as it is thought, quod est purgare, but more truly from the Ara∣bians Kartam. The first is called Cnicus sativus urbanus and vulgaris by most Authors, and Carthamus as I said in the Apothecaries shoppes, of some also Crocus Saracenicus. The second is remembred onely by Alpinus in his booke de plantis exoticis by the name of Cnicus singularis: the last Clusius calleth Cnicus alter coeruleo flore, and so doe all other after him without any great variation. The Arabians call it Kartam, the Italians Saffaran Sarase∣nisco: the Spaniards Alacor and Acafran salvaja: The Germaines call it Wilder Saffran, the French Saffran bastard and graine de Perroquets, because they use to feede Parrats with the seede: in English Wilde Saffron, Bastard Saffron, Spanish Saffron, and Catalonia Saffron. 
The Vertue. The first Spanish Saffron flowers are much used in Spaine and other places, to bee put into their brothes and meates, to give them a yellow colour, which doth much please them: for as for any relish of spice, or hot quick taste they have none, nor any comfortable qualities, that they should be desired or used, neither have they any great use in Physicke that I know: but many pounds of them are spent in dying silke into a kind of Carnation colour: the seede is chiefly used in Physick, or rather the kernells within the seede, which beaten and the emul∣sion thereof with honyed water, or with the broth of a pullet, taken fasting, doth open the body, and purgeth waterie and flegmatick humours, both upwards and downewards, which humors also it voydeth if the emul∣sion of the seede be given in a glister, and thereby helpeth the collicke and dropsie, and those other diseases that proceede from those humors: being made into a Lohoc or licking electuary, with Sugar and hony, and a few al∣monds and pine kernells, it clenseth the brest and lungs of flegme sticking therein wonderfully, causing it to be easily spit forth, it also cleareth the voyce, and encreaseth sperme, by the often use of it: but it doth somewhat trouble the stomacke, and therefore some stomachicall helpers are fit to be given with it, as Aniseede, Galanga, Masticke, or if neede be of more forcible, Cardamoms, Ginger, sal gemma, &amp;c. a dram of the flowers in pouder taken in hydromel or honyed water, or in barly water helpeth the Iaundise: a dram of the pulpe of the seede taken with an ounce of the Syrupe of Wormewood, doth the like also: the confection made of the seeds hereof, called in shoppes Diacarthamum, is an especiall good medecine both to purge choller and fleagme, as also to cleare and clense the body of the watery humors of the Dropsie. Parrots doe most willingly feede upon this seede, yet doth it not move their bodies a white. The second sort Alpinus saith is used by the naturalists in the same manner, and to the same purposes to purge that the first is used. Of the last there is little written, but wee may onely sup∣pose that being so like in forme, it should so be also in quality.
edges: from among which rise small round hollow browne greene huskes upon short stalkes about an inch long, divided at the brimmes into five divisions, very like unto the cuppes or heads of the Henbane seede, but that they are smaller, and these be all the flowers it carrieth: which are somewhat sweete being smelled unto, and wherein when they are ripe is contai∣ned small cornered rough seede, very like unto the ernells or stones of Grapes or Raisins: the rootes are small and whitish, spreading diverse wayes in the ground, and increasing into di∣verse heads, but not running, or creeping under ground, as di∣verse other creeping herbes doe, which are somewhat sweete in smell, resembling Nardus, but more being drie, than when they are greene, and of a sharpe but not unpleasant taste. Camerarius saith that Gesner found a greater kinde hereof, and more sweete, upon the Alpes in Switzerland, which Bauhinus as it should seeme never saw, and therefore doubted of the truth. 
2. Asarum Americanum. Virginia Asarabacca. The Asarum of Virginia groweth very like the former, but the leaves are a good deale larger, stiffe also and thicke, somewhat crumpled about the edges, of a darke greene colour, but not so much shining as it, and not so round but a little pointed at the end, some also will be spotted or straked: the flowers have usually but three divi∣sions or points of a paler greene colour: the rootes are somewhat greater and fuller of substance spreading in the same manner and smelling somewhat more fragrant, and a little hot in taste biting a little the tongue. 
3. Asarina Matthioli. Bastard Asarum of Matthiolus. Bastard Asarum is a low herbe also, creeping upon the ground, somewhat like unto Asarum, having such like leaves upon long hairy footestalkes, but rounder and rougher than they, and somewhat dented about the edges: the flowers are like unto Camomill flowers, but that they are smaller by much, and wholly yellow, as well the border of leaves as middle thrume, and are not unpleasant in smell; the rootes are slender small and long, creeping under the upper crust of the earth, and not shooting downe deepe somewhat of a sharpe taste, and a little bitter withall. 
The Place. The first groweth under trees and upon shadie hills, in Pontus and Phrygia, as Dioscorides saith, and in Italy al∣so, and in sundry other places, and is frequent in gardens, The second came from the parts in or about Virginia. The third as Matthiolus saith is found upon some mountaines of Bohemia and likewise in Somersetshire in our owne Land, found by Dr. Lobel. 
The Time. The first and second keepe their greene leaves all the winter, but shoote forth new in the spring: and with them come forth those heads or flowers, which give ripe seede about Midsommer, or somewhat after: the other doth follow much the same course. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke quasi in ornatum non veniens, as Plinye saith because in coronis non addatur; but the text of Dioscorides is flat against him, for he saith it is , a sweete herbe used in garlands: it is also called , in Latine Asarum &amp; Nardus sylvestris or Nardus rustica, and as Ma∣cer saith Vulgago, as by his verse appeareth; Est Asaron Graecè Vulgago dicta Latinis: The former times as I sayd before, thought Asarum and Baccharis to be one herbe, and therefore not knowing what Baccharis was, they called this Asarum Asarabaccara, which name is continued both in Spaine and other places, and with us also to this day: but the descriptions of them being so diverse (if they had beene regarded or lookt into, which was utterly neglected, and those times led onely by tradition, without searching out the veritie of things) would make one mervaile how they could be so much mistaken, as from the ignorance of some that called Asa∣rum Bacchar, to make one name of both: but the errour being so old even before Plinye his time, may seeme to make it the more excusable, but we should not continue in the same course, they formerly did: seeing Plinye sheweth the errour, and findeth fault with them that were so led, as is shewed in the chapter of Baccharis. The first is called Asarum by all our later writers, except Lobel that calleth it Asarum Baccharis sive Bacchatus. The second we have imposed the name according to the forme it carrieth as it is in the title. The third Matthiolus first called Asarina, and so doe others that set it forth after him, onely Clusius doth much suspect it, to be his se∣cond Tussilago Alpina, and that his figure was taken from a dry plant, and before it had brought forth the flowers to perfection: but by the sharpe taste and creeping roote, it may more probably be taken to be the Catyledon pa∣lustris acris or urens. The Arabians call it Asaron, the Italians Asaro and Bacchara, the Spaniards Asarabaccara, and we in English Asarabacca or Asarobacca. 
The Vertues. Dioscorides saith it hath an heating quality, where or howsoever applyed, and that it provoketh urine, &amp; easeth the paines of the stone; is profitable for dropsies, and for the old paines of the Sciatica: and that sixe drammes of the rootes being drunke in honeyed water procureth womens courses, and purgeth like unto blacke Hellebor: Mesues placeth it among other purging hearbes and so doe I, for being drunke it not onely provoketh vomiting, but worketh downewards, and by urine also, purging both choller and flegme; it is made the more strong if some Spiknard be added, with the whey of goates milke or honyed water; but it purgeth flegme more manifest∣ly than choller, and therefore doth much helpe those that are troubled with the paines in the hippes, and the parts thereabout, especially if it be either steeped or boyled in whey: it doth wonderfully helpe the obstructions of the liver and spleene, and therefore profitable for those that are troubled, with the dropsie, and the overflow∣ing of the gall, which is the Iaundise, being steeped in wine and drunke; it helpeth those continuall agues, that come by the plenty of stubborne humors: An oyle made thereof by setting it in the sunne, and whereunto some Laedanum is added, provoketh sweating, if the ridge of the backe be annointed therewith, and thereby driveth a∣way the shaking fits of agues. It will not abide any long boyling, the chiefest strength thereof vanishing thereby; nor much beating, for the finer powder doth provoke vomits and urine, and the courser purging downewards, thus saith Mesues: hereby as Matthiolus saith, the Germaine Country people were taught to cure, both tertian and quartaine agues, by drinking a draught of the decoction thereof made with wine, wherein a little Mace or Cinamon or honey is put, either every day or every other day, which purgeth the body and often procureth vo∣mitings: as also they anoint the ridge of the backe, and the soles of their feete with the warme oyle made there∣of by long sunning, upon the accesse or comming of the fit, being in their warme bed, whereby they prevent the shaking fits, and provoke much sweate, and are thereby cured, that have long lingred under the disease: It is profitable for those that have convulsion of the sinewes, and an old cough. The common use hereof is to take the juyce of 5 or 7 leaves in a little drinke to cause vomitings: the rootes also worke in the same manner, but not so forcibly; but an extract made thereof according to art with wine, might be more safe and effectuall, and may be kept all the yeare, to be at hand ready to be given, when there is occasion, the quantity onely is to be propor∣tioned according to the constitution of the patient, as the learned Phisition can best appoint: It is also effectuall against the bitings of serpents, (the roote especially) and therefore is put among other simples, both into Mi∣thridatum and Andromachus Treakle, which is usually called Venice Treakle: Galen saith that the rootes of Asa∣rum, have the same property that Acorus hath but more strong, and Paulus Aegineta agreeth with him; but Lugdunensis findeth fault with them both, because they have a purging quality, whereof they make no mention, A dramme of the roote in powder given in white wine, a little before the fit of an ague, taketh away the sha∣king fit, and thereby causeth the hot fit to be the more remisse, and in twise taking expelleth it quite: It is said that, the leaves being a little bruised, and applyed to the forehead and temples, doe ease the paines of the head, and procureth sleepe; and applied to the eyes, taketh away the inflammation of them: the juice with a little Tutia prepared, put to it and dropped into the corner of the eyes, sharpneth the eyesight, and taketh away the dimnesse and mistinesse that is often in them. The leaves and rootes being boyled in lye, and the head washed therewith often while it is warme, comforteth the head and braine, that is ill affected by taking cold and helpeth the me∣mory also. The Virginia Asarum hath beene but little experienced by any that I know, and therefore can say no∣thing thereof, but it is probable to be of the like effects, being so much more aromaticall and sweet. The Bastard Asarum as Matthiolus saith, hath a little clensing quality, but a greater propertie to attenuate, or make thin that which is thicke, to cut or breake that which is tough, and to open that which is obstruct: a dram of the pouder hereof taken in sweete wine, or honyed water doth loosen the belly, and purgeth from thence tough and thicke flegme, and blacke or burnt humors: It is to very good purpose and profit, given to those that have the Yellow Iaundise, to those that have the Falling sicknesse, and to those that have the Palsie, the herbe eyther taken of it selfe, and eaten as in Sallets, or the decoction thereof made and drunke: It killeth also the wormes of the belly: I confesse I might have placed these herbes among the other sorts of sweete herbes, but the purging qualities be∣ing so prevalent, both in procuring vomit and working downewards by the stoole, hath rather moved me to in∣sert them here. 
CHAP. LIII. Brassica. Colewort. A Ll the edible sorts of Coleworts and Cabbiges with some others of delight, I have mentioned in my former worke so amply, that who so will may finde them there at large declared, I will onely in this place give you some figures of them and their vertues more amply, because I was then so briefe, and with them show you some wilde kinds, as also the Sea Colewort, which for the purging quality is first for this place. 
1. Brassica sativa. Garden Cabbiges and Coleworts. The Cabbige (as I have shewed) is of many sorts, some greater others small, some white others red or be∣tween white and red, and all these close their innermost leaves so intricate that they grow into a round head, the outmost leaves onely abiding loose and open. The Colewort is well knowne never to close the leaves, but to grow alwayes spreading: the second yeare after the sowing they shoote forth stalkes, bearing pale yellow flowers, and afterwards small long pods with small round seed in them. 
Besides those sorts there are others also as the Coleflowers and the Colerape delicate meates: There are like∣wise some garden sorts of Coleworts not so much used to be eaten, as pleasant to the sight in regard both of the Brassica sativa. Garden Coleworts. 
Brassica capitata. Cabbiges. 
Brassica florida. Coleflower. 
Brassica Laciniata. The fine cut Colewort. 
2. Brassica sylvestris. Wilde Colewort. 
3. Brassica spinosa. The thorny Colewort: 
4. Brassica marina monospermos. Sea Colewort. 
fine crumpling forme of the leaves, and of the variable mixture of colours in them, as greene, white, red and yel∣low, which maketh them to be beheld with the more ad∣miration: of all which I have spoken in my former book, unto these I must joyne the wilde sorts. 
2. Brassica sylvestris. Wilde Coleworts. The wild Colewort groweth with many long grayish round leaves, much gashed or torne on the edges, among which rise the stalkes bearing such like but smaller leaves on them, and yellowish flowers at the toppes, succeded by small rough pods with small round seede in them: the roote is white, hard and somewhat woddy. 
3. Brassica spinosa. Thorny Coleworts. The whitish woddy stalke of this thorny Colewort ri∣seth to be more then two foote high, branching forth in∣to sundry striped or crested branches, and they againe into other lesser flender twigges, each of them ending in small sharp white thornes, and on each of them under the thornes groweth one flower, in forme like unto an Hiacinthe of a pale redde or blush colour, from which rise small round peaselike heads pointed, wherein lyeth the seede: the leaves that grow without order on the branches are some∣what long and narrow, a little dented or waved about the edges, and with other smaller sometimes set toge∣ther, of a grayish greene colour. 
4. Brassica marina monospermos. Sea Colewort. The Sea Colewort hath divers somewhat broad and large thicke wrinckled leaves, or as it were curled about the edges, growing each upon a severall thicke footstalke and very easy to be broken, of a grayish greene co∣lour; from among which ariseth up a strong thicke stalke two foote high and better, with some leaves thereon to the toppe; where it brancheth forth much, and on every branch standeth a large bush of pale whitish flowers, consisting of foure leaves a peece; after which come small thicke and short pods, conteining but one roundish grayish seede a peece, much greater then Soldanella or Sea Bindweede seede; the roote is somewhat great and shooteth forth many branches underground, keeping the greene leaves all the winter.
2. Anthyllis maritima lentifolia. Sea Chickweed with Lentill like leaves. This Lentill leafed Anthyllis, hath diverse short crested branches lying upon the ground, of a pale greene co∣lour, and not much above an hand breadth long, spreading forth diverse small branches, whereon are set many small winged whitish greene leaves, many together upon a stalke, somewhat like unto those of the lesser Lentilles somewhat narrow: the flowers stand at the toppes of the stalkes and branches, like pointed starres, of a yellow greene colour, after which come three square heads, like unto a Tithymall or Spurge, wherein is contained small round seede: this also is salt in the taste, but somewhat bitter and hot withall. 
3. Anthyllis altera herb ariorum. Sea ground Pine. This Anthyllis (which is referred unto the second Anthyllis of Dioscorides, and that not without good judge∣ment) hath divers hard hairy stalkes, without branches upon them, whereon doe grow many somewhat long and narrow leaves without order one above another, thicke bushing at the toppe, somewhat like unto those of Chaemapitys or Ajuga, but dented about the edges and hairy also, somewhat of a warming hot taste, and strong unpleasant savour: the flowers stand among the leaves upon the branches, like unto the flowers of Chamaepitys o gronud Pine, but of a purple reddish colour, after which come small grayish rough seede, somewhat long, fo for the most part in every huske: the roote is somewhat thicke and white. 
The Place. The first groweth neare the sea in Narbone of France as Pena saith, as also in the kingdome of Valentia in Spaine, as Clusius saith. The second hath beene found in the Iland of Portland in the West parts of this land by Lobel, and set forth in his Adversaria: the last groweth about Mompelier, and was also found by Clusius in Por∣tugall and Valentia. 
The Time. They flower in July and August, and their seede is ripe in September. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , in Latine also Anthyllis, quasi florida dicta videtur. There is much contro∣versie among Writers, concerinng these Anthyllides, imputing them to be some of Dioscorides, every one almost setting forth some herbe or other, under the name of the one or other Anthyllis; supposing them to be the right, or at least wayes, to be referred for its likenesse unto them; Lobel and Pena set forth three sorts, whereof the first two here mentioned are two of them. The first is called by Lobel and Pena, Anthyllis marinu incana Alfine fo∣lio Narbonensium: of Matthiolus and Angu llara, it is set forth under the name of Paronychia altera of Dioscorides, and by Caesalpinus called Centum grana: it is thought also by Anguillara to be the Gramen secundū Pliny, whereof he maketh mention in his 24. Booke, and 19. Chapter. The second is called by Lobel, Anthyllis prior lentifolia maritima Peplios effigie; by Durantes Anthyllis minima &amp; is the Anthyllis Portlandiae lentifolia Penae of Lugdunensis. The last is called by those of Mompelier Iva Moschata, and is with them also accounted to be the Anthyllis alter of Dioscorides Pena calleth it Anthyllis Chamaepityoides. Clusius Anthyllis altera, and saith it is very like unto Cha pi∣tys. Lugdunensis saith it is called Anthyllis 2. herbariorum: Bauhinus in his Pinax refuseth to name this among his Anthyllides, but putteth it among his Chamaepityoides, and nameth that for Anthyllis Chamaepityides frutescens, which Pena calleth Sedum marinum vermiculatum, doubting to call it Chamaepitys major Dioscoridis, but rather Chamaepi∣tys altera vermiculata, Sedi effigie; for he himselfe misliketh to call it Anthyllis, saying it hath no likenesse there∣unto, in comparison of the other he calleth Anthyllis Chamaepityoides, and called Iva Moschata by those of Mompelier; but assuredly the Anthyllis altera Chamaepity similis of Cordus, expressed in his annotations upon Di∣oscorides, and the Anthylloides minor of Thalius are none of them frutescentes plantae, which Bauhinus maketh to be all one with his Anthyllis Chamaeptyoides frutescens, whereunto he referreth his Anthyllis, as I have shewed you. 
The Vertues. The likenesse of these Sea Chickweedes unto the Anthyllis prior of Dioscorides, as also the salt taste perswade diverse, that they are not inferiour in qualitie unto that of Dioscorides; who saith that both his Anthylli es are very helpefull to the raines and bladder and to provoke urine, as also to mollifie the hardnesse of the matrix, and being used with oyle of Roses and milke, to heale up wounds in the body or flesh; and besides these properties; he saith that his second Anthyllis, doth helpe the falling sicknesse being taken with Oxymel or honied vinegar, but Clusius saith he learned both of the Portugalls and Spaniards in Valentia, where he found it growing, that they used it much and to every good purpose, to purge and clense the bloud, when it waxed foule; which shew∣eth that most of the sea plants, whether saltish or not, have a clensing quality in them, and might be to good effect applied, if wisely considered, and experience made of them. 
CHAP. LX. Chamaepitys sive Iva Arthretica. Ground Pine or herbe Ivie. D Ioscorides setteth downe three sorts of Chamaepitys, whose descriptions I will here expresse; that com∣paring them with those here set downe, you may see how fitly they doe agree unto them: the first Dioscorides saith is a small crooked herbe, creeping by the ground, with leaves like the small House∣leeke, but much thinner or smaller, fatter also and hairy, many growing about the roote smelling like the Pine tree leaves, (so hath Matthiolus, but Lugdunensis hath the Pitch tree, for it is generally held that in Greeke signifieth the Pitch tree, and the Pine, although some are of the contrary opinion) the flowers are small and yellow, or white, the roote is like that of Succory, the other is a kinde of Ajuga and hath very small branches of a cubit long crooked like an anchor; the rest is like the former, but hath a white flower and blacke seede, and smelleth also like the Pine tree (or Pitch tree as Lugdunensis ) leaves: the third which is called the male which is a small herbe, having white hairy small leaves, the stalke also rough and white, with yellow flowers; the seede groweth under the leaves, and smelleth also as the Pipe (or Pitch leaves) both these are in quality like the former but weaker. 
1. Chamaepitys vulgaris Common Ground Pine. 
2. Chamaepitys odoratior. The sweet Ground Pine. 
 
1. Chamaepitys vulgaris. The ordinary or common Ground Pine. Our common Ground Pine groweth low, seldome rising abovr an handbreadth high, shooting forth diverse small branches, set with slender small long narrow grayish or whitish leaves, somewhat hairy, and divided into three parts many times, many bushing together at a joint, and sometimes also some growing scatteredly upon the stalkes, smelling somewhat strong like unto Rossen; the flowers are very small, and of a pale yellow colour growing from the joynts of the stalkes, all along among the leaves, after which come small long, and round huskes: the roote is small and wooddy perishing every yeare. 
2. Chamaepitys odoratior. The sweete Ground Pine. This other Ground pine is also a small herbe, growing up with many hairy and hoary white slender branches, not above an hand breadth high, whereon are set many small long leaves, yet shorter than the former, hairy also and hoary white not in tufts or bushes, but growing by couples close together all along the stalkes, cut in, or di∣vided into some parts, of a strong but sweeter sent, by much than the former: at the toppes of the branches grow the flowers many together, of a pale yellowish white colour: the roote is somewhat long and fleshy like the roote of Succory or Dandelion, with many fibres thereat, but smaller. 
3. Chamaepitys Austriaca Clusij. Clusius his Ground Pine of Austria. This kind of Ground Pine hath diverse square strong hairy stalkes, a foote long, with many joynts on them, whereat grow, two somewhat long and hard leaves, somewhat like unto the first but broader, greene and shining on the upper side, and somewhat hoary and full of veines on the underside, divided into three or foure parts, or sometimes into more, somewhat hot in taste but not unpleasant, nor of any displeasing sent: from the joynts spring forth smaller branches, with the like leaves on them but lesser divided, and toward the toppes nothing at all but smooth, and long like unto Rosemary leaves; from the upper joynts and ends of the stalkes and branches stand diverse gaping flowers, like unto Germander, of a deepe purple or violet colour, for the most part, but sometimes of a lively red colour, and sometimes of a bleaker blew, or skie colour, the lower leaves or chappes of the flowers being whitish, spotted with reddish spots: after which come blacke shining somewhat long and cor∣nered seede, foure for the most part enclosed in every of those rough huskes, wherein the flowers stood before: the roote is composed of many blacke and hard strings, growing somewhat deepe in the ground, and springing a∣fresh every yeare. 
4. Chamaepitys adulterina seu Pseudo Chamaepitys. Bastard Ground Pine. The bastard Ground Pine is a small low bushing herbe, very like unto the common kinde, having small hairy stalkes, set full of long hairy leaves all alongst them, parted into three long parts, of no sent almost, but an un∣pleasant herby one rather, the flowers stand at the joynts with the leaves, at the toppes of the branches, very like unto those of the common Ground Pine, but of a white colour, and somewhat greater: the seede that follweth is grayish, greater than the common and rounder, foure for the most part contained in every huske: the roote is somewhat thicke and white and abideth the Winter. 
The Place. The first is the most common in our land, yet not growing in many other shires thereof then Kent, as farre as ever I could yet heare or learne: but there it groweth in many places, from on this side Dartford along to South∣fleete, Cobham and Rochester, and upon Chattam downe hard by the Beacon, and halfe a mile from Rochester in a field nigh a house called Selfey. The second is more rare to be found saith Pena, who onely saw it on the dry hills 3. Chamaepitys Austriaca Clusij. Clusius his Austrian Ground Pine. 
4 Chamaepitys adulterina seu Pseudo Chamaepitys. Bastard Ground Pine. 
and higher medowes of Savoy, but heard it grew also by Genua. The third Clusius saith he found plentifully: mile and a halfe from Vienna in Austria, and in other places there abouts. The last Clusius saith groweth in many unmanured places of Spaine. 
The Time. They all flower and give their seede in the Sommer moneths. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and in Latine also Chamaepitys, quasi humipinus, vel picea as I said before: it is cal∣led also in Latine Ajuga and Abiga, ab abietis odore, as Pena thinketh, but of the most, ab abigenda partu &amp; procu∣rando abortu: and as Pliny saith, Dicitur propter abortus, &amp; ab alijs Thus terrae: some also, (as it is likely by a Ecclipsis of Ajuga ) call it Iva, and adde thereto Arthretica or rather Arthrytica, because of the propertie condu∣cing helpe to the gout and other joint aches: the first is generally in these dayes helde by the best to be the third kind of Dioscorides, and not the first as Matthiolus and others make it: the second is Chamaepitys prima Dioscorides of Pena, and called odoratior for the sents sake, and is the third sort both with Matthiolus and Dodonaeus. The third is remembred first by Clusius, from whom others call it Chamaepitys Austriaca, and caerulea of Bauhinus, and is most likely to be his Chamaedrys Austriaca, mentioned in his Pinax, and described in his Prodromus. The last also Clusius calleth Pseudo Chamaepitys and Lobel Camaepitys adulterina; Dodonaeus calleth it Chamaepitys spuria, bu putteth two figures thereof, whom Lugdunensis followeth therein: it is called in English Ground Pine, and Ground Jvie after the Latine word Iva: and field Cipresse after the low Dutch name Velt Cypres; and forget me not after the Grmane name Vergiss mien nicht; for which name Matthiolus findeth fault with Brasav , whose Germane Apothecary so informed him; and saith it is called by the Germans Ie lenger, je lieber, that is the longer the more lovely, which as Pena and Lobel saiy, is the more proper name of Dulcamara, the wood Nightshade; it is called of the Italians Chamaepityo, and Iva; and of the Spaniards, Penilho and Iva artetica; of the French Iva Moschata and artetique: and of the Arabians Hamasiteos and Chamasithius. 
The Vertues. The decoction of Ground Pine drunk, doth wonderfully prevaile against the strangury and stoppings of urine, or any inward paines rising from those diseases of the reines and urine, and is specially good also for all obstruction of the liver and spleene, for it clenseth the grosse impure bloud, and expelleth that which is congealed, and gently openeth the body, to which purpose they were wont in former times, to make pilles with the pouder thereof and the pulpe of figges: it doth also mervelously helpe all the diseases of the mother, used inwardly or applied outwardly, procuring the courses, expelling the dead child and afterbirth, yea it is so powerfull upon those femi∣nine parts, that it is utterly forbidden to women with child, in that it will cause abortment or delivery before the time: It is as powerfull and effectuall also in all the paines and diseases of the joynts, as gouts, crampes, pal∣sies, sciatica and aches, either the decoction of the herbe in wine, taken inwardly or applied outwardly, or both, for sometimes together: for which purposes the pilles that are made with the pouder of Grourd Pine, and of Her∣ dactyles, with Venice Turpentine are very effectuall; these pilles also are of a speciall good use for those that have the dropsie, to be continued for some time: the same also is an especiall good helpe for the jaundise, and also for those that have any griping paines in the belly or joynts, or any other the inward parts: it helpeth also all diseases of the braine, proceeding from cold and flegmaticke humors and distillations, as also for the falling sicknesse: it is an especiall remedy for the poison of the Aconites of all sorts, and other poisonfull herbes, as also against the stin∣ging of the Scorpion, and all other venemous creatures; it is a good remedy for a cold cough especially in the be∣ginning, or that it bee nor growne inveterate: it procureth also sweate if it bee anointed, saith Pliny, but applied like other sudorisicks, it is likely to bee more convenient: for all these purposes aforesaid the herbe being tunned up in new drinke, and drunke, is almost as effectuall, but farre more acceptable to weake or dainty stomackes: And the distilled water of the herbe also hath the same effect but more weakely; the conserve of the flowers doth the like, which Matthiolus much commendeth against the palsie: the greene herbe or the deco∣ction thereof being applied, dissolveth the hardnesse of the wemans brests, as also all other hard tumors in any other part of the body: the greene herbe also applied, or the juyce thereof with some hony, doth not onely clense putride and stinking, foule and malignant and virulent ulcers and sores of all sorts, but healeth and conglutinateth or sodereth up the lippes of greene wounds in any part also: Matthiolus commendeth cer∣taine pilles against the Palsie, which are made in this manner; Take saith he, of Ground Pine, Staechas, Betony and Rosemary flowers, of each one dram, of Turbith one dram and a halfe, of Agarick two drams, of Colocynthis halfe a dram, of Ginger and Sal gemme of each ten graines, of Rubarbe one dram and a halfe, of Spiknard seaven graines, of the pouder called Hiera picra simplex halfe an ounce, of diagridium one dram; let all these be made up into a masse, according to art, with the juice of Ground Pine; (but I would and thinke it more convenient, I am sure more durable, that it be made up into a masse, with a Syrupe made of Hony or Sugar and the juice of the herbe,) for so they will not dry or wax hard so soone, of a dram whereof let nine pills bee made, and three of them taken by those that are paralitick, every night when they goe to bed; and this saith he will give a present and speedy helpe.
4. Aristolochia longa Hispanica. The Spanish long Birthwort. This Spanish kinde differeth very little from the last recited long rooted Birthwort, for in the flower and roote is the onely difference to be observed; the flower in this is somewhat more purple, both the flippet or eare, and the innerside of the toppe of the flower: the roote likewise is shorter for the most part, and blunter at the lower end, or nothing so much pointed. 
5. Aristolochia Clematitis. The running rooted Birthwort. The running rooted Birthwort, groweth with longer, stronger and rounder stalkes than the former, even three or foure foote long, branched oftentimes like the long rooted kind, whereon grow much larger and broader leaves, and of a paler greene colour, then any of the other: at the joynts with the leaves come forth the flowers, as the other sorts doe, but whereas none of them bring above one flower at a joynt, this bringeth three or foure like unto the rest for forme, but of a pale greene colour like the long: the fruite hereof likewise is greater than any of the other, as the seede is likewise: the roote hereof hath a stronger sweete sent than any of the for∣mer, and is smaller, of the bignesse of the bigger rootes of Asparagus, many growing from one head, and running very farre under ground, and springing up againe in many places, of as induring a nature as the Couch grasse almost, for if never so little a peece, be left in the ground as broken off from the rest, that is taken up, it will shoote forth leaves, and there grow againe, so that oftentimes it becommeth no lesse a plague to a ground, than a couch, or any other such like running or creeping herbe. 
6. Aristolochia Clematitis Baetica. Spanish Climing Birthwort. The Spanish climing Birthwort, hath diverse small long twining branches, spreading into many other small ones, running upon small trees and hedge bushes, winding themselves very much about them, like unto the grea∣ter Bindweedes, or like unto Hoppes, and often overtop∣ping 7. Pistolochia vulgatior. The bushie rooted Birthwort. 
8. Pistolochia Cretica semper virens. Ever greene bushie rooted Birthwort. 
them, whereon doe grow severall leaves, upon long footestalkes, being round and broad, somewhat like unto the Scammony of Mompelier, or unto the other Birthworts, but sharper pointed, smooth and greene on the upperside, and of a whitish purple underneath; the flowers stand singly at the joynt, as the former sorts doe, and not as the last, having the longest footestalke of any; of the same forme, but of a sad or darke purple colour, and hairy on the inside; the fruite is as great as the last, and so is the seede, but openeth it selfe, at the bottome, contrary to all the former sorts: the roote runneth into the ground like the rough Bindweede, whereunto it is very like, of a pale whitish colour on the outside, and of the bignesse of the last, of nothing so strong a sent as it; and of no unpleasant, but of a sharpe and an astringent taste. 
7. Pistolochia vulgatior. The bushy rooted Birthworte. The bushy rooted Birthwort hath many slender long branched stalkes, a foote long or more, straked and cre∣sted as is both the long and the round, whereon grow at distances as in the former, diverse round leaves, smaller, rougher, and blacker than the long, whereunto it is most like, but a little waved as it were about the edges: the flowers also are very like them, but in some very darke, and in others of a greenish yellow colour: the fruite is round and somewhat long, and round at the end or point, like unto the fruite of the first round kinde but smal∣ler, which openeth it selfe also as the last before doth at the bottome next unto the stalke, and shewing such like seede within but smaller: the rootes are many, and small, bigger than bullrushes for the most part, shooting from one head with many small fibres thereto, of a yellowish colour as all the rest are: this looseth the leaves in winter as all the former doe. 
8. Pistolochia Cretica semper virens. Ever greene bushie rooetd Birthwort of Candye. The ever greene bushie rooted Birthwort of Candye, sendeth forth many very slender flexible and trayling cornered stalkes, branching into diverse other smaller, about a foote long or better, and of a sad greene colour, whereon are set round leaves long pointed, full of veines, but lesser than the former, and of a sad greene colour, so abiding all the winter: the flowers are like unto those of the long kinde, standing upon long footestalkes, of a very sad red colour on the outside and yellowish within: the fruite and seede is smaller than in any other: the rootes likewise are like the last but smaller, and smelling somewhat sweet. 
The Place. The three first more ordinary kindes grow as well in Narbone and Provence in France, about Mompelier in the fields and vineyards, especially the running kinde, that it maketh their wine, where it is frequent, to taste there∣of, as also in Spaine and Italy: the other three that are like unto them, Clusius saith he found in Spaine in diverse places; and Honorius Bellus saith in Candye also, in his first Epistle to Clusius, and Petrus Bellonius in his first book of observations and 17 chap. doth also. The seaventh groweth in the stony Ollive yards of Provence and Spaine; and the last in Candye. 
The Time. These doe not flower with us untill the middle or end of Iuly, and their fruit doth hardly ripen before the winter, yet in the warmer countries they flower and seede early: some of these doe flower much later with us, if with all the care we can use unto them, we can preserve them in the winter; as both the sorts of long rooted and busty rooted kinds, for the other are more hardy. 
The Names. It is called in Greek quasi , i. e. optima puerperis, but not praegnantibus as Pliny hath it, it is good to helpe women that are ready to be delivered, and that are delivered, and not those that are with child, not ready to be delivered, for in such it may cause abortment, or delivery before the time: In former times, when ignorance had hid in a cloud all sorts of learning and knowledge, from all our Christian world, ma∣ny false herbes were obtruded for the right, and in those errours many lived and dyed: but the industry of this later age, hath searched out, found and detected many, and among others this of Aristolochia; many taking the Rad x Caeva major to be it, and the minor to be the Pistolochia of Pliny, but all now by the sight and knowledge of the true, are ashamed that any such errour should at any time creepe in among wise men: There is also some controversie among the later authors, which should be the Aristolochia Clematitis of Dioscorides; the Apotheca∣ries of Italy in and before Matthiolus his time, used this roote of Aristolochia Clematitis in stead of the true long Birthwort, not knowing either the true long or that this their longa was Dioscorides his Clematitis: Lonicerus and others found out this errour, wrote against it, and shewed that is was not the long one of Dioscorides, but his Clematitis; but Matthiolus contesteth against them with many words, both for it, and because they found fault with the text in Dioscorides, who saith that Aristolochia Clematitis hath slender branches, somewhat round leaves like unto Houseleeke, and the flowers of Rue: The Greeke word is aizoon or sempervivum parvum and they thought it should be rather asarum parvum, because the Aristolochia Clematitis hath round leaves like Asarum: but Matthiolus in shewing that the words are the same that Oribasius hath also who wrote the same that Dioscorides did, as also that Serapio and Avicen have the same words, and that there∣fore the text is uncorrupted, would thereupon conclude, that the Aristolochia longa, then used in the Apotheca∣ries shops, could not bee Dioscorides his Clematitis, and the rather, because the flowers of his Clematitis are like Rue, which those of their Aristolochia longa are nothing like, againe he saith the rootes are small, longer then the other; and have a thicke barke that covereth them, but the longe Aristolochia of the shops hath a thinne rinde as all know, that have seene it: yet Matthiolus is forced to grant, that the Aristolochia longa, that was used in the Apothecaries shops, was not the same Aristolochia longa, that Dioscorides maketh mention of, how then could he not perceive it to be his Clematitis, when he had set forth both the long and the round, and knew that the Aristolochia longa of the shops, was like unto the other two sorts, but differing in rootes onely from them; but saith, he thinketh it might be the Pistolochia of Pliny, or a species of that kind of long, whereof no mention was made by the antient writers; yet how far from likelihood these words of Matthiolus are, let others judge: but assu∣redly the text of Dioscorides, and so likewise of those that have followed him, cannot be exempt from blemish, or else neither we, neither any before us, have or know Dioscorides his Aristolochia Clematitis: for he in describing the three sorts of Aristolochia, maketh the two former to agree in leafe, flower and fruit, and to differ onely in the roote, whereunto all doe agree, but in declaring the Clematitis, he setteth downe the leafe and flower, to be farre differing, but sheweth nor what fruit it beareth, yet maketh it agree with the other two in properties, although lesse forcible: but seeing there is another herbe knowne to be so like the other two Aristolochia ' s, and to differ in nothing from them, so much as in the roote, which is sweete, small and longer then any of the other, as Dioscorides maketh his Clematitis to bee, and the very name Clematitis answerable to the plant, what should let it to be the right, and indeede it is so accounted of all now a dayes without doubt or question, notwith∣standing the text of Dioscorides; as also that their Aristolochia longa of former times, according to Lonicerus judgement, and those Monkes, that commented upon Mesues, is Dioscorides his Clematitis: Another doubt there is likewise risen of late dayes, what Aristolochia was ment by Andromachus senior, that he appointeth to be put into his Theriaca; for his elegiack verses maketh no distinction: and because Galen doth shew in secundo alimentorū that Andromachus junior, Adromachus senior his son, in setting downe his fathers Theriaca in prose doth explaine divers things, that were doubtfull in his verse, as for the Mel Cecropium he expresseth it Mel Atticum: for Centaurium without difference either of greater of lesser, he setteth downe the lesser, and for Aristolochia which was left indefinite, he setteth downe lepte tenuis, the small. Now here lyeth the doubt, what Aristol ∣chia Andromachus and Galen should meane, by this lepte tenuis: Matthiolus seemeth to answer this doubt, in shew∣ing that they would not meane any other Aristolochia, then the Clematitis, because they mention but three sorts; and this Clematitis is the smallest roote of the other, and that the tenuis Aristolochia, is not the Long of Diosco∣rides, whose rootes he saith were of the thicknesse of a finger; when as of the true Long none are found so small unlesse they be very young rootes, nor yet any other different kind from the Clematitis, as divers did thinke; and yet Galen in lib. 6. simp. med. in setting downe the properties of all the three sorts of Aristolochia, commendeth the round as most excellent, and of most subtill parts, and to all purposes more effectuall then both the other: the Long he saith is nothing so subtill, or of so thin parts, but is more hot and clensing; and of the Clematitis he saith onely that it is sweeter in smell then the other two, and therefore is more used in sweete oynt∣ments then otherwise, and is more weake for medicines, or the cure of any disease; why therefore the Clema∣titis should be taken for Andromachus Treacle with our Apothecaries I doe somewhat admire, seeing Galen saith that the other are more effectuall for all purposes: The severall appellations of authors of these Aristolochia ' s, are not so divers that they neede any long repetition, for they all as it were agree together, the variation being so small, that it is not worthy the reciting; onely I will shew you how Bauhinus in his Pinax doth distinguish them severally differing from the titles I give them: the first here set forth, he calleth Aristolochia rotunda flore ex purpura nigro: the second he calleth Aristolochia rotunda flore ex albo purpurascente: the third hee calleth Aristolochia longa vera: the fourth Aristolochia longa Hispanica: the fift Aristolochia Clematitis recta: the f Aristolochia Clematitis serpens: The seaventh Aristolochia Pistolochia dicta (and is Aristolochia Polyrrhizos of Lo∣bel and Pliny ) the last he calleth Pistolochia Cretica. The Arabians call it Zaranud Masmocra and Zaraved: the Italians Aristologia: the Spaniards Astronomia, the French Sarasine and Fozerne, the Germans Osterlucey and Holtwortz: the Dutch men Osterlucye and Sarasincrnidt. 
The Vertues. Galen, lib. 6. simpl. med. as I shewed you before sheweth the severall properties of these Aristolochia ' s, the roote saith he of Aristolochia is of most use for medicines, being bitter and somewhat sharpe, the round is the most subtill of them all, and of more effect for all diseases; that which is called Clematitis is sweeter in sent then the other two, and therefore those that make sweete ointments, doe use it in their ointments, but it is of lesse force and vertue in the curing of any disease; the Long hath lesse tenuity of parts in it, then the round, but yet is not without efficacy, for it hath a clensing and heating power therein, yet it clenseth and digesteth lesse then the round, but healeth no lesse, yea peradventure more, and therefore the long is of more use, for those that have neede of a meane clensing in the tuberous swellings of the flesh, and in fomentations of the mother, but where there is neede of a stronger extenuating faculty, there the round is of more use: and therefore the round Birthwort, doth more helpe to cure those greefes and diseases, that rise from the obstruction or aboundance, and grossenesse of raw and windy humors: it draweth forth thornes, and splinters, &amp;c. out of the flesh, it healeth all putrefactions, it clenseth and maketh sound foule and filthy Vlcers, it clenseth the gums, and the teeth, and maketh them white; it is profitable for those that are troubled with the shortnesse of breath, with the hickocke, with the Falling sicknesse, or with the Gout, if it be drunke with water, (or wine rather) as also for those that are bursten or are troubled with Crampes or Convulsions, or shrinkings of the sinewes and veines, and is as pro∣fitable as any other medicine whatsoever: and thus farre are the words of Galen, in the place before recited: Mesues, Paulus Aegineta and Aetius do shew the purging qualitie therein, which Dioscorides and Galen either knew not (as in Rubarbe ) or past it over in silence, who saith, that the roote either of the round or running Birth∣wort, doth purge downeward flegmaticke and cholericke humors also: it clenseth the lunges and the parts of the breast, from the toughnesse and rottennesse of humors; whereof a plaine demonstration is, that it helpeth those that are flegmaticke or shortwinded very much; if it be taken inwardly or applyed outwardly to the part, it mightily draweth downe womens courses, expelleth the dead child and afterbirth, and in the paines of delivery hath very good effect to cause the more speedy ease and delivery, and to cleare the parts, of what is accessary: the roots in pouder taken with Mirrhe &amp; Pepper in wine, is used also for the same purposes; it resisteth poyson of all sorts, the long resisteth the venome of Serpents, and other living creatures, the round resisteth all other sorts of poyson: but Pliny inverteth this order: the roote of the round being taken in water, helpeth those that are brui∣sed by falls, blowes, &amp;c. as also the paines of the sides; the running Birthwort helpeth the falling downe, of the mother, being eyther applyed in pessarie or in fume, and the place bathed with did decoction; it is said that di∣vers in Spaine doe use the rootes of the Spanish running Birthwort with no lesse good successe, then they doe the rootes of Sarsaparilla, to all the uses whereunto the Sarsa serveth: the distilled water of the greene herbe, when it is in flower is profitable for all the diseases aforesaid, and in especiall preserveth from the Plague, and is an especiall good remedy for the winde collicke: the Pistolochia or bushy rooted Birthwort, is commended by Pliny for all the aforesaid womens diseases, to be as effectuall as the other, and that it is very profitably applyed to those that are troubled with Convulsions and Crampes, or those that have beene bruised by stroakes or falles, if it be drunke with water, the seede worketh more strongly: the roote of the round Birthwort helpeth to draw forth broken bones, or any other hurtfull thing lying in the flesh, if the fresh roote bee applyed and bound thereto: the pouder of the dryed roote is of singular good use in all eating, or running, foule and rotten Vlcers, as also that are hollow and Fistulous, by clensing and filling them up, or causing the flesh to grow soundly, espe∣cially for Fistulaes, if a little Hony, and the roote of Iris or the Flowerdeluce bee used with it: it healeth also all wounds in the head: the fumes thereof, or the pouder in a quilted cap, stayeth all Fluxes and distillations of thinne rheume from the head? and it is an usuall saying, that without Birthwort no Chirurgion can performe any great cure: the long Birthwort is used as well as the round, in most of those diseases either inward or out∣ward, and some also doe hold that the Clematitis or running kind is no lesse effectuall, but you heard before the judgement of Galen concerning it. Pliny in his 25. Booke and 8. Chap. saith that the fishermen in Campania did call the roote of the round Birthwort the venume of the earth, and that having bruised it and minced it with Lime and Chalke, and cast it into the Sea, all the Fishes within a great way thereof would with incredible de∣sire gather themselves thereto, and presently upon the taking thereof become as dead, whereby they might easily be taken: but Lonicerus noteth it as an errour in Pliny, who referreth that quality to the roote of Aristolochia which should be attributed to Cyclamen, which he saith is called by the Greekes , id est, piscium venenum because it killeth them. 
CHAP. LXIIII. Mercuralis. Mercurie. V Nder the titles of Mercuries I must comprehend also the Phyllon of Theophrastus and Dioscorides, for that they are out of doubt congeners of the same kindred: they are in face and forme the one so like the other: and with them I thinke it not amisse to remember in this place also, the Mercurialis sylvestris altera of Tragus, called by Lobel, Noli me tangere: for although Bauhinus place it with the Balsamina, yet others reckon it with the Mercuries. 
1. Mercurialis vulgaris mas &amp; faemina. French Mercury, the male and female. I comprehend as you see, both the male and the female Mercury under one description, because as all do agree, they both rise from the seede of the one as Hempe doth, and they both are so like, that but for the flowers and seede, that shew their difference, they could not bee distinguished the one from the other: it riseth up with a square greene stalke full of joynts, two foote high or thereabouts, with two leaves at every joynt, and bran∣ching likewise from both sides of the stalkes, set with fresh greene leaves, somewhat broad and long like unto the leaves of Pellitory of the wall, but lesser and much about the bignesse of the leaves of Bassill, finely dented about the edges: towards the tops of the stalkes and branches, at every joynt come forth, in that which is called the male, two small round greene heads, standing together upon a short footestalke, which growing ripe are the seede, not having any flower, that ever I could discerne; in the female the stalke is longer, spike fashion, and set round about with small greene huskes, which are the flowers made like small branches of grapes, which give no seede that ever I could finde, but abide in that manner a great while upon the stalkes without shedding: the roote is composed of many small Fibres, which perisheth every yeare, at the first approach of winter, and raiseth it selfe up againe of it owne sowing, for where it is once suffered to sow it selfe, the ground will never want it afterwards, even of both sorts, for I yet never saw it grow in any place, where either of them was wanting. 
2. Mercurialis sylvestris Cynocrambe dicta vulgaris. The ordinary wilde Mercury or Dogs Mercury. This Dog Mercury is likewise distinguished into male and female, and riseth up many stalkes, slenderer and lower then Mercury, and without any branches at all upon them; the male is set with two leaves at every 1. Mercurialis mas &amp; femina. French Mercury; male and female. 
joynt somewhat greater then the female, but more pointed, and full of veines, and somewhat harder also in handling, of a darker greene colour, and lesser snipt or dented about the ed∣ges at the joynts, with the leaves come forth longer stalkes then in the former, with two hairy round seedes upon them, twise as bigge as those of the former Mercury: the taste hereof is herbie; and the smell somewhat strong and virulent: the fe∣male of this kind hath much harder leaves, and stand upon longer footestalkes, and the stalkes also are longer; from the joynts come such like long or rather longer spikes, of greenish flowers as are in the former female Mercury, with many small threds in them, which give no seede, no more then the other Mercury: the rootes of them both are many, and full of small Fibres, which runne under ground, and mat themselves very much, not perishing as the former Mercuries doe, but abiding the winter, and shoote forth new branches every yeare, for the old dye downe to the ground. 
3. Cynocrambe legitima Dioscoridis Bauhino. The true Dogs Mercury by Bauhinus. The true Dogges Mercury is a tender small and sappie herbe, and riseth up like unto the ordinary Mercury, with a round greene crested stalke, about a foote high set with many joynts, branching forth from every joynt; whereat commeth forth at the first two small leaves, and somewhat round like unto Chickweede, after which two other spring forth from the same joynt, which are much larger and broader, and from the same place also afterwards come divers other smaller leaves then the first, and this proportion it holdeth, not at one joynt alone, but at every one thorough the whole plant: from the lowest joynt almost of the stalke and branches, up to the top, where come forth three or foure small whitish greene flowers, with many threds in the midst of them, which turne into small hard round seede, like unto those of Mercury but somewhat lesser, greene at the first, but of a blackish ashcolour when they are ripe: the roote is white, long and fibrous. 
2. Cynocrambe vulgaris. The ordinary wilde or Dogs Mercury. 
3. Cynocrambe legitima Dioscorides Bauhius. The true Dogs Mercury by Bauhinus. 
4. Phyllum matificum &amp; faeminificum. Childes Mercury male, and female. 
5 Mercurialis sylvestris Noli me tangere dicta sive Perficari: siliquosa. Wilde Mercury called Quicke in hand.
 
4. Phyllum marificum &amp; faeminificum. Childing Mercury male and female. Childing Mercury also is divided into two kindes, as the former Mercuries are, whereunto it is so like in all the parts thereof, that many have beene of opinion, that it is but plaine Mercury, growing in a hotter Coun∣try: It hath a branched square stalke (I give you one description for them both, as I did in the former, although others give them severall) full of joynts and branches, in the male lower and more upright, in the female higher and more bushie: at the joynts stand alwayes two soft woolly leaves, somewhat narrower and longer, than in the former, and not dented or but seldome about the edges, of an acide and saltish taste: at the joynts in the male come forth short stalkes, bearing two small round seedes together at the toppe, like unto the male Mercury, (for it doth not give any flowers) which are of an ash colour before they are perfect ripe, but then they turne to be more blew; in the female the stalkes are longer, and beare many small pale mossie flowers, which seldome beareth any seede, which when it doth it is small and round like the other, sometimes two and sometimes more growing together: the roote is white, hard and wooddy; of the bignesse and length of a finger, perishing eve∣ry yeare, and raysing it selfe againe from it owne seede, in the naturall places: this hath a stronger sent and taste, than any of the former Mercuries: Dioscorides his description of this Phyllum is inverted, for unto the male he giveth spiked or bushie heads, and unto the female seedes like poppie: but as hee saith himselfe Cratevas was his author, and not his owne knowledge. 
5. Mercurialis sylvestris noli me tangere dicta sive Persicaria siliquosa. Wilde Mercurie called Quicke in hand. This kinde of wilde Mercury (which for the varietie of the forme hath beene diversely named of writers) riseth up with a round joynted stalke, two foote high sometimes, branching from thence in many places, where∣at continually standeth but one leafe upon a very slender rough foote stalke, most like unto those of French Mer∣cury, but longer pointed, and somewhat smaller at the stalke, not so finely, but as it were grossely indented about the edges, being thinner, softer, and of blewish greene colour; from every joynt with the leafe from the middle upwards, and at the toppes of the branches also commeth forth one long browne foote stalke, as small and fine as any haire, bearing one flower thereon, and sometime two or three, somewhat close together, hanging downe∣wards, composed of sixe leaves a peece, somewhat like unto those of the Hollow roote, but greater) of a faire gold yellow colour, Bauhinus saith it is found also of a paler colour: two of them that stand like winges at the sides, are larger than the other two that stand under them, which are small and round, the lowest is longer than the other two small ones, and broade at the end: the uppermost endeth in a short crooked home or heele be∣hinde: the bottome on the inside is whiter than the rest, which have sometimes some red spots in them: after these flowers are past, there come up in their places, small long joynted pods, hanging downewards, striped as it were all the length of them, wherein is conteined small long and somewhat flat seede, of a duskie colour, which is so hardly gathered, in regard that even before it be thorough ripe, if it be but very lightly handled, the pods will breake, and twine themselves a little, as the pods of some certaine pulses will doe, and the seed will leape forth, yea for the most part, the very shaking of the branches by the winde, causeth the pods to breake open, and shed their seede on the ground, where the ripest may best be gathered if they be taken in time: the roote is blackish and threddie, perishing every yeare; the taste hereof is small and waterish, as Columna saith in the greene hearbe as my selfe can testifie, and little otherwise in the dryed, and which gave him no offence nor me al∣so, either in the tasting or handling, but whether there were any further danger in taking a greater quantity, be∣cause Lobel saith it was venemous, was I doubt but onely an heare-say by tradition, yet neither he nor I would make any further experience therein. 
The Place. The two first Mercuries are found wilde in diverse places of our owne Country, as very plentifully by a vil∣lage called Brookeland in Rumney Marish in Kent; the other called Dogge Mercury is found in sundry places of Kent also, and elsewhere, the female kinde is more seldome found than the male: the true Dogges Mercury is not found wild with us, neither the childs or childing Mercuries, but grow about Mompelier in France, and in Spaine and Italy: the last groweth in the shadowie woods of Italy, France, and Germany: it hath beene found likewise by the shadie woods sides, of the mountaines and their vallyes in Wales, by an industrious Gentleman, and Herbarist, M r . George Bowles; and will abide in our Gardens, every yeare sowing it selfe being set in a sha∣dowie place. 
The Time. They all flourish in the Sommer Moneths, and therein give their seede; but the Childs Mercury flowreth so late with us, that it hardly beareth ripe seede. The quicke in hand flowreth and presently after seedeth, in his naturall place about the middle and end of August, but in gardens in Iune and Iuly. 
The Names. French Mercurie is called in Greeke Linosostis &amp; , Mercurii herba &amp; Parthenium; in Latine Mercurialis, because as Pliny saith it was found by Mercury: Dogges Mercury is called &amp; Cynea and Cynocrambe which is Canina Brassica, but because it hath no agreement with any Cabbage (unlesse you would say it were meate, or a Cabbage for a dogge) others have called it in Latine Mer∣curialis Canina, propter ignobilitatem, others Mercurialis sylvestris: The childs or childing Mercury is called in Greek &amp; Phyllum &amp; Elaeophyllum, quasi Oleaefolium. Theophrastus in his ninth booke and 19. chap. saith that they called one herbe Phyllum Arrhenogonon, and another Thelygonon Mariparū, &amp; Foeminiparum, which diverse doe thinke is but the former French Mercury, because he saith they have leaves like Bassill, whereunto the French and not the Childs or childing Mercury is most like, and the rather for that Dioscorides appropria∣teth to his Mercuries those effects of bearing male and female children, that the Phyllum of Theophrastus and Dioscorides hath. The French Mercury is generally of all writers almost, called Mercurialis mas &amp; faemina, Cordus upon Dioscorides thinketh them to be the Phyllum Arrhenogonon, and Thelygonon of Theophrastus; and Bauhinus calleth them Mercurialis testiculata &amp; spicata: the Italians call it Mercorella; the Spaniards Mercu∣riale: the French Mercuriale &amp; Vignoble; the Germanes Bengelkrant, and the Dutch men Bingelcruyte &amp; Mer∣curial. The second is called Mercurialis sylvestris, by Tragus, Lonicerus, Cordus &amp; Thalius, &amp; Cynocrambe by Mat∣thiolus, Fuchsius, Dodonaeus, Camerarius and Lobel, who in one figure representeth both the male and female. Columna calleth it Mercurialis Canina, and Bauhinus Mercurialis montana testiculata &amp; spicata, neither of them both thinking it worthy of the name of Cynocrambe, for that they knew it was not answerable to Dioscorides his Cynocrambe, who doth not make it a Mercury, whereof there is male and female, for if it had beene so, hee would have remembred it, but he putteth it indefinitely not naming either male or female: The third is called by Bauhinus, who first set forth the figure and description thereof in his Matthiolus, Cyncrambe vera Dioscorides, and Pona in his description of Mont Baldus, Cynocrambe legitima Belli. Caesalpinus tooke it to be an Alsine, and Columna calleth it Alsines facie plantanova. The fourth is generally taken of all to be the Phyllum of Dioscorides and Theophrastus. Bauhinus calleth it Phyllum testiculatum and spicatum, as he did the former Mercuries: The last is called of Tragus Mercurialis sylvestris altera, in his Chapter of Mercury, but putteth the figure thereof in the chapter of Esula; of Lonicerus Tithymalus sylvestris: of Camerarius, Tabermontanus, Lobel, and Gesner, Noli me tangere, who also calleth it Milium Caprearum. It is also called Perficaria siliquosa of Camerarius, Thalius, Lugdunensis and Lobel; of Dodonaeus Impatiens herba, of Caesalpinus Catanance altera, of Columna Balsamita altera, and of Lugdunensis Chrysaea; Bauhinus calleth it Balsamina lutea, sive Noli me tangere. I have called it Noli me tangere, and placed it in the Chapter of Mercuries, and given it an English name, proper for it as I take it, let o∣thers call it as they please. 
The Vertues. The decoction of the leaves of Mercurie, or the juyce thereof taken in broth or drinke, and with a little Se∣gar put to it, to make it the more pleasant, purgeth chollericke and waterish humors: Hippocrates commendeth it wonderfully for womens diseases, which none of the Physitians of our dayes, I thinke ever put in practise, for he applyed it to the secret parts to ease the paines of the mother, and used both the decoction of it to procure womens courses, and to expell the after birth, and the fomentation or bathing for the same causes; he also gave the decoction thereof with Myrrhe or pepper, or used to apply the leaves outwardly against the strangury, and the diseases of the reines and bladder; he used it also for sore and watering eyes, and for the deafenesse and paines in the eares, by dropping the juyce thereof into them, and bathing them afterwards in white wine; the decoction thereof made with water and a cocke chicken, is a most safe medicine to be taken against the hot in of agues: it also clenseth the breast and lungs of flegme troubling them, but it doth a little offend the stomacke; the juyce or distilled water thereof, cast or snuffed up into the nostrils, purgeth the head and eyes of catarrhes and rheumes, that distill downe from the braines into the nose and eyes, as also sometimes into the eares: Some use to drinke two or three ounces of the distilled water with a little Sugar put to it, in a morning fasting, to open the body, and to purge it of grosse viscous and melancholicke humours; as also mixing it with May dew taken from Rose bushes, and Manna dissolved therein, for the same purpose, which thereupon some call Rh ∣domanna, which purgeth choller also; It is wonderfull (if it be not fabulous) that the ancient writers, Dioscori∣des, Theophrastus and others doe relate, that if women use these herbes either inwardly or outwardly, for three dayes together after conception, and that their courses be past, they shall bring forth male or female children, according to that kinde of herbe that they use: Matthiolus saith that the seede of both the kindes of Mercury, that is both male and female, boyled with wormewood and drunke, cureth the yellow Iaundise, in a most spee∣die and merveilous manner: the leaves themselves or the juyce of them rubbed upon wartes or bound unto them for a certaine time, doth take them cleane away: the juyce mingled with some Vinegar, helpeth all run∣ning scabs, tetters, ringwormes and the itch; Galen saith that who so will apply it outwardly in manner of a pultis, to any swellings or inflammations, shall finde it to have a digesting quality, that is, it will disgest and spend the hu∣mours, that was the cause of the swelling, and alay the inflammations proceeding thereupon, it is frequently and to very good effect given in glisters, to evacuate the belly from those humors that be offensive therein, and wor∣keth as well after that manner, as if so much Sene had beene put into the decoction. The common Dogges Mer∣cury is seldome used, but may serve in the same manner, and to the same purpose that the other is put to, for purging waterish and melancholicke humors. The childes Mercury, although no other hath written of any pur∣ging qualitie in it, yet the forme thereof so like unto Mercury, and the saltish acide taste, should demonstrate in my opinion an irritating quality: Theophrastus and Dioscorides have onely mentioned the childing quality, for wo∣men to beare either males or females, that use this herbe, according as is before sayd of French Mercury. The Noli me tangere, or the Quicke in hand, hath a stronger purging quality, but it is by vomite, and therefore I thinke Lonicerus and Tragus, have put it under the names of Tithymales, as neerest partaking of their nature, which caused Lobel and Pena to say, it was venemous and deadly, and yet say it wanteth not his prayse for other effects, but shew not what they are: Camerarius in horto saith some doe apply the distilled water of the hearbe upon the places pained with the goute, with good successe. 
CHAP. LXV. Malva. Mallowes. T Here are three kinds of Mallowes, one with whole leaves, but little incised or cut in on the edges, called Malva; an other more deepely jagged or cut called Alcea, the third more soft in handling called Al∣thaea. Of each of these three divisions the varieties shall be reckoned together by themselves, that so each kinde may be separated. Some of each of these kindes I have set forth in my former Booke, whose des∣criptions neede not to be here repeated, and those are Malva Hispanica flore carneo amplo: The Spanish blush Mallow, Alcea vulgaris flore carneo, Vervaine Mallow with blush flowers. Alcea peregrina sive Vesicaria, Venice Mallow, or good night at noone. Alcea fruticosa pentaphyllea, cinque foile Mallow. Sabdariffa seu Alcea Ameri∣cana, Thorny Mallow. Bamia seu Alcea Aegyptia. The Mallow of Egypt. Althea frutex flore albo vel purpuru, Shrub Mallow with a white or purple flower. Malva hortensis Rosea simplex &amp; multiplex diversorum colorum Hol∣lihockes single and double of many colours; and Malva crispa, French Mallowes; yet the figures of some of them that are next at hand I will insert here: those which remaine to be intreated of I shall remember in this Chapter. 
Divisio prima. The first Division. 1. Malva vulgaris flore purpureo. The common Mallow with purplish flowers. The common Mallow hath many large soft greene roundish leaves, yet somewhat cornered and dented about the edges, standing upon long foote stalkes, next the ground, from among which rise up, diverse round greene stalkes growing in time to be three or foure foote high, especially in good grounds, and to be more hard and al∣most woddy, especially at the bottome, divided into many branches, towards the tops and with many lesser leaves, and more divided upwards; where it bringeth forth many flowers, standing in soft huskes, which flowers twine themselves, at their first shooting forth before they open themselves into fine large, broad pointed leaves, of a fine delayed purplish red colour, with many stripes or veines running thorough every leafe, of a deeper colour, which maketh the flower seeme very beautifull: after which come round flat cases, with many blackish seede, set in order, round about in them: the roote is long and white, growing downe deepe into the ground, tough and somewhat wooddy. 
2. Malva vulgaris flore albo. Common Mallow with white flowers. This Mallow groweth like the former, both for leaves and height of stalkes, the cheefest difference consisteth in the flowers, which are not fully so large as the former, and are of a pure white colour, without any stripe or veine, of any other colour running thorough them, the seede and rootes are also a like. 
3. Malva sylvestris minor. Small wilde Mallow. This small Mallow lyeth with his branches upon the ground, having many smaller and rounder leaves, not cut in, or very seldome, and lesse dented on the edges than the common: the flowers hereof are very small and white: the seede and rootes are like the common. 
4. Malva Montana. The mountaine Mallow. The mountaine Mallow, hath his lower leaves as large as the common wilde Mallow but longer, with some round divisions or cuts therein, but not deepe, somewhat like unto an Ivye leafe: the stalke groweth not so great and high as the common, with smaller leaves thereon, upwards somewhat rounder and lesse: the flowers are like the common, and so is both seede and roote. 
5. Malva trimestris sive Aestiva. The Sommer Mallow. The Sommer Mallow hath soft round greene leaves, without divisions, yet dented about the edges, somewhat paler underneath; the stalke riseth up to but halfe a yard high, bearing smaller leaves, and a little divided some∣what like those of Marsh Mallowes: the flowers are of a paler purplish colour then the common and lesser, the bottome of whose leaves are of a deeper colour, standing upon longer foote stalkes, and not so many together, the seede is small, and so is the roote, and perisheth with the first cold or frost that commeth; but sometimes if the Sommer be kindly, it giveth his ripe seede, before any frosty nights doe come. 
6. Malva Arborea Tree Mallow. The tree Mallow groweth with us to be a great tall tree more likely than an herbe, having his stemme some∣what wooddy, and oftentimes so great in compasse that no man can graspe it round with both his hands, the Malva vulgaris &amp; crispis folijs. Ordinary and French Mallowes. 
Malva Hispanica flore carneo ample. Spanish blush Mallowes. 
5. Malva trimestris sive Aestiva. Summer Mallow. 
Malva Rosea simplex. Single Hollihoches. 
Malva Rosea multiplex. Double Hollihockes. 
8. Malva rosea arborea Indica simplici &amp; duplici flore. The Indian tree Hollihocke with single and double flowers. 
leaves are twise as great and large, as any common Mallow, and as soft and woolly in handling as the Marsh Mal∣low but not so white or woolly, yet often somewhat crumpled about the edges: this flowreth not the first yeare of the springing up with us, but in the second Sommer, if the sharpe Winter hath not rotted his stalke in the first yeare (not then being growen to his ful strength) being more tender than afterwards; it spreadeth some branches, with leaves or them, but smaller, among which stand faire great and large deepe purple flowers, with stripes and veines in them like the common Mallow; after which rise such like round cases, with blackish seede in them, but larger according to the proportion of the plant, but seldome commeth to maturity in our countrie: the roote and stalke perish usually with us, after it hath abiden two yeare at the most with us; whereas in the warmer and na∣turall places, it abideth diverse yeares, and groweth to be as high and great as many trees.
1. Doronicum vulgare. The most common supposed Wolfes bane. The most common Doronicum, (that hath beene longest known unto us, and kept in our gardens, many of the rest being found of later yeares) hath diverse leaves rising from the roote, every one standing upon a long foote stalk, which are somewhat round, greater than the Romane Sowbread leaves, soft and gentle in the handlig, some∣what hayrie and of a fresh greene colour; from among which riseth up diverse greene roundish stalkes about a yard high or more, parted at the toppe, sometime into one or two branches, every one carrying a large flower, somewhat like the Corne Marigold, but much larger, having many narrow long yellow leaves, as a border set about a middle thrumme, somewhat yellower, which when it falleth away, turneth into small whitish doune; 1. Doronicum vulgare. The most common supposed Wolfes bane. 
2. Doronicum minus. The lesser supposed Wolfes bane. 
3. Doronicum brachiata radice. Scorpion rooted supposed Woolfes bane. 
with very small blackish seede, which is carryed away with the winde: the rootes are small, thicke and short, creeping or lying un∣der the upper crust of the earth, with divers small fibres, shooting from them downe into the ground and increasing divers such like tuberous rootes round about it, which are tender and not hard somewhat whitish and with some joynts therein, and greenish on the upper side next unto the upper face of the ground: Some would make these rootes to resemble a dead Scorpion, because of the joynts, which are like scales therein; the former part next the leaves, being thicke to be the body, and the other part, being small to be the taile, which is somewhat sweete in taste, and a little bitter, with some austere clamminesse joyned therewith. 
2. Doronicum minus. The lesser supposed Woolfes bane. The lesser Doronicum hath divers leaves, longer and narrower, then the former, somewhat like unto Ribwort Plantaine, but hai∣ry and of a yellowish greene colour; the stalkes are slender and rise nothing so high, nor are much branched, but carrying the like yellow flowers as the former, somewhat paler: the roote is small not like the former being without those joynts so plaine in them. 
3. Doronicum brachiata radice. Scorpion rooted supposed Woolfes bane. This Scorpion rooted Doronicum hath large round hairy leaves, like the first, somewhat waved or unevenly dented about the ed∣ges, of a sadder greene colour and somewhat bigger; the stalkes have divers narrower leaves thereon, the flowers are yellow and the leaves thereof dented at the ends, the seede is like unto the other, but the roote creepeth not so much, but is somewhat lon∣ger thrust downe into the ground, with joynts growing up∣wards, branched as it were on each side with young rootes, and ending in a small point, with divers long fibres set unto them. 
4. Doronicum Austriacum angustifolium. Small supposed Woolfes bane of Austria. This small Doronicum of Austria hath fewer leaves then the se∣cond, but soft, long, narrow and hairy like them, greene and some∣what shining on the upper side, and of a paler greene underneath of a sharper biting taste: the stalke is shorter then it, hairy also but smooth, and striped all along; whereon are set divers narrower leaves, compassing it at the bottome, up to the top, where there standeth but one large flower for the most part, like unto the other Doronicum, but of a deeper yellow colour, which turneth into downe, with small blacke seede therein, and carryed away with the winde, in the like manner: the roote is small and joynted somewhat like unto it, but not increasing so fast, with divers long fibres thereat. 
5. Doronicum humile Stiriacum Clusii. The low Stirian supposed Woolfes bane of Clusius. This low Doronicum hath many large and somewhat round leaves, dented about the edges like unto the third sort before expressed, standing upon high footestalkes: the stalke is lower then it, having some leaves thereon longer and narrower then those below, and at the top (not having any branches) one flower larger then any of the former, but else like unto them, with many long yellow leaves, set about a middle brownish yellow thrum: the roote is somewhat long, blackish on the outside and joynted but not plainely to bee discerned, the joynts ri∣sing upwards, and not downewards as they doe, in most of the rest, with some other rootes, growing from it, and having many long white fibres underneath it. 
6. Doronicum Germanicum. The supposed Woolfes bane of Germany. The Doronicum of Germany hath divers broad hairy leaves, of a yellowish greene colour on the upper side, and whitish and smooth underneath, lying on the ground somewhat like unto broad Plantaine leaves, or rather like unto the Crossewort Gentian, having some long ribbes therein: among these leaves riseth up a stalke, and some∣times many, bearing long leaves, at every joynt; at the top it brancheth forth into two or three or more parts sometimes, bearing every one a faire large flower, set as it were in a rough cup, which consisteth of many pale yellow leaves, dented at the ends, as a pale or border about the middle, which is made of many small flowers, of foure leaves a peece, of a deepe yellow colour, as it were the thrum; ( Bauhinus saith that there hath a so hereof beene found in Stiria ) with blew flowers, which being past, the head turneth into downe, and is carried away with the small blackish seede therein: the roote is small, yet joynted like the former sorts, but not so plainely to be discerned, of a sweete sent and a bitter biting taste, having many fibres underneath it, and giving many of sets, whereby it is increased. 
7. Doronicum maximum Austriacum. The greatest supposed Woolfes bane of Austria. This great Doronicum of Austria shooteth forth many faire greene leaves from the roote, lying round about it, which are broad, hairy, rough and somewhat round pointed at the ends, every one standing upon a long foote∣stalke: but those which are set upon the stalkes, which rise three or foure foote high or more, are larger and lon∣ger then those below, set without order, and compassing it at the bottome like Tobacco leaves, all of them a lit∣tle unevenly dented about the edges: the flowers upon the toppes of the leaves of the severall branched stalkes, are large and yellow like unto the common Doronicum, which after they are past, the greenish seedes that lie among the downe, are conveyd both away together with the winde; the roote is thicke and joynted like the rest, encreasing as much as any other. 
5. Doronicum bumile Stiriacum Clusii. The low Stirian supposed Woolfes bane, and the Doronicum rootes of the Apothecaries shops. 
6. Doronicum Germanicum. The supposed Woolfes bane of Germany. 
7. Doronicum maximum Austriacum. The greatest supposed Woolfes bane of Austria. 
10. Doronicum Americanum. Supposed Woolfes bane of America. 
 
8. Doronicum Helveticum incanum. The hoary Helvetian supposed Woolfes bane. The hoary Doronicum of Helvetia, riseth up with a round hollow greene stalke, a foote high or more, bearing thereon divers leaves somewhat longer and more pointed, then those that grow next the ground, some whereof are round, and others long and round, yet all dented about the edges, of a pale greene colour on the upperside, with a white rib in the middle, and of a mealie hoarinesse underneath, as the footestalke is also: the flower is great and yellow that standeth at the top of the stalke, with many long narrow leaves, not dented at the edges, but smooth compassing the middle thrumme: the seede is carried away with the downe, like unto others: the roote is small, joynted, and as it were scaled like the rest. 
9. Doronicum Helveticum humile. The low supposed Woolfes bane of Helvetia. This low Doronicum of Helvetia or Switzerland, hath many thicke, darke, greene, hairy leaves, and of a paler greene underneath, lying next the roote being somewhat long and round and dented about the edges; from a∣mong which riseth up a short hairy stalke, not halfe a foote high, with very long and narrow leaves set thereon, parted at the toppe into two or three small branches, bearing yellow flowers, of a meane size or bignesse like unto the rest. 
10. Doronicum Americanum. Supposed Woolfes bane of America. This strange Doronicum hath divers very large leaves next the ground somewhat rough and hairie, divided in∣to five parts, each part being five or six inches long, and two inches broad, pointed at the ends, and deepely denied on the edges into three parts: from among which riseth up sundry smooth round stalkes set with the like leaves, but somewhat lesser and lesse divided, and some little or not at all: at the top of every stalke standeth one large yellow flower like unto the former, the bordering leaves being long and narrow, and the middle thrum brow∣nish, and made as it were of many flowers set thicke together: the roote is great thicke and hard, fastned with many long strings, I have here given you two figures thereof, the one taken by us, the other by the French. 
12. Radices Doronici vulgo officinarum, &amp; Radices Mechini rarioris Lobelii, pro Doronico genuino Arabum a Pona exhibitae. The Apothecaries Doronicum, and the true one of the Arabians as Pona thinketh. I have here likewise particularly given you the figures of the rootes of two sorts of Doronicum as they are sup∣posed to be, the formost generally received by all or most both writers &amp; Apothecaries for their medicines, whose description is set downe before: the other Pona in his Italian Baldus setteth forth supposing it to be more probably the true Doronicum of the Arabians then the former, which doth not agree thereunto either in forme or quality, for Avicen in the 200. Chap. of his second Booke, and Serapio in the 325. Chap. of his Booke of simples have described their Doronicum to be a roote of the bignesse of ones thumb, of a hard and heavy substance, of a yel∣lowish colour on the outside and browne within, with some white veines, and is hot and dry in the third degree: thus Serapio, but saith Pona, I know no other roote more properly doth represent that Doronicum, then this sort of Mechinus, which is often found among the Mechinus or blacke Ginger, that is brought us chiefly from Brasil, which Lobell calleth Mechini rara varietas, having divers circular knotted lines as it were like joynts on the out∣side, 10. Doronicum Americanum. The supposed Woolfes bane of America. 
12. Doronicum antiqu m Pona. Lobel his rare varieties of Mechinus and the Ara∣bians Doronicum by Pona.
and is firme and heavy full of white veines therein when it is broken: it is also very sharpe, quicke, biting and aromaticall in taste, and therefore saith he, having all the notes of their Doronicum, it can be no other then the true and legitimate Doronicum, from whom the reasons being so pregnant, I know not well how to dis∣sent, yet leave it to others to judge as they shall finde cause. 
The true rootes of the Doronicum in the Apothecaries shops are misset, which should have beene in this table, but are expressed in the fift figure. 
The Place. The first groweth on the hills in Savoy, beyond the lake Lemanus, and in other places, both of France and Germany: the second groweth not farre from Burdeaux in France. The third on the wooddy hills about Trent, and in Austria also as Clusius saith: the fourth Clusius saith he found on divers hills in Austria. The fift likewise about Newberg in Styria. The sixt is found in many places of Germany, in the medowes and elsewhere, and as it is thought, on the hilly grounds in Northumberland. The seaventh groweth in many places, both of Au∣stria and Hungary, as Clusius saith: the eight upon the Alpes in Switserland: the ninth also on the same hills about Valesia, and the last came from the French colony about the river of Canada and noursed up by Vespasian Ro∣bin the French Kings Herbarist at Paris, who gave M r . Tradescant some rootes that hath encreased well with him and thereof hath imparted to me also. 
The Time. They all flower early for the most part, that is in May, and some of them in the Autumne againe. 
The Names. The name Doronicum which is given to all these plants is derived from the Arabian Doronigi or Durungi, for it is not remembred by any of the ancient Greeke or Latine Authors, except Actuarius who calleth it Carna∣badion; divers have accounted it among the Aconites, as Matthiolus (calling it Pardalianches, and referreth it to Pliny and Theophrastus their Aconites, whose rootes are like Scorpions, as the outward face or forme of these are, which bred the suspition; when as the properties of these are not like their Aconites, to kill wilde beasts speedily with their Darts, or Arrowes dipped in the juice thereof; or to be a caustike herbe, able to eate away the flesh of a wound, and cause it to fall away:) who having received it from Cortusus of Padoa, defameth it to all the world, to be a poyson not fit to be used inwardly in mans body, and that those Physitians that follow the Arabians to put it into Cordiall medicines, doe very ill, and little respect the health of man, because both as Cortusus writeth unto him, and himselfe upon tryall made as he saith found to be true, that it will kill dogs, the rootes being given them in flesh, which report of theirs how soever be true in dogs, may notwithstanding be not true, being given to other beasts, and may be safely given and without danger to men: for divers things that are wholsome to man, and which we often use without scruple, or doubt of danger, as Aloes and bitter Almonds, yet given to a Fox, either of them will quickly kill him, as Plutarch reporteth; and the Camaeleon Thistle as Fabius Columna setteth it downe, will kill dogs and swine, &amp;c. and yet is a most soveraigne Antidote against the poyson of Serpents, the roote being drunk in wine, and besides killeth the wormes in children with∣out any further harme, as also even Muske, Saffron, and other things being taken in two great a quantity will kill any man: others hold them to be wholsome, as it hath beene certainly and often found true by good experi∣ence, that divers of these sorts are very effectuall to helpe many diseases in men, as you shall heare by and by, and therefore it is not probable, that there lyeth any venemous quality hid underneath those good ones; and be∣sides, Gesner saith that he had taken much and often thereof, and had given it to others without any danger or harme; and Pena and Lobel reporteth that Iohannes de Vroede did eate many rootes thereof without any danger, or sense of paine thereby: and therefore doth advise others, not to abdicate the plant wholly from mans use, nor to discredit such famous Arabian authors, that have appointed it to be put into Electuarium de gemmis, Electua∣rium ex Aromatibus, and Diamoschum dulce, and others, as the most Cordiall medicines of all other, and where∣of there was never harme taken whosoever did use them, or to say that any that followed their prescriptions, were guilty of the death of any man. Dodonaeus was also of the same minde with Matthiolus for a while, but afterwards found his owne errour and reclaimed it; but it is much doubted, whether this be the Doronicum of the Arabians or no; for Franciscus Pona in his Italian description of Mont Baldus, as I said before, refuseth it, accounting it an auncient received errour, and therefore giveth us the figure of Lobels Mechinus, for the true Doronicum, the faculties of these being quite contrary to their Doronicum, for besides a little sweetenesse and clammy taste in the roote; it hath little or no other taste, except that being fresh, some of them have an aro∣maticall, and some a bitterish sweet taste, like unto juice of Licoris: but the roots of this Mechinus are of an aroma∣ticall, sharpe &amp; biting taste: the joynts in the roots of the ordinary Doronicum, very likely might cause the later age of the world to erre, in taking it to be the right: but leave we these controversies, and attend the varietie of names and properties of these sorts of Doronicum, which may better perswade us of the good to be reaped from them: The first is as I said, the most common, both in the Gardens of our country and others, and is most usually called Doronicum Romanum of all writers, or with a sweete roote. The second Clusius and others call Doronicum minus and Angustifolium, Bauhinus calleth it Doronicum plantaginis folio. The third Matthiolus calleth Aconitum Par∣dalianches Plinij, Dodonaeus Pardalianches alterum, Pena and Lobel, Doronicum Brachiata radice; but Clusius set∣teth out the figure more truely, &amp; calleth it his second Doronicum Austriacum. The fourth is Clusius his first Do∣ronicum Austriacum sive minus, and Bauhinus Doronicum longifolium hirsutie asperum. The fift is Clusius his fourth Doronicum, which he calleth Stiriacum, and Bauhinus Doronicum latifolium flore magno. The sixt is called diversly, by divers; Matthiolus calleth it Alysma or Damasonium, and thinketh it to be the right Alysma of Dioscorides ▪ and so doe Camerarius and Gesner, (who calleth it also Caltha Alpina) Fena and Lobel call it Nardus Celtica al∣tera, as Rondeletius did take it to be. Lugdunensis setteth it forth under the name of Ftarmica montana, as divers did call it there abouts, as he saith, and yet setteth it forth againe under the title of Alysma Matthioli. Gerard likewise hath set it forth in two severall places, under two severall titles, the one under Calendula Alpina, the other under Chrysanthemum latifolium. Clusius calleth it Doronicum Germanicum, and saith his Pannonicum or Doronicum sextum, is the same or very like, for both he and divers others doe set it forth, with smooth, and hairy leaves, also as it is found so growing in divers and sundry places. The seventh is Clus us his Doronicum Austria∣dum tert , which Bauhinus calleth Doronicum maximum foliis caulem amplexantibus: The eighth and ninth Bauhinus setteth forth in his Prodomus and Pinax, under the same titles they doe here beare: the tenth Robinus of Paris called Aconitum Americanum, and Cornutus Aconitum Helianthemum Canadense; but the upper leaves on the stalke, with the flowers and roote, declare it to come nearer to the sorts of Doronicum; the last are as the titles declare them. They may all be called in English, either Doronicum according to the Latine name, for so doe both Italians, Spaniards, French, Germanes; and Dutchmen; or as I have entituled them supposed Wolfes banes, both that the name may differ from the former Wolfes banes, and to give you to understand that they are but supposed to be dangerous; because as I said before the outward forme of the rootes, like unto Shrimpes or Scor∣pions, and the leaves round like unto the leaves of Sow bread or Cowcumbers, have caused many to thinke them to be the Aconites of Theophrastus and Dioscorides; but Columna hath treated very learnedly hereof in the 18. Chapter of his Booke of Plants, whereunto I referre you, for it were too tedious, to relate his sayings in this place. 
The Vertues. The true Doronicum is said to be a soveraigne Cordiall, and to resist the poyson both of beasts and other deadly medicines, to clense the breast and to helpe the cough, and to rid those humors, that cause paines in the sides: but our Doronicum, although it be not the true of Serapio and Avicen, yet it is no Aconite, as Matthiolus and others have supposed; for as is before said, both Gesner tooke it often, and a good quantitie at a time, even two drammes in powder, that he might find the operation of it, yet found no harme thereby; and Vroede, as Lobel saith tooke of it many times, without any harme; but what especiall good they found by it, is not remembred, for Gesner maketh not any mention thereof: yet the juyce thereof is found to be good, for those eyes that be hot and red, and full of paine, by reason of hot and sharpe rheumes, falling into them, to allay the heate, to take a∣way the rednesse, and to give ease of the paines and prickings in them. Clusius saith that the hunters, and shep∣heards that live in the mountaines of Austria, doe no lesse use and commend the rootes of the third and fourth sorts, here set forth, (which grow with them more frequently, than the others, at the least best known unto them,) then they doe the rootes of the yellow Auricula ursi, against the swimming or turning in the head, which is a disease subject to those places, rising from the feare and horrour, of such steepe downefalls and dangerous pla∣ces, which they doe and must continually passe, in seeking for and hunting the wild Goates, and therefore they there call them Gensswurtz, that is, Rupicapraria radix, as Clusius doth interpret it; and there hath beene found is their mawes a certaine stone, called by Bauhinus, in his Treatise thereof Bezoar Germanicum, in the middest of which stones, some of the rootes have beene found almost whole, which sheweth that they feede thereon wil∣lingly, without taking any harme thereby, and that the stones bred thereon are Cordiall, and so used: And I doe not thinke but any of the other sorts (seeing they are all in forme, and places of growing, one so like unto another) if triall were sufficiently made, would performe the same effect. For the sixt sort here expressed (which as I said is called Caltha Alpina of some, Alysma or Damosonium of others, and Doronicum Geranicum of others, of the people in the Alpes Mutterwurtz, as Iosias Simlerus saith, in his Commentarie of the Alpes, that is Matricaria, Mother wort, which they have found, and do continually use to procure womens courses, and to ease the paines and disea∣ses of the mother) is very effectuall against the poyson of the fish called Lapus marinus, as also the venemous biting of the Shrew, and the poyson of a Toade; and is also profitable for them that have eaten Opium, in any dangerous quantitie; it is given with good successe, to them that have the bloudy flixe, or any other paines or gripings in their body or bowells, by reason of sharpe humours gathered therein: it is also helpefull to those that have convulsions or crampes, and ach or paines in the joynts and sinewes, and is very powerfull to be taken with some wilde Carrot seede, to expell gravell, or the stone in the reines or kidnies, if the decoction thereof in wine or water, or the powder of the herbe and rootes be taken: it is applied also outwardly, to ease the paines and inflammations of apostumes and sores: the flowers hereof doe procure neesings. 
CHAP. IV. Ranunculus. Crowfoote. T Here are so many sorts of Crowfeete, some of the Woods, some of the Medowes, some of the Mountaines, some of the Water, some of the Rockes, and some of the Gardens; that to proceede in a methodicall manner, and to ease my selfe and the Reader of too much prolixitie, and intricasie, I thinke it best to distinguish or divide them into severall formes or orders, that so they may be the better apprehended and understood, for otherwise it would be too great a confusion, to huddle so many together: and because I have already set forth in my former Booke, many sorts, whose flowers being most beautifull and rare, were fittest to adorne that Garden; I shall not neede to describe any of them againe in this worke, but referre you thereunto to be informed of them: but in shewing you the rest, I will give you the figures of some of them, and of the Anemones which are nearest unto them, and so bring every of them into their severall order, and begin first with those of the Woods. 
Devisio prima. The first Division. Ranunculi nemorosi. Wood Crowfeete. 1. Ranunculus nemorosus albus simplex. The single white Wood Crowfoote. THe single white wood or wilde Crowfoote, riseth up with two or three stalkes, about an hand breadth high or better, about the middle whereof, come forth usually three stalkes of leaves, each being somewhat broad, hard and cut in on the edges into three parts, of a sad greene colour, and dented also; the stalke riseth up two or more inches high, bearing at the toppe one single flower, hanging downe the head for the most part made of five leaves, somewhat broad and almost round pointed, of a light blewish colour on the outside, before it be blowne open, but white afterwards, and more white on the inside, having a few white threds in the 1. Ranunculus nemorosus albus simplex. The single white Wood Crowfoote 
5. Ranunculus nemorosus flore luteo. The yellow Wood Crowfoote. 
middle, tipt with yellow, standing about a greene head, which in time growing ripe, is somewhat like other heads of Crowfeete, composed of many small seedes set together: the roote is usually of the bignesse of a wheate straw stalke, not growing downe deepe, but creeping longwise under the upper crust of the ground, spreading out into diverse small knobs like branches, of a darke browne colour on the outside, and white within, and of a sharpe biting taste, enflaming the mouth. 
2. Ranunculus nemorosus minimus albus. The least white Wood Crowfoote. This small wood Crowfoote, hath such like leaves as the former single white kind hath devided into three parts, and each of them into other againe, standing upon little long foote stalkes, but they are much lesser, so that the whole leafe hereof, is not much bigger than one of the Divisions, or parts of the other: the stalke is ve∣rie small with a few leaves thereon, in two places more devided than the lower, little more than two inches high: at the toppe standeth a white flower, consisting of sixe white leaves, with a few yellowish threds in the middle: the roote is small and long like unto the other. 
3. Ranunculus nemorosus flore carneo. The single blush wild Crowfoote. The single blush wilde Crowfoote, is both for forme, of growing, in stalkes, leaves, flowers, and rootes, like unto the former, so that untill it be in flower, there can hardly be any difference discerned, but when the flower appeareth, it sheweth it selfe much more reddish on the outside, and of a faire pale purple, or blush colour on the inside, which maketh it a distinct species of it selfe, differing from the rest. 
4. Ranunculus nemorosus flore purpureo caeruleo. The single purple Wood Crowfoote. This purple kinde is also like the other, and differeth from them chiefely in the stalke which is somewhat browner, and in the flower, which is of a pale purple blewish colour, like unto a pale violet flower; none of these have any great sent, but yet a little, and more than the yellow kinde which followeth next. 
5. Ranunculus nemorosus luteus. The yellow wood Crowfoote. The yellow Wood Crowfoote groweth in the same manner that the former doe, and with such like stalkes of leaves, but they are not so broad, nor so hard in handling, and are more deepely cut into more long and narrower parts, yet each also dented about the edges, especially towards the ends of the leaves, and of a darker greene co∣lour; from betweene these stalkes of leaves, shooteth forth sometimes but one, and sometimes two or three stalkes, with every one a flower thereon, somewhat smaller than the former, consisting of sixe usually or of seaven, and sometimes of eight leaves, which are of a faire pale yellow colour, with many yellow threds in the middle, the seede and rootes are like the former: this hath as I said least sent at all. Vnto these belong that sort of Anemone or rather Crowfoote that Dodonaeus calleth Trifolia having the leaves parted into three, Anemone triofolia Dodonaei. snipt about the edges with a whitish blush flower. 
6. Ranunculus nemorosus Moschatella dictus. The Muske Wood Crowfoote. The Muske Crowfoote, hath three or foure slender pale greene stalkes of leaves, somewhat devided at the edges of them, not halfe a foote high, and not of halfe that height in some places, very like unto those of the Hol∣low Anemone trifolia Dodonai. Dodonaeus his trefoile Anemone. 
6. Ranunculus nemorosus Muscatella dictu . The Muske Wood Crowfoote. 
7. Ranunculus nemorosus dulcis secundus Tragi. Sweete Wood Crowfoote. 
8. Ranunculus Virgin sis al . The white Virginia Crowfoote. 
roote, but smaller, and of a paller shining greene colour, from among which rise up one or two small stalkes with two such like leaves thereon, but smaller, and a little above them, a small round greenish yellow head, which spreadeth not into leaves, but into foure or five little mossie heads of threads, and so abideth a while, having no other flower, and passe away into many small kernelly seede; the roote is small and somewhat long, composed as it were of many small very shining white thicke scales, growing upwards, and having many white fibres at the head of them, of a little sweetish bitter, sharpe and binding taste, the leaves have a little sweete sent, some∣what like unto that kinde of Crannes bill, called Muske, yet more in the naturall places than in Gardens, when it is transplanted into them. 
7. Ranunculus nemorosus dulcis secundus Tragi. Sweete Wood Crowfoote. The first leaves of this kinde of Crowfoote, are round somewhat like unto Violet leaves, and not devided at all, but those that rise next after them, are more devided, somewhat like unto the leaves of the last, and so those that grow after and upon the stalkes are more devided than they: the flowers are small, and of a faire shining gold yellow colour, standing at the toppes of the stalkes, like unto the other common kindes of Crowfeete: af∣ter which come the seede many set together in a head, like a small Strawberry, as diverse other Crowfeete have; the roote is composed of many white strings and fibres, like unto others; neither roote or leafe of this kind, hath any sharpe or biting taste in them, but are almost insipide.
8. Ranunculus Virginensis albus. The white Virginia Crowfoote. The white Virginia Crowfoot shooteth forth from a reddish thick tuberous roote with some small fibres there∣to, three or foure somewhat large broad whitish greene leaves upon long foote stalkes, rent or torne on the edges for the most part, among which riseth up a slender round naked stalke, five or sixe inches high, bearing one white flower at the toppe made of tenne or of twelve small narrow and pointed leaves, with a few yellowish threds in the middle, set about a greenish umbone, which in time groweth to be a long slender pod, wherein is contained round whitish seede. 
The Place. The most sorts of these are found growing in Woods, Groves, and Orchards, some of them in our owne land in many places, the rest in many places of Italy, Germany, &amp;c. The fift is found as well by the brooke sides that passe by Medowes, as in Woods, and by hedge sides. 
The Time. They doe all flower very earely in the Spring, in March oftentimes, or at the furthest in Aprill. 
The Names. The first foure are diversly called of diverse Writers, for some call them Ranunculi nemorosi, or nemorum and syluarum, others Anemones sylvestres, or nemorosae: but in regard none of these do beare any cottony head of seede, as all the Anemones doe. I rather hold with their judgement, that referre them to the kindes of Ranunculus or Crowfoote; yet Clusius thinketh that they may be reckoned as kindes of wild Anemones, and saith that diverse did thinke them to be the Anemone sylvestris, that Theophrastus calleth Leimonia; the Italians call them Gengevo salvatico, wild Ginger, either because the rootes of them all, are very sharpe, hot and biting the tongue like Ginger, or rather as I thinke, because the rootes doe grow a little spreading into severall parts, very like un∣to Ginger. Tragus calleth them Ranunculus sylvestris, whereof there are two sorts as he saith, candidus and lu∣teus, one that beareth white flowers and an other yellow: Iohannes Thalius maketh them his third kinde of Crowfeete: Gesner calleth the first white one Ranunculus Phragmitis: I have therefore upon more mature ad∣vice entituled them Wood Crowfeete, and set them in the first ranke or division: the second is called by Bau∣hinus Ranunculus nemorosus Anemones flore minor: the third, fourth and fifth, have their names in their titles: the sixt is diversly also called, for Cordus calleth it Moschatella, and some other Moschatella pratensis that it may differ from the Moschatella caerulea of Lugdunensis called also Ageratum purureum; Lobel calleth it Ranunculus minimus Septentrionalium herbido muscoso flore. Tragus and Gesner make it to be a kinde of Aristolochia, for so they accounted the Radix Cava to be, and thereupon as Camerarius saith, divers did aswell account it a kinde of Capuos as small Crowfoote. Lugdunensis calleth it Denticulata from the forme of the roote which is made as it were of many teeth set together: The seventh is Tragus his second Ranunculus sylvestris, and Lobel his Ranunculus auri∣cemus. The last hath not beene set forth by any before. 
The Vertues. By reason of the hot sharpe biting taste of the foure first sorts, they are found no lesse to exulcerate the skinne being applied, then any of the other sorts of Crowfeete; yet they may be well used to eate away and consume hard tumours, as also to take away scarres and other blemishes, and wartes upon the hands, &amp;c. and to eate out the core of comes in the feete, the leaves or roote especially, being bruised and bound to for a certaine space: They are said also to clense foule ulcers that are much corrupted and stinking. The 6. and 7. sort are not knowne to be used. Vnto this Division appertaine those other sorts of Anemones sylvestres flore pleno, set forth in my former Worke. 
Divisio secunda. The second division. Ranunculi pratenses &amp; arvenses. Field Crowfeete. 1. Ranunculus pratensis dulcis. Sweete Meddow Crowfoote. THis Meddow Crowfoote (which I call sweet, not as Gerard doth because it smelleth sweete, but in regard it hath to sharpe biting or exulcerating taste, as most of the other Crowfeete have, but is so sweete and pleasant, that many in Germany and other places, doe stew the leaves, when they are young among other herbes, that serve to eate) hath diverse great broad, darke greene leaves, spread upon the ground, a little hayrie, cut in on the edges into five divisions, and a little dented also about, especially at the ends, and of a paler yellowish greene on the underside, of a sweete and not unpleasant taste, as I sayd before; among which rise up diverse hayrie stalkes, with some leaves upon them, much more divided and into smaller and narrower parts, than the lower: at the toppes whereof stand many faire yellow flowers, so like unto the ne t fielde Crowfoote, that is very violent, sharpe and exulcerating the skinne, that it can hardly 1. Ranunculus pratensis dulcis simples &amp; multiplex. Single and double meddow Crowfoote. 
2. Ranunculus pratensis acri . The common upright field Crowfoote. 
3. Ranunculus repens flore simplici &amp; pleno. The common creeping field Crowfoote with single and double flowers. 
4. Ranunculus arvorum. Crowfoote of the ploughed fields. 
be knowne from it: the seed likewise that followeth is like thereunto: the roote consisteth of many white strings. Of this sort there is one that beareth double flowers, Flore mul∣tiplici. and is planted in gardens onely for the beauty of the flowers. 
2. Ranunculus pratensis erectus acris vulgaris. The common upright field Crowfoote. The common field Crowfoote (whose branches stand upright and bend not downe againe unto the ground, neither creepe thereon, or spread, taking roote againe in diverse places, as the next doth) hath many large darke greene leaves, cut into diverse parts, somewhat like unto the last, that many might judge it a kind of the same; but the taste declareth the difference, which is very violent, sharpe and heating upon the tongue, and blistering the skinne, if it be layd thereon, no lesse than any exulcerating or corroding herbe can doe, and will have some blacke spots upon them now and then, but not in all, or all places; the flowers are many, and of a gold yellow co∣lour, after which come small heads of seedes: the roote is fibrous as other Crowfeete are. Flore pleno. Of this kinde also there is one with double flowers, which I have set forth in my former booke. 
3. Ranunculus pratensis repens The common creeping field Crowfoote. This creeping Crowfoote, that groweth commonly in fields and gardens also, is very like unto the last descri∣bed Crowfoote, both for leafe; flower, seede, and roote, but that this is more hayrie and creepeth with his bran∣ches upon the ground, taking hold by small white fibres which it shooteth forth at the joynts, and spreadeth farre thereon, his branches also rather leaning then standing upright, or rising so high but the yellow flower, Flore pleno. and sharpe biting taste of the leaves is almost equall with the former. Of this kinde there is also one with double flowers nuursed in gardens. 
4. Ranunculus arvorum. Crowfoote of the plowed lands. This Crowfoote hath diverse smaller leaves, than any of the former, divided into many narrower parts, of an overworne greene colour; the stalke is about a foote or more high, bearing some leaves thereon, more jagged than the lower, and more divided at the toppe into other branches, bearing pale yellow flowers after which come rough pointed seedes, set in heads many together: the roote is composed of many white fibres or strings. 
5. Ranunculus bulbosus sive tuberosus. Knobbed Crowfoote. The knobbed or round rooted Crowfoote, hath diverse leaves rising from the roote, much more cut in and di∣vided than any of the former except the last, every one standing on a short footestalke, of an overworne greene co∣lour, among which rise up diverse slender stalkes, a foote, or halfe a yard high, with some leaves thereon at the joynts, more divided, and into longer and narrower parts than those below; at the toppes whereof, stand se∣verall faire gold yellow shining flowers, made of five leaves like the former sorts, with many threds in the mid∣dle, standing about a greene head, which after the flowers are past, groweth to be more rough or pricking than the former: the roote is white and round, of the bignesse sometime of a Wallnut, and often much lesse, being no 5. Ranunculus bulbosus. Knobbed Crowfoote. 
Ranunculus Anglicus bulbosus. Batchelours buttons. 
bigger than a beane, or sometimes an hasell nut, with some long fibres at the ends especially of it, of a m sharpe biting taste than any of the former. Bulbosus Auglicus. 
Of this kinde is that thought to be, that beareth double yellow flowers one out of another, and called A g , set forth in my former garden, whose figure is here extant also. As also one whose flower is single and red like an Orange. Bulbosus flore rubro simplici. 
6. Ranunculus Echinatus Creticus. Small prickly headed or Crowfoote of Candye. This small Crowfoote hath many stalkes, rising from a threddy roote, round and smooth, full of branches, scarse rising a foote high, at every joynt standeth one broad sad greene crumpled leafe, upon a very long foote stalke: the flowers at the toppes are small, and of a pale yellow colour; and the heades of many small seedes and browne set together, are somewhat sharpe and prickely. 
7. Ranunculus Apuleii quibusdam. The small early Crowfoote of Apuleius. This small early Crowfoote, which some take to be the Batrachium of Apuleius, hath diverse small and she leaves, lying upon the ground, not so much divided as the last, but cut into three divisions, for the most part, each of them dented at the ends, and standing upon short foote stalkes, of an inch or two long, compassing one another at the bottomes of them: from among these leaves rise up diverse weake stalkes, bowing and leaning downe to the ground againe; at the joynts whereof grow such like leaves, as grow below, standing each of them upon his short foote stalke, and with them also commeth forth at each joynt, a small short stalke, bearing a flower con∣sisting of five leaves, of a faire pale yellow colour, with diverse yellow threds in the middle; after the flowers are past, there follow five or sixe small cods or hornes, pointed and crooked at the ends, wherein lye f brownish round seede, somewhat like those of the Winter Wolfes bane: the roote from the head thereof, shooteth forth many white fibres, whereby it taketh fast hold on the ground, encreasing into severall heade both rootes and leaves are no lesse sharpe and biting than any of the former. 
8. Ranunculus pratensis rotundifolius Bonomensis. Meddow Crowfoote of Bononia. The leaves that rise from this blackish threddy rooted Crowfoote, are round soft and hayrie, dented abou the edges of a sad greene colour, and about an inch broad, standing upon very long foote stalkes, but those the grow upon the stalke are larger, and for the most part round also, a little divided into some parts, but not to the middle: the stalke is about a foote high, bending a little downe to the ground, and as it were creeping, divided into smaller branches, with large leaves at the joynts, standing upon long foote stalkes, and small pale yellow flowers set on the toppes of them, with a few yellow threds in the middle about a greene head, which growing to be ripe, hath many sharpe or prickely browne seedes set together.
The Vertues. The first of these kindes, being of no sharpe or biting taste, is held to be harmelesse; for the Germanes as Tragus saith, use to eate it familiarly among other herbes: but the others are sharpe and doe exulcerate the skinne, especially the fift kinde more than any of the rest, and therefore not to be used inwardly in any case: the second and third sorts here expressed, are oftentimes used to be laid to the wrists of the hands, to drive away agues, the leaves being bruised, with a few cornes of bay salt, and a little glasse of windowes, beaten small and mixed to∣gether. Camerarius saith that they in Germany used to apply the roote of the fift kinde to plague sores, to draw them to maturity and breake them, yet it is no other likely but the other sharpe rootes will doe the like, for they will breake tumours and draw impostumes being wisely applied; and Tragus saith, that even those that are not sharpe, doe discusse and dissolve hard tumors in any part of the body, being applied: a peece of the round roo∣teed Crowfoote put betweene those teeth that doe ake, or into an hollow tooth, taketh away the paine, but many times, it either breaketh those that are hollow, or causeth them to fall out: some write, that applied to the finger, by causing more paine therein, than is felt, by the touthach, it taketh away the paine: the decoction of the leaves of the field Crowfeete, healeth scabs and the itch, but they must not be suffered to abide long upon the places; it is likewise used to stay the falling of the haire, the head being washed therewith, being made warme, but not to rest thereon above two or three houres, and then washed off with fresh warme water: it is also said that if the roote be bruised, and applied unto a foule ulcer, it will clense and take away all the filthy and corrupt matter therein, leaving the sore faire to be healed up with other convenient things, but it must not lie long to the sore lest it worke too forciblie: all these sharpe Crowfeete, have the same operation to take away wartes, or the scabbed ruggednesse of nailes, markes, spots, and blemishes in the skin, and all the other properties attributed to these sorts of Crowfeete, mentioned in the former division: besides being mixed with swines dung, they breake Scrophulas, or the small kernells under the eares, and of the necke called the Kings Evill, and ap∣plyed to the Haemorrhoides or piles that swell and bleede not, helpeth to discusse or take, them away: but in no hand must it be applyed to those that are open and bleede. The distilled water of the herbe, whilst it is in flower, worketh safely to all the purposes aforesaid, and as some report is given with good successe inwardly, with some Holland pouther, or the species called Lithontribon, to provoke urine when it is stopped, and to breake the stone: the dryed rootes of most of them made into pouther, and put into the nose procureth neefing. 
Divisio tertia. The third Division. 1. Ranunculi Montani. Mountaine Crowfoote. OF some of these Crowfeete I have entreated in my former Booke, by the name of Ranunculus montanus humilior, of two sorts, and is the first small figure set here also. Ranunculus montanus albus minor flore simplici, which is the second figure here, and the double sort among the other garden sorts hereafter. Ranunculus Thalictri and Rutaceofolio both in one figure, being the third in place: and then Ranunculus Thalictri folio mi Asphodeli radice the fourth: and Ranunculus gramineus flore luteo simplici &amp; duplici the fift, which are not here againe described: but there are a great many other sorts which I will here bring to your consideration and speake of them. 
1. Ranuntulus montanus maximus albus. The greater white Mountaine Crowfoote. The great white Mountaine Crowfoote differeth from the lesser single white mountaine Crowfeete that is set forth in my former booke (whose figure I give you here in the second place) chiefly in these thing, that the leaves of this Crowfoote, being somewhat hairy and very large, are divided to the stalke into five parts, and each of them somewhat deepelier dented about the edges, resembling the leaves of the Globe Crowfoote, but larger and standing upon footestalkes, that are hairy and a foote long almost: the maine stalke is somewhat great and hairy, bare almost of leaves unto the top, where it brancheth out into flowers, under which stand at the joynt three large leaves, much more divided then those below: the flowers are many, each standing on a long footestalk very large and white, consisting of five leaves so large that the whole flower seemeth to bee as great as a single purple ringed Daffodill, and very sweete withall, having many yellow threds in the middle, standing about a greene head, whereon being ripe the seede groweth many set together; the roote is somewhat great and long, but as it were bitten off in the halfe, with many long blackish strings hanging thereat. 
2. Ranunculus montanus Pennai. The great purple mountaine Crowfoote. This great Crowfoote hath foure or five or more very large and hairy leaves, rising from the roote, set upon long hairy foote stalkes, each whereof is devided into five or more parts, deepely cut in unto the middle, dented likewise about the edges, and of a darke greene colour on the upper side, and grayish, or as it were hoary under∣neath, among which riseth up a strong round hollow stalke, hairy also, about a yard high, bearing a leafe onely at the top much divided, and from thence spreadeth into three or foure or more small branches, each sustaining a small leafe or two, about which standeth the flower, consisting of five round leaves of a purplish colour on the under side, and about the edges of the inside, but pure white on the rest of the inside; having many yellow threds in the middle, about a greene head, which beareth many flattish and blackish browne sharpe pointed seede: the roote is composed of many long fibres or strings, and hairy at it were at the head thereof. 
3. Ranunculus Plantaginis folio. Plantaine leafed Crowfoote. This Pyrenean Crowfoote hath three or foure leaves rising from the roote, set on pretty long footestalkes, be∣ing somewhat long and broad like unto Plantaine leaves, with ribs therein, but more pointed at the ends, not devi∣ded or dented about the edges, but smooth and plaine with some veines running through the length of them, and pointed at the ends of a whitish or grayish greene colour, circled at it were with a white downe: the stalke i round, firme, and greene, about a foote and a halfe high, bearing two or three longer leaves, broad at the bot∣tome and compassing the stalke, which devideth it selfe at the top, into two or three small branches, having every of them a small long leafe at the foote thereof, and a reasonable large flower at the head without any consisting of five white round pointed leaves, with many yellowish threds in the middle, and a round greene head, which afterwards growing ripe hath many seedes set together, like unto divers other sorts of Crowfoote Ranunculus Montanus humilior albus simplex &amp; duplex. Single and doublecow white mountaine Crowfoote. 
Ranunculus Montanus albus minor simplex. The lesser single white mountaine Crowfoot. 
the roote is composed of many white strings or fibres, fastned to a head which is somewhat hairy, and abideth many yeares, but the leaves perish quite in the end of Summer, and are renewed in the spring. 
4. Ranunculus Pyrenaeus albus duplex. Double white Crowfoote of the Pyrenean hills. This Crowfoote differeth little from the last but in the flowers which are not so many together, and consist of two rowes of white leaves. 
5. Ranunculus montanus Betonicae foliis. Mountaine Crowfoote with Betony like leaves. This small Crowfoote hath divers leaves rising from the roote, somewhat broad and long, full of small veines which make it seeme rugged every one upon a little short footestalke, roundly dented about the edges and round at the point or end, very like unto the leaves of Betony, but that they are smaller, of a brownish greene colour on the upper side, and of a silver white shining colour underneath: the slender hayrie stalke that riseth up in the middle of those leaves, doth scarse exceede the length of ones hand, bare or naked without any leaves unto the top, where it beareth one flower onely, like unto the last described single Crowfoote but smal∣ler, consisting of five small white leaves, pointed at the ends with some yellow threds in the middle, having five small greene leaves under it, as a huske wherein it is set: the seede is conteined in a small rough head like unto other Crowfeete: the roote is a small tuft of white Fibres, somewhat like unto the roote of Betony: the whole plant both leaves and rootes are bitter, with an exceeding austere or astringent binding taste, whereby it is judged not to be hurtfull or offensive, but rather acceptable to the stomacke, and may be profitable for moyst, and cold diseases thereof. 
6. Ranunculus graminaeus bulbosus. The bulbed grasseleafed Crowfoote. This bulbed grasseleafed Crowfoote hath divers very long and narrow, smooth, grayish, greene leaves, some∣what hairy at the bottome, and with some long veines therein; from among which riseth up a slender stalke, about a foote high, with two small long leaves thereon, not branched at all, but bearing out of a small huske of five greene parts, one small faire shining yellow flower, like unto other Crowfeete, as is the seede also, being many set together on a long head, and every one pointed with a crooked end: the roote is somewhat round at the bottome, with a long necke upward, covered with a blackish hairy coate or covering, with divers thicke and round Fibres growing underneath, thicker at the ends then at the heads with some small hairy fibres at the end of them: within that outer hairy coate is found a round bulbous roote, like unto that of Gladiolus or Corne Flagge, the one set upon the other which was the elder, and seemed as it were shrunke. 
7. Ranunculus gramineus perfoliatus. Thorough leafed grasse Crowfoote. This small thorough leafed grasse Crowfoote sendeth forth from a small fibrous roote, divers narrow grayish greene grassie leaves, about two inches long, yet somewhat broader then the last; from the middle of whom riseth up the stalke, scarse higher then the leaves, having two long leaves about the middle thereof, broad at the bottome and compassing the stalke, like unto that small kind of yellow Centory, that hath his name from that effect, which brancheth it false at the top, bearing two or three very small greenish yellow flowers, consisting of five broad leaves, somewhat foulded inward, and not layd fully open: the head of seede is small, but like unto Ranunculus nemorosus Thalictri &amp; Rutaceo folio. Medow Rue and Garden Rue leafed Crowfoote. 
Ranunculus Thalictri folio minor Asphodeli radicibus. Colombine leafed Crowfoot with Asphodill rootes. 
Ranunculus gramineus flore luteo simplici &amp; duplici. Yellow grasse Crowfoot single and double. 
Ranunculus montanus maximus albus. The great white mountaine Crowfoote. 
the grasse Crowfoote described in my former Booke. Folij lati∣usculis. Of this kinde there is another whose leaves are somewhat broader, and the flowers more spread open, and with sharper ends. 
8. Ranunculus pumilus alter angustifolius. Another small narrow leafed Crowfoote. There is another of this last kinde, which groweth a little bigger and higher, and beareth but one yellow flower upon the toppe of the stalke, larger than in any other of these three last grasse Crowfeete. 
9. Ranunculus Asphodeli radice flore luteo. Yellow Crowfoote with Asphodill rootes. I have in my former Booke set forth one of this kind, very like hereunto both for forme of flowers and rootes, whose figure you have before: this other differeth from it in the leaves (the former being somewhat broa∣der than this, very like unto the small Thalictrum ) which are very small, narrow, and much divided, very like unto the leaves of the greater Bulbocastanum, or earth Chesnut; some lying upon the ground, and others standing more upright, each standing upon a reddish hairy foote stalke, which with the leaves is very nigh halfe a foote long, in the middle of whom appeareth a greene head before the stalke is risen, and beareth it at the toppe there∣of, as it riseth; which when it is ripe ready to blow, sheweth to be but one faire shining yellow flower, (whereas the other hath many white ones) consisting of five round pointed leaves; with many yellow threds in the middle, standing about a greene head, which in time groweth somewhat longer than in other sorts of Crowfeete, having many crooked seedes set together thereon, but much smaller than in many of the other: the stalke is singular, not many, but hairy and reddish, seldome branched, but bearing two or three divided leaves towards the toppes, somewhat broader that those below, upon short footestalkes, at severall distances one above another, on both sides thereof: the roote is composed of diverse tuberous, round and somewhat long clogs, ending in a very long fibre, very like unto the other. 
10. Ranunculus alter saxatilis Asphodeli radice. The pale Crowfoote of Naples, with Asphodill roote. This Crowfoote of Naples, hath many thicke cloggie rootes, joyned together at the end, greater above and smaller downewards, of about a thummes length, with many small fibres among them, from whence the first leaves that rise up are broad, somewhat deepely cut in on the edges on both sides, but those that follow next are much more divided, and into many parts, each part cut in also and dented besides on the edges, and standing upon long foote stalkes, which are broader at the bottome than above, and compasse one another at the foote, for a little way upward, being somewhat hairy also, greene on the upperside and whiter underneath: the stalke is round and hairy, about a foote and a halfe high, having diverse leaves thereon, much more divided than those below; and at the joynts with the leaves toward the toppes come forth long branches, with small jagged leaves on them, under a small tuft of three or foure large pale flowers, of five broad or round pointed leaves, of the breadth of ones naile, with many yellow threds in the middle: the seede is small, round, flat and pointed, many set together on a long head. 
11. Ranunculus montanus hirsutus latifolius. Great hairy Mountaine Crowfootes. The first leaves of this Crowfoote are round, like those of Doves foote, very hairy, of a blackish greene co∣lour, and soft, divided or cut into three parts, each of them also parted into three smaller divisions, standing upon 2. Ranunculus montanus Pennaei. The great purple mountaine Crowfoote. 
3. Ranunculus plantaginis folio. Plantaine leafed Crowfoote.
long hairy footestalkes, yet those that follow are broader, more divided and hairy, among which riseth up a straked hollow stalke, a cubite and a halfe high, with diverse leaves set thereon, and parted toward the toppe into many branches, having small pale yellow flowers on them, like unto others of this kinde, and seede also in the like man∣ner, the roote is long made of many fibres. 
12. Ranunculus montanus lanuginosus folijs Ranunculi pratensis repentis. Woolly mountaine Crowfoote. The roote of this Crowfoote hath reddish strings or fibres, sending forth a small soft woolly stalke, about a cu∣bite high, devided into many branches, with pale greene leaves set thereon, being soft and woolly, and standing on woolly long footestalkes, an hand breadth long, devided into three principall parts, and each of them into others, and dented about the edges, very like unto those of the Medow creeping Crowfoote; the flowers hereof that stand at the toppes of the branches are yellow, but larger than the last. 
13. Ranunculus saxatilis magno flore. Rocke Crowfoote with large flowers. This Crowfoote hath many small leaves rising from a long fibrous roote, set upon long foote stalkes, scarse so broad as the naile of ones hand, parted into three 4 Ranunculus Pyraeneus albus duplex. Double white Crowfoote of the Pyrenian hills. 
5 Ranunculus montanus Be∣tonica foliis. Mountaine Crowfoote with Betony-like leaves. 
7. Ranunculus gramineus persoliatus. Thorough leafed grasse Crowfoote. 
Ranunculus alter non perfoliatus latifolius. 
8. Ranunculus pumilus angustifolius. Another small norrow leafed Crowfoote. 
small jagges, and they againe into two or three o∣ther, somewhat soft, and woolly: the stalke that riseth up among these, is scarse an hand breadth high, somewhat woolly also bearing but one large flower at the toppe, of a shining gold yel∣low colour, made of five leaves, with many deeper yellow threds in the middle. 
14. Ranunculus saxatilis folijs subrotundis. Rocke Crowfoote with roundish leaves. This small Rocke Crowfoote, hath a few some∣what round leaves spread upon the ground, thicke and hairy, scarse a nailes breadth, yet devided into small peeces, which also are cut in on the edges, standing upon short footestalkes, scarce an inch long: the slender woolly stalke that brancheth it selfe from the bottome, riseth not above halfe a foote high with some leaves at the foote of the branches, and many yellow flowers of five small leaves at the toppes: the roote is small and fi∣brous. 
15. Ranunculus minimus saxatilis hirsutus. The smallest hairy Rocke Crowfoote. This smallest Crowfoote spreadeth diverse ve∣rie small, and somewhat round hairy leaves, cut into three round parts, and dented about the edges, standing upon small long hairy foote stalkes, in the middle of which riseth up, a small slender hairy branched stalke, not above two or three inches high, with small yellow flowers, at the toppes, like unto the rest, and so is the seede that followeth, the roote likewise is small and fibrous. 
16. Ranunculus vilosissimus Monspeliacus. Small red hairy Crowfoote of Mompelior. This red hairy Crowfoote of Mompelier, hath a small roote made of many reddish fibres, from whence spring up diverse thicke small and hairy leaves, at the first being devided into diverse peeces, some whereof are round, and other sharpe pointed; but those that rise up with the hairy stalke, are devided into long and pointed peeces, and as it were prickly at the ends, but of an uneven length, some being longer and shorter than others; which stalke being of an hand breadth high, and branched at the toppe, hath a small devided leafe, at the foote of every of those small branches, that beare yellow flowers of a meane bignesse, like unto others of this sort, the whole plant is covered with red∣dish soft haires, that it seemeth as if it were reddish it selfe. 
The Place. All these sorts of Crowfeete grow upon the Mountaines, some in Germany, some on Mount Iura by Savoy, some by Mompelier, and others in the Kingdome of Naples, or on the Pyrenean hills, none of them being knowne to grow wild in our countrie. 
The Time. They doe all of them flower about May and Iune, and their seede is ripe quickly after. 
The Names. The first kinde which is of two sorts, Clusius maketh to be his second kinde of Mountaine Crowfoote, of two sorts, but this is the later of his. Lobel calleth it Aconitum Batrachoides, and is the fift Ranunculus montanus of Bauhinus in his Pinax which hee calleth Narcisci flore: the second is Clusius his third Mountaine Crowfoote, which he saith Dr. Penny a Physition of our London Colledge, sent him the figure and description, finding it on Mount Iura nere Geneva; and is Bauhinus his sixt Ranunculus montanus hirsutus purpurascente flore, and saith it is the Aconitum candidum acaulon Dalechampij that Lugdunensis set forth, but how can this with a high stalke and a purplish flower, be called Candidum and acaulon without a stalke, I know not: the third Clusius nameth Ranun∣culus Pyrenaeus albo flore, whose leaves as he saith are like unto those of Plantaine, and therefore with most Her∣barists is called now adayes, Ranunculus plant aginis folio, and so doth Bauhinus, who likewise seemeth to thinke, that it may be the Ranunculus Phaeniceus Myconi, for the resemblance of the long leaves, like unto those of the Date tree: but herein, in my opinion he is much mistaken, for that the roote of that Ranunculus is Bulbous, and therefore more likely to be another, as I shall shew you, by and by: the fourth and fift have no other names than are in their titles, being plants never set forth by any before, but growing on one of the Alpes, which the inhabitants call Mont senis, &amp; sent the one by Monnel, &amp; the other by Peliterius unto Dr. Lobel: the sixt Fabius Columna finding on the hill Aequicolo, in the Kingdome of Naples, calleth it Ranunculus leptomacrophyllon bulbosus, or Ranunculus bulbosus gramineus montanus, which Bauhinus thereupon calleth Ranunculus gramineo folio bulbosus, and as I think doth more nearely resemble, the Ranunculus Phaeniceus Myconi, set forth in the great Herball called Lugdunensis, which hee saith groweth plentifully at the foote of the hills of Santa Maria Monteserato, and the places there abouts, and as he saith there, hath bulbous rootes and long narrow leaves, and so hath this, but the former hath neither. The seventh and eight with the other of the same kinde are likewise plants never written of by any other before, and therefore their titles must stand as they doe. The ninth Fabius Columna found likewise in the hills Campoclarenses and Aequicoli, and calleth it Ranunculus montanus Leptophyllos Alphodeli radice which is very like unto that with Asphodill rootes, which I have set forth in my former Book, having leaves like the small Thali∣ctrum, and a white flower but this hath yellow, which as I there said, Lugdunensis setteth among the umbelliferous plants, and calleth it Oenanthe Miconi, because he finding it on the rockie or stony hills in Spaine, referred it unto Oenanthe, in regard of the rootes; but the flowers and seede demonstrate it plainely to be no such plant, but a plaine Crowfoote, as both by the comparison and mine owne inspection (having had it growing in mine owne Gar∣den many yeares, and seene it with others) may truely be testified: The tenth Fabius Columna found likewise on the contrary colder side of those hills Aequicoli, and called it, as it is in the title: the last sixe sorts have their names in their titles, as Bauhinus calleth them in his Pinax and Prodromus. 
The Ʋertues. Most of these sorts of Crowfeete being hot and sharpe in taste, and exulcerating the skinne, no lesse than many of the former, cannot be but of the same quality with them, and although there hath not so many and manifest trials, beene made of these being most of them but of late invention, yet no doubt but they may be applied, for the same purposes; according to their degree, in being more or lesse sharpe than others; onely the fourth sort that hath leaves like Betony, for the forme sake of the flowers, being joyned to this family, as is said in the des∣cription, hath no such hot sharpe or exulcerating propertie, but as is there said being somewhat bitter, and excee∣ding astringent in taste, is held assuredly to be friendly to the stomacke, as other things that are of the same qualitie of bitternesse and astriction; which helpe to stay and drie up the defluxions of humors, be they cold or hot that fall from the head upon the stomacke and lungs, and to preserve them from putrefaction caused thereby. 
Ranunculi hortensis. Garden Crowfeete. THose Crowfeete that are chiefefly noursed up in Gardens, should follow next, but that I have already shewed them in my former Booke, selecting all those that beare flowers of any beautie, out of all the rest of the Tribes or Families, to store that Garden with all as was most fit and proper: whosoever therefore are desi∣rous to see their discriptions or know farther of them, I must referre them to that Booke wherein they may see and reade the varieties there expressed. The Anemones also or Wind flowers and Pulsatillas as being kindes of Crowfeete their sharpe taste and exulcerating qualitie declaring the same, shuold beare a place here with the rest, but that they are all likewise described aforehand, yet I thinke it not a misse to give you some figures of them, to beautifie this worke and to please your eyes. 
Ranunculus albus multiplex. The double white Crowfoote. 
Ranunculus Asiaticus flore rubro ampio s plici, vel vers . The large red or the party coloured Crowfoote of Asia. 
Ranunculus Creticus vel Asiaticus flore argenteo. The silver like Crowfoote or Candy or Asia. 
Ranunculus Asiaticus vel Creticus flore albo. Single white Crowfoote of Asia or Candy.
The Ʋertues. The Mandrake as Galen saith is of an exceeding cold qualitie even in the third degree, yet hath in it some heate, in the barke of the roote is some drinesse, and in the apple some moisture, whereby it is of a soporiferous pro∣pertie causing sleepinesse or drowsinesse, as Levinus Lemnius in his Herball to the Bible maketh mention of an experiment of his owne, that upon a suddaine became drowsie, sitting at his booke in his study, and mu∣sing what should be the cause, found that it proceeded from the sent of one of these apples, which he had laid on a shelfe therein, which being removed he found no further inconvenience: the barke or the juice taken therefro, is given to those that in their sickenesse cannot sleepe, the decoction of the roote in wine also doth the same, and is exhibited to those (as is aforesaid) that are to be seared, or a limbe or member to be cut off, to induce the lesse sence of paine: the condensate juice taken to the waight of one scruple in sweete wine, purgeth flegme and melancholy by vomit like unto Hellebor, but taken in a greater quantity it killeth: it is used also in pessa∣ries, either of it selfe, or with other emollient thinges to take away the hardnesse of the matrix, to procure their courses, and to expell the dead birth. But see that not above halfe a scruple be used at a time: the said juice is also used with those ocular medicines that coole inflammations in the eyes: the leaves are likewise used for the same purpose, as also impostumes, and discusse, all hardnesse, knots and kernels in the flesh, and take away the scars of burning, being often rubbed therewith: the roote beaten with vinegar and applyed to those inflam∣mations, called Saint Anthonies fire, doth heale them, and applyed with honey or oyle, taketh away the sting of Serpents. It is said that if Ivory be boild with the roote hereof six houres together, it will so mollifye it, that it will take what forme or impression you will give it; the apples and especially the seeds in them, doe purge and coole the hot matrix, as Serapio Avicen, and Paulus Aegineta after Dioscorides have set downe, which perad∣venture Rachel knowing to be availeable for her hot and dry body, which was the cause of her barennesse, (and her beauty argueth a probability of such a constitution) desired the more earnestly the Mandrake apples that Ruben Lea sonne had brought his mother, as it is Genesis 30. v. 14. the strong sent of these apples is remembred also Cant. 7, 13, although some would divert the signification of the Hebrew word , (which is the same in both places) unto Violets or some other sweete flowers, that Rachel, desired and the fruite of Musa or Adams apples to that in the Canticles: Hamilcar the Carthaginian Captaine is said to have obtained a famous victory, over the Libians by infecting their wines with the apples of Mandrake, whereby being made drowsie they left their wals unmand. 
CHAP. VI. Solanum. Nightshade. T Here are diverse sorts of Nightshades, properly so to be called, and there be some other that are referred thereunto, for the likenesse of the leaves, flowers, or fruite, or for the properties in the operation. Of those that are referred unto the Nightshade, I have already spoken of diverse in my former booke, whereunto I referre them, that would be enformed of them, not meaning to repeate their descriptions, but denominations in this place, which are Mirabilia Pervana, the Mervaile of Peruor of the world. Pomum amoris fructu majore, Apples of love the greater sort. Stramonium sive Pomum spinosum majus flore simpli albo, &amp; purpureo, &amp; Datura Turcarum flore albo simplici &amp; flore duplici purpureo, Thorne apples the greater, with a single white, or single purple flower, and the lesser with a single white flower, or a double purple flower. Solanum arborescens or fruticosum, called also Pseudocapsicum Dodonaei, or Amomum Plinij, Solanum Americanum, &amp; Cerasa Indiana, Tree Nightshade, the Mumme tree, or Winter Cherry tree: &amp; Solanum vesicarium or Alkekengi, Winter Cherries, Potatoes of Virginia called of many, apples of youth, and of Bauhinus in his Matthiolus Solanum tuberosum esculentum, and thought by Clusius, that it did in many things resemble the Pycnocomon of Dioscorides, moved chiefely thereunto from the likenesse of the figure thereof, which he saw in a written copy of Dioscorides, that had figures; as also that it might be Arachidna of Theophrastus; but setteth it downe in his History of Plantes, by the name of Papas Peruvianorum, and called by the Indians, or Spaniards Papas, as Gomara and others say: and although the common wild Night∣shade, is not dangerous, as divers others are, nor planted in Gardens with us as it was in former times, to be as a potherbe or salletherbe usually eaten, (but now adayes utterly refused,) and therefore called Garden Night∣shade, yet let me set it with the rest of the familye and not disjoine it from them. 
1. Solanum vulgare. Common Nightshade. The Common Nightshade, hath an upright round greene hollow stalke, about a foote, or halfe a yard high, bushing forth into many branches, whereon grow many darke greene leaves, somewhat broad and pointed at the ends, soft and full of juice, larger than the leaves of Bassill, else somewhat like, and a little unevenly dented about the edges, at the toppes of the stalkes and branches, come forth three or foure or more white flowers, made of five small pointed leaves a peece, standing on a stalke together, one by or above another, with yellow pointels in the middle, composed of foure or five yellow threds set together, which afterwards turne into so ma∣ny pendulous greene berries, of the bignesse of small pease, full of greene juice, and small whitish round flat seede, lying within it: the roote is white and a little wooddy, when it hath given flower and fruite, with many small fibres at it: the whole plant is of a waterish insipide taste, but the juice within the berryes, is some∣what viscous, like unto a thin mucilage, and is of a cooling and binding quality. 
2. Solanum vulgare baccis rubris. Red berryed common Nightshade. I call this common Nightshade, because it is in all things like the former common Nightshade, except that the leaves hereof are somewhat harder and rougher, and the berries when they are ripe, are either of a yellow, or of a yellowish red colour, the whole plant growing also little bigger then the other: this sort we have had out of Spaine, but endured not a winter with us, being more tender as comming out of a hotter Country, where it abideth many yeares, and it may be, that it is but a degeneration by reason of the climate, as it hapeneth in sweete Fenell seede and divers other things which change by transplantation. 
3. Solanum Sommiferum. Sleepy Nightshade. Sleepy Nightshade riseth up, with divers thicke round soft woolly stalkes, divided into other branches, where∣on grow many soft woolly, but greene broad round leaves, very like unto Quince leaves, two alwayes set at a joynt one against another, of somewhat a hot taste as Clusius saith: the flowers come forth at the joynts with 1. Solanum vulgare. Common Nightshade. 
3. Solanum Somniferum. Sleepy Nightshade. 
5. Solanum Somniferum alterum. Sleepy Nightshade of another sort. 
6. Solanum Laethale. Dwale or deadly Nightshade. 
the leaves, all along the stalkes and branches, three or foure together round about them, which are long and hollow, ending in foure somewhat long and pointed leaves, of a pale white colour, which being past, there rise up in their places small yellowish red berries, yet bigger then those of the former, set in woolly huskes: the roote is thicke long and hard, and of a brownish colour on the outside. 
4. Solanum somniferum antiquorum verum. The true sleepy Nightshade of the ancient writers. This Nightshade riseth up with three or foure or more thicke round straight whitish stalkes about a yard high or more, parted into some other branches, hard to 8. Solanum magnum Ʋirginianum rubrum. The great Virginia Red Nightshade. 
breake, set with somewhat broad leaves very like unto Quince leaves with small footestalkes under them not alwayes two at a joynt, but many stan∣ding singly at the joints with the leaves; from the middle of the stalkes upwards, come forth diverse reddish flowers together, consisting of foure leaves a peece after which follow, small striped and poin∣ted greenish huskes; but red when they are ripe, very like unto the bladders of the Winter Cher∣ries, but much lesse, with a red berry within it, in like manner; the roote is somewhat great and wooddy, covered with a whitish barke, not very thicke, of a foule sent and insipide taste. Because that kinde of Solanum, which Matthiolus first, and Clusius after him, set forth for the true Somnife∣rum of the ancients, doth, not beare bladder like huskes or fruite, as Theophrastus saith, lib. 9. c. 12. it hath, it cannot be the right, but this onely which hath such. 
5. Solanum Somniferum alterum. Sleepie Nightshade of another sort. The other sleepy Nightshade, hath an upright crested or cornered stalke, with many leaves there∣on, being longer and narrower than the last, and more inclining downeward to the ground, full of veines running long wise and traverse therein: at the joynts of the stalke, from the middle part upward, come forth severall pendulous flowers, hanging by very long stalkes, being long and hol∣low like unto a Bell flower, of a purplish colour, each of them set in a large greene huske, dented or cut into five parts at the edges, but not very deepe; wherein after the flower is past, standeth a round berry, of a deepe blackish purple colour, enclosed therein to the middle, and having like a Crowne, at the head of the berry; which is full of a winelike juice, and many small white seeds within it: the roote is great and spreadeth many great branches with small fibres also, un∣der the ground. 
6. Solanum laethale. Dwale or deadly Nightshade. Deadly Nightshade groweth sometimes to the height of a man, but usually it riseth not up above three or foure foote high, having round green stalkes, set with divers large leaves, much greater than any of those before, smooth and of a darke greene colour, set upon very short footestalkes; among which at the joynts with the leaves come forth severall long hollow flowers, dented at the brims, of a faint deadish purple colour, standing in a greene huske; which after the flower is fallen containeth a great round berry, greene at the first but of a shining blacke colour, like shining or polished jet; when it is ripe, full of a purplish juice, and many whitish seeds lying therein: the roote is great, growing downe deepe into the ground, and spreading great branches therein, and besides creepeth under ground, rising up in severall places distant, quickely spreading over a ground: the plant hath no good sent, nor taste, but unsavory and bitter and very pernicious. 
Of this kinde there is another sort, whose leaves are lesser, and of a darker greene colour, standing upon long∣er footestalkes, and the flowers are not so great and large as the other. 
7. Solanum Indicum umbelliferum hirsutum. Hoary Indian Nightshade. Clusius in his fourth booke of Exotickes, declareth that one D r . Cole, or Coolmans, going with Dutch Mer∣chant Ships to Bantam, and other places, in the East Indies (but dying by the way in comming home) had ga∣thered some herbes, and put them up into a booke of papers, which being viewed by Clusius, hee found among many others, this dryed plant without leaves, which yet he referreth to the kinds of Nightshade; the slender stalkes, being about five inches long, and hoary white, bearing many shrivelled berryes, hanging downe out of five pointed huskes or cuppes, of a brownish red colour, of the bignesse of pepper cornes, standing in a tuft or umbell, wherein were white seedes, like to those of Nightshade, but not ripe. 
8. Solanum magnum rubrum Virginianum. Red Nightshade or Red weed or Virginia. This great Virginian plant, which from the likenes of the leaves we have called a Solanum, and referred thereun∣to, riseth up with a great thick round reddish stalke, of the thicknes of ones thumbe at the least, &amp; 4. or 5. foote high or more, set without order with many very large fresh greene leaves full of veines, some greater and some smaller and sometimes turning reddish: from the joynts where the leaves stand from the middle of the stalke upwards, come forth severall smal stalkes bearing the flowers which are very small consisting of foure leaves a peece of a pale red or blush colour, divers standing together as it were in a small long cluster, which after bring forth small blackish round seede, foure usually set in one huske: yet it seldome commeth to ripenesse in our country: the roote is white and groweth great with us, but perisheth if it be not defended from the frosts in winter, which usu∣ally rot it, but in the naturall places it groweth as big as a mans legge, (for such hath beene sent me, with many circles to be seene in the middle when it was cut like unto a Bryonye roote) and above a foote long. 
8. Solanum Mexicanum parvo flore, sive Mirabilis Peruana minor. The small Mervaile of Peru. This small Mervaile of the world, or of Peru, groweth in the same manner, that the greater kinde, shewed you in my former booke doth, but nothing so great or high, having such like leaves set on the stalkes, but much lesser and rounder: the flowers likewise being of a red colour for the most part, and made of one leafe, opening into five parts at the brimes, like the other, are so small, that the whole flower of this is scarce so bigge as the one part, or division of the greater flower, the seed that followeth, and the roote likewise are answerable in propor∣tion to the rest of the plant. 
The Place. The first groweth wild with us, under old walles, and in rubbish, the common paths and sides of hedges and fieldes as well as in other countryes, either hot or cold, as also both in their and our gardens, without any plan∣ting. The second groweth onely wild in the hotter countries of Spaine, Italy, &amp;c. The third Clusius saith he found not farre from Malaga in Spaine, and Matthiolus saith in Italy also. The fourth Alpinus saith, groweth in Candye. The fifth as Matthiolus saith, groweth on the hill Salvatino in the County of Goritio in Italy, hard by Trent, and as some thinke in Syria, and the East Countries thereabouts. The sixth groweth wilde not onely in many, and divers woods of Germany, but in divers places of our owne Land, as in the Castle yard of Framing∣ham, in Suffolke, under Iesus Colledge wall in Cambridge, and in many places of that Country: also at Ilford in Essex, at Croydon among the Elmes, at the end of the Towne: in Moore Parke in the Parke of Sir Percivall Hart at L lling stone in Kent, on the Conny burries, in Burling Parke likewise, as also in the way that leadeth from S. Ma∣ry Cray to Footes Cray over against the gate of a great field called Wenaell. The seventh is declared in the de∣scription. The eighth groweth in Virginia, New England &amp;c. from whence the seed and Plants, were first brought to us. The last came as the greater sort did from the West-Indies. 
The Time. They doe all dye downe to the ground in winter, although some doe shoote a fresh in the spring, as the 3.4.5.7.8.9. doe, yet the third being more tender as comming out of a warmer Country, doth hardly endure, but perisheth utterly, by the extremities of our winters, especially if it be not housed or well defended, and even the two first that dye every yeare, and rise of their owne sowing, doe not spring out of the ground, untill it be late in the yeare, as not untill the latter end of Aprill at the soonest. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke of some , but more usually quod viteum, capreolum, vitem vel acinum, vel tale quiddam signet, ait Pena, in Solanorum classe, quibus cunctis proprium acinos plures vel panciores ha∣bere, nisi quis . Theophrasto suspicari malit, aut in mutatum. In Latine Solanum &amp; Solatrum, Ʋna lupina &amp; Ʋna vulpis. Pliny saith it was called also Strumum and Cucubalus, but they are thought to be ra∣ther bastard names, and not to be proper to this plant, the Arabians call it Hameb alhomaleb, Hameb alchaick, and Hameb althaleb, the Spaniards, Yerva Mora, and Morella, the Italians Solatro. The French Morelle. The Ger∣mans Nachtschad , and the Dutch Nascaye, and Natchscade. In English Nightshade, Morrell, Petty Morrell, and in some places Honnds berries. Dioscorides reckoneth up foure sorts, hortense, vesicarium, somniferum, and furiosum or manicum. Theophrastus in his 7 booke and 14. chapter, maketh but three sorts, solanum edule, fructum veluti mitem, velacinosum ferens. Sunt alia duo quorum alterum somnium, alterum insani adfert. The first is generally called by all writers Solanum simply, or vulgare, or hortense, because it is most usuall, and generally every where to be had, and was planted in gardens as other herbes for foode, but now is no where used, but Physically: the second is called of Cordus in his History of Plants Solanum puniceum, and of Gesner in hortis Germaniae Solanum rubrum &amp; luteum, and is remembred by others also. The third is generally taken to be the true Solanum somniferum of Dioscorides, for so Matthiolus, Gesner, Guilandinus, Lacuna, Clusius, Dodonaeus, Lobel, Caesalpinus, Castor Durantes, Camerarius, and Lugdunensis doe set it downe. Prosper Alpinus only contest∣eth against it, and sheweth that the fourth here set downe, which in his booke de plantis exoticis, he saith hath red bladders, and small red berryes in them, is the right sort, as Dioscorides, Theophrastus and Pliny doe describe their Solanum somniferum to be. The fifth Matthiolus calleth Solanum somniferum alterum, and so doe Camerarius; Gesner, and Lugdunensis, Dodonaeus calleth it Solani laethali aliud genus, The sixth is generally by the Italians cal∣led Bella Donna, either per Antiphrasin, because it is blacke, or as the Moores doe account them fairest, that have the finest blacke skinne, or as some have reported, because the Italians Dames, use the juice or distilled water thereof for a fucus, peradventure by the excessive cold quality, to take away their high colour, and make them looke paler. Matthiolus calleth it Solanum majus, and so doe Caesalpinus, and Camerarius: Tragus Solanum or∣tense nigrum: Fuchsius, Lobel, and Lugdunensis, Solanum somniferum, Dodonaeus, and Clusius Solanum laethale, and so doth Thalius; Gesner Solanum sylvaticum; Anguillara, Guillandinus, Dodonaeus. Fuchsius, Cordus and others, doe take it to be Mandragoras morion of Theophrastus, but not of Dioscorides, for they are so much differing one from another, as though they had lived in two severall worlds, to give names to herbes, the one not knowing of the other. The Germanes call it Schlaffbeere and Dolwurtz; it is called in English, Dwale, or deadly Nightshade. The seaventh Clusius maketh mention of, in the fourth booke of his Exotickes, by the name of Solani Indici ge , and Bauhinus thereupon calleth it as I doe in the title, Solanum Indicum hirsutum corymbiferum. The eighth we have referred as I said before, to the kindes of Solanum, for the likenesse of the leaves, although much larger, and call it rubrum, both for the colour of the stalke, and from the colour that it giveth, for the Indians there∣with doe both colour their skinnes, and the barkes of trees wherewith they make their baskets, and such like things, as we are informed: the Indians themselves call it and our English people that live in Vir∣ginia, call it Red weede, but we according to the Latine name, red Nightshade of Virginia. The last Bauhinus setteth fort in his Prodomus and Pinax, under the title here expressed, not being mentioned by any other writer.
The Ʋertues. The ordinary or common Nightshade is wholly used to coole all hot inflammations, either inwardly or outwardly, being no way dangerous to any that shall use it, as most of the rest are; yet it must be used moderate∣ly, for being cold and binding in the second degree, the distilled water onely of the whole herbe is fittest and sa∣fest to be taken inwardly: the juyce also clarified and mingled with a little vinegar, is good to wash the mouth and throate that is inflamed: but outwardly the juyce of the herbe or berries, with oyle of Roses, and a little vinegar and cerusse, laboured together in a leaden Morter, is very good to anoint all hot inflammations, Saint Anthonies fire, all other grieved places, that are molested with heate, as the head ache and frenzies, anointing the temples and forehead therewith, as also the heate and inflammation in the eyes: it doth also much good for the shingles, ringwormes, and in all running, fretting &amp; corroding ulcers, and in weeping or moist Fistu∣laes, if the juice be made up with some hens dung, and applied thereunto: a pessary dipped in the juyce, and put up into the matrixe stayeth the immoderate fluxe of womens courses; a cloth wet therein and applied to the testicles or cods, upon any swelling therein giveth much ease: as also to the goute, that commeth of hot and sharpe hu∣mours; the juyce dropped into the eares, easeth those paines that arise of heat or inflammation; Pliny saith moreover, that it is good for hot swellings under the throate: the sleepie Nightshade of both sorts, are of one and the same qualitie, being cold in the third degree, and drie in the second, comming neere unto the propertie of Opium to procure sleepe, but somewhat weaker, if a dramme of the barke of the roote be taken in wine, but not to exceede that proportion for feare of danger: the seede drunke doth powerfully expell urine, and is also good for the dropsie; but the often taking thereof in too great a quantite, procureth frenzie; the remedy whereof is, to take good store of warme honied water: the roote boyled in wine, and a little thereof held in the mouth, easeth the paines of the tooth ache: Pliny saith it is, good to fasten loose teeth: the juyce of the roote mingled with hony, is good for the eyes that are weake of sight: It is more effectuall in all hot swellings and in∣flammations than the former, in regard it is colder in qualitie, the juyce of the herbe or rootes, or the distilled water of the whole plant being applied; the deadly Nightshade is held more dangerous than any of the other, for it is thought to be cold in the fourth degree: the juyce of the leaves, and a little vinegar mixed together, pro∣cureth rest and sleepe, (when upon great distemperature, either in long sicknesse, or in the tedious hot fits of agues, rest and sleepe is much hindered) if the temples and forehead be a little bathed therewith; as also taketh away the violent paine of the head, proceeding of a hot cause: the leaves bruised or their juyce may be applied to such hot inflammations, as Saint Anthonies fire, the shingles, and all other fiery or running cankers, to coole and stay the spreading: the danger is very great, and more in the use of this inwardly, than in any of the for∣mer, and therefore there had neede of the more heed and care, that children and others doe not eate of the ber∣ries hereof, least you see the lamentable effects it worketh upon the takers thereof as it hath done, both in our owne land, upon sundry children killed by eating the broth wherein the leaves were boiled, or the berries, and beyond the sea in the same manner: yet some doe hold that two ounces of the distilled water hereof is effectuall to be taken inwardly without any danger, against the heart burning, and other inflammations of the bowells, and against all other hot inflammations of the skinne or eyes, giving ease to the paines. It hath beene often proved, that one scruple of the dried roote hereof infused in a little wine sixe or seven hoares; and then strained hard through a cloth, that if this wine be put into a draught of other wine, whosoever shall drinke that wine, shall not be able to eate any meate for that meale, nor untill they drinke some vinegar, which will presently dispell that qualitie, and cause them fall to their vlands, with as good a stomacke, as they had before: this is a good jest, for a bold unwelcome guest. The Ʋirginia Nightshade is a familiar purger with them in Ʋirginia, New England, &amp;c. where they take a spoonefull or two of the juyce of the roote which worketh strongly; but we having tried to give the dried roote in powder have not found that effect. 
CHAP. VII. 1. Solanum lignosum sive Dulcamara. Wood Nightshade or Bitter sweete. A Lthough this plant hath no dangerous quality therein, nor yet is properly any Nightshade, more than the outward conformitie in some sort, yet because many learned Authours have reckoned it as a sort thereof, and called it by that name, let me also place it with them, and shew it you in this place, thus: it groweth up with many slender winding brittle wooddy stalkes, five or sixe foote high, with∣out any claspers, but foulding it selfe about hedges, or any other thing that standeth next unto it, covered with a whitish rough barke, and having a pith in the middle, shooting out many branches on all sides, which are greene while they are young; whereon grow many leaves without order, somewhat like unto the leaves of Nightshade, but that they are somewhat broad, long, and pointed at the ends, with two small leaves, or rather peeces of leaves, at the bottome of most of them, somewhat like the Sage with eares, and many of them likewise, but with one peece on the one side, sometimes also those peeces are close unto the leaves, ma∣king them seeme as it were jagged, or cut in on the edges into so many parts, and sometimes separate there from, making the leaves seeme winged or made of many leaves, and are of a pale greene colour: at the toppes and sides of the branches come forth many flowers, standing in fashion of along umbell, upon short foote stalkes, one above another, which consist of five narrow, and long violet purple coloured leaves, not spread like a starre, or very seldome, but turning themselves backwards to the stalkes againe whereon they stand, with a long gold yellow pointell in the middle sticking forth, which afterwards turne into round and somewhat long berries greene at the first, and very red, soft and full of juyce when they are ripe, of an unpleasant bitter taste, although sweete at the first; wherein are contained many flat white seedes: the roote spreadeth it selfe into many strings under ground, and not growing into any great body: the barke also of the branches, being chewed, tasteth bitter at the first, but sweeter afterwards. 
2. Dulcamara flore albo. Wood Nightshade with white flowers. Of this kinde there is another that differeth not from the former, more than in the flowers, whose outer, leaves are white, and the pointell yellow. 
Dulcamara se Solanum lignosum. Wood Night shade. 
 
The Place. This groweth usually by ditches sides, and hedges, where they may climbe up upon them, the first almost every where: the second is very rare and seldome to be met with, yet it groweth by Saint Margates Church in Rumney Marsh, and neere unto Bermonsie house on South∣warke side, when Gerard wrote thereof, but now is not there to be found. 
The Time. The branches abide dispoiled of leaves all the Winter, yet perish not, but shooteth forth new leaves in the Spring, and flowreth about Iuly, the berries are ripe in August. 
The names. This hath not beene remembred, by any of the ancient Greeke Authours, although some of the moderne Wri∣riters, have imposed Greeke names upon it, calling it . Strychnodendron, which is Solanum arbores∣cens; and Glycypicron, that is, Dulcamara or Amaradulcis; diverse doe thinke it to be Melothron of Theophrastus. Matthiolus tooke it to be Ʋitis sylve∣stris of Dioscorides, lib. 4. cap. 183. Others in referring it to the Nightshades, call it Solanum lignosum or fruti∣cosum or rubrum. It is called of the Germans Ielenger ie lieber and Hynschkraut, because the shepheards use it for their cattell, when they are troubled with that disease they call Hynsch, of the Dutchmen Alfrank; of the French Morelle du bois; and we in English Bitter sweete, wood Nightshade, and Fellonworte of some. Tragus would referre it to the Hedera Cilicia, or Smilax of Theophrastus in his third Booke and last Chapter; or unto the Smilax lae∣vis of Dioscorides, set forth in his fourth Book and 140. Chapter; Dodonaeus thinketh, that that kinde that beareth white flowers, may be Cyclaminus altera of Dioscorides. Guillandinus tooke it to be Salicastrum of Pliny, lib. 22. cap. 1. but all erroniously: the learned of Mompelior as Pena and Camerarius say called it Circaea; whereunto it as little agreeth, as the Circaea set forth in the next Chapter, as you shall there understand. Bauhinus calleth it Sa∣lanum scandens, seu Dulcamara. 
The Ʋertues. Both leaves and fruit are hot and drie, astringent and clensing. Tragus sheweth the manner of making a medicine for the yellow Iaundise, (and for the dropsie saith Dodonaeus ) although it be inveterate, by driving it forth gently, both by urine and the stoole, in this wise: Take saith he, a pound of the wood of wool Nightshade, cut it small, and put it into a new earthen pot, whose cover hath an hole in the toppe, with three pints of white wine, close the joynts of the pot with paste, and set it on the fire to boyle gently, untill a third part be consumed; which afterwards being strained forth, take a draft thereof morning and evening: The juyce of the leaves and berries is thought to be good for them that have beene bruised by blowes or falls, to dissolve and avoid the congealed bloud, and heale the part affected afterwards: it is held also effectuall to open the ob∣structions of the liver and spleene, but so often as I have given it by appointment I have knowne it to purge very churlishly. Some also use the drinke before prescribed against putride feavers or agues. The countrie shepheards of Germany as Tragus reporteth, doth use to hang it about their cattells neckes, when they are troubled with the disease they call Die Hynsch, which is a swimming in the head, causing them to turne round: diverse countrie people doe use the berries bruised and laid to the finger that hath a Felon thereon to cure it. 
CHAP. VIII. 1, Circaea Lutetiana major. The greater Inchanters Nightshade. T HE likenesse also of this plant in some part thereof, hath caused it to be referred unto the Night∣shades by diverse, and so must I untill a fitter place may be knowne, the description whereof is that. It riseth up with diverse small round pointed stalkes, most usually standing upright, yet sometimes leaning downe to the ground, and taking roote at the jointes, about a foote or more high, especially if it grow in a moist shadowie place, with two leaves set at every joynt, each of them set upon a pret∣tie long foote stalke, which are broad and round almost at the bottome, and very long pointed at the end, some∣what dented about the edges: some compare them unto the leaves of Nightshade; others unto those of Pellitory of the wall, being of a shining greene colour on the upperside, and tender, soft, or gentle in the handling, although it be a little hairy, and of a darke grayish colour underneath: from the middle of the stalke almost upwards, doe the flowers grow Spike fashion, many set together one above another, which shew to be of a darke brownish colour, while they abide buddes unblowne open, but being blowne are small white five leafed starre flowers, dasht over especially at the brimmes or edges, with a light shew of blush, with many brownish yellow threds in the middle, where after they are past, came small rough round heads, like unto small burres, sticking unto garments in the like manner, wherein are included small shining blacke round seede, somewhat like unto the seed, of Pellitorye of the wall, but lesser: the roote is small, very white, and full of joynts, from whence it shooteth forth and creepeth every way under ground, quickly spreading a great compasse: the taste hereof is somewhat sweetish and waterish withall. 
2. Circaea lutetiana minor. Small Inchanters Nightshade. This small Nightshade is in all things like the former, but that it groweth much smaller in every part, although it grow in the same places with it. 
The Place. 1. Circaea lutetiana major. The greater Inchanters Nightshade. 
 
They grow in moist and shadowye places, and some∣times at the rootes of old rotten trees in woods, and sometimes by the hedgesides or borders of fields. 
The Time. They spring up in Aprill, are in flower in Iune, give their seede in August, and perish downe to the ground afterwards, the rootes abiding safe in the ground. 
The Names. Thse were not knowne to any of the ancient writers, that we can finde, but are usually in these dayes, called by all Herbarists Circaea, because in the outward forme, it is like the Circaea of Dioscorides: Lobel and Pena, call the greater Circaea Lutetiana, not knowing the lesser, we adde major for a distinction between them, the former is called also Circaea Monspeliensium. Tragus calleth it Lappa sylvestris, because the small heads of seed, are rough like small burres, for he judgeth the Amaranthus minor purpureus to be the Circaea of Dioscorides and Pli∣ny. Iohannes Thalius in Harcynia sylva (which is joyned with Camerarius his hortus Medicus ) calleth them Helxine sylvestris, sive fluviatilis major &amp; minor, and saith that they are like in leaves, unto the Helxine, that is called Parietaria. Gesner in hortis Germaniae, calleth it Ocima∣strum verrucarium (not being before knowne by any name) because the leaves as he saith, are like Bassill, and the rough heades, like unto rugged warts; Tabermonta∣nus calleth it herba Di. Stephani: Bauhinus calleth the greater Solanifolia Circaea dicta major, as hee doth the lesser Solanifolia Circaea Alpina, which Fabius Columna calleth Circaea minima. Many also have taken the Man∣drake of Theophrastus to be Circaea of the ancients, because he saith, it was so called by some in his dayes: and some the Mandragoras of Theophrastus, to be this Circaea, and have attributed the vertues thereof unto it: but assuredly none of these herbes, nor that in the former Chapter, is answerable unto the description of Dioscorides his Cir∣caea, for although he saith, the leaves of Circaea are like Nightshade, yet the flowers are many and blacke, and the seede like unto Millet, growing in small hornes: the roote also he saith is almost a foote long, three or foure together, being white, sweete in smell, and of an heating or warming property: so that as I said, none of these answer unto this description in all things, for the seede of none of them is contained in hornes or crooked cods, although Tragus saith the Amaranthus is; yet the rootes are not sweete nor heating, nor of any use, when as the chiefest property of Dioscorides his Circaea, consist∣ed in the roote applyed for many purposes. It is called in English of Gerard, Inchanters Nightshade, derived from Circes the great Enchantresse, mentioned by the ancient writers, but why he should call it also Bindweede Night∣shade, (and his corrector letteth it so passe) I see no cause; for that name doth better agree, unto the wood Night∣shade, set forth in the former Chapter, because it doth climbe like a Bindweed. 
The Ʋertues. There hath not beene any of the moderne writers, either Tragus, Gesner, Thalius, Lobel and Pena, or Taber∣montanus, that have set downe any property, wherewith any inward or outward diseases may be helped there∣by, but have overpassed them, as though none of all the Country people where they grow, made any use there∣of: but assuredly by the temperate qualityes, of cold and moisture therein, they may not unfitly, nor perad∣venture without good effect be applyed in hot griefes, as the Nightshade is, although it be moist and not astringent as it is: I doe not here set downe any of the vertues of Dioscorides his Circaea, because this is not it, nei∣ther doe we know what it is. 
CHAP. IX. Solana Pomifera. Applebearing Nightshades. V Nto the kindes of Nightshade I must, as divers other good authors doe, joyne some other plantes, which for their qualities, either more or lesse dangerous, or for their outward forme and propor∣tion, doe somewhat agree with the former set done. 
1. Solanum pomiferum herbariorum Lobelij. Lobels red berried Nightshade. It groweth like common Nightshade but greater, the leaves are like small Tobacco leaves, the flowers are white, like the ordinary sort, the berryes are small and round, of an orient reddish colour, with white seedes within them of an insipide taste, almost without any heate or sharpenesse, and perisheth every yeare as Nightshade doth, this differeth from Mala Aethiopica, although Bauhinus make them to be one, for this hath no prickes, or thornes, on stalkes, or leaves, nor is the fruite hard or crested. 
Solanum fruticosum Americanum dictum Amomum Plinij. The Winter Cherry Tree. This is described in my former Booke.
2. Mala Insana Syriaca. Madde Apples of Syria. This raging or madde Apple, riseth up with a great hard round purplish or brownish greene stalke, two foote high, divided from the bottome into divers branches, whereon are set many hairy broad rough leaves some∣what unevenly cut in on the edges, and somewhat like the Thorne apple leaves; at the joynts with the leaves, come forth severall large flowers, consisting of six large pointed leaves, in some plants white, in others of a pale, but deadish purple colour, with yellow threds in the middle; which being past there succeedeth large, some∣what long and round fruite, in the warme countries, as bigge as a Cowcumber, but in others, seldome bigger then a large great egge set in the same cup or huske, that contained the flower before, whose colour on the outside, is usually according to the flower it bore, either of a whitish greene, more yellowish, or of a grayish ash colour, or of a pale or wanne purplish colour, with a very thinne skinne or barke, and full of a whitish pulpe, and juice within, having many small flat whitish seedes within it, somewhat greater then those of the Apples of love, the roote is composed of many strings, some great, others small, not thrusting downe deepe into the ground, nor abiding but perishing with the first frosts. 
3. Mala Ethiopica. Madde Apples of Ethiopia. The Madde apples of Ethiopia, are somewhat like the former, but that it groweth not so high, nor spreadeth so much, but having one upright stalke, about halfe a yeard high, set here and there, with divers small prickes, not very hard or long, and at severall joynts with jagged leaves, both lesser, and lesse cut in on the edges, then the former, especially the lowermost, having some prickes also in the middle rib, on the backeside, but those leaves that grow higher, toward the toppes of the stalkes and branches, are much lesser, divided on the edges; the flowers stand dispersed on the branches at the joynts, consisting of sixe white white short leaves, with a yel∣low pointell in the middle, of divers threds joyned toge∣ther, 1. Solanum pomiferum herbariorum Lobelij. Lobels red berried Nightshade. 
after which commeth the fruite which is round and a little pointed at the end, smaller and harder then the grea∣ter kinde of Love apples, and straked, and furrowed with∣all in divers places, of an excellent red colour, and turning more deepe when it is ripe, having sometimes small bun∣ches on them, like unto other small apples, growing unto them; and containing a juicye pulpe within it, somewhat more sharpe then the former, but nothing so moist as the love apples, with such like flat yellowish white seede with∣in it: the roote is a tuft of threds, perishing likewise eve∣ry yeare, and seldome in these colder countryes commeth to maturity, to shew his beautifull colour or give good seede. 
4. Mala Insana Europaea. Madde apples of Europe. This kinde of madde Apples, groweth with an upright round stalke, to the bignesse of ones finger, a foote and a halfe high, from whence spring forth at severall joynts, sometimes on the one side, and sometimes on the other, di∣vers long and somewhat broad greene leaves, unevenly cut in on the edges; and ending in a long point, three for the most part comming together, each of them upon a short footestalke: at the tops of the stalke grow the fruite, which are round reddish berryes or apples of the bignesse of a Plum, full of seede within them. 
5. Poma amoris majora media &amp; minora. Apples of Love, of a greater, lesser, and middle size. These sorts of Love Apples, doe in all things so neerely resemble one another, both in the long trayling branches, the winged and divided leaves, the yellow flowers, and the red berries or fruite, as I have shewed in my former booke, that I can adde no more thereunto. 
The Place. The first was brought out of Spaine, the second groweth plentifully wild in Egypt, as divers doe report, as also in Sol fruticosum America um dictum Amo tum Plinij. The Winter Cherry tree. 
2 Mala insana Syriaca. Madde apples of Syria. 
3 Mala Ethiopica. Madde Apples of Ethiopia. 
5. Pomum amoris majus, The greater love Apples. 
Syria, and these Easterne countryes: the third is thought to come out of Aethiopia, and the backe parts of Bar∣barye: the fourth Lugdunensis saith, groweth in shadowie places, upon the Apennine Mountaines: the last like∣wise groweth in those Easterly Countryes of Egypt, Syria, Arabia, &amp;c. 
The Time. The three first doe flower late in the yeare, that is, not untill August, so that their fruite, hardly commeth to be any thing ripe with us, but the sorts of the last, doe usually ripen well, if the Sommer be not too cold. 
The Names. The first is called by Lobel, Solanum pomiferum herbariorum, but is not Mala Aethiopica of Dodonaeus and o∣thers as Bauhinus setteth it downe. The second is called in Latine Mala Insana of most writers, that is Madde Apples in English, (but many doe much marveile, why they should be so called, seeing none have beene knowne, to receive any harme by the eating of them:) in Italian Melanzana and Melongena, and of the Florentines, as Matthiolus saith Petranciani, of the Spaniards Ʋerengenas, of the French Pommes d ' amour, but why they should so call it, Ruellius doth not know as he saith, when as there is another more fitly to be called by that name; of the Germanes Melantzan and Dollopffell: divers doe take this to be Strychnon of Dioscorides, and vrbanum of Theo∣phrastus, as also the third kinde of Pliny, whereupon Caesalpinus as I thinke, calleth it Solanum hortense, and Pyra insana, of Bauhinus Solamum pomiferum fructu oblongo. Hermolaus is thought by Fuschius, and Brasavolus, to take this to be the Mandragoras Morion of Dioscorides, but Matthiolus defendeth him, and reprooveth them, for lay∣ing that imputation upon him, which he did not avouch. The third is called by Dodonaeus, and others, Mala Aethiopica: Lugdunensis calleth it Capsicum rotundum Dalechampij, but very erroniously, for this hath no such fiery heating quality therein as the Capsica Ginney Peppers have; of Bauhinus, Solanum pomiferum fructu rotun∣do striato duro: The fourth is called by Lugdunensis, Hyosciamus peregrinus Dalechampij, and of Bauhinus Sola∣num peregrinum fructu rotundo, I have called it Mala Insana Europaea, because that growing naturally in these parts, it is so like unto the last, which is a kinde of Mala Insana: the last is called, Pomum amoris, and Pom or Malum aureum, which Anguillara tooke to be Lycopersicum, or Lycopersion as some have it of Galen and others, and to be Glaucium of Dioscorides, which it cannot be, for that hath a yellow juice and bitter, which this hath not; Guilandinus saith it is called Tumatle by the Americans, and some others also would referre it to Solanum furiosum, whereunto it hath no quality correspondent, Bauhinus calleth it Solanum Pomiferum fructo rotundo striato molli. 
The Ʋertues. Madde apples are eaten being first boyled in fat broth, with vinegar or salt, oyle and pepper, as a continuall juncket with the Genveses and others, as Scaliger saith, and neither breed frensyes nor any other harme, and therefore he saith, minus sano judicio insana dicuntur. Yet Avicen lib. 2. cap. 455. condemneth them, saying that those that are old are very noisome and hurtfull, although the fresh ones be better: for by their bitternesse and acrimony it is gathered, that they are hot and dry in the second degree, and that therefore they engender Me∣lancholly, the Leprosie, Cancers, the Piles. Impostumes, the Headache, and a stincking breath, breed obstructi∣ons in the Liver and Spleene, and change the complecion into a foule blacke and yellow colour, unlesse they be boyled in Vinegar; so that it is to be admired, that Averrhoes should commend them, being drest in some fashion. Fuschius saith that there is a superaboundant coldnesse, and moisture, in the Madde apples, as there is in Cowcumbers and Mushroomes: yet the beauty of the fruite worketh in some, and the insatiable desire of de∣light to the palate in others, and the inciting to Venery in the most, (which these are thought to procure) doe so farre transport a great many, that in Italy and other hot countries, where they come to their full maturity, and proper rellish, they doe eate them with more desire and pleasure then we doe Cowcumbers, or the like, and therefore prepare and dresse them in divers manners; as some doe eate them raw, as Cowcumbers, some doe roast them under the Embers, and others doe first boyle them, pare them and slice them: and having strowed flower over them, doe frye them with oyle or butter, and with a little pepper and salt, serve them to the table. Some also doe keepe them in pickle, to serve for to spend in the Winter and Spring: but it is certainely found true, that they doe hardly digest in the stomacke, whereby they breed much windinesse, and thereby peradven∣ture bodily lust; that they engender bad blood and Melancholicke humours, and give little nourishment at all unto the body, and that not good: the Apples of Ethiopia, are of the same quality, although of a firmer substance, not yeelding any good nourishment, but rather offensive to the body, for these two are congeneres in forme, and there∣fore most likely in quality. The golden apples or apples of love, are cold and moist, more then any of the for∣mer, and therefore lesse offensive, these are eaten with great delight and pleasure in the hotter Countries, but not in ours, because their moisture is flashy and insipide, for want of the sufficient heate of the Sunne in their ripening. 
CHAP. X. Solana pomifera spinosa. Thornye applebearing Nightshades. T Here are one or two more to be spoken of, to finish this family of the Nightshades, one whose fruite is neerest in likenesse unto these Madde apples, the other to the Nightshades, after which the Thorne apples should next follow, as being by all authors referred unto the Nightshades, but because I have already set forth all their descriptions, I shall not neede to repeate them againe. 
1. Solanum spinosum fructu rotundo, sive Pomum Hiericonticum Imperato. Thorny Nightshade of Hiericho with round apples. The leaves hereof are very like unto those of the former madde apples of Europe, but whiter and softer, having many small thornes on the middle ribbe of every leafe on the under side: on the stalke likewise and branches are sparsedly set divers thornes, and purplish flowers at the toppes of them being smaller then the former, after which come smaller apples also, greene before they be ripe, changing yellow and brownish afterwards, being round and somewhat sweete in smell, but as unsavoury, or without taste as the former. Datura sive Fomum spinosum majus flore albo &amp; purpureo. Datura sive Stramonium minus flore albo simplici &amp; florae purpureo simplici &amp; duplici. These are described in my former Booke, and the figures of the lesser sorts here exhibited. 
2. Solanum poniferum Indicum folio rotundo. Indian Applebearing Nightshade with round leaves. This plant being onely mentioned by Monardus, in his Stramonicum minus sive perogrinum simplex &amp; duplex. Single and double small Thorny Apples. 
history of those simple medicines, that come from the West Indies, is referred by Bauhinus unto his Classis of Thorne Apples in his Pinax, but should more properly in my judge∣ment, be placed with the fruits, in the last Chapter going before, called Madde Apples, but that it hath farre more excellent properties. The plant groweth in manner of a shrubbe or hedge bush as he saith, of an excellent greene∣nesse, having leaves that are small, thinne and round, bea∣ring long fruit, round at the lower end, and flat toward the stalke, like unto the Malum insanum or Madde Apple, of a grayish or ash colour on the out side, and of a plea∣sant and gratefull taste, without any acrimony therein, ha∣ving many very small seedes within it. 
The Place. The first groweth in Syria and Palaestina, and other the countries neare there unto; the other groweth in the Mountaines of Peru onely, a Province in the West Indies, and the seede sent unto Monardus into Spaine, who sowed the seede, to make triall of the effects, were declared to be in it. 
The Time. It is not mentioned at what time either of them flow∣reth or beareth ripe fruite, but it is probable they varie not much from me season, of the other Thorne and Madde Apples, unto which they are so like in forme. 
The Names. The first Bauhinus calleth Solanum spinosum fructu ro∣tundo, which Ferrantes Imperatus of Naples, calleth Po∣mum Hiericonticum: the other Monardus saith came to him under the name of Cachos, as the Indians it is likely doe call it.
14. Capsicum erectum majus longum. Long and upright Ginny Pepper. This Pepper is long and round, yet not like that, that carryeth the forme of an Olive berry, but much longer, and of an equall bignesse all the length thereof, and standeth upright. 
15. Capsicum oblongum majus recurvis siliquis. The greater crooked or horned Ginny Pepper. The greater horned Ginny Pepper, hath great large cods, about five inches long, sometimes little or nothing crooked at the lower end, which is long and small, sometimes a little crooked or bended upwards, and some∣times very much. 
16. Capsicum oblongum minus recurvis siliquis. The lesser horned Ginny Pepper. This differeth from the last, in not being halfe so thicke or long, and keeping his end bowed or crooked con∣stantly, not varying as it doth: both this and the last hang downe their cods toward the ground: the whole plant also groweth lesse then the other. 
17. Capsicum bifurcata siliqua. Double pointed Ginny Pepper. This Pepper is very like the long upright Pepper, and much about the same forme and bignesse, being of an e∣quall size almost, all the length thereof, but differeth from it in this, the lower end is parted as it were, into two short round points, and is also a little smaller there then upwards, neither in colour nor any thing else differing from the rest. 
18. Capsicum siliqua flava breviore. The shorter gold yellow Ginny Pepper. It might be thought by divers, that onely see the cods of this Pepper, that it differeth from all the rest, in the manner of growing, as well as in the colour of the fruite, but it is not so; for it hath like leaves, stalkes and flowers in every part, and onely differeth in that it beareth cods, very like unto the first sort here set downe, which is the most common, but that they are shorter, and ending in a smaller or sharper point, and of a faire gold yellow colour, not red as all the other before are. 
19. Capsicum siliqua flava longiore. The longer gold yellow Ginny Pepper. This gold yellow Pepper differeth in nothing from the last, but in the cods, which are not so thicke as they, but a little smaller, from the middle thereof being longer, or lessening very finely unto the pointed end, of as faire a gold yellow colour as the other. 
20. Capsicum caule piloso. Ginny Pepper with hairy stalkes. This Ginny Pepper groweth with round greene stalkes; set full of white haires thereon, contrary to all the former sorts: at the joynts with the branches come forth two such leaves, as the first sort here set forth hath, but larger then they; the flowers are white, consisting of five leaves like the rest, but larger also then any of them; after which come the cods, greene at the first, as all the other are, but as red as the rest, when they are ripe, which are somewhat great and long, ending in a very long point, in the rest, as in the seede and rootes, not differing from the former sorts. 
The Place. All these sorts of Pepper, came first from the West Indies, called America, and the severall parts thereof, Brassile being reckoned as a parcell thereof, and our Sommer Ilands also, although we in English from others false relati∣on, give it the name of Ginny Pepper, as though it originally came from thence: they are nursed op in gar∣dens, in all the Provinces of Europe, and groweth in many places of Italy, Spaine, &amp;c. Set in pots about the windowes of their houses, either for the pleasure of the beautifull greene leaves and fruite or cods, when they are ripe, or for the use it serveth, or both. Clusius saith it is not onely planted in Spaine, and Portugall in divers places, but in Moravia also as he saith, for the profits sake they make of the fruite, which serveth them in those parts, in the stead of the East-Indian Pepper. 
The Time. They use not to sow them untill the end of March, or beginning of Aprill, no not in the warme Countries: they flower usually not before the beginning of August, at the soonest; and their brave red cods ripen not tho∣rowly, untill the beginning of Winter, and so will abide both with flowers and fruite, most of the Winter with them; but if they take any frosts with us, they presently perish, and therefore must be housed if any will pre∣serve them. 
The Names. It is generally held to be Siliquastrum of Pliny, a siliquis quas producit, and Piperitis of him also, quia fructu Piperis sapore &amp; acrimonia sit, and mordeo, Capsicum of Actuarius, Pena thinketh it to be Zingiher Caninum of Avicen: it is in these dayes diversely called, for some call it Piper Indicum, Piper Americanum, Piper Brasilicum, or Brasilianum, some Calecuthium, some Hispanicum, and some Piper de Guinea. Fragosus saith that the Indians call it Axi, and besides the sorts here mentioned, he speaketh of one in the last Chapter of Spices, of a blackish blew colour, familiar in Spaine. Of the Italians Pepe Cornuto, and Pepe d ' India. Of the Spaniards Pepe Indiano. Of the French Poiure d ' Inde, and Poiure d ' Espagne. Of the Germanes Pfeffer Indianisch, and so like∣wise of the Dutchmen, we in English generally call it Ginny Pepper, and some Indian Pepper. The first as being best knowne, and first obtained in these Christian parts of the world, is mentioned by most of the later writers: Fuschius calleth the first two, Capsicum rubrum &amp; nigrum, and Siliquastrum majus &amp; minus, Matthiolus calleth them Piper Indicum, and mentioneth three sorts, this first kinde, the sixth sort, and the seventh, which the fi∣gure in Bauhinus, his addition unto him doth demonstrate. Lugdunensis calleth them, Capsicum majus &amp; minus, Caesalpinus tooke it to be Circaea of Dioscorides. Lobel calleth them Capsicum, vel Piper Indicum longioribus sili∣quis: the thirteenth is likewise remembred by Fuschius, by the name of Capsicum latum, and Siliquastrum qua∣tum, and so doth Dodonaeus also, and Lugdunensis from him, call it Capsicum latum, some also doe call that sort Capsicum Cordatum: the last is mentioned by Camerarius in his Hortus Medicus, by the name of Piper Indicum piloso caule: the most of the rest are remembred by the foresaid Gregorio de Reggio, and some by Bauhinus. 
The Vertues. The Ginny Pepper of all sorts (for herein they are all like) are hot and dry in the fourth degree, and beyond it if there be any beyond it, and are so fiery hot and sharpe biting in tast, that they burne and enflame the mouth and throate so extreamely that it is hardly to be endured; for if any shall eate thereof unadvisedly, it will bee almost sufficient to choake them, and if it be outwardly applyed to the skin in any place of the body, it will exulcerate it, and raise blisters in the same manner, as if they had beene burnt with fire or scalding water: yea the fierce vapours that arise from the huskes or cods, while one doth but open them, to take out the seede, to use or sowe, (especially if they doe mince or beate them into pouder) will so pierce the senses by flying up into the head by the nostrills, that it will procure aboundance of neesings, and draw downe such aboundance of thin rheume, that it is to be admired, forcing teares very plentifully: and passing likewise into the throate, it will provoke a sharpe coughing, and even cause a vomiting in that vehemencie, that all the bowells as well as the stomack, will be much perplexed therewith, and if any shall with their hands touch their face or eyes, it will raise so great an inflammation, both in the face and eyes, that they will thinke themselves utterly spoyled, which will not bee remedyed in a long time, by all the bathing of them with wine or cold water that may be used, but yet will passe away without further harme: if some hereof be cast into the fire, it raiseth greevous strong and noysome vapours, procuring sneezings very fiercely and coughing, and even vomiting or casting very strongly, to all that be in the roome any thing neare thereunto: yet marke and observe the goodnesse of our good God, that hath notwithstanding all these evill and noysome qualities, given unto man the knowledge how to tame and maister them, and cause them to be serviceable and profitable for their health: for whereas if it should be taken simply of it selfe, either in pouder or decoction, it were scarse to be endured, although in a small quantitie, and by often taking would prove very dangerous to life, the way here set downe is found to be the safest, both to be taken familiarly and often without offence in meate as well as medicine, as also to worke those good effects in Physick whereunto it is conducible: It is Gregorio de Reggio his receipt, for take saith he, of the ripe cods of any sort of Ginny Pepper (for as I sayd before, they are all in propertie alike) and dry them well, first of themselves, and then in an oven, after the bread is taken out, put into a pot or pipkin, with some flower that they may be tho∣roghly dryed, clense them from the flower, and their stalkes if they have any, cut them or clip them very small, both huskes and seedes within them, and to every ounce of them, put a pound of fine wheate flower (the same yee dryed them withall in the oven, may be p rt if yee will) make them up together into cakes or small loaves with so much leaven, as yee thinke may be convenient for the quantitie you make; bake these as you doe bread of that sise, and being baked cut it againe into smaller parts, and bake it againe, that it may be as dry and hard as bis∣ket, which beaten into fine pouder and sifted, may be kept for any the uses hereafter specified, or may serve in stead of ordinary Pepper, to season meate or broth, or for sauce, or any other purpose the East Indian Pepper doth serve: for it not onely giveth as good, but rather a better taste or rellish to the meate or sauce (yea and your wine and other drinke) but it is found to be singular good, to breake and discusse the winde, both in the stomacke and the collicke in the body: it is singular good to be used with such meates as are flatulent or windy, and such as breed much moysture and crudities (whereof fish is reckoned one speciall:) one scruple of the said pouder, taken in a little broth of Veale, or of a Chicken, doth wonderfully comfort a cold stomacke, causing flegme, and such grosse or viscous humours as lye low in the bottome thereof to be avoided, helpeth disgestion, for it provoketh an ap∣petite to meate, provoketh urine, and taken with Saxifrage water expelleth the stone in the kidneyes, and the flegme that breedeth them, and taketh away the dimnes or mistinesse of the sight used in meates; taken with Pillule Aelephanginae doth helpe the dropsie: the pouder taken for three dayes together in the decoction of Peny-royall, expelleth the dead birth, but if a peece of the cod or huske, either greene or dry be put into the mother after delivery, it will make them barren for ever after: but the pouder taken for foure or five dayes fasting, with as much Fennell seede, will ease all paines of the mother: the same also made up with a little pouder of Gentian, and oyle of bayes into a pessarie, with some cotten wooll, doth bring downe their courses if they have beene stayed the same mixed with a Lohoc or Electuary for the cough, helpeth an old inveterate cough; being mixed with hony and applyed to the throate, troubled with the squinsie, helpeth it in a short space, and made up with a little pitch or Turpentine, and layd upon any hard knots or kernells in any part of the body, it will resolve them, and not suffer any more to grow there: mixed with some niter and used, it taketh away the morphew and all other freckles, spots or markes, and discoulourings of the skin; applyed with Hens grease dissolveth all cold impostumes and carbuncles, and mixed with sharpe Vinegar, dissolveth the hardnesse of the spleene: if some thereof bee mixed with unguentum de alablastro, and the raines of the backe anointed therewith, it will take away the shaking fits of Agues: a plaister made thereof, and the leaves of Tobacco, will heale the sting or biting of any venemous beast: the decoction of the huskes themselves made with water, and the mouth gargled therewith easeth the toothach, and preserveth them from rottennesse: the ashes of them being rubbed on the teeth, will clense them and make them grow white that were blacke: the decoction of them with wine helpeth the Rupture that commeth of water, if it be applyed warme morning and evening if they ut it to steepe for three dayes together in aqua vitae, and the place affected with the palsie bathed therewith, will give a great deale of ease; and steeped for a day in wine, and two spoonefull thereof drunke every day fasting, will helpe a stinking breath, although it hath continued long; and snuft up into the nostrills, will correct and helpe the stinch of them, which is procured of flegme corrupted therein. 
CHAP. XII. Dorycnium. The supposed venemous plant Dorycnium. I Here are diverse plants set forth for the true Dorycnium of Dioscorides by diverse Writers, not any one whereof agreeth with all the notes that he giveth of it; so that yet to this day, the true Dorycnium, is not knowne to any that we can heare of: I will therefore here set forth unto you some of those plants, that the most judicious moderne Writers, doe suppose may be referred thereunto, as agreeing therewith in many things, and shew whereunto else they may most properly be referred. 
1. Dorycnium supposititium Monspeliense &amp; Hispanicum. The white shrubbe Trefoile of Mompelier and Spaine. The shrubbe Trefoile, which Rondeletius and other the learned of Mompelier, (as Pena saith) called Do∣rycnium, shooteth forth many wooddy branches, browne at the bottome, and whiter towards the toppes, some∣what flexible, to the height of three or foure foote (as I have observed in mine owne Garden) whereon at severall distances, come forth diverse smal whitish leaves, three or five or more together at a joynt, round about the stalke: at the toppes of the branches stand many small whitish flowers in tuftes, like unto the flowers of other Trefoiles but smaller, which turne into small long cods with small round blackish gray seedes within them: the roote is great, wooddy, very long, and branched into many parts under ground, of a pale reddish or flesh colour on the inside, covered with a darke brownish barke: which abideth diverse yeares, although the branches dye downe to the ground, if there be care taken to defend it from the extremities of the frosts in Winter, for want whereof mine perished: it hath little or no taste at all. 
2. Dorycnio congener Clusij. Another Trefoile like unto the former. This other as Clusius faith is very like the former, but more white or hoary, having shorter and broader leaves set in the same manner, three or five together, upon the small bending branches, which are whiter and slenderer than they: the flowers are greenish and larger than the former, standing many together on a slender bare twigge; Anguilara and Camerarius say the flowers are purple, or of a whitish purple colour, this hath a saltish taste with some acrimony in it also. 
3. Dorycnium Dioscoridis fortè Ponae. Pona his supposed true Dorycnium of Dioscorides. This strange plant saith Pona, that was encreased from the seede sent out of Candy, to Signor Contarino, and grew in his garden, rose to the height of a foote and a halfe, spreading forth into many branches, whereon did grow many small long and narrow rugged leaves full of veines, lesser then the leaves of the Olive tree, set with∣out order upon them: the flowers were fashioned like unto the blossomes of Pulse or Pease sometimes of a white colour, and sometimes of a more yellowish colour: the 1. 2. Dorycnium supposititium Monspeliense &amp; Hispanicum. The white shrubbe trefoile of Mompelier and Spaine. Et Dorycnio congener Clusij. Another like it. 
seed he saith he did not see, (but surely it must give seede in cods or huskes: for there are very few plants that beare pease or pulse like flowers, but they beare their seede in cods or the like) the rootes are many small strings and fibres shooting from a head, which whether it die every yeare or abide, wee have not yet learned: but Dioscorides saith that his Dorycnium hath a roote of the length of a cubit and of the thickenesse of a finger when it is growne old, which this as you heare hath not, and therefore if for nothing else, it agreeth not with the right Dorycnium of Dioscorides, and yet Pona saith, he hath not seene any plant that doth so neerely resemble the true Dorycnium as this doth. 
4. Dorycnium Creticum Alpini. The supposed true Dorycnium of Candy. This plant doth so differ from others, that every one is ready to apply it to a severall plant, as his judgement and affection to some particular part thereof doth draw him, because it doth partake with divers plants, as you shall heare: it riseth with divers straight upright wood∣dy stalkes, yet very flexible, divided into many bran∣ches from the bottome, all white or hoary; whereon grow many long thicke, and somewhat narrow white silver like leaves, set without order, at the toppes of the stalkes and branches, come forth many flowers to∣gether in a tuft or umbell, with some small leaves with them, every one whereof is broad, open at the brims, and round, consisting of one whole leafe, like unto a Bell-flower, or bindweed, which open by degrees, one after another, and not all together, whereby it doth continue the longer in flowring: after the flowers are fallen, come small rough huskes, wherein is contained blacke seed, like unto those of the Bindweedes, some∣what thicke and great: the roote is somewhat great and thicke not growing downe deepe into the ground, with many fibres thereat, which abideth many yeares in the warme countryes, yet the branches lose their 3. Dorycnium Dioscoridis forte Pona. Pona his supposed true Dorycnium of Dioscorides. 
4. Dorycnium Creticum Alpini. The supposed true Dorycnium of Candy by Alpinus. 
leaves in winter, themselves yeelding new, and budding fresh in the spring but hardly endureth a winter with us, unlesse especiall care be had to preserve it, by keeping it in a large pot or, such like, and housing it untill the spring. 
The Place. The two first grow in divers provinces of Spaine, as Clusius setteth it downe, and the foremost about Mom∣pelier also. The third and the last growboth in rocky or stony places neare the Sea, in Candy, from whence the seede or plants were first brought into Italy, and from thence to severall friends elsewhere.
The Time. They doe all flower very late in these parts, whereby their seede seldome commeth to perfection, and in their naturall not untill the Autumne. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Dorycnium, and of Cratevas as Dioscorides saith, &amp; Halicacabus, and Calea, some write it is called Dorycnium quasi toxicum, quo spicula cuspidatave tela infici solita fue∣runt, ut celeriorem molirentur perniciem saith Pena, but we cannot heare, that any of these plants, have any sopori∣ferous, much lesse venemous or mortall quality in them, as Dioscorides attributeth to his, and therefore the more suspitious that none of them are the right, although in the outward face, they may all of them, in some things resemble it. There are other plants also referred thereunto, as the Phyllirea, which Gesner in hortis Germaniae, ta∣keth to be a shrubbe like unto the Vitis Idaea, as also Pisum cordatum, or Ʋesicaria nigra, sive peregrinna cordis af∣figie, by Cordus upon Dirscorides. The first is called Dorycnium verum, by the learned of Mompelier, as Pena and Lobel say, and Anguillara, and Clusius say the same also, yet Clusius calleth it Dorycnicum Hispanicum, which was also sent him as he saith, by Ʋlisses Aldroandus, by the name of Trifolium album, but by Cordus in the place before recited, it is accounted false. Bauhinus in his Pinax reckoneth it among the spiked Trefoiles, calling it Trifolium album angustifolium floribus, velut in capitulum congestis. Clusius saith that the Spaniards about Sala∣manca, where he found it, call it Mijediega. Gerard calleth it venemous Trefoile of Mompelier, and of Spaine, ma∣king them to be two severall plants, expressed by two figures, and M r Iohnson his corrector letteth them so passe likewise, but I had rather give it the denomination of Dorycnium, from the Latine, as most other nations doe, and call it Dorycnium supposititium, supposed Dorycnium, because it is but supposed to be right, or else from the forme, and call it shrubbe Trefoile onely, because it is not dangerous. The second is so called by Clusius, as it is in the title, but Bauhinus calleth it Lotos pentaphyllos incanus. The third is called by Pona in his Italian booke, Dorycnium Dioscoridis forte, but by Bauhinus in his Pinax, Iaceae olaae folio affinis, and saith hee had the seede from Honorius Bellus, out of Candy, by the name of Lago Chymica, which grew with him, but if the flowers be leguminous, as Pona describeth them to be it cannot possibly come nere to any Iacaea, and yet againe in his Pinax, fol. 465. he maketh it also to be Cneoro albo affinis, which how likely it is, let others judge. The last Clusius set∣teth forth in the Appendix, to his History of Plants, by the name of Dorycnium Plateau, because Iacobus Plateau. had it growing with him, from the seede received from Candy, and sent both the figure and description thereof unto Clusius, Imperatus also it is likely had it from thence, by the same name of Dorycnium, for so Bauhinus saith, he called it, and Alpinus in his booke de plantis exoticis, saith that they of Candy doe call it Dorycnium. Yet Pona doth not account it to be the right, but rather thinketh it to be a Convolvus, and calleth it Convolvulus rect Creticus. Lugdunensis calleth it Cneorum album Dalechampij, and Bauhinus in his Pinax calleth it, Cneorum ∣bum folio oleae argenteo molli. 
The Vertues. There hath not beene any experience made of any of these plantes, so farre as I can understand, that they be effectuall to any Physicall use, and therefore I can say no more of them; for seeing none of them are soperiferous, as Dioscorides his Dorycnium, or venemous, and was accounted as strong a Toxicum, to dippe their arrowes heads in, to kill wild beasts, as any other; I cannot appropriate the vertues of Dorychinum, to any of these plants. Yet Galen accounted it onely like unto Mandrake and Poppy, for the cooling property, and only dangerous if too much were taken thereof, in provoking too much sleepe. 
CHAP. XIII. Hyoscyamus. Henbane. T He ancient writers hath made mention, but of three kindes of Henbane, the one blacke, the other white, and the third yellow; which denominations are not taken from the colour of the herbe or flower, but of the seede: but there hath beene some other sorts found out of later times; all which I thinke meete to set downe in this Chapter together. 
1. Hyoscyamus vulgaris. Common Henbane. Our common Henbane, hath very large, thicke, soft, woolly leaves, lying upon the ground, much cut in or torne on the edges, of a darke or evill grayish greene colour, among which rise up divers thicke and soft stalkes, two or three foote high, spread into divers smaller branches, with some lesser leaves on them, and many hollow flowers, scarse appearing above the huskes, and usually torne on the one side, ending in five round points, grow∣ing one above another, of a deadish yellow colour, somewhat paler towards the edges, with many purplish veines therein, and of a darke yellowish purple in the bottome of the flower, with a small pointell of the same colour in the middle, each of them standing in a hard close huske, which after the flower is past, groweth very like (the huske of the Pomgranet flower, but that is not so well knowne unto us) the flower or huske of As a bacca, and somewhat sharpe at the toppe points, wherein is contained much small seed, very like unto Poppy seede, but of a duskye grayish colour, the roote is great white, and thicke, branching forth divers wayes under ground, so like unto a Parsnep roote, but that it is not so white, that it hath deceived divers, as you shall heare by and by; the whole plant more then the roote, hath an heavie evill soporiferous smell somewhat offen∣sive. 
1. Hyoscyamus nige vel vulgaris. Common or white Henbane. 
3. Hyoscyamus Creticus. Henbane of Candye. 
 
2. Hyoscyamus albus. White Henbane. The white Henbane hath divers large leaves, but not so great as the former, yet more soft and woolly and not so much jagged or torne on the edges, rounder also, and of a paler greene colour; the stalkes grow higher, and with fewer branches on them, the flowers are in forme like the other, but smaller and of a pale colour, en∣clining to a whitish yellow: the seed likewise groweth in such like hard huskes, but lesse prickely, and is whi∣ter: the roote also is not much unlike, but lesser and perisheth every yeare that it giveth seede, the smell of this is nothing so heady and offensive as the other. 
3. Hyoscyamus Creticus. Henbane of Candy. This Henbane of Candy, hath lesser and thinner leaves then the last, more white and woolly, and more cut in on the edges, dented also, and standing upon longer 4 Hyoscianus Aegyptius. Henbane of Egypt. 
footestalkes, the stalkes are more slender and short, ha∣ving such like flowers, ending in full round leaves, stan∣ding higher above the huskes, of a faire yellow and some∣time of a pale yellow colour, and purple at the bottome: after which come seede like the common kinde, but some∣what yellower in rounder heades or huskes: the roote is somewhat thicke and short, like a Navew roote, dying every yeare with us. 
4. Hyoscyamus Aegyptius. Henbane of Egypt. The Egyptian Henbane riseth up with a strong woolly stalke, about two foote high, wheron are set lesser leaves, then those of the common kinde, and almost as much torne on the edges, especially those towards the bottome, but those that grow up higher toward the toppe, are little or nothing cut on the edges at all, all of them being very white and hoary: the flowers stand every one of them at the joynts with the leaves, and at the tops likewise, in such like huskes as the common doth, and of the same pale yellow colour, with purple veines therein, at the first blowing of them, but afterwards as they grow larger, so the colour changeth to be of a darke reddish colour, with veines of a deeper colour, and a whitish bottome, with a purple pointell, encompast with yellowish threds in the middle, after which commeth such like prickely heads, as the common kinde hath, and such like seed also: the roote is small and perisheth every yeare. 
The Place. The first is commonly growing by the way sides, and under hedge sides, and walles: the second groweth by the Sea sides, in Narbone in France, neare where the River Rh da us runneth into the Sea. The third groweth in Can∣dye, and in Spaine also, from whence the seed being sent, hath growne with me and divers others also. The last is naturall both in Egypt and Syria, and in our Gardens. 
The Time. They doe all flower in Iuly, yet the strange kindes somewhat later, and from their seed growing ripe, and suffered to shed, it springeth up againe every yeare, but the two last doe scarse perfect their seede with us. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , quasi faba porcina, quod Aeliano authore, pastu hujus herbae convellantur sues aprive, presenti mortis periculo, nisi copia aquae statim se foris &amp; intus proluerint: adeuntes aquas, non ut proluant se tantum, verum etiam ut cancros venentur, eos enim nacti protinus sanitati restituuntur; in Latine also Hyoscya∣mus, and corruptly Iusquiamus, and Apollinaris, ab Apolline medecinae inventore, vel quia opplet cerebrum vitioso &amp; faetido halitu, coque montem percellit, quasi Apollinis oestro. Pliny saith that the Arabians call it Altercum, or Altercangenum, but Scribonius saith the Latines call it Altercum, ab altercando, quia cum verborum altercatione rixaque se torquent Hyosciamo dementati; Camerarius saith, it is also called Priapcia, quia Itali semine utuntur ad priapismum sedandum. It is called by the Arabian Phisitions Bengi (which name differeth but little from Bangue of Garcias ab Orta, and Christophorus Acosta, so called of the Persians and Indians also of divers places, and peradven∣ture may be the same, for they say the plant is insipide, or without taste, and the seede both smaller then Hempe whereunto it is compared, and not so white: (and which hath a great affinity as Clusius saith, with the Maslac of the Turkes: yet Bauhinus saith, that their Maslac, is made of the great Stramonium or Pomum spinosum ) which procureth a kinde of sleepy drunkennesse, or alienation of the minde, as this doth, with some other ef∣fects tending to venery, as may be seene in their workes, whereunto I referre those that would be further in∣formed:) of the Italians Iusquiamo, of the Spaniards Ʋelenho, of the French Iusquiame, and Hanne banc, of the Germanos Biilsenkraut, of the Dutchmen Bilsen cruide. The first is called by all authors Hyoscyamus vulgaris, or niger, onely Fuschius calleth it flavus. The second is likewise called Hyoscyamus albus of all, and is but of one kinde, although Bauhinus seemeth to make two. The third is called by Clusius, Hyoscyamus Creticus, and although he make two sorts as Bauhinus doth, that followeth him, yet assuredly I thinke that they are both but one plant, as the descriptions doe declare. The last likewise is by Bauhinus divided into two or three sorts, because Ca∣merarius in horto, setteth forth two figures, the one he nameth Syriacus, the other peculiaris; when in his de∣scriptions he saith they differ onely in the broadnesse of the leaves, the one from the other, which may happen rather by the fertility of the soile, wherein they grow, then of any other specificall difference. Bauhinus nameth it rubello flore, and maketh it to be another sort from the Egyptiacus of Clusius, when as both Clusius and Camerarius agree in this, that Paludanus brought the seede from Egypt, and Rauwolfinus saith he found it growing about Aleppo: so that the seven sorts of Hyoscyamus set forth by Bauhinus, are but these foure here recited, for his th sorts of white, are but one, his two sorts of Candy are but one; and his two sorts, the one rubello flore, and the other spinosi ssimis Aecauliculis giptiacus are but one, even that which Camerarius calleth Syriacus, and peculi and Clusius Aegyptiacus rubello flore: but Dioscorides his third sort, wich is the yellow, is not declared, which if these it should be, the first being called niger, blacke, and the second white, are peculiarly set downe, and agre upon by all, but the yellow, as I said is not so plainely determined, some taking the English Tobacco to be it or the Indian kinde, being quite differing in effect, this being hot and stupefactive, the other cold and soperiferous: but if I might be allowed my verdit, I should say that the Candy Henbane is most probable to be the yellow, and the Egyptian kinde the blacke, or a species thereof differing onely by the climate. 
The Vertues. The blacke or common Henbane, and the yellow, are both accounted to be more dangerous than the white, and therefore to be as much avoyded in inward medicines as may be, and that but in case of necessitie, when the white cannot be had, for the white is cold in the third degree, and the other in the fourth, procuring drowsi∣nesse and a senslessnesse of the spirits, stupefied by the benumming qualitie; the white is fit onely to be used in in∣ward Phisicke, which is most availeable to many good purposes, if it be wisely and conveniently applied; but the leaves of them all doe coole all hot inflammations, either in the eyes or any other part of the body; and are good to asswage all manner of swellings, whether of the cods, or womens breasts, or else where, if they be boyled in wine, and either applied themselves or the fomentation warme: the same also applied to the goute, asswageth the paines thereof, and of the Sciatica, and all other paines in the joynts, and other parts, which rise from an hot cause; it helpeth likewise the headach, and want of sleepe in hot fevers, applying it with vinegar to the forehead and temples: the juyce of the herbe or seede, or the oyle drawne from the seede doth the like, and so doth the decoction of the huskes, to wash the feete or the head, but see that you doe not use it too often for feare of danger: Dioscorides saith that the seede is profitable against the defluxions, of hot and sharpe salt rheumes upon the lungs causing a cough, as also against the strangling and other paines of the mother, and to stay the over∣great fluxes of their courses, and all other fluxes of bloud: the oyle of the seede is helpefull for the deafenesse and noise and wormes in the eares, being dropped therein: the juice of the herbe or roote doth also the same: it helpeth the tooth-ach, if the roote be boyled in vinegar, and a little of the decoction be held on that side the paine is: some have also affirmed, that the fume of the seede being burned, taken into the mouth, will not onely ease the paines, but cause the wormes to fall out from the teeth, but diverse cunning knaves to deceive those they would get money from, having caused such to hold their mouthes over warme water, have cunningly conveyed small peeces of Lute strings into the water, to cause them to beleeve they voyded so many live wormes, as there are peeces in the water: for the property of those Lute strings is, that feeling the heate of the water, they will seeme to stirre, and move as though they were alive: but Pena sheweth that hee knew a young woman that used the foresaid fomentation for her teeth, that after shee had ease of them, was for three dayes so troubled in her senses, that she seemed as if shee had beene drunke, being very merry and pleasant all that time, which passed away without further danger: but I know a friend of mine, that having digged up some Parsneppe rootes that grew in his Garden, by chance some rootes of Henbane which grew among them (which a I had before is somewhat like thereunto) were boyled with them, and he eating thereof at supper, was very shortly after first troubled with a drought, that nothing that he could take would quench it, then his taste, or rellish of any thing was taken away, suddenly also his sight was troubled that he could not discerne things as they were, but as if they were 3. or 4. fold, his urine also was quite stopped, so that notwithstanding he had great desire to make water, yet he could not possibly: in this perplexitie he continued most of the night, neither could he rest, or sleepe being in bed, but his urine by the stopping thereof grew so hot within him, and not able to passe it from him, caused him to bethinke himselfe of a pouder, himselfe had caused to be made, availeable against the stone, which he caused to be given him, which suddenly caused him to make water and thereby hee presently felt incredible ease in his whole body, for all the things that he had taken before did doe him no good, but by this meanes he quickly recovered his sight, and the other symptomes vanished, and before morning, hee was as well as before the taking of that roote: the servants also that did eate of the good Parsneps that were boyled with these malignant rootes were somewhat distempered, some more some lesse, each somewhat, according to their feeding, and their owne dispositions working together: this I have related that you may know also the danger of this herbe, and of every part thereof; the seede is usually mixed with Cocu Indus to take fish, causing them that take it to turne up their bellies, and lie above the water as if they were dead for a while; but they doe not long abide in this manner, but returne to their senses againe and swimme away: Hens also or other birds, that take of this seede will die, and the fume of the herbe being bur∣ned, and brought into their rousting place, will cause them to fall downe as if they were dead: the decoction also of the herbe or seede or both, will kill lice and vermine whether in man or beast, which you shall plainely per∣ceive in a dogge troubled with lice, being washed therewith, the lice will be soone found dead upon him, and some fall from him: the fume of the dried herbe, stalkes, and seede burned, and the hands held over the fume thereof, that are troubled with swellings and chilblanes in the Winter, or their heeles that have kibes, will quickly heale them. The distilled water of the herbe is effectuall for all the purposes aforesaid. The remedy to helpe those that have taken Henbane, is to drinke Goates milke, much mede or honied water, Pine kernells with sweete wine; or if these be not at hand or will doe no good. Fennell seede, Nettle seede, the seede of Cressies, Mustard or Raddish, as also Onions or Garlicke taken in wine, doe all helpe to free them from danger, and re∣store them to their due temper againe. The white Henbane is as I said, the fittest and most effectuall in all inward medicines for the griefes afore specified: the other sorts are of the qualitie of the ordinary, that is, more dange∣rous than the white. 
CHAP. XIV. Papaver. Poppie. T Here are diverse sorts of Poppies, some tame and of the garden, others wild and of the fieldes; of the Garden kinde some have single and some have double flowers: of the wilde there are diverse kindes, some of the corne fields most properly and plentifully, and therefore called Corne Rose, or Corne Poppie, others whose heads of seede are small &amp; long, bending or bowing like an horne, and therefore called Horned Poppy, of which kinde one sort groweth most usually by the sea side: others by the pathes, hedges and bankes in fields: then that kinde called Spatling Poppie, differing from them all, as Papaver Heracleum doth, although called Poppy: and lastly, there is a bastard kind of wild Poppie, called in Latine Argemone, which al∣though Dioscorides reckoneth it not among the Poppies, yet he maketh it like unto the wild corne Poppie, both in heads and flowers, and like the Anemones in leaves, and as he saith with a round roote, wherein it differeth from ours. Of some of these kindes I have already spoken, and therefore neede not to discribe them againe: the Gar∣den kindes, with double flowers I have set forth in my former Booke of the Garden of flowers, as also a kinde of that wild Corne Poppie, that beareth double flowers: and in the Classis of purging plants, here before in this Booke, I have set downe all the sorts of Horned Poppie; as also that kind of Spatling Poppie, that is so accounted with us: the rest of the sorts and kindes not set forth, are now to be entreated off: but I thinke it most fit to give you some of the figures before expressed, and to speake of the sorts of Argemone, in the next Chapter, and not in this. 
1. Papaver simplex sativum album. Single Garden white Poppie. The Garden Poppie hath at the first, foure or five whitish greene leaves, lying upon the ground, which rise with the stalke, compassing it at the bottome of them and are very large both broad and long, much rent or torne in on the edges, and dented also besides: the stalke (for every roote for the most part hath but one, of the height of foure or five foote (hath sometimes no branches at the toppe, and usually but two or three at the most, bearing every one but one head, wrapped or folded in a thinne filme or skinne, which boweth downe, before it be ready to blow, and then rising and being broken, the flower which was foulded within it, sprea∣deth it selfe open, and consisteth of foure very large white round leaves, with many whitish round threds in the middle, set about a small round greene head, having a crowne or starre-like cover at the head thereof, which growing ripe becommeth to be as large as the greatest apple; ( Bellonius saith the heades are in Natolia (where they make Opium ) so great, that they will containe halfe a pint) wherein are contained a great number of white small round seede, in severall partitions or divisions, next unto the shell the middle thereof remaining hollow 1. Papave simplex album sativum. Garden white Poppie 
Papaver multiplici flore. Double Garden Poppies. 
and emptie: this head abideth close, and openeth not at the toppe under 2. Papaver sativum simplex nigrum. Single garden blacke Poppie.
4. Papaver Rhaeas. Wild Poppie or corne Rose. 
5. Papaver spinosum Americanum. Thorny Poppie of America. 
the crowne, as all the blacke kindes for the most part doe: all the whole plant, both leaves stalkes and heads, while they are fresh, young and greene, yeeld a milke when they are broken, of an unpleasant bitter taste, almost ready to provoke casting, and of a strong heady smell, which being condensate, is called either Opium or Meconium, as you shall heare by and by: the roote is white and wooddy, perishing as soone as it hath given ripe seede: Of this white kinde, there is another in all things like unto it, but that the flowers, but especially the head of seede is not so great by the halfe, and for the most part hath more bran∣ches upon the stalkes; Alter. the seede is as white as the other, and as large or great. Papaver sativum multopli∣ci flore. The varieties of the double garden Poppies are set forth in my former Booke. 
2. Papaver sativum simplex nigrum. Single garden blacke Poppie. There is little difference to be discerned betweene this and the last mentioned, untill it beareth his flower, which in this is somewhat lesse, and of a blacke purplish colour, without any purple spots in the bottome of the leafe as in the next; the head of seede is usially not so bigge as the second sort of white ones, and openeth it selfe a little round about the toppe under the crowne, so that the seede which is very blacke, will fall out if one turne the head thereof downewards. 
3. Papaver sativum simplex flore rubro rubente, &amp;c. Single garden red Poppie of diverse colours. There be some other sorts of this garden Poppie, which differ not onely somewhat in the leaves from the former, being lesser, and in some crumpled and cut in on the edges, but in the jagged edges also of some of the flowers, and specially in the colour of the flower and seede, for the flower of some will be very red, of others paler, some of a Rose colour, others of a murry colour, either deeper or paler, yet all of them have a deeper spot somewhat large in the bottome of every leafe: and as the flower varieth so doth the seede also, for the Rose and pale coloured flower bringeth gray or ashcoloured seed, the Reddish and deepemurrey, not so pale seede, but more enclining to the blacke: the seedes of all these kindes, the white as well as the blacke or gray, if they be suffered to shed will spring up againe the next yeare, and beare every kinde his owne colour of flower and seed, and doe not degenerate or vary, for ought that ever I could observe. 
4. Papaver erraticum, Rhaeas sive silvestre. Wilde red Poppy or Corne Rose. The leaves of the wild Poppy, are long and narrow, very much cut in on the edges into many divisions, of a light greene colour, but not whitish, and sometimes hairye withall: the stalke is blackish and hairy also, but riseth not up so high as the Garden kindes, having some such like leaves thereon as grow below, parted into three or foure branches sometimes, whereon grow small hairy heads bowing downe, before the skinne breake, where∣in the flower is enclosed, which when it is full blowne open, is of a faire yellowish red or crimson colour, and in some much paler, without any spot in the bottome of the leaves, having many blacke soft threds in the middle, compassing a small greene head, which when it is ripe, is not bigger then ones little fingers end, wherein is con∣tained much blacke seede, smaller by halfe then that of the Garden: the roote perisheth every yeare, and the seed springeth every yeare of its owne sowing. Of this kinde there is one that is lesser in all the parts thereof, and differeth in nothing else. Bauhinus maketh mention of one of this kinde, that bore a great yellow flower, Minu Flore pleno. and peradventure might be the Argemone flore luteo in the next Chapter, but the plant was onely brought dry un∣to him, gathered as he saith in divers wet places, on the Pyrenean hils. The double wild Poppy is described also in my former Booke. 
5. Papaver spinosum. Thorny Poppy. Vnto the sorts of Poppye I thinke meete to adjoyne this Thornye Poppy, not finding a fitter place; which hath at the first, three or more whitish greene leaves lying upon the ground, straked with white veines, which growing greater, are long, smooth, and not hairy, somewhat long and broad, rent or torne diversly on the edges, but not to the middle ribbe, having many corners or dentes as it were about them, whereat stand many small sharpe prickes or thornes, not having any white strakes or veineson the underside, but in the white milkye veines are like to that wilde Carduus or Thistle, called our Ladies Thistle, and on the underside are more whitish, with some small prickes, along the middle ribbe and veines, compassing the stalke at the bottome of them, which riseth to be two or three foote high, spreading forth into diverse branches, with the like, but lesser leaves on them, and bearing at every of the toppes, one small head, enclosed in a rough skinne or filme, like as the Poppies have, from whence I thinke rose the name of a Poppy, given unto it, which being open sheweth forth a small yellow flower, consisting of five leaves usually, yet sometimes it will have but foure, and some∣times sixe, with a small long greene prickely head in the middle, tipped at the top with a red spot, which quickly weareth away, and with many yellow threds standing about it; after the flower is past, for it continueth but a while, the head groweth ripe, having five or sixe ribbes from the toppe to the bottome, and so likewise be∣tweene the ribbes, armed with very small, but cruell sharpe and short prickes, or thornes, wherein is enclosed round rough blacke seed, twice as bigge as any Poppye seed: the roote is small and spreading, dying every yeare; every part of the plant yeeldeth a yellow juice. 
The Place. The Garden kindes doe not naturally grow wild in any place, I thinke, although Dioscorides, Galen, and o∣thers say, that the blacke kinde that sheddeth his seede, groweth wilde, for I rather suppose that some seed hap∣pening there by chance, shed it selfe, and so was thought to grow naturally wilde, and being suffered to shed, will grow plentifully, though smaller, but in all Countries, at the least in all Christian Countries, they are all sowen, and not found wild, so farre as I can learne, onely the first wilde kinde is plentifull enough, and many times too much, in the corne fields of all Countries, and also upon ditch banckes, and hedge sides: the lesser also is found in corne fieldes, but more rarely, as also in some other places. The thornye Poppy groweth in the West-Indies, from whence the seede was first brought to us. 
The Time. The Garden kindes are usually sowen in the spring, which then flower about the end of May, and somewhat earlier, if they spring of their owne sowing: the wilde kindes flower usuall from May untill Iuly, and the seed of them all is soone ripe after the flowring. The Thorny kinde flowreth seldome before Midsomer, and the seede is ripe in August, but is to be sowen in Autumne, or else it hardly springeth. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke a non ministrando, quod vescentes suis muniis fungi non possunt; or as some thinke a , quod ejus usus nimium infrigidet, &amp; hominibus tandem motum auferat, the Garden white kinde is called (and of Dioscorides thy lacitis and the blacke seede is called pithitis) hortense or sativum: the wild kinde is called Rhaeas, that is fluidum, quia flores protinus decidunt; in Latine Papaver Rhaeas, erraticum, rubrum, or silvestre; Dioscorides Galen, and others, make onely the first great white kinde, to be the Garden kinde, and the blacke to be the wilde sort, the Garden kinde is called by the Arabians Caxcax, by the Italians Papavero domestico, by the Spaniards Dormideras and Cascall, by the French Pavot, by the Ger∣mans Magsamen and Olsamen, of the Dutchmen Huell and Mancup; of us in English Poppy, or Garden Poppye for the most part, yet in some Countries with us, Ione silver pinne, subauditur faire without and foule within, and in many other places Cheeseboules: the wild Poppy is called in Italian, Papavero silvatico, in Spanish Ama∣polas rosella, and Papoulas; in French Coquelicoc, Pavot sauvage and Confanons, in the high Dutch tongue Clapper rosen, and korn rosen, in the low Dutch tongue Rooden huel, wilden huel, and Colbloemen, in English, Wild Poppy, Corne Rose, redweede, and Canckers, Tragus calleth it Argemone. The Thorny Poppy is called generally by all now adayes, Papaver spinosum, but of Gerard Carduus Cerysanthemus Peruanus; by the Spaniards in the Indies, from whom the Italians had it Figo del Jnferno, that is Ficus Infernalis, the Figge of hell, because the prickely head is long and round, somewhat like a figge, and that whosoever should have one of them sticke in his throate, it would surely send him to heaven or hell. The milkye juice gathered from the heades onely of the great white Poppye, growing in the East Countryes of Asia major, towards India, and in divers other countries of those Indies, (for it is there a great merchandise of much use and expence, as also in Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Ga∣latia, Cilicia and Natolia, which is the lesser Asia, as I said before,) is that true and best Opium, that is or should be used in Narcoticke medicines, and is an ingredient of much respect, in those great compositions of Theriaca and Mithridatium, &amp;c. whereof a small quantity, hath beene gathered in some Christian Countryes: and my selfe and others in our owne land, have gathered a little from the greene heads, as they stand, and are but halfe growne ripe, slit or cut with a knife in two or three places, that the milke issuing forth, may be gathered into some convenient thing, and hardned afterwards in the Sunne, but not at the fire, which will not be so blacke as that Opium, that commeth usually to us, which is rather Meconium as Dioscorides setteth it downe, which is made of the juice of both leaves and heades pressed forth, of the white as well as of the blacke Poppy, for the true best Opium is somewhat of a whitish yellow or brownish colour, and giveth no such yellow tincture, as that which is sophisticate and made with Glaucium, (which is the yellow juice of an herbe, with leaves like un∣to horned Poppy, but divers have thought Glaucium, to be the juice of Chelidonius majus, others of Pomum am majus, and lastly Bauhinus and some others, thinke it to be of this thorny Poppy, because it giveth a yellow juice) but as Bellonius writeth, that to have any quantity of true Opium, it rather consisteth in the multitude of gathe∣rers (for it must be both speedily gathered, and in the heat of the day) then in the great quantity of ground sowen therewith, it being a tedious worke; for a very small quantity can be but gathered by any one in a day, in that every head yeeldeth but little, and must be attended to be taken from them, before it be dryed too much upon them. 
The Ʋertues. All the sorts of Poppyes are cold in the fourth degree, but especially Opium or the condensate juice, as Galen and divers other authours doe affime, yet Matthiolus sticketh thereat, thinking it rather to be hot, by the sharpe∣nesse and bitternesse thereof, and is Anodinum medicamentum, that is such a medicine, that by procuring sleepe, easeth many paines for the present, which indeede it doth but palliate or cause to be quiet for a time; the conti∣nuall use whereof, bringeth very often more harme, and a more dangerous disease then it hath allayed, that is an insensiblenesse or stupefaction of a part or member, which commeth to be the dead palsie, for although Diosco∣rides, Galen, and others write, that the white seed is familiarly taken in bread, and made into cakes and eaten with pleasure, and Matthiolus and divers others have observed that in our dayes, the white Poppy seede, is sowen in Italy and other places, and much used, yea and the blacke seede also, although as they all agree, it is stronger in operation, and onely medicineable, or onely to be used in Physicke to helpe diseases; for Matthiolus writeth that the inhabitants about Trent, doe sow the blacke seede in their fields and grounds, among Beanes and other pulse, which they familiarly eate, being made into cakes, that are made of many foldes, the seede be∣ing cast in betweene the folds, and so kneaded together, and yet hee saith, they are no whit more sleepy or drowsie, then those that eate none of them: as also that in Stiria and the upper Austria, the inhabitants doe eate the oyle pressed out of the blacke seede in their meates familiarly, in the stead of Sallet oyle, and finde no incon∣veniency of drowsinesse at all thereby; which made him as he saith, venture to give the creame of the seede made up with Barly water oftentimes, and in great quantity, in the hot fits of agues, and burning feavers, both to aswade thirst, and to procure rest, and hereby as he saith, he shooke of that feare of Poppy, that his wise Masters had by their grave admonitions, seasoned him withall in former times: the Garden Poppy heads with seedes made into a Syrupe, is both frequently used in our dayes, and to very good effect to procure rest and sleepe in the sicke and weake, and to stay catarrhes, and defluxions of hot and thinne rheume, from the head into the stomacke, and upon the lungs, causing a continuall cough, the forerunner of a consumption; but hath not halfe that force in those that are stronger, for the strength or debility of nature worketh divers effects, as you see, as well in this, as in all or most other things; the same also helpeth the hoarsenesse of the throate, and when one hath lost their voyce, which the oyle of the seede doth likewise: the blacke seed boyled in wine and drunke, is said also to stay the fluxe of the belly, and the immoderate course of womens sickenesse: the empty shels of the Poppy heades, are usually boyled in water, and given to procure rest and sleepe; so doe the leaves in the same manner, as also if the head and temples be bathed with the decoction warme, or with the oyle of Poppyes, the greene leaves or heads bruised, and applyed with a little vinegar, or made into a pultis with Barly meale and Axungia, cooleth and tempereth all inflammations, as also that disease called Saint Anthonyes fire. The Opium, but I may rather say the Meconium, (which is the juice of the Poppy thickned) that is commonly used in the A∣pothecaries shops, and is much weaker by the judgement of all, both moderne and ancients, then the true Opium, ) is much colder, and stronger in effect, than any other part of the plant, but if we may know the temperature and qualities of things, by their taste and effect, we may rather judge Opium to be hot then cold, or at the least, to have very hot parts in it, witnesse the bitternesse thereof, the heate and sharpenesse that is felt in the mouth, up∣on the tasting, and keeping it in the mouth a while, that it is ready to blister both tongue and pallate; as also the grievous or heady heavy smell, as well in it, as in the whole plant: but it may be saith Matthiolus, the bit∣ternesse, heate, and sharpenesse in Opium, or Meconium, is rather accessory then innate, and is therein by the mixture and adulterating of it with Glaucium, and to give a yellow juice, for our Opium if it be dissolved doth shew a brownish yellownesse; yet by his leave I may say, that even the fresh milke with us, is bitter and strong in smell like the Meconium or Opium, but because our ancients, who have found out the qualities of things and left them for our knowledge, have so found and judged of Opium, I must as Matthiolus saith, leave it for others to descant theron, as reason and experience shall direct them: It is generally used as I said before in Treakle and Mithridatum, and in all other medicines that are made to procure rest and sleepe, and to ease paines in the head, as well as in other parts, as I said before, or rather to palliate them, it is used also, both to coole inflammations, agues, or frensies, and to stay defluctions, which cause a cough or consumption, as also other fluxes of the belly, or womens courses, and generally for all the properties that the seede or any other part of the plant is used: it is also put into hollow teeth to ease the paine: it is used both in ocular and auricular medicines with some, and to stay fluxes and to ease paines, but Galen, and divers others in the former as well as in our times, have forbid∣den such medicines, as too dangerous for the eyes, and even any other wayes used inwardly, it is not to be ta∣ken, but with good correction and great caution, yet divers have found that applyed to the gout, it hath given much ease of paine: The wild or red Poppy that groweth in the corne, while it is young, is a Sallet herbe in Italy, in many places, and in the territory of Trent especially, as Matthiolus saith, as also to prevent the falling sicknesse, which Theophrastus also saith in his 9. booke and 13. Chapter, was common in his time: the Syrupe made of the flowers is with good effect, given to those that have a Plurisie, and the dryed flowers also, either boyled in water or made into powder and drunke, either in the distilled water of them, or in some other drinke, worketh the like effect; the same also is availeable, in all other cephalicall or pectorall griefes: the distilled water of the flowers of the wilde red Poppyes, is held to be of much good use against surfets, to drinke it even∣ing and morning: it is also more cooling in quality then any other Poppy, and therefore cannot but be as ef∣fectuall in hot agues, frensies, and other inflammations, either inward or outward the Syrupe or water to be used therein, or the greene leaves used outwardly, either in an ointment as it is in Populeon, a cooling ointment, or any other wayes applyed, Galen in 7. facultatum simplicium medicamentorum, saith the seede is dangerous to be used inwardly. Gerard was much mistaken, to thinke that this wilde Poppy should be that, which should be used in the composition called Diacodium, and citeth Galen for his authour, as if he had taught him that opi∣nion, not understanding what kinde of Poppy Galen doth meane by wild Poppy, for he according as Dioscori∣des afore him hath done, accounteth onely the great white Poppy, whose heads are somewhat long, to be the garden or manured kinde, and the other blacke kind to be wild, and doth not meane this red Poppy, because it is onely wild with us, and not sowen, as whosoever shall observe the places throughly shall finde. The thor∣ny Poppy being but of late invention, hath not beene applyed to any disease by any, that I can heare of. 
CHAP. XV. Argemone. Bastard wilde Poppy. T Here is of the kindes of wilde Poppy divers other sorts, some described by others, and some not set forth by any before that I know, which being found in our owne land, shall be spoken of with the rest. 
1. Argemone capitulo rotundiore. Round headed bastard Wild Poppy. This kind of wilde Poppy, hath divers hairy greene leaves lying on the ground, somewhat longer and more divided into parts, then those of the former wild Poppy, somewhat like unto the leaves of the thinne leafed Anemone or wind flower, as Lobel saith, but is seldome so found with us, from a∣mong which rise up diverse rough hairy stalkes, more then two foote high sometimes, bearing such like leaves here and there on them, lesser then those below, all yeelding a yellow juice or milke being broken, and on the top of each branch one flower lesser then the other wilde Poppy, yet consisting of foure round pointed leaves, of a more delayed red colour, sometimes having each of them a blackish spot in the bottome, and sometimes with∣out, with divers blackish threds standing about a small greene head, which when it is ripe, is somewhat short, rough and round, with some crests thereon, and a little round head, but not a Crowne or starre, like the Pop∣pies 1. Argemone capitulo rotundiore. Round headed bastard wilde Poppy. 
4. Argemone lutea Cambro-Britanica. Yellow wild bastard Poppy of Wales. 
at the top, wherein is conteined such like small blackish seed, as the former wild kind hath, but bigger, the roote is small and long, with many fibres thereat, and perisheth in the like manner after seede time. 
2. Argemone capitulo longiore. Long headed Bastard wild Poppy. This is in all things like the last, both for leaves, flowers, and seede, the chiefest difference in this from the for∣mer consisteth in the head with seede, which is longer then the other, smaller below then above, yet having little round head at the top, but no crowne, and is rough and hard like it. 
3. Argemone Alpina lutea, Yellow mountaine bastard wilde Poppy. The yellow outlandish mountaine bastard wilde Poppy, hath many smooth greene leaves, set on somewhat hairy long footestalkes, an handbredth long, which leaves are very much and finely cut on the edges, very like unto those of the Coriander leafed Crowfoote, from among which rise up divers bare or naked stalkes, yet hai∣ry withall, of halfe a foote high, at the toppes whereof stand one flower a peece, of a meane size, consisting of foure yellow leaves, with many whitish threds in the middle tipt with yellow, standing about a small round and rough head, like the former kinde, wherein is contained small blackish seede: the roote is small and long, and threddy at the end. 
4. Argemone Cambro-Britanica lutea. Yellow wild Bastard Poppy of Wales. This yellow Poppy, hath many winged large spreade leaves, lying upon the ground, that is, many leaves set to∣gether on each side of a middle rib, each divided leafe being somewhat deepely cut in, in some places of the edges, more then others, of a deepe, but faire greene colour: among these leaves rise up, divers branched stalkes two foote high, having some such leaves thereon, but smaller, at severall distances, and at the tops of the stalkes and branches, a faire yellow somewhat large flower, consisting of foure round leaves, with many yellow threds in the middle, standing about a long greene head in the middle, which when the flower is fallen, and the head ripe, is then larger then the former long headed wilde Poppy, but in the like manner smaller at the bottome and bigger at the toppe, with a small head thereon, containing much small blacke seed, lying within severall cels, in the same fashion that the other Poppies doe; the roote is long, and brownish on the outside, spreading into some branches, and divers small fibres thereat, which perisheth not every yeare, as the other sorts before specified doe. 
The Place. The two first are often found as well in Corne fields, in Summersetshire, Kent, and other Countries of this land, as in the corners and borders of fieldes, and by the way sides. The third was found upon Sueberg a hill in Austria, as also on some hils in Italy. The last groweth in many places of Wales, in the valleyes and fields, at the foote of the hils, and by the water sides, about a mile from a small village called Abbar, and in the midway from Den igh to Guider, the house of a worthy Gentleman Sir Iohn Guin, as also neere a woodden bridge, that giveth passage ouer the River Dee, to a small village called Balam, which is in North-Wales, and in going up the hill that leades to Banghor, as also nere Anglesey in the way to the said Sir Iohn Guin his house. 
The Time. All of them doe flower about the end of Iune, and in Iuly, and the seed is ripe in August, in some places earlier; and in others later.
The Names. It is called in Greeke , quia argemas, id est, oculorum nubeculas tollit, in Latine also Argemone, after the Greeke word, Pliny in his 25. booke, and 9. Chapter calleth it Argemonia, and saith that they in his time made three sorts hereof, whereof the best was that, whose roote did smell like Francumsence, but in some places he maketh mention of foure sorts, as in his 21. book, &amp; 23. chap. he saith, that Anemone is called Argemone, in his 24. book, &amp; 19. chap. he saith that Lappa Canaria, whose roote smelleth of Francumsence, was called Argemone, and in his 26. book, &amp; 6. chap. he saith Inguinaria was called Argemone: in former times our ordinary Agrim ny was ta∣ken for Argemone, but now a daies all our moderne writers do agree, that our Argemone is the same that Dioscori∣des wrote of, notwithstanding that he giveth to it, a round roote which ours hath not; some copies have ano∣ther sort of Argemone, which most doe not hold right: the first of these is called by Lobel, Argemone capitulo torulis canulato, Bauhinus calleth it Argemone capitulo breviore, and thinketh it to be the same, that Lobel and Pena in their Adversaria, call Anemone minor Coriandri folio, flore Fulsatillae capitulis hirsutis, noc ut Papatur co∣rolla donatis: The second is called by Lobel Argemone capitulo longiore, as Bauhinus doth also, but he maketh it also to be the Anemone Narbonensis major corniculata of Lobel and Pena, in their Adversaria, when by the judge∣ment of the best, that Anemone of theirs, is Papaver corniculatum violaceum of Clusius, Dodonaeus and others, and doth much differ from this Argemone, both in bignesse and colour of the flower, and in the head of seede, that being much longer and smaller then this: Cordus in his History of Plants, and 46. Chapter, setteth this forth by the name of Argemone, which Gesner who set him forth knew not, because Cordus saith, it giveth a yellow juice like Celondine: The third is set forth by Pena in his Italian Baldus, and by Bauhinus, in his Prodromus and Pin x, under two titles as two sorts, when as assuredly they are both but one: The last was found as I shewed you before in many places of Wales, by Lobel in his life time, and therefore entituled justly according to the Country. 
The Vertues. Dioscorides and Galen give unto this kinde of Poppie, a clensing qualitie and sharpe, that it is able to cleare the spots that happen in the eyes, and such mistes, filmes and cloudes, that grow in them to hinder the sight, as also to asswage any inflammations; but others say, that it helpeth the bloudy fluxe, the decoction thereof being made in water and drunke, as also if it be boyled in wipe and drunke, is a present remedy against the stinging or biting of any venemous b ast, and that two drammes thereof taken in wine, wasteth the spleene that is swollen: being beaten while it is fresh, and applied to cuttes and wounds healeth them speedily: applied also to any member vexed with crampes or convulsions, to any sores, cankers, or fistulas, to any blacke and blew spots in the face, or on the eyes, by strokes or falles, doth helpe and heale them all: being bruised and applied with vinegar to the throat, healeth the quinsie, and applied to the place grieved with the gout taketh away the paine thereof quickly: being rubbed upon Wartes, it doth in a short time consume them, and take them away. There is no propertie remembred belonging to any of the two last sorts. 
CHAP. XVI. Hypecoum. The Hypecoum of Dioscorides herbe. A Lthough Camerarius, Dodonaeus, Lobel, and others doe reckon this small plant as a species, or sort of wild Cumin, and have referred it to with them, yet I dare not so call it, because I doe not finde either the face, or outward resemblance there of, nor yet the temperature and qualities, to be any way answerable thereunto, but rather unto the Poppies, I have therefore thought it fittest to joyne it next unto them, and doe rather incline to the judgement of Clusius, to account this plant to be the true Hypeocum of Dioscorides: unto which I will also adjoyne another small plant, reckoned also by Lobel to be of the kindes of wild Cumin, which I must call another Hypeocum, in that it is so like unto the other: And let me crave leave with all to insert here, as in an extravagant place, that kinde of wild Cumin, which is so accounted of most Writers, as not having a fit place to set it alone, in regard it may not be joyned with the true Cumin, which must be intreated of among the umbellifers, and because this is in other Authors joyned with the former. 
1. Hypecoum legitimum Clusij. The true Hypecoum of Dioscorides according to Clusius. This small plant hath diverse long leaves lying on the ground, very much divided, and cut into many parts, of a pale or whitish greene colour, so like unto Fumiterry in the colour of the leaves, as also somewhat neere in the many divisions and parts thereof, that it will soone deceive one that doth but slightly regard it, but is smaller and thinner and more gentle in handling, yet is larger in Spaine than with us as Clusius recordeth; in the middle of them riseth up a stalke or two, with some leaves thereon, and divided towards the toppe into diverse bran∣ches; at the toppes whereof stand small yellow flowers, consisting of sixe leaves, two whereof are larger than the rest, and stand one opposite unto another, the rest being very small and scarse discerned, but when the flower is blowen open: after which doe arise long crooked flat huskes or cods full of joints, somewhat like unto the huskes of the Scorpioides of Matthiolus, but greater and longer: in the severall joints whereof lye severall square yel∣lowish seede, very hardly to be taken forth, and separated from the huskes or skinnes: the roote is small, and a little stringy, dying every yeare at the first approach of Winter, and is very hardly made to spring, but by an Autumne sowing▪ the taste of the plant is unpleasant. 
2. Hypecoum alterum. Another Hypecoum. This other sort (for so I make it) is very like unto the former, but that the leaves hereof are not so broad and long, being more finely divided, somewhat like unto the Seseli or Hartwort of Marseilles or wild Chervill; the stalkes are smooth, full of leaves and branches, whereat come forth yellow flowers made of five pointed leaves, and after them long pods, which hang downe and stand not upright: nor are crooked like the former, but joyn∣ted and with greater and yellow seedes within them, like unto those of Galega or Goates Rue. 
3. Cuminum sylvestre. Wild Cumin. Wild Cumin shooteth forth diverse long rough, or somewhat hard winged leaves, each whereof is finely den∣ted about the edges; from among which riseth up a slender weake bending stalke, divided at the toppe into many parts, each whereof hath a round whitish soft gentle, and woolly head or ball upon a small foote stalke, like unto those of the Plane tree heads or balls, wherein is con∣tained 1. Hypecoum legitimum Clusij. The true Hypecoum of Clusius. 
small seedes: the roote is small and white and quickly perisheth, with the least blastes or dewes of cold nights, and seldome commeth to maturitie in our countrey, as I have often seene the experience my selfe. 
The Place. The two first groweth as well in Province, in the way to Arles, Mompelier, and other places in France, as in diverse Pro∣vinces of Spaine as Clusius saith: the other as Lobel saith, grow∣eth in the same places in France, that the former doth: the last he saith likewise groweth plentifully in Narbone about Aquas Sextias, and other places of France. 
The Time. All these flower with us, not untill the midst of Sommer, and give their seede late, but the last worst as I said, and seldome good although late. 
The Names. Dioscorides calleth an herbe in Greeke and Hype∣coum and Hypopheum, for which the Latines have no other name Hypecoum, after the Greeke; yet there is great doubt amongst many, what plant should be the right, some thinking the Tha∣dictrum minus to be it, others thinking the Argemone minor of Tragus (which is the lesser Papaver Rhaeas ) to be it: Mat∣thiolus (according to his manner, that whatsoever was obtruded unto him, and was not manifestly contradictory, was presently presented for right; no markes there of wan∣ting) maketh the Alcea vesicaria or Ʋeneta, which Lobel cal∣leth Peregrina Solisequa to be it, which I have set forth in my former Booke: And lastly Clusius, and from him Dodonaeaus propound this first plant, for the true Hypecoum of Dioscorides; Clusius affirming that of all the plants that he knew, there was not any that came nearer thereunto than this, unto whom I must also consent, for that neither the face nor the qualitie, as I 2 Hypecoum alterum. Another Hypecoum. 
3. Cuminum sylvestre. Wild Cumin. 
said before doth gainesay it. It is also by Matthiolus, and Castor Durantes who taketh it from him, as also by Camerarius, Lugdunensis, Tabermontanus and Lobel called Cuminum sylvestre alterum or siliquosum, and Ger d Corniculatum; Clusius, as I said before, and after him Dodonaens and Camerarius, call it Hypecoum &amp; legitimum, and so doth Bauhinus also, who quoteth Matthiolus in two places to call Caminum sylvestre alterum both Delphi and this, but he quoteth Gesner in hortis Germaniae to call it so likewise; when in that place Gesner his Hypecoum, is that of Matthiolus, which is the Aleaea vesicaria, and not this. Clusius saith that the Spaniards in the kingdome of Granado and Murciano doe call it Cadorija. The second is called Cuminum siliquosum alterum, Diosco∣ridis of Lobel and Pena, whom Lugdunensis doth imitate; of Tabermontanus Cuminuni sylvestre 3. and siliquosum minu. Bauhinus calleth it Hypecoi altera species, and so doe I, the face thereof so nearely agreeing unto the first. The last is called Cuminum sylvestre, and Dioscoridis primum of Matthiolus, and so of most Writers, but Globosum of Camerarius, and Capitulis globosis of Bauhinus. Bellonius in his observations saith, that in the Ile of Lemnos, they call it Lago ' Chimeni, that is leporum cubile, which the inhabitants of Lemnos called at this day Stalimene, doe use in their meate in stead of Origanum which they want, for as he there saith, it hath both the smell and taste of Origa∣num; and for the likenesse, he there compareth the leaves with those of Yarrow, and the round heads to those of the Romane Nettle. 
The Vertues. The taste of the two first is as I said before unpleasant as that of the Poppies, and therefore of a temperature inclining to the propertie of Poppie, whereunto Dioscorides and Galen make Hypecoum to be like, there hath not beene any further experience made of either of the former plants, and therefore I can relate no more unto you of them: the last if it be the right wild Cumin of Dioscorides, as by Bellonius his relation here before set downe it may very well be, the seede is effectuall against the windinesse, either of the stomacke, or of the belly and bowells, which bringeth tormenting paines and swellings with it, being taken in wine, and expelleth the poyson of any venemous beastes: it is good for moist stomackes, that are troubled with raw crude humors: taken with vinegar, it stayeth the hickocke; and if it be applied with hony and raysins to the face, or any other place that is blacke or blew by stroakes and beatings, it will quickely take them away, and applied in the same manner to the cods when they are swollen, allayeth the swelling and taketh away the paine. 
CHAP. XVII. Arum. Wake Robin or Cuckow-pinte. V Nto this common Arum or Wake-Robin (which groweth wilde in many ditches and drie bankes throughout all this kingdome, I must adde divers other sorts, which in most things are like thereun∣to, as also another much differing from all the rest, accounted the true Colocasio or Faba Aegypti ca. 
1. Arum vulgare non maculatum. Common Wake Robin without spots. This Wake Robin shooteth forth three or foure or five leaves at the most from one roote, every one whereof is somewhat large, and long, broad at the botome next unto the stalke, and forked like unto a sorrell leafe, but ending in a point, without dent or cut on the edges, of a sad or full greene colour, each standing upon a thicke round stalke, of an handbreadth long or more; among which after they have beene up two or three moneths and begin to wither, riseth up a bare naked round whitish greene stalke, somewhat spotted and straked with purple, like the stalke of Dragons, somewhat higher than the leaves; at the toppe whereof, standeth a long hollow hose or huske, close at the bottome, but open from the middle upwards, ending in a point; in the middle whereof standeth a small long pestle or clapper, smaller at the bottome than at the toppe, of a darke pur∣blish colour as the hose or huske is on the inside, though greene without, which after it hath so abiden for some time, the hose or huske decaieth, with the pestell or clapper, and the foote or bottome thereof groweth to be a small long bunch of berries, greene at the first, and each of them when they are ripe, of a yel∣lowish red colour, of the bignesse of an Hasell-nut kernell, which abide thereon almost untill Winter: the roote is round and somewhat long, not growing downe right, but for the most part lying along, the leaves shooting forth at the bigger end, which when it beareth his berries is somewhat wrinckled and loose, another being growen under it, which is solid and firme, with many fibres or small threds hanging thereat, which in the beginning of the yeare, when the leaves beginne to spring yeeldeth a milky sappe being broken or cut: the whole plant is of a very sharpe and biting taste, pricking the tongue upon the tasting, no lesse than Netles doe the hands, and so abideth for a great while without alteration; the roote with the sharpenesse hath a very strange clamminesse in it, stiffening linnen, or any other thing whereon it is laid, no lesse than starch: and in former dayes, when the making of our ordinary starch (which is made of the branne of wheate) was not knowen, or frequent in use, the finest dames used the rootes hereof, to starch their linnen, which would so sting, exasperate and choppe the skinne of their servants hands that used it, that they could scarse get them smooth and whole with all the nointing they could doe, before they should use it againe. 
2. Arum vulgare maculatum. Spotted wake Robin. This Arum is in all things like the former, but that the leaves hereof are somewhat harder in handling, smaller pointed and have some blackish spots thereon, like the spotted Arsemart, which for the most part abide in the Sommer longer greene then the former, and both leaves and rootes, are more sharpe and fierce then it. 
3. Arum magnum rotundiore folio. Round leafed wake Robin. This kinde hath somewhat larger leaves, then either of the former, and more round pointed, both at the end and at the bottome next to the stalke, having some white veines appearing in the leaves, and abiding greene longer in the Sommer, even almost untill Autumne, the hose or huske, with the pestell or clapper, are both of a pale whitish yellow colour, in which things this differeth from the other and in nothing else: Alterum rotunda ra∣dice. Prosper Alpinus set∣teth fort an other sort found at the bottome of some of the Alpine hills, whose leaves and flowers differ little from the second sort, but the roote is round like unto the rootes of the round rooted Culcas: 
4. Arum Byzantinum. Wake Robin of Constantinople. This Arum of Constantinople, hath a reasonable great thicke roote, of an hand breaddth long, or there abouts, having many small round heades, breaking forth on all sides thereof, from whence come forth many fresh greene leaves, very like unto the two first sorts of Arum, some whereof will be spotted with small blacke spots, others not having any at all; from among which riseth up a stalke, having such a like hose or hood, as the Arum hath, and a pestle therein which are of a purplish colour in those that have spotted leaves, and white in those 1. 2. Arum vulgare macu ' actum &amp; non maculatum. Spotted and unspotted Wake Robin. 
4. Arum Byzantinum. Wake Robin of Constantinople. 
5. Arisarum latifolium. Broad leafed Fryers coule.
6. Arisarum longifolium. Long or narrow leafed Fryers coule. 
7. Arum Aegyptium rotunda &amp; longa radice vulgo Colocassia dicta. The Egyptian Culcas or wake Robin with a rounder and longer roote. 
Faba Aegyptia fructus. The fruite of the Egyptian Beane. 
that have no spots, the leaves likewise of those that have spots, spring up for the most part before Winter, and the other not untill the Spring, there hath not any fruite beene observed in this, by any that I can under∣stand. 
5. Arisarum latifolium. Broad leafed Fryers Coule. The Broad leafed Arisarum groweth in all things like unto the Arum, having divers faire greene leaves, whose middle rib on the upperside, as also some other of the veines are white sometimes, and somewhat thicker and rounder poluted then the Arum, the middle stalke bearing the flower (which is a crooked or bending hose at the top, with a small crooked whitish pestell in the middle, rinsing out of it,) is spotted with red spots, not rising fully so high as the leaves, which are nothing so sharpe in taste, as those of the Wake Robin, and doe alwayes spring up in the end of Autumne, abiding greene all the Winter: after the huske or flower is past, and the greene leaves withered and gone, which will be in the Summer, then the berryes doe appeare on the toppes of the stalkes, greene at the first, and of a yellowish red when they are ripe, which abide untill the frosts cause them to wither, and the greene leaves begin to appeate: the roote is white and somewhat round, encreasing much by of sets. 
6. Arisarum longifolium. Long or narrow leafed Fryers Coule. The leaves of this Arisarum, are very narrow and long, not rising so high as the former, but rather lying on the ground, and doth more seldome beare any hose, which is whitish small and long, with a very long and small reddish pestell in the middle, like unto a long worme, scarse rising above the ground, the berryes that follow are white and not red, the roote is white and round, smaller then the former, encreasing by of sets, but not in so plentifull a manner. 
7. Arum Aegyptium vulgo dictum Colocasia rotundibre &amp; oblongiore radice. The Egyptian Culcas or Wake Robin with a rounder and longer roote. This Egyptian plant, hath beene the subject of much controversie, among many worthy and learned writers, both of our and of former times, some applying it to the Faba Aegyptia of Dioscorides, whose huske conteining the fruite was called Cibarion, and whose roote was called Colocasia, and others refusing that opinion, call it simply Arum and Aegyptium, because it was a species or kinde of Arum, that is thought to bee naturall to Egypt, as also to other places, as you shall heare by and by, the description whereof is in this manner: It shooteth forth divers very large and whitish greene leaves, of the fashion of Arum, or Wake Robin leaves, poin∣ted at the ends, but somewhat rounder, each of them two foote long, and a foote and a halfe broad, not so thicke and sappy as they, but thinner and harder, like unto a thinne hard skinne full of veines, running every way, and refusing moisture, though they be laid in water, standing every one, on a very thicke stalke, nere five foote long in the said places, which is not set at the very division of the leafe into two parts, as the wake Robin is, but more toward the middle, somewhat like unto the water Lillies, the division of each leafe at the bottome, being some∣what rounder then those of Wake Robin: betweene these leaves after many yeares continuance in a place un∣stirred, there riseth up sometime but one stalke of flowers, and sometimes two or three, according to the age and encrease of the plant, the standing and keeping (for all these helpe to the fructifying thereof, for else it would not beare any shew of hose, or pestell, or flower, as many that not having seene any, have confidently set downe that it never beareth any) thereof in a large pot, or other such thing, and in a warme place and climate: each of these stalkes are much shorter, then those of the leaves, and beareth an open long huske at the top, in the middle whereof, riseth up for the most part three severall narrow huskes or hoses (and never one alone, as the Arum or Arisarum do) with every one their pestell or clapper in the middle of them, which is small, whitish and halfe a foote long, from the middle downwards bigger, and set round about with small whitish flowers, smelling very sweete, the lower most first flowring, and so by degrees upwards, which last not above three dayes, and from the middle upward bare or naked, ending in a small long point, after the flowers are all past, that lower part abideth, and beareth many berryes, like as the Arum and Arisarum doe, but much paler and smaller, the roote is great and bulbous, or rather tuberous, in some more round then in others, which are smaller and long with the roundnesse, as great as the roote of a great Squill or Sea Onion, (which I judge more properly, spea∣king thereof in my former booke to be a Sea Hyacinth ) and one which Alpinus setteth forth in his Historia Aegyp∣tiaca, with great long creeping rootes like the Reede, reddish on the outside, and whitish within, having many bulbous or tuberous heads, shooting from all sides thereof, whereby it is encreased, and with many great fibres shooting therefrom into the ground. 
8. Faba Aegyptia Dioscoridis &amp; Theophrasti cujus radix Colocasia dicebatur. Dioscorides and Theophrastus their Egyptian Beane, whose roote was called Colocasia. Because the Egyptian Arum, hath beene so much mistaken by many writers that have called it the true Colocasia of Dioscorides and Theophrastus; let me here shew you in this place, the description of the true Colocasia, that is the roote of the Egyptian Beane, as Dioscorides and Theophrastus have set it downe; to affront the false figure of Matthiolus his Egyptian Beane, as he set it forth in his comentaries upon Dioscorides, moulded from his owne imagination, and not from the sight of any plant growing in rerum natura, to make it answer the description, but hath failed chiefely in the fruite, which is not expressed like to the combe that waspes doe make, but farre differing as many have observed, and objected against him, although as he saith, Odoardus did shew it him at Trent, with many other rare plants, which he brought out of Syria and Egypt; the figure of the true fruite, Clusius hath set forth, in the 32. folio of his booke of exotickes or strange things, which was brought by Dutch Marriners from forraine parts unto Amsterdam, but was not then knowne where it grew (but since is knowne to be the Kingdome of Iava in the East-Indies ) who was perswaded it might be the true fruite of their Egyptian Beane, unto whose judgement therein, both Bauhinus and Columna doe encline, and so doe I as you shall heare by and by more at large, but for brevities sake, I will draw both the descriptions thereof by Theophrastus and Dioscorides into one. The Beane of Egypt, which some call the Beane of Pontus saith Dioscorides, (but Theophrastus men∣tioneth neither Egypt nor Pontus, but onely calleth it a Beane) groweth in Lakes and standing waters (plenti∣fully in Egypt saith Dioscorides, which Theophrastus speaketh not of,) in Asia, that is in Syria and Cilicia, but there saith Theophrastus, it doth hardly perfect his fruite, but about Torona, in a Lake, in the Country of Calcidi∣cum, it commeth to perfection, and beareth very large leaves (like those of the butter-burre saith Dioscorides ) the stalke saith Dioscorides, is a cubite long, Theophrastus saith the longest is foure cubits high, of the bignesse of one finger, like unto a soft reede, but without joynts, it beareth a flower, twise as large as that of the Poppy (with double flowers, for so I enterpret in plenum caput, the words of Theophrastus) of the colour of the Rose, after which is past commeth a round head called Ciborion, or Cibottion, that is a small caske, (yet Athenaeus saith that a kinde of drinking cup was so called also, whose forme peradventure was like this fruite here expressed) not unlike to the comb which waspes do make, wherin is contained thirty cels at the most, and in every cel or division there∣of, groweth a Beane, whose toppe riseth higher then the cell wherein it is enclosed, whose kernell is bitter; which say they, the inhabitants thereabouts put into clay, and thrust downe to the bottome of the water, with long poales, that it may abide therein and thereby make their encrease: the roote is very thicke and great, like unto that of the Reede, but ( Theophrastus addeth, which Dioscorides hath not) full of cruell prickes or thornes, and therefore saith he, the Crocodile refuseth to come nere it, least he should runne against the prickes thereof with his eyes, wherewith he cannot see well, and is called Colocasia as Dioscorides maketh mention, but not Theophrastus, which is used to be eaten either raw or otherwayes dressed, that is sodden or roasted, the Beanes faith Dioscorides are eaten while they are fresh and greene, but grow hard and blacke when they are old, being somewhat bigger then an ordinary Beane, which saith Dioscorides (Theophrastus making no mention of any qua∣lities, or vertues of them) have an astringent or binding faculty, and thereby profitable to the stomacke, and hel∣peth those that have the fluxe of the stomacke and belly, and the bloody flux, the meale or flower of them straw∣ed upon meate &amp;c. or taken in broth: the huskes whereof saith he doth more good, being boyled in sweete wine, the middle part of the beane which is greene and bitter, being bruised and boyled in Rosewater, and dropped into the eares, easeth the paines of them. Thus farre Theophrastus and Dioscorides. Now the description of Clu∣sius his strange fruite is thus, as he setteth it downe. This fruite did resemble a very large Poppy head, cut off at the toppe: and consisted of a rough or wrinckled skinny substance; of a brownish colour somewhat light, whose circumference at the top was nine inches, and growing lesser and lesser by degrees, unto the stalkes, which as it seemed, did sustaine the flower, after which came this fruite, for there appeared certaine markes of the flow∣er, where it did abide: the upper part hereof was smooth and plaine, having 24 holes or cells therein, placed in a certaine order, like unto the combe of waspes; in every one whereof was one nut, like unto a small akorne, almost an inch long, and an inch thicke in compasse, whose toppe was browne, ending in a point, like as an akorne doth, the lower part having an hole or hollow place, where it should seeme the footestalke upheld it, while it was in its place, whose kernell was rancide or mouldy, thus farre Clusius. Let me here also bring in an eye witnesse or two, of this plants growing in the Ile of Iava, Dr. Iustus Heurnius, both Divine and Physition, for the Ducth factory in the Kingdome or Ile of Iava, sent into Holland a small booke or collection of certaine herbes, &amp;c. growing in that country, with the vertues and uses, whereunto the naturals did apply the (which booke, as I understand by my good friends, D r , Daniel Horinghooke, and D r . William Parkins both English, is kept in the Vniversity Library at Leyden in a close cupbord having a glasse window before it, thorough which any one may reade so much thereof as lyeth open) at the end whereof is one by him set downe, under the name of Nymphaea glandifera thus described: the huske or cup (saith he) is rugged or full of wrinkles yet soft loose and spungye, like a Mushroome, and of a greene colour divided into twelve or fourteene cels ( Clusius his figure here exhibited hath 24.) or places, in every one whereof is contained one fruite like unto an akorne of a blackish purple colour on the outside and very white within, the taste whereof is astringent and somewhat bitter with∣all, like akornes but rough and spongie: it groweth in Moorish places, and by rivers banckes: the leaves are wondrous great and like unto those of the Water Lilly, and so is the flower also of a very strong smell like unto the oyle of Aneseedes: thus farre Dr. Heurnius; whose description in my judgement is so punctuall to those of Dioscorides and Theophrastus aforesaid, the description of the roote onely wanting, that I shall not neede fur∣ther to comment upon it, every ones judgement though meane, I suppose being able by comparing to agree the parts: it is probable that Clusius having seene this booke and the figure hereof annexed to the description might soone pronounce it (as I doe here) to be the true Faba Aegyptia of the ancients: there is no mention made in that booke of Heurnius by what name the Iavaneses or Malayos doe call it. The other eye witnesse hereof is M. William Fincham an English Merchant, as he is recorded in M r . Purchas his fourth booke of Pilgrimes, the 4. ch. Sect. 5. p. 429. that saith he often did eate of the fruite of a certaine herbe growing in a great Brooke or Lake, two or three courses or miles long on the North-West side of Fetipore, which is about twelve courses from Agra, in the dominions of the great Mogoll called Surrat or Guzurrat in the East-Indies, which the people call Can ∣chachery, describing it to be like a goblet, flat at the head conteining divers Nuts or akornes within it. I have here set downe these things, as well to show you mine owne observations after Clusius and others, that assured∣ly this is the true Faba Aegyptia of the ancients, as to provoke some of our nation to be as industrious, as the Hollanders by whose care in their travels, this was first made knowne to us, to search out such rare fruites as grow in the parts of their abode, and either communicate them to such as are experienced, or having penned them to publish their labours in Print, if it may be, which I hold the better, according to Mr. Finchams example, whose observations have given so great an illustration in this matter, as well as in other things, by me also remembred elsewhere in this worke. 
The Place. The two first are frequent enough in our owne Country. The third is found in some place of Germany. The fourth Clusius saith came among other rootes from Constantinople. The fift he also saith he found in Spaine and Portugall. The sixt in Italy, in divers places. The seaventh is not naturall to Egypt as I suppose, because it is not found to flower there, being planted for their onely use in meates which they seldome take without it but groweth in Candy naturally as Bellonius saith, and Portugall as Clusius reporteth, and in Italy also in many places, and in the Country of Salerne in the Kingdome of Naples as Columna reporteth it, as also in the Iland of Iava, where they use it as familiarly as in Egypt, and so recorded in the Hollanders Navigation thither, in Anno. 1595. The last as I said before in Iava and Surrat, and no doubt in sundry other places as Theophrastus remembreth, who therefore would not call it Aegyptia as Dioscorides doth, being not proper to Egypt, where for many ages past it hath not beene known to grow now at all, but assuredly if it were a naturall of Egypt, it cannot be quite extirpate, and might by good search be there found againe, if men industrious and of knowledg were employed thereabouts. 
The Time. The foure first sorts shoote forth leaves, in the Spring, and continue but untill the middle of Sommer, or some∣what latter, their hoses or huskes appearing before they fall away, and their fruit shewing in August. The fifth and sixt as I said, doe shoote forth their greene leaves in Autumne, presentlyy after the first frosts have pulled downe the stalkes with fruits, and abide greene all the Winter withering in Sommer, before which their huskes appeare: The seventh flowreth with his hose and clappers very late, even in the warme countries, seldome be∣fore October or November, and the fruit doth there seldome come to perfection: the last (as may be gathe∣red by the relation thereof) flowreth and beareth fruit in the Sommer time as other herbes doe. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and in Latine Arum, and some Pes vituli, because the leafe doth somewhat re∣semble a Calves foote; some also Dracontea minor, and Serpentaria minor: others againe from the figure of the pestle or clapper in the middle of the hose, call it Sacerdotis penes, and canis priapus. Simon Ianvensis calleth it Aron and Barba Aron; the Syrians as Dioscorides saith call it Lupha: it is called of the Arabians Iarus and Sara, and after them diverse Apothecaries beyond the seas in their shops: In Italian Aro, Giaro, Gigaro and Balaazon as Durantes saith; In Spanish Yaro, in French Pied de vean, &amp; vid or vit de prestre &amp; vit de chien, in high Dutch Pfaffenpint: in Low Dutch calfs voet; in English Wake Robin, Cuckowes pintle Priests pintle, Rampe, Buckrams, and of some Starch-wort. Caesalpinus calleth it with spotted leaves, Gicherum or Gigarum after the Italian name, when as all o∣thers agree in the name of Arum, with the distinction of maculis albis and nigris, as the kind or sort is; yet the third is called by Lobel Arum majus Ʋeronense, and by Bauhinus Arum venis albis, and by Dalechampius upon Pliny Calla primum genus Plinij. Cordus in historia plantarū calleth it Dracunculus henicophyllos, and as he saith is the same that Matthiolus calleth Dracunculus major Clusius calleth the fourth Byzantium, &amp; it is most probable, it is the same with Matthiolus his Arum aliud minus with many small rootes, which he saith he received from Calzolarius of Ʋerona, and thought it grew upon Mount Baldus, because he had sent him many plants that grew there: but because this is not mentioned in all the description of Mount Baldus, it is more likely that Calzolarius, had it from Constantinople, or some other place in Turkie, and sent it him as a raritie. The fift &amp; sixt are called Arisarum or Aris as Pliny saith, and distinguished by the titles of latifolium and angustifolium. The Spaniards call it Frailillos, that is little Friers, because the hose doth represent the forme of a Friers Cowle: the latifolium Dalechampius upon Pliny calleth Calla alterū genus Plinij, yet Tragus thinketh that this Arisarū, should be more properly the Arum of Dios∣corides, which is usually eaten, for our Arum is so hot and sharpe, that it is not to be endured, whereunto some others doe reply and say, that the Arum of the hotter countries is more mild, and yet the same in specie: The seventh is called by the Spaniards Manta de nuestra senora from the largenesse of the leaves, and diversely by divers late Latine Writers, some as I said contesting earnestly, that it is the Faba Egyptia, and Colocasia of Dioscorides, or Colocasion of Nicandar, others flatly denying it and calling it Arum Aegyptium, which terme Pliny useth, but it is not knowne from whom he had it: those that hold and maintaine the former opinion, are Bellonius, Alpinus, Camerarius, Lugdunensis, and lastly Clusius, who doe all conclude, that this plant which the Egyptians call Culcas, can be no other plant then the Faba Egyptia of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, although it beare neither flower not fruit, and thereupon doe much suspect the truth of their descriptions, because there was never heard or found (as they say) any other that did answer in all things unto their descriptions, and that this did most nearely approach thereunto, both for that the name of Culcas, so nearely drawing to the Greeke name Colocasia, and was so antient∣ly continued among those Nations of Egypt, Syria, Arabia and Affricke, and that the daily use of the roote to be dressed or eaten raw, for their food and meate as they said their Faba was; but the fruit or nuts was their foode and not the rootes, time having inverted both name and use: it is also called Talusse by the inhabitants of Iava (but Lalade in the Malaia tongue) which soundeth somewhat neere Culcas as it is recorded in the Dutch Na∣vigation thither in Anno 1595. before spoken of, where it is said also to beare neither flower nor fruit; but those that hold the contrary opinion that it is but Arum Aegyptium, and not the true Colocasia, although commonly so called, are Anguillara, Guillandinus, Maranta, Causabonus, Matthiolus, Gesner in hortis Germaniae, Dodonaeus, Lobel, and Columna, who have all of them in their times testified it, most of them having seene the flower or fruit, or both, that it beareth; which plainely declareth it to be a kind of Arum, and that it is not the Faba Aegyptia, whose roote was called Colocasia: but Fabius Columna lastly and most fully to the purpose, doth shew the truth, setting forth the description of this Arum Aegyptium, amply in every part to beare leaves, flowers, hose or huske with a pestle or clapper therein, and berries afterwards, agreeing in all those parts to the vulgar Arum and Arisarum, although somewhat in a different manner, as every species of a Genus doth; and with all doth defend the veritie of Dioscorides and Theophrastus descriptions thereof, against all gainesayers, wondering that so many learned men should not discerne the truth, but be led away so grossely into errour, against so plaine declarations; that they make of the plant and every part thereof, that is of roote, stalke, leafe, flowers and fruit: the roote to be like the roote of the Reede, but greater and not bulbous like the Arum, to be armed with prickles or thornes, when as the roote of this Arum, or supposed Colocasia is not so, then that it beareth a stalke a cubite or more high, which this doth not, and that it carrieth a flower thereon, bigger than that of the Poppie, and of a Rose colour, which this hath no resemblance thereunto; and lastly that it beareth a head like a Waspes combe, with many cells or divisions therein, in every one wherof groweth a fruit or nut, begger than an ordinary Beane, where∣unto this Arum hath no likenes; I might adde also the name of the head called Ciborion, or Cibotion, which as I said signifieth a small casket, from the similitude of the places, wherein the fruit standeth, as also from the forme of the head with the fruit, like unto a drinking cuppe, used among the ancient Graecians; as also the fruite or Beane it selfe, so notably knowne to all the Nations, both Greekes and others, that it was as a standard for a certaine weight, whose true proportion was certainely knowne, and constantly maintained: the place also of the grow∣ing, being in the waters, is differing from that of Arum, the vertues and qualities as different from it, all which I have therefore shewed you, that every one may plainely see the truth, and hereafter be better perswaded, if they have erred in their opinion and judgement. And to shew the originall of this errour, as it is most probable: first I may say that the revolution of time, which bringeth on with it many slippes and errours, hath beene the cause thereof, which therefore wise men and judicious, must still be carefull to finde out and reforme: Bellonius in the 28. Chapter of his second Booke of Observations, thinketh that Herodotus was the first, that was the cause of that errour, but I verily suppose it to be more antient, for Dioscorides saith in his Chapter of Arum, among the diverse names thereof, that those of Cyprus did call Arum by the name of Colocasion, and therefore it is most probable that diverse Nations, eating the rootes of this Arum, as well as the rest, which were not hot and sharpe in taste, in those countries, as they are in these colder, did from the Cyprians call it Colocasia, because the roote of the Egyptian Beane, being also called Colocasia, was boyled and eaten as those of Arum were: and thus this er∣rour spreading, and the use of them encreasing by being peradventure, both more plentifull, to be had by en∣crease, and more acceptable to the taste, than the fruite of the Egyptian Beane, it became of lesse esteeme, and in time to be so much neglected, that it was no more looked after and planted, whereby it became to be utterly unknowne at the last, and the name Culcas, was still maintained and imposed on those rootes of Arum, as if they had beene the rootes of the Egyptian Beane. Thus much I thought good out of my simple judgement to declare, which if it doe not agree with truth and reason, I submit it to those that can bring better. 
The Ʋertues. Tragus reporteth that a dramme weight, or more if neede be, of the roote of that Wake Robin, that hath spot∣ted leaves, whether it be fresh and greene, or dried it mattereth not; being bruised or beaten and taken, is a most present remedy never failing against both poyson and plague: some he saith, take as much A dromac Treakle with it, for the more certaintie: the juyce of the herbe taken, to the quantitie of a spoonefull or more, worketh the same effect: but if there be a little vinegar added thereunto, as well as to the roote before spoken of, it will somewhat allay that sharpe biting taste upon the tongue, which it causeth; the greene leaves likewise being bruised and laid upon any boyle or plague sore, doth wonderfully helpe to draw forth the poyson: the pouder of the dried roote of Wake Robin, to the weight of a dramme, taken with twise as much Sugar, in the forme of a Lohoc or licking Electuary, or the greene roote, doth wonderfully helpe those that are pursie or short∣winded, as also those that have the cough, having their stomacke, chest, and longs, stuffed with much flegme, for it breaketh and digesteth it in them, and causeth it to be easily avoided and spit forth: the milke wherein the roote hath beene boyled, is effectuall also for the same purpose: the said pouder taken in wine or drinke, or the juyce of the berries, or the pouder of them, or the wine wherein they have beene boyled provoketh urine, and bringeth downe womens courses when they are stayed, and purgeth them effectually after child bea∣ring, to bring away the afterbirth; it is said that it expelleth drunkennesse also; taken with sheepes milke, it healeth the inward ulcers of the bowells; the distilled water hereof likewise is effectuall, to all the purposes aforesaid; and moreover a spoonefull taken at a time, healeth the itch; and an ounce or more taken at a time for some dayes together, doth helpe the rupture: the leaves either greene or drie or the juyce of them, doth clense all manner of rotten and filthy ulcers, of what part of the body soever they be, and the stinking sores in the nose called Polypus and healeth them also: the water wherein the roote hath beene boyled, dropped into the eyes, clenseth them from any filme or skinne beginning to grow over them, or clouds or mistes that may hinder the sight, and helpeth also the watering and rednesse of them, and when by chance they become blacke and blew: the roote mixed with Beane flower, and applied to the throat or jawes that are in∣flamed, helpeth them: the juice of the berries boyled in oyle of Roses, or the berries themselves made into pouder, and mixed with the oyle and dropped into the eares, easeth the paines in them: the berries or the rootes beaten with hot oxe dung, and applied to the gout, easeth the paines thereof: the leaves and rootes also boyled in wine with a little oyle, and applied to the piles, or the falling downe of the fundament easeth them, and so doth the sitting over the hot fumes thereof: the fresh rootes bruised and distilled with a little milke, yeel∣deth a most soveraigne water to clense the skinne from scurfe, freckles, spots, or blemishes whatsoever therein: yet some use the rootes themselves bruised and mixed with vinegar, but that is too sharpe, and not to be used but when there is great neede, and with good caution, and not to abide long upon any place: there is a facula made by art from the fresh rootes, called Gersa serpentaria, which is as white as Starch or Ceruse, and being dissolved in milke, or in the distilled water, of the rootes and milke aforesaid, doth wonderfully blanch the skinne, hiding many deformities: the fresh rootes cut small and mixed with a sallet of white Endive or Lettice, &amp;c. is an ex∣cellent dish to entertaine a smell-feast, or unbidden unwelcome guest to a mans table, to make sport with him, and drive him from his too much boldnesse; or the pouder of the dried roote, strawed upon any daintie bit of meate, that may be given him to eate; for either way, within a while after the taking of it, it will so burne and pricke his mouth and throate, that he shall not be able either to eate a bit more, or scarse to speake for paine, and will so abide untill there be some new milke or fresh butter given, which by little and little, will take away the heate and pricking, and restore him againe. Some use to lay the greene leaves of Wake Robin among their Cheeses, both to keepe them from breeding wormes, and to ridde them also being in them. The Arisarum or Friers Coule, as Dioscorides and Galen affirme, is farre hotter, and sharpe or biting in taste, than Arum or Wake Robin, which is not so found in any part of Europe, whether Jtaly or Spaine, France, Germany or England, that I know, both hot and cold countries, but in all of them much milder and weaker than the Arum (which caused Tragus as I said before, to suspect that our Arum, was the Arisarum of the antients) and therefore they appoint it, to be laid to eating, fretting, and running sores, to stay their spreading, and abate their malignitie, as also to be put into fistulas and hollow ulcers, to helpe to clense and heale them up; a peece of the roote, put into the secret parts of any femall creature, killeth them causing them to die quickly; which thing is contradicted by some, and said to be utterly untrue. Amatus Lusitanus writeth, that in the Low Countries it was used against the plague, whereof Clusius saith, it was not knowne unto his countrie men, untill he had travelled into Spaine and Portugall, and from thence gave them the knowledge thereof, by sending it unto them: but it may be hee mistooke Arisarum, for Arum, which as you may see before, is found effectuall for that purpose. The Arum of Egypt as it is milder in taste, although somewhat sharpe and bitter and slimie in eating, so it is lesse effectuall in medicine, because it is more usuall in meate. All the East countries which the Italians call the Levant, as Asia, Syria, Arabia, Egypt, &amp;c. and Iava also, and other places in the Indies as you heard before doe most frequently eate the rootes hereof boiled in the broth of flesh, and many other wayes dressed, not onely as a daily foode, but as they thinke, to encrease naturall sperme or seede, and to cause a validitie also, and more powerfull abilitie in the act of generation. 
CHAP. XVIII. Christophoriana. Herbe Christopher. B Esides the usuall sort of herbe Christopher, which hath beene knowne of a long time to us, we have late∣ly gained an other sort as we suppose, the neare resemblance in face causing us so to imagine. 
1. Christophoriana vulgaris. Ordinary herbe Christopher. Herbe Christopher shooteth forth divese greene stalkes of leaves, halfe a foote long, which are made into three parts, yet some times into five, the lower parts standing for the most part one against another, or not much distant, and the other at the end of the stalke, each of these parts consist of three leaves separate a sunder, with small foote stalkes unto them, which are somewhat broad, and ending in a point, some of them cut in on the edges more deepely, and all of them dented about the edges, of a sad greene colour; among these leaves rise up diverse somewhat weake, smooth, round stalkes, halfe a yard or two foote high, yet not bending but standing upright, having three or foure such like leaves thereon, as grew below, but with shorter stalkes: at the toppes of the stalkes stand a tuft or bush of white flowers, every one consisting of five small leaves, with many whitish threds in the middle; and after they are fallen come small round berries, greene at the first, and blacke when they are ripe: the roote is blacke without, and a little yellowish within, and somewhat thicke with di∣verse blackish strings, or great fibres annexed thereunto, which perisheth not, although the stalkes and leaves doe die downe every yeare, fresh springing up againe. 
2. Christophoriana Americana baccis niveis &amp; rubris. Herbe Christopher of America. This stranger shooteth forth in the Spring many reddish stalkes about a foote high with diverse leaves thereon, divided into many parts somewhat resembling the former, but larger, rougher, and of a sadder greene colour, at the toppes, whereof standeth a large tuft of white flowers composed in a manner wholly of threds, yet if they be more neerely vewed, there will appeare for every flower sixe small white leaves with their threds in the middle, compassing a round greene button, which comming to maturitie is either white with a purple tippe and foote stalke, or reddish wholly: the roote is blacke, thicke, short and crooked, not growing downewards nor creeping: but with many fibres thereat. 
The Place. The first groweth generally in the woods of mountaines, that are somewhat open and not too much shadowed, and other like places, as well in our owne as other countries. The other both in our Plantations, and the French in America. 
The Time. They flower after Midsomer, and the berries are ripe in August. 
Christophoriana vulgaris. Ordinary herbe Christopher. 
Christophoriana Americana. Herbe Christopher of America. 

The Names. It hath no Greeke, or scarse any good Latin name, although commonly with most, it be called Christophoriana or herba sancti Christophori, but for what cause and respect I cannot learne, and many do doubt of the Saints name thinking it but composed as relative, bearing Christ according to the morall of the story, and not essentiall and in∣deede: Some call it as Lugdunensis saith Napellus leucanthemos, and some Aconitum bacciferum. Lugdunensis saith, it is called with them Napellus racemosus, and so with Marantha as Camerarius saith, some againe call it Costus niger, Pena and Lobel make a doubt whether it be nor Actaea of Pliny, in his 27. Booke and 7. Chapter, be∣cause his Actaea beareth blacke berries like Ivie: but diverse good and judicious Herbarists, doe rather take Actea to be Ebulus, for this hath no rough stalke as Actaea hath, but a smooth; and Paulus Aegineta interpreteth the roote of Actaea, to be the roote of Sambucus; Bauhinus calleth it Aconitum racemosum, and seemeth to leane to Lobel his opinion, whether it be not Pliny his Actaea or no. Some also doe call Scrophularia by this name of herbe Christopher. Camerarius saith it is called in high Dutch Wolfs worts, when as Tragus and others say, the Aconi∣tum Lycoctonum, that is Luparia or Lupicida is so called also with them. Camerarius saith also it is called with them Christoffels kraut, But Tragus saith that a kind of Vetch or Pulse, which he thinketh is the Aracus of Diosco∣rides, is called with them Sant Christoffels kraut: The other is called by Iacobus Coruntus in his Canadensium plan∣tarum historia Panaces sive racemosum Canadense: but why Panax being no wound herbe, I see no cause unlesse it were for want of a bettername: but I thinke I have entituled it more truely, I am sure more nearely resembling this herbe, than any Panax that I know. 
The Ʋertues. The Inhabitans of all the mountaines and places, wheresoever the first groweth as some Writers say, doe ge∣nerally hold it to be a most dangerous and deadly poison, both to men and beast, and that they use to kill Wolves herewith very speedily; it must therefore be cautelously used, or rather utterly refused: but I much doubt whether those Mountainers meane not rather that Aconitum Lycoctomum called Lupicida; and although many good Au∣thours hold it dangerous, yet cannot I in my judgement so thinke, not finding herein by the taste any pernitious qualitie; but I cannot learne what helpe this hath procured to any: Cornutus saith of his Panuces Carpimon, that it is eaten familiarly both with the naturalls, and French inhabitants with them as a sallet herbe. 
CHAP. XIX. Clematites. Climers or Clamberers. T Here are diverse sorts of Climers or Clamberers, most of which are sharpe hot and causticke, or ex∣ulcerating the skinne, if they lie any little time thereon, and thereby dangerous, although not dead∣ly; diverse of them have beene declared in my former Booke, whereunto I referre them that would be enformed of them, yet I thinke it not amisse to let you see some of their figures, the descrip∣tions of the rest shall follow. 
1. Clematis sylvestris latifolia sive Ʋiorna. The great wild Climer or Gerards Travellers Joy. This wild Climer or Travellers joy, as some call it, hath in some places (especially if it have stood long in a place) a thicke and strong ragged wooddie stemme or trunke, with diverse chops or riftes in the barke, which is of a grayish colour, from whence shoote forth many long pliant grayish greene branches, more strong and wood∣die, than any of the other Climers, (so that their branches doe in many places serve as withes, to winde about garden and field gates, or to binde any bundle together,) these branches spread upon the hedges or trees, whatso∣ever it standeth next unto, dividing it selfe into many other twigges, whereon are set at the severall joynts, two long stalkes of winged leaves, consisting of five leaves, two and two together, and one at the end, each dented on the sides, with small notches, of a pale greene colour, and tasting sharpe and hot, biting upon the tongue, but not so much as the burning Climer or Virgins bower; these branches winde themselves about any thing, standeth neare unto them for a great way, but have no clasping tendrells, like the Vine, to take hold and winde it selfe thereby, as Gerard saith it hath, so farre as ever I could observe: at the joynts where the leaves stand, come forth likewise towards the toppes of the branches, diverse bunches or tufts of white flowers, set to∣gether upon small long foote stalkes, with diverse yellow threds in the middle, smelling very sweete; and after they are past, there arise in their places severall heads of many long hoary silver-like plumes, as if they were feathers set together, with a brownish flat seede at the bottome of every of them, which abide a great while, even to the Winter, before they fall off, or are blowen away with the winde: The roote ir great thicke, and some∣what woddy, dispersing it selfe into diverse long branches under ground: the leaves fall away in the Winter, and recover againe in the Spring. 
2. Clamati s sylvestris altera Boetica. The great Spanish wild Climer. This other wilde Climer hath such like running or climing branches, but spreading farther with many joynts all the length thereof, whereat stand round about it diverse hard and somewhat broad leave, each by it selfe upon a small footestalke, and dented round about the edges, of as sharpe and hot taste as the former, where also come forth two claspers on each side, whereby it catcheth fast hold of any thing standeth in the way neare unto it: from the joynts likewise where the leaves stand, come forth (the flowers were not observed) long tufts or heads, in the same manner that the former hath, with the like plumed feathers, of a hoary white colour, with smaller seede below them, then the other. 
3. Clematis Cruciat Alpina. The crosse Climer of the Alpes. This Crossewort Climer hath any slender and more square branches, than any of the other Climers, some∣what hard and wooddy, rising to be foure or five foote high, standing for the most part upright, or but leaning a little downewards, from whence shoote forth many small twigges, not past foure inches long, whereon are set at equall distances, two small stakes of leaves, all the length of the twigges, three joyned alwayes together at the ends of them, each whereof is hard rough and full of vaines, of a sad greene colour, of the bignesse of a large Mirtle leafe, or bigger, dented thicke round about the edges; the flowets come forth single, every one upon Ʋines pervinca vulgaris. Common Periwinc le. 
Clematis Daphnoides latifolia s Vinca pervinca major. The greater Periwinckle. 
Clematis urens flore albo. The burning Climer or Virgins Bower. 
Clematis peregrina flore rubro vel purpureo si plex. Single Ladies bower red or purple. 
Clematis peregrina flore pleno. Double purple Ladyes Bower. 
F mmata Io is s r ecta. Vpright Ʋirginia Bower. 
Clematis Panonica minor. The lesser Hungarian Climer. 
Clematis Panonica Clusij major. The greater Hungarian Climer. 
a slender long foote stalke, consisting of foure woolly and 1. Clematis sylvestris latifolia sive Viorna. The great wild Climer or Travellers sive. 
2. Clematis sylvestris altera Boetica. The great Spanish wild Climer. 
3. Clematis Cru i ta Alpina. The lesser Climer of the Alpes. 
pointed leaves, laid open like unto a crosse, of a blush white colour, having in the middle thereof, many small whiter leaves foulded together: the roote spreadeth very much under ground, which hath but very small acrimonie therein, or none at all, but the leaves are somewhat sharpe and hot in taste. 
4. Clematis maritima repens. The creeping fiery Sea Climer. This creeping Sea Clematis, spreadeth abroad many creeping pliant, joynted and crested branches, about two foote long, covered with a very darke greene barke, from whence shoote forth many winged leaves, a little dented about the edges, very like unto the Clematis erecta, or Flamula Iovis, the upright Virgins Bower, consisting of five leaves, but most commonly of three upon a stalke, being narrower, harder and longer pointed: at the ends whereof commeth forth, a small clasping tendrell, but those that grow up higher upon the stalkes, and nearer unto the toppes, where the flowers doe stand, are much smaller and narrower: the flowers come forth many toge∣ther, as in the other, set upon long foote stalkes, which are white with many hairy threds in the middle of them: and after they are past, arise many round flat reddish seede, smaller than the other, three or foure upon a stalke toge∣ther, plumed with a white feather, at the head of every of them: the whole plant is sharpe and hot like unto the other. 
The Place. The first groweth in many places of our owne land, in the hedges of fields, &amp; by the high wayes side, in Bucking∣hamshire, Bedfordshire, and Essex, but especially in Kent, where from beyond Woolwich to Gravesend, and from Gravesend along to Canterbury, you may see it in many places. The second Clusius onely found in Spaine, betweene Medina Sidonia and Calpe, and in divers pla thereof. The third was found upon mount Baldus, by Iungermanus as Bauhinus saith, but is set downe by Iohannes Pona, an Apothecarie of Verona, in his description thereof which he sent unto Clusius, that first pub∣lished and set it forth at the end of his history of plants, and was augmented afterwards by Pona himselfe, and set forth first in Latine, and after that againe enlarged with many additions and set forth in Italian by his some; yet Bauhinus saith it was found also very plentifully, both fairer and greater by Doctor Burserus, upon the of Austria: The last Bauhinus saith, groweth in many places of the Adriaticke sea shore, and in those Ilands of the Venetians there, called Lio, and Litzefusina. 
The Time. They doe all flower about Iuly, and the feather like toppes of the crested ones, appeare in some places all the winter.
The Names. They are called Clematides of their climing and spreading branches. The first Bauhinus calleth Clematitis syl-Vestris latifolia, and so doe I also. Lobel and Gerard call it Ʋiorna, quasi vias ornans, which Latine word I thinke was but derived from the French Ʋiorne, or the French from the Latine: Bellonius saith, it is Ʋiburnum Gallor , (and Ruellius I thinke tooke it from him ore converso. ) as if the French Ʋiorne were derived from Vibu whereof Ʋirgil speaketh in these words. 
Verum hoc tantum alias inter caput extulit urbes, Quantum lenta solent inter Viburna Cupressus. Wherein he compareth the statelines of Rome to the Cypresse tree, and the meanesse of other Cities to the low shrubb. Viburnum: but so it is not likely to bee, seing this Viorna will rise to the top of the tallest Cypresse it selfe, if it be planted nigh it whereon it may clime; that Virgil his comparison therefore may hold good we must find Viburnum to be a low shrub much differing from this, as you shall heare in his place: Fuschius thought it to be Vitis nigra, Dodonaeus calleth it Vitalba, Anguillara judged it to be Atragene Theophrasti, whereof he maketh men∣tion in lib. 5. c. 10. whereunto Clusius doth consent as being the most likely of any other plant, and Pena and Lo∣bel doe not dissent therefrom, neither doe I for the reasons there shewed: it is also the Vitis sylvestris of Pliny whereof he speaketh in his 16. Booke and fourth Chapter, and the Clematis tertia of Matthiolus, the Vitis sylvestris caustica, of Gesner in hortis Gemarniae the Vitis sylvestris Dioscoridis of Anguillara, and the Clem tis altera prima of Cordus upon Dioscorides: the Italians call it Vitalba, the Germans Linen and Lijnen, the Dutch Ly , and in English of most country people where it groweth Honestie; and the Gentlewomen call it Love, but Ge∣rard coyned that name of the Travelours joy. The second Clusius calleth Clematis altera Baetica, and Bauhinus that he might vary therefrom, Clematis peregrina foliis pyri incisis: The third is set forth by Pona under the title of Clematis Cruciata Alpina, but Bauhinus to alter the title, calleth it Clematis Alpina Gerani folia: the last Bau∣hinus calleth Clematis maritima repens, as it is in my title and describing it in his Pinax, referreth it to Anguillar his Clematites. 
The Vertues. None of these here described are used in Physicke, by any that I know, for although they are all hot and sharpe in tast, some more or lesse then others, yet are they not applyed to the purposes that the other sorts are, which Dioscorides and Galen speak of: both these and the other Climers whose figure I give you here, and their description in my former booke may very well serve to make Arbours, in Gardens, Orchards, or other places for pleasure, for thereunto they are most fit, if any will so respect as to plant them. The other Climers serve to take away the scurfe, lepry, or other deformities of the skinne: but may not safely be used inwardly, although Dioscorides, Galen, Pliny, and others say it was used to purge the waters in the Dropsie: Matthiolus saith the wa∣ter of the upright Virgins Bower is effectuall in any cold greefes, and that some gave the leaves prepared to helpe the quartane Ague: an oyle made thereof is used to heale those that have aches, crampes, and other paines that come by cold, as also to helpe the stone and to provoke urine: the Periwincle is a great binder staying bleeding, both at the nose and mouth if some of the leaves be chewed, the French doe use it to stay the menstruall courses. Dioscorides, Galen, and Aegineta commend it against the laske and fluxes of the belly to bee drunke with wine: it is a tradition received with many, that a wreath made hereof and worne about the legs defendeth them from the crampe. The Maracoc or Virginia Climer, although I have placed it among them for the manner of growing, yet is it of a farre differing quality, the liquor within the fruite is very pleasant to the taste, as if Muske or Am∣ber were mixed with it, or as others say, having a little aciditie with it, so that it cloyeth not the stomack al∣though one take much thereof, nor giveth any bad symptome, but is held rather to move the belly downewards and make it soluble. Aldinus in his Farnesian Garden hath set downe many vertues thereof rather in an hyperbole I think then in verity, which I thinke were rather others fantasies then of his owne approbation: for in his owne judgement and tryall he saith the leaves are of a sleepie property, smelling like unto Nightshade, having with∣all peradventure some deleteriall or deadly quality in them also, because (as he observed) that flies resting on them were extinguished or kild. 
CHAP. XX. Apocynum sive Periploca. Dogs bane. T Here are three sorts of this Apocynum or Dogs bane differing chiefely in the climing, and in the forme of their leaves, and are dangerous to man and beast, but there are some other plants referred unto them, as well for their face and forme of growing and giving of milke, as for their violent and dange∣rous qualities, I have spoken of that kind that came out of Virginia in my former booke, whereunto I must refer them for the description that are desirous to see it. 
1. Apocinum latifolium non repens. Broad leafed or upright Dogs bane. This broad leafed or upright Dogs bane, a wooddy stemme of the bignesse of ones finger, covered with a gray∣ish barke, from whence arise divers wooddy, but flexible greenish branches, easie to winde, but very tough &amp; hard to breake, standing for the most part upright, and seldome trayling or laying hold of any thing that groweth neare it, having two broad darke greene leaves, but sharpe and not round at the points, set at every joynt all along, but not very neare one unto another, full of veynes, somewhat softer then Ivie leaves, somewhat thicke also, whose stalkes and branches being broken yeeld a pale yellow coloured milke; but as Dioscorides and other wri∣ters say, of a much deeper yellow, that is, in the warmer Countries; the flowers come forth at the joynts with the leaves, and at the tops three or foure or more sometimes standing together; which consist of five small poin∣ted leaves, of a whitish colour, yet larger then those of Asclepias or Swallowe wor ; after which (in the hot∣ter Climats, but never in ours that could be observed) grow long crooked and pointed cods, somewhat more hard and wooddy then those of Asclepias, although nothing so much as those of the Rose bay tree, called Oleander, most usually two standing together upon one stalke, but severed at the setting to the stalke, and are full of a sil∣ken white downe, wherein lye dispersed many flat blackish browne seedes: the roote groweth downe into the ground spreading into sundry branches, with divers small fibres thereat, this looseth not his branches, but leaves every yeare, new shooting forth every spring. 
2. Apocynum angustifolium sive repens. Climing Dogs bane. The climing Dogs bane sendeth forth from the roote divers wooddy branches, yet tough and flexible, of a darke grayish greene colour, and sometimes brownish especially neare the ground, where it beareth no leaves af∣ter it is growne of any bignesse or height, which winde 1. Apocynum latifolium non repens. Broad leafed or upright Dogs bane. 
themselves from the Sun ward (as in all that I have seene I have observed) to a very great height, twenty foote or more sometimes, if it finde whereon it may climbe higher, or else falling downe againe with his top, whereon stand at severall good distances, saving at the tops where they stand thicker together, two leaves longer and narrower then the for∣mer, and pointed at the ends, somewhat thicke, and of a deepe greene colour almost shining: the flowers stand in the same manner that the others doe, consisting of five thicke leaves, each of them pointed and somewhat bending backwards, seeming to have two leaves a peece, one lying upon another, like unto those of Epimedium or Barrenwort, the undermost being greenish and larger then the upper leaves, which lye upon them, and are not so large to cover them wholly, but leave the greene brims, or edges of the lower leaves to bee seene round about them, which upper leaves are of a darke purple or reddish colour, and cleave so fast to the lower, that it is very hard to separate them: in the middle of each flower standeth a greene pointell, incompassed with five darke yel∣low chives, each of them turning inwards: after the flowers are fallen, appeare (in the warme countries, but not in ours) small long cods, two alwayes joyned together, but more strictly then the other, bowing somewhat more outwards in the middle, and meeting almost together at the points, wherein lie such like flat seedes, wrapped in the like silken downe the roote spreadeth in the ground like the other, and sometimes sendeth forth suckers, whereby it is encreased: this likewise looseth his leaves but not his stalkes in the winter, and gaineth fresh in the spring. 
3. Apocynum angusto salicis folio. Willow leafed Dogs bane. This other narrow leafed Dogs bane groweth up in the same manner, that the last doth having two leaves set at every joynt of the climing twigs, but they are not so thicke, but somewhat thinner, and much narrower then they, almost resembling the forme of a willow leafe, the flowers are like the other, and blow as late, loosing his leaves in the winter, in the same manner. 
4. 5. Apocynum rectum latifolium &amp; angustifolium Americanum, sive majus &amp; minus. The great and lesser upright American Dogs bane. Although I have in my former booke given you both the description and figure of the greater sort of these Dogs banes by the name of Periploca Virginiana, Virginian silke, yet I think it not amisse to mention it here againe, &amp; give you the full figure thereof, referring you to see the description, &amp;c. there, and with it to joyne a lesser sort which creepeth not with the rootes in the ground like it, but from many long fibres shooteth forth a round browne stalke about halfe a yard high, having at each joynt a paire of long narrow leaves, and such a large tuft of flowers at the top, but of a deeper purple colour, which have a certaine clamminesse on them that will detaine flies or other light things that happen to fall thereon, after which come long and straight cods (not crooked like the greater sort hereof) with flat browne seede therein lying in a white kind of downe, like unto Asclepias Swallowewort: this yeeldeth a milky sap like the other, and thought to be both dangerous, although no true tryall hath beene made thereof. 
6. Pseudo apocynum Virginianum, alijs Galseminum Americanum maximum flore phaeniceo. Virginian Iasmine. Let me I pray you make bold to insert in this place to the rest this Indian, Ientitule him with bastardy for the reasons hereafter specified, whose description I give you in this manner. It shooteth forth sundry weake whitish wooddy stemmes not able to sustaine themselves without helpe of stakes or fastening to some wall but spreading exceeding high or farre, branching forth on all sides into many small ones, at whose joynts come forth long winged leaves seaven or nine set on a middle stalke, each whereof is somewhat broad and long poin∣ted 2. Apocynum angustifolium sive repons. Climing Dogs bane. 
Apocynum rectum latifolium &amp; angustifolium Americanum sive maj &amp; minus. The greater and lesser American Dogs bane. 
and dented somewhat deepely about the edges, and of a sad greene colour full of veines, very neare resem∣bling the leaves of the great Germane Burnet Saxifrage. This never bore flower with mee, nor any other the hath it in our country that I could heare of: but in the naturall place, as also beyond sea, at Rome, and other wa countries, it beareth a great tuft of flowers together hanging downewards, each whereof is large and somewhat long, somewhat like to the Foxglove, but rather Bell fashion, small at the bottome big in the belly, and wi open at the mouth, cut in on the brims into five or six lips as it were or divisions, of a sad Orenge or yellowish colour, with some yellow threds, &amp; a whitish stile in the middle: after the flowers are past; arise hard; wooddy, i &amp; flattish double edged crooked and pointed cods, containing within them a double row of flat, thin, transparent, browne skinny and winged seedes, with a thinne wooddy filme separating them in the middle all the length of the cod: the roote groweth not very deepe but spreadeth, yet runneth not under ground, the leaves all falling away from the branches every winter, and are renewed every spring. By this that hath beene sayd you may per∣ceive the reason why I place it among these dangerous climers, although it have no obnoxious or hurtfull quality therein for any thing I can learne, and doe not call it a Iasmine as many others do, nor a Honysuckle as our English Colonie at Virginia first did, nor a Bell flower as since they have done, nor yet place it with the other Clime s in the last Chapter, because of the pods with seede, neither yet doe I entitle it Gelseminum heder aceum Indicu , that good French goose doth, whose horned name is prefixed to his worke of great judgement no doubt, to m e it beare an Ivy title that hath so little resemblance thereto. 
The Place. The first groweth in Syria and those Easterne countries, the other groweth in Italy, in Apulia and Calabria is the kingdome of Naples: the third likely groweth in Italy, the seede being sent from thence, as also in Egypt, the three last sorts came all from our English plantations in America. 
The Time. They flower very late in the yeare, if they flower at all, that is, not untill the end of August, and to the middle of September. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and , Apocynum and Cynomeron, quia canis interficit: Dioscorides saith it was also called of divers in his time Cynocrambe, Brassica canina, but it is an extravagant name not fit, and Periploca of divers; which is as well a word, common to all sorts of herbes, that clime up and wind themselves about trees, and other things as peculiar to these called Periploca, whose Alexipharmacum or counterpoyson i the Vincetoxicum or Asclepias, as the Anthora is unto the Thora, and Herba Paris unto Pardalianches. Fab Columna seemeth to doubt, that the Herbarists and Apothecaries in Italy did take the Apocynum of Dioscorides, in their Medicines, which is deadly, in stead of Asclepias, and that they did not know the true Ascepius of Dios ∣rides, unto whose description that which is called Asclepias with them and us doth not agree, for although it hath a number of rootes, yet they doe not smell well, (as Dioscorides saith the rootes of his Asclepius should d e nor yet hath it seeds like unto Securiduca Hatchet Teeth, but hath leaves, flowers, cods, with silken downe, and seede in them, like unto the Apocynum of Dioscorides, and differing in nothing but in the milkye juice it yeel∣deth; which as he saith, in that, is white like milke (but Dioscorides saith, that his Apocynum giveth a yellow juice or milke) and in this, is of a pale yellow colour like unto the poyson of the viper, that sticketh in the gums of his teeth; which he saith he hath often shewed to his friends, to shew them the likelihood of danger to be in their Asclepias, which yeeldeth such a likely poyson, or at the least to cause them to be more cautelous in the use of it: but assuredly if their Asclepias (which is the same with ours called also Vincetoxicum as I thinke) doe give a yellowish milke, yet doth it not in our Country, neither the white nor black: he saith also, that the latter writers have set forth divers sorts of Apocynum under the name of Asclepias of Dioscorides, for that they doe not know, nor have seene the true Asclepias of Dioscorides, unlesse his Apocynum and Asclepias be all one, set forth in divers places, and by divers names: thus farre Fabius Columna, led away onely by the sight of that yellowish milke in their Asclepias; which as you heare he acknowledgeth not to be the right (howsoever the use thereof was fre∣quent with them, and might be as he acknowledgeth also, a counterpoison as the true Asclepias is accounted) but rather an Apocynum: but I thinke he did not thorowly consider that the true kindes of Apocynum, have all of them wooddy, yet pliant branches, as Dioscorides giveth to his Apocynum, fit to binde any thing, which abide and dye not downe to the ground, as all the sorts of Asclepias doe, which is the true note to distinguish the Apocy∣num from Asclepias. The names of them all, as they are in their titles here set downe, doe little or nothing vary, from those that all other writers give them, some calling them Apocynum, and some Periploca, and therefore I neede not I thinke, make any further repetition of their divers appellations, onely the fourth Bauhinus calleth as I doe, and taketh it to be also the Secamone Aegyptiorum of Alpinus, and the second sort of the second kinde of Apocynum of Clusius: the last, because of the wooddy pods with the manner of the climing, mooveth me rather to joyne it to these, although I know not of any evill quality therein, and therefore give it a bastard name. 
The Ʋertues. There is no property herein fit for the use of mans body, appropriated by any, either ancient or moderne wri∣ters, for the place in Pliny, lib. 24. c. 11. is mistaken or scarse to be beleeved, where he saith the seede of A∣pocynum taken in water, helpeth the pleuresye, and all paines of the sides, (unlesse he thought it to be like the hangman that can doe as much,) and yet afterwards saith it killeth dogges, and all foure footed beasts, being gi∣ven them in their meate, for Galen saith it is a poyson to man, and being of a strong sent it is hot, and that not in a meane degree, although it is not drying in the same, and is not to be used but outwardly, to discusse humours. Clusius saith, that the most illustrous Prince, William Landtsgrave of Hessen, in appointing his Physitions to make tryall of the Terra Silefiaca, which was taken at Strega, whether it had those properties to expell poysons, as they that brought it to sell reported of it, caused divers poysons to be given to dogs, as Arsnicke, Napellus, or Helmet flower, and Oleander or the Rose bay, and this Dogs bane also; which soever of those dogges, had that earth given to him in drinke, did after some fits or passions recover, but those that had none thereof given them dyed all, but none so speedily as those that had this Dogs bane given unto them, yet Pena and Lobel in their Ad∣versaria, speaking of that kind of Dogs bane, say thus; If it be death to a dogge that hath eaten it, it is proba∣ble that it is Apocynum (for in their title, they make a doubt thereof) of Dioscorides: but say they, wee have it for certaine, and of long time found true by experience and tryall, that this is a counterpoyson against other sorts of poyson given to dogges, thus you see the reports of these two are flat contrary, the one unto another, so that which of them to beleeve, I leave to every one as they thinke good: peradventure, this their Periploca Graeca folijs latioribus hederaceis, (for so they call it) is the same vulgar or common Asclepias, that Fabius Colum∣na saith, was used in Italy, as is before said, and not that Apocynum rectum of Clusius. 
CHAP. XXI. Asclepias sive Ʋincetoxicum. Asclepias or Swallow-wort. H Aving now shewed you all the Venemous Plants, as also those that procure sleepe, and those that are hurtfull and dangerous; let me now shew you also those that are accounted Counterpoysons, to those deadly or dangerous herbes, as also to other sorts of Venome or poyson, and yet not all, for some are dispersed in this worke, in the severall Classes thereof, and some are spoken of in my former booke, as you may there find. The first of them that I shall set forth unto you is the Swallow-wort, because it is so like unto the Dogs bane in the last Chapter, and is his Antidote, whereof there are three sorts as follow∣eth. 
1. Asclepias flore albo. Swallow-wort with white flowers. This Swallow-wort riseth up with divers slender weake stalkes; to be two or three foote long not easie to breake, scarse able to stand upright, and therefore for the most part, leane or lye downe upon the ground, if it find not any thing to sustaine it, and sometimes will twine themselves about it, whereon are set two leaves at the joynts, being somewhat broad and long pointed at the end, of a darke greene colour, and smooth at the edges: at the joynts with the leaves towards the toppes of the stalkes, and at the toppes themselves, come forth divers small white flowers, consisting of five pointed leaves a peece, of an heavy sweet sent; after which come small long pods, thicke above and growing lesse and lesse to the point, wherein lye small flat browne seede, wrapped in a great deale of white silken downe, which when the pod is ripe, openeth of it selfe, and sheddeth both seed and cotten upon the ground, if it be not carefully gathered: this yeeldeth no milke either white or yellow in our Country as the Dogs bane doth, in any that I have observed, but a thinne watery juice; the rootes are a great bush, of many white strings fastened together at the head, smelling somewhat strong while they are fresh and greene, but more pleasant when they are dryed: both leaves and stalkes, dye downe every yeare to the ground, and rise a new in the Spring of the yeare, when the stalkes at their first springing are blackish browne. 
2. Asclepias flore nigro. Swallow-wort with blacke flowers. The blacke Swallow-wort groweth in the same manner that the former doth, having his long slender rough branches, rise to a greater height then the other, and twining themselves about whatsoever standeth next unto 1. Asclepias flore albo. Swallow-wort with white flowers. 
2. Asclepias flore nigro. Swallow-wort with blacke flowers.
them, having such like darke greene leaves set by couples, but somewhat smaller then they: the flowers like∣wise stand in the same fashion, but somewhat smaller also and of so darke a purplish colour, that it seemeth to be a blacke, and are scarse discerned unlesse one looke very earnestly upon them: after which come more plen∣tifully then in the former, such like cods, with a white silver downe, and seedes in them as in the former: the rootes hereof are not so bushye as in the other, neither smell so strong, nor doth it give any milkie but a watery juice when it is broken, so farre as ever I could observe. 
3. Asclepias Cretica. Swallow-wort of Candy. This Candy Swallow-wort, riseth up in the same fashion that the former doe, with many slender flexible greene branches, with leaves set at the joynts, on either side, as the white kinde hath, and are very like unto them, but somewhat of a paler greene colour; the flowers stand in the same manner, three or foure together upon a stalke, but are somewhat of a paler white colour, not so white as they, to whom succeede sometimes but one, but most usually two pods together, which are thicker and shorter then those of the white kinde, stra∣ked all along, and double forked at the ends, wherein lye seedes and silke as in the former: the rootes have not so many strings as the last, and have as well as the rest of the Plant, a strong smell resembling Boxe leaves. 
The Place. The two first grow in rough untilled places, and in mountaines in divers places, both in France about Narbo , Marseilles and Mompelier, and in Italy also, and in other places. The last grew in Candy from whence the seed came. 
The Time. They all flower in the moneths of Iune and Iuly, and sometimes not untill August, if the yeare be backeward, and their cods with seede is ripe about a moneth after: the empty huskes abiding on the dry branches, when the seed and silke is shed out, and fallen on the ground, or blowne away with the wind. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Asclepias, ab Aesculapio, qui Graecie dicitur antiquo medicinae doctore some bastard names it hath also, as quasi hederula, and haederefolium: and thereupon or from the forme of the leaves like unto Ivy: Ruellius calleth it Hederalis, in Latine it is called usually Asclepias and Ʋince∣toxicum, which is as a generall word to denominate any Counterpoison, for Ʋincetoxicum quasi Alexipharmic dictum, &amp; quod illi insignis adversus venena vis insit, it was anciently called Hirundinaria, (although both the kindes of Chelidonium majus and minus, be also called Hirundinaria ) of some, quia acutae &amp; aperta ejus siliquae, cum c ∣dida lanugine volanti hirundini fere similis est, alij vero a semine lanugine pinnato, ita dici aiunt: that is, it is cal∣led Swallow-wort of some, because the pointed cods when they are open; and the silke appeareth out of them, doe somewhat resemble a Swallow flying; others say from the likenesse of the seed, fethered as it were with the downe about it: it is called in Italian Ʋenci tassico &amp; Asclepiade, in high Dutch Schwallen wurtz, in low Dutch Swalnwe wortel, and in English Swallow-wort, and of some silken Cicely: It is generally by the most writers, and most judicious Herbarists now a dayes, acknowledged to be the true Asclepias of Dioscorides, al∣though Anguillara doubteth of it; and Matthiolus denieth it and contesteth against Fuchsius that said it was Ʋin∣cetoxicum. For first concerning the leaves, to be like Ivye, as Dioscorides saith and long as it is in some copyes, but Oribasius as he saith hath it not so; and Marcellus doth thereunto agree, led peradventure as he saith, by the sight of some ancient copies, the leaves being like unto Bay leaves, but sharper pointed; secondly that the flowers had no strong or evill sent; thirdly that the leaves and rootes, did not smell sweet; and lastly, the seede was not like those of Pelecinum Securidaca, the Hatchet Fetch; all which Dodonaeus retorteth saying, all his exceptions and reasons are nothing worth, but I may say all Dioscorides his comparisons are not so stricktly to be stucke unto; for in the de∣scription of the cods of Apocynum, he saith, they are like Beane cods, when as all know they are more like the cods of Oleander: and in the description of the leaves of Periclymenum he saith they are like those of Ivy, unto whom they are in all mens judgement very little like, and so in a number of other things: Concerning the rootes, Matthiolus saith, that an ancient Manuscript hath not the word multas, but tenues, but which of them both is taken doth not much alter the matter: but that they are not sweete, no man that hath his sence of smel∣ling perfect, can say so, if he feele their sent, as they grow naturally in the Mountaines; and for the evill smell of the flowers, the word virus redolens, is not in all things of one equality: and for the seede although it be not as square as the Securidaca, yet is flat, and in colour and bignesse like it. Fabius Columna as it is set downe in the Chapter before, tooke the Italian Asclepias, to be rather Apocynum of Dioscorides: and Lobel also cal∣leth the blacke Swallow-wort Periploca minor, belike because it riseth higher, and clambereth like a Periploca, or more then the white: or peradventure because of the blacke flowers, but I shewed you before the chiefest note, to know Asclepius from Periploca or Apocynum. There is little variation in the denominations of these plants by any writers, more then is here expressed, some calling them by the one, and some by the other name, and there∣fore not worthy further trouble. 
The Ʋertues. The rootes have a most soveraine quality against all poysons, but in particular as is said before, against the Apocynum or Dogs bane; It is effectually given to any that are bitten by any venemous beast, or stunge by any Serpent or other Creature; as also against the biting of a mad dogge, a dramme and a halfe thereof taken in Cardus Benedictus water, for divers dayes together: It is taken also in wine every day against the Plague or Pe∣stilence: a dramme thereof taken in Sorrell or Buglosse water is very effectuall against all the passions of the heart, if a few Citron seedes be taken therewith, taken in the same manner and measure, it easeth all the griping paines in the belly: the decoction of the rootes, made with white wine, taken for divers dayes together, a good draught at a time, and sweating presently thereupon cureth the dropsie: the same also helpeth the jaun∣dise, provoketh urine, and easeth the cough and all defects of the chest and lunges: the powder of the rootes taken with Peony seede, is good against the falling sickenesse, or with Bassill seede or the rinde of Pomecitrons is good against Melancholly: and taken with the rootes of Dictamnus albus or Fraxinella, bastard Dittany, will kill and expell the wormes of the maw or belly: the rootes are very effectually used with other things, made for bathes for women to sit in, or over, to ease all paines of the mother, and to bring downe their courses: the de∣coction likewise of the rootes hereof, and of Cumfrye made with wine, is much commended to helpe those that are bursten or have a rupture, also for them that have beene bruised by a fall, or otherwise: the powder of the rootes or leaves, is no lesse effectuall to clense all putride rotten and filthy ulcers and sores wheresoever, then the rootes of Aristolochiae or Birthwort, and may safely be used in all salves, Ʋnguents and lotions, made for such purposes, in the stead thereof, the one for the other: the leaves and flowers boyled and made into a pultis, and applyed to the hard tumours or swellings of womens breasts, cureth them speedily, as also such evill sores as happen in the matrix, although they be inveterate or hard to be cured: the downe that is found in the cods of these herbes, as well as in the Dogs bane, doe make a farre softer stuffing for cushions or pillowes or the like, then Thistle downe, which is much used in some places for the like purposes. 
CHAP. XXII. Herba Paris. Herbe True love or one berry. B Esides the usuall and knowne Herba Paris, I have two other herbes like thereunto, to bring to your consideration, which I thinke is fit to take up the roome here. 
The ordinary Herba Paris, or Herbe true love hath a small creeping roote, of a little binding, but unpleasant loathsome taste, running here and there, under the upper crust of the ground, some∣what like a Couch grasse roote, but not so white, and not much lesser then the roote of the white wild Anemone, and almost of as darke a colour, but much like thereunto in creeping: shooting forth stalkes with leaves, some whereof carry no berries, and others doe, every stalke being smooth without joynts, and blackish greene, rising to the height of halfe a foote at the most, if it beare berries (for most commonly those that beare none, doe not rise fully so high) bearing at the toppe foure leaves, set directly one against another in manner of a crosse, or a lace, or ribben, tyed as it is called, in a true Loves knot, which are each of them a part somewhat like unto a Nightshade leafe, but somewhat broader (yea in some places twice as broad as in others, for it will much vary,) sometimes having but three leaves, sometimes five, and sometimes sixe, and sometimes smaller and sometimes larger, either by a quarter or halfe, or as I said before, twise as great: I have seene it also degenerate, that the foure leaves being twise as large as the ordinary, have beene dented in, both at the edges and points, which have beene parted or forked, (and have borne greater berries then the ordinary) all which are of a fresh greene colour, not dented about the edges: in the middle of those foure leaves, there riseth up a small slender stalke about an inch high, bearing at the toppe thereof one flower spread open like a starre, con∣sisting of foure small and narrow long pointed leaves, of a yellowish greene colour, and foure other lying between Herba Paris. Herbe true love or one berry. 
2. Herba Paris Canadensis rotunda radice. Herbe true love of Canada with a round roote. 
them lesser then they; in the middle whereof standeth a round darke purplish button or head, compassed about with eight small yellow mealy chives or threds, which three colours make it the more conspicuous, and lovely to behold: this button or head in the middle, when the other leaves are withered, becommeth a blackish purple berry full of juice, of no hot nor evill, nor yet of any sweetish taste, of the bignesse of a reasonable grape, ha∣ving within it many white seedes; the whole plant is almost insipide, without any manifest taste, and by the effects, in repressing humours and inflammations is accounted as cold as the Nightshade. 
2. Herba Paris triphyllos Brasiliano. Herbe true love of Brasill. The roote of this herbe is small and creepeth like the other, sending forth a slender stalke of foure or five inches high, having three broader and longer leaves set thereon, then are in the former, the stalke riseth about three inches above them, bearing at the top three much narrower leaves, as it were the huske to the flower, standing in the mid∣dle, consisting of three white leaves having some veines in them, and are about three inches long, and one broad. 
3. Herba Paris Canadensis rotunda radice. Herbe true love of Canada with a round roote. This herbe groweth with three large leaves like the last, and at the toppe of the upper stalke one flower, con∣sisting of sixe leaves, three whereof are greene and small, which are as it were the huske to the other three leaves which are larger and longer, of a darke purple colour, and in some white, in the middle whereof groweth a small round blackish berry, full of small seedes like Nightshade seede: the roote hereof creepeth not as the for∣mer, but groweth into a small round tuber. 
The Place. The first groweth in our woods and copses, as also sometimes in the corners and borders of fields, and waste grounds, in very many places of this land, for besides those places which Gerard hath set downe, which are al∣most all wasted and consumed, every one running thereunto, that is next him, and gathering it: it is found in Hinbury wood, three mile from Maidestone in Kent, in a wood also called Harwarsh, neere to Pinnenden heath, one mile from the said Maidestone, in a wood by Chisselhurst in Kent, called Long wood, and in the next wood thereunto called Iseets wood, especially about the skirts of a hoppe garden bordering thereon, in a wood also over against Boxly Abbay a mile from Maidestone in great abundance, not farre from the hedge side of that Med∣dow, through which runnes a rivelet, related by M r . George Bowles a young Gentleman, of excellent knowledge in these things. The second was found as Bauhinus saith in the woods of Brasil, but I had the knowledge thereof given me from Mounsier Loumeau of Rochell Preacher who had it out of Canada. The last was brought out of Canada, and mentioned by Coruntus in his booke of Canada plants. 
The Time, They spring up in the middle of Aprill, or May, and are in flower soone after, the berries are ripe in the end of May, and in some places in Iune. 
The Names. This herbe Paris hath not beene knowne, to either antient Greeke or Latine Writers, that wee can finde by their writings. It hath found therefore divers names, by divers of the moderne Authours, every one according as his opinion and judgement led him: for although Matthiolus, Caesalpinus, Anguillara, Camerarius, Dodonaeus, and Lugdunensis following them, doe call it Herba Paris, as it is now generally termed of all Herbarists; yet in the former times, Fuschius tooke it to be Aconitum Pardalianches, and to be deadly▪ or at least dangerous, whom Matthiolas contradicteth, and Cordus in his History of plants, seemeth to be of Fulschus opinion, calling it Aconi∣tum sive Pardalianches monococcon, but because it was found by good experience not to be hurtfull, but helpefull, Tabermontanus calleth it Aconitum salutiferum. Some called it Ʋva versa. Tragus not knowing any Latine name, that others called it by, giveth it the name of Aster, from his owne countrie people, who called it Sternkraut, but he addeth thereunto, sed non Atticus, because it might be knowne, he did not account it the Aster Atticus of Dioscorides, and others: he also calleth it Ʋva lupina, after the Germane word Wolffsbeer, whereby they in other places usually call it; as also einbeer: the Italians call it Herba Paris; the Spaniards Centelha; the French Raisin de Reinard; the Dutch Wolfebesien, and Spinne coppen. Gesner in hortis Germaniae, and Lobel and Paena in their Adver∣saria, call it Solanum tetraphyllon, from the forme of the leaves and berries, or both, and Bauhinus as leaning unto their judgement, calleth it Solanum quadrifolium Bacciferum. The second Bauhinus calleth Solanum triphyllum Brasilianum; and I Herba Paris triphyllos Brasiliana, because I doe not account the Herba Paris to be any kinde of Solanum. The last Cornutus calleth Solanum triphyllum Canadense. 
The Ʋertues. Although some formerly did account this herbe to be dangerous, if not deadly, as by the name of Aconitum, it may be gathered, because the forme thereof bred in them such a suspition, yet have not set downe any evill Sym∣tomes that it wrought, and therefore Pena and Lobel say, they made much triall thereof upon dogs, &amp; other crea∣tures, to finde out whether it would worke any dangerous effects unto them, but did not see any harme come to them that had eaten it, and therefore upon report of the contrary effect it would worke, they made triall likewise thereof upon two dogs, to whom was given of Arsenicke and Sublimatum, of each halfe a dramme in meate, unto one of them, about an houre after their taking of it, when their furious &amp; foming fits were over, that they become more quiet, as if they were ready to die, there was given one of them, two drammes of the pouder called Pulvis Saxonicus, (the receipt whereof hereafter followeth) in red wine, who presently thereupon grew well, the other dying without helpe the receipt of the pouder is thus. Res. Radicum Angelicae sativae &amp; sylvestris, Vincetoxici, Ph sive Valeriane majoris, Polypodij quercini, Althae &amp; Ʋrticae ana unciam dimidiam, Corticis Meseres Germanici, drachmas duas, granorum herbae Paridis numero 24. Foliorum ejusdem cum toto numero 36. ex radicibus &amp; cortice in aceto maceratis, ficcatis ut caeteris &amp; mixtis flat omnium pulvis: the leaves or berries alone are also effectuall, to ex∣pell poisons of all sorts, but especially that of the Aconites, as also the plague and other infectious diseases: it hath beene observed saith Matthiolus, as well from my owne experience, as from Baptista Sardus, the Author that enlarged the Pandocts, that some have beene holpen hereby, that have lyen long in a lingring sicknesse, and others that by Witchcraft (as it was thought) were become halfe foolish, as wanting their wits and sences, by the taking a dramme of the seedes, or the berries hereof in pouder, every day for twenty dayes together, were perfectly restored to their former good estate, and health: the leaves dried and given in pouder, have the like operation, yet in a weaker manner; it is thought also that the berries procure sleepe, being taken at night in drink: the rootes in pouder ease the paines of the collicke incontinently, being taken in wine: the leaves are very effe∣ctuall, as well for greene wounds, as to clense and heale up old filthy ulcers and sores, and is very powerfull to discusse all tumours and swellings, and to allay all inflammations very speedily, as also those tumours that happen in the cods, privy parts, or in the groine: the juyce or distilled water of the leaves, taketh away all heate and inflammation in the eyes: the same leaves also or their juyce applied to fellons, or those nailes of the hands or toes, that have empostumes or sores gathered together at the rootes of them, healeth them in a short space. 
CHAP. XXIII. Bistorta. Bistort or Snakeweede. T Here be diverse sorts of Bistorts, some being of late, others of elder account. 
1. Bistorta major vulgaris. Common Bistorte or Snakeweeke. This common Bistort hath a thicke short knobbed roote, blackish without, and somewhat red∣dish within, a little crooked or turned together, of an harsh or astringent taste, with divers blackish fibres growing thereat, from whence spring up every yeare divers leaves standing upon long foote stalkes, being somewhat long and broad, very like unto a Docke leafe, and a little pointed at the ends, but that it is of a blewish greene colour on the upperside, and of an Ash colour gray, and a litttle purplish underneath, ha∣ving divers veines therein; from among which rise up diverse small and slender stalkes, two foote high, almost naked and without leaves, or with very few, and narrower, bearing a spikie bush of pale flesh coloured flowers, which being past, there abideth small seede somewhat like unto Sorrell seede but greater. 
2. Bistorta magis intorta radice. Bistort with more crooked rootes. This Bistort differeth not much from the former, being a little lesse, both in leafe and roote, which are more writhed and crooked than the former; the Spikie flowers, &amp;c. are equall also, almost unto them, and so is the three square seede. 
3. Bistorta Alpina majora. Great Mountaine Bistort The great Bistort hath many very long and pointed leaves, of the same colour with the first, both above and underneath, some of a cubite or a foote and a halfe long, and but narrow in comparison of the length, being about three inches broad, these stalkes rise almost twise as high as the first, almost bare without leaves thereon, which are much smaller, bearing a spike of blush flowers, foure inches long at the toppes: the roote is foure times big∣ger than the common sort, blacke without, with many blacke fibres at them, but not so red within as the first, but rather whitish.
a little slender, not greene but reddish, the leaves are more woolly, and the edges deepelier dented in, the flowers also are of a deeper gold yellow colour then the last. 
5. Pentaphyllum minimum repens. The smallest creeping Cinkefoile. This smallest Cinkefoile, is lesse creeping then any of the former, having many small leaves of five parts, as o∣thers have, but a little whitish hoary underneath, this scarse beareth any stalke, with small pale yellow flowers, having a purplish head in the middle, which growing ripe is hard, and like a small Strawberry head as all the rest have, the roote is small, but somewhat sharper in taste then the others, but yet astringent withall. 
6. Pentaphyllum supinum Potentillae facie. Low Cinkefoile with wild Tansy leaves. This small Cinkefoile creepeth not, nor yet standeth up∣right, but leaneth downe with his weake stalkes to the ground ward, having very long stalkes of leaves on them, divided into many parts next the ground, set on each side thereof two at a space one against another, and an odde one at the end, all of them dented about the edges, very like unto wild Tansy leaves, but not hoary or silver like as they, but greene: the flowers come at the joynts with the leaves towards the toppes of the stalkes, which are there, lesser and lesse divided then those below, every one by it selfe, which are small and of a pale yellow colour, with a head in the middle, which after it is ripe, is like unto the other Cinkefoile heads of seede, that is, like unto a small hard dry Strawberry: the roote is small long and blackish, like the ordinary Cinkefoile. 
7. Alterum eidem simile Enneaphyllon. Another small one like thereunto. There is another low one of this kind, that Bauhinus hath et forth in his Prodromus, whose small slender stalkes, three or foure inches long are many, lying round about the roote upon the ground, divided into many branches, whereon are long stalkes of leaves like unto the last, but divided into nine parts, each of them much narrower than they, very hairy and dented about the edges: the flowers are small and more yellow, standing in the same manner, and yeel ing the like heade of seede: the roote is somewhat thicker and blacke ending in long fibres. 
The Place. The first groweth by woods sides, hedge sides, the pathwayes in fields, and in the borders and corners of them, almost through all the land: the second groweth on the highest toppes of the Alpes, that are highest unto Au∣stria; the other Pentaphyllum of Clusius groweth in the grassie fields of the Alpes neare Austria: the third groweth the most common of all others, by the wayes sides, in dry grounds in Hungary, the lower Austria, Mo∣ravia and Bohemia: the fourth groweth in the same places with the third, but more rare to be met with; the fift Tragus saith, in many sandie grounds of Germany, and in the grassie fields that are by the woods sides: the sixt Clusius saith he found in the borders of fields, that are by the woods sides about Ʋienna, and is cherished in gardens with many; the last groweth on the Alpes among the Switsers. 
The Time. They doe all flower in Sommer for the most part, yet the least, is often in flower the earliest, which is some∣times in Aprill, and the second in May. 
The Names. The first is generally called by all, either Pentaphyllum or Quinquefolium vulgare; of Bauhinus, Quinquefolium majus repens: the second is the third Pentaphyllum of Clusius, called by him, Pentaphyllum Alpinum flore aures, and by Bauhinus, Quinquefolium minus repens Alpinum aureum: the third is Clusius his first sort, of the fourth kinde of Pentaphyllum, which Bauhinus calleth Quinquefolium minus repens lanuginosum luteum: the fourth is the other sort, of Clusius his fourth kinde, and called by Bauhinus, Quinquefolium minus repens aureum. The fift is the first kinde of Tragus, called by him Quinquefolium minimum, and by Lobel in his Adversaria, Pentaphyllum minus luteum: the sixt is called by Lobel in his observations and Icones, Pentaphyllum supinum Tormentillae faci , but by Clusius more properly, Potentillae facie; by Dodonaeus according to his figure, but not the description Quinquefolium tertium repens, which is M r . Gerards Fragaria vesca sive sterilis: Bauhinus calleth it Quinquefo∣lio fragifero affinis; and calleth the last (which if it be not the same and growing lesse in his naturall or wilde place, yet is very like it) Quinquefolio affinis Enneaphyllon. 
Ordo tertius. The third Ranke. 1. Pentaphyllum majus erectum. The greater upright Cinkefoile. TThe greater upright Cinkefoile, hath somewhat longer and larger greene leaves, than any of the former sorts, cut into five parts, and often also into seven, and but with three leaves towards the toppes, and dented a∣bout the edges: the stalkes are strong and upright, not much above halfe a yard high, branched divers wayes, with large pale yellow flowers at the toppes of them, which 1. Pentaphyllum majus erectum. The greater upright Cinkefoile. 
turne into seede like as the other sorts doe, the roote is blackish and stringie. Of this kinde, there is some that doth sometimes beare white flowers, and others purplish, whereof their flowers make the difference. 
2. Pentaphyllum rectum minus. The lesser upright Cinkefoile. The lesser upright Cinkefoile, hath smaller and rounder leaves than the other, of a sad greene colour on the upper∣side, and gray or hoary underneath: the stalkes are tenderer and lower, and the flowers at the toppes of them, are some∣what smaller and of a more gold yellow colour, and herein consisteth the chiefest differences the one from the other. 
3. Pentaphyllum montanum erectum. The Mountaine upright Cinkefoile. The Mountaine upright Cinkefoile, hath divers upright but slender hoary stalkes, scarse halfe a yard high, divided at the toppes into sundry branches, whereon grow divers leaves, cut into five deeper parts, and deeper dented about the edges, some∣what hairy also, and a little hoary underneath but not shining, whose foote stalkes are some shorter and some longer than o∣thers: but those leaves that grow below, at the foote of the stalkes stand upon very long foote stalkes, and are for the most part divided into seven parts or leaves: at the toppes of the stalkes grow gold yellow flowers, like the former but smaller, the seede that followeth, is not unlike the rest, neither is the roote which is blackish. 
The Place. The first groweth in many places in Germany, France, and in Savena of Narbone where it beareth white flowers say Pena and Lobel, and in Italy purplish: the second groweth in Germany in divers places, for Fuschius and Iohannes Thalius make mention of it: the third Bauhinus saith was found on the hill Crentza∣cenis, in the ascending to the toppe. 
The Time. These flower for the most part all the Sommer long. 
The Names. The first is called Pentaphyllum majus by Brunfelsius and Lobel in his Observations; and rectum majus by Came∣ rius: yet unto Lobels figure in his Icones, and unto Gerards figure, the title is Pentaphyllum vulgare: in the Ad∣ ersaria the title is hereof, (because of the variation of their flowers in the colour as I said before) Pentaphyllum liud album &amp; purpureum: with many Herbarists in these dayes it is called Pentaphyllum Heptaphylli facie, be∣cause it hath so usually seven divisions or leaves upon a stalke. Bauhinus termeth it Quinquefolium rectum luteum: The second is called by Matthiolus in some editions Pentaphyllum album, and by Tragus Pentaphyllum exiguum, by Iohannes Thalius in Harcynia sylva Pentaphyllum canum, by Camerarius Pentaphyllum rectum minus: by Dodo∣ eus, Fuschius and Lugdunensis, Pentaphyllum or Quinque folium luteum minus: by Gerard Quinquefolium Tormen∣ illae facie, by Tabermontanus Quinquefolium petraeum majus, and by Bauhinus Qinquefolium folio argenteo. The third Bauhinus in his Pinax, and Prodromus setteth downe under the title of Quinquefolium montanum erectum hirsu∣ um luteum. 
The Vertues. Having declared unto you all the severall sorts of this kinde of herbe, called Cinkefoile, in their Orders and Rankes, I must now declare unto you the chiefe properties of them altogether, and yet shew which is the most effectuall in speciall: all these sorts for the most part, having one qualitie of cooling and binding, yet the binding is more incident, and naturall unto them all, then the cooling, in that some of them are a little sharpe or bitter in taste, which argueth some more heate, yet I may ghesse the sharpenesse or bitternesse therein, is no more any signe of heate than it is in Cichory, or Poppy or Opium: our common wilde creeping Cinkefoile, the greater upright one and the white Cinkefoile, are the chiefest for use, and strongest in effect of all the rest. These three sorts are much alike for their operation, and are held to be as effectuall for all the purposes, whereunto the Tor∣mentill is used, as well for preserving against venemous and infectious creatures, and diseases in each respect, as in keeping from putrefaction, for binding and restraining fluxes, either of bloud or humors, or any the other ef∣fects, whereunto Tormentill is applied; so that in stead thereof, and where it is wanting Cinkefoile may be used to as good purpose, I might referre you therefore to the properties of the Tormentill, to be enformed thereby, for the severall helpes, that this doth give; but I will shew you some particular remedies, it worketh upon especiall griefes and diseases: as first, it is an especiall herbe, used in all inflammations and feavers, whe∣ther infectious and pestilentiall or topicall among other herbes, to coole and temper the bloud and humours in the body, as also for all lotions, gargles, injections and the like, for sore mouthes ulcers, canckers, fistulaes, and other corrupt and foule or running sores: yet some are so foolish to thinke. that the decoction of one branch of leaves thereof, taken with a little Pepper, doth helpe a quotidian or daily ague, that three branches helpeth a tertian, and foure a quartane ague; but this set number of leaves and branches, is rather an idle conceit, as it is also to were it in their shooes, for the same purpose, then any certainety fit for a wise man or Phisitian to leane and trust unto: the juice hereof drunke about foure ounces at a time for certaine dayes together, cureth the quinsie and the yellow jaundise, and to be taken for thirtie dayes together cureth the falling sicknesse, and for all fluxes in man or woman, whither the whites or the reds, as also the bloudy flixe, the rootes boyled in milke, and drunke is held most effectuall of any other remedy: the rootes boiled in vinegar, and the decoction thereof held in the mouth, easeth the paines of the toothach: the juice or the decoction is good to helpe the hoarsenesse of the throate taken with a little hony; as also is good for the cough of the lunges: The distilled wa∣ter of both rootes and leaves, is effectuall to all the purposes aforesaid, and if the hands be washed often therein, and suffered at every time to drie in of it selfe without wiping it will in a short time helpe the palsie, or the shaking in them: the roote boyled in vinegar helpeth all knots, kernells, hard swellings and lumpes growing in the flesh in any part applied thereunto; as also all inflammations and S. Anthonies fire, all empostumes and paine∣full sores, with heate and putrefaction, the shingles also and all other sores of running and foule scabbs, sores, and itches; the same also boiled in wine, and applied to any joynts full of paine and ache, the gout also in any of the joynts of the hands or feete, and that also of the hippes called Sciatica: and if the decoction thereof be also drunke, it helpeth forward the cure much the sooner, and easeth also much paines in the bowells: the rootes are likewise effectuall to helpe ruptures or burstings to be used with other things availeable therefore, either in∣wardly or outwardly or both, as also for bruises, or hurts by blowes, falls, or the like, and to stay the bleeding of wounds, in any part inward or outward. 
CHAP. XXVI. Gentiana. Gentian or Fellwort. A Lthough I have set forth in my former Booke divers sorts of Gentians or Fellwort, yet there re∣maine divers others to be intreated of; which shall be here remembred; and because I was there somewhat briefe in declaring the vertues as was fit for that worke, being but an abstract of choise plants, that beare beautifull flowers to store a garden of pleasure, and not a generall worke wherein all things are to be comprised, and all that may be said of every one also, I will here therefore amplifie my selfe the more in their vertues that have beene spoken of, which are the most effectuall, and of these also, for they are to be referred unto them: yet I thinke good to give you here some of the figures extant before. But that I may use such a method all course, as I have formerly held, in set∣ting forth other plants which have divers sorts of one kinde, I will divide this family of Gentians into a greater and lesser sort, and of the lesser sort which admitteth a subdivision, and not the greater; I will divide them againe into perennes, everliving, or abiding, that is, that perish not in the Winter; and into annuas annuall, that is, such as spring up and perish the same yeare that they flower, abiding onely the Sommer and not the Winter: I might also divide the lesser sort againe into Ʋernall, Aestivall and Autum all flowring plants, whereof every one in their order. 
Gentianae majores. The greater Gentians. 1. Gentiana major flore purpureo. Great purple Gentian. THe great purple Gentian, is very like the great yellow Gentian in most things, having a great thicke brow∣nish yellow roote, parted into two or three great branches; with great fibres at them but a little more hand and woody of as bitter a taste as the other, which sendeth forth at the severall heads thereof, many faire broad three ribbed darke greene shining leaves, so like unto the other, that it is somewhat hard to distinguish them, many of these heads from among the leaves, shoote forth thicke and strong stalkes, three or foure foote high, with divers joynts on them, and two leaves at them, one against another: towards the toppes whereof co forth the flowers compassing the stalkes, at two or three of the uppermost joints, with two leaves apeece under them, like as in the other, which are not laid open, starre fashion, like the other, but abide close and hollow, the brimmes onely divided into sixe or more round parts, of a purple colour, but paler at the bottome of them, where they are spotted with purple spots on the inside, having so many yellowish threds in the middle, as the flower hath corners, standing about a long greene by forked head, which growing ripe is the seede vessell, and containeth there in such like flat brownish seedes as the other, but somewhat lesse. 
2. Gentiana major flore albo. Great Gentian with white flowers. This white flowred Gentian is very like the former, and the great yellow kinde, not much lesser and lower in any part than the former, whose flowers are not purple but pure white, and hollow like the other, without any spots in them, this making the whole difference betweene them. 
3. Gentiana major flore pallido punctato. Great pale yellow spotted Gentian. This spotted great Gentian, is in all things also like the first, but in the flowers, which are of a duskish pale yellow colour, spotted both within and without with very many blacke spots. 
4. Gentiana major flore caruleo. Great Gentian with blew flowers. And this also differeth neither in greatnesse of stalkes, leaves and flowers, nor in the manner of growing, bu in the colour of the flower, which is of a blew colour.
2. Scorsonera humilis latifolia Pannonica. The dwarfe Hungarian Vipers grasse. This dwarfe or low Scorsonera, shooteth forth not so many long leaves but almost as broad as the last, some∣what stiffer and shorter; and of the same greene colour; from among which riseth up one firme, but hollow and shortstalke, not above an handbredth high, bearing some few small and short leaves thereon and a yellow flower, out of the like greene scaly head, but shorter than the other, with the like seede therein also: the roote is blacke without, and whitewithin yeelding milke as the other doth. 
3. Scorsonera minor angustifolia Pannonica. The small Hungarian Vipers grasse. This small Vipers grasse hath long and very narrow greene leaves, very like the leaves of Tragopogon or Goates beard, but shorter and not so many, the stalkes are slenderer and much lower then the first, bearing smal∣ler and more single flowers upon them then it, and lesser seede, but like in all other respects, lying in such downe; the roote likewise is long and blacke without and white within, but smaller and slenderer, never growing to be halfe so great, neither yeeldeth such store of milke as the other doth. 
1. Scorsonera major Pannonica latifolia. The greater Hungarian broad leafed Vipers grasse. 
5. Scorsonera tuberosa radice. The smallest Spanish Vipers grasse. 
2. 3. Scorsonera humilis latifolia &amp; angustifolia. The greater low, and the lesser tall Hungarian Vipers grasse. 
 
4. Scorsonera elatior angustifolia Pannonica. Tall narrow leafed Purple Vipers grasse. The taller purple Vipers grasse, hath many such like narrow long leaves as the last, and longer stalkes, with some lesser leaves on them, divided sometimes into two or three branches, bearing every one a small flower like unto the last, but of a blewish purple colour, standing in a shorter greene head, wherein is contained shorter and thicker seede, then in the former, the roote is long, and blacke without and white within, like the other, and yeelding also but little milke, yet abiding as the rest. 
5. Scorsonera minima tuberosa radice Hispanica. The smallest Spanish Vipers grasse. This least Vipers grasse hath divers leaves very small and narrow, lying on the ground, some rootes giving smooth leaves, and others crumpled about the edges, the stalkes are very small, and scarse rising three or foure inches high, bearing out of a long small scaly head, a very small and single pale yellow flower, wherein grow smaller blacke seedes, and enclosed in farre lesser downe, then in any of the other, the roote is as thicke as three fingers or more, but much shorter then in any other kindes, blackish without, and somewhat whitish within, yeelding very little milke, when it is broken, but abideth the Winter almost as well as any of the rest. 
6. Scorsonera Illyrica. Vipers grasse of Sclavony. The multitude of long narrow leaves with three ribbes in them to the number of fifty or an hundred, and of twenty slender stalkes, of small yellow flowers, and smaller seed after them then most of the former, the roote be∣ing blacke and thicke, maketh this kinde differ from the rest. 
The Place. The first groweth in many places of Germany, Bohemia, and Hungary. The second on the hils by Baden in Ger∣many. The third in many of the same places with the first. The fourth on a small hill nigh unto Stampfen, which is two Dutch miles from Posonium, a chiefe City in Hungary, and in other places thereof. The fifth grew in Spaine, and good store of the rootes being brought hither, I planted some of them in my Garden, perceiving them in forme to differ from others, which growing yeelded such leaves, flowers, and seede, as is before for downe. The last in Illyria or Sclavonye, as Alpinus saith. 
The Time. They doe all flower in May, and their seede is ripe before the end of Iune. 
The Names. The first knowledge of Scorsonera to the world, came by Monardus a famous Physition in Sivell, although it was found out, and the use of it likewise, thirty yeares before he wrote thereof, who made a small tract thereof, and of the Bezar stone, which Clusius translated out of the Spanish into the Latine tongue, and pub∣lished it with other of his workes translated also, and annexed to his booke of strange or Exoticke things, where∣in it is set downe that a Moore, a bondslave did helpe those that were bitten of that venemous beast, (or Viper as it is called by others) which they of Catalonia, where they breed in abundance, call in their language Escuers (from whence Scorsonera is derived,) with the juice of this herbe, and the roote given them to eate, which both tooke away the poison and healed the bitten place very quickely, when Treakle and other things would doe no good, which ever since hath growne in estimation, as well against venome or poyson, as against other diseases, as you shall heare by and by. The first is called by Clusius, Scorsonera major Pannonica, by Matthiolus Scorsonera Bohemica, whom Lobel and Lugdunensis follow, Tabermontanus and Gerard, call it Germanica, and Bauhinus Latifolia altera. The second is called by Clusius, Scorsonera humilis latifolia Pannonica, by Tabermontanus, Sco∣sonera Pannonica, and by Bauhinus, Scorsonera latifolia humilis nervosa. The third is called by Lobel Scorsonera altera, by Tabermontanus, Scorsonera Germanica angustifolia, and by Bauhinus Scorsonera folijs nervos . The fourth is called by Clusius, Scorsonera angustifolia elatior Pannonica, by Thalius, Scorsonera tenuifolia altera; and by Bauhinus, Scosonera angustifolia subcaerulea. The fifth because it came from Spaine without any name, I have entitled it according to the face and forme thereof, Scorsonera minima tuberosa radice Hispanica, it is very pro∣bable that Bauhinus in his Prodromus doth meane this plant, it commeth so nere unto it which he there calleth Hieracium capillacco flore, for he saith it better agreeth to a Scorsonera then Hieracium. The last Alpinus setteth forth under the same title it hath, some doe call them Ʋiperaria and Ʋiperina, and some Serpentina. 
The Ʋertues. Bauhinus saith that the rootes of the Spanish kinde, hath in their naturall places some bitternesse, which if it be so (for I never saw such) is not perceived in those that have growne many yeares in our land, it is very likely that the temperature of the Climate, doth alter in some part the bitternesse thereof; but Monardus writeth, that those that grow in Spaine are somewhat sweete in taste like a Parsneppe, and may be eaten in the same manner, the roote hereof saith Monardus, whether raw or dressed, or condited, as also the juice of the herbe taken by themselves, or with any other cordiall or Counterpoyson, doth not onely helpe the biting of that so venemous: Serpent the Escuersos, but of the Viper, and all other virulent creatures, the water distilled in glasses, is a pre∣sent remedy for all contagious fevers, for by causing sweate the infection is evaporated, and the sicke person re∣stored, the same also or the roote it selfe taken, is good against the passions and tremblings of the heart, as also against swounings, sadnes, &amp; melancholy: the roote preserved and taken fasting, or the said water drunke for some dayes together, doth open the obstructions of the liver, spleene, and the other inward part, as also helpeth to bring downe womens courses, and to ease the suffocation, or other diseases of the mother whatsoever, for in those feminine griefes it hath a very powerfull effect as hath beene often and certainely found true; it is also very good against the swimming or turning of the braine, and all other paines in the head, it is also very condi∣all both to strengthen the vitall spirits, when they are much subject to faint or swoune, as also against melancholy or sadnesse, that ariseth without manifest cause, if the clarified juice of the herbe be set in the Sunne for certaine dayes, and the purer liquor thereof mixed with a little hony, be dropped into the eyes, it both cleareth and strengthneth the sight, and taketh away the spots and blemishes in them. The rootes preserved with Sugar, are not onely very pleasant to the taste, but effectuall for many of the aforesaid griefes. 
CHAP. XXVIII. Tragopogon. Goates beard. A Lthough it is not certainely knowne, that the Goates beardes have the like Alexipharmicall proper∣ty, to expell venome and poyson, as the Scorsoneras or Vipers grasses, yet because they are so like unto them in outward forme and manner of growing, they being but as species ejusdem generis, the Tra∣gopogon, or Goates beard, being the standard or genus, and herein principally differing, that all the Tragopogons are but annual, or perishing after they have borne seede, and all the sorts of Scorsonera, living after seede time many yeares. I have thought it not amisse to joyne them in neighbourhood as they be in kindred, whereof there be sundry sorts, some delivered in my former worke, others here to be expressed, and of them some not written of by any before. 
1. Tragopogon aestivum. Sommer Goates beard. The Sommer Goatesbeard, (which I so call because it is but annuall, to be sowen in the Spring, and perishing in the end of Sommer, when it hath given seed) is a small Plant, rising up with one stalke little above a foote high, whereon grow three or foure long and narrow leaves, yet shorter then in any of the other, that hath beene described in my former booke, broader at the bottome then they, and growing lesse by little and little to the end, of a pale greene colour, with a whitish ribbe in the middle: the stalke brancheth out into two or three parts, each of them bearing a large greene head, wherein is contained a small flower, of a pale purplish ashco∣lour, opening onely in the morning, and shutting up before noone, the long pointed ends of the huske or head, rising above the flower, which is not usuall in most of the other Goats beards; which being past the head grow∣eth greater, having the outermost seedes greater and thicker then the rest, spreading one from another, with no downe at all at the ends of them, but the smaller seede being in the middle, are smaller then any of the other, the roote is somewhat long wooddy, perishing before winter, and yeeldeth but a very little shew of milke, when the leaves are broken, or the rootes being young. 
2. Tragapogon minus luteum. Small yellow Goates beard. The small yellow Goates beard, hath a small slender stalke, about a foote high, with very few leaves thereon, which are somewhat long and narrow, as it were dented but rather waved about the edges, and of a pale greene colour, at the toppe of the stalke standeth one green head, like other Goats beards with pointed ends, enclo∣sing a large flower of a pale yellow colour, (like unto the greater yellow kinde, which yeeldeth small seed with downe at the endes of them, and spreading in the same manner, the roote is somewhat long, and yeeldeth milke as the other doth. 
3. Tragopogon laciniatum majus. The greater Goats beard with jagged leaves. This jagged Goats beard hath his first leaves, long, narrow, and smooth at the edges, like unto the pulple Goats 1. Tragopogon aestivum. Sommer Goats beard. 
3. Tragopogon lac niatum majus. The greater Goats beard with jagged leaves. 
beard, long and narrow at the bottome, and broader to∣wards Tragopogon purpureum. Purple Goatsbeard. 
the ends, but those that rise up afterwards, and those that grow next unto them upon the stalke, are jagged or torne as it were on the edges, on both sides in some leaves, and in some but upon the one, in some also more divided, and others lesse, of a paler greene colour underneath then above; the stalke riseth up to be about two foote high, with such leaves but smal∣ler on it to the toppe, but lesse divided, and the uppermost not at all, where it is branched into three or foure smaller parts, e∣very one bearing a small greene head, like unto the ordinary kinde, not having any pointed leaves rising up, as is in the pur∣ple and some other sorts, enclosing within it a smaller yellow flower, then the ordinary yellow sort, opening in the mor∣ning, and shutting at noone, which being past, there commeth such like seede, but smaller and not rough, the roote is long and blackish on the outside, and white within, yeelding milke as others doe, and perishing after seede time, as others doe.
4. Tragopogon laciniatum minus. The lesser Goats beard with jagged leaves. This lesser kinde, shooteth forth from a long and some∣what thicke roote, brownish on the outside, divers long and very narrow leaves, more finely cut in on the edges, and into farre smaller parts then the former, among which riseth up the stalke a foote and a halfe high or better, with some such like leaves thereon, but smaller, and lesse divided at the toppe where it is divided into three or foure branches, with every one a flower on them, like unto the last, but of a paler yellow colour, standing in greene heads, without beardes, as most of the sorts of yellow Goats beards doe, and after yeeldeth the like head of long rough seede, with downe at the ends of them as others doe. 
5. Tragopogon luteum angustifolium. Common Goats beard with narrow leaves. This Goatsbeard is very like unto the common yellow kind, but that it is not so great, nor riseth up so high, and hath much narrower, or rather grasse like leaves, and almost as long, the flowers are not so large, nor so thicke of leaves, and give the like seede. 
6. Tragopogon hirsutum humile. Small rough Goats beard. This likewise differeth not much from the last, but that it is lower, and the leaves are not so long and nar∣row, but a little broader, shorter, and rough withall, on both edges set with haires, as in the hairy wood grasse, the flowers are small and yellow like the last, but lesser, and so is both seede and roote. 
7. Tragopogon luteum Apulum. Goats beard of Naples. This Goats beard of Naples, hath many very long narrow leaves, somewhat broader then the next small pur∣ple kind, but somewhat hairy, some of them growing upright, and others bending downewards, among which a stalke riseth scarse higher then the leaves, bearing a large greene bearded huske, contrary to all other, with yellow flowers, containing a flower which consisteth of many yellow short leaves, more like a Hawke-weed, then a Goats beard, which passeth with the downe at the seed like others, and not halfe so great but yellowish, and smaller at the lower end, where others are greater. 
8. Tragopogon crocifolium purpureum. Small purple Goats beard. This small purple Goats beard hath many very long and narrow leaves, lying on the ground at the head of the roote, the stalke divideth it selfe into three or foure reddish branches, set with some leaves thereon, all of them narrower then grasse leaves, very like unto the narrow long leaves, of the manured or English Saffron, with a white line downe the middle of them, and hard in handling, each of the branches bearing a bearded greene be, with a darke purple flower therein, dented at the endes of the leaves thereof, and having yellow threds sprink∣led with meale as it were in the bottome of them, as the greater purple flower hath, and openeth but in the mor∣ning, and closeth at noone in the same manner, after which come the seede, spreading into a round globe or head, with the downe at the ends of them, as in the greater, the roote is great and long, yeelding milke as the others. 
9. Tragopogon Apulum suave rubeus. Rose coloured Goats beard. The Rose coloured Goats beard sendeth forth many long and narrow leaves like unto Grasse, with a white li in the middle of them, smooth and gentle, if you take them upwards, but as rough as Barly leaves, stroaking them downewards, and broadest at the setting to of the stalke, which is two foote high, scarsely dividing it into any branches, but beareth at the toppe one large and great head, in respect of the Plant, parted into eight long leaves or beardes, in the middle thereof is the flower, consisting of tenne or twelve leaves, of a pale pur∣ple or blush colour, neere unto a Damaske Rose, having divers blackish blew threds in the middle of them with a mealy dust upon them, which being past, the head or huske groweth somewhat narrow, with a long necke, containing within it the seed, which is not fashioned into a round globe, with downe at the head of the seedes, as in all the former except the first, it hath five longer and greater seedes on the outside, with little or no downe at the ends of them, and the lesser in the middle, with a little downe at the ends, which are yellowish and smooth but the least of all other: the roote is long and slender, even the smallest of all, white downewards and somewhat hard but more reddish at the toppe. This is very like the former or annuall Goates beard if it be not the same. Camerarius in his Hortus Medicus maketh mention of one with a white flower, Flore Albe which I never saw yet nor heard of by any other. 
The Place. The first was sent me out of Italy among other seedes, but from whence they had it I know not. The second as Bauhinus saith groweth about Mompelier, and so doth the fourth also. The third groweth in many places, both in Italy and Spaine, for I had seedes thereof out of Spaine, by my friend Boelus that gathered them: the fift I found in the Medowes about London, and other places of our land, but not so plentifully as our greater yellow kinde: the sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth, grow on the hills in Naples, as Columna recordeth, both in his Phytobasanos, and stirpium minus cognitarum historia. 
The Time. These doe flower about the time of the others, which is in the end of May, or in Iune, and the seede is ripe soon after: but all of them, except the first, doe abide greene the first Winter after it is sowen, or doth rise of its owne sowing, and flowreth and seedeth the next yeare after: but the first as I said, flowreth and seedeth the same yeare, and must be new sowen every yeare, for I never k nw it spring from any seede, that it shed it selfe. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke, , and , Tragopogon, Barba hirci and Barbula hirci, and Barba senis, quod a calyce semina promiscae hirci vel senis barbae instar pendent; so say both Dioscorides and Theo∣phrastus. The first came to me with the same name, I have set with it in the title Tragopogon aestivum: the second Bauhinus calleth Tragopogon folio oblongo sinuato: the third, both Anguillara mentioneth, calling it Acorus Theo∣phrasti as he saith others did, and Fabius Columna in his Phytobasanos Tragopogon laciniatis folijs. The fourth Bauhinus calleth Tragopogon tenuissime laciniatum. The fift is called by Tabermontanus Barbula hirci minor, and by Bauhinus Tragopogon gramineo folio radice villosa. The sixt Columna calleth Tragopogon Apulum hirsutum humile; and Bauhinus Tragopogon hirsutum. The seventh Columna calleth Tragopogon Apulum humile hirsutum luteum: the eighth Columna also calleth Tragopogon crocifolium montanum flore nigro purpureo, and Bauhinus Tragopogon purpuro carule∣um crocifolium. The last is called by Columna Tragopogon gramineo folio suave rubente flore. Some have doubted that this is not the Tragopogon of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, because the leaves of the most of them are greater than the leaves of the Saffron, but notwithstanding it is generally taken to be the right, because of the head of seede, which agreeth so well thereto, as no plant else can doe the like; and besides Columna hath set forth some of those before recited, which agreeth better with Dioscorides and Theophrastus Saffron leaves, than any of the rest, which therefore he taketh to be the truest. It is called in Italian Saffifrica; and with some Sassifica, and barba di becco: in Spanish Barba Cabrona, and Barba di Cabron: in French Barba de bouc: in High Dutch Bocksbart: in Low Dutch Boexbaert ende Iosephs bloemen: in English Goates beard, and goe to bed at Noone, or Noone tide, and of some Starre of Ierusalem, and others after the Dutch word Iosephs flower: of some also Saxifrage. 
The Ʋertues. The rootes of the greater wild yellow kinde chiefely, as also of the other kindes here set forth, being dressed as a Parsneppe, is more delicate and pleasant to the taste in eating: the rootes boyled and dressed (or as some do eate them raw) is a fine sallet likewise to be eaten cold, and are very acceptable to the stomacke, helping to strengthen them that are growing into a consumption, or are become spare and leane by some long sicknesse: the distilled water saith Tragus, is the most present remedy that is to helpe inward impostumes (such as is the Pleurisie) and all other paines and stitches in the sides: the Italians use it much and often against all the griefes of the stomacke, both to take away the heart burne as we call it (which is an hot and sharpe humour in the stomacke fretting and paining it) and doth helpe also in a dejected appetite, to incite and stirre it up, as also against the defects of the breast or liver, and to helpe to expell gravell and the stone from the reynes, kidneies, and bladder, whereof the name Sassifrica, which is as much as breakestone, declareth the propertie: some doe hold opinion, that the purple and ashcoloured kindes being more bitter, astringent and abstersive, have a more binding and clensing qualitie than the others, and are therefore onely to be used for medicament, and the others as nutriment, and that they onely are effectuall to all the purposes before recited. 
CHAP. XXIX. Echium. Wilde Buglosse, or Vipers Buglosse. C Lusius that painefull and industrious searcher of plants, hath given us the knowledge of many more sorts of Vipers Buglosse as he hath done of many other plants, than any before him; whereof I meane: to en∣treate in this place, and with them some others also. 
1. Echium vulgare. The common Vipers Buglosse. The common Vipers Buglosse hath many long rough leaves, lying on the ground, from among which rise up divers hard round stalkes, very rough, as if they were thicke set with prickles or haires, wherein are set, such like long rough hairie or prickly sad greene leaves, somewhat narrow, the middle ribbe for the most part being white: the flowers stand at the toppe of the stalkes, branched forth into many long spiked leaves of flowers bowing or turning like the Turnesole, all of them opening for the most part on the one side, which are long and hollow turning up the brimmes a little, of a purplish violet colour, in them that are fully blowne, but more reddish while they are in the budde, and not blowen open, as also upon their decay and whithering, but in some places of a paler purple colour, with along pointell in the middle, fethered or parted at the toppe: after the flowers are fallen, the seedes (growing to be ripe, and enclosed in round heads) are blackish, cornered and pointed somewhat like unto the head of a Viper: the roote is somewhat great and blackish and wooddy, when it groweth toward seede time, and perisheth in the Winter. 
2. Echium vulgare flore albo. White flowred Vipers Buglosse. There is little difference in any thing betweene this and the former, but in the colour of the flowers, which this is of a white colour wholly, and the leaves of a little fresher greene colour, and in some places groweth greater. 
3. Echium flore rubro. Red flowred Vipers; Buglosse. The red wilde Buglosse is also like the former, but that his hairy stalkes are sometimes marked with purplish spots, and the leaves thereof somewhat broader: the flowers which stand in the same crooked and bowing man∣ner, upon short foote stalkes, are of a brave red colour, and in some a little paler: the seede and rootes are alike and differ not. 
4. Echium pullo flore. Vipers Buglosse with darke reddish purple flowers. This wilde Buglosse hath shorter stalkes, and not so rough, but rather soft and woolly, whereon stand leaves, more thinnely placed, and without order: toward the toppe of the stalkes it brancheth forth into divers short sprayes, with some flowers on them, but not so plentifully as in the former, and are of a dead or darke blackish purpler colour: there is no disagreement either in seede or roote. 
5. Echium Creticum latifolium rubrum. Red flowred Vipers Buglosse of Candy. This Candy wilde Buglosse, hath large rough leaves lying on the ground, of a sise betweene Buglosse and Plan∣tane leaves, betweene whom riseth up round rough stalkes, two foote high, sometimes divided into many bran∣ches, with divers rough smaller leaves on them to the toppes, which are bowing in the same manner with the former, from whence grow holllow flowers, ending in five cornered brimmes like unto the rest, of an excellent pale red or blush colour at the first, and more purplish afterwards, standing in rough huskes, made of five small leaves a peece: the seede that followeth is like the rest. 
6. Echium Creticum angustifolium rubrum. Spotted Vipers Buglosse of Candy. This spotted wilde Buglosse hath rougher leaves and stalkes than the last, rising not fully so high, but both stalkes and leaves marked with red spots, almost as much as the stalkes of Dragons, but the spottes on the leaves are paler than on the stalkes: the leaves are very long, but narrower than the last: the flowers stand in the same manner that the others doe, of so orient a red colour, that they will not lose it, but keepe their bravery after many yeares keeping drie: in the rest it is like the former. 
7. Echium pumilum flore luteo. Dwarfe yellow Vipers Buglosse. This dwarfe kinde is in all things like the former Vipers Buglosse, but in the smallnesse of the whole plant, not growing to be a foote high: the leaves likewise are thereunto answerable, and so are the flowers also, of a pale yellow colour but not so bushie as it. 
8. Echioides lutea minima. The least yellow bastard Vipers Buglosse. This little bastard wilde Buglosse, hath divers leaves lying upon the ground, not above two inches long, and 1. Echium vulgare. The common Vipers Buglosse. 
3. Echium flore rubro. Red flowred Vipers Buglosse.
The Place. The first groweth commonly wilde by the way sides of moist fields and medowes, both in Italy, Savoy and o∣ther places; as also found of late growing wilde in the Medowes by Linton in Cambridge shire: the other not but upon the toppes of mountaines, where any plaines are found. 
The Time. They flower in the end of Iune and Iuly, and the seede is ripe in August. 
The Names. This herbe hath not beene knowne to the ancient Authors; and therefore hath no name, but is usully called in Latine Galega or Ruta Capraria, for they that first found it and the vertues, gave that name of Ruta thereunto, as finding it no lesse effectuall than the best Rue: some call it Gralega, and some Herba Gallica as Fracastorius: and of some Capraria: the Florentines call it Lavanese; in other parts of Italy it hath divers other names as Gesner saith Castracane, Lavanna, Thorina or Taurina, Martanica, Sarracena, Capragina, Herbanese, and Giarga as Brasa∣volus saith. Some with us call it Italian Vetch, but most commonly Goates Rue. The other Lugdunensis calleth Galega montana; and Bauhinus referreth it to the Orobus Pannonicus of Clusius, which it cannot be, for he saith it perisheth every yeare; and also to the Arachus latifolius of Dodonaeus, which it cannot be neither, for Dodonaeus saith, his Arachus is called of divers Ervum Venetum, which differeth little or nothing at all from Clusius his first Orobus Pannonicus, so that in this, as in very many other things, he is much mistaken. 
The Ʋertues. Goates Rew is most effectuall against the bitings or stings of any venemous creature, yea those Italians and o∣thers (as Pena and Lobel say) that use to gather Vipers (which are certainely Adders with us, by the judgement of the best) doe account it more effectuall to preserve them being bitten or stung, than any Treakle of the best making, or to defend them from any other infection, and therefore eare it continually, as other herbes in sallets or otherwise in their meates and brothes. It is no lesse powerfull and effectuall against poison then the plague or pe∣stilence, or any infectious or pestilentious fevers or diseases, that breake forth into spots or markes, as the measells, purples, and the small pocks, in all which it is admirable, what effects it worketh, both to preserve from the infe∣ction, and to cure them that are infected, to take every morning some of the juice thereof, as also to eate the herbe it selfe, every morning fasting, but it will be the more effectuall if the juice be taken with a little good Treakle and some Tormentill rootes in powder, mixed with Cardus benedictus water, or with some vinegar and fine Bole∣armonicke, and Treakle in the said water, and presently to sweat two houres thereupon, which it causeth also in some sort it selfe, and may be used as well when any is infected, as when any feare themselves to be infected with the plague; a spoonefull also of the juice given in a morning fasting, is very effectuall to kill the wormes in children, or the herbe it selfe fried with a little oyle of bitter Almons, and laid hot unto the navell, as also to helpe the falling sicknesse before it grow strong, and old upon them; it is very profitably applied to the belly pained with gripings of winde and the collicke, being fried and laid to warme: in the same manner also laid upon plague sores before they be broken, either disperseth them (yet defending the heart, not striking it in∣wardly) or draweth them forth, and healeth them: it is also effectually applied with vinegar to gangrene , running ulcers and sores, to stay the malignitie of them in their fretting and spreading, and to defend the vital spirits from danger: it is held also to be very cordiall to preserve the heart from palpitations, tremblings and swounnings, and against melancholike vapours oppressing it. Some use a Syrupe made of the juice, and some of the distilled water as a more familiar medecine, to take upon all occasions inwardly, for all the purposes afore∣said; and some use to make an oyle of the flowers digested in the Sun, by often repetitions of infusion to make the wrests of the hands where the pulse is felt, as also the region of the heart, to defend it from the diseases afore∣said, and danger of infection: it is no lesse effectuall for Sheepe, Goates, and Cattle, for from the experience of Goat-heards therein, came the name of Capraria added unto it: it fatteneth hennes also wonderfully, and cau∣seth them to lay egges the more plentifully. The other Mountaine Goates Rew, is held also almost as effectuall against poyson and infection of the plague as the other. 
CHAP. XXXII. Phalangium. Spiderwort. T Here are divers sorts of Spiderworts, some of antient knowledge, others of later accesse, of all which I have given the descriptions in my former Book, which although I meane not to repeate here again; yet I thinke it not amisse both to give you some of their names &amp; figures, and to set downe their ver∣tues. It is thought it tooke the name and , Phalangium and Phalangites from the forme of the seede vessells, others from the forme of the leaves like to that Spiders legges in going, but more certainely I thinke from the propertie of curing the dangerous poison of that great Spider: For which purpose both Dioscorides and Galen doe commend the flowers, leaves, and seedes of it, as also against the veru∣lencie of Scorpions and other Serpents, and to discusse the torments that rise from their hurts or otherwise. The names of those described are these Phalangium Allobrogicum: The Savoy Spiderwort: Phalangium majus Italian album. The greater Italian Spiderwort. Phalangium non ramosum vulgare. Vnbranched Spiderwort. Phalangium ramosum. Branched Spiderwort. Phalangium Ephemerum Ʋirginianum Iohannis Tradescanti. The soone fading Spiderwort of Ʋirginia, or Iohn Tradescants Spiderwort of Ʋirginia, which is of a deepe purplish blew colour, whereunto may be added of later knowledge one with a white flower, and another with a reddish or Carnation. 
Phalangium ramosum. Branched Spiderwort 
Phalangium non ramosum. Vnbranched Spiderwort. 
 
CHAP. XXXIII. Petasites vulgaris. The Butter burre. T HE Butter burre is of two sorts, the one grea∣ter Petasites vu garis. The common Butter burre. 
the other lesser, differing also in the flowers, as you shall heare: but because they are so like one another, one discription shall serve for them both. Each of them riseth up very early in the yeare, that is, in February, with a thicke stalke about a foote high, whereon are set a few small leaves, or rather peeces, and at the toppes a long spiked head of flowers, in the one which is the lesse and the more rare to finde, wholly white and of a better sent than the other (yet some say it hath no sent) in the greater which is more common with us of a blush or deepe red colour according to the soile wherein it groweth, the clay ground bringing a paler colour somewhat weake, &amp; before the stalke with the flowers have abidden a moneth above ground will be withered and gon, blowen away with the winde, and the leaves will beginne to spring, which when they are full growne are very large and broad, that they may very well serve to cover the whole body, or at the least the head like an Ʋmbello from Sunne and Raine, being somewhat thinne and almost round, whose thicke red foote stalkes about a foote long, stand toward the middle of the leaves; the lower parts being divided into two round parts close almost one to another, and of a pale greene colour above, and hoary underneath, that with white flowers bringing smaller leaves than the other, and having divers ribbes and veines therein: the roote is long and spreading under ground being in some places no beg∣ger than ones finger, in others much bigger, blackish on the outside, and white within, of a bitter and unpleasant taste. 
The Place and Time. Both these sorts grow in low and wet grounds by rivers and waters sides, their flowers, as is said, rising and decaying, that is, in February or March before the leaves appeare in Aprill. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and Petasites also in Latine, deduced a Petaso, id est, magno galero ita ut vicum galeri supplere possit. Some take it to be Iphium of Theophrastus; and some to be Personata or Persolata of Pliny. Camerarius in horto calleth the more common mas, and the other faemina; but in his Epitome upon Matthiolus, he and Matthiolus call the greater sort Tussilago major. The Italians call it Capellazi; the Spaniards Sombrereta: the French Herbe aux tigneux; the Germans Pestilentz wurtz; the Dutch Dockbladeren. 
The Ʋertues. The rootes hereof are hot in the first degree, but as Galen saith drie in the third, and are by long experience found to be very availeable against the plague, and pestilentiall fevers by provoking sweat, if the powder thereof be taken in wine; as also resisteth the force of any other poyson; the roote hereof taken with Zedoaria and Ange∣gelica or without them helpeth the suffocation or rising of the mother: the decoction of the roote in wine being taken is singular good for those that wheese much and are short winded: it provoketh urine also and womens courses, and killeth the flat and broad wormes in the belly: the powder of the roote doth wonderfully helpe to drie up the moisture of sores that are hard to be cured and taketh away all spots and blemishes in the skinne. 
CHAP. XXXIV. Polyrhizos Ʋirginiana. The rattle Snakeweeke of Ʋirginia. T His plant of Virginia so certaine a remedy against the biting of that venemous rattle Snake, as they call it which breedeth in Ʋirginia, must not be forgotten among the rest, for it is a Counterpoison, to be compared, and I thinke preferred before any the foreremembred most soveraigne plants against poysons: whose description as farre forth, as hath yet come to our observation, is this: It riseth up with divers small square stalkes, spreading not much above halfe a foote long, whereon are set divers duskish hoary greene leaves, somewhat rugged as it were with many veines, and somewhat resembling the leaves of Pistolochia, whereunto it may be referred but smaller, set without order one at a joint: the flowers grow more at the bottome of the stalkes next the roote than on the branches as the Pistolochia doth, and are not much unlike it, but of a darke or sullen yellow colour, and somewhat lesse also; after which come very small heades with seede, somewhat like to the Pistolochia but lesser: the rootes are a number of very small blackish gray fibres or threds, as small almost as haires, which have both an aromaticall and resinous smell, when they are drie, more than when they are greene, and of an aromaticall resinous astringent taste, without any great or manifest heate. 
Polyrhizos Virginiana. The rattle Snakeweede of Virginia. 
 
The Place. It groweth very frequent in the upper parts of our Ʋirginian plantation, in the fields and champion countries, where under the grasse and herbes, that venemous rattle Snake lurketh and abideth, ready to bite whomsoever shall come neare unto it. 
The Time. It flowreth with us in Iune and Iuly. 
The Names. This may very well be referred to the Pistolochia I said, but I have severed it being so notable an Antidote; but by what Latine name it might best be called, either Pistolochia Ʋirginensis, or as I doe Polyrhizos Ʋirginians; I leave it to every man to doe as he will, or untill a fitter Latine title may be given it, if it be thought expedient: our people in Virginia doe there call it the Snakeweede, or Snakeroote, and thereupon may be called Co∣lubrina Ʋirginiana, I have kept the same English name, untill another of better respect may be given unto it. But there is a cornuted Cornutus that among his American plants, calleth this (a horne plague on his head for his la∣bour) Snagroel or Snagroel nothae Angliae, the envy was base, whereby he wrote so, yet would colour it in that he could not write true, but false English and Latine too, it were not amisse therefore that he were whipt at the schoole for it. 
The Ʋertues. It is both a most certaine and present remedy against the venome of the Rattle Snake, which is a Serpent of a large sise, farre greater then any Snake or Adder with us, having naturally under the throate, certaine loose hard skinny scales, which by motion grate one against another, making a creking noise, which our people called a rattle, not that it hath any rattle indeed, but this noyse it maketh, stirre it selfe never so little, yet usually it is so quicke and wary in leaping at any, that it doth it not but suddenly: Now the manner of the using hereof, is this (God of his goodnesse providing a remedy, out of the same place and ground, from whences the evill doth proceed,) as soone as any is bitten by that creature, (for oftentimes it happeneth that some are bitten, before they can avoid the Serpent, the manner of them being to leape suddenly upon one, that the rattle cannot be heard before they be bitten) they take of this herbe and chaw it in their mouthes, and swallow downe the juice there∣of, and also apply of the herbe to the wound or bitten place, which instantly cureth them; for being taken quickly after they be bitten, it doth so defend the inward parts, that the party feeleth not so much almost as any outward paine, much lesse any of those inward Symptomes, are incident to those that doe not presently use this remedy, this is the present helpe of the present hurt, but if it so happen that any being bitten, cannot get of this herbe in any reasonable time, he dyeth certainely, yet if within twelve houres after the biting; he doe use this remedy, it will assuredly recover him, but with more trouble and paine, and with longer time, before it hath wought a perfect cure, for it is evident, that the poyson of this Serpent pierceth the blood, which runneth with all the speed it can unto the heart, the chiefest fortresse of life and health, which being infected, death must ne∣cessarily and speedily follow, but if it be defended by the vertue and force of any medicine, it preserveth the one, and expelleth and untterly defeateth the intent of the other. The powder of the herbe and roote taken in wine or other drinke, hath beene found a certaine and present cure for the biting of a madde dogge: as also to cure both the quartaine ague within three times taking, viz. halfe a dramme, or if neede be a whole dramme at a time before the accesse of the fit, and any other ague, or pestilentian feaver, or the pestilence it selfe.
CHAP. XXXV. Alexipharmacum Indicum sive Contrayervae Hispanorum. The Indian Spanish Counterpoyson. B Ecause the roote of this herbe also is of as certaine a cure, to helpe all sorts of venome and poyson (as well of hurtfull beasts, as of herbes, rootes, &amp;c. wherewith the Indians by dipping their ar∣row heads therein, did kill whomsoever they wounded,) as the former Virginian Plant, I thought fit to joyne it thereunto, although we have no more knowledge thereof, then what we may ga∣ther from seeing and observing the dryed rootes and from the relation thereof by Monardus, out of Petrus de Osma his letter to him, which is extant in his booke of the simple that are brought out of the new world, which Clusius translated out of the Spanish into the Latine tongue, and hath published it with other of his workes and joyned it to his booke of Exotickes. Contrayerva Hispanorum sive Drakenaradix Clusij. The Indian Spanish Counterpoyson. 
It hath saith Monardus, the roote of a Flower-deluce, and is of the smell of a Figgetree leafe: this is all the description that Monardus hath made of it: but Osma in his Epistle ma∣keth mention of the leaves to be like the Ribbewort Plan∣taine, Iosua Ferrus also wrote thereof as he saith to Mo∣nardus, to Dr. Tovar, and to Ʋaldes, and in his booke of se∣crets maketh mention thereof in two Chapters, the one is of Contrayerva, the other he entituleth de Contrayerva Bezoar, whereby he meaneth the herbe or roote that is found in the middle of a Bezoar stone when it is broken, which he accoun∣teth to be of more vertue then the stone it selfe, whereon it is engendred, but we in viewing many dryed rootes that came from Spaine unto us, have observed no good forme of any Flower-deluce in the roote, nor have seene any roote to ex∣ceed the bignesse of ones thumbe, and not one of many to be so great, but for the most part of the bignesse of a finger or lesse, and not any so long, but usually no longer then a joynt or two at the most, not so smooth on the outside as the roote of white Orris or the Flowerdeluce, but more rugged in all, &amp; in some more knobbed, (that is, with small knobs or bunches sticking out all along the roote) then in others, which are of an even sise, and some againe are greater at the one end, and smaller at the other, divided as it were by little spaces, in the growing almost like the greater Figgewort roote, or the roote of Dentaria Coralloides, being of a yellowish browne colour on the outside, and in some more blacke, but wh e on the inside, with many fibres or strings growing from them th roote lyeth or creepeth under the upper crust of th d like as the Flower-deluce, Tormentill, Bistort, and like doe, and doth not grow downe right, like other sorts of rootes, and are a little warme or hot in taste upon the tongue, drawing water as Pellitory of Spaine, but nothing so hot nor sharpe, or drawing rheume so much, which is not well perceived, unlesse heedfully observed, neither doth the heate abide any long time after the chewing but is soone gone, leaving the roote almost like a dry chippe, without any manifest stipticity, astringency, or aromatirity, that I could perceive, although Monardus saith it hath, and judgeth it to be hot and dry in the second degree. 
The Place. It groweth saith Monardus in Charcas, and as Ferrus aforesaid, saith in Tonsaglia, provinces in Peru, in the West-Indies, and in some other places there, and from thence brought into Spaine, and so to other Countryes. 
The Time. We must abide the time to know further hereof, before we can declare it to any other. 
The Names. Monardus first wrote hereof from the intelligence he had by Osmus Letter to him, and called it Radices Ʋen ∣nis adversantes, and said the Spaniards called it Contrayerva, which is as much as Alexipharmacum, a counter∣poyson, or rootes resisting venome and poyson, especially of that wherewith the Indians, by dipping their arrow heads therein, killed both the Spaniards and other their enemies in their warres, and the wild beasts whom they hunted, and is the same also that Clusius calleth Drakena radix. I have given it the title of Alexipharmacum Indi∣cum sive Contrayerva Hispanorum, and in English the Indian Spanish Counterpoyson, from both places and pro∣perties. 
The Vertues. The rootes hereof (saith Monardus, Petrus de Osma and Iosua Ferras made into powder, and taken in white Wine is a most present remedy against all manner of venomes and poysons, of what kinde soever they be (excep∣ting Mercurie Sublimate onely, which is to be cured by drinking of no other thing but milke) by forcing the poyson upward by vomit, and avoiding and expelling it by sweating: the powder drunke in the same manner (they say) resisteth such charmes or the like witchery, that is used in such drinkes that are given to procure love. It likewise killeth the wormes of the belly, and is also good against agues, either tertian, quotidian, or quartaine, to be taken before the comming of the fit, which will not onely hinder or lessen the fit, but by continuing the use thereof, will utterly take them away. I have knowne some that have made a composition of the powders of this roote, Bezarstone and Scorsonera rootes made into a masse or lumpe, to be used upon occasion against poysons and infections of the Plague, or any other contagious disease, as the small pox, purples, measles, or other that raise spots in the flesh, and is a most soveraine cordiall, to preserve the heart and the vitall spirits from danger, and to expell it by sweating, &amp;c. For the said Ferrus saith, that the Bezarstone is engendred in the beast that breedeth it by the vertue of this herbe which it eateth, and by the naturall disposition of the beast, some also adde unto that confection, some other things, as besides Scorsonera rootes, Bistort, Tormentill, or the like, as every ones af∣fection leadeth them more or lesse. Ferrus saith he made a tryall hereof with the best Treakle, and found it more effectuall for the diseases aforesaid. Againe he saith, that the Indians doe not eate the bodies of those they have slaine by their poysoned arrowes, untill they have lyen three or foure dayes with their wounds washed with the juice of this herbe, which rendereth them tender and fit to be eaten, which before were hard. 
Vnto this Classis also should appertaine divers other Plants, but that some of them are already described, and set forth in my former Booke, as Mirabilia, &amp;c. And of the Antidotes, or remedies against poyson, some are there also set forth, as Angelica, Carduus Benedictus, &amp;c. And some likewise not onely in the first Tribe of this worke here before, as Chamapitys, &amp;c. but in sundry other Classies, hereof, as they happen to be entreated of in their order. 
SAXIFRAGAE PLANTAE NEPHRITICAE SIVE CALCV∣LVM FRANGENTES. SAXIFRAGES OR BREAKE∣STONE Plants. CLASSIS QVARTA, THE FOVRTH TRIBE. CHAP. I. 1. Saxifraga alba vulgaris. The common white Saxifrage or Breakestone. T Here are so many and divers sorts of herbes that beare the name of Saxifrage, that is, from the effects in breaking and expelling the stone, much differing in forme one from an other, that I have therefore thought a small good to make a peculiar Classis of them, and yet not of all, for there are sundry Vmbelliferous and other plants, which cannot so fitly be severed from their owne Tribes. 
This white Saxifrage that is most common in our land, hath a few small reddish ker∣nells or rootes, covered with some skins, lying among divers small blackish fibres, which send forth divers round faint, or yellowish greene leaves, and grayish un∣derneath, lying above the ground, unevenly indented about the edges, and somewhat hairy, every one upon a little foote stalke; from whence riseth up a round brownish hairy greene stalke, two or three foote high, with a few such like round leaves thereon as grow below, but smal∣ler, and branched somewhat at the toppe, whereon stand pretty large white flowers of five leaves apeece, with some yellow threds in the middle, standing in long crested brownish greene huskes; after the flowers are past sometimes ariseth a round hard head, by-forked at the toppe, wherein is contained small blackish seede, but usu∣ally they fall away without any seede, which yet is not that which is called white Saxifrage seede for those same kernells or graines of the rootes, are they which are usually called the white Saxifrage seede and so used. 
2. Saxifraga alba altera bulbifera. The Mountaine white kernelly Saxifrage. This other white Saxifrage is very like the former in every part, but yet hath many especially differences to distinguish it, as first in the rootes, which although they are round, red, and bulbous like the other, yet are they twise as great, and made as it were of scales or cloves, one laid upon another, like the roote of a Lilly: the leaves are round and hairy, but somewhat lesser, with brownish foote stalkes: the stalkes are greater, having leaves thereon, as in the former, but at every joynt with the leafe commeth forht a small bulbe or kernell, like unto those at the roote, which when it is thorough ripe, will encrease to be plants, as the bulkes of the bulbed Lilly, or of the bulbed Corrall roote will: the flowers and heades with seede are alike: the bulbes on the stalkes by the Cutters fault are not specified in the figures. 
3. Saxifraga alba Alpina. Mountaine Saxifrage without kernelly rootes. This Mountaine Saxifrage groweth so like unto the first white Saxifrage, that Bauhinus taketh it to be no other but the very same with the first, but there is some varietie therein; first, in that this springeth up with fewer leaves at the ground, yet round and like to the white Saxifrage, then, although it hath small stalkes, with leaves thereon like it, yet at the toppes it hath pale yellowish flowers: and lastly the rootes are wholly composed of long strings or fibres, not having any of those small knots or kernells, that the former hath growing amongst them. 
The Place. The first of these groweth in many places of our owne land, in the lower moist, as also in the upper drie cor∣ners of Medowes, and grassie sandy places, on the backeside of Grayes Inne, where M r . Lambes Conduit heade standeth. The second groweth on the hills in the Kingdome of Naples: the last on the high snowie Alpes under the trees. 
1. Saxifraga alba vulgaris. The common white Saxifrage. 
2. Saxifraga alba bulbifera. The Mountaine white Saxifrage. 
 
The Time. They flower in May, and then they are gathered both for the seedes sake, which are as I said, the small graines or kernells at the rootes, or upon the stalkes, as also to distill: it quickly perisheth downe to the ground, when any heate commeth. 
The Names. This herbe is called Saxifraga or Saxifragia, from the effect to breake the stone, (but not knowne to any of the Greeke or antient Latine Writers, that we can finde) and alba from the flowers, which is added to distinguish it from all the other sorts. The first is generally called Saxifraga alba, by all the moderne Writers; Lobel addeth Chelid onides, because of the kernelly rootes; of Bauhinus rotundifolia, and of Clusius tuberosa radice. Fabius Ca∣lumna onely maketh mention of the second, by the name of Saxifragia bulbosa altera bulbifera montana; and Bauhinus from him Saxifraga adfolia bulbos gerens: the last is called by Lugdunensis as it is in the title, who ma∣keth it different: in English white Saxifrage or Breakestone: the Italians and Spaniards call it Sassifragia bianca; the French Rompt pierre and Saxifrage blanche: the Germans and Dutch Witt Stein brech. 
The Ʋertues. This Saxifrage being somewhat bitter, and held to be hot and drie in the second degree, is as effectuall as any other sort of Saxifrage whatsoever to clense the reynes and bladder, and to dissolve the stone engendered in them, and to expell it and the gravell by urine; to provoke urine also abundantly being stopped, and to helpe the strangury or pissing by droppes: for which purposes, the decoction of the herbe or rootes in white wine, or the powder of the small kernelly rootes, which is called the seede taken in white wine, or in the same decoction made with white wine is most usuall. The distilled water of the whole herbe, rootes and flowers, as it is effe∣ctuall in a manner, so it is much more familiar to be taken of any that hath neede thereof; it provoketh also wo∣mens courses, and freeth and clenseth the stomacke and lungs from thicke and tough flegme, that troubleth it, and causeth it the more easily to be avoided. 
CHAP. II. Saxifraga alba Petraea. White Rocke Saxifrage. T His white Rocke or Mountaine Saxifrage, I have joyned next unto the former, for the neare affinitie it hath therewith. It sendeth forth from a small long reddish roote, with some fibres thereat, divers somwhat hairy leaves longer &amp; deepelier cut in on the edgds than those of the former, among which riseth up a brownish hairy stalke, about a foote and a halfe high stored with branches from the bot∣tome to the toppe; at the ends whereof stand the flowers in greene huskes, consisting of five very white leaves a peece, having some yellowish threds in the middle, standing about a head or umbell, which in time growing to be the seede vessell, hath divers small seede Saxifraga alba petraea. White Rocke Saxifrage. 
contained within it; the taste of the leaves are sweetish at the first, but a little sharpe afterwards.
The Place. It groweth on Mount Baldus, not farre from Verona, in the territory of the Venetians. 
The Time. This flowreth in the naturall places in the end of Iune, and the seede is ripe soone after, and perisheth wholly after∣wards. 
The Names. It is called by Pona who set forth the description of Mount Baldus, and what plants doe grow in every part thereof, by the name of Saxifragia alba petraea; but Bauhinus according to his usuall manner, in all things almost that may be altered, doth vary the name twise, calling it first in his Phytopinax, Alfine Tridactylites Alpina; but afterwards in his Pinax changing his former minde, calleth it Sedum tri∣dactylites Alpinum majus album, and none of them both in my opinion answerable to so famous an Herbarists judge∣ment; as to referre them to such plants, as yeeld so small likenesse: for unto the Alfines, (whereunto I said he re∣ferred it at the first, but disclaimeth it afterwards) although it may seeme to have some resemblance, in the white flow∣ers, yet the leaves and other parts thereof, withstandeth that comparison; and unto any kinde or sort of Sedum, it hath in my judgement farre lesse correspondencie, which sheweth a strong conceit in him beyond compare, to make his later opinion worse than the former, which as is judged in most, should be more considerate and exact; but surely I thinke it doth so nearely resemble, as I said before, the former white Saxifrage, both in forme and qualitie, that it is most fitly to be referred unto it, and unto no other plant so likely: the chiefe differences consisting in the forme of the branches, leaves and rootes, as you may plainely per∣ceive both by the discription and figure. 
The Vertues. It hath no doubt the same properties that the former hath, both the name arguing it, and the likenesse of face in growing not reclaiming, and the taste especially, whereby the qualitie is chiefely discerned answering thereun∣to, and although there is not any authorities extant to warrant this my conceit, yet those foreremembred conditi∣ons therein, may plead a strong perswasion of veritie, and untill it be contradicted by sufficient triall and experi∣ence to be otherwise, I hold it may passe for currant as a Saxifrage. 
CHAP. III. Saxifraga aurea. Golden Saxifrage. G Olden Saxifrage is a small low herbe having ma∣ny Saxifraga aurea. Golden Saxifrage. 
round leaves lying on the ground bluntly en∣dented about the edges somewhat like the for∣mer common Saxifrage, but not hairy, some∣what thicker also and of a darker greene colour, among which rise up divers slender and weake stalkes, little above a hand bredth high, with such like leaves on them as grow below up to the toppes, where among the leaves come forth very small gold yellow flowers not easily observed, and falling away so quickly, that they are so seldome seene with them, and after they are past, there appeare in their places small round heads, wherein is contained small round reddish seede: the roote is composed of a number of small strings or fibres: the whole plant is almost insipide or without taste, but nothing hot that it may be judged to be effectuall to dissolve or expell the stone. 
The Place. It alwayes groweth in moist places by Well sides, or other standing and sometimes running waters, and sometimes al∣so in moorish grounds, as about Tidnaham in the Forrest of Deane, at Ashford, and Iden in Kent, at Chepstow in Essex, and in divers other places. 
The Time. It flowreth in May and sometimes in Aprill, but abideth greene all the rest of the yeare, and perisheth not like the last. 
The Names. It is called Saxifraga aurea of most Writers, from the forme of the leaves and colour of the flowers, scarse any well knowing whereunto better to referre it, Lobel from the naturall place of the growing and insipidity of the taste, calleth it Lichenis facie &amp; natalitijs, and Besteris that set forth the huge great booke of the Bishop of Eystot his garden, following Lobel calleth it Hepatica palustri Tabermontanus calleth it Chrysosplenium: Vlisses Aldroandus tooke it to be a kinde of Erysinum but farre unlike∣ly. 
The Ʋertues. The insipide taste as I said before, doth not argue any certaine effect or property to worke upon the stone or gravell either to dissolve or expell it, unlesse it be by some specificall or hidden property therein, yet assuredly it could not in my opinion have received the name of a Saxifrage among so many authors without some proper ef∣fect therefore, which rose no doubt from some Empyricall observation and practise, which gave it both the name and the opinion, unlesse it might from the likenesse of the leaves as I said before judged, which because I cannot maintaine nor disprove, I leave it for others to disprove if they can. 
CHAP. IV. Saxifraga vera Dioscoridis Matthioli. Matthiolus his true Saxifrage of Dioscorides. T He true Saxifrage of Dioscorides, according to the judgement of Matthiolus and others, from whom he received it, is a small low shrubby Plant, that sendeth forth divers small wooddy, and somewhat hairy stalkes, full of joynts close set one unto another, having divers small short and whitish narrow leaves, growing divers together at every joynt, at the toppe whereof come forth very small purplish white flowers, set with some leaves under them, this doth somewhat resem∣ble Time, both in the lownesse and manner of growing, but hath no such sweete sent, or hot sharpe taste like unto it, whereby it may be knowne to be a dif∣ferent Saxifraga vera Dioscoridis Matthioli. Matthiolus his true Saxifrage of Dioscorides. 
Plant. 
The Place. It hath beene sent unto us out of Italy among other rare seeds, but where the naturall place of growing is, it is not readily knowne. 
The Time. It is very slow in growing, so that it did not flower untill so late in the yeare, that an early frost caused it to perish, that we could gather no seede. 
The Names. It is very probable that it is the true Sarxiphragon or Saexifragon of Dioscorides, and differeth much from the Sa∣tureia or Thymbra St. Iuliani of Pena and Lobel, set forth before in this worke, which Bauhinus calleth spicata, (that it may the better agree with Dioscorides his Satureia ) and supposeth to be this plant of Matthiolus, but I by the sight and taste of the plant not finding it to agree, with the smell or taste of either Time or Savory, cannot agree unto him, but doe rather judge it to be a peculiar plant of it selfe, and to come neerer unto his Thynaum inodorum before mentioned, and therefore have separated it from the other Saxifrages that follow Dodonaeus: (and Gerard who hath but onely translated his words) judgeth the Serpyl∣lum vulgare, to be Dioscorides his Saxifrage, but they are both deceived. 
The Ʋertues. I doe verily beleeve that this plant, hath either the same e∣speciall vertues against the stone and gravell, restraint of ma∣king water and other the qualities, whereunto Dioscorides doth appropriate his Saxifrage, or commeth somewhat neere there∣unto, and I am hereunto chiefly led by the sight and forme of the plant, and from the name of Saxifraga Dioscoridis, where∣by it was sent unto us. 
CHAP. V. 1. Saxifraga major Italorum Matthioli. Matthiolus his Italian great Saxifrage. T He great Saxifrage of the Italians, as Matthiolus relateth it, hath a great wooddy stemme of thē big∣nesse of ones finger, toward the lower end, full of chinkes or clefts, spreading very thicke, with many slender hard whitish branches full of joynts, and two small long whitish greene pointed leaves, set at every joynt very like unto Pinkes, and many other smaller and shorter standing with them: the flowers stand at the toppes of the branches, out of whitish greene huskes, consisting of five and sometimes sixe, small white leaves, endented at the ends, of a sweete smell, standing above the huskes, laid open like a little starre, after which follow small round and somewhat long heads, full of small reddish round seede, much lesse then that of Poppy. Lobel and Pena thinketh that this Saxifrage is the same that they have set forth in their Adversaria, but that with us it groweth not so great and wooddy. 
2. Saxifraga Anglica Lobelij Occidentalium. Lobels West Country Saxifrage. This saith Lobel is very like the former, but that the flowers are white, and grow in small tufts at the toppes of the small stalkes, the whole plant being white. 
2. Saxifraga Ang ica Occidentalium Lobelij. Lobels West Country Saxifrage. 
3. Saxifraga palustris Anglicana. Mr. Goodyers Marsh Saxifrage.
4. Saxifraga Cretica prior. The former of the two Saxifrages of Candy. 
8. Saxifraga Bavarica. The Saxifrage of Bavaria. 
 
3. Saxifraga palustris Anglica. Mr. Goodyers Marsh Saxifrage. This hath sundry small leaves about an inch long, very small and narrow lying next the roote, among which rise divers slender round stalkes about halfe a foote high, full of joynts and branched here and there, set at the joynts with the like small leaves many together, but two for the most part longer then the rest, growing smaller and shorter up to the toppes, where groweth one pretty large white flower, made of five round pointed leaves a peece, with some white chives in the mi dle, the roote is small and fibrous. 
4. Saxifraga Cretica prior Alpino. Alpinus his first Candy Saxifrage. From a small long white roote, having a few small fibres at the head, shooteth forth a hard white wooddy stalke, divided into sundry small branches, sub-divided also into other lesser, which stand not upright but le e downewards, set at each joynt with two small long and pointed leaves, somewhat like to those of Tragoriga Goats Marjerome, and about the same bignesse: the flowers are small, made of many white threds set together, standing betweene the leaves, this is wholly without either smell or taste almost. 
5. Saxifraga Cretica altera Alpino. Alpinus his other Candy Saxifrage. They have also another kinde of Saxifrage growing in barren dry grounds, very like to a small Pinke, for the leaves and manner of growing, but the flowers stand at the toppes of the branches in tufts or umbels of a pale red∣dish colour, this is of an astringent and drying taste, with a little acrimony. 
6. Saxifraga montana Neapolitana. Mountaine Saxifrage of Naples. This small Saxifrage which Columna found growing out of the Chinkes of rocky steepe hils, beareth two small long leaves, at each joynt of the stalkes very like those of Matthiolus his great Saxifrage, but somewhat broader softer, and whitish, with some smaller ones set with them likewise, where also rise branches, bearing white flowers at the toppes, made of foure small pointed leaves a peece, with divers small threds in the middle and are succeeded by small round skinny heades, with small browne seede within them; the roote is made of many small threds. 
7. Saxifraga maritima Neapolitana. The Sea Saxifrage of Naples. This is another sort of the last described growing on the walls nigh the Sea at Naples, being twise as bigge, and having blush coloured flowers in Autumne and afterwards long pointed seed vessels, and small browne seede in them, this creepeth on the ground, and standeth upright when it flowreth. 
8. Saxifraga Bavarica. The Saxifrage of Bavaria. The Saxifrage of Bavaria, spreadeth upon the ground, with a number of slender round branches, divided into others, set full of leaves, two at every joynt, which are narrow, somewhat long and thicke, and of a pale greene colour, at the toppe of every small branch standeth one flower, set in a small cuppe or huske of whitish greene leaves, of which colour the stalkes are also, consisting of five small pure white leaves, pointed at the ends, and sometimes a little purfled about the brims, and with a wash of purple, laid open like a little starre, with some pale coloured threds in the middle, the seede that followeth in smal round and somewhat long heads, is small, f at, blacke and shining, the roote is small and white, and groweth downe somewhat deepe. 
The Place and Time. The first two sorts grow in the West parts of this land as Lobel saith, who relateth in his Adversaria, that he found the second betweene Chipnam and Marleborough in London high way to Bristow on a chalky hill, yet Mat∣thiolus saith, he had the first from Mount Baldus where it groweth, the third Mr. Goodyer saith, he found on a boggy ground below the red Well of Wellingborough in Northamptonshire, the fourth and fifth in Candy, the sixth and seaventh in Naples, and the last in Bavaria. They all flower late. 
The Names. Lobel and Pena say that the third Saxifrage of Matthiolus which some call magna Matthioli, and others major Ita∣lorum is the same which they have set forth in the first place, in their Adversaria, although it grow not so great, and entitle it also Saxifraga antiquiorum, but I enterposed my opinion of that in the last Chapter, but Bauhinus sup∣poseth them to be two severall plants calling that of Matthiolus Caryophyllus Saxifragus, and that of Lobel Cary∣ophyllus Saxifragus strigosior: the second is a species as Lobel thinketh of the former, as is said in the description, and commeth nearest to the second sort of Candy Saxifrage, but differing in the flowers, yet Lobel doubteth if it may not be a kinde of Chickeweede: but sure he need not doubt it, nor that it was Synanchice Dalechampij. The third here expressed commeth nere likewise unto Columna his first Neapolitane Saxifrage, but that ours groweth in morish, and his in rocky places, and that the flowers of his have but foure leaves, and ours five round pointed, and his sharpe. Alpinus maketh mention of the Candy kindes, and Columna of the Neapolitane which he entitleth Alsme Saxifraga mantana &amp; maritina: the last Camerarius and Pona call Saxifraga Bavarica, but Bauhinus put∣teth a doubt or quaere whether it be not the Saxifraga magna Matthioli, when as Pona in the description of mount Baldus, mentioneth the magna Matthioli, in divers places thereof, and describeth and giveth the figure of Bavari∣ca distinctly. 
The vertues. The Italians doe wonderfully extoll with praises the vertues of their Saxifrages, and so doe the Candiots and Neapolitanes likewise, to breake and dissolve the stone in the reines and kidneies, and bladder, and to procure u∣rine, and to confirme the truth thereof, Matthiolus saith he received from Calzolarius an Apothecary of Vec , such great stones of sundry persons that were voided in making of their urine, that it could hardly be beleeved, that they could passe through the pipes from the bladder; to give him knowledge how powerfull in operation these are, that can expell the stone in the kidnies and bladder, be they never so great, the other Saxifrages except the third, have the same properties taken in wine, or in a draught of the decoction of them, with Quich grasse rootes, doth effectually performe as much as the former, to dissolve and breake the stone. 
CHAP. VI. Gramen Parnassi vulgare. The common grasse of Parnassus. T His Grasse of Parnassus hath many leaves rising from the roote, not altogether round, but ending in a point, smaller and thicker than Violet leaves, with many ribbes or long veines in them, of a fresh greene colour, every one standing on a long foote stalke, among which there ariseth divers slender weake stalkes, scarse a foote high, and scarse able to stand upright, whereon grow at the severall joynts such like leaves, but smaller, without any foote stalke, but having the stalke joyning so close to it, that it seemeth almost to runne through it, the toppes of the stalkes are na∣ked and bare of leaves unto the flowers for a good way, which are white and consist of five leaves standing round, and in the middle a small round greene head or button, with some yellow threds about them, which in time growing to be ripe is a round button, wherein is contained small reddish seede: the roote is a small blackish threddy bush of fibres, not perishing as divers of the former doe. 
Gramen Parnassi duplicato flore. Double flowred Grasse of Parnassus. This is in all things like the former, saving in the flower, which hath a row of smaller leaves, within the other outermost, which maketh a shew of the double flower: this seldome giveth any seede as the former, 
The Place. The first groweth in many moist moorish grounds in England, as in the Moores neere Lynton and Cambridge, at Hesset and Drinkestone in Suffolke, in the Butchers close thereby; in a Medow close on the backeside of the Parso∣nage house of Burton, and at the bottome of Barton hills in Beafordshire, as also in the middle of the great Towne∣field of Hadington, which is about a mile from Oxford, and on the other side of Oxford, in the pasture next unto Botley in the high way. The other was found in the country of Brabant. 
The Time. They flower not untill about Saint James tide, and the seede is ripe a moneth after. 
The Names. It is called Gramen Parnassi, and judged by most to be the right Gramen Parnassi of Dioscorides, although Ges∣ner in hortis Germaniae saith, that the right is not knowne to any in our dayes, but saith withall that the Polonians doe call it Euneadynamis. It is very probable, that this herbe grew most plentifully upon Mount Parnassus, where∣on cattell feeding, became fat and well liking, as our Clover or three leaved grasse doth with us, and thereupon took the name, as is usuall in divers countries to call herbes by the name of Grasse, although they have no likenesse with Grasse indeede; and this may answer M r . Gerards finding fault with the name of Parnassus Grasse, Cordus Gramen Parnassi flore simplici. Singl Parnassus Grrsse. 
Gramen Parnassi duplici. Double flowred Parnassus Grasse. 
in his history of plants, calleth it Hepatica alba. Gesner in Collectione stirpium Ʋnifolium palustre, Lobel calleth it Gramen Parnassi hederaceum recentiorum. Tabermontanus Gramen hederaceum and Flos hepaticus. The other is cal∣led by Lobel Gramen Parnassi duplicato flore. 
The Ʋertues. Paulus Aegineta saith that Parnassus grasse, is temperately cold, of thinne parts, and somewhat sowre, the juice of the herbe, or the decoction thereof, or of the rootes, doth dissolve and expell stones and gravell from the reines and bladder gathered therein, and provoketh urine aboundantly; and the seede thereof taken in powder, wor∣keth more forcibly then either the herbe or roote, and withall doth stay any vomitings from the stomacke, and any fluxe of the belly, the decoction of the rootes made with wine, being drunke, doth ease torments and griping paines in the bowels, and the ulcers that are in the bladder, it helpeth also against the biting of any venemous beast, the juice of the herbe or roote is good to coole any inflammation or heate in the eyes, to dry up the running or watering in them, and to cleare them from mistinesse or cloudy skinns, that obscure the sight, if it be mixed with a little hony and dropped into them: it is held also effectuall to ease the toothache, being gargled in the mouth: the herbe, or roote, or seede, either the juice, decoction or powder, is very effectually applyed to close up greene wounds, that are much subject to bleeding, and restraineth inflammations that may disease the party, or hinder the cure.
CHAP. VII. Lachryma Iob. Iobs Teares. I Have thought good to place this plant in a Chapter by it selfe, and not with the kindes of Gromel, because it differeth so much from them in growing, because the seede doth nearest re∣semble them: and although divers Authors have thought it rather to be a kind of grasse or reed, and therefore have placed it among them; yet I cannot finde it agree with either of them, more than in the jointed, stalkes, and leaves, which in my judgement, is not so sufficient a marke, to make it of that kinred, but as Columna saith, the flower and seede especially of plants, doth best demonstrate to what genus every species may be referred. It shooteth from a thicke bushie threddy roote, many reasonable thicke round jointed stalkes, about a foote and a halfe high, whereon at every joint standeth one narrow long, great Lachryma Iob. Iobs Teares. 
leafe, somewhat like unto the leafe of Millet, or a small Reede, rather standing upright, than at any time bending downe; and at the joints with the leaves commeth forth one graine or seede, of the bignesse of a good Pease, wrap∣ped in some huskes, round at the bottome, and pointed at the end, whereat hangeth two or three small chaffie huskes, or beards as Pliny calleth them, somewhat like unto small lanke short eares of corne, which are idle having nothing within them: the seede it selfe, being taken out of the skins, wherein it was wrapped, is somewhat like unto a Gromel-seede, but much larger, brighter of colour, and harder to breake, round yet pointed at the one end, somewhat flat also, and with an hole at the bigger and lower part, where it stood upon a little short foote stalke; the taste whereof being broken, and having but little kernell within it, is a little drying without any other manifest taste. 
The Place. This groweth naturally in the Iles of Candy and Rhodes, in Syria also and those Easterne Countries, but no where else in Europe, unlesse it be planted as it is said. 
The Time. It groweth slowly in our countrie, and seldome giveth ripe seede for the want of sufficient heate of the Sunne to ripen it, before the frosts doe take it. 
The Names. It hath beene judged as I said before by former Authors, to be a kinde of Reede, and therefore Gesner in hortis Ger∣maniae, calleth it Arundo lythospermos, and so did Matthiolus account it, &amp; found fault with Fuschius, that tooke it to be a kinde of Lythospermon, as Tragus, Gesner, and divers others, who called it Lythospermum majus. Pena and Lobel in their Adversaria, doe call it. Lythospermum Plinianum sive majus, and doe very probably referre it to the Lythospermon of Pliny, lib. 27. cap. 11. (which hee there calleth Diospiros, Iovis triticum, which name is not so proper unto it, as the other Lythospermum, although the leaves hereof, are more like unto the blades of corne) but not of Dioscorides, who in the description confoundeth them both together, but in that he saith, the seede is of the bignesse of a Cich Pease, he doth most properly demonstrate this Lythospermum, for that of Dioscorides, which is our Gromell seede, is nothing so great, yet called also Lythospermum fruticosum of Gesner: it is now most usually called La∣chryma Christi from the Italians, who when they first had it called it simply Lagrima; and since every severall countrie, hath added another epithite thereunto: for the Spaniards call it Lagryma de Mosen; the French L ' armes de nostre Dame: the Germanes Lachryma Iodoci, as Gesner saith. Lugduneusis calleth it Lythospermum arundinaceum, and Bauhinus Lithospermum arundinaceum forte Dioscoridis &amp; Plinij, an Coix Theophrastis lib. 1. cap. 16. historia plantarum; we in English follow the titles, of almost all Nations; for some call it Iobs Teares, some Moses Teares, or Jobs Droppes, or Moses Droppe; Christs Teares, our Ladies Teares, and some Gromell reede according to Gesner his Latine. 
The Vertues. It is of little use in Physicke that we can understand in the naturall places, or where it may be had in more plenty than with us; yet some as Pena and Lobel say doe commend it, either in powder or the decoction thereof, against the stone or gravell in the kidnies and bladder: but beyond sea, the greatest use they make of it, is of the seede, to perforate and string them, as other things for beades, to stint God with their prayers, and tell him how many they mumble upon them, and are sure that they have done him so good service therein, that he must needs give them heaven for it. 
CHAP. VIII. Lithospermum. Gromell. T Here are divers sorts of Gromell found out and knowne to this later age, more than was to the for∣mer, and there are also some others that are somewhat like them, and therefore joyned unto them, although they participate with other plants: of them all I meane to speake in this Chapter. 
1. Lithospermum majus erectum &amp; legitimum. Great upright Gromell. The great Gromell riseth up with divers upright, slender wooddy, hairy, browne and crested stalkes, very little or not branched at all, whereon doe grow without order, long, hard, rough, and darke greene leaves, sharper pointed and somewhat longer and narrower than the next: at the toppes of the stalkes stand divers small white flowers, in rough browne huskes, wherein after they are past, is contained a white hard, stony, round, shining seede, like unto Pearles and greater than the next: the roote is long and hard, or somewhat wooddy, with divers branches and fibres thereat, which perisheth not, although the stalkes die downe to the ground every yeare. 
2. Lithospermum majus sive vulgare. The greater creeping Gromell. This kind of Gromell groweth up with slender hard and hairy stalkes, trailying and taking roote in the ground as it lyeth thereon, and parted into many other smaller bran∣ches, 2. Lithospermum vulgare majus. The greater creeping Gromell. 
with such like hairy darke greene leaves, but shorter and broader than the former: at the joints with the leaves come forth very small blew flowers, and after them such like hard stony roundish seede, but smaller and not fully so white and shining: the roote is like the former, abiding the Winter, and shooting forth stalkes fresh in the Spring, but giveth more plenty of seede, then the former, yet lesser than the first. 
3. Lithospermum minus vulgaris. Small wilde Gromell. The small wilde Gromell sendeth forth divers upright hard branched stalkes, full of joynts, to be two or three foote high, at every of which joints grow small long hard, and rough leaves, lesse than the last, and of a darke greene co∣lour, among which leaves come forth small white flowers, and in their places when they are past, grayish round seede like the other, the roote is not very long, but with many fibres fastened thereto. 
4. Lithospermum angustifolium umbellatum. Vmbelliferous Gromell. This Gromell spreadeth sundry wooddy rough stalkes, yet easie to breake, spread into divers branches about halfe a foote high, with many very narrow rough leaves set on them with∣out any order, the middle ribbe in them being somewhat great; the flowers stand at the toppes of the branches, and some times from the upper joynts, divers being set together as it were in an umbell which consist of five small round pointed leaves of a blew colour or rather being long and hollow are parted and cut into five parts set in rough greene huskes, wherein after the flowers are past growth usually two white and hard long and pointed seedes set together: the roote is hard and wooddy covered with a brownish red barke. 
5. Lithospermum Anchusae facie. Small Gromell with tufted toppes. This small Gromell hath many hard brittle, wooddy, low and hairy stalkes, rising little above halfe a foote high, dividing themselves even from the ground, into many smaller branches, whereon are set disper∣sedly small long and narrow rough greene leaves, whose middle ribbe riseth up somewhat high: the flowers for the most part stand at the toppes of the branches in an umbell, divers tufting together, and sometimes also at the 3. Lithospermum vulgare minus. Small wilde Gromell. 
5. Lithospermum Anchusae facie. Small Gromell with tufted toppes. 
6. Lithospermum arvenso radice rubente. Small corne Gromell. 
Lithospermum Germanicum Passerina Tragi. Germane Gromell or Sparrowort. 
joynts with the leaves, standing in rough huskes, which are somewhat larger then any of the other, and of a fine blew colour in some, in others white or reddish, to whom succeed small and somewhat long pointed hard and white seede, two for the most part joyned together, the roote is long and wooddy, spreading under ground, co∣vered with a rough brownish red barke. 
6. Lithospermum arvense radice rubente. Small corne Gromell. This small Corne Gromell, shooteth forth three or foure rough branches, divided into other smaller ones, ha∣ving many small long narrow hairy darke greene leaves growing on them, very like those of the former Gro∣mell, but not so hard or long, but set without order in the like manner, the flowers grow at the toppes, with ma∣ny small leaves among them, consisting of five small white leaves, which after they are past, there succeed small blackish seede, two, three, or foure set together in the same huske: the roote is somewhat reddish, but little or nothing colouring the fingers of them that touch it. 
7. Lithospermum minimum Germanicum, Passerina Tragi. The small Germane Gromell or Sparrow-wort. The small Gromell of Germany riseth up for the most part, but with one slender stalke, branched into one or two parts at the most, scarse a foote high, set here and there with small long and narrow leaves, somewhat like unto Line or Flaxe, and whereon stand small white flowers up towards the toppe, which turne into small smooth round blackish seede, very like else unto Gromell seede, the roote is small and threddy and perisheth e∣very yeare. 
8. Lithospermum Linariae folio Monspeliense. French Gromell with flaxen leaves. This kinde of Gromell hath likewise but one stalke, branched into two or three parts at the toppe thereof, whereon grow long and narrow leaves, somewhat larger then the former, and not rough as the other Gromels are: the flowers are small, of a pale whitish yellow colour like unto the former, but stand many together at the toppes of the branches, and after they are past, arise small round heads like Coriander seede, wherein is con∣tained round hard blackish seede like unto Gromell, the roote is small and stringy.
3. Polygonum minus breviore folio. Small short leafed Knotgrasse. This other small kinde, hath likewise many slender joynted branches, but more wooddy then the former, spread also into some other smaller ones, whereon grow small short leaves, lesser then those of the small St. Iohns wort: the flowers are small and white like the other. 
4. Polygonum Saxatile. Stony Knotgrasse. The stony Knotgrasse hath many weake trayling branches full of joynts, rising from a small white fibrous rootes, lying upon the ground, round about it, whereon grow leaves that are somewhat round, being of an inch in length, and halfe an inch in breadth, but growing smaller to the stalkeward, greene on the upperside, and of a whitish mealy colour underneath, at the joynts come forth small pale reddish flowers, like unto the other, and after them followeth such like seede as in the other. 
1. Polygonum mas vulgare majus. The greater common Knotgrasse. 
Polygonum maximis folijs. The greatest Knotgrasse. 
 
5. Polygonum marinum majus. The greater Sea Knotgrasse. The greater Sea Knotgrasse, runneth out into many and much 5. 6. Polygonum marinum majus &amp; minus. The greater and lesser Sea Knotgrasse. 
larger branches then the first, lying on the ground, yet full of joynts, set very close together, with leaves thereon, somewhat like the common kind, but thicker, somewhat shorter and broa∣der, and of a darke greene colour above, and whiter underneath: the flowers stand at the joynts in the same manner, having small white skinnes that cover the joynts, which in some also are of a white, and in others of a purplish colour; after which com∣meth small seede, enclosed in whitish shining skinnes; the taste of the whole plant and every part thereof is astringent, but some∣what salt withall: the roote is somewhat great, thicke, blacke, long, and somewhat wooddy. 
6. Polygonum marinum minus. The lesser Sea Knotgrasse. This lesser kind hath longer stalkes then the last, covered with a reddish barke, and more divided into smaller branches, having fewer joynts on the greater stalkes, but the branches are thicke, set with smaller leaves then the former, and are somewhat fat and thicke, long and narrow like the common kinde: the flow∣ers are small and whitish, and the seede is not much unlike the last, the roote is somewhat long blacke and wooddy, with a few fibres set thereat. 
The Place. The first two sorts grow every where, and in every Country almost, both by the footewaies in fields, and on the sides of high∣wayes that are greene, for in some it overspreadeth them, and by the sides of old walls. The third groweth upon the higher grounds, and upon hils and mountaines. The fourth in the same places also, among the stones in the rougher parts. The two last grow by the Sea side in divers places. 
The Time. They spring up late in the Spring, and abide all the Sommer untill Winter, when all their branches perish. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Polygonum, quod multis genubus crescit, which name is usuall to it in Latine, yet it is also called Seminalis, Sanguinalis, Sanguinaria and Proserpinaca of the severall properties it hath to stanch blood, or to creepe on the ground: in the Apothecaries shops in Italy and many other places Corrigiola, and Centinodia, for the severall respect unto the qualities to correct the heate of the stomacke and body, or for the joynts and knots that every branch hath. The Arabians call it Basia trahagi, the Italians Poligono, Corregiola, and some Lengua Passerina. The Spaniards Corriola. The Frenche Renovee, Corrigiole, and of the Walloones Marjolene de Cure. The Germanes Weggrasse, and Wegdrit. The Dutchmen weghgras oft duysent knoop. In English Knot∣grasse, and Swines grasse, and in the North Country of divers, Birds tongue, from one of the Italian names. The first three sorts are usually of al authors called Polygonum mas or masculum, for they are al alike, differing only that the one is bigger or lesser then another (for the Polygonum faemina or faemineum differeth in forme very much from this, and shall be entreated of among the Equiseta, Sheregrasses, or Horsetailes, as being likest unto them, al∣though not rough:) some also call the first vulgare or majus for distinctions sake from the second and third, which are both called minus; yet the third is thought by Bauhinus in his Pinax, both to be the Polygonum masculum fruticosum of Thalius, in the description of Harcyniasylva, (which Camerarius hath set forth and joyned it to his Hortus Medicus, ) and also the Sedum minimum arborescens vermiculatum of Lobel, for he seemeth doubtfull unto which Thalius his Polygonum should be referred. The fourth Bauhinus calleth Polygonum Saxatile, and no other before him that I know hath made mention of it. The fifth is called Polygonum marinum by Lobel in his Ob∣servations, and Polygonum marinum maximum in his Adversaria, and of Lugdunensis Polygonum marinum primum Dalechampij, as he calleth the last Polygonum marinum alterum Dalechampij; which Bauhinus calleth Polygonum maritimum angustifolium, calling the former Latifolium. 
The Ʋertues. The common sorts of Knotgrasse are cooling drying, and binding, in so much that the juice of them is most ef∣fectuall to stay any bleeding at the mouth, being drunke in steeled or red wine, and the bleeding at the nose to be applyed to the forehead and temples, or to be squirted up into the nostrils; it is also no lesse effectuall to coole and temper the heat of blood, or of the stomacke, and to stay any flux of the blood or humours, either of the belly, as all laskes or bloody fluxes that come by chollericke and sharpe humours, or the abundant flowing of womens courses, or the running of the reines also, the juice given before the fit of an ague, be it tertian or quartane doth come, is said to expell it and drive it away, it is also singular good to provoke urine when it is stopped, as also when it passeth away by droppes, and with paine, which is called the Strangury, as also the heate and sharp∣nesse therein, and to expell powerfully by the urine, the gravell or the stone in the reines or bladder, to take a dramme of the powder of the herbe in wine for many daies together; which effects as Dioscorides doth affirme, so Galen seemeth not to deny, but onely saith that Dioscorides hath not sufficiently expressed himselfe in the man∣ner of the disease and how it should be given: being boyled in wine and drunke, it is profitable to those that are stung or bitten by venemous creatures, and the same is very effectuall to stay all defluxions of rheumaticke hu∣mours upon the stomacke, and killeth likewise the wormes in the belly or stomacke, and quieteth all the inward paines of the body, either in the stomacke or belly or other parts that arise from the heate, sharpenesse and corrup∣tion of bloud and choller: the distilled water hereof taken by it selfe, or with the powder of the herbe or seetle, is very effectuall to all the purposes aforesaid: the said water or the juyce of the herbe, is accounted as one of the most soveraine remedies to coole all manner of inflammations, even Saint Anthonies fire, or any other breaking forth of beate, all hot swellings and empostumations, all gangrenous, that is eating and fretting or burning sores and fistulous cancers, or foule filthy ulcers being applied or put into them, but especially for all sorts of ulcers and sores happening in the privy parts of men or women, restraining the humours from falling to them, and cooling and drying up the hot and moist inflammations, that are apt to follow such sores in such places; it no lesse helpeth all fresh and greene wounds, by restraining the bloud, and quickly consolidating the lippes of them: the juyce dropped into the eares helpeth them wonderfully, although they are foule, and have running matter in them: the sea kindes of Knotgrasse, are not thought to be so cooling and operative for the griefes aforesaid, in regard they have gotten more heate by their salt habitation; yet effectuall in many of the other properties, the salt qualitie causing somewhat the more penetration. 
CHAP. XV. Polygona minora. Divers sorts of small Knotgrasse. O F these smaller kindes, there are many more than of the former, differing the one from the other, as shall be declared hereafter: and first I will shew you those that come nearest in outward face and forme unto the other, next going before, and the smallest afterward. 
1. Polygonum montanum niveum. White Mountaine Knotgrasse. This Mountaine Knotgrasse is so fine a white silverlike plant, especially in the hotter countries, and when it is growne old, that it giveth much delight to the beholders of it: for it spreadeth many weake trayling branches upon the ground, in some places not past an hands breadth, in others a footelong, as full or fuller of joynts than any of the former, and thicke set also with smaller branches; whereon are placed very small long leaves, lying almost like scales upon the whitish hard stalkes, these leaves are greene at the first and tender, but when they are growne old, they will be of a shining silver colour, and hard like skinnes or parchment, the toppes of the stalkes and branches being thicke set, with small white silver-like leaves; and at the joints also come forth very small white flowers scarse to be discerned, where also afterward there is the like seede, but smaller; the roote is small long and white, not perishing nei∣ther 1. Polygonum montanum nivenm. White Mountaine Knotgrasse. 
the branches nor the leaves in the Winter in his naturall place, but will not endure our cold blastes and nights, and therefore perisheth unlesse it have more especiall care and provision to preserve it. 
2. Polygonum montanum Ʋermiculatae folijs. Mountaine Knotgrasse with Stonecrop leaves. This small herbe (or Knotgrasse for unto this family Bauhinus doth referre it) groweth not much more than an hand breadth high, sending forth many slender whitish round stalkes full of joynts which doe a little bend themselves downe againe to the ground; at the joynts are set small long round fat leaves like unto those of Stonecrop pointed but not pricking at the ends, and with the leaves; at the said joynts towards the toppes rise single flowers, that is one at a joynt somewhat large that it doth seeme many, of a greenish colour, laid open like a Star, with divers whitish small threds in the middle scarse to be discerned, after which commeth a small round seed vessell and small seede therein: the roote is small white and threddy; this hath neither taste nor sent much to be perceived there∣in, onely it is a little harsh and drying and somewhat bitter withall: it seemeth to partake in face with the Stonecroppes, and in taste, with Knotgrasse, and the title riseth from both. 
3. Polygonum Ʋalentinum sive Anthyllis Va∣lentina Clusij. Spanish Knotgrasse. This small plant which Clusius found in Spaine, and thought might be referred to the Anthyllides, is by divers the best Herbarists since, accounted a kinde of Knotgrasse, or more neerely resembling them, for it shooteth forth many small weake reddish bran∣ches, lying upon the ground, and not able to stand upright, about a foote long, parted into many other smaller branches, whereon grow at severall joynts and spa∣ces many small leaves together, like unto those of Time spurge; whereon, as well as on the stalke there grow∣eth a shew of mealinesse, as many sea plants have; with the leaves come forth small purplish white flowers, consisting of foure leaves apeece; the seede hath not beene observed: the roote is small long and blackish on the outside. 
4. Polygonum minus Monspeliense. Small knotgrasse of Mompelier. This small French Knotgrasse hath divers small branches lying upon the ground, full of joints, whereat are set small greene leaves, being somewhat round and like unto those of the small Lentilles: the flowers are very small and of a whitish colour, tending unto greene, standing at the toppes of the branches onely, and many set there together, which afterwards give very small seede; the roote is small, but very long, growing downe deepe into the ground: this plant is very like Clusius his Anthyllis Ʋalentina; but Bauhinus contesteth seriously a∣gaing them that would so take it; for that Clusius his Anthyllis hath reddish branches, and this hath greene, his hath much smaller leaves, and more store of flowers, and 2. Polygonum m ntanum Vermiculate folijs. Mountaine Knotgrasse with Stonecrop leeves. 
3. Polygonum Valentinum. Spanish Knotgrasse. 
that of a purplish colour, and none at all standing at the toppes of the branches: all which considered, he determineth that this is a differing sort from the other.
5. Polygonum Creticum Thymi folio. Candy Knotgrasse. This small Candy Knotgrasse lieth likewise with his small branches upon the ground, not past an hand breadth in length: the leaves stand at the joints, sometimes but one or two, and sometimes three or foure, differing in bignesse and length one from another; with the leaves stand also many small white flowers together, as it were in a knot or bunch: after which commeth the seede, which is small and plen∣tifull. 
6. Polygonum Serpylli folio Lobelij. Lobels Knotgrasse with Mother of Time leaves. This Knotgrasse that Lobel hath set forth in his Ad∣versaria, hath very long threddy stalkes spread upon the ground, branched forth in divers places, with many small long and round leaves sap∣pie or full of juyce, somewhat like unto Stonecroppe, set together at the joints: the whole plant somewhat resembleth Serpyllum Narbonense, French mother of Time: the roote is long and wood∣die, of a bitterish taste, somewhat hot upon the tongue. 
7. Polygonum Germanicum sive Knawell Germanorum. Germane Knotgrasse or Knawell. The Germanes Knawell sendeth forth from a small slender threddy roote, di∣vers small branches, not fully lying downe on the ground, halfe a foote long full of joints, thickly set together, at e∣very one whereof, stand many very small and long pointed leaves, of a grayish greene or ash colour, which are of an unequall length, two for the most part longer than the other: at these joynts with the leaves grow out divers small herby or greene Starre-like flowers; thicke set together, which being fallen there appeare in very small huskes, no bigger than Millet seede, great store of very small seede, like dust, or the seede of Herniaria Rupture∣wort, which are of a quicke hot sent, somewhat sweete. 
8. Polyponum alterum Germanicum. Another Germane Knotgrasse. This other Knotgrasse of Germany, doth very much resemble the former, both in the manner of the growing, with slender trailing branches, and small long hoary, or grayish greene leaves, many set together at a joint, but that they are longer than they, some of them two inches long, especially those next the roote: the flowers here∣of stand not at the joints with the leaves, but at the toppes of the stalkes and branches, many clustering together which are very small and white on the inside, but of a brownish red colour on the outside, which after turne very small seede, and in a plentifull manner: the roote is small long, and white. 
9. Millegrana major sive Herniaria vulgaris. Rupturewort. The Rupturewort spreadeth very many threddy branches, round about upon the ground, about a spanne long, divided into many other smaller parts, full of small joints, set very thicke together, whereat come forth two ve∣rie small leaves, of a fresh yellowish greene colour, branches and all, where at grow forth likewise a number of exceeding small yellowish flowers, scarsely to be discerned from the stalkes and leaves, which turne into seede as small as the very dust: the roote is very long and small, thrusting downe deepe into the ground: this hath nei∣ther smell nor taste at the first, but afterwards it hath a little stiptive or astringent taste, without any manife heate, yet a little bitter and sharpe withall. 
10. Herniaria major Africana. The greater Rupturewort of Africa. This African kinde groweth greater, larger, and more upright than the last, and fuller of beanches, in other things little differing. 
11. Millegrana minima sive Herniaria minor. Rupturewort with longer leaves. This other kinde of Rupturewort, hath likewise small threddie 7. Polygonum Germanicum sive Knawell Ger∣manorum. Germane Knotgrasse or Knawell. 
9. Herniaria vulgaris. Rupturewort. 
10. Herniaria major Africana. The greater Rupturewort of Africa. 
stalkes, but with fewer joints, and long narrow leaves, somewhat rough or hairy set at them, fuller of branches towards the toppes, where the flowers and seede doe grow like unto the other, and in a plentifull manner also: the roote is small but not so long. Bauhinus maketh men∣tion in his Pinax of one which he calleth fruticosa with wooddie low stalkes, and some long leaves growing thicke thereon. Fruticosa. 
The Place. The first groweth both about Arles and Marseilles in France, and in Ʋalentia, Marcia, and Salamanca in Spaine, as Clusius and Pena doe record: the second in Naples as Columna saith: the third Clusius saith, groweth likewise about the Cattle of Ʋalentia in Spaine: the fourth both on the mountaines of Escuriall in Spaine, and in the barren grounds about Mompelier in France, as Bauhinus also saith: the fift in Candy, as Bauhinus saith, who had the seede from thence: the sixt upon the hills neare the sea in Provence of France, as Pena also saith: the seventh in the West countrie about Chipnam, if Lobel his figure be true; and in many places of Germany by the wayes sides; and so doth the eight likewise in drie sandy and rockie places: the ninth groweth in many places of our owne Land, as well as in others, in drie barren grounds, where it will be small, and in the moister places also, but not boggie or morish, that are not shadowed: the tenth in Africa neare Tunice where Guillame Boel gathered it: the last in the drie chalke or stony grounds of Kent, and other countries. 
The Time. They all are fresh and greene in the Summer, and unto the Winter, which causeth the most of them to wither and drie, and in the meane time they perfect their seede. 
The Names. The first is called of Lobel and Pena in their Adversaria Polygonum montanum minimum niveum, &amp; sericeum, of Clusius Paronychia Hispanica; of Lugdunensis Polygoni Hispanici genus Clusij: Tabermontanus and Gerard call it Polygonum montanum; and Bauhinus Polygonum minus candicans: the second Columna calleth Vermiculata montana nova; and Bauhinus Polygonum montanum Ʋermiculatae folijs: the third Clusius calleth Anthyllis Ʋalentina, because he saith Plaza and other the learned Phisitions of the Vniversitie of Ʋalentia in Spaine did so account and call it; which as he saith, although it might be a kind thereof, yet it could not be Dioscorides his fifth Anthyllis, because it hath upright stalkes, which this hath not; but all other Herbarists doe account it a kinde of small Knotgrasse, and so have I called it, although somewhat differing from him; Bauhinus maketh it an Anthyllis among his Anthyllides and a Polygonum also among these, calling it Polygonum gramineo folio majus erectum, which in my opinion is not fitting unto it, in that it neither groweth upright, nor hath such long leaves, that they should resemble grasse: the fourth Bauhinus in his Pinax, maketh to be both his ninth small Knotgrasse, calling it Polygonum minus ten i∣folium; and also his twelfth by the name of Polygonum minus lentifolium; and in both places referreth us to the fourth Polygonum described in his Prodromus, whereby he filleth up the number of sorts without reason: the fifth Bauhinus so calleth, as it is in the title: the sixt Lobel calleth Polygonum alterum pufillum vermiculata Serpill folio; and Lugdunensis, Polygonum alterum Serpilli folio; but Bauhinus Polygonum maritimum minus folio Serpilli: the seventh Tragus accounteth to be a kinde of Polygonum, which they of his countrie called Knawel; hee also thinketh it might be called Policarpon of the abundance of seede, and Polycnemon of the vertues. Lugdunensis also calleth it Polycarpon, and Dodonaeus in his Pemptades taketh it to be a Polygonum exignum. Gerard calleth it Pologonum Selinoides sive Knavel, wherein hee is deceived many wayes. First, in that he giveth the name Seli∣noides unto Knawel, when as his owne description and figure thereof might have plainely convinced that errour in him, in that Knawel hath not leaves like Selinum or Parsly: secondly, that he maketh Knawel and Parsly pert to be one, whereas they are two plants; then againe that he thinketh, that Saxifraga Anglicana of Lobel, which he saith he found about Chipnam in the West countrie to be Parsly pert, when as Lobel and Pena their description and figure doth contrary also that opinion, although their figure be somewhat like, as Gerard himselfe confesseth, which he calleth Selinoides: againe, that he thinketh the Parsly pert, that was shewed by a country Empericke, to Mr. Bredwell, was Knawel, which as it is likely Mr. Bredwell shewed him, and yet he could not discerne the face of the one herbe from the other; and lastly he findeth fault with the name Parsly pert, calling it a barbarous word, and would amend it with his owne fine Latine word Petra pungens, not understanding the true Etymo∣logie of the word being corrupted, as for the most part all unusuall or hard words are to the vulgar sort, for the uncorrupted word is Percepierre, a true French word, and signifieth the same that Lithontribon in Greeke, Saxi∣fraga in Latine, or Gerard his Petra pungens, if ye like it; Breakestone in English, of all which I shall speak more ful∣ly in the next Chapter: but I have here before given you my opinion of the Saxifraga Anglicana of Lobel, neither can I thinke the Knawel of Tragus to be it as many might imagine by the likenesse of their figures being compa∣red together; but surely it may be a kinde thereof: the forme and strong sweet smell, which Tragus saith it hath, inducing me in part so to thinke, but that the small greene flowers and seede in them be much differing from the Pincke like white flower in that: the eight, I call Polygonum alterum Germanicum, another Germane Knawel, be∣cause it is so like thereunto, and that Bauhinus saith, the Germane Knawel hath many varieties, whereof I thinke this to be one, and it is probable also, that both the Polygonum montanum niveum, and the Anthyllis Valentina may be a species thereof; Bauhinus himselfe calleth it Polygonum litoreum minus flosculis spadiceo albicantibus: the ninth is called Empetron by Tragus and Lonicerus, but not truely; Polygonum minus by Matthiolus and Castor Durantes that followeth him, Herba Cancri minor by Cordus in his Scholiastes, and Millegrana in his history of plants, Epi∣pactis by Anguillara, Herba Turca by Lobel and Caesalpinus, Herniaria multigrana Serpylli folio, by Pena in his Adversaria, and generally Herniaria, and so by Gesner in hortis Germania, and in libello de collectione stirpium, by Camerarius Dodonaeus, Thalius, Lugdunensis, Tabermontanus, and Gerard, and by Bauhinus Polygonum minus, se Millegrana major; the tenth we have imposed the name as it is in the title and most suting thereunto: the last is cal∣led Millegrana minima by Lobel in his Dutch Herball, and in his Icones stirpium, by Thalius Herniaria altera; and therefore I call it Herniaria minor, Bauhinus calleth it, Polygonum minimum, sive Millegrana minima. 
The Ʋertues. All or most of these sorts of Knotgrasse, doe participate with the former in the binding qualities, although not altogether so much in the cooling, some of them having a little bitternesse or sharpenesse in them, which decla∣reth some heate, and therefore hath not that abundant moisture, which Galen saith, is in the former, whereby as he saith, they have their cooling qualitie: they serve to provoke urine, and helpe to breake and expell the stone and gravell by urine, as the others doe, yet wee have not so evident testimony of the operations of the five first sorts, (howsoever the delicacie of forme in some of them doe argue in mans judgement some singular vertue, which yet doth not alwayes follow, for in many deformed, there is found much more helpe) as we have of the rest, which are these in particular; Tragus saith that Knawel hath the same properties that Knotgrasse hath, and may serve in the stead thereof to all purposes, as well inward as outward remedies, when the other is not at hand, and that it is very powerfull to breake the stone, being boyled in wine and drunke, which our owne peo∣ple doe averre also: the other Germane Knawel or Knotgrasse being of the same kinde, worketh the like effects. Rupture wort hath not his name in vaine, for it is found by daily experience in a number that have taken it, to helpe and cure the rupture, not onely in children, but in elder persons, so as it be not too old and inveterate; by taking either a dramme of the powder of the dried herbe, every day in wine for certaine dayes together, as the strength of the disease and age of the patient doe require; or the decoction made of the herbe in wine and drunke, or the juice or distilled water of the greene herbe taken in the same manner; and helpeth all other fluxes, either of men or women, vomitings also and the Gonorrhea, being taken any of those wayes aforesaid; it doth most assuredly helpe also those that have the strangurie, and have their urine stopped, or are troubled with the stone or gravell in their reines or bladder, causing them that take it to urine plentifully, and thereby to remove and wash downe, whatsoever sticketh or is offensive in the passages thereof: Vide Hollerium de morbis interniis, lib. 1. c 62. fol. 268. the same also helpeth much all stitches in the sides, all griping paines or torments in the stomacke or belly, caused by collericke or sharpe or salt humours; it helpeth the obstructions of the liver, and cureth the yellow jaundise likewise; it killeth also the wormes in children: being outwardly applied it conglutin th wounds very notably, and helpeth much to stay defluxions of rheume from the head to the eyes, nose or teeth, being bruised greene and bound thereto, or the decoction of the dried herbe, to bathe the forehead and temples, or the nape of the necke behinde, it doth also drie up the moisture of fistulous ulcers, or any others, that by the much accesse of sharpe humors are growne foule and spreading: the lesser Rupturewort is not much wanting, in all the faculties of the other. 
CHAP. XVI. Polygonum Solinoides. Parsly pert, or Parsly Breakestone. I Have as you see separated this kinde of Knotgrasse from all the other in the last Chapter, and not with∣out just reason as I take it, because the face and forme thereof, is so much differing from them, as the ensuing description will declare: the roote in very small and threddy, but abiding divers yeares in the naturall places, from whence come many leaves, spread upon the ground, each standing on a small long foote stalke, and being as broad as the naile of a mans finger or Sive Percepierre Anglorum Polygonum Selinoides. Parsly pert, or Parsly breakestone. 
humbe, is very much jagged on the edges, making it seeme somewhat like unto a Parslye leafe, whereof came the name, ut of an overworne or dusky greene colour: from among which riseth up weake and slender stalkes about three or foure ingers long, set full of the like leaves but smaller up to the oppes, that almost no part of the stalkes can be seene, and all or the most part standing close thereunto, few of them having ny footestalke at all, or very short: among these leaves come forth very small greenish yellow flowers, scarse to be dis∣cerned, where afterwards groweth the seede, as small as any of the former. 
The Place. This groweth naturally in most countries of this land, if it be observed by any that have skill, but especially in such bar∣ en and sandy grounds as doe not want moisture, for it joyeth much more in the wet places then in the dry, I found it upon Hampsteed Heath by the foote pathes, where being a dry ground, and in a dry time, it was very small, which else in moister time, and in a moister place upon the same Heath, was much greater, as also neare unto the meerestones by Lam∣beth, which divide the liberties of London from Surrey. 
The Time. It is to be found all times of the Sommer, Spring, and Har∣vest, even from Aprill unto the end of October, in severall pla∣ces, for in the open and Sunny places it will be withered, when in the shadowy and moist it will continue. 
The Names. This plant (being of long continuance in our land and know∣ledge to us, by the properties, for it hath not beene mentioned, by any the most curious searchers and writers of herbs beyond sea, as being onely peculiar I thinke to our Country, before Lobel came to us, who called it Percep er Anglorum and Lug∣dunensis from him) hath received no Latine name at all, and therefore I have transferred the name Polygonum Se∣linoides hereunto, as more proper unto it, then Gerards Knawell is unto it; for it may most fitly be reckoned a Poly∣gonum, by the manner of the growing, and the name Selinoides may most fitly agree unto it from the forme of the leaves, being derived from the Greeke word Selinon, for Knawel hath no likenesse with Selinum Parsly. In the former Chapter, I shewed you Gerard his errours herein, now let me shew you mine also (if peradventure I speake not per Antiphrasim ) concerning these names of Percepier or Perch pier, as some call it, and Parsly pert, or Parsly breakestone, as they are usually called in English; I shewed you before that the word Parsly pert, was but a cor∣ruption of time in the vulgar sort, and Percepier also, derived from the French word Percepierre, which as I said before, signifieth as much as Lithontribon in Greeke, Saxifraga, Petrifindula an old outworne word, and calculum frangens in Latine, pierce stone, or breakestone in English; some call it Parsly pert and derive it from petra: but the more proper English is Parsly breakestone. Now concerning this and Lobel his Saxifraga Anglicana, both of them are affirmed by Lobel to grow in the West Country, and both are used for one purpose, (yet Lobel see∣meth to referre the Percepier unto the Cerefolium, &amp; Scandix sive Pecten Veneris, or partaking of both of them, but most unproperly in my minde, which hath caused Bauhinus in his Pinax, following his opinion to make it a species of Cerefolium, calling it Chaerophyllo nonnihil similis planta, and Tabermontanus thereupon calleth it Scandix minor; and Columua was also much deceived in thinking this to be an Alchymilla, calling it minima montana. 
The Ʋertues. This herbe hath properly with the vulgar sort, both men and women leeches, who have had most practice of it, not found any other operation then to helpe to provoke urine, and breake the stone in those that are trou∣bled therewith, for which purposes it is most availeable; for they use to eate it familiarly as a Sallet herbe, and pickle it up as a Sampire to eate in winter, but is used also more Physically, either by it selfe or with other things, and either in powder or in juice, decoction or water distilled from it; whose severall wayes, that I may declare them a little more amply are these. Take of the juice of the herbe about three ounces, put this with so much white wine, as is fit to make a posset, take hereof every morning and evening a draught, or ye may adde hereto Wild Time, or Mother of Time, and some Camomill: You may also boyle these herbes aforesaid, in white wine, or in water if wine be not at hand, and drinke it when it is strayned in the same manner, the powder also of the dryed herbe, to the quantity of a dramme or lesse, in white wine, or in other drinke where wine is wanting, for divers dayes first and last, and the distilled water of the herbe taken with a little Sugar in the same manner, is found to be a singular remedy to provoke urine, when it is stopped wholly, or passeth away by drops with paine, or unsensibly without paine, expelleth store of gravell in those that breede it, and the stone also in the reines or kidneyes, in washing it downe by the aboundant passage of the urine, and helpeth also to expulse it out of the bladder, if it be not growne too great for the passages; otherwise it is held very probable, that the a∣boundance of urine brought downe into the bladder by the vertue of the medicine, and there abiding, worketh so much upon the stone, therein confirmed and growne great, that it wasteth it by degrees, avoyding it in gra∣vell with the urine. If you will have the receipt of the Country Empericke given to Mr. Bredwell, a Chirurgion of London, who practised physicke in London where he dwelt, as well as in all the Countries where he travelled, it is this. Take of the dryed herbes of Parsly pert, and Mouseare, Bayberties, Turmericke, and Cloves, the seeds of the Burre Docke, the seede in the heppe or Bryer berries, and the seedes of Fenugreeke of each one ounce; of the stone in an Oxes gall twenty foure graines weight; let all these beaten into fine powder and kept by you, in a dry box, or pot, to use upon occasion: whereof the quantity to be taken at a time, is from halfe a dramme to a dramme, as the age and necessity of the party, who is to take it shall require: but assuredly it would worke as effectually in other diseases, either inward or outward, as either the Knotgrasses, or Kn well, or Rupture-wort doe, if it were seriously applyed, for being alike in the temperature of the qualities, and wor∣king the same effects in some of the diseases, why not in many of the other, whereunto they are tryed to doe good: I may here deplore the carelesse course of many that are learned, who are content onely to sucke the hony that other Bees before them have gathered, but make none for others, whereas if they would be industrious, they might by their good judgement apply things to much better effect then the bold, blind bayards of our time, who dare to doe any thing, especially when under colour of giving Physicke to their pockie patients, they may passe without impunity, and without controll.
CHAP. XVII. Polygona. Baccifera. Berry bearing Knotgrasse. T Here remaineth of all the sorts of Knotgrasses, to speake of those that beare berries, some whereof are shrubby plants, whose berries are their fruite, bearing seede within them, whereby they are propagated: others are the excressences of the herbe, accidentall onely as I suppose to the soyle, that breedeth them, being not the naturall seede, whereof I entend to speake first, because it com∣meth neerest unto some of the former small Knotgrasses. 
1. Polygonum cocciferum Polonicum, The Polonian Scarlet Knotgrasse. The Scarlet Knotgrasse is as small a plant as the Knawell, or white mountaine Knotgrasse, spreading in the same manner with sundry small stalkes, full of joynts, whereat are set divers very small and long leaves, pointed, but not sharpe at the endes, which with the stalkes are of a grayish ashcolour, or more whitish, at the toppes of the stalkes stand a number of small white flowers, yet not so small as in the mountaine kinde of Knawell, but such as may be better descerned, comming forth of grayish greene huskes, wherein after they are past, groweth the seede, which is as small as dust, the roote is small and somewhat long, at the toppe whereof, and on the stalkes next thereunto groweth very small berries, lesser then those of the Ilex Goccigera, or Scarlet O ke, but of as orient a scarlet colour as they, and give as precious a dye as they doe, and but that it cannot be had in that quantity (every roote, yeelding but a few berries in comparison of the other) it would lessen the price, if not abate the use of the other; but howsoever it serveth that Country of Polonia, in some measure, to dye some of the cloathes that they weare. Aematus Lusitanus in his Commentaries upon Dioscorides, folio 623. saith that 1. Polygonum cocciferum Polonicum. Polonian Scarlet Knotgrasse. 
3. Polygonum bacciferum sive Vna matrina major. The greater Sea grape. 
these berries grow at the rootes of a kind of Saxifrage like unto Burnet or Burnet Saxifrage, as also at the rootes of Codsfoote, Pelletory of the Wall, and other herbes likewise, and that not onely in Poland but in Italy and o∣ther Countries. 
2. Ephedra sive Anabasis. Climing Knotgrasse or Sea Grape. This kinde of Sea Grape groweth in the warme Countries where it is naturall, into a thicke trunke or stemme as bigge as a mans arme at the bottome; from whence rise many very long branches, full of joynts like unto the other Sea grapes, climing up to the toppes of the highest plane 4. Vva marina minor. The lesser Sea Grape. 
trees, or others against which it groweth, otherwise if it stand neare unto a lower tree or shrubbe, it seldome riseth above their height, yet hath it no claspers to winde about any thing, nor doe the branches winde themselves, as the nature of Apocynum or Periploca Dogs bane doth; yet as the Ivy by sending forth rootes at the joynts, into the barke of the trees that groweth next thereunto, it thereby climeth unto the toppe of them: at these joynts grow no leaves for it is wholly destitute of them, but from them shoote forth divers other branches, and at the same joynts upwards, stand many small mossy flowers, of a pale or whitish yellow colour, somewhat like unto the blossomes of the male Cornell tree, which afterwards turne into small red berries when they are ripe, like unto small Mulberries, full of juice, of a sowre taste, wherein lye small yellow seede like Mil∣let, the roote spreadeth divers wayes under ground, being hard and wooddy. 
3. Polygonum bacciferum sive Ʋva marina major. The greater Sea Grape. This greater Sea Grape is so like unto the former, except in the long and climing branches, that it is verily thought of divers to be but the same, not growing neare any shrubbe or tree to cause it to ascend as the other doth, and as it is said before that the same kinde useth to doe, by the report of Bellonius, in his third booke of Observations, and the 41. Chapter, for this also hath a stubbed stocke, from whence rise many slender branches about a foote long, set with joynts like unto an Horsetayle-grasse, up to the toppes, which doe a little bow or hang downe againe, al∣together without leaves, and with many mossy pale flowers, but Anguilara saith reddish set together at the joynts, which afterwards turne into small red berries like Raspis, of a sowrish taste as the other doth, wherein lie the like yellowish seede: the roote is likewise hard and wooddy. 
4. Polygonum bacciferum minus, sive Ʋva marina minor. The lesser Sea Grape. The smaller Sea Grape riseth up immediately from the roote, with many slender weake, reddish, rush like stalkes, sixe or seaven foote long sometimes, lying for the most part upon the ground, wooddy at the bottome of them, with the like joynts and branches issuing from them, as in the former, and without any leaves at them also; the flowers are many and pale also, and mossy like them, but standing upon somewhat longer footestalkes, and the red berries are likewise like unto Raspis or Mulberries, of a sowrish taste, wherein is contained a small blackish three square seede or two, like unto the former: the stalkes and branches are no lesse astringent in taste then the last, the roote is smaller, and sendeth forth divers suckers, which creeping under ground spreade farre. 
The Place. The first groweth in many dry, barren, and sandy grounds, in Polonia. The second Bellonius in his third booke and 41. Chapter of his Observation, saith groweth in the valleies or lower plaine grounds, at the foote of the mountaine Olympus, and in Illyricum betweene Eastello novo, and the old Epidourus. The third Clusius saith he found onely in Spaine, in the Kingdome of Murcia, by the Sea side, and no where else. The fourth Lobel saith groweth not onely neare the Sea side, about Cape de Sete, Per aul and Magulona not farre from Mompelier, but at Rochell, also about the Sea side, and in other places, but Clusius saith, he found it not farre from Salamanca, which is the heart of Spaine in great plenty upon a small hill, whereof he wondreth much, not having found it or hearing of any other to have found it, in any other places then the Sea coasts. Anguillara saith in Dalmatia, a∣bout the river Sabenicus. 
The Time. These flower late, and ripen their fruite in the naturall places seldome before October, and never in these colder climates, as hath beene often prooved true: yea the rootes will hardly without especiall care and keeping, be preserved in the Winter with us. 
The Names. The first is mentioned of Camerarius, by the name of Polygonum coeciferum Polonicum in his Epitome of Matthi∣olus, and as I said before by Aema Lusetanus, yet as not growing on Polygonum but other herbes. The second is recorded by Bellonius in his third booke and 41. Chapter, fol. 197. by the name of Ephedra, that was full of red seede like unto Androsace, by Dodonaeus, under the name of Ephedra sive Anabasis, as also by Rauwolfius. Pliny calleth it Caucon sive Ephedra. Bauhinus calleth it Polygonum bacciferum scandens. The third is called by Clusius Polygonum quartum Plinij majus, and saith the Spaniards call it Belcho: by Tabermontanus Polygonum minimum sive cocciferum primum: by Bauhinus Polygonum bacciferum maritimum majus, sive Ʋva maritima major. The fourth is called by Clusius Polygonum, quartum Plinij minus who thinketh it to be the Androface of Bello ius but I thinke Bellonius rather meant the greater sorts, by Lobel Ʋva marina Monspelieufium, and contesteth with Matthiolus; (why this should not be Tragon or Traganon of Dioscorides, (as they of Mempelier formerly called it, and afterwards Androsace as Bellonius did) in that he made Theophrastus his Scorpio to be Trago ; by Ruellius Tragos, by Lugdunensis Tragus, sive Scorpius maritimus Dalechampij, yet in another place he calleth it Equisetum quar∣tum, as Pena doth Equiseti facis nacem sa planta; by Anguillara it is thought to be Croton of Nicander, by Camera∣rius Tragum and Ʋva marina, by Gesner in hortis Germania Tragium, by Tabermontanus Polygonum marinum secun∣dum, and by Bauhinus Polygonum hacciferum maritimum minus. Lugdunensis taketh it to be Osteocollum Hieroclis &amp; Absirti. The French call it Raysius de mer, from whence came the name of Vva marina. 
The Vertues. The Polonians with whom the first groweth, doe use the herbe in the same manner that the Germans doe their Knawel, that is to expell urine and to breake the stone: the second is not knowne, whether the people where it groweth doe use it as the two last sorts are, which may well perswade us, is of the same operation, being so like in the outward face and forme; for the Sea-grapes are both of one qualitie, and serve for the same diseases that the Knotgrasses are used by the Spaniards where they grow, as Clusius saith, but especially to cure the ulcers of the privy parts in men or women: they are also very effectuall to provoke urine plentfully, and are exceeding astringent and drying, so that they powerfully stay all fluxes of the belly, or of womens courses, restraine vomi∣tings of the stomacke, and the defluxions of thinne rheume from the head: they are also very consolidative to soder together the lippes of greene wounds, or to knit broken bones, and to settle and strengthen those that have beene out of joint: it is held to be so powerfull to knit dissevered parts, that being boyled with peeces of flesh, or with other things, it will cause them to be so glued or sodered together, that one cannot pull them in sunder againe; in all sorts of ruptures also, it is most effectuall. 
CHAP. XVIII. Cassia Poetica Monspeliensium. The red berried Shrubbe Cassia. I Have been bold to insert this plant in this place, because some have made it a kind of Polygonum, and although we cannot find it to be a Saxifrage or breakestone, yet it hath the other drying &amp; astringent qualities of Polygonum. This shrubbe riseth up to the height of two foote or there abouts, spreading many slender twiggie greene branches, whereon grow small long leaves like unto Line or Flaxe, or somewhat resembling those of Lavander, but thinnely set all along upon the branches; the flowers are mossie or threddy, and of a pale yellowish gerene Cassia poetica Monspellensium. The red berried shrubbe Cassia. 
coluor like unto those of the Olive tree, or of the Male Cor∣nell tree; where afterwards come small round berries, greene at the first, but red as Corrall, or like the berries of Aspara∣gus when they are ripe, of an astringent glutinous taste, with some sharpenesse joyned therewhith, wherein is contained an hard stone, having a white sweete kernell within it: the roote is hard and wooddy. 
The Place. It groweth by the high wayes, in many places of Spaine, both in the countries of Granado and Ʋalentia, and Sivill, as also in divers places of Provence in France, about the hedges and bordres of the Olive yeards: by the bankes also of the river Lanus, and about the village Peraul, not farre from Mompelier, as also in a small Wood or Coppise neare unto the Priory of Egremont, neere there adjoyning. 
The Time. It flowreth about Iune and Iuly, and the berries ripen not untill September. 
The Names. Clusius saith that it was accounted for Osyris of Pliny, while he lived at Mompelier, whereunto hee saith, it doth agree in many things, but afterward they called it Cassia, but by what reason or cause it is not knowne, for it neither agreeth with that Casia of Dioscorides and Galen, which is like Cinamon, and is of a spicie taste, called in Apothecaries shoppes Cassia lignea, whereas this is nothing so: nor can it be the Cneoron of Theophrastus, which as Pliny saith Hyginus called Cassia neither is it the sweete smelling Cassia of Ʋir∣gil, whereof he speaketh both in his Bucolicks and Geargicks; yet as I said they of Mompelier did call it Casia; and Lobel Casia Poetica Monspeliensium: Clusius calleth it Casia quo∣rundum, and saith that Placa a Phisition and professor in Ʋa∣lentia, called it Polygonum Plinij; and so doth Dalechampius upon Pliny call it Polygonum 4. Plinij: Lugdunensis calleth it Casia lignea maritima: Caesalpinus Casia lignea, and Genista rubra, because the stalkes and the leaves will sometimes grow red towards the end of Summer: and Bauhinus Osyris frutescens baccifera, numbring it among the Linarias, because of the leaves; and that he would make it to be the Osyris of Pliny, lib. 27. cap. 12. as they of Mompelier at the first did, which hee there saith, hath small gentle or pliant branches, with blacke leaves thereon like Lin, and a seede blacke at the first, and becomming red after∣ward, and citing Galen in his eigh Booke of Simples, that saith, of Osyris is made for women, which some interpret Smegmata, but Pliny saith Scopas, alij : but in my mind Pliny hath not true∣ly, related the words of Dioscorides and Galen, who both say that the leaves of Osyris are first black and then red, which he inverteth to the berries, which make a great alteration of sense; and Bauhinus, to make this pliant his Osyris, taketh him thus corrupted, which yet is not found, that the berries should be blacke before they be red. 
The Ʋertues. We have little recorded of any especiall cure this hath performed, or that it is applied to those that are sicke of any disease; for although all doe agree that it is of a drying, glutinous and astringent taste, and might no doubt be effectuall for laskes and fluxes of bloud and humours in men and women, and to performe whatsoe∣ver the astringent and drying propertie might, as in Polygonum promise to performe, yet there is nothing deter∣mined, and therefore I dare not play the Phisition to invent new receipts, for the cure of old diseases: it is suffi∣cient to declare the temperature and what others have used or approinted, when I have no new thing to shew. 
CHAP. XIX. 1. Asperula repens Gesneri, sive Saxifraga altera Caesalpini. Breakestone Woodroofe. T His small plant which is accounted a kinde of Saxifrage in some places of Italy, resembling in the outward face and forme Rubia minor, Asperula, Gallium, and such other like herbes, doth cause me to joyne it with them, as being a congener of one tribe and family; how therefore to know this plant is in this manner. It spreadeth upon the ground for the most part (and yet in some places standeth more upright) divers small tender stalkes, separated into other smaller branches, of about a foote high, full of joynts, at which come forth three, foure, or more sometimes, small and narrow smooth leaves: the flowers stand at the toppes of the branches, many set to∣gether 3. Iuncaria Sa maticeusis. Small stone Woodroofe of Spaine. 
in a tuft, which are long small and reddish, and after they are past, groweth, rough, crooked seede, which is small and blackish; the roote is small and threddie, and brownish on the outside.
2. Rubia Cynanchica saxatilis. Stone Woodroofe. This other small Woodroofe, is very like unto the for∣mer, but that it is smaller and lower, not past an hand breadth high, and the leaves much smaller, the flowers also of a pale red colour, many tufting together, and eve∣ry one standing upon a short foote stalke: the seedes and rootes are like the other. 
3. Iuncaria Salmaticensis. Small stone Woodroofe of Spaine. This small plant is likewise very like unto the first, growing more upright with square, rough rushlike branches, spreading forth into many small sprayes, al∣most like unto an Horsetaile grasse full of joints, with two leaves and sometimes with more at a joint, some∣what long &amp; narrow like unto Line or Flaxe, but rough: at the toppes of the branches come forth many small white flowers set in spikes, and foure or five standing upon a short foote stalke together, which stand in rough huskes, wherein commeth the seede, which is blacke and small; the roote is white and threddy like the other. 
The Place. The first groweth in shady Woods in many places of Italy, and Germany; the second about Ʋalentia in Daul∣phine in France: the last about Salamanca in Spaine as Clusius saith; but I found it on the right hand of Bradford bridge at the lower end of Grayes Iu L by London, neare the water course that passeth along thereby. 
The Time. They doe all flower and seede in the end of Som∣mer. 
The Names. The first is called by Gesner in libello de collectione stir∣pium Asperula herha repens, and is the second Saxifrage of Caesalpinus; Bauhinus referreth it to the Sy chyca of Ludgunensis, and to the Gallium montanum latifolium cruciatum of Columna, and calleth it himselfe Rubia Cynan∣chica: the second he setteth forth in his Prodromus, under the title I have here expressed it; the last is called by Clusius Inucaria Salma icensis, and Synanchicae species of Lugdunensis, by Tabermont Inucaria, but by Bauhinus Rubia linifolia aspera. 
The Vertues. The Italians as I said in divers places of their countrie doe use the first kinde to helpe those that are troubled with the stone or gravell in their kidneyes, by provoking urine, which washing or puffing by the uritories, car∣rieth with it small gravell, and fretting the stone into gravell, sendeth it forth with the urine: it conferreth like∣wise much helpe to those that are troubled with the Quinsie, which is an inflammation of the kernells of the throat, which by the extreme paine thereof is ready to stoppe the breath, and doth sometimes suddenly happen so indeede: it is a disease that Dogges and Wolves, are much subject into, for it is derived from the Greeke word laqueus, in that we usually hang up such Dogges that are troubled therewith, or else that the disease is as a gibbet to hang them; or from the Greeke word , quod spiritum continendo respirationem inhibeat: Of the other two sorts, there is not any that hath mentioned any use they are put to in Physicke, or other∣wise. 
CHAP. XX. Asparagus. Asperagus or Sperage. I Have in my former Booke set forth those sorts of garden Sperage or Asparagus, whose young buds are most usually eaten with us, as a sallet herbe of great esteeme, whereof I shall not neede to make any repetition, but proceede and shew you the rest of that kinde, whereof there are three or foure sorts more. 
2. Asparagus marinus crassiore folio. Sea or wild Asparagus with thicker leaves. This kinde of sea or wild Asparagus riseth up with many, but shorter stalkes then the garden kindes doe, stron∣ger also and thicker, branching forth in the same manner, and having such like winged leaves, but shorter, thicker, harder, and of a blewish greene colour; the blossomes are like the other, and so are the berries or seede that follow, but greater than they, and not of so fresh a red colour: the roote spreadeth in the ground. 
3. Asparagus sylvestris folijs acutis. Wilde Asparagus with sharpe leaves. This Asparagus with sharpe leaves, riseth up from a head of rootes, whose strings are thicker and shorter than any of the former kindes, with three or foure stalkes, which are shorter, stronger and whither then the other, diversly spread and branched into many wings, whereon are set at severall distances, many small, short, hard and sharpe pointed leaves, five or sixe standing at a joint together: at these joints likewise with the leaves come forth the flowers, many set upon a long stalke, which are yellow, consisting of sixe leaves apeece, smelling as sweete as a March Violet; after which come small berries, greene at the first, and of a blackish ash colour when they are ripe, wherein is contained a hard blacke seede. 
4. Asparagus petraeus sive Corruda a uleata. Prickly rocke Asparagus. This kinde of thorny Asparagus, that groweth in stony and rockie places, hath very thicke and short rootes or strings, many jointed together at the head, from whence rise sundry branched greene stalkes, having three or foure sharpe greene thornes, more likely than leaves, they are so hard, small, long, and sharpe pointed, set to∣gether all along the stalkes and branches; whereat come forth, small mossie yellowish greene flowers, and after them store of berries, greater than in the former, and of a blackish greene colour, when they are ripe, full of a greenish pulpe, wherein lieth usually but one blacke hard seede, or at the most two, having a white kernell within it. 
2. 3. Asparagus marinus crassis, &amp; folijs acutis. Asparagus with thicke, and with prickly leaves. 
4 Asparagus petraeus sive corruda aculeata. Prickly rocke Asparagus. 
 
5. Asparagus spinosus, sive Corruda spinis horrida. Asparagus with cruell sharpe thornes. This thorny Asparagus shooteth out from such a short, thicke, stringy roote as the last, but yellowish on the outside, two or three white crooked or bended stalkes, 5. Asparagus spinosus sive Corruda spinis horrida. Asparagus with cruell sharpe thornes. 
branched forth on every side, and at every joynt there, where the branches are bending and divided, and whereof the leaves are set also, standeth a most cruell sharpe thorne, growing downeward, and together with the thorne upon the younger branches, stand five or sixe small long, narrow and soft leaves, clustering together, which are of a sweetish clammie or gummie taste: at the joints likewise with the leaves, come forth the flowers, of a yellowish greene colour, each of them standing upon a long and slender foote stalke, hanging downeward: af∣ter which come in their places large roundish berries, red when they are ripe, seeming to be three square, full of a tough or clammie juyce, containing with it one blacke graine or seede, and seldome two. 
The Place. This first kinde by transplanting is thought to become the garden kinde, and groweth in many low medowes that are nere the sea, as also in many other places further of, the coasts as I doe heare; for it is thought that it is this kinde that groweth in the Marshes of Tidnam, neare Chip∣stoll, and in Apleton medow in Glostershire, which is about two miles from Bristow, from whence the poore people doe gather the buddes or young shootes, and sell them in the markets of Bristow, much cheaper then our garden kinde is sold at London: the second groweth in stony and rockie places, neare unto Salamanca in Spaine, and not one∣ly under the hedges, but in the very fields also in Castile and Gaenado, and about Narbone and Mompelier in France, and in Candy also: the third groweth both by hedges side, and in many stony and ragged places, both in Spaine and Portu∣gall, and in Candy also as Bellonius saith: the last groweth also in rough uneven places, very plentifull about Lishborne, in the common wayes, and by the river Tagus, and in ma∣ny other places, both in Spaine and Portugall, and in Candy likewise; but it will hardly endure our cold climate. 
The Time. They doe for the most part all flower, and beare their berries late in the yeare, and scarse at all with us, although they be housed in Winter. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and , Asparagus and Aspharagus. Varro saith, quia ex asperis virgul∣tis ligetur; Pompeius Grammaticus, quod in aspera virgulta nascitur; but as Galen saith the first budding of any herbe that was used to be eaten, after it was sprung from the seede, was called A sparagus, as in Cabbage, Lettice, and the like buddes, or shootes of herbes; but in speciall, and as most deserving this hath kept the name peculiar to it selfe. It is called also in Latine Corruda, quod ubi adolevit facile corruat decidat{que}. Pliny saith the Athenians called it Horminion, , quod est ruo, say some, but others thinke it to be derived , nam &amp; deco∣ctum &amp; semen Veneris causa bibitur: the Arabians call it Halion or Helion, the Italians Asparago; the Spaniards Aspa∣ragos; the French Asparge; the Germans Spargen; the Dutch Corallcraut, in English Sperage or Asparagus: the first sort is to be understood of that kind which is set forth in my former Book: the second is called by Matthiolus, Anguilara, and Tabermontanus, Asparagus palustris; by Lobel and Pena in their Adversaria, Asparagus mariti∣mus Dioscoridis, by Clusius and Camerarius, Asparagus marinus, and by Bauhinus Asparagus maritimus crassiore fo∣lio: the third is generally thought to be the Asparagus petraeus of Dioscorides and Galen, which he saith is also called Myacanthus, in his sixth Booke of Simples or simple medicines, and of Pliny Corruda, or sylvestris Aspara∣gus. Theophrastus in his sixth Booke and first Chapter, saith that Asparagus (without giving it any another Epi∣thite, which it must be understood of this kinde) and Scorpio are nothing but thornes, for they have no leaves, Matthiolus and Tabermontanus call it Asparagus petraeus, and Corruda; Gesner, Dodonaeus, Camerarius, and others, call it Asparagus sylvestris; Clusius Corruda prior. Cordus, Lobel, Lugdunensis and others Corruda, and Bauhinus as I doe, Asparagus folijs acutis: the fourth is called by Clusius Corruda altera, by Lobel Corruda Hispa∣nica; and so doe Lugdunensis and Tabermontanus, by Dodonaeus Asparagus sylvestris; and by Bauhinus Asparagus aculeatus alter tribus, ant quatuor spinis ad eundem exortum: the last is called by Clusius, Corrudatertia: Bellonius in his first Book of Observations, and 18. Chapter, saith, that they of Creete, called it Polytricha; by Dodonaeus Aspara∣gus sylvestris tertius; Lobel and Lugdunensis call it as Clusius doth, Corruda tertia, and Bauhinus aculeatus spinis horridus. 
The Vertues. The young buds or shootes or branches of any of these sorts of Asparagus boyled, are more powerfull in Phy∣sicke to helpe diseased persons then the Garden kinde: the buddes or branches boyled in ones ordinary broth helpeth to open the belly, and to make it soluble, and either they or the rootes boyled in wine, provoke urine being stopped: and is good also against the hardnesse or difficulty to make water, or the Strangury when it commeth by drops, and to expell gravell and the stone out of the kidneyes, and helpeth also other paines in the reines and backe; it is very good to be given to such as are troubled with the jaundise, and taken in wine, hel∣peth those that are bitten by the Phalangium, or great poysonous spider, and other Serpents; being boyled in wine or vinegar, it is good for those that have their arteries loosened, and are troubled with the hippe-gout, or Sciatica: the rootes boyled in wine and taken, are said to helpe the frensy, and the falling sicknesse, and to ease the paines of the mother in women; the decoction thereof likewise is good to cleare the fight that is dimme and misty, and being held in the mouth warme, easeth the tooth-ache; the same also healeth the paines of the breast, stomacke, and bowels, and taken every morning fasting for certaine daies together; stirreth up bodily lust in man or woman, although some have written the contrary, that it hindereth conception and causeth barrennesse, Chrysippus saith that three scruples of the seed of Asparagus, Smallage and Cummin, being given in three or foure ounces of wine, for five dayes continually, to them that make a bloody water, it will helpe them; and he saith also that it is not good for any that hath a dropsie to take thereof, but rather is an enemy and will doe them harme, although it be powerfull to provoke urine. Avicen saith, that it causeth the body to have a sweete savour, to take the buds as meate, but it doth render the urine stincking: it dissolveth the wind in the stomacke, liver, and guts, and the paines of the chollicke, which rise of pituitous and thicke flegmaticke hu∣mours: the Garden Asparagus nourisheth more then the wilde kindes, yet hath it also his effects, both in the urine, reines and bladder, in opening the body gently, and many other the forenamed diseases, but this incon∣venience happeneth by all medicines that strongly provoke urine, if they be too frequently used, they doe ex∣ulcerate the bladder: many doe use the seede of Asparagus, for all the purposes before written, and hold them as effectuall as the rootes; the decoction of the rootes or seede made in wine, and the backe and belly bathed therewith, or to sit therein as in a bath, but kneeling or lying low that they may sit the deeper therein, hath beene found to be effectuall against the paines of the reines kidneys and bladder, the paines of the mother and of the chollicke, and generally all those paines and torments that happen to the lower members of the body, it is no lesse effectuall also against stiffe and benummed sinewes, or those that are shrunke by crampes, or convulsions, and the paines of the hippes called Sciatica; it is said that whosoever shall moisten their hands, face, necke, or any other part of the skinne, with the decoction or juice of Asparagus, there shall no Bee, Waspe, Hornet, or other such like flye sting them. Dioscorides saith, that divers did affirme in his time, that if the decoction of it be given to a dogge to drinke it will kill him, divers fabulous things have beene obtruded for truth, in the writings of the ancient, and the moderne writers also, if they either follow the traditions of their elders, with∣out consideration of the probability, or examination of the verity, or else are led by vulgar reports, whereof this is one in the text of Dioscorides, which himselfe holdeth to be false, and untrue, because it is so unlike in reason and nature that if Rammes horne be beaten or bruised, and buried in the ground, from thence shall rise Asparagus; some have affirmed also, that if you sow the seede of Asparagus in canes stucke in the ground, they will grow the sweeter and more pleasant in taste, because they say the Asparagus, and the Cane or Reede, have a great simpathy one unto another, which how true or likely it is, I leave to every one to beleeve as they list; but the practise of many Gardiners that nurse Asparagus for their profit, is to have canes out of severall lengths, some shorter some longer; which they sticke over the heads or shootes of the Asparagus, whereby they say the buds are made the tenderer, and more delicate to be eaten; which peradventure may be likely in some part, as all other sallet herbes that are whited by covering them, or keeping them from the ayre, and are thereby caused to be the tenderer, onely by concocting the superfluous moisture in them, but I cannot beleeve that it commeth from any vertue or simpathy of the cane thereunto; if this be not true and probable, let others bring more pro∣bability, and I will yeeld unto it. 
CHAP. XXI. Linaria. Tode Flaxe, or Flaxeweede. O F the Linaria or Todeflaxe, there are many sorts, some whereof (that is the most beautifull) I have set forth in my former booke, which are these. Linaria purpurea five caerulea, Purple or blew Todeflaxe. Linaria purpurea odorata. Sweete purple Todeflaxe. Linaria Valentina. Todeflaxe of Valentia. And Linaria magna sive Scoparia Belvidere dicta Italorum. Broome Todeflaxe, which I shall not neede againe to describe here, but of the rest not there expressed. And because of the great variety I would use this method in setting them forth, first to place those that grow upright, and have broa∣der leaves, then next, those that have narrower leaves, and yet grow upright, and lastly of the smallest kinds, that creepe upon the ground.
4. Centaurium major luteum. The great yellow Centory. 
 
4. Centaurium majus Luteum. The great yellow Centory. This yellow Centory sendeth forth many more, both larger and longer leaves from the roote then the former, some of the lowest having fewer divisions in them then others; but those that grow upon the stalk, as wel as some of the other below, are very much divided into many parts, making every winged leafe to consist of a dozen or sixteene leaves, the ribbe in the middle betweene them being whitish, each for the most part set against ano∣ther, with an odde one at the end, and every of them being narrow and long, without any dents on the edges, and of a whitish greene colour; the stalkes are many, strong and round, somewhat straked downe the length of them, each divided into some other branches, which beare somewhat greater scaly heads then any of the other and larger spread thrumbs or threds, of a fine lively pale yellow colour, which abide in their beauty a long time without decaying, but seldome giveth seede in this Country, because as I thinke the scaly heads are so full of moisture, that it hindereth seede to grow ripe therein; for if they be but a little pressed betweene the fingers, there will issue forth on all sides, small cleare drops of water, as sweete as Sugar almost, and that not onely at noone dayes as Bauhinus saith, but at any time of the day, and not for once onely and no more, but oftentimes; yea every day if ye will, it will yeeld still some, as long as the flowers are fresh, and not quite withered, but when it doth perfect his seede, it is somewhat like the last great Centory, yet lessen, blacker, and more shining: the roote groweth in time, to be greater then either of the other, having many heads, that shoote forth in the Spring, the old leaves dying downe to the ground every yeare, which is wrinkled and blacke on the outside, and yellowish within, full of a slimy moisture in them, running downe deepe into the ground with some greater branches, and but a few small fibres. 
The Place. All these sorts grow upon mountaines, the first and third upon the Alpes and Mount Baldus; the second on the Pyrenean hils; Clusius saith, he found the third upon some stony hils, beyond Lisborne in Portugall, neare the river Tagus, and the last there likewise and on Mount Baldus as Pona saith. 
The Time. They doe all flower about the end of Iune, and in Iuly, yet the Portingall kinde doth least endure our cold aire, seldome shewing forth his flower, nor yet abiding unlesse well preserved. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Centaurium magnum, and as Pliny saith, tooke the name from Chiron the Centaure, who was healed herewith of the hurt he received in his foote, by one of Hercules his arrowes that fell from his owne hand thereon, in overlooking them, when hee received Hercules as his guest, and there∣fore of some was called Chironium. The first is called of all writers Centaurium magnum or majus, and vulgare of some, as a difference from the others. It hath beene in the former ages of the world (yet long since Galen his time, for many yeares, and yet continueth in many parts) called Rhaponticum, and used in the stead there∣of in all those medicines, that the ancients appoint Rhaponticum to be put, which is an errour growne so old by custome, that many obstinately persist therein, because they have received it from their elders, but learning and diligence in reading and scanning the writings of the ancient authors, hath not onely discussed this opinion, but many others also; for as I have shewed before in the second Classis, in the Chapter of Rubarbe, Dioscorides saith that the Rhaponticum is a roote like unto the roote of the great Centory; ho then can it be the same, when it is but like it, and although the roote of this Centory be yellowish, which encreased their error, yet will it not colour the spittle like unto Saffron. Brasavolus in his time, did thinke that those rootes called Rhaponticum in the Apothecaries shops, were not the rootes of this great Centory; whom Matthi contradicteth, shewing them to be the same. Some also as Matthiolus saith, did in his time take the Lysimachia purpurea, to be Cen∣taurim magnum. The Arabians, Mesues, Avicen, and Serapio, have much confounded the Centories, both the greater and the lesser together, giving both the face and qualities of the one unto the other, and Pliny also in his 25. Booke, and 6. Chapter runneth into the same error with them, who although be agreeth with Dioscorides in the description of it, yet saith it hath a certaine bitternesse in it, which is not found in this greater but the lesser kinde. The second is called by Cornutus among his Canada plants, Centauri folijs Cynarae: Pona saith in the description of the plants growing upon Mount Baldus, that the third kind was called of divers there about Rheu Baldensis, and Clusius saith, the Portugals where he found it, called it Rapontis. Bauhinus saith, that the last he received from out of the garden at Padoa, by the name of Rhaponticum Lusitanicum. 
The Ʋertues. The roote of the great Centory saith Matthiolus being steeped in wine, or the powder thereof given in wines is with great good successe and profit, used for those that are fallen into a dropsie, or have the jaundise, or are troubled with the obstructions of the liver: two drammes of the rootes beaten to powder, and taken in wine or in water, helpeth those that spit blood, or that bleede much at the mouth, if they have an ague to take it in water, or else in wine, it is likewise used for ruptures, cramps, and pleurisies, and for those that have an old or long continued cough, and for those that are short winded, or can ha dly draw their breath: it is good also to ease the griping paines in the belly, and those of the mother: being scraped and put up as a p ssary into the mother, it procureth womens courses, and causeth the dead birth to be avoided; the juice thereof used in the same manner, worketh the same effect: some copies of Dioscorides have this, it is called Panacea, because it helpeth all diseases and sores, where there is inflammation or bruises causing it; it helpeth the Strangury or pissing by droppes, if it be injected, as also the stone: the decoction or juice of the roote, or a dramme in powder thereof drunke, and the wound washed therewith, taketh away all the paine and danger of the bitings or stingings of venemous creatures; it helpeth to sharpen the eyesight, if it be steeped in water and dropped into them. Galen in 7. simp. sheweth that it hath contrary qualities in it, and therefore worketh contrary effects, the sharpe taste shewing an hot quality, whereby it provoketh womens courses, &amp;c. and the astringent a cold grosse earthly quality, glueing or sodering the lippes of wounds, and staying the spitting of blood; and by all the qualities joyned together, helpeth ruptures, crampes, and the diseases of the Lungs: the sharpenesse procu∣ring evacuation, and the astriction, the strengthning of the parts: the whole plant as well herbe, as roote, is very availeable in all sorts of wounds, or ulcers, to dry, soder, clense, and heale them, and therefore is a prin∣cipall ingredient, or should be in all vulnerary drinkes and injections. 
CHAP. II. Iacea. Knapweede. T Here are a very great many of herbes that beare the name of Iacea, which I must to avoide confu∣sion distribute into severall orders; that so the memory being not confounded, with a promiscuous multitude, each may be the better understood in their severall ranckes. 
Iaceae non Laciniatae, Knapweedes with whole leaves. Ordo primus. The first ranke or order. 1. Iacea nigra vulgaris. Our common Matfellon or Knapweede. THe common Knapweede hath many long and somewhat broad darke greene leaves, rising from the roote somewhat deepely dented about the edges, and sometimes a little rent or torne on both sides, in two or three places, and somewhat hairy withall, among which riseth up a strong round stalke, foure or five foote high, divided into many small branches; at the toppes whereof stand great scaly greene heads, and from the middle of them thrust forth, a number of darke purplish red thrums or threds (and sometimes white but very rarely) which after they are withered and past, there is found divers blacke seede, lying in a great deale of downe, somewhat like unto Thistle seed, but smaller, the roote is white, hard and wooddy, with divers fibres annexed thereunto, which perisheth not but abideth with leaves thereon all the Winter, and shooting out fresh every Spring. 
2. Iacea nigra angustifolia. Narrow leafed Knapweede. This Knapweede hath a round rough greene stalke, about a foote and a halfe high, whereon are set on each side, narrow rough, short and somewhat hoary greene leaves, compassing it at the bottome, and divided into some other branches above, on each whereof standeth a scaly whitish greene head, out of the middle whereof rise many small long threds, like unto the former, but smaller, and of a pale reddish colour; after which fol∣loweth small blacke seede like the other: the roote is blackish and parted into many small fibres. Of this sort also there is one, whose stalke and leaves are longer, smooth, and all hoary soft and woolly. 
3. Iacea nigra humilis. The smaller dwarfe Knapweede. This low Knapweede hath small weake and round hoary stalkes, about a foote high, bending to the ground 1. Iacea nigra vulgaris. The common wild Knapweede. 
6. Iacea Austriaca latifolia villoso capite. The greater hairy headed Knapweede. 
with leaves thereon, of an inch in breadth, and two in length, not divided or dented about the edges at all, but being a little rough and hoary, as it were thereabouts, compassing the stalkes at the bottome; at the toppes whereof stand such like scaly heads, as in the others, with purplish threds or thrummes rising thereout, as in the rest. 
4. Iacea montana Austriaca major. The greater mountaine Hungarian Knapweede. This greater mountaine Knapweede, is very like unto the former common wilde kinde, being somewhat broad and long, dented about the edges, and rough and hairy also, and of a darke greene colour, but those that grow upon the straked stalkes, are still up higher smaller, and more cut in on the edges: the heads that stand at the toppes of the stalkes, are not rough or hairy, but smooth and scaly, crackling if they be lightly touched, brow∣nish upward and whitish lower: the flowers consist of many purple whitish leaves, cut in the ends into five slits or divisions, like as those of the Cyanus, with many purplish long threds in the middle, and a purple stile in the middle of them, besprinkled at the head, with a mealely whitenesse: the seede that followeth is like unto the other, but somewhat larger: the roote also is blackish and stringy like the former, and abideth as the rest doe. 
5. Iacea montana Austriaca minor. The lesser mountaine Hungarian Knapweede. The lesser Hungarian kinde is in most things like the last, but that it groweth lower, and the leaves and stalkes are nothing so hairy and rough, but smooth and hoary; the flowers also are of a paler purple colour, and the seede is not blacke, but of a whitish gray or ash colour. 
6 Iacea Austriaca latifolia villoso capite. The greater hairy headed Knapweepe. This greater hairy headed Knapweede, hath many long and broad leaves, larger than any of the former, softer and whiter also, somewhat, but not much dented about the edges, of a certaine clammy or gummy taste. Io. Thalius saith it hath both sharpenesse in taste, and tenuitie of parts, so that he maketh it hot and drie in the second degree, not without much bitternesse; from among which rise up divers cornered or straked stalkes, about two foote high, branched forth at the toppes, whereon stand usually three or foure heads close together, and some times but one; whose scales end in such small whitish crooked tangling threds, that they seeme like a net, cast over the heads, out of which start purple flowers like the fift, but larger: the seede is not blacke but grayish like the last. 
7. Iacea angustifolia Austriaca flore albo. The white flowred Knapweede of Austria. This other Knapweede differeth not from the last in any thing, but in the flower which is wholly white, and the seede a little grayer. 
8. Iacea angustifolia Austriaca villoso capite. The lesser hairy headed Knapweede. This lesser kinde differeth not from the sixth, onely in that it is lower, and the leaves narrower, the heades are netted like it but hairy withall; the flowers are purple, and the seede blacke, and not gray like it. 
The Place. The first groweth with us in most fieldes and medowes, and about their borders and hedges, and in many wast groundes also, almost every where; the second groweth about Mompeliar and Padoa also: the third in Austria neare unto Saint Hippolitus; all the rest on the hills in Hungary and Austria, and in the pasture grounds upon them. 
The Time. They all flower in Iune and Iuly, and in August sometimes: the seede is ripe soone after.
The Names. The ancient Greeke or Latine Authors, have not mentioned this kinde of herbe in any of their Writings, as farte as can hitherto be imagined, and therefore wanteth a Greeke name, whereby it may be called: this latter age likewise hath scarse found a fit name, whereby to call it, yet all doe agree it is a kinde of Scabions, and there∣fore Tragus maketh it his fourth kinde of Scabions. Gesner in hortis Germaniae, taketh it for a kinde of great Cen∣tory of the Medow, and further thinketh it to be that plant, that Scaliger calleth Gethya nigra. Thalius in Harcy∣niasylva, calleth it Cyanus sylvestris angustifolius: but generally it is called Iacea, sic dictum ut Pena &amp; Lobelius volunt a Ianthino-colore florum, and nigra, as a distinction, both from the Iacea alba Monsp. of Pena and Lobel, which they in their Adversaria call Ocimoides, sive Ocimastrum; and from the Pansie, which of some is also called Iacea, or Ʋiola tricolor: some also would make it a kinde of Staebe. Many likewise call it Matrefillon, but very corruptly from Aphylanthes, quasi as some would call it, because the flowers are without leaves, be∣ing nothing in a manner but threds and thrummes. The first is called Iacea nigra of divers, and by Bauhinus Iacea nigra pratensis latifolia, and doubteth whether it be not Solidago Sarasenica altera of Lonicerus: the second is cal∣led by him also Iacea nigra angustifolia, vel Lithospermi arvensis folijs: the third he calleth likewise Iacea integrifolia humilis. The fourth and fift Clusius first made known to the world, as it is thought, and called them Iacea squamma∣to capite montana prima &amp; seconda, or major &amp; minor: the sixt Clusius also calleth Iacea Austriaca villoso capite ela∣tior. Thalius in Harcynia sylva, calleth it Cyanus sylvestris montanus integrifolius, &amp; saith it might be called Cynoglosso∣phyllos from the forme of the leaves. Bauhinus calleth it Jacea latifolia capite hirsuto: the seventh Bauhinus saith, is a species of the former, varying onely in the flower, and therefore calleth it Iacea alba hirsuto capite, which he saith Dr. Furerus of Northusa, sent unto him by the name of Iacea Austriaca major villoso capite flore albo: the last Clusius calleth Iacea montana villoso capite humilis, and Bauhinus Iacea angustifolia capite hirsuto: we call it in English Bullweede, and Knapweede, as also Matfellon. 
The Vertues. This Knapweede being so neare of kindred unto the Scabions, are in some part equall to them in their proper∣ties: for being of an astringent and drying taste, it thereby helpeth to stay fluxes, both of bloud at the mouth, nose, or other outward parts, and those veines that are inwardly broken, or inward wounds, as also the fluxes of the belly and of the stomacke, provoking castings; it staieth likewise the distillations of thinne and sharpe hu∣mours from the head, upon the stomacke and lunges: it is good also for those that are bruised by any falls, bea∣tings and other casualties: it is very profitable for them likewise that are bursten, and have the rupture, by drinking the decoction of the herbe and rootes in wine, and applying the same outwardly to the place: it is sin∣gular good in all sorts, of running and cankarous sorts and fistulous also, drying vp the moisture, and healing them up gently without any sharpenesse or biting: it doth the like also in the running sores and scabbes of the head or other parts; it is of especiall use for the sorenesse of the throat, the swellings of the Ʋvula and jawes, it is also excellent good, for all greene wounds, to stay the bleeding and to close the lippes of the wounds toge∣ther. 
CHAP. III. Iaceae non spinosae Laciniatae. Knapweedes with divided or torne leaves and without prickly heads. 1. Iacea nigra vulgaris Laciniata. The other common wilde Knapweede. T His other wild Knapweede that commonly groweth with us among corne very much, as well as in the Meades, groweth with greater and taller stalkes, the leaves both below and above upon them, are much divided on both sides, even to the middle ribbe, almost like the great Scabions of Matthiolus but darke greene colour, and as rough or rougher, then the former first or common kinde, the scaly heades on the toppes of the branches are greater, and the flowers larger, and of a deeper red colour; the seede is like the other, and so are the rootes, blackish and hard with many fibres. 
2. Iacea Cretica. The Knapweede of Candy. This Candy Knapweede hath many leaves lying on the ground, very much cut in on both sides of them, unto the middle ribbe, and each of those againe cut into other smaller peeces; from among which rise up crested h d stalkes two foote high, whereon are set at severall joints, lesser and lesse divided leaves than those below; the toppe of the stalke is severed into sundry small branches, with every one of them, a scaly head on them, thrusting forth the flower composed of many long threds of a purplish, and sometimes of a white colour, each of them much jagged at the ends, with a pale stile or pointell in the middle of them, which being past, the seede lieth in the like downy matter, and is not unlike the former: the roote is thicke and somewhat great, with fib thereat. 
3. Iacea montana Narbonensis. The French mountaine Knapweede. This French Knapweede hath divers long leaves, very much divided on both sides, into other small long, and narrow ones, but they little or nothing againe divided, of a light greene colour on the upperside, and hoary white underneath, and a little rough or hard withall, somewhat like unto the yellow Knapweede with prickly heades, among which riseth up a round stalk, somewhat rough also, about a foote high, without many branches, but bearing three or foure scaly heads at the toppes, with each of them, a long narrow divided leafe at the foote, with divers purple threds in the middle, smelling sweete; after which commeth the seede, not unlike the rest but lesser: the roote is long and slender and of a bitter taste. 
4. Iacea montana candidissima. The hoary white mountaine Knapweede. This hoary white Knapweede, sendeth forth, from a thicke wooddy roote, divers winged leaves lying upon 3. Iacea montana Narbonensis. The French mountaine Knapweede. 
4. Iacea montana candidissi a. The hoary white mountaine Knapweede. 
the ground round about it, very much rent or torne on both sides into many small leaves, which are each of them deepely dented on the edges, somewhat like unto the leaves of Staebe or jagged Scabions; all covered over, with a hoary white cotten or wooll, or as it were sprinkled with flower or meale; from whence riseth up a crested white hoary stalke, about a foot or a cubite high, scarse having any leaves thereon to the top, where it beareth only two or three scaly heads like the others with purple threads rising out of the middle of them: the seede, is like the rest. 
5. Iacea humilis Hieracij folio. Low Knapweede with torne leaves. This small Knapweede hath many small and narrow long leaves, unevenly cut in or gashed on the edges, but blunt or somewhat round at the ends of every division, as at the point end also, from among which rise up weake stalkes, not able to stand upright, but leane downe to the 6. Iacea pumila Narbonensis. Pineapple headed Knapweede. 
7. Iacea Liciniata alb Iagged white Knapweede. 
ground, of about a foote high, with some smaller leaves on them; and at the toppes small scaly heades, like unto the others, out of which thrusteth the flower, very like unto the Cyanus or Corne-flower, but of a whitish blew purple colour, somewhat obscure or sullen, and sometimes white, the seede that followeth is not unlike the rest: the roote is thicke and long. 
6. Iacea alia pumilae Narbonensis. The Pineapple headed Thistle or Knapweede. This small French plant groweth sometimes in the naturall places, without any stalke, bearing his Cone or Pineapple-like head, so neare the ground, that scarse any part of a stalke can be seene under it, and sometimes, and in the same grounds also, it will beare a round hollow stalke, of an handbreadth or two, or a foote high, having divers leaves thereon, cut on both sides, into many narrow short peeces, greene on the upperside and hoary un∣derneath: at the toppe of the stalke standeth only one large round and long great head, bigger than beseemeth the smallnesse of the plant, resembling a Cone or Pine apple, delicately set with scales, blackish at the toppes, and forked or cut into two or three notches at the end, and bright shining white from thence to the bottome of them; from the middle whereof riseth up divers purple threds, as in the other sorts, after which come small seeds wrapped in much down, as the rest are, and like unto the former small Knapweedes, but blackish: the roote is blackish on the outside, and whitish within, of the bignesse of ones little finger. 
7. Iacea Laciniata alba. Jagged white Knapweede. This white Knapweede hath the stalke set with many ve∣ry much jagged leaves, from the bottome branching forth on all sides, with lesser &amp; lesse jagged leaves up to the tops, where on the severall small stalkes stand such like scaly heads as the other before have, but with fine white threds rising out of them: the roote is long and threddy, and spreadeth somewhat under ground. 
8 Iacea montana minima lutea. Small yellow mountaine Knapweede. This mountaine Knapweede, hath divers leaves next the roote, about three inches long, cut into many divisions on both sides, and each of them againe into smaller, but some∣what thicke and fleshie, smooth also, but ending in a sharpe point: the stalke is small scarse a foote high, bearing a grea∣ter scaly head, then the smallnesse of the plant should seeme to beare, with a gold-yellow flower in the middle, having many upright threds in the middle, and the out∣ward leaves, lying downewards and compassing them: after which come small seede, wrapped in downe like o∣thers, but smaller: the roote is somewhat thicke, hairy at the head, and parted into fibres. 
The Place. The first, as I said groweth in many places of this land, among corne as well as in other fields, especially about Co∣ventry: the second groweth in Candy, from whence the seede being sent, hath sprung in divers parts: the third groweth upon the hills of Castrum novum, neare Mompelier: the fourth neare Capua in Italy; the fift about Mompelier also, in the borders of fields; the sixt there also, but a∣mong the Cistus and skarlet Oakes; the seventh is found in sundry places of our owne land; the last, as Fabius Columna saith on the hills Aequicoli in Naples. 
The Time. The first five sorts flower in Sommer, and their seede ripe∣neth shortly after, but the two last flower not untill Sep∣tember in their naturall places. 
The Names. Divers would referre some one or other of these Iacea ' s, either going before or following after, unto Hyosci∣ris or Hyosiris of Pliny, (quasi Iovia Seris as Pena saith) whereof he maketh mention in his 27. Booke, and 11. Chapter, which he saith is like unto Seris or Intibum Endive, or Succory, but lesse and rough in handling, and good for wounds; of which short description it is hard to determine that Pliny meant this plant, for if Hyosci∣ris be a kinde of Succory, or belonging to that Tribe, as the name aforesaid should declare, this cannot be it, for none of the Succoryes, or of that stocke are found availeable for wounds as these are. The first here set downe, is the lacea major of Lobel, the sixt Iacea of Clusius, which he calleth montana hirsuto capite, as Camerarius doth; and by Bauhinus Iacea nigra laciniata. The second Clusius calleth Iacea squammato capite Cretica, and Bauhinus Iacea lacin ata squammata. The third is called by Lobel, Iacea montana Narbonensis, by Tabermontanus Iacea musca∣ta &amp; quinta, and by Bauhinus Iacea montane incana odora. The fourth is so called by Bauhinus, as it is in the ti∣tle, which he called both in his Phytopinax, and in his Matthiolus Iacea montana Laciniata. The fifth is called by Lobel Iacea pumila humilis serpens, &amp;c. by Lugdunensis Iacea humilis Hieratij folio; and by Bauhinus Iacea ho∣milis alba Hieracij folio. The sixth is called by Lobel and Pena in their Adversaria, Iacea montana, and Carden pineus Narbonensium, and thinke it also to be the Chamaeleon non aculeatus of Theophrastus, and by Camerarius in horto Iacea alia pumila sive nana, It is very likely to be that Iacea, that Lugdunensis calleth montana Acanophor, or very like unto it; and by Bauhinus Iacea montana incana capite pini. The seaventh is mentioned by Gerard on∣ly as I thinke. The last Fabius Columna calleth Iacea montana minima tenuifolia, but Bauhinus calleth it Iacea laciniata lutea. 
The Ʋertues. The First of these especially, is equall in property with any of the other Knapweedes, both for inward and outward diseases, and therefore whatsoever is said of any of them, may be effectually found herein, the rest of them that are set downe in this Chapter, are in some sort like unto it, although there is no certaine author, hath appropriated them in such manner as the former. 
CHAP. IV. Iaceae Laciniatae capitulis spinosis. Thorny headed Knapweedes. 1. Iacea lutea capitulis spinosis. Yellow Knapweede with prickly heads. T His yellow Knapweede hath a few leaves next the ground, much rent or torne on the edges into many unequall parts, some bigger and others lesser, of a grayish or overworne greene colour, and of a little acide or sower taste, among which riseth up a stalke about two or three foote high branched forth into some few, but not into very many branches, set with some smaller and more divided leaves on them, and at the foote of the branches; the toppes of the branches and stalkes are each of them furnished with a great scaly head, set round about with small and sharpe white prickles, and out of the middle thereof many threds, of a pale but sullen yellow colour, which abide in flower a good while, and when they are past, the seede is wrapped in a deale of white flockye or downy matter, of a whitish or ash colour, the roote is long and white, and as sweete almost as the roote of Eringus or Sea Holly, but creepeth very much and farre underground, springing up againe in divers places. This in the hotter Coun∣tryes yeeldeth forth among the flowers, a small reddish graine like unto Gum Tragacant, but I could never ob∣serve it in our land. 
2. Iacea lutea spinosa Apula. The thorny headed Knapweed of Naples. This yellow Knapweede of Naples, is in most thing so like the former yellow, that if it be not the same, it differeth but little from it, which consisteth chiefly in these things, the roote is wooddy, as Columna who so describeth it saith, covered with a rugged barke, whose head hath, many blackish haires, as the ribbes and veines of the last yeares leaves, the first leaves that spring up are smooth and whole, like unto a Docke, but those that follow after are divided into many parts, like unto Radish leaves, but larger and somewhat like unto the great Centory leaves: the crested or straked stalke riseth to be three foote high, somewhat hairy as the latter leaves are, at the head whereof which divideth not it selfe into above two or three branches, groweth on every one a scaly greene head, the edges and toppes of whose scales are somewhat cut in, and set with sharpe yellowish thornes, and many yellowish threds comming out of the heades; the seed that followeth is white and flat, lying in a purplish downe.
10. Staebe fruticosa angustifolia Cretica. The narrow leafed shrubbe Staebe of Candy. This shrubbe Staebe in his naturall place riseth to be three or foure cubits high, with a wooddy flemme or trunke covered with a hoary rugged barke, the wood it selfe being very hard, &amp; of an evill savour being burned: from whence it spreadeth many branches on all sides rugged also at the bottome and hoary, but smooth at the toppes, somewhat thicke set with very long and narrow leaves, &amp; somewhat like unto those of the Pine tree or rather of Rosemary, but longer and more hoary all other; the greater armes do send forth divers smaller branches, with the like leaves on them but lesser and shorter, and at the ends of every of them one scaly head, from the mid∣dle whereof shoote forth the flowers composed of many purplish blew threds like unto a Cyanus for the colour, or a Staebe for the manner, but larger than either of both: this plant will serve as a hedge bush, to be cut and trim∣med into what forme you please like unto other bushes, and will also be encreased by slipping, and abideth with the leaves alwayes upon it, especially in the warmer countries, yet will not abide the cold Winter of our climate without some especiall defence: the roote is wooddy and spreadeth like a shrubbe or bush. 
The Place. The first three sorts grow in divers places of Spaine, but especially about Salamanca, as Clusius who first set them forth saith: the fourth and fifth in Austria, and other parts of Hungary: the sixt is likewise thought to grow about those parts: the foure last their titles testifie to be in Candy. 
The Time. They all doe flower in the Sommer Moneths of Iune and Iuly; yet those of Candy flower later, even in the of August or September, where if any earely frost take them, they wither straight wayes, although in their natu∣rall places, which are the warme countries, they continue many yeares. 
The Names. Although I doe acknowledge, (as I said before) that none of these plants are the true Staebe of the ancient which hath thorny or prickly leaves, as Gaza falsely translateth Theophrastus, but should be thornes and prick growing with the leaves, yet because as Clusius saith, the learned Phisitions of Salamanca in Spaine, did usually so call the former sorts and esteeme of them, because the ends of their leaves were sharpe pointed, which in some part as they thought did answer the description of the Staebe of the ancients; as also because those plants may in the judgement of many be referred to the kinde of Scabions (but more truely I suppose unto Iacea ) which of most Phisitions of these later ages, is therefore accounted, called, and used for Staebe; which notwithstanding is an error great and intollerable, in regard Scabious is a smooth herbe, without any shew of pricke or thorne there∣on which the true Staebe hath, so it is no lesse erronious to transferre the vertues of Staebe to the Scabious; for as Dioscorides and Galen after him doe affirme, Staebe hath so drying and astringent a quality, that it wil stay any flux of humours or bloud in the bowells or belly, as also those of wounds, which I thinke was never found in Scabious. But that I may informe you, (which to some may seeme doubtfull) that Staebe hath a prickly stalke, which is neither extent in Dioscorides nor Galens Coppies: let me shew you it out of Theophrastus in his sixt Booke and first Chapter where he numbreth Phleos, which as he saith, was also called Staebe, (and not Phloum, whereof hee speaketh in his fourth Booke and eleventh Chapter, among those plants that grow in watery and morish places; the likenesse of which two words, hath deceived many, mistaking them to be one thing,) among those plants, that have a leafe besides the thornes on their stalkes, which sentence Gaza (as I said before) translateth, that it hath beside the prickly leafe, another leafe also by it, for Theophrastus in the fifth Chapter of the said sixth Booke, doth deny Phleos, and Hippophaes to have any prickly but a smooth leafe, although in the third Chap∣ter of the same sixth Booke, he seemeth to say, that Phleos, Tribulus, and Capparis have prickly leaves, be∣side the thorny stalkes, but both of them cannot be true. And herein Pliny hath shamefully erred in con∣founding Theophrastus, making Phleos and phleum to be one thing, and hath beene the cause of many o∣thers errours also. Plutarch in the life of Theseus about the beginning doth name Staebe among the thorny plants, whose words are these; Menalippi filius Ioxus Ornito socius deducendae in Caryam Coloniae fuit unde Ioxides criginem traxerunt, quibus mos est patruus, neque spinis Asparagi, neque Staebes igne cremari sed honore &amp; cultu prosequi. In English thus, Ioxus the sonne of Menalippus was joyned with Ornitus, to leade forth a colony to Carya, from whence the Ioxides have their originall, whose Countries custome it is neither to burne the thornes of Asparagus nor of Staebe, but to give them honour and reverence: thus much Plutarch. Aetius also in his third Booke and one and twentieth Chapter, remembreth Staebe, saying that Epithymum, (or more truely Dodder ) groweth upon it. But now as I have shewed you that the true Staebe is a prickly or thorny plant, and that there∣fore neither Scabious nor this Staebe is it. Let me here also shew you what is the true Staebe, which is indeede wor∣thy the hearing, but that I reserve it to a fitter place, that is among the thorny plants, where it is called Pimpinella spinosa, or Poterion, but I forbeare any farther to speake thereof in this place. The first of these here set downe, is called by Clusius Staebe Salamantica prima, by Dodonaeus Aphyllanthes prima, by Bauhinus Staebe major folijs Ci∣ch raceis mollibus lanuginosis. The second is called by Clusius, Staebes Salamanticae primae altera species, by Lobel Staebe argentea incana Aldroandi, by Dodonaeus Aphyllanthes tertia, by Bauhinus Staebe major folijs Erucae mollibus lanuginosis. The third is called by Clusius Staebe Salamantica altera vel tertia, by Lobel Staebe argentea Salamanti∣ca minor, by Dodonaeus Aphyllantes quarta, by Bauhinus Staebe calyculis argenteis. The fourth is called by Clusius, Staebe Gallica and Austriaca elatior, by Bauhinus Staebe major calyculis non splendentibus. The fifth is called by Clusius, Staebe Austriaca humilis, by Gesner in collectione stirpium, Centaurij majoris species minor, and by Bauhinus Staebe incana Cyano similis tenuifolia. The sixth is called by Taberna ontanus and Gerard, Iacea flore albo, and by Bauhinus Staebe calyculis argenteis minor. The seaventh is called by Alpinus lib. de plantis exoticis as it is in the title. The eighth is called by Pona in his Italian Baldus, Cyanus spinosus Creticus, and so also by Alpinus in lib. de exo∣ticis plantis: Clusius in his Auctuarium, to the other Appendix to his history of plants, calleth it Staebe peregrina, and saith that Iacobus Plateau, who sent him a branch of the plant, with the figure thereof drawne, having ga∣thered it in the Garden of the Duke of Areschote, in Bellomonte, called it Staebe spinosa fruticans. The ninth I have joyned with these Staebes as I said before, rather then with the Storax trees as Bauhinus doth, calling it Frutex rotundo argenteo folio Cyani flore; for Pona in the same place above said, calleth it, Cyanus fruticosus Cre∣ticus, and is the same plant that Honorius Bellus, in his second Epistle to Clusius, as he saith, could not learne by what name they of Candy called it, and therefore he onely called it Pulcherrimus frutex. I have as you see, set it and the last with the Jacea ' s, being nearest in likenesse to them, in regard these have all scaly heads, as the Iaceas have; which are not seene in any Scabions. The last Pona in the description of Mount Baldus first called St bo capitata Rosmarini folijs, but after in his Italian booke, he calleth it Chamaepitys fruticosa Cretica Belli, and by them of Candy called , id est, lignum faetidum, and by Bauhinus Iacea fruticans Pinifolio, and is thought to be the Chamaepence Plinij of Anguilara. The Spaniards as Clusius saith, call the first by the name Cabesuela, id st, capitulum a little head, and usually make broomes thereof to sweepe their houses, the learned Phisitions there s he saith, use the third sort instead of Scabious for all the purposes thereof. 
The Vertues. The most of these sorts, but especially the three first, do come somewhat nigh unto the qualities of Scabions and therefore I must referre you thereunto, to know both what remedies may be had from these plants, and in what manner, and to what purpose to be used: for as Scabions fitteth the parts whereunto it is applyed, so doe these also. 
CHAP. VII. Ptarmicae non vulgares. Vnusuall Sneesewort. I Have here as I promised before, brought to your knowledge those other plants, that comming neerest unto the Iacea ' s and Staebes, and yet being none of them, were fittest to be entreated of in a Chapter peculiar by themselves; for as I said although Bauhinus doth put these two sorts under the title of Iacea oleae folio, and reciteth their authors for them, who are chiefely Lobel and Clusius, yet I cannot finde by the same authors, as well as by mine owne sight and knowledge, but that they are offering plants, from both Iacea and Staebe, but I would not have you conceive, that any of these Ptarmica ' s is , which groweth wild with us in divers places; for I meane to bring it into that Classis that is fit for it, namely at of hot, sharpe, and biting herbes; the double kinde whereof, I have set forth in my former booke. 
1. Ptarmica Austriaca Clusij sive major. Clusius his Sneesewort of Austria. The Sneesewort of Austria sendeth forth many leaves from the rootes lying on the ground, being soft and smooth, somewhat long and narrow, greene on the upper side, and hoary on the under, of a little sower relish or taste; among which riseth up an hoary stalke, about two foote high or better, having divers such like leaves thereon, but lesser, spreading into some few slender branches, with every one for the most part, a small scaly white silver like head on them, from whence spring forth a dozen or foureteene hard, and small long pointed leaves, as a border or pale, about a number of small short thrummes in the middle, almost like as if they were made of parchment, whitish at the first appearing, but afterwards being come to their full maturity, of a most faire bleake blewish purple colour, without any sent to commend it, pleasant onely by the prospect of forme and colour, and by the durability; for being gathered in his perfection, it withereth not, or looseth colour, but abideth in the same colour, without changing for many yeares together, being put into a paper booke, other∣waies being let stand upon the stalkes, they become somewhat brownish, having many small blackish long seedes lying among a deale of white downe, the roote is hard and blacke with some fibres at it, but perisheth every yeare. 
2. Ptarmic Imperati sive minor. The smaller Sneesewort of Spaine or Naples. This smaller Sneesewort, hath such like long and narrow soft hoary leaves, but not fully so large as the former, the stalke riseth not so high, but is divided into more and more slender hard branches; at the toppes whereof stand such like scaly heads, but not so white or silver like, from whence shoot forth, such like stiffe hard leaves as the pale or border, but neither so large nor so many, being seldome above eight or tenne, neither are they of so faire a blewish purple colour, but of a pale delayed colour, having many thrummes in the middle: the seede that followeth is like the former, and so is the roote, but smaller both of them; and perisheth in the same man∣ner every yeare, this plant being a little rubbed or handled, sendeth forth a reasonable sweete sent, or at least not to be misliked. 
The Place. The first Matthiolus saith groweth in Italy, and Clusius saith he found it in Austria, and afterwards in divers parts of Hungary, Lobel saith it groweth about Mompelier, for I suppose his incana altera Iacea, to be this Ptar∣mica, himselfe also saying that some did so call it, although he describeth it to have rougher leaves. The second we having received the seede from Italy, under the name of Ptarmica Imperati, have thought good to expresse it, by the same title we received it. Clusius in his Curae posteriores saith, the seede was brought out of Spaine, that grew with them, and Lobel saith of the same plant as I take it, that it came out of Syria. 
The Time. They both flower late, that is not untill the beginning of August at the soonest, and the seede is not ripe until the middle of September. 
The Names. The name in Greeke, signifieth as much as Sternutamentorium in Latine, that is, to provoke sneesing, 1. Ptarmica Austriaca Clusij. Clusius his Sneesewort of Austria. 
2. Ptarmica Imperati sive minor. The smaller Sneesewort of Spaine or Naples. 
which Clusius saith this doth not, and therefore cannot be Dioscorides his Ptarmica, although it doth agree there∣with in many other things, neither doth Matthiolus acknowledge it for the right Ptarmica, although he saith hat those plants that grow in Italy doe provoke Sneesing. Clusius calleth it Ptarmica Austriaca, because he first found it in Austria, Matthiolus Ptarmica altera: Lobel out of doubt meaneth this plant, which he calleth Iacea sincana altera Cyani, aut Iaceae capitulis, and therefore in my perswasion, Bauhinus hath not done well, to make it two distinct plants, for if he ever saw it, he might finde it to differ notably from the Iacea ' s, for which cause both Mathiolus and Clusius gave them rather the name of Ptarmica, to shew the variety thereof from Iacea. (as it worthily deserveth) The other is called by Clusius in his Curae posteriores, Ptarmicae Austriacae species, and is out of doubt also, that plant which Lobel in his Observations calleth, Iacea pusilla incana altera folio Oleae, which Bau∣hinus also maketh to be two distinct plants, thus making foure sorts of these two plants, when as Lobel in his quotation in the Margent of the said Iacea saith, it is Ptarmica herbariorum, meaning the former Austriaca, or this, for thereunto it doth most properly appertaine. 
The Ʋertues. Matthiolus saith that in Italy they use it for no other purpose, but to make broomes thereof to sweepe their houses, Clusius saith the women about Ʋienna, who gather herbes abroad, and bring them to the City to sell, doe call it a Scabious, and keeping it dry all the yeare, doe sell it to the Apothecaries, and others when they need it, to serve them for the purposes whereunto Scabious is appropriate; and further saith, that the people there∣abouts doe confidently beleeve, that the decoction thereof given to Children, doth very profitably helpe them, when they thinke they are bewitched; (or rather as I doe take it, when some grievous paines or torments in their stomackes and bowels doe take them, from the crudity of humours therein gathered, by their often feeding of fruites that breed such corruptions;) and although we have not found that it hath beene much used in Phisicke, yet assuredly by the judgement of many, it cannot be without some of the especiall properties of Scabious, or Iacea at the least, it doth so neerely approach thereunto, both in forme and temperature. 
CHAP. VIII. Cyanus. Blew Bottles. I Would willingly interpose this Chapter of the Cyani Blew Bottles, betweene the former plants, and the sorts of Scabious that shall follow in the next, both because they have scaly heads, which none of the Scabiouses have, and because that divers of the Iacea ' s and Staebes have heads of flowers much resembling the Cyani. 
1. Cyanus major vulgaris. The greater ordinary blew Bottle. The greater blew Bottle or Corneflower, (which I therefore call ordinary, because there is a Turky kinde, which is extraordinary) riseth up with a crested, or rather winged whitish greene stalke, about two foote or a yard high, whereon are set divers leaves somewhat long and broad, without any division or dent on the edges, greene on the upperside, and grayish underneath, each of them compassing the stalke about, at the lower ends, which is divided at the toppe into a few branches, bearing somewhat large scaly greene heads, with white or silver like edges; from the middle whereof commeth forth a larger flower then in the smaller kinde, thinnely or sparsedly set, and of a deeper violet blew colour, in which heads after the flowers are past, some few white seedes are found among the downe, like the lesser kinde, but somewhat bigger and flatter: the roote creepeth under ground, and spreadeth divers wayes, so that the heads with greene leaves will abide all the winter, which in the other sorts doe not so, but perish wholly after seede time, and doth rise of it owne sowing before winter, and so abideth greene all the winter, untill the next Spring and Sommer, that it flowreth, seedeth, and perisheth againe. 
2. Cyanus minor vulgaris diversorum colorum. The small ordinary Corne flower of sundry colours. The small ordinary Corneflower is wonderfully diversified, as I have shewed in my former booke, in the co∣lours of the flowers, but not variable in any thing else: for the leaves are long and narrower then the former, cut in on the edges somewhat deepely, yet some more then others of a whitish greene colour; the stalke riseth to be three foote high or more, set with the like leaves, but smaller and lesse cut in on the sides, bran∣ching forth on all sides, and, bearing at their toppes many greenish scaly heads, out of which rise flowers consisting of five or sixe or more long hollow leaves, small at the bottome and opening wide at the brimmes, where they are cut and notched somewhat deepely into divers parts, with many small short threds in the middle; the colours of these flowers are divers, some being of a perfect blew or purple colour, paler or dee∣per, some white or of a blush colour, otherwise of a sad or light red or overworne purple, wholly without mix∣ture in the leaves or thrummes; but some will be mixed of blew and white or of the other colours, either edged, striped, or spotted, the threds in the middle varying likewise: after the flowers are past, Creticus L ugi∣nosi . the heads grow full of small hard white shining seede among the short downe, which easily and quickly falleth away, leaving the head flat and empty, the rootes are somewhat long and hard perisheth every yeare, but usually is renued by it owne sowing. The Candy kinde is like hereunto, but more hoary, and the flowers purple, not varying. 
3. Cyanus floridus odoratus Turcicus sive Orientalis major &amp; minor. The Sultans flower a greater and a lesser. This stranger lately obtained from Constantinople, where the Gran Signior or great Turke as we call him, espy∣ing it growing abroad, liked it and wore it himselfe, whereby all his vassals held it in great esteeme; the leaves hereof are not much greener, but larger, and more gashed in on the edges; the stalkes are a yeard high at the least in the greatest, and lower in the other, beset with the like leaves but smaller, and branching into sundry parts, bearing each of them a larger scaly head then the former, and bigger in the one then in the other, with such like flowers but larger, consisting of eight or nine hollow leaves with wider open brimmes, and small threds in the middle: the circling leaves are of a fine delayed purple or blush colour very beautifull and the thicke thrums paler or almost white, of so exceeding a sweete sent, that it surpasseth the finest Civet that is; the seede is black∣ish and enclosed in the like downy substance; the roote perisheth every yeare, the greater of these two sorts smel∣ling much better then the other. 
1. Cyanus major vulgaris. The great ordinary blew Bottle. 
2. Cyanus minor vulgaris diver sorum colorum. The small ordinary Corne flower of divers colours.
2. Morsus Diaboli flore albo. Devils bit with a white flower. This sort differeth not from the former in any other thing, then in the flower, which is of a pure white colour as some other sorts of the Scabiouses are, and that the greene leafe is not altogether of so darke a colour. 
3. Morsus Diaboli flore carneo. Devils bit with blush coloured flowers. This other sort likewise differeth neither in roote stalke or leafe, from the former, onely the flowers which are of an incarnate or blush colour, maketh the difference from both the other. 
4. Morsus Diaboli alter flore caruleo. Strange Devils bit. This herbe which I place here for some likenesse, hath divers leaves rising from the roote, every one severally on a long footestalke somewhat like unto Betony or Sage, dented about the edges, the stalke riseth up amongst them a foote or more high, bearing one large flower at the toppe, hanging downe the head and made all of blew∣ish threds. 
The Place. The first groweth as well in dry meddowes and fields as moist, in many places of this land, but the other two sorts are more rare and hard to meete with, yet they are both found growing wild about Apple dore, neere Rye in Kent. The last groweth in the fields that are on the mountaines beyond the Seas. 
The Time. They flower somewhat later then the Scabiouses, as not usually untill August. 
1. Morsus Diaboli vulgaris. Common Devils bit. 
Scabiosarubra Austriaca. The red Hungarian Scabious. 
 
The Names. It is usually called Morsus Diaboli, by most writers, or Saccisa as Fuschius doth, and others after him, a pr ∣morsa or succisa radice. Some there have beene that have thought it to be the Geum of the ancients: others take it to be Nigina of Pliny, whereof he maketh mention in his 27. booke, and 12. Chapter, in these words. The herbe that is called Nigina, hath three long leaves like the Endives. Fabius Columna referreth it to Picunoc of Dioscorides. The Italians, Spaniards, and French, and so likewise all other nations follow the Latine name each nation in their severall dialect or else the Germanes first calling it Abbiss and Tewfells abbiss, caused the La∣tine name, and all other tongues following it, to call it thereafter: And we following the Germanes Devils bit. The last is the second Aphyllantes of Dalechampius. 
The Vertues. The taste hereof being somewhat more bitter, declareth it to be hot and dry in the second degree compleate, and therefore is more powerfull and availeable, for all the purposes whereunto Scabious is appropriate, either in∣wardly or outwardly, as they are declared before, and especially against the plague, and all pestilentiall dis∣eases, or feavers, poisons also, and the bitings of venemous beasts, the herbe or roote being boyled in wine and drunke: the same also helpeth those that are inwardly bruised by any fall, or crushed by any casualty, or bruises by outward beatings or otherwise, dissolving the clotted or congealed blood, and voyding it by ex cuti∣on, or otherwise, and the herbe or roote beaten and applyed outwardly, taketh away the blacke and blew markes, that remaine in the skinne after some accidents: the decoction of the herbe, wherein some Hony of Roses is put, is very effectuall to helpe the inveterate tumours and swellings of the Almonds and throate, which doe hardly come to ripenesse, for it digesteth, clenseth, and consumeth the flegme sticking thereto, and taketh away the tumours by often gargling the mouth therewith: it helpeth also to procure womens courses, and to ease all paines of the matrix or mother, to breake and discusse windes therein and in the bowels: the powder of the roote taken in drinke, driveth forth the wormes in the body, the juice or distilled water of the herbe, is as effectu∣all for greene wounds or old sores, as the Scabiouses be, and clenseth the body inwardly; and the head outward∣ly, from scurffe and sores, itches, pimples, freckles, morphew, or other deformities thereof, but especially if a little Ʋitriol be dissolved therein. 
CHAP. XI. Plantago. Plantaine. V Nder the name of Plantaine, is not onely comprehended all the sorts of Plantaine properly so called whereof there are a great many sorts, as I shall shew you in this Chapter, but divers other sorts of herbes much differing from them▪ which shall be set forth in the next Chapter following, each kinde by it selfe as neare as I can, and because the Plantaines are divided into greater and lesser, or broader and narrower leafed ones, I thinke it the best method to separate them, and speake of each of them and their species apart, and not confound them together to avoide mistaking. One of these Plantaines are called Rose Plan∣taine, which although I have set it forth in my former Booke, yet I thinke it fit here to expresse it againe, and the severall formes and varieties therein. 
Plantagines latifoliae. Broad leafed Plantaines. 1. Plantago latifolia vulgaris. Common Waybredde or Plantaine. THis common Plantaine I here set in the front of all the rest, because I would ranke it with the rest of the kinde, which is well knowne to all to beare many faire broad almost round pointed leaves, with seaven ribbes or veines in every of them for the most part, running all the length of the leafe, of a sad greene colour on the upper side, and more yellowish greene underneath; among which rise up divers small slender stemmes or stalkes, a foote high more or lesse, not easie to breake, naked or bare of leaves unto the toppes, where each stalke heareth a small long round blackish greene spike or scaly head, whose bloomings or flowers, are small whitish threds with aglets hanging at the ends of them, almost like unto the blooming of Corne, after which come browne small seede, enclosed in the severall small scales or skins: the roote is made of many white strings, growing somewhat deepe, and taking so fast hold in the ground, that it is not easie to pull it up. 
2. Plantago latifolia maxima. The greatest Plantane. This great Plantane is in all things like the former, but that it exceedeth it in greatnesse and height, for the leaves that lie on the ground are sixe inches, that is, halfe a foote long many times and more, and foure inches broad, and the stalkes sustaining every leafe, neare an handbreadth long: the naked stalkes that beare spiked heads like the o∣ther, are two cubits high, and the head or spike a foote long, the roote hereof is blackish and stringy: Laciniata folijs. Sometimes this kinde is found to have leaves a foote long and halfe a foote broad, somewhat torne on the edges, and having some leaves under the spiked heads. 
3. Plantago major incana. Great hoary Plantaine. The hoary Plantaine is likewise like the first, but that the leaves are very hoary white, especially in the hotter Countries of Spaine, &amp;c. much more then in these colder climates, and somewhat small, it seldome beareth any spiked heads in Spaine as Clusius saith, but when it doth, they are smaller then the first, Mino . and the rootes are blackish and stingy. Iohannes Thalius in Harcynia sylva mentioneth a smaller kinde hereof, both in leaves and flowers. 
4. Plantago exotica sinuosa. The strange crumpled Plantaine. This strange Plantaine upon the first yeares sowing of the seede, which was sent from beyond sea, rise up but 1. Plantago latifolia vulgaris. Common Waybredde or Plantaine. 
2.3. Plantago maxima &amp; flos incana The greatest Plantaine and the flower of the great hoary Plantaine. 
4. Plantago exotica sinnosa. The strange crumpled Plantaine. 
Plantagluis exotica s sa spica. The spiked head of the strange Plantaine. 
5. Plantago latifolia rosen multiformis, soliumque incisum &amp; Spiralis. Broad leafed Rose Plantaine of much variety, with a jagged leafe, and bushing spiked head. 
with one great and large leafe, almost a foote long, foulded as it were together, and wound about spine i∣on into two parts at the further end thereof, which opening it selfe, yet remaining somewhat hollow, much crumpled and waved on the edges; the further end shewing somewhat like unto a Plantaine leafe: but the bottome of the leafe had on each side thereof a large peece as it were torne from it, but yet growing to it, which were likewise crumpled and waved, and each of them shewing the forme of a Plantaine leafe, whose taste also was not unlike, so that the whole leafe seemed, as if divers great large leaves were joyned together to make one: this leafe perishing the first yeare, there rose up the next Spring divers leaves close together, not for∣med into one as the former, but as if divers leaves were joyned together, each bearing the Plantaine forme, but somewhat rounder a little crumpled and waved as the former was; the stalke rose up in the middle of these leaves, above a foote and a halfe high, bearing thicke and short spiked flattish heads and seeds therein, like the others; the roote is composed of a thicke round head, at the toppe with many long strings or fibres i i thence downewards; thereby taking strong hold in the ground.
The Names. It is called in Greeke and Holostium and Holosteum, for it is written both wayes by many, quasi tota ossea, which is per antiphrasim, for as Pliny saith, ex adverso sit a Graecis appellata, sicut fel dulce, quod sine duri∣ti est herba nihil enim durum osseumve habet. There hath beene much controversie among the learned writers and Herbarists about this herbe, divers diversly thinking of it, some holding one herbe to be it which another dis∣prooveth, almost every writer framing one to himselfe, as Lonicerus the Cauda Muris, Matthiolus the Grame Iunceum, when as before he tooke Serpentina to be it, and some as he saith tooke the Pilosella minor to be Ho∣losteum, whom he contradicteth: Lobel the Filix petraea Tragi. R llius Lancanthemum. Clusius calleth that Holostium Salamanticum majus, which Dodonaeus calleth Plantago angustifolia albida; and that minus which as he saith (and Lobel and Pena say the same) they of Mompelier called Holosteum parvu . Bauhinus includeth not one∣ly the Serpentinas, or Serpentarias of Matthiolus and others, and the Holosteum Salamanticum majus and minus of Clusius, under the name of Holosteum, but the Leontopodium Creticum of both sorts of Clusius, which as he saith he set forth in his Phitopinax above twenty yeares, before Clusius set forth his historia rariorum plantarum. The first was first mentioned by Lobel and Lugdunensis, and Gerard from him. The second of both sorts is called by Clusius Holostium Salamanticum majus &amp; minus, because the learned of Salamanca in Spaine, called it Holosti∣ m as he saith, whom Camerarius, Lobelius, and Lugdunesis doe follow. Camerarius in his Matthiolus calleth it Holosteum quorundam, and Dodonaeus as I said before Plantago angustifolia albida. Bauhinus calleth it Holosteum irsutum albicans majus, as he calleth the lesser Salamanticum of Clusius, rsutum albicans minus. The third Matthiolus called Coronopus sylvestris, and saith they of Goritia called it Serpentina; which since hath beene con∣tinued by Dodonaeus, Lobel and others, Camerarius in horto calleth it Plantago marina: Dodonaeus calleth it also Plantage angustifolia. The fourth is mentioned also by Lobel by the name of Serpentina omnium minima, and is his Coronopi &amp; Sedimontani media planta Massiliensium also, for so he saith, they are both one and the same, and is in my judgement the Holosteum quorundam of Lugdunensis, although Bauhinus maketh these two sorts to be foure severall plants, with foure distinct titles. The fifth Bauhinus as I said before, saith he set forth before Clusius in his Phytopinax, and after in his Prodromus, under the title of Holostium, sive Leontopodium Creticum, and inclu∣deth both the descriptions and figures of both the sorts of Leontopodium Creticum of Clusius in one, wherein I thinke he hath done rightly, whom I have followed, for although Clusius hath set forth divers figures, as they were sent him from divers places and persons, yet it seemeth very probable, both by his owne relation, and Ho∣norius Bellus his description thereof, which is extant in the first Epistle of the said Bellus to Clusius, that they are both but one plant, and not two different sorts; but as he and Bauhinus say, was sent by Cortusus to them both, by the name of Catanance prima of Dioscorides, which Honorius Bellus disprooveth in the said Epistle. Bauhinus saith also he received it from Ferrantes Emperatus of Naples, by the name of Holostium minus, and from Alpinus by the name of Gotne album catharticum, and is the Habbures of Camerarius, and the Planta planta∣gini similis of Lugdunensis in his Appendix. The last as I said before, divers doe referre to these kindes of Holostea, as after Lonicerus, Camerarius, Thalius, and Lugdunensis. Bauhinus himselfe calling it Holosteo affinis Cauda muris, and almost all others Myoscuros or Cauda muris, onely Tragus calleth it Coronopus sylvestris. We may call all these herbes except the last, Sea Plantaines, although they grow in some places farre from the Sea, as well as neere it in others, for the resemblance they have in their narrow ribbed leaves, and spiked heads, unto the smaller Plantaines or Ribbe worts, but especially for their properties which being cooling and binding like un∣to them, are no doubt of the same faculty: the Leontopodium may be called Lions foote, or Lions claw, accor∣ding to the Latine, although it justly be referred to these kinds of Plantaines. The last is called in English Mouse∣taile generally, and of some Blood strange, but I thinke corruptly from blood staying, for in that faculty it is praedominant, all other Dialects follow the Latine name thereof. 
The Vertues. What hath beene formerly said of the other Plantaines, may in some sort be justly referred to these, for in their qualities of cold and drynesse, they are I said little differing, wherein the Plantaines are excellent; and there∣fore it shall not neede to repeate the same things here againe, that formerly have beene there spoken. Onely for the third kind here mentioned, Matthiolus saith, that they of Goritia, who call it Serpentina, have used it to especiall good purpose, as he himselfe saith also, he hath found by good experience, against the bitings or sting∣ings of Serpents especially, and of the other venemous beasts, as also to helpe those that are troubled with the dropsie, especially that which hath possessed the whole body, the Monsetayle is cooling and drying like the Plantaine, and the Country people in some places of this land, apply it not only to those that bleede at the nose, by bruising the leaves and putting it up therein, but also to stay the much bleeding of wounds, and to heale them up. 
CHAP. XIII. Coronopus sive Cornu Cervinam. Buckshorne Plantaine. T Here are some other sorts of this herbe better knowne in these dayes, then they have beene for∣merly, which though growing in different climates, we will draw into one Chapter, and ex∣presse them together. 
1. Coronopus vulgaris sive Cornu Cervinum. Common Buckshorne Plantaine. This being sowen of seede riseth up at the first, with small, long, narrow, hairy, darke greene leaves like grasse, without any division or gash in them, but those that follow are gashed in on both sides of the leaves, into three or foure gashes and pointed at the ends, resembling the knagges of a Bucks∣horne, whereof it tooke the name, and being well growne lye round about the roote upon the ground, in order one by another, thereby resembling the forme of a starre, and therefore called Herba Stella; from among which rise up divers hairy stalkes, about an handbreadth high, bearing every one a small long spiky head, very like un∣to those of the common Plantaine, having such like bloomings and seede after them: the roote is single long and small, with divers fibres annexed thereunto, the taste hereof is altogether drying like Plantaine. 
2. Coronopus Prochytae Insulae; Prickly Bucks-horne. This differeth little from the former, but that it hath his leaves somewhat larger, broader, and thicker, more hairy or rough also, and the dents or divisions of the leaves more sharpe and prickly; the stalkes and heads are somewhat more rough and hairy, and differeth not in the rest. 
3. Coronopus tenuifolius maritimus. Small Sea Bucks-horne of Naples. This small Sea Bucks-horne (for I might well have made our owne Sea Plantaine, to be the greater kinde here∣of, in that it hath more eminent dents on the edges of the leaves, then the other Serpentina of Matthiolus, which I might impute rather to the climate then to a differing kinde, but take it in which sense you please, for neither you nor I can erre much, if we take it in either) hath many leaves lying on the ground, foure inches long, and so narrow that the Sea Southernewood leaves exceed them not, having on each side the leafe, three very long cuts or gashes turned inwards, all of them smooth and of a fresh greene colour, and not rough or hairy at all as the former, among which come up such like heads, upon small stalkes, as are in the first, but 1. Coronopus vulgaris sive Cornu Cervinum. Bucks-horne Plantaine. 
Coronopus R llij. 
5. Coronopus Ruellij recta vel repent. Vpright or creeping Bucks-horne or Wart Cresses. 
smaller, as the roote is also: the taste hereof is no lesse astrin∣gent then the former. 
4. Coronopus maritimus minimus hirsutus. The small hairy Sea Bucks horne. This other little kinde, is somewhat like the last, but that the leaves being very small, are not so finely or smally gashed on the edges, but stand rather like a little Scabious, and all hai∣ry over: the stalkes likewise are hairy, and not much above an inch high, bearing small hairy spiked heads like the rest, but smaller, whereon appeare white flowers quickly fading. 
5. Coronopus recta vel repens Ruellij. Vpright and creeping Bucks-horne or Wart Cresses. Ruellius hath referred this small plant to the ordinary Corono∣pus or Bucks-horne, for some resemblance it hath thereto, al∣though in quality much differing, which notwithstanding di∣vers writers have since Ruellius reckoned still with the Corono∣pos or Bucks-hornes, and therefore let it also here passe in the same manner. It is a small low herbe, yet in some places stan∣ding more upright, but most usually creeping with many long branches, and spreading a great way upon the ground round about: the creeping kind never rising much above foure fingers high the other more, with divers very small long and divided or cut leaves thereon, all along on both sides of them, some∣what resembling the divisions of the former or the Garden Cresse: the flowers are small and white, comming forth at the joynts with the leaves, many set upon a small long foote∣stalke, one above another; after which come small rough or sharpe round huskes somewhat resembling rough warts, which divide themselves into two parts, and containe in each of them a small brownish seede: the roote is small white and long, with many fibres thereat growing downe deepe into the ground, the taste whereof is somewhat hot like Cresses, but much milder, and is of many used to be eaten as a Sallet herbe, both boyled and greene with vinegar, as Ruellius himselfe saith. 
The Place. The first usually groweth in drie sandy grounds, as in Tuttle fields by Westminster, and divers other places of the land: it was wont to be planted and nourished up in garden in Italy, France, and other places, where the people more delight in greene and sallet herbes than we in this countrie doe, because it was in frequent use to be eaten by them: the second as Columna saith, groweth on the rockes, in the Iland Prochyta: the third hee saith likewise groweth in many untilled grounds in the Kingdome of Naples neare the sea side, and so doth the fourth, neare the sea side, but particularly in what countrie is not expressed: the last groweth every where almost round about London, in any moist ground, or the foote of bankes, where there is any low trench or rill, that is not con∣tinually filled with water. 
The Time. They all flower and seede in May, Iune, and Iuly, and their greene leaves abide fresh in a manner all the Winter. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Coronopus, a corvino pede quem effigiant folia, saith Pena, that is Crowfoote, whereunto the leaves are like, which name the Latines doe hold, as also Cornu cervi, or cervinum, and Herba Stella, both of them, from the posture of their leaves. Some also call it, Hurenaria and Sanguinaria or Sanguina∣lis, the one from the place of his growing, the other from the effects or properties. There hath beene much doubt formerly, what herbe should be the true Coronopus of Dioscorides, for the name signifying a Crowes foote, de∣ceived many, and led them into that errour, to thinke that the herbe called Pes corvinus, and Pes gallinaceus should be it; among whom are not onely the Comentators upon Avicen, but Brunfelsius also of late dayes, who carried away rather with the currant of the time, and the signification of the name, than with the opinion of others that contradicted it, and without the due examination of the herbe it selfe held this opinion, whom Mat∣thiolus justly reprehendeth therefore, shewing that it was a species of Ranunculus, that was generally called Pes corvinus, and Pes gallinaceus, which is an exulcerating herbe, and not this Coronopus which Dioscorides ma∣keth a sallet herbe familiarly eaten, and alloweth of Monardus Ferrariensis his judgement, that set downe this Herba stelle, or Cornu cervinum, to be the true Coronopus of Dioscorides. Matthiolus contesteth also against Loni∣cerus that tooke a kinde of grasse, called gramen Manne esculentum, and Pentadactylon, which hee saith was cal∣led by his countrimen Capriola, and Sanguinella in Matthiolus countrie, to be the Coronopus of Dioscorides; which grasse as he saith, although it hath five small spikes growing at the toppes of the stalkes, which being opened re∣semble in some manner, the foote of a Crow or other bird (as thereupon tooke the name Pentadactylon, of five fingers of a spread hand) yet this hath no divided leaves, neither is a sallet herbe for men to eate, but onely being a grasse serveth as hay for beastes: there is also another controversie among divers, what herbe Theophrastus should meane by his Coronopus (which Gaza translateth Solidago, and) which hee placeth among the prickly plants, whom Pliny also herein followeth in his 21. Booke and 16. Chapter; and yet in his 22. Booke making mention thereof, doth not speake of any prickles it hath, following peradventure Dioscorides text therein; but Motthiolus to excuse Theophrastus his prickles in Coronopus, supposeth that the jagges or divisions of the leaves of Corum Corvinum, might be taken or mistaken by Theophrastus to be thornes (he might as well say hornes) or prickles, although they be not hard nor sharpe: and therefore judgeth the Coronopus, both of Dioscorides and Theophrastus to be one palnt; which thing although with Matthiolus I thinke to be true, yet doe I not thinke his reason therefore to be true; but if I may give my judgement thereof, I thinke it more probable that Theophrastus might see such a Coronopus, as Fabius Columna calleth Insulae Prochytae, which hath sharpe and prickly edges; (as is before said in the description thereof) and therefore placed it inter aculeatas; and Dioscorides such as we usu∣ally have, which grew in milder places, and is a tender herbe, used to be eaten; and hereby as I thinke they may be reconciled together. The first is called Coronopus sativus, by Cordus, Gesner, Camerarius and others, and hortensis by Bauhinus, because it was familiarly sowen in gardens for meate, and Herba Stella, as I said before, by Lobel, Dodonaeus and others, and Cornu cervi, and Cornu cervinum; yet the same herbe is also called sylvestris, being found wild by divers, both the same and other Authors: the second is as I said called Coronopus Insulae Pro∣chytae, by Fabius Columnae, and by Bauhinus Coronopus sylvestris hirsutior: the third the same Columna calleth Coro∣nopus Neopolitanus tenuifolius minimus, and minimus tenuifolius maritimus: the fourth Bauhinus setteth forth under the name expressed in the title: the last is thought by some to be the Coronopus of Dioscorides; but called by some Nasturtium verrucarium: yet is generally called Coronopus repens Ruellij: but Dodonaeus thinketh it fitter to be cal∣led Pseudo coronopus, or else Cornu cervi alterum vulgi; the upright plant is Matthiolus his Ambrosia, and Lobels Am∣brosia spontanea strigosior, and Bauhinus himselfe putteth it for a second Ambrosia, because it is figured upright by Matthiolus and Lobel. The first is called by the Italians Herba stella and Coronopo, by the Spaniards Guia∣bella, by the French Corne de Cerf, and pied de cornolle; by the Germans Krauwen fuss, by the Dutch Hertzharren, we in English call it Bucks horne, Harts horne, and Bucks horne Plantane, and of some Herbe Ivye, and Herbe Eve; Gerard calleth it Swines Cresses, but I do rather call it Wart Cresses according to the Latine name that some give from the forme of the huskes of seede. 
The Ʋertues. Buckshorne Plantane boiled in wine and drunke, is an excellent remedy for the biting of a Viper or Adder (for I hold our English Adder to be the true Viper, both by the forme thereof, the teeth it hath with poison in the gummes, being deadly and dangerous upon the biting, and by the breeding, which is of quicke young ones, and not by egges as snakes, &amp;c.) by laying some of the herbe to the wound: the same also being drunke, helpeth those that are troubled with the stone in the reines and kidneyes, not that it breaketh the stone or expelleth it, but by cooling the heate of the parts, and strengthening the backe and reynes: it stayeth likewise all bleedings, and eruptions of bloud, whether at the mouth or nose, either by urine or the stoole, and helpeth the laske of the belly and bowells, and the disentery or bloudy fluxe: it helpeth much also those that have weake stomackes, and are much given to casting, not containing their meate; and this the herbe doth well, but the roote more effectu∣ally. Paulus Aegeneta in his seventh Booke writeth, that it helpeth those that are troubled with the collicke; of which some make a doubt, that it might be an errour of the Writer in mistaking the word, but that he in the same place, presently after that he hath shewed, that the Larke is a remedy for the collicke adioyneth this also, that the rootes also of Coronopus doth helpe the cholicke; it hath beene held profitable for agues, to weaken their fits, and to take them away, to hang the rootes with the rest of the herbe about the necke, as nine to men, and seven to women and children; but this, as many other are idle amulets of no worth or value: yet since it hath beene reported unto me for a certaintie, that the leaves of Bucks-horne Plantane laid to their sides that have an ague, will suddenly ease the fit, as if it had beene done by witcherie: the leaves and rootes also beaten with some bay salt, and applied to the wrestes worketh the same effects, which I hold to be more rea∣sonable and proper: the herbe boyled in Ale or Wine, and given morning and evening for some time toge∣ther, helpeth all sorts of sore eyes, that come by the destillation of hot and sharpe or salt rheumes, falling from the head upon them, by cooling and tempering the heare and sharpenesse, and staying the destillations. The Cor p s Ruellij or creeping Buckshorne being as I said a sallet herbe with many, is also thought by some, good to take away warts by a specificall propertie of the seede. 
CHAP. XIV. Ophris sive Bifolium. Tway-Blade or Herbe Bifoile. S Ome have made two or three sorts of the upland Bifoile, one greater and another lesser, one with two leaves as is usuall, another with three leaves, as if it were a differing species; but herein I thinke they are deceived, for the superfluitie of leaves in this, is no otherwise than in many others, a lusus nature, which upon transplanting every one may know that will. I shall therefore shew you the description but of one of this kinde, yet mention these other that are but as accidents in nature, and withall shew you a Marsh kinde not remembred by any before. 
1. Bifolium sylvestre vulgare. Ordinary wood Bifoile or Twayblade. This small herbe from a roote somewhat sweete, whose head or toppe is somewhat thicke, which some have called a Bulbe (I have therefore given you it in another figure by it selfe) shooting many long fibres downe∣wards, raiseth up a round greene stalke, bare or naked next unto the ground, for an inch two or three to the mid∣dle thereof, as the plant is in age and growth, as also from the middle upward unto the flowers, having onely two broad and short ribbed pale greene or hoary leaves, very like unto Plantane leaves but whiter set at the mid∣dle of the stalke one on each side, and compassing it at the bottome, sometimes it will get three leaves, which thereupon some reckoned to be a different sort, which is as we call it, but lusus naturae by the abundance of nou∣rishment in the plant, as it hapneth to very many other plants, (as to the Herba Paris as I said before, sometimes having five leaves, and sometimes sixe or seven, and sometimes wanting a leafe, when as ordinarily it hath but foure, and so likewise in the ordinary field Trefoile, which as all know usually hath but three leaves upon a Bifolium sylvestre vulgare seu Ophris. Ordinary wood Twayblade or Bifoide. 
Ophris Bifolia cum radice bulbosa. Twayblade whose bulbous head is more conspicuous. 
e, yet oftentimes divers stalkes are found, that beare foure leaves and the like in a number of other plants which were endlesse as well as needelesse to repeate) some also reckon up two species or sorts hereof, a grea∣ter and a lesser (but none of them mention the Palustre whereof I shall speake in the next place) both in that which beareth but two, as also in that which beareth three leaves; and Clusius in his Curae postoriores mentioneth one very small sort, that the Capuchine Frier Gregorius de Reggio found, all which I account to be but the varia∣tion of the soyle and aire, and therefore I do not here distinguish them into so many severall sorts as they do: the at the toppe of the stalkes are many small long whitish greene shapelesse bodies, as it were, somewhat like unto some of the Orchides or Satyriens which passe away, having small heads with dust in them after∣wards. 
2. Bifolium paelustre. Marsh Bifoile. The Marsh Bifoile hath scarse beene observed by any, or at least hath deceived many that supposed it not to be differing from the former, although differing in the site, yet the difference is manifest, first in the smallnesse, be∣ing much lesser, and having sometimes three leaves also: secondly in the greenesse, the other being more hoary white: thirdly in the spike of flowers, which although of the same fashion and colour or very neare, yet lesse by farre: fourthly, in the rootes which in this doe runne or creepe in the ground: and lastly, the place which is not the Woods, but Moores, Bogges, and wet Marish grounds.
2. Cynoglossum maximum. The greatest Hounds tongue. This kinde differeth not from the former, either in leafe, flower, or seede, but onely that in them all it is neere twise so large which maketh the difference. 1. Cynog ossum majus vulgare. The ordinary great Hounds tongue. 
 
3. Cynoglossum maximum montanum. The great mountaine Hounds tongue. This great mountaine Hounds tongue hath also many large but hairy and soft leaves, lying on the ground, above a foote long, and an hand bredth broad, of a whitish greene colour, having every one the middle ribbe reddish; with many greene veines running thorough them, and reddish footestalkes to su∣staine them, those which are in the middle of them standing more upright; from amongst which riseth a thicke hollow cre∣sted, reddish, woolly, or hairy stalke, two foote high and above stored on all sides with such leaves, but lesser and lesser up to the toppe, where it breaketh forth into foure or five branches or flowers, standing all on one side, yet forming at the first a round head, very pleasant to behold, for the varietie of colours therein: the hairy stalkes of the flowers being greene ending in five points, the flowers hollow and long consisting of five purplish red leaves, somewhat sweete, standing above the flowers and greene leaves among them with red ribbes in them, which in the shadow where it delighteth to grow, is the more conspicuous and beautifull; after which in the said huskes come larger seede than the former, foure usually toge∣ther, which on the upperside are flat circled about with a few short prickes, whereby it cleaveth fast to garments: the roote is blackish on the outside, and whitish within, somewhat like the former. 
4. Cynoglossum medium montanum angustifolium. Narrow leafed hoary mountaine Hounds tongue. This Hounds tongue hath many soft woolly, or hoary long and narrow leaves standing upright and not lying upon the ground, being halfe a foote long, and an inch broad in the middle, but small at both ends, whose middle ribbe, and foote∣stalke are both reddish: the stalke riseth up to be somewhat more, then halfe a fooote high, replenished so thicke with such like leaves as grow below, that no part of the stalke can be seene, each whereof are more hairy or woolly, and compasse 3. Cynoglossum maximum montanum. The greater mountaine Hounds tongue. 
5. Cynoglossum semper virens. Ever greene Hounds tongue. 
6. Cynoglossum subrubente versicolore flore. Hounds tongue with party coloured flowers. 
7. Cynoglassum Creticum latifolium. Broad leafed Hounds tongue of Candy. 
8. Cynoglossum Creticum angustisolium. Narrow leafed Hounds tongue of Candy. 
10. Cynoglossum flore caeruleo. Small Hounds tongue with blew flowers. 
the stalkes at the bottomes of them, and sharpe at the point: on the toppe of the stalke standeth a round hoary head, of the bignesse of a reasonable apple, which opening it selfe, sheweth forth many woolly leaves, with red ribbes, standing at the foote of the branches and stalkes of flowers, which are of an excellent vermillion red colour, standing in larger and more woolly huskes, and are more laid open like a starre, standing on both sides of the stalke, and not all on side as the last: the seede that followeth is smaller and not so rough, with a smaller hollow middle: the roote is thicke and long, with a thicke blackish barke, on the outside, and a hard wooddy pith in the middle, of an unpleasant taste as the leaves, bitter and astringent and hairy at the head, which are the ribbes of the withered leaves: the roote springeth afresh before Winter, after the leaves and stalkes are all dre and withered. 
5. Cynoglossum semper virens. Ever greene Hounds tongue. This Hounds tongue doth not much differ, from the common or ordinary fort, but that the leaves are alwayes fresh and greene, somewhat long and narrow with a great whitish greene ribbe in the middle, smooth on the upperside, and more hoary underneath: the stalke at the first is but low, with many narrow long leaves, com∣passing it about, but more thinnely than in the former: the flowers are red, but somewhat larger than the ordi∣nary, standing in the like manner upon small branches that are writhed or turned like the Heliotropium, or the first kinde: the seede that followeth standeth all on the one side, and is smaller and lesse rough, but the stalke is then growne much higher: the roote is blackish, as the other: This hath no manner of hoarinesse, or is of so strong a sent as the last, and doth spring forth with fresh leaves, before the old stalke with seede is quite drie and withered. 
6. Cynoglossum subrubente versicolore flore. Hounds tongue with party coloured flowers. This beautifull and rare Hounds tongue, from a small slender wooddy roote, shooteth forth divers heads, of soft hairy and smaller leaves than the last: the stalke riseth up a foote and a halfe high, set on both sides, with the like smaller leaves than those below, the toppe whereof is parted into three branches of flowers, which are smaller than the last, but of a blush colour, striped with long bloud red strakes, having the bottomes of them of a deeper blush: the seede standeth in the same manner that others doe foure together in a huske, but they have the middle somewhat raised up, and small at the toppe, with a pointell thereat, and a large thinne circle or list about them. 
7. Cynoglossum Creticum latifolium. Broad leafed Candy Hounds tongue. This Candian hath for the first yeare of the springing many leaves lying on the ground, somewhat broad and not very long, with a long foote stalke to every one of them, soft, and covered with a whitish shining woolli∣nesse, almost like silver, and a thicke whitish ribbe in the middle: but the next yeare after, the stalke riseth from the middle of them, set here and there with shorter leaves compassing it at the bottome, and so smaller up to the toppe: this stalke is branched from the middle upwards into divers others, that are crooked or writhed inwards, opening by degrees as the flowers blow, which are short but somewhat large, ending in five round leaves, of a whitish colour at the first, with blush edges, and in some with pale purplish veines or stripes, which afterwards decaying grow wan or blewish, standing in hoary cuppe, wherein after they are past, the seede groweth some joyned together, rough and cleaving to garments as in the rest, with a pointell in the middle: the roote is wood∣dy, and perisheth after it hath given seede, springing from the seede that falleth of it selfe, but while it is young of the first yeare, is somewhat like unto others, not so thicke or fleshie and blackish on the outside, of an evill or unpleasant sent, as the rest of the plant is. 
8. Cynoglossum Creticum angustifolium. Narrow leafed Candy Hounds tongue. This other Candian hath divers long and narrow leaves, somewhat broad at the end, and round pointed of a whitish greene colour, lying next to the roote upon the ground; from among which riseth up a stalke; in some plants higher, in others lower, whereon grow without order, such like leaves but shorter and lesser, compassing it at the foote of them: from the middle whereof upwards, it spreadeth into branches, bearing such like flowers as are in the ordinary sort, ending in five leaves, but of a paler red colour, with each of them five darke red threds in the middle: the seede and roote is somewhat like the ordinary, but hath no evill sent like it or the last: this perisheth every yeare, and is sowed or riseth of the fallen seede againe. 
9. Cynoglossum minus sive pusillum, Small Hounds tongue. This small Hounds tongue that groweth with us in divers places of our land, is not much differing from the greater ordinary kinde, but is smaller in all things, having such like leaves smaller and shorter, but greener and more shining: the flowers also being small, are of a pale red colour, and the whole plant hath not so strong or evill a sent: this might be thought to be thus small from the barennesse of the soyle wherein it doth grow, but that is not so, for it is often found in the same grounds where the greater groweth, and besides being either trans∣planted, or the seede sowen in gardens, it wil still continue much smaller than the other. 
10. Cynoglossum minus flore caeruleo. Small Hounds tongue with blew flowers. This other small Hounds tongue sendeth forth from a small long but annuall roote, one round small hairy stalke, sometimes but a foote, and sometimes two foote high, brownish below and greene above, whereupon are set on both sides without order, divers small and somewhat long but narrow leaves, of a blewish greene colour, covered with a long hairy down, that is tough and sticking, the middle ribbe being somewhat great and eminent, of a hot bitter taste; from the bottome of these leaves, especially upwards, come forth sometimes other smaller leaves in a tuft together, and is parted into divers branches, the toppes whereof are bended, as in divers other sorts, bringing forth very small flowers, of a faire blew colour, with a yellow starre in the bottome, standing in such like huskes, wherein after they are past is contained very small roundish seede, without any pricke in the middle, as others have, but very rough or prickly, ready to sticke upon any garment, as others will. 
The Place. The first groweth in most places of the land, in wast grounds and untilled places, as by high wayes sides, lanes, and hedge sides: the second in the Low Countries, especially in their gardens: the third on the mountaines of Naples to the Southward: the fourth on the same hills to the Northward: the fift in the shadowie woods on the hills in Germany and Naples also: the sixt groweth onely at the foote of a certaine hill in Naples, to the South∣wards, as Columna saith, who there observed it: the seventh as by the name it should seeme, is originally of Can∣die, from whence being brought into Italy, hath from thence beene communicated to many countries: the eight not onely in Candy, but on the hills of Naples also: the ninth is found in Germany, as well as in our owne land, being mentioned by Cordus upon Dioscorides, and it may be is that kinde that is said in the Adversaeria to grow about Mompelier, and called Pusillum Narbonense: the last groweth in Austria as Clusius saith, and in other parts of Germany as Tragus saith, in Naples also as Columna saith. 
The Time. They all flower about May and Iune, and the seede is ripe not long after. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and , Cynoglossum and Cynoglossos, idest, Canina lingua, a folijs c i∣nam linguam imitantibus. There hath beene great controversie among divers the learned Writers of our time. whether the Cynoglossum that is here first set downe, and is the most ordinary in all countries, and therefore called vulgare, should be the Cynoglossum of Dioscorides, because he saith it beareth neither stalke nor flowers, which this doth; among whom wee must account Matthiolus to be one, who saith he found in some sandy grounds in Rome, behind or beyond Adrianus Mount the true Cynoglossum of Dioscorides, whom Pena and Label in their Adversaria, doe both taxe of want of knowledge of the true Cynoglossum Dioscoridis (for say they it doth in the same and other places beare both stalke and flowers; although in divers yeares and places it doth not beare, yet will beare after some respite of time in any place, as not onely they but divers other good authours have ac∣knowledged as well herein, as in other plants; and we our selves have often found divers plants of the first kinde of Hounds tongue, not to beare flowers in the same places that others have the same yeare, and therefore by the best Herbarists in these dayes, there is now no doubt, but that the common kinde is the right) as also that h knew not that this his Cynoglossum Dioscoridis, is Lycopsis, that sometimes doth not beare flowers, but ref th without stalke, as hath been obsevred oftentimes, as well herein as in Onosma stone Buglosse: the next that oppose this truth, is Ruellius &amp; Fuschius, who say that this Cynoglossum, which was then used by Apothecaries, in Germany and other places as the right was not the true kind of Dioscorides but rather Lycopsis Wall, Buglosse, whereof we shall speak hereafter, against whom Cordus upon Dioscorides and Matthiolus also do contest, Cordus acknowledg∣ing that Cynoglossum to be right, for the reasons before set downe, and Matthiolus simply coting it as an errour in them, and judging the Lycopsis, for the red rootes sake, and other things therein, to be a kinde of Anchusa, and also accounteth this common kinde, to be the second Cynoglossum of Pliny, in his 25. Booke and 8. Chapter (for his first kinde that is fit to make Arbors, or Imagery hedges, is not yet knowne what is is) which beareth small burres, and of the best Writers and Herbarists now adayes is accounted the eight kinde here set forth: Lac also calleth it Lycopsis. There is an errour likewise in Aetius which Dodonaeus noteth, in making Li oni and Cynoglossum, to be both one plant. And another in Rondeletius, who tooke Glastum sylvestre, which differeth very little from the Sativum, to be Cynoglossum: and lastly Lugdunensis, who setteth the Plantago media or ifolia, to be the Cynoglossum Dioscoridis, calling it Cynoglossum quorundam. The first is generally called by all Authors, either Cynoglossum, or vulgare, or Cynoglossa vulgaris: the second is but onely mentioned by Lobel in is observations, under the title of Cynoglossum maximum: the third is called by Fabius Columna, Cynoglossa mon∣ na maxima frigidarum regionum, and by Bauhinus Cynoglossum sylvaticum rubente caule, because he thinketh it is the same that Thalius in Harcynia sylva, calleth Cynoglossum sylvaticum Harcynicum, and the Cynoglossum monta∣ of Caesalpinus: the fourth is called by Fabius Columna Cynoglossa media montana incana angustifolia altera; &amp; by Bauhinus Cynoglossum globoso flore: the fift is called by the said Columna, Cynoglossa media virente folio, &amp; by Bauhinus Cynoglossum semper virens: the sixt is also called by Columna, Cynoglossa altera media fructu cotylodes, sive Lychnodes, and by Bauhinus Cynoglossum fructu umbilicato: the seventh is called by Clusius, Cynoglossum Creticum secundum, and by Bauhinus Cynoglossum Creticum latifolium foetidum: the eight is called also by Clusius Cynoglossum Creticum rimū, by Camerarius in horto Cynoglossum parvum cinereum Creticum, by Columna Cynoglossa media argentea Apula ampestis; and by Bauhinus Cynoglossum Creticum argenteo folio: the ninth is mentioned by Cordus upon Diosco∣rides, and by Label in his Adversaria, calling it Cynoglossum pusillum Narbonense, whom Lugdunensis followeth: the last is very much confounded by Bauhinus in his Pinax for his eight species, which he calleth Cynoglossum medium, and saith it is the same that Cordus upon Dioscorides calleth Cynoglossa minor, and Camerarius Cynoglossum Italicum, and Lobel, Lugdunensis, and Eystetensis call Cynoglossum pusillum Narbonense, who all say that it is like the ordinary great one having such like red flowers; and yet he maketh the same to be Clusius his Cynoglossum pumilum sive Austriacum alterum, and also Columna his Cynoglossa minor montana serotina altera Plinij, who both say that theirs have blew flowers, as the Elatine of Tragus, and the Lappula rusticorum of Lugdunensis, which are both one and the same with it; this also Bauhinus himselfe maketh his tenth species, calling it Cynoglossum minus, and there also making it to be the same Cynoglossa Plinij of Columna, before set downe; so that he confoundeth them much, maketh that sort with red flowers, to be the same with that of Tragus and Lugdunensis which hath blew flowers, and doth corresponde altogether with theirs, which errour in him is usuall in many other places of his Pinax, and not in this onely. It is called by the Italians Cinoglossa, and Lingua di canc, by the Spaniards Langua de perro, by the French Langue de chien; by the Germans Hundss zungin; by the Dutchmen Honts tonghe; and we in English Hounds tongue generally, or of some Dogges tongue. 
The Ʋertues. Hounds tongue is temperately cold, drying and astringent, and yet hath a mollifying qualitie. The roote is very effectually used in pills as well as in decoctions or otherwise, to stay all sharpe and thin defluxions of rheume, from the head into the eyes or nose, or upon the stomacke or lungs, as also for coughs and shortnes of breath; for which purpose the Pilulae de Cynoglossa, either of Mesues or Trallianus description, or as it is corrected by Ferne∣lius, is singular good, which is set downe in this manner, Take of Myrrhe five drammes, Olibanum sixe drammes, of Opium, of the seedes of white Henbane, and the barke of the dried rootes of Hounds tongue of each foure drams or halfe an ounce, of Saffron and Castor of each one dramme and a halfe; let all these be made into a masse or lumpe for pilles, according to art, with the syrupe of Staechados, the leaves boiled in wine, saith Dioscorides, but others do rather appoint it to be made with water, and to add thereunto oyle and salt mollifieth or openeth the belly downewards: the same also taken doth helpe to cure the biting of a mad Dogge, and applying some of the leaves also to the wound: the leaves bruised, or the juice of them boyled in Axungia, that is Hogges larde, and applied, cureth the falling away of the haire, which commeth of hot and sharpe humours: the same also is a very good remedy, to apply to any place that is scalded or burnt with fire: the leaves of themselves bruised and laid to any greene wound, doth heale it up quickly: the same ointment aforesaid with a little Turpentine added thereunto, as also the juyce used with other fit things, doth wonderfully helpe all old ulcers and deepe or much spread sores, in the legges or other parts of the body, and taketh away all inflammation that rise about them, or any where else in the body, be it St. Authonies fire or the like: the roote likewise baked under the embers, either wrapped in paste or wet papers, or in a wet double cloth, and thereof a suppository made and put up into the fundament, or applied to the fundament, doth very effectually helpe the painefull piles or hemorrhoides: the distilled water of the herbe and rootes is very good to all the purposes aforesaid, to be used as well inwardly to drinke, as outwardly to wash any sore places, for it doth heale all manner of wounds, or punctures, and those foule ulcers that rise by the French Poxe.
CHAP. XX. Auchusa. Alkanet. T Here are divers sorts of Alkanet, whereof I have given you the description of one, and under it have made mention of some other sorts in my former Booke; but because I there did not shew you them at the full; I will in this place make further mention thereof, with the rest of it is kinde. 
1. Anchusa lutea major. The greater yellow Alkanet. This yellow Alkanet hath many long and narrow hoary leaves lying on the ground, and thicke set on the stalkes likewise, which riseth not much above a foote and a halfe high, at the toppes wherof stand many yellow flowers, with a small leafe at the foote of every flower, which are somewhat long and hollow, very like unto Comfrey flowers, but a little opening themselves at the brimmes, like unto Buglosse flowers, with a pointell in the middle: after they are past there come in their places, small long blackish seede, not unlike both to Buglosse and Comfrey seede: the roote is of the bignesse of ones finger, and of the length of two, whose outward barke is somewhat thicke, and of an excellent orient red colour, ready to colour their hands and fin∣gers with its red colour that shall handle it, the inner pith being white and wooddy: the whole herbe is of an astringent taste. 
2. Anchusa lutea minor. The lesser yellow Alkanet. This small Alkanet is very like unto the former, but that the leaves are narrower, and not so long, yet covered 1. Anchusa lutea major. Th great yellow Akanet. 
2. A chusa lutea r. The lesser yellow Alkanet. 
3. Anchusa minor purpurea. Small Alkanet with purple flowers. 
5. 6. Anchusa arbore Anchusa h Tall and low Alkanet. 
with an hairy hoarinesse, as the stalkes are also, which in some are but a foote, in others a foote and a halfe high, with smaller leaves thereon: the flowers are hollow and yellow like the other, but lesser; the seede also is a∣like: the roote is great in respect of the plant, red and tender while it is young, but growing wooddy when it is old, and blackish, but liveth and abideth after seed time, which some others doe not. 
3. Anchusa minor purpurea. Small Alkanet with purple flowers. The small purple Alkanet hath greater and longer leaves then the last, hairy and greene like unto Buglosse, and somewhat like unto the first; but yet lesser and narrower, although more plentifull, that lye upon the ground, and those also that rise up with the stalkes, which are many, tender and slender, Altera supina a∣tro purpu∣reo flore. whose flowers being like the others, are of a reddish purple colour: the seede following is more gray; the roote is greater and thicker then the other. We have another sort hereof, whose small flowers scarse rising out of the huskes, are of a sad or dead red colour, the seede blackish rising againe yearely of its owne sowing, and leaning downe to the ground. 
4. Anchusa lignosior angustifolia. Wooddy Alkanet. This smallest Alkanet, which scarse deserveth to be accounted one of them, both for the want of colour in the roote, and the hardnesse of both rootes and stalkes; for the stalkes are scarse a foote high, hard and wooddy, ha∣ving many small and narrow sad greene hairy leaves, much smaller and shorter then the last, the flowers stand on crooked stalkes, bending inwards like Heliotropium, and are hollow but smaller then the former, and of a very blew colour like unto them, for the forme and manner of growing, the roote is hard and wooddy, brown sh red on the outside, and not colouring the hands with any red colour, or very little, such as the rest doe. 
5. Anchusa humilis Cretica. The low Alkanet of Candy. From a small long reddish roote of a fingers bignesse, spring small stalkes halfe a finger long, bearing thereon many small white leaves on each side of them, set very thicke together, like but lesse then the other Alkanets, at the toppes whereof stand reddish flowers inclining to purple, larger then those of Alkanet, and formed like those of bastard Sena, after which come small long rough vessels, containing within them the small seede: in the Summer time the roote will give a red juice, that will die their fingers that touch it, which is much commended by the natives, to be singular good against the poyson of any Serpent. 
6. Anchusa arborea. Great and tall Alkanet. The roote of this Alkanet is insipide, wooddy, long, and of a fingers thicknesse, somewhat reddish within, and with a thinne blackish rough barke without; the stalke is thicke and rugged, shooting forth divers branches, and they other smaller, with many small leaves like Savory set together at the joynts, and small white prickes about them, but on the small branches they stand single for the most part, one above another at equall distances, at the ends whereof grow small flowers, somewhat like unto the ordinary Alkanet, of a yellowish purple colour, and the like seede succeeding, and is not of any knowne use. 
The Place. The first groweth both in Italy, Spaine, and France, as well neare the Sea as further of into the land. I have not yet heard of any that have seene it growing any where in our Country. The second Columna saith groweth in Naples. The third about Mompelier and Lions, as Lobel saith, and this I thinke is the same that groweth in our Country, namely in Kent neare Rochester, in a field neare Sr. Iohn Leveson his house, and in some other places thereabouts: as also in the West parts, as Devonshire, and Cornwall, as it hath beene affirmed. The fourth also about Marseilles, and Frontignana as Pena saith, the two last in Candy. 
The Time. They flower in Iuly for the most part; and sometimes in August, but their rootes have their bravest colour in Iuly and August or thereabouts. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Anchusa , quod vim suffocatoriam habet, ut aliqui volunt, sed alij m lius &amp; verius a Graeco verbo quod est fucare &amp; colorare formam, &amp; eo derivatum nomen b radicis sangui∣neum floridum ve colorem; for the beautifull red colour in these rootes, hath not onely made them knowne, but di∣stinguished from Echium, Lycopsis, Buglossum, and the rest that are like unto them in leaves, but want that colour in their rootes; some have called it Alkanna but very falsely, others Fucus herba. The first is thought to be the third kinde of Anchusa, whereof Matthiolus giveth a figure, although he saith that all the Anchusa ' s that were knowne to him, bore purplish flowers: it is called Pseuda anchusa by Dodonaeus, and is the same Anchusa exalbido flore, that Clusius setteth forth in his History of Plants; it is also very likely to be the same, that Cordus upon Dioscorides maketh his first sort, and Lobel calleth Anchusa lutea. The second Columna calleth Anchusa Echioides minor. The third Camerarius in his Epitome calleth Anchusa altera minor, and Bauhinus Anchusa minor Patavina, and yet he distinguisheth it from the Anchusa minor Alcibiadionsive Onochiles of Lobel, and Clusius making them to be two sorts, Lonicerus calleth it Buglossa rubra. The fourth is called by Lobel and Pena in their Adversaria, Anchusa lignosior angustifolia, and by Clusius, Anchusa lignosior, Bauhinus calleth it in his Pinax, Anchusa an∣gustifolia, and saith it is the same he formerly in his Phitopinax, called Lithospermum minus repens, and in his Matthiolus Lithospermum fruticosum angustifolium, and saith also that this is the same that Lugdunensis setteth forth, under the title of Tragoriganum Monspeliense Dalechampij. The two last are remembred by Alpinus in his History of strange Plants, under the same titles they are here expressed. The Italians call it Anchusa, the Spani∣ards Soagem, and as Clusius saith Argamulo, the French Orchanette, the Germanes Oxenzunge, the Dutch Ghile Anchusa, and take it for a wilde Buglosse, we in English after the French word, Alkanet. 
The Ʋertues. Dioscorides saith that his first kinde (which as I suppose, is that I have described in this and my former Booke, with a purplish flower) doth helpe old ulcers, and those that are burnt with fire, being made into a salve with waxe and oyle, and used with barly flower, it cureth all hot inflammations, and even that which is called Saint Anthonies fire, used with vinegar, it helpeth the morphew, lepry, and the like; the same also applyed to the lower parts, draweth forth the dead childe; the decoction thereof made in water, for those that are aguish, or else in wine, is profitable for those that are troubled with the yellow Iaundise, the spleene or gravell, and the stone in the kidneys; the Apothecaries that used to make ointments saith he, used it to thicken their ointments; which Pliny altereth (as he doth in some other things, relating the text of Dioscorides ) and saith it is used to colour oyntments, and for that purpose they take Cinnabaris and Anchusa. To the second kinde (which we ge∣nerally take to be that with the yellow flower, and is the first here described) Dioscorides giveth these pro∣perties; that whether it be eaten or drunke, or but bound to the wound, it helpeth all such as are bitten by Ser∣pents, especially by the viper (or adder) and that if any that hath eaten hereof shall but spit it into the mouth of any Serpent, it will presently kill it, the leaves (but much more the roote) being drunke in wine stayeth the fluxe of the belly. Pliny addeth hereunto somewhat more; the chiefest strength hereof saith he is in harvest time, a draught of wine wherein some of the dryed leaves and rootes have beene boyled, and given to those that are troubled with the falling downe of the mother doth helpe them; it killeth wormes, being taken with Hyssope, it is good also taken in wine for the paines of the backe and reines, as also for the liver. Galen doth more acurately and distinctly set them forth in this manner. O clea saith he hath a roote astringent and some∣what bitter, and thereby fit both to condensate the thinne humours in the body, and somewhat to extenuate those that are thicke, and as well to clense the chollericke, as to wash the salt humours therein; for it is said before, that a harsh tasted quality joyned with a bitter, can performe those properties; in the like manner it is profita∣ble for the yellow jaundise, for those that are spleneticke, and for those that have paines in the backe and loi , by reason of the stone in the kidneyes. It is also cooling and applyed with Barly flower, helpeth inflammation and Saint Anthonies fire: it clenseth also either inwardly taken, or outwardly used, and therefore with vinegar helpeth morphews, lepries and the like, but these properties are chiefly in the rootes, yet the leaves although they be weaker then the roote, are not without the qualities of drying and binding, and therefore they being taken in wine, are good for all fluxes and laskes, but that which is called Onochiles or Alcibiadion is more phy∣sicall, for in taste it hath a greater acrimony, and speedily helpeth those that are bitten by a viper, whether they eate it, or apply it as a salve to the wound, or but hang it or tye it to the wound, but the little Anchusa, which scarse hath a name, is like unto the Alcibiadion, being more bitter, and therefore more fit to give remedy, and is good to kill the broad wormes in the body, being given to drinke with Hyssope and Cresses, thus saith Galen. It is of late daies given to those that are bruised by some fall, or by beatings, or any other casualties, as also to drive out the small poxe, measles, or the like, to be drunke in hot drinke. Some have said that it will co∣lour waters, gellies, and the like; but Pliny saith it will not dissolve in water, but in oyle, and so we have it true by experience, yet the colour holdeth not long, being boyled in oyle, butter, or other fat thing; and there∣fore the painting that was made therewith by the French Ladies, served onely for a small while except they take it while it is fresh; but the oyntment that is made with a pint of good sallet oyle, wherein two o es of the rootes of Alkanet, and twenty earthwormes hath beene boyled, and afterwards str y ed forth and kept in a pot, is a singular good salve to use for any fresh wounds, made either crosse the flesh or deepe thrusts thereunto, or into the body, as also where nerves and sinewes are, to consolidate and knit them againe; some of the roote put into Petroleum, or oyle of Peter, and being let stand till any one needeth, it is a singular good remedy to heale any fresh cut or thrust: workemen of all sorts, that use sharpe and pointed tooles, ought to have it familiar among them, to use upon all occasions of harme. 
CHAP. XXI. Lycopsis. Wall Buglosse. B Ecause this herbe is so like unto the Anchusa, that as Dioscorides saith, it was called of divers Anchusa, and Galen in his time accounted it as a kinde thereof, as also that is like unto Echium, and other sorts of wilde Buglosse, whereof Anchusa is also accounted a species; I thinke it fit to joyne it next unto them, whose description is as followeth; it spreadeth upon the ground, with many long and nar∣row rough or rugged darke greene hairy leaves, somewhat like unto the Echium or wilde Buglosse, which doe abide in that manner, some yeares, without sending forth any stalke or flowers at all, (which divers having marked, have thought it never did beare flower or seede,) but if it or any other plant should doe so, how could any man thinke it could come there, or any where else, where they are found; and therefore I am verily perswaded, there is no herbe or plant growing upon the ground, but hath a kinde of seede, whereby it is encrea∣sed, in all the places where they are naturall; I doe neither except the Fearne, Maidenhaire, Miltwast, H ts tongue, Coltsfoote, Butter burre, or any other whatsoever, although I know this my opinion, doth not onely contradict divers other more learned mens observations, or rather other mens conceites now adaies (but it hath beene sufficiently I thinke said before in the Chapter of Cynoglossum, that as that, so this notwithstanding, that it doth not beare a stalke for flowers or seede some yeares, yet it is found to beare it in others; because divers plants of each kinde, have beene found, as well with stalkes and flowers, as voide and without) and when it bea∣reth a stalke which riseth two foote high, it carryeth many such like leaves thereon a grow below, but set one distant from another, without order and smaller up to the toppe, where the flowers stand upon the severall branches, that it hath spread, as also comming forth at the joynts with the leaves, like unto the hollow flowers of Echium or Wild Buglosse, with uneven and gaping dented brimmes or edges, of a pale purple colour, with a long stile or pointell in the middle, growing out of the flower above the length thereof; after which follow∣eth seede like unto Buglosse, but not altogether so great or blacke, the roote is somewhat wooddy, long, and not much greater then a finger with some fibres thereat, of a brownish red on the outside, little or nothing co∣louring the fingers, as the Anchusa ' s doe. 
2. Lycopsis Anglica. The English Wall Buglosse. This Lycopsis differeth very little in leaves, stalkes, or flowers from the former, the onely difference con ∣eth in that the flowers doe all grow at the toppes of the branches, and are of a deeper purple colour, with divers threds shooting out of them, the roote is a little reddish like the other, and giveth as little colour. 
3. Lycopsis Aegiptiaca. Egyptian Wall Buglosse. The roote hereof is red, the stalke straight, and two cubits high, with many rough and hard leaves like Bramble leaves, but long narrow and pointed, spread upon the ground, and dispersed upon the stalkes, but not in that manner the rough wilde Cynoglossum Lycopsis Ang ica. English Wall Buglosse. 
doth, the stalke is branched from the mid∣dle to the toppe thereof into a number of slender twigges, bare or naked of leaves for a good di∣stance, and the flowers at the ends of them, which are small, and of a purple colour, made of sixe leaves like a starre. 
The Place. The first groweth not farre from the sea-shore about Frontignan neare unto Mompelier, as Pena and Lobel say; the other Lobel observed in the West country in the way from Bristow and Bath to London: the last Ranwolfius saith hee found in a field where corne grew in Egypt.
The Time. These flower about Iuly, and sometimes in Au∣gust. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Lycopsis, sic dicta ut aliqui volunt, quod caulis foliorum &amp; florum im∣pexa hirsuties pedem Lupinum imitat, vel ut alij, ob radicis fuscum ex purpureo colorem a quo Lycopsis derivata fuit; id est, fuscedo sive obscuritas quaedam, qualis est diluculi summi &amp; primae lucis, quae ortum solis praecedit, vel vespertini crepusculi, quae vulgus in Gallia inter canem, &amp; lupum vocat: sed alij melius &amp; verius ut opinor a florum hiante figura quae lupi fances apertos aemulatur: some as you have heard did take the Cynoglossum vulgare to be it, as Ru∣ellius and Fuschius; in which opinion Matthiolus saith, he himselfe was formerly, but afterwards was disswaded because the roote was not red, but in finding fault with them, hee himselfe is repre∣hended by Pena and Lobel, I have given the same figure of Lycopsis, being not in flower for the Cyno∣glossum of Dioscorides: Dodonaeus taketh the com∣mon Buglosse to be Lycopsis, and so doth Lonicerus also, and saith that the Buglosse in the warmer countries hath a redder roote; but herein surely he is much deceived; for the taste and propertie, as Galen saith, is nothing so astrin∣gent in Buglosse, as is in Lycopsis, wherein it exceedeth Anchusa, whereof he maketh it the fourth sort; and besides, Dioscorides describeth Lycopsis purpurascente flore, with a purplish flower, but so hath not Buglosse, but blew, al∣though the buds be somewhat reddish, before they be full open. The first, as is said, is Matthiolus his Cynoglossum, whom Lugdunensis doth follow and Durantes also. Dodonaeus, as is before said, maketh our knowne Buglosse to be the Lycopsis of Dioscorides, and calleth this Lycopsis Echij altera species. Lobel and Pena in their Adversaria cal∣leth it Lycopsis vel Lycopsis degener Anchusa Aeginetae, Bauhinus doth call it Lycopsis simply without more words, and he maketh his Lycopsis altera Anglica, to be it also, although Lobel sheweth the difference: the last is set forth in the Appendix to Lugdunensis, where hee sheweth that Rauwolfius, who found it, did account it a kinde of Cynoglossum, and called it Lycopsis vera Dioscoridis. 
The Ʋertues. The roote of Wall Buglosse boyled in oyle, healeth greene wounds speedily, and applied with Barly flower helpeth all inflammations, and St. Anthonies fire, and being anointed in convenient places, provoketh sweate. Galen in his sixt Booke of Simples saith, that Lycopsis is cold and drie, and more astringent than Anchusa, especi∣ally the roote, and therefore is very good against inflammations, it staieth rheumes and fluxes, and the accesse of hot and sharpe humours to old sores, whereby they are hard to be cured. 
CHAP. XXII. Onosma. Stone Buglosse. T He forme and likenesse of this plant with the former, and both with Anchusa, hath made me to joyne it next to them, although the vertues hereof be not answerable unto them: it hath many long and narrow smooth leaves lying upon the ground, not above a finger broad, but foure long, like unto those of the lesser Alkanet; this is said by Dioscorides to have a reddish roote, and to be with∣out either stalke flower or seede, which thing he saith likewise of Cynoglossum and Lycopsis, which both have beene knowne in divers plants, to beare both flowers and seede, and therefore it is as probable in this, as in them. Matthiolus onely saith, that such a plant was brought unto him, with long leaves, and reddish rootes like those of Madder, and had neither stalke nor flower, which he thereupon tooke to be the right Onosma, not knowing whether it had or would beare. 
The Place. It groweth in rockie and stony places neare Goritia. 
The Time. It is greene all the yeare, and his time Onosma. Stone Buglosse. 
for flowring if it doth at all, is not expres∣sed. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and so likewise Onosma in Latine, Galen saith it was called also in his time Osmas Phlo ∣tis, and Ononis; wee may call it in English for distinctions sake Stone Buglosse, both for that it is like in forme and manner of growing unto some of the sorts of wilde Buglosse, and that it chiefely deligheth in stony dry, and rockie grounds. 
The Ʋertues. This is sharpe, hot, and bitter in taste, differing in qualitie from the other sorts before, which are rather cold and dry: the leaves hereof in powder taken in wine, or the decoction of them made in wine and given to women with child, will cause them quickly to miscarry, and if the child be dead before the birth, it will cause it speedily to be driven forth; it is also dangerous saith Dioscorides for great bellied women to passe over it, for feare of causing them to miscarry. 
CHAP. XXIII. Cerinthe. Honywort. A Lthough in former dayes there was but one kinde of Cerinthe knowne, or two at the most, yet since in these our dayes, there have beene 1. Cerinthe major flore luteo &amp; rubro. The greater yellow and red Honywort. 
some other sorts found out, and pub∣lished by Clusius, and some others also not untill now expressed by any; and although Gesner first, and Bauhinus following him, doe call it Cynoglossum montanum, and thereupon joy∣neth it next thereunto, yet by comparing the flowers, I finde it therein most to resemble the Comfryes, and therefore I have interposed it betweene them. 
1. Cerinthe major flore luteo &amp; rubro. The greater yellow and red Honywort. The greater party coloured Honywort, riseth up with divers thicke, hairy stalkes, almost two foote high, whereon are set large long leaves, of a blewish greene colour, spotted with great white spots, round at the further ends, and so much compassing the stalkes at the lower end, that it seemeth to goe thorough them, set with some small prickes or thornes thereon, and a little hairy withall: the stalkes are branched toward the toppes into other smaller ones, full of leaves but much smaller, whose ends doe turne inwards like the Turnesole heads; at every leafe whereof commeth forth a long hollow flower, like unto a Comfrey flower and as great, which in some are all yellow, with a reddish circle about the middle thereof; but in others from the middle for∣ward is of a yellow colour, the other part next the stalke being of a purplish red colour, with some threds in the middle, tasting sweete like Hony, wherewith Bees are much delighted, each of them standing in a greene huske divided into five parts at the toppes, in which after they are past grow the seede, two for the most part set together, greater than Burrage seede, blackish, a little cornered and flat at the bottome, where it is joyned to the huske; 3. 5. Cerinthe major flore flavo vel purpureo. The greater yellow or purple Honywort. 
4. 6. Cerinthe minor flore flarovel albo. The lesser yellow or white Honywort. 
the roote is somewhat great and thicke, spreading many fibres within the ground, but perisheth every yeare af∣ter seede time. 
2. Cerinthe minor flore luteo &amp; rubro. The lesser red and yellow Honywort. This lesser Honywort, hath his branches both shorter and leaning downewards, not standing upright, whereon grow long greene leaves, without any spots on them, and lesser than the former: the tops of the branches are as full of leaves and flowers as the former, but turne not in the same manner: the stalkes that sustaine the flowers, and so likewise the small leaves at the foote of every stalke, are somewhat purplish, but the huske wherein the flower standeth is greene, cut into five divisions, the flower is long and hollow like the former, and almost as great, of a gold yellow colour, dented at the ends, and with a red or deepe crimson circle about the middle of them: the seede that followeth is like the former, but a little lesser: the roote is long and full of fibres, perishing every yeare. 
3. Cerinthe major flavo flore. The greater yellow Honywort. This yellow Honywort riseth up with a reasonable great stalke, branched on all sides from the bottome to the toppe, many of the lowermost lying upon the ground, and the other standing more upright, whereon are set large and long blewish greene leaves, spotted as the former is, but not so large at the bottome, where they com∣passe the stalkes, yet having some prickles in the middle thereon as they have, and a little hoary about the brimmes or edges; the toppes of the branches doe bend downewards set with small leaves and flowers at them as the former, and as great, but without any circle or bottome of purple, being wholly of a faire yellow colour, with such like threds as the rest have; the seede is like the former, and so is the roote also perishing after seede time in the same manner. 
4. Cerinthe minor flavo flore. The lesser yellow Honywort. This smaller Honywort hath a slenderer stalke than the former, neare two foote high, set with smaller, nar∣rower yet spotted leaves thereon without order, one above another on both sides of the stalkes, which spreadeth into many small but longer branches, from the middle thereof thicke set with leaves and flowers, which are like the last, all yellow but smaller, and dented at the brimmes of them; after which come such like seede as the last, but smaller: the roote hereof is likewise white and long, and that which grew in my garden, did not abide the first Winters blast, and most usually perished at the first therewith, yet Clusius saith that his lesser yellow sort, whch he found wild in the fields of Austria and Stiria, did sometimes abide greene in the Winter. 
5. Cerinthe major flore purpurante. The purple Honywort. The purple Honywort groweth very like the great yellow kinde, with low bending branches, and somewhat large blewish greene spotted leaves, like as the rest have: the flowers stand in the same manner that the rest doe, and as large, wholly of a darke purplish colour, on the superficies whereof is a little whitenesse perceived: the seede that followeth is like the other, but greater than any of them, and two for the most part standing together in a huske, flat at the bottome, the roote perisheth every yeare, and must be new sowen againe. 
6. Cerinthe minor flore albo. White Honywort. This small Honywort hath divers weake and small branches, leaning or rather lying downe upon the ground, set with such like pale greene leaves, but lesser than the former, whose white spots are not so easie or conspicuous to be seene as in many of the other: the flowers are white long and hollow, like them but smaller, with a red∣dish circle about the middle of the flower, and standing with greene leaves, and in greene huskes as the rest, wherein after they are past, come very likeseede, but not halfe so great as the last; the roote likewise is long, slender, and white, perishing every yeare after it hath given seede. 
The Place. The first as Clusius saith, groweth generally throughout Baetica of Spaine plentifully, and in some places of Portingall also: the second is not knowne from what place it came, but was onely observed by Clusius, in Iohn ab Hogheland his garden: the third Clusius saith he found in the Kingdome of Ʋalencia in Spaine. Gesner in horti saith it groweth in Monte Palatino at Rome, as also in Germany, betweene Dresda and Misena: and Clusius saith he found it in divers fields of Austria and Stiria, where sometimes it would out live a Winter; and Dodonaeus saith in Bohemia and divers parts of Hungary: the fift and sixt grow in divers places of Spaine, from whence we had them, by Guillaume Boel his diligence in finding them out there.
CHAP. XXVII. Bellis. The Daisie. T Hre be many sorts of Daisies, some growing wild both greater and smaller, and others in gar∣dens chiefely; whereof I have in my former Booke given you the hint of divers, but many more is to be spoken of here, that is not there set downe, which are fitter for this than that place; and I am the more willing and thinke it fitter to joyne their Chapter next unto the last, because some of them are called Consolida, which I would set altogether. 
1. Bellis major vulgaris sive sylvestris. The great white wild Daisie. The great white Daisie hath many long narrow and round pointed leaves next the ground, cut in on both sides, making it seeme almost like the divisions of some sorts of Oaken leaves, the stalkes grow to be somewhat high, with divers leaves thereon, but smaller and lesser divided than the lower, at the toppes whereof grow large flowers each upon severall footestalkes, consisting of many white and narrow leaves as a pale or border, and the yellow thrummes in the middle, of no sent at all, whose seede which is somewhat long it blowen away with the winde: the roote is a bush of white stringes, which abide many Winters with the leaves, shouting forth every Spring anew. Ftore pleno. Of this kinde there is one that beareth double flowers differing from the former in nothing else, which is set forth in my former Booke. 
2. Bellis montana major folio acuto. The mountaine great Daisie with sharpe pointed leaves. This Daisie grow lower than the former, and hath much narrower leaves, and shorter also, not deepely dented, nor sharpe about the edges, but ending in an exquisite point; the stalkes beare but one flower apeece, somewhat lesse than the former, but else in all things alike. 
1. Bellis major vulgaris sive sylvestris. The great white wilde Daisie. 
4. Bellis major ramosa umbellifera Americana. The great strange white Daisie. 
 
3. Bellis Alpina major rigido folio. The greater mountaine Daisie with sharpe edged leaves. The leaves of this Daisie are longer and narrower then the first sort, whose dented edges are very sharpe, and the leaves harder in handling, the endes in some are pointed, in others somewhat rounder: the toppes of the stalkes are furnished with single flowers like the first, but larger then it: the seede is small and long like it, and the rootes are blackish with strings or fibres thereat, being somewhat hard and wooddy. 
4. Bellis major ramosa umbellifera Americana. The great strange white Daisie. The stalke of this great Daisie is higher and greater then of the first great sort, the leaves also are larger, and broadest towards the ends, but longer and smaller at the bottomes, dented likewise about the edges, shoo∣ting forth sundry branches, and all of them bearing many white flowers at their toppes, as it were in an umbell, yet not so great, nor the white leaves so large as it, but smaller, and more in number, with a greenish yellow thrumme in the middle, and some a little larger then others, the seede is smaller then the other, and the roote full of fibres. 
5. Bellis Alpina minor rigido folio. The smaller great Mountaine Daisie with rigid leaves. This mountaine Daisie is very like unto the last but that it is 7. Bellis majo spinosa flore luteo nudo. The greater yellow Daisie with prickly leaves. 
8. Globularia Monspeliensium Bellis caeruleae. Blew Daisies. 
lesse, growing scarse a foote high, with hard or harsh nar∣row or short leaves, deepely and sharpely dented at the edges: the stalkes have each of them one large flower, made like the rest, whose border of white leaves, have sometimes yellow, and sometimes purplish yellow thrums in the middle. 
6. Bellis maritima folijs Agerati. The small Sea Daisie with Maudeline leaves. This small Sea Daisie, riseth with a small downy stalke, not above halfe a foote high, divided into two or three very small and long branches, at the bottome whereof grow a few very small leaves, dented about the edges, very like unto the leaves of Mandeline, the rest of the stalkes and branches, be∣ing bare or naked of leaves unto the toppes, every one where∣of beare one small flower, having above twenty small white leaves, compassing a greenish head in the middle: the roote is small and white. 
7. Bellis major spinosa flore luteo nudo. The greater yellow Daisie with prickly leaves. This prickely leafed Daisie springeth up with divers heads, of many small greene leaves, dented about the edges, and every dent sharpe at the point, which shooting up into stalkes, with the like, but lesser leaves on them, become hard and wooddy up to the toppes, sometimes branched, other whiles not, but carrying on their toppes divers small round flowers, on severall small footestalkes, which have no border of leaves, either white or yellow to compasse them, but are like the na∣ked Camomill, or Fetherfew, and somewhat lesser, being a yellow round knop, somewhat hollow in the middle; after the flower is past, there stand in their places small heads with seede, each whereof is small long and whitish, which must soone be gathered when it is ripe, or else it quickely falleth, or is blowne away with the winde, the roote is a great tuft or bush of long blackish strings, or long fibres; the taste hereof is bitter and unpleasant, and the smell somewhat strong. 
8. Globularia Monspeliensium sive Bellis caerulea. Blew Daisies. The blew Daisie hath many narrower shorter and blacker greene leaves then the common field or garden small Daisie lying on the ground; the stalke riseth to be halfe a foote high or more, set with some such small leaves, and at the toppe a small round head, composed of many blew flowers, some∣what like unto the head of a small Scabious, and sometimes with white flowers: the roote is hard and stringy, the whole plant is bitter in taste. 
9. Bellis caerulea spinosa. The blew Daisie with prickely leaves. This Daisie is wholly like the former blew Daisie, but that the leaves that grow below upon the ground, as well as those upon the small stalkes, being like in forme unto them, are dented about the edges, the points whereof are prickely, as the ends are likewise: at the toppes of every stalke, which is not higher then the other, standeth one round flower, lar∣ger or greater then of the other, but composed of the like blew threds as they. 
10. Globularia lutea montana. The mountaine yellow Daisie. 
11. Bellis minor simple sylvestris. The lesser wilde white Daisie. 
12. Bellis minor alba ramosa. Branched small wilde white Daisies. 
 
10. Globularia lutea montana. The mountaine yellow Daisie. This yellow Globe flower hath many thicke, hard, smooth, round pointed leaves spread into sundry heads on the ground, from among which spring sundry stiffe rushlike stalkes about a foote high, with a joynt towards the middle of them, and two small upright leaves set thereat, each bearing on their toppes, a globelike round head of flowers inclosed in a skinne, which opening, a number of flowers appeare, thicke thrust together, like un∣to a head of Scabions, each flower being set in a rough purplish huske consisting of five sweete faire yellow leaves laid starre fashion, with tenne long threds in the middle, standing about a small round umbone, having a pale flat bicorned pointell rising out thereof, which umbone growing ripe is rough, and conteineth within it an hard shell, opening at the toppe into foure parts, wherein lie round flat, blacke seed, divided as it were with a small cut; the roote is white, a foote long, and of a small fingers thicknesse, with a thicke brownish barke, and a hard woody pith within, divers long fibres issuing out there from, whose taste is drying, and sent quicke and heady, the leaves being bitter and sharpe withall.
1. Alchymilla major vulgaris. Common Ladies Mantle. Our common Ladies Mantle is very like to the former Sanicle, having many leaves rising from the roote, standing upon long hairy footestalkes, being 1. Alchymilla major vulgaris. Common Ladies Mantle. 
almost round, but a little cut in on the edges, into eight or tenne parts, more or lesse, making it seeme like a starre, with so many corners and points, and dented round a∣bout, of a light greene colour, somewhat hard in hand∣ling, and as if it were foulded or plaited at the first, and then crumpled in divers places, and a little hairy, as the stalke is also which riseth up among them, to the height of two or three foote, with a few such leaves thereupon, but smaller, and being weake is not able to stand upright, but bendeth downe to the ground, divided at the toppe into two or three small branches, with small yellowish greene heads, and flowers of a whitish greene colour breaking out of them, which being past, there commeth small yellowish seede like unto Poppy seede, the roote is somewhat long and blacke, with many strings and fi∣bres thereat. 
2. Alchymilla minor quinquefolia. Cinkefoile Ladies Mantle. This small Ladies Mantle, hath also a few smaller and smoother greene leaves, rising from the small blacke fi∣brous roote, set upon long footestalkes, but divided at the edges into five corners or points, and somewhat deepelier dented about the brimmes then the former; from whence two or three small weake bending stalkes doe rise, not halfe a foote high: the flowers that grow at the toppes are smaller, but alike according to the bignesse of the plant, and of the same herby or greene colour. 
The Place. The first groweth naturally in many pastures and wood sides, both in Hartford and Wiltshire, and in Kent also, as in Kingwood neere Feversham, in the pastures nigh Tidnam, and Chepstow, and in other places of this land; the other groweth on St. Bernards hill among the Switzers. 
The Time. The first flowreth in May and Iune, the other not untill August, but both abide after seede time, greene all the Winter after. 
The Names. It was not knowne by name unto the ancient writers, as can be gathered, and although Brunfelsius and some others thought it to be Leontopodium or Lions foote, deceived by the name, because divers nations have so called it, from the forme or likenesse of the leafe, yet is it not that of Dioscorides, as may plainely appeare by his de∣scription thereof. It is usually called Alchymilla by most writers, because as some thinke the Alchymists gave such commendations of it. It is called also of Matthiolus, Lugdunensis, and others Stellaria, from the forme of the leafe, that with the corners resemble a starre, but there are divers other herbes called Stellaria by divers au∣thours, and some also call this Pes Leonis, and Pata Leonis: others call it Sanicula major, not without good rea∣son. Cordus in historia de plantis, calleth it Drosera, Drosinus, and Psiadeion from the Germane name Sinnaw, be∣cause the hollow crumplings and the edges also of the leaves, will containe the dew in droppes like pearles, that falleth in the night. Bauhinus calleth the other Alchymilla Alpina Quinquefolia. The Italians call it Stellaria, and Stella herba. The French Pied de lyon. The Germanes as I said before Sinnaw, and some Lewenfuss, and V ser∣frawen mantel. The Dutch Onser urawen mantel. And we in English Our Ladies Mantle, and great Sanicle, and some Lions foote, or Lions paw, or Padelyon after the French. 
The Ʋertues. Ladies Mantle is more cooling then Sanicle, and therefore more proper for those wounds that have inflamma∣tions, and more astringent binding and drying, and therefore is more effectuall to stay bleedings, vomitings, fluxes in man or woman of all sorts, and bruises by fals or otherwise, and to helpe ruptures, it helpeth also such maides or women that have overgreat flagging breasts, causing them to grow lesse and hard, being both drunke, and out∣wardly applyed, and serveth also to stay the whites in them, wherein it is so powerfull that it is used as a surfu∣ling water also, the distilled water drunke continually for twenty daies together, by such women as are barren and cannot conceive, or retaine the birth after conception, through the too much humidity of the matrice, and fluxe of moist humours thereunto, causing the seede not to abide but to passe away without fruite, will reduce their bodies to so good and conformable an estate, that they shall thereby be made more fit and able to retaine the conception, and beare out their children, if they doe also sit sometimes as in a bath, in the decoction made of the herbe. It is accounted as one of the most singular wound herbes that is, and therefore the Germanes extoll it with exceeding great praise, and never dresse any wound, either inward or outward, but they give of the decocti∣on hereof to drinke; and either wash the wound with the said decoction, or dippe tents therein, and put them thereinto, which wonderfully dryeth up all the humidity of the sores, or of the humours flowing thereunto, yea although they be fistulous and hollow, and abateth also such inflammations, as often happen unto sores: but for fresh or greene wounds or cuts, it so quickely healeth them up, that it suffereth not any quitture to grow therein, but consolidateth the lippes of the wound, yet not suffering any corruption to remaine behinde: it hath formerly beene much accounted of by Chymists, who have affirmed that the juice hereof will constraine the vo∣lubility of Mercury, and make it fixt, from whence as it is thought it tooke the name, but these idle fancies are now quite worne out, as I thinke. 
CHAP. XXXI. Solidago Saracenica. Sarasins Consound. T Here have beene divers herbes that have beene mistaken and set forth for the right Sarasins Con∣sound, we will therefore shew you here in this place some of them that are not right, with the true one also. 
1. Solidago Sanacenica vera Salicis folio. The true Sarasins Consound with willow leaves. The true Sarasins Consound groweth very high sometimes, with brownish stalkes, and other whiles with greene and hollow, to a mans height, having many long and narrow greene leaves snipt about the edges set thereon somewhat like unto those of the Al∣mond, 3. Solidago Saracenica sive Germanica siliquosa. The Germane Consound with small cods. 
or Peach tree, or Willow leaves, but not of such a white greene colour; the toppes of the stalkes are fur∣nished with many pale yellow starrelike flowers, standing in greene heads, which when they are fallen, and the seed ripe, which is somewhat long, small and of a yellowish browne colour, wrapped in downe, is therewith carryed away with the wind, the roote is composed of many strings or fibres, set together at a head, which perish not in winter, but abide, although the stalkes dry away, and no leafe appeareth in Winter; the taste hereof is strong and unpleasant, and so is the smell also. 
2. Solidago Saracenica major. The greater Sarasins Consound. This greater Solidago differeth not much from the for∣mer, rising up with upright hard round hollow stalkes, as high as it, with many darke greene leaves at the first, set at the head of the roote, which afterwards rise up with the stalkes, and are set there without order, somewhat larger then they, and dented about the edges; the flowers are much greater with more and yellower long leaves star∣fashion, standing in greene heads many together, where∣in after they are past, are contained the seede, which with the downe thereof flieth away with the winde, in the like manner as the former doth, the rootes are com∣posed of a great bush of white strings, or white fibres growing very strongly in the ground, and shooting forth string on all sides, which produce new plants, encreasing in a small time, and overspreading a great quantity of ground, the head of leaves is somewhat browne at the first shooting out of the ground, and so is the head of the roote before the Spring, and are of a bitter taste, and binding withall. 
3. Solidago Saracenica sive Germanica siliquosa. The Germane Consound with small cods. This Consound riseth up with great round wooddy stalkes, to as great an height as the former, or more, but are so weake by reason of the length and weight of leaves thereon, that they cannot stand upright, but fall upon the ground, bearing many darke greene leaves thereon, long and narrow like the first, with a wh in the middle, snipt or dented about the edges, and many smaller yellowish flowers at the ppes of the turne into very small and long round darke pods, as small and long as those of Sophia or Flin ede, and brownish seedes within them, of an hot and quicke, sharpe and unpleasant taste withall; as the herbe in but much more, the roote in time groweth to be very great, even of the bignesse of a very deepe also (for such I have digged up in my owne Garden) of a strong unpleasant savour and taste, then Cresses, and very like unto that of Flixeweede, abiding many yeares: but the stalkes perishing do the ground, and shooting forth a new in the Springs. 
4. Solidago Saracenica altera sive tertia Tragi. Tragus his Germane Consound. This other Germane Consound, is somewhat like both in stalkes and leaves unto the middle kinde of Neppe, with long leaves, being white as they are, the flowers stand at the toppes of the stalkes, many together upon small round greene heads, very like unto the first sort, being small and yellow, which after they are p s the heads with seed are ripe, open themselves, and with the downe in them, is carryed away by the wind, in the same manner: the roote creepeth in the ground, and shooteth up branches round about; the taste of the herbe is bitter, whereby it is found to be drying, and of a piercing quality. 
The Place. All these doe grow in moist and wet grounds, by woods sides, and sometimes in the moist places of the sha∣dowy groves, as also by water sides. 
The Time. They flower in Iuly, and the seede of the two first, is soone ripe, and carryed away with the winde after the third hath not his pods and seede ripe untill the end of August, or beginning of September. 
The Names. None of these herbes are of ancient, but later invention and appellation; it is called Solidago and Consolida from the old Latine word Consolidare, which in the barbarous Latine age did signifie, to soder close, or glue up the lips of wounds, and Saracenica, because the Turkes and Sarasens had a great opinion thereof, in healing the hurts and wounds of their people, and were accounted great Chirurgions, and of wonderfull skill therein, whom the Christians followed and called it thereafter, others called it herba fortis from the strong sent and taste as it is thought. Tragus after he had described the Solidago Saxacenica vera, addeth two sorts more, the one which is his second, is the Lysimachia caerulea spicata, and the third which is the last here, Bauhinus calleth it Coniza assi Germanica, referring it to the Conyza ' s or Fleabanes, but I have thought it fitter to place it here. Tragus calleth the first Solidago Saracenica prima, and saith that Brunfelsius wrote very largely thereof, and yet Bauhinus quoteth not Brunfelsius to have called it so, but that he called the Bellis sylvestris minor, to be Solidago Consolida species, divers have thought the Ʋirga aurca to be it, and so doth Bauhinus also, and therefore saith that Tragus his first Solidago is the Virga aurea angustifolia serrata, Tabermontanus calleth it Consolida aurea. The second is called by Lugdunensis, Solidago Saracenica major. The third I presume is the same that Lobel giveth us the description of in his Adversaria, and the figure in his Observations, yet maketh the heads with seed to flye away with the wind as the others doe, but surely the figure hereof, doth so truely represent this plant, that I doe here set forth unto you, as no other can come neerer unto it, and therefore I am perswaded that he was mistaken in the heads of seede, which as I shew you in this, give small long pods with small browne seed therein; or else there is another so like this as can be, whose seed with the downe is carryed away with the winde. The last is as I said Tragus his third Solidago Saracenica, which he calleth Herba vulneraria ad fluvium de Pfrim. The Germanes as it is thought first called it Heidnisch Wundtkraut, that is Ʋulneraria Turcica Heathenish Woundwort, from whence came the name Solidago Saracenica, and the French thereafter Consoulde Sarazine, and so all other nations in their severall tongues. 
The Ʋertues. Among the Germanes this Wound herbe, is not onely of especiall account, but even preferred before all other of the same quality, be it Bugle or Sanicle, or whatsoever else, for it is hot and dry almost in the third degree, and binding withall: being boyled in wine and given to drinke, it helpeth the indisposition of the Liver, and eeth the gall from obstructions, whereby it is good for the yellow jaundise, and for the dropsie in the beginning of, as also all inward ulcers of the reines, or elsewhere, and inward wounds or bruises; and being wine, and then distilled, the water thereof drunke is singular good to ease all gnawing in the stomacke, or any other paines or torments in the body, as also the paines of the mother; and being boyled in water, helpeth con∣tinuall agues; and this said water or the simple water of the herbe distilled, or the juice or decoction are all very effectuall to heale any greene wound, or old sore or ulcer whatsoever, both clensing them from any corruption is bred in them, and healing them up quickely afterwards; the same also is no lesse effectuall, for the ulcers in the mouth or throate, be they never so foule or stinking, by washing and gargling the mouth and throate there∣with, and likewise for such sores as happen in the privy parts of man or woman, briefely whatsoever hath been said of Bugle or Sanicle, may be found herein. The other sorts of Consounds doe runne the same course with this, and are as effectuall in a manner as it. 
CHAP. XXXII. Herba Doria sive Aurea. Dorias his Woundwort. B Ecause this herbe doth notably differ, both from the former Consounds, and the Golden roddes that shall follow, I have thought good to set it betweene them, whereof there are more sorts then one, as they may best be referred. 
1. Herba Doria vulgaris. The ordinary Dorias Woundwort. This Woundwort hath many great thicke fleshy long deepe greene leaves rising from the 1. Herba Doria vulgaris. The ordinary Dorias Woundwort. 
2. Herba Doria minor Americana. Dorias Woundwort of America.
almost as long as Docke leaves, but thicker, sharper at the points, smaller at the lower ends of them, and broa∣dest in the middle, somewhat harsh or hard in handling, among which riseth up but one great stalke for the most part, but exceeding high, above any man, whereon are set very sparingly, scarse two or three such leaves, but smaller as grow below, at the toppes whereof stand a few yellow flowers, in greene scaly heads, greener then those of the golden rodde, or of the former Consound, which when they are ripe, are blowne away with the winde: the roote is not so great, as the plant would make shew it should be, having many fibres set at the head together, which take strong hold of the ground, and dyeth not, nor the leaves lose their verdure in the winter, but spring afresh every yeare. 
2. Herba Doria minor Americana. Dorias Woundwort of America. This is so like the former in shew, that it cannot better be referred then unto the former, abiding greene all , whose leaves are thicke somewhat long and narrow, but not halfe so great as the for∣mer, and paler greene colour, esse for forme very like them: the stalkes which are many, and rise not to halfe that height are , and for the most part, leane downe, not being able, by the multitude of flowers and leaves , to stood upright, which flowers stand upon longer, and greater greene scaly heads then the former are themselves also greater, and more laide open, with many small, long narrow leaves, which turne into a white mossie downe, and is carryed away with the winde, the roote is composed of many blackish fibres. 
3. Consolida aurea nemorum. The golden Consound. This golden herbe divers long and narrow sharpe pointed leaves, standing at the toppe of the roote, very like unto Dorias Woundwort, but not so great, yet thicke like them, and of a darker greene colour, the stalkes rise not much above▪ foote high, having here and there narrower long leaves on them, then below, the flowers that stand at the toppes of them, are larger then of the former, having many narrow long yellow leaves there∣on, laide open like a starre flower, with divers thrummes in the middle, the rootes are many small white fibres, like unto the Daisies, the taste thereof is somewhat sharpe, and aromaticall, and astringent or binding withall. 
The Place. The first as Lobel saith, groweth neare the bankes of Rivers, in Provence and Narbone of France. The second came from the French Colony in America, into France, for from Vespasian Robin of Paris I had it. The best in the thicke woods neere Orleance, as Lobel also saith, they doe all well abide in Gardens. 
The Time. The first and the last doe for the most part, flower a moneth before the second, which is not in flower before August at the soonest. 
The Names. The first is thought to have beene found out by Andreas Doria, the Generall of the Emperour, and the French Kingsfleete, or at least commended or commanded to be used for the reliefe of his Souldiers and Marriners, al∣though Lobel seemeth to invert the name, from the French, L '  herbe Dorea, herba Dorea, quasi aurea herbe, and thinketh it may be the Panax Chironium of Theophrastus, which he describeth in the 12. Chapter of his 9. Booke, whose forme and properties there related, doe very fitly answer hereunto (yet some doe rather referre the Bupleuron Hares eare unto it) or else (as he saith) is one of those Panaces of Theophrastus, which Pliny in his 23. Booke, and 4, Chapter speaketh of, found by Chiron, and called Centaurium, also Pha ceum, of the King Pharnaces, who is said also to finde it. Gesner in hortis Germania, called of seene, Pana∣ces Chironium, and Tabermontanus also calleth it, Panax Chironium Theophrastus, that D aliud, that Lugdunensis saith was so called of some Herbarists, setting it forth in the Chapter of Le d m, and yet is the same that he set forth for the Dorea Narbonensium of Pena and Lobel, in the Chapter of Ʋirga aurea, although it seemeth he did not know so much, which kinde of error is very frequent in him. Bauhinus calleth it Ʋirga aurea major vel Doria, The second came to me under the same name that is in the title, which because it can be no waies bettered, I thinke not fit to alter. The last Pena and Lobel, doe onely make mention of in their Ad∣versaria, by the name of Consolida aurea nemorum Limonij folijs, and Bauhinus calleth it, Virga aurea ma flore. 
The Vertues. The properties of healing greene wounds, and old sores is proper hereunto, being accounted as a meane in the vertues, betweene the former Consounds, and the golden rods that follow, and therefore it needeth not any further repetition, or amplification of the same things: but if it be the Panax Chironicum of Theophrastus as a∣foresaid it should then be availeable against the bitings of the viper, and the Phalangium, and other venemous Creatures, being given in wine inwardly, and annointed therewith, and the oyle outwardly; as also for old or foule ulcers, used with wine and oyle, and with hony for excrescences in the flesh, and to destroy the moths of garments, unto all which properties, both the smell and taste so aromaticall in leaves and rootes, like unto that of wild Angelica, may very well conduce us to beleeve, for many both Physitions and Chirurgion in France doe much esteeme thereof, and use it both inwardly and outwardly, in many medicines for their Pa∣tients, and to good effect. 
CHAP. XXXIII. Virga aurea. Golden Rod. V Nto the two sorts of golden Rods, that are knowne and set forth by many writers, we have another sort not yet knowne publikely, whose originall was in America. 
1. Ʋirga aurea vulgaris. The ordinary Golden Rod. This Golden Rod, that is most common to our Country, riseth up with brownish small round stalkes, halfe a yard or two foote high, but high∣er 2 Virga aurea serratis folijs. Golden Rod with dented leaves. 
if it grow in a fat soile, or in a Garden, having thereon ma∣ny narrow and long darke greene leaves, very seldome with any nickes or dents about the edges, and as seldome with any strakes or white spots therein, and yet sometimes and in some places, they are so to be found, divided at the tops into many small branches, with divers small yellow flowers on every one of them, which are turned one way, not looking sundry waies, as all the flowers of the former kindes doe, which likewise being ripe, doe turne into downe, and are ca∣ried away with the winde, the roote consisteth of many small fibres, which grow not deepe into the ground, but abideth all the Winter therein, shooting forth new branches every yeare, the old ones dying downe to the ground. 
2. Ʋirga aurea serratis folijs. Golden Rod with dented leaves. The stalkes of this Golden Rod, rise not up so high as the former, but are as great, bearing larger, but shorter leaves thereon, and dented about the edges, the branches beare such like flowers, facing one side of their stalkes as the former doth, and are turned into downe, flying away in the same manner, the roote is like the other. 
3. Ʋirga aurea Americana. Golden Rod of America. The leaves of this Golden Rod, before it runne up to stalke, are as great as the last, being but narrow and long, yet broa∣dest in the middle, and very sharpe pointed at the ends, some∣what dented also about the edges, but lesse then the former, and of a darke greene colour, the stalke is a little hairy, rising higher then the last, or about a foote and a halfe high at the most, bearing yellow flowers all on one side, like the former, and flye in the winde, with the downe as the rest, the roote is not much unlike the other, and abideth under ground in win∣ter in the same manner, losing all the old stalkes. I have given but one figure for all these three plants, they are all so like that it were needlesse to multiply more figures, the place and the dented leaves making the whole difference. 
The Place. The first is as I said frequent enough in divers places of the land, in the open places of woods and copses, both in moist and dry grounds, the second is not so frequent, and is found but in few places, although Gerard, deceived with the common kinde, which he found sometimes, to have but a few dents about the edges, thought it to be the other, and therefore said that both sorts were to be found plentifully in Hampsteed wood, neere unto the gate that leadeth to Kentish Towne, when as all that there groweth, as I said for the most part, is but of the first sort, yet in some places it is there to be found also, but more sparingly. The last as I said before, came from America, but from what part I know not. 
The Time. The first flowreth later then the second, which is about July, and the other in the beginning or middle of Au∣gust. The last also flowreth very late. 
The Names. The first is generally called by all writers almost, Virga aurea, because the stalkes being reddish, make the bushy toppes of flowers seeme as if they were of a gold yellow. The second is called folijs non serratis by Came∣rarius in his Epitome of Matthiolus, or major angustifolia, as he doth in horto, Lobel in Adversaria, giveth the title of Ʋirga aurea Ʋillanovani, but his description is of the other, (for in his Icones and observations, he called that which is not dented about the edges Ʋirga aurea Villanovani, and the other altera serrato folio) Anguillara thought it might be the Leucographis of Pliny, because it is said in the description thereof, it is found sometimes with white strakes in the leaves, but why Tabermontanus should take it to be Symphitum petraeum, is not well knowne, for he maketh three sorts, whereof this is his third, and the other two be the other serratis folijs, where∣of he found or saw one, with somewhat rounder leaves, and whose flowers were more white then the others. The last hath his name in his title, as is fittest for it. It is called in French Ʋerge d ' or, and in high and low Dutch gulden roede, and we in English Golden Rod. 
The Vertues. As Golden Rodde is like unto the Sarasins Consound in forme, but much lesser, so is it also in the properties, not much inferiour, being hot and dry almost in the second degree. Arnoldus de villa nova, commendeth it much against the stone in the reines and kidneyes, and to provoke urine in abundance, whereby the gravell or stone engendred in the uritory parts, by raw and tough flegmatike humours, may be washed downe into the bladder, from growing into a stone in those parts, and thence may be avoided with the urine: the decoction of the herbe greene or dry, or the distilled water thereof is very effectuall for inward bruises, as also to be outwardly ap∣plyed: the same also stayeth the bleedings in any part of the body, and of wounds also, and the fluxes of the menstruall courses in women, and the fluxes of the belly and humours, as also the blooddy flixe in man or woman: it is no lesse prevalent in all ruptures, or burstings, to be both drunke and outwardly applyed: it is the most so∣veraigne woundherbe of many, and can doe as much therein as any, both inwardly for wounds and hurts in the body, and for either greene wounds, quickly to cure them, or old sores and ulcers, that are hardly to be cu∣red, which often come by the fluxe of moist humours thereunto, and hinder them from healing: it is like∣wise of especiall use in all lotions for sores or ulcers in the mouth, and throate, or in the privy parts, of man or woman: the decoction thereof likewise helpeth to fasten the teeth that are loose in the gummes. 
CHAP. XXXIII. Lysimachia. Loosestrife or Willow herbe. I Ntending next unto the Golden rods, to shew you the sorts of Loosestrife or Willow herbe, I am forced for methods sake, and that I might not encumber your memory, with too many in one Chapter, to divide them, and speake of them severally; those with yellow flowers first; and se∣condly, of those that doe not beare their flowers in spiked heads: thirdly, of them that doe beare spiked flowers: and lastly of those that doe beare their seede in longs huskes, or pods, bee they wilde in our owne land or in others, and brought into gardens. 
1. Lysimachia lutea major vulgaris. Common yellow Loosestrife or Willow herbe. The greater yellow Loosestrife, or Willow herbe, which is the more common, groweth in ranke moist grounds, to be foure or five foote high, or more, with great round stalkes, a little crested, diversly branched, from the middle of them to the toppes, into great and long branches, on all which at the joynts there grow, long and narrow leaves, but greater and broader below, most usually two at a joint, yet sometimes three or foure, somewhat like unto Willow leaves, without nickes or dents on the edges, and of a faint greene colour, from the upper joynts of the branches, and at the toppes of them also stand many yellow flowers, of five leaves a peece with divers yellow threds in the middle, which turne into small round heads, wherein are contained small cornered seede, the roote creepeth underground; almost like Couchgrasse, but greater, and shooteth up e∣very spring brownish heads, which afterwards grow up into stalkes, &amp;c. it hath no sent or taste, but onely a∣stringent and thereby drying. 
2. Lysimachia lutea minor. The lesser yellow Willow herbe. This yellow Willow herbe, or Loosestrife, as it riseth not up so high as the former, with his round joynted stalkes, which are somewhat woolly or hairy, so the leaves being also woolly and somewhat like them, are narrower and shorter then they, foure for the most part, and sometimes but three set together at a joint, spotted with blackish spots on the underside of them, not compassing it at the bottome, but every one standing upon a short footestalke, and not dented about the edges at all, from the middle of the stalke almost, upwards at eve∣ry joynt commeth forth the branches, which are short, nothing so long as the former, and standing closer toge∣ther, whereon grow a few leaves, lesser then those below; at whose toppes, and at some of the upper joynts also, stand a few flowers lesser then the former, but yellow, and consisting of five leaves as they are, with many yellow threds in them, of a strong sweete sent, which so joyne together at the bottome, that the whole flower 1. Lysimachia lutea major vulgaris. Common yellow Loosestrife or Willow herbe. 
3. Lysimachia lutea flore globoso. Roundheaded yellow Willow herbe.
The Vertues. Moneywort is somewhat cold, but very astringent, binding and drying, whereby it is singular good for to stay all fluxes of blood in man or woman, whether they be laskes, bloody fluxes, the flowing of womens moneth∣ly courses, or bleedings inwardly or outwardly, also the weakenesse of the stomacke, that is given to ca∣sting, it is very good also, for all ulcers, or excoriation of the lungs or other inward parts; yet some shepherds and others doe thinke it is very hurtfull for their cattell to feede thereon, and that it causeth their lungs to blister, which assuredly is but a conceit or opinion, for no cold and binding thing was ever knowne to exulcerate. It is exceeding good for all wounds either fresh or greene, to heale them speedily, for old ulcers also, which by their humidity, and by the fluxe of moist and sharpe humours, are either spreading or long in curing, for all which purposes, the juice of the herbe, or the powder drunke in water, wherein hot steele hath beene often quenched, or the decoction of the dry or greene herbe in wine or water drunke, or the seede, juice, or decoction used to the outward places, to wash or bathe them, or to have tents dipped therein, and put into them are effe∣ctuall. 
CHAP. XL. Paronychia. Whitlow wort, or Whitlow grasse. A Lthough Bauhinus disclaimeth all the sorts of Paronychia expressed by all other Authours, referring them all to some one or other herbe, and although those that I shall set forth here by that name, doe not fully answer the description of Dioscorides, yet because divers worthy Authours have so called them, and I had rather if they have erred, erre with them, then be singular in error with Bauhinus, let them therefore receive their place here at this time. 
1. Paronychia major. The greater Whitlow wort. The greater Whitlow wort hath very many leaves lying on the ground, in a round compasse one by another, of three inches long, and one broad a peece, rough, hairy, of a darke greene colour, and somewhat dented about the edges, standing upon short footestalkes, from the middle of whom rise up one or two small round naked stalkes, with few or no leaves thereon, scarse able to stand upright, but bending downewards, at the tops wher∣of stand small white flowers, after which come small long pods containing small reddish seede, nothing so hot and sharpe as the next. 
2. Paronychia altera minor. The lesser Whitlow-wort. This other that is smaller, hath likewise divers leaves lying on the ground, lesser then former, somewhat like unto the lesser Mouseare, called Cats foote, but not so hoary, yet a little hairy, and of a yellowish greene 3. Paronychia Alfines folio. Common Whitlow grasse. 
4. Paronychia altera rutaceo solum. 
4. Paronychia incisis folijs. Iagged Whitlow grasse. 
colour from which spring divers small straight and crested stalkes, halfe a foote high or more, branching forth at the toppes, where stand divers white flowers, unto whom doe follow very slender long pods, like those of Flixeweed, full of small reddish seede, as sharpe and hot in taste as Cresses, the roote is small, hard and wooddy. 
3. Paronychia vulgaris Alfines folio. Common Whitlow grasse. This is a very small herbe, seldome rising to be an handbreadth high, ha∣ving many small and somewhat long leaves, lying next unto the roote, somewhat like those of Chickeweede, but somewhat longer and whiter, from whence rise divers slender naked stalkes, bearing many white flowers one above another, exceeding small, after which come small flat pouches, lesse then of any Thlaspi, wherein is contained very small seede, of a sharpe taste, the rootes are a few small fibres. 
4. Paronychia folijs incisis, Iagged Whitlow grasse. This other Whitlow grasse, hath some pale or reddish; greene leaves, cut in on the edges into two or three small cuts, making them seeme like unto the leaves of Rue, or herbe grace; it hath fewer stalkes then the former, and such like leaves but smaller, set thereon in some places, with some white flowers at the tops of the stalkes, which turne about like a Scorpions taile, greater then the other, and huskes that hold the seede greater also, the rootes are small and fibrous. 
The Place. The two first sorts are found upon open hils, and in the dryer grounds of them, both the last sorts are often found together, that is either upon old stone or bricke wals, or in dry gravelly grounds, yet still where it hath grasse or mosse or the like, growing neere to shadow it. 
The Time. They flower very earely in the Spring, for they are all past by the end of Aprill, and are not to be found all the Sommer following. 
The Names. These are not as I said, the true Paronychia of Dioscorides, but received under that name by good Her∣barists, Bauhinus as I said before disclaimeth all the sorts of Paronychia, &amp; referreth them all to one plant or other, as he thinketh best, and therein I think he hath as much erred, as he thought others did, for althogh the Paronychia prima Matthioli, be true Ruta muraria, or Salvia vitae, being of the taste and quality of the rest of the capillary herbes, as you shall heare when wee come to speake of them in their proper place, and Matthiolus his Parony∣chia altera, be Anthyllis Alfines folio, yet how Bauhinus should make the Paronychia folijs incisis sive rutaceo folio to be a Sedum, rather then the other, calling it Sedum tridactylites tectorum, I cannot well see; for the leaves thereof doe not lye compassing one another, as all or most of the Seda ' s doe, neither are the leaves thereof thicke, as most of them are, nor are the Seda ' s hot in taste as these are, and although Lonicerus setteth forth the Medica lunata, (whose figure and description I have given you in my former Booke) for a Paronychia, whereunto as he saith, Dioscorides his description doth not much vary, which is called also Lunaria Italica, as a difference from the Lunaria Germanica, which may be refused, yet in my opinion he hath erred as much as in the others, to make all the other here set downe to be species of Bursa pastoris, and I cannot but morvaile also at Gerard, in that hee had meant if he had lived to have seene his worke published againe, with the additions, to have made another Paronychia by the name of Paronychia Cambrensis, of an herbe that he had received from a friend that sent it him, being gathered upon a mountaine in Wales, which is the Pyrola Europaea alfines flore minor, as by his description may plainely appeare, but I must excuse him in that, I thinke he never read, or marked what he read of Pyrola Alfines flore, spoken of before in the Chapter of Pyrola, and therefore he referred the plant upon sight, unto the neerest his wits would serve him. The first is called by Thalius Pilosella siliquata major, Aizoon Telephium Dale∣champij by Lugdunensis, and Bauhinus, Bursa pastoris similis siliquosa major seu majoribus folijs. The second is Thalius his Pilosella siliquata minor, which Gesner calleth Paronychia altera Myagri folijs, and Bauhinus Bursae pastoris similis siliquosa minor seu minoribus folijs. The third is called Paronychia Alfines folio, by Lobel, Lugdunensis, and Ca ius, Paronychia vulgaris by Dodonaeus, Thlaspios minima species, by Thalius who yet saith it may well be referred to these sorts, by Lugdunensis Myosoris altera species, and by Bauhinus Bursa pastoris minor loculo ob∣longo. The last which is Paronychia incisis folijs and rutaceo folio by Lobel, Paronychia altera by Dodonaeus, Alfine petraea rubra &amp; Paronychia tertia by Tabermontanus. Tragus not knowing by what name best to call it, entituled it in his owne language Hendelkrant, and Thalius thereafter Dactyliobotanon alterum, and as I shewed you before, Bauhinus maketh it an Aizon or Sedum. 
The Vertues. There is no exact and certaine tryall made of late dayes of this herbe Whitlow-grasse, whether it performeth the cure, Dioscorides and Galen attribute unto their Paronychia, for being by taste found to be somewhat hot and sharpe, it hath not that drying faculty without sharpenesse, that they say is in theirs, and therefore it is not pro∣bable to worke those effects, to heale the impostumes that grow at the rootes of the nailes of a mans hand, and other hot inflammations and impostumes, but onely a generall supposition it hath from the name that it will helpe whitlowes and fellons, that rise upon the fingers, most usually about the joynts of them, which is performed by a digesting quality. 
CHAP. XLI. Anagallis. Pimpernell. T Here were formerly onely two sorts of Pimpernell knowne to Dioscorides and the other ancient Authours, which are that with the red flower, and that with the blew but our times have found out other sorts, as shall be shewed in this Chapter, yet I doe not ane to speake of any of the Brooke limes, or Water sorts here, for they shall be entreated of in their proper place, which is among those plants that delight to grow in watery places. 
1. Anagallis flore phaeniceo. Red flowred Pimpernell. The Common Pimpernell hath divers weake square stalkes lying on the ground, beset all along with two small and almost round leaves at every joynt, one against another, very like unto Chickweede, but have no foote∣stalkes, for they doe as it were compasse the stalke, wherein it differeth from Chickeweede the flowers stand singly ach by themselves, at the s betweene them and the stalkes, consisting of five shall round pointed leaves, of a fine pale red colour, ending to an O eng, with so many ds in the middle, in whose places after they are past succeed smooth round heads like those of Chickeweedes, wherein is contained small seede, the roote is small and fibrous perishing every yeare. 
2. Anagallis flore caeruleo. Blew flowred Pimpernell. This other Pimpernell, is in all things like unto the former, saving onely in the colour of the flower, for whereas that is of a red colour, this is of a faire blew colour, wherein consisteth the difference. 
3. Anagallis flore obsol te purpurea. Pimpernell with sullen red flowers. This Pimpernell doth in all things like wise resemble the former, save that the flowers hereof are of a sullen or darke red colour, having a glimpse of purple therein, 
4. Anagallis flore carneo. Pimpernell with blush coloured flowers. Of the same kinde also is this other, not differing in any thing, but in the colour of the flower, which is of a faire blush or incarnate colour. 
5. Anagallis flore luteo. Pimpernell with yellow flowers. The yellow Pimpernell groweth in the like manner, 1. 2. 3. 4. Anagallis floribus phaniceis, caru ' eis, obsoleie purp carneis. Pimpernell of foure sorts of colours in the flower that is, red, blew, sullen red, and blush colour. 
5. Anagallis florelateo. Pimpernell with yellow flowers.
6. Anagallis tennifolia flore car le . Blew flowred Pimpernell. 
that the former doe, with many spreading branches up∣on the ground, but they are somewhat greater, and so are the leaves also, larger then the former sorts, but set by couples at the joynts, where the flowers come forth upon long footestalkes, like unto the other, but larger or greater, and of a faire yellow colour, with pointed leaves somewhat like unto Numularia, with round heads also containing the seede, and small fibrous rootes not perishing every yeare, as the rest doe; for with the plant in flower, which I have gathered, there hath remained the dry stalke, with the heads of seede, of the former yeares growing. 
6. Anagallis tennifolia flore caeruleo. Narrow leafed Pimpernell with blew flowers. This blew flowred Pimpernell, groweth in the same manner that the rest doe, with spreading branches upon the ground, and leaves set at the severall joynts thereof, all along up to the toppes, but they are longer and nar∣rower, somewhat resembling the leaves of Gratiola, or hedge Hyssope, and not alwaies two at a joynt, but of∣tentimes three, or peradventure more, yet very seldome: at the joynts likewise with the leaves, stand severall flowers as in the other sorts, upon small long foote∣stalkes, made of five small round pointed leaves, yet somewhat greater then those of the former blew sort, having a shew or circle of a purple colour in the middle, or bottome: which afterwards yeeld such like round heads and seedes, and having small threddy rootes like unto the other, perishing in the same manner every yeare. 
The Place. The first groweth every where almost, as well in the medowes and corne fields, as by the wayes, or in gardens arising of it selfe: the second is nothing so common, yet is found growing neere Battle by Oxford, and plenti∣fully in Rumney Marsh, at Higham Ferrers, Artilborro , and Raundes in Northamptonshire, and at Beconsfield in Buckinghamshire. The third as Clusius saith, first grew with him, in his Garden at Franckford, and continually by the shedding of the seede, preserved it owne kinde, as well there, as in Holland at Leyden. The fourth grew of it selfe, in my owne Garden here in London, and commeth up every yeere, of it owne sowing. The fift grow∣eth in the shady places of Hampsted wood, and in many places of Kent, and about Ashford, at a place called the Parke. The last Clusius saith he had from the noble and learned Iohn Monnel of Tornay, who received it from Cadis, or Calis, where it grew; and grew likewise in his garden at Tornay. 
The Time. They doe all flower from May, unto August, and the seede ripeneth in the meane time, and falleth. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , Anagallis, and so likewise in Latine. Pena thinketh it might take the name , quod Graece dicebatur Hyacinthus unde a colore Hyacintheo, Anagallis nuncupari potnit: vel fortè dixit anti∣quitas Anagallidem, quia superbula floribus venustis vias passim ornet, colore oculis grato &amp; amico. Iacobus Manlius, and Matthiolus after him, call it Morsus Gallinae, and Morgelina, but that name is more truely the name of Alfine Chickeweede, whereof this may be accounted a species. Some have called it Auricula Muris, following therein the Pandectarum author. Dioscorides saith, that in his time it had divers names, among which he numbreth Macia, which Marcellus Ʋirgilius also remembreth, and Corchorus, and Halicacabus, whereby it is supposed to be the Corchorus of Theophrastus, which in his seventh booke, and seventh chapter, he reckoneth Inter olera, a∣mong the pot herbes, or sallet herbes; and for the bitternesse became a Proverbe , Corchorus inter alora; which is understood of those men, that would be esteemed of some worth and account among others, when they are the vilest of others, for so Plinye, in his twenty fift booke, and thirteenth chapter, doth say that this Anagallis Pimpernell, was called Corchorus, or Corcorus in the same manner: but not that Corchorus he men∣tioneth, in his 15. booke, and 32. chap. which as I sayd before, is more truely taken to be Melochia, Olus Iudaicum, the Iewes Mallow. Paulus Aegineta used the male Pimpernell in the composition. Diacorallion, because it was called Corallion, whereof he speaketh in his seventh booke, which is used against the diseases of the Arteries and joynts, and was to be made with this herbe, which some doe rather thinke should be called, diacollarion, and the herbe Collarion, which may seeme to take the name of glewing, which is proper to Pimpernell. Some also take this to be the Melochia of Serapio, but Serapio calleth the Anagallis flore phaeniceo, which is generally called Mas, In the Arabian tongue Xantala, and the other flore caerulea, which is the Femina Cardabella, as Tragus saith. The Italians call it Anagallo, and Morso di gallina. The Spaniards Murages. The French Mauron and Morgelius. The Germanes Gauch heiil, quasi salus fatnorum, or coccygis sive cuculi, for so they call Gauchbrot Panis cuculi, and Gauch blum flos cuculi, from a superstitious conceit as it is thought, that it being hung over the threshould of the porch or dore, will frustrate or expell all witchcraft or sorceries. The Dutch, Guichel heil: and we in English Pimpernell. The first here set downe is generally of all writers called, Anagallis mas &amp; flore phaeniceo, as the other, or second, Anagallis faemina flore caeruleo. The third Clusius maketh mention of in his hi∣story of planes. The fourth is not remembred or spoken of by any other but my selfe: the fift is generally cal∣led Anagallis lutea, but of Gesner in hortis Germania Numularia sylvatica &amp; mas, and of Lugdunensis Alfine lutea. The last Clusius calleth Anagallis tennifolia Monelli, and Bauhinus Anagallis caerulea foltis bini ernisve, exadverso nascentibus. 
The Ʋertues. Pimpernell as Galen saith, in his sixth booke, of the faculties of simples, of both sorts with red or blue flowers, are of a clensing faculty, they have also an attractive heate, whereby they draw forth thornes or splin∣ters, or other such like things fastned in the flesh, and therefore the juyce put up into the nostrils, purgeth the head; briefely also they have a drying faculty without sharpenesse, whereby they are good to soder the lippes of wounds, and to clense foule ulcers; thus saith Galen; whereby it is plaine, that they e greatly, that make Pimpernell, to be cold and moyst, when as they are quite contrary hot and dry, and of such a clensing quality, that the distilled water or juyce, are by the French Dames accounted mervailous good to clense the skinne from any roughnesse, deformity or discolouring thereof, and to make it smooth neare and cleere: being boyled in wine and given to drink, it is a good remedy against the Plague, and other Pestelentiall Fevers, and contagious diseases, so as after the taking thereof warme, they lye in their beds, and sweate for two houres after, and hereby the venome of the disease would bee expelled, yet so as that it bee used twice at the least: the same also helpeth all stingings and bitings of any venemous beasts, be they of Serpents, as the Viper, Adder, or Scorpion, or madde dogges, or any other, used inwardly, and applyed outwardly: the same also openeth the obstructions of the Li∣ver, and is very availeable against the infirmities of the raines, provoketh urine, and helpeth to expe the stone and gravell out of the Kidnies and Bladder, and conduceth much in all inward wounds, and ulcers. The decocti∣on or the distilled water, is no lesse effectuall, to be outwardly applyed to all wounds, be they fresh, to consoli∣date them, or old filthy or fretting and running ulcers, venemous also, or infected, by clensing their corruption, by restraining their malignant corroding, and infectious qualities, by drying up their fluxe of humours, which hindreth their cure, and quickly bringing them to healing: a little honey mixed with the juyce, and dropped into the eyes, clenseth them from cloudy mistes, or filmes growing over them, which hinder and take away the sight: it helpeth the toothach being dropped into the eare, on the contrary side of the paine: it is effectuall also to ease the paines of the hemorrhoides, or piles: the male Pimpernell is sayd to drive forth the fundament, and the female to repell it, and drive it into his place againe, whereby it is found that the male is more powerfull in expelling, and the female in repelling. 
CHAP. XLII. Androsaces altera Matthioli. Matthiolus his Navelwort. A Lthough these plants conteined in this Chapter, be referred to the Chickweedes, by divers authors, and might therefore have beene placed among them, yet in regard I finde them not onely to very, from all the sorts of Chickweedes, as well in the outward forme, as in the inward qualities, as by the taste may plainely be discerned, I have therefore thought good to separate them, and speake of these in this Classis, and of them in another. 
1. Androsaces major Matthioli. Matthiolus his Androsace called the greater Navel-wort. The greater hath diverse somewhat broade fresh greene leaves, a little hayrie, lying upon the ground, some what resembling a Plantaine leafe, with some ribbes in them, but much smaller, and a little unevenly dented about the edges: from among which rise up divers round stalkes, foure or five inches high, somewhat hayrie also, but or naked without a leafe up to the toppes, where stand foure 1. Androsace altera major Matthioli. Matthiolus his Androsace called Navel-wort. 
or five leaves, like those that grow below but les∣ser; and among them start forth divers slender foo stalkes, bearing every one of them a small white flow∣er, consisting of five small notched leaves, standing in a greene huske, divided also at the toppes into five parts, wherein after the flower is past, standeth a small round head, containing small blackish seede: the roote is small and fibrous, perishing as soone as it hath borne seede, and riseth often of it owne sowing againe, which if it spring before winter, or that it doth not runne up for flower, the first yeere of the sowing, will abide the first winter, and flower the sommer following. 
2. Androsaces minor. The lesser Androsace, or Matthiolus Navel-wort. The lesser Navel-wort groweth like the former, with ma∣ny leaves lying on the ground, but they are smaller and nar∣rower by much, yet somewhat hayrie, and dented about the edges; from whence rise also many small naked hayrie stalkes, three or foure inches high, not having any leaves at the toppes like the former, but an umbel or tuft, of many small flowers, like the former but whiter; after which come forth such like small round heads with seede: the roote is likewise small and fibrous, but more reddish, and perisheth every yeere, after seede time. 
3. Androsaces minima. The least Androsace or Matthiolus Navel-wort. The least Navel-wort is also very like the former, with many hayrie leaves, lying in a round compasse upon the ground, very like unto the leaves of the smallest Sheap∣heards purse, with more pointed and deeper dented edges, than either of the former: the stalkes that rise from among them are much smaller than the former, so are they shorter also, but not lesse hayrie, having five small greene leaves, set in a round compasse at the joynt, which is about the middle height, from whence arise as in the first sort, three or foure small white flowers, which afterwards beare seede in small heads like the former: the roote is also a few threds as the rest, and answerable to the plant. 
The Place. These all grow in divers places of Germany: the first in Austria in the cornefields about Baden, and Vie as Clusius writeth, although Matthiolus his friend that sent it him, sayd it was brought out of Syria; the second Doctor Burserus gathered neere a village called Markerson, about foure miles from Herb polis, as Bauhinus in his Prodomus setteth it downe. The last he saith likewise Doctor Furerus told him, groweth in the plaines of H r∣thusa. 
The Time. They doe flower in May, and their seede is ripe in Iune and Iuly, yet the last is the earliest of the rest, both for flower and seede. 
The Names. in Greeke, is called also in Latine Androsaces, ut quis forte putare possit ab urina &amp; yd picorum aquis educendis, yet this is not the right Androsaces of Dioscorides and Galen, because he saith it groweth without leaves, as it is extant in some copies, yet in others it is said to have leaves, having onely a head with seede, Matthiolus first exhibited two plants under the name of Androsaces, the one which is a Sea plant, sent unto him, as he saith from Lucas Ghinus of Pisa, who found it about the Sea coasts in Hetruria, Tuskany, or Florence, which doth not answer unto the Text of Dioscorides, who saith folliculum in capite habet in quo se , it hath a huske at the toppe, wherein is the seede, and therefore Bellanius called the Polygonum quartum Plinij, which is the lesser Ʋva marina, or Sea Grape, by the name of Androsace, as it is declared before in the Chapter of Polygona baccifera, Berry bearing Knotgrasses, Anguillara accounteth the Cusenta to be the Androsace of Dioscorides, which is without leaves, according to those copies that have it so, and as Tragus before him doth, who saith that Antoniu Musa, and Ericius Cordus were of the same minde before him, which is not without some probability, in that it carryeth no leaves but heads of flowers and seede, upon a number of small threds, but that this is not of a Sea plant, as Dioscorides his Androsaces is, nor is white as some copies have it, or with slender rushy stalkes, as other copies have, and therefore I thinke we may easily conclude, that Cuscuta is not Dioscorides his Androsaces, but the Ʋva marina Sea Grape, may be thought &amp; is by many, to come neerer therunto, and I should with Bellonius thinke so also of it, if it were an herbe, and not a shrubbe, and if it had white and slender stalkes, as it hath wooddy, and climing, bearing red berries, which it is likely Dioscorides would not have omitted, if he had meant that plant, and for that first Sea plant of Matthiolus, for any thing we can per∣ceive it is but an excrescence of the Sea, not bearing any heads with seede, but small round Navell-like leaves, and therefore at Mompelier, called Vnebilicus marinus, which grow hard and white, being out of the water, although tender underneath it, as Corall, Coralline, and some other Sea plants doe, whereof you shall heare more in the proper place, which is of Sea plants, the other Androsace that Matthiolus setteth forth and calleth altera was sent him as he saith, by Cortusus, for Androsace, which although it agree not unto that of Dioscorides, yet all other writers since, have so called it, but both Clusius and Lobel deny it to be any Sea plant however Cor∣tusus saith, it came from the places, neare the Sea in Syria. The first here described is generally called Androsa∣ces altera Matthioli, who as it should seeme, held the reading of Dioscorides his text, to be tenues spargens juncos cum folijs, spreading small rush like stalkes with leaves, for so hath this plant, and as I said before is referred to the kindes of Alsine, Chickweede; but for the reasons before aledged, I doe as ye see distinguish them, but Rauhinus calleth it Alsine affinis Androsaces dicta major. The second is called by Bauhinus in his Pinax and Pro∣dromus, Alsine affinis Androsace dicta minor. And the last is called also by him, in the places before named, Alsine verna Androsaces capitulis. I have called it in English, (not simply Navel-wort, for I see no reason why such a name should be given it) as others doe, but Matthiolus his Androsace, or Navel-wort, as a distinction be∣tweene it and the Cotyledon altera, called also Navel-wort. 
The Vertues. This Navel-wort, being somewhat sharpe in taste, is accounted hot and dry in the second degree, and doth both clense old sores and ulcers, and stayeth those that are corroding or fretting from their malignity, and after∣wards dryeth up the superfluous humidity, which hindereth their healing, and clenseth also the skinne outward∣ly from roughnesse, Sunburning or the like discolouring, the juice clarified and dropt into the eyes, clenseth them from those filmes or skinnes, that by growing over the sight, cause blindenesse. 
CHAP. XLIII. Sagina Spergula. Francking Spurry or Spurrewort. T Hese plants also as the former, I might as others doe, referre unto the kindes of Chickeweedes, but their qualities being not alike, nor the forme of them, but very little conformable, I must likewise for this worke disjoyne them, howsoever for another they may be joyned. 
1. Sagina Spergula major. The greater Franck Spurry, or Francking Spurrewort. The greater Spurry or Spurrewort, sendeth forth divers small round and upright stalkes, scarse halfe a foote high, whereon at severall distances or joynts, grow many small and narrow leaves, set together in the manner of a starre, or the rowell of a spurre, whereupon came the name, the flowers are many, small, and white, standing at the toppes of the stalkes, which turne into small round heads, containing therein blacke seede, the roote is small and threddy, perishing every yeare after seede time. 
2. Sagina Spergula minor. The lesser or Sea Spurry. This Sea Spurry is not much differing from the former, but that it hath not so many long and narrow leaves set together at the joynts of the stalkes, which doe not rise fully so high, and doe somewhat more leane downe∣wards to the ground, which together with the leaves are more white, and of a saltish or brackish taste, if it grow neere the Sea side, as most Sea plants are, otherwise nothing so hoary white, or brackish at all, the flowers likewise are fewer, but of a white colour, and the seede blacke like the other, the roote is likewise, small, long and somewhat hard, with small fibres thereat. 
3. Sagina Spergula minima. The least Franck Spurry. The smallest Spurry hath likewise divers weake stalkes, but somewhat bowing downe to the ground, seldome above an handbredth high, full of joynts, and at every of them, two small short leaves, compassing them at the bottome, from betweene the stalkes and the leaves come forth other small leaves without number, towards the toppes of the stalkes from the said joynts come forth the flowers, every one upon a small footestalke, which are of a pale blew colour, and sometimes more blew, or tending to a purple, after which come such like round heads with blacke seedes in them, as are in the former, the roote is small and long, with some fibres, or threds at it.
4. Asterias sive Stellaria Monspeliensium. French Spurry, or Spurrewort. The French Spurry, is likewise not much differing from the last sort, but that the small short and narrow leaves, that stand at the joynts of the small low stalkes, are all of an equall length, and being stiffer and harder; stand straight outright in an equall distance, one from another like a starre, the flowers hereof are small, having five narrow pointed leaves laid open abroad like a starre also, but of a reddish colour, so that whether you re∣spect the leaves or the flower, they both resemble a starre, and from thence tooke the name, and yet we know there are many other herbes so called, much differing one from another. 
The Place. These doe all grow in dry sandy grounds, as well among the Corne in divers Countries, as in untilled and shadowy places, especially the first and second, although 1. Sagina Spergula major. The greater Franck Spurry. 
it is also found growing neare the Sea shore in the like places. 
The Time. They flower in Iune and Iuly, and the seede is ripe usu∣ally in August before Harvest time. 
The Names. It is called Spergula of all those that have written there∣of, except Thalius, who calleth it Anthylloides, and Fabius Columna, who calleth the first, Alsine tenuifolia altera, vel sylvestris altera, tricophyllos. Lobel calleth it Sagina Sper∣gulae, a saginandis pecoribus, from the Francking or feeding fat of cattle, and therefore he saith, that divers Braban∣ders and others in the Low Countries, did sow their grounds therewith, for the same purpose, to cause their Kine to give the more store of milke. Bauhinus calleth them Alsine Spergula. The last Lugdunensis maketh men∣tion of, under the same name in the title. Both the Dutch and we in England call it Spurry, or Franck Spurry, for the causes aforesaid, but I do a little more explaine the names, in calling it Francking Spurrewort. 
The Virtues. The seede is held to be a provoker to vomit, and there∣by to bring forth flegmaticke and foule slimy humours, that sticke in the stomacke, both troubling the body, and hindering digestion, and health, the herbe a little bruised and laid to the fingers, or other places that are cut, will speedily heale them, whereof the Country people in di∣vers places, say they have had good experience. It fatten∣eth cattle as you have heard before, and so it doth also Pullaine, and as it causeth the Kine to give more store of milke then ordinary otherwise, so it causeth Pullaine like∣wise to lay more store of egges, which is no idle conceit, for those of Brabant, and other the parts thereabouts have found it sufficient true, by their daily use and tryall there∣of. 
CHAP. XLIIII. Asperula. Woodroofe. T Here are two or three sorts of this herbe Woodroofe, whereof although some be common, and well knowne, yet the others are not so. 
1. Asperula odorata. Common Woodroofe. The Common Woodroofe, or Woodrowell, sendeth forth divers square stalkes, halfe a foote high or more, full of joynts, and at every joynt seaven or eight faire greene shining leaves, broa∣der then those of Clevers, in a manner smooth or but little rough at all, at the toppes of the stalkes stand foure or five white sweete smelling flowers, made of five leaves a peece, laid open like a starre, af∣ter which come small round seede, a little rough, or cleaving to whatsoever it toucheth, the roote runneth cree∣ping under ground, and shooteth up new stalkes round about it every yeare. 
2. Asperula flore caeruleo. Woodroofe with a blew flower. This Woodroofe hath seldome more then one round stalke, rising from the roote, set full of joynts, at every one whereof stand divers small and somewhat long greene leaves compassing it, not so smooth and greene as the former, and likewise small branches, from the bottome almost up to the toppe, set with the like leaves but smaller, where the flowers stand three or foure together, each upon a small footestalke, which are of the same greatnesse with the former, or rather somewhat lesse, and of a faire blewish purple colour, without any sent at all: and after they are past, in their places grow small round brownish seede, not rough at all, the roote is small, somewhat yellowish and fibrous, and perisheth every yeare, and from the seede when it falleth, springeth new plants every yeare. 
3. Asperula purpurea. Woodroofe with a purple flower. This is very like unto the last, but with more store of stalkes, and fewer pale greene leaves at the joynts of them, having purplish flowers, and small fat oylie seede. 
4. Asperula Muralis minima. Small stony Woodroofe. This small Woodroofe, (which doth in my judgement, better resemble Gallium then Asperula, yet because others so call it, I am content to let it so passe also) hath divers square, rough, and upright stalkes, about halfe a foote high, which are in a manner transparent, being full of joynts, and at every joynt sometimes foure or five but usually stand sixe small rough greene leaves, somewhat hairy and bitter in taste: at the joynts above the leaves come forth the flowers, round about the stalkes, at certaine distances up to the toppes of them, which consist of foure small yellowish leaves, the roote is threddy and small, perishing also every yeare in these Countries. 
1. Asperula aut Aspergula odorata. Common Woodroofe. 
2. Asperula caerule . Woodroofe with blue flowers. 
 
The Place. The first is found in the open woods of Germany and other places oftentimes, but is most usually planted in gardens, as the second is also. The third groweth as well in the fields as gardens, about Lyons. The last Colum∣na saith, hee found in stony or rockie places, on the hils Ʋalvenses, which are in the Kingdome of Na∣ples. 
The Time. They doe all flower early, even about May, and their seede is ripe while they are yet in flower, or present∣ly after. 
The Names. It is generally called Asperula, Aspergula or Spergula, &amp; odorata is put to the first, to distinguish it from the other, and not mentioned by any of the antient writers, except it be as Gesner in collectione stirpium, thinketh it to be Alyssum minus of Plinye, in his 26. booke, and 9. chap. and some others that tooke it to be Alyssum Galeni, but erroniously: the first hath beene diversly taken, of divers of the later writers; for Brunfelsius calleth it Ca∣prifolium, vel Stellaria, or Herba Stellaris, and Hepatica quarta. Tragus, Cordus, Lonicerus, and Thalius call it Matrisylva. Dodonaeus, Lobel, and Lugdunensis, Asperula. Clusius and others Asperula odorata. Pena in Adver∣sariis. Aspergula odora nostras; Cordus upon Dioscorides Aparine sylvestris quaedam. Gesner in his Appendix Rubia sylvestris alia minor, and Tabermontanus Hepatica stellata: but generally now adayes it is called of most men Asperula odorata, although it hath but little roughnesse therein at all, save onely as I sayd in the seede: the Italians call it Asperulla: the French Mugnet: the Germanes Hertzfroidt, waldneister, &amp; Leberkrant: the Dutch Walt∣neester: and we in English Woodroofe, and Woodrowell: the second is called Asperula caerulea, by Dodonaeus, Lobel, Camerarius, and Lugdunensis, and our English Turner calleth it Alysson, and so doe others also but falsely. Bauhinus calleth it Asperula caerulea arvensis: the third is called Myagrum alterum minus Dalechampii by Lug∣dunensis; and Asperula hexaphyllus purpurea by Bauhinus. The last is called by Columna Asperula verticillata mu∣ralis minima, and by Bauhinus Asperula verticillata luteola. 
The Ʋertues. The Germanes doe account very highly of this Woodroofe, using it very familiarly in wine, like as we doe Burnet to take away melancholy passions, to make the heart merry; and to helpe the stomacke dejected, unto a good appetite, and the Liver being oppressed and obstructed: it is held also to be good against the Plague, both to defend the heart, and vitall spirits from infection, and to expell the noysome vapours that are received: it helpeth also to dissolve hard impostumes, being bruised and applyed, and in the same manner many Country people use it, for any fresh or greene wound, or cut in the flesh any where: the distilled water of the herbe is no lesse effectuall, for the purposes aforesayd, either inwardly or outwardly. 
CHAP. XLV. Gallium. Maidens haire, or Ladies Bedstraw. O F Gallium Ladies Bedstraw, there are diverse sorts, some growing with us, others e brought from other places, all which is fit that we should joyne in one chapter, as follow∣eth. 
1. Gallium luteum vulgare. The common Ladies Bedstraw. This Ladies Bedstraw riseth up with divers small browne and square upright stalkes, a y high or more, sometimes branched forth into divers parts, full of joynts, and with divers very small leaves, at every one of them, little or nothing rough at all: at the toppes of the branches grow long tufts or branches of yellow flowers, very thicke set together, one above another; from the severall joyn which consist of foure small leaves a peece, which smell somewhat strong or resinous, yet not unpleas ; seede is small and blacke, like Poppie seede, two for the most part joyned together: the roote is reddish, hath many small threds fastned unto it, which take strong hold of the ground, and creepeth a little also, and the branches leaning a little downe to the ground, take roote at the joynts thereof, whereby it is easily en∣creased.
2. Gallium flore rubro. Red flowred Ladies Bedstraw. This small plant hath slenderer and lower stalkes than the former, yet divided into many branches, as whole joynts stand 4. 5. or 6. long leaves, and not of so darke a greene colour: the flowers are of a red colour, not so thicke set together as the former, consisting of foure small pointed leaves, with a yellow pointell in the middle, but 5. or 6. or more standing together at the toppes of the branches at the most, which afterwards turne into small blacke seede like the former; the roote also is reddish like it, but greater and creepeth not, abiding y yeeres, and perisheth not. Like hereunto is that Gallium nigro purpureum montanum tennifolium of Col , which therefore I doe but onely remember here, not thinking it to be a differing species from it, although the flower bee in some places a little darker, they are so like in all things, although Bauhinus doth make them divers. 
3. Gallium flore albo major sive Mollugo montona. Mountaine white flowred Ladyes Bedstraw. The white flowred Gallium, which is the greater Mollugo, shooteth forth from the roote, which is blacke, and very threddy or fibrous, a number of slender and weake stalkes, which yet stand upright of themselves, diver ly branching forth into many parts, so that it maketh shew of a pretty well spread bush, having many shorter and broader smooth greene leaves, set at the joynts, than any of the former, or the next that followeth: the flowers 1. Gallium Luteum. Common Ladies Bedstraw. 
2. Gallium flore rubro. Red flowred Ladyes Bedstraw. 
are very small and white, standing at the toppes of the 4. G m a bum sive Mollugo vulgatior. The common white flowred Ladies Bedstraw. 
branches, more thickly or plentifully set than the other, with red flowers before, which likewise turne into small blacke round seede. 
4. Mollugo vulgatior. The common white flowred Ladies Bedstraw. This is in all things like the last, but that the branches are so weake, that unlesse they be sustained by the hed∣ges, or other things neere which it groweth, it will lye lowne on the ground; and the leaves are smaller and narrower, yet not so small as the former, with yellow flowers; the flowers are likewise small and white, but not plentifully set thereon: and the roote threddy and abiding; some doe make a smaller sort hereof, Minus flore albo. which s not a proper species, for upon transplanting it will grow as great as the last. 
5. Gallium montanū Cretioum Mountaine Candy Gallium. Gallium montanum Creticum groweth like the ordinary but much lesser, with greater rootes and branches: it is a more effectuall rennet than the other, it is hot and stringent, staying fluxes of blood. 
6. Gallium montanum alterum. Another small Candy Gallium. The rootes are small and wooddy; it hath two or three small, long leaves, broad pointed and whitish flowers, standing in spikes. 
The Place. The first and the fourth are frequent in many places of this Land, in Meddowes and Pastures both wet and dry, and by the hedges: the second was found in Italy, as Clusius saith, and Columna his in the Kingdome of Na∣ples: the third is found in Germany, on divers hils there; the two last in Candye. 
The Time. All these are in flower in May, for the most part, yet that with the red flower is later than the other, &amp; flow∣reth not untill Iune: the seede is ripe in Iuly and August. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and in Latine also Gallium, or as others have it Galium, and as Dioscorides saith, of some , &amp; Galerion and Galarion, and was so called from the effect, which is to cause the milke to gather into a curd, when they set it to make cheese; and therefore in many Countries, as well here as beyond the seas, they call it Cheese rennet, and serveth for that purpose very well. The first is generally called of all writers, without variation Gallium, and Gallium luteum. The second Clusius first made mention of, and then Columna by the names formerly set downe. The third is the Mollugo montana of Dodonaeus, Clusius, Lobel, Lugdunensis, Thalius and Tabermontanus▪ Gesner in hortis calleth it Rubia sylvatica altera, &amp; major in his Appendix, and is the second Matrisylva of Tragus. The fourth is the Mollugo vulgatior herbariorum of Lobel, and the Mollugo prima of Dodonaeus, Lugdunensis, and Tabermontanus; it is Tragus his third Gallium, and called of Ca∣merarius, Thalius, Pena and others Gallium album. The two last are mentioned by Alpinus in his book de plant is ex∣oticis. The Italians call it Galio, the Spaniards Coaja leche yerva: the French Pety Mugnet: the Germaines Wal∣stro, and Ʋnserlichen frawen Betstro, and Magerkraut, of helping of the dry scabbe in children, which they call Megerey: the Dutch Walstroo, and we in English, our Ladyes Bedstraw, according to the Germane name, or Cheese rennet, and Maides haire in divers Countries of this Land. 
The Ʋertues. The decoction of the hearbe, I meane the common Ladies Bedstraw, being drunke, is used by divers, to helpe to provoke Vrine, and thereby to fret and breake the stone: the same also drunke helpeth to stay inward blee∣dings, as also to heale inward wounds, by the drying and heating qualities therein, the herbe as the flowers being bruised, and put up into the nosthrils, stayeth their bleeding likewise▪ Dioscorides writeth that the roote is good to provoke bodily lust, and some say the flowers doe so also: the flowers and the hearbe likewise made into an oyntment or oyle, in oyle to be insolated or set into the Sunne, and changed after it hath stood some tenne or twelve dayes, but if it be made into an oyntment, it must be boyled in Axungia ▪ or sallet oyle, with some waxe melted therein after it is strayned; which will helpe burnings with fire, and scaldings with water: the same also or the decoction of the herbe and flowers, is good to bath the feete of traveilers, who are surbated with travaile, and for Lackies or such like, whose running long, causeth not onely wearinesse, but stiffenesse in their sinewes and joynts; for which both the decoction warme is very availeable, and so is the oyntment to use afterwards: the same also as is sayd before, helpeth the dry scabbe, and the itch in children, whereof the Ger∣manes doe make dayly experience: these sorts with white flowers have beene thought unprofitable, and of no use: but Clusius saith, the poore women in Austria, Hungaria, and other places in Germany, that gather herbes and rootes for their uses that neede them, bringing them to the market to sell, calleth it Gleidkraut; and by their experience have found it good, for the sinewes, arteries, and joynts, to bathe them therewith, both to take away their wearinesse, and weakenesse in them, and to comfort and strengthen them also, after travaile, cold, or paines. 
CHAP. XLVI. Cruciata. Crossewort. W Ee have formerly knowne but one sort of Cruciata Crossewort, but because I find two other neere in forme thereunto, and it may be in property also, as the taste may induce one to have placed them together. 
1. Cruciata vulgaris. The common Crossewort. The common Crossewort groweth up with square hairy browne stalkes, little above a foote having foure small broad, and pointed, hairy, yet smooth not rugged yellow greene leaves, growing at joynt each against other crossewise, which hath caused the name; towards the toppes of the stalkes at the joy with the leaves in three or foure rowes upwards stand small pale yellow flowers, after which commeth blackish round seed, foure for the most part set in every huske, the roote is very small and full of fibres or taking good hold of the ground, and spreading with the branches a great deale of ground, which perisheth in the winter, although the leaves die downe every yeare, and spring againe anew. 
2. Cruciata minor lutea. Small yellow Crossewort. This small plant is like the other, but smaller, and not hairy, having smooth pale greene leaves, with yellow flowers. 
3. Cruciata minor montana. Small Crossewort with blush flowers. This small Crossewort (for so I take it to be rather then Gallium as Columna entituleth it) hath divers square weake branches, lying at the first upon the ground, but afterwards raising themselves up on high, and spreading many branches full of joynts, and foure leaves usually at them, 1. Cruciata vulgaris. Common Crossewort. 
the lowest very small and short, but those that grow more up∣wards to the middle of the stalkes, are larger and longer, and from the middle upwards much longer, and towards the tops but two leaves, long and narrow standing at a joynt, which joynts are more separate one from another then below, all of them smooth, and not hairy at al as the stalkes are likewise: the flowers stand at the toppes of the branches, in a thinne or spar∣sed umbell, as the small Centory, or Saint Iohn, wort doth, which have somewhat a long and hollow truncke, and then end in foure small leaves of a blush colour, very like for their forme, as well as for their sweetenesse, unto the flowers of the white or yellow Iasmine but lesser then they, and larger then any flowers of Gallium, after which come small rugged and somewhat crooked and long seedes, two alwayes set together, greater then those of the former, and of a yellowish colour, the roote is long and great, in respect of the plant, with divers fi∣bres set thereat, of a brownish colour on the outside and white within. 
4. Cruciata minima muralis. The least Crossewort. The least Crossewort hath many smal square stalkes, smaller at the bottome, and greater upwards, sometimes reddish and somewhat hairy also, set full of joynts, and at every one of them, foure small leaves, one against another, in manner of a crosse; from those joynts likewise upwards, come forth the flowers, of a pale greene colour, consisting of foure leaves, but set in such a manner that they are scarse to be discerned from the threds, that stand with them, for one part seemeth to be a body or belly, with prickes thereon, another a head shew∣ing to be prickly also, but not hurting, and the rest which are as it were beards, seeme to be armes, which when they are withered, seeme to be hooded: after they are past come small heads, or swelling round vessels, which were the bellies of the flowers, wherein is contained small round yellowish seede like Pannicke seede, the taste of the whole plant is somewhat bitter and harsh withall, the roote is as small almost as a thred with some small fibres at it. 
The Place. The first groweth in many moist grounds, as well medowes as untilled places about London, in the Church yard at Hampsteed neere London, at Wye in Kent, at Rande, and neere Ringmore in Sussex, along the high way, and in sundry other places. The second groweth under the hedges about Bononia. Fabius Columna saith that the third groweth in the open hils in Naples, and the last in the ruines of the walls of Dioclefian, his baths in Rome, and some other places thereabouts. 
The Time. They are all in flower from May all the Sommer long, in one place or another, as they are more open to the Sunne, and the seede ripeneth soone after.
The Names. It hath no Greeke name that we know, being unknowne to the ancients; it is called in Latine Cruciata, and Crucialis, of the situation of the leaves, as I said before, and so doe most other writers. Thalius calleth it Cruciata erniaria, and Lobel Cruciata minor, to distinguish it from the Gentiana cruciata. Lugdunensis calleth it also Aspe∣ ula Aurea, and Tragus maketh it his second kind of Gallium, for his Cruciata is Gentiana cruciata. Bauhinus calleth it Cruciata hirsuta, the French call it Croise, the Germans Golden Waldtmeister, the Dutch Croysette, and wee in English Crossewort and Golden Crossewort. The second Bauhinus in his Prodromus describeth by the name of Gallium latifolium glabrum, but in his Pinax he calleth it Cruciata glabra: The third Columna cal∣leth Gallium montanum latifolium cruciatum, but because I thinke it doth more truly represent a Cruciata, by the standing of the leaves; I have called it Cruciata minor montana. The last Columna calleth Cruciata nova Romana minima muralis, and Caesalpinus Crucialis minima in maritimis. 
The Vertues. This Crossewort is of a binding and drying propertie, and is accounted as singular a good wound herbe al∣most as any, and is used inwardly not onely to stay bleeding of wounds, but to consolidatate them, as it doth outwardly any greene wounds, for by closing the lippes of the wound together it is quickly healed, Camerarius saith it helpeth to expectorate flegme out of the chest, and is good for the obstructions in the brest or stomacke, or in the bowells, or miseraicke veines, and helpeth a decayed appetite, to use the decoction of the herbe in wine: the same will serve also to wash or bathe any wound, or running moyst sore, to clense and heale it, the herbe bruised and then boyled and applyed outwardly for certaine dayes together, renewing it often, and in the meane time, the decoction of the herbe in wine taken inwardly every day, doth certainely cure the Rupture in any, so as it be not too inveterate, but very speedily if it be fresh and lately taken. 
CHAP. XLVII. Aparine. Goose grasse, or Clevers. T He herbe that is usually called Goose grasse or Clevers, is of two sorts, one which is rough, which is knowne to all; the other not rough at all, which is not so well knowne or observed by many, of which there are some varieties which I shall entreat of in this Chapter, but of a greater kind, whereof Gerard maketh mention, we know not of, but are sure his figure exhibited, is of a wilde Borrage, which Lobel calleth Alyssum Germanicum Echioides, as Bauhinus also testifieth. 
1. Aparine vulgaris. Common Clevers. The common Clevers hath divers very rough square stalks, 1. Aparine Vulgaris. Common Clevers. 
not so bigge as the tagge of a point, but rising up to bee two or three yards high sometimes, if it meete with any tall bu∣shes or trees, whereon it may clime (yet without any clas∣pers) or se much lower or lying upon the ground full of joynts, and at every of them shooteth forth a branch beside the leaves thereat, which are usually six, set in a round com∣passe like a Starre, or the Rowell of a Spurre, from betweene the leaves at the joynts, towards the toppes of the branches come forth very small white flowers, every one upon a small threddy footestalke, which after they are fallen, there doe shew two small round rough seedes joyned together like two testicles, which when they are ripe, grow hard and whi∣tish, having a little hole or hollownesse on the side, some∣what like unto a Navel, both stalkes, leaves and seede are so rough, that they will cleave to any thing shall touch them, the roote is small and very threddy, spreading much in the ground, but dyeth every yeare. 
2. Aparine laevis. Smooth Goose grasse. The smooth Goose grasse groweth like the former, but that it neither groweth so high, nor are the leaves so great, and not at all rough, or sticking to what it toucheth: the flowers are as small and white as the former, and give such like seede, but smooth also, and not rough as the former. There is another little differing from this in any other nota∣ble thing, Semine Coriandri succharati. but the seede which is rough like unto a Coriander Comfit. 
3. Aparine floribus purpureis. Purple floured Clevers. This kinde of Clevers is in all things like unto the former sort, except the colour of the flower, which in this is pur∣ple, as in the other it is white. 
The Place. The former sort groweth by the hedge and ditch sides in many places of the Land, and every where also in Gardens, where it is a weede of much labour to weede out, for it will rampe upon every thing groweth next unto it, and be ready to choake and spoyle it, shedding the seede if it be suffered of both sorts. The second was brought me out of Spaine, but the last is as great a stranger. 
The Time. These doe flower in Iune and Iuly, and the seede is ripe and falleth againe by the end of Iuly, or in August, not springing any more from the rootes, but from the shaken seede. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Aparine, and so it is in Latine also usually, but it hath divers other Greeke names, as and , as Galen saith out of Hippocrates, and as Dioscorides saith , not , as it is falsely read in many copies of Galen, Pliny, Paulus Aegineta and Aetius, for not , is umbilicus, and the seede is Navell fashion, whereof came the name; yet some have it : It is called also , quasi hominis amans, and for the same cause: Pliny calleth it Lappanius, saying it is Lappaginis species, whereof this being one sort, is called Asperugo, because the leaves are rough; and the other Mollugo, because they are soft: but Pliny his words concerning Mollugo, seemes not to be truly ex∣pressed, as his copies extant doe declare: I have therefore thought it fitter to referre the Mollugo (at the least that which wee so call) unto the kinds of Gallium, then unto this Aparine, because we have a smooth Aparine, which is not the Mollugo; of which smooth Aparine I finde no auther to make mention but Thalius onely, no, not Bauhinus himselfe in his Pinax, which is an enumeration of all plants, that were eyther set forth by any other Author, or that himselfe knew or heard of: The Italians call it Speronella, the Spaniards Presera, and Amor di o∣tolano, the French Roble and Grateron, the Germans Clebkrant, the Dutch Kleefcruyt, and we in English Goose grasse and Clevers. 
The Vertues. Clevers are hot and dry, Dioscorides saith and Pliny from him, that the juice of the herbe and seede together ta∣ken in wine, helpeth those that are bitten with Vipers, or the great Spider Phalaugium, by preserving the heat from the venome; Galen saith it clenseth meanely and dryeth, and is of subtill parts: it is familiarly taken in broth to keepe them leane and lanke, that are apt to grow fat. Tragus saith, that the distilled water drunke twice a day helpeth the yellow Iaundies, and the decoction of the herbe is found by daily experience to doe the same, and stayeth Laskes and Bloody flixes; the juice of the leaves, or they a little bruised and layd to any wound, or place that bleedeth, will stanch the blood; and Matthiolus saith, that the juice is much commended and used to close the lippes of greene wounds, and so doth the pouder of the dryed herbe strowed thereupon, and likewise helpeth old Vlcers: being boyled with Axungia and anointed, it healeth all sorts of hard swellings, or kernells in the throate; the juice dropped into the eares taketh away the paines of them: the herbe serveth well the Country people in stead of a strainer, to cleare their milke from strawes, haires, or any other thing that falleth into it. 
CHAP. XLVIII. Camphorata. Stinking Groundpine. T Here are two or three sorts of this Camphorata, or stinking Groundpine which I thinke fittest to follow the former herbes, because of some resemblance in forme as well as in vertue. 
1. Camphorata major Monspeliensium. The greater stinking Groundpine. 
3. Camphorata congener sive Anthyllis altera Italorum. Groundpine not stinking. 
 
1. Camphorata major Monspeliensium. The greater stinking Ground Pine. The rough or greater kind of Camphorata shooteth forth many slender and pliant feathered round stalkes of leaves, parted into many branches from the very ground, growing upright to be about a foote and a halfe high or more, thicke set with joynts by certaine spaces, and many very small thicke and narrow whitish greene leaves at them, round about the branches, very like unto the leaves of the Tanariske tree, but longer below then they are up higher, which being broken or bruised betwixt ones fingers smel∣leth somewhat strong, resembling Camphire, as many doe take it, and of a drying unsavory taste; there hath not beene eyther flowers or seede observed, but is increased by slip∣ping the branches; the roote is somewhat great, thicke and wooddy, blackish on the outside, with many fibres thereat. 
2. Camphorata minor. The lesser stinking Groundpine. The smaller Camphorata, hath many slender and weak stalks lying or bending to the ground in a compasse, with divers rundles of small long leaves, set at spaces, as in the former, of a yellow greene colour, especially to∣wards winter, when the tops of the branches also will be reddish with some wollinesse thereon, whereon divers flowers do stand together, as it were in a tuft, consisting of five small white leaves a peece; after which rise small hard seede vessels, of the bignes of two barley cornes, wherein is enclosed very small seede: the roote is greater and longer then the proportion of the plant above ground may seeme to allow, of a reddish yellow colour on the outside, with many fibres thereat: the whole plant both leaves, flowers and seede, are of a strong and grievous sent, and of a very sharpe and quicke taste. 
3. Camphoratae congener sive Anthyllis altera Italorum. Ground Pine not stinking. The other Ground Pine that smelleth not so strong as the former sorts doe, groweth upright in the same manner, with divers upright slender stalkes, and many small leaves set at the joynts, some of them being longer and some shorter then others, all covered with a small woollinesse: the flowers are very small, standing many together at the toppes of the branches, of a pale yellowish colour, and of an astringent and dry∣ing taste. 
The Place. The first groweth neare unto Mompelier, and Nemausium, especially out of the rifts and chinkes of the old walls of the Amphitheater there, and seldome in any other part of France, or Italy as Pena saith; yet Lugdunensis saith it prospereth better in fertile and moyst places, then in such as are barren and dry. The second groweth both in sandy dry grounds, and in rotten moorish grounds likewise: The last groweth in many places of Italy, but whether naturally of that country or no, is not signified, but they there keepe it in their gardens, where most usually it is to be seene. 
The Time. All these flower very late, or not at all with us, and are very hardly preserved in the winter, being tender, comming from so hot and dry places.
The Vertues. Thoroughwaxe is hot and dry, and therefore of singular good use with Chirurgions, for all sorts of bruises and wounds, either inward or outward, and old ulcers and sores likewise, if the decoction of the herbe made with water or wine be drunke, and the places washed therewith, or the juyce or greene herbe, bruised and boyled, either by it selfe, or with other herbes, in oyle or Axungia, to be made into an oyntment, to serve for all the yeere: the decoction of the herbe, or the powder of the dryed herbe, taken inwardly, and the same or the greene leaves bruised, and applyed outwardly, is no lesse singular and availeable to cure ruptures and burstings, especially in children, before it grow to be too old, the successe still answering the commendations of it: being applyed also with a little flower and waxe, to childrens navels that sticke forth, doth helpe them. Tragus saith that the codded Throughwaxe, is of the same operation with the other, and worketh the like effects, for his se∣cond perfoliata or minor hath long cods, which can be no other than this, although in Camerarij horto, it be mi∣staken, and major Tragi, set for minor, for so Gesner in hortis hath it. 
CHAP. LV. Pimpinella sive Sanguisorba. Burnet. P Impinella hath a double interpretation declaring two sorts of herbes, for it either signifieth Burnet, and then it is usually also called Sanguisorba, or it is referred to the Saxifrages, and then it is called Pi pi∣nella Saxifraga, Burnet Saxifrage, of either of which kindes there are diverse sorts: but of the Saxi∣frage kindes, because they are umbelliferous plants, I shall speake among the other of that rancke or order, and of these Burnets in this place, whereof there is both greater and lesser, and in either of both some difference; and although I have set forth the common Burnet in my former booke, yet because I there spake of it, onely as an herbe for a Kitchen garden, and spake very little of the properties; I thought good to mention it here againe, and enlarge the vertues. 
1. Pimpinella vulgaris sive minor. Common Burnet. The common Ordinary Burnet groweth with many long winged leaves, spread upon the ground, which con∣sist of divers small roundish leaves, greene on the upper side and grayish underneath, finely dented about the 1. Pimpinella vulgaris sive minor. Common Burnet. 
3. Pimpinella major vulgaris. The ordinary great Burnet. 
edges, set on each side of a middle ribbe; among which rise up crested browne stalkes, two foote high or better with some smaller leaves, set in some places thereon, divided into sundry branches, and at the toppes small round loose heads, or knaps upon long foote stalkes, of a brownish colour; from whence start forth small pur∣plish flowers, and after them cornered seede: the roote is small, long, and blackish browne on the outside, grow∣ing downe deepe into the ground, with some fibres thereat: the herbe hath a fine quicke sent and taste, giving a delicate relish unto wine. 
2. Pimpinellae minor inodora. Vnsavory Burnet. This unsavory Burnet is in all things like the former, but that the leaves of this are not so round, but something longer, and have neither sent or taste in them to commend it like the other. 
3. Pimpinella major sive sylvestris. Great or wilde Burnet. The great wilde Burnet hath such like winged leaves rising from the rootes, but nothing so many, and each of these leaves on the wings, are twise as large at the least, as the other; and nicked in the same manner about the edges, of a grayish colour on the underside: the stalkes are 4. Pimpinella maxima Americana. Great Burnet of America. 
greater and rise higher, with many such like leaves set thereon, &amp; greater knaps or heads at the tops, of a brownish greene co∣lour, and out of them come small darke purple flowers, like the former, but greater: the roote also is blacke and long like the other, but greater: this hath in a manner neither sent or taste therein, like the common small, or garden kinde. 
4. Pimpinella maxima Americana. Great Burnet of America. This great Burnet is in all the parts thereof like the last, but much greater, having oftentimes all the leaves, which are of a blewish greene on the upperside, and folded halfe way toge∣ther inward, the underside of the leaves, which are grayish, shewing themselves upward, nicked somewhat deepely about the edges, with greater dents, which make them shew the more comely, and gracefully: the toppes of the stalkes carry smaller, and much longer, whitish greene spiked heads, set thicke with knaps, each whereof when it flowreth (beginning below and so rising higher) sheweth to be foure whitish greene leaves, having many small white long threds in the middle: after which come the seede in the same places, being cornered like the other: the roote is much greater and wooddy, longer also and blacker than the last: this hath little sent, but in taste is somewhat like the first, yet nothing so aromaticall. 
The Place. The first groweth wilde in divers places of this Land, in dry sandy places, but is usually preserved in gardens, to be ready at hand, when it shall neede to be used: the second was found in Spaine, as Bauhinus saith: the third is found in divers Coun∣tries of this Land, especially in Huntington and Northampton shires, in the Meddowes there, as also neere London both by Pancras Church, in two or three fields nigh unto Boobies barne, as also by a causie side in the middle of a field by Paddington: the last was brought out of the North parts of Virginia, where it is naturall. 
The Time. All these flower about the end of Iune, and beginning of Iuly, and their seede is ripe in August. 
The Names. The Greeke word or as Gesner hath it Pimpinella, is onely found in Nicolaus Myrepsus, and is thought by divers to be understoode of this hearbe, (for it is not knowne to be mentioned by that name, in any of the old writers: but divers by good judgement doe referre it to the Sideritis secunda of Dioscorides, whereunto it answereth fully, both in forme and qualities, so that we neede not any further to doubt thereof, and the rather, because as it is sayd at this day, this herbe is called Sideritis by the Greekes, in the Island Chio, or Sio, divers also referre his Sideritis unto the other kindes of Pimpinella, that are umbelliferous, for there is such a confusion among many of the later writers, that it is hard to understand, which of these two kindes they meane whereof they write: Gesner in hortis Germaniae, maketh mention of Pimpinella minor sativa laevis, to be of the same kind with the other sylvestris, or wilde sort, &amp; as he saith, not differing from it, but in the manuring, which his Pim∣pinella minor sylvestris, is the Saxifrage kind as may be plainly perceived, by his own words following: for he saith that that herbe which the Germanes call usually Pimpinella is by other people called Saxifraga, and by the Italians Hircina, or Pimpinella hircina, and yet Bauhinus maketh this Pimpinella sativa laevis of Gesner, to be Sanguisorba mi∣nor laevis, which is quite contrary to his mind as I think; and although by saying it is used in sallets, he might seeme to understand this Burnet kinde, which was wont often to be so used, yet his words of Saxifraga Hircina, cannot be understood of this Burnet, but of the other Saxifraga umbellifera: the like doubt and difference there is concer∣ning those scarlet berries, that grow upon the rootes of Pimpinella vulgaris (as Fragosus maketh mention, l. 3. c. 15. which he taketh to be the Cocchenilla, for he there saith, that Cochenille is a certaine berry brought from Peru, which groweth upon certeine small plants, like unto Pimpinella vulgaris, unto whose rootes it doth sticke, of the likenesse of wilde Grapes, which some take to be the true Coccognidium, and others to be the Chermes of the Arabians, which differeth from the Coccus Baphica of the Gracians; thus saith Fragosus; all which is utterly untrue, for Cochenille is neither the berry of any Pimpinella, nor is it the true Coccognidium, not doth the Cher s of the Arabians differ from the Coccus Baphica of the Graecians, as shall be shewed in due place, but Oviadus tru ly saith that Cochenille groweth like berries on the underside of the leaves of a tree in the West Indies called Tu , or by others Tunas, which tree we call Ficus Indica. Now whether of the two kinds of Pimpinella is meant, this or that is not expressed, for some referre it to one and some to the other. Some as it should seeme call Pimpinella, Pampinula, and Peponella, but I rather referre all these names to the Saxifrage kindes: it is called Sorbastrella, and Sanguinaria also of divers, but most usually Sanguisorba, quod sanguineos fluxus sistat and it may be Bipinella or Bipenula, a foliorum binis ordinibus pennatim sive plumatin digestis: the Italians call it Pinepinella or Sorbastrella, the French Pimpinelle, the Germanes Hergots bertlin (id est, Dei Barbula) Blutkraut, and Megelkraut, because the country people as Tragus saith, give it to their Hennes, and Geese when they have the Pippe, to cure them of it; we doe in all places I thinke in England call it Burnet: but many of our ignorant Apothecaries doe shame∣fully mistake this herbe, in using Pimpernell in their Syrupe of Dealthea, and in other their medecines instead thereof, from the nearenesse of the Latine and English names, of Pimpinella and Pimpernell, taking them to bee both one: it may be referred also as it is thought to that herbe which in Persis is called Sifitiepteris, as Pliny saith in his 24. Booke and 9. Chap. because it causeth mirth, and Dionisionymphas, because it doth wondrously well agree with wine. The first is called Pimpinella Sanguisorba, to distinguish it from the other Pimpinella S ∣fraga, and Pimpinella minor and hortensis, to distinguish it from the other Sanguisorba, which is called major, and sylvestris: Anguilara, Guilandinus, Tragus, and Columna, call it Sideritis secunda Dioscoridis, and so doe others since them: they also call it Pimpinella Italica, and is the first of Tragus by that name, for the third is his Pimpinella Italica major, and so Clusius calleth it also: others call it Pimpinella sive sanguisorba major, and Columna Sideritis 2. Dioscoridis major. The second Bauhinus onely mentioneth, and the last is not remembred by any writer be∣fore me, although Lobel may seeme in his Adversaria to point at this, where he saith, that the great wilde kind hath sometimes leaves as great as Betony, as this hath, but yet is not this, being a differing kind, as by the heads of flowers may well be knowne. 
The Vertues. Both the greater and the lesser Burnet are accounted to be of one property, but the lesser, because it is quicker and more aromaticall, is more effectuall being both hot and dry in the second degree, especially the lesser (yet some say it is cold in the second degree) which is a friend to the Heart, Liver, and other the principall parts of a mans body; two or three of the stalkes with leaves put into a cup of wine, especially Claret, as all know give a wonderfull fine rellish to it, and besides is a great meanes to quicken the spirits, refresh the heart, and make it merry, driving away melancholly: it is a speciall helpe to defend the heart from noysome vapours, and from the infection of the Plague or Pestilence, and all other contagious diseases, for which purpose it is of great effect, the juice thereof being taken in some drinke, and they either layd to sweate thereupon, or wrapped and kept very warme. They have a drying and astringent quality also, whereby they are availeable in all manner of fluxes of blood, or humours, to stench bleeding inward or outward, Laskes or Scowrings, the Blooddy flix, womens too aboundant courses, and the whites also, and the chollericke belchings, and castings of the stomake, and is also a singular good Woundherbe, for all sorts of wounds, both of the head and body, either inward or out∣ward, for all old Vlcers, or running Cancers and moyst sores, which are of hard curation, to bee used eyther by the juice or decoction of the herbe, or by the pouder of the herbe or roote, or the water of the distilled herbe; or else made into oyle, or oyntment by it selfe, or with other things to be kept: the seede also is no lesse effectu∣all, both to stay fluxes and to dry up moyst sores, to be taken in pouder inwardly in steeled water or wine, that is wherein hot gadds of steele have beene quenched, or the pouder of the seede mixed with their oyntments, or injections. 
CHAP. LVI. Sideritis sive Ferruminatrix. Ironwort. H Aving in the last Chapter shewed you that Burnet is the second Sideritis of Dioscorides, I thinke it not amisse to entreate next thereunto, of some other herbes called Sideritides, as being referred by many authors unto the first kinde of Dioscorides, leaving the third sort to bee spoken of in another place hereafter. 
1. Sideritis prima Herba Iudaica. Iewes Ironwort. This first Sideritis is a small low herbe, neither wholly standing upright, nor wholly leaning downe to the ground, but hath divers weake, rough, hoarie square stalkes not much above a foote high, full of joynts, at the seve∣rall distances whereof, grow two small leaves somewhat long, rough, or as it were crumpled, hard and hairy, not halfe so broad as Horehound leaves, dented about the edges, smelling and tasting somewhat strong, which spread abroad into divers branches, the upper parts whereof are replenished, with many rough small wharles of pale purplish gaping flowers, with hoary leaves at the joynts under them also; where after they are past, come small blackish seede, conteined in those huskes, wherein the flowers stoode before: the roote is small and wood∣dy, yet living and shooting forth a new every spring. 
2. Sideritis parva procumbens. Small Iewes Ironwort. This small herbe is somewhat like the former in the hairy square branches, but more trayling or leaning, and in the leaves, but somewhat larger, a little hairy, and dented from the middle of them forwards: the flowers stand compassing the stalkes at certaine distances as the others doe: the roote is small and perisheth every yeare. 
3. Sideritis altera parva Clusij. Another small Iewes Ironwort. This other small Ironwort hath the middle stalke upright somewhat hairy and square, spreading into many smaller branches, even from the bottome upwards, which in a manner lye on the ground, with two such like leaves as the last at the joynts, but little or nothing dented at all; the flowers are white, without spots, as farre as I remember, but gaping in like manner: the roote of this likewise perisheth every yeare. 
1. Sideritis prima Herba Iudaica. Iewes Ironwort. 
2. Sideritis parva procumbens. Small Iewes Ironwort. 
4. Sideritis vulgaris Clusij. The Germanes Ironwort.
The Time. They all flower in Iune and Iuly, and their seede is ripe soone after. 
The Names. in Greeke, Sideritis sic dicta a ferro, quasi Ferruminatrix, quod vulneribus ferro factis fuit modela ▪ for th it did heale wounds made by the sword, whereof there was great use in the warres, and therefore many that were conducing to this purpose, although of different formes were called Sideritid s, as also Str Dioscorides, Pliny and others doe declare (because milites Souldiers had most speciall use of them) in Latine also Sideritis and Militaris, who have mentioned divers sorts. The first sort here expressed is thought by most Her∣barists, to be the right Sideritis prima, or Herculea Dioscorides, sic dicta propter vires plane Herculeas (and in Ger∣many the French sort is so accounted and called also:) the rest set forth in this place are referred thereunto, as species of the same genus and most neare, and like thereunto, both in forme and qualities; (otherwise all the herbes set downe in this Classis, and many other might be called Sideritides, being they are Ʋnlneraria, Wond∣herbes for that purpose:) It is also called Tetrahil, Tetrahis, and Herba Indaica by divers, because the Iewes that exercised Physicke and Chirurgerie, like the Charletones and Mountebankes in Italy, and the Quacks ers in Germany had this herbe in much use with them; the second and third of mine here, are the fourth and soft of Clusius: the fourth is the first of Clusius, which he calleth vulgaris, because it was best knowne and most fami∣liar to the Germanes growing amongst them. The fift is called by Lobel and Pena in their Adversaria, Sideritis Monspeliaca Scordioides, and in his Icones plantarum, is set floribus luteis, Tragoriganum prassioides Francisci Pu∣nini: it is also the fift Sideritis herbariorum of Tabermontanus, which Bauhinus calleth Sideritis folijs hirsutis pro∣funde crenatis; the sixt is called by Lobel and Fena Sideritis montana, and is the seventh sort of Clusius, and the sixt of Tabermontanus, which Bauhinus calleth Sideritis Alpina Hyssopifolia: the seventh is by Columna called Sideritis montana parvo flore nigro purpureo: the eight is the sixt Sideritis of Clusius, which hee saith is familiar at Vienna, as his first and my fourth is also. The ninth is by Bauhinus so called as it is in the title: the tenth is by Lugdunensis so called, and Bauhinus followeth him, and withall saith, that such a like Plant he gathered in I ∣doa garden, by the name of Brittanica: the eleventh is of mine owne endeavours finding it wilder and planting it in my garden, where it hath continued ever since: the twelfth is by Bauhinus onely set forth in Prodromus, which he had from Sprengrus of berg: the thirteenth is called Lo s ¦nensis, who saith some also called it e r folium: Camerarius calleth it Siderit , and Thalius, another c gever to his first is Cae Sideritis alia in vine Al re purpureo, and Bauhinus Sideritis rubra. The foureteenth is the Sideritis se i li, as Bauhinus saith, although Lobel that to be a kind of Cannabis spuri , and others take it his Marrubium Pa nicu : it is the Sideritis Her a altera of Caesalpinus, the Sideritis dr sis of ∣merarius, the Sideritis a enfit spe ltera of Thalius, set downe by Gerard &amp; Tabermonta the Alyssum Germanicum; and called by Bauhinus Sideritis arvensis tfolia g bra: the last is called Panax Coloni, from a country husband acure of his owne Leg therewith, which he had cut in now e a field of Pease; but why he should call it Pa x in Latine, being not an for all diseases, nor any knowne Panax in forme, I know unlesse Quicquid in buccam venemt, he to ke that which came hand, for in my judge t it is a from any before, and therefore I have given the title ritis An∣glica strumosar e, for the t downe in the description. It may seeme probable to ny that this herbe was not onely knowne divers of r mod e writers, but called also Sideritis by of them, for it is supposed to be Th his first Si hic termeth gratis ad du odor Ca his tachys palustris Gesneri, Gesner himselfe calling it is o f tida &amp; Herba Iudaicae cognata, Sideritis or Tetrahil that was most common amongst them▪ and with Lugdunensis Chy but in some doubt thereof; first in that the leaves their care shorter then of this, then that the flo are say bee pale purple, and ours are very red, spotted with white: their rootes likewise are not des d to have any tuberous knobbes at them except Thali The Arabians call the Sideritides in generall Sidrach lans Siderite, the French in some places as I hea he Carpentaire, the Germans Glidkrant, the D it, and wee in English after the Dutch name, lewort of some, and Ironwort of most, for Wo wo is no gene∣rall a name, unlesse you will the clowne to it as Gerard doth. 
The Vertues. Most of these herbes are very powerfull to stay all Fluxes of blood, in man or woman, inwardly o ∣wardly, as also to stay rheumes and defluxions from the head, but especially the first, the fourth, and the last: the first and the fourth being nearest in forme and also in qualities, being of speciall use for the foure and chol∣lericke belchings of the stomacke, and to heale burstings or ruptures, and the whites in women as well as the reds; for being exceeding drying and binding, and moderately hot, as wee take it, (yet Galen saith of halfe cold and moyst, and but a little bending) it not onely preserveth those parts, but is admirable good for all greene wounds, to stay the bleeding, and to heale and close up their lippes quickely without suppuration, as well as to dry up the moysture and fluxe of humors in old fretting ulcers, and cancres, that hindreth their healing; and herein as it seemeth, it hath his name Heracleae, by priviledge of excellency, as an Hercules or mastertamer of the strong: and if there be any inflammation about the parts, by the application of the herbe, juyce or decoction, it is soone taken away. The last by Gerard his testimony of the use thereof is singular effectuall in fresh wounds, and can be no lesse availeable in the staying of blood and humors than the others. 
CHAP. LVII. Alyssum. Madwort. His name Assyssum is diversly confounded, both by the ancient and moderne writers, being referred to divers herbes, for Dioscorides hath one sort, and Galen another, and Pliny a third, each differing from others, as it is thought, and Matthiolus hath a kinde of Thlaspi, for the Alyssum of Dioscorides, and others as Lobel saith, the Bugula or Consolida media, Ruellius a kinde of wilde or Bastard Hempe, Caesal taketh that kind of Hore ound, that is called Cardiaca Motherwort, to be Alyssum Galem, and Fr us out ordinary Clary, Gesner and others take Asperula, or some other smaller Madder to be Pliny his Alyss Caesalium Cruciata: but be-cause they are all improperly applyed, I meane not here to entreate of any of place; but of other plants, that this later age hath found out, most neerely to represent the two sor rides and Galen, their Alyssum. 
1. Alyssum Dioscoridis. The Madwort of Dioscorides. The Madwort of Dioscorides, hath many hoary, hard, and rough leaves, lying on the ground, somewhat broad and r , for the first yeare of their springing, but the next yeere when the stalke beginneth to arise, they grow there of both greater and longer, and somewhat torne in on the edges, in some places, which stalke is hoary about a cubite high, and spreadeth into two or three branches, at the toppes whereof come divers pale yellow, and very small flowers standing one above another severally, on both sides of the stalkes, which turne into somewhat large and round, flat, thinne, hoary, hard, rough huskes, resembling little bucklers; or rather most like the yel∣low huskes with seede, of the Lunaria major, or Bolbonach, which is the white Sattin, but that these are smaller, rougher, and harder, and wherein lye small flat reddish seedes, in a double order on both sides of the thinne middle skinne, which in this is not white, like that of the sattin, but else very like: the roote is small and wood∣dy, dying every yeare, after it hath given seede, and seldome perisheth the first yeere, before it runne up to stalke. 
1. Alyssum Dioscoridis. Madwort of Dioscorides. 
3. Alyssum montanum Columna. Madwort of Columna. 
 
2. Alyssum alterum Dioscoridis minus. The lesser Madwort of Dioscorides. This lesser Madwort hath divers long leaves, lying on the 4. Alyssum Guleni Clusio. Galen his Madwort according to Clusius. 
ground, a little waved on the edges, of a pale or blewish greene colour, about three inches long and one broad, rough and hayrie, but softer than the former; from among which rise slender weake rough stalkes, scarse able to stand up∣right, parted into sundry branches, whereon grow the leaves by couples, one opposite to another, smaller but not lesse hay∣rie, and rough than the former, the flowers first beginne to breake forth at the toppes, and afterwards on the sides or winges, which are many set together in tufts, consisting of foure white leaves, notched in the middle, which maketh eve∣ry leafe seeme like a hurt, with divers yellowish threds in the middle of them, and each standing in a greene huske, the out∣side whereof have longer foote stalkes than those more in∣ward, and each flower larger than the inner ones, which being past; there succeede round seede vessels like bucklers, smaller than the former, hard and rough on the outside, in which are conteined flat seede, in foure round reddish cells or partitions, divided by a certaine shining skinne, two seede lying in each cell or partition: the roote is small and long, with divers fi∣bres thereat, and abideth, shooting forth a new, more sharpe in taste than the leaves, which are drying and astringent. 
3. Alyssum montanum Columnae. Mountaine Madwort of Columna. This other Madwort of the Mountaines, hath a small thred∣dy roote, from whence spring up small and weake round red∣dish stalkes, lying upon the ground, shooting forth rootes at the joynts, and raysing themselves up againe, the lowest leaves whereof are small and roundish, not much bigger than ones naile, but those that grow up afterwards upon the stalkes are greater, being two inches long, deepely dented about the edges, and very rough, covered with a long hairinesse, two for the most part, set at every joynt, with long foote stalkes under them: at these joynts likewise on both sides come forth three or foure blewish flowers, each standing upon a very small hayrie footestalke, having foure small greene leaves under them as a huske wherein they stand, and wherein af∣terwards groweth the seede vessels, which are two, flat, ovall or round huskes like Bucklers, joyned at the sides together, hayrie at the brimmes, and conteining five or sixe yellow flat seedes in each partition: the roote dyeth every yeere, and must be new sowen, when any will have it. 
4. Alyssum Galeni Clusio. Galen his Madwort according to Clusius. Clusius his Madwort of Galen is accounted a kinde of Horehound, and riseth up with a square whitish wool∣ly stalke, divided into branches from the very bottome, having two leaves at every joynt, somewhat, like unto Horehound, but lesser, rounder, and more hoary, smaller at the bottome, broade at the ends, and somewhat di∣vided at the edges, without sent, but bitter in taste: at the joynts with the leaves come forth the flowers, round about the stalkes like unto Horehound, but of a purplish colour, standing in hoary huskes, with points very sharpe and prickly, wherein after they are past, lye red seede, like unto those of Horehound: the roote is small and stringie, and abideth in the warme Countries, as it is probable after it hath perfected the seede; for Clusius faith he found it in Spaine in March, having both flowers and ripe seede thereon, but being sowne as he saith, in these colder Countries, it every yeere perisheth, and by the seede which it sheddeth is renewed againe. 
5. Alyssum verticillatum foliis crenatis. Madwort with dented leaves. This hath a small wooddy roote with fibres set thereat, from whence rise sundry square stalkes of a foote or more high, leaning down to the ground, set with leaves at sundry distances, the lowest being largest, somewhat like unto Horehound but longer, comming neere unto those of Germander, but hoary, with a rough hayrinesse, and dented not deepely about the edges, somewhat like Betony: at the joynts of the stalkes where the leaves grow lesser upwards, rise sundry whitish purple flowers set in wharles or roundles as Horehound hath, out of prickly huskes which conteine in them brownish seede: the whole herbe is in taste astringent, yet not unpleasant to the taste, and having withall a little bitternesse, and sweetenesse withall in sent. 
The Place. The first groweth in gardens both with us, and in Italy, France, and the Low Countries, the originall place being not well knowne: the second groweth about Rome, and the third upon one of the hils in Naples, Columna saith: the fourth Clusius saith he sound in one place in Spaine and no where else: the last Columna saith grow∣eth by the pathes sides of the dry rockie hills in Naples, where there is small store of earth for it to grow in 
The Time. These doe all flower about Iuly and August, and the seede is ripe quickely after. 
The Names. It it called in Greeke Alyssum, and Alyssum in Latine, so called because it cureth those that are bitten by a mad dog, yet Plutarch in Symposia lib. 3.9.1. by saying it helpeth the hickock, would derive the name from singultire. There is some doubt among many, whether these should be the right or true Alyssa of Diosco∣rides and Galen: for as concerning the first, they affirme, that it may more fitly be referred unto the sorts of Thla∣spi, or of Lunaria Graeca, and therefore some have called it Lunaria major, and Lunaria lutea, Caesalpinus Luna∣ria Graca tertia, and Gesner Lunaria aspera; but Dodonaeus, Clusius, Camerarius, Lugdunensis and Lobel doe all call it Alyssum and Alyssos, &amp; Lobel saith farther, there is no herbe to be found that better agreeth with Dioscorides his Alyssum in all things then this first doth. Aetius in his first booke saith, that Alyssum was called Sideritis He∣raclea by some in this time, that it grew by the way sides, and bore a purple flower, and thicke leaves (which is most likely Galens Alyssum ) some doe account it a kinde of Leucoium, and so do both Columna and Bauhinus; the one calleth it Lencoium montanum lunatum, for he saith that the Leucoia and Thlaspi, be congeners, which I grant, but yet I thinke, that the Lychnides be nearer congeners to the Leucoia, then the Thlaspies be; the other that is, Bauhinus calleth it Leucoium Alyssoides clypeatum majus. The second is called by Columna, Leucoium pel∣tatum Romanum minus, who saith it is a congener to the Alyssum of Dodonaeus, which as I sayd is the first here expressed; and therefore Bauhinus calleth it, Leucoium Alyssoides clypeatum minus The third Columna calleth Alyssum Dioscordis montanum: but Bauhinus setteth it among the Chamaedries, calling it Chamaedrij spuriae affiris rot folla scutellata, which in my judgement is very improper, and may be set downe among the rest of his improper titles; for unlesse it bee the leaves in this plant that hath some likenesse, and that is very little, there is no part therein else that can agree with any Chamaedrys, eyther vera or spuria; for whoever saw a Germander with broad buckler like huskes of seede: the fourth is called by Clusius Alyssum Galeni, and saith hee never saw any plant that came nearer to the discription of Galens Alyssum then this doth, and that notwithstanding that hee had read what Columna had written thereof, in his calling it Planta Hispanica, Marrubio similis, and not thinking it to be Alyssum Galeni, yet he was still of the same minde: and I finde that Camerarius, Dodonaeus, Lobel, Taber u and Bauhinus, doe all follow Clusius herein, but none Columna; onely Lugdunensis seemeth to con∣trary Clusi s, in saying that it seemed to him, that he did expresse the Molucca spinosa instead of Alyssum Galeni: the last Columna hath set forth in his Phytobasanos, calling it Sideritis Alysson, Sideritis Heraclea Dioscoridis, Alysson Antonij Coi ex Galeno; whereby hee seemeth to judge the Sideritis Heraeclea of Dioscorides, to be all one with the Alyssum Galeni, and herein as it is likely confirmed, because he found Aegineta and Aetius (as I sayd before) to say that some in his time called the Sideritis Heraclea, Alyssum; yet the figure that Columna setteth out for it, is so like (for I have not seene his plant if it differ from) the Herba Iudaica, that I thinke it the very same, whereas Dioscorides maketh his Sideritis to have longer leaves then Horehound, almost as bigge as Sage, but so is not his: but the same Columna is another place maketh the Alsine Veronicae folijs to be Alyssum also, Bauhinus entituleth it, Alyssum verticillatum folijs crenatis, when as he called that of Clusius Alyssum verticillatum folijs profunde incisis. 
The Vertues. These Alyssa of Dioscorides and Galen, although they differ in forme one from another, yet they doe agree as they say in this, that being taken in wine, or in broth, or in meate, or howsoever, doth cure the venome of the biting of a madde dogge and thoroughly performe the cure, which Galen saith in sexto simplicium med camento∣rum, it worketh from the likenesse of the whole substance, and was found so to doe by plaine experience, with∣out any other method, and that it would performe many other cures if any should try it, for those diseases where the faculties of drying, digesting and moderately clensing, which are in this herbe are required; and therefore both Dioscorides and Galen doe say of each of their plants, that they clense the skinne from wheales and pimples, from spots and other discolourings, as the morphew, sunburning, &amp;c. Dioscorides saith that his Alyssum, taken in drinke stayeth the hickocke if there be no ague, and that it will doe so also, if any shall but hold it in their hand or smell unto it: They are also effectuall for wounds, either inward or outward, to digest the clotted blood that is gathered by any fall, blow, or bruise, and to clense and heale old rotten and filthy Vlcers, or creeping Can∣cers. And because Dioscorides saith it is an Amulet to expell charmes, that shall be used upon man or beast, and that tyed with a scarlet cloth to cattell that are diseased, it helpeth them; therefore divers in the ages since, have eeked this tale with the reports of farre greater things, which because they are not onely idle but prophane, I lost not to insert them here: for from the forme of the seede vessells of the first here expressed, which is that of Dioscorides; as I sayd divers called it Lunaria, Moonewort, and went beyond the Moone in expressing the pro∣perties; and therefore I thinke had neede themselves to be cured of their madnesse herewith. 
CHAP. LVIII. Ʋlmaria sive Regina prati. Medowsweete or Medesweete. O F this herbe there are two sorts, the one familiar to our countrey, the other a stranger to us, and onely entertained of a few, and those the lovers of rare Plants. 
1. Ʋlmaria vulgaris. Common Mede or Meddowsweete. The stalkes of this Medesweete are reddish and easie to breake, rising to be three foote high, and sometimes to be foure or five, having at the joynts thereof large winged leaves, standing one above another at distances, which are made of many somewhat broad leaves, set on each side of a middle ribbe, being hard rough or rugged, crumpled much like to Elme leaves, whereof it tooke the name, but having also some smaller leaves with them, even as Agrimony hath, somewhat deepely dented about the edges, of a sad greene colour on the upperside, and grayish underneath; of a pretty sharpe sent and taste, ve∣ry like unto Burner, and will lesse give a fine rellish to a cup of Claret wine if a leafe be put therein then Burnet; at the toppes of the stalkes and branches stand many tufts of small white flowers thrust thicke together) which smell much sweeter then the leaves; and in their places being fallen, come croked and cornered seede: the roote is somewhat wooddy and blackish on the outside, and brownish within, with divers greater strings and lesser fibres for thereat, of a strong sent, but nothing so pleasant as the flowers or leaves, and perisheth not but abideth many yeares, shooting forth a new every spring. 
3. Ʋl ariamajor sive altera. The greater Medesweete. This Medesweete groweth higher then the former, with longer winged leaves set one above another upon the 1. Ʋlmaria vulgaris. Common Medesweete.
2. Vlmaria major sive altera. The greater Medesweete. 
crested brownish stalkes, having long footestalkes upon them, each being divided usually into three parts, the two lowest one against another, and every part also consisting of three or five smaller leaves then the other, separate each from the other, being hard crumpled and finely dented about the edges: at the tops of the stalkes grow the flowers in longer spikes more sparsedly and not so thicke thrust together, turning downe their heads which are white like the former, and smelling very sweete also, more nearely resembling a Goats beard, whereof some have given it the name then the other: the roote is more wooddy, with many blackish strings which smell strong, and taste somewhat harshly: the stalkes and leaves dye wholly downe every yeare, and rise againe in the spring. 
The Place. The first groweth in moyst Meddowes that lye much wet, or neare the courses of water, and the later is found also in shadowie woods, and places very often. 
The Time. They are found in flower, in some place or other all the three Summer moneths, that is, Iune, Iuly and August and their seede is ripe quickly after. 
The Names. They are not fround mentioned by any of the ancient Greekes, or Latines, onely some thinke it may bee re∣ferred to Rodora of Pliny. It is called by the later writers Ʋlmaria, a foliorum Ʋl similitudius, of the of Elme leaves, of Dodonaeus Regina prati, and Barba, and Barbula Capra, or Barba Caprina of Thalius, and by him thought also that it might be Ficnocomon of Dioscorides, as Gesner in hortis and Lonicerus doe. it Barba capri, and Lobel Barbi capra. Cordus M desusium from the Germaine word Modesuss, th sweete. Some as Lugdunensis saith, tooke the later to be Melandrium Plinij, and some also call i Anguillara calleth them Pot ntilla major prima and secunda, and Thalius the greater sort Argentina l ra saith the Italians call it Christoforiana, the French call it Barbe de Chre, and Raine des pre the G Geisbart, and the greater Wielde Geisbart, and Camerarius saith Wor kraut, because as he saith the roote is of∣ten found, as if it were eaten by Wormes; but it is more likely for that it helpeth horses of the Wormes, and so he saith the countrey people used it; the Dutch R tte, and saith G y Camecruidt, in English Medesweete or Meddowsweete and Queene of the field ddowes. 
The Vertues. Being neare a little in taste and smell with Burnet, they are most likely to bee of the same f Tragus accounteth them more hot and dry, they are also used in the same manner and for the same purposes to stay all manner of fluxes, bleedings, and vomitings, and womens courses, as also their whites: it is sayd to the and take a way the fits of quartaine Agues, and to makes merry heart, for which purpose some use the flowers, some the leaves: it helpeth also speedily those that are troubled with the Collicke, being boyled in wine and wi little honey taken warme, it doth open the belly; but boyled in red wine and drunke, it stayeth the flux of the belly, &amp;c. it helpeth the Bottes in horses as you heard before; being outwardly applyed it healeth old Vlcers, that are cancrous or eating, and hollow or fistulous, which many have used and much commended; as also for the sores in the mouth, and secret parts: the leaves when they are full growne being layd upon the skinne, will after a small time, raise blisters thereon as Tragus saith: the water thereof helpeth the heate and inflammation in the eyes: the seede to saith being taken, causeth paines in the head; and because both flowers and herbes are of so pleasing a sweete sent, many doe much delight therein, to have it layd in their Chambers, Parlars, &amp;c. and Queene Elizabeth of famous memory, did more desire it then any other sweet herbe to strew her Chambers withall: a leafe or two hereof layd in a cup of wine, will give as quick and as fine a rellish thereto, as Burnet will, as I sayd before. 
CHAP. LIX. Potentilla. Wilde Tansey. W Ilde Tansey creepeth upon the ground, taking roote at the joynts, every where round about the place where it groweth, that it will quickly take up a great compasse, shooting forth sundry winged leaves made of many, set on both sides of a middle ribbe, some smaller, being set among the greater, somewhat like unto Agrimony or Medesweete, and like also unto Tansey, from whence it tooke the name; for it partaketh in forme with them all, and dented about the edges, but of greene colour on the upper side, and of a sil∣ver Potenilla. Wilde Tansey. 
shining white colour underneath: it beareth no stalk, but the flowers every one of them by it selfe stand upon a small short footestalke, rising from the joynts with the leaves, which consist of five small yellow round pointed leaves, y like unto those of Cinkefoile, or Five leaved grasse: th prime roote shooteth downeward like the Cinkefoile. 
The Place. It groweth almost every where wilde abroad in most places. 
The Time. It floweth in Iune and Iuly. 
The Names. It is called Potentilla ab eximijs viribus quibus pollet, and Argentina a foliorum argenteo splendore, some take it to bee Stepha melis of Pliny, lib. 26. c. 13. others referre it to Argemene: It is also called T acetum sylvestre, or agreste, as Br felsius doth. Tabermontanus calleth it Anserina, Gesner in hortis Germania Arge one Altera: and so doth Tragus, and withall saith, it might be called also Millifo∣lium majus, and some Agri nia sylvestris: the Italians call it Potentilla, the French A entine sanuage, the Germanes Gre sich and Genserich, the Dutch Gansericke, wee in Eng∣lish Silverweede, and wilde Tansey. 
The Vertues. Wilde Tansey is cold, and dry, and binding withall, so that it stayeth the laske, and all fluxes of blood in men or women, and some say it will doe so if the greene herbe be but worne in the shooes, so as it be next the skinne, it stayeth also spittings or vomitings of blood; the powder of the dryed herbe taken in some of the distilled water, helpeth the ites in women, but more especially if a little Corall and Ivory in powder be put to it: it is also much commended to helpe children that are bursten, and have a Rupture▪ being boyled in water and salt; it is also said to be good for those that have bin bruised by any fall, or the like, to dissolve the blood; &amp; as it is said doth help to break the stone; being boyled in wine and drunke, it easeth the griping paines of the bowels, and is good for the Sciatica and joynt aches: the same boyled in Vinegar with Hony and Allome &amp; gargled in the mouth easeth the paines of the toothach, fastneth loose teeth, and the gums that are sore and spongie, and setleth the Ʋvula or Pa of the mouth when it is fallen downe; it clenseth and healeth those Vlcers that are therein, or in the secret parts, and i singular good also for inward wounds, and to consolidate or close the lips of greene wounds, as also to heale the old moyst and corrupt running sores, in the legges or elsewhere: being bruised and applyed to the soles of the feete, and to the wrests of the hands, it wonderfully cooleth the hot fits of Agues, be they never so violent: the distilled water clenseth the skinne of all discolourings therein, as morphew, sunburning, &amp;c. as also pimples freckles and the like, and dropped into the eyes, or wet cloathes applyed unto them, taketh away the heat and inflammations in them. 
CHAP. LX. Agrimonia sive Eupatorium. Agrimonie. W Ee have divers sorts of Agrimonie, some of our owne land, and some of others, as you shall have them here set forth unto you. 
1. Eupatorium sive Agrimonia vulgaris. Our common Agrimonie. Our common Agrimonie hath divers long leaves made of many set upon a stalke, some gre , others smaller, all of them dented about the edges, greene above, and grayish underneath, and a little hairy withall; among which ariseth up usually but one stiffe, strong, rough or hairy browne round stalke, 2. or 3. foot high, with smaller leaves set here and there thereon: at the top whereof grow many small yellow flowers, above another in long spikes; after which come rough heads of seeds hanging downewards, which will cleave to any thing that shall rubbe against them, and sticke upon garments, being touched or cast thereon: the roote is blacke, long and somewhat wooddy, abiding many yeares, and shooting afresh every spring; it hath a reaso∣nable good sent yet very small. 
2. Agrimonia odorata. Sweete smelling Agrimonie. This other or sweete smelling Agrimonie, is so like the other that there is hardly any difference to be dis by the eye, but by the nose onely, except that if there be any difference, this groweth somewhat rounder and whiter leaves then the other, and the roote of a darke red colour, but the smell herein doth much surpasse the other, and so doth the taste being aromaticall and astringent; whereby it is held to bee of ex∣cellent use to corroborate and strengthen weake parts. 
3. Agr oid Bastard Agrimonie. This herbe that is like to Agrimonie, and ye ne, and therefore called Bastard Agrimonie, hath iv long, soft and hairy leaves next the ground, every pon a long reddish hairy footestalke, which are cut and divi∣ded into many parts or leaves, seaven for the most part, three on each side and the seventh at the end, but ha∣ving some smaller ones betweene them, like as Agrimony hath, yet somewhat rounder then they, and all of them smaller dented, and sharper pointed, of a darker greene colour on the upperside, and grayish underneath: among these leaves rise up sundry weake stalks, not fully standing upright, but leaning downewards, whereon are set very sparsedly such like leaves, but smaller and rounder, with small peeces at the joynts of every of them, &amp; at the tops come forth three or foure hairy greene huskes like cups dented at the brims, out of every one whereof riseth a small yellow flower, like unto Agrimony, yet sometimes they scarse appeare above the huskes to bee seene; wherein after they are fallen and past, appeare small long and round graynes like unto the graines of 1. Agrimonia vulgaris. Common Agrimony. 
3. Agrimoxo des. Bastard Agrimony. 
wheate, two standing together like two small lumpes, which 4. Eup torium Cannabinum. Hempelike Agrimony. 
5. Eupatorium Cannabinum Americanum latifolium. The broader leafed Hempelike Agrimony of America. 
7. Eupatorium aquaticum duorum generu , Water Agrimony of two sorts.
fall out of the huskes of themselves, when they are ripe, lea∣ving the huske emptie and gaping; the roote is small red∣dish and wooddy, abiding and not perishing in the winter. 
4. Eupatorium Cannabinum. Hempelike Agrimony. The Hempelike Agrimony hath many long darke, greene, soft or woolly leaves, lying upon the ground, among which riseth up a soft whitish stalke, full of a white pith within it, to the height of two or three cubits sometimes, set full of such like leaves as grow below up to the top, where the flowers breake forth, many standing together in tufts, being very small and mossie, of a pale purplish colour, which turne into downe, and is carried away by the winde: the roote spreadeth farre, with many strings and fibres thereat: the whole plant hath a little sweete sent in it, but is very bit∣ter, and so is the roote also. 
5. Eupatorium Cannabinum Americanum latifolium. The broader leafed Hempelike Agrimony of America. The broader leafed kind of Agrimony groweth greater and higher then the former with a brownish stalke, and lon∣ger and larger leaves thereon, so that some have compared them to those of Elecampane: the flowers grow at the top of the stalke in greater number, and more sparsedly with longer scaly husks being many long threds standing in the middle, of a more purplish blew colour, and the seede at their bottomes, which together are blowne away with the winde. 
6. Eupatorium Cannabinum Americanum angustifolium. Narrow leafed Hempelike Agrimony of New England The other kind of American Agrimony groweth at the first with a few small long leaves upon the ground, unevenly dented in some places on the edges, and in others but little or not at all dented: the single hairy thicke round brittle stalke of two or three high foote or more, is full set on all sides, very thicke with longer and narrow leaves without order, some dented and some not, of 2.3. and 4. inches long a peece, and halfe an inch broad or lesse, of the greene colour and soft, full of branches from the middle at the least upwards and smaller leaves on them, very many small mossie pale threds for flowers on every branch, out of small greene huskes or heads, which with the seede almost insensible, is carried away with the wind, that one would thinke it had no seede at all▪ which yet will spring very plentifully before winter of it owne sowing: the roote is a few hard sprayes with small fibres at them, and perishing yeerely after it hath seeded. 
7. Eupatorium aquaticum duorum generum. Water Agrimony of two sorts. Although all these sorts of Hempe-like Agrimony doe usually grow by watery ditch sides, and the like ∣rish places, yet because they will also grow well in different soiles, I thinke it not a misse to joyne them all toge∣ther, for the likenesse of name, forme, and qualities. Of this water Agrimony we have two sorts of our owne Land, and another also out of America or New England, being in all other things very like one unto another, hee onely in the placing or setting of the leaves upon the stalkes; which in one sort hath divers leaves set together, like the fingers of an hand, all meeting together at the bottome, set by distances at the stalkes, every one not divided, but whole, yet dented about the edges, and in forme and greenenesse like unto the leaves of wilde Hempe, or of the former Agrimonies but softer: and in the other, every leafe is somewhat divided, three or five upon a stalke, two at a joynt: the flowers are yellowish browne, made of many leaves like a starre, set about a middle thrum, with greene heades under them, divers standing together, thrusting forth from the joynts with the leaves, and at the toppes of the branches, which turne into long flat rugged seede, which will sticke to any garment it toucheth: the roote is made of many blacke strings and fibres, encreasing much, the whole somewhat aromaticall smelling sweete, and tasting somewhat sharpe like Pepper, and so doth the roote also. We have another of this last sort, brought us from Ʋirginia and New England, whose great hard solice, browne round stalke, America∣num. of 3.4. and five foote high, is wonderfull full of long branches from the bottome, set with joy spotted red, on the younger greene ones, with large greene leaves on them, the lowest having five on those upward but three yet larger than the former, as the flowers and seede is also, yet not rough but smoth and blackish: this hath no sharpenesse of taste in it. 
The Place. The first groweth in the borders of fieldes, by ditches and hedge sides throughout all the Land: the second is a stranger to us, growing with us onely in the gardens of the curious, but is naturall to Italy in many places, both the former and this growing neere one to another, or not farre distant: the third Columna found in Naples, and was sent to Bauhinus from many other parts of Jtaly likewise, as he saith himselfe: the fourth is found in many pla∣ces that are wet, as the brinckes of ditches, and water courses, and in the upland grounds also, where it will thrive and endure as well: the fift, sixth, and last came to us from New England &amp; Virginea, the two first of the 7. grow sometimes in the very water; the last in shallow ponds and plashes of water, as also sometimes in places from them: the last American groweth huge and great in our garden grounds, comming first unto us out of New England, among the earth that Iohn Newton a Chirurgion of Colliton in Somersetshire brought me with Planta Car∣dinalis, their little red Lillies and other plants. 
The Time. They doe all flower in Iuly and August, and the seede is soone ripe after, yet the last American flowreth latest. 
The Names. The first is called in Greeke Eupatorium, and so the Latines call it also, of Eupator the first finder of it, as Pliny saith, who calleth it Eupatoria; and as it is thought is his Argemonia in arvis nasceus, but Dioscori∣des sheweth that this was an errour in his time, in mistaking Argemonia, for Agrimonia. Some also call it Hi ∣torium quoniam hepati praecipue medetur: because it is a chiefe helpe to the Liver: it is also called Agrim of divers: some other names are also given unto it, as Marmorella, Concordia, Lappa inversa, and Ferraria. The Arabians call it, Cafal, Cafel, and Gafel: the Italians Agrimonia, and so doe the Spaniards, the French Agrimoni , and Eupatoire. The Germanes, Odermeing, and Bruchwurtz: the Dutch Agrimony: and we in English Agrimony or com∣mon Agrimony. All the Apothecaries of our Land, especially of London now adayes, doe use this first kinde of Agrimony, as the most assured Eupatorium of Dioscorides: howsoever in former times, both we and they beyond the seas, did usually take the Eupatorium Cannabinum, which they called Eupatorium vulgare, for the true kinde, and either of ignorance not knowing the right, or of wilfulnesses in not enduring to be with drawne from their old errours, but our age hath reformed very many of these errours, we were formerly nusled up in; and no doubt but by the diligent search of divers for the truth; both the light that hath risen hath appeared, and the dark∣nesse that remaines may be expelled, which time must as it hath done in part already, bring to passe, the perti∣natious wilfulnesse of many being the cause that it is not wholly performed as yet. Anguillara first, and Colum∣na after him doe make this Eupatorium of Dioscorides, to be that of Avicen also, and so to be both one. Dodonaeus because he would not acknowledge the Ageratum of Dioscorides, to be the Eupatorium of Mesues, runneth him∣selfe a ground, on the dangerous shelfe of two errours, namely that the Eupatorium of Mesues and Avices, doe not differ, and the Eupatorium of Mesues and Dioscorides, be both one; when as it is in neither of them tr for as we shewed in the Chapter of Ageratum, that Ageratum was the true Eupatorium of Mesues, which differeth much from this of Dioscorides; so doth that of Mesues, from that of Avicen also, which is by the most judici∣ous now adayes, accounted to be the first Eupatorium Cannabinum, here set downe and as before is sayd was in former times called Eupatorium vulgare: yet there is some doubt therein, in that Avicen saith, the flowers of his Eupatorium are like those of Nenufar or water Lilly, which the most judicious know not well how to reconcile but doe verily suppose some errour or mistake to be in the text: and although it be not the true Eupatorium of Dioscorides, the errour thereof being now reformed, both their descriptions and figures inducing the same unto you, yet is it not without very speciall properties, as you shall heare by and by: the second is called Agrim ni odorata by Camerarius, and Eupatorium alterum odoratum, &amp; aromaticum by Columna; the third is called Agrimo∣noides of Columna, of Bauhinus Agrimoniae similis, and of some Pimpinella folio Agrimoniae: the fourth was usu∣ally called in former times beyond the Seas, as I sayd Eupatorium vulgare, as Matthiolus and others doe set it downe. Fuschius called it Eupatorium adulterinum, and Dodonaeus and Thalius Pseudo hepatorium mas: Lobel calleth it Cannabina aquatica, sive Eupatorium mas. Gesner Eupatorium aquaticum, &amp; Trifolium cervinum aqua∣ticum. Baptista Sardus calleth it Terzola, Anguillara, Gesner in hortis Germaniae, Lacuna, Lonicerus, and Camera∣rius call it Eupatorium Avicannae. This is called in high Dutch S. Kunigunds Kraut, that is Herba Sancta kunig∣dis &amp; Wafferdost, of the low Dutch Boelkencruiit: the fift is called by Cornutus Eupatorium foliis Enulae, and I according to the title, to put a difference betweene it, have set latifolium, and the other of the sort which I call angastifolium, and hath onely sprung with me, and hath not beene mentioned by any before: the last which as I sayd is of two sorts, the one with divided leaves, the other with whole are diversly named by divers; for that with divided leaves is called by Tragus Verbena supina, by Cordus upon Dioscorides Ʋerbanaca recta, by G s∣ner in hortis, Forbesina B endensium, and by some as he there saith, Conyza palustris, &amp; Ʋerbesina in his Appendix; by Dodonaeus Hepatorium aquatile, Ruellius tooke it to be Hydropiper, and so did Lugdunensis, but yet doth con∣fute his opinion, and sheweth the differences, as Matthiolus before hath done, by Caesalpinus Bidens folio tripar∣tito divisa, and by Bauhinus Cannabina aquatica folio tripartito diviso: the other with whole leaves is called by Lobel, Eupatorium Ca binum faemina Septentrionalium; by Tabermontanus, Eupatorium Cannabinum Chrysan∣the by Lugdunensis Hydropiper aliud Dalechampii; by Caesalpinus, Bidens folio non dissecto, and by Bauhinus in his s Cannabina aquatica similis capitulis nutantibus, and in his Pinax Cannabina aquatica folio non di∣viso: that o Virginia may well goe under the same title. 
The Vertues. The sweete Agrimony is held by divers to be the more excellent in all the properties of Agrimony; but be∣cause we cannot have it in that quantity, that may serve all mens continuall uses, our ordinary sort will serve suf∣ficiently will and effectually. Serapio saith, it is hot and dry in the first degree, and as Galen saith, it is of thinne parts, clensing and cutting faculty, without any manifest heate; it is also moderately drying and bin∣ding eth the obstructions of the Liver, and clenseth it; it helpeth the jaundise, and strengthneth the in∣ward and is very beneficiall to the bowels, and healeth their inward woundings and bruises or hurts, and qualifieth all inward distemperatures, that grow therein: the decoction of the herbe, made with wine and drunke, is good against the sting, and bitings of Serpents, and helpeth them that have foule, or troubled and bloody waters; it is good for the strangury, and helpeth them to make water currantly, and helpeth also the collicke clenseth the brest, and helpeth the cough: it is accounted also a good helpe to ridde a quartaine as well as a tertia gue, by taking a drought of the decoction warme before the fit, which by altering them, will in time ridde them: the leaves and seede saith Dioscorides, the seede saith Pliny, stayeth the bloody flixe, being taken in wine: outwardly applyed it helpeth old sores, cancers, and ulcers that are of hard curation, being stamped with old Swines grease and applyed, for it clenseth and afterwards healeth them: in the same manner also ap∣plyed, it doth draw forth the thornes or splinters of wood, nayles, or any other such thing, that is gotten into the flesh, and helpeth to strengthen members that be out of joynt: it helpeth also foule impostumed eares, be∣ing bruised and applyed, or the juyce dropped into them: the distilled water of the herbe, is good to all the purposes aforesaide; either inward or outward. The Hempe like Agrimony, or Eupatorium Cannabinum, is of the same temperature of heate and dryeth, for it also openeth, clenseth, cutteth and maketh thinne those humors that are thicke and tough, and therefore is very effectuall for the dropsie, yellow Iaundise, obstructions of the Liver, and hardnesse of the Spleene, fulnesse of humors, and the evill disposition or habit of the body: the juyce hereof drunke, is commended much against the impostumes that come of a cold cause within the body, and for those that are without, the herbe bruised and applyed outwardly: the decoction thereof taken before the fits of long and lingring agues, doth helpe much to free any from them: the same also provoketh urine, and wo∣mens naturall courses; and boyled with Fumiterry in whey and drunke, helpeth scabbes, and the itch, which proceede of salt and sharpe humours; but the juyce mixed with vinegar, and annointed cureth it outwardly; and cureth the Leprosie also, if it be taken in the beginning, but the juyce being drunke, is held to be more effectuall: the juyce being clarified and dryed, and the weight of a scruple taken in pills, killeth the wormes of the belly, and the leaves sleeped in drinke, and given to children doth the same. The leaves are often given by the Coun∣try people, to their cattle, and other beasts, troubled with coughes, and when they are broken winded, or have griping paines within them, all which it helpeth: the flowers chiefely are used to heale both greene and old sores, but the herbe it selfe will doe so likewise; it is sayd that hunters have observed, that Deare being woun∣ded, by the eating of this herbe have beene healed of their harts: the dryed herbe being burned, driveth away by the smoake and smell thereof, all flies, waspes, and the like, and all other hurtfull and venemous crea∣tures. 
CHAP. LXI. Cannabis. Hempe. T Here are two kindes of Hempe, the tame or manured, and the wilde or bastard; of the manured kind there are two sorts, male, and female, of which I intend to entreate in this Chapter; and of the wilde or bastard sorts in the next. 
Cannabis sativa. Manured Hempe. The Manured Hempe, (which is of so great use, both for linnen cloath and cordage) is as I sayd of two sorts, male and female as they are called, yet both rise from one and the same seede; and herein is somewhat like the French Mercury, but how this change in nature should be, no man can give a reason: the male hath the stronger stalke, and more bushie, and the leaves greater, and of a darker greene colour, and bearing seede without any shew of flowers, and endureth longer, before it be ripe to cut downe: contrariwise, the female hath a single stalke, for the most part, with few or no branches, and beareth flowers, but no seede followeth, and is ripe, and must he cut downe, or pulled up before the other: they both rise up to a great height, even sixe or seven foote high or more, with many leaves set thereon at distances, every one divided into 5. or 6. or 7. severall leaves, joy∣ned together at the bottome of them, and dented about the edges, somewhat like unto the forme of the leaves of the Palma Christi, Lupine and bastard Hellebor, every one set upon Cannabis sativa. Manured Hempe. 
a long foote stalke, of a darke greene colour, and of a strong un∣pleasing savour; the flowers are small, and of a whitish yellow co∣lour, standing many together, upon a long branch, which turne in∣to dust, and are carried away with the wind, not carrying any seede after them; which being the tenderer and weaker, and the stalke hollow and not so strong, maketh the finer stuffe, to be spunne and woven into linnen cloath, fit for mens bodies, or other the like uses, and is called of some Sommer Hempe: but the other being stronger and called winter Hempe, because it is not gathered untill toward Winter, or at the least, not of a moneth after the other, beareth seede in the same manner, that the other bore flowers on long branches, which is round and conteined in round heads: the rootes are made of many strong stringes which take fast hold in the ground, but dye and perish every yeare: to shew you the manner of steeping, drying, beating, and clensing hereof, to be made into cloth or Cordage, is not my purpose, nor pertinent for this worke; besides that, it would take up too much roome and time; it is familiarly known to every country huswife almost. 
Virginen∣sis major. We have had from Ʋirginia a very great kinde of Hempe, with greater stalkes, and much larger leaves and flowers, which being broken down with the wind, when it was almost at the perfection, we cannot fully expresse it as we would, and as time may doe it hereafter. 
The Place. Although Pliny. lib. 20. c. 23. saith that Hempe was formerly found wilde, yet know we not in these dayes, where such may be found; for in all places of the world I thinke, it is onely sowne in fieldes and places, chosen out for the purpose. 
The Time. It is sowne in the end of March, or beginning of Aprill, and is ripe in August or September, as the two sorts grow ripe and fit to be gathered. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and so Cannabis in Latine also, from the Greeke word , saith Lobel, quod fonticulos sparsas∣ve scaturigines significat, quo loci lubens sponte, &amp; sata l curiet: the Arabians call it Canab. and Schehedonegi; the Italians Canape: the Spaniards Cannamo; the French Chanure, and Chaneve: the Germanes Zamer Hauff: the Dutch Kempe, and we in English Hempe. 
The Vertues. Hempe is cold and dry say Tragus and Lonicerus, but Galen in lib. 7. simpl. medicament. &amp; primo de aliment facul∣tatibus, saith it is hot and dry, and so doe Matthiolus, Ruellius, Fuschius, and Lugdunensis, agreeing with him there∣in: the seede of Hempe consumeth wind, and by the much use thereof, doth disperse it so much, that it dryeth the naturall seede of procreation, therewith: for it is hard of digestion, hurtful to the head &amp; stomack, and breedeth ill blood and juyce in the body, yet being boyled in milke and taken, helpeth such as have adry and hot cough, as Tragus saith: the Dutch as one saith doe make an Emulsion out of the seede, and give it with good successe to those that have the Iaundise, especially in the beginning of the disease, if there be no ague accompanying it, for it openeth the obstructions of the gall, and causeth digestion of choller therein: but as Matthiolus saith, the wo∣men in Germany went a wrong course, to give their children the decoction of Hempe seede for the falling sicke∣nesse, which it did rather augment, then helpe to take away: the Emulsion or decoction of the seede, stayeth laskes and fluxes that are continuall, easeth the paines of the collicke; and allayeth the troublesome humours in the bowels: divers also doe stay bleedings herewith, whether at the mouth or nose, or at other places, by frying the leaves with some of the blood that hath come from them that bleed, and so given them to eate; it is held very good to kill the wormes in man or beast, as also the wormes in the eares, or the juice dropped therein, or to draw forth any other living creature that hath crept therein; and to shew the strength hereof this purpose, Mat∣thiolus saith, that the decoction thereof, powred into the holes of earthwormes, will draw them sorth, and that fishermen and anglers have used this feate to get wormes to baite their hookes. The decoction of the i sayd to allay inflammations in the head, or any other part, the herbe it selfe, or the distilled water thereof performeth the like effect; the same decoction of the rootes, easeth the paines of the gout, the hard or knots of the joynts, the paines and shrinking of the sinewes, and other the like paines of the hippes: it to be used, for any place that hath beene burnt by fire, if the fresh juyce be mixed with a little oyle or er. Matthiolus saith, that Hempe seede, given to Hennes in the winter, when they lay fewest egges, will make them laye more plentifully. 
CHAP. LXII. Cannabis sylvestris sive spuria. Wilde or bastard Hempe. T Here are two or three sorts of herbes, that are accounted by divers for wilde or bastard Hempes, yet are none of them the true Cannabis sylvestris of Dioscorides: Bauhinus therefore in not so ac∣counting of them, referreth them to the kinds of Nettles, as you shall heare by and by. 
1. Cannabis spuria prima. The first bastard Hempe. This bastard Hempe riseth up with a reasonable great hairy square stalke, not very strong nor upright, but as it were leaning downe, with divers joynts bunching out like knees, and two leaves set at every of them, somewhat long hairy and pointed, of a fresher greene colour then the manured Hempe and dented about the edges: at the joynts likewise come forth divers branches joynted and set with leaves in the same manner, where about towards the toppes grow divers hoodded and gaping flowers, like those of the dead Nettle, but larger, and greater, of a pale purplish colour, standing in small greene prickly huskes; wherein afterwards groweth the seede, being small and round, three or foure growing together: the roote is hard and white, and somewhat spreading, but dying before winter. 
There is another hereof, whose flower is of a perfect white colour for the most part, or a little pale whayish, Flore albo which doth plainely expresse the difference.
having at the bottome of them some small long and narrow leaves, like threds or peeces as it were torne off from the rinde of the lower part of the stalke and sharpe pointed, some greene and some browne: the rest of the stalkes are middle, which from thence to the toppes at farre distances one from another, have at every joynt two broader, rounder, and shorter leaves then Betony, the middle ribbe being blackish, and den∣ted about the edges: above the two uppermost leaves come forth a soft round spiked short head made of a number of white haires, somewhat resembling a white Fox taile, whereof it tooke the name. 
The Place. The first two sorts are frequent in woods and copses, and other such like shadowie places throughout the land, but that with the white flower is more usually found in the stiffe clay grounds, then in any other mould, and in the woods by Brumley in Kent; the third grow on the Alpes of Helvetia or Swisserland: the fourth was brought from Denmarke by D r . Lobel, when he went thither with the Lord Edward Zonche Ambassadour from the Queene Elizabeth of famous memory, in the yeare 1592. The last as Lugdunensis saith, groweth in the moyst vallies that are shadowed with trees of the high hills. 
The Time. They flower in Iuly, and the seede ripeneth quickly after. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Cestron, a remediorum copia &amp; varietate, yet some take it a flori spicata &amp; ta acuti rruculum proferroute, and Psycotrophon, quod in frigidis locis inveniatur: the word Ce divers interpretations in Greeke as in Suidas for a kind of dart, in Sophocles for a pricke or pointed thing, understand hereby bookes, conteining much variety of matter, and Pliny speaking of graving, saith anciently there were two wayes, the one in wax, the other in Ebore Cestio dest, viricul ▪ set downe for veruculum, which expresseth both in Greeke and Latine the sharpe pointed toole wherewith they did grave in Ivory. It is called in Latine ica, and V ica ab iv ntoribus Veronibus Hispani populis as Pliny saith; but Galen, seemeth in his fift booke de sa , to make Betonica and C stron to be two herbes, in these words ted , Conijcitur , gua id solum articularibus sacisfa ▪ ijs vero qui calcu labo , aliquid Betonica &amp; C sri in Galli s scitur, vocent autem ea herba S phagon: Aeti also in his fourth booke and 30. Chap. ting this place of Galen saith, Ex quibus colligitur n sol m latinorum Betonicam, sed etiam Gallorum S r pha Cestru fuiss , dulus Aegin in his seventh Booke doth plainely set downe two sorts of Betony, the one with slender branches like unto Pennyroyall, but smaller, and almost without taste, growing espe∣cially in stony places (&amp; as I said before in the Chapter of La is taken by Qu dramius to be Lamium Scutellaria dictum ) which is used in those med cines that are for the rel ce: the other is the Romans Betony which Diosco∣rides calleth Cestron, and others Psychotroph because it joyeth in cold places, and hath no likenesse to the for∣mer but in the qualities and vertues, thus saith Aegineta. It is called by the Arabians Chastura, by the Italian Betonica, but as Pliny saith ( lib. 25. cap. 8. speaking of his times) Serratula, by the French Betoine, and Beto s , by the Germanes Braun Betonick, by the Dutch and us Betony. There needeth no further declaration or explana∣tion of these unto you, seeing all Authors almost agree in the name. The third and fourth by their title and place are expressed whereupon they tooke their names: the last Lugdunensis calleth Alopocurus montana, which hath Betony like leaves, and therefore Bauhinus as is before said referred it thereunto. One thing more I would ad∣vertise you that Vetonica and Betonica are diversly taken in divers Authors for Vetonica, although it be set downe in some Authors for Betonica, yet more properly and usually it is understood to bee the Caryophyllus, our Gilli-flower, and then it is denominated Ʋetonica altilis. 
The Vertues. Betonie is hot and dry, almost in the second degree: it is saith Pliny ante cunctas Laudatissima, and to have others also set it forth, with admirable (and yet not undeserved) praises: Antonius Musa, the Emperour Au∣gustus his Physition, who who wrote a peculiar booke hereof, saith of it, that it preserveth the lives and bodies of men, free from the danger of diseases, and from witchcrafts also; but it is found by dayly experience, as Dio∣scorides formerly wrote thereof, to be good for innumerable diseases, as Matthiolus termeth it, for it helpeth those that either loath or cannot digest their meate, those that have weake stomackes, or have sower belchings, or con∣tinuall rissings in their stomacke, if they use it familiarly, either greene or dry, either the herbe, the roote, or the flowers, in broth drunke, or meate, made into conserve, syrupe, electuary, water, or powder, as every one may best frame themselves unto, or as the time or season requireth, taken any of the foresayd wayes: it helpeth the jaundise, falling sickenesse, the palsie, convulsions or shrinking of the sinewes, the goute, and those that are en∣clining to dropsies, as also those that have continuall paines in their heads, yea although it turne to fre : it is no lesse availeable the powder mixed with pure honey, for all sorts, of coughes or colds, wheesing and shortnesse of breath, distillations of thinne rheume upon the lungs, which causeth consumptions, the decoction made with Me and a little Pennyroyall added thereunto, is good for those that are troubled with putride agues, whether quotidiane, tertian, or quartin , that rise from the stomack; and to draw down and evacuate the blood and humors, that by falling into the eyes, do hinder the sight: the decoction thereof made in wine &amp; taken, killeth the wormes in the belly, is good to open the obstructions, both of the liver &amp; spleene, &amp; for stitches or other paines in the sides or back, the torments also &amp; griping paines of the bowels, and the wind Collick, and with honey helpeth to purge the belly: the same also helpeth to bring down womens courses, and is of especiall use for those that are troubled, with the falling downe of paines of the mother, and to cause an easie and speedy deliver for those in ile of childbirth: it helpeth also to breake and expell the stone, either in the Kidnies or bladder, the decoction with wine gargled easeth the toothach: it is commended against the sting or biting of venemous S pents, and mad dogs, both used inwardly and applyed outwardly, also to the hurt place: it is sayd also to hinder drunkennesse, being taken before hand, and quickely to expell it afterwards: a dramme of the powder of Betonic taken with a little ho∣ny, in some Vinegar, doth wonderfully refresh those that are overwearied by travaile it stayeth bleedings at the mouth or nose, as also those that spit or pisse blood: it helpeth those that are bursten and have a rupture, and is good for those that are bruised by any fall or otherwise: the greene herbe bruised, or the juyce applyed, to any inward hurt, or outward greene wound, in the head or body, will quickely heale it and close it up, as also any veines or sinewes that are cut, and will also draw forth any broken home, or any splinter, thorne, or such o∣ther thing, gotten into the flesh: it is no lesse profitable for old filthy sores, and ulcers, yea though they be fi ∣lous and hollow; but some doe advise to put a little salt thereto for this purpose: being applyed with a little Hogges Lard, it helpeth a Plague sore, and other biles, and pushes: the fumes of the decoction while it is warme, received by a funnell into the eares, easeth the paines of them, estroyeth the wormes, and cureth the running sores in them; the juyce dropped into them, doth the same likewise: the roote of Betony is found to be of much differing quality from the leaves and flowers, as being much displeasing both to the taste and stomacke, procuring loathing, vomitings, and belchings▪ whereas the leaves and flowers, by their sweete and spicie taste, are comfortable both in meate and medicine. 
CHAP. LXX. Chelidonium. Celandine. F Ormerly there were two sorts of Celandine generally knowne, as Dioscorides and others make men∣tion, which differ in outward face, very much one from another, whereof I entend to entreate in this Chapter, but unto them I must adioyne some other sorts of the greater; which are of er in∣ ention. 
1. Chelidonium majus vulgare. Common great Celandine. Common Celandine hath divers tender, round whitish greene stalkes, with greater joyn th o∣ther herbes, as it were knees, very brittle and easie to breake, from whence grow branches with large long leaves much divided into many parts, and each of them cut in on the edges, set at the joynts upon both sides of the branches, of a darke blewish greene colour on the upperside, like unto Col mbide , and more pale blewish greene underneath, full of a yellow sappe or mil when any part is broken, of a bitter taste and strong : at the toppes of the branches which are much divided, grow gold yellow flowers, of foure leaves a , after which come small long pods, with blackish seede therein: the roote is somewhat great at the forth divers other long rootes, and small fibres reddish on the outside, and yellow within full of a yellow therein. 
2. Chelidonium majus laciniatum. Iugged Celandine. This other great Celandine groweth in all things like the former, but the the leaves are thither, and the divi∣sion slenderer, and more cut in on the edges: the flowers likewise of the same gold yellow colour, and con∣sisting of foure leaves, somewhat larger than the other, and are each of them cut in on the edges, as the greene leaves are: this as the other by the shedding of the seede, 1. Chelidonium majus vulgare. Common great Celandine. 
2. Chelidonium majus lacintatum. I gged Celandine. 
3. Chelidonium minus. Small Celandine or Pilewort. 
riseth againe before winter, and so abideth flowring the next spring, and seeding in sommer. 
3. Chelidonium maximum Canadense Great Celandine of Canada. This strange Celandine hath a fleshie roote, full of a yel∣low juyce, smelling strong like the ordinary, from whence rise onely three large blewish greene leaves, cut in after the manner of Vine leaves, without any foote stalke under them, or with very short ones, from among which rise a short red∣dish foote stalke, with a white flower on the toppe of it like unto the flower of Sowbread. 
4. Chelidonium minus. Small Celandine or Pilewort. Although there is no affinity in the forme hereof unto the former, as I before sayd, yet because it generally beareth the name of the lesser Celandine, and that it is of an healing quality, especially for the piles, I thought good to joyne it with the other for this worke, which else might be severed. This small Celandine doth spread many round pale greene leaves, set on weake and trayling branches, which lye upon the ground, and are fat, smooth, and somewhat shining, and in some places, though seldome, marked with blacke spots, each standing on a long foote stalke; among which rise small yellow flowers, consisting of 9. or 10. small narrow leaves, upon slender foote stalkes, very like unto a Crow∣foote, whereunto the seede also is not unlike, being many small ones set together upon a head: the roote is made of many small kernels, like graine of corne, some twice as long as others, of a whitish colour with some fibres at the end of them. 
There is another sort hereof, which hath as it were dou∣ble flowers, consisting of two rowes of leaves, Flore du∣plici. in all other things not differing from the former, which Camerarius in horto, onely mentioneth. 
4. Chelidonia rotundifolia major. A greater small Celandine. This greater sort of the small Celandine, hath a fibrous roote, whereunto grow small round knobs: the leaves are round thicke and smoth, growing almost as large as Asarum, or Asarabacca, sometimes a little waved about the edges, each standing upon a longer foote stalke than the former, yet lying upon the ground: the flowers that stand severally as the others doe, upon longer foote stalkes, are of a pale yellow colour, and larger than they, consi∣sting but of five or sixe leaves, cut in at the ends, unto the middle of them, and having some reddish threds in the middle of the flowers. 
The Place. The first groweth in many places by old wall sides, and by the hedges and way sides in untilled places, and be∣ing once planted in a garden, especially in some shady place, it will still be found therein, the second is not knowne where it is naturall, but is received into gardens for the varietie: the small sort groweth for the most part in the moyst corners of fields, and places that are neere water sides, yet will abide in dryer groundes, so as they be a little shadowed; the third in Canada as the title sheweth: the last groweth in the wet grounds about M pelier. 
The Time. The two first sorts flower all the Sommer long, and the seede ripeneth in the meane time: the other flower betimes about March, or Aprill, and is quite gone in May, so at it cannot be found untill it spring a∣gaine; that of Canada flowred late but gave no seede. 
The Names. The first and greater is called in Greeke , in Latine Chelidonium majus, and Hirundinaria major: the lesser is called , and in Latine Chelidonium minus, and Hirundinaria minor: some call them Chelidonia major &amp; minor, and tooke the name as Dioscorides saith, because it springeth when Swal∣lowes come in; and withereth at their going away (which is true in neither, the greater whereof Dioscorides chiefely speaketh, being greene both winter and sommer, and the lesser springing before Swallowes come in, and is gone and withered long before their departure,) Dioscorides likewise and Pliny also, say it tooke that name from Swallowes that cured their young ones eyes, that were hurt, with bringing this herbe, and putting it to them: but Aristotle, and Celsus from him, doe shew that the young ones of Partridges, Doves, Swallowes, &amp;c. will recover their sight (being hurt) of themselves in time, without any thing applyed unto them, and therefore Celsus accounteth this saying but a fable. The Chimists in former times, in mistaking the Greeke name, called the greater kinde Caeli donuim; and thereupon did highly extoll the Quintessence drawne from it, not one∣ly to expell many diseases, but for many their idle and fantasticke transmutations: the lesser sort beside the for∣mer names, is called Ficaria &amp; Scrophularia minor of Brunfelsius, of Fuschius Malacocissos minor, whom Mat∣thiolus taxeth therefore, Guilandinus and Cordus tooke it to be Amellus Ʋirgilii, as we shewed you in the Chap∣ter of Amellus or Aster. Sylvaticus calleth it Testiculus sacerdotis, and is likely to be the Ranunculus latifoli of Lugdunensis. Bauhinus calleth it Chelidonia rotundifolia: it is thought also to be the Strumea of Pliny, whereof he speaketh among the Ranunculi: many doe make doubt whether this herbe be the Chelidonium minus of Dio∣scorides and Galen, because it hath not any acrimonie or sharpenesse therein, as they say is in theirs: but yet all writers doe agree, that howsoever it hath not any acrimony, it is in forme and all other properties the same. It is as I sayd called Ficaria and Scrophularia minor, a signatura, from the likenesse of the rootes unto those Strume called Scrophulae, which appeare in ano, &amp; ad tonsillas, and therefore as in many other the like, held powerfull to cure them; the greater is called of the Italians Celidonia maggiore, of the Spaniards yervade las gelondri as, and Celidrenha: of the French Chelidoine Felongue and Esclaire: of the Germanes Gross Scholwurtz and Goldwurtz, and Schwalbenkrant: of the Dutch Gonte wortel en groot gouwe: and we in English great Celendine, and of some Swallow-wort, and Tetterwort. The lesser is called by the Arabians Memicen, by the Italians avagello and Favoscello: by the French Coullious de prestre, or petite Esclaire: by the Germanes Meinkraut and Klein Feig∣wartzen: of the Dutch Cleyne Gouwe or speene cruiit: and we in English small Celandine, Pilewort, and of some Figge-wort. 
The Vertues. The greater Celandine is hot and dry in the third degree, and of a clensing facultie; It openeth the obstructions of the Liver and Gall, and thereby helpeth the yellow Iaundies, the herbe or the rootes being boyled in white wine with a few Anne seedes and drunke: Matthiolus saith that if the greene herbe be worne in their shooes that have the yellow Iandies, so as their bare feete may tread thereon, it will helpe them of it; the same also taken in the same manner, helpeth those that are inclining to the dropsie, or have it confirmed in them by often using it, as also for those that are troubled with the itch, or have old sores in their Legs, or other parts of their bodies: the juice thereof taken fasting, is held to bee of singular good use against the Plague or Pestilence, and so is the distilled water also with a little Sugar, but especially if a little good Treackle bee mixed therewith, and they upon the taking layd downe to sweete a little: the juice dropped into the eyes doth clense the eyes from fumes and clouds that darken them: because it is somewhat sharpe, the hardned juice relented with a little breast milke will well allay it: it is to good purpose used in old filthy or corroding and creeping Vlcers wheresoever, to stay their malignitie of fretting and running, and to cause them to heale the more speedily: the juice often ap∣plyed to tetters, ringwormes or ther such like spreading Cancers, will quickly kill their sharpenesse and heale them also: the same rubbed of upon warts will take them away: the herbe with the rootes br ised, and hea∣ted with oyle of Camomill, and applyed to the Navill, taketh away both the griping paine in the belly and bowells, as all the paines of the mother, and applyed to womens breasts that have their courses two great aboundance stayeth them; the juice or the decoction of the herbe gargled betweene the teeth that ake, taketh away the paine, and the powder of the dryed roote, layd upon an aking, hollow, or tooth, will as they say cause it quickly to fall out: the juice mixed with some powder of brimstone is not onely good to annoint those places that are troubled with the itch, but taketh away all the discolourings of the skinne whatsoever, be they spots or markes of bruises, stripes or wounds, the Morphew also, sunburning or any the like; and if it chance that in a tender body it cause any itching or inflammation, by bathing the place with a little Vinegar it is soone helped: the lesser Celandine, because it hath not that acrimony with us, that it seemeth it hath in Greece, where Dioscorides lived, cannot have those properties, they ascribe unto their Chelidonium minus, which is, the juice taken from the rootes, and put up into the nose purgeth the head, and a decoction thereof with a little honey put to it and gargled in the mouth, doth the same effectually, and doth purge and clense the brest of flegme or any other tough humors that doe offend: it also helpeth a running itch, and those nailes of the fingers and toes that grow deformed, and scabbed: thus farre Dioscorides and Galen, but it is certaine by good experience, that the decoction of the leaves and rootes doth wonderfully helpe the piles or hemorrhoides, as also kernels by the eares and throate, called the Kings Evill, or any other hard wennes or tumors. 
CHAP. LXXI. Dentaria. Toothed Violets, or Coralworts. T Here be divers sorts of these toothed Violets, differing one from another, eyther in roote or leafe '  or both, as you shall presently understand.
1. Leucoium marinum maximum. The greatest Sea stocke Gilloflow 
. Leucoium marinum ifol . Broad leafed Sea Stocke Gilloflower. 
4. Leucoium marinum minus. The lesser Sea Stocke Gilloflower. 
both this and the next smell sweeter after the Sunne is downe, then in the day time: the cods that follow are long and somewhat flat, with reddish flat seede in them, the roote is divided into many parts. 
4. Leucoium marinum minus. The lesser Sea Stock Gilloflower. This lesser kinde hath more upright stalkes; divided from the bottome into many branches, whereon grow soft woolly leaves, smaller, narrower, and lesser jagged than the former: the flowers that stand at the toppe of the branches, are smaller than the other, but made of foure leaves like the rest, of a fresh red or crimson colour, which upon their fading seeme to be of a deeper colour, and of a weaker sent than the other; in their places come long pods wherein are conteined the like red seede: the roote is wooddy like the other, and pe∣risheth after seede time. 
5. Leucoium marinum minimum. The smallest sea Stockgilloflower. The least Sea stock Gilloflower, hath a brownish square stalke, not above two inches high, set with five or sixe small and somewhat long round pointed hoary and hayrie leaves, on both sides thereof, bearing at the toppe one or two blewish flowers; whose footestalkes are hayrie also; the roote is small and threddy, with five or sixe very small and somewhat round pale greene leaves, lying about it, for the first yeares increase, and flowreth the next. 
6. Leucoium marinum Creticum majus. The greater Candy Stocke Gilloflower. The greater Candy Stocke Gilloflower, hath a round weake stalke, branched into many parts, whereon are set divers long and narrow leaves somewhat thicke and hoary, without any dents or divisions on the edges, or with very few, and at their toppes many flowers clustring together, as it were in tufts, consisting of foure leaves a peece, whose ends are cut in somewhat deeper than others are, making the end seeme like unto a heart, as it is usually expressed, somewhat reddish upon the first opening, but of a blewish purple when they are full blowen, the bottomes of them being yellow, pointed up like a starre; the cods that follow are about two inches long, and round, conteining within them, somewhat long and browne seede. 
7. Leucoium Creticum minus. The lesser Candy Stocke Gilloflower. This lesser Candy kind is like the former Candy sort in the growing and leaves, but that it is lesser in both; the flowers also are not above halfe so great, being fully white at their first blowing, and gathering afterwards a lit∣tle purplish colour upon them, yet so as the whitenesse appeareth still. 
8. Leucoium Creticum oblongis foliis crenatis. Long leafed Candy Stocke Gilloflower. This third Candy kinde hath longer leaves, than either of the two last, plainely dented about the edges, from among which ariseth a round stalke, not halfe a foote high, sending forth diverse branches stored with as small flowers as the last, but of a deeper blewish purple colour, than the first Candy kind. 
9. Leucoium Croticum marinum Coeruleum. The blue Candy Stocke Gilloflower. This small Candy kinde hath many small greene hayrie and straked stalkes not much above an hand breadth high for the most part, two or three whitish, soft greene leaves, set together at a place, and some also standing singly, each of them being somewhat like the other Stocke Gilloflower, but round and broad at the ends, with long footestalkes under them: the toppes of the stalkes are parted into small branches, each whereof sustaine sundry small flowers, somewhat long, made of foure leaves a peece, of a faire blue colour, after which come small blackish seede in long cods like the other: the roote is small and slender perishing yearely after seede∣time, yet abideth a winter from the seede; but sowen in the spring groweth quickly to flowring and so conti∣nueth in flower most part of the Summer. You have a branch hereof expressed in the table with L i ∣teum utriculato semine in the next Chapter. 
10. Leucoium saxatile Thymifolio. Small Rocke Stocke Gilloflower. The Rocke Stocke Gilloflower for the beauty of the flowers is not unfitly placed here among this Tribe, which else for other respects might more truly in my judgement be put in that Classis of the Thl spia, as the descripti∣on sheweth) is a small low plant, having hairy small leaves like unto those of time; set very thicke on both sides of the weake stalkes, which doe lye in such a round compasse that it seemeth like a small round bush, of an evill or stinking sent, but sharpe biting taste, comming nearer to the degree of a Thlaspi then Leucoium, as C h a saith himselfe, who setteth it forth: it beareth small flowers plentifully on the stalkes and branch a blewish purple colour, the middle part being of a whitish yellow with standing in the of them. 
The Place. The first was brought out of the Isle of Ree by Rochel by M r . Iohn Tr when the Duke of Buckingham was sent with supplies for Mounsieur Subise: the second growes by the Seaside, as the third and fourth about the Sea coasts in Narbone, not farre from Mompelier, and on the coast of Portugall and Spaine beyond the Straights: the fift neare the Sea at Terracina: the three first Candy kinds Clusius saith hoe received from C s , having brought them out of Candy: the ninth Bauhinus saith was brought out of Signor Contare of Venice his Garden, but Alpinus saith from Candy, the tenth Columna found on the hills Ʋalvenses in Naples. 
The Time. They doe all flower in the Summer moneths of Iune and July for a great while, and the seede ripeneth not untill August. 
The Names. The Greeke word is given to all these wilde plants as well as to the other of the Garden, entreated of in my former booke, whether they be those we call Stocke Gilloflowers or Walflowers: for so Dioscorides and Pliny and the rest that follow him, have distinguished the Leucoium (as the Latines also call them) into three co∣lours, white, purple and yellow, for of a blew one as some copies of Dioscorides have it there is some doubt among many writers, in that Pliny, Oribasius and Serapio, all following the Text of Dioscorides, and as Marcellus saith the Text of Dioscorides also in the Sclavanian Longobardian Characters hath no mention at all of a blew one, but this word Leucoium that is, Viola alba, here is not opposed unto Melanium (which signifieth Viola nigra, and are our March Violets, white or purple as the composure of the Greeke words import) in that properly is Ʋiola, but is imposed upon these plants, as the proper names to them; for so Dioscorides divideth them into severall places and Chapters, from the whitnesse of the leaves rather then of the flower as I thinke, and yet the name Leucoium is so variously transferred to other plants in Dioscorides text, that the flowers of many herbes, much differing one from another, are referred by Dioscorides to the flowers of Leucoium; and so Pliny saith, that the name of Violets in his time were given to very many flowers, that were put into garlands for the beauties sake and sweete savour of the flower, custome prevaling above reason, yea many other nations in the like manner, have followed them and called them Violets, as Ʋiola Damascena or Matronalis which are our Dames Violets or Winter Gilloflowers, &amp; those in Italy, Ʋiola marina. The first hath the name in the title as is fit∣test for it in my judgement. The second Lobel calleth Leucoium marinum alterum latifolium. Camerarius Leu∣coium marinum aliud, and saith Anguilara tooke it for Tripolium, and Bauhinus Leucoium marinum latifolium, and doubteth whether it be not the Leucoium maritimum minus of Lugdunensis, which as he saith some tooke to be Hesperis. The third and fourth are Clusius his Leucoium marinum majus and minus, and so doe Lobel and C ∣rarius call them, Bauhinus calleth them marinum latifolium and angustifolium: the fift Bauhinus onely mentioneth by the same name in the title: the sixt, seventh and eighth Clusius calleth, Leucoium marinum Creticum pri , se∣cundum &amp; tertium: the ninth Bauhinus thinketh to be that Leucoium Creticum pulcherimum, forte Leucoium cer ∣laeum Dioscoridis, that Pona mentioneth in his description of Mount Baldus, and calleth it himselfe Leucoium Cre∣ticum minimum folio subrotundo, and after a sort describeth it in his Prodromus, and peradventure may be his sixt sort there described likewise, for I finde little difference the one from the other: but Alpinus libro de plantis exe∣ticis describeth it more perfectly and exactly, and calleth it Leucoium caeruleum marinum. The last Columna hath set forth by the name of Lithoreo Leucoium minimum supinum, and Bauhinus Leucoium saxatile thymifolio hirsutum caeruleo purpureum, but might as I sayd be rather accounted a Thlaspi. 
The Vertues. These wilde or Sea Stocke Gilloflowers are of the same qualitie with those of the garden saving that they are not of so sweete a sent, and are almost esteemed as effectuall as the ordinary yellow Leucoium or W llflower, for so is Galens judnement of them all, saying they are of a clensing qualitie and of thinne parts: the Garden Stock Gilloflowers (for under them I comprehend the vertues of these also as I sayd) especially the dryed flowers, rather then the fresh and greene boyled in wine and drunke doth rectifie the indisposition of the Liver and veines, provoketh womens courses, as also helpeth the hardnesse and paines of the mother, and expelleth the secondine or afterbirth, and the dead child also, yea and the living also saith Galen, if they shall drink of it when it is quick a hath made for them to sit in doth the same, &amp; the seed or the juice drunk worketh in the same manner also. If the same be drunke twise a day, it will helpe to strengthen and restore any member growne weake, loose, or out of joy ; the decoction of the rootes in vinegar, is held good for the hardnesse of the spleene, to be used outwardly, as well as inwardly. The distilled water of the flowers is availeable, to all the purposes aforesayd, and is sayd to clense the blood, to comfort the inward parts, to ease paines and to procure a merry disposition: the leaves bro∣sed with salt is used as a remedy for the Ague, to be tyed to the wristes: The juyce dropped into the eyes doth clense them from the mists and clouds, that seeme to hinder the sight, and such fil es or skinnes, that begins to grow over the sight to take it quite away: it is good also to gargle the mouth, with the decoction of the flowers, and some honey put to it, and a little allome and is found good for ulcers and sores therein, as also all other old and filthy ulcers, boyled also in Vinegar and applyed warme upon the place pained by the Goute, giveth a great deale of ease, as also to the joynts and sinewes that have weakenesse and paines, or are troubled with hard tumours, swellings, or inflammations. 
CHAP. LXXIII. Keiri sive Leucoium luteum. Wallflowers. I Have in my former booke, shewed you all or most of those Wall-flowers that carrying beautifull flowers are received as the delights and ornaments of a garden of Pleasure. I there also declared that there were some other, of no such beauty, or sent fit for that place, and therefore to be referred to this, as shall be now shewed you. 
1. Keiri sive Leucoium montanum luteum. The Mountaine Wall-flower. The Mountaine Wallflower riseth up with divers upright, strong, and wooddy stalkes, as high as any man sometimes, beset with many short greene pointed leaves, dented about the edges: the flowers are single, but larger than of the ordinary sort, and of a faire yellow colour, consisting of foure leaves, smelling very sweete like them, the long pods that containe reddish seede, are somewhat slender than the other: the roote is wood∣dy dispersed under the ground into branches, and endureth long especially in the warmer Countries, where the frosts are not so extreame, as they are with us. 
2. Keiri sen Leucoium sylvestre Clusii. Wild Wallflowers of Clusius. This wild Wallflower, hath sometimes many, and sometimes but one head of long narrow greene leaves, lying on the ground about the roote, somewhat like unto the ordinary Wallflower, but a little waved or spa∣ringly dented about the edges, which so abide the first yeare for the most part; yet some the yeare of their first springing will send forth a stalke or two, of about a yard high, with many such like leaves set thereon, as grew below, but smaller and with few or no dents on the edges at all: the flowers are many that stand clustring to∣gether, as it were in an umbel, (and not in a long spike, as the ordinary Wallflower doth at the toppes) consi∣sting of foure leaves a peece, not altogether so large as the Wall-flower; nor of such a yellow colour of little or no sent at all: after which come long slender pods, with flattish seede in them like the other: the roote is long and single, with divers fibres thereat, and perisheth after seede time. 
3. Leucoium luteum Eruce folio. Wallflowers with jagged leaves. This kind of Wallflower, hath his lower leaves much more and deeplier jagged on the edges, (almost like Keiri sive Leucoium vulgare luteum vel album. The ordinary yellow Wallflower or the whine. 
2 Keiri seu Leucoium sylvestre Clusii. Wilde Wallflowers of Clusius.
those of Rocker, or of the wilde Poppie) than those upon the stalke, yet all of them very long greene and soft and somewhat hayrie: the stalke which is round and somewhat hayrie, about two foote high, and somewhat branched, beareth many yellow flowers, like the common Wallflower, but set more closely together, as it was in an umbell, and of the smell of new Waxe: but afterwards doe more separate a sunder, when it beareth the long pods like unto the other; the whole plant hath a sharpe quicke taste. 
4. Leucoium Creticum luteum utriculato semine. Candy Wallflowers with roundish pods. From a small Wooddy roote divided into sundry branches, rise up divers wooddy stalkes, about a foote high, branching forth and set at severall places, with many small whitish greene leaves set together, lesser than those of the ordinary sort, harder in handling and set with sharpe haires: the flowers are yellow at the toppes of the branches, made of foure round pointed leaves a peece usually, but sometimes with foure or sixe, after which come yellowish roundish pods, conteining many whitish seedes, like unto the ordinary but broader and this abideth with some leaves greene above ground in the winter, not perishing as many others doe. 
The Place. The first Pona hath set forth, in the 4. Leucoium Creticum luteum utriculato semine &amp; Marinum creticum c ruleum. Yellow Stock Gilloflowers with round heads, and the least Candy kinde with blue flowers. 
description of Mount Baldus, in his Italian Edition, but not in the Latine, found growing there: the second groweth in Germany, in many places, as Gesner, Tragus, Camerarius, and Clusius make mention: and in Spaine also, for from thence hath the seedes thereof beene brought to me: the third Columna saith groweth in the vallies of the Campoclare hils in Na∣ples: the fourth in Candy, 
The Time. They flower almost all the Som∣mer long, and in the meane time ri∣pen their seede. 
The Names. I have shewed you in the Chap∣ter, next before this, the Greeke and Latine names to be Leucoium, and the derivation and transposition thereof, to many other herbes; where∣unto I referre you, onely these yel∣low kinds, as well as the other set forth in my former booke, are called Leucoium luteum, or aureum, as a distinction to severthem: the Arabi∣ans doe properly call this yellow kind Keiri, or Cheiri, although divers doe transferre the name, to all the other sorts of Leucoium; but because this is more excellent and vertuous, than any of the Stocke Gilloflowers, even by Gàlen his judgement. I hold the name Keiri, more proper to this kinde than that: some also call it Viola lutea, as Tragus, Fuschius, Dodonaeus, and Caesalpinus, but Tabermontanus Ʋiola petraa lutea: The first here set downe is called by Pona aforesayd, Leu∣coium luteum montanum serrato folio: the second is called Leucoium sylvestre by most writers thereof; by Tragus Viola lutea sylvestris: it is very probable that it is the same also, that Bes rus in h r o Eystetensi, calleth Leucoium sylvestre inodorum flore flavo pallidore, as also the Leucoium sylvestre of Clusius, although Bauhinus would make them two severall plants, calling the one Leucoium luteum sylvestre Hieratis folio, and the other Leucoium luteum sylvestre angustifolium: the third Columna calleth Leucoium terrestre majus, and Bauhinus Leucoium luteum Eruce folio: the fourth is onely found extant in Alpinus de plantis exoticis by the same name is in the title; the Italians call it Viola Gialla: the Spaniards Violas amarillas: the French Violas I nes &amp; Violas Imnes Mares: the Germa Geell Violen, and Winter Violen: the Dutch Steen Violeren: we in English Wall flowers, Wall Gilloflowers; Winter Gilloflowers, and some Bell flowers, and yellow Stocke Gilloflowers. 
The Vertues. All writers doe attribute the most especiall vertues, of all the sorts of Leucoium, to the Leucoium luteum, which is our common Wallflower: and some of these wilde kindes here expressed, doe come so neere thereunto, al∣though wanting that sweete sent that they may be used in their stead; for even these somewhat bitter and hot, and conduce (but especially the ordinary or sweete kindes) unto all the purposes that are specified in the former Chapter; for Galen saith in his seventh booke of simple medecines, that the yellow Leucoium doth worke more powerfully than any of the other kindes, and therefore of more use in Phisicke: it clenseth the blood and freeth the Liver and reines from obstructions, provoketh womens courses, expelleth the secon∣dine and dead child, helpeth the hardnesse and paines of the mother, and of the spleene also: stayeth inflam∣mations and swellings, comforteth and strengthneth any weake part, or out of joynt; helpeth to clense the eyes from mistinesse and filmes growing on them, and to clense foule and filthy ulcers, in the mouth or any other part, and is a singuler remedy for the Goute, and all aches and paines in the joynts and sinewes. 
CHAP. LXXIIII. Hesperis sive Ʋiola Matronalis. Dames Violets. I Have in my former booke set forth two sorts of Dames Violets, both of them with single flowers, but the Presse had scarse passed that Chapter, where I mentioned them, but I did understand of two others, with double flowers, the one that was sent me from Paris, and yet was in England long before, as I understood afterwards, although I heard not of it; and another likewise nursed up with the other, in the West parts of our Land, which I meane to declare unto you here, (and may be transferred to the other single ones, when that booke shall be reprinted) together with some other sorts hereof. 
1. Hesperis sive Ʋiola Matronalis flore albo pleno. Double white Dames Violets. The double white Dames Violets groweth not so great in any part thereof, nor so high as the single doth, except in the flowers, which being very thicke of leaves, of a pure white colour, and many standing in a cluster, sweeter also than the ordinary, and longer abiding, causeth it to be had in some esteeme; it hath somewhat lesser leaves of a fresher greene colour, little or nothing snipped about the edges, and more tender; but the branches grow more plentifull, and more easie to be slipped and transplanted, than the single kinde, but giveth no seede, as many other plants doe, that carry double flowers, and is more tender to be kept in the Win∣ter. 
2. Hesperis flore pleno purpurante. Double purple Dames Violets. This other double Dames Violets differeth not much in any thing from the former, but in the colour of the flowers which in this is of a fine pale purplish colour, and not fully so double as the others, nor so many clustring together. 
Hesperis Melancholica. The Melancholy Gentleman. 
Hesperis Syriaca Camerarii, &amp; 5. Sylvestris latifolia flore albo parvo. Dames Violets of Syria, and the small white flowred Dames Violets. 
 
3. Hesperis Pannonica inadora. Vnsavory Dames Violets of Hungary. This Hesperis is so like unto the ordinary sort, in all other things saving the sent, that there can be no diffe∣rence found betweene them: this onely hath no sent at all, neither morning, nor evening, neither day, nor night, to commend it, which maketh it to be a differing sort from the rest: and some have made another different sort hereof, (which is likely to be but a degeneration of the same) that beareth greenish flowers. 
4. Hesperis sylvestris folio sinuato. Wilde Dames Violets with waved leaves. This Dames Violet sendeth forth an hairy, rough, crested, pale greene stalke of about a foote high, parted at the top into divers branches, with leaves set thereon from the bottome, which are thicke, rough, and hairy, narrower and longer then the other, and waved about the edges, the lowest having footestalkes, and those above none, but stand close to the stalke: the flowers are as large, and consist of foure leaves in the same manner that the rest doe, and smelleth pretty sweete also, but of a deeper red colour then they: the cods with seede in them are like the other and perish after seede time most usually, yet sometimes abiding a third yeare of it selfe, but most certainely if it be hindered from bearing too many branches and flowers by cutting them downe , th goe to flower. 
5. Hesperis sylvestris angustifolia flore parvo. Small purple floure Dames Violets. The leaves of this small Hesperis are narrower and longer pointed then in the common sorts, lesse and deepelier cut in or dented on the edges: it hath a stalke about halfe a yard high, branched toward the toppe with very small flowers thereon, of a purplish colour, so that one of these flowers, are not much bigger than one of the leaves of the flower of the ordinary; the pods that follow are long but much smaller. 
6. Hesperis sylvestris latifolio flore albo parvo. Small white flowered Dames Violets. The leaves of this kinde are large and broad, small at the bottome of the stalke where it is a little parted or torne, but crumpled and dented all about the edges, a little rough hairy and woolly, but in Summer wh the stalke riseth up the next yeare after the first springing about a yard high, branching forth at the top into sun∣dry long spikes, full of very small white flowers no bigger then the last, consisting of foure leaves a peece, which afterwards yeeld very many and very long slender flat pods like the Stocke Gilloflowers hanging downe, but smaller, with very darke browne flat seedes therein on both sides like the Leucoium ▪ so that it partaketh with the Hesperis in the greene leaves, and with the Leucoium in the flat pods and seede: the roote is not very long but white and wooddy perishing yearely after it hath borne seede: the flowers have little or no sent in them; but the leaves have a little hot and drying taste. I have given you onely a leafe hereof, and a few flowers as the des of the Hesperis Syriaca. 
Because both the Leucoium Syriacum and Melancholium, that I have set forth already in my other booke, as I there call them, partake more with this Hesperis then with Leucoium, in that their leaves are greene, and not white like them; and in that the seede in the pods of the Melancholium are not flat but long and round like He∣speris. I have given you here the figure thereof, and with the Syriacum a leafe and some flowers of the last: I might have multiplyed the sorts of Hesperis unto you as Bauhinus doth if I would follow him, who maketh that Leucoium alterum saxatile obsoleto flore of Columna to be of a different sort from the Melancholium, which un∣doubtedly is the same, and the Hesperis Syriaca or Leucoium Syriacum, of Camerarius, and Clusius to bee the Leucoium Melancholium also, which certainely also are differing plants, and even Bauhinus himselfe would so have acknowledged, if ever he had seene both the plants. 
The Place. The first was as I sayd before sent me first out of France, which perishing I had both it againe and the second also by the liberalitie of M r . D r . Anthony Sadler a Physitian in Exeter, son to the elder Sadler an Apothecary there, who both affirmed unto me for certaine, that the white one was in many mens Gardens in the West parts, and the purple also although not so plentifull, before my booke came forth, but from whence the originall of them came is not knowne: the third as Clusius saith groweth in the skirts of the vineyards at the foote of the hills, that are neare Ʋi in Austria: the fourth groweth as Bauhinus from Barstrus rel eth it, among the stony places in Proevnce that are moystned with springs: the fift also neare Mompe r, in the gr ed grounds, on hortus Dei: the last grew in my garden from seede, receaved from some friend but I have forgotten who. 
The Time. They all doe flower in the Summer Moneths of Iune and Iuly chiefly, and the first abideth longest, if it stand not too much in the Sunne.
1. Ocimoides repens. Creeping wilde Campion. This creeping wilde Campion sendeth forth divers slender weake trayling flexible branches, divided into others, set full of joynts, and two leaves alwayes at them which are somewhat long like unto Mirthe , or as Lobel saith unto knotgrasse, but larger, that is shorter and broader: at the toppes of the branches stand small blush coloured flowers in hairy long greene huskes, like the common wilde Campion, but lesser, consisting of five small round pointed leaves, cut or dented in with some threds in the middle, the roote is small and long▪ and disperseth some strings and fibres under ground, abiding divers yeares. 
2. Ocimoides Lychnitis Columnae sive Lychnis incu a repens. Hoary creeping wilde Campion. This hoary wilde Campion hath small hoary leaves set by couples upon the trayling hairy branches, which are somewhat broad comming neare unto the leaves of Bassill, and a little pointed at the ends, the flowers gr w many together in hoary long huskes, like the wilde Campions. 
3. Lychnis marina repens alba. The white Sea Campion. This Sea Campion hath divers weake flexible branches, lying all about upon the ground (much divided into other smaller ones) two or three foote long, thicke set with small long flat and whitish greene leaves at the tops of every branch standeth one short, thicke, whitish greene huske, parted or dented at the toppe, out of which shooteth forth a small long necked white flower, very like unto that of Spa ling Poppie, and as white, made of five small round pointed leaves, with some blackish thred in the middle: the seede that followeth is browne, conteined in such like huskes as other wilde Campions have, the roote is slender and long, and abideth ma∣ny yeares. 
4. Lychnis marina repens flore rubell . Red flowred Sea Campion. This red Sea Campion differeth not from the former in any thing but in the colour of the flower, which in this is of a fine delayed red colour as in the other it is white. 
5. Lychnis arvensis minor Anglica. The small white field Campion. The lower leaves of this our small wilde Campion are small and hairy, very like unto the small Mou ea e, but those that grow upon the slender small stalke, which is sometimes single of it selfe, and sometimes many the roote, are not above a foote high, two alwayes being set together at a joynt, smaller then those below, and spotted with white spots; from the bosome whereof, that is, betweene them and the stalke come forth two other leaves, much smaller then they, without any manifest taste: the flowers are small and white like unto the other wilde Campions, after which come small long heads, with grayish seede in them: the roote is small and white and perisheth every yeare. 
6. Lychnis sylvestris lanuginosa minor. The little Spanish wilde Campion. This small wilde Campion hath a small slender upright stalke, about an hand breadth high, or little roote with divers joynts, and two leaves at every of them which are hoary, somewhat long and narrow: the flow∣ers stand single for the most part, each comming forth at the joynts with the leafe, and some also at the toppes of the stalkes and branches set in small long hoary huskes striped, consisting of five small bright red leaves, den∣ted at the ends in two places so making three points: the roote is small and dyeth after seede time. 
7. Lychnis sylvestris minima exigno flore. The small flowred wilde Campion. This wilde Campion riseth up with a small round brownish stalke, not halfe a foote high, spreading from the joynts (where there are two small narrow and pointed leaves, smaller then the last, otherwise not much unlike) very small branches somewhat rough or hairy, on the top of every one whereof standeth one purplish flower made of five leaves, so dented in at the end of every leafe, that it expresseth the forme of an hart; the seede conteined in the small heads is like the other: the roote is small and endureth not. 
8. Lychnis exilis rubra. The very small red wilde Campion. This small Plant might rather be accounted a kind of small Pinke, if the head with seede did not gaine say it. For it hath many small grasse-like leaves at the foote of the stalke, and at the joynts of them, which stand thicke together, two or more such like leaves but smaller: the flowers stand at the toppes of the stalkes two or three together in slender long huskes, very like unto those of that Muscipula or Catchflie, that is called Ben rubrum Monspeliensia of a reddish colour dented at the ends, the roote is very small and long and tasteth not. 
9. Lychnis tennifolia altera. The least wilde Campion. There is small difference in this from the last in the smalnesse of the growing or leaves, or posture of them but that this hath seldome above two leaves at a joynt, the flowers chiefely distinguish them, which are as small but growing from the upper joynts, and some at the top of the thred like stalkes, of a pale greene colour, and without any notch or dent at the end of the leaves: the seede and seede vessells are small and like the rest: the roote is like a thred, Exiles 3. alterae. Three other small ones. like unto these two last, I here shew you three other small Plants whose descriptions every eye may reade that seeth the figures. 
10. Ocimoides muscosus Alpinus. Small mountaine wilde Campion. The roote of this small Campion although small, yet is wooddy and of a whitish colour, not growing deepe but spreading much under ground, and shooteth forth a number of heads of small greene leaves very thicke set together in tufts, in that manner spreading much ground, and covering it like Mosse; from the middle of each head whereof, riseth up a small blush coloured flower, out of a small long huske, but standing upon so short a stalke above the leaves, that it is scarse to be discerned, in each part very like unto the first creeping wilde Cam∣pion; the seede is small and browne, it hath no great sent to commend it, but onely the beauty of this verd , and blush so thicke intermixt like a wrought carpet to please the sight. 
1. Ocimoides repens. Creeping wilde Campion. 
3. 4. Lychnis marina repens alba vel rubra. The white or red flowred Sea Campion. 
6. Lychnis sylvestris Lanuginosa minor. The lesser Spanish wilde Campion. 
10. Ocimoides muscosus Alpinus. Small mountaine wilde Campion. 
 
The Place. The first groweth on Mount Baldus, and in the shadowie hills and woods of Provence, and in other such like places: the second Columna saith he found in Naples: the third groweth by Hurst Castle neare the Isle of Wight, and in the sayd Isle also in many places by the Sea side: the fourth is found in some of those places aforesaid, as also about a mile from Southampton, in the ground of one M r . Gouch a Divine: both of them chiefly in the South parts of this land, on the most stony bankes by the Sea side: the fift groweth in divers grounds by Colche∣ster in Essex, and in a field called the Millfield, behind the house of S t . Thomas Lucees neare Colchester: the sixt as Clusius saith he found no where else then on the hills neare Salamanca in Spaine: the seventh groweth at the foote of the hill that is by Boutonet neare unto Momplier, and in the borders of the fields neare Florence: the eighth and ninth in divers places of our owne Land: the last upon mount Baldus, as Pona saith, and by Clusius his report upon the Alpes of Austria and Stiria, on the highest places of them. 
The Time. They all flower in the Summer Moneths of Iune, Iuly and August, soa e earlier or later then others, and their seede is ripe quickly after. 
The Names. The first is called Ocimoides repens by Camerarius and Pona, Lobel addeth Poligoni folio Saponariu flore. Gesner in hortis calleth it Ocimoides Alpinus. Bauhinus taketh it to be the Gi of Matthiolus, but I thinke verily is therein much mistaken, for that as Clusius saith, that Cneorium heareth a long white berry (a red in Lugdunensis historia folio 1364.) somewhat like unto the berry of T ae , with a seede therein unto it also, which in part was the cause that Clusius did referre it to the ym l , excepting the sh pe , and Bauhinus followeth him also in fol. 463. of his Pinax, making a Chapter peculiar of Cneorum Matthioli, which he there calleth Thymaelaea affinis facie externa; and if it be that, how be then this Lychnis, for this Ocimoi∣des beareth a head or seede vessell somewhat like unto the , and ade th unto them also: but whether Cneorum Matthioli should be either of Dioscorides or Galen, or of any of the sorts of Theophrastus in his sixt Booke and second Chap. is much of by divers, and what plants are the is as much controverted. Anguillara and others thought the Cneorum album and nigrum of Theophrastus, were Lavendula and Rosmarinum, our ordinary Lavender and Rosemary (as is sayd before in both the Chapters of La∣vender and Rosemary) whom Matthiolus contrarieth, shewing that neither of them can bee so as it in there de∣clared: others thinke they might be referred to the Chamaelea and Thymaelaea of Dioscorides; but in these two can be no distinction of white and blacke, being both of them greene, and neither of them whiter then others, and besides they doe both flower in the spring, and not in the Autumne, as Theophrastus saith his doe; notwith∣standing that the leaves of Thymaelaea by Dioscorides was called Cneorum, and Pliny saith that Thymaelae w ∣led of some in his time Cnestrum and Cneorum. Now how neare Matthiolus his Cneorum commeth unto that of Dioscorides and Galen is to bee shewed: it is certainely held that that of Dioscorides and Galen doth much any from those of Theophrastus, as Matthiolus saith in both his Epistles to Crato, in his third Booke of Epistles Fol. 134. and in his fourth Booke Fol. 172. and saith that because the Cneorum album is sweete, therefore according to Pliny in his 21. Book and ninth Chap. and twelfth Chap. it was reckoned among the sweete herbes that were put into Garlands, which neither Chamaelae or Thymaelaea doe, but is as hee there saith called Casia by Hig , which it seemeth it was also by Virgill in divers places of his Georgicks and Bucolicks; as first in his Bucolicks Eclogues, he sheweth one of the Naides worke in making a Garland in these Verses: Tunc Casia atque alijs intexens suavibus herbis, Mollia luteola pingit vaccinia caltha. And in the second of his Georgicks, Ʋix humiles apibus casias roremque ministrat. And in the fourth of the same, Nec circum casiae virides &amp; olentia latè Serpylla, &amp; graviter spirantes copia thymbrae Flore at, irriguumque bibat violariae fontem. All which doe plainely shew that Casia was commonly accounted with them a sweete herbe, usually planted for Bees to feede on, as well as to put into Garlands; and not that Cassia which is a tree like unto Cinamon, called of the Apothecaries Cassia lignea, for which cause it is very probable that Ga a in translating Theophrastus Greeke copie into Latin, put Casia for Cneorum, taking them to bee both one: for Cneorum as Dioscorides and Galen say, was the leafe of that plant that bare the Coccus Ginidius, which by all the best moderne H i s groweth upon Thymaelaea, being the fruit thereof, which both in face and qualitie differ much in der as it shewed before. Now how much it differeth from those of Theophrastus, resteth to bee declared, that it cannot agree with his blacke Cneorum, needeth no further demonstration then is shewed before: but that it commeth neare to his white most doe agree, yet some things therein are doubtfull, as first there is no shew therein, why it should be called white, secondly the branche are not so pliant and stiffe that they may serve to binde things withall as rushes are: thirdly the roote is not very great; and lastly it doth not flower after the Autumne solstice, but in the Spring. Thus farre I have digressed from the first Ocimoides, being drawne on by Cneorum, whereunto as I sayd Bauhinus referreth it, and calleth it Lychnis vel Ocimoides repens montanum, and saith also that it is the Ocimoides Alpinum of Gesner in hortis, and the Saponaria minor Dalechampij in Lugdunensis: the se∣cond Fabius Columna calleth Ocimoides Lychnitis, and by Bauhinus Lychnis incana repens: the third is remembred by Lobel and Lugdunensis, and Tabermont that follow him and called Lychnis marina Anglica, and Lychnis maritima repens by Bauhinus: the fourth is mentioned in Gerards Herball, taken but by report, and is not truely written of by any before this time, that I know of: the fift is not remembred also by any other before now: the sixt is the sixt Lychnis sylvestris of Clusius called by Lobel Lychnis sylvestris hirta minima: the seventh is very like unto it, and called by Bauhinus Lychnis sylvestris minima flore parvo: the eighth and ninth are not spoken of by any other: the last is called Muscus floridus by Gesner, and Caryophyllus sylvestris 9. or pumilio Alpinus by Clusius, and by Pona Ocimoid scosus Alpinus; by Bauhinus Lychnis Alpina pumila folio graminos, sive Muscus Alpinus Lychnitis flore. Every one hath his English name in his title fit to distinguish them. 
The Vertues. All or most of these herbes are of later knowledge so that there is but little sayd of their vertues, yet by their some of them being somewhat drying and astringent may be profitably applyed to stay the fluxes of blood and humors, and thereby also conduce to the healing of old and moyst Vlcers or sores: the Sea kinds taste some∣what b ackish, yet not unsavory, so that they are often eaten cold as a Sallet herbe, or stewed and so eaten. 
CHAP. LXXIX. Saponaria. Sopewort or Bruisewort. A S a supplement to the wilde Campions, I have some other sorts of herbes to bring to your conside∣ration, which both for face or forme, and for use and properties are so like unto the former, that they might well be taken as species of the same gonas.
1. Saponaria vulgaris. Common Sopewort or Bruisewort. Having shewed you in my former booke the double Saponaria and under it in a sort described the single or common kinde, it might seeme needelesse here againe to set it forth, which indeede I would not have done, but that being briefe as well in the description as in the vertues in that place, I thought good here to enlarge my selfe and therefore to insert the description thereof as well as another sort thereof with it. The roote cree∣peth under ground farre and neare, with many joynts therein, of a browne colour on the outside, and yellow∣ish within shooting forth in divers places many weake round stalkes, full of joynts, set with two leaves a peece at every one of them on the contrary side, which are ribbed somewhat like unto Plantane and fashioned like the common field white Campion leaves, seldome having any branches from the side of the stalkes, but set with di∣vers flowers at the toppe, standing in long huskes like the wilde Campion, made of five leaves a peece, round at the ends, and a little dented in the middle, of a pale Rose Colour almost white, sometimes paler, and sometimes of a deeper colour, of a reasonable good sent. 
2. Saponaria Anglica convoluto folio. Hollow leafed Sopewort. This kind of Sopewort, which is peculiar to our owne land, in the forme and manner of the running of the roote is very like unto the former, but much smaller sending forth divers weake round stalkes, with fewer joynts then in the former, and at every one of them one leafe and seldome more, which eyther compasseth the stalke at the bottome as many of them doe, or being hollow the whole leafe like a pipe or trunke compasseth it before it open it selfe on the outside, or sometimes doth not open it selfe at all, and are ribled like the former, somewhat 1. Saponaria vulgaris. Common Sopewort. 
2. Saponaria Anglica convoluto folio. Hollow leafed Sopewort. 
broader and rounder at the ends: these stalkes have no branches at all, but from some of the upper joynts, and at the toppes stand three or foure flowers, upon slender footestalkes in long huskes, made of five leaves for the most part somewhat broader at the ends then the former, and uneven, and many times breaking the huskes wherein they stand, on the one side or other, of a pale white colour enclining to a blush, especially on the sides, of little or no sent at all: wee never yet observed the seede or seede vessells, being increased sufficiently by the roote. 
The Place. The first groweth wilde in many low and wet grounds of this lands, by the brookes, and sides of running wa∣ters, and is brought for the flowers sake into many country gardens also, to serve to decke up their houses, the other was first found and set forth by M r . Gerard in his Herball, and hath not beene found to grow any where else then in that little Grove called the Spinny which is neare unto Lichborrow in Northamptonshire. 
The Time. They both flower in July, and usually not before, and so cotinue all August and part of September, before they will be quite spent. 
The Names. This Herbe is usually called Saponaria because it serveth in stead of Sope to wash any thing withall &amp; therefore Fuschius first of all other writers as I take it, set it forth for the Struthium of Dioscorides, Galen, Theophrastus and Pliny, which commeth from the Greeke word which signifieth Canas purgare, &amp; candida facere, but quite differeth from it as you shall heare by and by; for although this as well as many others, may be called Ser ∣thia, of their scouring and clensing quality, yet none of them have the right description of Strathium (which of the Latines is called Radicula, and Lanaria herba, and by some others also transferred to this Saponaria but ∣neously) and overpassed by Dioscorides as too well knowne in his dayes, and therefore needed no descriptions, and but remembred onely by Theophrastus in his sixt Booke and third Chap. of his history of Plants, among those herbes whose leaves are prickley. Pliny in his 19. Booke and third Chap. describeth Struthium at large: his owne words I thinke fit to set downe and afterwards interpret them, that all may know what little care and judgement divers have shewed in referring the more obscure Plants of the ancients, in not duly comparing and examining their Authors words and declarations. At quae vocatur Radicula (saith Pliny) lavandis demum lanis succum : mirum quantum conferens candori mollitiaeque. Aeque nascitur sativa ubique, sed sponte praecipue in Asia Syri , saxosis &amp; asperis locis, trans Euphratem tamen laudatissima, caule ferulaceo, tenui, &amp; ipso cibis indigenarum expetito, &amp; tingenti quicquid sit cum quo decoquatur, folio Olea, Struthium Graeci vocant: floret astate grato aspectu verum sive odore, spinosa &amp; caule lanuginoso semen ei nullum, radix magna quae conciditur ad quem dictum est usum: which may be thus Englished, But that herbe which is called Radicula, hath a juice or sappe therein fit to wash clothes: it is wonderfull to see what whitenesse and smoothnesse thereby it giveth unto them. The manured sort groweth with many in divers places, but of it owne accord in Asia and Syria, in rocky and rugged places; but the chiefest and most praise worthy groweth beyond Euphrates, having a small ferulous stalke, which the inhabitants doe eate with their meats, and is apt to colour or dye any thing that shall be boyled with it, and hath the leafe of an Olive tree: the Greekes call it Struthium. It flowreth in Summer, and is pleasant to behold but without any sent, be∣ing prickly, and the stalke woolly: it beareth no seede, the roote is great and being cut in peeces serveth for the uses aforesayd. Thus farre Pliny. Now if you will compare the Saponaria with this description, you shall finde that the Saponaria, hath no Olive like leafe, but rather like a Plantane, it hath no ferulous nor woolly stalke, but smooth and joynted, it hath no prickly leaves but smooth nor no great roote but small and creeping; it wanteth neyther sent nor seede, as Pliny saith Str thi doth: so that it is wonderfull that any should make them both one, for one qualities sake onely of scowring or clensing; when so many delineations are absolutely different: and therefore doth Matthiolus contrary Fuchsius plainely as also those that took the Lutea, or Luteola herba to be Stra∣thium which he therefore called Pseudo Struthium. Divers also in taking it to be Struthium, called it also Condisi of the Arabians, which is thought to be the Struthium of the Greekes, and have applyed and used it for all those purposes whereunto they have appropriated their Condisi unto: but Bellunensis giveth the description of Condisi in these words: It is the roote of a plant (that hath prickly leaves like a Thistle) of the thicknesse of ones thumbe somewhat yellowish on the inside and blacke without, sharpe both in sent and taste ( Serapio out of Dio∣scorides saith) the roote is long and round, and of a quicke sharpe taste, which words are wanting as Lugdunensis saith in the printed Latine copies) with the decoction thereof they use to clense both wooll and clothes; and the sweete oyntment makers in Damasco, doe put it into their confections that are made of honey, and boyled wine, which giveth them such a whitenesse that they seeme as if they were made of Sugar, and Starch: with the roote cut into peeces, the Syrians use to wash the filth out of their garments or shirts instead of Sope or Lye. I have beene somewhat tedious in declaring these things, that others might understand what Struthium and Condisi are, and that neither Saponaria nor Luteola can be it, for there is no heate or sharpenesse in eyther of them, besides their differing for me: the first is generally called Saponaria by all writers except Tragus who calleth it Viola agr ∣stis, and Fuschius, who as is sayd called it Struthium: the other Gerard called Gentiana concava, and placed it next unto them, thinking it a species thereof, but it is plainely seene and knowne to agree with the Saponaria, both in rootes leaves, and flowers, and not with Gentian but in the bitternesse. It is usually called in English Sopewort, and of some Bruisewort: the countrey people in Kent and Sussex call it Gill run by the street. 
The Ʋertues. The Country people in divers places doe use to bruise the leaves of Sopewort, and lay it to their fingers, hands or legges, when they are cut to heale them up againe. Some make great boast thereof, that it is reticall to provoke urine, and thereby to expell gravell, and the stone in the reines or kidnies: and account it also as singu∣lar good to avoyd Hydropicall waters, thereby to cure the disease, but their practicke is not I thinke sufficient autentike, upon their theory or speculation, to inforce beleefe that it will clense the inward parts, as by experi∣ence it is found to doe the outward of womens treene and pewter vessels: they no lesse extoll it to performe an absolute cure in Lue Ʋenerea, then either Sarsaparilla, Guajacum, or China can doe; which how true it is let o∣thers judge, that have judgement upon true knowledge of the truth; for my selfe, I cannot be induced to beleeve the one halfe, untill more evident proofes doe convince me. 
CHAP. LXXX. Trachelium sive Cervicaria. Throatewort. V Nder the name of Trachelium (which is a kinde of Campanula or Bell flower) may all the rest of the Bell-flowers be comprehended, whereof some I have already set forth in my former booke, but be∣cause there are so many. I thinke fittest to distribute them into severall Chapters, that so they may be the better expressed by me, and apprehended and retained by you, and distinguished to all. In this Chapter I will onely mention the rest of them that have rough or hayry leaves, and in the next those that have smooth. 
1. Trachelium majus Belgarum. Great Throatewort This great Throatewort hath very tall and great hayrie stalkes and leaves of the fashion of the other sort, that I have set forth in my other booke, there called the greater Canterbury Bells, but greater than it, both in stalke and leafe, the flower is of a purplish blue colour, almost as large as those of the Coventry bels, in all other things it agreeth with the other. 
2. Trachelium petraeum majus globosum. The great globe rocke Throatewort. The greater of the two rock Throateworts, riseth up with brownish or reddish straked hayrie stalks, about two foote high, bearing thereon divers rough or hayrie darke greene leaves on the upper side, and paler underneath, set without order, and a little dented about the edges with some smaller leaves set at the joynts with them: at the toppes of the stalkes especially, grow many flowers, clustring together in a round fashion, and some at the upper joynts also with the leaves, but not so many, and some also under them at the lower joynts, but still fewer and fewer, being all of them, of the forme of the former Throatewort, but of a white colour, and smaller than the small, or ordinary sort, and ending in five, sixe, or sometimes in seven points, having in the middle many yel∣lowish threds, and one greater than the rest, crooked at the end when it is biggest, and which becommeth bifor∣ ed, and blunt as it ripeneth, the flowers abide long before they fall, but the seede hath not beene observed: the roote is somewhat great and wooddy, rugged on the outside and reddish, but white within, and more astrin∣gent than any of the rest. 
3. Trachelium petraeum minus globosum. The lesser globe like rocke Throatewort. The lesser of these Throateworts, hath the first leaves somewhat long and not dented on the edges but pointed, and after them rise diverse others that are round, and cut in on the edges, standing on long footestalkes, an hand breadth long at the least, somewhat like unto those of Cimbalaria Italica hederacea, the Ivie like leafe, or Itali∣an Gondelo but not so thicke, fuller of ribbes and veines, deeplier cut in on the edges, and of a darke greene co∣lour, from which rise divers naked or bare slender stalkes, about halfe a foote high, which usually have one or 1. Trachelium majus Belgarum. Great Throatwort. 
2. Trachelium majus petraeum globosum. The greater globe rocke Throatwort. 
3. Trachelium petraeum minus globosum. The lesser Globe-like Throatwort. 
6. Trachelium saxatile spicatum. The rocke spiked Throatwort. 
7. Trachelium spicatum tennifolium. Thinne leafed Throatwort with spiked heads. 
Trachelium minus. The small Throatwort or Canterbury Bells. 
two leaves about the middle of them, with little or no stalke at all to them, somewhat deepelyer dented about the edges; at the toppes of these stalkes stand foure or five long and narrow greene leaves, like unto those that are about the middle of the stalkes, but lesser, narrower and more jagged compassing them at the heads, and from the middle of them start forth divers small flowers, set in a tuft together, of a darke blewish purple co∣lour, with very short footestalkes under them, and are fashioned somewhat like a bigge bellyed bottle, with a small long necke, opening at the brimmes into five points, somewhat deepely cut downe, with divers threds in the middle, one being bigger and longer then all the rest, issuing a good way beyond the necke which in the ripening becommeth the seede vessell, biforked like the other: the roote is very rugged whitish and wooddy. 
4. Trachelium montanum majus. The greater mountaine Throatwort. The greater mountaine Throatwort sendeth forth from a long blackish roote, thicke at the head and growing smaller downwards, with many small fibres set thereat, and some bigger, with a number of long &amp; narrow leaves, somewhat like those of Alkanet, set at the bottome of the slender round reddish stalke, which is about a foote or more high, with very few leaves thereon, at the toppes whereof grow a few long flowers, somewhat like unto the ordinary sort, of a ale purplish colour, with a long Pestell in the middle. 
5. Trachelium montanum Tragopogi folijs. Narrow leafed Throatwort. This Throatwort hath sundry narrow long leaves lying next the ground, somewhat resembling those of Goates beard, the flowers at the toppes of the stalke are Bellfashion and somewhat small, of a blush colour the seede that followeth is small like the rest.
6. Trachelium saxatile spicatum. The rocke spiked Throatwort. This spiked Throatwort sendeth forth from a white great roote full of bunches or knots on the outside, as it doth grow old, and spreading under ground many branches with fibres thereat, sundry round and crooked hoary white stalkes, of an unequall height, some being a foote and 10. Trachelium folijs Echij. Wilde Buglosse leafed Throatwort. 
some lesse high, with broad leaves set thereon without order, most usually but one at a joynt, but sometimes two unevenly dented about the edges, somewhat like the leaves of Doroni∣cum, or of that herbe is called by some Fulmonaria Gallorum, by others Pilosella major, and Chondrilla aurea, and we in Eng∣lish as I have shewed you in my former book Grim the collier, but hoary, especially underneath: from the middle of the stalkes upwards, come forth some flowers at the joynts with the leaves, but especially at the toppes many together spike fashion, one above another, which are small and of a blewish purple colour, but like in forme unto the ordinary Rampions, or Throatwort: after which come such like seede vessells and browne seed in them as is in the smaller Throatwort: this as the rest giveth milke both stalkes and rootes, which is no lesse plea∣sant and edible then the rest, and endureth many yeares, al∣though the stalkes dye downe every yeare. 
7. Trachelium spicatum tennifolium. Thinne leafed Throatwort with spiked heads. This thinne leafed Throatwort hath many long and narrow hairy greene leaves, somewhat like unto those of wilde Bassill, but much smaller, betweene which riseth up a strong round greene stalke, about a foote high or more, somewhat straked, and of the bignesse of a finger, set with narrower leaves and lon∣ger, from the bottome to the middle of the stalke and from thence up to the toppe, come forth small whitish coloured flow∣ers, like the others, standing at the joynts with the leaves, en∣ding in a long spike of flowers and leaves, set thicke together very orderly: after the flowers are past commeth small heads, conteining very small brownish seede: the roote is thicke and white, as bigge as ones finger, and rugged on the outside, with some bigger fibres set thereat. 
8. Trachelium umbelliferum caeruleum. Vmbelliferous blew Throatwort. This Throatwort groweth with a number of small fibres set at the roote, from whence riseth up a stalke about two foote high, having a few hard rough greene, and somewhat long leaves set one above another, very like unto the ordinary sort, and dented about the edges in the same manner: from the middle of the stalke upward at the joynts, it sendeth forth branches, set with such like leaves as grow be∣low, but lesser and lesser, every branch being bare or naked of leaves for a little space next under the toppe, where there stand two small narrow leaves, and from thence rise many small perfit blew flowers, set upon little short footestalkes in manner of an umbell or tuft, all of them in a manner standing to an equall height, somewhat like to mountaine Spikenard, the heads and seede are like the rest: all the whole plant giveth milke, and is of an astringent and sharpe taste, but is very impatient of cold and therefore must have some extraordinary care be∣stowed on it in these colder countries, to preserve it in the winter. 
9. Trachelium pumilum Alpinum. Small Mountaine Throatewort. This small Throatewort hath many leaves rising from the roote, like the common small sort (whose figure I here give the description being extant in my former booke) every one standing upon a long foote stalke, among which riseth up a round stalke diversely branched, having all the leaves that grow thereon, narrower and longer pointed than those below, and without any stalke to compasse the branches at their lower ends; at the toppe of every one standeth a reasonable large flower in fashion like the ordinary, ending in five points, but of a pale blewish almost ashcolour in some, but of a deeper blewish purple colour in others: after the flowers are past the heads wherein the small whitish seede lyeth, turne downewards when they are ripe, and are three square; the roote is white and great, for the proportion of the plant, having divers heads at the toppe thereof, where the leaves shoote forth: the whole plant hath a soft doune somewhat whitish upon it, and giveth milke as all the rest doe. 
10. Trachelium foliis Echii. Wild Buglosse leafed Throatewort. The lower leaves of this Throatewort or Bell-flower, are many, long, very rough and narrow, lying upon the ground, like unto Vipers Buglosse but broader and shorter, whose stalke that riseth up amongst them, is about a foote high, round and rough also, set with few leaves but smaller, at the toppe whereof stand five or f e bl e flowers Bell-fashion, upon short footestalkes hanging downe their heads, whose brimmes as also the wherein the flowers stand, have some hayrie douninesse upon them. There is a lesser of this sort as Bauhinus saith, Minor. which hath hayrie shorter leaves and lesser flowers, found on the hils among the Switsers. 
11. Trachelium serotinum, sive Viola Calathiana forte Gerardi. The late flowring Throatewort. This late flowring Throatewort hath the lower leaves very like for forme unto the Campanula Pyrami or steeple Bell-flower but softer in handling, the stalkes rise a yard high being soft or almost woolly like the leaves, &amp; divided into some branches at the tops, bearing many Bell fashioned flowers like the ordinary greater sort, but smaller and of a pale blewish or purplish ash colour, which by reason of their late flowring gave me no seede any yeare, the roote is thicke and bushie. 
12. Rapunculus Scabiosae capitulo caeruleo. Rampions with Scabious like heads. I was long in suspence with my selfe and unresolved, whether I should set this plant in this place or not, for finding good authors to set it forth as a Scabious, and Columna onely and Bauhinus that followeth him, indifferent from them and make it a R puntium, first, because it giveth milke which no Scabious doth, and then the seede be∣ing altogether Rampion like, wherein I would judge of a plant most materially, I could not upon these reasons joyne it with the rest of the Scabious, but place it here according to the title with this description. It hath very many crested stalkes, brownish at the bottome, rising up to be a foote high, from a long white living roote, giving milke with many small narrow, and somewhat long leaves, whose edges are somewhat dented, or rather and writhed, than cut in, standing thick thereon, without order on all sides, and covered with a small soft or hayrinesse, unto the toppes almost, yet leaving a good space bare: the flowers stand in a round head, made of fi e narrow short blue leaves, the middle part formed into white starres and standing in greene huskes cut into six or seven points, and a long pointell in the middle, which flowers are long at the first, and rise by degrees, some falling away when others are beginning to open themselves; all of them when they are past, and fallen, leave the greene huske standing like a starre, in the middle whereof groweth a small head, conteining such like small browne seede as the others have. 
13. Campanula Drabae minoris folijs. Bellflowers with small dented leaves. The leaves of this Bellflower are rough or hairy, greene and small, about an inch long, and halfe an inch snipt about the edges, and pointed at the ends, standing on each side of the hairy stalkes that are scarse a high, without footestalkes: the flowers are but few, of a meane sise, formed like Bellflowers, but ending in corners or points, of a blewish colour set upon long footestalkes: the roote is white and long like the Rampions. 
14. Viola Mariana peregrina. The Syrian Coventry Bells. Vnto these kind of Plants may very well sort the Coventry Bells, as being nearest unto them, and therefore I thought it not amisse to joyne this unto them, in this Chapter, set forth by divers, after Ranwolfi had declared it, as he found it at the foote of Mount Libanus in Syria, in the shadowy woods. It hath saith he ma long and narrow leaves, rising from the roote which is somewhat great and long, very like those of the small Ribbewort Plantaine, but more cut in unevenly on the edges, and hairy also, but upon the stalkes those are smaller, and not cut in at all, bearing the flowers at the joynts with them up to the toppes, which are l ger and more open then the ordinary sort, and parted into seaven or eight corners of a pale purplish colour: the seede he could not observe, being not the time of ripening: 
15. Trachelium subrotundis folijs. Round leafed Throatwort. From a small creeping roote, a stalke of halfe a foote high being a little hairy riseth up, with a few somewhat round leaves set thereon, hairy or rough also, of about two inches broad, and as long, and little dented about the edges, at the toppe whereof stand a few small blew pendulous flowers like unto the others. 
The Place. These grow naturally in divers places, as some in Candy, some upon Mount Baldus, and others of the Alpes, in Germany, in Italy also and in Naples, as Clusius and Columna hath set it downe, onely the last save one in Syria as is aforesayd, and the last was sent Bauhinus from Helmstade. 
The Time. They all flower in the Summer Moneths of Iune and Iuly, but yet some of them flower not untill all the rest are past, and scarse perfect their seede, but are encreased by their roote. 
The Names. It is called , Trachelium both in Greeke and Latin, or Cervicaria, for that it helpeth the sores of the neck and throate, either inward or outward; it is also called Vvularia, because it helpeth the Vvula the palace of the mouth (which hath the diminitive from Ʋva ) for the likenesse unto a grape, when it is swollen and fallen downe, others call them Campanulae of the likenesse of the flowers unto Bells, and therefore called Bellflowers; by which generall name not onely these but the others in the next Chapter, and many other plants are also called. Some also call them, Rapi sylvestris genus, but unproperly, and Rapunculus or Rapuntium, Rampions, because they are like unto Rampions, and many of them edible as they are. Caesalpinus onely as I take it, thought the great ordinry sort to be Archangelica: the French call them Gantelettes and Gaus de nostre Dame, the Germanes and Dutch Halzkruit, and we in English Canterbury Bells, and Throatwort, of some Haskewort: the first here s forth is that sort that Lobel calleth Trachelium majus Belgarum, and Bauhinus to vary the name Campanula maxi∣ma folijs latissimis: the second and third is set forth by Pona, in the description of Mount Baldus; the greater whereof Ba Alpi sphaerecophalos and the lesser Rapunca Alpinus corniculatus, which in his Phytopinax, and Mar he called Rapunculus Alpinus spicato similis; but having obtained a more ex∣act knowledge thereof from Pona, he altered the title and gave both the description and figure more plainely: the fourth is called Trachelium tanum of Lugdunensis, which Bauhinus calleth Campanula s Anchusae flo∣ribus obl gis: the h Columna calleth Trachelium montanum, and Clusius Trachelium Tragop folijs; but Bau∣hinus turning all the Traechelium almost to Campanulas calleth it Campanula Alpina Tragop ijs: the sixt Clu∣sius setteth forth Curae iores, having received it from Gregorius de Reggio a Cha Fryer of Pla∣centia in Italy, By the nam yramidalis villosa saxatilis latifolia; and Clusius upon it with others of the e kind saith it e called either Rapunculus saxatilis montanus Doronici follis, or Rapunculus mon∣tanus Pul , and Trachelii flore. Bauhinus diversifieth it to Tra folijs Pulmo∣nariae Ga : the seave Clusius calleth Trachelium , and Thalius in Har aria major tenuifolia. Lugd nensis, set th it forth by the name of Echium montanum Dalechamp , called it Alep cures Clusius there saith, that though the leaves bee like unto Ec are not the flowers, seede, seede , and therefore cannot so properly be referred unto to Trachelium. Bauhinus calleth ia foliis Echii, in the Chapter of Trachelium, and in the C of Echium hee calleth it Ec eum, e referreth it likewise to this Trachelium Thyrsoides, Lugdunen∣sis figure of alloweth of to be his Trachelium Thyrsoides, but it Echium lu∣te also as de and know; but this must be accounted but one of of memory (for his first and likely to be the figure of Lugdunensis his Tracheliu deede) and yet he saith in his Prodromus he giveth the figure thereof because gave none, and yet his to carry that shew of a thirsus or bush as Clusius saith h th. The eighth Pona onely in his on of Mount Baldus, maketh mention of by the same name the title, having received it from Sig rini, Maginfico of Venice, brought to him from and thought; which Bauhinus calleth C Va caerulea: the ninth Clusius calleth Tra um, and Bauhinus Ca la inosa: the tenth is called by Bauhinus Camp foliis E ii floribus villosis the enth G eth lathiana, the true Calathian Viol , upon good ground I know not; for all writ t since Pliny his time, who first gave the have erred it to one of the A e G and himselfe doth so likewise among the G tians ) except Da pi who tooke the Digita to be it yet maketh the same Gentian or Gentianella aestiva to be it also, ng it Thylacitis minor, but ke he would not so have written, seeing himselfe both knew and set it downe for a Throat∣wort, had not herein beene led by his owne or some others willfull judgement, a it is most probable. I have as you see given it another title, most answerable in my judgement thereunto, and the description most proper as it grew with me, the colour of whose flower I never saw, other then a pale blewish or purplish ash colour, and never purpl as he saith it is: the twelfth as I sayd divers did take to be a small or sheepes Sca∣bions, as Gesner, Dodonaeus Camerarius, and Lobel, but Columna contesting there against sheweth by those proper∣ties before spoken of, that it cannot be any sort of Scabious but a Rapuntium, and calleth it Rapuntium montanum capitatum leptophyllon, and Bauhinus as it is in the title: the thirteenth Bauhinus onely mentioneth in and Prod by the same that I doe, olfius in his journall remembreth, and calleth Medium Dio∣s , , and from him Lugdunensis and Camerarius upon Matthiolus so call in. an∣ . The last Bauhinus onely mentioneth in his Prodr ? 
The Vertues. Although the rootes of many of these be sweete in taste, and therefore eaten in Sallets, eyther raw or stewed to both the greater and smaller ordinary sorts of Rampions, set forth in the next Chapter, yet some of them here described as well as the greater sorts, set forth in my former booke, are not so pleasant but rather more astrin∣gent; by which qualitie they are found to be effectuall, not onely in all Vlcers of the mouth or throat, to gargle and with them, or for the Voula or the palate of the mouth, when it is swollen and fallen downe; but for all other sores, whether in the secret parts of man or woman, to be used in decoction with honey, wine and allome, or in any other part of the body; for by the faculty of drying and binding, they are very profitable for old sores, to restraine the moyst and sharpe humours which ret the pla e and keepe them from healing, and for greene wounds , to those up the lippes of them speedily. 
CHAP. LXXXI. Rapunculi sive Campanulae glabrae. Rampions or wild Bellflowers. A S in the former Chapter I shewed you those sorts of Bell-flowers, that had hoary, rough, or hayrie leaves, which as I sayd are usually called F chilia, and Cervicariae: so the other whose leaves are smooth and not hayrie or very little, are either called Rapunculi Campions, some being of old sed up in Gardens, for dayly use and to be neere at hand, or growing wilde, and onely used as they may bee found, or Campanulae Bell-flowers, being like unto them in some things although that quality of bitternesse and healing bee wanting yet not to be dis∣joyned. 
1. Rapuncul escule vulgaris. Garden Rampions. The Rampions that are usually kept in gardens, are accounted a lesser kinde than many of the others, that grow wilde and lying upon the ground, with divers small and long round pointed pale greene leaves, before it runne up to the stalkes, which spread divers such leaves thereon, but smaller to the toppe, where breake forth, purplish flowers, ending in five points like unto the former Throateworts, but much smaller, having also such like heads, with small brownish seede therein: the roote is small and white, and giveth milke being broken, as all the rest of the plant doth; shooting two or three branches almost of an equall bignesse, which 1. Rapunculus escu vulgaris. Garden Rampions. 
2. Rapunculus spicatu Al es. Long Foxtaile Rampions. 
is sweete in taste, and therefore much used to be eaten. 
2. Rapunculus spicatus Alopecuruites. Long Foxtaile Rampions. The lower leaves of this Rampion are somewhat broad and round, yet ending in a point, dented about edges, of a darke greene colour, in some places spotted with b e spots, and standing upon small long stalkes, but those that grow upon the stalkes are somewhat longer and narrower, yet but sparingly sc e there, leaving the toppe bare, where standeth a small spikes head or bush of flowers, seeming like a Foxtail whereof it tooke the name; at the first of a darke greenish colour, for so are the huskes of the flower with breake out of them, being long and small, like unto hornes, bigger below and smaller above, ending in some sometimes in five points, of a blewish purple colour, in some paler in others deeper, and in some of a white co∣lour, which being past there appeare in their places, small round heads, a little cornered, with brownish s de therein: the roote is white greater than the former, but as full of milke, and as sweete and fit to be especially when it is boyled, and after stewed with butter, &amp;c.
hanging downe their head, like in forme and bignesse unto these last Bell-flowers, but of a reddish purple colour; the whole Plant doth so resemble wild Time, that but the flowers onely can or doe distinguish them. 
16. Campanula Cymbalariae foliis. Ivie leafed Bell-flower. The stalkes of this Bell-flower rise up to be scarse halfe a foote high, yet leane downewards upon what standeth next it, and brancheth forth from the bottome almost, set very sparingly and without order, with round and cor∣nered leaves, unevenly dented about the edges, like unto those of ground Ivie, or the Cymbalaria, which leafe is somewhat like it, every one upon a small long footestalke: at the toppes of the stalkes, and sometimes also from the sides of them, stand somewhat long blue flowers, like unto the other Bell-flowers, upon long foote stalkes. 
17. Rapunculus petraeus. Rocke Rampions. The roote of this Rampion is long white and of a fingers thickenesse, growing so fast into the Rockes that with much labour it can be drawne out whole, being of a sweetish and sharpe taste, often taken as a sallet: it hath divers thicke, and somewhat broade leaves, ending in a point, from whence rise two or three slender stalkes scarse a foote high, having narrower and longer leaves on them set opposite, at the toppes whereof stand round heads, of many blewish flowers set together without smell, after which follow very small yellowish seede, as bigge as Poppie seede. There is another with thinner leaves and smaller flowers. 
The Place. Many of these are strangers to us not growing wilde in our Land that I can heare of, but some in Candy, others in Italy, and some in Germany, &amp;c. yet some of them in divers places of this Land, as the first, second, seventh, eleventh, and twelfth. 
The Time. They flower all the Sommer long, some abiding long, and lasting untill the Autumne cold dewes doe take them away, others sooner spent. 
The Names. Some call these Rapunculi, and Rapuntia, Gesner, Dodonaeus and others call them Rapa sylvestria, having little likenesse at all with Rapum, the Turnep, but in the ediblenesse of the roote, although the name be a diminitive thereof. Others call them Campanula of the forme of the flowers, being like little Bells. Columna taketh the Rapunculus minor, to be Erinus of Nicander and Dioscorides, and the other Rapunculi to be kindes thereof: Matthiolus taketh the Campanula perfici folia, to be Phyteuma of Dioscorides; and Caesalpinus calleth the Rapun∣culus spicatus sive Alopecuroides, Phyteuma foliis Rapunculi, chiefely because the heads with seede have holes in them, as Dioscorides saith the seede of his Phyteuma hath. The first is called Rapunculus and Rapunculus minor by Matthiolus, Camerarius, Dodonaeus, and others; Tragus calleth it Rapunculum vulgare, and Lobel Rapuntium parvum sive Pes locustae Avicennae. The second is called Rapunculum sylvestre by Tragus, and by Dodonaeus R p sylvestre majus, and Rapunculum Alopecuron, by Lobel Rapuntium majus Alopecuroides con so flore, by Clusius Rapunculus Alopecuroides longa spica, by Thalius Rapunculus sylvestris spicatus, and by Taber montanus Rapunculus nemorosus primus a the third is called by Clusius Rapunculus Alopecuroides orbiculari penè spica, by Columna Rapun∣tium corniculatum montanum: the first of the fourth kinde Thalius calleth Rapunculus sylvestris caeruleus umbelatus minor, and is the second Rapunculus umbellatus in Camerarius his figures, at the end of his hortus medicus, which Bauhinus calleth Rapunculus umbellatus latifolius: the second of the fourth kinde, is the first umbellatus of those three figures of Camerarius, and is the Rapunculus sylvestris caeruleus umbellatus major of Thalius, which Bauhinus calleth umbellatus angustifolius; and the third of the sayd fourth kinde, is the seventh umbellatus with Thalius, and the third of Camerarius his figures, which Columna calleth Rapuntium alterum angustifolium Alpi∣num, and Bauhinus Rapunculus umbellatus folio gramineo; the fift is Petromarula, seu Lactuca petraea Cretica, both by Honorius Bellus, in his first Epistle to Clusius, and by Pona in his Mons Baldus, and by Perrantes, J peratus in his generall History, which thereupon Bauhinus calleth Rapunculus Creticus, seu Pyramidalis altera: the sixt is called by Bauhinus Rapunculus Alpinus seu Pyramidalis minor, and thinketh it to be the Campanula foliis serratis ce∣rulea of Beslerus in horto Eystetensi. The seventh is called by Thalius Rapunculus Campanulatus Nerij foliis tertius, and by Tabermontanus Rapunculus nemorosus. The eighth is called by Columna Rapuntium sive Erinus magno flore, and by Bauhinus Rapunculus nemerosus magno flore minor. The ninth and tenth are so called by Bauhinus as they are in their titles: Anguillara taketh the eleventh to be Cantabrica Plinij, and Caesalpinus Phyte a unico flore, in summis cauliculis, and is also the Campanula minor rotundifolia of Lobel, or Alpina rotund ∣bus imis foliis of Clusius, which Bauhinus would distinguish, and thereupon hath given as he saith, a truer figure of that Alpina rotundifolia minor, but assuredly they cannot differ, otherwise than the place may give it, for that I have seene and gathered both these sorts, with the differences specified, in one and the same ground almost. The twelfth is called by Tabermontanus Rapunculus sylvestris flore ex purpureo candicante, and by Gerard Campa∣nula minor, alba &amp; purpurea for that they grow usually on the barren dry Heath of Hampsted, and other grounds under the bushes. The thirteenth is called by Bauhinus Campanula Alpina linifolia caerulea: the fourteenth by Ta∣bermontanus Rapunculus nemorosus tertius, and by Bauhinus Rapunculus nemorosus angustifolius parvo flore, and saith it is the same with Gerards Campanula lutea linifolia. The fifteenth and sixteenth are so named as their titles de∣monstrate them by Bauhinus, who onely remembreth them: the last is remembred by Alpinus in lib. de ex tis. 
The Vertues. The rootes of all the sorts of Rampions, and so likewise some of the Bell-flowers, especially if they have any greater rootes, than the ordinary stringie ones, are used for sallets either cold with vinegar oyle and pepper, or boyled and stewed with butter or oyle, and some blacke or long pepper cast on them; either way or any way else they are familiar to the stomacke, stirring up the appetite, and by reason of their temperate quality, causeth a good digestion, and engendreth store of milke in nurses breastes; the rootes beaten small, and mixed with some meale of Lupines, clenseth the skinne from spots, markes, or other discolourings. The distilled water of the whole plants, rootes and all, performeth the same, and maketh the face very splendent and cleare. 
CHAP. LXXXII. Digitalis. Foxglove. A Lthough I have set forth in my former booke many sorts of Foxgloves, being all of them pretty ornaments to a Garden that is kept for delight, yet there is one remaining to bee spoken of, being commonly knowne to grow wilde in our land, in every countrey almost, so that it is not thought worthy a place in our Gardens (although in other countries beyond the Seas, where it is not so familiar, it is as greatly desired as any other with us, that is common with them) but I thinke not amisse to expresse the names of them I have formerly set forth, that so you may see all the sorts in one place: Digitalis maxima ferruginea, Dun coloured Foxgloves, Digitalis major flore carneo, Blush coloured Foxgloves. Digitalis media flore luteo rubente, Orenge tauny Foxgloves. Digitalis major alba, The grea∣ter white Foxglove. Digitalis alba altera, seu minor, The lesser white Foxglove. Digitalis major lutea flore amplo, The greater yellow Foxglove, whose figure I give you here with the common: and Digitalis minor lutea, sive pallida, The small pale yellow Foxglove. 
Digitalis purpurea vulgaris. Common purple Foxglove. This common Foxglove hath many long and broad leaves lying upon the ground, dented about the edges, a little soft or woolly, and of a kind of hoary greene colour, among which rise up sundry stalkes sometimes, and but one very often, bearing such leaves thereon, from the bottome to the middle; from whence to the top it is stored with large and long hollow reddish pulple flowers, a little more long and eminent at the lower edge. with some white spots within them one above another with small greene leaves at every one, but all of them turning their heads one way, and hanging downewards, having some threds also in the middle, from whence rise round heads, pointed sharpe at the ends, wherin small browne seede lyeth: the rootes are many small huskie fibres, and some greater strings among them; the flower hath no sent, but the leaves have a bitter hot taste. 
The Place. It groweth in dry sandy grounds for the most part, and as well on the higher as lower places under hedge sides, in every country almost of this Land. 
The Time. It flowreth seldome before Iuly, and the seede is ripe in August. 
The Names. It was not knowne unto any of the ancient Greek or Latin writers, for it hath scarse attained a Latin name other then Digitalis from the hollow forme of the flowers, which are like finger stalles: Some have taken it to bee a kinde of Verbascum. Caesalpinus calleth it Virga regia major flore purpureo, Alisma also and Damasonium, and Fistula pastoris. Tragus calleth it Campanula sylvestris, flore purpureo, and flore luteo: Columna taketh it to bee the Ephemerum of Dioscorides, and Dalechampius upon Pliny taketh it to bee Calathiana Ʋiola Plinij, as I sayd be∣fore: Digitalis purpurea vulgaris. Common purple Foxglove. 
Digitalis luteo flore amplo. Foxglove with large yellow flowers. 
the Italians call it Aralda as Camerarius saith, the French call it Gent ' de nostre Dame, and Doigtier, the Garmanes call it Fingerhuet and Fingerkraut, the Dutch Vingercruidt, and we in English Foxgloves. 
The Vertues The Italians have an usuall proverbe with them concerning this herbe, called by them Aralda which is Aralda, tutte piaghe salda: Aralda salveth all sores: for they use it familiarly to heale any fresh or greene wound or cut, the leaves being but bruised and bound too, and sometimes also they use the juyce in old sores to clense them, dry up their moysture, and heale them the more speedily, which it performeth by the bitter quality therein where∣by it is found to be heating and drying, and clensing withall; so that whensoever there is neede of a rarefying, or extenuating of thicke tough flegme and viscous humours troubling the chest or stomacke; the decoction or juice hereof made up with some Sugar or honey is availeable, as also to clense and purge the body both upwards and downewards sometimes, of tough flegme, and clammy humours, and to open the obstructions of the Liver and Spleene; and yet notwithstanding that these qualities are found to bee in it, there are but few Physitions it our times that put it to these uses, but is in a manner wholly neglected: It hath beene found by late experience to be availeable for the Kings Evill, the herbe bruised and applyed to the place, or the juice made up into an ∣ment and used thereon: And it hath beene of later experience found also to be effectuall against the Falling sick∣nesse, that divers have beene cured thereby; for after the taking of the decoction of two handfulls thereof, with foure ounces of Pollipody, of the oake bruised made in Ale, they that have beene troubled with that disease 26. yeares, and have fallen once in a weeke or two or three times in a moneth, have not fallen once in 14. or 15. moneths, that is untill the writing hereof, which I thinke may be sayd to be an absolute cure, not to be presumed that after so long stay it should returne againe. 
CHAP. LXXXIII. Helenium sive Enula Campana. Elecampane. A Lthough Dioscorides, Theophrastus and Pliny that followeth them, did in ancient times account of di∣vers herbes to be called Helenium, which were much differing one from another, and which are not so well knowne as guest at by us in these times, what they are, as that Helenium Aegyptium of Dio∣scorides in his Chapter of Helenium, and that Helenium Comogenum, with whose rootes Costus was wont to be adulterated, as he saith in his Chapter of Costus, if they be not both one; and that He∣lenium of Theophrastus in his sixt Booke and sixt Chapter numbred among the sweete herbes put into Garlande, which may also be the same with that Egyptium of Dioscorides; and although Bauhinus in these times would re∣ferre the flos Solis, and the varieties thereof unto it (of some whereof I have spoken in my former booke) yet I meane not to speake of any of them in this Chapter, but of Helenium sive Enula Campana. Elecampane. 
the most ordinary sort, even the first of Dioscorides, which is most usually called Enula campana, Elecampane: (and of that which is thought to be Dioscorides his Heleniū Aegyp∣tium in the next:) the description of which you shall have in this manner. It shooteth forth many large leaves lying neare the ground which are long and broad, small at both ends, somewhat soft in handling, of a whitish greene on the upper side, and gray underneath, each set upon a short footestalke; from among which rise up di∣vers great and strong hairy stalkes, three or foure foote high, with some leaves thereon compassing them about at the lower ends, and are branched towards the toppes, bea∣ring divers great and large flowers, like unto those of the Corne Marigold, both the border of leaves, and the middle thrumbe being yellow, which turne into downe, with some long small brownish seede among it, and is carryed away with the winde: the roote is great and thicke, branched forth divers wayes, blackish on the out∣side, and white within, of a very bitter taste, but good sent, especially when they are dryed, no part else of the plant having any smell. 
The Place. It groweth in the moyst grounds and shadowy places oftner then in the dry, and open borders of fields and lanes, and in other waste places almost in every countrey of the Land. 
The Time. It flowreth in the end of Iune and Iuly, and the seede is ripe in August, the rootes are gathered for use, as well in the Spring before the leaves come forth, as in Autumne or Winter. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , Helenium also in Latine, and of some Inula, and Enula, and Enula Campana: some thinke it tooke the name from the teares of Helen, from whence it sprung which is a fable; others that shee had her hands full of this herbe, when Paris carried her away: others say it was so called, because Hellen first found it availeable against the bitings and stingings of venemous beasts; and others thinke that it tooke the name from the Island Helena, where the best was found to grow: the Arabians call it Iasin, and Rasen, the Italians L ' ella, and Enola and Enoa, the Spaniards Raiz de alla, the French Aunee and herbe Alaine, the Germans Alant, and Alant∣wurtz, the Dutch Alantwurtel, and Galantwurtel, and we in English Elecampane generally, yet in some countries of this kingdome S wort and Horseheale Anguilara and Cordus tooke it to be Panax Chironium Theophraste.
The Ʋertues. The fresh rootes of Elecampane preserved with Sugar, or made into a syrupe or conserve, are very effectuall to warme a cold &amp; windy stomack, and the pricking and stitches therein, or in the sides caused by the Spleene, and to helpe the cough, shortnesse of breath, and wheesing in the Lungs: the dryed rootes made into powder mixed with Sugar and taken, serve to the same purposes, and is also profitable for those that have their urine or their men∣strues stopped, those that are troubled with the mother, or are pained with the stone in their reines, kidneys or bladder; it resisteth poyson, and stayeth the spreading of the venome of Serpents, &amp;c. as also of putrid and pe∣stilentiall Fevers, and the Plague it selfe; for which purpose it is put into Treakles, and other medecines for that disease. Iulia Augusta as Pliny writeth in his 19. Booke and 5. Chap. let no day passe without eating some of the rootes of Enula condited, which it may be shee did to helpe digestion, to expell melancholy and sorrow, and to cause mirth, and to move the belly downewards, for all which they are also effectuall: the rootes and herbe bea∣ten and put into new Ale or beare instead of wine, as they use in Germany, Italy and other places, and daily drunke of them that have weake and dim fights, cleareth, strengthneth and quickneth the sight of the eyes wonderfully, the decoction of the rootes in wine, or the juice taken therein, killeth and driveth forth all manner of wormes in the belly, stomacke, or mawe, and gargled in the mouth, or the roote chewed fastneth loose teeth, and helpeth to keepe them from putrefaction: the same also drunke is good for those that spit blood, helpeth to remoove Crampes or Convulsions, and the paines of the Goute, and the huckle bone, or hip-goute called the Sciatica, the loosenesse and paines in the joynts, or those members that are out of joynt, by cold or moisture happening to them, applyed outwardly as well as inwardly, and is good also for those that are bursten or have any inward bruise: the rootes boyled well in vinegar, beaten afterwards, and made into an oyntment, with Hogs Suet or oyle of trotters, &amp; a little salt and vinegar in powder added thereto, is an excellent remedy for any scabs or itch, in young or old; the places also bathed or washed with the decoction doth the same; the same also helpeth all sorts of old putrid, or filthy sores or Cankers wheresoever. In the rootes of this herbe lyeth the chiefe effect for all the remedies aforesayd, yet the leaves are sometimes also used to good purpose: And the distilled water of them, and the rootes together is used also in the like manner, and besides is very profitable to clense the skinne of the face or other parts from any morphew, spots, or blemishes therein, and causeth it to be cleare. 
CHAP. LXXXIIII. Helenium alterum Dioscoridis, sive Helianthemum. Dwarfe Cistus or small Sunflower. A Ccording as many good Authors doe, I account this herbe for the second Helenium of Dioscorides, al∣though it hath received other names by divers writers, and therefore joyne it next thereunto, and because it much resembleth some other sorts of Cistus, I thinke it fit to entreate of them in the succee∣ding Chapters, and not mingle them together, for of these kinds there are many sorts, some whereof I have set forth in my former booke, which are the Camaecistus Frisicus, the Dwarfe Holly Rose of Freezeland, and Cistus ananus, the Holy Rose of a yeare, which I shall not neede to describe againe in this place, but referre you thither where you shall finde them, yet I will here give you their figures. 
1. Helianthemum vulgare, sive Chamaecistus flore luteo &amp; Flos solis quorundam. The ordinary yellow Dwarfe Cistus or small Sunflower. This low or Dwarfe Cistus sendeth forth from a hard wooddy brownish root, growing in time to be somewhat great, but not very long, and divided into small branches at the lower end, sundry small and weake, yet hard and almost wooddy branches, lying for the most part round about the head of the roote, upon the ground, whereon are set by couples many small and somewhat long leaves, a little soft or hairy, with other small leaves also grow∣ing betweene them: at the toppes whereof stand three or foure small pale yellow and sometimes gold yellow flowers, consisting of five round pointed leaves a peece, with some yellow threds in the middle, of a pretty sent in some places, but lesse or none in others; after which follow small round heads, containing therein small yellow seede: this dyeth not but abideth many yeares, increasing in branches, which yeeld a viscous or muciligi∣nous juice, like unto Comfrey and is of an austere and astringent taste. 
2. Helianthemum flore albo. White Dwarfe Cistus or small Sunflower. This Cistus differeth little from the former, but that it riseth somewhat higher, the leaves being a little whiter and longer, and not set so thicke together: the flower also is somewhat longer and white, in some places being a little sweete, and in others little or nothing at all, but an astringent taste like the other. 
3. Helianthemum Saba dicum. The Savoy small Sunflower or Dwarfe Cistus. This is likewise one of the same kind, differing very little from them, having flexible but tough reddish bran∣ches, standing somewhat more upright, and divided into other lesser, with foure small narrow leaves usually set at a joynt contrary to all the rest, yet the flowers are like the others, being in some yellow, in others white; the seede and roote are not unlike. 
4. Helianthemum angustifolium. Narrow leafed small Sunflower or Dwarfe Cistus. This small low or Dwarfe Cistus is likewise a small plant, having most of the branches lying on the ground, with leaves set thereon but in a different manner from all the rest, that is confusedly, for they are very many, small and narrow, and in a manner hoary or white; at the tops of the stalkes rise up small whitish or pale yellow flowers, like in forme unto the other, with small threds in the middle: the heads that follow are small and three square, like unto those of Line or Flax, with reddish seede in them; the roote is wooddy and fibrous. 
1. Helianthemum vulgare. The ordinary dwarfe Cistus or small Sunflower. 
3. Helianthemum Sabandicum. The Savoy Dwarfe Cistus. 
Chamaecistus Frisicus. The Dwarfe Cistus of Vrtezel d. 
 
5. Chamaecistus latifolius. Broad leafed small Sun∣flower or Dwarfe Cistus. The small branches of this low or Dwarfe Cistus doe lye on the ground, but the leaves are somewhat broader then in any of the former, nearest in forme unto small Mirtle leaves, and pointed at the ends: above the leaves on a small stalke stand foure or five small yellow flowers like the rest: the heads for seede are three square, and the seede within them somewhat rough and reddish; the roote is like the rest abiding long. 
6. Chamaecistus hirsutus. Dwarfe Cistus with rough leaves. The stalkes of this low Cistus grow more upright then the former, more blacke also and more woddy, about halfe a foote in length, having so many small, rough and hairy darke greene leaves set thereon, somewhat like the last, and so thicke that they seeme to have foure at a joynt: at the toppes of the stalkes and branches for they are divided into smaller ones, stand usually but one somewhat large flower, and sometimes two, consisting but of one leafe, yet cut in so deepe that it seemeth to be five round pointed leaves, of a pale purple or light blush colour, with a long purplish stile, or pointell in the middle, compassed about with ten small chives, tipt with blackish chives, after which come five square round heads, conteining small yellow seede: the root is wooddy and spreading. 
7. Chamaecistus Ericae folijs. Heath leafed Dwarfe Cistus. This Dwarfe Cistus is likewise a small plant, having most of the branches lying on the ground, and some bearing them∣selves upright, which are of two sorts, the one with very short leaves, which is the lower, and in the other which riseth higher much longer, set both so small that they are most like unto the leaves of Heath, or Tamariske, with small yellow flowers at the toppes of them, like unto the former, after which come small heads that swell out in the middle are straked and yellowish, &amp; containe within them small round seede like Millet, but greater: the roote is somewhat long, hard and wooddy, blackish on the outside with divers long fibres thereat. 
8. Chamaecistus Serpilli folio flore luteo. Yellow Dwarfe Cistus with wilde Time leaves. This Dwarfe Cistus creepeth upon the ground, like unto wild Time, with such like small leaves set upon the reddish branches very thicke, or as it were in a double row, of a darke greene colour, and a little hairy withall, but a little longer and whiter next unto the flowers, which stand three or foure together, every one on a pretty long hairy footestalke; consisting of five small yellow leaves like unto the other and somewhat sweete: the roote is very fibrous or much spread under ground. 
9. Chamaecistus Serpilli folio flore carneo. The great Dwarfe Cistus with wilde Time leaves. This other wilde Time leafed Cistus hath creeeping blackish branches, farther extended upon the ground then the other being about a foote in length, and taking roote as they creepe, having such like but small leaves set thereon by couples, of a sad greene colour on the upper side, and grayish underneath: at the ends of the bran∣ches stand three or foure flowers together, made of five leaves a peece, of a kind of blush colour: the heads that beare the seede are five square, and open themselves at the toppes shewing very small seede; the roote is small and wooddy: all these sorts of Dwarfe Cistus or Sunflowers are durable, not perishing in the Winter. 
The Place. The first and second grow in divers places of this land, but especially in Kent, in every tract thereof through∣out, which in some places is greater then in others, yet that with the white flower is more rare to finde then the others: the third according to the title in Savoy: the fourth Clusius saith he found on the hills about the Bathes of Baden: the fift he likewise saith groweth plentifully on the Alpes of Austria and Hungary: the sixt also up∣on the snowy hills of the Alpes: the seaventh on the open sunny sandy hills in divers places of France, Spaine, and Italy: the eighth Clusius saith hee never found but upon the highest Alpes of Austria and Stiria; and as some thinke is that sort is most usuall with us here in England: the last also on the snowy hills of the Alpes. 
The Time. All these sorts of Dwarfe Cistus doe flower in the Summer, some earlier and later then other by a moneth, yet most of them are so soone fading, that their flowers endure but a day or two, and perfect their seede soone after. 
The Names. I am verily perswaded that Dioscorides hath made mention of this herbe in two sundry places of his worke, the one in the Chapter of Helenium which he saith Cratevas called Helenium Aegyptium, and grew like Serpyllum, unto which Pliny also in his 29. Booke and 10. Chap. consenteth, saying Helenium is sayd to grow of Helleus teares, and the best to grow in the Island Helena: it is a small shrubbe lying on the ground, with leaves like unto Serpyllum or mother of Time, and in the 22. Chap. of the same Booke hee remembreth it againe and giveth the vertues thereof, which are differing from the other Helenium or Elecampane; for he there saith, that the juice thereof is sweete, and being drunke in wine is a furtherer of mirth, and may be held to be the Ne∣penthe, whereof Homer speaketh, that putteth away all sorrowes: but some thinke that this differeth from the Helenium of Theophrastus, because he numbreth it still among sweete herbes that were used in Garlands, as Serpyllum, Sisymbrium, and Abrotanum, and therefore judge it to be Marum, or herbe Masticke: the other place in Dioscorides is in his Chapter of Panax, and called Panax, and Panaces Chironium, which hee there saith hath leaves like unto Amaracus or Marjerome and yellow flowers, and a small roote; all know the leaves of Marjerome doe not much differ from Serpyllum in the forme, but in the largenesse and hoary whitenesse: and therefore divers Authors doe call it diversly; some, as Lugdunensis calleth it Helenium minus Dioscorides, and others Helenium alterum, sive Aegyptium, and some Panax, and Panaces Chironium as Matthiolus and others that follow him, or Chironia as Caesalpinus: some also take it to be Helianthe of Pliny, which Cordus calleth He∣leanthemum, or flos Solis, and so doe Lobel, Thalius, Tabermontanus and divers others: Gesner in hortis Germaniae calleth it Gratia Dei, or Hyssopoides, for the likenesse of the leaves, which deceived both him and Tragus, who called it Hyssopus campestris, and Lonicerus who called it Hyssopus montana, sive sylvestris, who all follow the com∣mon appellations of their countries. Cordus saith it was called by divers in his time, Consolida aurea &amp; so saith Clu∣sius also, yet he would rather referre all these sorts to the family of the female Cistus, and make them of his third order of Cistus, calling them Chamaecistus, because they are like unto them, both in face and propertie. Lobel in his Adversaria would rather referre it to the Centaurium luteum, whereunto as he saith it is both in face and vertue not unlike: the first which is as usuall with us as in Germany is called of the Germans Heyden Yssop, that is, Heathen Hyssope we may call it in English, and so the rest, eyther small Sunflower or Dwarfe Cistus: the third is remembred by Tabermontanus under the same title, it is expressed here: the fourth is the sixt Chamaecistus of Clu∣sius: the fift is his third Chamacistus in his History of Plants, but are the first and second in his Pannonicke observati∣ons, and there called Augustifolius and Latifolius, as Bauhinus doth also: the sixt is Clusius his eighth Chamaeci∣stus, and called by Tabermontanus Cistus humilis Austriaca, by Bauhinus Chamaecistus hirsuta: the seventh is called by Lugdunensis Erica Chrysanth os, and by Bauhinus Chamaecistus Erica folio luteus, who judgeth it to bee the Cori simili frutex in mariti is of Caesalpinus, and the Coris Dioscoridis of Guilandinus: the eighth is the second Chamaecistus of Clusius, which Tabermontanus calleth Cistus humilis Serpillifolia, and I thinke may bee the Heli∣anthes species ara, in the Adversaria of Pena and Lobel, which Lobel afterwards in his Icones calleth Cistus ma∣joranae foliis; and Bauhinus maketh to be a Cistus faemina, numbring it among them: the last Clusius in his Pan∣nonicke observations, was not well resolved by what name to call it, as partaking both with Cneorum Matthioli, &amp; Chamaecistus, and therefore left it there as an Anonima, without name, but considering afterwards better upon it, he setteth it forth in his history of Plants for his seventh Chamaecistus, Bauhinus calleth it Chamaecistus Serpylli folia floribus carneis, and taketh it to be the Rosa Alpina altera folijs minimis of Gesner in hort. and the Alpina al∣tera of Lobel. 
The Vertues. All these sorts are drying and binding or astringent, with some bitternesse joyned thereto, especially in some more then in others, and not without some small sent also; the decoction of this herbe and roote, is singular good for them that spit blood, and to stay all bleedings, eyther inward or outward, as also all fluxes or laskes, and the aboundance of womens courses: the same also is very effectuall to wash sore mouthes, and the Vlcers that hap∣pen in the privy parts of man or woman: it is no lesse profitable in other Vlcers of the body or legges, which are long kept from healing, by a defluxion of moist and sharpe humours falling upon them, which it consumeth and dryeth up, thereby causing the sores to heale the more speedily: it likewise sodereth and closeth up the lippes of greene wounds, for it is very powerfull in consolidating, binding, and strengthning any part, and is as effectu∣all as any Comfrey for burstings, the strengthning of weake joynts, or any other binding propertie, whereunto any Comfrey may be applied: being bruised and applyed to the biting or sting of any venemous creature, it stay∣eth the venome from further spreading, and healeth the party quickly; especially if they take also of the juice, or the decoction thereof in wine: the distilled water of the herbe is held to beautifie the skinne of the face, or any other part of the body. 
CHAP. LXXXV. Cistus mas. The male Holly, or Sage Rose. B Ecause I entreated in the last Chapter of the small or Dwarfe Cistus, which upon good ground as I take it I referred to the Helenium alterum of Dioscorides; I thinke it not amisse here to prosecute the other kinds of Cistus, whereof there are two principall, one that beareth the sweete Gum Lad , and another that doth not, according as some doe distinguish them; or as others doe into male &amp; fe∣male; yet some make three kinds, and the Cistus Ledon to be the third, but it may bee comprehended under the female kind, in that it beareth white flowers as the female doth, the male alwayes bearing red flowers: but be∣cause there is so much varietie in every of them, I will distribute them into their severall Chapters, not inten∣ding to speake of those here, I have spoke of in my former booke, which is one of eyther of the two first sorts, and two or three of the last, yet if I give you their figures, it shall be to shew you their differences.
CHAP. XCI. Tripolium. Sea Starrewort. A Lthough Dioscorides and Galen knew but of one Tripolium, yet because Lobel hath set forth another that is lesse, and Camerarius accounteth another herbe also to be a little sort thereof, I thinke it not amisse to make mention of them also in this place, and some others of later knowledge. 
1. Tripolium majus sive vulgare. The greater Sea Starrewort. Our ordinary Sea Starrewort hath many long and somewhat broad leaves, rising from the roote next the ground, smooth, fat and thicke, and of a blewish greene colour, somewhat like unto the leaves of Dorias Woundwort, but much lesser, from among which riseth up a smooth herby or fleshy greene stalke, two or three foote high, branched towards the toppes into divers smaller branches, with such like leaves on them as grow below but lesser: the flowers that stand at the toppes of them are somewhat larger and greater then of the other Italian Starrewort, here before set forth among the Asters and almost of the same colour, having a blewish purple border of leaves standing about a yellow middle thrum, which after it hath done flowring, turneth into downe, and the small seede therewith is blowne away at the will of the winde: the roote hath divers greater strings, and many smaller fibres thereat, which grow deepe and sticke fast in the mudde of the marshie ditches where it groweth. 
2. Tripolium minus. The lesser Sea Starrewort. The small Sea Starre is in all things like the greater, but lesser and lower, both in roote, leafe stalke and flower, and in the naturall places observed not to exceede the greatnesse of the small Conyza or Fleabane. 
3. Tripolium minus Germanicum. Small Sea Starrewort of Germany. This also is very like unto the last, but lesse then it, having a shorter stalke and narrower leaves, the flower also is small and of a more purplish colour. 
Lobel maketh mention that Montonus had in his Garden one hereof with yellow flowers, but I rather thinke it was another kinde of herbe, and therefore I make no further mention of it here. 
4. 5. Tripolium Lychnidis Coronariae folio &amp; alterum Ferulae folio. Starrewort with Rose Campion like leaves, and another with Fennell like leaves. The seede of both these sorts of Starreworts I received from Signor B el from Lishone, but they sprang not with me: but it may be that with Fennell like leaves was the Ageratum f rulaceum of Lugdunensis. 
The Place. The first groweth as I sayd before in the ditches of the salt Marshes, neare the Sea coasts in many places of this Land, so that you shall hardly misse it in any salt Marsh in some place or other if you looke well for it: the se∣cond groweth as Lobel saith neare the mouth of the River 1. Tripolium vulgaris. Sea Starrewort. 
P o: the third saith Cordus groweth in the salt Marshes that are nigh unto the Lake of brackish water, which is by Staffurt in Germany, and so doe the other two as hee saith also. 
The Time. They flower in Iune and Iuly for the most part. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Tripolium, which name the Latines keepe and change not, and as Dioscorides re∣lateth was so called, because the flowers did change their colours three times a day, which was but a false informa∣tion or a negligent consideration. Serapio called it Turbith, but Lobel and Pena disprove it, as I sayd before in the Chapter of Tithymales or Spurges: for the roote of this purgeth not say they, either the juice or decoction: Pliny in mistaking Tripolium maketh Polium to have the same fa∣cultie, that Theophrastus in his ninth Booke and 21. Chap. giveth to Tripolium: and Gaza following Pliny his errour, translateth it Polium also; the first is called Tripolium of all that have written thereof, except Cordus, who in Obser∣vationum sylva calleth it Anthyllis major, as he doth the se∣cond Anthyllis minor, and the last Anthyllis brevior, and Co∣lumna who calleth the first Amelli species palustris, as Lobel before him gave him the occasion, who saith it doth more significantly expresse the Amellus of Ʋirgil, then that Aster Italorum, or montanus purpureus which we doe account to be it: yet I may say by Lobels leave, that the Aster before said doth more properly grow prope flumina as Virgil saith his Amellus doth, then in aquis vel scrob bus as Tripolium doth. 
The Vertues. Dioscorides saith that the roote is sweete in smell, and hot in taste, that two drammes thereof given in wine to drinke purgeth the belly, (which as is before sayd Pena and Lobel doe deny) from watery humours, and by Vrine. Galen saith the roote is sharpe in taste and hot in the third degree. Dioscorides further addeth that it is put into Antidotes against venome and poyson. It is found by la∣ter experience to be singular good to heale all fresh wounds, the leaves onely bruised and bound to the place, or the juice dropped into them; as also for other hurts or inward bruises, and as effectuall also as any other wound herbe almost whatsoever, for any old Vlcers or sores. 
CHAP. XCII. Verbena. Vervaine. T His herbe hath bred much doubt among many of our moderne writers, what it should be that Dio∣scorides, Galen and Pliny make mention of, some supposing one herbe, some another, as you shall heare by and by; but unto those two sorts that Dioscorides speaketh of, and Pliny calleth mas and faemina, and others recta and supina, wee are to adde one or two more knowne in these later times, and set forth by some. 
1. Verbena mas seu recta &amp; vulgaris. Common or upright Vervaine. The common Vervaine that is familiar to our Countrey hath divers somewhat long and broad leaves next the ground, deepely gasht at the bottome of them, the other part being deepely dented about the edges, and some onely deepely dented, or cut all alike, of a blackish greene colour on the upperside, and somewhat gray under∣neath: the stalke is square and branched into divers parts, rising to bee about two foote high, especially if yee put thereto the long spike of flowers at the toppes, which are set on all sides thereof one above another, and sometimes two or three together, being small and gaping, of a purplish blew colour, and white intermixt; after which come small round seede, in small and somewhat long heads: the roote is small and long and of no use. 
2. Ʋerbena supina sive faemina. Bending or female Vervaine. This other Vervaine hath divers smaller and weaker square stalkes, leaning or bending downe to the ground, and almost lying thereon, not standing upright like the other, parted into many more and smaller branches, and having such like leaves growing on them at the severall joynts, but much smaller, and more divided or cut in, ma∣king them seeme to be many leaves, set on both sides the middle ribbes, of a grayish greene above and more gray underneath: the flowers grow in the same manner that the other doth, in small long spikes, being of a deeper blew colour them the other, otherwise in forme not unlike: the seeds that follow is like it also and so is the roote, both perishing after seede time, and raising it selfe of its owne sowing. 
3. Ʋerbena Pernana. Vervaine of Feru. This Vervaine is like unto the last Vervaine, but growing greater, and abiding greene in Winter as well as Summer, as many of those Accidentall plants doe, which will not in these European parts, yea it hath beene ob∣served that those plants that naturally abide not greene 1. Ʋerbena vu ga is. Common Vervaine. 
2. Ʋerbena supina sea faemina. Bending or female Vervaine. 
4. Verbena repens nodiflora. Round headed Vervaine. 
a Winter in these parts, being carried thither have conti ued greene all the Winter, contrary to their course here. 
4. Ʋerbena repens nodiflora. Round headed Vervaine. The round headed Vervaine hath from a small fibrous roote a small square, smooth trayling joynted stalke, whereat grow small leaves almost round, yet pointed at the ends, and dented from the middle of them for∣wards, at each joynt also with the leaves come forth other small branches, and a bare small stalke, bearing at the toppes a scaly round head, from whence start forth such like small flowers as are in the other sorts, and such like seede also following them. 
The Place. The first groweth generally throughout the Land in divers places, by the hedges and way sides, and other waste grounds: the second is not found in our Land, although Gerard saith so, for it will not indure a Win∣ters blast before it seede with us: the third is of the West Indies, and the last is naturall of Naples.
The Place. The first groweth not wilde in Italy, France or Germany, but with them all is onely sowen in their Gardens, and so it is with us; and even Dioscorides saith it grew in Gardens in his time, as not growing wilde in Greece or other places that he had heard of. The second groweth about Mompelier and Marseilles as Pena and Lobel say, and is a stranger at Venice and other places of Italy, as well as in Germany and with us, and onely to be found in the Gardens of those that are curious conservers of rare plants. The two last come from the West Indies called America as it is thought. 
The Time. The first flowreth in Iune and Iuly, and doth alwayes perfect his seede, but the others because they flower la∣ r, doe often misse to give good seede, whereby we are often to seeke for them againe. 
The Names. The Greeke seemeth to be taken a voluptate, for so Homer saith it serveth Deorum voluptati. The first is of most of the best writers taken to be the of Dioscorides in Latine Lotus sativa or Ʋrbana, yet Mat∣thiolus taketh it to be his , Lotus sylvestris, and so doe Anguillara and Castor Durantes, but Fuschius, Cordus, Gosner, Camerarius and Dodonaus call it Lotus sativa, Lacuna, and Turner Lotus urbana; Tragus calleth it Trifol Dioscoridis, for so Dioscorides saith his Lotus sativa was called. Dodonaeus calleth it Trifolium odora∣ ab , because he named the Melilot in the next Chapter to be Trifolium odoratum: Lobel calleth it Lotus hortorum odora, onely Tabermontanus calleth it Melilotus vera, Bauhinus calleth it Lotus hortensis odora, and is the Melilotus singularis Alpini by Pona, in the description of Mons Baldus. Most now a dayes call it Trifolium , and the Germanes of old time called it Siben gez it (as Tragus and others set it downe) that is seaven times sweete; supposing it lost his sent and gained it againe so many times in a day, which is but a fancy as I said before, but being gathered and kept dry in the house it doth keepe his sent a little, but will smell stronger against weather, whereby many desire to lay it in their chambers, to be as it were their Almanacke to shew them faire and foule weather. It is called or many women now a dayes Balsame for the singular healing properties it hath: The other is called by all Authors Trifolium Asphaltaeum, or Aspaltites or Bituminosum, Gesner in hor Germaniae calleth it Oxytriphyllum, as Dioscorides saith some used to call it in his time and Menianthes: The third is mentioned by Iacobus Cornutus in his booke of Canada plants. The last hath his name in his title, as much as in convenient to know it by: yet Bauhinus taketh it to be the Loti sylvestris genus latifolium ex Armenia that Caesal∣pinus mentioneth. 
The Ʋertues. The juice of the sweete Trefoile as Dioscorides saith is used with hony to be dropped into the eyes to helpe the Vlcers that happen therein, and taketh away all manner of spots, as pin or haw, as also all skinnes that grow over them to hinder the sight. Galen saith it is of a temperate quality, and that it is of a meane vigour in dige∣sting, so it is of a meane propertie betweene heate and drynesse. The oyle made of the leaves and flowers hereof, in the same manner as I sayd of the flowers of white Melilot, is so soveraigne a salve (many women calling it a Baulme) for to dissolve all hard swellings, bunches or wennes in any part of the body, as also to re∣presse moderately all inflammations, and helpeth to digest all corrupt and rotten sores full of corruption, bring∣ing them to maturitie, and healing them perfectly that it is to be admired: as also to heare what properties they say it hath, and how wonderfully they extoll it, for all sorts of greene wounds as well as old Vlcers, as also to ease the paines of the Goute: It is said to be good for bruises and burstings of young children, for stiffenesse and lamenesse of joynts and sinewes, crampes, stitches, Aches, and generally all other the like outward diseases, whether they proceede of heate or cold. The distilled water is good to wash childrens heads that are broken out with scurfe or scabbes. They use to lay it in Chests and Presses to keepe Mothes from garments. The strong smelling Claver is of a stronger and hotter temperature, the decoction thereof made in wine and drunke, easeth the paines of the sides comming by obstruction, and provoketh Vrine as Hippocrates saith, it helpeth women who after their delivery are not well purged or cleared of the afterbirth, it provoketh their courses also, and helpeth to expell the birth. Dioscorides saith it is very effectuall against all venemous creatures, as Serpents or other, and as it is reported saith hee, the decoction of the whole plant taketh away all the paines thereof, if the place be wa∣shed therewith, but if any that hath a sore shall wash it with that decoction, which hath helped them that have bin bitten or stung, it causeth the same paines in that party, which he had that was stung or bitten, and was cured thereby. Galen reporteth this matter a little otherwise, for hee saith that the decoction of the herbe Trefoile that is like unto an Hyacinth, taken in the Spring time when it is fresh, and boiled in water careth those that are bitten and stung by Serpents and other venemous creatures, if the places be washed therewith; but if any that are sound and not bitten shall bee washed with any of that decoction, (and doth not say as Dioscorides those that have a sore or that are washed with the same part of the decoction that the other that was bitten was washed with) they shall feele the same paines that he that was bitten felt; and further saith, the effect hereof is worthy of admiration that the same herbe should cure them that are bitten or stung, and cause a sound body or place to be alike evill affected, as if it were stung or bitten. Pliny also in his 21. booke and 21. Chapter saith, that he is led to beleeve, that it is venemous to a sound party to be washed therewith, because Sophocles the Poet saith so, and that Simus an excellent Phisition affirmeth that the juice or decoction thereof applyed to one not bitten or stung, procureth the same paines that he that is bitten or stung doth feele, and therefore perswadeth it not to bee used but to those are bitten or stung by Serpents, &amp;c. the flowers, leaves or seede eyther all together or each se∣verally by it selfe being boiled in venegar, and a little hony added thereto being drunke is a speciall remedy for them that are stung or bitten by any vinemous creature: the seede is of most force with Galen who appointeth it to be put into Treakles that he caused to be made for divers persons: the seede also boiled in honied water and drunke is singular good for the Plurisie, provoketh Vrine and allayeth the heate thereof, and is good for the Strangury: it helpeth those that have the falling sicknesse, and is singular good for women that have the rising and strangling of the mother, whereby they often seeme to be dead: the same decoction is also good for those that have the Dropsie, and taken before the fit of either tertian or quartaine Ague, it lessoneth the fits both of heate and cold, and by often using it doth quite take them away; three drammes of the seede, or foure of the leaves powthered and given in drinke provoketh womens monethly courses effectually. The second Claver of America by reason both of the forme of the leaves, and smell so neare thereunto may seeme to be of the same property, but I have not knowne any that have made triall of the effects. 
CHAP. CXIII. Melilotus. Melilot, or Kings Claver. T He Lotus Ʋrbana mentioned in the last Chapter causeth mee to joyne the Mellilots next thereunto both for the forme name and nature, being no lesse effectuall in healing then the other, and unto the more common and knowne sorts to adde some more unknowne to close up this Classis. 
1. Melilotus vulgaris. Common Melilot. This Mellilot which is most knowne and growing wilde in many places of this kingdome, hath many greene stalkes two or three foote high, rising from a tough long white roote which dyeth not every yeare, set round about at the joynts with small and somewhat long, strong, well smelling leaves, three alwayes set to∣gether unevenly dented about the edges: the flowers are yellow and well smelling also, made like other Tre∣foiles but small standing in long spikes one above another, for an hand breadth long or better, which afterwards turne into long crooked cods wherein is contained flat seede somewhat browne. 
2. Melilotus flore albo. White flowred Melilot. This Mellilot is very like the former, but hath more wooddy stalkes rising up higher, greater, and with smaller greene leaves, smelling neare unto the former, but weaker: the flowers likewise grow in longer spikes and more in number, of a white colour and lesser also, which turne into small round heads and not crooked like the other: the roote is tough whitish and slender, perishing usually after it hath given seede but rayseth it selfe againe of the shed seede, flowring the next yeare after the springing usually or after the seeding. 
3. Melilotus Italica. Italian Melilot. The Italian Melilot hath seldome more then one stalke rising from a roote which quickly groweth whitish and somewhat wooddy, set here and there with three leaves at a joynt which are much larger then the former, and the end leafe larger then the other two, somewhat unevenly waved or cut in on the edges, of a sent almost as strong as the first, yet somewhat more pleasant: at the toppes of the stalkes stand many flowers spike fashion, but of a more deepe yellow colour, and somewhat larger also then the first which turne into round whitish heads greater then the last, wherein usually is but one seede conteined: the roote is small long and wooddy, perishing every yeare, and seldome riseth of the shed seede, but must be new sowen every spring. 
4. Melilotus Syriaca. Assirian Melilot. The Assirian Melilot riseth up with divers stalkes about two foote high, set with joynts, at every one of them three leaves somewhat larger then the first, but not so large as the last, and a little dented about the edges: the stalkes branch forth toward the toppes, whereon stand many pale yellow flowers set in order one above another as in the former, which turne into small long and somewhat flat cods, a little crooked or ben∣ding at the end like an Hawkes bill, wherein the seede is conteined: the roote is wooddy and perisheth every yeare after it hath given seede: the whole plant as well flowers as leaves and seede did smell very sweete at their first bringing into Europe, but by degrees grew every yeare weaker, so that as it seemeth it hath not now neare halfe so good a smell as formerly it had: this kind as Pena saith is used in Italy in stead of the true Melilot, where∣of they have small store growing with them. 
5. Melilotus Aegyptiaca. Aegyptian Melilot. This small low Melilot riseth up with many slender weake stalkes, rather lying or leaning downe to the ground, then standing upright; whereon grow at the severall joynts thereof, two small greene leaves, and from the joynt likewise a small long stalke, bearing three small greene leaves at the end; the stalkes branch forth diversly, having many small flowers standing at the toppes of them spike fashion like the rest, and of a deepe yel∣low colour; after which come small cods a little crooked at the ends, wherein is conteined small round brow∣nish seede, smelling somewhat like unto Melilot, and of a Stipticke and somewhat bitter taste: the roote is small with some fibres set thereat. 
6. Melilotus Hispanica folijs maculatis. Spanish Melilot. This Spanish Melilot hath divers small branches little more then a foote high, at the joynts whereof stand two small greene leaves, and likewise in the bosome thereof a small long footestalke, bearing three small darke greene leaves at the end somewhat round pointed, and having many white lines like veines running through every one of them: the flowers are small, of a pale yellow colour, standing at the toppes of the branches, like the other but smaller, the roote is small and stringy: this hath a small sweete sent somewhat like unto a Me∣lilot, which hath caused it to be referred to that tribe or family. 
1. 2. Melilotus vulgaris vel flore albo. The common yelloW or white flowred Melilot. 
3. Melilotus Italica. Italian Melilot. 
 
7. Melilotus Indiae Orientalia. East Indian Melilot. The East Indian Melilot is a small low plant, 4. Melilotus Syriaca odora. Sweete Assirian Melilot. 
scarse rising above halfe a foote high, with small slender brownish stalkes beset in severall places with very small greene leaves, three alwayes growing together like the rest, little or nothing dented about the edges: the toppes of the stalkes being not bran∣ched at all, are furnished with many very small flowers, of a deepe yellow colour; after which come small round heads, somewhat like unto the Italian Melilot, before spoken of, wherein is conteined small brownish blacke seede, which hath a strong smell of Melilot, which the other sorts of Melilot have not, the herbe and flowers hereof having but a very small or no sent thereof; the roote is small and perisheth every yeare, and must be new sowen in the Spring every yeare that you will see it. 
The Place. The first as I said is found in many places of this Land plentifully, as in the edge of Suffolke, and in Essex in divers places, as also in Huntington shire and in other places more sparingly, but most usually either in corne fields, or in corners of Medowes, and in worse places sometimes. The second groweth not in any place of this Land naturally but is very frequent in Germany, and is onely nursed up in Gar∣dens with us: The third came to us from Italy, and by that Italian name wee hold it still: The fourth is said by Pena and Lobel to come first from Aleppo in Syria to Ʋenice; where being sowen it was found to be of an excellent smell, as I said before, but de∣generated successively by degrees: The fift Prosper Alpinus saith is peculiar onely to Egypt, where they use no other sort of Melilot, as not having any others growing with them: The sixt Bauhinus saith was found on the Mountaines of Castile in great plenty. The last hath beene sent us from Italy, among di∣vers other stange seedes by that name, and therefore wee must imagine untill it can bee disproved, that they came from the Easterne parts of Asia major, which usually wee call the East Indies. 
The Time. They doe all flower in the Sommer Moneths of Iune and Iuly, and their seede is ripe quickly after. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke quasi Mellita lotus, a Lotus that smelleth sweete like Honey. In Latine ancient∣ly it was called Sertula Campana, because the flowers growing in the fields of Campania were used to bee put into Garlands, and Corona regia, because the yellow flowers doe crowne the toppes of the stalkes. Some also have called it Trifolium odoratum, but we have another garden Trefoile, more properly called by that name, as you heard in the former Chapter. Some also call it Trifolium equinum, or Caballinum, because it is good pasture for horses, wherein they delight and thrive well with it; in English wee call it generally Kings Claver as the chiefest of all other three leafed grasses, generally called Clavers or Claver grasses, and Melilot after the Latine name to be the more easily understood, yet in some places they call it Harts Claver, because if it grow where Stagges and Deere resort, they will greedily feede thereon. And in some places of Essex they call it Hartwort, because as they thinke the seede thereof happening into their bread caused paines in the stomacke and chest, which they usually call the Heart burne or paines of the heart. The first is called by most Authors Melilotus after the Greeke name; the old Latine name of Serta or Sertula Campana, being quite left; Tragus calleth it Melilotus major vulgaris, Camerarius, Dodonaeus and Lobel call it Melilotus Germanica, and Thalius &amp; Dodonaeus Trifoliū odo∣ratū. Matthiolus, Durantes and Lugdunensis call it Lotus urbana and sativa, Fuschius and Lonicerus Saxifraga Lutea and altera. The second is scarse mentioned but under the other, and is called by Tragus Melilotus major candida, and of Dalechampius Lotus sylvestris flore albo. The third Camerarius calleth Italica, and Bauhinus Melilotus Italica folliculis subrotundis. The fourth is called by Tragus tertia species Meliloti vulgaris, who saith it is most likely to be Serapio his Melilot: Fuschius, Gesner, Dodonaeus and Matthiolus, make it to be Melilotus Italica, but we have another more true species, called Melilotus Italica here set downe the next before this: and Lobel as you heard before called it Melilotus Syriaca odora, and that because it came from Aleppo as hee saith it was much used in Italy for the true Melilot, and therefore called Melilotus Italica. Bauhinus calleth it corniculis reflexis major. The fift Prosper Alpinus saith is called in Egypt Alchimelech, and is the onely Melilot they use. Bauhinus calleth it Corniculis reflexis minor. The sixt Bauhinus onely giveth the name, being brought to him out of Spaine. The last hath his name in his title as it hath beene sent to us; which as I said doth still continue. There hath beene some controversie among our later writers, what herbe should be the true Melilotus of Dioscorides, some taking a kind of Citysus to be it, others a Medica or Lagopus, and others a kind of wild Lotus without sent, and some also doubting of his Melilot, holding it rather to be Dioscorides his Lotus urbana: for as Dodonaeus saith, all the Apothecaries in Germany were wont to use no other Melilot then the Trifolium odoratum, but time by degrees hath worne out all these opinions, and setled a more constant of this, and is so now generally accepted; for is former times almost every country had a severall Trefoile with yellow flowers to be their Mellilot. The A∣rabians call it Alchilelmelich, and the Italians, Spaniards, and French Melilote, the Germanes Edlersteinklee, the Dutch Groote Steenclayeren, and Ghemayne Melilot; and in English as I have said before. 
The Ʋertues. Dioscorides saith, it hath an astringent or binding qualitie. It mollifieth all hard tumours and inflammations, that happen in the eyes or other parts of the body, as the seate or fundament, and the privie parts of man or wo∣men, being boyled in wine and laide to the place, and sometimes the yoalke of a roasted egge, or the powder of Fe eke or Linseede, or fine flower, or Poppie seede, or Endive is added unto it. It healeth those impo∣stumes that are fresh, being applied with torra figillata and wine and the spreading ulcers also in the head being washed with a lye made thereof. It easeth the paines of the stomacke, applied either fresh, or boyled with any other of the aforenamed things. It helpeth also the paines of the eares being dropped into them, and steeped in Vinegar or Rosewater it mitigateth the headach: Thus saith Dioscorides. Galen saith in his sixth Booke of sim∣ple Medecines, that Melilot is of a mixt qualitie, for it hath a little astringent facultie in it, and yet it doth digest: for the warming or hot qualitie is more abundant therein then the cold. The Arabian Physitians doe appoint the cods and seede, to be used in medicines, and make no mention of flowers. The Greekes contrariwise doe will the flowers onely to be used, and never make use of seede or codds; and therefore as Matthiolus saith, it is no wonder that the compound plaister of Mellilot, which the Apothecaries make, not having any of the meale of the seede of the true Melilot therein, doth not worke that effect that the Physitians doe expect, for this com∣pound plaister is appointed to be used, to dissolve hardnesse, windinesse, tumours and swellings, both of the spleene, liver and belly, as also mightily to ease the paine of them all, and to heale the Hypochondria, or sore part of the belly, about the short ribbes, when it is stretched or crackt by the swelling thereof; but there is ano∣ther plaister called Mellilot, which is much used, to draw and heale all sores and wounds that neede cleansing, and is made of the juice of the greene young Mellilot, boyled with Rossen, Waxe, Sheepe tallow, and some Turpentine, which if it be well made, will be almost as greene as the herbe it selfe, and smell very strong thereof, although it be two or three yeares old. The flowers of Mellilot and Camomill are much used to be put together into glysters that are given to expell winde, &amp; to ease paines, as also into pultoses that are made for the same purpose, and to asswage swellings or tumors that happen either in the spleene or other parts, by the mollifying or dis∣cussing qualities that are in it: It helpeth also inflammations whether in the eyes or face, or other parts of the body. The juyce dropped into the eyes is a singular good medicine to take away any filme or skinne from them, that groweth as a cloud to dimme the eyesight. It is effectuall to be applied to those that have sodainely lost their senses by any paroxisme, as also to strengthen the memorie, to comfort the head and braines, and to preserve them from paines, and the feare of the Apoplexie, if the head be often washed, with the distilled water of the herbe and flowers, or a lye made therewith. The water also distilled serveth as a perfume, to wash course gloves or other things. The flowers and herbe of the white flowred Mellilot, steeped in oyle Olive, and set into the Sunne to digest for some time, and after being boyled in a Balneo of hot water, and strained forth, and other fresh flowers and herbes being put thereto, and Sunned, as before and strained, and so used at the second or third time, is accounted a most soveraine Balme, both for greene wounds and old sores, for swellings, inflammations, crampes, convulsions, paines, or aches whatsoever in any part of the body, whether it be in any fleshy or musculous part, or among the sinewes and veines, The Italian Melilot, is as effectuall as any of the other, and by some ac∣counted to be of more efficacie and vertue. The Egyptian Melilot, as Alpinus saith, the seede thereof onely is used by them, being boyled, and the places greeved, fomented and bathed with the warme decoction against paines of the sides, the Pleurisie and Peripneumonia, as also the paines of the collicke and winde in the belly, the windinesse or strangling of the mother, or any griefes thereof to fit in the decoction thereof; and if Fenegreeke and Lineseede, and Camomill flowers be added thereto, it helpeth all tumors or hard swellings thereof, and doth helpe to provoke the monethly courses, and to open the obstructions of the veines, and afterwarwards to strengthen the parts. The Indian Mellilot, if wee would use the seede, which as I said before smelleth stronger than the rest of the plant, hath no doubt the same qualitie that the former have, the smell and taste perswading plainely thereunto.
Divers other herbes there are that might be referred to this Classis, some whereof are set forth in my former Booke, and some you shall finde specified as well in the precedent as subsequent Chapters of this Worke, which you may observe in the Vertues as you reade them. 
PLANTAE REFRIGERANTES ET INTVBACEAE. COOLING AND SVCCORY LIKE HERBES. CLASSIS SEXTA, THE SIXT TRIBE. CHAP. I. Portulaca. Purslane. V NTO the cooling Herbes let me, I pray adjoyne the Iutubaceae or Cichoreaci whereunto they may more fitly in my minde be added, then to any other, notwith∣standing the bitternesse in some that argues some heate. 
I have set forth the Garden Purslane in my former Worke, there remaine some o∣ther to be spoken of here, and first of the wilde Purslane. 
1. Portulaca sylvestris. Wilde Purslane. The Wilde Purslane spreadeth upon the ground sappie reddish stalkes set with thicke fat shining greene leaves like in all things unto the garden kinde but smaller at the joynts, with the leaves toward the end of the branches, come forth very small starre-like yellowish greene flowers scarse to be discerned, and as quickly falling a∣way as the Garden kinde, and hath such like hard huskes wherein the like blacke seede is contained: the rootes are threedes, and perish with the first cold nights that come: this is somewhat more astringent in taste (as for the most part all wilde herbes are) then the Garden kinde. 
2. Portulaca exigna Camerarij. Camerarius his small Purslane. This small Purslane also is like the other, but much smaller then it, having alwayes two leaves set together, of a paler yellowish greene colour on the thicke round stalkes and branches which stand a little more upright and bend downe to the ground againe: the flowers are like the former, and so is the blacke seede, but the huskes open themselves before the seede is ripe, and stand upon smaller and longer footestalkes, this hath little or no taste but waterish or herby. 
3. Portulaca Cretica. Candy Purslane. The Candy Purslane (which in my judgement might rather be referred to the kindred of the small Houseleekes, as Camerarius, Columna and Bauhinus doe, but that, I would keepe the name whereby it was sent, for his sake that sent it) is a very small low berbe not past two or three inches high, having many small heads of leaves standing round together, somewhat like the head of a small Houseleeke, but each leafe set further in sunder and not clo∣sing which are very small at the bottome, and sodainely grow broad and round at the point, yet so small as no leafe is bigger than the naile of ones little finger, and of a pale greene colour, which so abide for the most part the first Winter after the springing up, if the extremitie thereof doe not utterly rot it: in the Sommer follow∣ing it shooteth forth into branches with somewhat longer leaves on them, and at the upper joynts and toppes stand divers small whitish flowers, and after them appeare long pods a little crooked or bending upwards set together in forme of a starre, wherein is very small blackish seede contained; the roote is small and fibrous, and perisheth after seede time. 
The Place. The first groweth in Vineyards, Orchards, Gardens, and other rockie and stony places also where it is so apt to abide from it owne sowing, that it will hardly be rid out againe: the second Camerarius saith in horto Me∣dico, that he first before any other found it about Lipswicke: the last was sent me from Hieronymu Winghe, a Canon of Tournay in Flanders, who it is likely, either received it himselfe or some other friend that gave it him from Candy. 
The Time. The two first doe abide all the Summer, from the Spring that they rise, which yet is late, untill the cold nights doe nippe them, and cause them to perish: the third, as I said before, abideth the first Winter of it be not too vio∣lent, and seedeth the next Summer after the springing. 
1. P sa &amp; vestri Garden and wilde P rs ne. 
3. Portulaca Cretica. P rslane of Candy. 
 
The Names. It is called by Dioscorides in Greeke Andrachne, and by Theophrastus Adrachne, and so each of them also call the Arbutus or Strawberry tree, which some call Portulaca arbor in Latine, as they also call this herbe Portulaca herba, of the Arabians Bakle ancha, and Bachele alhanica, the Italians Porcellana and Porchacchia, the Spaniards Ʋerdolagas and Baldroegas, the French Pourpier Porchailles and Porceltaine, the Germanes Burgel, Burtzel, &amp; Portselknaut, and Grenzel; the Dutch Porceleyne, and we in English Purslaine: The first is generally cal∣led Portulaca sylvest is: Gesner and Camerarius call it Portulaca minor: Caesalpinus and Bauhinus Portulaca angu stifolia; and Cordus upon Dioscorides saith that Cepaa is no other than the wilde Purslane: the second is called by Camerarius Portulaca exigna, and by Bauhinus Portulaca arvensis: the last was sent me by the name of Portu∣laca Cretica, which as I said I am not willing to alter, although I know that Canerarius hath set it forth by the name of Arz n peregrinum, and Columna, by the name of Sempervivum tertium Dioscorides, refusing that of others so accounted, and Bauhinus doth thereupon call it Cotyledon stellata. 
The Vertues. Garden Purslane is cold in the third degree, and moist in the second as Galen saith, &amp; is therefore good to coole any heate in the liver, bloud, reines and stomack, and in hot agues nothing better: it staieth also hot and collericke fluxes of the belly, as also of womens courses, the whites &amp; gonorrhaea, the distillations from the head &amp; the paines therein proceeding of heate, want of sleepe, or the frenzie: the seede is more effectuall then the herbe, and is of singular good use to coole the heate and sharpenesse of urine, and the outragious lust of the body, venereous dreames and the like, in so much that the over frequent use thereof extingusheth the heate and vertue of natu∣rall procreation: the seede being bruised and boiled in wine, and given to children that have the wormes expel∣leth them; some doe more commend the seede of wilde Purslane for the wormes then the other: the juice of the herbe is held as effectuall for all the purposes aforesaid, as also to stay vomitings and taken with some Sugar or Hony helpeth an old and drie cough, shortnesse of breath and the sicke, and to stay an immoderate thirst taken upon extreame heate. The distilled water of the herbe is used by many as the more pleasing to the pa∣late taken with a little Suger and worketh to the same effect. The juyce also is singular good in the inflammati∣ons and ulcers of the secret parts in man or woman, as also of the bowells and hemorrhoides when there are ul∣cers or excorriations in them. The herbe is sufficiently knowne to be used in sallets in the heate of the yeare, to coole and temper the bloud and hot and fainting stomackes, and is good for them to use that have the falling sick∣nesse: the herbe bruised and applied to the forehead and temples, allaieth excessive heate therein causing want of rest and sleepe, and applied to the eyes taketh away the rednesse and inflammations in them, and those other parts where pushes, wheales, pimples, Saint Anthonies fire, and the like, breake forth, especially if a little Vine∣ger be put to it, and being laid to the necke with as much of Galles &amp; Linseede together taketh away the paines therein, and the cricke in the necke: the juyce also is used with oyle of Roses for the said causes, or for blastings by lightening, or planets, and for burnings by Gunpowder, or other wise, as also for womens sore breasts, upon the like hot causes, and to allay the heate in all other sores or hurts: it is said also to stay the spreading of venemous serpents bitings, and to draw forth the poyson; applyed also to the Navell of children that sticke forth it helpeth them, it is also good for sore mouthes and for sore gums when they are swollen, to fasten loose teeth, and to take away their paine when they are set on edge by eating sower things: Camerarius saith that the distilled water used by some tooke away the paine of their teeth when all other remedies failed, and that the thickened juice made in pilles with the powder of gum Tragacanth and Arabeck, and taken prevailed much to helpe those that made a blooddy water: applyed to the Goute it easeth the paines thereof, and helpeth the hardnesse of , if it bee not caused by the crampe or in a cold cause. The wilde Purflane is used as familiarly in lle and meates in many parts beyond the Seas where it groweth plentifully, as the Garden kinde, and the no lesse effectuall a remedy for most of the diseases aforesaid, onely it cooleth not so strongly, but is more gent and drying for fluxes and the like. 
CHAP. II. Portulaca marina. Sea Purslane. T He Sea Purslane might be entreated of with the other Sea plants in the proper place, but that I thinke it not meete to sever it from the other going before, and hereunto for the neare likenesse and resem∣blance to joyne two other sorts of Halimus, which may be called Sea Purslanes as well but growing in a hotter climate. 
1. Portulaca marina nostras. Sea Purslane of our countrey. The Sea Purslane hath divers hoary and grayish purple stalkes somewhat wooddy, rising from the roote about a foote or more long, lying for the most part upon the ground, bearing thereon many small thicke for and long leaves of a whitish greene colour set without order, at some joynts more and at some lesse, branching forth here and there, and bearing at the toppes many long sprigges or spiked stalkes, set round about with greenish purple flowers, which turne into whitish flat thinne seedes like unto those of the Sea Arrache, the roote is some∣what wooddy, with divers long strings joyned thereto and abideth with the leaves on the branches all the Winter. 
2. Halimus latifolius sive Portulaca marina incana major. The greater outlandish or hoary Sea Pu e. This hoary Sea Purslane sendeth forth divers thicke and wooddy hoary &amp; brittle stalke, foure or five foot high, whereon are set many thicke leaves, without any order somewhat short &amp; broad, so hoary white that they almost glister: the flowers grow at the tops of the stalkes on divers long sprigges, being mossie like the Olive blossome, but of a purplish colour; after which come broad and flat whitish seede like unto those of Arache: the roote is long hard and wooddy enduring many yeares in the naturall places, but must bee somewhat defended in the Portulaca marina. Sea Purslaine. 
2 Halimus latifolius sive Portulaca marina incana major. The greater outlandish or hoary sea Purflane. 
Winter with us if you will have it preserved, yet bringeth not forth the leaves so hoary white with us. 
3. Halimus tennifolius sive Portulaca marina incana minor. The lesser outlandish or hoary Sea Purslane. This other hoary Sea Purslane hath very slender, weake, and somewhat hoary stalkes about two foote long, scarse able to stand upright, but for the most part fall downe and lye upon the ground, the leaves that grow on them being set in the same manner, that is without order, are narrower, longer and not so hoary white: the flowers are like the former, but of a more greenish colour growing at the toppes of the stalkes, and afterwards ye such like seede as the former, but somewhat lesse: roote is wooddy and endureth like the other. 
4. Halimus minor Germanicus. The lesser sea Purslane of Germany. This hath a small hoary stalke an handfull high, rising from a small threddy roote leaning divers wayes, branch∣ing forth a little above the roote, set with small and somewhat round leaves, and those up higher with a gash on each side, of an ash colour, the flowers are small greenish and mossie, yet yellow within, set on long stalkes, after which come square huskes with small gray seede like unto kidneys in them.
6. Sedum majus angustifolium. Great narrow leafed Houseleeke. This kinde of Houseleeke hath sundry circles of leaves somewhat like the former sort, but the leaves are n ∣rower and longer, and a little rough or hairy withall; the stalke that riseth from some of the heads is brownish and about a cubit high, set thicke with narrower and red pointed, fat thicke undented leaves up to the toppe where it brancheth forth into some few, bearing each a flower of tenne or twelve long and narrow leaves laid open like a starre, of a reddish purple colour; the seede that followeth in so many small heads, as there wer leaves in the flowers, is as small almost as dust: the roote is reasonable thicke, with divers strings fastene thereto. 
7. Vermicularis arborescens. Tree Houseleeke with small leaves. This kinde of Houseleeke or Prickemadam, riseth up to be five or sixe foote high, as I have observed it when groweth in Gardens, plentifully stored with branches from the bottome to the toppe, and set thicke with sm long and round greene leaves without any taste, very like to those of the small Houseleeke called Stone cropp or Prickemadame, (although Lobel, as I thinke saith it hath a saltish taste) but lesser and greener, the flowe grow at the toppes of the branches, smaller than in the next that followeth, and of a pale yellowish colour: th rootes are long wooddy and spreading in the ground: the branches hereof slipped and put into the ground wi quickly take roote and grow. 
8. Ʋermicularis fruticosa altera. Shrubby Prickemadam. This other shrubby plant groweth nothing so high as the former, not being above a foote high full of branches covered with an ash coloured barke, as limber and pliant as it, the leaves hereof are somewhat greater and la ¦ger than the other, of a more saltish taste, and of a darker greene colour: the flowers at the toppes of the bran∣ches are larger, but fewer, and of a yellowish colour, the roote is hard and wooddy. 
The Place. The first groweth in Greece, Italy, Portugall, Spaine, Illyria or Slavony, and some of the Illes in the Me∣diterranian sea, as Scicily, Sardinia, Corsica, &amp;c. where it groweth naturally, but in divers places of Italy, Portu∣gall and Spaine, it is kept, as Clusius saith, in pots, and carefully preserved in the Winter, &amp; in Lis , as he saith upon the houses as our common Houseleeke, but will not endure the cold of these more Northren countries o Europe, with all the care that may be without a stove, such as they use in Germany and other places more Nor∣therly; yet Lobel saith, he found it in the Iland of Holmes by Bristow: the second groweth by the sea side in ma∣ny places of this Land, and in the Ile of Holmes not farre from Bristow: the third groweth naturally on divers hills in Germany, but with us onely where it is planted upon house sides, &amp;c. and that in clay especially, for there∣in it will best thrive. The fourth, Clusius saith, he found very common on the hills neare Vienna in Austria: th fift Columna found in Naples: the sixt Clusius saith, he found on the Alpes neare Saltzburg in Germany, the two last groweth by the sea side, and further off likewise where the last will taste brackish as well as neare the sea side 
The Time. The first flowreth in Portugall, as Clusius saith, in November and December, but never with us: the second flowreth by the sea side in August: the third, fourth, and sixth, in Iuly; the fift in May; and the two last so very late also. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , Aizoon magnum or majus, of the everliving and greenenesse thereof, and therefore Gaza translateth it out of Theophrastus Sempervivum, which is the same in signification; it hath likewise divers other names, for as Pliny saith, it was called Buphthalmum Zoophthalmum, and Steigethrou, and Hypo ¦son; some called it also, as he saith, Oculus and Digitellus: it is called by Apulectus, Vitalis, and Iovis ba, bu usually, Sedum majus; the Arabians call it Bejahalalem and Haialhalez; the Italians Sempervivo maggiore; the Spa∣niards Sempreviva herba puntera; the French Grande Ioubarbe; the Germans Hanswurtz and D rbaar; th Dutch Donderbaert and Huislook; we in English generally Houseleeke; yet some call it Sengreene, Aigree and some Iupiters Eye, Bullocks eye, and Iupiters beard. Clusius and others doe certainely affirme, that our or∣dinary great Houseleeke is the Cotyledon altera of Dioscorides, and no one can disprove their judgement therein The first is the true Aizoon magnum of Dioscorides and others, and there is no doubt made thereof by any Matthiolus and others call it Sempervivum arborescens, and Sedum arborescens and Aizoon arbor : Ch calleth it Sedum majus legitimum: the second Lobel maketh a kinde thereof, and calleth it Sedum P ¦landicum: the third is most common with us, and is generally called Sedum majus, and Semp ¦vum majus vulgare, which as I said, Clusius calleth Cotyledon altra Dioscorides; some also call it Acet majus, which peradventure is more proper to the first sort, and Anguilara, Vmbilici veneris species altera. Casalpinus, Cassia ligneae snilis frutex tertius, who also thought it to be the Selago of Pliny, Lobel saith it may be Chamapence of Pliny that is, Piceae humilis; but Selago was called Camphorata by the learned of Mompelier from the smell of Camfyre, which the leaves being bruised give, but this hath no such smell, and therefore I thinke cannot be the Selago of Pliny, which is a different plant from this whereof I have spoken before, but it is pro∣bable that this plant is that which Bauhinus calleth Sedum montanum Ericoides as he saith himselfe; the last Lobel calleth Sedum minimum rhorescens vermiculatum, Bauhinus maketh some doubt whether it might not be the Po∣ yg mosculum fruticosum of Thalius, who saith he never saw the flowers, but saith it is not the Poligonum al∣ter lium Anglorum, meaning Lobel and Pena, for so hee calleth them, because their Adversaria was printed in England. 
The Vertues. Our ordinary Houseleeke is cold in the third degree, moderately drying and binding, and is good for all in∣ward heats as well as outward, and in the eyes or other parts of the body: a Possit made with the juice of House∣leeke is singular good in all hot agues, for it cooleth and temperateth the blood and spirits, and quencheth the thi t, and is also good to stay all hot defluxions of sharpe and salt rheume into the eyes, the juice being dropped into them, or into the eares helpe them, it helpeth also all other fluxes of humors into the bowells, and the im∣mo courses of women: it is sayd also to kill the wormes, and to remedy the biting of the Phalangium Spi∣der: it cooleth and restrayneth also all other hot inflammations, Saint Anthonies fire, and all other hot eruptions in the flesh, scaldings also and burnings, the shingles, fretting ulcers, cankers, tetters, ringwormes and the like, and easeth much the paine of the goute, proceeding of an hot cause: the juice also taketh away warts and cornes in the hands of feete being often bathed therewith, and the skinne of the leaves being layd on them afterwards: it easeth also the headach, and distempered heate of the braine in frensyes or through want of sleepe, being appli∣ed to the temples and forehead: the leaves bruised and layd upon the crowne or seame of the head stayeth blee∣ding at the nose very quickly. The distilled water of the herbe is profitable for all the purposes aforesaid: the leaves being gently rubbed on any place stung with Nettles or Bees, or bitten with any venemous creature doth presently take away the paine. 
CHAP. VI. Aizoon Sedum sive Sempervivum minus. Small Houseleeke. T He next ranke of Houseleeks that I am to entreate of, are of those smaller sorts that grow with us else where upon mudde and stone walls, or on dry sandy bankes or places, &amp;c. whereof some are of a contrary qualitie, being hot, sharpe and exulcerating, whereunto I must adjoyne one other that grow∣eth in moyst medowes, because it is so like them in the outward face. 
1. Ʋermicularis &amp; Crassula minor vulgaris sive Illecebra major. The ordinary Prickmadam or Stonecrop. The common Stonecrop groweth upon the ground with divers trayling branches, set with many thicke, fat, and somewhat round whitish or yellowish greene leaves, a little pointed at the edges: the flowers stand at the toppes of the branches, many set together, yet somewhat loosely and not in a thicke tuft or cluster as the Or∣pines, of a yellowish colour, the rootes are very small creeping in the ground, and send forth stalkes with leaves here and there all abouts. 
2. Vermicularis Scorpioides. Stonecrop with turning heads. This other Stonecrop or Prickmadam hath such like stalkes with leaves thereon as the former, that it is hard to distinguish them untill they come to flower, which then may be descerned to differ onely in the turning toppes, of yellow flowers bending or turning like the taile of a Scorpion, or those herbes that are resembled unto it: the rootes in like manner creepe and shoote forth in divers places. Haemae∣todes. Of this sort there is another whose head of flow∣ers turneth not, which Lobel calleth Haematodes. 
3. Vermicularis minor. Small Stonecrop. The small Stonecrop hath small and long leaves like the other, set upon short stalkes, not past an handbreadth long which are not so thicke but more flat, and of a more stipticke taste, the flowers are of a paler yellow colour and greater then the first, else standing in tufts in the same manner: the roote is like it also creeping about: this looseth both stalke and leafe in the Winter. 
4. Ʋermicularis flore albo. white flowred Stonecrop with round pointed leaves. The white flowred Stonecrop creepeth upon the ground in the same manner that the others doe, with slender stalkes and long round leaves upon them, of a blewish greene colour, not sharpe but round pointed, seeming like wheate cornes or pine apple-kernels, being sparsedly set thereon: at the toppes whereof stand small white starre like flowers in small tufts or sparsed umbells: the roote creepeth like the rest, and the leaves perish with the stalkes every yeare like the last. 
5. Ʋermicularis dasyphyllon. A smaller white flowred Stonecrop. This other Stonecrop groweth lower and hath more store of such small round leaves like wheate cornes, thic∣ker set thereon then the other: the flowers are white also like the last, and in no other thing differeth from it. 
6. Sedum arvense sive palustre flore rubente. Marsh or Field Stonecrop. This Field Stonecrop hath divers reddish stalkes set with small fat long leaves, somewhat hairy, and much greener then any of the former: the flowers are small standing like starres, many in a tuft together, of a pale red or carnation colour: the roote is like the rest, sending forth divers shoots: this abideth greene all the Winter, and hath as little taste as the former. 
7. Illecebra minor sive Sedum tertium Dioscoridis. Wall Pepper. This wall Pepper is almost the smallest of all these, and groweth like the former with very many and slen∣der stalkes, and small round leaves thicke set upon them, at the toppes whereof grow small pale yellow flowers 1. Ʋermicularis sive Crassula minor vulgaris. Prickmadam or Stonecrop. 
2. Vermicularis Sco p s, es. Stonecrop with turning heads and without. 
3. Vermitularis min . Small Stonecrop. 
6. Sedu rviose sive pa st Marsh or Field Stonecrop. 
in tufts as the others doe: the roote in like manner creep∣eth about, sending forth ma∣ny stalkes, which as they lye upon the ground take roote and spread farre: the taste hereof is very sharpe and hot upon the tongue, which chiefely distinguisheth it from all the rest, but it may also bee distinguished by the forme, being small and thicke, set with round leaves. 
8. Illecebra insipida. Vnsavorie Wall-Pepper. This Wall-Pepper is as small a plant as the last, grow∣ing altogether like it in leafe, stalke, and flowers, being yellowish likewise, but the taste onely distingnisheth it from the other, which in this is nothing biting, but utterly unsavorie and without taste.
little from the last in the manner of growing, smalnesse of the leaves, or height of the stalkes that beare flowers, but different in these points, that it beareth more flowers at the tops of the stalkes, not heartlike pointed, but whole, and of a pale yellow colour. 
5. Sedum petraeum montanum luteum. Small rocke Houseleeke with yellow flowers. This small rocke Houseleeke hath divers heads of leaves lying upon the ground like the other, but harder, narrower, pointed also and somewhat hairy: the flowers being foure or five that stand together, above on the naked stalkes about three or foure inches high, consist of foure small yellow leaves apeece, after which come long pointed flat coddes, somewhat like unto a Thlaspi, wherein it contained small brownish flat seede. 
6. Sedum Alpinum grandiflorum. Small mountaine Houseleeke with great yellow flowers. This small Houseleeke hath many small heads, of lesser leaves than those of the last, with small stalkes under them, from among which rise slender stalkes set with leaves up to the tops, where stand foure or five pale yellow flowers, larger than the smallnesse of the 13. Sedum minimum Alpinum villosum alterum. Another small mountaine hairie Houseleeke. 
Sedum montanum serr tum g tt flore. The Princes feather set forth in my former Booke. 
plant might seeme to give, being almost as great as those of the white Saxifrage consisting of five leaves a peece, the roote runneth in the ground and spreadeth with many heads. 
7. Sedum Alpinum flore pallido. Small mountaine Houseleeke with pale yellow flowers. The neare resemblance of this small Houseleeke unto the small Stonecrops in the last Chapter, might justly have challenged the company: but because it is a mountaine kind I thought better to place it here: It creepeth upon the ground with a number of small sappie branches of a hand breadth high, furnished round about with small long and pointed leaves, very like unto Stonecroppe, but somewhat flatter and not so thicke, and of a very stipticke taste, up to the toppes where stand many somewhat great flowers, yet much lesser than the last, of a pale yellow colour: the roote spreadeth much, whereby it greatly encreaseth. 
8. Sedum minus montanum flore rubro. Small mountaine Houseleeke with red flowers. This red flowred Houseleeke hath many small narrow and long leaves lying on the ground, among which riseth up a stalke about three or foure inches high, with a few leaves thereon, being longer and more pointed than those are below, and at the toppe divers large flowers made of many narrow and pointed leaves starre fashion, of a reddish colour and yellow in the bottome, with a white line at the bottome of each leafe, which are sweeter in smell that in any other sort. 
9. Sedum saxatile hirsutum purpureum. Small hairie purple flowred Houseleeke. This small plant hath sundry small hairy leaves set together, each whereof is lesser than those of Lentills, the stalke that riseth is slender and hairy, as the leaves that grow on them to the toppe are also, which is divided in∣to small branches bearing every one a small purplish flower: the roote is small and threaddy. 
10. Sedum Saxatile atrorubentibus floribus. Rocke Houseleeke with darke red flowers. This small Rocke Houseleeke shooteth forth some slender stalkes, about two inches high, with small long leaves, set opposite thereon, and sundry flowers at the toppes of them, of a very darke red colour standing many together, as though they stood round in an umbell: the roote is small and long. 
11. Sedum montanum perpusillum luteolis floribus. The least mountaine Houseleeke with yellowish flowers. This least sort groweth into sundry small heads, very thickely stored with fine small leaves like Mosse on the ground, from which rise small slender stalkes scarse appearing with their heads above the leaves, each of them bearing but one pale yellow flower thereon apeece, rising from out of a large greene huske: the roote is long and slender, with many small fibres thereat, the whole plant above ground scarce attaineth unto two inches of height. 
12. Sedum saxatile variegato flore. Small rocke Houseleeke with discoloured flowers. Like unto the last small one is this variable coloured Houseleeke being as small as it, the leaves of whose heads also like Mosse upon the ground are small f somewhat round, and of a pale greene colour: the stalkes are many that rise from among them, bearing every one a small flower of foure leaves apeece, diversely striped with white purple and darke red colours very delectable. 
13. Sedum minimum Alpinum villosum alterum. Another small hairy mountaine Houseleeke. This small Houseleeke hath many heads of small long leaves set with small haires about the edges, among which rise up small stalkes three or foure inches thicke, set with the like leaves, and three or foure small whitish flowers at the toppes, 
The Place. Most of these sorts grow upon the Alpes and Tyranean Mountaines in divers places, but withall very hard∣ly endure the transplanting into Gardens. 
The Time. They flower in Iune and Iuly in their naturall places, but earlier in Gardens when they will there abide. 
The Names. All these have beene lately found out, and are not mentioned by any of the ancient, but later Writers, and that you may know whose each of them are, I will shew you their Authors: The first is the ninth Sedum minus of Clu∣sius, the second his tenth, whereof Gesner in hortis maketh mention: Bauhinus thinketh it is the Iasme montana of Lugdunensis: the third is Clusius his eleventh Sedum minus: the fourth hath not beene exhibited by any before, the fift is the twelfth Sedum minus of Clusius, and called Sedum petraeum montanum by Lobel, Lugdunensis set∣eth it forth for Phyllon Arrhenagonan Dalechampiij, but both Lobel and Clusius taxe him for it: and Gesner also misli∣keth their judgement that would make any of these small Seda to be Phyllon of Dioscorides: Columna also mislik∣keth that this should be accounted a Sedum, because the forme of the flowers and seede vessells doe differ from all the other sorts of Sedum, which although they be both great inducements and especially the seede vessells being as I have shewed in many places of this worke a precise note to know unto what genus the species of any herbe may best belong, yet in regard the manner of growing of these Houseleekes is so differing from all other herbes, and that this in the heads of leaves is so like unto them, I doe not see but that it may better bee referred to a Se∣dum then to a Leucoium as Columna doth, who calleth it Leucoium luteum Azoides montanum, making it a Wall∣flower; and indeede Clusius observing the difference, giveth a note thereof, and saith that it agreeth not in all parts unto the small Houseleekes, and therefore leaveth it to other mens judgements, to call it by some fitter name if they can: the sixt is the Sedum minus tertium of Lobel, Dodonaeus calleth it Sedum serratum as Bauhinus thinketh as also to be the Sedum Alpinum quartum of Columna, but calleth it himselfe Sedum alpinum Saxifragae d flore sive grandifolium, the seventh is the Sedum minus sextum of Clusius: the eighth is called Aizoon monta∣num, by Lugdunensis, and by Bauhinus Sedum Alpinum rubro magno flore: the ninth and tenth are remembred onely by Bauhinus and I from him: the eleventh hath not beene set forth by any Author that I know before: the twelfth is called by Bauhinus Sedum saxatile variegato flore, but is not that Sedum flosculis partim candidis partim purp is that Gesner in hortis Germaniae maketh mention of, for that I shall shew you by and by to be a Cotyle∣d with such flowers, which are all greater Plants then any of these Seda minima, the last also hath not beene re∣membred by any before. Bauhinus maketh mention of some more sorts of these small Seda, which I thinke are comprehended under some of the other sorts, and therefore not fit to be double repeated. 
The Vertues. All or most of these small Houseleekes being in taste drying and astringent, and some of them a little bitter withall doe testifie that they will well serve to helpe defluxions and to stay laskes and fluxes of blood or humors as powerfully as any of the other sorts, but are not so cooling: but because I have no author that hath set downe the properties of any of them in Physicke, either for inward or outward diseases, this therefore may bee suffici∣ent for our nation (that are not likely to have much experience of any of them in our land) to have said thus much. 
CHAP. VIII. Sedum laciniatis folijs. Small Houseleeke with divided leaves. I Cannot be brought to be of Bauhinus judgement, to make many sorts of this kinde of Houseleeke, for in my minde he forcibly draweth in other herbes to beare this title, which cannot fitly agree there∣unto, as by the description of them in the precedent discourse, both in the second Chapter of the fourth Classis, and in the 40. Chapter of the fift Classis of this booke, and in other places you may more plainely perceive. 
1. Sedum Alpinum laciniatis Ajugae folijs. Small Mountaine Houseleeke with jagged leaves. I cannot finde any more plants fitly in my minde to beare this title but this and another, and therefore I must give you the descriptions of these onely and leave Bauhinus or any one 1. Sedum Alpinum laciniatis Ajugae folijs. Small Mountaine Houseleeke with jagged leaves. 
that will undertake to be his champion herein, to maintaine his other sorts as he can. This first shooteth forth on all sides many small heads of leaves from small strings like to the Houseleekes, each leafe where∣of is long and narrow, cut in deepely into three divisions, one on each side and the end longest, somewhat like the leaves of the sweete Groundpine, but smaller and greener, not having any hoarinesse on them, astringent and drying also in taste as much as any of the other: the stalkes are reddish, very slender and not two inches high (saith Clu∣sius, but they were higher with us) bearing every one of them one small flower but somewhat large with us) made of five leaves a peece, of a pale greene colour (so saith Clusius ) but that which wee had from M r . Hesket out of Lancashire bore pale whitish flowers with some yellow threds compassing a middle round umbone: the roote is small but spreadeth much. 
2. Sedum Monspeliense &amp; Pyraenaeum laciniatum. The French jagged mountaine Houseleeke. This other jagged Houseleeke hath likewise divers heads of very small greene leaves, each whereof is deepely cut into two, or, e usually into three parts, and seldome into more, from among which rise one or two small stalkes three or foure inches high, with some few leaves set thereon, parted very often into some branches, at the top whereof stand foure or five flowers of five leaves a peece, of a pale colour, with divers threds in the middle: the roote is blacke and small, creeping about.
The Place. The first saith Clusius groweth on the Mountaine called Sneberg or Snowhill among the stones, but on the Moun∣taines of Lancashiere with us as M r . Hoskes told us, the other both upon Mount Lupus and Calcar neare M ∣pelier, and on the Pyraenaean hills likewise. 
The Time: The first flowreth in August saith Clusius, within a while after that the snow is dissolved, but in the end of Aprill and beginning of May with us, although somewhat later in the naturall places, and the other much thereabouts. 
The Names. The first is mentioned by Clusius who in his Pannonicke observations maketh it his seventh Sedum Alpinum Ajugae folio, and in his History of Plants setteth it for his Sedum decimum tertium: the other Bauhinus setteth forth by the name of Sedum tridactylites Alpinum minus and referreth it to the other sort of Sedum Alpinum tertium of Gregorius de Reggio, remembred by Columna, but so it cannot be, for he saith that that sort hath not leaves com∣pact together as the other Seda but dispersed. 
The Vertues. You have heard before of the taste, and therefore you may judge of the qualities of these herbes, for I have no more to say of them, but that it is likely they be as effectuall for those causes that the last small sorts of House∣leekes are. 
CHAP. IX. Cotyledon primus sive Ʋmbilicus Veneris. Kidneywort or Wall Pennywort. T He last kinds of Houseleeke whereof I am to entreate, so to accomplish the whole family is of the Kidneyworts, whereof the first sort of Dioscorides being different from the other I will first speake of, and then of the rest that I have not mentioned in my former booke. 
1. Ʋmbilicus Veneris vulgaris. Our ordinary Kidneywort or Wall Pennywort. The great Kidneywort or Wall Pennywort that groweth with us hath many thicke flat and round leaves growing from the roote, every one having a long footestalke fastned underneath about the middle thereof, and a little unevenly waved sometimes about the edges, of a pale greene colour, and somewhat hollow on the upper side like a spoone or sawcer, from among which rise one or more tender smooth hollow stalkes halfe a foote high, with two or three small leaves thereon usually not round as those below but somewhat long and di∣vided at the edges; the tops are sometimes divided into long branches bearing a number of pendulous flowers, set round about a long spike one above another, which are hollow and like a little bell, of a whitish greene co∣lour, after which come small heads conteining very small brownish seede, which falling on the ground will plentifully spring up before winter if it have moysture: the roote is round somewhat like the full roote of an 1. Vmbilicus veneris vulgaris. Our ordinary Kidneywort or Wall Pennywort. 
3. Cotyledon altera minor folio sulvotundo. Small Kidneywort with roundish leaves. 
Orchis or Doggestone, most usually smooth yet sometimes rugged or knobbed, grayish without and white with∣in, having small fibres at the head of the roote and bottome of the stalke, altogether like an Orchis whereunto I would more nearely resemble the rootes then unto Houseleeke, but I must (not be singular although I speake my minde) herein follow others. Major Lu ∣fit icus. Of this kinde wee have received from Doctor Boelus at Lishbone a greater sort, with paler greene leaves very beautifull, which M r . Tradescunt keepeth at Lambeth. 
2. Cotyledon sive Sedum montanum latifolium serratum guttato flore. Spotted Kidnywort, or the Princes feather. This pretty kind of Houseleeke, or Kidnywort call it which you will is described in my former booke, where I call it the Princes feather, and therefore needeth not to be here againe repeated although I give you the figure of it among the rest: you shall finde the Figure hereof in folio 738. 
3. Cotyledon alter minor folio subrotundo. Small Kidnywort with roundish leaves. This other small Kidnywort hath much rounder and smaller leaves in the heads then the former, not so bigge as the nayle of ones finger, of as pale a greene colour as it, or more white and dented at the edges in the same manner, of an astringent taste like the other Houseleekes, from the middle of some of the heads yearely rise up slender but hard and rough stalkes about an handlength high, set with a few smaller and longer leaves thereon, at the toppes whereof appeare small flowers upon long footestalkes, consisting of five and sometimes of six leaves a peece, sometimes wholly white, and sometimes spotted with red spots, and sometimes having three purple lines running downe the backe of every leafe, so that it maketh the whole leafe seeme purplish, in their places follow small heads with small seede: the roote is small and fibrous like the rest, setting of heads of the like leaves round about it. 
4. Cotyledon alter versicoloribus floribus. Small Kidneywort with party coloured flowers. This small Kidnywort groweth with many heads of small leaves circlewise like unto the last Kidniwort (whereof it is a peculiar sort) greater then the smallest and smaller then the greatest; each whereof is somewhat long and narrow of a whitish greene colour dented as it were about the edges, or rather set with silver white spots about the edges making them seeme like white teeth (or as Gesner compareth them to the silver like fins of Fishes) very pleasant to behold, for in the Winter when no flower appeareth this and the last (and the first that I have expressed in my former booke, being all of one genus ) giveth as much delight as when it is in flower, which are many standing on severall footestalkes, each leafe whereof is part white and part purple, variably diversified in every one of them. 
The Place. The first groweth very plentifully in many places of this kingdome, but especially in all the west parts of this land, upon stone and mud walls, upon rockes also, and in stony places upon the ground, at the bottome of old trees, and sometimes on the bodies of them that are decayed and rotten: the other of that sort in Portugall as is sayd; the second on the Pyrenian hills, the other two grow upon the rockes and among the very stones where there is scarse any earth for the rootes to abide, on the Alpes of the Helvetians or Switzers, and upon the hill called Hortus Dei neare Mompelier. 
The Time. The first doth usually flower sooner then the other, as at the beginning of May, and the seede ripening quickly after sheddeth it selfe, so that about the end of May usually the leaves and stalks are withered dry and gone untill September that the leaves spring up againe and so abide all Winter: the second about the middle of May, the other two sometime flower not untill Iune and Iuly, and their seede is ripe in August, those heads that bare stalks usually perishing together, and the other that bare not abiding all the extremity of the Winter. 
The Names. The first is called in Greeke Cotyledon ab acetabuli sive umbilici figura, and therefore the Latines call it Acetabulum as well as Cotyledon or Vmbilicus Veneris: it hath also divers other names as Scatum caeli, Scutellum, Terra Vmbilicus, Hortus Veneris and Herba Coxendicum: the Italians call it Ombilico di Venere, and some Cupar∣tivole, that is pot covers, the Spaniards Scudetes, that is Shields, the French Escueilles and Nombrill du Ʋenus, the Germanes Loffelkraut and Navelkraut, the Dutch Navelcruijt, and we in English of some Navelwort, or great Navelwort, Wall Pennywort, Hipwort, Kidneywort, Venus -Navell and Navell of the earth. The other is called of some in Greeke Cotyledon alter Cymbalion, and Scytalium, but they are rather referred to the former great Houseleeke, which I have shewed you before, and is the true Cotyledon alter of Dioscorides by the judgement of Clusius and others, the second is usually called Sedum serratum with most Herbarists: I have as you see joyned it here as fittest I thinke, but the other two last sorts have obtained that name of Cotyledon from Matthiolus who first called them so, and is still kept and held currant with many, yet confounded also with many others for the likenesse unto Sedum minus, as with Cordus, Gesner, Camerarius, Dodo∣naeus and Bauhinus, who often call them Seda, and very properly, for there is no herbe can so properly be called a Sodum as that which hath the leaves placed circle wise, one within another as they have, but because the Coty∣ledon is of that fashion it is I said justly termed a Sedum. 
The Ʋertues. The Wall Pennywort as Galen saith is of mixt qualities, that is, of moist and cold, somewhat astringent and a little bitter withall, whereby it cooleth, repelleth clenseth and discusseth, and is very effectuall for all inflamma∣tions and unnaturall heates, either inwardly to coole a fainting hot stomacke or an hot Liver, or the bowels or the mother, to drinke the juice or the distilled water, or else outwardly for pimples, rednesse, Saint Antho∣nies fire and the like heates and inflammations, to apply the bruised herbe or to bathe the place with the juice or the distilled water: the said juice or water helpeth much also to heale sore kidneys, torne or fretted by the stone or exulcerated within and easeth the paines: it provoketh Vrine likewise, and is availeable for the dropsie: it helpeth also to breake the stone, and to coole the inflamed parts by the paines thereof, and other wringing paines of the bowels and the bloody flux: it is singular good for the painefull piles or hemorroidall veines, to coole and tem∣per their heate and the sharpenesse of blood in them, and to ease their paines, to use the juice as a bathe unto them, or made into an oyntment by it selfe or with Myrrhe or other things conducible thereunto: it is no lesse effectu∣all to give ease of paines to the hot goute, the Sciatica and the inflammations and swellings in the cods, and bringeth againe the prepuce: it likewise helpeth the Kernells or knots of the necke and throate called the Kings Evill: it healeth Kibes and Chilblanes if they be bathed with the juice, or annointed with an ointment made thereof, and some of the skinne of the leafe laid upon them: it is used also in greene wounds to stay the blood and to heale them quickly: The lesser sorts are held to be cooling and somewhat more binding then the greater, and thereby availeable for those diseases whereunto those qualities are proper. 
CHAP. X. Acetosa sive Oxalis. Sorrell. S Orrell is accounted a Docke, and called the soure Docke, and therefore might have beene brought un∣der the generall title of the Dockes: but because none of the other Dockes are so cooling, nor planted in Gardens, I shall speake of those sorts severally hereafter, that I have not made mention of either be∣fore in this Worke, or in my former Booke. The sorts of Sorrell are many more found out of late by the industrious searchers of Natures varieties, than formerly hath beene knowne, some growing naturally in our fields, some in our woods, some also in other countreis. Of the ordinary Sorrell nursed in Gardens, which yet groweth also wilde in our fields and medowes throughout the Land, I have already entreated of in my former Booke, and shall not neede to speake thereof againe here, but of the other sorts, yet of the wood Sorell, I shall speake in the next Chapter, although for their forme sake, they might have beene joyned with the rest of the Trefoiles, whereof they are species. 
1. Acetosa maxima Germanica. Great Sorrell of Germany. The great Sorrell of Germany groweth in the same manner that the ordinary Garden sort doth, but the leaves thereof are much larger, and sometime a little curled at the edges, the joynts of the stalkes are great and tuberous sticking out like knots, which being taken from the stalke and put into the ground, will take roote, and bring forth leaves like the mother plant, the seede and so all other things are large answerable to the proportion of the leaves Joannis Thalius in Hircynia sylva, maketh mention of a greater sort of Sorrell than ordinary: &amp; Camerarius in horto, of a great one received from Spaine, but neither of them speake of any tuberous joints they should beare, so that it is probable, it is but onely the climate and soyle that produceth the tubers. 
2. Oxalis sativa Franca sive Romanarotundifolia. Round leafed Sorrell. In the leaves of this Sorrell consisteth a cheefe difference which are short and almost round in some, and in others they will have somewhat round pointed peeces on both sides, of a paler greene colour then the former, the stalkes are weaker not standing upright, but the flowers and seede differ not from the ordinary sort: the roote is small and threddy creeping about and shooting up heads of leaves round about: the Acetosa vulgaris. Our ordinary Sorrell. 
1. Acetosa maxima Germanica. Great Sorrell of Germany. 
2. On h sativa Franca sive Romana rotu difolia. Round leafed Sorrell.
3. O alis tuberosa radice. Tubercus rooted Sorrell. 
7. Acetosa Cretica semine aculeato. Candy Sorrell. 
11. Acetosa vesicaria Americana. Indian Sorrell with swollen huskes. 
taste is of a much more pleasant sharpenesse then the other, and therefore more desired of any that formerly ha used it. 
3. Oxalis tuberosa radice. Tuberous rooted Sorrell. The cheefe differences in this consist both in leaves and rootes, the leaves hereof being formed somewhat like the ordinary but larger and not so broad next the stalke, the stalks, flowers and seede are answerable to the former, but the rootes are many tuberous clogs fastened by strings to the head whence the leaves spring forth. 
4. Oxalis bulbosa montana major. The greater bulbous Sorrell. This bulbed Sorrell hath large greene leaves somewhat like the garden kinde, but more round at the further end, and more forked at the lower part next the stalke, that it seemeth almost three square like unto n Ivie leafe, in the rest it agreeth with the ordinary sort but that the rootes are round and bulbous. 
Bulbosa minor. There is another like hereunto, but that the leaves are lesser and rounder, the whole plant smaller and low∣er also. 
5. Oxalis rotundifolia Alpina. Small Mountaine round leafed Sorrell. This small Sorrell hath five or six small leaves standing upon very long and slender footestalkes, each leafe be∣ing no bigger then the nayle of ones hand, and in a manner as round as the Violet leafe: the stalke riseth halfe a foote high, bearing such like chaffie huskes and reddish, wherein the like seede unto the ordinary sortlyeth. 
6. Oxalis scutata repens. Creeping Sorrell with small broad leaves. This creeping Sorrell hath slender weake joynted branches trayling on the ground, foure or five inches long, whose leaves are small, of a nailes breadth, and of the fashion of a pointed shield, and pointed also at both ends, with very long footestalkes under them, the leaves being almost as long as the stalkes, in the taste it is like the other small Sorrells. 
7. Acetosa Cretica semine aculeato. Candy Sorrell. The Candy Sorrell hath weake bending stalkes and sometimes but one, branched forth on all sides, the leaves are small and long not broad or forked at the lower end as divers other Sorrells are, having long footestalkes un∣der them: the toppes of the branches end in a long spike of small mossie flowers, which afterwards turne into small thinne pricking huskes or skinnes wherein the seede lyeth, every one fastned with a crooked footstalke. 
8. Acetosa Neapolitana Ocimi folio. Sorrell of Naples. This Sorrell of Naples shooteth up a stalke set with smaller thicke mealy leaves thereon than those below, which are broadest in the middle, and smaller at both ends like the last, the toppes of the stalke endeth in a spike of greenish yellow flowers which turne into skinnie huskes, somewhat representing, as Columna saith, the head of an Oxe with hornes standing up, and eares handging downe, wherein lie the small seede. 
9. Acetosa Zacynthina Calthaefolio. Marigold leafed Sorrell. This Sorrell also hath no other difference therein from other Sorrells, but in the leaves which are broad poin∣ted and somewhat long like 13. Accetoso minor lanceolata. Sheepe Sorrell. 
15. Acetosa angustifolia ation. Tall narrow leafed Sorrell. 
a Marigold leafe without those eares or points that the common Sorrell hath. 
10. Acetosa Indica. Indian Sorrell. This Indian Sorrell riseth up with a slender weake hollow stalke, with a few long thicke leaves thereon, somewhat smaller than those at the foote thereof next the ground, small at both ends, and of a pale greene colour, of a delicate small sharpe taste: at the toppe of the stalke grow sundry brownish smooth skinnes, with small seede in them, the roote perish∣eth yearely. 
11. Acetosa vesicaria A∣mericana. Indian Sorrell with swollen huskes. The Indian Sorrell hath slender straked stalkes, of a cubite high, leaning downe to the ground, spreading in∣to many branches, some∣what reddish towards the toppes: the leaves are smooth and thicke of a rea∣sonable sise, somewhat like a Garden Sorrell leafe, but that the lower points are not so long, but rather short like an Arrache leafe of a pale greene colour and somewhat mealy withall every one upon a very long foote stalke, and of a more sharpe sowre taste than our Sorrell: at the toppes of the stalkes and branches stand the flowers in a long spike, like our ordinary Sorrell, but greater and of a greenish red colour: after which come round yet cornered skinnie swollen huskes hanging downewards, of a reddish colour, striped with redder veines, very beautifull, wherein are contained two or three cornered browne and shining seede: the roote is small and threddie, perishing for the most part every yeare. 
12. Ac tosa Cambr -Britanica Montana. Mountaine Welsh Sorrell. The W lsh Sorrell groweth up with small stalkes branched forth diversly with round leaves set thereon, as also growing at the bottome of them every one upon a long footestalke, in shape somewhat like the Wall Penny∣worte, but that they are cut in at the lower part with ends on both sides, the flowers hereof are whitish, and not red like others but the huskes with seede that come afterwards are reddish, and containe browne shining three square seed like the rest, the roote is small and threddy, abiding many yeares. 
13. Acetosa minor Lanceolata. Sheepes Sorrell. This is a small Sorrell well knowne to many (growing in many medowes with us) not to differre from other small Sorrells, but in the leafe which is somewhat small and long broadest in the middle, and pointed at the fur∣ther end, with two small eares at the lower end of a pale greene colour somewhat whitish. 
14. Acetosa minima. The smallest Sorrell. The smallest Sorrell that groweth most usually on drie barren grounds is all together like the last, but smaller in each degree. 
15. Acetosa angustifolia elatior. Tall narrow leafed Sorrell. This Sorrell may by the figure soone declare the variation, whose stalke is slender and tall, and the leaves nar∣row and long, yet formed like a Sorrell, as both flowers and seede.
The Place. The most of these Sorrells beare in their titles or descriptions the places where they have beene found. 
The Time. All of them flower and seede in May and Iune, except the Indian sort, which flowreth not untill Iuly for the most part, and the seede is ripe in August. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Oxalis of the sharpe taste, many of the Latine Writers keepe that name, in Latine also Acetosa, of some Acedula of the fourenesse thereof, others call it Rumex hortensis, and Galen calleth it Oxulapathum, id est, Lapathum acidum, soure Docke, yet with Dioscorides, Oxyalapathum is Lapathum Acutum, that kinde of Docke whose forme of leafe is more sharpe and pointed than others, and not for the sharpe taste to cause that name, the Sheepes Sorrell, is called Lapatiolum and Acetosella by divers. Clusius maketh mention of the first great sort, and Lobel, Dodonaeus and others of the second, Lobel gave first of all others know∣ledge of the third, and Columna of the fourth; Bauhinus of the fift, sixt, and seventh, Columna of the eight, Prosper Alpinus in his Booke of Egyptian plants of he ninth; of the tenth and last none hath made any mention before now Besterus in horto Eystetensi speaketh of the eleventh, by the name of Acetosa vesicaria peregrina, which Bau∣hinus calleth Acetosa Americana folijs longissimis pediculis donatis; but of the twelfth sort (if it be not the same with the second, whereunto it is very like) no author ever made mention before now, and scarce is it knowne to any but the Gentleman of Anglesey called M r . Morris Lloid of Prislierworth that found it on a mountaine in Wales, and shewed it to D r . Bonham in his life: the thirteenth is called by Matthiolus Tenuifolia; and so by Loni∣corus, Gesner, Tragus, &amp; almost all other writers of herbes in our later age, and called Oxalis vervecina of Lobel and Ovina of others, and arvensis lanceolata by Bauhinus; the fourteenth is remembred by Montanus, Gerard, and Bauhinus. All of them deservedly have the name of Sorrell, because howsoever they are somewhat different in leafe or roote, yet they all agree in the sourenesse, although some more or lesse than others. The Arabians, as Se∣rapi saith, call it Humaalh; the Italians Acetosa, the Spaniards Azederas Azederilha and Agrethas: the French A ills or Oseille, Saltelle, Surelle and Aigrette; the Germanes Sawrampffer; the Dutch Surckcle and Surincke; and we in English Sorrell. 
The Ʋertues. Sorrell is cooling and drying in the second degree, and is prevalent in all hot diseases to coole any inflamma∣tion and heate of bloud in agues pestilentiall or chollericke or other sicknesses and fainting, rising from heate, and to refresh the overspent spirits with the violence of furious or fiery fits of agues, &amp;c. to quench thirst, and to procure an appetite in fainting or decaied stomackes; for it resisteth the putrefaction of the bloud, killeth wormes, and is as a cordiall to the heart which the seede doth more effectually, being more drying and binding, and thereby also stayeth the hot fluxes of the menstrues, or of humours in the bloudy flixe, or fluxe of the stomacke: the rootes also in a decoction or in powder, is effectuall for the said purposes: both rootes and seede, as well as the herbe is held powerfull to resist the poison of the Scorpion, so that he that shall eate thereof shall feele no paine being stung: the decoction of the rootes is taken to helpe the jaundise, and to expell gravell, and the stone in the raines or kidneyes: the decoction of the flowers made with wine and drunke helpeth the blacke jaundise, as also the inward ulcers of the body or bowells. A Syrupe made with the juyce of Sorrell and Fumiterrie is a soveraine helpe to kill the force of those sharpe humours that cause the itch: the juyce thereof with a little Vine∣gar, serveth well to use outwardly for the same cause, and is also profitable for frettings and gallings of the skin many part, and for tetters, ringwormes, &amp;c. it helpeth also to discusse the scrophules or kernells in the throate, and the juyce gargled in the mouth helpeth the sores therein: the leaves wrapped up in a Colewort leafe, and roasted under the embers, and applied to an hard empostume, botch, bile, or plague sore, both ripeneth and brea∣ eth it: the juyce of Sorrell dropped into the eares of such as are hard of hearing helpeth oftentimes: the distil∣led water of the herbe is of much good use for all the purposes aforesaid. The lesser wilde Sorrell, and so all the other are of the same qualitie, and are no lesse effectuall in all the diseases before spoken of. 
CHAP. XI. Oxys, Alleluja sive Trifolium acetosum. Wood Sorrell. T Here are two sorts of Wood Sorrell, the one familiar enough in many places of this Land, the other stranger as farre as I can learne, and onely cherished in the Gardens of those that are curious, I have as I said brought these two sorts from their family, where they might otherwise be ranked that i among the Trefoiles for their propertie and name also in part. 
1. Trifolium acetosum vulgare. Common Wood Sorrell. The common Wood Sorrell groweth low upon the ground without any stalke rising from it having a ber of leaves comming from the roote made of three leaves like a Trefoile or Three leafed grasse, but broade at the ends, and cut in the middle, of a faint yellowish greene colour, every one standing on a long footestalke, which at their first comming up are close folded together to the stalke, but opening themselves afterwards, and are of a fine soure relish, more pleasing than many of the former Sorrells, and yeelding a juyce, which will turne red when it is clarified, and maketh a most daintie cleare Syrup: among these leaves rise up divers slender weake foot stalkes not growing above them, with every one of them a flower at the top, consisting of five small and pointed leaves starre fashion, of a white colour in most places, or in 1. Trifolium Acetosum Vulgare. Common Wood Sorrell. 
2. Oxys luteo flore. Wood Sorrell with yellow flowers. 
some dasht over with a small shew of blush, and in some but on the backe side onely: of any other colour (although some have set downe that it beareth deepe coloured flow∣ers) I have not seene: after the flowers are past, follow small round heads, with small yellowish seede in them: the rootes are nothing but threads or small strings fastened to the end of a small long peece, all of them being of a yel∣lowish colour not perishing every yeare, but abiding with some leaves thereon in the Winter. 
2. Oxys luteo flore. Wood Sorrell with yellow flowers. This Wood Sorrell shooteth forth divers slender weake reddish stalkes trailing upon the ground, and taking roote at the joynts as they lie, spread into many branches with many leaves on them, standing singly one above another, and made of 3. leaves cut in at the ends like the former, but are much smaller, and of a paler greene colour: at the joynts with the leaves come forth three or foure small flowers together, at the end of a long foote stalke, yet each separate from other, consisting of small and pointed leaves like the other, but of a yellow colour: the seede that followeth is brownish like the other, but contained in smaller and lon∣ger heads like cods or hornes, yet not crooked but pointed small which quickly fall away being tou∣ched when they are ripe, and spring up a∣gaine all about where it grew; it abideth the Winter withou perishing, if it be not too violent, else they will rot and perish &amp; must be new sowne a∣gaine. 
The Place. The first, as I said, groweth plentifully in many places of our Land, in Woods, and Wood sides where they may be moist and shadowed, and in other places that are not too much open to the Sun: the other groweth in divers shadowie places about Sevill in Spaine, and in Gardens at Mompelier. 
The Time. The first flowreth early in Aprill and May, the other after Midsommer, and so continueth in flower untill the Autume colds perish it, and the seede is ripe in the meane time. 
The Names. It is generally taken to be the Oxys of Pliny, whereof he speaketh in his 27 Booke, and 12. Chapter, but not the Oxytriphyllum, although Tragus and Lacuna did so call it, because the name did somewhat agree thereto, but that it is an other herbe whose sharpe pointed leaves, and not the sharpe taste caused this name, for the Greeke word doth signifie both sharpenesse in forme and in taste, It is called Trifolium acetesum of divers, which is the same in signification as I said with Oxytriphyllum, and of some Panis Cuculi, Cuckowbreade, ey∣ther because the Cuckowes delight to feede thereon, or that it beginneth to blossome when the Cuckow begin∣neth to utter her voyce; it is called by the Apothecaries in their shoppes Alleluja and Lujula, the one because about that time it is in flower when Alleluja in antient times was wont to bee sung in the Churches, the other came corruptly from Iuliola as they of Calabria in Naples doe call it, as Scaliger upon Theophrastus de causis plan∣taru saith, yet it is there set downe Alleluja, but I thinke it rather should be Lujula. The other is called Oxys flore lute of Clusius, and Oxys lutea corniculata repens of Lobel, and of Bauhinus Trifolium acetosum corniculatum. The Italians call it Trifolio acetos Pan cuculi and Alleluja, the French Pain de coqu, the Germans Sawerklee, the Dutch Coeckco bre t, and we in English Wood Sorrell, Wood sower, Stabbewort, and Sorrell dubois. 
The Ʋertues. Wood Sorrell is cold and dry as the other Sorrells are, and serveth to all the purposes that they doe, being as effectuall if not more, especially in hindring the putrefaction of blood and ulcers in the mouth and body, and in cooling and tempering distempered heats and inflammations, to quench thirst, to strengthen a weake sto∣macke, to procure an appetite, to stay vomiting, and most singularly excellent in any contagious sicknesse or pe∣stilentiall Feaver, the Syrupe made of the juice is effectuall in all the causes aforesaid, and so is the distilled wa∣ter of the herbe also: Spunges or linnen clothes wet in the juice and applyed outwardly to any hot tumors and inflammations doth exceedingly coole and helpe them: the same juice taken into the mouth and there gargled for some time, and after spit forth and fresh taken, will wonderfully helpe a stinking foule Canker or Vlcer there∣in: it is also singular good in wounds, punctures, thrusts and stabbes into the body, to stay the bleeding and to clense and heale the wounds speedily, and helpeth well also to stay any hot defluxions or catarrhes upon the Throat and Lungs. 
CHAP. XII. Atriplex sylvestris. Wilde Arrache. T He two sorts of garden Arrache are already set forth in my former booke, there remaine divers other sorts to be declared, as well such as for their raritie and beauty wee nurse up in our Gardens, as grow wilde, whereunto I would also joyne the Sea plant to set them all together. 
1. Atriplex baccifera rubra. The red berried Arrache. This beautifull small plant sendeth forth divers slender branches somewhat wooddy, about a foote high, or more or lesse as the place where it groweth will produce, with a small cornered leafe like the broad lea∣fed wilde Arrache, set at the joynts one above another, and at every of the said joynts with the leafe from the lowest almost standeth a small red berry, cluster fashion, that is many small graynes set together like a Mulberry, cleare and almost transparant, full of an excellent juice, as red as blood or Claret wine, which being bruised upon the backe of the hand while it is fresh will seeme as if you had drawne blood out thereof; which berry being dry groweth blackish, and containeth within it small blackish seede, and will still spring up every yeare, if it be suffered to shed: the roote is small and fibrous perishing after seede time. 
2. Atriplex sylvestris lappulas habens. Wilde Arrache with small berries. This Arrache likewise is small even smaller then the other, whose branches doe not exceede an hand breadth or halfe a foote at the most, set with such like small cornered and pointed leaves as in the other, every one stan∣ding upon a short footestalke, at every joynt with the leafe even almost from the bottome commeth forth two very small berries or burres, of the bignesse of a Coriander seede▪ containing therein small blacke seede like the last: the roote is small and wooddy perishing every yeare after seedetime. Of this kind there is another that beareth greater burres, leaves, and stalkes, not differing in any thing else. 
3. Atriplex sylvestris fructu compresso roseo. Wilde Arrache with flat Roselike berries. This other wilde Arrache hath a whitish hard round stalke, about a foote and a halfe high; spreading forth into many the like branches, and they againe shooting forth other smaller ones, which bow themselves downe a little, whereon are placed small hoary or mealy leaves, no bigger then the nayle of ones finger, waved and cut into corners on the edges, like the wilde Arrache called Goosefoote, every one closing the stalke and branches without any footestalke; at every of these leaves commeth forth a most dainty broad and flat coloured fruite, made as it were of leaves, raysed up a little in the middle, having foure other eminences at the brims or edges, yet so set as that the brims or edges are betweene them somewhat like unto the folding of the leaves in a Rose as it is painted, in every one of which foure aforesaid eminences is contained one flat seede of a reasona∣ble bignesse. 
4. Atriplex marina repens. Creeping Sea Arrache. This Sea Arrache creepeth upon the ground with many hoary white branches and mealy white leaves set on them without order, cut in on the edges or nere at the bottome, and pointed at the ends, somewhat like unto a small Goosefoote leafe; at the toppes of the branches grow divers slender hoary yellowish spikes of seede set close, together like clusters: the roote is great with many strings and perisheth not, and is of a saltish taste although bred up in a Garden, sometimes it will turne reddish like the Garden red Arrache and sometimes nothing so aly but rather greene. 
5. Atriplex maritima angustifolia. Narrow leafed Sea Arrache. It groweth up with an hoary and wooddy stalke a foote high, spread at the toppe into many small branches spotted with blacke spots, which end in long yellow spikes of clustering seede like the former, the leaves that grow below are somewhat long and narrow about two inches long, of a darke greene colour with some corners about the edges but smaller as they grow higher. 
6. Atriplex sylvestris vulgatior sinnata. The greater common wild Arrache. The greater common wild Arrache hath strong round hard stalkes and branches, with large leaves on them like 1. Atriplex baccifera rubra. The red berried Arrache.
1. Fragaria minor hispido folio. Small Strawberries with hard leaves. This Strawberrie groweth like to other Strawberries both in leaves, flowers, and fruite, but lesse in all of them; and to distinguish it the more certainely from the other sorts, the leaves hereof are hard rough and hairie, grayish as well on the upper as underside: the berries when they are ripe are small but sufficient pleasant to eate, red on the one side, and white on the other, as if they were equally divided. 
2. Fragaria Alpina fructu compresso. Flat Strawberries. There is no difference in this kinde from our ordinary Strawberrie but in the fruit which is more flat than round, and hath a strake or list, every berrie of a taste neare a Raspis: this also usually beareth fruit againe in the Autumne. 
3. Fragaria Helvetia nana. Dwarfe Strawberries. Divers may judge that this Strawberrie smallnesse commeth by the barrennesse of the soyle wherein it grow∣eth, but that is not so: for it is well knowne to most, that those hills of the Swissers have no barren ground upon them: this hath very small triparted leaves next the ground, closer set together upon short foote stalkes than any other, and those that are set on both sides of the long branch, not above foure inches long, which lieth creeping on the ground, grow lesse and without stalke: the flower standeth at the end of the branch many times, but one at a place, which consisteth of five round leaves like a Strawberrie, but larger then agreeth with the proportion of the plant, and is of a yellowish colour; what fruite this beareth wee have not yet scene or knowne certainely. This commeth neare unto the description of the Fragariae affinis sericea planta of Bauhinus, his brother formerly so calling it, which as he saith is the Leucas Dioscoridis Adversariorum, and giveth thereunto a small head containing small se de therein: but this was brought us from the Alpes by one Flescher a Silefian, a young Doctor in Physicke but very skillfull in simples, who perished in Virginia by tasting some poysonfull herbe, and therefore I thinke it should beare a Strawberrie like head, whereunto I am the rather per∣swaded, because that as Bauhinus citeth, although wrong∣fully, Fragaria vulgaris. Common Strawberries. 
3. Fragaria Helvetica n . Dwarfe Strawberries. 
as I thinke, for I cannot finde it in him. Gesner in hortis that he should call one Fragaria parva flore luteo: the rootes are blacke and stringie. 
4. Fragaria minime vesca. Barren or unprofitable Strawberries. This Strawberrie is in the growing altogether like the ordinary kindes, with leaves triparted standing on seve∣rall stalkes and flowers, in the same manner but smaller, the fruite onely maketh the difference betwixt them, which being small and many set together, are sere and drie without sappe and of an harsh unpleasant taste. 
The Place. The three first plants grow upon divers of the Alpes, and other places of Germany, and the last in our owne Land in most woods and the fields sides neare unto them, in Cornewall, as Lobel saith, but in other places also. 
The Time. They flower in May, when the other sorts doe for the most part or somewhat later, and the fruite is ripe quick∣ly after. 
The Names. The whole plant is called in Latine Fragaria, and the berries Fraga a fructus fragrantia odoris &amp; gustus, for it hath no certaine Greeke name that I know, unlesse as Tra∣gus thinketh it may be referred to the of Diosco∣rides, or as others thinke to the Comaron of Apule∣ius, but neither of them is likely: others suppose that Dioscorides did understand this plant under his : some have called it Rubus Idaeus non spinosus, but there is a shrubbe like unto the Raspis that beareth no thornes, as I have shewed in my former Booke. Pliny maketh men∣tion of Fraga, lib. 25. c. 9. Servius calleth them Mora ter∣restria, and therefore some would referre it to the Chamae∣batus: the Italians call the plant Fragheria, and the berries Fraghe and Fragole; the French Fraisier and Fraises, the Germans call the fruit Erdbeer, and the Dutch Erdtbesien, and we in English Strawberries, The first here set forth is the third Fragaria of Tragus, which he saith the people about Spires in Germany doe call Harbeer; and Gesner in hortis Germaniae calleth Fragaria species minor: the second is called by Caesalpinus Fragariae genus in Alpibus; and Bau∣hinus Fragaria bis fructum gerens: the third is likely to be the Fragaria flore luteo of Bauhinus who citeth Gesner in hortis, as I said in the description, to call it so; and I thinke it may as well agree unto the Leucas of Lobel which Bauhinus seemeth to make another plant differing therefrom, calling it Fragaria affinis sericea incana, for the descriptions are very correspondent: the last is that which Lobel calleth Fragaria sylvestris minime vesca sive sterilis, but is not that which Gerard calleth Fragaria vesca sive sterilis, which is another plant, as I have shewed before. 
The Vertues. These Strawberries that are here set forth and fit to be eaten, are of the same qualitie with the other garden kinds expressed in my former Booke, the leaves of them all being cooling in the first degree, and yet some say hot and drying in the second, the roote is more drying and binding, the berries while they are greene are cold and drie, but when they are ripe they are cold and moist: the berries are excellent good to coole the li∣ver, the bloud and spleene, or an hot chollericke stomacke to refresh and comfort the fainting spirits, and to quench thirst: they are good also for other inflammations, yet it behoveth one to be cautelous, or rather to re∣fraine them in a fever least by their putrefying in the stomacke, they encrease the fits and cause them to be the more fierce: the leaves and rootes boiled in wine and water and drunke, doe likewise coole the liver and bloud, and asswage all inflammations in the raines and bladder, provoketh urine, and allaieth the heate and sharpenesse thereof: the same also being drunke staieth the bloudy flixe and womens courses, and helpeth the swellings of the spleene: the water of the berries carefully distilled, is a soveraigne remedy and cordiall in the palpitations of the heart, that is, the panting and beating of the heart, and is good for the overflowing of the gall, the yellow jaundise; the juyce dropped into foule ulcers, or they washed therewith or with the decoction of the herbe and roote, doth wonderfully clense them and helpe to cure them. All lotions and gargles that are made for sore mouthes or ulcers therein, or in the privie parts, or else where are made with the leaves and rootes hereof, which is good also to fasten loose teeth, and to heale spungie foule gummes: the same also helpeth to stay catarrhes or defluxions of rheume into the mouth, throate, teeth or eyes: the juyce or water is singuler good for hot and red inflamed eyes, if some thereof be dropped into them, or they bathed therewith, the said juyce or water is also of excellent propertie for all pushes, wheales, and other e∣ruptions of hot and sharpe humours into the face or hands, or other parts of the body to bath them therewith, and helpeth to take away any rednesse in the face, and spots or other deformities of the skinne, and to make the kin cleare and smooth: some use thereof to make a water for hot inflammations in the eyes, and to take away any filme or skin that beginneth to grow over them, or other defects in them that any outward medicine can helpe in this manner: Take what quantitie of Strawberries you please, and put them into a brasse vessell, with a little salt cast upon them, which being covered, set into a wine cellar for eight dayes, in which time the berries will be dissol∣ved into a greene water, which being cleared from the rest, keepe in a glasse close stopped to use when you neede: a droppe or two put into the eyes serveth for the purpose aforesaid: some in misliking both salt and brasse for the eyes, make a water both for the eyes and for the deformities in the skinne, be it morphew, leprey, or the like in this manner: Into a large destillatory or body of glasse, they put so many Strawberries as they thinke meete for their use, if a few, the lesser glasse body will serve, which being well closed, let it be set in a bed of hot horse d g for twelve or fourteene dayes, and after distilled carefully and the water kept for your use. 
CHAP. XVII. Alsine. Chickweede. T Here are so many sorts of Chickweedes, some chiefely growing in moist and watery places, others up∣on drie mountaines, some in the Fields, others in the Woods, some worthy of ones paines to plant in a Garden, others of no such respect that I must severre them, and intreate of some in an other Classis where they are fittest to be spoken of; you shall therefore have those evpressed in this Chapter, and the next that follow that I thinke fiit for this place. 
1. Alsine repens baccifera. Great spreading Chickweede. The great Chickweede bringth forth many flexible branches full of joynts, rising higher than a man if it stand by bushes, or other things where it may take hold, otherwise through weakenesse lying on the ground, it see∣meth not so long, at every of the joynts stand two leaves one against the other, somewhat like unto the ordinary Chickweede leaves, but much larger, comming somewhat neare unto those of Pelletory of the wall, and of a fresh greene colour: at the joynts likewise on both sides of the stalkes come forth other branches, joynted and set with leaves in the same manner, and at the ends of them large greene round huskes ending in five points, with e flowers growing out of them, consisting of five and sometimes of sixe white leaves apeece cut in at the , in which huskes after the flowers are past stand small round heads like berries, greene at the first, and black∣ish when they are ripe, containing within them many flat blackish purple seed: the roote is white and long creeping much under ground, and shooting forth in divers places every yeare new shootes, the old dying downe every yeare: this hath no taste, but herbye as the ordinary Chickweedes have, and therefore is by the judgement 1. Alsine repens baccifera. Great spreading Chickweede. 
2. Alsine maxima. The greatest Chickweede. 
of the best Herbarists referred unto them, yet Lugdunensis saith it hath a stinking and most unpleasant taste. 
2. Alsine maxima. The greatest Chickweede. This Chickweede which is the greatest of all the ordinary sorts riseth up with sundry stalkes, a foote high or more, and lye not on the ground as the smaller sorts Alsine mi r. The smaller Chickweede. 
doe, bearing two leaver usually at a joynt larger then in any other that follow, but somewhat narrower then the former, it beareth plenty of white flowers, of six leaves a peece, standing in long greene huskes, which containe likewise the head or seede vessell, after the flowers are fallen, with small yellowish seede in them; the roote is white and threddy like the rest. 
3. Alsine major. Great Chickweede. This great Chickweede is in all things like the last both in leafe and flower, but smaller, the stalkes stand not fully upright but doe a little bend downewards, and needeth no other description to cause it to bee knowne. Minor. There is another sort hereof differing in nothing else but the smalnesse of the whole plant. 
4. Alsine Baetica. Spanish Chickweede. The Spanish Chickweede riseth up very often with a single upright reddish stalke, not branched at all, and sometimes with many, about a foote or more high, full of joynts, at each whereof grow two smooth and darke greene leaves, narrower then the last, a little broa∣der at the bottome next the stalke, and small pointed at the ends, the middle ribbe on the backside being somewhat great and raised up: the flowers stand at the end of the stalke many set together in heads or huskes like those of Symphytum petraeum, of a purplish colour; the roote is small white and long. 
5. Alsine recta triphyllos sive laciniata. Vpright Chickweede with jagged leaves. This jagged Chickweede groweth upright, with a stalke for the most part branched into three or foure smaller sprayes about a foote high, set at the severall joynts, with small long leaves, cut into three and some∣times foure parts, even to the middle ribbe almost, so that they seeme like severall leaves spread like so many fingers to the hand: the flowers come forth at the toppes and uppermost joynts, consisting of five small blew and round pointed leaves, with some threds in the middle, and standing in small greenish huskes, wherein after the flowers are withered and gone, appeare small flat heads divided as it were into two parts, wherein lye small whitish seede: the roote is small and long, set with many fibres and perisheth every yeare after seedetime, and springeth againe of the seede that is shed. 
The Place. The first as Clusius saith groweth in divers places of Spaine and Germany also, and I have sometimes found it by hedge sides in our own Land: the second and third is usually found in moyst and watery places, by wood sides also oftentimes and in many other places, the fourth Clusius found in Spaine: the last groweth in sundry grounds and among rubbish sometimes.
The Place. All these sorts of Chickweedes grow upon hills and mountaines in divers places, some in Italy, Spaine and France, &amp;c. and many of them in our owne Land: 
The Time. They doe all flower in Iune and Iuly except the sixt, which flowreth not untill Autumne. 
The Names. The first is so called by Columna as it is in the title, who saith it was not mentioned by any before him: the se∣cond is the Alsine folio Hederulae altera of Lobel, the third is called by Lugdunensis and Thalius Elatine prior, by Dodonaeus Alsine spuria prior, by Camerarius Alsine hirsuta, by Lobel Morsus gallinae folio hederulae, thought to be Hippago Plinij by Anguilara, and called Centunculus hirsutior by Caesalpinus; but generally Alsine hederacea, and hederulae folio, &amp; minor I have added to distinguish it from the greater: the rest have their denominations by Bau∣hinus as they are set downe in their titles. 
The Ʋertues. All these herbes being lately found out and to be referred to the family of Chickweeds, are not of such ex∣perienced use, as these of an ancienter knowledge: but it is most probable that being in taste somewhat agreeing unto the common sort, their qualities are not much differing, and therefore untill wee have learned some certaine properties whereunto they are effectuall, let this be sufficient at this time to have given you the knowledge of their being. 
CHAP. XIX. Alsines spuriae alia parvae. Small Bastard Chickweedes. T Here are some other Chickweedes to be entreated of that pertaine to this Classis, and grow in se∣verall soyles which shall be shewed in this Chapter. 
1. Alsine Ʋiscosa. Clammy Chickweede. This clammy Chickweede standeth more upright then the last, with rough, hairy and clammy leaves somewhat like the other, but of a more blewish greene colour: the flowers hereof are white and small, scarce opening themselves but in the hot time of the day, standing at the toppes of the stalkes, which from the middle upwards are so clammy, that they will sticke to the fingers of any that touch them, whereby they are apt to hold flyes, and such other small things as light upon them. 
2. Alsine Muscosa. Mosse like Chickweede. This creeping and spreading Chickweede scarce sheweth it selfe above the Mosse and other herbes among which it groweth, with very slender small stalkes and small fine but thicke leaves thereon, and small white flowers of foure leaves a peece at the ends turning into long and round heads like unto the other small Chick∣weedes, the rootes are nothing but threads. 
3. Alsine nodosa Germanica. Knotted Chickweede of Germany. This knotted or great joynted Chickweede, thereof tooke the name because the stalkes which are part learning and part upright an handbreadth long, have the joynts more knotted or bunched out then then in others, the greene leaves that grow at them are very small and long like threads, many set together, from whence like∣wise spread small branches bearing small white flowers of five leaves, set in great huskes that end in five corners every one on a long footestalke. 
4. Alsine folio Trissaginis. Germander leafed Chickweede. This small Chickweede spreadeth sundry small weake branches upon the ground, three or foure inches long, set with small somewhat round leaves dented about the edges, and pointed at the ends, by couples one against another, at the joynts whereof towards the toppes come forth small blew flowers, and sometimes white, con∣sisting of five round pointed leaves, after which succeede small round seede vessells, two alwayes joyned toge∣ther, having small round seede within them; the roote is composed of many threds, and abideth the Winter. 
5. Alsine corniculata Clusii. Clusius his horned Chickweede. This Chickweede riseth up a spanne high, with one tender hairy stalke full of joynts, and two small long some∣what hairy leaves set at them, towards the toppe divided into some branches, where and at the joynts also come forth small white flowers in greene huskes, and after them small and long thinne transparant hornes, as it were like to Cockes spurres, and clammy withall, wherein lye small blacke seede: the roote is small and annuall. 
4. Alsine folio Trissaginis. Germander leafed Chickweede. 
5. Alsine corniculata Clusij. Clusius his horned Chickweede. 
 
The Place. These Chickweedes grow in Fields as well tilled as untilled, and by the wayes sides, &amp;c. 
The Time. They flower in Sommer, some a little earlier or later than others, and their seede is ripe quickly after. 
The Names. The first Bauhinus calleth Alsine hirsuta altera viscosa, and Camerarius Alsine viscaria, Dodonaeus Alsine spuria quarta, and Gesner in collatione stirpium Alsine species glutinosa, yet this is not the Lychinis viscosa or any sort thereof, although for the properaie it might be called Muscaria: the second Lugdunensis calleth Alsine muscosa: the third is called by Bauhinus Alsine nodosa Germanica, and differeth from the nodosa Gallica, whose heads of seedes are like knottes upon a thread or string, as is shewed in the Chapter before: the fourth is the third Morsus Gallinae of Tragus, the Alsine spuria altera of Dodonaeus, called by Lobel and others Alsine folio Trissaginis, taken to be Antirrhi∣ Dioscoridis by Caesalpinus, and by Bauhinus Asine Chamaedrifolia flosculis pediculis oblongis insidentibus: but surely if ever he saw any whose flowers had long stalkes, I did never: the last is so called, first by Clusius, and after him by all others, as it is in the title, yet some supposed it might be a kind of Nigellastrum or Cockle. 
The Ʋertues. There is little use in Physicke of these Chickweedes, yet the two first are of the taste of Burrage, and the rest of Chickweede. 
CHAP. XX. Borrago &amp; Buglossum. Borrage and Buglosse. A Lthough I have given you in my former Booke the knowledge of the Garden Borrage and Bu∣glosse, and some other sorts of them, yet there doe remaine some others both of the Garden and wilde kindes, whereof I meane now to speake. 
1. Buglossum minus sativum. Small Garden Buglosse. This Garden Buglosse is very like the ordinary garden kinde for the manner of growth, but that it is smaller in all the parts thereof, the leaves are narrower and shorter, the flowers are smaller, some of a blew colour, and some purple; (and Lobel mentioneth one with a red flower, Buglossum Echij fa∣cie. which he stileth Echij facie Buglossum minimum flore rubente: ) the seede is likewise blacke but smaller: the roote perisheth not, and is like the other. 
2. Buglossum sylvestre majus flore nigro. Great wilde Buglosse. This kinde of Buglosse differeth not from the last in any thing but in the greatnesse, being greater in every part, and in the colour of the flowers which are of so deepe a purple colour, that it is called blacke, and that it is found growing naturally in some places of Italy, and the other not but in Gardens.
The Time. They doe all flower and seede about the same time of the other Succories, except the second, which flowreth earlier then the rest. 
The Names. All these herbes are accounted severall sorts of Succory by many writers, and some of them (that is those of Naples as Columna saith) are used in the stead of the true Succory with good successe, but as I said before they are but bastard sorts which their seedes declare, being rather Hawkeweedes as I doe thinke: The first is called by Gesner in Collectione stirpium Hieratium praetense asperum, by Tabermontanus and Gerard Cichorium luteum, by Thalius Iutubus sylvestris sive Cichorium sylvestre flore luteo, Tragus maketh it his Cichorea 3. flore luteo, and Caesal∣penus calleth it Lactariola altera: the second is the Cichoreum luteum pratense of Lobel in Adversarijs and Hedip∣nois Plinij and Aphaca Theophrasti in his Observations, as Dalechampius before him had done, and as Lugdu∣nensis setteth is downe for Aphace Dalechampij, Caesalpinus calleth it Endivia sylvestris, and Garard Dens leonis Cichorizata, Dodonaeus and Tabermontanas make it their third kind of Dens leonis, and Bauhinus calleth it Cicho∣rium pratense, luteum laevius; the third is sufficiently expressed in the description: the fourth and fift Columna ma∣keth mention of, the one under the name of Cichorium sylvestre vesicarium pratense, and the other of Cichorium sylvestre asperum , sive Cichorium dulce, which Bauhinus numbreth among the Sow Thistles and calleth it S chus latifolius leviter hirsutus: The sixt is Tabermontanus ninth sort of Hieracium, which he calleth Hieraci∣us Intabaceum asperum, and Gerard Hieratium esperum: the last was first called by Matthiolus Zacyntha sive Ci∣chorium verrucarium and so doth Clusius also: but Lobel in his Observations, Fol. 116. (in calling it Chondrilla verrucaria, Chondrilla prior Dioscoridis Clusii Zacyntha Matthioli ) doth foulely confound the two plants of Mat∣thiolus and Clusius together, for he there giveth the thicke woolly leaves of Clusius his Chondrilla to this Zacyntha of Mathiolus which hath greene leaves, and maketh it first to have crested heads of seede as the true Zacyntha hath, and afterwards saith the flower is yellow, &amp;c. flying away in downe utterly contrarying himselfe, which Clusius tooke knowledge of and found fault with him for it, and thereupon set forth the true figure and descrip∣tion of it in his history of plants: Gesner in hortis calleth it Ʋerrucaria Seridis species, and Caesalpinus Condrillae species in ruderibus, whereupon Bauhinus putteth it among his Chondrillas, and calleth it Chondrilla verrucaria folijs baceis viridibus: the Italians call it Mazzo di Cavalliero and Mazza serrata. 
The Vertues. These kinds of Succories except the Neapolitane and the last are not used in Physicke that I know but they, that is the Neapolitane kinds as Columna saith are there used in stead of the true Succory, being so like it that as I said in the description they soone deceive one, mistaking one for another yet used with good successe whereby we may judge of the others not to be much differing, and therefore untill some further and more certaine experience bee made of them, let this advise serve for the present. Matthiolus hath given us first knowledge of the propertie of Zacyntha or warted Succory, from Calzolarius of Ʋerona, who by practise had found it to be availeable to take away warts from the hands by once eating the leaves as a Sallet; and Matthiolus saith that by his owne experience a dram of the seede in powder taken for certaine dayes together in white wine to bedwards tooke away the warts from ones hands that was wonderfully pestered with them: but Pena denying that the once eating of the leaves will doe any good, but yet saith that if the juice of the leaves bee used to bathe the warts, it will extirpate them most certainely as he and divers other found by their experience, the same also taken in wine helpeth the biting of a mad Dog. 
CHAP. XXVI. Deus eonis. Dandelion. T He Dandelion is assuredly a differing kinde of wilde yellow Succory, and therefore I thinke it meete to expresse it before the Chondrilla Gumme Succory which is also an other kinde: hereof there are more differences and varieties found out of late than have formerly beene knowne, which shall be set forth here together. 
1. Dens leonis vulgaris. Common Dandelion. Our common Dandelion is well knowne to have many long and deepely gashed leaves lying on the ground round about the head of the roote, the ends of each gash or jagge on both sides looking downeward to the roote againe, the middle ribbe being white which being broken yeeld abundance of bitter milke, but the roote much more from among the leaves which alwayes abide greene, arise many slender weake naked footestalkes, rather than stalkes, every one of them bearing at the toppe one large yellow flower, consisting of many rowes of yellow leaves broad at the points and nicked in, with a deepe spot of yellow in the middle, which growing ripe the greene huske wherein the flower stood, turneth it selfe downe to the stalke, and the head of downe becommeth as round as a ball with long reddish seede undernath bearing apart of the downe on the head of every one which together is blowne away with the wind, or with the blast of ones mouth may be blowne away at once: the roote groweth downewards exceeding deepe, which being broken off within the ground will notwithstanding shoote forth a new againe, and will hardly be destroyed where it hath once taken deepe rooting in the ground. 
2. Dens leonis angustioribus folijs. Dandelion with narrow leaves. This Dandelion is in all things like the other, but that the leaves are narrower, yet hath not fewer gashes or divisions on the edges, so that by this one note it may be distinguished. 
3. Dens leonis tenuissimo folio. Fine jagged Dandelion. This Dandelion hath a thicke reddish roote full of fibres, sending forth sundry most finely cut very greene leaves, each of a hand breadth long and two inches broad, deepely jagged, and divided againe into two or three other small rents or divisions, ending in a fine small point: the flowers are much smaller that stand at the tops of naked stalkes and yellow, turning into downe as the other. 
4. Dens Leonis minor radiatis folijs sive Trinciatella Italorum Camerarij. Sweete Dandelion. This sweete Dandelion (called by Camerarius Trinciatella Italorum, hath many leaves spread on the ground of three inches long and halfe an inch broade, cut in on the sides into sundry deepe gashes, whose ends have each of them three very deepe dents, and each having divers points standing like a starre or spurre, the foote stalke, whereof are a little hairy, among which rise up many smooth slender naked stalkes, one whereof standeth up∣right scarse an hand breadth high, the rest are lower and bend downewards, each of them bearing a small yellow 1. Dens leonis vulgaris. Common Dandelion. 
6. Dens leonis Monspaliensium sive Asphodeli bu b li . Bulbed or clogged Dandelion. 
flower like unto other Dandelions turning into downe, and flying away with the wind carrying the seede with it, which is somewhat long and broad with hard haires like beardes at the tops: the roote is small and blackish with∣out and white within, very sweete in taste as the leaves are also, and so tender to keepe that it perisheth with the first cold it feeleth: and must therefore be housed, which then will endure many yeares giving seede yearely. 
5. Dens leonis minor aspero folio. Small rough Dandelion. The small rough Dandelion sendeth forth sundry small leaves lying round about the roote of two or three inches long and one inch broade, divided or torne in on the sides, each of them set with small smooth sharpe prickes or haires like as the prickly Sowthistle hath: the stalkes are about two inches high, and beare each of them a large pale yellow flower like the rest and turned into downe: the roote is small and whitish. 
6. Dens leonis Monspeliensium sive Asphodeli bulbulis. Bulbed or clogged Dandelion. This Asphodell rooted Dandelion spreadeth many large and blewish greene hairy leaves upon the ground un∣evenly waved or cut in on the edges but not deepely gashed, as the common Dandelion is of a bitter and sharpe taste like unto it, from which rise sundry bare or naked stalkes with severall flowers, at the toppes of them larger and more double than it, and of a paler yellow colour which passe into downe like the rest: the rootes are sun∣dry long tuberous and slender clogges like unto those of the Asphodill but smaller, shorter, and more pointed at the ends. 
7. Dens leonis Gadensis. Dandelion of Cadis in Spaine. This plant so like in face unto a little Dandelion hath made me contrarie unto others opinions place it in the same ranke with them. It hath a number of long leaves a spanne long or more rising from a long white tender roote: he middle ribbe of the leafe is bare from the roote to the halfe length of the leafe, and then it hath many r s or cuts on each side, very much resembling the leafe of the ordinary Dandelion but smaller and narrower: the flowers likewise stand upon long foote stalkes as the Dandelion doth being small and yellow, and doe turne into downe that is carried away in the winde, with the seede which is small long, and reddish like unto some of the Hawkeweedes. It groweth in the Iland of Gades, which wee call Cales or Cadis as Guillaume Böel saith, who brought it us out of Spaine, and called it Cichorium Gadense: Clusius it seemeth not well marking the plant being drie, and never having seene it greene or growing, tooke it from Böel, and calleth it in his Curae posteriores Cichorium sylvestre pumilum sive Hedipnois, and saith it is altogether like unto it though lesse: but how like it is, upon this description truely set downe as before, I leave it to any judicious to determine. It flowreth in Iuly, Au∣gust and September, and the seede is soone ripe after the flower is past; the roote liveth all the Winter if it be milde, or else it perisheth with the hard frostes. 
The Place. The first is too frequent in all medowes and pasture grounds, but the second is more rare, yet often to be met with: the third groweth in Austria: the fourth in Italy as it is suspected, because it came from thence: the fift and sixt about Mompeliar, as also about Florence, and in other parts of Italy especially the sixt, and the last in Spaine. 
The Time. They flower in the Summer moneths, yet as is well knowne the first is found in some place or other in flower every moneth in the yeare. 
The Names. The Dandelion is not certainely intituled by any Greeke denomination, for it is certaine it is not Chon∣drilla: but hath divers Latine names, as Dens leonis, Ʋrinaria, Corona and Caput monachi, Rostrum porcinum; and as Anguilara thinketh Chrondrilla Galeni: the first is usually called of most of the later writers Dens leonis, but Tra∣gus tooke it to be Hieracium majus, and Cordus in historia, to be Hieracium parvum; Gesner in hortis Hieracium mi s, Thalius and Dodonaeus Chondrilla altera, and Caesalpinus (as divers others also doe) to be the Aphaca of Theo∣phrastus, in lib. &amp; cap. 7. and 10. among the Wortes: divers also take it to be Hedypnois Plinij lib. 28. c. 8. but the most judicious rather take the former Cichorium luteum to be it: Fuchsius calleth it Hedypnois major, and Lugdu∣nensis Hedypnois Dalechampij; Lonicerus calleth it Taraxacon minus, and is generally held to be the true Taraxacon of Serapia and Avicen, and so used with us in all compositions whereunto Taraxacon is appointed: the second Cesalpinus calleth Aphaca angustioris folij: the third is called by Columna Hieracium foetidum: and Camerarius calleth the fourth Trinciatilla; the fift is also of Bauhinus mentioned by the name in the title: the sixt is called by Matthiolus Cichorium Constantinopolitanum, because, as hee saith, hee received it from Angerius de Busbeque the Emperours agent at Constantinople; but Lobel and Pena say that hee needed not to extoll this plant as a stranger, being to be had plentifully in his owne country of Siena and Tuscane, Liguria and other places of Italy whereof he was ignorant, as also about Mompelier, whereupon they called it Dens leonis Monspeliensium Asphodeli bulbu∣lis, and withall suppose it to be the Chondrilla altera Dioscoridis, or Perdion (rather Perdicion ) of Theophrastus; which hath more rootes than leaves: Tabermontanus calleth it Dens leonis altera; the last is mentioned sufficient∣ly in the description: the Italians call Dandelion Dente de leon; the Spaniards Diente de leon; the French Dent de lyo and Pisse en lict; the Germanes Pfaffenblat, Korlkraut and Pfaffenrorlin; the Dutch Papencruyt Houtsroosen and Canckerbloemen; and we in English Pisse a bed and Dandelion. 
The Ʋertues. Dandelion is neare in propertie unto the wilde Succory, and by the bitternesse doth more open and clense, and is therefore very effectuall for the obstructions of the liver, gall and speene, and the diseases that arise from them, as the jaundise and the hypochondriacall passion, it wonderfully openeth the uritorie parts, causing abundance of urine, not onely in children whose meseraicall veines are not sufficiently strong to containe the quantitie of urine drawne in the night, but that then without restraint or keeping it backe they water their beds, but in those of old age also upon the stopping or yeelding small quantitie of urine; it also powerfully clenseth apostumes and in∣ward ulcers in the uritorie passages, and by the drying and temperate qualitie doth afterwards heale them, and for those purposes the rootes being buried a while in sand and whited (which taketh away much of the bitternesse, and maketh them the more tender) being eaten as a sallet are more effectuall than the leaves used in the same man∣ner, or who so are not accustomed to such raw sallets may take the decoction of the rootes or leaves in white wine, or the leaves chopped as pot herbes with a few Allisanders boiled in their broth. And who so is macilent drawing towards a consumption, or hath an evill disposition of the whole body, ready to fall into a Cachexia by the use hereof for some time together shall finde a wonderfull helpe, not onely in clensing the malignant humor but strengthening the good, and preserving the body sound in all his functions: it helpeth also to procure rest and sleepe to bodies distimpered by the heate of ague fits or otherwise: the destilled water also is effectuall to drinke in pestentiall fevers and to wash the sores. 
CHAP. XXVII. Chondrilla. Gumme Succory. I N Dioscorides time there were but two sorts of Chondrilla knowne, both which are much contro∣verted in our time, divers herbes being assimilated unto them, and scarse any agreeing in all things with them, but this age hath found out sundry plants, which for the resemblance are refer∣red to Chondrilla, and called by that name, whereof some beare blew flowers, and divers yellow. Of those with yellow flowers I shall entreate in this Chapter, and of the other in the next. 
1. Chondrilla prior Dioscoridis legitima Clusij. The former true Gumme Succory of Dioscorides according to Clusius his minde. This Gumme Succory hath many long and somewhat broad hoary leaves lying upon the ground covered with a thicke downe, cut in on the edges somewhat like those of Succory, from among which riseth up an hoary stalke, a foote high or more parted into a few branches with smaller and narrower leaves set without order, whereon are sometimes found yellowish graines like unto small peeces of Gumme, which grow quickly to be hard: at the toppes of the branches stand singly yellow flowers like those of Camomill, which when they are ripe turne into downe, and with the seede is carried away with the winde: the roote is of a fingers thicknesse blackish on the outside with some fibres thereat, and parted at the toppe into some heads, which bring forth leaves, &amp;c. it is full of juyce which is yellowish when it is drie. 
2. Chondrilla viminalibus virgis. Gumme Succory with twigge-like branches. This twiggy Gumme Succory shooteth forth sundry slender tough and flexible branches or twigge-like stalkes very clammy in handling, set with many narrow and short leaves, but those that grow at the foote of the stalkes next the ground are larger and longer, cut in on the sides into divers long gashes, when those stalkes grow toward flowring, the greater leaves begin to wither and die, so that being in flower they are quite gone and wi∣thered, the toppes whereof are furnished with small yellow flowers, which in time turne into downe and passe away with the winde: the roote is long and slender, full of milke as all the rest of the plant is if any part be broken.
3. Chondrilla viminea viscosa Monspeliaca. French twiggye Gumme Succory. This French kind of Gumme Succory hath a white round straked clammie stalke two cubits high, spreading into 1. Chondrilla prior legitima Dioscoridis. The former true Gumme Succory according to Clusius his minde. 
2. Chondrilla viminalibus virgis. Gumme Succory with twigge-like branches. 
4. Chondrilla viscosa humilis. Clammy dwarfe Gumme Succory. 
5. Chondrilla saxatilis viscoso caule. Galens Gumme Succory. 
6. Chondrilla Bulbosa. Bulbed Gumme Succory. 
divers clammy branches pliant and easie to bend, whose leaves at the bottome are smooth like Willow leaves of sixe inches long, and halfe an inch broad, sometimes having a gash or two on them, but those that grow up higher are somewhat like unto the lower leaves of the last Gumme Succory divided into many and very fine parts: the flowers are small and yellow like the last which passe into downe and are blowen away, the roote is long and yellowish on the outside. 
4. Chondrilla viscosa humilis. Clammy dwarfe Gumme Succory. This low Gumme Succory sendeth forth from a small long white roote sundry slender rough clammy, and ben∣ding stalkes about a foote high with a few long and narrow leaves without any dent thereon, especially, from the mid∣dle upward, where at the joynts with the leaves stand seve∣rall small long and yellow flowers turning into downe like the rest, but the lower leaves, and those on the lower part of the stalke are long and narrow, some whole without any dent, and others with one or two on the sides. 
5. Chondrilla saxatilis viscosa caule. Galens Gumme Succory. This rare Gumme Succory (which as Columna saith was not set forth before) hath a long roote so fast set on the rocke where it groweth, that without breaking the rocke it can∣not be got out, and being broken yeeldeth store of thicke viscous milke as every part else of the plant doth, which will hardly be washed off where it sticketh to the hands, &amp;c. and quickly groweth into hard graines: the leaves are many that grow below, and are very much torne on the sides into many deepe and crooked gashes like unto Dandelion: it seldome hath more than one stalke, and sel∣dome also any branch, which is slender white and round, about a cubite high, set from the middle upward with long and narrow leaves not cut in or dented at all but parted at the bottome where it compasseth the stalke, and the most part of the length of the leafe cleaving thereto, that almost none of the stalke can be seene being as a hose or thereon (which caused Columna to give it the name of ) at the joynts with the leaves come forth two or three or more flowers in long huskes, with short footestalkes, yellow on the inside and whitish without, flowring by degrees, so that some will be ripe and blowne away when others are now blowne or in the bud: the taste hereof is bitter: the upper part hereof in the forme of the flowers and posture of them is very like unto the wilde Lettice, whereunto Galen resembleth Chondrilla lib. 2. alimentorum, and so may be referred to his Chondrilla or that of Dioscorides for it hath some resemblance with each. 
6. Chondrilla bulbosa. Bulbed Gum Succory. The bulbed Gum Succory hath divers small leaves lesser then Succory, with small divisions on the sides set up∣on slender stalkes, among which spring up many slender weake stalkes on them, and at the toppes of each, one small yellow flower like unto Dandelion which turneth into downe as the rest: the rootes are divers small round and bulbous, cleare, and of a purplish white colour, every one fastned to the head with a long string: the whole plant both roote and leafe is of a bitter taste. 
7. Chondrilla bulbosa Syriaca angustifolia. Bulbed Gum Succory of Syria. This Syrian plant hath many long grasselike leaves lying upon the ground, among which rise divers small stalkes set with small leaves, from the joynts whereof breake forth small branches bearing one flower a peece, which is large double and yellow like unto the great Mouseare: the roote is as big as ones little finger at the head, and about a span long growing smaller downewards smooth and of a brownish yellow colour, having a small round bulbe hanging at the end thereof of the bignesse of a Chesnut, full of milke being never so little touch∣ed or broken. 
8. Chondrilla bulbosa Syriaca altera latiore folio. Another Syrian bulbed Gum Succory. This other Succory is both in roote and flower altogether like the last but differing onely in the leaves which are broader, more hairy and of a grayer colour. 
The Place. The first Clusius saith he found in divers places of Spaine in wast places: the second he saith he not onely found in the Corne fields about Salamanca in Spaine, but in divers places of Germany and Hungarie: the third is found by the way sides, and about Mompelier in Mount Lupus: the fourth about Bassile in Switzerland: the fift upon the Rockes in the Kingdome of Naples: the sixt not onely under the hedges about Naples, and in the wayes from thence to Puteoli: but towards the Sea side about the Fishermens cottages in Narbone, and the low Marshes of Mons Caetus and thereabouts: the two last Ranwolfius in his Peregrination found about Aleppo in Syria the one in the plowed fields and the other in stony places. 
The Time. All these sorts of Succory doe flower later then the rest, many of them not untill August in their naturall places, and are so tender that they quickly perish with the cold of these colder climates. 
The Names. Gum Succory is called in Greeke Chondrilla, so called as it is thought from which signifieth that drop or Gum-like Masticke that groweth upon the herbe and stalke hereof, originally taken from the likenesse with that kind of graine prepared for pultage which was used in auncient times, called Chondrus or Alica, as I shall shew you more fully in the proper place, when I come to speake of Cornes and the severall sorts of Pultage and Ptisanes the ancient times made of them: some saith Dioscorides called it Cichorion and some Ieris, and for that the leaves were like unto Succory, they accounted it a kinde of wilde Succory. The first is taken by Clusius and others since him for the true Chondrilla prima Dioscoridis and calleth it Chondrilla prior Dioscoridis legitima (Bauhinus and divers others doe account Matthiolus his Chondrilla prior to bee but figmentum ex Cichorio, but I verily beleeve that it is Cichoreum luteum, for Matthiolus expresseth not the colour of the flower, and I am sure the Figures are transposed or misset, for the first Figure answereth the second description, and the second Figure to the first description, which Lacuna it seemeth well observed in making that his first which in Matthiolus is the second) Lobel and Lugdunensis from him doe call it Chondrilla verrucuria but as I have shewed in the descripti∣on of Cichorium verrucarium, he mingled this and that together, Tabermontanus calleth it Chondrilla Graeca, and Bauhinus Chondrilla folijs Cichorei tomentosis: the second Clusius calleth Chondrilla viminalibus virgis, and Lobel Chondrilla viminea viscosa vinearum, Cordus upon Dioscorides Chondrilla altera, Dodonaeus Cichorium sylvestre luteum, Caesalpinus Chondrillae species in collibus &amp; vicinis, Tragus Cichorea procera vel quinta; Columna taketh it to be Chondrilla prior Dioscoridis as Bauhinus doth also, and withall thinketh it to be Aphaca of Theophrastus, Ta∣bermontanus and Gerard call it Chondrilla Iuncea: the third is called by Bauhinus Chondrilla viminea viscosa Monspe∣liaca: the fourth also from Bauhinus taketh the name of Chondrilla viscosa humilis: the fift Columna so calleth as it is in the Title: the sixt is called by Lobel Chondrilla pusilla marina lutea bulbosa, and may be as he saith Perdion of Theophrastus (but rather Perdi on, lib. 1. cap. 11. for Perdion is not read in him) of Clusius Chondrilla altera Diosco∣ridis and so doth Columna, by Caesalpinus Herba terrae crepolae similis, by Castor Durantes Hemorrboidale, Lugdu∣nensis setteth it forth by the name of Cichorium bulbosum Dalechampij, and of Cichorium strumosum Myc i as Bauhinus thinketh: but I rather take strumosum to be that sort of Chondrilla which Ranwolfius found in Syria with the larger leaves and is the last here expressed which Bauhinus calleth Chondrilla bulbosa Conysae facie, and referreth the Conyza marina of Lugdunensis thereunto, wherein he is much mistaken in my judgement, for that Cony a hath no such bulbous roote, which causeth a great difference, besides the difference in the heads of flowers Clusius from Imperatus of Naples saith that they about Naples call it Herba dilatte, and account it to bee Scrophulana minor, Pandectarius calleth it Stridula. The Arabians call Chondrilla Candarel Cadaron, and Amiron, the Italians Con∣drilla, and Terra crepola, the Spaniards Leit gas and Leichagas dentro los planos, but Clusius saith they call it Teru di S. Guiteria, and that by the same name they call Phyllum, and that they call the second Condrilla I alina and Ajunjera, the French Leitteron, the high and low Dutch Condrille, and we in English Gum Succory, be∣cause of the Gum is found upon it. 
The Vertues. Gum Succory is of the same propertie with wilde Succory but more bitter and more dry, and is thereby the more effectuall in opening obstructions, and by the drying qualitie stayeth the loosenesse of the belly, if the juice of the roote be taken in wine: the Gum used with Myrrhe in the forme of a pessarie draweth downe womens courses that are stayed, the juice of the foote or the herbe and roote together made into powder and drunke in wine, helpeth the biting of the Viper and all other venemous Serpents, and destroyeth field mise also: Pliny writ∣eth that one Dorotheus in his verses sheweth that it is beneficiall to the stomacke, and helpeth digestion, and fur∣ther saith that some did account it hurtfull to the eyes and to hinder generation both in men and women, and yet be numbreth Chondrilla among other sallet herbes that were used to bee eaten: the juice of the herbe but more effectually of the roote dropped from the point of a needle or other such small thing, taketh away by the rootes the sup is haires of the eyebrowes, the same also used with a little niter clenseth the skinne from all free∣ es, morphew, spots or any discolouring thereof. The bulbous Gum Succory is much commended against the swellings and kernells of the throat called the Kings Evill, and so is the distilled water thereof: the rootes preser∣ved are found to be wonderfull effectuall, if the use be continued for some time together. 
CHAP. XXVIII. Chondrilla purpurea. Purple Gum Succory. T Here are other sorts of Gum Succory to be entreated of, differing from the former in many notable parts as well as in the flowers which are quite of another hew, as shall be shewed in this Chapter. 
1. Chondrilla cer lea sive purpurea. Purple flowred Gum Succory. This Gum Succory shooteth forth in the beginning of the Spring sundry long winged or rather jagged leaves, consisting of many long and narrow jagges, cut in on both sides to the middle ribbe, and equally about set one against another of a blewish greene colour very tender and full of milke being broken, among which m weake and render stalkes three or foure foote high, scarse able to stand upright, very brittle also and apt to be broken, as full of milke as the leaves, which divideth it selfe towards the toppes into a few other smaller b hes, with smaller and lesse jagged leaves upon them, and small blewish purple flowers at the ends and sometimes white, consisting of ten or twelve small narrow leaves standing round about the middle, which when they are ripe fall away of themselves: the rootes grow deepe downe and spread into many corpulent bran∣ches like Dandelion, blackish on the outside and yeelding much milke in every part that is broken, which are so apt to grow that every little peece in the ground will spring againe and beare leaves &amp;c. 
2. Chondrilla caerulea latifolia. Purple Gum Succory with broader leaves. This other Gum Succory is very like unto the former in all things, but that the leaves are somewhat shorter and broader, and the gashes also larger wherein cheefely consisteth the difference. 
3. Chondrilla purpurascens faetida. Stinking Gum Succory. The strinking Gum Succory hath divers long and somewhat narrow leaves growing next to the ground some being waved or torne somewhat deepely on the edges, the footestalkes being sometimes reddish, in the middle of whom riseth up sundry browne stalkes a little hairy, and about a cubit high, having but very few branches and 1. chondrilla caerulea sive purporea. Purple flowred gum Succory. 
2. Chondrilla caerulea latifolia. Purple gum Succory with broader leaves.
Lactuca aguina. Lambes Lettice or Corne Sallet. 
 
The Time. Their time of flowring, seeding, and spending is the same with the common sort. 
The Names. Lettice is called Thridax in Greeke, and in Latine Lactuca a lactis copia. The first is taken by Bauhinus to bee the Lactuca Gallica of Castor Durantes, and calleth it himselfe Lactuca folio oblongo acuto, the other also is called by him Lactuca Italica laciniata, and we in English thereafter Italian jagged Lettice, the Arabians call Lettice Chas and Cherbas, the Italians Lattuga, the Spaniards Lechuga and Alfalsa, the French Laittue, the Germans Lattik, the Dutch Lattouwe, and we in English Lettice. 
The Vertues. Although these sorts of Lettice doe differ in forme from the other, &amp; each of them also one from another in the forme of their leaves, yet in qualitie they are alike, and acceptable to an hot stomacke troubled with choller, yeelding good nou∣rishment to the body, as both Serapio and Galen testifie of the experience thereof on themselves, and Pliny also sheweth that the learned Physition Musa did by Lettice ease Augustus of the violence of his disease. Galen sheweth that the eating of boyled Lettice at night when hee went to bed procured him rest and sleepe, who should have had none if hee had beene without it, having used himselfe to watching from his yonger dayes: the same is found effectuall also with di∣vers, or the juice thereof mixed or boyled with oyle of Ro∣ses and applied to the forehead and temples, both to procure rest and sleepe and to ease the headach of any hot cause: be∣ing eaten raw or boyled it helpeth to loosen the belly, and the boyled more then the raw, which eaten last performeth it the better and was generally so used in ancient dayes which made the Poet Martiall move this question seeing the con∣trary course held in his time. 
Clandere quae caenas Lactuca solebat avorum, Dic mihi cur nostras inchoat illa dapes. Which may be thus, Lettice that earst our Grandsires meales did close, Why it begins, pray tell me whence it growes. It helpeth digestion, quencheth thirst, helpeth to encrease milke in Nourses, and easeth all griping paines of stomacke or bowels that come of Choller: it abateth bodily lust, and therefore both it and Rue are commended for Mo kes, Nunnes and the like sort of people to eate, and use to keepe them the chastes: it represseth also venerom dreames, and applyed outwardly to the Cods with a little Camfire, abuteth the pride and heare of lust which some call the Colterevill; applyed also in the same manner to the region of the Heart, Liver, or Reynes, or by bathing the said place with the juice or distilled water, wherein some white Saunders and red Roses are put also, is not onely a repercussive medicine to stay and represse the heate and inflammations therein, but doth also comfort and strengthen those parts: the same also tempereth the heate of Vrine, Galen adviseth old men to use it with spices to conserve the radicall moysture, and that where spices are wanting to adde Mintes, Rocket, and such like hot Sallet herbes, or else Citron, Lemon, or Orrenge seedes, or the young shootes of them, to abate the cold of the one and the heate of the other. The seede and the distilled water of the Lettice worke the like effects in all things: but the use of the Lettice is chiefly forbidden those that are short winded or have any imperfection in their Lungs or doe use to spit blood; Galen saith it did hurt his teeth and some say it hurteth the sight. 
CHAP. XLIIII. Lactuca sylvestris. Wilde Lettice. O F the wilde Lettice there are two or three sorts to bee declared in this Chapter, wherewith I shall close and finish this Classis of cooling herbes. 
1. Lactuca sylvestris Endiviae folijs odore viroso. Broad leafed wilde Lettice. This wilde Lettice riseth up with foure or five somewhat long and large leaves, smaller at the bot∣tome and broader at the ends being round pointed, unevenly dented about the edges but not cut in or torne at all, of a pale or whitish greene colour, and very like unto the Garden Lettice, or Garden Endive leaves so that it will soone deceive one that never saw it before, which doe soe abide the first winter after the sowing, whether in the Spring or Autumne of the shed seede: but in May following it beginneth to rise up to a stalke, and then those lower leaves will have the middle ribbe on the backe side set full of small sharpe prickes: the stalke hath risen in my Garden to be eight foote high at the least, and as bigge as the thumbe of any mans hand at the lower joynt, somewhat browne and spreading into divers very long branches, whereon are set large leaves like the other but more crumpled, the lower and so to the middle of the stalke set with prickes in the manner of the bottome leaves, but lesser, and higher, somewhat more jagged or divided on the edges, all and every part yeelding plenty of milke being broken, which smelleth strong, very like unto Opium or bitter in taste: the flowers are very small and single somewhat like unto Lettice, but smaller and paler yellow, scarse opening themselves, and scarse abiding also halfe a day open, but turne into downe with small blacke seede therewith very like unto seeke Lettice seede, and is carryed away with the winde: the roote is white long and wooddy when it beareth 
2. Lactuca sylvestris . Wh with jagged leaves. This other wilde Lettice groweth like the last but not so high or great, the first leaves are of a grayer greene colour, smaller and narrower then the other, which so 1. Lactuca sylvestris Endiviae folijs odore viroso. Broad leafed wilde Lettice. 
abide and afterwards gaine thornes or prickes on their back∣sides as the other hath: those that follow are much more jagged then the others, and set with sharpe prickes also, yelding milke as plentifull being broken and as bitter as the former, but doth smell as strongly of Poppie or Opium as the other: the flowers and seede are like it flying away with the winde, but the roote hereof abideth after seede when as the other doth not. 
3. Lactuca sylvestris purpureo flore. Wilde Lettice with purple flowers. This great plant sometimes in moyst grounds riseth up to be foure or five cubits high but usually two or three with a strong great stalke set on each side with leaves smallest at the bottome, and larger as they rise up higher, being largest about the middle of the stalke, and then grow smaller a∣gaine up to the toppe, all of them unevenly waved about the edges, and compassing it at the bottome, of a darke blewish greene colour on the upper side and grayish under∣neath yeelding a milke when it is broken: the flowers stand upon small long stalkes issuing from the joynts with the leaves from the middle upwards, with many flowers on them, consisting of foure darke purple coloured leaves with divers threds in the middle, tipt with a yellow dust &amp; a three forked stile in the midst, which standeth in long purplish greene huskes hanging downe their heads and turne into 2. Lactuca sylvestris laci iata. Wilde Lettice with jagged leaves. 
3. La ca sylvestris purpureo flore. Wild Lettice with purple flowers. 
Downe with smooth grayish seede among it flying away with the winde: the root is thicke and set with nodes in divers places not growing downewards, but spreading forwards, and having long fibres shooting from it which perish not. 
The Place. The two first grow in divers places of our owne Land as well as beyond Sea, the first in the borders of fields and by the hedges and lanes sides of Buckinghamshire, the other on a high banke by the footeway going downe Grayes-Inne-lane unto Bradford bridge and in many other places, the last is found upon hills and mountaines in divers parts of Germany mentioned both by Gesner, Thalius and others, and in Naples also as Columna saith. 
The Time. They doe all flower about Iuly, and their seede ripeneth and is blowne away while it is in flower and hath young buds on it. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Thridacine, and by Dioscorides derived as it is thought quae uti folio ficulneo lactis non expertia sunt, some saith Pliny, lib. 19. cap. 8. called it Endochion, in Latine Lactuca agrestis and sylvestris a lactis copia, because it giveth more store of milke then any of the Endives or Succory doe, or because it causeth milke in women. There is a controversie among our moderne writers what plant should be the true Lactuca sylvestris of Dioscorides, Theophrastus and Galen, some allowing of one that others disprove, for that which Matthiolus setteth forth, Lobel findeth fault withall, calling it Seris domestica. The first is called by Tragus Endivia major, as hee calleth the other Endivia vulgaris, yet hee calleth the same plants in another place of his booke Lactuca sylvestris prior and altera, his later sort being the first here, and his Prima the other. Bauhinus in my minde hath erred in missetting Tragus his Endivia major, both making it a Garden Lettice, calling it Lactuca Endivia folio, and a Lactuca sylvestris also, but how can it be both a Garden and a wilde Let∣tice, the one not having any bitternesse therein nor prickles on the leaves, and the other having both. Lobel cal∣leth it Lactuca sylvestris Scariolae hortensis folio lactuca flore Opij odore, Lugdunensis setteth it downe in the Chap∣ter of Lettice for Lactuca sylvestris vera Dalechampij, and in the 14. Chapter of the same Booke calleth this first Thesion Dalechampij, whereof Pliny out of Theophrastus maketh mention. Camerarius calleth it Lactuca sylve∣stris Anglica odore Opij. The second is called Lactuca sylvestris by Matthiolus, Fuchsius Dodonaeus, Caesalpinus, Thalius and others, Brunfelsius and Tragus as I sayd call it Endivia vulgaris, because generally in all Germa Apothecaries shops it was so accounted and used, taken from the Italians, whose Phisitions not knowing any other permitted the errour, Lobel calleth it Seris domestica altera lact Dioscoridis, and Erici Cordus Sc ri and Serriola according to the received opinion thereof in their time to be Endive. The last is called by Gesner Hortis Lactuca sylvestris flore purpureo, and Sonchus arb r eus p niceo flore, Thali Lactuca sylvestris and Columna, Sonchus montanus purpureus , Tabermontanus maketh it his third Sonchus, and taketh it to be the Liba tis sterilis of Theophrastus which Gerard setteth forth under the title of Erysimum sylvestre, and Bauhinus calleth it Lactuca montana purpuro caerulea major, because he maketh that to be the minor hereof which I call L sana Austriaca. The Italians call this wild kind Lattuga salvatica, the Spaniards Lechuga salvaja and Al∣fo sasa a, the French Laittue sannage, the Germans Wilder Lettick, the Dutch wilde Lattouwe, and wee in English Wilde Lettice. 
The Ʋertues. The wilde Lettice is neare the same propertie of cooling that the Garden kinde is, although the bitternesse therein maketh it the more opening, but not heating even as it is in Succory, Poppie, Opium &amp; the like, whose bit∣ternesse doth rather open a way for the qualities to worke the better, no cold qualitie being powerfull of it selfe, and therefore as Succory, Poppie, or Opium it is more availeable to procure sleepe then the Garden kinde, and to ease them that are given to much watching, which by the seede, the juice or the distilled water drunke or out∣wardly applyed performeth well, the milke of the wilde Lettice gathered and dryed in the Sunne and given in Vinegar distilled is sayd to purge the water of the Dropsie, to provoke womens courses, and to helpe the sting or poyson of the Scorpion and Spider Phalangium: the distilled water of the whole herbe is singular good to quench the thirst in any burning or pestilentiall fever: the said juice dissolved in white wine and a little hony mix∣ed therewith being dropped into the eyes doth wonderfully strengthen the sight, and cleareth them from mistes, clouds filmes or skins growing over them. And as some are of opinion that it may be used in stead of the Garden kinde for any the physicall purposes before mentioned. 
PLANTAE CALLIDAE ET ACRES. HOT AND SHARPE BITING PLANTS. CLASSIS SEPTIMA, THE SEVENTH TRIBE. CHAP. I. Eruca. Rocket. F Rom the cooling herbes I am now come to those that are hot, sharpe, and biting upon the tongue, especially such as are not umbelliferous or more properly belong to ano∣ther Classis. 
There are divers sorts of Rocket, some growing in gardens) whereof I have set forth one in my former booke, which is the most common with us, and called by Camerarius in horto Eruca tertia Anglica, as I take it:) some wilde growing in divers differing pla∣ces, others that grow neare the sea side: to speake of them severally in divers Chapters is the best way, and not to cloy one Chapter with too many sorts. 
1. Erucasativa alba. White or Romane garden Rocket with white seede. The Romane Rocket is a smaller plant than our garden kinde, having somewhat broad leaves cut in on the edges, but not so much nor so deepe, each part being rounder, and round at the end, nothing so hot also or sharpe in taste: the stalke hath some leaves thereon, lesser, and lesse jagged, and beareth white flowers at the toppes, made of foure somewhat long and round pointed leaves, after which come short pods somewhat long and round with a small peece at the end, wherein is contained whitish round seede: the roote is small &amp; perisheth presently after the seede is ripe. Altera se∣mine ni∣grescente. We have an other very like in leaves unto the former, whose stalke riseth three or foure foote high, branched into many parts with the like leaves on them, and large whitish flowers at the toppes of foure leaves apeece, also round pointed, with a blackish line in the middle, of each leafe having slender long pods with small blackish browne seede therein: the roote perishing in like manner.
2. Eruca latifolia. Great Garden Rocket. This large Rocket hath broader and larger divisions at the leaves, and smaller at the ends than our ordinarie garden Rocket, and each part more unevenly dented about the edges, the flowers hereof are more yellow and en∣clining to a gold colour, and the seede smaller and darker in smaller and longer pods. 
3. Eruca maxima Americana. Great Rocket of America. This fruitfull herbe riseth up to a mans height, with a number of rough hairy stalkes branching forth on all sides, and set with divers long and pointed leaves unevenly dented about the edges, somewhat like unto those of Lysimachia Loose strife, but having a small downy hairinesse upon them tasting somewhat sweete at the first but sharpe afterwards, the flowers are many that stand at the ends of the stalkes and branches, consisting of foure yellow leaves apeece, which turne into slender long pods, containing small seede that are sweetish, and there∣fore I have rather placed it here for the mildnesse than with the wilde sorts. 
The Place. Both these former kindes of Rockets are nursed up in gardens in all places and countries, their naturall place be∣ing not well knowne, yet it is thought that the first is originally from the sea side in some country: the other of that sort came to us from Boel by the name of Eruca Aragonica: the last from that part of America which the French possesse called Canada. 
The Time. They doe flower about Iune and Iuly, and their seede is ripe in August. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke obsnavitatem in condiendis obsonijs, and Eruca in Latine, quod vellicando linguam quasi erodat: the Arabians call it Jergir and Ergir: the Italians Ruchetta and Rucola gentile: the Spaniards: Orug E sativa alba. Garden Rocket with white seede. 
3. Eruca maxima Americana. Great Rocket of America. 
and Aruga: the French Roquette: the Germans Rauken and Rockelen: the Dutch Rukette: and we in English Gar∣den Rocket, Romane Rocket, Rocket gentle, and white Mustrad seede. The first is called by Tragus Eruca sive Rucula marina major, by Cordus in historia Erucula major, yet he giveth thereunto long blacke seedes which cannot agree to this, and quoteth Tragus to agree with his, which hath yellowish seede; of Lugdunensis Sinapi hortense &amp; album; and Lobel Sinapi sativum semine albo duplo quam Thlaspi vulgaris majore: there is no other that I know hath expressed this sort, for Matthiolus and others have set forth a garden kinde that beareth yellow flowers, and small browne seede in slender long pods, which Camerarius calleth Eruca Anglica: we doe usually call this Eru∣ca flore &amp; semine albo, to put a difference betweene it and the other: the second is called by Bauhinus Eruca lati∣folia, and mentioned by no other: the last is set forth by Cornutus among his Canada plants. 
The Ʋertues. This Rocket gentle so called from the Italians who by that title of Gentle, understand any thing that maketh one quicke and ready to jest, to play, or to Venery as this herbe doth, or that it is more pleasant and gentle in taste, than the wilde kinde; it is seldome eaten alone but among Lettice, Purslaine, or some other cold herbes to tem∣per each others cold and heate: for as it is said by Galen it procureth head-ach if it be taken alone: it is in a manner wholly spent as a sawse or condiment to meate, to quicken the appetite and to please the palate, or to encrease sperme and Venerous effects, for which purposes Martiall sheweth the effects in these Verses. Et Ʋenerem revocans Eruca morantem. And Columella thus, Iamque Eruca salax foecundo provenit horto. And Ovid Nec minus Erucas jubeo vitare salaces. But as for any Physicall qualitie I know not any it is employed upon, for that the wilde Rockets, as you shall heare by and by, are used for all such purposes, except in the want of the one the other may be taken, but as it is more milde and gentle in taste, so it is also in operation. 
CHAP. II. Eruca sylvestris. Wilde Rocket. O F the wilde Rockets that are more seldome used for sallets or sawse except unto churlish stomackes, and are most spent in Physicall uses, there are divers sorts, as shall be here declared in this Chapter, and the other three that follow. 
1. Eruca sylvestris vulga ior. The more common wilde Rocket. This common wilde Rocket hath longer and narrower leaves much more divided, and into slen∣ and jagges on both sides of the middle ribbe, of a sad over-worne greene colour, from among which ri∣seth up divers stiffe stalkes two or three foote high, some∣times 1. Eruca sylvestris vulgatus. The more common wilde Rocket. 
5. Eruca caerulea. Blew flowred Rocket. 
6. Eruca sylvestris angustifolia. Narrow leafed wilde Rocket. 
set with the like leaves but smaller, and smaller up∣wards, branched from the middle into divers stiffe stalkes, bearing sundry yellow flowers on them made of foure leaves a peece as the others are, which afterwards yeeld small red∣dish seede in small long pods, of a more bitter and hot biting taste than the other, as the leaves are also. 
2. Eruca sylvestris minor parvo flore. Small ill smelling wilde Rocket. This small wilde Rocket doth not much differ from the last but in the smellnesse of the leaves, branches, flowers, and pods, for in all it is lesser, and the leaves, although as much divided, yet into smaller parts, and smelleth nothing well. 
3, Eruca sylvestris minor Bursae pastoris folio. Small wilde Rocket of Mompelier. This is a very small Rocket, the stalke not growing much a∣bove an hand breadth high, and somewhat rough withall par∣ted into small and short branches with a few leaves upon them at the joynts, which are little or nothing divided, but those that grow at the foote of the stalke next the ground, are somewhat long and more cut in on the edges into divers parts, much like the leaves of Shepherdes purse, and rough likewise; the flowers are somewhat large and yellow standing upon long foote stalkes, after which come small seede in small and short pods. 
4. Eruca sylvestris minor incana. Small hoary wilde Rocket. The hoarie wilde Rocket riseth up with divers hoarie or whitish greene stalkes halfe a foote high, and sometimes low∣er, branching forth at the toppes into short sprigges of an inch long, bearing many small yellow flowers which turne into ve∣ry slender and short pods with seede: the leaves at the bottome are many very small cut and jagged, and hoarie over the whi∣tish greene, as those upon the stalkes growing on each side one above another are also. 
5. Eruca caer lea. Blew flowred Rocket. This kinde of Rocket hath the lowest leaves cut in on both sides somewhat like a Rocket, but more like Groundsell in my mind, from among which rise up divers hairy straked stalkes scarce a foote high, bearing rough hairy leaves on them, lesse jagged, and some not at all, shorter also and narrower: at the toppes stand the flowers one above another of an excellent purplish blew colour made of foure leaves, after which come small long smooth pods with small reddish sharpe seedes therein: the roote is long slender and reddish with some fibres thereat. 
6. Eruca sylvestris angustifolia. Narrow leafed wilde Rocket. This plant is doubtfull whereunto it might be referred, in that it participateth of divers plants, namely of the leaves of Tarragon long and narrow of the colour of Rocket; the yellow flowers of wilde Rocket upon stalkes a cubite high with cods of Mustard or Cresses and hot sharpe seede, and the whole face of Erysimum Bancke Cres∣ses, yet the taste of Rocket. 
The Place. Many of these are found wilde in divers places of our Land, although they are recorded by divers Authors to grow in others, yet some of them are strangers to us, and therefore imparted to furnish the gardens of the curious. 
The Time. They keepe the same time to flower and seede that the others doe.
The Names. The first is called Eruca sylvestris by Matthiolus, Lobel, Dodonaeus and others: the second is called by Gesner in c lle stirpium Eruca sylvestris foetida, by Tabermontanus Eruca palustris minor, by Lugdunensis Eruca sylvestris, and Ery veru , and by Gerard Sinapi palustre: the third and fourth Bauhinus hath set forth by the same names are in the titles: the fift Bauhinus hath set forth in his Matthiolus and Phytopinax by the name of Eruca palustris caerulea, and in his Pinax by the name of Eruca caerulea in arenosis crescens: the last is the Eruca sylvestris angusti∣folia of Lobel which Bauhinus calleth Eruca angustifolia Austriaca. 
The Ʋertues. The wilde Rockets are hotter and dryer than those of the garden, more strong and effectuall also to encrease sperme and Venerous qualities whereunto the seede is no lesse effectualll than the herbe; it serveth also to helpe digestion, and to provoke urine exceedingly: the seede is used to cure the bitings of Serpents, the Scorpion, and the Shrew-mouse, and other poysons, and expelleth wormes and other noysome creatures that engender in the bo∣dy. Pliny writeth (but that it is too superstitious to relate) that if one gather three leaves of Rocket with their left hand, and bruise them, and drinke them in mede or honied water, it shall cure the jaundise, and that he that should suffer whipping or beating, by drinking hereof in wine, shall not have any sence thereof or feele any paine, but I wish that Pliny had be one a true relator hereof by his owne experience first, that others might have beleeved him the better: the herbe boyled or stewed, and some Suger put thereto helpeth the cough in children being ta∣ken often: the seede also taken in drinke taketh away the evill smell of the arme-holes or pits, and of the rest of the body, and encreaseth milke in Nurses breasts, and wasteth the spleene: the seede of wilde Rocket mixed with hony and used on the face clenseth the skinne from spots, morphew, and other discolourings therein, and used with Vinegar taketh away freckles and other rednesse hapning in the face or other parts, and used with the g ll of an Oxe it amendeth foule scarres, blacke and blew spots, and the markes of the small poxe restoring the ski to owne colour againe. As both these Rockets, and the former are forbidden to be used alone, in regard their sharpenesse doth fume into the head, there causing each and paine, so they are no lesse hurtfull to hot and chol∣ persons, and to be forbidden them for feare of inflamming their bloud, and therefore for such we may say a little doth but a little harme. 
CHAP. III. Barbarea. Winter Cresses, or rather Winter Rocket. V Nto the Rocket (and not unto the Cresses as the name hereof commonly giveth doth import) by the judgement of the best Herbarists in these dayes pertaineth this Barbarea, whereof there are two sorts more, although untill very lately one onely was knowne. 
1. Barbarea simplici flore. Common Winter Rocket or Cresses. The Winter Cresses or Rocket whether he will, hath divers somewhat large sad greene leaves lying upon the ground tor or cut into divers parts somewhat like unto Rocket or Turnep leaves &amp; nothing like, Cresses with smaller peeces next the bottome, and broade at the ends which so abide all the Winter (if it spring up in Au e when it is used to be either greene or stewed) from among which riseth up divers small round stalkes full of branches, bearing many small yellow flowers of foure leaves apeece, after which come small long pods with reddish seede in them: the roote is somewhat stringie, and perisheth ever after the seede is ripe. 
2. Barbarea flore plano. Double flowred Winter Cresses. The double flowred Winter Cresses differeth not from the former but in the greatnesse of the stalkes which are bigger and crested, yet shorter in the leaves being an inch long cut in on the edges in the same manner, and in the flowers which are double and somewhat larger but yellow as the single, and in the roote which perish∣eth not but abideth many yeares. 
3. Barbarea minor. Small Winter C sses. This smaller fort hath blackish greene leaves somewhat jagged or come on the sides resembling Moth-Mullein, the flowers are yellow and lesse than the former, and so are the ends likewise: the roote hereof perisheth like the first. 
The Place. The first groweth oftentimes of its owne accord in gardens and in the fields also by the pathes and wayes side in divers places, and by name in the next Pasture to the Con∣duit 1. Barbarea simplex. Common winter Rocket or Cresses. 
head behind Grayes-Inne that bringeth water to M r . Lambes Conduit in Holborne: that with double flowers was found in the province of Berne among the Switzers, and the last in Gardens onely both with us and in Germany. 
The Time. They doe all flower in May and the single ones doe seede in Iune and then perish, but the double abideth greene both Sommer and Winter. 
The Names. It hath no Greeke name that I know except it should be the Pseudobunium of Dioscorides which Lobel thinketh should rather be Pseudobunias, for having shewed the difference betweene Bunium and Bunias, the one that is Bunium to bee Bulbocastanum, Earth Nuts, or Earth Chesnuts, and Bunias the Navew: this herbe in the forme of the leaves flowers and seede is like unto the Turnip or the Navew, which is called Bu∣nias or the wilde kindes of eyther: the Latines call it Barbarea, Sanctae Barbarae herba, Nasturtium Barbaricum, and of some Nasturtium hybernum from whence came our English name of Winter Cresses, but as I said being nearer both in forme and qualitie unto a Rocket then unto Cresses, the most judicious have hereunto referred it. Gesner in hortis calleth it Nasturti∣um palustre, and Lugdunensis Eruca palustris, Camerarius Buni∣um adulterinum, Dodonaeus Pseudobunias, Anguilara Scopa regia, and Fuchsius Sideritis latissima, Tragus maketh it his Sinapi 5. genus, and Bauhinus calleth it Eruca lutea latifolia sive Bar∣barea: the second Bauhinus onely hath written of and calleth it Eruca lutea sive Barbarea flore pleno: the last Lobel calleth Bar∣barea minor Herba Sancti Alberti Bononiensium, and so doth Cae∣salpinuus also, Bauhinus putteth it among his sorts of Erysimum and calleth it Erysimo similis laevis laciniata floribus luteis. The Italians and Spaniards are scarse aquainted herewith being more peculiar to these colder climates, The French, high and low Dutch and we doe follow the Latine names, some of Saint Barbary and some of Winter Cresses, or as I sayd before more properly to be called Winter Rocket. 
The Ʋertues. This is somewhat sharpe in taste and withall somewhat binding, whereby it may easily be knowne to bee hot and dry, and is profitable to provoke urine, and helpeth the strangury and to expell gravell and the stone: it is also of good effect in the Scorbute or Scurvey, and may be used for it to very good purpose: it is also found by good ex∣perience to be a singular good wound herbe both to clense inward wounds, the juice or decoction of the herbe to be drunke, or outwardly applied to wash fowle ulcers and sores, clensing them by the sharpenesse and ab ting the dead flesh growing therein, or hindering it from growing therein, and healing them by the drying qualitie: It is used as Rocket or Cresses eaten in Winter when varietie of Sallets are not to be had with as great desire and content as any other for that time. 
CHAP. IIII. Eruca marina. Sea Rocket. O F the Sea Rockets there are three or foure sorts, with notable differences as you may perceive i the succeeding Chapter. 
1. Eruca marina Anglica. English Sea Rocket. The English Sea Rocket (for so I call it for distinctions sake, and that this sort and none of the other groweth on our coasts, although it grow in other countries also) hath divers stalkes, some tray∣ling upon the ground others standing more upright (but brought into Gardens it somewhat varieth the face both in stalkes and leaves) scatteringly set with small long leaves thereon waved as it were on the edges like Ground∣sell or Rocket (but longer and lesser in the Garden) at the toppes of the stalkes grow the flowers, of a pale pur∣plish colour of the fashion of the flowers of Raddish composed of foure leaves, after which come seede fashioned like a wheate Corne (such also it beareth in the Garden) but greater, which are somewhat spongie and not solid, not two joyned together as it is set downe to have by the Sea side, but every seede single by it selfe. 
2. Eruca maritima Cretica. Candy Sea Rocket. The Sea Rocket of Candy hath divers short and narrow rough greene leaves next the roote, cut and divided on the edges into small parts: the stalkes are straked and crooked about halfe a foote long bearing flowers at the toppes (which Bauhinus who giveth us the knowledge thereof hath not set downe) but if it be the same that Lug∣dunensis setteth forth by the name of Eruca maritima, which as he saith M us s out of Spaine as I am ve∣rily perswaded it is, it hath purplish flowers, and three square pods with seede, and after them divers, rough croo∣ked and joynted pods three or foure inches long, containing small reddish seede: the plant is hoary all over both stalkes and leaves. 
1. Eruca marina Anglica. English Sea Rocket. 
3. Eruca Monspeliaca siliqua quadrangula. Square codded Rocket. 
4. Eruca maritima Italica. Italian Sea Rocket. 
 
3. Eruca Monspeliaca siliqua quadrangula. Square codded Rocket. This square codded Rocket hath the lower leaves small, long and narrow, hairy, rough and waved or cut in on the edges like Groundsell or Rocket, from whence rise two or three stalkes that are round, rough and reddish at the bottome set with some lesser leaves, lesse divided then those below, and when it is full of flowers almost not at all: the stalkes are branched at the toppes bearing many small yellow flowers of foure leaves a peece after which succeede small square smooth pods, hard when they are ripe, with a rough sharpe point at the end, and open into two parts, with one brownish seede lying in each part or side, and is turned like a snaile pointed at the ends, and sharpe in taste upon the tongue: the roote is somewhat thicke and white, with some fibres fastned thereto. 
4. Eruca maritima Italica. Italian Sea Rocket. The Italian Sea Rocket hath some long and narrow leaves growing next to the roote, very much and finely cut into divers small parts, having the stalke branched diversly, and set with the like leaves but lesser and lesse divided still up to the toppes, where the flowers being purplish consisting of foure leaves, stand one above another in small huskes, with two points a peece wherein when the flowers are faded and gone stand small pointed heads fashioned like a Speares point wherein is co ned a white kernell: the roote creepeth under ground with some strings but perisheth after it hath borne seede.
The Place. The first groweth on our owne Sea coasts in many places both of Kent and Sussex especially, yet it is not proper onely to our coasts but is found in the like places in divers Countries: the se∣cond was sent by Honorius Bellus from Candy unto Bauhinus as hee saith the dryed plant with seede thereto but no flowers, and therefore I could not expresse them but as I sayd in the de∣scription it is very probable to be the same that Lugdunensis saith My sent from Catalonia in Spaine where it grew, to Lyons: the third groweth about Mompeller: and the last about the Sea coasts of Italy, both Ʋenice and other places. 
The Time. They doe all flower and seede in the Sommer moneths, for they are all but annuall plants and are to be sowe in Gardens in the spring of the yeare. 
The Names. The first is called by Lobel Eruca marina Kakile Serapionis, and so it is also by Anguilara, Camerarius, Col and Lugdunensis; the second is called by Bauhinus Eruca maritima cretica siliqua articulata, and is likely as said to bee the same of Myconus, which Lugdunensis calleth Eruca maritima having three square cods of seed which is a manifest difference from the former: the third is called also by Bauhinus Eruca Monspeliaca siliq quadrangula aechinata which Lugdunensius calleth Sinapi echinatum: the fourth is called by Bauhinus Eruca mari∣tima Italica haste cuspidi simile, and withall maketh the Kakile Serapionis, the Eruca maritima of Lugdunensis, and his Nasturtium maritimum to be all one with it, for which I can see no reason, in that having given the figure thereof in his Prodromus, every one may plainely see it to differ very much in the forme of the leaves from the other, it may well be his Nacturtium maritimum for thereunto it answereth very well as also unto his Eruca cinerea in some part that is in the leaves. 
The Ʋertues. The Sea Rocket is in the same degree of heate and drynesse with the wilde kinds but saltish and are effectuall for the same diseases: moreover Anguilara saith that Kakile (which I call the English Sea Rocket) purgeth ex∣ceedingly, and Myconus affirmeth that his Eruca Maritima doth wonderfully helpe those that are troubled with the Collick, and those that are grieved with the stone or gravell in the Kidnies or Bladder, if they drinke the quantitie of foure ounces of the distilled water warme at a time. 
CHAP. V. Reseda. Base wild Rocket. B Esides the two sorts of this kind of Rocket the greater and the lesser set forth by sundry Authors wee have some others which for their neare affinitie and likenesse are fit to be joyned and entreated of to∣gether. 
1. Reseda major. The greater base wilde Rocket. This greater kind riseth up with divers crested bending stalkes about two foot high, set with ma∣ny and much divided leaves thereon somewhat like unto the lowest leaves of Rocket, of a piercing sharpe sent and taste like unto Cresses and many such like leaves also bushing together at the foot of them: at the toppes of the stalkes grow yellow flowers in long spikes thicke bushing 1. Reseda major. The greater base wilde Rocket. 
together, which opening by degrees at the bottome, spread themselves farther in sunder, and afterwards upon the said short footestalkes come small skinnie cornered swollen cods turning downewards, wherein are contained very small seede: the roote is long and wooddy with divers fibres thereat, and abideth many yeares. 
2. Reseda minor seu vulgaris. Common base wilde Rocket. This other Reseda groweth more upright and not so high, with whiter greene leaves, deepely cut in or torne on the ed∣ges, but each division is broader then the former, the flowers are small and yellow growing on such spikes but shorter. 
3. Reseda Linariae folijs. Narrow leafed base wild Rocket. The stalke of this Reseda is straight and round, about a cubit high, parted into sundry branches, compassed about with long and narrow greene leaves like those of Linaria or Tode Flax: the flowers grow at the toppes of the branches spike fashion, of a yellow colour, after which come cornered seede vessels double forked at the toppes, full stored with pale coloured seedes. 
4. Reseda alba minor. Small white base wilde Rocket. This small Reseda shooteth forth divers whitish greene stalkes not fully a foote high, bearing divers long and narrow hoary leaves lesser then those grow neare the ground, or at the foote of the stalke, which are somewhat broader but not lesse hoary: the flowers are white growing on the like spikes many clustering together, with small greene heads in the middle of every one, wherein afterwards there is small blackish seede conteined: the roote is small long and white with fibres adjoyning unto it. 
5. Reseda affinis Phyteuma Monspeliensium dicta. Loves plant of Mompelier. The lowest leaves of this small plant are small long and somewhat narrow, of a whitish greene colour, and very like to those of Lambes Lettice, the others that grow afterwards and upon the stalks which are weake and tender, about halfe a 2. Reseda minor seu vulgaris. Common base wilde Rocket. 
5. Resedae affinis Phyteuma Monspeliensium. Loves plant of Mompelier. 
foote high and doe almost lie on the ground are cut in, some on the sides a little, and others more divided at the ends resembling a small Valerian leafe: the flowers grow towards the toppes of the stalkes one above another, but not in any spike with a small leafe at the bottome of every one, and are composed of divers white narrow leaves like threads, with many small threds also in the middle set in greene full huskes, the heads of seede are cornered, broad above and smaller below, wherein is con∣tained whitish seede with a shew of a hole or dent in every one of them: the roote is white and somewhat long, divided into sundry small stringes which die every yeare, and raising it selfe againe from the shed seede. 
The Place. The two first are commonly growing in our owne Land in divers waste grounds, both neare London and further of: the others grow on the Pyrenaean hills and about Mompelier. 
The Time. They doe all flower about Iune, and some of them all the Sommer long. 
The Names. Reseda in Latine asedandis doloribus collectiones &amp; inflammationes discutere nomen traxit: for it hath no Greeke name that I know: yet is thought by most to be that Reseda of Pliny which he saith grew about Ariminum, for as Camerarius in horto saith, both the two former sorts grow there now frequently: the first is called by Lobel Reseda maxima, and Reseda major by Thalius and Tabermontanus, Reseda lutea by Lugdunensis, by Camerarius Reseda recta, by Gesner in hortis Reseda quae Sesamoides majus Ghino, Sesamoides magnum, by Lacuna, and Sesamoides alterum by Casalpinus, and Pycnocomon by Anguilara: the second is called by Lobel Resdea Plinij Ne tericorum Eruca pere∣grina Italica and Cantabrica, by Camerarius Reseda supina, by Tabermontanus Reseda latifolia, by Caesalpinus Sesamoides primum, and by Columna Erucago vulgaris: the third is described by Bauhinus by the name of Re∣s ia folijs, and by him thought to agree with the Reseda candida of Lugdunensis, and with the Sesamoides Salme ticum alterum of Clusius: the fourth is called by Bauhinus Reseda alba minor; and by him said to be Clusius his Sesamoides par um Salmanticum, and so doe Lobel, Tabermontanus and Lugdunensis; but as I noted before in the 77. Chapter of the Classis of Vulnerary herbes which is of the Lychnides viscosae: Bauhinus hath much forgot∣ten himselfe in setting downe these small Sesamoides of Clusius making them there to be Lychnides, and here to be Reseda, and therefore I have referred them to these, to whom in my judgement they better agree: the last is cal∣led by Lobel Phyteuma Monspeliensium; and Narbonensium by Lugdunensis, Sesamoides parvum by Lacuna, and Se∣samoides tertium, by Caesalpinus, and as Bauhinus saith Erucago Apula Columnae, but the description thereof in Co∣lumna doth not fitly agree thereto in my opinion. Gerard calleth the two first sorts (for he knew none of the rest) in English, Italian, Rocket and Crambling Rocket, but I thinke it better to call them base wilde Rockets, in that being referred to the Rockets they are base and wilde herbes but clammer not. 
The Vertues. None of our later authours have mentioned any knowne properties, these plants are endued withall more than what may be gathered from the definition of the name which is to ease paines, and to discusse swellings and in∣flammations for Pliny his old wives spell or charme wee daine it not worthy the reciting, but the taste thereof somewhat neare Rocket may induce some such like propertie. 
CHAP. VI. Nasturtium. Cresses. O F Cresses there are divers kindes, and divers sorts of every kinde, some are of the Gardens, some of the Fields or Medowes, some of the Water, some of the Hills or Mountaines. I shall forbeare to speake in this place of those that grow in the Water, having a Classis of water herbes among whom they shall be expressed: I will beginne with those of the Garden, and make them the subject of this Chapter, yet I have in my former Booke given you the knowledge of that which is most common and best knowne, whose figure notwithstanding I thinke not amisse to exhibite here againe to beare his fellowes company, and that thereunder the properties of the rest may be comprehended. 
1. Nasturtium hortense latifolium Hispanicum. Great Spanish Cresses. The great Spanish Cresses hath the first leaves small like Nasturtium hortense. Garden Cresses. 
Basill, among which riseth up a stalke about a foote and a halfe high, set with larger leaves thereon without division, but smal∣ly dented about the edges and pointed at the ends, every one standing upon a long foote stalke, branched from the middle to the toppe with lesser and narrower leaves, like to the toppe leaves of Garden Cresses, from whence breake forth many white flowers set in spikes one above another, after which come brownish seede in pouches like the other Cresses, but much more bitter, and not so fiery sharpe: the roote is small and long perishing every yeare, and therefore must be sowen in the Spring, for although it will spring up quickly from the shed seed, yet it will not abide the cold of our Winters.
1. Cardamine tenuifolia montana. Thin leafed mountaine Ladies Smocks. This mountaine Cardamine or Ladies Smocks hath divers long winged stalkes of smaller and nar∣rower leaves then in the former, a little dented about the edges, from whence spring up sundry stalkes with smaller leaves on them to the toppes, where stand many small yellow flowers in clusters, and afterwards small long pods with small yellowish seede in them, which opening themselves fall out: the roote is small and fibrous creeping upon the ground. 
2. Cardamine Alpina minor Resedae folijs. Small mountaine Ladies Smockes. This small Cardamine sendeth forth from a small long white roote divers weake and leaning stalkes, some a lit∣tle branched and others not at all, set in many places with long stalkes of leaves divided into three foure or five parts or round leaves, somewhat like unto those of Reseda, the base wild Rocket, the flowers that stand at the toppes are small and white, and afterwards give long and slender round pods an inch and a halfe long. 
3. Cardamine Alpina midia Clusii. Clusius middle sised Ladies Smockes. The leaves of this mountaine kind lye in a round compasse upon the ground, very formally being two inches long, made of divers small leaves like unto the other Ladies Smockes, but of a middle sise and more rough and hai∣ry then the other, of a grayish colour on the upper side and greene underneath, the stalke riseth to bee halfe a foote or more high, bearing many white flowers like the others at the toppes, where afterwards stand long pods with seede in them; the roote is white and fibrous. 
4. Cardamine Alpina minima. The smallest mountaine Ladies Smockes. This is a very small and tender plant whose stalkes are not much above an inch long, bearing umbells or tufts of small white flowers on them of foure leaves a peece, the greene leaves are very small, five or seven, set upon a small footestalke on both sides of a middle ribbe as in the rest, very sharpe in taste. 
5. Cardamine Alpina insipida. Vnsavory Ladies Smockes. This hath small long leaves rough and hairy and jagged like the field Mustard, but without any sharpenesse or taste at all in them: the stalke is small and hairy bearing small white flowers, and afterwards small cornered and prickly huskes with very small seede therein: the roote is small and long with few fibres thereat. 
6. Plantula Cardamines alterius aemula Clusii. The Ladies Smocke-like plant. This small plant hath six or seven small leaves lying upon the ground, not much unlike the leaves of the small wilde Daisie, but much more tender, having a little sharpenesse in them: from the middle whereof riseth up a small tender stalke an hand breadth high or little more, with very few and they smaller leaves and small Cardamine Alpina trifolia. Mountaine three leafed Ladies Smocks. 
2. Cardamine Alpina minor Resedae folijs. Small mountaine Ladies Smocks. 
6. Plantula Cardamines alteri a la Clufii. The Ladies Smocks-like plant. 
7. Nast pe . Rocke Cre . 
white flowers at the toppes, after which commeth pods which are somewhat larger and greater then the smal∣nesse of the plant might seeme to give, with small reddish seede therein somewhat sharpe in taste: the roote cree∣peth under ground shooting forth in sundry places. 
7. Nasturtium petraeum bursae pastoris folio. Rocke Cresses. In the leaves of this Cresse consisteth the greatest difference from the others which is small and jagged or cut in on the edges like the leaves of Shepherds purse, for the flowers are small and white, and the seede vessells small and flat like to Thlaspi or Treakle Mustard. 
8. Nasturtium pumilum vernum. Small Cresses of the Spring. The first leaves of this small plant are somewhat round, two or three being set one against another about a middle ribbe as the others are, but those that follow are somewhat longer and more in number: the stalke is scarse a handbreadth long, bearing such small white flowers that they are scarse discerned, after which come very small short and round pods with very small yellowish seede, the roote is small and fibrous: the whole plant is sharpe in taste. 
9. Nasturtium Alpinum capsula Nasturtij hortensis. Mountaine Cresses. This mountaine Cresses hath small and narrow thicke leaves smaller then the nayle of ones hand, and not above two inches high, with such small white flowers on them, and somewhat large powches like to those of Garden Cresses: the roote is somewhat wooddy and fibrous. 
10. Nasturtium Alpinum Bellidis folio majus. Daisie leafed mountaine Cresses. The stalke hereof is smooth and round about a cubit high, branched from the very bottome, the leaves are very thin but of foure inches long, somewhat like to Daisie leaves, those on the stalkes are somewhat waved about the edges and without footestalkes compassing the branches at the bottomes, the flowers are white and stand on a long spike one above another of six inches long, after whom succeede long and slender pods three inches long, containing within them flat round reddish seede. 
11. Nasturtium folijs Barbareae. Winter Rocket-like Cresses. The stalkes of this Cresse are very small, tender and bowing downewards somewhat hairy and divided into some branches of an handbreadth long, some twise that length, and some a cubit high, having many very small and slender greene leaves lying at the bottome of them, divided after the manner of the Winter Cresses or Winter Rocket as I called it before, but with fewer divisions, those on the stalkes are fewer, smaller and lesse divided; the flowers are very small and white, and the pods very slender and long: the roote is small white and threddy. 
The Place. Most of these plants grow upon the Alpes and other hills and mountaines in Germany, yet some of them in Na∣ples as Columna hath made mention. 
The Time. Some of them flower earlier in the Sping then others, and some later. 
The Names. Columna of Naples calleth the first Sium alterum aquaticum luteum sive Carda i tennifolium monta , and Bauhinus Nasturtium montanum luteum: the second is called by Bauhinus Nasturtium Alpinum minus Resola fo∣lio: the third Clusius calleth Cardamine Alpina media, and Bauhinus Nasturium Alpinum minus folijs in wh sparsis: the fourth is called by Clusius Cardamine Alpina minima, by Gesner in Epist Clusius mentioneth it Na∣sturtiolum and Lugdunensis Thlaspi montanum minimum, by Columna Carda pa xatili montana dis , and by Bauhinus Nasturtium Alpinum tenuissime divisum: the fift is called by Columna Carda Alpina inspid , and by Ba Nasturtium A insipidum: the sixt is called by Clusius Plantula Cardamines alterius aemula &amp; Sinopi pu lum Alpinum, and by Bauhinus Nasturtium Bo is folio minus; the seventh is called by Taber∣ and Gerard Nasturtium petraum, and by Bauhinus Nasturtium petraeum folijs bursae pastoris: the eight is called by Banhin Nasturtium pumilum ver : the ninth is called by Bauhinus Nasturtium Alpinum capsula Na hortensis: the tenth and last he also calleth as they are in their titles. 
The Ʋertues. There h not beene any especiall triall made of any of these herbes that I know, but most of them being some∣what sharpe in taste, they are adjudged to be neare of the same qualitie with the former, or rather stronger in that mountainous plants, but I have nothing to affirme for certaine, and therefore let this suffice untill wee can te of them. 
CHAP. IX. Nasturtia sylvestria. Wilde Cresses. T Here is a wilde kinde of Cresses yet to be handled whereof there are not many sorts, one of them is to be found almost in every field, which although it be accounted a very foule weede in a garden, yet it is not amisse as I thinke to place it with the rest.
1. Nasturtium sylvestre Osyvidis folio. Narrow leafed white Cresses. This wilde Cresse bringeth forth many small round and hard stalkes, with divers small round and narrow leaves set without order thereon, branched from the middle upward into many parts, at the toppes come forth a num∣ber small white flowers (yet some have beene found with 1. Nasturtium sylvestre Osyridis folio. Narrow leafed wilde Cresses. 
yellow flowers) one standing above another spike fashion, af∣ter which appeare huskes containing small seede: the roote is wooddy and perisheth after seede time. 
2. Nasturtium sylvestre Ʋalentinum. Spanish wilde Cresser. Spanish wilde Cresses groweth up with a round greene, rough, and hairy stalke about a foote high spreading into bran∣ches from the very ground at every joynt whereof stand long winged leaves very much divided like unto the ordinary gar∣den Cresses but yet more smally parted and sharpe in taste like Cresses: the flowers are many, and of a pale whitish yellow colour standing in long spikes at the toppes, and afterwards small short powches divided into two parts which stand not upright but hang downewards wherein is contained small red∣dish seede like unto Cresses: the roote is long and slender, and perisheth every yeare. 
3. So ia Chirurgorum sive Pseudonasturtium sylvestre. Flixe weede. There is no doubt but that this herbe pertaineth to the family of wilde Cresses, although a bastard sort of them rising up with a round upright hard stalke foure or five foote high spread into y branches, wherein grow many grayish greene leaves very ly cut and severed into a number of short and almost round parts, the flowers are very small and yellow growing ke fashion, after which come very small long pods, with ve∣rie small yellowish seede in them: the roote is long and wooddy perishing every yeare. 
Whereof there is an other sort with somewhat broader leaves and into other thing differing: they have a strong evill savour being smelt unto, and are of a drying taste. 
The Place. The first and the last grow wilde in the fields by hedge sides and wayes, and among rubbish and many other places: the se∣cond was found onely in the kingdome of Valentia in Spaine. 
The Time. They flower and seede quickly after, namely in Iune and Iuly. 
The Names. The first is Thlaspidij genus, and Nasturtium 5. Tragi, Thlaspi angustifol. of Fuchsius and Lug . Thlaspi minus hort. salg. Osyridis folio acorrimū album &amp; luteum of Lobel, Nasturtiū syl, of Thalius, Bursa pastoris minor of Brunfelsius, and Nasturtium sylvestre Osyridis folio of Bauhinus, and may in my minde be accounted a Thlaspi much better yet participateth of both: the second is called by Clusius Nasturtium sylvestre Valenti , and so doth Lugdunensis in following him; but Lobel in altering that title called it E ca Nasturtio cognata tennifolia, and is reprehended by Clusius for so doing; by Lugdunensis also Eruca cinerea, as Bauhinus thinketh, who maketh it also to be the Ia∣ , as is before said, and called this Nasturtium sylvestris Eruca folio: the last is called by some Pseudo∣ stre, by F and Gesner in hortis Nasturtium sylvestre, by Tragus phium Germanicum, and Seriphium alfi (but very erroniously not having any affinitie with Wormewood) by Dodo∣ his French Booke, by Gesner in hortis, by Cor , Lugdunensis, Thali and Tabermontanus Thalietrum or T but not truely: but by Dodonaeus in his Latine Booke, by Lobel and Gerard Sophia Chirurgorum, by 2. Nasturtium sylvestre Ʋalentinum. Spanish wilde Cresses. 
3. ophia Chirur . Flixeweede. 
which name it is now generally called and knowne, by Caesalpinus Accipitrina, who maketh two sorts thereof, as Tabermontanus doth of his Thalictrum, viz. latifolium and angustifolium, Bauhinus calleth it Nasturtium sylvestre tenuifolium divisum. Lobel putteth a doubt whether it be not the Eruca Gelatina of the Italians: the Germanes call it Well samen as they doe Wormeseed, and Saphiakraut after the Latine; the Dutch Fiecrayt, and wee in English Flaxeweede from the effect. 
The Vertues. The two sorts of wilde Cresses are neare the qualities of the other Cresses; but both the herbe and the seede of Flixeweede is of excellent use to stay the fluxe or laske of the belly being drunke in water, or water wherein some gads of steele being heated have beene oftenquenched, and is found also no lesse effectuall than Planta e or Comfrye for the said purpose, and to restraine any other fluxe of bloud in man or woman, to consolidate also broken bones, or out of joynt; the juyce thereof drunke in wine, or the decoction of the herbe drunke doth kill the wormes in the stomacke of belly, as also the wormes that grow in putride and filthy ulcers, and made into salves doth quickly heale all old sores how foule or malignant soever they be: the distilled water of the herbe worketh the same effect although somewhat weaker yet is a faire medicine, and more acceptable to be taken. 
CHAP. X. Sinapi. Mustard. T Here be divers that make some of the Rockets to be kind of Mustard as you have heard before, and there be many also that make some kindes of Mustard to be Rocket: I will endeavour as neare as I can to give each their due title and place, yet of these kindes I have in my former Booke set forth that which is most frequently used to make sawse in this Land, whereof I shall not neede to speake againe. 
1. Sinapi sativum Rapi folio. Broad leafed Mustard. This Mustard hath large and broad rough leaves very much jagged with uneven and unorderly gashes, somewhat like a Turneppe leafe but lesser and rougher; the stalke riseth to be more than a foote high and sometimes two, being round, rough, and branched at the toppe, bearing such like leaves thereon as grow below, but lesser and lesse divided, and divers yellow flowers one above another at the toppes, after which e small rough pods with small lancke flat ends, wherein is contained round yellowish seede greater than T ppe seede, sharpe, hot, and biting upon the tongue: the roote is small, long and woody when it beareth stalkes and perisheth every yeare. 
2. Sinapi sylvestre minus. Small wilde Mustarde. This Mustard is somewhat lesser than the former not rising above a foote high with small jagged leaves more orderly placed somewhat like those of the Shepheards purse, but more smally gashed, the flowers are yel∣low and the seede brownish like the former but not so sharpe. 
3. Sinapi parvum Monspeliense. Small Mustard of Mompelier. This small Mustard is the least of them all growing not above a spanne high, with small bending branched stalkes, and small pale yellowish flowers at the toppes, which afterwards give small long and slender rough pod winged on the sides or edges, with very small seede therein: the lower leaves are somewhat broad, cut into ma∣ny parts, but those on the stalkes have very small cuts lesser than the smallest leaves of Rocket somewhat hot and sharpe in taste. 
1. Sinapi sativum Rapifoli . Broad leafed Mustard. 
2. Sinapi sylvestre minus. Small wilde Mustard. 
5. Sinapi marinum Aegyptium. Egyptian Sea Mustard. 
 
4. Sinapi agreste Neapolitanum. Wilde Mustard of Naples. This Neopolitane Mustard from a small whitish fibrous roote shoo∣ eth forth many rough greene leaves cut into divers parts, some∣what like unto the leaves of the greater Celandine, but lesser and more pointed at the ends: the square stalke is divided into sundry branches, bearing at the toppes divers small purplish flowers con∣sisting of foure leaves a peece set together as it were in an umbell or tuft, after which rise small pods of two inches long a peece, with yellowish seede within them, which quickly breake their vessells and spill, not onely by ones touch, but by the shaking of the winde, so that it is hard to gather the ripe seede.
5. Sinapi marinum Egyptium. Sea Mustard of Egypt. I call this a Mustard (saith mine Author) because it hath larger leaves than Rocket, and might seeme to be the Eruca maxima Mi∣c i of Lugdunensis, but hath not any bitternesse therein as his hath: nor is it the Kakile Serapionis commonly called Eruca marina which hath a nitrous taste in it when as this hath a very sharpe taste: the roote hereof is long, white, slender and wooddy; having one or two reddish round stalkes, not standing upright but a little bending, branching forth into other, with a few winged leaves thereon, that is made of many fine long sappie leaves on a side, a little dented about the edges, in both colour and smell, comming nearest to Rocket; at the toppes of the stalke come forth blewish flowers in fashion of Sto ow flowers which turne into small long pointed pods, containing small smooth round seede of a very sharpe taste and smelling like Rue. This is very like the Eruca caerulea set forth before. 
The Place. The first is not found wilde with as but in Gardens onely, but the second, as well as that which is spoken of in my other booke, are found often in the borders of fields, as also in the low villes and surrowes of them; the o∣ther three are strangers to us, the one being of Mompelier, the other of Naples, and the last of Egypt. 
The Time. All these Mustardes are but annuall plants flowring in Iuly, and their seede ripe in August. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Sinapi, and so doe the Latines call it also, and Sinapi : but Athaneus saith that the A∣thenians called it , and Aristophanes in Equiti saith of Cleomenes when he was angry, . Conspexit Sinapi &amp; frontem contraxit. The Arabians call it Cardel, the Italians Senape, the Spaniards Mostarde and Mostaza, the French Sen and M ∣starde, the Germanes Seneff and Seuff, the Dutch Mostaerte, and we in English Mustard. The first is called of Lo∣bel Sinapi sativum Erucae ant Rapifolio, of Cordus upon Dioscorides, and of Lugdunensis Sinapi bortense, of Dodonaeus Sinapi sativum prius, of Camerarius Sinapi album differing from Eruca s ine albo, of Bauhinus Sinapi rapifolio, Sinapi Dioscoridis &amp; Theoprhasti, Sinapi alterum Plinij: the second is called by Lobel Sinapi sylvestre minus bursa pastoris folio, by Dodonaeus and Lugdunensis Sinapi sylvestre, and is the third Sinapi of Matthiolus, Durantes, and Caesalpinus, Tragus calleth it Eruca sive Rucula marina minor, and Sinapi novum; Fuchsius Eruca sati , Turner Eruca hortensis, and Gesner in hortis Eruca sylvestris: the third is called by Bauhinus Sinapi parvum siliqua aspera: and the fourth Columna calleth Sinapi alterum agreste nostras: and Bauhinus Sinapi umbella purpurea: the last is so so called by Alpinus as is in the title. 
The Vertues. Mustard seede especially the common sort is hot and drie in the fourth degree (but the white seede and the o∣ther small sorts are not so hot) and hath the vertue of heating, discussing, rarefying and drawing forth splinters of bones or other things out of the the flesh. The condiment or sawce is of great use, for in a manner the whole en∣crease of the ground is spent there about to season or sharpen the meats, both of fish and flesh that are eates either by the rich or poore: the said Mustard is of good effect to bring downe womens courses, and for other hystericall diseases, and for those that are Epilepticke or Lethargicke, that is troubled with the falling sicknesse or lethargie, drousie, forgetfull, evill, to use both inwardly and outwardly to rubbe the nostrills, the forehead and temples, to warme &amp; quicken those dull spirits that are as it were asleepe or almost dead; for by the fierce sharpenesse it pier∣ceth to the braine and purgeth it by sneesing and drawing duwne rheume &amp; other viscous clammy humors which by their residence doe much offend, or by their distillation upon the lungs and chest procure coughing, and there∣fore with some honny added thereto doth much good therein. Our ancient forefathers even the better sort in the more simple, and as I may say the more healthfull age of the world, were not sparing in the use hereof, for with∣out doubt they found it much conducing to their health by warming the stomacke and helping digestion, by clen∣sing the braine, lungs and breast of rheume and flegme: but now a dayes it is seldome used by their successours be∣ing accounted the clownes sawce, and therefore not fit for their tables; but is transferred either to the me ny or meaner sort, who therefore reape the benefit thereof. The decoction of the herbe, but the seede is the more usu∣all and effectuall made in wine and drinke provoketh urine, resisteth the force of poison, the malignitie of Mush∣romes, and the venome of the Scorpion or other venemous creatures, for it suffereth not the virulencie thereof to pierce to the heart, and vitall spirits, thereby to overthrow life, but mastereth it in the way if it be taken in time: the same also taken before the fits of agues doth by warming the bloud and spirits, keepe backe and lessen the cold fits, thereby altering the course and curing the disease: the seede also taken either by it selfe or with other things, either in an Electuary or drinke doth mightily prevaile to stirre up bodily lust, being taken also in the same man∣ner it helpeth the spleene and paines in the sides and gnawings in the bowels, and used as a gargle, it helpeth the Vvula or pallate of the mouth when it is fallen downe and fasteneth it, and also dissolveth the tumours &amp; kernells about the throate in the Kings evill, especially if it be also applied outwardly thereto: being chawed in the mouth it oftentimes helpeth the tooth-ach: the outward application hereof upon the pained place of the Sciatica doth much helpe to discusse the humours, and to ease or lessen the paines, as also for the goute and other joynt-aches, and is much and often used to ease paines in the sides or loynes, the shoulders or other parts of the body, upon the applying thereof to raise blisters, and by drawing the paines to the place from the inward or more remote, cureth the disease or diverteth it to those outward places where locall medicines may helpe: it is also used to helpe the falling of the haire: the seede bruised mixed with hony and applied, or made up with waxe, taketh away the markes and blacke and blew spots and bruises of beatings or the like, the roughnesse or scabbednesse of the skin in any place, as also the leprosie, and lowsie evill: it helpeth also the cricke in the necke, or that disease when one can∣not turne their heads, but they must turne their whole body with it. The distilled water of the herbe when it i in flower, is much used both inwardly to drinke to helpe in any the diseases aforesaid, or to wash the mouth for the Vvula, or the kernells and tumours of the throate, but outwardly also for the scabbe, itch, or the like infirmities, and clenseth the face and skinne from freckles, spots, morphew, or other deformities thereof. The Italians use to keepe a drie condiment or sawce made of Mustard seede to use upon all occasions, suddenly made fit to be eaten, which it is likely they learned from Dioscorides who taught his to keepe Rocket seede good for a long time, by beating it and making it up with vinegar and milke into balles to be dried: for they much after the same manner appoint two ounces of Mustard seede to be taken, and halfe an ounce of good Cinamon well beaten to be made up into balles or cakes with hony and vinegar, which being dried in the Sunne are to be kept untill use be to be made thereof, which then relented with a little vineger is made into sawce presently, very delicate and pleasing to the palate and stomacke. 
CHAP. XI. Irio sive Erysimum. Hedge Mustard. T Here are divers sorts of this Hedge Mustard more knowne at this time then formerly hath bin, being found out by divers diligent and experienced searchers of herbes, as you may perceive in the suc∣ceeding discourse. 
1. Irio sive Erysimum vulgare. The common wilde Hedge Mustard. The common Erysimum groweth up usually but with one blackish greene stalke, tough or limber, easie to bend but not to breake, branched into divers parts, and sometimes with divers stalkes, set full of bran∣ches whereon grow long rough or hard rugged leaves very much cut in or torne on the edges into many parts, some bigger and some lesser, of a durtie greene colour: the flowers are small and yellow that grow at the tops of the branches in long spikes flowring by degrees so that continuing long in flower, the stalkes will have small round cods at the bottome, growing upright and close to the stalke, while the toppe flowers yet shew themselves, in which are contained small yellow seede, sharpe and strong as the herbe it selfe is also: the roote groweth downe slender and wooddy, yet abiding and springing therefrom every yeare. 
2. Erysimum alterum siliquis Erucae. Broad leafed hedge Mustard. This hedge Mustard riseth up with two or three darke greene stalkes, somewhat like the former but not so much branched, set on all sides with large darke greene leaves, cut into three or foure parts, with almost equall gashes on each side, but the end is the largest, somewhat unevenly waved or dented about the edges thereof: the flowers are small and yellow, yet greater then the former, whose spikes are not so long, neither doe the long and round pods of yellow seede stand so close to the stalkes, nor are so small but shorter like to those of Rocket: the roote is not so long or wooddy but more fibrous continuing but a yeare. 
3. Erysimum verum sive montanu . The true hedge Mustard. The leaves of this Erysimum are of a fresher greene colour then either of the former, smaller also, and cut in on both sides into more but smaller parts, resembling the divisions on the leaves of Dandelion but very small, each part or corner looking downewards, from among which rise up sometimes two or three stalkes, but more usually but one, round, and about halfe a yard high, thicke set with such leaves but smaller and full of branches to the toppes, all along which come forth very small yellow flowers with smaller leaves with them, after which fol∣low whitish yellow small cods growing close to the stalkes, conteining within them small yellow seede, nothing so strong or sharpe as the first, yet somewhat quicke upon the tongue the roote is small and perisheth after seede∣time, but by sowing it selfe never misseth to be in the ground where it hath once seeded. 
4. Erysimum latifolium Neapolitanum. Broad leafed hedge Mustard of Naples. This Neapolitane hedge Mustard hath many small long and smooth greene leaves lying in a compasse upon the ground, divided or cut after the manner of the wilde Rocket (which we call our ordinary Garden Rocket) but with smaller and lesser divisions, the middle ribbes being white, the stalke that riseth from among them, for it 1. Iri sive Erysimum vulgare. The commonwilde hedge Mustard. 
3. Erysimum verum sive montanum. The true hedge Mustard. 
4. Erysimum latifolium Neapolitanum. Hedge Mustard of Naples. 
6. Erysimo s li hirsuta pl . An hairy hedge Mustard with uncut leaves. 
seldome beareth more then one is about two foote high, set with the like leaves but lesser and lesse divided up to the toppe, and with longer ends more pointed, of a strong sent and bitter sharpe taste, the flowers are many set together, small and yel ow, with longer spikes more like to Mustard then Rocket, after which come longer and thicker cods about two inches long, small and round not closing the stalke like the last, but spreading somewhat further off, wherein is small yellow seede, nothing so sharpe as the leaves: the roote is long and white, stronger and hotter then either leaves or seede and most neare unto Mustard. 
5. Erysimum angustifolium Neapolitanum. Narrow leafed hedge Mustard of Naples. The lower leaves of this hedge Mustard are long and narrow, somewhat hairy but soft, of a pale greene co∣lour, cut in or torne on the edges, and pointed very like unto the common hedge Mustard here first set downe, but those that grow up higher upon the stalke, which is seldome more then one about a yard high and rough, are smaller and with fewer divisions branched from the middle upwards, and sometimes from the very bottome, bearing the smallest yellow flowers at the toppes of all the rest, after which come small long pods set on all sides of the branches and standing upright, thicke and blunt at the toppes with small yellowish seede in them not very sharpe. 
6. Erysimo similis hirsuta planta. An hairy hedge Mustard with uncut leaves. This hairy hedge Mustard-like plant hath many leaves lying on the ground clustering together, each whereof is rough, hairy, and whitish, an inch and a halfe long, unevenly dented about the edges, and some a litttle more deepely cut in, from whence rise up sometimes many stalkes, and sometimes but one, rough, hairy and reddish at the bottome, with some few lesser leaves set thereon compassing them at the bottomes: the flowers stand spike fashion at the toppes of the stalkes, which are sometimes branched made of foure small white leaves, and after them rise straight long cods with small seede in them. 
The Place. The first is very frequent in our Land by the wayes and hedge sides and sometimes in the open fields: the second is more rare to meete with, yet is sometimes found but still in the better grounds which maketh it so large: the third is found wild in Italy as Matthiolus saith in the like places with the first: the fourth and fift are of Naples as Columna saith: the last groweth upon stones and rubbish and upon old mudde walles at Bassil, Mompelier and other places. 
The Time. These doe flower sometimes late and sometimes earlier, but most usually in Iuly or thereabouts. 
The Names. The Greeke name is Erysimum a foliorum multiplici sectione sic dictum a quibusdam putatur ab alijs quasi pretiosum, neither of which seemeth so likely as quod ob suam caliditatem attrahendi sacultate praeditum est: in Latine also Erysimum and Irio quod acrimonia sua irruit in gustum. This is the Erysimum of Dioscorides and not of Theophrastus, for hee placeth his Erysimum inter fruges among the sorts of Cornes or Gaynes as shall be declared both when we come to speak of them, &amp; somewhat also in the Chapter of Myagrium following: Galen doth acknowledge both sorts, for of this kind he speaketh in 6. simplicium medicamentorum, and of the other in primo de alimentorum facultatibus: Pliny also speaketh of them Lib. 18. cap. 7. and lib. 22. cap. 25. but in the end confoundeth them both together: for in the former place he saith Estiva frumenta diximus Sesamum, Milium, Panicum, and after huic scilicet Sesamo simili est in Asia Graeciaque Erysimum, idem{que} erat nisi punguius esset, quod apo nos vocant Irionem, medicaminibus potius annumerandum quam frugibus. And in the other place hee saith Iri m inter fruges Sesamae simile esse diximus, and a Graecis Sesamum vocari: est autem fruticosum folijs Eru∣ce ioribus tamen, semine Nasturtij, this being the description of Dioscorides his Erysimum and the other of Theophrastus. The first is called Hierabotane faemina of Brunfelsius, Verbena faemina and Sinapi septimuni of Tra∣gus, Sinapi alterum sylvestre of Fuchsius, Erysimum Sinapi sylvestris species of Gesner in hortis. Irio of Matthiolus, Cordus in Diosco. L iceru , Lugdunensis and Caesalpinus, Irio sive Erysimum of Lobel: Cleone Octavij Horatij of Anguilara, and Erysimum vulgare of Bauhinus: the second is Tabermontanus his second Erysimum whose Figure Gerard hath placed for Eruca sativa. Bauhinus calleth it Erysimum alterum Erucae siliquis: the third is the Irio alter of Matthiolus, Lugdunensis and Camerarius, Erysimum verum of Anguilara, Dentillaria alia Irio aliquibus of Gesner in Hortis, Irionis tertia species of Caesalpinus, and Saxifraga Romanorum of Lugdunensis according to his description, but the figure is transposed to a contrary place under the other title of Saxifragia aurea, Bauhinus calleth it Erysimum polyceration vel corniculatum, but is generally called by most herbaristes with us Erysimum ve∣rum sive tanum: the fourth is called by Columna Irio laevis Apulus Erucae folijs, and by Bauhinus Erysimum lati∣folium majus glabrum, and was sent him as he saith by the name of Rapistrum Hispanicum non descriptum, I have entituled it Erysimum latifolium Neapolitanum: the fift is called by Columna Rapistrum montanum Irionis folio, but by Bauhinus Erysimum angustifolium majus: but in this as in many other, Bauhinus doth much forget what he had written but two or three leaves before in his Pinax, for he setteth this for a Rapistrum among the other sorts of Rapistrum but it cannot be an Erysimum and a Rapistrum both, for so to doe were to make a confusion unsufferable and too farre unfit so worthy a man as he was, or any other that would be accounted of any worth in his judge∣ment. The last is called by Bauhinus Erysimo similis hirsuta non laciniata alba, and was called as he saith Barbarea muralis by his brother Iohn Bauhinus. The Italians call it Erisimo and Irione, the Spaniards Rinchaon, the French Velar and de la torteille, the Germans Hedericke and Wilder Senff, the Dutch Edel Rakette, and in English by Ge∣rard Banke Cresses, but because I finde the most judicious to make it a kind of wild Mustard, I have thereupon en∣tituled it wild Hedge Mustard. 
The Ʋertues. The three first sorts of Erysimum as the most in use and effectuall doe temperately heate, consisting of a thinne substance, cutting and clensing with some moyst parts joyned therewith, whereby it doth not dry the thicke and viscous flegme but maketh it easie to be spit forth, for it is singular good in all the diseases of the Chest and Lungs, hoarsenesse of the voyce, and by the use of the decoction thereof for a little space those have beene reco∣vered perfectly well, who had utterly lost their voyce and therewith their spirits also almost: the juice thereof made into a Syrupe or Lohoo with hony or Sugar, is no lesse effectuall for the said purpose, and for all other coughes wheesings and shortnesse of breath: the same also is profitably taken of those that have the Iaundies, the Plurisie, paines in the backe and loynes, and for torments and wringings in the belly or in the Colon, which is called the Collicke being used also in Glisters: the seede is held to bee a speciall remedy against poyson and ve∣nome. It is singular good for the paines in the hippes or huckle bones, called the hippe Goute or Sciatica, the Goate also and all joynt aches, as also for Fistulaes, hollow Vlcers, and eating or running Cankers, and for Apo∣stums, sores, and Cankers in the mouth or throate or behind the eares, and no lesse also for the hardnesse and swel∣lings in womens breasts or in the testicles or stones.
CHAP. XII. Thlaspi. Treakle-Mustard. V Nto the Cresses, Rockets, and Mustards perteine these herbes called Thlaspi, Treakle-Mustard as comming nearest unto them both in forme and qualitie, whereof there are found at this day so ma∣ny sorts more then the former ages ever knew, that I must with these as I have done with many other such herbes that yeeld a plentifull varietie, distribute them into sundry rankes or orders, that so they may be both better described and apprehended. 
Thlaspi arvense. Treakle Mustard of the Fields. 1. Thlaspi Drabae folio. Treakle Mustard with broad flat Powches. This kinde of Thlaspi riseth up with a hard round stalke about a foote high, parted into some branches, ha∣ving divers soft greene leaves somewhat long and narrow set thereon, waved but not cut in on the edges, broadest towards the ends and somewhat round pointed: the flowers are white that grow at the toppes of the branches spike fashion one above another, after which come large round powches, parted in the middle with a furrow, having one blackish browne seede in eyther side somewhat thicker and larger then in any other of the Thlaspies that I know, somewhat sharpe in taste and smelling of Garlick, especially in the fields where it is naturall, but in Gardens, neither so sharpe nor smelling of Garlicke as others have expressed it, for any thing I could ever perceive by it my selfe: the rootes are small and threddy perishing every yeare. 
2. Thlaspi Mithridaticum sive vulgatissimum Vaccariae folio. Mithridate-Mustard. This Thlaspi groweth higher then the former spreading more and longer branches, whose leaves are smaller and narrower sometimes unevenly dented about the edges; the flowers are small and white growing on long branches, with much smaller and rounder seede vessells after them, and parted in the middle in the same manner 1. Thlaspi Drubae folio. Treakle-Mustard with broad flat powches. 
2. Thlaspi Vaccaria folio. Mithridate-Mustard. 
3. Thlaspi majus. Great Treakle-Mustard. 
6. Thlaspi villosum capsulis hirsatis. Hairy Treakle-Mustard. 
with smaller browne seedes therein then in the former, and much sharper in taste: the roote perisheth after seede time but abideth the first winter after the springing. 
3. Thlaspi majus. Great Treakle-Mustard. The great Treakle-Mustard hath larger, smoother and broader leaves then the last, somewhat pointed at the ends: the flowers are small and white like the other, standing at the toppes of the stalkes which are two or three foote high, with divers branches on them: the seede vessells are round, and set with browne seene therein: the whole plant is of a strong unpleasant sent and taste. 
4. Thlaspi Vaccariae folio Monspeliacum. French Treakle-Mustard. The leaves hereof are somewhat like the leaves of the second kind being smooth and of a darke greene colour, the flowers are small and white also that grow on the stalkes which are about halfe a yard high: the seede vessells are somewhat broad at the head like unto those of Shephards-purse but greater. 
5. Thlaspi vaccariae incano folio minus. Small hoary French Treakle-Mustard. The creeping or bending branches of this Thlaspi are all hoary over, scarse rising a handbreadth high, whose leaves are hoary also somewhat long and narrow without any footstalke unto them but set thereon without order on each side, having small white flowers on a short spike and small seede vessells following. 
6. Thlaspi villosum capsulis hirsutis. Hairy Treakle-Mustard. The stalke of this Thlaspi is about a foote long round and hairy, at the bottome whereof grow divers hairy leaves somewhat long and broad set upon long footestalkes, but those that are upon the stalke have no footestalke but compasse it at the bottome, being pointed at the ends and somewhat dented about the edges, the flowers stand at the toppe spike fashion made of five white leaves a peece, after which succeede flat hairy powches parted as others are with reddish sharpe seede within them. 
7. Thlaspi arvense p rfoliatum majus. The greater Treakle-Mustard with Thorough wax leaves. The lower leaves hereof that lie upon the ground are small and somewhat round like those of Bassil, but yet a lit∣tle rent or torne on the edges at the bottomes, where they are smallest and a little dented about the other part, of a grayish greene colour, every one upon a small footestalke, among which riseth up a round stalke purplish at the bottome about a foote high sometimes spotted, whereon grow single leaves one above another at the joynts by certaine distances, which compasse it at the bottome in the manner of Thoroughwax leaves, and whereat like∣wise come forth other smaller leaves upon short branches, whereon and at the toppes of the stalke stand divers small white flowers that break forth out of reddish huskes, after which appeare small flat powches like unto those of Shepherds purse parted in the middle, as is usuall with most of the Thlaspies, on each side whereof lye small flat yellowish seede: the roote is long white and wooddy, the whole plant is more milde or lesse sharpe then others. 
8. Thlaspi perfoliatum minus. The smaller Treakle-Mustard with Thoroughwax leaves. This other Thlspi hath a few leaves lying on the ground, which are of a grayish greene colour, like both for 7. Thlaspi arvense perfoliatum majus. The greater Treakle-Mustard with Thoroughwax leaves. 
8. Thlaspi perfolialum minus. The smaller Treakle-Mustard with Thoroughwax leaves. 
9. Thlaspi arvense minus lateum. Yellow field Treakle-mustard. 
12. Thlaspi inca um mari um Hispanicum, Eruca peregrina Clusi. Spanish hoary Treakle-Mustard. 
forme and colour unto the leaves of Brassica campestris Codded Thoroughwax, but much lesser, those that grow up higher upon the stalke, which is scarse a foote high, and but a few set thereon are smaller, pointed at the ends, and broad at the bottomes compassing it like the last, the flowers are small and white and the seede vessells flat like the Candy kind, somewhat sharpe pointed. 
9. Thlaspi arvense minus luteum. Yellow field Treakle-Mustard. This hath sometimes but one stalke and at other times many set thicke with small long hoary and hard leaves, with a great long tuft of yellow flowers at the toppe, made of five leaves a peece, after which follow flat round yellowish powches, swelling in the middle, containing within them browne seede: the roote is small and long and dyeth every yeare. 
10. Thlaspi spanospermon Americanum. The spare bearing Thlaspi. This Thlaspi brancheth from the roote divers wayes somewhat thicke, set with long fat greene leaves some∣what like that of Mechlin: the toppes of the branches are without leaves, but stored infinitely with small yellow∣ish flowers of foure leaves which endure onely one day, falling away for the most part without bearing fruit or seede or very sparingly, so that on the whole plant there will be scarse foure or five huskes of seeds gathered any yeare which are flat and a little long like to those of the manured Woade, with a sharpe tasted seede within, the root is hard with many fibres thereat, and tasteth sharpe like Cresses. 
11. Thlaspi incanum marinum Hispanicum, Eruca peregrina Clusio. Spanish hoary Treakle-Mustard. This small Spanish (or Italian ) plant sendeth forth sundry slender round hoary stalkes about two foote high with many long and narrow leaves at the bottome, a little unevenly waved about the edges, narrowest at the bottome and broader to the ends, of a grayish greene colour or rather hoary, with a great ribbe in the mid∣dle of a sharpe taste, the upper leaves on the stalkes being smaller then the lower, with some pale yellow small flowers at the toppes, made of foure leaves a peece dented in the middle, after which succeede somewhat round and full seede vessells parted in the middle as many other sorts of Thlaspi are, with a small point at the end, containing therein many browne reddish flat shining sharpe seede: the roote is white and somewhat long, thick at the toppe with many fibres downewards.
The Place. Divers of these sorts of Mustard have beene found in sundry places of our owne Land, especially the first and se∣cond, as halfe a mile from Hatfield by the river side under an hedge as you travell to Hatfield, and in the streete of Peckam on Surrey side, &amp;c. the other sorts grow some in Germany, some at Mompelier. 
The Time. They flower and seede some earlier and later then others, even from May unto August. 
The Names. The Graecians call it and Thlaspi and Thlaspe, quod fructus quasi infractus, and also Thla∣spi quasi fructum clypeatum and Sinapi agreste quod Sinapi acrimonia resert: the Latines keepe the Greeke name for the most part and call it Thlaspi, yet some do call it Capsella and Scandul aceum, Nasturtium tectorū and Sinapi sticum: the Italians call it Thlaspi: the French Seneve Savage: the Germans wilde Kerse; the Dutch Bo∣erens Kers and we in English Treakle-Mustard, or Mithridate-Mustard, because the second sort, especially above any other is that Thlaspi that the best do allow for the truest Thlaspi to be used in Treakle and Mithridate. The first i called by Lobel Thlaspi Dioscoridis Drabae and Chamaeline folio, &amp; Scorodo-Thlaspi by Dodonaeus and Lugdunensis; and is the second Thlaspi of Matthiolus, called Platycarpon by Camerarius, and by Bauhinus Thlaspi arvense siliquis lau: the second Lobel calleth Thlaspi vulgatissimam Ʋaccariae folio, whose figure is the same with the first of Mat∣thiolus, and differeth much from that which Bauhinus setteth forth in his Matthiolus by the name of Thlaspi vulga∣ta Camerarius calleth it Thlaspi verum cujus semine utimur in Theriaca: by Cordus in historia Thlaspi Cardamoides, by Tragus Thlaspi, and vulgare Thlaspidion, and by Bauhinus Thlaspi arvense incano folio majus: the third is the Thlasp of Tabermontanus and Gerard, which Bauhinus first setteth forth by the name of Thlaspi arvense Ʋac∣carie l lavi{que} folio, but afterwards in his Errata appointed it to be amended &amp; made Acetosaefolio in stead there∣of: the fourth is called by Bauhinus Thlaspi Vaccariae folio bursae pastoris siliquis: the fift is also called by him Thlaspi Va c in folio minus: the sixt is also called by him Thlaspi villosū capsulis hirsutis: the seventh is called by Lug∣dunensis Thlaspi primum Dalechampij, by Tabermontanus Thlaspi oleraceū, because it is almost without taste, by Bau∣hinus Thlaspi arve se perfoliatum majus, who quoteth it to be Columna his Thlaspi alterum minus rotundifolium bursae pastoris fractu; and yet Columna in his discription thereof maketh no mention of persoliating in the leaves, Gerard also hath mistaken this in calling it Thlaspi incanum which belongeth to incanum Mechliniense: the eight is called by Cl si Thlaspi pumilum, and Thla pi montanum minus, but by Bauhinus Thlaspi perfoliatum minus: the ninth is called Alyss by Matthiolus, and Anguilara, &amp; Alyssum Matthioli by Lugdunensis and Camerarius, by Lobel Thlaspi Gra : by Lugdunensis Alyssum minus Dalechampij; by Tabermontanus Thlaspi minus clypeatum, by Bes∣lerus in b Eystet si Polium Alpinum flore luteo, Bauhinus maketh two sorts thereof calling them Thlaspi Alexandrinum campestro majus &amp; minus, and yet saith they are so like that they may be both accounted one sort You see I have referred it rather to the Thlaspi than any other as nearest resembling it, and to this ranke of field Thlaspi which is the proper place of the growing: the tenth is so called by Cornutus in his history of Canada plants: the last is called by Clusius Eruca peregrina, and so doth Lugdunensis, but Lobel inverteth the name cal∣ling it Leucoium marinum Patavinum, but Clusius misliking it, holdeth still his owne, and Bauhinus more encli∣ning to Lobel than him (for his loves sake to Padoa as it seemes) calleth it Leucoium incanum utriculo rotundo: but because both herbe and seede is hot and sharpe, and so are not the Leucoia generally, I have thought it more fit to joyne it to the Thlaspies. 
The Vertues. The most of these sorts of Mustards are hot and drie in the fourth degree, or very neare like unto Cresses, for they are sharpe and quicke in taste, and are heating, rarefying, attracting and purging: It is set downe by some authors to purge the body both upward and downewards, and that if any exceede a due proportion it will scoure unto bloud, but how truly I know not in that I never heard of any to make triall thereof in that manner: it is said to procure womens courses so forcibly that it suffocateth the birth: being taken inwardly it breaketh inward apo∣flums and used in glisters helpeth the Sciatica, the seede applied outwardly doth the same. It is an especiall in∣gredient into Mithridatum and Treakle, for it is held to be of it selfe an antidote resisting poyson, venome and pu∣trefaction besides the acrimony it addeth to the composition. It is also availeable in many of those causes that Mustard is used but somewhat weaker. 
CHAP. XIII. Thlaspi Ʋmbellatum. Vmbelliferons Treakle-Mustard. A Nother kind of Treakle-Mustard beare their flowers in tufts and round umbells, and not in spikes, of some whereof I have spoken in my former booke, that is, the Thlaspi Candiae, Candy tufts, both with white and purplish flowers, as also a Spanish kinde not set forth by any before. 
1. Thlaspi Creticum album umbellatum majus. Great white Candy Mustard. This Candian plant hath divers hard and small stalkes, bearing a few long and narrow pointed smooth leaves, set on them one above another up to the toppes, where the white flowers grow in broad round tufts, somewhat larger than in that sort is expressed in my former booke: the seede vessels that follow are greater also with a pointell in the middle of them: the roote is small and threddy, and endureth divers yeares not dying as the other doth. 
2. Thlaspi umbellatum arvense Iberidis folio. Variable flowred Mustard. The leaves hereof are somewhat long and narrow, cut in or deepely dented about the edges, more than those of Candy Mustard: the flowers grow in tufts or umbells like thereunto but of mixed colours, that is white and purple usually, and sometimes wholly white, and in others yellowish but much more rare: the seede is like the Can∣die kinde. 
3. Thlaspi umbellatum Creticum flore albo odorato Sweete Treakle Mustard with a white flower. This white Candy Mustard is smaller, and groweth lower than the first; bushing thicke with smaller and nar∣rower leaves dented onely at the ends; the flowers are white but smaller than they, and smelling very sweete, after which follow such like powches with yellowish seede in them: the roote perisheth yearely. 
4. Thlaspi umbellatum Nasturtij folio Monspelianum. Mompeliers umb lleferous Mustard. The stalkes of this Mustard are many and greater than in the other before, bearing many more jagged leaves on them resembling those of the common garden Cresses: the flowers are white in spikie rundles or umbells at the toppes which give smaller seede than the others but as sharpe as any of them. 
The Place. Some of these grow about Mompelier, and the greater number in Candy, and but in gardens with us. 
1. Thlaspi Creticum album umbellat majus. Great white Candy Mustard. 
2. Thlaspi umbellatum arvense Iberidis folio. Variable flowred Mustard. 
3. Thlaspi umbellatum Creticum flore albo odorato. Sweete Treakle-Mustard with a white flower. 
4. Thlaspi umbellatum Nasturtij folio Me pet. Mompeliers umbilliferous Mustard. 
 
The Time. They flower and seede about the same time that the Candy kindes doe, expressed in my former booke, which is usually not untill Iuly. 
The Names. The first Bauhinus calleth Thlaspi Creticum flore albo majus, and I thinke it to be the Thlaspi Narbonense Cen∣t lifolio of Lobel, which as he saith the Italians and Matthiolus accounted an Alyssum: the second is taken to be the Thlaspi Allobrogicum of Clusius; and the Thlaspidij aliud genus vel tertium Trugi, the Thlaspi amarum of Ta∣ba and the Nasturtium sylvestre of Lugdunensis, which Bauhinus entituleth Thlaspi umbellatum arvense I orid folio, as I doe: the third is the fourth Thlaspi of Clusius called parvum odorato flore, which Bauhinus calleth Thlaspi umbellatum Creticum flore albo odore minus: the last is called by Lobel Thlaspi alterum minus umbellatum N st ij hortensis folio Narbonense, which Lugdunensis and Tabermontanus doe both remember, the one by the name of Thlaspi aliud umbellatum Pona, and the other by the name of Thlaspi Narbonense umbellatum. 
The Ʋertues. The vertues of these herbes are to be referred to the former, for being almost as sharpe they cannot but worke the like effects, yet in a weaker manner, and therefore thus much shall be sufficient for them. 
CHAP. XIIII. Thlaspi Montanum. Mountaine Treakle-Mustard. T He next kinde of Treakle-Mustards that are to be spoken of, are those that grow upon high hills and mountaines and in rockie stonie places. 
1. Thlaspi montanum Glastifolio majus. Clusius his Hungarian Treakle-Mustard. This Thlaspi riseth up with divers small but strong stalkes a foote or more high, set at distances with long and somewhat broad leaves, compassing it at the bottome as the Brasica campestris doth, and neare unto the same colour, greene above and grayish underneath smelling somewhat like onto Garlike, as those also doe that lie upon the ground: the flowers are many and 1. Thlaspi montanum Glastifolio majus. Clusius his first Hungarian Treakle-Mustard.
white plentifully growing at the toppes without any sent, which afterwards give hard and flat powches, not parted as o∣thers are, but whole and round sticking forth in the middle like a buckler, in the middle whereof lieth but one seede, the roote is bushie and full of strings and fibres that continue many yeares. 
2. Thlaspi montanum Glasti folio minus. The small Treakle-Mustard of Baden. This hath a great many small leaves lying on the ground round about the roote, very like unto the blew Daysie, full of juyce, and of a darke blewish greene colour, among which rise up di∣vers stalkes about a foote high, bearing thereon many leaves longer and more pointed than the lower, and at the toppes sun∣dry white flowers one above another, which afterwards bring flat powches like those of Shepheards purse: the roote is long white and fibrous. 
3. Thlaspi montanum, semper virens: Evergreene Mountaine Mustard. The stalke of this Thlaspi is somewhat great and wooddy, co∣vered from the roote upwards to the branches, with a brownish rugged barke set with divers long white leaves at sp e s, some∣what like to those of Stocke-Gillow flowers but smaller and ve∣ry quicke and sharpe in taste: at the toppes of the branches which are many and much dispersed stand tufts of white flowers, ter which come such like husks as are in the common Thlaspi, and such like seede in them very hot and sharpe: the roote spreadeth it selfe into many branches and perisheth not, but abideth with the stemme also above ground uncorrupted ma∣ny yeares. 
4. Thlaspisaxatile rotundifolium. Mountaine Treakle-Mustard with round leaves. This mountaine Thlaspi hath rising from a small long yellow∣ish roote many small weake bending stalkes a foote high, shoo∣ting forth fibres at the joynts as they lie next the ground, where the leaves grow small and somewhat round, from the upper joynts spring forth small naked branches an hand breadth long, bearing a few pale coloured flowers, and after them small pods upon very slender foot stalkes, wherein is contai∣ned very small seede. 
5. Thlaspi Alpinum minus capitul rotundo. Small mountaine Mustard with round heads. This small mountaine Thlaspi hath from among many small short leaves, that grow next the ground being pointed at the ends, lightly dented about the edges, and every one on a short foote stalke, divers tender stalkes rising up about a foote high, branched at the toppes, and bearing a few narrow long leaves on them, and small white flowers above them, after which follow small round seede vessells divided by a small skinne into two parts, standing upon very slender foote stalkes with small yellowish sharpe seede within them: the roote grow∣eth somewhat great at the toppe and smaller downewards. 
2 Thlaspi montanum Glastifolio minus. The smaller Treakle-Mustard of Baden. 
3. Thlaspi montanum semper virens. Evergreene mountaine Mustard. 
5. Thlaspi Alpinum minus capitulo rotundo. Small mountaine Mustard with round heads. 
11. Thlaspi montanum luteum majus. The greater yellow Thlaspi. 
13. Thlaspi Veronicae folio. Treakle Mustard with Speedewell leaves. 
14. 15. Thlaspi montanum Vermiculato acuto folio: &amp; alterum carnoso rotundo folio. Treakle Mustard with very small and pointed leaves, and another with small thicke leaves. 
 
6. Thlaspi Alpinum majus capitulo rotundo. The greater mountaine Mustard with round heades. The greater kinde hath divers heads or tufts of somewhat longer leaves next the ground, from the middle of each whereof riseth up a bigger stalke, set with narrow leaves up to the toppes, where they branch forth and beare such like white flowers and round heades with seede, as the lesser kinde doth but larger: the roote likewise is somewhat great. 
7. Thlaspi Alpinum repens. Creeping mountaine Treakle Mustard. This for all Thlaspi hath many small branches creeping by the ground of foure or five inches long with some few leaves there are somewhat round set without order on them, and at the toppes many white flowers somewhat large and great, in whose places afterwards come small flat powches, containing seede in taste like unto Rocket: the roote is small and long. 
8. Thlaspi parvum saxatile flore rubente. Small reddish flowred Treakle-Mustard. The roote of this Thlaspi is white and long, from whence come three or foure round upright yet weake stalkes, with very small thicke and round leaves at the bottome, not much broader than the fruit or seede vessells them∣selves, of a pale greene colour, and those that grow up higher smaller and narrower up to the toppes, where the flowers made of foure leaves apeece, stand in tufts many set together of a pale reddish or blush colour, striped with veines of a deeper red rising out of reddish greene huskes being the outer flowers, which as a crowne com∣passe the tufts, for from the middle rise other flowers afterwards upon long foote stalkes, and flat seede-vessels after they are past with sharpe seede in them, but the rootes and leaves are bitter. 
9. Thlaspi saxatile Polygala folio. Mountaine Thlaspi with Lentill-like leaves. The stalkes of this Thlaspi rise to be about a foote high having small leaves on them in forme like unto Polygala or Milkeworte, but much smaller or rather like unto those of the pulse we call Lentills (and in some countries Tilles) that is somewhat longer than round: the flowers are many small and white perking on the toppes of the stalkes, which afterwards give small round seede vessells, parted in the middle with very small seede therein. 
10. Thlaspi montanum luteum majus. The greater yellow Thlaspi. From a small long roote spring forth sundry weake branches scarce able to stand upright, set with divers small long and somewhat narrow leaves a little hoary without order, somewhat like unto Serpillum Mother of Time: at the toppes grow many small yellow flowers set together in a tuft or umbell something large, where afterward stand small seede vessells with very small seede in them. 
11. Thlaspi montanum luteum minus. The lesser yellow Thlaspi. The leaves of this Thlaspi are small somewhat long and narrow, pointed at the ends like unto the last, but smaller, rough and hoary withall, the stalkes are browne leaning downe to the ground rough and hoary likewise, bearing many flowers at the toppes of them somewhat larger than the last, and of a deeper yellow colour almost like the Wall-flower, every leafe being round pointed, and cut in in the middle making them seeme like hartes which doe not stand in round tufts or umbells but in short spikes, after which come rough and hoary round seede vessels, with a pointell sticking forth in the middle of every one of them, and containing one flat round yellowish seede in them: the roote is small and long and springeth new leaves and stalkes every yeare: this hath but little sharpenesse in it. 
12. Thlaspi Veronicae folio. Treakle-Mustard with Speede-well leaves. This Thlaspi hath divers leaves lying next the ground rough or hairy and almost round, of the bignesse of the nayle of ones thumbe, and of a deepe greene colour every one upon a short footestalke, somewhat resembling th leaves of Speedewell: the stalke is hairy halfe a foote high branching usually from the bottome, and somewhat without branches, set with very few leaves that compasse them at the bottomes and bearing at the toppes small white flowers and after them small round and long pods upon small footestalkes one above another spike fashion, containing in each a small brownish yellow seede, somewhat sharpe in taste: the roote is white and long. 
13. Thlaspi montanum vermiculato acuto folio. Treakle-Mustard with very small and pointed leaves. From a great white hard roote rise sundry thicke and short riveld stalkes above a span long, thicke set with very small leaves without order, being narrow and almost round, &amp; pointed at the ends, somewhat hairy about the edges and of a sad greene colour, but smaller upwards unto the flowers at the toppes which grow many bushing together in a large umbell, consisting of foure white or somewhat reddish leaves, the under couple being greater then the upper with some yellow threds in the middle: the seede followeth in broad round flat powches, hol∣lowed in the middle like a Spoone on that side next the stalke and bunching or bellying forth on the outside, flat also at the head, with a seame in the middle as is seene in many sorts of these Thlaspies which is flat and yellow in both the sides.
14 Thlaspi montanum carnoso rotundo folio. Treakle-Mustard with small thicke leaves. The roote of this small Thlaspi is long, smooth, white and hard, from whence spring divers reddish stalkes, set thicke with small leaves that are fleshie, and not much broader then the powches with seede, of a blewish greene colour, yet smaller and narrower up to the toppes, where the flowers stand in a small round tuft of a blush colour striped with reddish lines or strakes: after which come smaller flat pouches a little dented at the toppes and pur∣plish with small seede in them like the other but lesse. 
The Place. All these Mustards grow on hills and in rocky stony places in severall Countries, yet some of them are found in our owne Land in the like stony places. 
The Time. They all for the most part flower and give their seede in the Sommer moneths, yet some sooner or neare the Spring. 
The Names. The first of these is called by Lobel, Camerarius, and Tabermontanus Thlaspi Pannonicum Clusii, by Clusius himselfe Thlaspi primum vel montanum peltatum, and by Bauhinus Thlaspi montanum Glasti folio majus: the second is the second Thlaspi montanum of Clusius, called also by him Thlaspi Badense, by Lobel and Tabermontanus Thla∣spi album supinum, Columna mentioneth it under the title of Thlaspi montanum primum bursae pastoris fructu, which Bauhinus calleth Thlaspi Alpinum Glasti folio minus according to his correction in his Appendix: the third is Lugdunensis his Thlaspi montanum candidum, and called by Bauhinus Thlaspi montanum semper vireus: the fourth Bauhinus onely maketh mention of by the name of Thlaspi saxatile rotundifolium: the fift is called by Camerarius in his Epitome upon Matthiolus and in horto, Thlaspitertium saxatile, and by Bauhinus in his Matthiolus Thlaspi saxatile minore folio, but in his Pinax and Prodromus, Thlaspi Alpinum minus capitulo rotundo, and by Pona in his description of Mount Baldus Thlaspi petraeum Myagroides: the sixt is the third Thlaspi saxatile of Matthiolus, which Lugdunensis and Thalius doe also mention, but Thalius his description thereof is much differing from it, and Camerarius upon Matthiolus saith hee never found that sort among rockes and stony places, but in the fields and under hedges, and therefore in his Matthiolus he setteth forth that figure of that which grew with them, and omitted the other of Matthiolus, Bauhinus afterwards saith that such an one as Matthiolus set forth was brought him out of Italy and therefore he giveth the figures of them both in his Matthiolus and Prodromus by the title of Thlaspi Alpinum majus &amp; minus capitulo rotundo, the seaventh is called by Bauhinus onely Thlaspi Alpinum repens: the eighth is the Lithothlaspi quartum carnosofolio of Columna and called by Bauhinus Thlaspi par vum saxatile flore rubente: the ninth is called by Bauhinus Thlaspi saxatile Polygalaefolio according to the correction in his Appendix, folio 519. at the latter end of his Pinax, but is among his Thlaspies folio 107. Vermiculato folio: the tenth is Lobel his Thlaspi supinum luteum which Bauhinus entituleth Thlaspi montanum incanum luteum Serpillifolio majus, as hee doth the eleventh Thlaspi saxatile incanum luteum Serpillifolio minus, and is the Ionthlaspi luteo flore montanum of Columna: the twelfth is called by the learned of Mompelier, Thlaspi Veronica folio, and as Bauhinus saith is the Draba minima muralis Dioscoridis of Columna, and yet hee maketh it to be a Burso pasturis also, calling it major loculo oblongo, but Columna saith it hath a sharpe taste like a Draba but so hath not Bursa pastoris: the thirteenth and the last are mentioned by Columna under the same titles here expressed. 
The Ʋertues. These sorts of Thlaspi also as they are all or the most of them of the like sharpenesse in taste unto the former, so they may bee of the same qualities in operation but no speciall properties being set downe by any author that have made mention of them nor other private experience, I cannot speake further concerning any of them. 
CHAP. XV. Thlaspi clypeatum. Bucklet-like Thlaspi or Treakle-Mustard. A Fourth kind of Thlaspi is to be spoken of, whose difference from others consisteth chiefly in the seede vessells which are formed somewhat like a buckler, and thereof taketh the name, of which we have not many to entreat, but as they are they shall here follow. 
1. Thlaspi clypeatum Hieracifolium majus. The great Buckler-Mustard. This Thlaspi hath divers long leaves lying next to the ground, somewhat like unto those of common Hawkeweede, but lesser and unevenly dented or rather waved about the edges, and a little hairy also, among which rise up two or three weake trayling stalkes, with a few leaves thereon much smaller then those below, without any dent or incision in them at all, at the toppes they spread a few branches, whereon are set many pale yellow flowers made of foure leaves a peece, which after∣wards give flat round powches divided as it were into two round parts like bucklers, the footestalke standing be∣tweene them, and ending in a small pointell, in each side whereof is conteined one seede of little or no sharpe at all: the roote is small and slender perishing every yeare. 
2. Thlaspi clypeatum asperum minus. The lesser Buckler-Mustard. This other or lesser Buckler-Mustard hath lesser leaves but more rough and hairy then the former, deepely dented about the edges, and from them riseth a small weake stalke, divided at the toppe into two or three bran∣ches, set with narrow leaves and small yellowish flowers, made of five leaves a peece at the toppes one above ano∣ther spike fashion, where afterwards stand small Buckler-like heads, and pointed in the same manner as are in the former but smaller as the seede is also: the roote is small and perisheth. 
3. Thlaspi biscutatum villosum flore calcari donato. Spurre flowred Buckler Thlaspi. The leaves of this Thlaspi that lye on the ground next the roote are about two inches long &amp; halfe an inch broad, cut in on the edges into deepe gashes being hairy and of a light hoary greene colour: the stalke is likewise hoary and hairy of a cubit high, set with such like torne leaves but lesser and compassing it about at the bottome bran∣ched at the toppe and bearing large pale yellow flowers consisting of foure leaves a peece, with a small heele or spurre behind like unto those of Todeflaxe, with a small pointell and some threads about it in the middle standing in rough huskes, after the flowers are past appeare such like buckler-like seede vessels as are in the former, parted into two sides, with a pricke in the middle betweene them standing forth: the roote is thicke and long of the big∣nesse of ones little finger of a taste betweene sweet and sharpe, but the leaves and seede much more sharpe and bi∣ting upon the tongue. 
4. Thlaspi clypeatum minus Serpillifolio. Small Buckler-Mustard with wild Time leaves. This is a very small herbe not above foure or five inches high whose lower leaves are as small as those of Mo∣ther of Time, of a whitish yellow greene colour, those on the stalkes are like the other but smaller, and thickly 1. Thlaspi clypeatum Hieracifolium majus. The greater Buckler-mustard. 
5. Thlaspi clypeatum arborescens Creticum. The great Buckler-mustard of Candy. 
set thereon, the flowers are small and yellow like the last, and so are the seede vessells but cleare and transparent like cleare Parchment somewhat yellowish: the taste whereof is small like the first. 
5. Thlaspi clypeatum arborescens Creticum. The great Buckler- Thlaspi of Candy. This hath the lower part of the stalke thicke short and wooddy, the branches rising from thence are of cubits length and wooddy also, with two hoary thicke leaves set all along the branches, many of them turnin one way, bearing at the toppes sundry small white flowers, and after them round flat huskes, resembling old f ¦shioned Bucklers among the Venetians, with small round flat seede within them, and somewhat sharpe: th roote is thicke, short and wooddy, with divers strings and fibres thereto. 
The Place. Some of these sorts are naturally growing about Mompelier and the parts not farre off, some also about Napl as Columna relateth, and the last in Candy as Alpinus saith. 
The Time. They flower and give their seede about the same time that the others before set downe doe, or some∣what later. 
The Names. The first is called by Lobel Thlaspi parvum Hieracifolium sive Lunaria lutea Monspeliensium, by Clusius Thlaspi clypeatum, by Camerarius Thlaspi biscutatum vel Lunaria bisulcuta, by Lugdunensis Lunaria lutea Dalechampij, by Thalius Leucoium montanum primum, by Columna Lencoium Alyssoides umbellatum montanum, by Taber Thlaspi clypeatum minus, but in Gerard the figure is misset, the greater in stead of the lesser as the descriptions de∣clare, and by Bauhinus Thlaspi biscutatum asperum Hieracifolium majus: the second Columna calleth Iundraba Alyssoides Apula spicata and by Bauhinus Thlaspi biscutatum asperum minus: the third Columna calleth Le ium montanum flore pedato, referring it rather to Leucoium then to a Thlaspi, although the seede vessells are farre diffe∣ring, but Bauhinus contrariwise maketh it a Thlaspi as it doth most fitly thereunto agree, and calleth it Thlaspi biscutatum villosum flore calari donata: the fourth is called by Lobel Thlaspi alterum minus Clypeatum Sorpillifolio, by Lugdunensis Thlaspi minus clypeatum Penae, by Columna Thlaspi minimum spicatum lunatum, by Caesalpinus Luna∣ria Graeca quarta, and by Bauhinus Thlaspi clypeatum Serpillifoliom: the last is so named by Alpinus in his booke of exoticke plants as it is in the title. 
The Ʋertues. There is none of these herbes of halfe that fiercenesse or sharpenesse that many of the others before are, neyther is any of them used in Physicke that I know for any purpose, but serve onely as varieties in nature to please the curious. 
CHAP. XVI. Thlaspi fruticosum. Shrubby, bushie, or wooddy Treakle-Mustard. A Fift kind of Thlaspi is of those that grow greater then the rest and more wooddy like a small bush, whereof there are some varieties here to be expressed. 
1. Thlaspi fruticosum Leucoij folio latifolium. The broader leafed wooddy Treakle-Mustard. This broad leafed wooddy Thlaspi riseth up with a wooddy round stalke halfe a yard high bearing thereon long pale greene leaves like unto those of the Stock-Gilloflower but shorter, and narrower the flowers that stand at the toppe are somewhat large and of a pale whitish yellow colour, after which follow seede vessells made like shields parted into two parts, as many other of the for∣mer sorts are. 
2. Thlaspi fruticosum Leucoij folio angustifolium. Narrow leafed wooddy Treakle-Mustard. This other wooddy Thlaspi spreadeth with many branches thicke set with narrow long leaves, very like unto the lesser Sea Leucoium: the flowers at the top are white standing many together in short spikes, which turne in∣to small flat seede vessells like unto the rest: the roote is white long and wooddy spreading much under ground.
The Place. The first flowreth and seedeth plentifully both in the naturall places, and whether it is transplanted in the Sum∣mer moneths: but the second, as is said was not knowne: the last as comming out of an hotter climate is some∣what more tender and hard to be kept a Winter, for it beareth not the first yeare, and hardly the next but very late. 
The Names. The first is called by Lobel Thlaspi hederaceum, and so doth Lugdunensis, and others that have made mention thereof since; Bauhinus calleth it Thlaspi repens hederae folio: the second is called by Lobel Lunaria Magorum Ara∣bus, as he saith the Italians doe call it: Bauhinus calleth the last Thlaspi Alexandrinum being so called by Cor∣tusus who sent the seede. 
The Ʋertues. There hath no triall beene made of any of these sorts by any that I know, and therefore thus much shall suffice to have spoken of both of those and the others before, for I intended not to invent receipts of those things I men∣tion, but to relate what I have reade or knowne to be practised. 
CHAP. XVIII. Draba sive Arabis. Arabian Mustard. A S nearest both in forme and qualitie unto the Thlaspi is this herbe Draba which I have Englished Arabian Mustard for want of a fitter name, for although the Latine or Greeke name (whether ye will, or neither if ye will) may seeme to 1. Draba vulgaris. The more common or knowne Arabian Mustard. 
urge an Arabian originall, yet we find that it is as an adulterate a Greek name as a La∣tine, and not thought to be of Dioscorides his owne setting downe, but intruded by others into some copies of his, because others that are more authenticke have it not at all: the ancients have mentioned but one sort, but these later times have produced divers others, which have beene so called of the likenesse in some parts, unto the most knowne and common. 
1. Draba vulgaris. The more common or knowne Arabian Mustard. This Arabian Mustard from a creeping white roote shooteth up in divers places many straight straked stalkes set about with grayish greene leaves, somewhat broad and not very long, a little pointed at the end, and broad at the bottome compassing them, but those that grow at the foote of them have every one a short foote stalke and dented unevenly about the edges: the toppes of the stalkes are spread into many branches, all of them rising to an e∣quall height, with many small whiteflowers set thereon of foure leaves apeece, forming a large tuft or umbell, where after they are past stand small round seede vessells, divided into two parts like some of the former Thlaspies with a small ll at the end, containing in each part one seede somewhat sharpe as the leaves are a little also: this by the creeping rootes maintaineth it selfe in the Winter and perisheth not. 
2. Draba minor capitulis orbicularibus. The smaller Arabian Mustard. This smaller sort hath divers hairy leaves rising from the roote somewhat dented about the edges, and standing upon long foote stalkes, from among which spring up a small slender stalke about an hand breadth high, having a few leaves much longer and narrower set thereon, and from the middle thereof plentifully stored with small branches and round heads on them (for the flowers have not beene observed) parted by a thinne skinne containing one seede in each part: the roote is reasonable great for the smallnesse of the plant, with small fibres annexed thereunto and living many yeares. 
3. Draba tenuifolio. Thinne leafed Arabian Mustard. From a small long white roote rise brittle short stalkes about a foote long, with small branches towards the toppes, set with a few pale greene leaves of two inches long and one broad, dented about the edges and compos∣sing them at the bottome, of a fierie hot and sharpe taste: the flowers stand at the toppes as it were spike fashion, small and white, which afterwards give small round heads every one set upon a long foote stalke. 
4. Draba alba siliquosa repens. The more creeping codded Arabian Mustard. This more creeping square codded Arabian Mustard sendeth forth many heads of leaves compassing one ano∣ther circlewise, thicke full of juyce somewhat broad, dented about the edges and of a darke greene colour, sharpe and pricking upon the tongue, and from the midst of them severall weake stalkes a foote or more long, upon whom grow smaller leaves and broader at the bottomes where they compasse them, set at severall distances, at the toppes whereof come forth divers white flowers in a small tuft standing one above another, more separate as they flower, making a long spike, and give small long and round coddes, which parting into two parts; shew the small reddish seede within them cleaving to each side: the roote is small and creepeth spreading farre about. 
5. Draba alba siliquosa minor. The lesser codded Arabian Mustard. This smaller sort hath divers branches of leaves rising from the roote which lying on the ground or a little cove∣red with earth shoote forth small fibres whereby it creepeth farre about: the leaves are broad at the point and smaller at the bottome, dented into some deepe dents or notches, the greatest whereof are lowest, of a grayish greene colour which so abide the first Winter, and then somewhat earely before the beginning of Summer follow∣ing, from among them rise sundry upright slender hairy stalkes halfe a foote high, set with lesser leaves which compasse the stalkes at the bottome, after which come slender long and round coddes, like to those of the ordinary Mustard, containing within them in a double row small reddish seede: the roote is small and white, sending forth such like branches of leaves yearely abiding all the Winter after. 
6. Draba Erysimi flore &amp; siliquis. Bastard Arabian Mustard. This small plant hath divers such like branches of hairy whitish leaves lying about the roote, slightly dented a∣bout the edges, every one on a small footestalke, from among which rise up weake and slender stalkes, set with the like leaves and sundry small yellowish flowers at the toppes, whom small long coddes doe follow, contai∣ning small sharpe seede: the roote is of the bignesse of a finger, white and long, set without, or with very few fibres. 
7. Draba lutea. Yellow Arabian Mustard. The last plant is not so small as this is great, shooting forth square, but weake stalkes, foure or five foote long or more, not able to stand upright, but lie on the ground oftentimes, set orderly with long and somewhat broad greene leaves, a little hairy and dented about the edges, spreading many long branches, all of them stored 4 Draba alba siliquosa repent. The more creeping codded Arabian Mustard. 
5. Draba alba siliquosa minor. The lesser codded Arabian Mustard. 
6. Draba Erysimi flore &amp; siliquis. Bastard Arabian Mustard. 
7. Draba lutea. Yellow Arabian Mustard. 
with very small yellow flowers, growing scatteringly at the toppes with some small leaves among them, which turne into very slender and limber long pods, with very small yellowish seede in them very sharpe and biting up∣on the tongue: the roote groweth to be very great and somewhat wooddy, very strong and fierce both in smell and taste, abiding under ground many yeares, but loosing all stalkes and leaves above ground every yeare. 
8. Draba flore caeruleo galeato. Hooded Arabian Mustard with blew flowers. For some likenesse unto Draba is this plant referred thereunto, although in many things much differing: the roote consist of many long white strings and fibres like unto the Asclepias Swallowort, of an hot but aromaticall and spicy taste, which usually sendeth forth but one stalke, yet sometimes two, straight smooth and straked, about halfe a yard high, spread into some few branches, bearing hoodded blew flowers like those of Orchis or Dogs stones of an inch long, standing on each side of them to the toppes: the lower greene leaves are about two inches long and scarse one broad smooth and dented about the edges, but those that grow up higher and but few upon the stalkes are narrower and more pointed. 
The Place. The first Clusius saith he found as plentifully about the borders of the fields at Ʋienna, as others have done in other places, and so likewise the fourth and fift, the second being not mentioned where it grew, the third was found about Bononia: the sixt Lobel saith groweth not farre from Mompelier: the seaventh at Tubing neare the river Nectar about Heidelberg and Bornis in Rhaetia among the Switzers: the last is naturall in certaine places of Narbous in France. 
The Time. They doe all flower in the moneths of Iune and Iuly and their seed ripeneth in the meane time. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and some in Latine Arabis and Draba but from whence deduced it is not yet found out, although Lobel and Pona doe gliesse much thereabouts: for divers writers have observed, that this herbe was never knowne to Dioscorides nor mentioned by him, but thrust into the text as I said before by some later writers, for neither Galen nor Oribasius who both followed Dioscorides method, and wrote most of the same things make any mention thereof at all, no more doe Aetius nor Paulus Aegineta who in the same manner and order write of the same herbes with Dioscorides, no nor Pliny neither who wrote out of Dioscorides the most of his plants yet Cordus thinketh that Pliny meaneth this plant under the name of Driophonon: besides it is twise sat downe at some Greeke copies that are manuscripts, first in the Chapter next unto Thlaspi in his second booke, and then at the end of the same booke betweene Glastum and Telephium, yet howsoever it is, the herbe so named is well knowne now a dayes, and accepted by that name among all the moderne writers of herbes, and although Do∣donaeus mistook this and thought the Thlaspi creticum to be it, yet others soone found his errour &amp; avoided it. Serapio calleth it Nasturtium Orientale: the first is generally called Arabis and Draba vulgaris by all Authors, and Nastur∣tium Babilon by Lobel, Bauhinus calleth it Draba umbellata, vel Draba major capitulis donata: the second is cal∣led by Clusius Draba minor and by Bauhinus Draba minor capitulis orbicularibus: the third is called by Bauhinus Draba tenui veluti spicata: the fourth is called by Lobel Draba vel Arabis altera and so by Lugdunensis, and E n muralis by him also, by Clusius Draba tertia succulento folio, and by Bauhinus Draba alba sili∣quosa repens, who thinketh it may be the Planta siliquifera Thlaspeos generibus cognata of Thalius, but Thalius himselfe thinketh it may agree with Lobel his Sinapi and Thlaspi media planta: the fift is Clusius his Draba secun∣da which Bauhinus calleth Draba alba siliquosa: the sixt is that Sinapi and Thlaspi media Provincialis planta of Lobel whom Lugdunensis followeth &amp; Bauhinus calleth Draba Erysimi flore &amp; siliquis: the seventh is mentioned by Camerarius, both in his Epitome upon Matthiolus &amp; in his Hortus medicus also, by the name of Arabis quorand m floribus is, and saith it may more fitly agree thereunto then unto the Solidagines, by which name he received it of England, which maketh me much to suspect that this Draba lutea is the same herbe that wee doe usually here in England call Solidago Sarasenica and Germanica siliquosa, it doth so nearely answer it in every part, which was also well knowne to Gerard in his time, although mentioned by him in a contrary place from the Solida Sarasenica, namely in the Chapter of Epimedium Barren-wort, where hee compareth the cods of Epinodium the cods of Sarasens consumed, meaning this plant and not that which he had described before for Bal dago Sa ¦nica, whose seede he saith is blowne away with the winde. Bauhinus in his Matthiolus calleth it Draba , and in his Pinax Draba lutea strictissimis siliquis: the last Bauhinus hath onely mentioned by the name of Draba flore caeruleo galeato, which as I sayd doth hardly or very little agree unto any Draba.
The Vertues. The Arabian Mustard being as sharpe in taste as any Thlaspi, is accounted to be hot and dry, and thereby to b as effectuall to all the purposes that Thlaspi or Cresses serve unto, and as it is in Dioscorides if the Chapter be hi is used in stead of Pepper to put among broths and meats, and also being boyled with Ptisane, is availeable as tough flegme that sticketh in the breast and lungs, causing it to be easely expectorate and spit forth. 
CHAP. XIX. Turritis sive Turrita. Towers Mustard. O F this herbe there are two or three sorts mentioned by some writers, whereof some of them referred them as Bauhinus doth unto the kinds of wilde Coleworts, to whose censure I cannot so readily a∣gree, in that the herbe in part but the seede chiefly is as hot and sharpe in taste as the Thlaspi or Dra∣ba, and therefore fittest to be joyned next thereunto as comming nearest unto their family. 
1. Turritis vulgatior. The more common Towers Mustard. This more common sort of Towers Mustard hath many rough hairy leaves full of sappe or juice, of a deep greene colour about two inches long and more then one broad, pointed at the ends and broadest in the middle, little or nothing dented about the edges, lying round about the head of the roote upon the ground, from among which rise up divers rough and hairy stalkes neare two foote high, set orderly with such like leaves one above another on all sides thereof, but compassing them at the bottome which are narrower &amp; longer pointed then those below at the toppes of the stalkes which are seldome branched, grow many very small white flowers as it were in a tuft together, but flower by degrees the lowest first, and bring forth long slender cods presently after, which standing upright round about the stalkes before the highest flowers are blowne, the whole stalkes seeme like Pyramides, Steeples or Towers from whence it tooke the name, in which cods are contained small browne and sharpe bi∣ting seed: the root is composed of many white fibres or strings seldome abiding after it hath given seede thereof, 1. Turritis vulgatior. Common Towers Mustard. 
2. Turritis major. The greater Towers Mustard. 
being shed, there doth spring up divers plants before winter, and so abide to flower and seede the next Sommer. 
2. Turritis major. The greater Towers-Mustard. This greater sort spreadeth many leaves upon the ground somewhat greater &amp; longer, and not so rough or hairy the former, somewhat crumpled and waved about the edges, and of a paler or whiter greene colour, almost of the colour of the field Coleworts (which onely thing in my opinion caused Bauhinus and others to referre these so unto the wilde Coleworts) the stalkes rise higher and more branched, the leaves on them compassing them at pes, much more than the former, bearing small whitish yellow flowers at the toppes, and long slender like unto the other after them, but somewhat longer more crooked, and not growing up so straight about the more loosely or sparsedly, containing within them somewhat larger seede and not altogether so fierce : the roote is white and thicke with fibres growing about it, which perisheth and is raised againe in the same manner. 
3. Turritis Alpina. Mountaine Towers-Mustard. Th small mountaine Towers Mustard groweth up with a small smooth round stalke little above a spanne high, having divers small leaves at the foote thereof slightly waved about the edges, and of a pale greene colour, lon∣ger also them those that grow upon the stalke which are not many, and they smaller and shorter and without foote stalkes, at the toppes whereof stand many small white flowers so clustering that they forme a short spike, every one standing on a long foote stalke: the coddes have not beene well observed: the roote is small and white. 
The Place. The first delighteth to grow more on the open Sunnie hills, and the second more in the woodes and shadowye places, and both in Austria plentifully as Clusius saith where the last was found also. 
The Time. These flower early for the most part sometime in Aprill but usuall in May, and the seede is ripe in Iune. 
The Names. These herbes have not beene knowne to any of the ancient Herbaristes either Greeke or Latines, neither yet to many of our moderne Writers, for I finde none of them to make mention thereof by the name of Turritis or Tur∣ Lobel in his Dutch Herball, Clusius, Tabermontanus, and Gerard from him whose figures were used for his Herb l, and Bauhinus last of all, who yet, as I said in the beginning of the Chapter referreth them rather to the kindes of Brassica sylvestris wilde Colewortes. The first is called by Clusius Turrita vulgatior, and Turritis by Lobel, Tabermontanus calleth it also Vaccaria, and Bauhinus Brassica sylvestris folijs integris &amp; hispidis: the second is called Turrita major by Clusius, but Thalius Brassica sylvestris procera, and Bauhinus following Thalius rather than Clusius calleth it Brassica sylvestris ramosa tota penè glabra: Bauhinus calleth the last Brassica sylvestris Alpina, al∣though as he saith it was sent him by a skilfull Herbarist by the name of Turritis Alpina. 
The Vertues. The fierce sharpenesse of these herbes, and especially the seedes doe plainely declare them to bee congeneres to the Mustards, Cresses, Thlaspi, and the like, and no doubt will worke the same effects, although I have no author from whom I might declare any speciall properties in them, and therefore I leave them to every ones practise to experiment their vertues. 
CHAP. XX. Iberis Cardamantica. Sciatica Cresses. S Ciatica Cresses are of two sorts, of both which Matthiolus entreateth but in severall places, the one in the end of the first booke under the title of Iberis, the other under Lepidium in the second booke. 
1. Iberis Nasturtij folio. Sciatica Cresses. This Iberis riseth up with a round stalke about two foote high spread into divers branches, whose lower leaves are somewhat larger than the upper, yet all of them cut or torne on the edges, somewhat like unto Garden Cresses but smaller: the flowers are small and white growing at the toppes of the branches, where afterwards grow huskes like unto Cresses, with smaller brownish seede therein than in the other, very strong and sharpe in taste more than the Cresses: the roote is long, white and wooddy. 
2. Iberis latiore folio. Sciatica Cresses with larger leaves. This other hath the lower leaves whole, somewhat long and broad not rent or torne at all, but onely somewhat deepely dented about the edges towards the ends very like unto those of Thlaspi Creticum set forth here before among the Thlaspies, but those that grow up higher are lesser: the flowers and seede are like the former, and so is the roote likewise, and both roote and seede as sharpe as it. 
The Place. These grow by the wayes sides in untilled places, and by the sides of old walles, &amp;c. 
The Time. They flower in the end of Iune, and their seede is ripe in Iuly. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke by Dioscorides , Iberis sive Cardamantica quod Cardamo, id est, Nastur∣tis f milicest (and Nasturtium sylvestre ) if the text be Dioscorides his owne, which is plainely con∣vinced not to be by good reasons, because by the testimonie of Galen Iberis and Lepidium are all one (for in his tenth Booke De comp. medicam secundum locos, from the authority of Hygienus Hipparcus, hee saith thus: Si cerendicum dolores levare est animus, herbani Iberidem quam aliqui Lepidium vocant, aut Nasturtium sylvestre colligito, &amp;c. and Dioscorides hath a Chapter in his second Booke entituled for Lepidium, so that he would not speake of one herbe in two places, besides this Iberis is thrust into the end of his first Booke, which doth not in qualitie sort with the rest of the herbes there set downe before. Galen also in his booke De simplicium censu, doth never intreate of them severally as of two herbes, but still as of one. Paulus Aeginea likewise saith that Lepidium was called Iberis, being hot in the fourth degree and neare unto 1. Iberis Nasturtij folio. Sciatica Cresses. 
2. Iberis Cardamantice latiore folio. Sciatica Cresses with larger leaves. 
Cresses in the properties: and in his third Booke and 77. Chapter, speaking De Ischiadis caratione, he saith, In totum ischiadicos sanitati restituit Iberidis herbae usus quam Lepidium quo{que} vocant: they therefore that separate them and make them different herbs are in an errour, but the said Paulus Aeginita in the same Booke and place sheweth that there is another Iberis saying, Iberis fruticosa quae apud nos nascitur Lauri folijs similibus &amp; multo ampliori∣bus respondere multis testimonia testantur, non solum in coxarum sed in alijs quoque dinturnis affectibus; which Iberis or Iberias altera is very likely to be the Lepidium of Pliny in his 19 Booke and 8. Chapter, whereof he saith thus, Exit Lepidium in cubitulem altitudinem folijs Laurinis, which Lepidium, by the judgement of the best of the latter Writers is that herbe which some call Piperitis, and some Raphanus sylvestris; in English Dittander, whereof I shall speake in the next Chapter. Damocrates, as Galen sheweth first, called it Iberis, because he cured a friend of his in Iberia with this herbe, which he learned of another who knew not the name thereof, and therefore Damo∣crates in a Booke of his called Clinicus setteth downe in Iambicke Verses both the forme of the herbe, and the place of growing, that others might know it, and the manner of the cure also for others to follow, which here to recite were too tedious. Pliny calleth it Hiberis mistaking the accent over the Iota, as it is likely. It is thought also by some that it is the Grias Apulcij. Matthiolus giveth the figure of the first in his greater figures, and of the other in his lesser: Anguilara calleth the first Lepidium campestre, Tabermontanus Iberis secunda, Durantes Iberis, and Gerard Jberis Cardamantica, but Bauhinus Iberis Nasturtij folio: the other is called Iberis by Lugdunensis, Dodonaeus, Lacuna, Gesner in hortis and Caesalpinus, who yet saith it is Lepidium forte Columella, by Anguilara Le∣pidium hortense; by Lobel Iberis Cardamantica Lepidium Iberias Pauli; and by Bauhinus Iberis latiore folio: the Arabians call it Seitaragi and Hansab: the Italians Iberride and Lepidio; the Spaniards Mastuorso montesine; the French Passerage sonnage and Nasitort; the Germanes Wilderkerss; the Dutch Sciatica Kerss; and we in English likewise Sciatica Cresses. 
The Vertues. The leaves, but especially the rootes while they are fresh taken in the Summer time, beaten and made into a pultis or salve with old Axungia or Swines grease, and applied to the place pained with the Sciatica, to continue thereon for foure houres in men, and two houres in women, the place afterwards bathed with wine and oyle mixed together, and then wrapped with wooll or skinnes after they have sweate a little, will assuredly cure, saith Galen from Damocrates, not onely the said disease in the hippes and hucklebone, and others of the joynts, such as is the gout in the hands or feete, but all other old griefes of the head, as inveterate rheumes, or in any o∣ther part of the body that is hard to be cured, and saith also that Damocrates cured hereby all those diseases wherunto were Sinapismes used or Thapsia applied: Pliny reciteth the same method and manner that Damocrates useth in his Verses, and saith that if any part of the griefe remaine, the same medicine after 20. dayes, is to be ap∣plied againe: the same also is effectuall in the diseases of the spleene: and applied to the skinne it taketh away the blemishes thereof, whether they be scarres, or leprosie, or scabbes, or scurse, &amp;c. which although it exulcerate the part, yet that is to be helped afterwards with a salve made of oyle and waxe. Dioscorides, and Pliny from him say, that if the roote be hung about the necke, or tied to the arme it will ease the paines of the tooth-ach.
CHAP. XXI. Lepidium sive Piperitis. Pepperwort or Dittander. H Aving shewed you in the last Chapter that 1. Pipperitis sive Lepidium vulgare. Pepperwort or Dittander. 
2. Lepidium Monspeliacum Dentellaria dictum. French Dittander or Scarre-worte. 
3. Lepidium annuum. Annuall Dittander or Scarre-worte. 
there is another Lepedium differing from Iberis, I thinke it meete to shew you which it is, and place it next thereunto, and toge∣ther with it expresse some others, that for their likenesse and properties have obtained the same name. 
1. Piperitis sive Lepidium vulgare. Dittander or Pepperworte. Our common Pepperworte called Dittander, sendeth forth somewhat long and broad leaves, of a light blewish greene colour finely dented about the edges and pointed at the ends, standing upon round hard stalkes three or foure foote high, spreading many branches on all sides, and ha∣ving many small white flowers at the toppes of them, af∣ter which follow small seede in small heads: the roote is slender running much under ground, &amp; shooting up againe in many places, and both leaves and roote are very hot and sharpe in taste like unto Pepper, for which cause it tooke the name. 
2. Lepidium Monspeliacum Dentellaria dictum. French Dittander or Scarre-worte. This herbe which is usually called Dentellaria Rondeletij sive Narbonensum, sendeth forth a number of long and limber stalkes, reddish at the bottome, and lying downe upon the ground, and not standing upright by reason of the length, which in my Garden became five or sixe foote long et with leaves on all sides of them, being somewhat narrow, long, and smooth, of a sadde greene colour smal∣ler at the lower end, and compassing the stalkes about, but lesser still up higher to the toppes, where they are a little branched, and doe break forth into divers darke purplish flowers set together, consisting of five small pointed leaves a peece standing in rough brownish huskes, wherein af∣terwards is contained small round and blackish seede very sharpe in taste, exulcerating the skinne and burning it being layd thereon as the leaves doe also; the roote is composed of many great strings with a wooddy pith in the middle, running downe deepe into the ground and abiding many yeares, although both stalkes and leaves perish every yeare gaining fresh in the Spring. 
3. Lepidium annuum. An uall Dittander or Scarrewort. This Dittander or Scarrewort hath stalkes more upright then the last, three or foure foote high, set with such like leaves as the last but somewhat larger and compassing them at the bottomes: the flowers are white, and stand upon small branches spike fashion one above another, which afterwards give small round and pointed huskes like some of the Thlaspies, wherein the seede is contained no lesse hot and fierce in taste, and exulcerating the skin then in the former: the roote is small and fibrous perishing yearely. 
The Place. The first is found naturally growing in many places of this Land, as at Clare in Essex, neare Exester also, and up∣on Rochester Common in Kent, at Sawle Abb y neare Whawley in Lancashire, and in other places, but is usually kept in Gardens: the other two are found about Mompelier in France. 
The Time. The first flowreth in the end of Iune and in Iuly, but the second very late with us in August, and never gave ripe seede in England that ever I knew: the last flowreth in July and the seede is ripe in August. 
The Names. Lepidium in Greeke is so called as it is thought quod est, maculas &amp; squammas in cute delant, or as others thinke quod acrimonia urenti ulceret Lepidium also in Latine, yet this is not the Lepidium of Dioscorides and Galen which is a smaller herbe even the same I shewed you in the last Chapter, but is that Iberis fruticosa of Paulus Aegineta, and Pliny his Lepidium folijs laurinis also, as I shewed you before: The first is called Piperitis by Fuchsius and Lonicerus, by Tragus, Matthiolus and Camerarius Lepidium sive Piperitis, and Lepidium magnum by Fuchsius, Turner and Cordus in Historia, Anguilara tooke it to be Lepidium Dioscoridis, it is Lepidium Plinij by Lobel and Dodonaeus, and Lepidium Pauli &amp; Plinij, by Matthiolus, Lugdunensis and Caesalpinus, by Lobel Raphanus sylvestris officinarum, and by Bauhinus Lepidium latifolium: the second is called Dentellaria M speliaca, by Gesner in hortis and Flammula, who saith it is called at Rome Herba Sancti Anthonij, by Lobel and Lugdunensis, Dentellaria and Dentaria Rondeletij and Narbonensium, Molybdena Plinij by Anguilara and Camerarius, who also saith it is called Crepanella by the Italians, Clusius, Durantes and Tabermontanus call it Plumbago and Pl ba∣go Plinij; Bellonius saith that they of Candy call it Saxiphago they of Lemnos Phrocalida, and they of Lesbos M ∣nia, Caesalpinus calleth it Glastum sylvestre and Bauhinus Lepidium Dentellaria dictum, the last is called by Lobel Lepidium annuum, and so also by Lugdunensis, but by Bauhinus Lepidium glastifolium. Wee usually all the first in English Dittander and Pepperwort, but the other two may be called in English from the Greeke etymologie Scarrewort, eyther because it will make a marke in the hand of them that shall hold it a while, or that it will take away markes and starres of wounds, sores, or burnings in the flesh. 
The Ʋertues. All these herbes are as hot and fiery sharpe as the last, and worke the same effects, for both Paulus Aegineta and Pliny say, that they are as effectuall for the Sciatica or Hip-goute or any other goute or paine in the joynts, or any other inveterate greese, the leaves hereof to bee bruised and mixed with old Axungia, and applyed in the same manner, and used in the same order that the Sciatica Cresses are appointed before: the same also amendeth the deformities or discolourings of the skinne, and helpeth to take away markes, scarres, and scabbes or the fowle markes of burnings with fire or Iron. The women of Bury in Suffolke doe usually give the juice thereof in Ale to drinke to women with child to procure them a speedy delivery in travaile. The others are judged by the lear∣ned men at Mompelier to be also of the same effect, for some of them tooke that of Rondeletius to bee the right Lepidium of Dioscorides, whereunto such vertues are attributed by Rondelitius, who made as good use thereof for the tooth ach as he did of Pelletory of Spaine, and moreover by holding some of the leaves in their hands that had the toothach did give them ease, and withall raise a marke or wanne discolouring in the palme of the hand, and leave it so after it was cast away. 
CHAP. XXII. Hydropiper sive Persicaria. Arsmart. B Ecause the last herbe was called Piperitis I thought good to joyne these, and although in former times there were onely two sorts of Arsmart knowne to all Herbarists, yet since them Lobel hath added a small one, Bauhinus a fourth, and we to increase their number are to joyne divers others unto them. 
1. Persicaria vulgaris acris sive minor. Ordinary quicke or sharpe Arsmart. The quicke or sharpe Arsmart groweth not so high or great as the mild sort doth, but with more store of branches and leaves, somewhat like unto Peach leaves, and are long and somewhat narrower then the other, and most usually without any spot at all upon them, yet sometimes it hath beene found with reddish markes upon the leaves: at the greater joynts as well towards the toppes of the stalkes, as at the toppes also come forth small spikie heads of blush coloured, and sometimes more red or white flowers mixed or clustering together, which falling away, blackish flat seede come in their places: the roote is somewhat long with many fibres thereat, which as well as the rest of the plant is of a very sharpe and quicke taste, biting the tongue more then Pepper. 
2. Persicaria vulgaris mitis sive maculosa. Ordinary spotted Arsmart. This other Arsmart hath somewhat broader leaves set at the great red joynts of the stalkes, with semicircular blackish markes on them usually yet sometimes without; the flowers grow in somewhat longer spikes usually, eyther blush or whitish with such like seede following: 1. 2. Persicaria vulgaris vrens &amp; mitis sive maculata. Ordinary quicke or sharpe Arsmart, and the spotted or mild sort. 
4. Persicaria pusilla repent. Small creeping Arsmart. 
6. 7. Persicaria frutescens maculosa Ʋirginiana flore albo &amp; flore carneo. Shrub spotted Arsmart of Virginia, with white and with blush flowers. 
the roote also is of the same fashion and both perishing yearely: this hath no sharpe taste at all, but rather sower like Sorrell, or else a little drying or without taste. 
3. Persicaria Angustifolia. Narrow leafed Arsemart. This small Arsemart hath reddish stalkes of a cubits height, with much narrower leaves at the joynts then the former, and at their toppes such cluster-like heads of blush flowers but lesse by a great deale: the roote is black∣ish and threddy. 
4. Persicaria pusilla repens. Small creeping Arsmart. This other small Arsmart standeth not upright at all as the former doe, but leaneth downewards with the weake branches, which together with the small long narrow leaves are not by the halfe so great as either of the two first, and differeth not but in the smalnesse from them with sometimes white and sometimes purplish flowers. 
5. Persicaria acris Ʋirginiana. Sharpe Arsmart of Ʋirginia. This Arsmart of Ʋirginia is in most things like the first, with long narrow leaves, but the flowers grow on more slender and long spikes and wholly white.
6. Persicaria frutescens maculosa Ʋirginiana, flore albo. Shrub spotted Arsmart of Ʋirginia with white flowers. This sort of Ʋirginia Arsmart riseth up with sundry hard round greene stalkes with the like great joynts on them as the others have, and faire large broad darke blewish greene leaves with small long points on them, spotted oftentimes like the common sort, and often also without markes, in many six inches long or better, and three and a halfe broad, with sundry compassing veines from the middle ribbe, and others lesser and transverse: at the toppes of the stalkes and from the joynts with the leaves likewise, spring bran∣ches of spiked white flowers, like close graines as in the other but greater, succeeded by the like blacke and flat shining seede: the roote consisteth of a great bush of long blacke stringes and threads which perish not yearely as the former doe, but abide from yeare to yeare, yet often∣times the stalkes with leaves above ground dye downe and rise afresh in the Spring. 
7. Persicaria altera frutescens longifolia maculata Ʋirginiana flore carneo. This other Virginia Arsmart groweth up with straight round stalkes, much higher than the last, with much lon∣ger and narrower leaves, marked also oftentimes in the like manner, and often also without: this is more plen∣tifull in branches of flowers, which are shorter spikes but thicker set, with fine blush coloured flowers, much lar∣ger than in any of the former, but gave no seede with the Gentleman Mr. Iohn Morrice of Isselworth, that had it risen from the seede that was sent him from a friend in Virginia: the roote is greater and more woody than the last, and perished with the extremitie of the hard winter frost. 
The Place and Time. The former two sorts grow almost every where with us in watery plashes, ditches, and the like, that for the most part are drie in Summer: the third in Germany: the fourth in the like places about Antwerpe, as Lobel saith: the three last sorts came from Ʋirginia; the former sorts flowring in Iune, and their seede being ripe in August: but the other sorts flower much later with us, and scarce perfect their seede except the fift. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , id est, Piper aquaticum, many doe call it also Hydropiper in Latine, and general∣ly Persicaria a foliorum formae, yet some distinguish them, calling the milde or gentle sort Persicaria simply, and the other Hydropiper or Persicaria urens, as Lobel doth, or mordax as Thalius doth: some as Lugdunensis saith would make the spotted sort to be Plumbago Plinij, because of the leaden-like spots on the leaves, but they are much deceived: some also call it Britanica Plinij, but they are as farre wide as the other: Lacuna calleth it Crata∣ogonum, and Anguillara calleth the sharpe sort by that name of Crataeogonon, and by some Zingiber caninum: the third is onely remembred by Bauhinus, the fourth by Lobel, and the three last by no other before: the Itali∣ans call it Persicaria, the Spaniards Munchas, the French Culrage, the Germans Wasser pfeffer, and Muckenkrant, the Dutch Watter poper, and we in English Water pepper and Arsmart, and in some countries Red-knees. 
The Vertues. The milde Arsmart is of a cooling and drying qualitie, and the other contrarie is hot and drie: the first is very effectuall for putrid ulcers, either in man or beast to kill the wormes, and clense the putrified places; the juyce thereof dropped in, or otherwise applied, it likewise consumeth all cold swellings, and dissolveth the congealed bloud of bruises by strokes, falls, &amp;c. a peece of the roote, or some of the seede bruised and held to an aking-tooth taketh away the paine: the leaves bruised and laid to the joint that hath a selon thereon taketh it away: the juyce dropped into their eares that have wormes in them destroyeth them quickly: if the herbe be strowed in a chamber it will soone kill all the Fleas therein; and if the herbe or juyce thereof be put to horses or other cattelles sores, it will drive away the Flyes that will sticke thereto, even in the hottest time of Summer: a good handfull of the herbe put under a horses saddle, will make him travell better, although hee were halfe tired before. The milde Arsmart is held to be good against hot empostumes and inflammations at the beginning, and to heale greene wounds. 
CHAP. XXIII. Ptarmica vulgaris. Common field Pelletory or Sneeseworte. N Ext unto Dittander should follow Tarragon called Tarchon and Dracunculus hortensis &amp; oscule us being of the like hot and sharpe biting taste, but that I have entreated therof in my former Book, as also of the garden Dragons, whose figure I herewith shew you, &amp; must in this Chapter shew you the Ptarmica vulgaris, ordinarily called wilde Pelletory and Sneeseworte, of which kinde also I have set forth one with double flowers in my former Booke. Pyrethrum also vulgare, called by us Pelle∣tory of Spaine, although set forth in my former Booke. Vnto this I must adde an other stranger scarce knowne so much as by name to our Nation. This common Pelletory shooteth forth divers brittle stalkes a yarde high and more spread into sundry branches, whereon are set narrow long leaves pointed at the ends, and finely dented a∣bout the edges standing one above another up to the toppes, where grow many white flowers in a round tuft to∣gether, somewhat like unto those of Yarrow or Millfoyle, with a very small yellowish thrumme in the middle, bordered about with very short whitish leaves dented in at the broad ends, which passing away leave behinde them small heades with chaffie seede therein: the roote is long and whitish joynted at severall distances, creeping farre about under ground: both leafe and roote are of an hot sharpe biting taste, like unto the tree Pelletory of Spaine whereof it tooke the name. 
2. Pyrethrum vulgare officinarum. Pelletory of Spaine. This is a small low plant bearing many finely cut long leaves upon the stalkes lying on the ground, much larger than Camomill, bearing at the toppes of each one single large flower having a pale or border of many leaves, white on the upperside, and reddish underneath set about the middle yellow thrumme, but not standing so close joyned at the bottome as the Camomill flowers doe, but more severed one from another: it beareth small whitish seede which is hardly found and discerned from the chaffe: the roote is long growing downeright of the bignesse of a mans finger or thumbe in our countrie, but not halfe so great where it groweth naturally, with divers fi∣bres from the sides, of a very hot, sharpe, and biting taste, drawing much water into the mouth being a while chewed after it hath beene dried, but nothing so much while it is fresh and greene: the plant is very tender with us not enduring our Winter, unlesse it be very carefully preserved. 
3. Ptarmica Alpina sive Dracamalus Alpinus Scabiosae folio. Wilde Pelletory with Scabions leaves. This mountaine Pelletory hath round stalkes about a foote high, spreading some branches towards the toppes, whereon are set divers long pale greene leaves on both sides one above another as in the former, but jagged or deepely cut in on both sides, somewhat like unto a Scabious leafe: at the toopes of the stalkes and branches stand Ptarmica vulgaris. Common field Pelletory or Sneeseworte. 
Dracunculus major vulgaris. Ordinary Dragons. 
2. Pyrethrum vulgare officinarum. Pelletory of Spaine. 
the flowers somewhat larger than the other, else not much un∣like having a border or pale of white leaves, set about a middle thrumme: the roote hereof is more stringy and fibrous than the other. 
The Place. The first groweth in fields and medowes by the hedge sides and path wayes almost every where, and in lanes also and wast grounds, the other in Spaine and divers other countries: the last was found in the mountainous fields of Helvetia or Switserland and other parts there abouts. 
The Time. The first and last flower in the end of Iune and in July, and the second not untill August with us, and seldome giveth ripe seede, unlesse carefully preserved in the Winter. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Ptarmica, quod est Sternutatoria, or Storuntamentoria, as it is also in Latine from the effect of pro∣voking sneesing. The first is diversly called by divers. Tragus calleth it Tanacetum album sive acutum, &amp; Millefolium primum, Gesner in hortis Tarchon sylvestre vel aquaticum, &amp; in collect. stir∣pium Draco aquaticus▪ Brunfelsius Pyrethrum, Cordus on Dioscori∣des Pyrethrum sylvestre, Dodonaeus Draco sylvestris sive Ptarmica, Bauhinus referreth it to that plant which Lugdunensis calleth Mencha Sarasenica species altera Myconij, and yet maketh it also a kinde of Costmarie; Thalius Ptarmica sylvestris Germanica, Clu∣sius Ptarmica pratensis, Lobel Ptarmica folio Taracanis vel Sterun∣ eria, Matthiolus, Fuchsius, Gesner, and others Ptarmica, and B Dracunculus pratensis serrato folio the second is called by all thors Pyrethrum, and of some Salivari , but Gesner in hortis addeth Germanicum, as it is thought Matthiolus, Lugdunensis and all other alterum, Lobel officinarum, and Bauhinus flore Bellidis: the last is set forth onely by Bauhinus who calleth it Dracunculus Al∣ folio cabiosae: it is called by the Arabians Ma arcaraba, or , by the Italians tro, by the Spaniards Peliere, by the Fr ch Pis d '  Alexandre, by the Germans and Dutch Bertram; it is ed in English wilde Pelletory, or wilde Pelletory of Spaine, as the second is called the true Pelletory of Spaine. 
The Ʋertues. Wilde Pelletory is hot and dry in the second degree while it is fresh and greene, but in the third degree when it is dry. An ounce of the juice hereof taken in a draught of Muscadine an houre or two before the it of an Ague and presently layd to sweat, will assuredly drive away the Ague at the second or third time taking at the farthest: the herbe dryed or the roote chiefly chewed in the mouth draweth downe from the head much fleg e, and is thereby availeable to ease the paines in the head and teeth, and to draw forth cold rheume, catarrhes and de∣fluxions upon the Lungs or distillations into the eyes, it mightily also purgeth the braine from those humours that are the cause of the Appoplexie and Epilepsie or falling sicknesse: it helpeth also to consume the superfl moysture of the head and braines, that falling into other parts of the body is the cause of many diseases and muche trouble thereunto: the powther of the dryed herbe or roote put up into the Nostrills procureth sneezing, which oftentimes doth ease the head-ach, the leaves or flowers bruised and made into a salve or poulti with old H g grease, being applyed taketh away blacke and blew spots that come by stroakes or falls or bruises, as also all other sores or blemishes in the skinne, and is also good for the Goute and Sciatica. The true Pelletory of Spaine is most commonly used for the toothach, by the root it selfe or with other things to bee chewed in the mouth, Galen saith it is to be used with oyle, and rubbed on the parts that have shaking fits of Agues. 
CHAP. XXIIII. Raphanus Rusticanus. Horse Reddish. T He kinds of Garden Reddish I have Raphanus rusticanus. Horse Reddish. 
declaed in my former Book, &amp; there∣fore need not to describe the againe, but onely to shew you their Figures and with them the Horse Reddish, whose first leaves that rise up before Winter are about a foote and a halfe long, narrower and ve∣ry much cut in or torne on the edges into many parts, of a darke greene colour with a great rib in the middle, but after these have beene up a while others follow which are greater, rougher, broader and longer, whole and not divided as the first, but onely somewhat roundly dented about the edges: the stalke when it doth beare flowers as it doth but seldome is great, rising up with some few lesser leaves thereon to the height of three or foure foote, spreading at the toppe many small branches of whitish flowers made of foure leaves a peece, after which come small pods like those of the lesser Shepherds purse, but seldome with any seede in them: the roote is great, long, white and rugged, shooting up divers heads of leaves which may be parted for increase, but it doth not creepe within the ground, nor run above ground, and is of a strong sharpe and bitterish taste almost as Mustard. 
The Place. It is found wilde in some places of this Land, but is chiefly planted in Gardens where it joyeth in a moyst and shadowy place. 
The Time. It flowreth as I sayd but seldome, but when it doth it is in Iuly. 
The Names. It hath no Greeke name that I can finde, for if Dioscorides his Copies bee true it cannot bee his Raphanus sylvestris, called by the Romans Ar∣moracia, for hee maketh the roote thereof to bee small, and the leaves tender and fit to bee eaten which cannot agree hereunto, yet Tragus is confident that it is the Armoracia of Pliny, and thinketh with∣all that it is the Thraciaradix and Liothalassion of Theophrastus lib. 7. cap. 4. which Pliny referreth to the Turneps. It is called Raphanus Rusticanus by Lobel, and Raphanus vulgaris and Rusticanus by Matthiolus, by D d eus La∣phanus magna and Radicula magna, Armoracia aut Raphanus major by Brunfelsius, Raphanus major by Tragus and Gesner, Cordus upon Dioscorides and Lonicerus call it Thlaspi majus and magnum, and Bauhinus doth in part so judge of it also, for he calleth it Raphanus Rusticanus Thlaspi alterum Dioscoridis lib. 2. cap. 13. But Pliny in his 19. booke and 15. Chap. hath faulted much, in reciting the kinds of Reddish with the Graecians to make three which he taketh out of Theophrastus lib. 7. c. 4. where he by the word doth not understand Reddish but Cab∣bage as the learned doe well know that reade him, and that with him is as it is thought Raphanus Red∣dish, whereof in the same Chapter he mentioneth five sorts, Corinthia, Cleo ea, Liothalassia, Beotia and mother wild sort with Rocket like leaves which Athenaeus calleth Amorhea, and Pliny inverting the word Raphanus Raphanus vulgaris. Ordinary Garden Reddish.
Raphanus niger rotuddiore redice. The rounder rooted blacke Reddish. 
to Napus, calleth viridis: the Corinthia saith Theophrastus is the greatest, whose roote is bare above ground, grow∣ing upwards and not downewards as the rest doe, Liothalasia called of some Thracia, doth best indure the cold, Beotia is sweetest, the forme being small and round, when as the Cleonaea is somewhat long. Now let any one referre all these sorts rightly, to the kinds of Reddishes knowne to us, &amp; erit mihi magnus Apollo. The Ita∣lians call it amoracia, the French Grand raphaim and grand raifort, the Germans Merrettich, (and thereupon Taho tanus calleth it in Latine Raphanus marinus ) and some Krein or Kren, the Dutch Meerradijs and wee in English Horse Reddish, Mountaine Reddish, and in the North greene Reddish, but better I thinke Clownes Mustard for it is too strong for any tender stomacke. 
The Vertues. Horse Reddish is hot and drie in the third degree: with the roote salt and vinegar is made a Mustard, much used with country people, and strong labouring men in some countries of Germany, &amp;c. and in our owne land also, but as I said it is too strong for tender and gentle stomackes, for as Matthiolus saith, to those that use it, it hur∣teth the head, and causeth sharpe and soure belchings, but it is of much good use in the paines of the raines, blad∣der, and stone, provoking much urine and helping to separate the gravell from the stone and to expell it, being boyled with hony and vinegar into an Electuary: it is also a good remedy in strong bodies, both for the Cough, the Tifficke and other diseases of the lunges, as also to procure womens courses that are stopped: the same also by provoking vomiting and sweating, is often given before the fit of the quartane ague to alter the course: the juyce given in drinke is held to be very effectuall for the scurvey: t killeth the wormes in children being drunke, as also being laid upon the belly: the roote bruised and laid to the place grieved with the Sciatica-gout, joynt-ach, or the hard swellings of the spleene and liver, doth wonderfully helpe them all: the distilled water of the herbe and rootes is more familiar to be taken with a little Sugar for all the purposes aforesaid. 
CHAP. XXV. Rapistrum. Wilde Rape or Charlocke. I N this Chapter I shall shew you the sorts of wild Rape called Chadlocke or Charlocke with us, where∣of there are more sorts knowne at these times then formerly were to the ancient writers. 
1. Rapum sylvestre non bulbosum. The wild Rape or Turnep. The leaves hereof are very like the garden long Turnep, but growing thicker and more plentifully from the roote, and more crumpled and rough in handling, the roote is long and slender, in the rest it differeth not from it. 
2. Rapistrum aliud sylvestre non bulbosum. Another wilde Turnep. This other sort hath smaller leaves at the bottome not jagged, 1. Rapum sylvestre non bulbosum. The wilde Rape or Turnep. 
but those that follow are larger and somewhat jagged and waved, the flowers are yellow and the seede flat, and of a whitish yellow colour in small long pods somewhat sharpe. 
3. Rapum sylvestre five Rapistrum arvorum. Wilde Charlocke. This wilde Rape hath many long and broad rough leaves hairy and greene, lying upon the ground round about the roote, somewhat deepely gashed in on the edges and round pointed; from among which riseth up one slender and hairy stalke seldome many, branched from the middle upwards into many parts, with divers lesser leaves on them up to the toppes where stand divers yellow flowers of 4. or 5. leaves a peece af∣ter which follow somewhat long and rough pods, not very slender with divers round small reddish browne seede therein like unto Mustard seede but larger, as quicke and sharpe in taste but more bitter then it: the roote is long and white, and grow∣ing wooddy when it runneth up to stalke and perisheth after seedetime. 
4. Rapistrum alterum arvorum. Another wilde Charlocke. This other wilde Charlock hath large leaves waved in but not cut or jagged as the former, the upper leaves being whole and smaller, the flowers hereof are pale yellow and the pods fol∣lowing are not more smooth with a shew of divisions in them, and is annuall also. 
5. Rapistrum album articulatum. White wilde Charlocke. This Charlocke groweth up with fewer, smaller and rougher leaves in some little or nothing jagged in others more: the stalks are rougher and lower then the others, the flowers like∣wise grow not so many together, neither are so great or yel∣low 2. Rapistrum aliud sylvestre non bulbosum. Another wilde Turnep. 
3. Rapistrum arvorum. Wilde Carlocke. 
4. Rapistrum alterum arvorum. Another wilde Charlocke. 
5. Rapistrum album articulatum. White wilde Charlocke. 
6. Rapistrum monospermon. One grained Charlocke. 
9. Rapistrum maximum rotundifolium monospermon Hispanicum. Spanish one grained Charlocke. 
yellow, but eyther pale yellow or more white, after which come smaller rough pods with joynts or divisions in them, with smaller brownish seede nothing so fiery hot as the other: the roote is small and long in some, in others somewhat thick and rounder neare unto a small long rooted Turnep. Flore purpureo. Of this kinde also some are found with a purplish flower. 
6. Rapistrum album nigris lineis. Charlocke of Naples. The Neapolitane Charlocke hath the greene leaves next the ground like unto those of the Garden Reddish, cut in or torne on the edges in the same manner but harder and rougher, the ribs on the under side being hard and rough, but those that grow upwards on the stalkes which are two foote high, and are divided, and those up higher and next the flowers long and narrow, without any incisure at all: the flowers are white with blackish veines in them and the pods that follow are small and long with small seede in them, nothing so hot or sharpe as the former: the roote is white and long, sharper in taste then the leaves which are in a manner herby without sharpenesse. 
7. Rapistrum parvum Massilieuse. Charlocke of Marielles. This small Charlocke groweth not above foure or five inches high, with small rough leaves with few divisions in them of an inch long, and dented about the edges, the flowers are small and of a pale blew colour like unto the Sea Stocke gilloflower, the pods that follow are small and long conteining small seede within them, the roote is small and white. 
8. Rapistrum monospermon. One grained Charlocke. The lower leaves of this Charlocke are somewhat large thicke and hairy, of a very fresh greene colour torne on both edges at the bottome, but broader at the ends where they are onely waved, the stalkes also are a little hairy about a foote high or more, set with a few such leaves as the lowest, but smaller and bran ing forth into long spikes of gold yellow flowers the length of ones hand, in whose places come small round striped be s or huskes with a small point at the end, contayning in every one of them but one seede from whence it tooke the name: the roote is long, and white, and somewnat fibrous. 
9. Rapistrum maximum rotundifolium monospermon Hispanicum. Spanish one grained Charlock. This Spanish kinde differeth from the former French or Dutch sort set forth by Bauhinus, in that it groweth high∣er, with larger leaves divided into parts, the end peece great, round, and more hairy: the branches more, the flowers large and white in yellowish huskes without any threds in the middle: the seede also rounder and not pointed at the ends.
The Place. The greater and lesser sorts that have cut leaves are frequent in every place with us, but the other two with whole; I have not seene to grow wilde, but in Germany, Mompelier, and Italy, as Bauhinus and Thalius say. 
The Time. They flower and seede all the Summer long, yea so quicke some of them are, that they flower and seede twice in every yeare. 
The Names. It hath no Greeke name, and all that have written hereof do call it in Latine Bursa or pera pastoris, except Gesner, who calleth it Thlaspi fatuum &amp; Castor Durantes Herba Cancri, Bauhinus maketh particular relation both of the second and the last: and Thalius of that small one with whole leaves: the Italians call it after the Latine name Bersadi pastore, the French Tabouret &amp; bourse de bergier, the Germanes Sickelkraut, and Teschelkraut, the Dutch Bersekens, and we in English Shepheards purse or pouch, and in the North, Picke purse and Caseweede. 
The Vertues. Some doe hold that Shepheards purse is cold and binding, others finding a little heate upon the taste of the flowers and seede, doe judge it not to be cold at all but drying and astringent, and by that onely quality worketh so powerfully in staying all fluxes of bloud, either in inward or outward wounds, as also the fluxes or laskes of the bellie, the bloudy fluxe, and the abundance of womens courses, or the pissing of bloud, the juyce or the decoction of the herbe with: some Plantane being drunke, or any other way taken: some doe hold that the greene herbe bruised and bound to the wrests of the hands, and soles of the feete will helpe the yellow jaundise: the herbe bruised and laid pultis wise upon inflammations, Saint Anthonies fire, or the like represseth them: the juyce drop∣ped into mattering or running eares helpeth them: it closeth the lippes of greene wounds, and is of great effect being made into a salve for wounds in the head. 
CHAP. XXVIII. Myagrum. Gold of pleasure. T He other plant that I entend here to set forth, and therein also not pleasing my selfe to bring them into this Classis is Myagrum, Gold of pleasure, whereof there are more sorts come to our knowledge in these dayes than formerly hath beene. 
1. Myagrum sativum. Garden gold of pleasure. This golden seeded plant riseth up with one or more upright round stalkes about two foote high, set with sun∣dry long and somewhat narrow leaves, of a whitish greene colour, somewhat deepely dented about the edges, or deepely waved, cōpassing them at the bottome, spread from the middle upwards into sundry branches, bearing at their tops very small yellow flowers, where when they are fallen, come small flat seede vessells, with gold yellow coloured seede within them, somewhat long and small, the roote is small and long, perishing still after seede time. 
2. Myagrum sylvestre sive Psendomyagrum. Wild gold of pleasure. This plant that is much found among the fieldes of flaxe, springeth up but with one round stalke, almost a yard high, set about with long and somewhat narrow leaves, resembling those of Woade, but longer and smaller poin∣ted, broad at the bottome where they compasse the stalkes about with a point end sticking out on each side, shoo∣ting forth many branches from the very bottome almost, at whose toppes come forth divers whitish flowers ve∣rie like unto those of Flaxe, after which rise round small heades, with a small point at the toppe, very like in fa∣shion unto the Myagrum with one seede therein, but these are full of small yellowish seedes like unto Cresses, but sweete in taste without any acrimony when it is dry, and exceeding bitter when it is fresh as the herbe being greene is also. 
3. Camelina sive Myagrum alterum amarum. English Worme seede. The English Wormeseede groweth very like the last, with a taller upright stalke, branching toward the top, but thicker set with long and narrow greene leaves, somewhat like unto those of the single Wall-flowers, but smaller, and of a whiter greene colour, and very like unto the leaves of Clusius his L uconium sylvestre, that it is often mistaken for it, but that the leaves of this are somewhat smaller and not of so fresh a greene colour, at the toppes of the stalkes and branches come forth many very small pale yellow flowers made of foure leaves a peece, very like also unto those of that Leucoium, but much smaller, even more than halfe, which afterwards give small long cods, containing within them very pale coloured seede, bitter in taste, the roote is small and wooddy, pe∣rishing every yeare after seede, but rising againe of the shed seede. 
4. Myagrum foetidum. Stinking gold of pleasure. The stalkes of this Myagrum rise to be about two foote high being rough, round, and greene, bearing rough pale greene leaves on them, set here and there one above another, being foure or five inches long, and one and a halfe broad, very lightly waved about the edges: at the tops of the branched stalkes stand divers small pale yellow flowers upon long foote stalkes in a thicke tuft together, where unto succeede small round huske containing small seede: the leaves and flowers hereof, not onely bruised but growing, have somewhat a grievous or evill sent. 
5. Myagrum monospermon majus. The greater one grained gold of pleasure. The first leaves hereof that lie upon the ground are long and narrow, round pointed, and cut in on the edges like unto Succory leaves, with a white line in the middle of every one, and of a pale greene colour, but those that 2. Myagrum sylvestre seu Pseudomyagrum. Wilde gold of pleasure. 
3. Cameline sive Myagrum alterum amarum. English Wormeseede. 
5. Myagrum monospermon majus. The greater one-grained gold of pleasure. 
7. Myagro similis siliqua r tunda. Round podded like Myagrum. 
grow upon the whitish bending hard stalke, which groweth to be a yard high or more, spreading branches from the bottome are little or nothing waved about, but compassing it at the joynts where they stand, the toppes whereof are stored with small yellowish flowers on a long branch one above another, after which come round hard and white heads, small at the bottome, and broader at the toppes with three corners and a small middle point sticking up in each, whereof is contained but one seede which is long and reddish whereof it tooke the name: the roote is white, long and wooddy perishing after the seede is ripe. 
6. Myagrum monospermon minus. The lesser one grained Myagrum. This lesser Myagrum hath much smaller leaves, the lowest whereof are two inches long and one broad, waved about the edges, standing upon foote stalkes, and of a pale greene colour, from whence rise one or two slender stalkes about a foote high, with a few very narrow leaves set on them, compassing them at the joynts: the flowers are small and white, standing at the toppes in a round tuft together, where afterwards grow small round heade with one kernell apeece within them: the roote is white and thready but perisheth in the like manner. 
7. Myagro similis siliqua rotunda. Round podded like Myagrum. The plant hath a stalke a cubit high, hairy, brittle, and spread into branches, whose bottome leaves are about sixe inches long, and one and a halfe broad, rough, hairy, and sappy, not dented at all about the edges, a little sharpe in ste with some clamminesse also, but those that are set at the joynts of the branches, and compasse them about are nothing so great, and the higher they grow, smaller and narrower, the flowers stand spike fashion on small branches, being small and of a white colour, after which come small round rugged heads with a pricke at the toppe, every one on a small long footestalke, greene at the first, and blacke when it is ripe, with an oylie yel∣low kernell within them. 
The Place. The first groweth in some places of Italy wild, but yet both they and we doe sow it in gardens for pleasure, and in the fieldes for the seedes sake, whereout is pressed an oyle that serveth the poore for meate, and the rich for their Lampe: the second is frequent in Germany most usually in all their flaxe grounds, which being in stalke like it, but not of that use is accounted a weede and cast away, except of such as will save the seede to give to small birds, whereon they will feede when it is ripe, and growing upon the stalke most greedily: the third groweth in many places of our owne country, and being once brought into the garden, and there suffered to shed the seede, it will come up yearely againe of it selfe: the fourth groweth in the sandy grounds about Balsill: the fift on the Engane∣ hills by Padoa: the sixt not farre from Mompeliar: and the last neare Lunella that is also hard by Mompelier. 
The Time. All these flower in the Summer moneths, and their seeede is ripe about August. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Myagrum and also Melampyrum as Dioscorides saith, and some Myagrium, Paulus Aeginaeta hath two sorts of plants of an oily substance, quod impurum aut sordidum signi∣ficat, cujusmodi est Melampyrum, &amp; quod muscipulum sive muscarium significat, qua insidentes sive praeter vo∣lantes muscas glutine suo implicat. Some (saith Matthiolus ) take the first sort here set downe to be the true Myagrū of Dioscorides, which, he saith, it cannot be because this hath the leaves of Rocket, but Dioscorides his should have the leaves of Madder. Others againe as he saith would have the second sort to be it, which he disaloweth also, be∣cause the leaves are liker Woade than Madder, and therefore calleth it Pseudomyagrum, yet by the judgement of the best is the true one. Some there be also that take them both to be but one plant: but Bauhinus misliketh of their judgement, because they are described to be so different both in leaves and flowers, and therefore hee judgeth them to be two distinct plants as they are indeede. Dodonaeus setteth downe this first Myagrum to be that plant which the Germans call Flachsdotteren, and Leyndotteren, which Tragus saith is proper to the second. Dodonaeus also taketh this to be that kinde of graine which both Galen in primo de aliment▪ facultat. and Theophra∣stus, lib. 8.1.3. &amp;c. call Erysinium, which Gaza translateth Trionum, and is like unto Sesamum, as both he and Pliny say, but not the Erysimum of Dioscorides, although Pliny confoundeth them both together, as you may reade here a little before, in the Chapter of Erysimum, whereunto I agree, but not that the Erysimum of Theophrastus is our Tra∣gopyrum Buckwheate, as some would have it, for thereunto it is utterly unlike, in that the seede of Theophrastus and Pliny, their Erysimum is oily, which that of Buckewheate is not, nor is fit to be used for Lampes, as you shall heare further, when I come to speake of Buckwheate. Tragus taketh it to be, although not the true Sesamum of Egypt, yet to be very like it, as Pliny &amp; Theophrastus before him did, and calleth it Sesamum Germanicum, the oyle of whose seede is not onely like the true oyle of Sesamum, but is of divers, and may safely be used in the steede there∣of both for meate and medecine, and therefore some have called it Sesamum minus. The first is that Myagrum that Mathiolus misliked in Ruellius and others, that they should so call it, and saith his country people did call it Droda, D odella, and Dorella having leaves like Rocket as he saith, and therefore calleth it Pseudomyagrum: Lobel in Ad∣versary calleth it Myagrū Germanis &amp; Cameline Gallis, and in his Icones Cameline Myagrum, the French, as Ruellius and Dodonaeus say, call it Cameline and Camelinum; Bauhinus in his Matthiolus and Pinax calleth it Myagrum sati∣vum, Dodonaeus Camelina sive Theophrasti Erysimum &amp; Myagrion Dioscoridis, and so it is indeede: the second is the Linaria quinta of Tragus, which be also calleth Sesama, and of the Germans Flachsdotter▪ Cordus upon Dioscorides saith, some pertinaciously insisted that it was the true Sesamum of Dioscorides, but he there disproveth them, and saith his people called it Schwaden (which Gesner in his note thereupon saith, that some did interpret to be Leyndotter ) whose toppe branches with the seede resembled the Juba of Milium, Gesner in hortis Germaniae sheweth, that neither Schwaden nor Myagrum Dioscoridis (thereby judging them to be two severall plants) are Sesamum: Matthiolus calleth it Pseudomyagrum with the leaves of Woade, and Bauhinus in his Matthiolus giveth a more exact figure of it than Tragus doth, yet in imitation of it: Bauhinus notwithstanding that he hath given the figure of both saith, as I said before, that they doe import two plants, yet in his Pinax hee confoun∣deth them as if they were but one, bringing in the authors both of the one and the other, as Lugdunensis and o∣thers under his title of Myagrum sativum: the third is the Camelin Myagrum alterum Thlaspi effigie of Lobel, the second Myagrum of and his third Erysimum also Gerard hath two figures hereof which Bauhinus noteth, the one by the title of Cameline, and the other of Eruea angustifolia: Tragus calleth it Ʋiola lutea sylve∣stris, for as I said in the description, it is very like to the Leucoium sylvestre of Clusius, and in my judgement is the Thlaspi amarum of Lugdunensis, as who so will well compare them shall finde: the fourth is Bauhinus his Mya∣grum faetidum: the fift Bauhinus saith was sent by the name of Bricorrves, and that Alpinus called it Pseudoi satis but calleth it himselfe Myagrum monospermon latifolium: the sixt he also calleth Myagrum monospermon minus: the last Bauhinus saith grew with his brother Iohn Bauhinus at Mount Belgrade by the name of a Myagrum, and therefore he calleth it Myagro similis siliqua rotunda, but saith it was called a Lepidium at Mo pelier, and that Doctor Doldius sent it him from Norimberge by the name of Thlaspi. 
The Vertues. The oylinesse of the seede of Myagrum serveth as Dioscorides saith, to make the skinne smooth that is rugged in any part of the body, and Galen saith that the seede being oyly hath an emplasticke or clammy quality therein. Pliny saith and Ruellius as it should seeme from him, that the oyle thereof helpeth the Vlcers of the mouth, if it be therewith annointed: the oyle of the seede is of much use in Germany and other places where they sow ma∣ny fields therewith, and is used as I said both for the poore mens tables and rich mens Lampes, and serveth also with a lye made of ashes to make Sope, for which purposes it is most used; the oyle thereof being as I said to like unto the true oyle of Sesamum being hot and causing thirst if it bee drunke as the true oyle of Sesamum doth, may safely be used in the stead thereof, and no doubt will performe the like effects or very neere that the true oyle will. The second sort is in qualitie very neare the former, and although the herbe as the seede, also while it is greene, is so bitter that no creature will taste thereof, yet when they are dry they loose their bitternesse, and the seede especially becommeth so sweete as no other can bee more acceptable to small birds as Linets, Finches and the like to feede upon: the third being called in many places Worme seede, and I thereupon calling it Eng∣lish Worme seede, but by Gerard Treakle Worme seede is much used by the countrey people where it groweth to kill the wormes in children, the seede being a little bruised and given in drinke or any other way. The other sorts I have not knowne to be used to any purpose, either inward or outward for meate or medicine, and therefore let this suffice untill we can understand with what vertues they are endued to be related.
CHAP. XXIX. Cepaceum genus. The sharpe Onion rooted kindes. C Epae, Porrum, Allium, Onions, Leekes and Garlicke as under one kind, are to be referred unto this Classis, of many whereof I have amply entreated in my former booke, of which I shall say little here, but of some others not there specified, namely of other sundry sorts of Garlicke, yet I thinke good to recite some of the names of the other, and give you some of their Figures. 
Of Onions (comming very likely of the Latine Ʋnio, because the roote is single, not giving off-sets or encrease as other bulbous rootes doe) there is the ordinary round Moly Indicum Lobelij. Indian Moly. 
white one, the flat and the long both sharpe and sweete, and the greater and lesser red flat, some onely on the out∣side, others red quite through: the Squill or Sea Onion, I have there shewed to be no Onion: Of the ordinary sort of Leekes, there is a greater and a lesser, called Ampelo∣prassum the French or Vine Leeke, Cives called Schaeno∣prassum which are the smallest, and Scalions, accounted by some, to be of the kindes of Onions rather then Leekes, because they are called Copae Ascalonicae, or Ascalonitides, and may be the Gethyum of Theophrastus, which some call Gethyllis, Lobel taketh it to be Bulbus Setanius of Theo∣phrastus and Pliny. Besides these, Lobel mentioneth a wilde Leeke, I odorum Syriacum. without sent or taste, which is like the Gar∣den kinde, but smaller. 
And Tabermontanus one of Syria with large leaves. 
Of the tame or Garden Garlik, as well as of the wilde, I have given the descriptions of divers, both Allium Ʋrsi∣num Ranisous, and Moly of sundry sorts, as Moly Indi∣cum bulbiferum sive Caucafon. Moly Homericum vel Theo∣phrasti. Moly Fannonicum bulbiferum of two sorts. Moly Serpentinum. Moly caule &amp; folijs triangularibus. Moly Narcissinis folijs. Moly montanum latifolium luteo flore. Moly Pyrenaeum purpureum. Moly latifolium purpureum Hispanicum. Moly purpureum Neapolitanum. Moly pyxi∣datum argenteum Hispanicum. Moly serotinum Coniferum. Moly Dioscorideum &amp; alterum Hispanicum, and Moly Moschatum vel Zibettinum Monspeliense: The rest are here to follow. 
1. Allium sylvestre. Crow Garlicke. The Crow or wilde Garlicke is of two sorts, each of them hath sundry narrow long leaves like grasse, the one softer, and the other stiffer and harder, from among which rise up one or two slender bare stalkes, bearing a tuft of purplish flowers, and blackish seede after them: the roote is long and round with three coates, or severall peelings, Moly Theophrasti sive Homeri. The Great Moly of Theophrastus or Homer. 
Moy Serpentinum. Serpents Moly. 
Ampe rassum▪ Vine Leekes. 
1.2. Allium sylvestre &amp; Allium anguinum. Crow Garlike, and spotted or Snakelike Ramsons. 
the outermost whereof is whitish in the one, with sundry fibres under it, and reddish in the other and encreaseth by the offets, but is not parted into cloves as the garden Garlicke is, so strong smelling of Garlicke that the milke of Kine that feede thereon will taste thereof. 
2. Allium anguinum. Spotted or Snakelike Ramsons. This kinde of Ramson hath somewhat broader leaves then the other Ramson, somewhat like to Lilly Convally leaves but spotted oftentimes with blacke spots as the slender stalkes, are which beare many small white flowers on the head: the roote is bulbous but longer then the other, covered with a brownish outward skinne or coate, somewhat netted as it were like Gladiolus, with a tuft of fibres thereto; it is called by Herbarists as Cl sius saith Ʋictorialis longa because the Gladiolus is called rotunda. 
3. Scorodoprassum. Great Turkey Garlicke. This great Garlicke shooteth forth sundry great long leaves much bigger then the ordinary Garlicke, and after divers yeares abiding a great long stalke three or foure foote high with some lesser leaves thereon naked from the middle up to the toppe, where it beareth a large tuft of flowers enclosed at the first in a thinne skinne, of a paler colour then those of Homers Moly or rather whitish, with three square huskes and blacke seede in them like the rest: the roote is great white and almost transparent at least shining, and seldome giveth of sets for en∣crease. There is another with looser scaly and yellower rootes, Alterum. and narrower leaves. 
4. Scorodoprassum alterum bulboso &amp; convoluto capite. Great Turkie Garlick with a bulbed and twining head. This other great Garlicke groweth after the same manner but larger in each part: the stalke riseth sometimes halfe a yard higher, having at the toppe a large head of bulbes like to the Indian Moly, wrapped in a thinne skin, with a long point growing above it being smaller to the end, which bulbes in time breake that outer skinne and shew the bulbes to be at the first purplish, but growing whiter afterwards, having also some flowers among them: the head with the toppe of the stalke at the first doth winde or twine it selfe like a Snake or Serpent, which when the bulbes grow to ripenesse standeth upright: the roote is as great and white as the last, and more ready to part into Cloves like the ordinary sort of Garlicke: both of these doe smell somewhat lesse strong then Garlicke, partaking of Leekes, from whence rose the Greeke name as Dioscorides saith. 
5. Moly Pannonicum latifolium primum Clusi . Clusius his first leafed Hungarian Moly. This Hungarian Moly hath divers long and somewhat broad leaves rising from a white round roote that hath sundry small bulbes growing thereto: the stalke riseth two or three foote high with those leaves thereon, but naked or bare from the middle to the top, where it beareth a round tuft of purplish flowers, after which commeth blackish seede in three square huskes. 
3. Scorodoprassum. Great Turkey Garlicke. 
3. Scorodoprassum alterum Lobelij. Another sort of great Turkey Garlick with narrower leaves. 
4. Scorodoprassum alterum convoluto capite. Great Turkey Garlicke with bulbed and twined heads. 
5. Moiy montanum latifoltum primum Clusij. Clusius his first broad leafed Hungarian Moly. 
 
6. Moly Pannonicum odorato flore. Sweet smelling Hungarian Moly. This sweete kinde is very like unto the last, but with lesser leaves and fewer stalkes bearing at the toppe a long tuft of pale coloured flowers upon longer footestalkes hanging downe their heads, of a pretty fine fresh sent which abideth not long, but quickly vanisheth, the three square heads that so low bring blackish seede somewhat like to those of Pinkes or Gilloflowers, the round roote hath some bulbes growing thereto.
Siler montanum than Ferula or Thapsia, but much greater than it, and lesse than Ferula or Thapsia, the roote is of the thicknesse of ones thumbe, brownish on the outside, and much whiter than Fe∣rula within, with a thicke barke, and a slender tough pith, yeel∣ding forth a yellowish milkie juyce, being broken, which being condensate is somewhat gummie, but hard and drie: at the toppe of the roote there groweth a small bush of short haires, whereby this plant is knowne from Ferula, which else would scarce be discerned: the taste of the herbe is somewhat sharpe and unplea∣sant, but the roote much hotter and offensive to the taste and sto∣macke, moving vomite, and in the greene more than dry. 
2. Thapsia latifolia Hispanica. Spanish broad leafed Thapsia. The leaves of this Thapsia are somewhat like unto Fennell giant, greene, but covered over with a little woolly hairinesse, spread round about on the ground, of an unpleasant taste: the stalke that riseth up among them, groweth to be a cubite, and sometimes to be two cubits high, of a fingers thicknes, with a few joynts and leaves at them like the lower but lesse, at the top whereof stand somewhat bread umbels of yellow flowers, which while the seed is in ripening changeth the forme to be round as a ball: the seede is broad &amp; winged as it were, the middle part wherof which sprout∣eth out the leaves is long and narrow: the roote is somewhat like the former, thicke, long, and broader at the toppe, with a blackish thicke barke full of a milkie juyce which is most bitter and sharpe in taste, provoking vomiting and white within. 
3. Thapsia maxima Hispanica. The greater Spanish Thapsia. This Thapsia shooteth forth stalkes three or foure fingers thicke, like to a Ferula, and exceeding any mans height, having branched, winged leaves like the last, but larger, and spread on the ground like it: the flowers and seedes are like it also: the roote is greater. 
4. Thapsia Carote folio. Carrot Leafed Thapsia. This was the most usuall Thapsia that the shoppes of those Seminum Thapsiae 5. genera cum folio &amp; radice latifoliae. Five sorts of Thapsiae seedes, with a leafe and a roote of the broader leafed one. 
Thapsia Carotae folio su itates. The toppes of the Charrot leafed Thapsia. 
parts of Europe knew, and tooke to be right, untill learned and judicious men scanning it better, found it to be much differing, having large winged leaves lying upon the ground, more like unto the wilde and tame Carrot, than unto Ferula, whereunto the true is compared: the umbell of flowers is yellow, but smaller, as is both seede and roote than the Ferula: Matthiolus set this forth first for Thapsie, but is disproved by all: it smelleth somewhat strong. 
5. Thapsia fetidissima. Stinking Thapsia. In the country of Salamanca in Spaine, saith Clusius, groweth a certaine Ferulous plant with leaves like Laba∣natis herbe Francumsence spread upon the ground, bedewed alwayes with a clammie moisture, of a deepe greene colour and shining: the stalke is said to be small and straight, bearing an umbell of flower almost as round as a ball. 
Wee have had the seedes of a Thapsia brought us out of Spaine by Boel, whose rootes were short and tuberous, Thapsisia berosa ra∣dice. but the late springing, and small time of the abiding of them in my garden, by the early frostes comming there∣upon tooke them away so quickly, that I can give you no further relation of them: but he called it Thapsia tubero∣sa rad , which whether it were a speciall kinde, or but the youngnesse of the rootes I cannot tell, never having the like opportunity to get of the seede againe. 
The Place and Time. The first, as Dioscorides saith, groweth in Thapsia one of the Iles of the Sphorades, and in the countie about A∣thens, as Theophrastus saith, and as Lobel saith about Mompelier, and the way to Fromtignacke; all the rest grow plentifully in sundry parts of Spaine, and doe flower there, as he saith somewhat late. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and Thapsia also in Latine, from the Iland of that name, as Dioscorides saith; but as Lobel &amp; Pena say, it may as well be so called from the fierie heate wherewith it scorcheth or burneth the bare parts of the body, even a farre off, if they stand in the winde or breath of it that gather it; and therefore Dioscorides adviseth not to gather it, but in a quiet day free from winde, and to be on the leeside thereof for feare of exulcera∣ting the face and hands, &amp;c. The first is the true Thapsia of Lobel and Pena, and Lugdunensis so entituleth it; and the second Thapsia of Clusius: the second is the first Thapsia of Clusius which Lobel and others setting forth for Seseli Peloponense majus is taxed by Clusius for so doing, saying, that their so easie sliding to errour, ariseth from their want of due consideration of all the parts thereof, and the sight of the true plant, and onely led by weake conje∣ctures upon the sight of the figure, and as he saith, is called Cucurillo by those of Murcia in Spaine: the third is Clusius his third Thapsia, which some, as he saith, would call Cieutaria maxima Lobelij, for which he blameth them likewise; the fourth is Clusius his fourth also, which as he saith the Spaniards call Tuero: the last is that Thapsia that Matthiolus A guilara and Caesalpinus, because it is most frequent in Italy tooke to be the right, but is since knowne to differ much from it: Lobel in his Observations, pa. 452. in the title over it, maketh some doubt whether this plant should be not the Sagapenifera Ferula, for all do account these Thapsias to be kinds of Ferula, &amp; so the Italian name which is Ferulacoli doth import as much; but as I shewed you in the Chapter before, that I have gathered some gum from the Ferula in my garden, that hath bin in shew as pure and good gumme Sagapenum as any we have in our shoppes, and therefore I doe not thinke any gumme Sagapen was ever taken from this or any other Thapsia: the Arabians call it Iamtum and Dryx; the Italians Thassia, and those of Naples Siciba, and other parts Ferula∣coli: the Spaniards, as Clusius saith, call this Canaheja promiscuously with Ferula and Libanotis, making no di∣stinction betweene them: the French call it Turbit blave, and grie by others: the High and Low Dutch little knowing them, have scarse given them any name, but as the Latine doth: Gerard calleth them stinking and dead∣ly Carrots, which how fitly it agreeth with any of them, but that of Matuhiolus, let others upon due consideration judge: I have called the true Thapsia according to the nature, burning and scorching Fennell, which if any can al∣ter and give a better, I shall be well content: the rootes of the first Spanish kinde are accounted for Turbith with them, but they differ much from the right, and therefore are called Thapsia turbith. 
The Ʋertues. Thapsia, or the scorching Fennell, as Dioscorides saith purgeth choller strongly both upwards &amp; downwards; two scruples of the barke of the roote, as well as halfe a scruple of the juyce therof drunke with mede or honied water, more be taken it is dangerous; this manner of purging is fit for those that are astromasticke, or short winded, and if or are troubled with paines in their sides and spitting of bloud, but saith Lobel this manner of purging thereby is quite left of, and that worthily in respect of the danger to the inward parts, for more harme oftentimes came thereby than helpe by the grievous torments it used to stirre up: Galen briefely setteth downe the properties thereof in these words; Thapsia hath a sharpe and strong heating facultie joyned with some moisture, and there∣fore it violently draweth from farre, and digesteth what it draweth: but much time is required to effect this, for being full of much moisture, it is the fault thereof to be quickly corrupted. Outwardly applied it hath most usually better succeeded, for as Pliny reporteth, Nero by annointing his beaten face with the juyce hereof, and very equall ra sence and Waxe mixed together at night, shewed the next day his face to be free and cleare contrary to expectation: whereby it hath beene found to take away all blacke and blew spots, bruises, markes, and blemishes in the skinne whatsoever, yea the morphew, leptye, scabbes, scurfes, wheales, pushes, or the like, yet caution and be used not to suffer it to lie too long on the place, that is not much longer than two houres, and then to be washed with salt or sea water warmed: it is used likewise being dissolved into an ointment with good effect to the sides or breast for the griefes therein, or for the paines in the feete or joynts: it serveth also to gather againe the prep ce in whom it is naturall to want it, by raysing a tumour, and after mollified and supplied with flat things, supplieth the part of a prepuce: it serveth likewise to cause haire to grow apace where the places wanted it, or were deprived thereof. The rootes of the second and third, but of the last especially in former times were gathered by impostors in Italy and Spaine, and dressed like Turbith that is pared and pithed, and so sold instead thereof, untill diligence add experience to know the right, and restise the false, had prevented the future deceit; and Matthiolus declaiming against Fuchsius, who tooke these rootes to be the true Turbith sheweth it was so taken in Germany; but I have shewed you before in the Chapters of Alip , the Tithmalls and Scamony, the many errors that former times came into concerning the true Turbith: the old women Leeches of Salamanca in Spaine, saith Clusius, use the rootes of the third or greatest Spanish kinde of Thapsia to procure womens courses, and to purge the body which it doth with that violence both upward and downeward that they are brought into great danger that take it. 
CHAP. III. Peucedanum. Sow-Fennell. W Ee have three sorts of Sow-Fennell to offer to your consideration in this Chapter. 
1. Peucedanum majus Italicum. Great Sow-Fennell of Italy. The great Sow-Fennell hath divers long branched stalkes of thicke and somewhat long leaves, three for the most part joyned together at a place, among which riseth a crested straight stalke, neare as bigge as Fennell with some joynts thereon, and leaves growing thereat, and towards the toppe some branches issuing from thence, likewise on the toppes of the stalke and branches stand divers tufts of yellow flowers where after grow somewhat flat thinne and yellowish seede twise as bigge as Fennell seede: the roote groweth great and deepe with many other parts and fibres about them, of a strong sent like hot brimstone, and yeelding forth a yel∣lowish milke or clammy juyce almost like a Gum. 
2. Peucedanum vulgare. Common Sow-Fennell. The common Sow-Fennell groweth in the same manner that the former and hath no other difference but that this is lower and smaller by a fourth part, and the smell thereof as strong as the former. 
3. Peucedanum minus. Small Sow-Fennell. As the first Sow-Fennell was larger then the second, so this is lesse then it, having smaller and shorter leaves of a blewish greene colour, of a little bitter taste but almost no smell, the stalke is slender and round, about halfe a yard high, parted into divers branches, whereon stand small tufts of white flowers in an umbell, which are succeeded by thicke short seede almost like to Parsley, but of an ash colour, and bitter sharpe taste: the roote is of the bignesse of ones thumbe, sometimes greater or lesser, with a bush of haires at the toppe, blackish or brownish on the outside, with a thicke barke of a pleasant sweet taste at the first and afterward sharpe. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth naturally in Italy in divers places: the second in good plentie in the salt low Marshes a little by Feversham in Kent: the last was found on Saint Ʋincents Rocke by Bristow, by Lobel as hee setteth it downe in his Adversaria pag. 331. and in Hungarie and Austria by Clusius. They all flower and seede in the end of Sommer that is in Iuly and August. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and in Latine Peucedanus and Peucedanum, some take it of the pitchy sent it 1. Peucedani majoris Italicum s itat. The toppes of the Italian Sow-Fennell. 
2. Peucedanum vulgare. Common Sow-Fennell. 
carryeth, and others of the Pine tree whose leaves are like it. Apulei calleth it Pinastellum: the first is the Peu∣cedanum of Matthiolus, Anguilara and others, and Peucedanum majus Italicum by Lobel and Lugdunnensis: the se∣cond is called by Bauhinus Peucedanum Germanicum and Peucedanum simply without any other addition by Tra∣gus, Fuchsius, Dodonaeus and others: it is called also Foeniculum porcinum but by Tabermontanus Cauda porcina: the last is called by Lobel Peucedani facie perpusilla planta: it is called by Clusius Peucedanum Pannonicum and is proba∣ble as Clusius and Bauhinus say to be the second Saxifrage of Matthiolus: the Arabians call it Harbatum, the Ita∣lians Peucedano and vulgarly Finocchio porcino, and by some also Pinastello, by the Spaniards Fenicho del porco: by the French Fe il de Pourceaus, by the Germans of some Harstrang, but commonly Sewfenchel or Schebelwurts, of the Dutch Verkens Venekell and we in English Sow-Fennell, Hog-Fennell, Sulphurwort and Horstrange. 
The Vertues. The juice of Sow Fennell say Dioscorides and Galen used with Vinegar and Rosewater, or the juice with a lit∣tle Epp orbium put to the nose, helpeth those that are troubled with the Lethargie, the Phrensie, the turning of the braine or dissinesse in the head, the Falling sicknesse, long and inveterate Headach, the Palsie, the Sciatica and the Crampe, and generally all the diseases of the Nerves and Sinewes used with oyle and Vinegar: the juice dissolved in wine or put into an Egge is good for the Cough or shortnesse of breath, and for those that are trou∣bled with winde and tormenting paines in the body: it purgeth the belly gently and dissolveth the winde and hardnesse of the Spleene, it giveth case to those women that have sore travaile in child birth, and easeth the paines both of the bladder and reines, and wombe also: a little of the juice dissolved in wine and dropped into the eares easeth much of the paines in them, and put into an hollow tooth ceaseth the paines thereof. The roote worketh to the like effect, but more slowly and lesse, and is to be boyled in water and the decoction thereof drunke: the dryed powder of the roote being put into foule Vlcers of hard curation clenseth them throughly, re∣mooveth any splinters of broken bones or other things in the flesh, &amp; healeth them up perfectly, &amp; likewise bring∣eth on old and inveterate sores to cicatrising: it is also put into such salves as serve to heate and warme any place. the roote is hot in the second degree and dry in the third, but the juice is stronger. Pliny recordeth the vertues hereof in divers places: the roote being drunke in wine with the seede of the Cypresse tree in powder easeth the str gling of the mother, but some use to burne it and by the smell thereof give ease thereunto: the juice helpeth the burstings of children and their Navells when they sticke forth: the roote is of so great force in greene wounds and sores, that it draweth out the quitture from the very bones.
CHAP. IIII. Libanotis. Herbe Francumsence. T Here be divers sorts of Libanotides as both the old and new Authors have recorded, some whereof beare broad leaves, others fine and like Fennell, of which I meane to entreat in this Chapter, and referre the other to the last order of these Vmbelliferous plants, which containe those with broad leaves. 
1. Libanotis Ferula folio sive Cachryfera sive Cachrys vera. Fennell leafed herbe Francumsence. This herbe Francumsence is a worthy, goodly, and rare plant, shooting forth divers bushy great reddish stalkes of leaves of a fresh greene colour, being somewhat thicker and longer then those of the Ferula but shorter then of Peucedenum Sow Fennell, yet often and in many places set three together, of a quicke aromatick sent and taste comming somewhat neare a Lemmon: from among these leaves riseth up sometimes but not every yeare with me a good bigge stalke, but neither so great nor halfe so high as the Ferula, and not much above a yard high, nor much higher then the stalkes with leaves, branched into very many sundry parts, bearing yellow flowers which are succeeded by pretty good big whitish yellow seede, round and a little long withall, somewhat cre∣sted on the outside two joyned together as is usuall in most ferulous plants, which maketh one side flat, the small footestalke running betweene, and is sayd to be causticke or burning; which caused the name Cachrys to be gi∣ven to it: the root groweth deepe and spreadeth much and with many branches in the ground, bigger then a great Pa snep at the toppe, and white on the outside as well as inside, with a pith in the middle, but so brittle that one must handle it very tenderly if he doe not breake it, and yeeldeth forth a clammy pale juice, of so fine a sharpe sent that I compare it to the Lemmon, and endureth many yeares. 
2. Libanotis ferulae folio &amp; semine, sive Panax Asclepium Perulae facie Lobelij. Lobel his Esculapius, Woundwort or Allheale. Divers learned men have set forth each almost a sundry herbe, for the Panax Asclepium of Dioscorides and Th phr sti , and every one supposing his to be the right, and because they all seeme to be worthy plants fit to be knowne, I thinke it meete to shew you them all with their differences, and wherein they come nearest or are fur∣ther off from the true, and first to beginne with that of Lobel, which groweth nothing so high or great as the F ul , with fine leaves like unto it and yellow flowers also: but the seede that followeth is broad not so small as Fennell but more like unto Ferula of a little quicke taste or sent: the roote is small and not growing deepe, nor abideth after it hath given seede, the sent and taste being not much resinous or sharpe. 
3. Panax Asclepium Matthioli. Matthiolus his Esculapius Allheale, Although Pena being very spleneticke against Matthiolus in many things doth thinke and so doth Columna also that this Pinax Asclepium is no other herbe then a Ferula, yet surely I thinke they are much mistaken therein both for that Matthiolus had set forth the Ferula before and described it at large, and although he had not described his Panax as he did the Ferula, I presume the chiefe cause was that hee had onely the dryed plant sent him without a description and therefore so let it passe, not intending to coyne a description of that which hee never saw growing, as also because Bauhinus doth number it among the other sorts as a differing , and Lugdunensis giveth his Figure also which is divers fron the Ferula in having finer, smal∣ler 1. Libanotis cachryfera sive Cachrys vera ▪ Fennell leafed herbe Francumsence. 
2. Panax Asclepi Ferula f e Lobelij. Lobel his Esculapius Woundwort or Allheale. 
and shorter leaves then Ferula, and a smaller umbell of flow∣ers, the roote likewise is small and no way answerable to a Ferula. 
4. Panax Asclepium Apulum Columna. Columna his Esculapius Allheale of Naples. Fabius Columna saith that this his Panax Asclepiū is the truest 4. Panax Asclepium Apulum Columna. Columna his Esculapius Allheale of Naples. 
of any other, hath bin described by any other author, growing frequently in Apulia, answering it in every part according to the descriptions thereof in Dioscorides and Theophrastus. Fo it hath a small slender roote with a bush of haires at the toppe of the bignesse of ones thumbe, with a thicke rugged barke of a whitish yellow colour on the outside, and spungie white and wooddy pith within, full of a clammy white milke hardening quickly into a Gum which is bitter and sharpe in taste and un∣pleasant but yet aromaticall: the stalkes of leaves which are spread next the ground, in a round forme at the head of the roote, are cut into severall long haires as it were thicke set together, somewhat like unto common Yarrow and hairy withall, which is not seene in the other sorts, or rather like unto Fennell leaves but bigger, having seven winged leaves set on a pretty big stalke, five bigger and two smaller which are next the hairy stalke, being greene at the first, but changing yellow when it groweth toward flowring, which with the leaves is halfe a yard long: frō among these doth rise up but one maine of stalke, which is slender two or three foot high sometimes, having some joynts but no leaves thereon to the toppe, whereat usually stand but one or two small tufts or umbells of yellow flowers and seldome three, but spread a little largely and growing closer and rounder as it turneth to seede which are flat and winged on both sides two growing together as is usuall in all other umbelliferous plants, whereon as also on the stalke is often found a sweete smelling Gum as cleare as Timpentine or Gum Arabecke, which is hardly dissolved in water without heate, the like also is taken from the roote cut in peeces, but that it is yellower because it must be forced by the fire. 
5. Panax Asclepium Dalechanipij. The French Esculapius Allheale. The French kind Dalechampius found about Mompelier having a white roote like Parsly, slender, sharpe and w ll s elling, and leaves also like Parsly, or rather like Coriander then Fennell and somewhat hairy with um∣bell of yellow flowers of an absolute roundnesse. 
6. Panax Asclepium Anguilarae &amp; Camerarij. Esculapius Alheale of Candy. This Panax which Anguilara and Camerarius have remembred, saying that in Candy it is usually called Seseli and in Sicilia Peucedanum though both falsely, riseth up with a round Fennell-like stalke foure or five cubits high, with divers joynts thereon divided into branches of leaves, larger then Fennell and smaller then Ferula, of a darke greene colour on the upper side and of a blewish greene underneath, with large umbells of yellow flowers at the toppes turning into broad flat winged seede of a resinotis sent and taste, the leaves being much more milde, and yeelding a whitish milke nothing so hot or strong in smell as Ferula. 
7. Libanotis minor umbella candida. Small herbe Francumsence. This small herbe Francumsence hath sundry leaves lying upon the ground, much cut and divided into longer parts than Peucedanum, and narrower than the greene English Saxifrage, the stalke hath but few joynts and leaves on them, bearing small umbells of white flowers like M u , and small seede after them, almost like the seede of A i i, Bishops weede: the roote is great and white, divided into sundry branches, and with a bush of haires above. 
8. Libanotis ferulacea Germanica. Germane herbe Francumsence. The herbe Francumsence of Germany hath a blackish long roote, as thicke as ones finger, full of a resinous juyce, sharpe and well smelling, set with a bush of haires at the toppe, from whence spring stalkes of fine Fennell-like leaves, but shorter than they: the stalke riseth to halfe a yard height, on the toppes whereof stand bowing umbells of white flowers smelling sweete. There is of this kinde a lesser sort also, not differing from the former in any thing, but in the smallnesse. 
The Place and Time. All these kindes of Libanotid s have beene found growing in sundry places of Italy and France, except the sixt, which as is said hath beene found in Sicily and Candy, and the last in Germany, and doe all flower, and seede, if the yeare be kindely, in the end of Summer. 
The Names. in Greeke is derived from , which is Thus or Olibanum Francumsence, because the smell of the herbes is compared to the smell thereof, and Libanotis likewise in Latine: but because this later age hath found out divers herbes which may be referred for the forme, or for the smell, unto some of the ancients; Theophrastus, Di sc rides, and Galen (who yet in their writings, acknowledged that there are many more sorts than they have set downe) I have here onely shewed you those kindes that have fine leaves, whereof the , or may well be accounted as one of them, both for forme and smell, taking the name from Aescu∣lapius, who ended his life by a fall from of a ladder, as it is set downe by Pliny. The first is called Libanotis seu Rosmarinum by Matthiolus and others (and indeede many Writers have interpreted the Libanotis to be Rosmarinum, and thereby confound the two names together, for the , Libanotis Stephanoma∣tice, id est Coronaria onely is the fourth sort of Libanotis with the ancients, which is properly the Rosmarinum of the Latines, and was, and is usually put into Garlands, &amp;c. and therefore so called Coronarium, when as none of the other Libanotides, being ferul plants can fitly be called Rosmarinum in that sence, or serve for that use) and is the first Libanotis of Dioscorides, Theophrastus, and Galen, whose seede is called Cachrys or Canchrys, as it is in some coppies, because it is fiery in taste Camerarius calleth it Libanotis cachryfera, Lobel Cachrys verier Libanotis Galeno, and Cas lpiu Libanotis Candida. This word Canchrys or Cachrys, is of divers significations, and it is the pill or or ball wherewith they use to burne the skin to make an escarte, from whence also the seed had the name, having the like qualitie and Cachrys i understood to be a scaly tuft (which some also take to be the catk ins of sundry trees) of leaves growing in Winter, and falling away, say some, in the Spring; but others thinke that it is but the ger en or bud, which pleadeth into branches with leaves after Winter, when the Spring is come on: the second hath his name and is title, as Lobel and Bauhinus call it, and is the Panaces Asclepium of Dodonaeus and others: the third is called Panacis Asclep um by Matthiolus, Lugdunensis and others, and by Banbinus Libanotidi secunde s ilis, Panax Asclepium pri the fourth is so called by Columna, as it is in the title, and by Banbinus Panax se f lioso: the last is the Panax Asclepium alterum of Dalechampius in Lugdunensis, which Bauhinus calleth Pa∣nax Asclepium umbelli lu a the sixt is the Rosmarinum alterum ferulaceum Dioscoridi by Lobel, and by Angui∣la Ca Panax Asclepium, for so it was entitled unto them by Dodaeneus, and Tabermantanus Lib ∣ and by Casalpi Libanotis nigra: the seventh is the Libanotis Septentrionaliū herbariorū of Lobel, and the by Lugdunensis: the last is called by Thalius in his Harcynia sylva Libanotis whereof he maketh a major ▪ and , and I have thereupon called it Libanotis ferulacea Germanica. The Ara∣bi and the Libanotis Xaier , A lfach, and Calchala, or Cachola: other Nations doe follow the of Rosmarinum, and thereafter call this as well as the Latines Rosmarinum, which is our ordinary by one and the fam ame: but wee have more fitly distinguished them, by calling this kinde, herbe F sence from the Greeke appellation. 
The Vertues. D scorides saith that the leaves of all the sorts of herbe Francumsence doe usually stay the bleedings of the he∣ all veines, and aseth the heate, inflammations, and swelling of the fundament, if they be bruised and ap∣plied unto them, and do digest the kernells and empostumations of the body, wheresoever they are hard to be : the dried rootes mixed with honey clense foule ulcers, and ease the paines and torments of the body or bowells, and being take in wine helpeth the biting of venomous Serpents, and provoketh both urine and wo∣mens courses: the same also helpeth to discusse ancient tumours or swellings being laid on them: the juyce of the herbe as well as the roote mixed with hony and annointed on the eyes quickneth the sight, the seede being drunke doth the like, and helpeth those that have the falling sicknesse, or have old paines in their breasts or sto∣mackes: it helpeth also the Kings evill, if it be taken with pepper in wine: it provoketh sweat being put into oyle and annointed, it helpeth those that are bursten, that have crampes or convulsions or the gout, if it be beaten with the meale of darnell, and mixed with vinegar, and laid to the places: the same also mixed with sharpe vine∣gar, cleanseth the lepry, morphew, and the like deformities in the skinne: that seede that is burning, called Cachrys, is not to be used inwardly, for it is too sharpe, and will exasperate the throat: the greene roote is a great healer of all wounds being bruised and laid thereto, but saith Dioscorides, the seede called Cachrys is of a heating and mightie drying qualitie, and therefore is good to be put into washing balls, or such things as clense the skin, and being annointed on the head helpeth the defluxions and rheumes of the eyes, but it must be rubbed off the third day. Esculapius Panax or Allheale, as the said Dioscorides saith, hath in the flowers and seede a helping power to heale ulcers, fretting or running cankers, and likewise wheales, pushes, or the like breaking out in the skinne, being bruised with hony and applied to them; the same also is profitably both drunke in wine against ve∣nemous Serpents, as also to have the places annointed with it, and oyle mixed together. 
CHAP. V. Foeniculum. Fennell. A Lthough I have in my former booke given you the knowledge of two or three sorts of Fen∣nell, yet because there are some others not there spoken of, I thinke it not amisse to shew you them all in this place together, and the rather, because therein I did not so amply insist on the vertues, as they did require. 
1. Foeniculum vulgare. Common Fennell. Common Fennell is well knowne to rise up with sundry round stiffe stalkes, foure or five foote high, bearing at severall joynts long stalkes, of fine small long leaves, smelling some∣what strong, but not unpleasant, and at the toppes on severall branches, tufts, or umbells, of yellow flowers, which turne into small round bitterish greenish seede, two alwayes together, as in the other umbellifers, and be∣ing ripe and drie become somewhat sad coloured; the roote is long and white, running downe deepe into the ground with divers branches thereat: some doe make two sorts, one with greene leaves wholly, an other with teddish greene leaves not differing in ought else. 
2. Foeniculum dulce. Sweete Fennell. Sweete Fennell groweth no otherwise than the former doth, having both rootes, leaves, stalkes, and flowers, after the same manner, saving that this, neither beyond sea, nor in our country doth rise so high, and hardly en∣dureth the sharpenesse of our Winters; the seede is larger, yellower, and sweeter in taste, neare unto Anniseede then the former, which so continueth in the hot countries, but will not hold either colour, largenesse, or sweet∣nesse, long in our countrie, but each of them decay yearely, so that the third yeares sowing, yeeldeth as bitter small, and sad coloured seede as any in any other garden or country of this land, so that you may hereby certainely know that it is the climate onely that changeth it to be ei∣ther 1. Foeniculum vulgare. Common Fennell. 
larger or smaller, longer or shorter, yellower or paler than others, &amp; also giveth the taste to be sweeter or bitterer, which divers have thought to be differing sorts: some also thinke that the Cardus Fennell, as the Italians call it, is a di∣vers sort of Fennell from the other sweet sort, when as it is onely the art in ordering it, by transplanting and whitening it that maketh the leaves grow so thicke bushing together more than the ordinary, and the whiting giveth it a sweeter rellish, and a shorter crispe taste in eating. 
3. Foeniculum semine rotundo minore. Small round Fennell. There is a small kinde of Fennell which differeth not from the common sort, either in taste or smell, but in being lower and smaller than it, and that the umbells at the heads of the stalkes are white, and the seede that followeth is lesse than the ordinary sort, being somewhat more like unto Carum Caraway seede.
4. Foeniculum sylvestre. Wild Fennell. The wild Fennell groweth up with great, but fewer stalkes than the common of the garden, having also but few leaves, and those very thinly set thereon, but somewhat stif∣fer or harder in handling, and shorter also; the seede is small and somewhat round, which followeth after the small umbells of yellow flowers. 
5. Hippomarathrum Creticum. Great Fennell of Candy. This great Fennell hath fine, but shorter leaves than the the ordinary sort, the stalke is crested and round, two or three cubits high, of the bignesse of ones finger, divided in∣to sundry branches, bearing yellow flowers at the toppes, and great large, almost round seede afterwards, the roote is great and whitish. 
6. Hippomarathrum sphaerocephalum. Great round headed Fennell. The stalkes of this Fennell are three cubits high, with large Fennell-like leaves, and round globe-like umbells, whose flowers are of a purplish violet colour and large seedes like Fennell, but of a strong sent almost stinking: the roote is long and white enduring long: this is not the last called Hippomarathrum Creticum and Cachryferum for that hath yellow flowers and seede like Cachrys. 
The Place and Time. These sorts of Fennell grow in hot countries as in their titles and desciptions is declared, for the coldnesse of our climate alteroth even the best and sweetest is sowen with us: the wilde sort was brought mee out of Spaine among other seeds by Boel: they all flower and seede in the end of Autumne if the yeare be kindly, I meane the strange sorts. 
The Names. It is in called in Greeke , and Foeniculum in Latine, and both from one signification, quod quasi foenum in hye s arefactum &amp; marcidum reponatur, vel quod magno cum foenore semen reddat, &amp; cum inaruerit ad condienda multa plari sit usus. The first is the most common both in our Land and both the Germanies, which they call nostrum vulg r as well as we, Casalpinus calleth it sylvestre, and Camerarius in horto saith that some tooke it to be Hippo∣marathrum: the second is the Faemiculum dulce of Matthiolus and divers others, and called vulgare by Lugdunen∣sis which all Germane authors say doth as well alter in their countries as in ours, but holdeth more sweete still the hotter the countrey is wherein it groweth: the third Bauhinus onely hath made mention of in his Pinax: the fourth Lobel calleth sponte virens in agri Narbonensium and I may say as well Hispanorum, Matthiolus calleth it Erraticum, and Anguilara doubteth whether it may not bee Hippomarathrum: the fift is very probable to bee the Hippomarathrum of Honorius Bellus of Candy whereof he maketh mention in his first Epistle to Clusius which is extant in the end of Clusius his history of plants, who saith the Candiots call it Platecumino, whose seede as he there saith is as great as those of Cachrys, Bauhinus in his Prodromus seemeth to aime at this having but a branch thereof sent him out of Signor Contarini his Garden at Venice, but could not demonstrate the whole plant: the last is remembred by Alpinus libro de exoticis. The Arabians call it Raienigi, the Italians Finocchio, the Spa∣niards Hin i and Funcho, the French Fenouil, the Germans Fenchel, the Dutch Venkel, and we Fennell. 
The Vertues. Fennell as Galen saith is hot in the third degree, and dry but in the first, and put to many uses, the leaves seede and rootes being both for meate and medicine, the Italians especially doe much delight in the use thereof, and therefore as I sayd before transplant it and whiten it, to make it the more tender to please the taste, which be∣ing sweete and somewhat hot and comforting the stomacke, helpeth to digest the crude flegmaticke qualitie of Fish, and other viscous meats which they much inure themselves unto. We use it to lay upon Fish or to boyle it therewith and with divers other things, as also the seede in bread or other things: the physicall use thereof is to breake winde to provoke Vrine and to ease the paines of the Stone and helpe to breake it: the leaves or seede boyled in Barley water and drunk is good for Nurses to encrease their milke, and to make it the more wholsome for their Nurse Children to take: the leaves being boyled in water but much more the seede stayeth the hickocke, and taketh away that loathing which often happeneth to the stomackes of sicke or feaverish persons, and alayeth the heate thereof, the seede boyled in wine is good for them that are bitten by Serpents or have eaten poy∣sonfull herbes or mushromes, the seede and the rootes much more helpeth to open the obstructions of the Liver, Spleene and Gall and thereby much conduceth to all the diseases arising from them as the painfull and windie swellings of the Spleene and the yellow Iaundies; as also the Goute and Crampes, the seede is of good use in pectorall medicines, and those that helpe the shortnesse of breath, and wheesing by obstructions of the Lungs: it helpeth also to bring downe the courses and to clense the partes after delivery: the rootes are of most use in Physicke drinkes and brothes that are taken to clense the blood, to open obstructions of the Liver, and to pro∣voke Vrine and to amend the evill colour or complexion in the face after long sicknesse, and to cause a good co∣lour and a good habit through the whole body: Fennell both leaves and seedes or rootes are much and often used in drinkes or brothes, for those that are growen fat to abate their unweldinesse and make them more gaunt and lanke: the distilled water of the whole herbe is likewise commended for the same purposes, as also to be dropped into the eyes to clense them from all enormities risen therein, but the condensate juice dissolved or as some take it, the naturall juice or Gum that issueth out thereof of it owne accord in hot countries, doth clense the eyes from mists and filmes that hinder the eyesight: some for this purpose take the greene stalkes of Fennell, and holding them to the fire in Autumne while they are greene, cause a certaine juice or liquor to drop from them, which they apply to the eyes, as holding it to bee more effectuall then eyther condensate juice or the naturall Gum. And some yet more neately make a water to cleare the eye sight in this manner: they powther some fine white Sugar Candy very finely, and put that powder into the hollow greene stalke of Fennell while it groweth a foote above the ground, so that it be betweene two joynts, which after it hath remained therein a day two or three, and the hole covered and bound close over that no raine get in in the meane time, they open it at the lower joynt, having first placed a good peece of soft wax made a little hollow gutture wise under the hole, which may serve as a gut∣ter or quill to carry the liquor (from falling downe by the stalke) into a vessell or thing set of purpose thereto to receive it. The sweete Fennell by reason of the sweetenesse is much weaker then the ordinary, which is better to all the physicall purpose aforesayd, and therefore they doe but deceive themselves and others, that use the sweet Fennell seede in compositions as thinking it the better when as it is much the weaker, by want of the bitternesse which is the most operative: the juice of Fennell dropped into their eares that have wormes breeding in them, killeth the wormes: The wilde Fennell is stronger and hotter then the tame, and is therefore most power∣full against the Stone, but not effectuall to encrease milke, for it is dryer: Honorius Bellus saith that the women of Candy use to boyle the great seede of the Hippomarathrum of Candy in Lye to dye their haire yellow. 
CHAP. VI. Anethum. Dill. A Lthough formerly we have beene acquainted but with one sort of Dill, although Theophrastus saith there are many sorts but expresseth none of them, yet in these later times two other sorts more have beene found out, which we will shew you together here. 
1. Anethum hortense sive vulgare. Common garden Dill. The common Dill groweth up with seldome more then one stalke, neither so high nor so great usually as Fen∣nell being round and with fewer joynts thereon, whose leaves are sadder and somewhat long, and so like Fen∣nell that it deceiveth many, but harder in handling and somewhat thicker, and of a stronger sent also and unplea∣santer, the toppes of the stalkes have fewer branches and smaller umbells of yellow flowers, which turne into small seede somewhat flatter and thinner then Fennell seede, and of a stronger and more unpleasant taste: the roote is small and wooddy perishing every yeare after it hath borne seede, and is unprofitable, never put to any use. 
2. Anethum sylvestre majus. Great wilde Dill. This great kinde differeth not from the former in any nota∣ble 1. Anethum hortense sive vulgare. Common garden Dill. 
part but in the greatnesse both of stalkes, leaves, flowers and seede and that it is found growing naturally wilde in Sici∣lia as Caesalpinus saith. 
3. Anethum sylvestre minus. Small wilde Dill. As the last was greater in all parts then the first so this is much lesse then it growing but a foot high, the leaves are fine and small on the stalkes, and the flowers yellow like it, and the seede small and long, thus in roote as well as the rest being smaller maketh the difference, for both these last are but annu∣all as the first. 
The Place and Time. The first is most usually sowen in Gardens and grounds for the purpose, yet it is found wilde with us in some places: the second as is sayd hath beene found in Sicilia as the last, and sent by Columna to Bauhinus, and by Boel from Lishbone to us. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke quod cito crescat say some, or as others thinke quasi , id est, invictum quia cibi appetentiam excitat: as also quod est congressus &amp; coitio venerea ad quam lacessit Anethi usus ut antiqui prodiderant, tameatsi plurimo usu geniteram tandem exhauriat. The first is simply called Anethum by all authors, or Anethum hortense as Bauhinus doth: the second is onely mentioned by Cesalpinus and Bauhinus out of him and the last by Bauhinus onely from Columna, the Arabians call it Zebet or Sebet, the Italians Aneto the Spaniards Eneldo, the French Anet, the Germans Dyllen and Hechkraut, the Dutch also Dille and we Dill. 
The Vertues. Dill is hot in the third and dry in the second degree, especially being greene, but when it is dryed it is hot and dry in the third, digesting then, more then before: it is good to breede milke saith Dioscorides, but Galen in the Fennell before seemeth to gainesay it, for being so dry it stayeth milke and engendreth it not, and to ease swellings and paines being boyled and drunke: the same also stayeth both the belly and the stomacke from cast∣ing: the decoction thereof helpeth women that are troubled with the paines and windinesse of the mother if they sit there∣in: it provoketh Vrine, it stayeth the hickock, being boyled in wine and but smelled unto tyed in a cloth, and dulleth the eye sight, and being much taken extinguisheth venery, for it mightily expelleth wine, and dryeth up naturall sperme: the seede is of more use then the leaves, although they bee much used to rellish condiments, and is more effectuall to digest raw and viscous humors, yet more unpleasant then Fennell, and is used in all medicines that serve to expell winde, and ease torments and paines thereof: the seede being roasted or fryed and used in oyles or plaisters dissolveth the Impostumes in the fundament, and dryeth up all moyst Vlcers especi∣ally in the secret parts: the oyle made of Dill is effectuall to warme, to resolve humours and Impostumes whe∣ther soft or hard tumors, to ease paines and to procure rest. 
CHAP. VII. Cuminum. Cumin. C Vmin is not knowne to most of our best latter writers and Herbarists to be of any more sorts then one, but wee have had the relation of other sorts, but not those of the ancients, as eyther Syriacum, Aegyp∣tium or Africum which are but one and the same as many good Authors thinke, and but onely differing by the soyle and climate where they grew as shall be shewed. 
1. Cuminum vulgare. Ordinary Cumin. Ordinary Cumin groweth up with slender and low stalkes 1. Cuminum vulgare. Ordinary Cumin. 
not above halfe a yard high, growing white at the last and brancheth out more, having store of leaves which are small and long like unto Fennell, the flowers are somewhat reddish at the tops of the stalkes, which turne into small whitish yellow seed somewhat long and almost round, crested or straked on the rounder side and smelling strong, the roote is small long and white perishing yearely. 
2. Cuminum Melitense dulce. Small sweete Cumin of Malta. This small Cumin whose seede is small and like unto Anne∣seede, but as sweete as sweete Fennell, is usually sowen in the Ile of Malta to put into their bread or other meates, as also to trade with to other parts, for exchange of other commodities, is as I am given to understand as small and low a plant as the Cumin and much like it in leaves and growing, the seede onely is observed to be differing. 
3. Cuminum satiuum acre Melitense. Great sharpe Cumin of Malta. This other hath greater seedes then the ordinary Cumin lon∣ger also and pointed at both ends, crested likewise on the roun∣der side, and of a deader colour smelling more unsavourly and tasting hot quicke and sharpe, almost like Cubebes or Pepper: and it is probable (for we never saw it greene) groweth grea∣ter then the ordinary, although like it in all other parts. 
The Place and Time. All these sorts grow familiarly in the hot countries as Spaine, Italy, the Iles in the Mediterranean Sea, whereof Malta is one, and in Syria, and the other East countries where it is sowen: in our Land it seldome commeth to good, unlesse in a kindly yeare, and sowen in the middle of the Spring, so that it must be late with us (though nothing so with them) before it can be ripe.
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and in Latine also Cuminum and Cyminum: the ancient authors as Dioscorides, Theophrastus, &amp;c. made hereof many kinds, calling them by the sundry countries where they grew, as Egyptium, Galatium, Syriacum, &amp;c. when as it is confidently held they were not differing in specie but in loci praerogativa, for although one sort of seede was rough or hairy and white and called Cuminum Aethiopicum which Hippocrates called Regium as the best, another not rough or hairy called Aegyptium, yet they were not severall sorts but one was better than another according as the countrey gave it goodnesse or excellen∣cie. As for Dioscorides his wilde kinds of Cumin, I have entreated of them before in the third Classis of this worke. The first is called by most writers Cuminum sativum or Cyminum, yet Caesalpinus taketh it to be Cumini sylvestris primum genus Dioscoridis, Guilandinus calleth it Cuminum Aethiopicum and Cordus in Dioscor. Cymi∣num R num. The two last are onely touched by Bauhinus in his Pinax and called by those of Malta Cumina∣gero that i wilde Cumin and the sweete kinde Cuminagero dolce. The Arabians call it Camum or Kemum, the Indians Cumin , the Spaniards Cominohos, the French Comin, the Grmans Kimmell, the Dutch Comijn, and we Cumin, and the seede Cuminseede. 
The Vertues. The seede of Cumin is not onely most used with us who have little or none of the herbe growing, but every where else also, and both was and yet is in sundry places used both in bread and meate to give a rellish to them as we doe with Pepper, and was pleasing as well to the stomack as the taste: Galen saith it is in the third degree of heate, and in the same degree almost of drynesse, and as Dioscorides saith, it heateth, bindeth and dryeth, but Do∣d us insisteth thereagainst, shewing that Cumin seede by attenuating and digesting doth discusse humors and doth not represse them by binding or astruction, as in the swellings of the cods by winde or a waterish humor. Cuminseede used in a Foul doth quickly take it away, and so it doth all other paines and swellings, being boy∣led and Barley meale put unto it and so used: it also dissolveth winde in the body and easeth the paines and tor∣ments thereof by the Collicke, being boyled in wine and drunke, and is i used as a corrector of any windy meats: in the same manner also taken it helpeth those that are bitten by Serpents: the seede also taken in broth, or drinke or Polca Dioscorides hath it, is good for those that are short winded, or are otherwise troubled with an old cough, or the disease of the breast to boyle the seede with Figges in wine: the same seede beaten and mixed with Vi and applyed to the nose that bleedeth doth stay the bleeding, and boyled in water and the lower parts ba∣thed therewith stayeth the abounding courses of women: Cumin seede bruised and fryed with an hard E and bound to the backe part of the head easeth an old head-ach, and stayeth the rheume that falleth into the eyes or are blood shotten, or else the powder mixed with wax into the forme of a plaister and applyed warme to the eyes will soone helpe it, and take it away. Cumin seede is sayd to make any one looke pale that useth it inward∣ly, or applyeth it outwardly. 
CHAP. VIII. Meum. Spignell. O F Meum the ancients likewise knew and described but one kind, although it was entit led by divers names of the places where the best grew: but we have in these latter times beene acquain∣ted with three or foure other plants which may not unfitly be referred also thereunto, as by their de∣scriptions you shall soone understand. 
1. Meum vulgatius. Common or ordinary Spignell. The rootes or common Spignell doe spread much and deepe in the ground, many strings or branches growing from one head which is hairy at the top of a blackish browne colour on the outside and white within, smelling well, and of an aromaticke taste, from whence rise sundry long stalkes of most fine cut leaves like haires, smaller then Dill, set thicke on both sides of the stalke and of a good sent: among these leaves rise up round stiffe stalkes with few joynts and leaves at them, and at the toppes an umbell of fine pure white flowers at the edges, where∣of sometimes will be seene a shew of reddish or blush colour especially before they bee full blowne and are suc∣ceeded by small somewhat round seede bigger then the ordinary Fennell, and of a browner colour, divided into two parts and crested on the backe as most of the umbelliferous seedes are. 
2. Meum aliud minus. Small Spignell. The small Spignell hath a good big roote a foote long into the ground blacke on the outside and white within without any branches downewards, but parted into severall heads upwards, each whereof sendeth forth sundry short slender stalkes of most fine short leaves set by small tufts together: among which rise up a few low stalkes not above a foote high, bearing white umbells of flowers and very small seede after them as small as Parsley, but blacker of colour, the sent whereof is most quicke sharpe and very pleasing as is the rest of the plant. 
3. Meum Alexiterium Creticum. The preservative Candy Spignell. The stalke hereof is about two foote high, as thicke as that of Dill and greene, with many long winged leaves thereon as finely cut as the former Spignell: the umbells of flowers are white and small, and very small long 1. Meum vulgatius. Common or ordinary Spignell. 
3. Meum Alexiterium Creticum. The preservative Spignell of Candy. 
4. Meum Spartian Italicum. Italian Bastard Spignell. 
5. Meum Alpinum Germanicum illis Muttelina dictum. Mountaine Spignell of Germany. 
sweete smelling seede follow them: the roote is slender long and white of a fingers thicknesse, smelling well and of a sharpe taste: Our author Alpinus saith hee had another sort from the Bassan hills, but this hee holdeth for the truest. 
4. Meum spurium Italicum. Italian bastard Spignell. Bastard Spignell is somewhat like unto the true, yet more like unto Dill with longer and thicker leaves: the stalkes rise as high as the first with white umbells of flowers, and larger seede on them: the whole plant and every part whereof is of more strong and unpleasant sent and taste then the former, but the roote especially which spreadeth branches like the true Spignell, but smaller somewhat like Sow or Hogge-Fennell. 
5. Meum Alpinum Germanicum illis Muttelina dictum. Mountaine Spignell of Germany. This Spignell hath but few stalkes of winged leaves rising from the roote, somewhat broader then the leaves of the ordinary Spignell and shorter, and are betweene Carum and Meum; among which riseth a slender straked stalke a foote high ba e of leaves for the most part to the toppe, where are set two or three small umbells of pur∣plish flowers each consisting of five small leaves a peece, bearing seede afterwards that is somewhat long and reasonable great, the roote is of a fingers length covered with a rugged blackish barke, and but few fibres ad∣joyning thereunto, and a bush of haire at the toppe, of a smell somewhat sharpe like the ordinary Spignell but much weaker. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in many places wilde in the North countries of this Land, as in Lancashire and Yorkeshire yet it is planted also in Gardens, the second in Savoy, the third in Candy; the fourth in Italy, the last in Austria, and at the bottome of Saint Vincents Rocke by Brestow, right against the hot water which is not to bee seene but at a low water as it hath beene affirmed to me by some: but I doubt it will prove Lobel his Pencedani facie pusilla plants: when it is cetter growne up with me I shall the better judge of it. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and , in Latine also Meum, and by some of the ancient authors Athamanticum, ey∣ther from Athamantes the son of Ac lus who is thought first to have found it, or from the mountaine Athamantes which is in Thessalia where the best grew: Pliny nameth it Macedonicum and Hispanicum, not as though they were severall sorts but as was usuall with them in many other plants, they named the places where the best was gathered in their time: for the same Pliny saith that in his time Meum was onely sowen in Italy by some few Physi ions, when as it is now knowne to grow wilde in many places of Italy. The first is generally taken for the Meum of the ancients, &amp; so called by most of the moderne authors, yet Tragus and Fuchsius took it to be Dau∣ Creticus and Cordus in Dioscor lem and historia to be Tordylion, some also called it Anethum sylvestre, &amp; as Ruel∣lius saith the French Anethum t t osum, and Dodonaeus saith some tooke it to be Libanotian genus and others Fani∣culus p rcium, Faithfull calleth it Sesili Creticum, and Bauhinus calleth it Meum folijs Anethi, because he calleth the second Meum Dauci Cretic facie, which Lugdunensis calleth Meum aliud: the third is only remembred by Alpinus, at the south by Matthiolia that it is more like Dill then the first but not described, and therefore Lobel in his Obser∣vations giveth a very briefe touch thereof, and the figure withall, calling it Meum spinum alterum Italicum, Bau∣hinus and Tabermontanus call it Meum adulterinum; the last is first remembred by Gesner in hortis, and then by Ca∣merarius, who call it Muttelina, from the name Mutry or Mutteren, whereby the Germanes, Helvetians, and others did call it. Bauhinus in his Matthiolus and Pinax, calleth it Meum Alpinum umbella p rpurascente, and maketh a doubt if it be not the Daucus Montanus of Clusius, which in my mine opinion it cannot be, for that Clu∣sius saith, the leaves of that Daucus is like Seseli pratensae, and the seede is as small as Parsley, in both which this Muttelina differeth from it, although it seeme to agree in the purplich umbell, and somewhat in the roote: the Arabians call it Me, the Italians Meo &amp; Imperatrix as Matthiolus saith, but that name is given by the vulgar Italians to Angelica, and many other plants that are of any especiall vertue, as Lobel saith: the Spaniards Pinel s, and Sistre of some, the French Meum, the Germans Beerwurts. 
The Ʋertues. Galen saith that the rootes of Spignell are hot in the third degree, and dry in the second, whereby it is availe∣able to provoke urine and womens courses, and the paines in the kidnies and bladder; but if more thereof be taken than is fit and convenient it causeth head-ach, for by sending the hot vapours to the head, it is thereby moved and hurt; the rootes of Meum or Spignell (for no part else of the plant is of use unto us, and yet the seede is very aro∣maticall) boyled in wine or water and drunke, helpeth the strangury, and stoppings of the urine▪ the winde, swellings and paines in the stomacke, the paines of the mother, and all joynt-aches: if the powder of the rootes be mixed with honey, and the same taken as a Lohoc or licking medicine it breaketh tough flegme, and drieth up the rheume that falleth on the lungs: the rootes are accounted very effectuall against the sting or biting of any vene∣mous creature, and is one of the ingredients into Mithridatum and Theriaca Andromachi, which are especiall an∣tidotes for the same, and many other effectuall purposes. 
CHAP. IX. Gingidium. Strange Chervill. I Have two sorts of this Chervill that properly belong to this Division or Order, and there are two more which might be referred to the other Divisions of these umbelliferous plants which I distinguished in the beginning, yet for the names sake, I would not willingly exclude them the family, but let them keepe company with the rest at this time. 
1. Gingidium verum sive Syriacum. The true Gingidium or strange Chervill. The true Gingidium that Ranwolfius saw in Syria groweth up with an upright stalke some∣what rough, branching forth from the very ground almost, whereon are set sundry stalkes of fine cut leaves, smaller than Fennell, especially those on the stalkes and branches, for the lowest are a little broa∣der; Visnaga Gingidium appellatum. 
4. Gingidium latifolium Syriatum. Broad leafed Chervill of Siria. 
at the toppes where of grow great broad umbells of white flowers, a little purplish in the middle, which umbells before they flower hang downe their heads, and after the flowers are past, the umbells doe contract or draw themselves rounder, the outer part being higher than the middle, which then is so hollow, that it represen∣teth a birds neast, somewhat like to the umbell of seede in the wilde Carrot, and beareth plenty of very small seed, the roote is not great, but long, white, and woolly, perishing every yeare that it beareth seede, which is usually the same yeare it is sowen, or else springing late and not shooting up in stalkes for seede, it will abide a Winter: the whole plant hath a little resinous taste and smell to my senses. 
2. Gingidium Hispanicum. Spanish Toothpicke Chervill. The Spanish Toothpicke Chervill groweth rather greater than the former, but with smaller and slenderer stalkes and tenderer leaves at the joynts, thicker and more finely cut at the toppes, whereat stand large umbells of white flowers, divided into many parts, and standing upon long stalkes, which when the seepe groweth ripe waxe hard, being long and slender, and serve well for tooth pickes: the roote is long and white: the whole plant is of a bitter taste.
3. Gingidium Chaerefolij folijs. Another strange Chervill. This other strange Chervill hath divers stalkes of winged leaves, very like unto the ordinary Chervill, but not divided into so many parts, the stalke is round, straked, and blackish, halfe a yard high, with joynts and leaves like the others: the umbells of white flowers are compassed about with smaller and finer cut leaves, which when the flowers are past are contracted together somewhat like the first, and are somewhat clammy, wherein lie small seede: the roote is long, white, and bitterish. 
4. Gingidium latifolium Syriacum. Broad leafed Chervill of Syria. This Syrian Chervill hath but few stalkes of winged leaves, somewhat like to Parsneps, but that every divided leafe is broad and round but lesser, the stalke is somewhat hairy, crested, small, low and naked of leaves to the toppe, where grow divers long stalkes with small umbells of white flowers, and two or three small long leaves with them: the smell and taste is like unto the first. 
The Place and Time. All these here exprest, are said to be brought out of Syria, but the second groweth also plentifully in Spaine, from whench it hath beene brought and sent to friends: they all flower late, and therefore the seede is much la∣ter, so that if the yeare be not hot and kindly, the seede will hardly ripen with us. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and Gingidium in Latine; Dioscorides saith it was also called in his time Lepidi∣um, but that name doth more fitly sute to another plant, as is shewed before: the old Romanes were wont to call it Bisacuta, and the Syrians Ʋisnaga. The first, as I said, Rauwolfius in these later times first made knowne to the Christian world, having gathered it in Syria, giving it the name of Gingidium Dioscoridis, which it doth most truly represent, for Dioscorides, cōpareth Gingidiū to Pastinaca sylvestris, which as it is finer in leafe so is it most like in the head of seede, and Camerarius in hortis thereupon calleth it Syriacum: the second is the Ʋisnaga of Mat∣thiolus, Lobel, and others; yet Matthiolus would faine have it to be Pastinaca sylvestris major, because it groweth so great, Tragus calleth it Seseli, and Fuchsius Seseli Massiliense, Caesalpinus Cumini sativi alterum genus: the third is the Gingidium of Matthiolus, Lugdunensis, and Tabermontanus: the last is called by Lobel Gingidium folio Bau∣cie Syriacum, and is the first Gingidium by Dodonaeus; yet as he sheweth in the Chapter of Fastinaca latifolia, Iaco∣bus Manlius taketh Baucia to be the Pastinaca tenuifolia of Dioscorides. 
The Vertues. These herbes are more used as nutriment than medicine, both in former times and now also where they grow, for Dioscorides and Galen speake more of the edible propertie, that they are by their bitternesse welcome and a∣greable to the stomacke, being eaten raw or boyled, or divers other wayes ordered, as those times and mens wills led them to take them: but in that Galen saith in one place, that they are rather medicinable than nourish∣ing, it is because he sheweth that they have a temperate qualitie betweene heat and cold, but have a manifest bit∣ter and binding property, by both which they are so commodious to the stomacke, that they are of the nature of a medicine, to clense and dry up the moist humours that by their abounding doe much offend the stomacke, and by it the liver and other parts: the other medicinable qualities also therein rising from thence, are to be pro∣fitable for the diseases of the bladder, and to provoke urine being boiled in wine and drunke. 
CHAP. X. Pyrethrum umbelliferum. The true Pelletory of Spaine. T Here are in mine opinion two sorts of this Fyrethrum, the forme of their leaves being different, indu∣cing me so to thinke, although there be nothing else as shall be shewed. 
1. Pyrethrum umbelliferum primum. The first Pelletory of Spaine. This Pyrethrum hath divers stalkes of fine cut leaves, the forme and divisions whereof doe some∣what resemble the forme of Mayweede, being short, and not long like Fennell, or like wilde Carrots, as Dioscorides compareth them, from among which riseth up some stalkes, with few or no leaves on them, bran∣ched into two or three parts, bearing a round umbell of white flowers, after which follow somewhat round darke coloured seed bigger than Anniseede: the roote groweth sometimes as great as two thummes together, but often of a thumbes bignesse, and a foote or more deepe, of a brownish yellow colour on the out side, and whi∣tish within, of a very sharpe and heating taste, drawing forth water into the mouth, more plentifully and quickly than the common Pelletory of Spaine, which hath a Daisie-like flower (as my taste if it deceive mee not, hath enfor ed me) howsoever some authors have set downe the contrary, and endured after seede time, if it be some∣what carefully defended in the Winter time. 
2. Pyrethrum umbelliferum alterum. The other Pelletory of Spaine. This other Pelletory groweth somewhat lower, the 2. Pyrethrum umbelliferum primum. The first Pelletory of Spaine. 
leaves are somewhat longer and finer, resembling Dill; the stalkes are slenderer and full of leaves, the umbells of flowers are white, but not so great: the roote is slenderer and single, and herein consisteth the chiefest difference. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth more usually in the hotter countries, of Italy, Spaine, &amp;c. the other on some mountaines in Germa∣ny, and often among the rockes whereon there is but a crust of earth, so that the rootes grow in the chinkes: they flower and seede toward the end of Summer. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , ob radicis igneum fervorem, and Pyrethrum in Latine, as also Salivaris, from the quality to draw spittle into the mouth: the first is the Pyrethrum ve∣rum of Matthiolus, and alterum of Lobel and others, Came∣rarius calleth it Pyrethrum Dioscoridis, Caesalpinus doubted to call it Pyrethrum, for untill it was well examined by the learned, they were loath to admit it as Dodonaeus, who would rather find a ' fault in the description of Dioscorides, and suppose it to be a kinde of Saxifrage, than admit it for true Pyrethrum. The other is called by Lugdunensis Pyre∣thrum Gesneri, because Gesner sent it to Dalechampius, and as I said, is most probable to be a differing sort from the for∣mer; for I rather thinke this to be it that Tragus found on the mountaines, and called Faeniculum montanum, than the former, as Bauhinus doth, who also noteth it in his Pinax, that the Pyrethrum, that hee saw in the Padoa garden, varied in having yellow flowers from this, which hath growne with us and is white. 
The Vertues. This Pelietory is hot and drie in the third degree: the roote taken with hony is effectuall against all cold diseases of the braine, as the Apoplexie, falling sicknes, the vertigo, or turning of the braine, and others of the like nature: it helpeth also the defluxions of rheume from the head to the teeth, being bruised and heated in some vineger, and the mouth gargled therewith, or the roote it selfe chewed in the mouth, doth often ease the furious paines of the tooth-ach if it proceede from rheume; it is effectually put also into all those oyles or oyntments that are used to warme and heats any part of the body, or the sinewes that are benummed with cold, or the dead or shaking palsie: for which purpose, some doe much commend an oyle drawne from the greene rootes, to be anointed, yea though the parts be drawing to a gangreene: assuredly, it much helpeth all cold griefes either inward or outward. 
CHAP. XI. Nucula terrestris sive Bulbocastanum. Earth Chesnut. O F the Earth Chesnut there is two sorts, a greater and a lesser in each part. 
1. Nucula terrestris major. The greater Earth Chesnut. The great plant bringeth forth divers long stalkes of leaves immediatly from the roote which are finely cut in and divided, somewhat like unto the leaves of Parsly, that grow on the middle or top of the stalke, as Dodonaeus compareth them, yet larger than the next or small Earth-nut, among which riseth up a slender stalke about a foote high, bearing at the toppes many small white flowers in an umbell, which turne into blackish small long seede, smelling somewhat sweet: the roote is not fully round or smooth, but bunching out in one place or other, and somewhat rough, of a blackish browne colour on the outside, and white within, of a pleasant taste, betweene a Chesnut and a Parsnippe, which is often eaten by women and children, a -they have roasted them by the fire or under the embers. 
2. Nucula terrestris minor. The lesser Earth-nut or Chesnut. This smaller Earth-nut hath a small toundish browne roote like the former, but lesser, from whence riseth up a long slender whitish string or stalke, whethersoever you will call it, within the ground, not alwayes rising straight up from the roote, which groweth foure or five inches deepe in the earth, but foulding or crumpling it selfe to and fro unto the toppe of the ground, from whence it riseth a little bigger naked or bare of leaves for an inch or two, and then sendeth forth from the sides of the same stalke, sundry small stalkes of very fine cut leaves, little bigger than haires, of a sad greene colour, and at the toppe whereof sundry branches of white flowers in umbells, and such like small long seede, as in the former, but lesser, ond somewhat sharpe in taste. 
The Place and Time. The first is as frequent in the upper and lower Germany, and in France and Italy, and the lesser more frequent in our country than theirs, although, as Camerarius saith, it groweth by the Rheyne also, and flowers in the begin∣ning of Summer, seeding quickly after. 
The Names. It hath no Greeke name, but what is acquired from the Nucula terrestris major vel minor. Earth-nuts or Chesnuts. 
Latine, which is , when as the Latines by a cor∣rupt word doe call it Bolbocastatinum, or Bulbocastainum, but by a better Nucula terrestris, as Lobel doth, but Guinterius &amp; Ge pilas thinke that the word should be rather Balanocasta∣um, which is strange as the other, and but formed toge∣ther to shape it a coat sutable to the wearing: Dodonaeus in his forme workes tooke it to be Bunium of Dioscorides; but it seemeth upon better advice, he changed his opinion, and maketh no mention thereof in his later, or Pemptades . which Lobel also seemeth to stumble at, not knowing, as he sa aduersaria, fol. 71. any other plant that may repre∣sent Dioscorides his Bunium if this be not it: but the descrip∣tion of in Dioscorides doth so much vary from this, and hath so little resemblance, that I wonder judicious and lea men should so erre, for if one or two words herein doe correspond unto the Bulbocastanum, all the rest co th quite, for besides that Dioscorides maketh no mention of the roote to be bulbous, or otherwise, which was not fit to be omitted, and giveth an especiall knowledge of the plant; there is in this Earth-nut no square stalke, nor of a fingers thicknesse, nor in the true coppies, as Lugdunensis noteth, is there any mention of Parsley-like leaves neare the rootes, but on the stalkes, nor are the flowers like Dill, which are yellow, nor is the seede smaller than Henbane, the properties also of each, being different, Thus have I shew∣ed you that Bolbcastanon connot be Bunium, but what Buni∣um is, by the judgement of Dalechampius, I shall shew you a little hereafter among the wild Carrots. Matthiolus ma∣keth the first here, to be his first Oenanthe in fol. 627. of Bau∣binus edition; Doctor Turner tooke it to be Apios; and Cae∣salpinus calleth it Pancaseolus, and as Camerarius saith, Gera∣nium primū Dioscoridis, but he saith that the Italians call it so; because the vulgar eate it in stead of bread and cheese. Lug∣dunensis calleth it Bulbocastanon grandius, as Camerarios in hurte also aknowledgeth it, and doth call it Bulbo castanum Tralliani, but Lugdunensis by that name understandeth the lesser sort calling it mas, because he would make afae∣mina, which is a quite differing plant from this, as I shall shew you among the Oenanthes. Gesner, Dodonaeus, Taber∣montanus and others, doe generally call it Bulbocastanum. The other is, as I said even now, called by Lugdunensis Bulbocastanum mas Tralliani, and Bulbocastanum alterum minoribus folijs &amp; bulbis by Camerarius, Lonicerus un∣derstandeth this plant, which he calleth a species of Ornithogalum. The French Savoyards call it Faverottes, the Germans Erdkersten, and Erdnuss, the Dutch Erdtnoten, and wee Earth-nuts, Earth Chesnuts, Ground nuts, and Kipper nuts. 
The Vertues. The roote is hot and drie, and somewhat binding, yet all moderately, but the seede is more in both, yet hath an opening propertie to provoke urine: the roote is said to be good for those that either spit or pisse bloud: they that use to eate of them doe finde them nourishing as Chesnuts, and no otherwise profitable in any especiall respect. 
CHAP. XII. Oenanthe recepta herbariorum. Dropwort. A Lthough I know that none of these plants described in this Chapter, is the right Oenanthe of Dioscorides, yet because the common vote of these times passeth so upon them, and that I could not so well joyne them to the Filipendulas here before set forth, unto whom they are in some sort like in that they were umbellifers, let me place them here to beginne this second divi∣sion of the umbelliferous plants, which are of such as beare thinne cut leaves, like Carrots or Parsley, and that in the last Chapter it was shewed you, that some did call the Nucula terre∣stris, Oenanthe, as well as the ordinary Filipendula.
1. Oenanthe Apij folie major. The most ordinary great Droppewort. This great Dropwort, hath for rootes, many round white and somewhat long Asphodill like clogs, joyned toge∣ther at the toppes, and ending in small fibres, from whence rise many greene winged leaves, made of many parts, ut in to the forme almost of Smallage leaves, but much smaller, and from among them two or three stiffe round stalkes, halfe a yard, or sometimes two foote high, beset with some such leaves as grow below, and at the toppes sundry spokes or umbells of white flowers, converted afterwardes into Fennell-like seede, but smaller, and of a darke whitish colour. 
2. Oenanthe Apij folie minor duarum specierum. Two smaller sorts of the former Droppewort. These two sorts of small Dropworts have their winged leaves very like in the divisions unto the former, but both 3. Oenanthe Cretica setellata. Candy Dropwort with starre-like heads. 
5. Oenanthe nagusti folie Lobelij. Lobels narrow leafed Enanthe or Droppewort. 
6. Oenanthe Cicurae facie Lobelij. Lobels Hemlocke like Enanthe or Dropwort. 
smaller by much &amp; more green, yet the one of them also smaller than the other, and the lesser a little finer jagged, which plaine∣ly sheweth the difference as well as the seede, which is smaller almost by the halfe, and rounder than the greater of these, which is somewhat like unto Dill seede, but somewhat smaller and white, the flowers in either being white, but differing in greatnesse: the rootes likewise are much alike: yet still greater or lesser the one than the othrr, and each consisting of sundry small tubers, with many strings or fibres among them. 
3. Oenanthe Cretica stellata. Candy Droppewort with starre-like heads. After many yeares standing, this sendeth forth an upright stalke, scarce a foote high, without any leafe thereon, and with foure and five heads or tufts of white flowers, upon long foote stalkes, encompassed with eight or tenne somewhat long and pointed leaves like a starre, after which follow small seede somewhat like to the Indian Scabious: the leaves that grow below are winged, that is many small ones set at distances upon a long foote stalke, very like, both for forme and bignesse, unto the biger of the last two recited sorts which fall away in the Winter, and springing a fresh in the Spring from the roote, which consisteth of sundry Asphodill like clogs, but lesser, somewhat hard and blackish. 
4. Oenanthe Cretica prolifera. Candy Dropworte with fruitfull heads. Very like unto the last is this Candiot, yet differing first in the leaves, which are larger and not cut into so many parts, then in the heads of flowers, which though white and cluste∣ring together like it, yet instead of the long pointed leaves set thereabouts, this hath sundry small heads of the like white flowers, after the manner that many other plants have, namely Marigolds, Daysies, &amp;c. which we call childing or fruitfull, or as some doe, Iacke-Anapes a horse backe, and againe in the seede, which is like to the water or Marsh kinde, and lastly and most especially in the rootes, which are not glandulous like the other, but wholely composed of a number of white fibres and threds: this also upon the first springing thereof from the seede hath but three leaves upon divers stalkes, and those after gaine more. 
5. Oenanthe angustifolia Lobelij. Lobels narrow leafed Enanthe or Dropwort. This Enanthe of Lobel is sayd to be like the first, but with much narrower and finer cut leaves, and not to differ greatly in any other particular. 
6. Oenanthe icutae facie Lobelij. Lobels Hemlocke like Enanthe or Dropwort. The leaves hereof are more like the medow Rue then Smallage having many small ones set together of a fowle darke greene colour, and somewhat like Hemlocke in colour as also in the flowers but more in effect, trou∣bling and overunning the braine and senses being eaten as Lobel saith, the rootes are white and glandulous, or A like sort and tender but sharpe and unpleasant in taste, yeelding a whitish milke at the first, and turning yellow after, which is poisonous, virulent and exulcerating. 
7. Oenanthe palustris sive aquatica. Marsh Dropwort. The lower leaves hereof are much divided into many smaller parts then the former sorts, but those that grow upon the hollow stalkes are much finer and smaller: the spikie umbells of flowers are white as the other, and the seede like Hemlocke: the rootes are many small tubers fastned by strings and other fibres among them. 
8. Oenanthe Monspeliaca major &amp; minor. French Dropwort a greater and a smaller. The greater of these two French plants of Dalechampius as Lugdunensis remembreth them, hath a thicke crested stalke about a foote high and leaves thereon like unto Carrots, the umbells of flowers are white, and some∣what long seede succeeding: the rootes have many somewhat long and blackish tubers with other fibres among: The lesser sort hath a thicke handhigh stalke, and the like Carrot-like leaves: but the seede thereof is flat like Ar∣rache, wherein hee saith, as also in that it groweth in stony places, it commeth nearer then the other unto the right Oenanthe of Dioscorides although the other in all things is nearest thereunto: the rootes hereof also are small and tuberous like the other. 
9. Oenanthe Iuncoides minima. Small Rushlike Enanthe or Dropwort. Although I here give you the lesser figure of Lobels Oenanthe aquatica in want of the right, whereunto this doth come very neare, yet the description shall amende that defect: For it hath sundry very fine and small divided greene leaves lying on the ground all the Winter and some as small and fine as Meum Spignell: but those upon the hollow greene Rush-like stalkes which are about halfe a yard high are finer by much, yet very few, and at the upper joynt with the leafe and not at the top of the stalke come forth a few very small white flowers which turne into very small seede: the heads or tubers that bee dispersed among the small haire like fibres, are as small as rea∣sonable big Pins heads, which abide and perish not encreasing yearely, but best in a moist and shadowie place. 
10. Oenanthe tennifolia altera Africana, Fine small Dropwort of Africa. I have yet one other of these Oenanthes to shew you which Boel gathered on the Barbary coasts and brought to us, having a small slender broad stalke with very fine cut leaves thereon as fine as either Dill or Spignell, set at distances with divers branches of umbel-like white flowers at the toppes, changing into very fine white seede: the roote being small and tuberous like the last. 
The Place and Time. All save the second two sorts, and those particularly entituled grow in our owne Land, which second and last have not beene remembred by any other before, flowring and seeding in the end of Summer. 
The Names. Dioscorides hath by Matthiolus judgement recorded three sorts of Oenanthe, derived a vine &amp; flore quasi flos vinosus, quod florum decore, odore et quadantenus colore non sint viti dissimiles: vel etiam Lenc uthon appellari a florum candore scribit, yet Theophrastus in the last Chapter of his sixt Booke maketh mention but of one sort not to be excluded from the number of flowers yet sowen of seede, which all doe interpret to be the bloomings of the wild Vine, and as Matthiolus saith Dioscorides implyeth that wild Vine that beareth Grapes as well as that which is barren. Divers authors have diversly judged of Dioscorides his Oenanthe, Matthiolus contradicting Fuchsius, who first and Lobel after him that strove to maintaine his opinion, that the common Fi∣lupendula was it: yet notwithstanding Lobel his opinion, Matthiolus his reasons stand for good arguments there a∣gainst. And although as I sayd in the beginning of this Chapter, I here shew you many diversities of Oenanthe as they are so accounted, yet we cannot be assured that any one is the genuine and right plant: and howsoever as you heare Fuchsius and Lobel would maintaine Filipendula; Lugdunensis his smaller Mompelier Oenanthe, Alpinus also as much insisteth that his is the right, yet still there is somewhat defective in each of all these, namely eyther in the rootes or stalkes, or seedes: but because I cannot absolutely determine this controversie, I must leave eve∣ry one to his owne judgement, to use them that are found most vertuous. For the names, the first doe most truly de∣serve the name of Apij folio, which our countrey women herbe gatherers, and sellers most falsly call white Peony rootes, because the rootes are white and cloggy, somewhat like unto the female Peony rootes: the rest have names according to the titles their authors give them, yet except the first, the third and the sixt they have all roots more like unto Filipendula: Bauhinus in my opinion hath much mistaken himselfe in quoting Columna his Cymi∣num bulbosum Pliny to bee Oenanthe Apij folio which may plainely bee seene to bee the Nucula terrestris or Bul∣bocastanum which is Matthiolus his first Oenanthe after Filipendula, and not Oenanthe Apij folio which is his second. 
The Vertues. Lobel onely brandeth his Oenanthe Cicutae facie to be virulent and venemous, from the relations of the North country people, whereas he saith it chiefely groweth, and contesteth against Matthiolus that approved it bene∣ficiall in Histericall, Epilepticall, Analepticall and Cephalicall diseases, as also the Strangury or hard making of water; yet holdeth the other to be by some singular prerogative available in the same cases. Alpinus also com∣mendeth his Candy Oenanthe stellata to be good for them that have the strangurie. 
CHAP. XIII. Daucus. Dauke or wilde Carrots. A Lthough there be many sorts of these Daukes or wilde Carrots, yet because I cannot well tell how to se∣perate them, I must packe them all into this one Chapter. 
1. Daucus Creticus verus Dioscoridis, The true Dauke of Candy. The true Candy Dauke hath sundry stalkes of winged leaves as finely cut as Fennell but shorter, see at distances one against another, of a whitish or hoary colour smelling somewhat sweete, from among which rise divers slender branched stalkes a foote high, bearing at their tops small umbells of white flowers, and after them small hoary grayish seede, somewhat long and round of a quicke sent and taste: the roote is small, long and white, almost as quicke and sharpe both in sent and taste as the seede, but will not abide our Winters with all the care we can use. 
2. Daucus Alpinus Cretico similis. Mountaine leafed Dauke. This fine Dauke differeth little from the former which is in that it groweth in colder places, the leaves being somewhat longer and greener then the former, nothing so hoary or white, and grow not so many or thicke toge∣ther▪ the umbells of flowers are white and the seede like also, but a little longer and not so hoary, but somewhat neare both in taste and smell: the roote also is quicke and sharpe as the other. 
3. Daucus montanus Pannonicus. Mountaine Dauke of Hungary. This Dauke of Hungary which Clusius calleth Saxifraga Pannonica, and Bauhinus Daucus montanus multi id brevique folio, hath sundry long stalkes of fine cut leaves and short, somewhat like unto the leaves of Fumitery, of a strong sent and taste, and somewhat sharpe withall; among which rise up joynted stalkes about a foote high with the like leaves on them, and at their tops umbells of white flowers: the roote is but short and blackish tasting quicke and sharpe, drawing water into the mouth upon the chewing, and hath a bush of haires at the toppe.
4. Daucus montanus pumilus. Low or dwarfe mountaine Dauke. This Dwarfe kind hath a few small stalkes with fine cut leaves longer then the last, and but thinly or sparingly set thereon, somewhat resembling Sow-Fennell but seldome exceeding fifteene leaves on a stalke: from among which leaves riseth up a short thicke stalke not a foote high, branched from the bottome upwards with the like leaves on them, but seldome exceeding nine on the stalke, broadest below and of the smell and taste of Carrots; the toppe of each branch and stalke is furnished with many small umbells of white flowers without any sent at all, unto which succeede small seede like Parsley: the roote is small and short, browne and rugged on the outside, and white and spongie within having a bush of haires at the head: Clusius calleth this Selinum montanum pumilum, but Bauhinus referreth it to the wilde Carrots and calleth it Daucus montanus multifido folio Selini semine. 
1. Daucus Creticus verus Dioscoridis. The true Dauke of Candy. 
2. Daucus Alpinus Cretico similis. Mountaine fine leafed Dauke. 
3. Daucus montanus Pannonicus. Mountaine Dauke of Hungary. 
4. Daucus montanus pumilus. Low or dwarfe mountaine Dauke. 
5. Daucus Selinoides major. The greater Parsley leafed Dauke. 
7. Daucus tertius Dioscoridis Bello. Coriander leafed Dauke. 
 
5. Daucus Selinoides major. The greater Parsley leafed Dauke. The greater of these Daukes which hath large stalks of somewhat broad pale greene leaves bigger then Parsley, and with divisions of the same fashion and manner next the ground, hath somewhat bigge stalkes almost two foote high with the like leaves at the joynts but shorter, and at the toppes spokie rundles of white flowers which turne into long crested seede bigger then ordinary Fennell seede, and of a yellow browne colour: the roote i somewhat great, thicke, long and white, with a bush of haires at the head as many other umbelli ercus plants have, Minor. and of a hot and sharpe taste as the seede is also. There is another sort hereof as Lobel in his observations saith, somewhat lesse then the former but else agreeing therewith in all parts, which hee found in the wood by Narveum. 
6. Daucus Selinoides maximus. The greatest Parsley leafed Dauke. This greatest kinde called by Clusius Seseli alterum Pannonicum yet putteth the figure of the last for it, hath a root sometimes as great as ones arme, or being young of the bignesse of ones thumbe, parted into severall branches at the bottome, and covered with a rugged blacke barke of a clammy taste at the first, but sharpe afterwards and cau∣sing spitting, having at the toppe many hairy heads, from whence spring sundry very large and great winged leaves, much divided and dented about the edges somewhat like the last but larger, of a faint greene colour some∣what shining on the upper side, and of a grayish ashcolour underneath: among which riseth up a large great cre∣sted stalke of a fingers thicknesse, with some joynts and leaves at them, and with branches also from betweene them, at the tops whereof stand small umbells of whitish flowers, and somewhat larger but like seeds as the last. Both these two last sorts may well be referred to the second Daucus of Dioscorides, whose leaves are like Selin or Parsley before any other. 
7. Daucus tertius Dioscoridis Bello. Coriander leafed Dauke. This Dauke which Honorius Bellus saith groweth in Candy, and is referred by him to the third Daucus of Diosco∣rides, and both leafe and roote eaten by the Candiots as a familiar Sallet herbe, hath sundry stalkes of fine cut leaves somewhat like to Corianders but lesser and thicker, the stalkes are neare two foote high, with great and swol∣len joynts (and therefore called by some Seseli nodosum, but by Bauhinus Daucus Creticus nodosus umbella lutea ) and smaller leaves at them, at the tops whereof grow yellow umbells of flowers but white with me, which turne in∣to bigger seede then Fennell: the roote is great, thicke and short, perishing yearely, the whole being aromaticall. 
8 Daucus montanus Apij folio flore luteo. Mountaine Dauke with yellow flowers. This yellow flowred Dauke hath a crested smooth stalke branching forth into sundry parts, having leaves like unto Smalage but shorter and not dented at all about the edges, set on both sides of the crested ribbe, the flowers are small that grow at the toppes and yellow. 
9. Daucus pratensis Apij folio Bauhini. Medow Dauke of Bauhinus. The rootes of this Dauke are long and reddish on the outside smelling and tasting like Carrots, being hairy at 8. Daucus montanus Apij folio minor. Mountaine Dauke with yellow flowers. 
11. Daucus secundus Dalechampi . The French wilde or fielde Dauke. 
at the toppe, from whence rise stalkes with many winged 12. Daucus ter us Dalechampij. Another French wilde Dauke. 
15. Daucus stellatus. Starre headed Dauke. 
16. Daucus Alsaticus. Dauke of Germany. 
leaves on both sides, cut in on the edges and dented also nd about, somewhat like unto the last, but much smaller and of a pale greene colour, betweene which riseth a slen∣der straked stalke a foot high or seldome higher, with few ioynts and leaves, parted into some branches with um∣bells of white flowers at the toppes of them, which turne into blackish long seede smelling well. 
10. Daucus Hispanicus. Spanish Dauke. The Spanish Duake hath a thicke long roote, parted into thicke long strings hairy at the head, from whence rise great winged stalkes of leaves, parted into divers other win∣ged or divided leaves set one against another on a middle ribbe, of a sullen greene colour, among which riseth one or two stalkes as high as a man being somewhat reddish cre∣sted and joynted with the like leaves at them, but lesser ranching forth diversly, and bearing large umbells of yel∣lowish flowers, after which come flat and somewhat thinne round seede. This came to me by the name of Daucus Hi∣spanicus, but doth very well answer the Daucus Alfaticus of Bauh in his Prodromus in every part which hee saith doth well agree unto the Apium palustre of Dodonaeus, and to the Thysselinon Plinij of Lobel, but that it giveth milke which this doth not and that this riseth much higher then that: the smell and taste of this is wholly like unto a Carrot. 
11. Daucus secundus Dalechampij. The French wilde or fielde Dauke. This kinde of field Dauke hath a long round white root, like unto a small long Carrot, sweet and somewhat sharpe, hairy at the head, with long slender stalkes of win∣ged leaves rising from it, which are whole and some∣what thicke, not gashed or cut in on the edges but dented, resembling Parsnep leaves but much smaller, seaven for the most part set together one against another somewhat close, and the odde one at the end, the stalke is a cubit high or higher, with finer leaves at the joynts then grow below with store of white flowers in umbells, and small long feede after them, somewhat sweete in smell and in taste.
12. Daucus tertius Dalechampij. Another French wilde Dauke. This other French wild Dauke hath a whitish yellow roote short and slender with haires at the head; stalkes of leaves that grow next thereunto are somewhat broad like unto the lower leaves of those grow higher on the stalkes are smaller and smaller, being as small as Fennell at the highest, the flowers white and the seede somewhat long like in taste unto Dill or Cumin that is sharpe. 
13. Daucus pratensis Dalechampij. Wilde Dauke with water Milfoile leaves. This fine leafed Dauke hath divers long stalkes of most fine leaves set many together at spaces one against ano∣ther, very like unto the water Yarrow or Milfoile, being soft and of a fresh greene colour; the stalke hath some few joynts and fine long leaves like Fennell set at them with branches rising from thence, likewise bearing large umbells of flowers which are reddish at the beginning and white when they are open, somewhat bitter and sharpe but well smelling. 
14. Daucus Petroselini vel Coriandri folio sive Bunium Dalechampij. Rockie wilde Dauke. The wilde Dauke that groweth in rough and rockie or stony places riseth up from a small white branched well smelling roote, hairy at the head with sundry long stalkes of leaves so nearely resembling Parsley that many are deceived at the first sight untill they better heede it, the stalke is square, tall and of a fingers thicknesse, with finer leaves thereon like the finer leaves of Corianders and umbells of flowers like Dill, the seede is smaller then Hen∣bane seede of a good sent. 
15. Daucus stellatus. Starre headed Dauke. This Dauke hath sundry leaves, at the ground are somewhat like unto Parsley, but smelling well like the Candy Dauke and tasting hot: the stalke hath sundry branches set with the like leaves at them, and yellow um∣bells of flowers which are succeeded by small seede vessells, having five small leaves like thornes under them, representing little starres five or six small threds rising from the bottome to the toppes making every head seeme like a Cone, each standing separate by it selfe on its owne footstalke, smelling sweet and aromaticall in taste: the roote is thicke and long like unto a Parsley or Parsnep roote, and eaten familiarly by the Natives either raw or boyled, and held good to procure Vrine, womens courses and Venery. 
16. Daucus Alsaticus. Dauke of Germany. This Germane Dauke hath a thicke root somewhat long, with sundry great strings thereat, and at the head many haires from whence come divers large winged leaves made of many parts, set one against another, among whom one or two reddish stalkes, seldome more doe rise to a mans height, divided into many branches and they into lesser with the like but smaller leaves at the joynts, and at the toppes stand large umbells of yellowish flowers and somewhat flat seede succeeding them. 
The Place and Time. The two first sorts grow not onely in Candy but in many places and countries, the shorter, thicker set and more hoary leaves in the warmer, and the longer, thinner set and lesse hoary in the colder countries of Germany, Swisser∣land and Savoy; most of the rest are declared in their titles or descriptions: many of them flower and seede some∣what earlier then others, yet all before the end of Autumne. 
The Names. The Greekes call it , and the Latines also Daucus, Daucum and Daucium. Dioscorides made three sorts thereof, the first he named Creticus the second Selinoides that is with leaves like Parsley, and the third with leaves like Coriander, which severall sorts hath caused many learned men to suppose divers herbes to be the same, which are since found much differing, and yet the certainetie of the two last is not fully assured, but that some doe justly question those are held to be the truest. For as for the first it is in these times, and so hath beene for a good while in Italy, France, Germany, &amp;c. well knowne and onely used now a dayes in all the compositions wherein Daucus is appointed to be put: whereas formerly the common wilde Carrot (which is in most things like the , except the roote which is more hard and wooddy, and more physicall and not edible as it is) was wholly used of all in stead of the true Candy kinde: but to come to the declaration of these here set downe. The first is now well knowne to be the true Daucus Creticus of Dioscorides, as Lobel, Matihiolus, Gesner and others have observed▪ and so set it downe: the second also is acknowledged to be so like the first, that the climate and country onely maketh the difference as I sayd before, and so say Gesner, Camerarius, Lobel and others: the third and fourth shewed in their descriptions to whom they belong and how they called them: the fift is diversly Tr ∣gus and Matthiolus call it Dioscorides his second Daucus, and Dodonaeus the other kinde of Liba tis of Dioscori∣des and Theophrastus, Camerarius, Gesner and Fuchsius to be Seseli Pelopo nse, Lobel saith it is , and Clusius as I sayd giveth the figure of this for his Seseli montanum alterum, whose description ∣presse the next or sixt here set downe, which Bauhinus in his Pinax entituleth Daucus montanus , but I have for the neare resemblance unto the former Selinoides called it maximus, because it is greater : the seventh is exprest to be from Honorius Bellus of Candy, as it is set downe in his first Epistle to , and by Pona in his Italian Baldus in the same words: the eighth and ninth are remembed onely by Bauhinus and described in his Prodroneus, the foure next unto them are expressed in their titles or description fit for them: the foureteenth is as I sayd in the title cailed Bunium Dalechampij by Lugd ensis, which calleth as it is in the title also Da eus petroseliui vel coriandrifolio: but concerning this Bumium I m st thereof here as I promised before in the Chapter of Bulbo castanum, that is to shew you that this Dalechampij is referred by to the kindes of Daucus, the description and figure thereof are both so an∣swerable thereunto: but yet I must withall give you my opinion thereof which is, that I thinke this her be is rather forced then yelding freely of it selfe to take upon it this title, the composure of the description being so punctu∣ally applyed to every part of Dioscorides his description moving that doubt in me: ven I would bee loth to dero∣gate eyther from the accurate judgement or sinceritie of so learned an Herbarist as Dalechampij was. The Ara∣bians call it Dauco and Giezar, and all other nations doe for the most part follow the Latine as as their Dialect will permit, or else following the French Carot Savage as some doe with us, to call them Carots, or rather as is more fit Dauke according to the Latine, because there is another herbe more properly cal∣led wilde Carrot. 
The Ʋertues. Although the herbe of the true Dauke is by the watery moisture therein lesse effectuall then the seede, as Galen which hath that powerfull heate therein that it is a principall medicine to helpe the strangurie, to provoke and womens courses, to expell the dead birth and helpe the suffocation of the mother, yet the herbe is of a , and will helpe to digest humors by exhaling them by the pores, if it bee applyed thereunto yet then the seedes, which is powerfull to discusse griping paines, torments and wounds in the body or bowells, and especially profitable for those that are bitten by the Phalangium or deadly Spider, and the rootes as well as it against any other venemous beast, or any other venom, or poyson or p stilence being drunke with wine: the same also put into pultesses doth ease tumors and swellings in any part, being mixed with hony it hel∣peth old and inveterate Coughes. 
CHAP. XIIII. Pastinaca tenuifolia. Carrots. H Aving shewed you in the last Chapter all the sorts of Daucus which some for want of a more pro∣per name have called wilde Carrots, I will in this shew you all the rest whether tame or wilde that so they may stand together. 
1. Pastinaca tenuifolia sativa lutea. Common yellow Carrots. The common Carrots I might well have spared to describe here, having shewed you all the sorts of them in my former booke, but seeing I am to speake of some wilde sorts which are like nto the manured, it shall not be impertinent to set them forth againe that so the wilde sort may bee knowne wherein they differ. This is well knowne to have divers large spread leaves made of many thin cut deepe greene leaves divided into many parts, among which riseth a round stalke three or foure foote high bearing large tufts of umbells of white flowers which doe close together and spread not much, and turne into small whitish rough of hairy seede holding one to another, the roote is somewhat great and yellow, big above and small pointed be∣low, without any fangs or twines of a pleasant sweete taste, and therefore wholly spent for foode. There are other sorts as I have shewed in my former booke, whereunto I referre them that are desirous to know, but I have seene this garden yellow kinde by sowing it selfe sometimes the root to become white. 
2. Pastinaca tenuifolia sylvestris. Wilde Carrots. The wild groweth in a manner altogether like the tame but that the leaves are somewhat whiter and rougher &amp; so are the stalkes likewise which beare large spokie tufts of white flowers, with a deepe purple spot in the middle which are contracted together when the seede beginneth to ripen that the middle part being hollow and low, and the o er stalkes rising high maketh the whole umbell shew Pastinaca sativa altera tenuifolia atrorubens. Common red Carrots. 
like unto a birds nest, as I shewed before in the Chapter of strange Chervills the Gingidium verum useth to doe, the roote is small long and hard, unfit for meate, being somewhat sharpe and strong, although Dioscorides seemeth to say it was used to be be a en. 
3. Pastinaca sylvestris Apula Columnae. Wilde Carrots of Naples. This Neapolitane Carrot is so like in leaves and stalkes unto the last that they can hardly be distinguished one from the other before it be in flower or seede, for although the whole winged seemeth to be lesse and the parts fewer, yet therein is small difference: but being in flower the umbells are larger, the darke purple, with a reddish yellow spot in the middle, the seede (wherein lyeth the chiefest difference) long and with a little white hairinesse upon them, and not rough Carrots, being more like to the true Daucus, but of a colour being greene and fresh, and of a bitter and little taste: the roote is somewhat long, white, hard, sweet . 
4. Pastinaca echinophora Apula. Prickly wilde Carrots of Naples. The roote of this kinde of Parsnep or white Carrot is of a thicknesse and a cubits length, equall alike, like unto or the Sea Holly roote, somewhat yellow on the and white within, the barke being thicke and of with a small pith of a taste somewhat sharpe and itter, not unpleasant, especially the younger rootes, the that lye upon the ground are like unto those of ordinary , yet not altogether so large and broad, but are finely and it were betweene it and the Sea kinde, of a whitish colour with some hairinesse: the stalke is thicke and full and leaves which bend a little downewards and globe fashion, being smaller, lesse divided, harder thereon up to the toppes, where the umbells of stand, which have six thicke sharpe pointed at the bottome of them, the middle umbell first 1. Pastinaca tenuifolia sativa lutea. Common yellow Carrots. 
2. Pastinaca tenuifolia sylvestris. Wilde Carrots. 
flowring, and the rest at the sides afterwards: after they are paste the seede appeareth which is of an ovall for me, long and round, hard and straked, with six lines pointed at the toppes and yellowish, whose inner kernell is brownish, and of an aromaticall savour. This saith Columna differeth from the usuall Pastinaca marina both in the large spreading and manifold fine divisions of the leaves, and in the pleasanter taste and greatnesse of the roote, resembling rather a Parsnep although their seedes are alike. 
5. Pastinaca sylvestris hirsuto caule. Wilde Carrots with hairy stalkes. The roote of this Carrot is white and often a foot long, sometimes single and sometimes divided into two or three parts, very like both in sent and taste to a Parsley roote, but hotter in the mouth for a long time, from whence riseth up a stalke a foote and a halfe high as thicke as ones little finger at the bottome, being somewhat round but crested or cornered very plainly, exceeding hairy and full of joynts, whereat grow large crested stalkes of winged leaves compassing the stalke at the bottome, a foote in length, divided into sundry leaves, and they againe into other smaller parts very rough and hairy also, and of a yellowish greene colour, from betweene which leaves and the stalkes at the joynts, come forth other crested stalkes and the like leaves at their joynts but lesser, and doe very well resemble the leaves of our garden Carrots but larger and soft if one handle them hard, but rough both on the backe and edge being gently touched: from every one almost of these joynts both of the stalke and branches ariseth a certaine long hu ke, consisting of six small long leaves close set together which when it openeth sheweth forth a small tuft or close umbell of white flowers, and sometimes yellowish somewhat sweet, after which doe follow somewhat round seede, two alwayes joyned together and very prickley, on the backside, the inner side being flat and more yellow then Carrot seede, else somewhat like. 
The Place and Time. The first kindes are alwayes sowen in Gardens or in the fields chosen out for that purpose, the rest grow wilde: the first plentifully in our owne Land by the fields side and in untilled places: the last in the like places of Germa∣ny: the rest in Naples and doe all flower and seede in the end of Summer. 
The Names. in Greeke derived (as is most likely) from the grape when it is almost ripe whose purplish co∣lour the one sort hereof doth resemble and not from , the stalke of Bryonie as some thinke doth answer both to the tame and wilde sorts of Pastinaca in Latine as Dioscorides sheweth in the said Chapter, but usually Staphylinus simply is taken for the wilde Carrot if be not joyned with it to expresse the tame but Pastinaca, which in Latine seemeth to take the name a pascendo cum al t, is now a dayes divided into two sorts that is into latifolia which is the Parsnep whereof I shall speake hereafter, and into tenuifolia which is the Carrot cal∣led also Carota by divers from the Italians who doe so call it, but Dodonaeus thinketh the word was from the Germans Garrot which is totum rubens but I doe not so , and Dancus iger as it is thought by , whereof yet there is some doubt whether the word should not be which is yellow, as it is in most true copies rather then which is blacke as it is in few. Galen also seemeth to call it Daucus; but with an addition of Pastinaca, that others might know he did distinguish it from the true Daucus, but hereupon in all the Apothecaries shops beyond the seas, and with us, the first wild sort was usually in former times taken for Daucus; and so used, and the use continueth with many to this day; and Dioscorides sheweth that Staphylinus bea∣ eth a purple spot in the middle of the white umbell, whereby it may be knowne to differ much from any Daucus which doth not so, besides that he speaketh of them in severall Chapters. The first is the Pastinaca sativa, or teuni∣folia sativa by most Authors, yet some following the Greeke name, call it Staphylinus primus &amp; secundus; ac∣cording to the colour of the roote yellow or red, as Tragus and some others, and Matthiolus, Lacuna, and Siser, and Siser alterum, or Carota, as Guilandinus, Caesalpinus, Camerarius and Lobel: Camerarius saith , that some do not touch amisse that take the rootes of the red and yellow Carrot for the succedaneum to Ben and r brum: the second is called Pastinaca sylvestris by Matthiolus and others, and sylvestris tenuifoliae and Dioscoridis by Dodonaeus and Lobel, Pastinaca erratica by Fuchsius, Cordus and Tabermontanus, Staphylinus sylvestris by Tragus and Caesalpinus, and Daucus agrestis by Galen in lib. de alimentis; Daucus vulgaris, and officina∣ by and Lobel: the third is called by Columna Pastinaca sylvestris Daucoides Apula: the fourth is by him also called, as it is in the title: the last is the Daucus of Thalius, that is to say hirsuto caule, and may be the Daucus angulosus of Cordus in historia, although he findeth some defects and differences therein from his. The Italians call it Carotta, and by some Pastinaca; the Spaniards Canahoria, as they call the Parsneppe; the French also Pastenades, but they adde jaunes to distinguish it from the Parsneppe, and the wilde kinde Paste∣nade s age; the Germanes Geel Ruben, and Mobren, and the wild Carrot Ʋogelnest as the Dutch doe, and the the manured kind Geel pooten, and geel wortelen; and we in English wilde Carrot. 
The Ʋertues. The manured or garden kinde is somewhat windie with the sweetnesse, and therefore in the nourishing stir∣reth up bodily lust, but doth not expell winde as some have thought, for so it should worke contrary effects which is not found herein: the wilde kinde indeede, is more physicall, and besides that it breaketh winde, and stitches in the sides, it provoketh urine and womens courses, and helpeth to breake and expell the stone: the seede also of the same worketh the like effects, and is good for the dropsie, and those whose bellyes are swollen with winde, helpeth the cholicke and the stone in the kidneyes, and the rising of the mother being taken in wine, or boyled in wine and taken, and helpeth conception: Dioscorides saith, that it is so powerfull to helpe the bitings or stings of venemous creatures, that if it be taken before hand their bitings shall not hurt them; the leaves also he saith, and Galen doth the like, being applied with honey to running ulcers or sores doth clense them.
CHAP. XV. Seseli. Hart-wort. B Ecause there are many sorts of Seseli, much differing in forme one from another, some having fine leaves like Fennell, others like Hemlockes, or other herbes they might peradventure seeme fit to some to be referred to the severall Orders here appointed, but I thinke it better to place them all together. 
1. Seseli Massiliense Foenieuli folio, quod Dioscoridis censetur. The true Seseli or Hart-wort of Marselles, as it is thought. The true Seseli Massiliense Dioscoridis, as it is taken by the most judicious Herbarists of our times hath a ve∣ry long white slender roote like unto Fennell, but smel∣ling 1. Seseli Massiliense folio Faeniculoquod Dioscoridis censetur. The true Seseli or Hart wort of Dioscorides as it is thought. 
better, and tasting hotter and sharper, having but few leaves thinly set on the stalkes, thicker and shorter, and hardder than Fennell leaves, turning downewards, of a grayish or ash colour, as all the rest of the plant is (especially in the hotter countries, for in some places they are thicker or longer or shorter than in others, as Bauhinus saith is observed) the middle stalke riseth not above a foote high, bowing to and fro sometimes, having many branches from the bottome with the like leaves on them, and each bearing umbells of white (most usually and seldome purplish) flowers, after which come small long seede more like to Anniseede than Fennell, somewhat pleasant in taste, yet sharpe and hot. 
2. Seseli Massiliense alterum. Another Hart-wort of Marselles. This other Seseli Massiliense hath likewise Fennell-like leaves, but thicker and shorter divided, greene and hard, but with white points, whose winged stalkes are large and more spread than Fennel: the middle stalke is two cubits or more high, of a fingers thick∣nesse, crested, jointed, and branced into divers other smaller parts, each of them carrying umbells of white on their toppes which turne into flat seede, no unlike to Angelica seede, and bigger than Dill, her , and very aromaticall, the roote is thicke, long, and white, with divers strings and fibres thereat earely. 
2. Seseli Massiliense alterum. Another Hart-wort of Marselles. 
3. Seseli pratense Monspaliensium. Medow Hart-wort of M mp lies. 
4. Seseli pratense nostras. Our English greene Saxifrage. 
6. Seseli palustre lactescens. Milkie Marsh Hart-wort. 
 
3. Seseli pratense Monspelie sium. Medow Hart-wort of Mempelier. The roote of this Hart-wort is blacke without and white within, parted into many strings with fibres at them increasing well, from whence riseth a stalke two or three foote high, with divers large spread stalkes of winged leaves, very finely cut into many parts, each being like unto Fennell, but larger, harder, and of a darke greene colour, set at the joynts, and branching forth towards the toppes, bearing umbells of white flowers, and after they are past, small, long, and somewhat flat seede, larger and blacker than Fennell, and neare unto Meum Spig∣nell, of little sent, and a small sharpe taste. 
4. Seseli pratense nostras. Our English greene Saxifrage. The likenesse of this our English greene Saxifrage unto the last Seseli described, hath made me joyne it next thereunto, although I might have put into the Classis of the Saxifrages, but that being an umbelliferous, I would place it among the same Tribe or Family, which hath stalkes rising nothing so high, somewhat crested, and thereon stalkes of winged fine cut leaves, but nothing so largely spread, yet somewhat like them in greenenesse, harsh∣nesse and forme, or somewhat lesse; the umbells of flowers are smaller, paler, or somewhat tending to a yellow∣ish whitenesse, and the seede after them like unto common Fennell seede, both for forme and greatnesse, but of a browner colour and small taste. 
5. Seseli pratense tenuifolium. Medow Hart-wort of Germany. This German Hart-wort hath a round crested or straked stalke above two cubits high, with divers joynts and leaves at them, very like for the forme and divisions unto the wild Carrot leaves, but smooth, and not rough, and of a deepe greene colour, branching forth into sundry parts, bearing umbells of whitish yellow flowers, after which follow small long seede somewhat like Fennell and Carraway, or betweene them both, and somewhat aromaticall: the roote is as thicke as ones finger, and very long, blacke without, and white within, of a sharpe and somewhat bitter taste. 
6. Seseli palustre lactescens. Milkie Marsh Hart-wort. This milke Hart wort riseth up with a round stemme or stalke three cubits high, with joynts and long stalkes of well spread leaves set at them, the divisions whereof are very small, and much cut in, almost like to those of Carrawayes, or betweene them and Fennell, at the toppe of the stalkes it breaketh forth into branches, and they beare small umbells of white flowers, after which follow thinne, flat, and winged seede: the roote is long and browne on the outside, of an unpleasant taste, with no small heate joyned therewith, which inflameth the throate, but being planted in a Garden, it looseth much of the evill taste of the burning qualitie becomming more milde: the whole plant, or any part thereof being broken, there issueth from it a certaine milke, as many other um∣beiliferous plants doe. 
7. Seseli Creticum majus. The greater Hart-wort of Candy. This greater Candiot kinde hath rough and hairy round stalkes, about two or three foote high, set with long stalkes of winged leaves, much resembling Parsneppe leaves, both in forme and greatnesse, yet somewhat longer and narrower, dented about the edges, and pointed at the ends, being rough and hairy likewise, and turning themselves a little backward to the stalke, towards the toppes of the stalkes they branch forth and have smaller leaves set at the joynts than grow below, bearing umbells of purplish white flowers, whereon after they are fal∣len, grow flat whitish round seede, circled about, as it were, with a border, and cut in round about it also with round dents, of little or no smell or taste: the roote is white, somewhat long and wooddy after it hath seeded, and perisheth, rising from the sowing of its owne seede againe plentifully. 
8. Tordilium sive Seseli Creticum minti . The lesser Hart-wort of Candy. The lesser Candiot Hart-wort hath such like stalkes of winged leaves, but smaller, rounder, and shorter, some∣what hairy and whitish: the stalkes are lesser and lower, fuller of branches, bearing paler purplish flowers in um∣bells and seede after them, of the same fashion, but somewhat sharper and quicker, as the herbe is also, and there∣fore more accepted and used as a sallet herbe with the Italians and others: the roote is as unprofitable and perish∣eth as the last. 
9. Seseli Creticum majus luteum. Great Candy Hart-wort with yellow flowers. This Hart-wort groweth very like the first greater kinde, having the like leaves on the stalkes but somewhat broader and shorter, a little sharpe in taste, and not above two or three couples together, set on the like stalkes, but smaller of branches, and bearing umbells of yellow flowers like Dill, without any leaves under them as the others have: after which follow such like whitish flat buckler-like seedes ringed and dented about the edges like them, but larger and smoother, and divided in the middle with a brownish stroke or line, making the seede seeme like unto a kinde of Thlaspi or Treakle-Mustard seede: this flowered and seeded at Naples in May, as Columna saith, and that onely in gardens, and not wilde. 
10. Seseli Apulum Creticum minimum. The smallest Hart-wort of Candy. This smallest kinde is very like unto the lesser Candy sort that is eaten in sallets, but with leaves like the lower leaves of Corianders, soft but a little hairy; the first leaves being of an inch and a halfe long, and an inch broad, and dented about the edges with round dents: the second leafe is of two inches long; the third hath a longer stalke, with two leaves set thereon, smaller and rounder than the other, about halfe an inch broad, and a bigger leafe at the end, yet smaller and longer than the first leafe, the next are lesser and longer, the stalke is naked of leaves below, being small, hard, hairy and straked, and carrying thicke umbells of white flowers, with yellow threds in the middle, and under set with long hairy leaves. the outer flowers being larger than the inner, thereby making the umbell resembell that of the wilde Carrot, after which come such like seede as the former have but not halfe so great, the middle part being of a darker colour, before they are ripe they looke of a purplish greene colour, but white when they are full ripe, of an aromaticall taste, somewhat bitter, and somewhat sweete in sent: the roote is small, white, hard, and a little heating in taste. Columna saith, that the Gingidium Syriacum fo∣li Bancia of Lobel is like unto this plant, if the figure be not imperfect. 
11. Seseli montanum Cicutae folio glabrum. Mountaine Hart-wort with smooth Hemlocke-like leaves. This mountaine Hart-wort hath large spread leaves, divided into many smaller parts, somewhat like unto He lockes or Seseli Peloponense: the stalke is hollow, and riseth a cubit and a halfe high, dented into branches 7. Seseli Creticum sive Terdilium majus. The greater Hart-wort of Candy. 
8. Tordilion sive Seseli Creticum minus. The lesser Hart-wort of Candy. 
11. Seseli montanum Cicutae folio glabrum. Mountaine Hart-wort with smooth Hemlocke-like leaves.
12. Seseli montanum Cicutae folio hirsutum. Hairy mountaine Hemlocke Hart-wort. 
13. Seseli Peloponesia cum recentiorum. The most usuall received Seseli or Hart-wort of Poloponesus. 
14. Seseli Aethiopium frutex. Shrubbe Hart-wort of Ethiopia. 
bearing small smooth long leaves, more finely divided at the joynts, and larger umbells of white flowers at the toppes, which turne into yellowish crested seede, two joyned together of an aromaticke and hot taste. 
12. Seseli montauum Cicutae folio sub-hirsutum. Hairy mountaine Hemlocke Hart-wort. This other Hemlocke Hart-wort from a thicke roote, sendeth forth broad Hemlocke-like leaves, or like to the greater sweete Chervill, of a darke greene colour, and somewhat rough and hairy, especially the foote stalkes of the leaves, in the middle of whom riseth up a thicke hollow, crested, hairy and joynted stalke, about two foote high, divided into severall branches, with few leaves thereon but lesser: at the toppe whereof standeth a large umbell of white flowers, which are succeded by long, sharpe pointed seede, two joyned together. 
13. Seseli Peloponesiacum recentiorum. The most usuall received Seseli or Hart-wort of Poloponesus. This Grecian Hart-wort hath a great roote, blackish on the outside, and white within, growing deepe into the ground like Ferula or Thapsia, somewhat sweete in smell and hot in taste, the stalke riseth two foot high or better, as thicke as ones finger, with divers large spread leaves at the bottome as great as Hemlocke, but crumpled, rough and hairy; the stalke and branches beare large tufts or umbells of yellow flowers, which after yeeld broad flat winged seede, of a pale yellow colour, somewhat like unto Angelica, but greater, and nothing so thicke, of a very sweete sent as the Seseli Aethiopicum hath. This, saith Lobel, the chiefest learned and most judicious Herba∣ ists of Mompelier, acknowledged upon due consideration thereof, to be the true Seseli Peloponense of Dioscorides, although formerly they tooke it to be a kinde of Thapsia, but saith he, the true Thapsia is much differing, both in forme and colour from this, so that none there doubteth of the truth thereof. 
14. Seseli Aethiopicum frutex. Shrubbe Hart-wort of Ethiopia. This Hart-wort of Ethiopia (to keepe his fellowes company for name sake is fittest to be placed here, although shrubbie and everliving) shooteth forth sundry wooddy rough stems, covered with a blackish barke divided in∣to many branches, two or three cubits long, beset with many faire, large, thicke and hard, smooth and pale greene leaves, being long, and somewhat like unto Woodbind leaves, but not so broad, smooth on the edges, and not ipt or dented at all, on the toppes of the branches stand small tufts of yellow flowers, which afterwards beare brownish round and long seede, bigger and larger than sweete Fennell seede: the root is great and woody having divers smaller parts set with fibres issuing from it, abiding many yeares, if it be defended from the cold: the whole plant smelleth very well, and the seede best, being of an aromaticke taste somewhat bitter and sharpe withall, which is commended by Dioscorides for the best of the Seselies, and beyond the Massiliense. 
15. Seseli Cretense nodosum. Great joynted Hart-wort of Candy, This Seseli riseth up with foure or five hard round, and rough, or rather prickly stalkes, about two foote high, whose joynts are great, and bunched out like knees, with a rough large winged leafe, or two at each of them, some of three, and others of five parts, and every of them also divided into severall parts, of a sad or dead greene colour, changing reddish at the seed time; the stalke is rough and crested, and the sundry branches hereof do carry small tufts of white flowers, which turne into great, long, and round, rough seede: the roote is composed of divers slender, long, white wooddy strings, perishing yearely. 
The Place and Time. Most of these Seselies grow about Mompelier, and in Narbone in France, yet some in Germany, other in Italy and Candy, and some in our owne country; and although some of them be entituled of Candy, yet that is but to an∣swer that kinde which Dioscorides doth so call, as likewise that of Peloponesus in Greece, and that of Ethiopia: and most of them doe beare ripe seede with us before the end of Summer, if care be had in the ordering and keeping of them. 
The Names. in Greeke, is likewise called Seseli in Latine, and of some Sile. The first is taken by Lobel to be the Seseli Massiliensium of Dioscorides, because there is not about Marselles &amp; Mompelier, any other herbe that insur∣reth so truely unto the description thereof by Dioscorides as this doth, and Clusius also consenteth hereunto, and calleth it. Lobel saith also that formerly it was called by the students, and others there, Ferniculum turtu sum, be∣cause the stalke groweth seldome upright but crooked: the second is the other Seseli Massiliense of Lobel, which he calleth Ferulae aut Dauci Cretici facie, &amp; the Seseli Massiliense of Matthiolus, against whom Lobel contesteth for affirming that it grew on the hills by Trent, where he saith, it is not to be found, nor yet on Baldus, which is more fruitfull in rare plants than they are, and but onely to be found about Mimpelier, and at the foote of Mount Fi s∣coue in Italy, which is in the way from Rome to Sienna, Camerarius calleth it Seseli Massiliense nonunllorum, and saith Lucas Ghinus affirmed to have seene twentie sorts of herbes called all by that name. Gesner in horto, Lugdu∣nensis and others, doe meane this kinde that they call Massiliense: the third Lobel also calleth Seseli pratense Mon∣speliensium, which Gesner in horto thinketh is the Ligusticum of Matthiolus, Dodonaeus calleth it Siler alterum prae∣tense, Bauhinus thinketh it may be the Silaus Plinij in lib. 26. c. 8. and withall saith it is the Pastinaca nigra of Cor∣dus in his history, which in my judgement differeth much from it, for that of Cordus hath divided leaves like wilde Carrots, and this like Fennell, that hath yellowish flowers, this white, and the seede likewise seemeth to be more sharpe, which is not found in this, although growing in a hotter climate. Tabermontanus calleth it Hip∣pomarathrum: the fourth Lobel calleth Saxifraga Anglorum facie Seseli pra tensis Monspeliensium, for although it be somewhat like to it, yet it is not the same as he there sheweth: the fift is called by Bauhinus Seseli pratense tenuifo∣lium sive Daucoides pratensis tenuifolius described in his Prodromus, as though none had exprest it before, when as it is the very same Pastinaca nigra of Cordus spoken off before, as any that will compare them together shall easily finde: the sixt Camerarius in horto described, but Bauhinus in Prodromo giveth the figure of it, which none had done before: the seventh is called Tordylion sive Seseli Creticum majus by Lobel and Lugdumensis, and Seseli Creti∣cum majus by Camerarius; Caesalpinus saith, that in Italy it is called Pimpinella Romanae alterum genus sylvestre: the eight is the Ordilion Nicandri, and Tordylion Dioscoridis by Anguilara, Tordylion and Gordilion by Dodonaeus, Ges∣ner, and others, and Seseli Creticum by Lobel, Dodonaeus and others; Caesalpinus and Golumna saith, this is common∣ly called in Italy Pimpinella Romana, and familiarly eaten as a fallet herbe, and Bellonius saith, that this is the Caf∣calitra, that is Caucalis which is used in Candy and Greece, as Honorius Bellus sheweth in his first Epistle to Clu∣sius: the ninth is set forth by Columna, by the name of Tordylion majus alterum luteum: and the tenth is Tordyli∣um minimum Apulum alterum by him also; the eleventh is thought by Bauhinus to be the Levisticum alterum of Lobel and Lugdunensis, Ligusticum secundum herbariorum of Tabermontanus, but I thinke it doth better agree un∣to the next, and is the Seseli primum montanum of Clusius, called by Bauhinus Seseli montanum folio Cicutae glabrum, and thinketh it may be the Seseli Peloponesiacum of Dioscorides: the twelfth is set forth by Bauhinus as it is in the title: the thirteenth is the true Seseli Peloponense folio Cicutae Dioscoridis, as Lobel saith, and so taken by the lear∣ned at Mompelier, as I shewed before, and therefore thought fit to set it forth with them, although his Peleponense is placed with the Thapsias: the fourteenth is also taken at Mompelier for the true Seseli Aethiopicum Dioscoridis, as Lobel saith, all other authours acknowledge the verity thereof, onely Matthiolus maketh a doubt whether his Seseli Aethiopicum (which is an herbe and no shrubbe, and well knowne now to be the Libanetis Theophrasti ) or this Aethiopicum, which he calleth alterum should be the truer, for that as he saith they both resemble it very well, but Lobel taxeth him too bitterly for it: the last hath his name in his title as I received it, and is not the Daucus Creticus nodosus before. 
The Vertues. The true Seseli Massiliense is commended by Dioscorides to helpe the strangury, and the straightnesse of breath, as also the suffocations of the mother, provoketh their courses, and expelleth the dead child, helpeth also the falling sicknesse, old coughes, and all other inward griefes, either the roote or the seede being taken in wine: the seede drunke in wine doth helpe digestion, expelleth winde and the paines in the bowells: it helpeth those that have taken cold in their journey, if they drinke it in wine with some pepper: it is given to Goates and other cattle to facilitate the delivery of their young. Pliny saith that women use it before their delivery of child (be∣ing taught by Hindes that eate Seseli ' s to speede their delivery, as Aristotle did declare it before) to helpe them at that time. Galen sheweth that the rootes of Seseli, speaking in generall of them all, are so powerfull in heating that they provoke urine, and are of thinne parts, that they helpe the falling sicknesse, &amp;c. the other Seseli ' s, saith Dioscorides, have the same facultie and operation: the Candy Seseli is good to provoke urine, if it be stopped or hin∣dered, and womens courses also: the juyce taken with the seede in wine for tenne dayes together helpeth the paines of the kidneyes, and driveth forth the stone engendered therein: the roote being taken with honey is good to breake the flegme in coughes, and to cause it easily to be spit forth; Paulus Aegineta saith, that Tor ylium taketh away bruises, and the blacke and blew spots that come by stroakes or otherwise if one part of Terra Sa∣mia be put to two parts thereof, and laid to with hony. Our English Seseli or Saxifrage is well experimented and much used by country people, either the juyce or the decoction or the distilled water or the seede in powder, and drunke in wine, to helpe to breake and expell the stone, to provoke urine, and to expell wind, and the chollicke in old or yong, and is much given to sucking children for the frets, as women call it, which is winde in their bodies and stomackes. The Ethiopian Seseli is preferred for the singular vertues therein, beyond all the other sorts of Se∣seli, and therefore most fit of all other to be used in medicines especially those two notable great compositions, Mithridatum and Theriaca Andromachi, and Lobel sheweth that he gathered about Mompelier at a time so much, that he sent thereof to Venice and other places sufficient for them to use in the said compositions: the rest of them are little or not at all used to any physicall purpose. 
CHAP. XVI. Ligusticum verum sive Siler montanum. Libisticke or Sermountaine of Liguriae. O F this Ligusticum I have two sorts to bring to your consideration both of them in face neare cor∣responding one another, and first of that which is held to be truest. 
1. Siler montanum vulgo Siselios. The true Libisticke or Sermountaine of Liguria. The true Sermountaine of Liguria riseth up with a round joynted stalke two or three foote high bearing both at the bottome and at the joynts large spread winged leaves, divided into many sun∣dry and small leaves whose small footestalkes beare usually two leaves and sometimes foure, set one against ano∣ther, and three alwayes at the end, each being much broader and shorter then Sow-Fennell leaves, almost equall to Mellilot, of a small sweete sent if they bee a little rubbed, and spreading at the toppes into a few branches bearing very large umbells of white flowers and after them long, thicke, full brownish yellow seede larger by halfe then Cumin seede, two alwayes joyned together, striped on both sides and winged, with yellow shining wings at the edges; and of a quicke sharpe hot sent and taste: the roote is long great and whitish on the outside, of a hot sharpe sent and taste likewise abiding long. 
2. Siler montanum angustifolium. Narrow leafed Sermountaine. The stalke of this Sermountaine is small about a cubit high divided into branches, which beare small umbells of white flowers: the leaves are few separated into many thinne small leaves like unto Sow-Fennell but much shor∣ter, and those towards and at the toppes more finely cut like haires. 
The Place and Time. The first is found plentifully growing on the Appenine hills in Liguria, whose chiefe Citie is Genua: and the other in Austria, and doe seldome beare ripe seede with us unlesse in a warme kindly season. 
The Names. It is supposed by the most judicious writers of these times that it is the true of Dioscorides or of Galen by changing one letter, and tooke the name from Liguria the Countrey where the best and most store groweth, and there they call it Sier montana, in Latine it is also called Ligusticum but not Levicticum, which is our Lovage much differing from this as may soone be discerned: but this is also the same that Matthiolus calleth Ligusticum, and after him Lugdunensis, Castor Durantes and others. Tragus, Lobel, Dodonaeus and Clusius call it Siler montanum as was used in the Apothecaries Shoppes, and Siselios also, because in former times they knew none of the true Seselies, but as Lobel saith this errour was tollerable, because they tooke a seede that had more sharpenesse and was of more efficacie then Seseli, although as Gesner saith it is like none of the Seselies, Caesalpi∣rus calleth it Ser montanum and Peloponense. Pliny sheweth that Siler tooke the name from Sila whereby 1. Siler montanum vulgo Siselios. The true Libisticke or Ser mountaine of Liguria. 
2. Siler montanum angustifolium. Narrow leafed Ser mountaine. 
they used the seede for Seseli: and antiently they used to call Seseli by the name of Sili and Seli: Pliny saith that Cratevas used to call it Cunila bubula, and some Panaces: the last is remembed onely by Bauhinus in his Pinax, and set downe in his Prodromus, I have called it in English Libisticke, or Ser mountaine, as the fittest to expresse it. 
The Vertues. This Libisticke or Ser mountaine is of a warming and digesting qualitie both roote and seede, and helpeth in∣ward gripings and paines, swellings and winde, especially in the stomack, it provoketh urine also and womens courses being drunke or the roote outwardly applyed, and is used against the bitings of venemous beasts and Ser∣pents, and therefore is put both into Mithridate and Treakle, and for the propertie to breake winde is used among other things tending to the same purpose: the Ligurians among whom it groweth use the seede familiarly in their meats, to season and rellish them as others doe with pepper. 
CHAP. XVII. Carum. Caraway. A Lthough with most writers there hath beene but one kind of Caraway formerly remembred, yet be▪ because there are two other herbes that nearely resemble it, I will put them together.
1. Carum vulgare. Ordinary Carawayes. The ordinary Caraway is well knowne to beare divers stalkes of fine cut leaves lying on the ground, somewhat like to the leaves of Carrots, but not bushing so thicke, of a little quicke taste in them, from among which riseth up a square stalke, not so high as the Carrot, at whose joynts are set the like leaves but smaller and si∣ner and at the toppe small open tufts or umbells of white 1. Carum vulgare. Ordinary Carawayes. 
flowers which turne into small blackish seed lesser that the Anneseede, and of a quicker and hotter taste, the roote is whitish small and long, somewhat like unto a Parsnep, but with a more wrinkled barke and much lesse, of a little hot taste and quicke, and stronger then a Parsnep, and abi∣deth after seedetime. 
2. Carum Alpinum. Mountaine Caraway. This mountaine Caraway is a small plant and smooth, shooting forth from a long blackish aromaticall roote sun∣dry long stalkes with leaves on them like unto the former Caraway, but the devided leaves are somewhat broader and of a pale greene colour, from among which riseth one or two slender stalkes halfe a foote high, from the middle upwards bare or without leaves and thence spreading five or six small sprigges to forme an umbell, each of them bea∣ring at the toppe a few small flowers in a tuft as it were to∣gether, of a reddish yellow colour. 
3. Carum pratense. Medow Caraway. The Medow Caraway groweth greater and higher then the ordinary kinde, with leaves somewhat like also unto it but larger, the spokie umbells of white flowers are like∣wise larger, and the seede like unto Cumin seede but much larger: the roote is small and slender of a sent somewhat strange or like unto Dauke, of an hot and sharpe taste yet not so much as the seede. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth as Tragus saith in Germany in many places in the fields, and by the way sides, it is usually sowen with us in Gardens: the second was found on the Pyrenian hills, and the last in the fields and medowes of Germany, as Tragus saith also: they flower in Iune or Iuly and seede quickly after. 
The Names. in Greeke is Caros, and Carum in Latine or Carui, as it is in the Apothecaries shoppes, Simeon Sethi calleth it Carnabadion, and tooke the name as Dioscorides saith from the Countrey of Caria, from whence it was first brought. All Authors doe generally call the first Caros or Carum and some Careum and some Carvum as it is in shoppes, Bauhinus calleth it according to his owne country name Carum pratense: the second Bauhinus hath onely expressed in his Pinax and described in his Prodromus: the last Tragus calleth Cyminum equinum after the high Dutch name as they call it there Rosskimmel: Bauhinus referreth it to the Foeniculum erraticum alterum Loniceri and Hippomarathrum of others, as if it were a Fennell when he him∣selfe calleth it onely Caruifolia. The Arabians call it Karvia, Karavia or Carvi, the Italians Carre, the Spani∣ards Cara vea, and Alcaravea, the French Carni, the Germanes Wisenkummell that is, pratense Cuminum, and of some Motthkummell, the Dutch Carve, oft Swicker peen, and we in English Caraway. 
The Ʋertues. Caraway seedes are hot and dry as Galen saith, almost in the third degree, and have withall a moderate sharpe qualitie, whereby it breaketh winde and provoketh urine, and that not the seede onely but the herbe also and the roote thereof is better foode then of the Parsnep, and is pleasant and comfortable to the stomacke helping dige∣stion▪ the seede is conducing to all the cold greefes both of the head and stomacke, the bowels or mother, as also the winde in them, and helpeth to sharpen the eye sight: the powder of the seede put into a poultis taketh away blacke and blew spots of blowes or bruises: the seede is much used in Bread, Cakes, &amp;c. to give a rellish and war∣ning qualitie to them as of a spice, and in Comfits, to eate with fruit to breake the windinesse of them: the herbe itselfe or with some of the seede bruised and fryed layd hot in a bagge or double cloth to the lower part of the elly doth ease the paines of the winde Chollicke. 
CHAP. XVIII: Anisum. Anise. A Nise is a small low herbe seldome a yard high, having the lower leaves broader then those above few upon the stalkes, seldome divided, but dented on the fore part, of a whitish greene colour, and of a good sweet taste and smell, the stalk is rounder and not spread into branches saving at the toppe, where the white umbells of flowers doe stand, which afterwards give small round whi∣tish seede very sweete, yea more then any unbelliferous seede and pleasant taste, and smell yet somewhat quicke withall: the roote is small and perisheth every yeare, and is to be new sowen in the Spring. 
The Place and Time. It is every where sowen even in the East Countries as Anisum. Anise. 
Syria, &amp;c. or else where, and not knowne where it is natu∣rall, but is very fruitfull and plentifull in hot countries, be∣ing sowen and gathered within three or foure moneths at the most. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke quasi vocavere, quia cibi appetentiam praestaret, &amp; forsan sic dictum , quod tensiones flatulentas internas &amp; externas remittat et laxet: it is generally called Anisum of all authors, and almost by all nations according to their dialect, onely the Spaniards call it Matabalna and yerva dolce. 
The Vertues. Galen hath erred very much in relating the temperature of Anise seede, saying it is hot and dry in the third degree; and burning withall, by reason of the sharpenesse and bit∣ternesse: when as it is well knowne it hath no such acri∣monie therein that it should come neare to any burning qualitie: for the sweetenesse doth so temper the sharpe∣nesse therein that it doth not exceede the second degree in heate nor the first in drinesse: but the chymicall oyle draw∣en from the seed exceedeth much these degrees, the spirits being contracted must needs be the more fierce: The seede being often taken helpeth a stinking breath and to breake winde in any part of the body, bee it the head, stomacke, spleene, bowells or mother, and to provoke Vrine and sleepe to them that want it: they helpe Nurses to store of milke for their children, to eate the seedes comfited fasting and last at night, and is very good also for teeming women or with child; they helpe those that are short winded, or have a Tificke or Consumption, to take the decoction of them with Pigs &amp; Licorice, &amp;c. they helpe also to expecto∣rate flegme in them that have a Cough or straightnesse in the breasts, and is very conducible to the stomacke, and be∣ing boyled in wine and taken it helpeth the obstructions of the Liver assuredly, and the Dropsie that commeth thereby: the same also stayeth the hickocke and helpeth digestion: the chymicall oyle taken in broth or in wine three or foure droppes at the most for a time doth wonderfully helpe the giddinesse of the head, the straightnesse and paines in the breast and stomacke, or the crudities and belchings therein, the much desire to cast, and the ri∣sing of the mother, as also all other griefes and paines inwardly that rise of cold or winde: if Anise eyther greene or dry be beaten and laid to their eyes that have any hurtfull thing fallen into them it will soone draw it forth and likewise take away the venome of any hurt by the bitings of venemous creatures, and healeth them quickly: the herbe or seede boyled in oyle of Roses and dropped warme into the eares easeth the paines and noyse in them: the bruised seede and storax mixed together, and the fumes thereof taken being cast on quicke coales, so the head he covered over, that the fumes may penetrate the better, will soone ease the continuall headach: The Italians have this saying, Qui tanno in mano una pianta a aniso, non saran molestati del malcaduco; that is to say, he that holdeth a plant of Anisei his hand shall not be troubled with the Falling sicknesse: but although this may seeme somewhat too easie to helpe so grievous a sickenes, yet assuredly the distiled water of the herbe, or more effectu∣al chymicall oyle, or I would say and use rather, the Quintessence thereof made as I shall shew you presently ease to those that are franticke or distempered in their braines, especially if also there be an out∣wa application with the her be or seede and other conducible things to the forehead and temples: the same likewise is very effectuall for old folkes as well as young children that have the Falling sicknesse, or are troubled with Spasma ' s and Convulsions. The Quintessence is made in this manner, having infused the seede little (what quantitie every one please) for 24. houres in good spirit of wine, let it stand as long then let it bee pressed forth and distilled or vapoured gently in glasse, the residence in the bottome when come to the thicknesse of thinne hony, keepe it for your use as aforesayd. 
CHAP. XIX. Ammi. Bishops weede. A Lthough we have not the true Ammi of Dioscorides and the ancients in all the Christian world, ey∣ther growing or to be seene with any Apothecarie or Druggist, yet wee have two or three herbes that learned men have called by that name which we will here set forth unto you. 
1. Ammi vulgatius. Common Bishops weede. Common Bishops weede riseth up with a round straight stalke, sometimes as high as a man, but usually three or foure foote high be set with divers small long and somewhat broad leaves, some places, and dented about the edges, growing on both sides of the long footestalke one against another, of a darke greene colour, somewhat like unto Skirret leaves, having sundry branches on them, and at the toppes small umbells of white flowers which turne into small round and browne seede, little bigger then Parsley seed, and not so bigge as Anneseede, of a quicke hot sent and taste, the roote is white and fibrous perishing every yeare after it hath seeded, and riseth usually of it owne sowing againe. 
2. Ammi Creticum. Bishops weede of Candy. This Ammi sendeth forth divers slender stalkes of fine cut leaves, somewhat like unto those of wilde Carrots, smelling somewhat quicke, from which rise slender stalkes with some joynts, and the like leaves set thereon, and at the tops umbells of white flowers, which turne into small seede like unto Smallage, of a sweet sharpe sent and quicke taste: the roote is somewhat great and browne on the outside, with sundry fibres thereat. 
3. Ammi parvum folijs Foeniculi. Small Bishops weede. This small Ammi hath rising from a small roote two or three small and slender stalkes, about a foote high bran∣ched towards the toppes, and set with divers very fine small leaves finer then Fennell, bearing small umbells of white flowers, and very small blackish seede after them like to Parsley seede, somewhat pleasant but sharpe and a little quicke withall: the roote is small and white, perishing after seedetime. 
The Place and Time. The first is found growing wilde in many places in England and Wales also; as by the hedge side of the next field beyond Greene hithe on the way as you goe to Gravesend, &amp;c. the second hath beene sent from Candy, and 1. Ammi vulgatius. Common Bishops weede. 
2. Ammi Creticum. Bishops weede of Candy. 
 
3. Ammi parvum folijs foeniculi. Small Bishops weede.
likewise, as Matthiolus saith, from Anguilara on in Italy the last was brought from Alex∣andrinum i Egypt, but groweth in Arabia, and do all flower &amp; reasonable well with us, if the yeare prove kindely, or . 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and , Ammi and Am∣eos in also, Ammi and Ameos in shoppes, and is in stead of the true in most shoppes: the first is called Ammi &amp; vulgare or vulgatius by all authors, yet Tabermon∣tanus calleth it Ammioselinum, and some tooke it to be , as Lugdunensis saith, and some to be , as Lobel doubteth: but as I said in the begining, the true Ammi of Dioscorides is not knowne; and although Dioscorides doth not describe it, as in many were commonly well knowne in his time the , yet from some notes thereof from him, from and from Galen, it is plainely desciphered especially the seede, to be much smaller and whiter than seede smelling like Origanum, and therefore was Aethiopicum, and Hippocrates called it from the excellencie; yet as both Dioscorides and say, some opposed it in their times, taking the Ammi be of a different nature wholly, because it is smaller and whiter than Cumin: but yet saith Pliny the use of this seede in Egypt, both in their bread and meate, is like unto that of regi , or Aethiopicum. Now pone of these seeds, or of any other that have been shewed for Ammi, or used by the Apothecaries, have the smell of Origanum, or can be compared with Cumin: I have onely once seene a seede that was brought out of the East Indies, and obtruded for the true Ammi, whose smell was strong, somewhat neare to Origanum, but the other notes and markes agreed not with it, for it was larger and browner also than Cumin seede, which I sowed in my Garden, but sprang not, and there∣fore can say no more thereof: the second is the Ammi of sent to some, Matthiolus, Castor, Lugdunensis &amp; Camerarius, who all call it Ammi Matthioli, and Camerarius Creticum also, as both one; Lobel calleth it Ammi Creticum aromaticum: the last is called Ammi aletrum parvum by Dodonaeus, and as he saith divers suppose it may rather be taken for Sisan than Ammi. Ammi verum by Gesner, and by Lobel, and Ammium primum Alexandrinum by Tabermontanus. The Arabians call Ammi Nan chue and Nanazue; the Italians and all other Nations Ammi, or neare thereupon, but we Bishops weede, I meane these sorts here exprest: peradventure the true Ammi may be the Cuminum sylvestre before set and would be better considered. 
The Vertues. The is commended by Dioscorides and Galen, being of an heating and drying property in the third , and of thinne parts a little bitter in taste, and sharpe withall, whereby it digesteth humours; provoketh and womens courses, dissolveth winde, easeth paines and torments in the bowells being taken in wine; and against the biting of Serpents: it is used to good effect in those medicines that are given, to hinder operation of Canth rides upon the vritory parts which they chiefely affect: being mixed with hony and blew markes or spots by b owes and bruises, it doth take them away, and being drunke , it abateth an high colour, and maketh it pale, and the fumes thereof taken with Rossin or the mother. Dodonaeus doth much commend the common sort here first set downe, that it expressed of the true Ammi: The Egyptian or Arabian seede is said to be very powerfull to venery, for which purpose the Egyptians doe much use it. 
CHAP. XX. vulgare sive Amomum Germanicum. Small wilde Parsley of Germany. F Or some resemblance of this herbe, with the first in the last Chapter, I thinke good to joyne it next thereunto: this riseth up with a tall slender stalke scarse able to stand upright without helpe, thinnely with winged leaves on the branches, the lower leaves being largest, and divers being set on a stalke on both sides, each whereof is as small almost as the former Ammi leafe, some whereof will be more or lesse, and some not cut in at all, but all of them dented about the edges, at the toppes umbells of white flowers, which turne into small blackish seede, lesser than Parsley, but of a sent, and quicker bot er taste the roote groweth downe much, and spreadeth every way, whereby it fast in the ground, and abideth long. 
2. Sisum odoratum. Sweete wilde Parsley. to distinguish it from the former sort called Sisum, although Sison of Dioscorides it beareth a single stalke about two cubits high, with long Fennell-like 1. Sisum vulgare sive Amomum Germanicum. Small wilde Parsley of Germany. 
2. Sisum odoratum. Sweet wilde Parsley. 
like leaves at the joynts, which swell sweete betweene Dill and Fennell: the umbells are small thin set and white, and the seede small blacke well smelling, but bitterish, somewhat like Smallage: the roote is long, white and slender: some have taken this to be Seseli Massiliense, but erroniously. 
The Place and Time. This was formerly taken to be a forraine plant, the seede being to be had in the Apothecaries shoppes onely in Germany, but afterwards divers found it wilde with them, as Gesner in hortis sheweth, and we have done the with us, growing neere hedges by moist ditches almost every where, and flowreth in Iuly, the seede being ripe quickly after. 
The Names. Dioscorides calleth it in Greeke , and so doth Galen &amp; Sinon also, but Hippocrates Sinnon, and Pliny doth the like, so that Sison and Sinon be both but one plant, as Cordus also doth acknowledge: Tragus, Ges , and other German Writers doe testifie, that the seede hereof was called in the Apothecaries shoppes of their , A ∣mum, and used in the stead thereof, so great ignorance was spread over the face of the world for many yeares, that not onely the knowledge of herbes, but of good literature was in a manner buried, or at least neglected and lost: and therefore it is still called by many Amomum Germanicum: Fuchsius calleth it Petroselinum , and Dodonaeus maintaineth it, taking it to be the truest was extant before others: in the Chapter next going before , I shewed you that he liked of their judgement that called the Ammi perpusillum to be Sison, and now this i knowne to be the true Sison, and called so by Tragus, Camerarious and Lugdunensis, he would make it to be Ma∣cedonian Parsley, but surely this cannot be referred to any of the Selinum, the composure thereof, as well as other things contradicting it; Alpinus hath onely mentioned the other. 
The Ʋertues. The properties given to Sison are all found to be effectuall in this plant, that it is good against the diseases of the spleene and stitches in the sides, against the strangury and difficulty of making water, and womens courses when they are stopped: it likewise helpeth digestion, and is therefore used as Pepper in broths, meates, and saw es. 
CHAP. XXI. Cerefolium. Chervill. O F the Chervills, there is both tame and wilde, which shall be here declared, but some Scandix to be a kinde thereof, which although it doe in some sort resemble, yet I ∣ver them, and to speake of it, and the other indes thereof in the next Chapter. 
1. Cerefolium sativum. Garden Chervill. This garden Chirvill at the first doth somewhat resembell Parsley, but after it is better growne the leaves are very much cut in, and jagged resembling Hemlockes, being a little , and of a whitish colour, and sometimes turning reddish in Summer with the stalkes also it little above 1. Cerefolium sativum. Garden Chervill. 
2. Cerefolium sylvestre. Wilde Chervill. 
bearing white flowers in spoked tufts which turne into long and round seede pointed at the ends, and blackish when they are ripe, of a sweete taste, but of no smell when as the herbe it selfe smelleth reasonable well: the root in small and long and perisheth every yeare being to be sowen a new in the Spring for seede, and after Iuly for fillers. 
2. Cerefolium sylvestre. Wilde Chervill. The wilde Chervill groweth two or three foote high, with yellow stalkes and joynts set with broader and more hairy leaves devided into sundry parts, nicked about the edges, and of a darker greene colour, which likewise grow reddish with the stalkes, at the toppes whereof stand small white tufts of flowers, and afterwards smaller and longer seede: the roote is white and hard and as I suppose enduring long: this hath little or no sent. 
The Place and Time The first is sowen in Gardens to serve as a sallet herbe: the other groweth wilde in their Vineyards and Or∣ch ds beyond Sea, and in many of the medowes of our owne Land, and by the hedge sides, as also on heathes: they flower and seede early and thereupon are sowen againe in the end of Sommer. 
The Names. Columnella calleth the first Chaerophyllum and is likely to be the Caerephyllum of Pliny which he saith the Greekes called P d r ta, but because he is so briefe nothing certaine can be affirmed, some also take it to be the of Th phrasi lib. 7. c. 7. which Gaza translateth Enthusicum, all authors doe call it Cerefolium or Chaerifolium, &amp;c: onely Anguilara and Caesalpinus thinke it may bee Oreoselinum which it cannot bee. Tragus, Matthiolus, Ges er and others also leaning to that opinion, Fuchsius and Lobel take it to be a kind of Gingidium: the Italians call it Confoglio: the French du Cerfueil, the Germans Kerffol and Korbelkrant, the Dutch Kervell, and wee Chervill. 
The Vertues. The Garden Chervill by reason of the good rellish it hath, is willingly put among Sallet herbes to make them the better, as also into Loblollies of stewed herbes which the French &amp; Dutch doe much delight in, for it doth moderately warme the stomacke: it is a certaine remedy saith Tragus to dissolve congealed or clotted blood in the body, and so doth it likewise the blood by bruises, falls, &amp;c. the juice or distilled water of it drunke, and the leaves laid to the place: it is taken also by divers to be good to provoke urine, and to expell the stone in the and womens courses, taken eyther in meate or drinke and moreover to helpe the Plurisie and prickings the sides: wilde Chervill will helpe to dissolve any tumors of swelling in any part of the body, as also to take away the spots and markes in the flesh and skinne of congealed blood by bruises or blowes in a short space, by applying it to the place. 
CHAP. XXII. Scandix. Shepheards needle. T Here are three or foure sorts of Sepheards 1. Scandix vulgaris sive Pecten Veneris. Common Shepheards needle. 
3. Scandix Cretica minor sive Anthriscus. Small Shepheards needle of Candy.
4. Scandix Cretica major. The greater Shepheards needle of Candy. 
needle that I am to shew you in this Chapter, some of which are revived and referred to those of the ancients, and some never knowne before. 
1. Scandix vulgaris sive Pecten veneris. Common Shepheards needle. The common Shepheards needle hath sundry long hard large, greene stalkes of leaves, more divided, and into many more parts, and of a sadder browne greene colour than Chervill, and of no sent; the stalkes grow a foote high, bearing small tufts of white flowers, and after them five, or sixe, or more or lesse long seeds, somewhat round pointed at the ends, and a little rough, as if they were dented, all of them comming from one head or stalke, with a few small leaves under them: the roote is very small and threddy. 
2. Scandix altera capite glomerato. Round headed Shepheards needle. This kinde of Shepheards needle hath stalkes of lar∣ger leaves than the wilde Carrot comming somewhat neare to Parsley, smooth, and of a pale greene colour, those that grow at the joynrs of the stalkes come forth out of a broad filme or skinne, as is seene in many feru∣lous and umbeliferous plants, and bearing at the top a round head, of many greenish white thredes set close together: the roote is like the wilde Parsnippe, and of a bitter and sharpe taste. 
3. Scandix Cretica minor sive Anthriscus. Small Shepheards needle of Candy. The small Shepheards needle of Candy hath sundry stalkes of very fine cut leaves, not bushing thicke like the first, but more sparsed and thinne, comming somewhat neere to Camomill, but finer and a little hairy, of a pleasant both sent and taste, among which rise slender short stalkes, somewhat hairy or hoary, with but few joynts or leaves on them, at the toppes whereof stand five or six small white flowers close set together consisting of five leaves a peece, in the middle whereof is a darke purplish stile or leafe longer then the rest, spreading sorth like a blazing starre, after which follow long seedes like the first but smaller, bigger below and ending a∣bove in two small points, whose edges are more rough and seeme more dented, and bee a little purplish as the young ones are before they be ripe, which are the seedes themselves: the roote is small long and white. This hath beene observed to have a better sent that groweth in untilled voyde and gravelly grounds then that which grow∣eth in the fields. 
4. Scandix Cretica major. The greater Shepheds Needle of Candy. The greater kinde hath a crested small stalke a cubit high, parted into divers branches, a little hairy at the very joynts having the lower leaves broade and somewhat round, divided like unto the lesser Burnet Saxifrage one set opposite to another, standing upon long stalks, which together with the leaves are a little hairy: but those that stand at the joynts are much more finely cut in, and like unto the leaves of the first, the umbells are a little spread and small, yet greater then the first, which are succeeded by more store of long rough dented seede then the last, having each of them two small prickes at the end: the roote is small and fibrous. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth plentifully in our owne Land among Corne: the second in France, the third both in Candy and Naples also, and the last in Candy: they flower early and seede accordingly. 
The Names. The Greekes call it and the Latines Scandix also, and Pecten Veneris, Acus Veneris, and Acus pactoris or Acul and some call it Scanaria. There is much doubt and controversie among our later writers, first what herbe the Scandix of Dioscorides, Galen and Pliny should be, that was so common a Sallet herbe for the people to feede on and growing wilde with them, so that Aristophanes merrily taunted Euripides the Poet, that his mother sold not a true wort but Scandix, which was accounted the meanest or vilest of all others, for our Pecten Veneris is not taken to be the true Scandix in Candy, as Honorius Bellus sheweth in his first Epistle to Clusius; for he there saith the Candiots eate it not, calling it , and hath no smell, but another which they call Sandici, and , smelleth well, but moveth nothing to Venery: divers therefore doe thinke that the Gingidium of Matthiolus should be Scandix as Lugdunensis setteth it downe, Columna taketh the Caucalis echinato nodoso semi∣ne anbini to be Scandix, which how farre they are from veritie or almost any shew of reason this one thing doth declare, that neither Matthiolus his Gingidium nor Bauhinus his Caucalis were ever used to bee eaten as Scandix was, nor is likely to grow so familiarly in Greece as Scandix so wilde a wort: but if I might spend my opinion in the matter, I should sooner beleeve Bellus his judgement hereof that lived long among the Graecians, (for I ac∣count the Candiots in speaking Greeke and using the Greekish rites, to be as it were the off-spring of the Greeks) and from both their denominations of herbes, and the use of them besides his owne both reading and observation; holding the ancient Greeke words although somewhat corrupted, who sheweth that Scandiki as they usually call an herbe that they eate should be the true Scandix, then eyther Matthiolus or Columna, whose opinionative conceits that he had found out the genuine plants of the ancients, made him runne farre awry in many things, as may be seene in his Hyssope, Polium and divers others the like: so that my opinion is that our Pecten Veneris is not the true Scandix of the ancients, but a kinde of wilde Chervill, and not used to bee eaten with them or us, as the properties also do declare: but that Scandici which they in Candy (and as it is likely throughout all Greece also) doe take and use for their foode is the true Scandix which we have seldome seene or knowne: next what Anthriscus of Pliny should bee, whether this of Elonorius Bellus sent to Clusius, or that of Columna in his Chapter of Scandix, which I take to be our Pecten Veneris; and whether Bellus his correction of Pliny his description be not true which explaneth the matter throughly. Anthriscus saith Pliny were the same that Scandix is, if it had thinner and sweeter leaves, which reading being admitted, Anthriscus is an herbe that hath broader leaves and not so sweete in smell as Scandix, which Columna as it should seeme would have to be the Scandix of Dodonaeus, and is our Pecten Veneris, which Columna commendeth him so much for his true description thereof, and so would make our Pecten Veneris to be the true Scandix of the ancients, which is neither sweete nor used to be eaten, and all this is I suppose because he would have his Anisomarathrum to be a new plant of his owne finding, and not the Anthris∣cus of Pliny, as others before him had judged it to bee, when as his description of Anisomarathrum sheweth it must be a species of the Scandix by the manner of growing and the forme of the seed: but admitting Bellus his cor∣rection of Pliny that Anthriscus were the same, but that it hath finer and sweeter leaves, it endeth the whole con∣troversie, putting all things without doubt. I am somewhat more ample and tedious in the explanation of these things then I thought to be, because they are intricate and various; the first here is called Scandix by divers au∣thors, and Pecten Veneris by others without doubting or questioning whether they were true or no: the second Lugdunensis remembreth, and the last Bauhinus onely hath made mention of: the other I have I hope sufficiently expressed it to be called and taken to be the Anthriscus of Pliny which Bauhinus calleth Scandix cretica minor. 
The Ʋertues. Both Dioscorides and Galen say that Scandix is somewhat sharpe and bitter, being hot and dry in the third de∣g te and thereby is good both for the stomacke and belly being eyther eaten raw or boyled: being made into drinke and taken it is good for the Liver, backe and bladder, provoketh Vrine mightily and freeth the inward parts from obstructions: it also bindeth a loose body, the seede being taken with vinegar presently stayeth the hickock, and used in an oyntment it helpeth the parts that are burnt with fire: Pliny saith that the roote of Pecten Veneris beaten with Mallowes draweth forth splinters or any other thing sticking in the flesh. Honorius Bellus that the Anthriscus is used in Candy by the people with great delight, not onely because it is pleasant to the taste, but because it mightily provoketh to Venery and helpeth those persons that are weake or spent therein, and hel∣peth women to conceive in that it clenseth the seminary parts. 
CHAP. XXIII. Coriandrum. Coriander. T He ancients formerly knew and set forth but one sort of Coriander, and sayd that it had no diversitie but the later writers have added two more unto it as shall be shewed. 
1. Coriandrum vulgare. Ordinary Corianders. When Coriander first springeth up the leaves are somewhat broad very like unto Parsley, but it is growne up into a stalke which is three or foure foote high, being full growne they are smaller and finer every one then other up to the toppe, where stand small loose umbells of white flowers, turning into round striped hollow seede of a whitish yellow colour when it is ripe: the roote is small and perisheth every yeare after seede time: the whole plant, seede and all while it is greene and growing hath a strong and loath∣some savour scarse to be endured, but when the seede is full ripe and dry it is of a reasonable good sent and taste without offence. 
2. Coriandrum minus odorum. The lesse sweet Coriander. This Coriander hath the lower as well as the upper leaves all finely cut in and jagged, the stalkes grow lower not halfe a foote high, and lying almost on the ground, with white flowers on them and round seede as the other but fuller and greater, and two alwayes joyned together. 
3. Coriandrum alterum foetidissimum. The stinking Coriander. This other Coriander hath sundry small stalkes that are five square being firme, and not hollow, not growing high, all the leaves whereof are as fine as the uppermost of the first: at the toppes of the stalkes stand such like small umbells of purplish white flowers, after which come round seede like the other, but two alwayes joyned together: the roote is great dying yearely as the other, the smell hereof is more strong and offensive then the other to the head and senses. 
The Place and Time. The two first are onely sowen in Gardens as well now as in ancient times, for Pliny saith it is not found wilde, their naturall places being not knowne: the last was sent from Barcinona to Lyons by Myconus to Molinem, who hath set it forth in historia Lugdunensi: they doe all flower in Iuly and ripen in August. 
The Names. It is cal ed in Greeke and , and so in Latine also Corion and Corianon, but usually Coriandrum, and derived from , which is that kinde of noysome flie or worme that is called Cimex in Latine, a wall Louse or Punie in English, whose stinking smell Coriander doth much imitate. There hath beene formerly some contro∣versie betweene Avicen and Galen, and others also about Coriander, some condemning the use as hurtfull and dangerous by reason of the grievous smell, and that it maketh the voyce hoarse, procureth a kind of frensie 1. Coriandrum vulgare. Ordinary Coriander. 
2. Coriandrum alterum minus odorum. The lesser sweete Coriander. 
like unto drunkennesse, and that the juice thereof being drunke causeth death, and that it is very cold, all these properties the Arabian Physitions give it: the correction therefore of the seede they appoint to bee by steeping it all night in Vinegar, and dryed up againe to be safely used: but Lobel seemeth to refuse this preparation, saying that the coldnesse of the Vinegar can draw forth none of the foule and stinking spirits from it, but rather the dry∣ing of it of it selfe or by the fire, as it is used when they are made into Comfits, without any other preparation and then is not found hurtfull but rather comfortable to the stomacke, &amp;c. as also by the continuall use of it in meates and medicines among many countrey people of it selfe without preparation: and some commending the use be∣cause when the seede is dry it hath a warming, sweete and no noysome smell or taste: the noysome vapours sub∣sisting onely in the moysture and not in the drying, as wee may see in many fruits which being not ripe are so hard and harsh that scarse one can eate them without harme, but being ripe are both mellow and sweete, heate onely working this effect; the hotter countries for the most part giving the mellower and sweeter fruit: The first is called by all writers Coriandrum, the second is mentioned by Lobel, and Dodonaeus giveth the figure without description, Lugdunensis onely remembreth the last. The Arabians call it Casberra and Elcosbur, the Italians Co∣riandro, the Spaniards Culantro, the French Coriandre: the high and low Dutch Coriander, and we in English Co∣riander and Coliander. 
The Vertues. First for greene Coriander and the cooling qualitie thereof: the juice as is before said being drunke killeth them that take it: outwardly applyed it dissolveth knots and kernells, being mixed with Wheate or Barley Flower, as also Saint Anthonies fire being used with bread, and running and fretting sores, wheales, pushes and carbuncles, and botches rising in the skinne or flesh, and taketh away the swelling and inflammation of the cods, either the juice or greene herbe applyed: the juice thereof made into an ointment with Cerusse, Litarge Vine∣gar and Oyle of Roses doth the like, Now for the dryed seede of Coriander which is most in use, and being taken in sweete wine killeth the Wormes in the body and encreaseth coiture: it is also good against the Serpent that is called Amphisbaena, eyther drunke or layd to the bitten place: it is very comfortable to the stomacke, by heating and drying, the cold and moisture thereof helpeth digestion and represseth the vapours therein that rise upwards, and resisteth forcible paines of the winde chollicke and the stopping of Vrine: and being a nourishment of a tem∣perate qualitie it helpeth to encrease both blood and Sperme. 
CHAP. XXIIII. Caucalis. Bastard Parsley. O F these Caucalides I have above a dozen sorts to expresse here in this Chapter, some whereof have small fine cut leaves, others are larger and broad, some well knowne of a long time to many, and others of later invention. 
1. Caucalis vulgaris floribus albis. The common Bastard Parsley. This Bastard Parsley riseth up with a short stalke, not above halfe a yard high, set at the joynts with whitish rough diversly cut leaves smaller then Parsley, furnished at the toppes with small sweete umbells of white flowers, the outermost being the greatest, after which succeede divers rough prickly round seede, two al∣wayes joyned together, which maketh them but halfe round when they are parted.
2. Caucalis Hispanica. Spanish Bastard Parsley. This Spanish kind hath divers crested rough stalkes and leaves very like unto the former, but the umbells of white flowers are smaller and growing more round together as it were into the forme of a round head, and the seede which followeth is greater very much striped and rough but not prickly as this, it being broken in any part giveth a sweete milke: the roote perisheth after seede likewise but giveth no milke. 
3. Caucalis major flore sature rubente. Deepe red flowred Bastard Parsley. This red flowred kinde hath larger winged leaves then the former, being divided and cut in after the manner of the lesser Burnet Saxifrage leaves: the flowers hereof are larger then of the first and of an equall bignesse, but of a deepe red colour. 
4. Caucalis maxima. The greatest Bastard Parsley. This greatest kinde bringing forth many upright tall stalkes three or foure foote high or more sometimes, being crefted and hollow within with divers joynts on them, and the stalkes of the long and large winged leaves com∣passing them at the bottome, which leaves are large almost like Angelica leaves, set by couples on the middle rib and an o de one at the end, all of them finely dented about the edges, and of a darke greene colour: at the toppes of the stalkes grow large umbells of white flowers, somewhat purplish or of a blush colour underneath, after which come very large and flat rough seede, with a double point at the head and prickley, round about the roote is white and wooddy. 
5. Caucalis Anglica flore rubeute. English Bastard Parsley with reddish flowers. This English kinde groweth about two foote high, of an Olive greene colour, with a strong round crested rough and hairy stalke, set at the joynts which are two or three inches in sunder, with leaves three or foure inches long, consisting of seaven or nine narrow hairy leaves set by couples, somewhat deepely dented about the edges, the soote of the stalke being a broad thinne skinne or filme, and from betweene it and the stalke come forth lesser stalkes of leaves, towards the toppe parted into three or foure branches, which at three inches distance doe each of them from one center, shoote forth foure, five or six equall stems about an inch and a halfe long a peece, having a thinne skin running all the length of them, and the two innermost strings, being of a darke red colour composing a spokie umbell: at the toppes of each stemme grow five or sixe long rough hairy small knaps or bottomes crow∣ned with flowers of a pinkie red colour, consisting of five leaves a peece, the outer most where of sheweth like two by the folding of it inward, and the inner foure with five chives and a double pointell shew not halfe so big as it when they are full blowen: in the center of the flower lye six or seven such like small flowers: the leaves give being broken of little or no taste: after the flowers are past come the seede which are rough burres, sticking to any thing they touched, like the seede of Hounds tongue, 1. Caucalis vulgaris albis floribus. The common Bastard Parsley. 
5. Caucalis Anglica flore rubente. English Bastard Parsley with red flowers. 
6. 7. Caucalis Echinophora major &amp; minor &amp; purpurea Columna. The greater and lesser Bastard Parsley with prickly seedes. 
within which are contained two browne seeds like unto hul∣led Oates but bigger: the roote is small and long, white and hard, perishing every yeare after seede time. It flowreth in Iune and the seede is ripe in August. This may seeme to be the Caucalis rubro flore folio latiore of Lobel, and the Caucalis ru∣bello flore of Clusius set forth without description, but the leaves of theirs are larger. 
6. Caucalis tenuifolia purpurea. Fine leafed Bastard Parsley. I find in Columna one other very like unto this last also which he calleth Echinophora leptophyllon purpurea, but that the leaves as he saith are most finely cut into sundry parts like unto the wilde Carrots, and the umbells of flowers, and so the seede after them stand by three and three at a place, whose kernell or seede within is somewhat like unto hulled Barley. 
7. Caucalis arvensis latifolia purpurea. Broad leafed bastard Parsley with red flowers. This Parsley hath sundry stalkes of hard rough leaves, divi∣ded into five parts, each leafe being three inches long and an inch broad, deepely dented in on the edges somewhat like unto Oaken leaves: the stalke is rough and hoary, two foote long, so crested that it seemeth square, bearing such like um∣bells as in the last, standing 3. together but their small stems are shorter and thicker, the flowers are red like the former, but greater, having small leaves like beards under them: after which followeth the seede being smaller then the former and not so rough, containing such like seede within them but smaller and aromaticall: the roote is white, hard and aro∣maticall. 
8. Caucalis magno fructu echinato. Bastard Parsley with great prickley seede. The leaves hereof are divided somewhat like unto those of the greater Parsley leafed Dauke, set forth before in the Chapter of Daucus and hairy underneath: the stalke is two foote high, and somewhat rough, having the like leaves at the joynts upwards but smaller, bearing small umbells of whitish flowers standing three together and perfecting usually but two seedes on them which are twise as big as others and more rough and prickly, having a large flat kernell within it: the roote is small and white but somewhat sweete both in taste and smell. 
9. Caucalis minor flore rubente. Small Bastard Parsley with reddish flowers. This small Parsley hath a smaller and short rough stalke, whose leaves are divided somewhat like unto Hemlock leaves but each of them broader, and the end leafe longest and hairy, all of them dented deepely about the ed∣ges, and of a darke greene colour, at the upper joynts of the stalkes come forth slender branches bearing sparsed small umbells of reddish flowers, and sometimes more white, and after them small round, rough seede: the roote is small and white. 
10. Caucalis nodoso echinato semine. Small Bastard Parsley with knotted burres. This other small Bastard Parsley lyeth on the ground with long rough trayling branches, some longer then others set at severall distances, with long winged leaves divided in the same fashion almost as the last, but somewhat lesse, being rough or crumpled, but not hairy, and of an overworne or evill greene colour: at every joynt al∣most close unto it, and round about it come forth small whitish flowers out of rough huskes which are after the seede, very sharpe prickly and hard: the roote is small and perisheth every yeare, the seed rising by the falling of, in the fields or gardens whereinto it is brought. 
11. Caucalis folio Foeniculi. Fennell leafed Bastard Parsley. This is both in stalke and lease very like unto Fennell, but rising seldome above a cubit high, bearing white sweete smelling flowers in umbells at the toppe, set close together, which afterwards give seede that is not rough like the former: and therefore Lobel that first set it forth saith, that although Anguilara in his time did call it a Caucalis, yet hee liked of the others better then of this: the roote is white growing deepe, and of the taste of a Parsnep. 
12. Caucalis tenuifolia montana. Small Mountaine Bastard Parsley. The roote hereof is somewhat thicke and from it riseth a stalke of a foote long, divided from the bottome into small round smooth branches, and they againe into lesser, whose smallest branches even neere the roote as well as the others, beare small umbells of very small white flowers, and afterwards small long striped seede: the leaves next unto the roote are divided into very fine and small leaves, but those above on the stalke much more small like haires. 
13. Caucalis pumila Hispanica. Dwarfe Bastard Parsley of Spaine. This Dwarfe kinde which Boelius brought out of Spaine with a number of other fine seeds riseth not with us halfe a foote high and lower in Spaine, whose leaves are very small and much divided on the stiffe stalkes, bearing small umbells of whitish flowers and after them small rough whitish seede: the root is small and annuall; I never saw this beare but once, which was from the first seede I received from Boel, which was thorough ripe. 
9. Caucalis minor flore rubente. Small Bastard Parsley with reddish flowers. 
11. Caucalis folio Foeniculi. Fennell leafed Bastard Parsley. 
 
The Place and Time. These sorts of Parsley grow in the severall countries of Germany, France, Spaine, Italy, &amp;c. and divers of them in our owne Land likewise; and particularly the fift was found in Lincolneshire, on the North descent of the North field of Witham nigh to Bourne; and doe all, save the last, flower and seede reasonable well, but that , as I said. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and Caucalis also in Latine, either of the hemispericall seede, or from the noise that the seede will make when it is dry, being shaken with the winde, or from narrow mouthed pots, such as the seed is like, that make a noise at the powring of the liquor out of them: the first here exprest is the Caucalis albis fla∣ribus of Lobel, the Lappa agrestis of Tragus, the Lappula Canaria Plinij of Anguilara; the Caucalis alia vulgaris, and Myrrhis Lappa Dalechampij of Lugdunensis, the Caucalis of Dodonaus, Gesner, and others, and the Echinophora of Columna: the second is the Caucalis Hispanica of Clusius and Camerarius; and the third the Caucalis sature rubente flore of Clusius; the fourth likewise is his Caucalis major, which Bauhinus calleth Caucalis maxima aculeato semine: the fift is of our owne country not published exactly before, although Gerard seemeth to have Sp ∣ndilij had a hint of it: the sixt is the Echinophora Leptophillon of Columna: the seventh his Echinophora major purpurea: and the eight his Echinophora altera asperior platycarpos also, which Bauhinus calleth Caucalis Monspeliaca echinato magno fructu, and is the Lappa boaria Plinij by Lugdunensis, and the Daucus Xanthiocarpos of Thalius: the ninth is figured by Bauhinus in his Prodromus, but the description is of his nodoso echinato semine, which is the tenth, as may soone be perceived, if they be but compared, and are both growing wild in our own land: the tenth is also the Daucoides minor of Cordus in historia, and of Thalius: the eleventh is the Caucalis of Anguilara, as Lobel saith in his Adversaria which Lugdunensis calleth Caucalis Penae, and Bauhinus Caucalis folio Pencedani: the twelfth is Bauhinus his Caucalis tenuifolia montana; and the last I had from Boel by the name of Caucalis marina B ti a. The Italians usually doe call Caucalis Petrosello salvatico; and the Germanes, as Tragus hath it, Feldt oder Ackerklette , and we in English Bastard Parsley, rather than wilde Parsley, as the Italians doe.
The Ʋertues. Dioscorides in regard that Caucalis was a familiar sallet herbe, and therefore used more as meate than medicine giveth no other propertie belonging to it than to provoke urine, but our later Writers have found out and pub∣lished divers others, as Matthiolus, who saith it is comfortable to the heart, and helpeth the obstructions of the liver and spleene, clenseth the raines and kidneyes, of the flegme and niter, gravell and the stone which ingen∣dereth in them, if the juyce thereof be taken: the seede being drunke sharpeneth the eye-sight, and procureth womens courses: it is likewise given to men with Miltwast, and the seede of Agnus castus against the running of the raines: it also causeth fruitfulnesse in barren women, being drunke in wine, and helpeth the bitings of the Trigon (we understand it to be the Thornebacke) the Draco marinus, which is called a Quaviver, and the sea Scorpion being applied to the wound; if the whole herbe be taken with vineger after a vomit, it purgeth the belly and stirreth up a fainting appetite, taking away the evill of loathing ones meate: all the parts of the herbe, as well seede as juyce, or decoction being taken, is helpfull to melancholicke persons, and therefore is good to be given against a quartaine ague, and the itch and scabbes, as also for the great French disease. 
CHAP. XXV. Selinum five Apium. Parsley. V Nder this title of Selinum or Apium, is contained divers and sundry sorts of herbes, for with the ancients, besides the Apium hortense, they had Baludapium Api∣pium montanum Petrapium or Petroselinum, Hipposelinum , sylvestre and others, of all which I must give you the knowledge, and therefore I thinke it fittest to distribute them into severall Chapters, and to comprehend under each all the species and sorts that pertaine to that genus or kinde: and first to beginne with the Apium hortense, which by an usuall received opinion is our Petroselinum, Garden Parsley, whereof I shall say more in its due place. 
1. Petrosolinum vulgare. Common Garden Parsley. Common Garden Parsley is well knowne to have many stalkes of fresh greene leaves devided into sundry parts, first into three parts or leaves, and then each of them into three, somewhat round and finely snipt about the edges: the stalke riseth much higher in some places than in others, according to the soile wherein it groweth with divers smaller leaves at the joynts, and still finer cut, and long like Fennell at the toppe, that one would not thinke them to be the leaves of Parsley; the flowers are white growing in umbells, and the seede small and of a hot and sharpe taste: the roote is white and long, with somewhat a rugged barke perishing after seede time, and aromaticall as the herbe is also and very pleasant to the taste and stomacke. 
2. Petroselinum crispum. Curl ' d Parsley. The curl ' d Parsley differeth not in any thing from the former but in the leaves, which although they grow af∣ter the same manner, yet they are finely curled, or crisped, or folded in on the edges, seeming like a Russe or the like. 
3. Petroselinum majus sive Virginianum. Ʋirginia Parsley. Virginia Parsley groweth after the very same manner that the Garden Parsley doth, but larger, having greater stalkes of leaves, set by three and three as in the former, but much larger, even as large as Smallage, and pa∣ler or yellower greene colour, the stalkes, flowers, and seede are alike, but still larger, the seede being if not thrise as bigge as the common, the roote is greater and shorter, but perisheth like it. 
4. Petroselinum Creticum. Candy stone Parsley. This Parsley of Candy is very like to the ordinary parsley, but lesser in every part, having leaves made and cut into such like divisions, but lesser and somewhat thicker, the stalke is like, but shorter than Parsley, bearing of white flowers, after which follow smaller seede than that of Parsley, but blacker: the roote is alwayes single 1. Petroselinum vulgare. Common Garden Parsley. 
3. Petroselinum majus sive Virginianum. Virginia Parsley. 
that is but one, of the thicknesse of ones thumbe, long, and covered with a thinne blacke barke or rinde that may easily be rubbed off with ones finger, being white underneath, and of a sweetish taste, like unto the Earth Chesnut, being often eaten by the Natives, and liveth after seede time, shooting forth a new every yeare. There is an other of this kind which differeth in nothing from it, but in the colour of the roote, which is reddish on the outside, and not blacke as the former: this flowreth and seedeth earlier than others, and is called Agriopastica by the countrey people in Candy, that is, sylvestris Pastinaca, but hath no likenesse to a Pasnippe, but in that it is fit to be eaten. O∣thers there, as Honorius Bellus saith, doe call it Saxifragia, and use it as Saxifrage: but he himselfe saith it doth come nearest unto the Buselinon described by Pliny in lib. 20. c. 16. especially that with the red roote, and hath the vertues that the ordinary hath. 
The Place and Time. These doe all grow in gardens onely in our Ladd; the naturall place of the first being not certainely knowne, but the second is of the Iland of Sardis, and the third, as the name sheweth, was sent out from Virginia; the last in Candy: they perfect their seede in August, but the last earlier. 
The Names. It is, as I said, by a continuall received opinion held by most, that this Parsley is the Apium bortense of Dioscorides and other the ancients; first, because there cannot be found another herbe that can answer both the and the properties given thereunto, to be so pleasant and to be eaten familiarly in all countries; and next the use of this Parsley is continued to this day, as a sallet herbe among the Greekes and Turkes, and called also Petroselius Macedonico by the vulgar Greekes usually, whereby there groweth some doubt with many whe∣ther should not be the Petroselinum Macedonici of the ancients, as Isidorus and Platina, Marcellus Virgi∣ , and did take, seeing, as Bellonius saith, it is so used and called throughout all Macedonia, Epirus, , and in Candy, and with all the Greekes, and that all Christian Nations also according to their follow the Latine Petroselinum; but because the seede is not bitter, as Gal saith the true sort is, wee as other doe, refuse it, and doe not hold it for the right Petroselinum Macedonicum. It is also called by all Wri∣ter veterum or borteuse, or domesticum: yet Fuchsius tooke it to be Oreoselinum; the last is declared suffi∣ciently in the description▪ the Arabians call it Charss Chares, or Charsi, the Italians Petrosello and Apio domestico; the Spaniards Peroxill, the French du Pers ll, the Germanes Petersilge and Peterlin, the Dutch Peterseli, and we , or garden Parsley. There is some caution to be used concerning this herbe that it is usually called Apium , if it be to be used in any of the Greeke Authors medicines, for so Selinon is translated, but the Arabians i our Smallage, which they held to be hurtfull to the eyes, and the use therof to bring the falling sicknesse. 
The Ʋertues. used in meare and broths, &amp;c. in all countries, as hath beene aforesaid, being of so milde a so comfortable to the stomacke, that no other is more, and besides doth helpe to provoke urine and courses, and to breake winde, both in the stomache and bowell , and doth a little open the body, but the much more, and openeth the obstructions, both of the lives and pleene, and therefore is usually put among those herbes and rootes that move the belly downewards, and is one of the fi e opening rootes, but doth the body as Dioscorides hath it, and hereby also is profitable for the yellow Ju s es and Dropsie: and commendeth it against the Falling sicknesse, and to provoke urine mightily, espetially if the rootes be boyled and eaten like Parsneps: the seede is held by most to be the most effectuall part of the plant, yet some doe thinke the roote to be strongest: but the seede is effectuall to provoke urine and womens courses to expell winde, to breake the stone and to ease the paines and torments thereof, or of any other part in the stomacke and by winde, and is also effectuall against the venome of any poysonfull creature, and is put poysons for that purpose, as also against the danger that commeth to them that have taken it is also ap∣pointed among other things that serve for the cough: The leaves of Parsley eaten after Onions, taketh away the offensive smell of them, suppresseth the vapours that may offend eyther the eyes: they use also to cast the herbe into their Fish ponds if there be any sicke among them to distilled water of the herbe is a familiar medicine with nurses, to give their children when they stomacke or belly with wind, which they call the frets, and is no lesse availeable then the water of that purpose, and is effectuall also for them that are of greater yeares. The leaves of Parsley laid to the eyes are in∣inflamed with heate or are swollen doth much helpe them, if it be used with bread or meale; and to wo∣mens hard breasts that come by the curding of their milke doth abate the hardnesse quickly if it and applyed, and doth also take away the blacke and blew spots or markes by bruises, falls, &amp;c. there∣of dropped into the eares with a little wine easeth the paines. Tragus setteth downe an excellent medicine to helpe the Iaundies and Falling sicknesse, the Dropsie, and stone in Reynes or Kidneyes in this ma ▪ Take saith he of the seeds of Parsley, Fennell, Anise, and Carawayes, of each an ounce, of the roots of Parsley, Burnet, Saxifrage and Carawayes, of each one ounce and a halfe: let the seedes be bruised and the rootes washed and them all lye in steepe in a pottle of white wine, and in the morning boyled in a close earthen vessell part or more be wasted, which being strained and cleared, take foure ounces thereof at a time, morning and eve∣ning first and last, abstaining from drinke for three houres after: this doth open the obstructions of and Spleene and expelleth the Dropsie and Iaundies by Vrine. 
CHAP. XXVI. Petroselinum Macedonicum. Macedonian stone Parsley. D Ivers authors have set forth divers sorts of herbes for the true stone Parsley of Macedonia, every one supposing that to be the right which they propose: of them all I entend not to entreate in this Chapter but severally as they fall out, I will onely in this Chapter shew you that kinde, which now a dayes go∣eth currant under that name, and joyne thereto another which Lugdunensis calleth Petroselinum Dale∣champij. 
1. Petroselinum Macedonicum quibusdam. The first supposed stone Parsley of Macedonia. This Parsley of Macedonia hath divers stalkes of leaves next 1. Petroselinum Macedonicum quibusdam. The first supposed stone Parsley of Macedonia. 
the ground, divided much like to the garden Parsley, but with greater, broader and rounder leaves, dented round about and in some places more deepely cut in or gashed, of a bright pale greene colour, among which riseth a short thicke and some∣what hairy stalke about halfe a yard high or better, full of joynts and leaves, and branches at them that it seemeth a small thicke bush, bearing small umbells of whitish flowers and small rough darke grayish seede after them, somewhat like unto ordinary Parsley s ede, especially after the roughnesse is rubbed from them, yet somewhat longer and darker, of an aromaticke and sharpe taste, and of an unsavoury bitternesse last of all like cu∣min seede: the roote is somewhat thicke short and white pe∣rishing after it hath given seede, especially with me in our coun∣trey, but as I have heard not so in the warmer. 
2. Petroselinum Macedonicum forte Dalechampij. The second supposed stone Parsley of Macedonia. This other Parsley taken to be the true Parsley of Macedonia by Dalechampius and not much gainesaid by Columna, hath a short roote (a long roote saith Columna like ordinary Parsley) bl cke on the outside, with a tuft of haires at the head thereof, neither sharpe nor sweete which is wonderfull (but Columna saith it is both more sharpe and bitter then the common Parsley roote) from whence riseth up sundry slender stalkes, with di∣vers very thinne cut leaves thereon, all of them like the upper∣most (and not the undermost) leaves of Parsley, or like unto Dill of a blew greene colour, having three of the leaves al∣wayes set together at the end of the winged stalke as Parsley hath, and smelling so like unto Parsley as both Lugdunensis and Columna doe say, that if any should smell it when it is a little bruised that were blinde and did not see it, or having his sight did not plainely perceive a difference in the leaves, hee would surely say it were very Parsley: at the toppes of the stalkes stand small umbells of pale reddish or blush coloured flowers: after which follow small seede like unto that of Parsley, some∣what blackish furrowed or guttered like unto Cumin seede, of a very sharpe taste almost burning the mouth, and of a sweete sent, but so bitter withall that it may well bee accounted the most bitter of all the kindes of Parsley. 
The Place and Time. The is thought originally to come from Candy unto Ʋenice where they have sowen it, and taking it to be the Parsley, have used it in their dispensations for Mithridatum and Thiriaca Andromachi, and have so esteemed of it that they are lo th to let any good seede come from them that might grow in any other place, besides the unreasonable price hath beene set upon it hath made it the more esteemed and sought after, yet I have had it growing in my garden and from it have gathered good store of seede in one yeare, but the first perishing I could not get againe any to spring from the seede that I gathered, being as it should seeme not sufficient ripe, nor could I get any outlandish seede since to grow with me againe: the other groweth as Lugdu∣nensis saith on the rockie hills of Gratianopolis, and as Columna saith on the hills of Campoclarensis and Aequicoli: they seede late with us. 
The Names. Fabius Columna hath much commented upon those two kindes of Parsley, concerning the first hee laboureth to pr to be the second Dancus of Dioscorides, from the forme of the leaves thereof like unto Apium agreste as he his second unto, and not to the seed as the qualities of sweetnesse, sharpenesse and heate might import: but in the description of this Parsley Columna assimilateth the leaves unto Apium vulgare (and not to Apium agreste as Dioscorides doth, which is that herba Sardinia called Apium rusus, for other Apium agreste is not set downe by Dioscorides in any place that I can finde) our common Parsley which although it doe, yet other authors have as likely herbes as this, and as agreeable to the second Daucus of Dioscorides in all things I thinke, but because nei∣ther Dioscorides nor any other ancient author hath given any description of the leaves, &amp;c, of the Petroselinum more then of the seede, and that Pliny saith it differeth in the kinde, it is a hard matter to determine any cert tie upon so short a relation, all being but conjectures that can be said in it, which may as likely misse as . Concerning the other he saith that the Neapolitans where it groweth call it Anethum sylvestre, and others Sacri from the effects. But that the first should be Petroselinum Macedonicū, Matthiolus, Lobel, Dodonaeus, Castor D , Lugdunensis and Taberm ntanus doe all call it as it was in their time held to be, and still continueth the same opinion and not undeservedly as I thinke, both the forme of the leaves flowers and seed, so nearely resembling the other kinds of Selinon or Apiū declaring it, but especially the qualitie of the seed being answerable to the pro∣perties that Galen doth appropriate it. And for the other it also commeth neare unto that relation of Pliny concer∣ning Petroselinum, that it was another kinde, differing from the other Apia Parsleys as this doth, in the forme of the leaves being finer cut then any of them, but somewhat more like in the sharpenesse and bitternesse of the seed, and therefore saith Columna it may be used in the want of a better in stead of the true Petroselinum Macedonicum or a truer may be had out of Macedonia or Epirus. But Bauhinus calleth it Apium montanum folio tenniore. 
The Vertues. The true Petroselinum saith Dioscorides provoketh urine and womens courses, and is profitable against the winde and belchings of the stomacke and against the winde Collicke also, and easeth the griping paines and tor∣ments of the belly, as also the paines in the sides and the raines and in the bladder being taken in drinke, it is put also into those medicines that provoke urine. The seede of this stone Parsley saith Galen is most in use, the herbe and roote also is used alike, but are of a weaker propertie but the seede is very sharpe in taste and bitter also, hot in qualitie, and of a cutting propertie withall, and hereby it mightily provoketh urine and womens courses, and driveth forth winde, and is therefore hot and dry in the third degree. This saith Galen in lib. 8. simplicium medi∣ : but in his first booke de antidotis he doth prosecute this subject more fully, which although it bee somewhat large, yet I am the more willing to insert it here for young students sake, that they might be acquain∣ted with Galens minde (who was in his facultie almost absolute) in this matter: As concerning Petroselinum stone Parsley (saith he) the best is knowne to all to be that of Macedonia, which some call also Estreaticum, imposing that name from the place wherein it groweth: yet it is but very little that groweth there, the place being very dangerous by rocks and small in compasse withall: and therefore this Macedonian stone Parsley that is of Estri∣ , and carried unto all nations (is but small in quantitie to be had in the countrey of Macedonia it selfe: but it hap∣peneth to this stone Parsley of Macedonia, in the like manner that falleth out with the hony of Athens and the wine of Falerus. For as the Merchants doe export into all countries of the world the Athenian hony and the Faler wine, so doe they this stone Parsley of Macedonia, when as there doth not grow such a quantitie thereof in Macedonia as may suffice all nations: but there groweth much of this Parsley in Epirus, as there is much ho∣ny gathered in the Ilands called Cyclades or Sporades (which are in the Aegean Sea) and as the hony is carried from the to Athens, so is this stone Parsley first brought out of Epirus into Macedonia, and much of it if not all into , and from thence is carried forth as if it were of Macedonia: the same thing happeneth to the wine , for growing in a small peece of ground in Italy called Falerno, yet cunning Marchants doe so prepare that they carry to all the subject Nations of the Romane Empire that they make it seeme the very same . If you therefore at any time shall want this Estreaticum Petroselinum, doe not esteeme the Treakle the if you shall put thereinto others: for although another is not so fit against deadly poysons or the bitings of beasts, yet against other diseases it may be not a little profitable, such as are the paines and torments in the body or bowells, the weakenesse of the stomacke, the Dropsie and divers other such like, which diseases Treakles chiefe intent doth not promise to cure. And besides this Estreati um Petroselinum doth make the more bitter, especially being used while it is fresh, for it differeth from other stone Parsleys, in that as it sharpe so it is most bitter of all other Parsleys: the seede whereof is thus described from Dioscorides, Galen and Pliny, without any relation of herbe, that it differeth in kinde from all others, the seede being like unto Ammi weede which is whiter and lesser then Cumin seede, but of a bitter sent, of a sharpe taste, and smelling , and as Galen addeth most bitter. 
CHAP. XXVII. Elaeoselinon. Paludapium sive Apium palustre. Smallage. W Ee have besides the Smallage that hath usually beene knowne with us another sort thereof (as I may call it from the likenesse) which in my former booke I called Selinum dulce, sweet Parsley, and doe meane here to joyne it with the ordinary Smallage. 
1. Apium vulgare sive Palustre. Ordinary Smallage. The ordinary smallage groweth up with greater hollow and more crested stalkes then Parsley, and 1. Apium vulgare sive palustre. Ordinary smallage.
greater and larger winged leaves set one against another, broa∣der, and of a darker greene colour and shining more then Par∣sley but dented somewhat unevenly about the edges, at the toppes of the stalkes and branches stand large tufts of small white flower, swhich turne into smaller seede then Parsley: the roote is greater but not so long and slender, with a number of blackish fibres set thereat: the whole herbe and roote is strong in smell, and much more unpleasant and bitter in taste then Garden Parsley, not to be endured to be eaten alone, but being boyled and otherwise dressed it savoureth better. 
2. Selinum sive Apium dulce. Sweete Selinum or Smallage. The sweet Smallage or Parsley call it which you please, groweth up in the same manner that the former Smallage doth but larger then it, the leaves likewise are larger but not of so deepe a greene colour the flowers and seede likewise are like those but somewhat larger: the roote is great and long with divers fibres set thereat, white and much more sappie and pleasant than eyther Smallage or Parsley, with a very war∣ming and comfortable rellish also nothing offensive, but the whole herbe is so pleasant as if Sugar had beene mixed with it: This both rellish and forme wee have found it hath held for the first or second yeare, the seede hath beene sowen with us that commeth from beyond sea, but as sweete Fennell doth degenerate more and more in our Land, and onely continueth sweete in warme countries, so doth this, the leaves also de∣cay in their verdure and become nothing so fresh, but are more sullen or sad like Smallage. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth naturally in wet and marsh grounds, but if it be planted or sowen in gardens it there prospereth well: the other is familiar in Greece and Italy, where they eate it with great delight both herbe and roote, and is onely sowen and replanted in all those places, the naturall place being not knowne to us: they both abide greene all the winter and seed in August with us. 
The Names. The Greeks call the first Esaeoselinon which the Latines render Paludapium or Apium palustre, and is the same with the Greeke word: Selinon in Greeke is al∣wayes rendered Apium in Latine, and thereunto is added the other Epithite, which doth demonstrate his kind as I sayd before in the first division of these Apia: but as I gave you then a caution concerning the Greeke and Ara∣bian acceptation of Apium, so let it here be observed also that Apium after the Arabian authors, whom the Apo∣thecaries shoppes have most followed in their appellations, is to be understand this Smallage, when as else Apium is the Greekes S linon: and therefore it is by most writers called Apium and Apium palustre and Esaeoselinum by Do∣donaeus and Lobel; Columella in his eleventh book and third Chapter sheweth how by sowing the seede of Apium (which Matthiolus thinketh is this palustre but I thinke rather he meant of the hortense ) to make it have a broa∣der leafe and how to make it have a crumpled leafe, and Matthiolus saith also that Gardiners in following his rules have made this Smallage to beare crumpled leaves, onely for pleasure to looke on: but by his leave I be∣leeve they are but conceits, and rather fallacies then verities, for that Apium latifolium is this Apium and Apium crispum is our curled Parsley, both of them being so by nature and not by art, for Columna saith the Apium or Petroselinum crispum is so naturally growing in Sardinia, and from thence the seede thereof hath beene disper∣sed. The other is mentioned by Bellonius in his observations, yet taking it as Columna doth also but for Apium S ∣taneum altered by art of transplanting, &amp;c. to make it to be called Geoselinum as Quatramius doth, who would also (as I shewed you before make our common Parsley to be Petroselinum Macedonicum ) make this herbe to be Api∣um hortense, whom Columna doth much inculcate for it: it is generally called Selino and Selino dolce by all Itali∣ans and Greekes likewise in their countries. I called it before Selinum dulce, sweet Parsley, which as I sayd you may eyther doe so or call it sweete Smallage which you will. The Arabians call Smallage Assilis, the Italians Apio palustre and Apio aquatico, the Spaniards Perexil dagna and Apio, the French de l ' ache, and Persil de the German Epffick and Eppick, the Dutch Eppe. 
The Vertues. Pliny hath erred much and caused others to follow his tract, in following and allowing Chrysippus and Di ∣sius their writings, by mistaking the various acceptation of the word Apium of the Latines from the Greekes, and from the Arabians, for he doth referre that to the Apium hortense, which is to be understood of this Apium pa∣lustre, , that it is an enemy to the eye sight, condemned as not fit to be eaten: that it would breede the Falling sicknesse and many other such like things, which if they were true of Smallage whereof very few doe beleeve their writings, yet can be no way true of Parsley in any part. Smallage is hotter and dryer then Parsley and is much more medicinable: for it much more openeth the obstructions both of the Liver and Spleene, ratifieth icke flegme and clenseth it and the blood withall: it provoketh urine and womens courses and is singular good against the yellow Iaundies: it is also very effectuall against tertian and quartaine agues, if the juice thereof bee taken, but especially made into a Syrupe: the juyce also put to hony of Roses and some Barley water, is very good to gargle the mouth and throate of those that have sores and Vlcers in them, and will quickly heale them: the same lotion also doth clense and heale all other fowle Vlcers and Cankers else where, if they be washed there∣with: the seede is especially used to breake and expell winde, to kill wormes and to helpe a stinking breath: the roote is effectuall for all the purposes aforesaid, and is held to be stronger in operation then the herbe but espe∣cially to open obstructions, and to rid away an Ague if the juice thereof be taken in wine, or the decoction thereof in wine bee taken: Pliny saith it hath an especiall propertie against the poyson of Spiders. The sweete Smallage is chiefely used as a Sallet both herbe and roote eaten eyther raw or boyled: the roote being scraped is sliced and so with oyle and vinegar, it much warmeth a cold stomacke to digest their meate, and helpeth cold windy bodies to expell winde. 
CHAP. XXVIII: Oreoselinon sive Apium montanum. Mountaine Parsley. I Have three sorts of mountaine Parsley to shew you in this Chapter as they are taken by the judicious, and thereunto referred. 
1. Apium montanum vulgatius. The more common mountaine Parsley. The first mountaine Parsley hath divers reddish stalkes of large spread leaves, divided into sundry parts lying like a bush on the ground next the roote, very like unto Garden Parsley but somewhat larger smelling well, from among which riseth up a short stalke of about a cubit height, with divers the like leaves upon it, branching towards the toppe, and bearing thicke tufts of white flowers, after which come small seede like Smal∣lage smelling somewhat sweete, sharpe in taste and bitter withall: the roote is long great and thicke with a bush of haires at the toppe being sweete sharpe and aromaticall. 
2. Apium montanum verius. The truer Mountaine Parsley. This other mountaine Parsley shooteth forth a hollow kexie stalke in some places, tall and high in others, short and low according to the soyle wherein it groweth, bea∣ring 1. Apium montanum vulgatius. The more common mountaine Parsley. 
sundry large spread leaves cut and divided somewhat like into the leaves of Hemlocke bearing umbells of white flowers, and after them somewhat long blackish seede, like unto Cumin seede, being sharpe in taste and sweete in smell: the roote is small long and white. 
3. Apium montanum Parisiensium. The Parisians mountaine Parsley. The Parisians mountaine Parsley hath a large, thicke, white roote, tasting and smelling much like unto the roote of Herbe terrible, the whole herbe doth resemble Parsley lying thicke bushing on the ground, the umbells of flow∣ers are white and the seede is sharpe in taste, but smelling very sweete. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth neare unto Vienna in Austria as Clusi∣ saith and on the mountaines among the rockes in Ger∣many and other places, the next is found in the borders of the fields on the mountaines of Burgundie, the last on the sandy top of the Surene hill by Paris: they florish in the Summer, and give seede soone after. 
The Names. The Greeke name is given to these plants, and is likewise Oreoselinum and Apium montanum in Latine, through the first and the last differ as well in leafe as in the seede from Dioscorides description of it, and yet is Oreoselinum of many, whereas the second onely commeth nearest to the true Oreoselinum both in leafe and seede: The first is called Oreoselinum by Dodonaeus (who also saith it is called by the Silesians Veel gutta: 1. multi good for many things) Lobel and Clusius, and by Lug∣dunensis Oreoselinum majus and Apium montanum Dale∣chapij: the second is the Oreoselinum aliud of Lugdunen∣sis, the second Selinum peregrinum of Clusius, as it downe and by himselfe Apium peregrinum : I have as I rightly referred it to bee the true Oreoselinum of Dioscorides, agreeing so well : the last is called also by Lugdunensis Oreoselinum Parisiensium, and by Bauhinus Apium montanum . 
The Vertues. Dioscorides saith that the mountaine Parsley provoketh urine, if the roote and seede be broken in wine it bringeth downe also womens courses, and is put among those medicines that are made to expell gravell, and those that doe warme any cold part. Galen saith it is in working like unto Smallage, but more effectuall. setteth downe that the first mountaine Parsley called Veelgutta, that is good for many things, is hot and drie the end of the second degree, that it doth extenuate and make thinne the thicke grosse clammy honnours, that it cutteth tough flegme, openeth obstructions of the liver and spleene, and provoketh urine, breaketh and ex∣pelleth the stone, moveth womens courses, and helpeth the yellow jaundise, and being chewed in the mouth, it draweth much water and spittle into the mouth, and easeth the tooth-ach. 
CHAP. XXIX. Thysselinum sive Apium sylvestre. Wilde milkie Parsley. T His kinde of wilde Parsley, hath sundry large spread leaves, somewhat resembling gar∣den Parsley, but they are divided into more parts, and each division hath swaller leaves, from among which riseth up an hollow Thysselinum sive Apium sylvestre. wilde Milkie Parsley. 
straked stalke a yard high, reddish toward the bottome, sometimes with the like leaves at the joynts where it bran∣cheth forth diversly, bearing large thicke umbells of white flowers, reddish on the one side and pale on the other, and after them flat seede, somewhat like unto Parsneppe seede, but a little lesse hot in taste, and somewhat aro∣maticall, the roote spreadeth divers long strings, blackish with∣out, but white within, and deepe into the ground, somewhat like unto the Meum Spignell, and abideth many yeares. The whole plant and every part thereof, yeeldeth a milkie juyce, if it be broken in any part. 
The Place and Time. It groweth in moist and marshy grounds, and water-courses, and much also in the moist woods where Alders doe grow: it flowreth in Iune and Iuly, and seedeth soone after. 
The Names. Both Dioscorides &amp; Theophrastus have a Apium syluestre, but they differ much one from another, for Dioscori∣des his is that kinde of Ranunculus, hee calleth Herba Sardinia, but Theophrastus doth not number his among his other Selina, and peradventure may be this that hath beene referred both by Dodonaeus and Lobel unto the Thysselinum of Pliny, which Lo∣bel calleth Thysselinon Plinij, supposing the name Thysselinon, bet∣ter to agree with the forme of this plant as comming neerest to a Selinon, but howsoever if it be not the same with Pliny his Thysselinum it commeth so neare it, that no other is yet found so neare, especially in the forme of the leafe and property of the roote, as you shall heare by and by; Lobel and Dodonaeus doe both say, that this was in former times used in all the shoppes of the Low Countries instead of Meum, taking it to be the right; and therefore Dodonaeus did also call it Apium sylvestre as Lug∣dunensis doth likewise; Gesner in hortis calleth it Daucus palu∣stris, and Cordus in historia Olsenichium from the German word Osenich, whereby they so called it; Bauhinus calleth it Apium sylvestre lacteo succo turgens; and thereupon I have entituled it in English, Wild milkie Parsley, to distinguish it from other sorts of wilde Parsley. 
The Ʋertues. The roote hereof is hot and drie in the third degree, which being chewed in the mouth, draweth downe much flegme from the head to be spit out, and easeth the tooth-ach: and this quality, Pliny saith, the roote of his Thys∣selium is endued withall: the other properties appropriate to the other kinds of Apium are no doubt to be found herein, and that to no lesse effect, as both to extenuate, cut, and open, and to provoke urine, and womens courses 
CHAP. XXX. Selinum sive Apium peregrinum. Strange Parsley. T His strange Parsley hath from along whitish roote, sharpe in taste, well smelling, and t sting Parsley, growing wooddy, and perishing after seede time, divers long stalkes of leaves lying on the ground, which are almost round, yet a little pointed and dented about the edges, five usually and more also, sometimes but three on the stalkes, set by couples and of a sad greene colour, the stalke, is and Selinum sive Apium peregrinum Cl sij. The first strange Parsley of . 
Selinum sive Apium peregrium Cl sij. The first strange Parsley of .
hollow, three or foure foote high with divers leaves, shooting from it, divided much, and into long parts, and likewise, at the toppes whereof grow umbells of small white flowers, bowing downe their heads al∣most double before they rise to be in flower, which better expressed in the former figure, after which come very small seede not so bigge as Smallage seede, but quicke and hot and of a good smell: this by the shedding of its owne seede doth easily abide in a garden if it once seede therein. 
The Place and Time. This groweth, saith Clusius, in the borders of the Vineyards, and by the paths and wayes side in the countrey of in Spaine, and that it flowreth in Iuly, and the seede is ripe in August, but with us it is more late . 
The Names. who found it in Spaine, called it Selinum peregrinum, and is the first with him, Bauhinus calleth it Apium peregrinum folijs subrotundis; and is the third Saxifraga of Cesalpinus, and the third Daucus of Dioscorides with , which he mketh the second with Pliny. 
The Vertues. The qualities of heate and drinesse perceived in the taste of both leaves and roote, but especially of the seede doth argue it to be no lesse effectuall to provoke urine, and to helpe to breake and to expell the stone than some of the former Parsleyes, and besides may be also good for other diseases, as they are formerly remembred, and the name of Sa eifraga also, as Cesalpinus giveth it, sheweth the same: these things are probable, although we have had no certaine experience by triall. 
CHAP. XXX. Hipposelinon sive Sinyrnium. Allisanders. V Nder this title of Allisanders, I must comprehend two sorts of herbes, each of them called Smirni∣um, and the last Croticum, as shall be shewed. 
1. Hipposelinum sive Sinyrnium vulgare. Garden Allisanders. Our common garden Allisanders groweth the greatest of all the Selina mentioned by the old authours, having divers large spread leaves; cut into many parts greater and rounder than darke greene colour, and dented about the edges, of somewhat an hot and spicie taste, and a little the stalke that riseth up amongst them is thicke and round, a yard high and , with sundry parted into smaller divisions, with branches also rising from the joynts, each beating large tufts white flowers, and after them great blackish seede, not still round, but a little straked on the backe, as the leaves and roote also is, which is great, thicke, long, and blackish on the outside, spreading parts underground, and whitish within. 
1. Hypposelinum sive Smyrnium vulgare Common Allisanders. 
2. Smyrnium Creticum. Candy Allisanders. 
 
2. Smyrnium Creticum. Candy Allisanders. The Candy Allisanders is the strangest in the growth of any plant upon the ground, by the alteration of the upper from the lower leaves, for before the stalke riseth, any one would take the leaves to be some kinde of , the whole leafe being large, and more divided into smaller parts than the former, as if it were some Parsley, of a darke greene shining colour, and dented about the edges: the stalke is round and stiffe, firme and , foure foote high or better, usuall having at the joynts whole, and almost round leaves, yet sometimes than round, and here and there cut in on the edges, of a yellowish greene colour which doe not so much the stalke at the bottome of them, as that the stalke in a manner groweth through them: from the sundry branches, with the like yellowish round leaves on them, and the stalkes running through the toppes, where stand thicke tufts or umbells of yellowish flowers, which afterwards turne into small blackish seede, about the bignesse of Radish seede: the roote is at the first almost round, as bigge as a great , yet a little long withall, and white on the outside, which afterwards groweth thicker and longer, and at the toppe, ending small, but perishing quite after it hath borne seede, which hath nothing so hot, bitter, or spicie a taste as the former hath, especially in our countrey, but as some might thinke that it hath altered the , yet Fabius Columna saith, that even in Naples where it is naturall it hath no sharpe or bitter taste, nor the is neither with us. Bauhinus maketh another sort hereof, the difference only consisting in the upper are longer than the other and more cut in, both which sorts hath risen in my garden from one kinde therefore I hold them to be both one, and make no more differing sorts. 
The Place and Time. The first hath beene found wilde in some of the Iles about our own Land by Mr. William Quicke, a in his time, who gave me and Mr. William Cois a famous Gentleman, and a great lover of the seede, supposing it to be differing from the common sort, but after they were growen up, was no diversitie. It is usually sowen in all the gardens of Europe, as farre as I beare, where they came from Candy. They both flower in Iune or Iuly, and the seede is ripe in August. 
The Names. in Greeke, is called Hypposelinum also in Latine, Gaza rendereth it Equapium, the greatest of all other their Selina, Dioscorides saith it was called by some in his time he saith the true Smyrnium is an other herbe, which be described in the Chapter following, Creticum. There is some controversie among Writers about this Hypposelnium; first, true Hypposelinum of Dioscorides or no, then whether it or the other Smyrnium Creticum Di∣oscorides or no: for the first, Matthiolus sheweth the errour of in taking the of the Italians, and saith he findeth not what herbe this Hypposelinum should be, unlesse it be Levisticum , which yet he acknowledgeth not to answer Dioscorides his notes thereof, because it is in forme so like a great Selinum, and for this opinion Lobel yerkes him too critically, shewing that Levisticum is too hot and sharpe, and in no place used to be eaten as a wort or sallet herbe, and that he did unworthily taxe Brasovolus for taking the of the Italians to be this Hypposelinum by the false translation of Marcellus Ʋirgilius, in gi∣ving of Hypposelinum to be blacke without and white whithin, when as Dioscorides maketh no mention of any blacknesse in the roote: Lobel also saith that it is the true Hypposelinum as they affirmed by the judgement of the learned in these dayes, and yet by all their leaves, the roote of Dioscorides is different from it, who such it is white when as this is blacke, that it is small, but this is not so, which maketh Columna in the scanning of Smyrnium, to say that he would further search what Dioscorides his Hypposelinum should be, as not holding this that we account of to be so. Now concerning the other doubt whether this Hipposelinum, or the other plant cal∣led Smyrnium Creticum should be the true Smyrnium of Dioscorides or no, the currant opinion of most Writers in these that this Smyrnium Creticum is the same, and yet as Columna hath in the said place very worthily, and throughly examined the matter, it is nothing so; for Dioscorides describeth his Smyrnium, first, that it was called Petroselinum in Cilicia, and that it hath leaves of a good smell, sharpe or quicke on the tongue, with some pleasant∣nesse also: that the seed is round like to Colewort seed, (wherein Columna, thinketh some, mistaking of the to be that is set down in stead of , for as he saith, the seed is as like to the seed Canchrys as the black colour) black &amp; of a sharpe taste like Myrrhes sweete Chervill, so that one may be used other, and that the roote is blacke without and of a whitish greene colour on the inside, of a sweete sharpe taste, heating the mouth, both roote, seed, &amp; leaves being of an heating propertie: not any one of or notes except in the seed to be blacke and round, is to be found in this Smyrnium Creticum, and be the right: whether then the Hypposelinum of Dioscorides can be Smyrnium, Dioscorides him∣selfe , and saith that although some called it Smyrnium, yet the true Smyrnium was another herbe, even the have one of Dioscorides his description set downe a few lines here before unto you: Theophrastus hath set forth in Hipposelinum, lib. 9. c. 5. and spoken of it in other places, which is plainely differing from the Hipposelinum of Dioscorides, and neerest unto, if not the same within his Smyrnium; for Therphrastus saith that his Hipposelinum (rendred by Gaza Equapium ) doth yeeld a juyce from the roote like unto Myrrha or Myrrhi, as Dioscorides saith of his Smyrnium: so that by this that hath beene said (although it be somewhat tedious, yet I could not more briefely declare them) we finde that Smyrnium Creticum is not the true Smyrnium of Dioscorides, as , Camerarius, Dodonaeus, Lobel, Lugdunensis, Tabermontanus, and Gerard hath set it downe, nor that the Hipposelinum of Dioscorides, which is called also Olus atrum with us is sufficiently knowne, although some authors call it Hypposelinum, nor is that which it is taken to be, by the defect of some of the notes or markes that Dioscorides giveth it, and lastly that the Hipposelinum of Theophrastus doth agree with the Smyrnium of Dioscorides, but not with his Hipposelinum being different plants, and so Matthiolus, Cordus on Dioscorides, Gesner in hortis, Camerari∣us and Columna set it downe: Columna his Iudgement is, that the seede of this Hipposelinum, or Smyrnium may more be used for Petroselinum Macedonicum (if his other fine leafed herbe that hath the smell of Garden Parsley be refused, or not to be had) than either the common Parsley seede, or that of Ʋenice called Petroselinum Macedonicum by many, and by him Daucus secundus Dioscoridis. The Italians call the first Macerone, the Spaniards Macedonico, the French Alexandre, the Germans Gross Epffich, the Dutch Peterselie van Macedonieu and and Petersolio van Allexandrien, and we in English Allisanders. 
The Vertues. Our Allisanders are much used to make broth with the upper part of the roote, which is the tenderest part, and the being boiled together, and some eate them either raw with some vinegar, or stew them, and so eate and this chiefely in the time of Lent, to helpe to digest the crudities and viscous humours are gathered in , by the much use of fish at that time, it doth also warme any other cold stomacke, and by the bitter∣nesse to open obstructions of the liver and spleene, to move womens course, to expell the after birth, to , to provoke urine and helpe the strangury, and these things the seede will doe likewise if either of boyled in wine or taken in wine, and is effectuall against the bitings of Serpents. Wee know of no good the other hath, being in a manner incipide. 
CHAP. XXXI. Selinum Segetale. Corne Parsley. _ finish these Apia Parsleyes, let me joyne this unto them, which Iohn Goodier first gave me the know∣ledge of, with some seede which springeth in my garden I thus describe unto you; it is a small low herbe having sundry winged long leaves lying on the ground, many being set one against an∣other, finely dented about the edges, with one at the end, which are each of them longer than Burnet and pointed at the ends, among which rise sundry round stalkes halfe a yard high with the on them, branching forth likewise from the joynts, and all of them bearing small umbells , which turne into small blackish seede lesse than Parsley, but as hot and sharpe in taste as it: the , long, and white, and perishing every yeare after it hath feeded, and riseth againe of its owne . 
The Place and Time. in the fields among the corne, or where corne hath beene sowne in divers places of the land: it me untill August, and the seede ripened a month after at the least. 
The Names. gave it me by the name of Sium terrestre, and after that I found it an umbelliferous plant, be referred to the Selina or Apia, and called it then Apium Sijfolijs from the composti Selinum Segetale. Corne Parsley. 
of the leaves like unto Sium odoratum Tragi; but since that I heard it, I suited it with Selinum Segetale, which is Corne Parsley, but it is called in some places of the land Homewort. 
The Ʋertues. Because the seede is both in forme like Parsley, and as hot in taste, there is no doubt but that it is very neere of the same proper∣tie with Parsley, but because I have not made any triall thereof my selfe, I can say no more, but what Mr. Goodyer related to mee, that the use of the juyce of a handfull of the leaves to be drunke in a draught of beare every morning for a fortnight, did cure one that had a swelling in her cheeke yearely there arising sometimes, but whereof it proceeded I could not be showen. 
CHAP. XXXII. Cicuta. Hemlocke. T Here are many sorts of Hemlockes to be shewed you some greater, others lesse, some growing in the marshes, and others by the hedge sides, &amp;c. 
1. Cicuta vulgaris major. The common greater Hemlocke. The common great Hemlocke groweth up with a hollow greene stalke foure or five foote high or more, full of red spots sometimes, and at the joynts very large winged leaves set at them which are divided into many other winged leaves, one set against another, dented about the edges, of a sad greene colour branched toward the toppe, where it is full of umbells of white flowers, and afterwards with whitish flat seede, the roote is long, white, and sometime crooked and hollow within, the whole plant, and every part, hath a strong headdy illfavoured sent, much offen∣ding the senses.
2. Cicuta minor sive fatua, Foolish Hemlocke or counterfet Parsley. This small Hemlocke riseth not a yard high, with whiter and smaller stalkes not spotted at all: the leaves are much smaller comming neare unto Parsley, so that many are mistaken in gathering one for another, being often found as a wilde weede in gardens of a paler greene colour, and with few branches, the flowers and seede are both white as the roote is, but small, and perishing every yeare: the sent hereof is much lesse or offen∣sive. 
3. Cicutaria maxima. The greatest Hemlocke. This Hemlocke hath much larger winged leaves than the former, thicker set, more spread, and of a sadder greene colour (for the smell whereof, which Lobel calleth a satidissima. I that have had it growing in garden for many yeares could never take offence by the smell of it, if it be the same that Lobel meaneth) the stalke is great, but riseth not so high as the common sort doth, and beareth large umbells of white flowers, where after∣wards grow large and thicke white crooked seede of no ill sent that ever I could perceive: the roote and white both growing deepe in the ground, and spreading many great branches therein, which sometimes after it hath given seede, and yet not alwayes, but at sometimes, and in some places will abide. Lobel joyned to this another, which he calleth maxima Brancionis, but he himselfe doubteth whether it be not the same with this last, and ther fore I thinke good to make no further mention of it. 
4. Cicutaria palustris alba. White wilde Hemlocke. The white wilde Hemlocke hath a white long thicke roote like Fennell, but divided into many parts, being of a sweete sent, and an hot sharpe taste, from whence rise divers stalkes of winged leaves much cut in on the among which riseth a slender branched and crumpled stalke, a cubit high, bearing umbells of white flowers and long blacke well smelling seede, after tasting sharpe, two alwayes joyned together with a be∣tweene them. 
5. Cicutaria palustris rubra. Red wilde Hemlocke. This other red Hemlocke hath a thicke blacke, and jointed roote with divers fibres thereat, forme like the last, but larger, and not so much cut into parts, and paler of colour, the stalke is a foote high, bearing flat umbells, with pale red, or blush flowers, and long blacke seede after smell and sharpe in taste. 
6. Cicutaria palustris tenuifolia. Marsh or Water Hemlocke. The Marsh or Water Hemlocke hath a great thicke hollow stalke, two or three cubits high, full of leaves at them, at the joynts with the leaves which are cut into divers parts somewhat like unto Parsley but smal∣ler come forth the branches up to the toppe, bearing small umbells of white flowers, the seede is sweet in smell and blacke, somewhat greater than Aniseede: the roote is long and blackish, with sundry growing from them. 
7. Cicutaria bulbosa. Bulbous rooted wilde Hemlocke. This bulbous Hemlocke hath divers stalkes of fine cut leaves, more agged than the comming somewhat neare unto the Bulbos , Chesnut leaves, of a little sharpe hot taste, the is 1. Cicuta vulgaris major. The common greater Hemlocke. 
2. Cicuta minor sive fatua. Foolish Hemlocke or counterfeit Parsley. 
3. Cicuta Maxima. The greatest Hemlocke. 
6. Cicutaria palustria tenuifolia. Marsh or Water Hemlocke. 
a foote and sometimes a cubit high, having thicke and knobbed joynts and leaves at them, at the oppes where standeth an umbell of white flowers, and after them somewhat long seede like Chervill seede: the roote is round and tuberous, somewhat like unto the roote of the round Aristolochia Birthwort, knobbed or bunched forth in some places, blackish browne without and white within of the taste of a Parsnep roote, but growing some∣what longer like a Turnep roote, when it runneth to seede and perisheth yearely, being raysed of it owne sowing. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in all countries by walls and hedge sides in waste grounds and untilled places, the se∣cond is found as well a road also as in gardens, and the third in Gardens alone in these parts, the and in moist grounds and marshes and by waters sides in France, the sixt by our Thames sides in many places and the like Rivers sides in our owne Land, and the last as Clusius saith in Hungaria and Austria, both wilde abroad and in their gardens, they all flower and seede in Iuly or there abouts. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , a circum vertendo, quod vertiginom &amp; imaginem earum que aspici∣untur, tanquam circumagantur ac in tenebras inducat ijs quae eam biberunt, ut fusius declarat Nicand : in Latine Cicuta. The first is called Cicuta and Cicuta major by all writers, yet Clusius calleth it Cicutaria: the second is the Cicuta minor of Cordus and Camerarius Cicutaria fatua by Lobel, Apium cicutarium by Thalius, Caninum by Tabermoutanus, Petroselini vitium by Tragus, and Apij comes vitium by Gesner in : the third is called Cicutaria latifolia faetidissima, and Cicutaria maxima Brancionis by Lobel, for as I said he judgeth them both one, and Cicutaria Myrrhis by Thalius; by Matthiolus, Gesner in hort, Lugdunensis and others Seseli which Lobel contradicteth, but without just cause as I suppose, as I said before: the fourth and fift is called by Lugdunensis Cicutaria alba, and Cicutaria rubra, and by Camerarius and Bauhinus Cicutaria palustria and flore purpureo, and peradventure may be the Meum Selesianum of Camerarius also as Bauhinus saith, the sixt is called Cicuta palustris and aquatica by Cordus, Gesner and Thalius; and Cicutaria palustris by Lobel and others, and taken to be Phellandrium of Pliny by Dodomeus and Lugdunensis, who make it also a kinde of or , Ligusticum sylvestre by Thalius, and Silaus Plinij by Caesalpinus and others: the last was first found out and named Cicutaria Pannonica by Clusius, Camerarius calleth it Bulborastanum Coniophyllum, Tabermentanus Myrrhis Cicutaria, and by Bauhinus as I doe also Cicutaria bulbosa. The Arabians call it Sucaram, the Italians Cicuta the Spaniards Ceguda and Canheja the French Cigue and Cocue the Germanes Wurtzerling Scirling and Wetterich, the Dutch Scharhuk dullekernell, and we in English Hemlocke and Kexes. 
The Vertues. Hemlocke is exceeding cold in qualitie and very dangerous, especially to be taken inwardly; For the Athe∣nians adjudged the most wise Socrates to dye by taking the juice thereof, for not thinking rightly of their Gods as Aristus and Melitus accused him: yet as it was then well knowne some countries bred it stronger to kill then other, and although some doe appoint it to be applyed outwardly to the cods of those that have venerous dreames or the like, or to maidens and womens breasts to represse their swellings and repell their milke, yet by reason the places are so tender and full of vitall spirits, it often proveth that the remedy is more dangerous then the disease: it may safely be applyed to inflammations, tumors and swelling, in any other part of the body, as also Saint Antho∣nies fire, wheales, and pushes and creeping Vlcers that rise of hot sharpe humors by cooling and repelling the heate: the leaves bruised and layd to the brow or forehead is good for their eyes that are red and swollen, and doth soone ease the paine and take away the swelling and rednesse, as also to take away a pinne and web grow∣ing in the eye, this is a tryed medicine, to take a small handfull of the herbe and halfe so much bay Salt beaten to∣gether and applyed to the contrary wrist of the hand for 24. houres doth within thrice dressing remove it If the roote of Hemlocks be roasted under the Embers wrapped in double wet papers untill it bee soft and tender, and then applyed to the goute in the hands or fingers wi l quickly helpe this evill. The remedy for Hemlocke if any shall by mischance eate the herbe in stead of Parsley, or the roote in stead of a Parsnep, whereby happeneth a kinde of frensie or perturbation of the senses, as if they were stupified or drunke, is to drinke of the bell and strongest pure wine before it strik to the heart, as Pliny adviseth or Gentian put into wine as others say, but Tr g saith that he holpe a woman that had eaten the roote, by giving her a draught of good Vinegar, but if it be gi∣ven with wine it procureth death without remedy: Matthiolus sheweth that Asses by chance eating of the herbe fell into so deepe a sleepe that they seemed dead, which when some came to flay them they flang from them in the doing it, to their amazement and merriment. 
CHAP. XXXIII. Myrrhis. Sweete Chervill or sweete Cicely. T Here are three or foure sorts of this Myrrhis to be shewed you in this Chapter some whereof are of later invention then others. 
1. Myrrhis major sive vulgaris. The ordinary Garden sweete Chervill. This sweete Chervill by reason of the so neare resemblance unto Hemlockes, I thought good to joyne next them, which groweth not so high, but hath large spread leaves cut into divers parts, somewhat resembling the greatest Hemlocke but of a fresher greene colour, tasting as sweete as the Anneseede, the stalke riseth up a yard high or better, being crested or hollow having the like leaves at the joynts but lesser, and at the toppes of the branched stalkes umbells or trufts of white flowers, after which come large and long crested blacke shining seede pointed at both ends tasting quicke, yet sweete and pleasant like the lease or Anne∣seede: the roote is great and white growing deepe in the ground, and spreading sundry long branches therein, in taste and smell stronger then the leaves or seede and continuing many yeares. Latifolium America∣ um. Of this kinde wee have another much greater and larger that was brought from America, especially the leaves, which are foure is large as the former, not differing else. 
1. Myrrhis major vulgaris sive cerefelium majus. The ordinary greater sweete Chervill. 
2. Myrrhis altera minor. The lesser sweete Chervill. 
 
2. Myrrhis altera minor. The lesser sweet Chervill. The lesser sweete Chervill is somewhat like the former, but the whole winged leafe is much lesser, and divided into fewer and lesser leaves also, and softer in handling, the stalkes are lower and the umbells of white flowers smaller: the seede that followeth is long but much smaller, and not blacke but tasting neare unto the former: the roote is a bush of many blackish fibres. 
3. Myrrhis sylvestris. Wilde sweete Chervill. The wilde sweete Chervill is likewise a low plant, and not much differing from the last in the forme of leaves but that it is somewhat hairy and whiter, the flowers are white, but in more thinne and sparsed umbells, and the seede that followeth is small, long and smooth: the roote is thicke and blackish and liveth many yeares.
4. Myrrhis sylvestris Neapolitana &amp; etiam Anglicana. Wilde sweete Chervill of England as well as Naples. This kinde of Chervill is so like in leafe unto the common Hemlocke, that before it be growne up to stalke it derriveth many that gather it, for the stalke is spotted sometimes with white and red, yet seldome so with us as that of Hemlocke is but whitish, at the joynts whereof with the leaves which are lesser come forth small tufts of white flowers, and not at the toppes of the stalkes as in all other umbelliferous plants saith Columna which wee have not observed in ours, after which the seede followeth which are somewhat long and with a long point more rough and hairy, and cleaving faster to garments then the wilde Carrot seede doth, and is of an aromaticall sharpe sweete taste, mixed with a bitternesse as Columna saith with them but nothing so much with us: the roote is small long and white, not bigger usually then a Parsley roote dying yea rel. 
The Place and Time. The first is thought to grow wilde in some fields of Germany, but I doubt the report was onely true for the third here, which groweth wilde with us as well as with them, neare unto ditch sides and other water courses, for the first is onely kept in Gardens with us and them too as I heare: the second is naturall of Geneva and the parts thereabouts as Lobel saith, but was sent also by Aicholzius from Ʋienna to Norunberge to Camerarius as hee saith in , and is likely to be naturall of those parts also: the last Columna found upon some of the hills in Naples, and we have often seene it growing with us in waste places by way sides, in the fields sometimes and walls sides. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke as well as and Myrrhis and Myrrha likewise in Latine, in imitation of the Greek▪ Pliny saith that some called Myrrhis by the name of Smirnisusa and others Myrrha, yet some have it from the likenesse unto Smyrnium, as before the Smyrnium was likened to Myrrhis, some also call it and some Cicutaria from the likenesse of the leaves, and of some Conilaus: the first is generally called most authors, yet Anguilara calleth it Seseli Peleponense, and is Gaesalpinus his Cicutaria tertia, and by Caerefolium Hispanicum, and by Bauhinus Myrrhis major vel Cicutaria odorata: the second Lobel Myrrhis altera parua and Camerarius Myrrhis sativa minor; and is the second Cicutaria of Caesalpinus, and by Myrrhis montana: the third is the Myrrhis of Fuchsius and others which Camerarius calleth sylvestris, and Gesner in hortis Cicutaria similis Cicutae herba that grew in the fields, and was not which Bauhinus calleth Myrrhis sylvestris seminibus evibus, because hee calleth the last Myrrhis syl. which Columna called Myrrhis sylv. nova Aequicolorum, and I have added to the title Anglicanum because it is like his. The Italians call it Mirrhida, the French Persil d ' asne, the Germans Wilder kerffell, the Dutch Kervell and we in English sweete Chervill, great Chervill and sweet Cicely. 
The Vertues. Galen saith that Myrrhis is hot in the second degree with some of parts: both leaves, seede▪ and are so fine and pleasant in Sallets as no other is comparable to it, and give a better rellish to any other put with it: the seedes while they are fresh and greene sliced and put among other herbes make them the very pleasant: the roote boyled and eaten with oyle and Vinegar, or without oyle if any mislike oyle, doth pleas and warme a cold or old stomacke oppressed with flegme or winde, or those that have the or Con∣sumption of the Lungs: the roote drunke with wine is a remedy against the biting of the venemous Pha∣langium, as also the Plague or Pestilence: the same also provoketh womens courses, and expelleth the after birth: it also procureth an appetite to meate and helpeth to expell winde: the juice is good to the of the head and face: the candid rootes of this Chervill are held as effectuall as Angelica to preserve the spirit from in∣fection in the time of a Plague, as also to warme and comfort a cold weake stomacke. 
CHAP. XXXIIII. Levisticum vulgare. Ordinary Lovage. H Aving finished the two former rankes or order of umbelliferous plants. I am come now to speake of the third and last sort which is of such as have broader leaves like Panax or Angellica: and be∣cause I could not well place the Lovage among the Selina or Apia although it be most like unto them, and not to be accounted one of them, let me set it in the forefront of this broad leased or∣der, whose description is thus. It hath many long and great stalkes of large winged leaves, divi∣ded into many parts, somewhat like unto Smallage, but much larger and greater, every leafe be∣ing cut about the edges, broadest forwards and smallest at the stalke, of a sad greene colour, smooth and shining, from among which rise up sundry strong and tall hollow greene stalkes five or six foote high, yea eight foote high in my Garden, full of joynts and such like but lesser leaves set at them then grow below, and with the leaves come forth toward the toppes long branches, bearing at their toppes large umbells of yellow flowers, and after them flat brownish seede bigger by much then Dill, and lesser then Parsneps and thicker also: the roote groweth great and deepe, spreading much and enduring long, of a brownish colour on the outside and whitish within: the Levisticum vulgare. Ordinary Lovage. 
Levisticum vulgare Germanicum. The Lovage of Germany. 
plant and every part of it smelleth somewhat strongly and aromatically, and of an hot sharpe biting taste. Having another figure of Levisticum which Camerarius in his Epitome upon Matthiolus exhibiteth, I could not insert it here, that the difference from the other may be seene, our rootes being great and thicke, Germa∣nicum. and nothing , and in the flowers which they say are white, and are yellowish with us, which Dodonaeus noteth also, so that either they observed it not well when it was in flower, or theirs doth differeth from ours therein, ven as it is noted in the Pa ax Heracleum. 
The Place and Time. It groweth no where wilde in Europe that I can here of, but is onely planted in Gardens where it will grow and great if it be suffered: it flowreth in the end of Iuly, and seedeth in August. 
The Names. It is called usually in Latine Levisticum (for Greeke name it hath none) and not Ligusticum, being farre diffe∣ring plants, although some have taken them to be both one, deceived chiefely by the vicinitie of the name, as namely, Cordus, Gesner, Tragus, Camerarius and Tabermontanus, who all call it Ligusticum, either sativum or vul∣gar; Fuchsius calleth it Libysticum and Smyrnium also, for which he is reprehended by Matthiolus, Anguilara tooke it to be Laserpitium and Dodonaeus saith it is likely to be a kind of Laserpitium, and Lobel calleth it Laser∣pitiu Germanicum, but Lugdunensis maketh it to be Hpposelinum, after Matthiolus his opinion, who saith, if this be not Dioscorides his Hipposelinum, he knoweth no other: Matthiolus, Dodonaeus and Lobel doe call it Levisticum, Bauhinus setteth it among the Libanotides, and called it Ligusticum vulgare; and Libanotis fertilis Theophrasti. For the true Ligusticum called Siler montanum, and in shoppes Siselios, I have shewed you here before. The Italians call it Levestico, the French Levesche, the Germanes Libstockel, the Dutch Laverse and Lavas, and wee in in English Lovage. 
The Ʋertues. Lovage is hot and drie in the beginning of the third degree, and is of thinne parts also, and thereby doth open out and digest humours, and doth mightily provoketh womens courses and urine, as much as any of the kindes of Parsley: the dried roote in powder taken to the weight of halfe a dramme in wine, doth wonderfully warme a cold stomacke, helping digestion, and consuming all superfluous moisture and raw humours therein, easeth all in∣ward griplings and paines, dissolveth winde, and resisteth poyson and infection effectually: the greene roote here∣of bruised in a stone morter, and steeped for twelve houres in faire water, then strained and drunke first in the morning and last at night two or three spoonefulls at a time, asswageth any drought or great desire to drinke more than a carouse of cold drinke, found true by often experience, although the roote is well knowne to be hot: it is a knowne remedy, and of much and continuall experience in divers shires of this Land to drinke the decoction of the herbe for any sort of ague, whether it be quotidian, tertian or quartaine, and to helpe the paines and torments in the body and bowells comming of cold: the seede is effectuall to all the properties aforesaid, ex∣cept the last, and worketh more powerfully: the Germanes and other Nations in times past, used both the rootes and seede in stead of Pepper to season their meates and brothes, and found them as comfortable and warming to the stomacke: the distilled water of the herbe helpeth the quinsie in the throate, if the mouth and throate be gar∣gled and washed therewith, and helpeth the plurefie, if it be drunke three or foure times; the said water also dropped into the eyes taketh away the rednesse or the dimmenesse of the eyes, it likewise taketh away spots or freckles in the face: the leaves of Lovage bruised and fried with a little hogges larde, and laid hot on any botch or will quickely breake it: the greene rootes may be kept in pickle made with salt and vinegar for a long time, but preserved with Sugar is more pleasant. 
CHAP. XXXV. Laserpitium. Laserwort. B Ecause Lovage was called Laserpitium Germanicum, I thought good a little to declare the true Laserpitium or Laser of the ancients, both to shew what it was, and what with divers it is now taken to be; and withall to joyne both the French kinde and that which Alpinus hath set out for the true. 
Laserpitium Gallicum. French Laserwort. The French Laserwort hath a great long roote, bigger than that of Ferula Fennell giant, of a grayish or ash colour on the outside, and white within, full of a fat or thicke juyce, and smelling sweete, from whence rise up great stalkes as thicke and high as the Ferula, whereon are set divers stalkes of winged leaves like into Smallage, but thicker, harder, and of a darker greene colour, somewhat deepely dented about the edges, and sometimes more deepely jagged than others: at the toppes of the branches and stalkes stand large umbells of flowers like unto Ferula, and after them large flat winged seede like unto Angelica, of the colour of Boxe, and smelling sweete. 
2. Laserpitium Alpino. Alpinus his Laserwort. The stalke of this Laserwort, saith Alpinus groweth to be of three cubits in height, hollow, and of the bignesse of a great Ferula stalke, having large winged leaves set thereon, somewhat like the great Selinum, or sweete Parsley, and greater than those of wilde Angelica, yeelding a milke being broken; the umbells of flowers at the toppes yeeld large broad flat seede, as Theophrastus saith of his: the roote is great, and as thicke as ones arme, yeel∣ding also a milke when it is broken, which is white at the first, but groweth yellow being drie: the proportions hereof is extant upon some of the ancient copines of Iupiter Ammon, as Alpinus saith. 
3. Laserpitium antiquorum. The true Lasewort of the ancients. Dioscorides describeth the true Laserpitium in this manner: it groweth, saith he in Syria, Armenia Media and Lybia with a Ferulous stalke (which they call Maspetum ) and leaves like to Apium, and with a broad seede: the Laser or juyce is taken from the roote and from the stalke by scarifying them: that is preferred to be best, that is red, transparent, like unto Myrrhe and not greene, of a strong sent and sweete taste, which being moi∣stened 1. Laserpitium Gallicum. French Laserwort. 
2. Laserpitium Alpius. Alpinus his Laserwort. 
with water quickly becommeth white, if any shall taste the Cyrenian sort it will move and stirre all the hu∣mours in the body to a sweate, with a moist sweet sent, so that his breath shall smell well that hath tasted but a little: that of Media and Syria is not so forcible or good, and giveth a stranger unwholsome sent, All the sorts of Laser are adulterated with Sagapen, or with Beane flower before they are dried, the falsehood whereof may be found out by the taste, by the smell, by sight, ot by the wetting or washing it in water. Some doe call the stalke Silphium, the roote Magydaris, and the leaves Maspetum; the most effectuall is the Laser, the next are the leaves and the stalkes last. This is Dioscorides his text▪ but Theophrastus doth more largely expresse it; and Pliny from him, which is too tedious to insert here: I will therefore but onely mention a few of those things that are most pertinent, and not expressed before, which are these: the seede is broad spread like a leafe, and called folium and is as yellow as gold; the stalke is annuall as is that of Ferula; the flesh of the cattle that feede thereon doth taste most savoury, the stalke is eaten by men sundry wayes dressed or boyled: it groweth wilde by nature, and will not abide to be manured or transplanted. Pliny saith that in his time it was not to be had but after the weight of silver, and that it was so much destroyed, that onely one branch was brought unto the Emperour Nero of all that could be found in his time; and Pliny saith also that it groweth in plenty on mount Parnassus. Thus farre Theophrastus and Pliny, whereby it may be seene what losse there is of it by the great esteeme was made of it, and by the ver∣tues it had which they have expressed, and how hard a thing it is to find out the true plant of all that are knowne now unto us, although divers have referred sundry herbes thereunto as is formerly set downe, and yet still is by divers: for some would make Benzoin the sweete gumme to be the Laser, and called it Asadulcis, which is a word but derived from Laser as it is most likely, and is so farre f om reason, that I wonder how men could be drawen so to thinke, the Benzoin being the gumme of a great tree in the East Indies, as all may know that will en∣quire after it, and is neither hot, sharpe, nor bitter as Laser is said to be: but it is very probable that the Apothe∣caries, who had many of their names from the Arabian authors, had these likewise of Assadulcis, and Assafaeti∣da, and peradventure rose from Serapio his two sorts of Laser, one pure, and the other impure, but that he saith the pure is of a stronger sent, and the impure of small sent. The Arabians call the plant Anjuden, the juyce Altith and Avicen Almarut, and the Indians Imga and Imgara. 
The Place and Time. This former sort was found about Marselles in France, as Lobel in Adversaria saith, and adjudged the truest by Rondeleteus of any other that he had seene before, flowring and seeding in the end of the yeare as Ferula doth, the other is expressed in the narration before, Alpinus saith it was first seene in Cardinall Bembo his Garden, and af∣terwards in that of the Mussares. 
The Names. It hath not found any other name since the first invention, than Laserpium and Silphium which was given it at the first by Lobel, onely Bauhinus calleth it Gallicum, and Tabermontanus Massilioticum; the other is declared in the description sufficiently. 
The Vertues. There is not extant in any that hath written of the French kinde for what disease it is effectuall, and therefore we can say no more thereof: but of the true Laser Dioscorides hath given a very ample recitall, which although I thinke it almost needlesse to set downe the vertues of an herbe which is so little likely to be had as this is, for ign ti nulla cupido, yet to satisfie those that are curious, these they are: the roote, saith he heateth, and is hardly di∣gested, it hurteth the bladder, and healeth knots and kernells of the throate, called the Kings evill, if it be made into a cerot or plaister, and laid to with oyle, taketh away blacke and blew spots that come by bruises or strokes: it helpeth the Sciatica if it be made up with Ceratum Irinum or Cyprinum: it taketh away the outgrowings about the fundament, if it be boiled with vinegar in the rinde of a Pomegranat: it resisteth the force of deadly poisonfull medicines. The Laser of Media and Syria is weaker than that of Cyrene, &amp; hath a loathsomer sent: it is a juyce that is windy and sharpe in taste, and cureth the falling of the haire, if it be annointed with it Wine, Pepper, and Vine∣gar, it sharpeneth the sight, and discusseth the pinne and webbe in the beginning, it is put into hollow teeth being tied up in a little linnen cloth, with some white Francumsence, and being boiled with Hisope and Figges in Vi∣negar and Water, it is good to wash the mouth; it helpeth the biting of mad dogges, if it be applied to the wounds, also the venome of any other creature, or envenomed darts or a owes, if it be either drunke or out∣wardly applied: it cureth the wounds of Scorpions if it be relented in oyle and anointed; it is put into those ulcers that are ready to runne into a Gangreene if they be first scarified: it breaketh carbuncles or plague sores being applied by it selfe, or used with Rue, Niter and Honey: it taketh away warts, cornes, and hard skinnes growing in any place being first pared, and it mollified with a cerote, or the pulpe of a dried Figge, and healeth tetters and ring wormes while they are yong being applied with vinegar: it healeth the polypus in the nose, which is a peece of flesh growing there, if it be annointed for certaine dayes with it, made up with Coperas or Vardi∣grease, at other superfluous wens or outgrowings in the flesh being first clipped off: it helpeth a continuall hoarse∣nesse in the throate, and cleareth the voyce that is suddenly growen hoarse, being delaied in water and supped off: it sta eth the falling of the pallate of the mouth; being applied with honey, and helpeth the quinsie if it be put into honied water, and the mouth gargled therewith: being taken in meates, it maketh one better coloured: it helpeth the cough being taken in a reare egge, and being put into broathes with dried Figges, it is very profitable for those that have the dropsie or the yellow jaundise: it taketh away the shaking fits of agues being taken with Pepper and white Francumsence in wine: it is given to those that have strong crampes or crickes in their neckes, halfe a scruple weight rowled up in waxe and swallowed: it draweth out horse-leeches that by chance are got into the throate and there sticke, if the mouth be gargled with it and a little vinegar, it helpeth those who have the milke curded in their breasts, and the falling sicknesse being taken with Oxymell, or vinegar and honey: it provoketh womens courses being taken with Pepper and Myrrhe, and helpeth the chollicke being eaten in a Ra s n, and being drunke in lye it suddenly helpeth crampes or convulsions, and burstings: it is dissolved with bitter Almonds or with Rue, or with hot bread, to be given in potions: the juyce of the leaves worketh the like effects but lesse powerfully: this is eaten with Oxymell, to helpe the windepipe when the speech is lost. Pliny declareth many of these things out of Dioscorides, but varieth from him in his remedy for teeth-ach, for I cannot thinke, saith he, that any author would appoint it to be put into hollow teeth to take away the paine, when as we have seene the experience thereof in a man, that for the same cause threw himselfe downe headlong from an high place: for it inflameth oxen if it be put into their noses: and being mixed with wine, it bursteth those Serpents that take it, who are most greedy of wine, and therefore, saith he, I would perswade men not to be anointed there∣with, although they doe appoint it. Galen also lib. de simpl. briefly speaketh thereof thus; the juyce of Silphium is very hot (saith he) the leaves, stalkes, and rootes, doe sufficient stoutly heate any cold part, but they are all of flatulent windinesse hereby it is hard of concoction, but applied outwardly it is of more effect, &amp; the juyce is the strongest of all other, having a mightie drawing facultie, yet it holdeth a certaine power to take away excressences in the flesh, by reason of the temperature is said to be in it, thus farre Galen: Serapio likewise speaketh of the Greekes Laserpitium in this manner: Laser, saith he is knowne to the Indians to be of two sorts, the one sincere shining and cleare, like to Electrum, of a stronger sent and greater price, which is brought, as it is thought from Guzarate, Patane, Maudou, Chitor and Dely, which is a cold countrey, and extending unto Chervam: the other is foule and muddy smelling lesse, which they say is brought from Corasone to Ormus in Persia, and from thence is carried to Pegu Malaca, Tauasiris, and the countries next adjoyning: the Baneans of Cumbaya, who were in times past Phylosophers, and are now Merchants, and forbeare to eate of any living creature which was the institution of Pythagoras doe buy this Laser, according to their abilitie, and put it into their broaths and sallats, rubbing the vessells therewith first, and use no other sawse to their meates being pleasant to them, both in taste and smell, yet doth it not breede any loathing in any that are not accustomed to it: the taste thereof is at the first somewhat bitter as pickled Olives are, but being chewed a while longer it is very pleasant, that which is impure, Porters and others of meane qualitie that live on bread and water only doe buy, because they cannot for the greatnesse of the price buy that which is sincere, and the Baneans who deale in this kinde of mer∣chandise doe purge and clense the impure, and doe not suffer it to be used in meates before they have cured it by their skill; and thus much Serapio. 
CHAP. XXXVI. Angelica. Angellica. A Lthough I have spoken of Angelica in my former booke, yet having more to say thereof, and to shew likewise some other sorts thereof, I will here insert it with the rest.
The Ʋertues. The roote of Maisterwort is hotter then pepper, even to the third degree compleate, and is of very subtile parts, it is very availeable in all cold griefes and diseases, both of the stomacke and body, dissolving winde very power∣fully, both upward and downeward, it is also used in a decoction with wine, against all cold rheumes, or destil∣lations upon the lungs, and shortnesse of breath to be taken morning and evening, the same also provoketh urine and helpeth to breake the stone and expell gravell from the Kidneyes, it procureth womens courses and expelleth the dead birth, and is singular good for the strangling of the mother, and other the like womens diseases: it is effectuall also against the dropsie, crampes, and the falling sicknesse, for the decoction in wine being gargled in the mouth doth draw downe much water and flegme from the braine thereby, purging and easing it of what op∣pressed it: it is of a rare qualitie against all sorts of cold poysons, to be taken as there is cause either more or lesse and provoketh sweate, the seede worketh to the like effect, although not with the like efficacie if they can brooke the taste thereof: and therefore many doe distill the water from both herbe and roote that they may take it with the better content: the juice hereof dropped or tents dipped therein and applyed eyther to the greene wounds or rotten ulcers, yea although they fret and creepe, and be almost gangrenated, and those also that come by enveno∣med weapons doth soone clense and heale them, or if they be bathed with the distilled water: the same also is very good to helpe the Goute comming of a cold cause. Tragus saith that the decoction of the roote in wine be∣ing drunke doth revive the abilitie of generation being almost extinct, which you may truly beleeve and try to be certaine as he saith: but by his leave this is against Galens rule, for hee saith that those things that are so hot to expell winde doe not helpe but hinder nature: the other sort as I said before is more effectuall and in especiall for quartaine Agues, to expell the dead child, to purge the braine, and to expell winde and helpe the Collicke. 
CHAP. XXXVIII. Podagraria sive herba Gerardi. Goutwort or herbe Gerard. O F this herbe likewise there are two sorts, the one knowne but to few, yet the other is two well knowne especially where it getteth into any ground, and although for their likenesse one to another, divers have joyned this and the foregoing Maisterwort in one Chapter, yet because they are differing plants in many notable parts, I have thought good to part them into two. 
1. Podagraria vulgaris. Common herbe Gerard. The common herbe Gerard is a low herbe seldome rising halfe a yard high having sundry the like leaves stan∣ding upon brownish greene stalkes by threes as in the former, but they are smaller narrower and not cut in on the edges at all, or very seldome but snipped about and of a strong unpleasant savour: the umbells of flowers are white and the seede blackish and lesse: the roote runneth and 1. Podagraria vulgaris. Common herbe Gerard. 
creepeth like Quich in the ground, soone occupying a great deale of roome. 
2. Podagraria hirsuta. Hairy herbe Gerard. This hairy herbe Gerard hath a thicke fibrous roote of a blackish browne colour on the outside, &amp; white within endu∣ring many yeares and of a good sent, from whence springeth up a stalke about a cubit high, blackish at the bottome and a little hairy, spreading into divers short branches, bearing much divided leaves thereon like to wilde Angellica or the last herbe Gerard, but more deepely gashed, of a greene colour and hai∣ry all over: the footestalkes as also the umbells of flowers are small and white, and followed with blackish seede. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth by hedge and wall sides and oftentimes in the borders or corners of fields and in gardens also sometimes, if it be not rid and weeded out: the other groweth in a part of Germany called Lusatia, and flower and seede somewhat ear∣lier then the Maisterwort. 
The Names. This herb hath found sundry appellations as every ones judge∣ment led him, for Brunfelsius calleth it Pycnomos, Gesner in hortis Car hortis quibusdam, Cordus on Dioscorides Elaphobosco similis, Tabermontanus Aegopodium, Tragus Osteritium sylvestre, and Angelica vitium, Camerarius Angelica sylvestris communis, Tha∣lius Angelica erratica, Bauhinus Angelica sylvestris minor sive ceretica, Dodonaeus herba Gerardi, because the Brabanders call it Ger rt, and Lobel Podagraria Germanorum, which as he saith the Dutch call Flercincruit, and Camerarius saith the Germane call Stre tzel or Giersick and Tragus Hynfuss and Witscherlo∣ sch, and wee in English Goutewort or herbe Gerard after the B ahanders, and of some in our Land Aisweede or Axe∣weede as Lyte and Gerard say: the other is onely remembred by Bauhinus who numbreth it among the Angellicaes, and cal∣leth it Angelica sylvestris hirsuta inodora, and herba Podagrari . 
The Vertues. Goutewort had not his name given as it seemeth at randome, but upon good experience to helpe the cold and Sciatica, as also joynt aches and other cold griefes, for as Lobel saith his vulgar in taking it to bee Danewort, applyed it for the same diseases that Danewort was good for. 
CHAP. XXXIX. Pastinaca Latifolia. Parsnep. O F Parsneps there are two sorts, the tame or Garden kinde, and another that groweth wilde in divers places beyond the Seas, as well as in our owne Land. 
1. Pastinaca latifolia sativa. Garden Parsnepps. This Garden Parsnep hath large winged leaves, that is many set on both sides of a long stalke, each of them for the most part standing directly one against another, and one at the end, being much larger then those of the Skirret, and closer set together and rougher, and dented about the edges: the stalke groweth five or six foote high, with divers the like leaves and branches 1. Pastinaca latifolia sativa. Garden Parsneps. 
thereon but lesser: the flowers are yellow that grow in tufts and umbells at the toppe, which turne into brownish thinne flat seede, smelling reasonable well, the roote groweth grea∣ter and larger in some grounds then in others, being white within and without, very sweet and pleasant to be eaten, when they are sodden tender and are dressed afterwards many wayes as every one list. Of this kinde I have declared in my former booke another sort differing in nothing but the roote, Altera. which is thicker at the head and shorter, and not so savourie as the former. 
2. Pastinaca latifolia sylvestris. Wilde Parsnep. The wilde Parsnep differeth little from the former, but as a wilde plant, not growing so faire and large, nor hath so many leaves and that the roote (as all writers affirme of their coun∣tries) is shorter more wooddy, and not so fit to bee eaten, and therefore the more medicinable, but as I said in my former booke it is the garden kinde is found wilde in many places of our Land so sweete and so tender after the sowing, that by be∣ing manured it proveth as good as the Garden kinde. 
The Place and Time. The first is every where in these parts nursed up in Gardens: the other growing wilde as I sayd in divers places, as in the Marshes by Rochester in the grounds of Sir Iohn Leveson there, and flowreth in Iuly, the seede being ripe about the be∣ginning of August the second yeare after the sowing, for if they doe flower the first yeare, the countrey pleople call them madde Neepes. 
The Names. The later writers generally call it Pastinaca latifolia to put a difference betweene it and the Carrot which is called Pastina∣ca tenuifolia, as I said before, some authors calling it sativa or domestica or vulgaris. Fuchsius calleth it Sisarum sativum mag∣num and Tabermontanus Elapoboscum sativum; but Columna taketh it to be the Siser of Dioscorides. The wilde sort is cal∣led by many Pastinaca sylvestris or latifolia sylvestra as Dodo∣naeus doth, Cordus upon Dioscorides calleth it Pastinaca sylvestris Gallica, Matthiolus Dodonaeus and Tabermontanus Elaphoboscum, Fuchsius calleth it Siser sylvestre, and Lobel Bancia Pastinaca sylvestris Arabum an Elaphoboscum: but whether this should be the Elaphoboscum of Dioscorides, I shall referre you to the next Chapter, in the Apo∣thecaries shops of Italy and Germany it was usually called Bancia, Tragus saith and so doth Dodonaeus, that some in their time did call it Staphylinus as well as the other tennifolia. The Italians call it Carotta biancha, the Spani∣ards Canaoria Blanqua, the French Fastenad , the Germans moren weiss, Pasteney and Pastinach the Dutch Pastinaken. 
The Vertues. The Garden Parsnep nourisheth much, and the nourishment is good and wholsome, but a little windy, where∣by it is thought to procure bodily lust, but it fatteneth the body much if it be used: it little respecteth any physi∣call use as most of those herbes and rootes doe that are much eaten, which made Dioscorides and Galen not to in∣sist much upon them: onely it is conducible to the stomacke reines and bladder and provoketh urine: but the wilde kinde is more physicall, having a cutting, attenuating, clensing and opening qualitie therein: it resisteth and hel∣peth the bitings of Serpents: it easeth the paines and stitches in the sides, and dissolveth winde, both in the sto∣macke and bowels which is the chollicke and provoketh Vrine, the roote is often used but the seede much more. 
CHAP. XL. Siser. Skirret. I Have two sorts of herbes to shew you under this title of Siser, whereof the one hath beene fetcht as farre as from Syria. 
1. Siser vulgare. The common Skirret. The common Skirret hath sundry stalkes of winged leaves, somewhat like unto those of the Parsneppe, but that they are smaller and farther set in sunder, smother and greener, and likewise dented about the edges, among which riseth up the stalke, little more than halfe the height of the Parsneppe, bearing at the toppes umbells of white flowers, which afterwards turne into small darke seede, somewhat bigger than Parsley seede, the roote is composed of divers small long round white rootes, set together at one head, like the Asphodill, bunched out, or uneven in sundry places, and rugged, or as it were wrinckled with all, and not smooth as other rootes are, with a small pith within them, and very pleasant to be eaten. 
2. Siser alterum Syriacum. Skirrets of Syria, or white Carrots. The Syrian Skirret hath a long, tender and smooth roote, grayish on the out side, and white within, and easie to be broken as thicke as ones finger, and twise the length, having sundry small bunches or knottes thereon, like un∣to wartes, of a pleasant sweete taste like unto our Carrots, from whence rise many stalkes of leaves, much divi∣ded and cut into sundry parts like unto Carrot leaves: the stalkes likewise have such like leaves at the joynts and umbells of flowers at the toppes like unto them for forme, but of a yellowish colour. 
The Place and Time. The first is not naturall in any places of Italy or Germany that I can understand, but in the countrey of Nar∣b e in France, as Lobel saith, and is every where sowen or planted in Gardens, and with us rather sowne than planted, for sowne among Onions, the one will not hinder the growth of the other, the Onions being still drawne away that the Skirrets may have the full growth against Winter: the other groweth wilde in Egypt by Cairo, but not in their gardens, as Ranwolfius saith: they flower and seede later than the Parsneppe. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and in Latine also Sisarum and Siser: the first is called Siser by Matthiolus, Cordus, Gesner, and Camerarius, and Sisarum by Tragus, Dodonaeus, Lobel and others. Caesalpinus calleth it Siser Germani∣cum, and taketh it also to be the Elaphoboscum of Dioscorides, as Columna also doth: but assuredly herein they are both deceived, for Dioscorides describeth Elaphoboscum at large, and howsoever the manner of the leaves deceived them, that they were like unto the leaves of the Turpentine tree, yet neither is the stalke of this Ferulous, that is strong and great as that of the Parsnep is, nor hath any umbells of yellow flowers, nor seede like Dill, both which the Parsneppe hath; for this Skirret hath white flowers and seede like Parsley, so that I wonder how such wise and judicious men, that in other things will scanne the text of Dioscorides throughly before they give their judge∣ment, 1. Siser vulgare. The common Skirret.
2. Siser alterum Syriacum. Skirret of Syria, or Wilde Carrot. 
and yet in this have failed much, as you may understand by this that hath beene said: now whether th manured or wilde Parsneppe should be Dioscorides his Elaphoboscum, I incline to thinke rather the wilde tha the tame, although he saith, it is sweete and fit to be eaten; for as I said before, even the wilde might be goo with them, as we have shewed it to grow wilde with us. Another controversie there is among many learne men, whether this be the true Sisarum of Dioscorides or no, in regard that neither he nor any other of the ancient have given almost any touch of forme or leafe or roote it had, because it was so familiar and well knowne i their time, and so it falleth out in many other things that were so common with them, that they thought it need lesse to describe them, that they are now most unknowne to the succeeding times, and to us yet in our time: th greatest propability that we have, is that, as Dioscorides saith, Sisarum is pleasant to the pallate, profitable to th stomacke, provoking urine, and procuring an appetite if it be boyled (for he doth not say eaten raw as divers o ther rootes are) all which agree to the Skirret: but Pliny in setting forth his Siser, which assuredly is all one wit Dioscorides his Sisarum sheweth plainely that it hath a nerve or string in the roote, which is to be taken away af∣ter the boyling, that the rest may be eaten with the more pleasure, and such hath this Skirret and no other roote, that either then was or now is edible but it: and therefore there is no doubt but that it is the true Sisarum or Siser of the ancients: the other Ranwolfius saith is called in Egypt by the Arabians there Secacul as Scerapio did, and therefore this may cease all controversies concerning it, that our Parsneppe roote is not Siser, as it formerly was taken, nor our ordinary Siser neither to be Secacul: the Arabians call it Fisarum and Seisaron: the Italians Sisaro the Spaniards Chiribas; the French Cheruy, the Germans Gierlin: the Dutch Swycker wortelen, that is Sugar roote; and we in English Skirret. 
The Ʋertues. Skirret rootes (for no other part is in use as I know) being dressed according to every ones liking doe nourish well, but not so much as the Parsneppe, it being of a stronger taste, and this more delicate and pleasant, and is al∣so very wholesome, yet engendreth a little winde, and provoketh to venery: it doth somewhat respect the Kid∣nies and bladder by moving to urine, and a little to consume the stone and gravell in them: and this is all that we have learned it to be availeable: for those herbes and roots that are temperate and most used to be eaten, are the lesse physically applied for any disease; the other as Ranwolfius saith, is used to be eaten also by the Egyptians, as other rootes are and is common with them. 
CHAP. XLI. Saxifraga Pimpinella. Burnet Saxifrage. W E have foure or five sorts of this burnet Saxifrage, to shew you here, some being of our owne countrey, and some of others, and some greater or lesser than others. 
1. Pimpinella Saxifraga hircina major. Great Germane Burnet Saxifrage. This great Burnet Saxifrage of Germany hath divers large and long stalkes of winged leaves, one set directly opposite to another on both sides, each being somewhat broad, a little pointed and dented about the edges somewhat deepely, of a fresh greene colour almost shining, from among which rise up one or more round hollow stalkes, three foote high or more, set at the joynts, with the like, but lesser leaves, and bea∣ring at the toppes small umbells of small white flowers, after which come small blackish round seede like unto Parsley seede, but much hotter in taste, and sharper upon the tongue, the roote is small long and white, very like unto a Parsley roote, but much hotter in taste, and perisheth not after seede time, but endureth long. 
2. Pimpinella Saxifraga major flore rubente. Great Burnet Saxifrage of Germany with a reddish flower. This sort differeth little from the former, either in forme or greatnesse of leaves or tallnesse of the stalkes, the chiefest difference consisteth in the flowers which are reddish or of a blush colour. 
3. Pimpinella Saxifraga major nostras. The greater English Burnet Saxifrage. The greater sort of our English Burnet Saxifrage groweth up in the same manner that the former doe, the forme of whose leaves is all one likewise, but that they are usually not more than halfe so bigge or large, and not so deepely dented about the edges, but of a sadder greene colour; the stalkes likewise are smaller and shorter than the other, the umbells of flowers are white also and the seede small and blackish, but sharper than the for∣mer: the roote is long and whitish enduring long. 
4. Pimpinella Saxifraga hircina minor. The smaller Burnet Saxifrage of Germany. This lesser Burnet Saxifrage of Germany hath likewise sundry shorter stalkes of finer cut leaves by much than the former, every one set against other, being very narrow and much cut in or deepely dented about the edges, which maketh the leafe seeme as if it were made of many fine cut and jagged leaves set on both sides of a foote stalke, which sometimes groweth reddish, and is very neere of the same fresh greene colour that is in the first: the stalkes rise as high, almost, and the umbells of flowers white like the former; the seede also is blackish but smaller than the former: the roote is long and white but smaller, but more hot, quicke and sharpe as the seede hereof is also. 
5. Pimpinella Saxifraga minor nostras. The lesser English Burnet Saxifrage. Our lesser English Burnet Saxifrage hath much finer cut leaves than the last, so that there is not halfe that breadth to be seene in them that there is in the leaves of the former, but yet divided after the same manner, and of as darke a greene colour as the greater English sort: the umbells of flowers are white, and the seede that followeth smaller than of the last, the roote likewise is smaller, but as hot and quicke in taste as it. 
The Place and Time. The Germane kindes grow as well in their fields, as on the mountaines, and in rockie grounds, and as it is affir∣rmed unto me by divers in our owne land likewise; the other of our owne land, are usually growing in most me∣dowes of this land to be easily found of them that know them, and will looke for them, for they lie hid among the grasse oftentimes scarsely to be discerned: they doe all flower about Iuly, and their seede is ripe about the end of August. 
The Names. The ancient Writers neither Greekes nor Latines had any knowledge of any of these plants, but are called of 1. Pimpinella Saxifrage Hircina major. Great Germane Burnet Saxifrage. 
4. Pimpinella Saxifraga Hircina minor. The smaller Burnet Saxifrage of . 
the moderne Herbarists Pimpinella simply by many, as Cordus, Tragus, Fuchsius, Gesner, and Lobel &amp; Pimpinella Saxi∣fraga by Matthiolus and Camerarius, or Saxifraga hircina, as Gesner &amp; Clusius do, some also Bipinella Saxifraga, as Lobel, or Bipenula as Lacuna, or Tragoselinum majus as Tabermontanus: the second is remembred by Gesner in hor∣tis, &amp; in descriptione mon is fracti; the third is the second Pimpinella of Tragus, yet is greater than that kinde that groweth in our owne land; and so is the fift, and is most likely to be Bauhinus his Pimpinella Saxifraga tenuifolia; the fourth is the third Pimpinella of Tragus, and is called Pimpinella minor by divers, and Saxifraga hircina minor by others, taken by Cordus to be Daucus Selinoides, and by Lugdunensis Dauci tertium genus, and by Columna to be Tragium Dioscoridis. There is growing at the rootes of these Saxifrages in some countries certaine graines that will give a searlet die, as Lacuna and Anguilara have set it downe, and by them called Coccus radicum, but Amatus L sitanus saith that the like graines are found at the rootes of many other herbes. Fragosus seemeth in reciting these graines growing at the rootes of these Saxifrages, to thinke that these graines are the Cochenill that the Diers use to die their silke and cloth in graine colours; for he saith, lib. 3. c. 15. that the Cochenill that commeth from Peru be the graines that grow at the rootes of certaine plants like unto our common Burnet Sa ifrage, wherein he was much mistaken, for as Oviedus saith, they are gathered from the leaves of great trees in the West Indies, called there Tunal, and with us Ficus Indica, and as it is set downe in the eight part of the West Indian Hi∣story, the fourth Booke and thirteenth Chapter (and in the Classis of the trees in this Worke) from whence it seemeth Iohn de Laet of Anwerpe in his fift Booke and third Chapter, pag. 229. of the West Indian History tooke his relation thereof, which is somewhat too large to insert in this place. I will therefore but briefely touch what he there saith, that there are divers sorts of Ficus Indica, some that beare no fruit growing wilde, or so thorny that serveth to no use: others that are manured and beare fruit, which are eaten, and are either white, which are the better, or of a reddish purple colour dying their hands that gather them, like as Mulberies doe: and there is ano∣ther manured sort that beareth no fruit, but is of greatest worth, and most carefully kept, because that certaine Flies doe breede thereon (which are that graine called by the Spaniards Cochenill, derived from the Coccus of the ancients, and this as a diminutive thereof) which they gather twise or thrice in a yeare, and kill them by casting cold water on them, and afterwards drie them in the shadow: but of this he saith there are foure sorts, some bet∣ter or worse than others, the worser being gathered from the wilde plants, the best from those are planted in order like an orchard, and tended carefully. Tragus calleth this Saxifrage Piper Germanicum, and saith that no other plant can be more fitly referred to the Petresolinum Macedonicum of Dioscorides than it, who compared the seede thereof unto the seede of Amoes, yet to be sweeter in smell like unto spice, and sharpe and hote in taste, and to grow in rockie places, and hereon complaineth that men more willingly spend their cost on strange things fetcht from farre, than upon their owne hombred and country plants: and assuredly the seede hereof is so aromaticall, and sharpe piercing withall that I thinke he had reason so to thinke as he did, when as it farre surpasseth either the old Petroselinum Macedonicum of our modernes, I meane our Allisander seede or the new Petroselinum Mace∣donicum that commeth from Venice, and is now a dayes in so great account, as though it were the true Petroselinum Macedonicum not to be doubted of, or none to goe beyond it: but I am in doubt I shall finde among my brethren so e Critickes that will taxe me for inferring this noveltie: if it please not them, let the judicious censure it as they shall finde cause and reason. Tragus also saith that some others referred this to the Oreoseli or Apium of Dioscorides. 
The Vertues. These sorts of Saxifrages are hotter than any the former kindes of Apia Parslies, and as hot as Pepper, and as Tragus saith, more wholesome, by his often experience: it hath the same properties that the Parslyes have, but in provoking Vrine, and easing the paines thereof, or of the Wind and Collicke is much more effectuall, the rootes or seede being used either in powder or in decoction or any other way, and likewise helpeth the windie paines of the Mother, and to procure their courses, to breake and avoyde the stone in the Kidnies, to digest cold viscous and tough flegme in the stomacke; and is a most speciall remedy against all kinde of venome. being boyled in the distilled water hereof, is singuler good to be given to those that are troubled with and Convulsions: some doe use to make the seede into Comfits, as they doe Caraway seede, which i effectuall to all the purposes afore sayd, and some doe distill the water that the more tender stomackes may take it, being a little sweetened with Sugar: the juyce of the herbe being dropped into the most grievous wounds of the head, doth dry up their moysture and healeth them quickely: the experiment is taken from Hennes whose combes and head being pierced through, so as the braine was not hurt, were soone helped hereby: some women also use the distilled water to take away freckles, or other spots in the skinne or face, and to make it the more cleere and smooth. 
CHAP. XLII. Pinax. Alheale. D Ioscorides maketh mention of three sorts of Panax, Panax Heracleum with Figge-like leaves, whereof I intend to intreate in this Chapter, and with it some others that for their likenesse may be referred thereunto: Panax Asclopias with Fennell-like leaves, but I have spoken hereof in the fourth Chapter of this Classie, and Panax Chironium with Marjerome-like leaves, I have shewed you in the 84. Chapter of the fifth Classie of this Worke, but Theophrastus maketh foure sorts, for unto these three he added a fourth, which he calleth Syriacum but doth not describe it. I have to shew you in this Chapter many other sorts, that for their likenesse have obtained that epithite. 
1. Panax Heracleum verum ficulneo folio. The true All-heale of Hercules. The true Panax hath divers large broad greene leaves growing next the ground, cut into three or more parts, resembling a Figge leafe, each standing on a long footstalk, w ch as well as the leafe is somewhat rough or rug∣ged, from whence riseth up a stalk foure or five foot high, having such like leaves as grow below but lesser &amp; lesse divided bearing a large tuft or umbell of yellow flowers, and somewhat large flat seede after them: the roote is white with divers branches thereat: the whole plant smelleth somewhat strong and as it were sower. From this it is probable the Gum Opopanax is gathered which commeth out of Syria and the parts thereabouts to the chiefe Mart townes, as Damasco, Cairo, Alexandria and others the like, to be transported else where. And the like plant answering very notably to this discription have I had growing in my Garden, the seede whereof was sent me among other rare seeds by some of my divers friends from Italy, but perished by some extreme hard winter. 
2. Panax Heracleum alterum sive peregrinum Dodonaei. The more ordinary Alheale of Hercules with us. This Panax spreadeth many very large winged leaves round about upon the ground, most of them two foot long, consisting of foure, five or six couples of rough winged leaves, set each against other on a round great footestalk, surrowed on the upper side, each of them consisting likewise of three or foure couple of rough but large faire fresh yellowish greene leaves &amp; one at the end, broad below, and narrow to the end, the one of the lower sides of the leafe, being alwayes deeper at the bottome then the other and finely dented about the edges, tasting a little hot and biting in the mouth, and yeelding forth a yellowish juice in the Sommer much more gum∣my, hot and bitter than the leaves; from among these leaves riseth up one strong great round greene stalk foure or five foote high or more, with some joynts and leaves thereat, and a few branches towards the toppes, where breake forth small yellow umbells of flowers, which afterwards give whitish yellow flat short seede: the roote groweth somewhat great and deepe downe into the ground, with two or three long branches from it, whitish yel∣low on the outside and more white within, full of that yellow sap issuing from it if it bee cut or broken, of a little stroug sent and hot bitter taste more then eyther leafe or seede: this description is from the plant growing in mine owne Garden where it abideth the extreamest winter without harme. 
3. Panax Heracleum alterum Americum splendente folio, Laserpitium creditum quibusdam. American Alheale of Hercules with shining leaves, supposed to be the true Laserwort. This Herculean Alheale groweth for the forme very like unto the last, having such like winged leaves set in the same manner, and the wings with foure or five or six couple of leaves, but differing in greatnesse and colour, for neither is the whole stalke above halfe so long, nor are the leaves themselves eyther halfe so great so broad or so long, but are rather somewhat short, and of a deepe greene colour, very much shining on the upper side and paler greene underneath, much hotter and sharper in taste then the former and not bitter drawing water into the mouth: the stalk hereof is seldome above a yard high, with joynts and leaves thereon, and more branches towards the toppes then the other bearing larger umbells of yellow flowers succeeded by flattish but almost round seede, of a pale browne colour the roote is white and great at the head with sundry long strings thereat with a pith in the middle and endureth not after seede time which sometimes is the second yeare after the springing and some∣times the third. At o pur∣pureo. There is another sort hereof with taller and purplish stalkes, and larger browne greene leave. 
4. Panax Costinum sive Pseudostus Matthioli. Costus-like Alheale. This Costus-like Alheale differeth not much in forme from the second but in the greatnesse and substance of the yellow juice which this giveth not and therefore is not of that kind, for this hath such like large winged leaves, set in the same manner but lesser together, each leafe whereof is larger then a Parsnep leafe, thicker, rougher and more crumpled also and dented about the edges: the stalke is small and about two cubits high, full of joynts and lesser leaves set at them, branched towards the toppes and bearing round tufts of yellow flowers, after which follow flat and somewhat round seede: the roote is sappie with a thicke fleshy barke, and of a shining ash colour, bitter and sharpe in taste. 
1. Panax Heracleum verum. The true Alheale of Hercules.
2. Panax Heracleum alterum sive peregrinum Dodonal. The more ordinary Alheale of Hercules with us. 
3. Panax alterum Americanum splendente folio Laserpitium creditum quibusdam. Americas Alheale of Hercules with shining leaves. 
4. Panax Costinum sive Pseudocostus Matthioli. Costus like Alheale. 
 
5. Panaci Heracleo similis Tataria Ʋngaris dicta. The Hungarian Alheale of Hercules. This Hungarian or rather Tartarian herbe hath the leaves much cut in and gashed on the edges somewhat like unto Turneps, but more nearely resembling those of the Alheale of Hercules, full of a rough hairinesse, of a pale greene colour, with other smaller ones lesse divided and lesse rough also, among whom riseth a rough cr hollow stalke two foote high, and of the thicknesse of ones thumbe, full of joynts and such leaves set thereat grow be ow, but smaller and more divided compassing the stalke at the bottome: at the toppe of the stalke com∣meth forth umbells of yellow flowers, after which follow the seede very sparingly set on the umbells (for every flower doth not perfit the seede many more failing then holding) which is very great and thicke, resembling those of the Cachrys, and straked like thereunto: the roote is very great and long even as thicke as ones arme, and of a cubits length which perisheth after seede time, and doth smell very fouly that one cannot well endure the smell, but rather cast them out of the garden, yet this before it be growen to seede is taken and eaten both by the Hungars and Tartares in stead of bread, and is pleasant to them being of great use with the Tartares, for with∣out it they could not marke their long journeys through the Desarts where no foode is to be found. 
6. Panax seu racemosa Americana. The cluster berry Allheale of America. This herbe of America riseth up with a round pithy brow∣nish 6. Panax seu racemosa Americana. The crusted berried Allheale of America. 
purple stalke, set at the joynts with large leaves divi∣ded into many parts, usually by three at a space, little dented about the edges, bearing both at the joynts with the leaves and at the top , on sundry branches, many tufts of flowers made of small threds like Vine blossomes, at the first gree∣nish, but whiter afterwards, which turne into small bunches of greene berries, which grow to be darke red, when they are ripe, full of a pleasant tasted juyce, with many seedes therein: the roote is of the thicknesse of ones thumbe, and very long: it looseth both stalke and leaves every yeare, and new spring up againe after winter: The whole plant both leaves and rootes, are eaten as sallets and potherbes, of the Indians where it is naturall, and the French also that live a∣mongst them, and taste more pleasantly then the berries themselves. 
7. Panaces moschatum Americanum. Sweete sented Allheale of America. The first leaves of this Panax are large and about a foote long, onely dented about the edges, somewhat like unto Costmary leaves, lying on the ground, and compassing the long white roote at the head, but those that follow are so deepely cut in that they reach to the middle ribbe almost, the stalke riseth to be two cubits high, without any leaves thereon save onely about the middle, where it hath a knot and a leafe that compasseth it, of a differing forme from the rest, the toppe branches are so heavily laden with umbels of white flowers, that before they open they hang downe their heads, which have so excellent a sweete smell, that they smell like Muske, a great way of the place where it groweth: the seede that succeede are like, but not so broad as the ordinary Panax. The leaves taste sharpe, and a little bitter, but the roote lesse: 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in Nalpes as Matthiolus saith, on the Ap∣perine hills also and the Sea coasts by Siena: the second is thought to grow in some places of Italy also but generally in our gardens: the third came first from America, &amp; the seede being imparted to sundry persons i received sundry names, and came to me out of Italy for Laserpitium an∣tiquorum, and is set downe in Cornutus for Angelica lucida Canadensis, and the other sort thereof for Angelica atro purpurea Canadensis: the fourth as Matthiolus saith groweth on mount Garganus in Apulia: the fift in Tartaria and Hungaria, the two last in America, and doe all flower and seede in the end of Summer. 
The Names. It is called in Greek , and Panax or Panaces also in Latin, because it is a remedy for all diseases, and not as Pliny taketh it from Hercules, to be the first founder of it, and some would have it named rather from He∣raclea a City in Candy, but the name Panax is referred to many plants, as Theophrastus saith, there are many other Panaces, and Dioscorides saith Origanum sylvestre, called also Cunila bubula, and Cunila gallinacea, which is like to Origanum Heracleoticum was called also Panax Heracleum Centaurium magnum also, and Ligusticum were called Panax Heracleum. The first here set downe is the Panax or Panaces Heracleum of Matthiolus, Anguilara, Gesner in hortis, Lobel, Lugdunensis, and others, but Dodonaeus taketh that Panax Heracleum that grew in the low Coun∣try Gardens, bearing white flowers, to be rather another sort of Sphondylium, to whom I must consent, for that plant with such broad leaves and white flowers, is a greater Sphondylium then the ordinary, as I shall shew you in the next Chapter save one, that which Lobel saith he saw in the gardens of some Franciscans, with yellow flowers, is a differing plant from it, and may be the true Panax Heracleum or Herculeū of Dioscorides, the second is the Pa∣nax Alterum recentiorum Olusatri aut Pastinacae folio of Lobel, the Panaces peregrinum of Dodonaeus, but mistaken by Lugdunensis, who calleth it Panax Chironium Dodonaei, when as Dodonaus taketh the Panax Chironium to be the Helianthes or Helianthemum of Pliny as it is, and so by Clusius, Cordus ond others, Bauhinus thinketh it may be Panax Syriacum of Theophrastus, whereof there is great probability, for the seede of this plant as Lobel saith found among the gum▪ Opopanax, and sowen by Coudenbergius a famous Apothecary in Antwerpe which no was from the plant that brought forth that gum Opopanax, out of which it was taken, which as you see much in forme of leaves from that of Dioscorides and Theophrastus. The third was sent to us by the name serpitium verum, but having well considered it, I found it remembred by Cornutus among his Canada plants, calling it Angelica lucida Canadensis, but not rightly, for the smell of the root with me, is more like unto Turpentine Angelica, the other sort hereof he calleth atro purpurea, I cannot referre it better to any plant, then to the Panax it carryeth so like a face thereunto, and therefore call it Panax Heracleum alterum Americanum, &amp;c. The fourth Matthiolus first set forth by the name of Pseudocostus, and so, many others have called it since, and Cu sp rius, but Camerarius in horto saith, that some called it in his time Panax Chironium, and Tabermontanus calleth it Panaces Costinum, and Costus Illyricus, but Caesalpinus Herba Costa, and Bauhinus Panax Costinum, whom I follow: the fifth Clusius setteth forth by the name of Tataria Ʋngarica, and Bauhinus thinketh it may be the Bal∣tra , which Iosephus Barbarus saith he saw in Tartaria, whereof he speaketh in his journey into Persia, that the Tartarians of the decoction of the leaves make their drinke, and the Hungarians their bread of the roote, and Bauhinus thereupon calleth it Panaci Heracleo similis Vngarica, The last are so named by Cornutus, as they are set downe in their titles. The Arabians call it Steusir Ieusir, and Giausir. The Italians Panace Heracleo and thereaf∣ter all other Christian nations that know it, and we in English Allheale of Hercules, according to the Greeke sig∣nification of the word. 
The Ʋertues. From the rootes and stalkes of this Panax Heracleum, being cut saith Galen, commeth forth that juyce or gum called Opopanax, which is of much more use then any other part of the plant, and is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second, being of an heating mollefying, and digesting quality, the barke of the roote is heating and dying likewise, but in a meaner degree, having withall a little clensing property, whereby it is good for viru∣lent and maligne ulcers, and to cover with flesh the bones that are bare: the seede also saith he is hot, and is mix∣ed with those medicines that procure womens courses, the juyce or gum saith Mesues hath a speciall property therein to purge thicke and clammy flegme from the more remote parts, as the braine, nerves, sensitive parts, joynts and breasts, and therefore profitably applyed to all the cold greefes incident to any of those parts, as to helpe a weake sight, an old cough, shortnesse of breath, pursinesse and wheeling and is good also for the Sciatica, the gout in the knees and feete, it is good likewise for crampes, convulsions, paines, and stitches in the sides, by the windinesse, swelling and hardnesse of the Spleene, for the strangury also and difficultie in making urine: it like∣wise discusseth the windinesse hardnesse and suffocations of the mother, provoketh their courses and expelleth the dead birth: being also drunke in mede or wine it helpeth the itchings and sores in the bladder: it breaketh car∣buncles or Plague sores, and is profitabley applyed with mollifying salves, and those that cure wounds and sores in the head, it helpeth the toothach, being put into an hollow tooth, and helpeth the biting of a madde Dogge, and against all other poisons of venemous creatures. The leaves of the Hungarian Tataria boyled in water is a familiar &amp; usuall drink with the Tartars as the roots are bread to the Hungarians as is before said; the operation of the American plants are found to be more alimentall then medicinall, being familiarly eaten by the natives and French. Matthiolus doth recount the properties of his Pseudocostus or Panax Costinum in this manner. It is saith he hot &amp; dry in the third degree compleat, it openeth, clenseth, cutteth &amp; maketh thin, and see∣ing it is bitter, sharpe and somewhat sweet, it may performe all those things that are related of it, that is, it helpeth all cold greeses of the head and nerves, and is also helpfull for the cough, shortnesse of breath and the like, as al∣so for the winde Collicke and against the obstructions of the Liver and Spleene, the Stone and gravell in the reines and bladder, and the diseases of the mother, to bring downe the courses, and to expell the dead birth: it like∣wise helpeth all old greefes of the head, the swimming and turning of the braine, the falling sicknesse, the Lethar∣gie, Convulsions, Crampes, Gouts and the like: it killeth also the wormes, and provoketh urine, and helpeth all joynt aches. 
CHAP. XLIII. Libanotis latifolia. Herbe Francumsence with broad leaves. O F that kind of Libanotis that hath Fennell-like leaves with all the sorts thereof, I have spoken before in the fourth Chapter of this Classis, there remaineth such to bee entreated of that beare broad leaves which shall follow in this as I there promised. 
1. Libanotis Theophrasti major. The greater white herbe Francumsence. This greater Libanotis hath many great long stalkes with wings of large broad leaves some eight inches long a peece and almost foure broad, five being set together whereof one at the end, one against another, three or foure inches broad below and smaller to the end, being somewhat hard in handling, of an overworne greenish colour and a little dented about the edges, among which riseth up a strong round stalk, foure or five foot high oftentimes, having such like leaves on the joynts but fewer and lesser then grow below and a few branches rising from the up∣per joynts bearing large spread umbells of whitish flowers, and after them somewhat flat and round light seede two joyned together, white on that side where it is joyned, and straked with rough crumpled strakes on the backe or round side, and of a pale browne colour when it is ripe but a little purplish before: the roote grow∣eth great and long, whitish on the outside with a tuft of haire at the toppe, abiding long, smelling and tasting somewhat strong as many other umbelliferous rootes doe, but the seede much stronger. 
2. Libanotis Theophrasti minor. The lesser white herbe Francumsence. This lesser Libanotis agreeth with the former both in the forme of leaves, flowers, seede and rootes, but that they are all lesse, and the number of leaves are more set together on every stalke, being also more deepely dented about the edges, the roote is white but more bitter then it. 
There is another sort hereof which Bauhinus calleth Libanotis latifolia minor semine crispo, and differeth onely in ving fewer leaves on the stalkes, although as small and but one or two deepe cuts on the edges. 
3. Libanotis Theophrasti Apij folio Cretica. The truest herbe Francumsence of Theophrastus. This plant which I take to be the truest Li∣banotis 1. Labanotis Theophrasti major. The great white herbe Francumsence. 
of Theophrastus Apij folio, that is yet extant, hath a stalke about a cubit high, divi∣ded into some branches, with leaves both be∣low and above set sparingly, somewhat resembling Smallage for the largenesse of the leaves, and dented about the edges, bea∣ring white flowers, and large, rough, croo∣ked brownish seed: the roote is covered with a blackish barke, and very white under∣neath, smelling strong like Francumsence. 
4. Libanotis latifolia Aquilegiae folio. Columbine leafed herbe Francumsence. This herbe Francumsence hath a thicke rugged browne stringie roote, with a white pith in the middle, smelling somewhat sweete and bitter in taste, having a tuft of blackish haires at the toppes, from whence rise sundry leaves upon long foote stalkes, broad &amp; hollow at the bottome like a skinnie huske, cōpassing one another as those do also on the upper stalkes, and are hard in handling, yet of a shining darke greene colour above, and whitish underneath, with divers pur∣plish veines running through them, not all of them divided like unto Columbine leaves, but many of them parted into five leaves, with three divisions a peece, others into three leaves, each standing on a stalke: it hath one white round stalke, straked with purple, ri∣sing up more than three cubits high, with divers joynts thereon, and branched towards the toppes, bearing every one a large um∣bell of small white flowers, and after them long and broad striped seede, of a purplish colour somewhat bitter, hot, and drawing water into the mouth▪ if it be a little chewed therein, and somewhat sweete in smell. 
The Place and Time. The two first sorts are found in many places in Germany, and the parts neere adjoyning, the third in Candy, and the last it is likely came out of Aethiopia, by the name was given it. The two first seede with us yearely, after they are well growne; but the two last very seldome, unlesse the yeare prove hot and kindely. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke, from the sent of Francumsence which it hath, and Libanotis in Latine, and some Cervina alba, and Cervicaria alba, but generally Libanotis latifolia, that it may be knowne to differ from the for∣mer, which is called Ferulae folio, it is translated Rosmarinus by divers, when as properly the Rosmari of the Latines, is but the first kinde of Dioscorides his Libanotis, called Stephanomatice, that is, Libanotis Coronaria, be∣cause it onely was put into garlands, and so Galen did account it: the two first here set downe, are accounted by most of the later Writers to be the Libanotis fertilis of Theophrastus, which is set downe in his 9. Booke and 12. Chapter, with leaves of Smallage, but much greater; the fruit or seede whereof was called Canchrys, with a great white thicke roote smelling like Thus or Olibanum: but how any can well make the leaves hereof to resemble Smallage I cannot see, or that the seed hereof was ever called Cachrys, having a causticke qualitie, or the roote the smell of Olibanum. I onely touch this as a Quaere further to be considered of: and it is probable that the figure that Matthiolus giveth for his Ligusticum alterum, was entended for this Libanotis, the five leaves being mistaken in the placing, for that they should not be set so close together, or else he entended it for the Aquilegiae folio, for he calleth this Libanotis, Seseli Aethiopicum in another place, as Gesner in hortis, Lugdunensis, Clusius, and o∣thers doe, calling it Seseli Aethiopicum Matthioli, and therefore to helpe the matter Dodonaeus calleth it Seseli Aethiopicum herba: it is also Tragus his first Seseli, and the Dauci alterum genus of Fuchsius, Turner, and Lugdu∣nensis: the third Camerarius saith that it was sent him out of Italy by the name of Siler Creticum, and is the Rosmarinus Selini folio, that Honorius Bellus maketh mantion of in his first Epistle to Clusius, &amp; saith is fasly called Siler Creticum by many, but is by him taken to be the true Libanotis Theophrasti, to whose judgement I adhere thus farre, that it is the truest and the likeliest of any other we know extant; the last is called by Camerarius in horto Seseli Aethiopicum alterum, and saith the seede was in smell and taste somewhat like Cinamon: Bauhinus calleth it; as I doe, Libanotis latifolia Aquilegiae folio. Bauhinus in his Pinax maketh another lesser sort of Libano∣tis which he calleth Apij folio, and referreth the Daucus anguloso caule of Cordus in his history thereunto, and like∣wise the Libanotis alba minor of Thalius, whereas both it and that of Cordus, as also that Libanotis Theophrasti mi∣nor of Lobel are all comprised under his Latifolia altera sive vulgatiro, and are not severall plants, as I thinke.
The Vertues. This herbe Francumsence is of a mollifying and digesting qualitie, helping the old griefes of the breast and lungs, the falling sicknesse, and the jaundise, if it be taken with Pepper in wine: it increaseth milke in Nurses breasts, if the roote be taken in wine, it likewise easeth the paines of the stomacke and belly, and the biting of ve∣nemous beasts and Serpents, procureth womens courses and the urine being stopped: the leaves being bruised and applied staieth the bleeding of the pile or hemorrhoidall veines, the heate also and swelling of the funda∣ment, and bringeth those hard tumours and impostumes to ripenesse, which doe hardly yeeld to be easily cured: the dried roote mixed with honey and put into foule ulcers clenseth them throughly: it helpeth likewise those that are bursten, or that have convulsions and crampes, and the gout, being bruised and applied with the meale of Darnell and some vinegar; and being used with vinegar, it taketh away the morphew or discolouring of the skin, or the leprye also: the juyce of the leaves and rootes cleareth the eye-sight, and sharpneth it, and also the rheume fallen into them, applying it to the forehead: the seede also of any of these sorts doe the like, but if it be that seede, which is called Cachrys that is forbidden to be taken inwardly, by reason of the causticke and burning qualitie therein to inflame the mouth and throate being taken or drunke. 
CHAP. XLIIII. Sphondylium. Cow Parsneppe. A Lthough formerly there was but one sort of the Cow-Parsneppes knowne and divulged to the world, yet there are now divers others found out, some in our owne land, and some in others, all which shall be entreated of together in this Chapter. 
1. Sphondylium vulgare. Ordinary Cow Parsneppe. The ordinary Cow Parsneppe groweth with three or foure large spread winged rough leaves, lying often upon the ground or else raised a little from it, with long round hairy foote stalkes under them, parted usually into five divisions, the two couples standing each against other, and one at the end, and each division or leafe being almost round, yet cut in somewhat deepely on the edges, in some leaves and places, and not so deepe in others, and of a whitish greene colour, smelling somewhat strongly; among which riseth up a round crested hairy stalke two or three foote high, with a few joynts and leaves thereon, and branched at the toppe, where stand somewhat large umbells of white flowers, but sometimes a little reddish, 1. Spondylium vulgare. Ordinary Covv Parsneppe. 
and after them flat whitish thinne winged seedes, two alwayes joyned together, as is usuall in most of these umbelliferous plants: the roote is long and white, with two or three long stringes growing downe into the ground, smelling likewise strongly and unpleasant. 
2. Sphondylium majus sive Acanthus Germanica major. The great Cow Parsneppe of Germany. This greater sort differeth onely from the former, in the large∣nesse both of leaves and stalkes, being neere twise as large, I meane every single leafe or division, which are seldome above three on a great long foote stalke, above halfe a foote long, unto the leafe, which is hairy and rough, of the like evill greene co∣lour, and a little foulded in or crumpled, and dented besides on the edges, the flowers and seede are alike, but larger, as I said, growing higher, of an hot unpleasant taste; but not so unplea∣sant as the other: the roote is white, and like the other but greater. 
3. Sphondylium majus aliud Laciniatis folijs. Iagged Cow Parsneppe of our owne Land. This jagged Cow Parsneppe groweth as high or rather higher than the last, and with greater stalkes, and a white hairinesse on them, the lower leaves grow very large and much spread, divi∣ded into five parts or winged leaves, two couple standing dire∣ctly each against another, but of another forme, for each of these leaves or divisions are parted into distinct parts, yet closely joy∣ned at the bottome, the two sides leaves or divisions being not of halfe that length that the middlemost is, which is in some a∣bove sixe inches long, in others above five, and not above halfe an inch broad, each of them having a deeper cut or notch at the bottome, than is on the rest of the leafe, which yet is dented with greater notches than in must usuall herbes, the upper or end leafe being usually parted into five long divisions or leaves, dented in the like manner, little or nothing hairy, but of a dee∣per greene colour on the upper side, and grayish underneath, the umbells of white flowers are as large as in the last, and the flat , white, seede is so like, but a little whiter, that they are hardly discerned one from another, but onely in the taste and smell, which is little or nothing in either: the roote is great, thicke, and white, living with me after seede time, and springing a new every yeare. 
4. Sphondylium Alpinum parvum. Small mountaine Crow Parsneppe. This small sort hath a stalke a foote high, parted into two or three branches, and pale greene great leaves on them, some whereof are parted into three divisions, and others into five, being somewhat round some of them, 2. 3. Sphondylium majus &amp; aliud Laciniatis folijs. The greater Cow Parsneppe of Germany: and another with jagged leaves. 
5. Sphondylium Alpinum glabrum. Smooth mountaine Cow Parsneppe. 
and others pointed, hairy likewise, and dented about the edges, the flowers on the umbells are white, and the seede thinne and broad. 
5. Sphondylium Alpinum glabrum, Smooth mountaine Cow Parsneppe. The roote hereof is white and great, the stalke joynted, and two foote high, the leaves are like unto Figge-leaves and smooth, being a hand breadth long and two broad, besides the foote stalkes which are a little rough, usually divided into three parts, but not to the middle and dented about the edges: the toppes of the branches have umbells of smaller white flowers standing on them than in the other: the seede is flat and round, but having a small pricke or point at the end. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in moist medowes, and the borders or corners of fieldes, and neere ditches generally through the land: the second is proper onely to Germany, as I thinke: the third was found by Mr. George Bowles a worthy and industrious Gentleman in Shropshire, as I take it: the fourth on the Alpes of Austria: the last on the Alpes of Bassil: they doe all flower in Iuly and seede in August. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and Sphondylium and Spondylion, for both are extant in good authours, derived as it is thought from Spondyle, a flie stinking like this: Matthiolus, Gesner, Lobel, Dodonaeus, and others doe call it Sphondylium; but Tragus, Cordus, and some others call it Branca ursina, and Fuchsius Acanthus vulga∣ris sive Germanica, and so is most usually the second sort called by divers; and this is the plant, as I thinke, that Do∣donaeus in his Chapter of Panax, did rather take to be Spondylium alterum, because it bore white flowers, and as I said, is very likely, for that which Lobel saith, he saw with yellow flowers was a Panax, and not this: the third as it is a plant lately found out to grow in our owne land, so I have given it a name, correspondent, as I thinke to the forme, yet I thinke verily it is the same that Bauhinus hath described in his Prodromus by the name of Sphondylion hirsutum folijs angustioribus, and is, as I also verily thinke the same that Matthiolus set forth for his fourth Crith∣mum, and Lobel in his Observations (finding fault with Matthiolus for so calling it) Erryngium montanum re∣centiorum alterum, which why they should set it, the one with the Eryngia bearing an umbelliferous toppe, such as none of them doe, or that it should be called an Eryngium, the other with the Crithma I somewhat mervaile: the two last are specified by Bauhinus in his Prodromus, by the same titles that I give them: the Italians call it Sfondilio, the Frence Brance ursine; the Germanes Bernclaw, the Dutch Beeren claw, and we in English Cow Parsneppe and Medow Parsneppe by some. 
The Ʋertues. The seede of Cow Parsneppe, as Galen saith, is of a sharpe and cutting qualitie, and therefore is a medicine fit to e given to those that have the cough and shortnesse of breath, or the falling sicknesse, or the jaundise; the roote of the like qualitie, and availeable to all the purposes aforesaid, and besides, is of great use to take away the callous skin that groweth on a Fistula, if it be scraped upon it: the seede likewise hereof being drunke doth the belly from tough flegmaticke matter abiding therein, easeth them that are liver growne and womens of the mother, as well being drunke, as the smoke thereof when it is burned received underneath, and likewise raiseth such as are fallen into a deepe sleepe, or have the lethargie by burning it under their nose, and if it and the roote be boiled in oyle, and the head rubbed therewith, it helpeth not onely those that are fallen into a , but those that have the lethargie or drowsie evill, and those that of long time are troubled with the head∣ach, if it be likewise used with Rue: it helpeth also the running scabbe, and the shingles: if the juyce of the flowers be dropped into the eares that runne, and are full of matter, it clenseth and healeth them. It is said that the people of Polonia and Lituania make a certaine decoction of the leaves and seede hereof, putting barme there∣to as is used in beare with us, whereof the poorer sort doe usually make their drinke. 
CARDUI ET SPINOSAE PANTAE. THISTLES AND THORNIE PLANTS. CLASSIS NONA, THE NINHT TRIBE. CHAP. I. Cardui &amp; Spinosae Plantae. Thistles and Thorny Plants. U Nto the Thistles I thinke meete to joyne such prickly or thorny Plants, as were neither fit for any of the former or subsequent Classis; yet I must except out of this number (although they pertaine to the Classis) those Thistles, or other prickly plants, as I have entreated of in my former Booke, referring those that would be informed of them to the Booke it selfe; whose names are these: Acanthus sativus, and sylvestris, Eryngium Pannonicum sive monta∣num flore caeruleo &amp; flore albo, Carduus mollis, Carlina humilis, Carduus Sphaerocephalus sive globobsus major &amp; minor, Carduus Eriocephalus sive Tomentosus, id est, Caput monachi sive Corona fratrum, Cinara diversarum specierum alimentosa, &amp; Corduus benedictus. 
1. Carduus pratensis latifolius. Broad leafed field Thistle. The broad leafed field or medow Thistle sendeth forth sundry large and long leaves cut in on the edges, and every part finely dented, and set with small prickes that are very tender, of a whitish greene colour: those that grow up higher upon the stalkes are smaller, two of them set together at a joynt where they so compasse it, that they will containe water in them, even as the Teasell doth, at the toppes upon long stalkes grow single greene prickly heads, out of which start pale coloured thrummes, compassing a few purple threads in the mid∣dle, and after they are faded and gone, small whitish seede somewhat bigger than those of Cyanus, Corne flower, or Blew-bottle wrapped in downe, as all the sorts of Thistles are: the roote is somewhat long and great, abiding divers yeares. 
2. Carduus pratensis Acanthi folijs laciniatis. The yellow jagged medow Thistle. This medow Thistle hath very large leaves, almost a foote long and somewhat broad, cut in on both sides into foure or five deepe gashes, even to the middle ribbe, set with prickes at the dents of the edges, from whence ri∣seth up a straked stalke about two foote high, set with a few lesser leaves, at the tops whereof stand divers small greene prickly heads, and out of the middle yellow threds or thrummes, which afterwards give seede inclosed in downe: the roote is great, long, crooked, and speading in the ground. 
3. Carduus bulbosus Monspeliensium. The French bulbed Thistle. The whitish leaves of this Thistle are of an hand breadth long, somewhat fat and thicke cut in on the edges, but not very deepe, armed at every dent with small sharpe prickes: the stalke is two cubits high hairy and slen∣der, with few or no leaves thereon, at the toppe whereof stand harmelesse prickly heads upon long foote stalkes, and out of them pale purplish thrummes, wherein afterwards lie the seede inclosed in much downe: the roote is composed of divers tuberous small long clogs like unto those of the Asphodill fastened together at the head. 
4. Carduus Pratensis Asphodeli radicibus. Medow Thistle with Asphodill rootes. This Thistle hath divers blackish cloggie rootes like unto the Asphodill or Piony, which whiter and perish every yeare (but give encrease from it before) which sendeth forth divers thicke, and long pale greene leaves cut into many parts, armed with sharpe prickles on all sides, every pricke ending in three points, from whence riseth up a tall stalke, somewhat branched with one or two prickly heads at the toppes of every one branch, out of which come purplish flowers, and afterwards small long seede wrapped in downe. 
5. Carduus pratensis polycephalos. The many headed medow Thistle. This Thistle hath but few leaves lying next the ground, being both short and narrow, armed with sharpe and long prickes, the stalke is round straked and without prickes, spread into sundry small branches bearing many small heads with purplish flowers, made of thrummes or threads thrusting out of the middle of them, but set with large and sharpe prickes: the seede is inclosed in downe as the rest are: the roote is long, hard and wooddy. 
6 Carduus palustris The moist Medowes Thistle. The roote of this Thistle is single, the stalke three cubits high, straight and full of prickes, thicke set with darke greene leaves unevenly waved, and sometimes more deepely cut in on the edges, having a few prickes at them, and branched toward the toppe, with many small heads upon slender stalkes, and reddish purple flowers like o∣thers, and then turne into downe.
1. Chamaeleo albus verus acaulis. The true Chamaeleon or changeable Thistle without a stalke. The true Chamaeleon or changeable Thistle without a stalke (which differeth from the Carline Thistle without stalke as you shall heare by and by) hath sundry large leaves lying on the ground a foote long or more cut in on the edges and more prickly then the Carline Thistle, whose cuts or divisions are more like unto those of the Artichoke, being white and as it were hoary and sometimes greene, and reddish when they grow old, which va∣rietie (as Dioscorides saith was the cause of the name) would make many to beleeve they were differing and somewhat hairy underneath: among these leaves riseth a round hoary prickly head without any stalke, of the bignesse of a great Thistle head in which the flower is conteined, and is not composed of a border of leaves with a middle thrum as the Carline Thistle hath, but out of the head rise divers flowers made of threds, every one ¦ding in five parts or points, in the same manner as is to bee seene in the flower of the Artichoke, whereunto it i most like, but not of such a purplish blew, but rather of a pale reddish colour which withering, there groweth in the head small long and grayish shining seede, lying as it were at the foote of every flower as is usuall in mo Thistles, but are not thicke and round or cornered as Cnicus the bastard Saffron seede, and many other Thistle seede are, which when they are ripe the head openeth it selfe as other Thistles doe, and they together with th downe are carried away with the winde: the roote is somewhat thicke and long, reddish or brownish on the outside and white within, yeelding plentie of milke if it be never so little broken or cut, which because it is ve thicke and viscous hardeneth quickly and falleth into small droppes or peeces, of a strong but aromaticall sent no unpleasant, and quickly piersing the senses, whose taste is sweete and fit to be eaten: about the leaves and prick∣ly heads also hereof, is sometimes and in some places found a certaine peece of gumme sticking, which at the fir is soft and glewish, and being dryed is harder like unto the milkie gumme of the roote. 
2. Carlina humilis acaulis. The low Carline Thistle. The low Carline Thistle (which is usually accounted for the white Chamaeleon Thistle) hath many long an large leaves lying on the ground cut in on both sides, and set with sharpe prickles, but not cut in so deepe not sharpe as the former or true white Chamaeleon Thistle, among which riseth a large head without any stalke, co passed about with divers long and narrow leaves, cut in on the edges and as prickly as the undermost, and both a whitish greene colour not varying as in the former, the head hath a number of whitish not purplish leaves lesse it be a little purplish underneath, set about with leaves like a crowne or border as in the corne Marigold an many other the like flowers, which leaves are thinne somewhat long hard smooth and shining, the u bo e o middle thrumme being flat and made of many small and thicke yellow flowers like threads: this hath in so places a kind of viscous or glewish gum issuing from the roote as also about the Thistly head which being har ned resembleth white Mastick very notably; the head before it seedeth openeth in the day and closeth at the nigh 
3. Carlina caulescens. The Carline Thistle with a stalke. This Carline Thistle never flowreth low like the last, but beareth a reddish stalke about a foote high, and ther on narrower greener and more prickly leaves then the low kinde, the heads of flowers at the toppe of the stalk are many, every one standing on his owne footestalke, composed of a border of smaller leaves being hard, thi smooth and whitish like the former, whose middle thrumme is yellowish before the flowers therein begin open but then are of a reddish purple colour, which thing unlesse one heede it well hee may thinke them dive plants: the roote is blackish on the outside, but whitish within, and as it were bitten off, which being cut broken yeeldeth such like thicke white viscous milke, and hardneth into a gumme as in the former, but of no 2. Carlina humilis. The lovv Carline Thistle. 
3. Carlina caulescens. The Carline Thistle with a stalke. 
yet a little sweete in taste, whereupon (saith mine author) we may judge it to bee of the same kind but not plant. 
4. Carlina acaulis Septentrionalium. Our low wilde Cerline Thistle. thistle doth yearely send forth divers very long and narrow leaves very much cut in on the edges into parts, set with small prickes and of a dustie greene colour, not lying flat upon the ground but a little raised 4. Carlina acaulis Septentrionalium. Our low wilde Carline Thistle. 
5. Carlina sylvestris major. The greater Carline Thistle. 
6. Carduus Pinea sive Ixine Theophrasti. The Pine apple Thistle. 
Cardui Pineae capitulum. The head of the Pine apple Thistle. 
up from it, among which at the latter end of Sommer commeth forth a short stalke scarse two inches long, beari thereon a large round scaly and prickly head with many bright purplish threads rising out of the middle, which abide in their colour a long time, and being past among the downe in the head lye many small whitish or silve coloured seede, somewhat like unto the first Chamaeleon Thistle but shorter and smaller: the roote is great thic and blackish on the outside and whitish within enduring many yeares. 
5. Carsina sylvestris major. The great wilde Carline Thistle. This wilde Carline Thistle hath sundry slender round but 7. Chamaeleon niger verus. The true blacke Chamaelion Thistle. 
prickly stalks rising from a small long roote, bearing divers nar∣row long leaves thereon very prickly and somewhat like unto the former Carline Thistle, but lesser, and at the tops of each a flower, whose bordering leaves are yellow and the thrumme reddish. 
6. Carduus pinea seu Ixine Theophrasti. The Pine Thistle. This brave Thistle hath a long thicke blackish yellow roote, of the thicknesse of ones thumbe, growing smaller downe to the end, but white within, smelling sweete and tasting hot, somewhat like the Carline Thistle, but of a weaker and pleasanter smell: the many leaves that rise from thence are long and of a singers breadth, with a middle rib therein, somewhat like to the leaves of Cyperus, but harder whiter and broader, without either dents, incisure or prickles; in the middle of which leaves lyeth hid a prickley head, armed fully with long prickes or thornes in manner of crosses, which growing ripe hath within it a hard white flockie substance, wherein as also from among the thornes without on the head, issueth forth a yellowish sweet gumme much like unto Mastick of a hot taste. Alpinus saith that both Bellus and Bellonius &amp; Dalechampius like∣wise took this thistle to be Chamaeleo albus, but untruly, for Theo∣phrastus maketh mentiō of Chamaeleo albus in another place: but saith Alpinus Chamaeleo albus differeth not from Chamaeleo niger but onely in the colour of the leafe &amp; therefore (saith he) I doubt not to affirme that the Carlina having blacker leaves then Cha∣maeleo albus which hath white leaves is the Chamaeleo niger, but Theophrastus putteth not any such difference in the leaves to be blacker or whiter, for that hee referreth to the rootes, and the leaves of the white Chamaeleon to bee greater and the blacke smaller then those of Scolymus, and such distinction in the leaves Dioscorides also maketh, but in shewing their differences more amply there Theophrastus saith, that the white Chamaeleon hath no stalke, and the blacke a stalke of a cubit height, the white hath purplish flowers and the blacke variable coloured flowers, and like a Jacinth, which by Alpinus his leave are not to be seene in Carlina. 
7. Chamaeleon niger verus. The true blacke Chamaeleon Thistle. The blacke Chamaeleon Thistle hath many long leaves lying about the roote, much thinner and lesse prickly then the white Chamaeleon Thistle, much cut in also on the edges into many fine parts or jagges, which as the stalke that riseth up among them are sometimes greene, and sometimes whitish, and sometimes reddish, which brancheth forth on all sides, and beareth at the toppes of them many small prickly heads in a tuft together, some∣what scaly, out of which come divers small long blew flowers, ending in five and sometimes in six sharpe prick∣ly points or ends, somewhat like unto those of the Orientall Iacinth, with five or six white threads in the middle of them: the roote groweth great and thicke at the head ending in many great long strings, and is of a blackish colour on the outside and pale yellow within, of a most sharpe taste as the leaves are also, procuring itching, bur∣ning pimples, and almost exulcerating the skinne if the face or other tender part be touched therewith, or if the hands that have handled it doe touch the face as Bellonius hath observed. 
The Place. The first is not so frequently found in these Westerne or transalpine countries as the second which is usually found upon the hills and mountaines in many places of Germany, and the Alpes, where it is generally taken to bee the Chamaeleon Thistle, though called the Carline Thistle; but the true Chamaeleon Thistle is more frequent in Italy, Greece, and those parts where the Carline is more rare: the third is oftentimes found in the same places with the second and oftentimes by it selfe and in other countries also; and this wee have observed also that from the seede of the low kind sowen in our gardens sometimes it hath growen high and not abidden low: the fourth is frequent in our countrey, especially in Kent every where almost, as the former are in others, and is also found i Germany and France, especially the more Northerly parts: the fift also many times with us, but the sixt onely i the warmer countries: the last is found but in Greece and Asia and those hotter countries. 
The Time. All these doe flower late in the yeare with us, but in Sommer in their naturall places, but the Carline Thistle will well abide the cold of our climate, although the white Chamaeleon will hardly, but the blacke and the Pin Thistle seldome doe abide. 
The Names. The Chamaeleon Thistles both the white and the blacke are called in Greeke , and in La∣tine Chamaeleon or Chamaeleo albus &amp; niger (Gaza translateth them both Ʋernilago ) and so called from the vario appearance of the leaves, Dioscorides saith it of the white, but Pliny both of the white and blacke, the Carline Thistle is called in Latine Carlina quasi Carolina, for it is supposed that the great Emperour called Charlemaine had this herbe shewed him in his sleepe by an Angel, with the roote whereof he might cure his Army infected with the Plague: it is thought as I said of many to be the Chamaeleo albus, but of others observing the differences, it is thought not to be knowne to the ancient writers. Lugdunensis striveth with many words, and by altering and correcting the Greeke text of Dioscorides to prove them both one plant, yet lastly hee saith that many skilfull Herbarists did call Carlina Ixine Theophrasti: and so doth Fabius Columna indeede judge, and that the Ixine spina of Theophrastus (mistermed Helxine by Pliny ) which Gaza translateth Carduus pinea &amp; Ixia also, better doth agree with our Carlina then with the Chamaeleon albus of Dioscorides: and that because as it is likely hee never saw the true Ixine of Theophrastus, which is a much differing plant: but Dioscorides saith the white Chamaeleon Thistle was called Ixia by some in his time, because in some places there grew about the roote a kinde of birdlime, which the women used in stead of Masticke, and Pliny saith the Cretanes especially tooke a little thereof after supper, to keepe them waking in working in the night, but being a by name I thinke it also a false name, for Ixia is said to be a deadly poyson by Dioscorides himselfe, who sheweth it with the remedies thereof, in his sixt booke and 21. Chapter, and the roote of the white Chamaeleon is said by Dioscorides to be an Alexipharmacum or coun∣ter poyson, so that it or any thing growing from it can no wayes be accounted deadly or dangerous: but that clam∣my gum or birdlime (call it what you will) indeede that groweth at the roote of the blacke Chamaeleon is truly called Ixia and Vlophonon, that is, the corruption or corrupter of the blood, and Pliny in his 22. Booke and 18. Chapter doth say that the roote of the blacke Chamaeleon was called Ʋlophonon and Cynozolon (mistaking Diosco∣rides his Cynoxylon ) and as it is set downe in the divers appellations of herbes attributed to Dioscorides, the blacke Chamaeleon also is called Ʋlophonon by some, and Ixia by others, and Cynoxylon. Some also have affirmed as Mat∣thiolus sheweth in his comments upon the Ixia of Dioscorides, that Ixia should be the Ixine of Theophrastus whom be confuteth effectually; shewing that Theophrastus in discribing Ixine doth not declare any evill quality therein, but more then so, he saith that it yeeldeth a Lacryma or Gum that is of a good taste, and called Acanthine or Spina∣lis Mastiche because it was so like Masticke, and grew on a Thorne or Thistle, and although as Matthiolus saith, he had not seene any Gum about the roote of Ixine (which hee mistooke for the white Chamaeleon both in that and in other places) in Italy, yet saith that such was sent him both from Cortusus of Padoa and Calzolarius from Ʋerona, and saith also that he understood by a Candiot Herbarist, that the Fletchers in Candy did use the said Gum to fasten Feathers to Arrowes as others doe with Glew; Matthiolus setteth forth the Carlina caulescens (as it is judged by the best) to bee the true Chamaeleo niger of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, although himselfe findeth some defct therein and likewise impugneth that which Maranta sent him from Naples, as not answering the description thereof, which is now received by the most judicious to bee the indubitate blacke Chamaeleon. Co∣lumna seemeth to thinke in the discourse of Chamaeleo albus and niger that Ixia (and not Ixine ) was a small low plant, more agreeing with the blacke then the white Chamaeleon, especially seeing that Dioscorides in the end of his Preface to his sixt booke numbreth Ixia as well as Chamaeleon among the roots that are venemous. The first here set downe is the Chamaeleo albus Apulus purpureo flore gummifer of Columna differing from the usuall Carlina which is taken by many to be Chamaeleon albus as is evident the by description, it is also the Chamaeleon albus gummi Mastix ferens of Henorius Bellus, expressed in his first Epistle to Clusius: but Bauhinus calleth it Carlina acaulis gummi fera, whereof I much marvaile that he should continue that opinion of Chamaeleo albus and Carlina to be both but one plant, knowing that Columna shewed them plainely in his booke to be different, although that Car∣lina as well as Chamaeleo albus giveth a like gum also: and that Theophrastus his Ixine hath such likewise which Columna as is sayd being deceived thought to be Carlina: the second is the Carlina humilis of Columna, taken by him to be the Ixine of Theophrastus as Anguilara did before him) and Dodonaeus, and called by Lobel Carlina herbaaiorum (yet thought by him &amp; Clusius to be the Chamaelon albus of Dioscorides as Guilandinus in Papyro did thinke before) as also by Matthiolus, Cordus and Lugdunensis, by Caesalpinus Carlina vulgo, and by Gesner in hortis Cardopatium caule ullo, by Ericius Cordus Carduus panis seu pacis, by Camerarius Carlina sessili flore, by Dodonaeus in former times taken to be Spina Arabica, and by the Monkes that commented upon Mesues Acanthe lence of Dioscorides, and by Carlina acanlos magno flore: the third is the Carlina caulescens of Columna and Camerarius both in hortis in Epitome by Dodonaeus Carlina sive Leucacantha, by Caesalpinus Carlinae alterum genus, by Clusius Carlina ma∣jor &amp; elatior, by Lugdunensis Carlina caulem habens, and taketh it also to be Crocodilion, by Gesner in hortis Cardo∣pati flore albo caulem habens, and called by Lobel Chamaeleo albus cauledonatus, but Chamaeleo niger by Lacuna, Matthiolus and Lugdunensis, Chamaeleon niger vulgaris by Tragus and Besler that set forth the Hortus Eystetensis, by Brunfelsius as Bauhinus saith in his Matthiolus Eberwurtz that is, Apri radix (and from hence came the name of Carduus Snarius ) and Cardopacis, but in his Pinax he referreth this name of Brunfelsius unto the Carlina acau∣lis, so that it seemeth the Germanes call both sorts Eberwurtz, he himselfe calling it in his Pinax Carlina caule∣scens magno flore, and in his Matthiolus, Carlina caule donatus: the fourth is called Chamaeleon albus seu exiguus by Tragus and Lugdunensis, and parvus by Louicerus, by Columna Chamaeleon Septentrionalium exiguus appella∣ us, by Lobel Carduus acaulis Septentrionalium, by Clusius Carlina minor purpureo flore, who saith that some of opinion that it did not seeme unlike unto the Chamaeleon of Theophrastus in his sixt Booke and third Chapter, and by Bauhinus Carlina acaulis minor purpureo flore: the fift is the Carlina sylvestris vulgaris, the first Carlina sylvestris of Dodonaeus, and the Acarna vel Cirsium luteū Sequanorum of Lobel, &amp;c. the sixt is set forth by in his book de plantis exoticis, and called also by him as Gaza did Carduus Pinea, but is not, although some∣what like the Iacea pinea called pumila Narbon of Lobel: the last is called Chamaeleon niger Dioscoridis by Anguilara Mara tha, Cortusus, Camerarius, Lobel and Columna, and Chamaeleon niger alter by Matthiolus, Chamaeleon niger Dalechampij by Lugdunensis, but thought to be Crocodilion by Tabermontanus, and called by Bauhinus Cha∣maeleon niger umbellatus flore caeruleo hyacinthino. The Italians call the white and blacke Chamaeleon Thistle Came∣ and nero, and the white more usually Carlina, the Spaniards call both sorts Cardo pinto, the French all the white Charline and Chamaeleon blanc, but the blacke Chardonnette: the Germanes as is said before call all Eberwurtz as the Dutch doe Ebewortele, and wee in English Chamaeleon Thistle or Changeable Thistle, or blacke, or as they are set downe in their titles, and the rest accordingly. 
The Ʋertues. The roote of the white Chamaeleon Thistle, saith Dioscorides, taken to the quantitie of a spoonefull in red wine, wherein Origanum hath beene boyled killeth the broad wormes in the belly: a dramme thereof taken in wine helpeth dropsie persons, for it extenuates their belly: the decoction thereof is profitable for them that cannot make water orderly; Theophrastus and Pliny from him saith, that the root hereof cut into peeces &amp; hung up on strings to drie, &amp; afterwards boyled in broath, or otherwise taken doth help the defluxions of rheume that fall from the head the eyes, teeth, nose, or lungs. If any, saith he, would trie whether a sicke person should die or live, if he beare and endure three times washing with the decoction of the roote he shall not die: it is as a Treakle or an antidote against poison being drunke in wine, and from hence it is supposed that the Carline Thistle roote was used against the plague in the Emperour Charles his army (although it be suggested to be declared by an Angell, without an Allegory or allusion to the good Angell from due observation and practise, which hath since found it very effe∣ctuall both to resist the infection, as also very powerfull against the biting of a mad dogge, or the sting of Ser∣pents, and yet Dioscorides saith, the roote of Chamaeleon albus given to dogs, swine, or mise, killeth them, which propertie is also found in divers other things, as on the contrary side divers creatures do feede on these things that are poysonous to men. The blacke Chamaeleon Thistle is said by Dioscorides to cure the itch, the roote being beaten and mixed with Axungia and so used, and being boiled in vinegar and some brimstone put to it killeth tetters, and ringwormes: it clenseth the face and skinne from all blemishes, deformities, and discolouring being used with some brimstone: it is put with other things that doe digest and mollifie, and also with those that consume and eate the flesh, and therefore is used to helpe foule sores, and stincking ulcers; hereby you see he doth not appoint it to be used inwardly for any disease, by reason of the virulent qualitie therein, but onely alloweth of the decoction thereof to gargle the teeth in the extreme paines of them; or by the roote bruised and boyled in vinegar to helpe the tooth-ach and to breake them if they be touched therewith. Of our wilde Carline Thistle I have not knowne or heard of any that have made any experiment, although I am perswaded that it commeth neere to the qualities of the low Carline Thistle, that is so much commended, as you heard before: and of the gummes, either of the white Chamaeleon or Carline Thistle, there is no other speciall propertie set downe by any than is declared be∣fore, that as it is called Masticke of the Thistle, so it is used as Masticke to chew in the mouth, both to amend the evill savour of the breath, and by reason of the glewing qualitie to stay rheume, and to strengthen loose teeth: for the juyce doth follow the propertie of the herbe or tree from whence it is taken: and although the gumme of the white Chamaeleon be called Ixia, as Dioscorides saith, yet the Ixia that is poysonous is another thing quite differing from this, for neither Dioscorides nor Theophrastus doe attribute any venemous or evill qualitie thereunto. Of the qualities both of the white and blacke Chamaeleon Galen in 8. simplicium med. saith thus: in the roote of the blacke Chamaelenion Thistle, there is somewhat that is deadly, and therefore the use therof is outwardly for scab , itches, tetters, &amp;c. and to clense the skin: but the roote of the white Chamaeleon Thistle, besides that it killeth the broade∣wormes in the body or belly; it is given also to those that have a dropsie, and is somewhat like in the temperature unto the blacke Chamaeleon, but that it is more bitter than the white. Paulus and Aetius in their Treatises of poy∣sons, after they have spoken of the poysons in both sorts of Chamaeleon Thistle, and of their cures, doe entreate of the poysonous Ixia in the same manner that Dioscorides doth, wherefore we may conclude that Ixia hath a double interpretation, and doth as well signifie the harmelesse gummes of the white Chamaeleon and Carline Thistles, as the poysonous gumme or roote which is deadly: but because we are not sure that it is taken from the blacke Cha∣maeleon Thistle, I thinke it needlesse here to set downe the cure of it. 
CHAP. VI. Cactos Theophrasti, id est Scolymus Dioscoridis &amp; Scolymus Theophrasti qui Eryngium luteum est. The prickly or wilde Artichocke Thistle, and the golden Thistle. O F all the sorts of manured Artichockes, whether prickly like Thistles, or not being fit to be eaten, I have sufficiently spoken in my former Booke; and intend not further to speake of them againe: but of some other kindes that are more prickly, and more like Thistles, whereof there are two or three sorts which shall be here expressed. 
1. Scolymus Dioscoridis. The prickly or wilde Artichocke Thistle. This prickly or wilde Artichock Thistle hath divers long thicke, hard, but narrow leaves, ending in long points somewhat cut in on the edges, set with strong and sharpe great prickes, which growing on the sta kes compasse them at the bottome, and are of a darke greene colour: at the toppe of each stalke and branch standeth one scaly and prickly head, lesser than those of the Chardons that are kept to be eaten, from the middle whereof put forth divers bright purplish crimson threads, which after they have stood some time passe away, the seede in their heads being flat and like other Thistles: the roote is great and spreadeth much.
2. Cynara sylvestris Cretica. The Candy wilde Artichocke. This wilde Artichoke from among the long and hoary white leaves somewhat broader than the former, cut in on the edges, and thicke armed with long &amp; sharpe prickes, rise up sundry round stalkes, set with but few leaves, and branched into two or three parts some times, at the toppes bearing small scaly sharpe prickly heads, which are eaten by the Peasants of the countrey, hoth greene and boyled after the scales and sharpe prickles are cleared, with salt, oyle, and pepper, and are as pleasant to their palate, as a daintie Artichoke to ours: the roote is very long, and groweth deepe. 
3. Scolymus Theophrasti sive Eryngium luteum Monspelienfium. The golden Thistle. The golden Thistle shooteth forth divers skinny &amp; prickly stalkes, which in some places, as Spaine, &amp;c. standup∣right, and in other countries, as Mompelier, and ours also, bendeth with them unto the ground, bearing at every joynt both a branch and a leafe, which is long and somewhat narrow smaller at the bottome than any where else, much cut in on the edges, and set with small white prickes in some places marked with white spots on the deepe greene leaves, but in others &amp; in my garden none at all: at the joynts betweene the leaves and the stalkes, and at the toppes also come forth severall small heads, smaller than any of the former, composed of all scales 1. Scolymus Dioscoridis. The prickly or wilde Artichoke Thistle. 
2. Cynara sylvestris cretica. The Candy wilde Artichoke. 
3 Scolymus Theophrasti sive Eryngium luteum Monspelienfium. The golden Thistle. 
with very sharpe prickes at the ends, out of the middle whereof start forth many gold yellow threads, which abide not long, and wherein when they are past, the seede is contained being small and thinne scales lying close together: the roote is long, of the bignesse of a finger, very sweete and pleasant to eate like unto Eringium Sea Holly: both roote and leaves doe yeeld a white milke, especially when they are young, and perish every yeare. 
The Place. The first is found about Mompelier and the last in Spaine: the second is naturall of Candy. 
The Time. They doe all flower in the end of Sommer, and their seeee ri∣peneth quickly. 
The Names Dioscorides calleth the first in Greek Scolymus, which the Latines generally translate Carduus simply, and Theophrastus so calleth the last also, yet there is great difference betweene them, for that of Dioscorides was knowne unto Theophrastus, who called it Cactos (being the same that is called and Cynara and Cinara for it is written both wayes by divers, and as Columella and Palladius thinke tooke the name wherein they delight to grow, but is not likely that the Greekes derived their names from Latine appellations, but contrariwise the Latines from the Greekes, for so the ancient both Poets and Orators doe declare, as Sophocles, Hecataeus, Mi∣lesius Callimachus and others: and Athenaeus in his second Book maketh mention of Cynara Spina, some Poets have therefore a tale of a faire maid called Cyrana, metamorphosed in∣to an Artichoke, and some againe thinke it tooke the name from canis, and that Locrus a King asking counsell at Apollos Oracle at Delphos it was answered him that hee should there build him a City where he should be bitten by a woodden Dog, who afterwards being hurt in the Legge by a wilde Artichoke, where it grew did there build his City: but Didymus in Athenaeus saith it was the Cynosbatos Ca is sentis, the Bryer bush, but the Scolymus of Theophrastus was not knowne unto Dioscorides. Pliny lib. &amp; cap. 22. confoun∣deth both the kinds of Scolymus together, as if they were both one plant, giving the vertues of both as unto one, and saith moreover that the Scolymus of the Graecians is called also by another name Limonium, which is the of Theophrastus lib. 6. c. 11. which Gaza very falsly translateth Beta sylvestris, whereas Theophrastus num∣breth it among the Thistle-like plants, and is a differing Thistle from Scolymus set downe in the same place. Lo∣bel calleth the first Cynara sylvestris, because as he saith it doth so nearely resemble the Cynara aculeata, as also Sco∣limus sylvestris sive Chamaeleontha Monspeliensium, and Lugdunensis Scolymus Dioscoridis, but Bauhinus Cynara sylvestris latifolia: the second is called by Honorius Bellus (as it is set downe in his second Epistle to Clusius) Cy∣nara sylvestris, the Cretanes as hee saith calling it Agrioanzinari, and by Pona in his Italian Baldus Agriocinare Cretica, by Bauhinus Cinara sylvestris Cretica, and thinketh it may be the Cinara sylvestris Baetica of Clusius, set downe in his Curae posteriores in quarto, fol. 66. the last is called by Clusius Scolymus Theophrasti (whereof hee gi∣veth two figures, the one of the Spanish plant growing upright, the other of that which groweth at Mompelier leaning downewards, and called by him Narbonensis, whom Dodonaens followeth, giving both his figures and calling the one Cardus Chrysanthemus, and the other Cardui Chrysanthemi alterius icon: and so doth Lobel (who also saith it is the Eryngium luteum Monspelientium) Camerarius, Caesalpinus and Tabermontanus, Anguilara calleth it Eryngium Ʋegetij, and Bellonius saith it is called in Candye Ascolymbros, and by the Latines Glycyrrhiz as hee saith, wherein I thinke he is deceived; Bauhinus calleth it Scolymus Chrysanthemos, and saith it is the Attractylis marina of Lugdunensis, which as I said before in the Chapter of Atractylis, he saith was the Picnomos of Lobel and Pena, and yet as I shewed you in the Chapter of Acarna he maketh it an Acarna likewise, calling it Acarna hu∣milis caule folioso, but it cannot be both an Acarna and Scolymus, this double denominations of plants is not agree∣able to Dioscorides minde, who is never found of himselfe to name one plant in two severall places or to call one plant by two severall names, although he shew the divers appellations of others. The Italians as Bellonius saith doe in agro Romano call the last Spina borda, and thinketh it to be that plant whieh the ancients did call Gly∣cyrrhizon, the Spaniards of Salamanca did call it Sylibum, but as he saith it cannot bee Sylibum of Dioscorides, and in their owne Language Cardon lechal or lechar, id est, Carduus lacteus, because of the white spots upon the leaves: the French call the first Chardonuette. 
The Ʋertues. Dioscorides saith that his Scolymus is good to expell strong and stinking Vrine, and to amend the strong or stin∣king savour of the Armeholes, or of the whole body, if the decoction of the rootes in wine be drunke: the young shootes also are eaten like unto Aspharagus, and the young heads also in Spaine before they flower: but they use to raise up the earth over the young shootes untill they bee-risen to a good height, which then are not onely white but more tender and delicate, to be eaten raw as their usuall manner is with Oyle, Pepper and Salt, or boy∣led or stewed: the flowers are used by the Italians as Lobel and Pena say to curdle milke, whereof they make Cheese, as also are perswaded that the sayd flowers given to women with child in their broth or to drinke doth hinder aborsment, and cause them to goe out their full time in good plight, and also is very good for those that doe not teeme or are barren, and cause fertilitie. The Cretanes used their wilde Artichoke in the same manner that the Italians, Spaniards and French use their Cardoni or Chardons. Theophrastus also saith that the roote of his Scolymus is most pleasant being boyled or eaten raw, but then chiefly when it is in flower, as also that the in∣ner substance of the heads are eaten. Clusius saith that they of Salamanca use to eate the young plants rootes and all, being washed eyther raw or boyled with flesh, and that with the milkie juice thereof they doe coagulate or curdle any milke, and with the flowers doe counterfet Saffron, for the like uses as in other places they doe with the flowers of Bastard Saffron. 
CHAP. VII. Acanus Theophrasti. The ancients Thistle. T His Thistle riseth up with a great thicke prickly stalke three or foure foote high, branching sorth on all sides from the very bottome, set at the joynts with somewhat large leaves, broad and long, cut in on the edges, and set with sharpe prickes at the points and corners: at the toppes of the branches come forth severall small Thistle-like heads, out of the middle whereof thrust forth the flowers, com∣posed of many deepe purplish threads, after which come somewhat round and flat seede, of a brow∣nish colour lying in downe: the roote i thicke with divers long strings at it. 
The Place. It groweth in Candy from whence the seede hath beene sent into divers other parts of Europe. 
The Time. It flowreth in the end of Sommer, that is, somewhat late as other sorts of Thistles that come out of hot countries. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Acanus, which doth as well signifie a peculiar plant of it selfe, such as this Thi∣stle here set downe as the head of any thistle, or any other Thistle-like head of any other plant; Theophrastus onely (and Pliny from him) making mention both of this and that, for in his first Booke and sixteenth Chapter he nameth it among the , those plants that beare prickly leaves, thus, , and in his sixt booke and fift Chapter, some saith he, have prickly leaves as and then making Aca∣nus to be the head of a Thistle also (which Dioscorides calleth Echinus from whence commeth Echinacea, as from Acanos Acanacea signifying all Thistles or Thistle-like plants) in his ninth Booke and thirteenth Chap∣ter, where speaking of the Chamaeleon Thistle he saith thus, , caput hujus magnum Acano simile, unde quidam Acanum dixerunt, and in his sixt Booke and fourth Chapter speak∣ing of Ixine he saith, , Achanus Theophrasti. The Thistle of the ancients. 
de media radicis seminalis acanus velu∣ inol extuberat, and therefore doth signifie as much as Acanum ferre, as in the same Chapter hee saith Aacnum (id est Acanaceum caput) fert Cha∣maeleon, the Chamaeleon beareth a Thistle-like head; but how this Thistle here expressed should bee thought to bee the true Acanus of Theophrastus, seeing hee hath there∣of given no description, as being then so well knowne that hee thought it needed none, Honorius Bellus in his fift Epistle to Clusius sheweth; first that in Candy the Inhabi∣tants call this Thistle Agavano, as they doe also the heads of other Thistles, in the same manner as Theophrastus doth his Acanus as is shewed before: and then that the name Agavano is but a corrupted word from Acano, for the na∣turall language of the Cretanes is a bastard or corrupted Greeke speech: both which reasons are not onely forcea∣ble, but sufficient to confirme any ones opinion in this truth; Guilandinus in his eight member and 128. page of his com∣mentaries de Papyro the Paper rush, after that he had shew∣ed that Theophrastus used divers names for one thing (in many whereof by his leaves hee is thought to be mistaken) saith that the Ixine of Theophrastus is his Acanus also, whom Honorius Bellus although hee had beene his scholler contradicteth, not allowing of that opinion for the reasons aforesaid. Pliny saith lib. 22. c. 3. that some thought the Acanus should bee Eryngium being a broad sharpe prickly herbe with broad thornes. I cannot finde that Anguilara or Lugdunensis did know any plant peculiarly called Aca∣nus, although Bauhinus setteth them both downe to call this plant so, but that they tooke the name onely to signifie the prickly head of Thistles: Pona in his Italian Baldus gi∣veth the figure thereof somewhat rudely done, but no other description then that of Honorius Bellus in the place aforesaid, Bauhinus calleth it Carduus latifolius echinos ob∣soletae purpurae ferens: because I could not finde a more pro∣per appellation to call this Thistle by, then that I have given of The ancients Thistle in English, I will not refuse to alter it if any can give it a better. 
The Vertues. I cannot finde any propertie peculiar imputed to this Thistle by eythar ancient or modorne writer, and therefore untill I can be better informed I must be silent as others are. 
CHAP. VIII. Silybum sive Carduus lacteus. Our Ladies Thistle, or the stript milkie Thistle. A Lthough formerly there hath beene but one sort hereof knowne to Herbarists, yet of late by the dili∣gent search and observation of some that have beene curious, there are some other sorts found which together must be handled in this Chapter. 
1. Carduus Mariae vulgaris. The common Ladies Thistle. The common Ladies Thistle hath divers very large and broad leaves lying on the ground, cut in and as it were crumpled but somewhat hairy on the edges, and of a white greene shining colour, wherein are many lines and strakes, of a milkie white colour running all over, and set with many sharpe and stiffe prickles all about, among which riseth up one or more strong round and prickly stalkes, set full of the like leaves up to the toppe, where at the end of every branch commeth forth a great prickly Thistle-like head, strongly armed with prickes and with bright purple thrummes rising out of the middle of them: after they are past the seede groweth in the said heads lying in a great deale of fine soft white downe, which is somewhat flattish and shining, large and browne: the roote is great spreading in the ground with many strings and small fibres fastned to them, all the whole plant is bitter in taste and therefore supposed not to be without very good effects. 
2. Silybum majus annuum. Great Milke Thistle of a yeare. This Thistle riseth up with one round stalke almost a yard high with somewhat large greene leaves, not halfe so large as the former, nor halfe so much marked with white lines, somewhat cut in also on the edges, and set with prickes but fewer: the stalke hath few or no branches, but beareth at the toppe and the upper joynts two or three prickly heads, out of which rise reddish purple threads or thrummes, and somewhat great browne seede afterwards lying in Downe: the roote is long and perisheth as soone as it hath given seede. 
3. Silybum minus Baeticum. The small Spanish milke Thistle. The first leaves of this Thistle are somewhat broad and smally cut in on the edges, of a pale greene colour, with some small white lines and markes thereon having footestalkes upon them, but those that presently rise up with the stalke are somewhat longer and broader forwards then below, where being narrow they compasse the stalke 1. Carduus Mariae vulgaris. The common Ladies Thistle. 
3. Silybum minus Baeticum. The small Spanish Milke Thistle.
3. Dipsacus sylvestris laciniatis folijs. Wilde Teasell with jagged leaves. This wilde Teasell (whereof I have no knowledge and but follow mine author, whom I will not so farre mistrust as to say there is none such, for who knoweth all the diver∣sities that other countries doe produce) is in all other things like the last saving in the leaves which are not whole and onely dented about the edges, but torne in on both sides into deepe gashes. 
4. Ʋirga pastoris. The Shepherds staffe. The Shepherds staffe is a kinde of Teasell also, but differeth therefrom in many notable parts, for the leaves hereof being large are of a sadder greene colour, and not so prickly on the backe ribbe, but finely dented about the : the stalkes grow higher and not so prickly, yet having some thereon, and leaves set by couples at the but not compassing the stalke to hold water in manner like the former: the severall branches beare small not much bigger then Wallnuts, with soft prickles thereon and blush flowers like the wilde Teasell. 
The Place. The first is onely manured and sowen in gardens or fields for the Clothworkers use, by raysing the Wooll of cloth with the crooked prickles of the heads, make it fit for their sheeres to cut it smooth and thereby leave a thereon pleasing to all: the other sorts except the third grow in moist places neare ditches and tills of water to many places of this Land; the third sort in some places of Germany and the last in sundry places of our owne Land. 
The Time. They flower in Iuly and are ripe in the end of August. 
The Names It is called Dipsacus in Greeke, quasi fitibundus, quod nomen a contrario invenit (say divers authors) quoni∣ cavo alarum siuu rorem vel imbrem recipiat, quo veluti ad abigendas fitis injurias abutitur: but I thinke not so, for the water conteined in these leaves groweth bitter by standing in them, &amp; therefore not fit to quench but to increase thirst rather: the Latines also call it Dipsacus and after the Greeke , Labrum veneris, cujus nomenclaturaa carinato foliorum habitu contraxit; quae se ambage anfractuosa s nnantia peluis speciem constitu∣ , &amp; intra se humorem retineut: but I am of a different opinion that it tooke the name of Venus lips from the ef∣fects of a whores lippes, which as the leaves the raine, so they are ready to receive all mens offers and as the heads or Teasells, so they ready to carde and teare all mens skins that have to doe with them, untill they leave them bare and thin: pardon I pray this extravagancie who follow Camerarius and other good authors herein, that in the midst of their naturall phylosophie doe sometimes mix a little moralitie: it is called also Carduus Veneris and Lavacrum Veneris it may be upon the like insinuation; it is thought also to be the Gallidragon Xenocratis of Pliny &amp; Carduus fullonum also, and some Ʋirga pastoris, but that is more usually given unto the last sort, and so called be∣cause the dryed stalke clensed from the prickes, for so much as might be held in ones hand served the Shepheards to guide their sheepe withall, transferring the name of Virga pastoris to the Dipsacus sylvestris, calling it Virga pestoris major and this other minor, as Bauhinus doth. Some, saith Lugdunensis, take it to be Plumbago Plinij, Lobel maketh doubt whether it should bee the Spina Selenitis Theophrasti Guilandino, Camerarius calleth it Dipsacus fatum, and Dalechampius upon Pliny taketh it to be Molybdona Plinij: The Arabians call it Chir and Moleta, the Italians Dissaco and Cardo, the Spaniards Cardo penteador, and Cardencha; the French Chardon de foullon and vergae abergier, the Germanes Karten distell Bubenstrall and Weberkarten, the Dutch Caerden and Ʋoelder Caerden, and we in English Teasell or the Fullers Thistle. 
The Ʋertues. Dioscorides saith that the roote bruised and boyled in wine untill it be thicke, and kept in a brasen vessell or pot, and after spread as a salve and applied to the Fundament doth heale the clefts thereof, as also Cankers and Fi lace therein: the same also saith he, taketh away warts and wennes: Galen saith it is drying in the second de∣gree, and hath withall some clensing facultie: others hold it to be cold and dry, and therefore they say the leaves applyed to the forehead and temples qualifieth the frenzie or madnesse: the juice of the leaves dropped into the ears killeth the wormes in them: the distilled water of the leaves is good to bee dropped into the eyes, to take away the rednesse in them and such mists as darken the sight: the said water is often used by women to preserve their faces in beauty, and to take away all rednesse and inflammations, and all other heate or discolourings. The Shepherds staffe is held profitable for no disease that wee know of. 
CHAP. XIII. Eryngium. Sea Holly. A Lthough Dioscorides hath made mention but of one sort of Eryngium (which is suspected by many to be appropriate rather to the Mediterraneum or campestre because he saith that it groweth in fields and rough places and not at the Sea side, when as his description may as fitly be referred to the one as the other) yet Pliny maketh mention of the Sea kinde also, and this later age hath added divers others which for some resemblance in leafe, head or roote, they have so termed. The Eryngium Pannoni∣ flore cerule &amp; flore albo, I have exhibited in my former booke, which is assuredly the Eryngium Genevense of Lobel, and Eryngium planum of Matthiolus, although Bauhinus doth make them different: the rest shall bee shewed in this Chapter. 
1. Eryngium marinum. Our ordinany Sea Holly. The first leaves of our ordinary Sea Holly are gentle or nothing so hard and prickly as when they grow older, being almost round, and deeply dented about the edges, hard, sharpe prointed and a little crumpled also, of a blew∣ish greene colour, every one upon a long footestalke, but those that grow up higher with the stalke doe as it were sse it at the bottome, the stalke it selfe is round and strong yet somewhat crested with joynts and leaves thereat but more divided, sharpe and prickly, and branches rising from thence which have likewise other smaller branches, each of them bearing severall blewish round prickly heads, with many small jagged prickly , under them standing like a starre, and are sometimes found greenish or whitish: the roote groweth won∣ ng even to eight or ten foote in length, set with rings or circles towards the upper part but smooth and joynts downe lower brownish on the outside and very white within, with a pith in the middle, of a pleasant taste but much more delicate being artificially preserved and candid with Sugar. 
1. Eryngium matrinum. The Sea Holly. 
2. Eryngium mediterraneum sive campestre. Vpland Sea Holly. 
3. Eryngium planum minus The small smooth bastard Sea Holly. 
4. Eryngium pumilum Hispanicum. Small bastard Sea Holly of Spain. 
 
3. Eryngium meditterraneum sive campestre. Vpland Sea Holly. This other Sea Holly (which groweth in upland grounds is therefore more answerable unto Dioscorides his Eryngium, but else as I sayd before his description doth answer them both directly) hath slenderer or not so stalkes as the former, and hath the leaves more divided, more prickly and lesse aromaticall: the heads are but smaller, and the roote slenderer and shorter, neither so sweete nor fit to be preserved, nor so aromaticall in taste, in other things it is very like the former. 
3. Eryngium planum minus. The small smooth bastard Sea Holly. This bastard Sea Holly hath the lower leaves smooth 5.6. Carduus Eryngioides sive Carduncellus montis Lupi &amp; Eryngium trifolium. 
The French Thistle of Lobel and Pena, and Trefoile Thistle. 
of a pale greene colour, somewhat long and pointed narrow at the bottome, and somewhat pely dented at the edges: the weake stalkes that upon the ground take roote againe at the joynts had rise not above a foote high, have with like leaves that grow below, others that are finely jagged into many parts and sharpe pointed, from out of which all along the stalkes and at the toppes also, forth blew heads lesser than those of the upland Sea Holly: the roote is composed of many thicke and long strings which perish not after seede time, but abide many years. 
4. Eryngium pumilum Hispanicum. Small bastard Sea Holly of Spaine. This small bastard Sea Holly hath divers leaves lying in a compasse upon the ground somewhat long, broad toward the middle smallest at the foote, and deepely de ed but not jagged about the edges and somewhat soft withall: but those that are set at the joynts of the stalke which is branched from the very bottome, are cut or devided into many small narrow leaves dented abo , hard also and sharpe pointed or prickly: at the toppes of the stalke and branches, upon every one stan∣deth one round prickly head, with six or eight narrow long prickly leaves under it spreading like a starre, which together with the head and flowers that come out thereof are of a faire blew colour, which give small flat chaffie seede like the Hungarian kinde: it is sel∣dome seene to have eyther the lower leaves, or almost any on the stalke and branches when it is in flower, but they all wither and are dead and dry before: the roote also perishing as soone as it hath given seede, and is long hard and wooddy. 
5 Carduus Eryngioides, sive Carduncellus montis Lupi Lobelio &amp; Pena. The small Frēnch Thistle of Lobel and Pena. I put this small Thistle like plant among the Eryngia (herein following Bauhinus and Alpinus lib. de exoticis plan∣tis, which else as Lobel and Pena in Adversarijs say might be accounted a species of Atractylis purpurea, if as they say it be not the very same, but I would rather referre it to the Iacea or Cyani ) which sendeth forth divers long and winged leaves, somewhat prickly, among which a slender smooth stalke ariseth scarse a spanne high with the like leaves thereon, at the toppe whereof out of the middle of some long leaves stand two or three large, great, greenish yellow scaly heads bigger then may seeme proportionable to the plant, set with sharpe hard white pri , which are often eaten by those where it groweth naturally; from the middest whereof issueth forth divers purple threads like unto the Atractylis or Distaffe Thistle saith Lobel, but Alpinus saith they are like unto Cyanus the Corne flower, after which come yellow Thistle-like seede; the roote is edible white and fleshy, thrusting downe deepe into the ground with divers fibres thereat. 
6. Eryngium trifolium. Trefoile Thistle. This unknowne plant sendeth forth at the first many long hard and narrow leaves from the roote which is like into a Ranpian and aromaticall, whereof some are parted into three, but those that are set on the stalke have all for the most part three long leaves joyned together at the end of the footestalke at distances: at the top of the stalke stand two or three heads somewhat like those of Eryngium montanum with purple flowers, and long leaves under them: the seede also is broad long and small like unto it: the rootes encrease Venery and provoke Vine.
The Place. The first is found about the Sea coasts almost in every countrey as well hot cold, as Spaine, Italy, France, on our almost every where and low countries also, and others more Northerly: the second groweth as Camerarius saith in Franconia in the vineyards and high wayes every where, but not about Norimberge where he lived as he saith: as also in the upland farther remote parts from the Sea in Narbone in France, as Lobel and Pena say: the third Lobel saith he never saw but in Ioannes Mutonus his garden the seede hath beene imported to friends, but it is likely to come out of some hot countrey, because it flowreth late in these colder countries, and seldome com∣meth to perfection, even as the fourth doth also, which Clusius saith, he gathered at the foot of certaine hills were Salamanca in Spaine, and in no other place▪ the fift Pena saith groweth on that side of Mons Lu than the Sunne, neere unto a small brooke of water. 
The Time. The first and second flower in the end of Summer, and give ripe seede within a moneth after: the other flower later with us, and therefore seldome doe their seede ripen with us. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Eryngium, quasi sive rictum, dictum nimis fabulos ant , for I think that Plutarke was the first author of the fable, that one Goate cropping a branch of Sea Holly causeth the which flocke to follow him, untill he spew or spit it out againe; or as others say untill the Shepheard take it out of hi mouth: the Latines keepe the same name of Eryngium, yet in many Apothecaries shoppes it is called Iring , and of some Centum capita, Pliny calleth it Erynge, and saith that some did referre Acanos unto Eryngium, and doth thereof make some doubt, and others referre it to Drypis Theophrasti as he saith also: Casalpi Crocodilion of Dioscorides and Pliny, Lacuna calleth it Glycyrrhiza spinosa, all other authors generally first Eryngium marinum, onely Bauhinus and Gesner in hortis call it Eryngium maritimum: the second is Eryngium vulgare by Camerarius, Clusius and Bauhinus, because in Germany there is no other so frequent, the ¦mer being not so well knowne as being farre from the Sea side where onely it is naturall: Fuchsius, Ang Lacuna, Cordus upon Dioscorides, Caesalpinus and Tabermontanus call it simply Eryngium without other epi Tragus and Lonicerus make it their first Eryngium; Matthiolus, Durantes and Lugdunensis call it Eryngium ∣tanum sive ampestre, Turner, Gesner and Gerard Eyngium mediterraneum and Lobel Eryngium campestri mediter∣raneum: the third is the Eryngium pusillum planum Mutoni of Lobel, Lugdunensis and Clusius, which Bauhinus cal¦leth Eryngium planum minus: the fourth is called by Clusius Eryngium pumilum hispanicum, whom Dod Lugdunensis, Tabermontanus and Gerard do follow: the fift is called by Lobel &amp; Pena Carduncellus mon , Lupi, and Lugdunensis Carduncellus Penae sive Cardui minimi species, and Bauhinus Eryngium inputanum minimum capitula magno, Alpinus lib. de exoticis as I take it mentioneth this, calling it Carduus Eryngioides: the last is mentioned by Alpinus. The Italians call the first Iringio marino, The Spaniards Cardo corredor, the French Chard a cent testes according to the Latine Centum capita, and of some also Paracault, the Germanes Wallendistill Brakendis ell and Mans trewe, the Dutch Meere wortele, Endel os and Cruijs distel, and we in English Sea Holly, or Sea Hulver. 
The Vertues. Both the Vpland and Sea Holly are temperate in heate, somewhat drying and cleansing, but our Sea Holly is more effectuall than the Vpland kinde in all things whereunto it may serve, yet it is so neare thereunto that it is accepted in the steed thereof, and that to very good purposes, being not much inferiour, what therefore I shall shew you of the Sea kinde, you may transferre to the other, as divers other good Authours doe. The young and tender shootes are eaten of divers, either raw or pickled: the decoction of the roote in wine being drunke is ve∣ry effectuall to open the obstructions of the spleene and liver, and helpeth the yellow jaundise, the dropsie, and the paines in the loynes and winde collicke in the guts and bowells, provoketh urine▪ and expelleth the stone, and procureth womens courses: the same also, or the powder of the roote, to the quantitie of a dramme at a time, with some wilde Carrot seede drunke in wine, or as Apollodorus doth appoint in the broth of boyled Frogges, or as Heraclides saith, in the broth of a Goose, is availeable anainst the sting or biting of Serpents, and other vene∣mous creatures, the poyson also of the Aconite, and other poysonous herbes: the continued use of the decoction for fifteene daees taken fasting, and next to bedwards, doth helpe the strangury, the pissing by droppes, the stopping of the urine and the stone, and all defects of the reines and kidneyes, and if the said drinke be continued longer, it is said perfectly to cure them that are troubled with the stone, that the paines shall never returne againe, the ex∣perience on them that have beene troubled along time therewith, declaaring it to be true: it is usually taken to helpe Venereous actions, and is good against the French disease: the rootes bruised and applied outwardly helpeth Scrophula ' s, or the kernells of the throate, called the Kings evill, or taken inwardly either, and applied to the stung or bitten place of any Serpent, &amp;c. healeth it speedily: if the roote be bruised and boyled in old Ax gis or salted lard, and applied to broken bones, thornes, &amp;c. remaining in the flesh, doth not onely draw them forth, but healeth up the place againe, gathering new flesh where it was consumed, or almost fallen away: the juyce of the leaves dropped into the eares helpeth impostumes therein. The distilled water of the whole herbe when the leaves and stalkes are young is profitably drunke for all the purposes aforesaid, and doth helpe the melancholy of the heart, and is availeable in quartaine and quotidian agues, as also for them that have their neckes drawne awry, or cannot turne them, without they turne the whole body therewith also. The other sorts are farre lesse effectuall to be used in Physicke, but the two last sorts are much used by the Natives to incite Venery both rootes and heads. 
CHAP. XIIII. Carduus Stellaris. The Starre Thistle. O F the Starre Thistles there are two or three sorts, some whereof have beene but lately found out, and exhibited to be knowne; the other of more ancient cognisance, the Spina or Carduus Solstitialis being one of the number in that it doth so meerely resemble them, as shall be presently shewed: but in my opinion these plants, but that custome hath entituled them Thistles, might as well be referred to the Iaceas or Knapweedes with prickly heads, as divers others there placed are, and even Clusius placing his Ia flore luteo capitulis spinosis, at the first among the Thistles, doth afterwards change his minde, and see it among the Iaceas. 
1. Carduus stellaris vulgaris. The ordinary Starre Thistle. The common Starre Thistle, hath divers long and narrow leaves lying next unto the ground, cut or torne on the edges, somewhat deepely, into many, almost even parts, soft or a little woolly all over the greene, which is somewhat white, among which rise up divers weake stalkes parted into many branches, all lying of downe to the ground, rather than much raised up, that it seemeth a pretty bush set with divers the like leaves up to the toppes, where severally doe stand long and small whitish greene heads, set with very 1. Carduus vulgaris. The ordinary Starre Thistle. 
4. Carduus Solstitialis Dodona . S t . Barnabies Thistle by Dodonem. 
Carduus Solstitialis Lobel . Lobels S t . Barnabies Thistle. 
long white prickes, no part of the plant being in any place else prickly, which are somewhat yellowish, and as sharpe as in any other Thistle; out of the middle whereof riseth the flower composed of many small red∣dish purple threads, and in the heads after the flowers , come small whitish round seede lying in downe as others doe: the roote is small, long, and wooddy pe∣ ing every yeare, and raising it selfe from it owne seede sowing. 
2. Carduus stellaris flore albo. The white flowred Starre Thistle. There is no difference in this Thistle from the former, but in the white greenesse of the leaves, and the white threads in the flowers. 
3. Carduus stellatus latifolius. The broade leafed Starre Thistle. This Thistle hath broader and shorter leaves than the former, but not much or so deepely cut in on the edges, with a few prickes set here and there at the corners; the stalke is but little divided, having few branches set with the like leaves, and at the toppes small round thicke white heads, set thicke with prickes, many set-together, in the fashion of a Starre, seven for the most part set sprea∣ding in every place, the longest of them being middle∣most, and the other on each side being shorter; out of the middle of the head rise reddish purple threads like unto divers other Thistles: the roote is small and annuall. 
4. Carduus Solstitialis Dodonai. Dodonaus his Midsommer Thistle or S. Barnabies Thistle. This Thistle of Dodonaus as hee saith hath long leaves lying next to the ground, deepely cut in on the many long and narrow parts, the lower part being somewhat broad and ending in a long point, of a ish greene colour, from among which rise up divers upright stalkes two foote high, with divers long and somewhat divided but the uppermost without division, and all of them without any prickes up∣ at the toppes stand sundry small sharpe prickly heads, whose prickes are as white or rather more then in any of the other, and are so cruelly sharpe that they pricke the Thighes and Legges of those that nadvisedly passe thereby, in the middle whereof stand a few yellow threads; the seede is white and long not much those of the former starre Thistle: the roote is blackish, long, and slender not growing deepe, joynted or in divers places somewhat wooddy and bitter in taste, somewhat like unto the long Ciperus grasse roote. Lobel giveth a figure hereof whose lower leaves are as little jagged as the upper, which I have here set to let you see the difference. Solstitialis Lobelij. 
The Place. The first groweth in the fields about London in many places as at Mile-end greene, in Finsbury fields beyond the Milles, and in many other places: that with white flowers is much more rare and not to be met with in a great compasse: the third is found about Narbone in France, and the last about Mompelier in good plentie but is not to be found wilde with us. 
The Time. The first flowreth early and seedeth in Iuly and sometimes in August: the last is usually in flower about Midsommer or a little after. 
The Names. It is very probable that the Carduus Stellatus or Stellaris is the Myacanthus of Theophrastus, lib. 6. c. 4. (and not the either of Dioscorides which is Asparagus petraeus or Pliny which is Corruda or sylvestris Asparagus which is tota spina a bush onely of thornes) which hath thornes or prickes not upon the leaves, but be∣sides them, as Capers Ononis and Tribulus, for with them he setteth Myacanthos as being of a likenesse, and so called because the prickly heads being stucke upon salted flesh that was hung up, would sufficiently defend it from Mice or other vermine that would devoure it: Brunfelsius calleth the first Eryngium and so doth Guilandrum, Tragus maketh it his Eryngium alterum, Matthiolus calleth it Cacatrepol Cacotribulus, id est infestus tribulus and so doth Caesalpinus also: who thinketh withall that it may bee the Ste Theophrasti whereof yee shall heare more a little after: Dodonaeus and Camerarius call it Carduus Stellatus, and so doth Lobel also, and Calcitropa, as the shops beyond the Sea in divers places doe. Horatius Angerius calleth it Stellaria and Gesner in hortis, Carduus Stella∣torius sive Stellari, Cordus Polyacantha, Tabermontanus Spino stella, Lugdunensis Myacanthos Theophrasti Dalechampi , Clusius Carduus muricatus, Columna Hippophaestum vel Hippopha s, Dioscorides and Bauhinus, Carduus stellatus so∣lijs papa veris erratici: the third is called by Lugdunensis, Carduus stellatus Dalechamp , and Bauhinus Carduus stellatus latifolius caulescens: The last is thought by some to be the , Spina regia Theophrasti, and is called by Gesner in hortis Spina citrina sive lutea, and Spina Solstitialis and so doe Dodonaus, Lobel and Camerarius who also call it Carduus Solstitialis, Lugdunensis Leucacantha quorundam, who as Lobel also saith, the French call it Aurioles in divers places, Caesalpinus Calcatrepola altera, and Columna Spina Solstitialis mitior Apula sive Carduus stellatus minor, and Bauhinus Carduus stellatus luteus folijs cyani, Gerard his figure thereof is not right, for it is but the first Carduus stellatus which M r . Iohnson hath noted, yet giveth a figure for Solstitialis little or nothing diffe∣ring from the Stellatus, when as this true figure hereof is extant in Lobel, and whereas Gerard his Solstitialis lu∣tea peregrina is supposed to be Acanthium peregrinum of Tabermontanus, which Bauhinus knew not what to make of; it is plaine by Gerards owne words that hee ment it by Clusius his Jacea lutea capitulis spinosis: many such faults have passed M r . Iohnsons correction, which I am loth in every place to exhibit, knowing that none of us all can publish any thing but there may bee slippes and errours in many places thereof. The Italians call the Starre Thistle (as I sayd before) Calcatrepola, the French Chaussottoppe, the Germans Wallendistell, the Dutch Starre di∣stel, the other we call in English S. Barnabies Thistle or Midsommer Thistle. 
The Ʋertues. The seede of the Starre Thistle made into powder and drunke in wine doth provoke Vrine, and helpeth to breake the stone and drive it forth: the roote in powder given in wine is good against the Plague or Pestilence, by drinking thereof daily fasting for some time together is very profitable for a Fistula in any part of the body. They about Franckeford doe use the rootes hereof in stead of Eryngium which groweth there together with it as Camerarius saith. Baptista Sardus doth much commend the distilled water hereof being drunke to helpe the French disease, and to open the obstructions of the Liver, and clense the blood from corrupted humors, and is also profitably given against eyther quotidian or tertian Agues: The Midsommer Thistle is used by the Savoyars as Camerarius saith, and both flowers and roote admirably commended against the evill disposition of the whole body called Cachexia, against the Dropsie, daily Agues, maidens pale colour by reason of the greene sicknesse, or other obstructions, the countrey people saith hee, doth much use the distilled water or the decoction thereof, both against the swellings of the spleene and prickings in the sides, as also to provoke sweating and to helpe the hip-goute or paines in the huckle bones called the Sciatica. 
CHAP. XV. Carduus mollis. The gentle Thistle. O Ne of these kinds of gentle Thistles I have published in my former booke and therefore shall not neede to speake againe thereof in this place, but of the rest as they follow. 
1. Carduus mollis laciniato folio. The gentle Thistle with jagged leaves. This jagged gentleman hath many leaves, some lying on the ground, others standing more upright much jagged or cut in on the edges, even to the middle ribbe, greene on the upper side, hoary white and woolly underneath like unto the younger and softer leaves of the first starre Thistle, not having any shew of prickles on them, of a little drying and bitter taste: from among which rise up one or two round striped stalkes about two foote high, of a reddish colour yet covered with a fine Downe or Cotton, set with divers leaves, the lowest whereof are like those on the ground but smaller, and those up higher are narrow and long without di∣vision, the ends and points of them being usually reddish, at the toppe of the stalke which is more usually without branches, groweth one head composed of many scales, set together with very soft and gentle prickes 1. Carduus millis laciniato folio. The gentle Thistle with jagged leaves. 
3. Carduus mollis Helenij folio Camerarij. Camerarius his gentle Thistle. 
thereon, out of the middle whereof riseth a reddish or stammell flower made of divers soft and woolly threads: the seede that followeth is great and somewhat cornered: the roote is somewhat long and of the bignesse of ones finger, brownish on the outside with some fibres thereat.
The Names. The Greekes call it Aspalathus, and so doe the Latines also, yet Pliny from Dioscorides saith it was also called Erysisceptrum and of some Sceptrum. The first three sorts Clusius doth acknowledge are none of them the true Aspalathus alter Dioscoridis, yet because saith hee others did call the first so (and the others are likest unto it) he calleth it and them Aspalathus alter primus secundus &amp; tertius Bauhinus entituleth them all Genista∣spartium spinosum as Lobel doth, set forth in his Icones; but in his Observations he calleth it Alspalathus secundae Monspeliersium, and Lugdunensis Aspalathus primus Monspessulanus but should be secundus being the Printers fault; Anguilara tooke it to be Acacia altera, and Tabermontanus calleth it Scorpius minimus: the fourth is the Acacia altera of Matthiolus, Lacuna, Lonicerus, Lobel, Lugdunensis, Gesner and Camerarius: but Honorius Bellus in his fift Epistle unto Clusius sheweth (as Pona also from him doth, and as I sayd in the description) that in Candy and throughout all Graecia it is called Spalathos to this day, and therefore is confident to call it Aspalathus secun∣dus Dioscoridis, as Guilandinus in his Epistles did before him, who wa Bellus his Tutour: but Bauhinus because he would go with the greater although not the better number as it should seeme (for he quoteth the same authors himselfe that I doe here, both that call it Acacia and Aspalathus ) calleth it Acacia trifolia: the last onely Pona hath set forth in his Latine and Italian description of Mount Baldus, who saith that the wood is pale, and yet Bauhi∣nus in setting it downe in his Pinax as having received a peece thereof from Pona himselfe saith thus of it, Aspa∣lathus cortice cinereo ligno purpureo making the wood to be purple when as nothing but the inner rinde is so. Clu∣sius saith that the Spaniards call the first Eulalia, the second Aulaga, and the third Hallada. 
The Ʋertues. Avicen saith that Aspalathus is hot in the first degree and dry in the end of the second, almost to the third. Dio∣scorides saith it hath an heating qualitie with some astriction, but Galen lib. 6. simpl. medicament saith thus. Aspa∣lathus is in taste sharpe, together with some astriction also, the faculties therein being of unlike parts, to wit sharpe whereby it is heating; and harsh or sowre, whereby it is cooling by both which it is drying, and thereby good against putrefactions and Fluxes of all sorts: a decoction thereof made in wine and gargled in the mouth is singular good to heale the fowle Vlcers thereof, as also those in the nose to bee snuffed up or injected, as also those Vlcers of the genitoryes or secret parts, if they bee bathed therewith: the said decoction stayeth the flux of the belly and helpeth the spitting of blood, it helpeth also those that cannot make water, and dissolveth windy swellings. Pliny saith the same, and further saith that it helpeth the chappes in the hands or other parts, and that the barke is effectuall against the strangury, as also availeable to binde the belly, and the decoction thereof stayeth bleedings. 
CHAP. XXI. Genista Spartium spinosum. The pliant thorny Broome. O F this kinde of Plant Bauhinus maketh many sorts, some whereof I have placed in the former Chap∣ter as fittest for that place in my opinion rather then this, the rest shall be declared here. 
1. Genista spartium spinosum minus. The lesser pliant thorny Broome. This small thorny bush riseth about a foote high set with most sharpe thornes, placed in order two alwayes together one against another, of a pale greene colour, many branches of these thornes springing from the mix stemme up to the toppe, at the ends whereof stand three or foure such yellow Broome-like flowers as are to be seene in the Furse bushes, after which come small short pods so enclosed in a hoary woolly downe that they seene as it were covered with copwebs, wherein lie small seede lesser than Vetches: the roote is long and sprea∣deth much. 
2. Genista spartium spinosum Syriacum. The pliant thorny Broome of Syria. This thorny bush riseth up more then a cubit high, set with divers branches and small long ash-coloured thornes yet more soft and gentle then the other, and more sparsedly placed also, having divers long and narrow blewish or ash-coloured leaves with them like unto those of Knotgrasse: the flowers are of a purple colour, standing in small red huskes, after which come small long pods like unto the Scorpion podded seede vessells, con∣taining reddish seede within them: the roote is long and browne. 
3. Spartum spinosum Creticum. The pliant thorny Broome of Candy. This thorny Broome riseth up with a wooddy stalke or stemme covered with a blackish barke, spreading sun∣dry slender blackish branches, and they againe divided into smaller like rushes, all ending in sharpe thornes, be∣sides divers others, set here and there at the joynts of the branches, where also come forth fine small hoary leaves sit together the flowers are small and yellow succeeded by small long pods and small seede in them. 
4. Spartum spinosum aliud Creticum. Another pliant thorny Broome of Candy. I have joyned the figure hereof with the foregoing plant, and that it should not passe undescribed, but take it briefly thus: It groweth very tall &amp; high, busheth and brancheth forth very much, the slender flexible greene bran∣ches are sprinkled with small white spots, having three small leaves at a joynt, with yellow flowers and small pods afterwards: each branch and twigge ending in a long thorne at the last. 
5. Erinacea Hispanica Clusij. Clusius his Spanish Hedgehog Thorne. This no lesse rare then daintie bush groweth to be scarse a foote high spreading many stalkes and branches one interlaced among another, and all set in a round forme or compasse replenished with a number of cruell sharpe greene thornes: at the toppes of the branches stand three or foure flowers alwayes together of the same fashion with the former, but of a blewish purple colour set in rough and hairy hoary huskes, while it flowreth there are 1. Genista Spartium spinosum minus. The lesser pliant thorny Broome. 
3, 4. Spartum spinosum Creticum duarum specierum. The two thorny pliant Broomes of Candy. 
5. Erinacea Hispanica Clusij. Clusius his Spanish Hedgehog thorne. 
6. Echinopoda frutex Creticus. The Hedgehog Thorne of Candy. 
7. Echinus Creticus. The small round Hedgehog Thorne of Candy. 
some few small leaves to bee seene upon it in sundry places, but they prickly wither and fall away, leaving the bush without a leafe thereon all the yeare after, which by the round forme of the branches with the thornes sticking forth, doth represent a Hedgehog so fitly that the inhabitants thereupon have termed it Erizo, that is, an Hedgehog, the roote spreadeth many long strings and fibres on them under ground. 
6. Echinopoda frutex Creticus. The Hedgehog Thorne of Candy. This other small Thornie bush groweth up with ma∣ny thorny greene sprigges and branches set close toge∣ther, having alwayes three prickes or thornes growing together at every place, and is seldome seene likewise to have any leaves thereon because they fall away so quick∣ly; ( Alpinus saith it never beareth any) the flowers hereof groweth at the toppes of the branches in great plentie (but Alpinus denyeth it and saith it beareth but very few) are yellow but like the other in forme, wherof the Bees never doe taste, standing in whitish greene huskes, a little hoary all over, and afterwards small pods with very small seede in them; this is very tender to keepe, not enduring any cold place Sommer or Winter. 
7. Echinus Creticus. The small round Hedgehog Thorne of Candy. This Thorne (saith Alpinus ) doth better resemble a Tragacantha then the former Echinopoda as Honorius Bellus would have it: for this round formed thorne is not much bigger then a hand Vrchin or Hedghog, scarse rising above two or three fingers from the earth, but spreading the blacke branches halfe way within the ground, very thicke set together, and shooting out small rootes at the joynts as they spread, all which end in small short white and broad sharp thornes thwarting one ano∣ther thereby forming as it were crosses or starres, not ha∣ving any leaves at all upon them, but innumerable small flowers like unto Hyacinths for their forme, but much smaller, after which succeede small long pods like unto those of the other Tragacanth : it groweth round and spreadeth not further out of that forme: the Candiots call it Caloschirrida. 
The Place. The first as Clusius saith groweth on the hills neare the kingdome of Granado going to Corduba: the second Rauwolfius found about Aleppo in Syria: the third Clusius found in the kingdome of Valentia in Spaine about a small towne called Siete aguas most plentifully, which is in the way to Maedrill: the last Bellonius saith groweth in Candy, and Honorius Bellus saith in all Graecia likewise besides. 
The Time. All these doe flower in the beginning of Sommer, yet Clusius saith hee found the third in flower in Aprill where it grew naturally. 
The Names. lius as I said intituleth all these plants Genista spartium spinosum, calling the first minus, because he made the time first in the last Chapter to be majus. Clusius calleth it Scorpius secundus, and thinketh it may be the Echi∣nopoda Cretica of Honorius Bellus for that as he saith it grew very like it, and Lugdunensis termeth it Aspalathus se∣ dus Lobel calleth it Genista spartiū spinosum alterū, Caesalpinus Spina Christi and Dodonaeus Genistae spinosae altera , and Tabermontanus Scorpius tertius: the second Lugdunensis in his Appendix sheweth out of Rauwolsius j nall, that the Moores of Aleppo did call it Alhagi, on whose leaves a kinde of Manna called by the Arabians Te∣ bin, and by the Moores Trunschibin was used to be gathered, especially in Persia and calleth it Planta spinosa M rum Alhagi, and Bauhinus Genista spartium folijs polygoni: the third Alpinus l. de plantis exoticis calleth Spar∣ti spinosum, and the fourth Spartiū Creticū: the fift Clusius calleth Erinacea from the Spanish word Erizo, for the likenesse in the growing round with prickles and thornes unto an Hedgehog, Caesalpinus calleth it Genistae rotundae genus, Lobel Spartum aphyllon fruticosum junceis aculeis lanatis folijs, Tabermontanus Scorpius quartus and Spartium aculeatum aphyllon: Gerard maketh it his fourth Genista spinosa humilis, aod▪ saith it groweth in the South and West parts of this Land, but sure I am he is much mistaken therein, for in his description hee saith it hath yellow flowers which this hath not: Bauhinus calleth it Genista spartium spinosum folijs Lenticulae, flo∣ribus excaruleo purpurascentibus: the sixt is mentioned by Bellonius in his first booke of Observations and 18. Chapter calling it Achinopoda, and as he there saith is very like unto Aspalathus, but Honorius Bellus in his se∣cond Epistle to Clusius contraryeth him therein, shewing that Echinopoda differeth much from Aspalathus both in the greatnesse of the plant or bush, being much greater then Echinopoda, as also having fewer thornes, and three leaves set together, long abiding contrary to Echinopoda and sheweth it to be very common in all Graecia, and in the Iland Chi or Si , and that Dalechampius was much deceived herein in his marginall note upon Athaeneus, in taking Echinopoda to bee Cardui Chij genus, and that it may appeare to bee commonly growing there, and knowne, Plutarke in his Symposiaks and libro de auditione towards the end, setteth down this old Distichon, Inter Echinopodas velut, asperam &amp; inter Ononim, Interdum crescunt mollia Leucoia. And so doth Athenaeus likewise mention it in his third booke of Dipnosophistes, as still growing among Ononis and thornes it selfe being one, Pliny also in his eleventh Booke and eighth Chapter mentioneth it under the name of Che , Melchior Guilandinus knew it not, for in his Epistle to Langius he numbreth it among the unknowne plants to him. 
The Ʋertues. The second Rauwolfius saith is hot and dry, and that the Syrians with an hand full of the leaves make a decocti∣on in water and drinke it, whereby they purge themselves: but I doe not finde any mention of the vertues of any of the rest of these plants, eyther used by the learned or by the inhabitants where they grow, and therefore untill I can learne more of them I must be silent also. 
CHAP. XXII. Scorpius sive Genista spinosa. Thorny Broome and Furse. H Aving as well before in this Worke as in my former Booke shewed you all the sorts of smooth Broomes or without thornes, and in these two last Chapters divers thorny bushes comming nearest to the thorny Broomes, it remaineth for me to declare them also, which although some grow so wild on barren heaths and dry grounds in our owne Land that they are not thought fit to bee planted in a Garden, yet there be divers others that are, let me not therefore sever them into many places, but set them together in this Chapter, the common Furse bushes being of the same tribe or family.
Paliurus sive Rhamnus tertius Dioscoridis. Christs Thorne. 
branches and somewhat lesser leaves, thicker whiter and 4. Rhamnus niger Theophrasti. Blacke berried Buckes thorne. 
5. Rhamnus Bavaricus. The Bavarian Buckes thorne. 
6. Rhamnus Myrtifolius ex Insula Sancti Christophori. Buckes thornes with Myrtle-like leaves of Saint Christrohers Iland. 
of a more saltish taste: the flowers stand in the same man∣ner but are of a purplish red colour. 
4. Rhamnus niger Theophrasti. Blacke berried Buckes thorne. The blacke Buckes thorne groweth unto the bignesse of a Blacke thorne bush, having a blackish barke covering the g test armes and body, set with divers narrow and long thicke greene leaves together at the joynts like unto the other before, but of a more astringent taste like unto Ru∣barbe, armed with long sharpe thornes, each branch en∣ding also in a long sharpe thorne: the flower is small and of a greenish colour, comming forth in the spring of the yeare, and the fruit followeth in the Sommer which is small and blacke like unto a Sloe and harsh also in taste. 
5. Rhamnus Bavaricus. The Bavarian Buckes thorne. The Bavarian Buckes thorne groweth to the height of a man with a reddish barke, with many very sharpe long thornes, thicke set on the branches, and leaves thereon of a pale greene colour, somewhat broad and long like unto the llex or evergreene Oake finely dented about the edges, and with some smaller and rounder leaves set with them also, each twigge ending in a thorne: what flowers or fruite this beareth is not yet come to our knowledge, but for the likenesse of the growing, and being a thorny ever∣living plant it hath beene accounted a species of Rhamnus and so called. 
6, Rhamnus Myrtifolius ex Insula Sancti Christophori Saint Christophers Myrtle leafed Ramme, In the naturall places this groweth great and tall, but in France whether it was brought scarse a cubit high, the barke being greene and smooth, the leaves many set to∣gether on the stalkes by couples, somewhat like as the Wallnut tree leaves grow, but each leafe resembling those of the greatest Myrtle: at each knot on the branches where the leaves shoot stand one or two small short weake thornes on each side: the further relation wee cannot give you because the plant perished through the intemperature of the climate. 
The Place. The first as I sayd groweth not onely neare the Sea coasts in the low countries and in our Land also, but in the uplands also of the higher and lower Germany also by rivers sides, as Cordus, Gesner, Clusius and others have set it downe: the second as Clusius saith groweth in divers places of Spaine, Portugall, and Narbone in France: the third he saith he onely found at the farther border of the kingdome of Valencia in Spaine about the Citie Horūela neare the River Sagura and in no place else: the fourth he likewise saith he found plentifully among other shrubbes in the waste grounds of the kingdome of Granado and Murcia. 
The Time. They flower in the Sommer, and the fruit is ripe in September. 
The Names. There is great controversie among our moderne writers as I said before concerning this Rhamnus, as the Greekes and Latines call it, every one almost appropriating one thorny bush or other thereunto, for Camerarius and Tragus judge the Grossularia or Vuacrispa our Goose berry bush, to be the Rhamni tertium genus of Dioscori∣des, and call the Spina infectoria before set forth in this worke to be Rhamni aliaspecies, not knowing any purging qualitie therein as others afterwards did, and thereupon called it Rhamnus Catharticus or solutivus. Matthiolus setteth forth likewise a kind of prickly bush for the Rhamnus secundus Dioscoridis which Pena and Lobel mislike, giving another in the stead thereof, which they say commeth nearer to the description of Dioscorides: and even the ancient authors themselves are not constant nor free of variation herein: for as before said Dioscorides hath three sorts of Rhamnus (whereof the third sort is much doubted of by divers, some thinking the Text of Diosco∣rides to be corrupt, and the third sort to be added or superfluous) Theophrastus hath but two sorts, white and blacke and mentioneth Paliurus as a peculiar plant by it selfe, saying also it is of many sorts, and Galen maketh mention but of one sort, as if there were but one or that the rest were comprehended under that one. Pliny maketh two sorts, but he without consideration referreth them to the Rubus or Bramble. The first here set forth is the Rham∣nus secundus Dioscoridis of Matthiolus, Dodonaeus, Clusius, Lugdunensis, as also of Lacuna and Lonicerus, but Pena and Lobel in Adversarijs make it the first of Dioscorides, Cordus upon Dioscorides and in his history also calleth it Oleaster Germanicus, and in his Observationum sylva, Oleastri peculiare genus: Camerarius in horto and in Epitome calleth it Rhamni species, and Caesalpinus Rhamni alterum genus, Bellonius in his Observations maketh mention of a Rhamnus baccis rubentibus which it is probable is this. Columna taketh it to be Hippophae Dioscoridis, and Bau∣hinus calleth it Rhamnus Salicis folio angusto fructu flavescente: the second is the Rhamnus primus Dioscoridis of Matthiolus, Anguilara, Lacuna, Lonicceus, Clusius. Dodonaeus, Lugdunensis and Rauwolfius; Lobel calleth it Rham∣nus alter Dioscoridis Monspeliacus, Cordus upon Dioscorides and Bauhinus call it Rhamnus candida Theophrasti, as also Rhamnus spinis oblongis flore candicante. Rauwolfius saith that the Arabians call it Haoser, and they about Tripoli in Soria or Syria Hansegi: the third is Clusius his Rhammi primi altera species: the fourth is his Rhamnus tertius, and so also it is of Dodonaeus and Tabermontanus, and of Lobel Rhamnus primae speciei tertius and is likely to be the Rhamni genus baccis nigris in Graecia of Bellonius, Bauhinus calleth it Rhamnus niger Theophrasti and Rhamnus tertius flore herbaceo baccis nigris: the fift Lugdunensis exhibiteth from a skilfull Herbarist as hee saith that brought it to Dalechampius gathered in Bavaria. and not knowing unto what plant to referre it better called it Rhamnus Bavaricus, which name doth so continue untill it can be better disposed of: the last Iacobus Cornutus onely exhibiteth in his Canadensium plantarum historia The Arabians call it as is aforesaid: the Italians Ramno and Mauruca, the Spaniards Scambrones, the French Bourgespine in some places, for that name is given to divers plants in sundry places: Anguilara saith that generally Dioscorides his first Rhamnus is taken to be that plant which at Rome is called Spino santo, and of others Spino de Christo, Marcellus in his booke de re medica calleth it Saluta∣ris herba and spina alba: Cordus also witneseth that Rhamnus is called by the Latines Spina alba, but wisely adviseth that this shrub Spina alba be not confounded with the other two sorts of Thistles so called also. Ovid also spea∣keth of it lib. 6. fastorum, shewing the use of it in his time to expell incantations in these verses, Sic fatus, spinam qua tristes pellere posset Aforibus noxas, haec erit alba, dedit. And in another place not farre from the former he saith the same of the same plant, otherwise called Virga Ianalis in this manner; Virga{que} Ianalis despina sumitur alba. Qua lumen thalamis, parva fenestra dabat. 
The Vertues. These thorny plants are in qualitie one much like another, being as Galen saith cold in the end of the first de∣gree or in the beginning of the second and drying and digesting in the second, and thereby helpeth inflammati∣ons, Saint Anthonies fire and other fretting and eating Cankers and is good against pushes, wheales, &amp;c. in using the young leaves whiles they are fresh. A decoction of the leaves and inner barke thereof made in water where∣unto a little allome is put is very good to wash the mouth when there is any inflammation or Vlcer or other di∣sease therein. ( Clusius saith that the Spaniards doe eate the young shoots of his first Rhamnus as a Sallat herbe, and that they use the decoction of the Blacke berries of this fourth sort, to bathe those places that are out of joynt, and to helpe the paines of the Goute. 
CHAP. XXIIII. Lycium sive Pyxacantha. Box thorne. A Lthough we are not certaine that any of these thorny shrubs here set forth in this Chapter is the true and right Lycium of Dioscorides agreeing thereunto in all things, yet because all of them have some corre∣spondence therewith in divers particulars, they have beene by the judicious finders out of them re∣ferred unto it as shall be shewed. 
1. Lycium vulgatius. The more common Box thorne. The more common Box thorne is a shrubbe or low tree yet growing sometimes foure or five cubits high, with many branches spreading therefrom, covered with a darke greene barke, somewhat grayish in the body and older boughes set somewhat thicke with small hard and almost round leaves like Box, two for the most part at a joynt, from whence also thrusteth forth a small sharpe thorne: the flowers grow many together in a cluster at the seve∣rall joynts upwards of a greenish colour, after which come small berries, greene at the first and blacke when they are ripe, of the bignesse of Privet berries but full of a bitter unpleasant sappe: the roote speadeth diversly. 
2. Lycium Italicum. Italian Box thorne. The Italian Box thorne is a smaller and lower shrubbe, whose older barke is rugged and of a darke colour, but the younger have it thinne smooth and greenish, the branches ending in a thorne, whereupon are set small leaves dented about the edges very like unto those of the Sloe bush, and of a darke greene colour, harsh in taste and some∣what bitter withall: at the joynts with the leaves come forth a few flowers of a whitish greene colour, made of foure leaves a peece, after which follow small greene berries and blacke when they are ripe, with two and some∣times with three leaves as it were on the berrie: the roote is wooddy and spreadeth. 
3. Lycium Hispanicum folio Buxi. Spanish Box thorne with small round leaves. The Spanish Box thorne hath divers slender but yet upright stemmes about two foote high, covered with a reddish barke parting into many branches every one not onely ending in a thorne, but having divers thornes set also here and there upon them, many times but weake and short, and at other sharpe and strong with many leaves growing on them, somewhat like unto the small Box Myrtle leaves being of a clammy acide taste, some∣what biting, neyther flower nor fruit hath beene observed hereof. 
4. Lycium Hispanicum folio oblongo. Spanish Boxthorne with longer leaves. This other Spanish Box thorne riseth up but with one stemme, parted into sundry branches whereon grow long and narrow leaves set without order. 
5. Lycium latifolium Monspeliacum. Broad leafed Box thorne of Mompelier. This cruell thorny bush groweth and spreadeth like an hedge bush, set thicke with sharpe long thornes, and divers leaves somewhat broad with them, whereat likewise come forth small flowers which turne into small berries, blacke when they are ripe, three for the most part standing together, having a reddish yellow juice with∣in them, giving that colour on paper, leather, &amp;c. and with three seedes in them, and of a quicke sharpe taste. 
6. Lycium Gallicum Avenionense. The yellow graine of Avignon. This thorny shrubbe groweth to the height of three or foure cubits, whose lower barke is of a grayish ashco∣lour, spreading divers branches ending in thornes, set at the joynts with many small leaves very like both for colour and thicknesse unto the small Box but somewhat narrower and longer, whereat also come forth small flowers and after them small berries upon short footstalkes some being three square and others foure square ac∣cording to the number of graines within them, at whose head is set a small cup or cover, and is of an astringent taste, somewhat bitter, which being dryed are much used of Diers and others to give a yellow colour. 
1. Lycium vulgatius. The more common Box thorne.
2. Lycium Italicum. Italian Box thorne. 
4. Lycium Hispanicum folio oblongo. Spanish Box thorne with longer leaves. 
6. Lycium Gallicum Avenionense. The yellow graine of Avignon. 
7. Lycium Creticum primum Belli. The first Box thorne of Candy. 
8. Lycium Creticum alterum. The other Box thorne of Candy. 
10. Lycium Indicum creditum Alpino. The supposed Indian Box thorne. 
12. Agiahalid Egyptiaca Lycio affinis. The Egyptian Tree like unto Lycium. 
 
7. Lycium Creticum primum Belli The first Box thorne of Candy. This Candian thorne groweth to be foure or five cubits high covered with a rough or scabbed barke, of a gray∣ish colour, stored with sharpe thornes, three alwayes growing together at a jont, where the leaves also come forth three or foure together which are small somewhat neare unto Box leaves, and lesser then those of the Barbary bush, lightly snipped or dented about the edges: the flowers are yellow comming forth at the joynts with the leaves which turne into small long berries not fully round, therein somewhat like unto a Barbary but blacke when it is ripe, each of them standing singly by it selfe upon a small footestalke, of a taste betweene sweete and sower: the wood hereof is yellow and the roote much more giving an excellent yellow dye: divers have accounted it a kinde of mountaine Barbary for the resemblance thereunto more then unto Lycium: but it differeth from the Barbary in that the leaves thereof are greater then of this, and the Barbary hath the berries growing many together in a long cluster, and this but singly one at a place as is before said, and from the true Lycium it differeth in the fruit not being round like Pepper, and is not bitter as the berries of most sort of Lycium are. 
8. Lycium Creticum alterum. The other Box thorne of Candy. This other Candian bush riseth up not above two or three cubits high thicke set with branches and thornes, and small leaves upon them, the berries are round, as small as Pepper and blacke when they are ripe, whereof is made an excellent yellow colour. 
9. Lycium legitimum Rauwolfij. The true Box thorne of Syria. The true Box thorne as Rauwolfius setteth it forth in the fourth Booke of his journall o Itinerary is a small shrubbe having many shoots from the rootes, set full of thornes and small leaves somewhat like unto Sloe leaves or betweene them and Box. 
19. Lycium Indicum creditum Alpino. The supposed Indian Box thorne. This Box thorne supposed to be the right Lycium Indicum by Prosper Alpinus in his Booke of Egyptian plants, shooteth from the rootes divers upright wooddy stemmes three or foure cubits high, set thicke with joynts, at eve∣ry one whereof come forth both long and sharpe thornes, and foure or five small long whitish greene leaves lon∣ger, narrower and whiter then those of the Olive tree: at the joynts likewise with the leaves stand two or three small whitish flowers, very like unto those of the Orientall Iacinth, which turne into small and blacke berries very like unto Wallwort berries of an astringent and bitter taste. 
11. Lycium Indicum putatum Garsia. Garsias supposed Indian Box thorne. Garcias ab Orta in his first booke and tenth Chapter of his Indian history of Drugges sheweth that the Indians, Persians and other nations of Asia major, use a certaine juice which they call Cate or Cato, mixed with Betre and A reca, as an usuall familiar junket continually to chew in their mouths, which he thinketh to be Lycium, having the properties of the true Lycium, the juice thereof being drawen forth in the same manner that the ancients did shew the true Lycium was made: but the tree as he describeth it doth much differ from that of Dioscorides for as Garcias saith his is a great tree as bigge as an Ash tree, having fine small leaves thereon like unto Heath or Tamariske (whereas Dioscorides saith that his Lycium is a shrubbe with leaves like Box, full of thornes and al∣wayes abiding greene) it beareth flowers but no fruit as the inhabitants reported unto him: the roote of the tree is firme heavy and strong, neyther subject to rottennesse exposed to the weather, nor swimming in the water, and thereupon called by them Lignum sempervivum. Evergreene wood. 
12. Agiahalid Aegyptiaca Lycio affinis. The Egyptian tree like unto Lycium. This tree groweth to the height of a wilde Peare tree, having but few armes or branches crooking many wayes in the growing, set with many long and very sharpe thornes and small Box-like leaves with them but somewhat broader, seldome but one and usually two at a joynt, the flowers are small and white like Orientall Iacinths but lesser, where afterwards stand smal blacke round berries both bitter and astringent: the leaves also are somewhat sower and astringent. 
The Place. The first groweth on the Alpes of Liguria and in Dalmatia as Lugdunensis saith: the second on Mount Balchus and in divers places of Italy: the third Clusius saith he found neare unto Complutum in Spaine by the Rivers sides: the fourth Lobel saith was brought from Spaine: the fift as Lobel saith groweth not farre from Mompelier neare the River Lanus: the sixt as is sayd about Avignon and Carpentoracte in France: the seventh and eight in Candy as Honorius Bellus setteth it downe in his first Epistle to Clusius: the ninth on Mount Lybanus and other places in Syria: the tenth in Egypt by the banckes of that arme of Nilus that is called Calig that runneth into the Sea: the eleventh groweth as Garcias saith in many places in the Indies where it is of great use: the last Alpinus saith hee saw in the garden of a Turke in Cayro which was brought out of Ethiopia. 
The Time. Their times of flowring and fructifying are according to the countries where they grow, some earlier and others later. 
The Names. The Greeke name Lycium (and Pyxacantha ) is imposed on the dryed juice as well as on the bush, so called as it is thought because it was brought out of Lycia and Cappadocia, and was of much use in former times but not of later dayes, because what was brought was well knowne and perceived to bee counterfeit, be∣ing made of the berries of Privet or of the Honysuckle or Doggeberry fruite or of them all together, and had none of the notes of the true Lycium which are these; It is blackish on the outside of the whole cakes or peeces, but being broken of a brownish yellow colour within, and quickly growing blacke againe having no virulent sent, but of a bitter taste astringent withall: the Indian kinde which is the best will have a Saffron like colour, and this especiall note the true and best will have, that being put into the fire it will burne and flame, and being quenched it will give a reddish (scumme say some and others a reddish) fume or smoake: but that sophisticate or adulte∣rate Lycium which of late dayes hath beene used hath none of these true properties in it: and Dioscorides and Ga∣len doe both shew that there wanted not impostoris in their time, to counterfeit the true, and would mixe Amurca, that is, the Grounds or Lees of oyle with it to make it burne, and with the juice of Wormewood or the Gall of an Oxe to make it bitter, and as Galen saith they did so cunningly counterfeit it that it was hard to know the false from the true. The first as the most frequent is thought by divers and Lugdunensis standeth mainely for it to be the right, notwithstanding that Anguilara saith it is not the right Lycium although it be so taken by divers. Matthiolus &amp; Tabermontanus call it Lycium, &amp; Lugdunensis, Lycium Alpinum, Dodonaeus, and Lonicerus Pyxacantha, Lobel in Adversarijs setteth forth a Lycium sive Pyxacantha Narbonensiū, which it may be is this, Bauhinus calleth it Lycium Buxifolio: the second Matthiolus, Lugdunensis and Tabermontanus call Lycium Italicum. Pona sheweth in his description of Mons Baldus that it is the same that Clusius calleth Spina infectoria pumila altera, and Bauhinus Lycium facie Pruni sylvestris sive Italicum: the third Clusius calleth Lycium quorundum, and saith the Spaniards where it grew call it Tamujos and Tamuexos, and thereof make Broomes and heate their Ovens and Kills, &amp;c. but Lugdunensis is much mistaken in thinking this of Clusius to be the same that Lobel in his Appendix to his Ob∣servations calleth Lycium Hispanicum, which is my fourth sort here, and hath longer &amp; narrower leaves then that of Clusius which hath rounder leaves more like Box and Bauhinus observing well the differences calleth the one Lycium Hispanicum folio buxi, and the other Lycium Hispanicum folio oblongo: the fift Lobel in Adversarijs calleth Pa∣liurus alter peregrimus, but hath mistaken the figure thereof in his Icones putting the figure of Pyracantha (that is of Oyacantha Dioscoridis which as he saith hath an ever greene leafe, and is not the Barbary as divers do mistake it) for it, which he setteth downe in his Adversaria, but in his Icones the said figure of Pyracantha is put under both the title of Paliurus alter peregrinus and of Rhamnus tertius Dioscoridis also, Bauhinus not taking it to be any species of Paliurus calleth it Lycium latifolium: the sixt Lugdunensis saith Dalechampius tooke to be a Lycium hee there∣fore calleth it Lycium Dalechampij, and withall saith that some called it Tinctorium granum, that is in French Graine a teindre and others call it Graine jaulne and some Graine d '  Avignon; Bauhinus calleth it Lycium Gallicum and may be called Granum Avenionense: the seventh Honorius Bellus of Candy saith it is there called Loue∣zia of the inhabitants, but he himselfe calleth it Lycium Creticum, yet saith also because it is not the right Lycium, it may be called Berberis Alpina aut montana, for Siluerius Todeschinus reported unto him that he found the very same very frequent on Mount Lybanus in Syria, Pona followeth Bellus in his Italian Baldus, and calleth it by the same names, Bauhinus referreth it rather to the Barbery, making it another species thereof and not of Lycium: the eighth as Bellus saith is also another sort of Lycium, and called by the Candiots Lazegiri, and Petroamygdala hoc est petraea amygdala, but yet hath no resemblance to our Almond tree: the ninth is called of Clusius Lycium legitimum Rauwolfij, and by Rauwolfius himselfe Frutex spinosus peregrinus Aralibus Had∣hadh, incolis Zaroa, Bauhinus Lycium Indicum folijs pruni: the tenth is by Prosper Alpinus called Lycium Indicum Creditum, and saith it is called Ʋseg by the Egyptians: Bauhinus calleth it Lycium Indicum alterum: the eleventh is called by Garcias Cate sive Lycium, and saith the true is called Hattych, which thereupon I have intituled Lycium Indicum putatum Garcia, and by Bauhinus Lycium folijs Ericae: the last Alpinus saith is called by the Egyptians Agiahalid and may not unfitly be accounted a Lycium, Bauhinus thereupon calleth it Lycio affinis Aegyptiaca. 
The Ʋertues. The condensate juice of Lycium is that that onely is to bee used, of all the parts of the tree, which was made as Dioscorides sheweth of the leaves and berries, but Pliny saith of the roote and branches, which being steeped three dayes in water was afterwards boyled and strayned, &amp; then evoporated untill it came to the thicknes of ho∣ny, and so to be kept as a liquid medicine as Galen seemeth to intimate, or else dryed up to the thicknesse of Opium and made up in that manner into Cakes, which as is sayd were to be broken to know the goodnesse: the scumme saith Dioscorides taken away in the boyling is put with other medicines that serve for the eyes, the rest is put to other uses, yet the Lycium it selfe is also set downe by him, to be effectuall to take away the dimnesse and filmes that hinder the sight. It stayeth Fluxes of all sorts both of the belly and humours, as the Laske and Bloody flux, the a undance of Womens courses, and the whites, bleedings at the mouth or nose and spitting of blood: it is effectuall also for all fowle and creeping Cankers, Vlcers and sores, whether in the mouth throat or other parts of the body, as also for the loosenesse of the gummes, chappes in the lippes or clefts in the fundament, and at the rootes of the nayles of the hands: but especially for all sores in the privie parts of man or woman: it is good for the cough being taken with water, as also against the bitings of a mad Dogge: being put into the eares that ru e and matter, it helpeth them: it is good also against the itch and scabbes▪ and to clense the skinne: it colou∣reth the haire yellow, and giveth a yellow dye not onely to Leather and skinnes, but serveth Dyers also and Painters in their workes. 
CHAP. XXV. Rubus. The Bramble. O F the Brambles there are are divers sorts, some having thornes or prickles upon them, others few or none, some growing higher and lower then others, some also carefully nursed up in Gardens which are the Raspies berries of divers sorts, whereof I have in my former Booke given you the know∣ledge sufficiently and shall not be here againe described. 
1. Rubus vulgaris major. The common Bramble Blacke berry bush. The common Bramble or Blacke berry bush is so well knowne that it needeth no description, every one that hath seene it being able to say that it shooteth forth many very long ribbed or straked branches, which although a great part thereof standeth upright, yet by reason of the length 1. Rubus vulgaris major. The Bramble or Blacke bush.
and weakenesse they bend againe downe to the ground, there many times taking roote againe, all of them thicke set with short and crooked thornes, and leaves likewise at severall places up∣on long prickly footestalkes, three and sometimes five set toge∣ther, hard and as it were crumpled with small prickes on the middle under rib, of a darke greene colour and grayish under∣neath, which seldome fall away all the winter, untill all the sharpe frosts be past (whereby the countrey men doe observe that the extremity of Winter is past when they fall off) and that new leaves shortly after beginne to shoot forth againe: the flowers are many set together at the ends of the branches, which consist of five whitish leaves like those of the wilde Bryer bush, and sometimes dasht with a little Carnation, with small threads in the middle, after which come the fruit every one by it selfe, but consisting of many graines or Berries as it were set together in a round head like a Mulberry, greene at the first, reddish after∣wards, and blacke and sweete when they are ripe, which else are harsh and unpleasant: the roote groweth great and knottie. 
2. Rubus minor Chamaerubus sive Humirubus. The small low or ground Bramble. The branches hereof are very slender, alwayes lying and tray∣ling upon the ground, never raysing it selfe up as the former doth, and often rooteth as it creepeth, set with crooked thornes, but much smaller then the other, &amp; with the like leaves and flowers of a pale Rose colour, and berries but smaller, and of a blewish blacke colour when they are ripe like unto a Damson, and as sweete as the other Blaccke berry almost, but with lesser sappe or juice in then: the roote here of creepeth about, and from the knotty joynts send forth new branches. Of this kinde there is another sort. 
3. Rubus montanus odoratus. Sweet mountaine Bramble or Raspis. This mountaine Bramble or Raspis (for to eyther it may bee referred) hath sundry long stalkes rising from the roote without any thornes on them, but set thicke with soft haires, from whence shoot forth thē broad and large leaves without order, set upon long hairy footestalkes divided into five parts almost to the middle ribbe, and sometimes but into three or more, each a little dented about the edges of a very sweet sent but falling away in winter: the flowers are somewhat large like the Eglantine of a delayed purplish violet colour, with divers yellow threads in the middle 2. Chamaerubus sive Hamirubus. The small or low Bramble. 
4. Rubus saxatilis Alpinus. The stony Bramble or Rocke Raspis. 
6. Chamaemorus Anglica. Our Knot berrie. 
7. Chamaemorus Cambro Britanica. The welsh Knot berry or Lancashiere Cloud berry. 
standing at the toppes of the branches, after which come the fruit very like unto Bramble berries but reddish as Raspis but not so well rellished: the roote spreadeth much about under ground. 
4. Rubus tricoccos. The Deaw berry or Winberry. The Deaw berry hath slender weake branches like the last more often lying downe then being raised up with fewer prickes and thornes thereon then in the last, the leaves likewise are usually but three set together, more se∣parate on the branches, yet almost as large as it and nearer set together on long footstalkes: the flowers are white and small, the berries usually consisting but of three small berries or graines set together in one, yet many times foure or five lesse sappie but not lesse sweete or blew then the other: the roote hereof creepeth under ground more then the last. 
5. Rubus saxmilis Alpinus. The stony Bramble or Rocke Raspis. This small low plant which by Clusius is more fitly referred to the Raspis then the Bramble hath divers slender reddish twiggy hairy branches little more then a foote high, without any thorne at all on them, set here and there with rough leaves upon footstalkes three alwayes joyned together and dented about the edges of a very harsh and binding taste: the flowers stand at the toppes of the branches three or foure together consisting of foure and some of five leaves a peece, of a pale or whitish Rose colour which afterwards turne into small fruit, compo∣sed of three foure or five graines or berries set together greater then eyther in the Raspis or Bramble of a reddish colour when they are ripe, almost transparent, full of a most pleasant sweete and acid juice gratefull to the palate, having in each of them a white rough kernell or stone: the roote creepeth all about and shooteth forth sundry branches from the joynts as they creepe. 
6. Chamaemorus Anglica. Our Knotberry. The Knotberry riseth up with slender brownish stalks not a foot high, set with foure or five large leaves one above another at severall winged joynts, each of them divided into five parts, and each of them somewhat deepely jagged and dented also round about the edges, rough and as it were crumpled each upon a long footstalke, which at the joynts have two small peeces like eares set thereat; each stalke being furnished at the top with one flower made of five round pointed leaves of a darke purple colour, after which followeth a large berry like unto a Mul∣berry of divers graines set together, of a reddish colour when it is ripe and of a sowrish sweet taste, the roote creepeth much and farre shooting forth small fibres at the knotty joynts whereby it is fastned in the ground and from thence divers new shoots for stalkes. 
7. Chamaemorus Cambro-Britanica sive Lancastrense Ʋaccinium nubis. The Welsh Knotberry or Lancashire Cloud berry. This small and low Bramble that scarse appeareth above the ground mosse among which and the blacke berried Heath, &amp;c. it groweth hath small creeping rootes running under ground, and shooting forth here and there faire large leaves almost round a little divided as it were into five parts, and a little unevenly dented about the edges, being somewhat rough and full of veines of a darke greene colour on the upper side and paler underneath, as al∣so some slender stalkes with two or three the like but lesser leaves on them, and at the toppe a purplish small Rose-like flower which changeth into a Raspis-like fruit, in some smaller in others greater consisting of sundry berries set together, sometimes more and sometimes lesser, of a pale reddish Orenge colour tasting reasonable well, although not so good as a Raspis. 
8. Chamaemorus Norwegica. The Knotberry of Norway. This Knotberry of Norway is very like unto our first Knotberry, having many slender brownish twigges ri∣sing not much above a foote high, whereon are set divers broad leaves upon long footstalkes more round then the and parted into three or more short divisions, each snipped or dented about the edges, and having 3. great ribs on the underside with divers small veines from them to the edges: from the toppes of the stalkes rise divers flow∣ers each upon a long footstalke composed of five white leaves for the most part, with divers white threads tipt with yellow in the middle: after which follow the fruite, of the bignesse of a Strawberry, some reddish and others more pale, of a soft pulpy substance somewhat clammy, yet not unpleasant with small kernells therein. 
9. Chamaemorus Norwegica altera. Another Norway berry. The likenesse of the leaves of this small bush unto the last which are very like unto those of the Riles or red Currant hath caused the name to be joyned thereunto, the stalkes are of a like shortnesse, of a blackish colour whose leaves are broad, and cut in somewhat more deepely into sundry parts, the berries stand at the toppes of the stalkes many clustering together as it were in a tuft every one upon a short stalke, red when they are ripe and somewhat tart in taste. 
The Place. The first is frequent every where: the second groweth sometimes by woods and hedge sides and sometimes in the middle of fields in many places in this Kingdome, the third groweth on the hills and higher grounds: the fourth is well knowne in the North parts of this land, as Cheshire, Lancashire, &amp; Yorkeshire: the fift in stony and roc∣ky places, both in the Ile of Thanet and other places of Kent, as also in Huntington and Northamptonshire; the sixt groweth on the high hills in Lancashire and Yorkeshire, the one called Ingleborough the other Pendle the two high∣est hills in England: the seventh was first made knowne unto us by Thomas Hasket a painefull Chirurgion and Sim∣plist of Lancashire, who gave us a rude draught thereof, but Doctor Lobel going both into Wales and the Shires neare thereunto found it there growing, and on Ingleborough hill in Lancashire, as M r . Bradshangh a Gentleman of the Country did likewise and sent it up to us, where the people call the fruit cloud berry, because the hill seemeth as it were continually covered with clouds: and the two last are declared by their titles to grow naturally in Norway. 
The Time. All these flower about Iuly and their berries are ripe in the end of August or beginning of September. 
The Names. The Bramble is called in Greeke Batus, the Latines call it Rubus and Sentis. Theophrastus hath three sorts Batus Rubus, Chamaebatos Humilis rubus, or Humirubus and Cynosbatos Rubus caninus or Canis rubus. Pliny hath three also but in a different manner: the two first sorts of Theophastus are generally knowne of all, but of the third there is some controversie, for Tragus maketh the Spina appendix or Oxyacanthus our white thorne or Haw∣t rne to bee Cynosbatos, and so doth Dodonaeus also. Cordus, Lacuna, Mercatus and others thinke the Rosa Camina or Sylvestris to bee it, Pliny as I thinke being the author of that opinion, l. 14. c. 13. where he saith there is another kinde of Rubus whereon a Rose groweth called Cynos batos by Dioscorides growing in hedges with other Brambles; againe Pliny lib. 16. cap. 37. saith thus, Rubi Mora ferunt &amp; in alioginere simitudinem Rosae qua vocatur Cynosbatos, but in lib. 15. cap. 2. hee describeth Cynobatos to have a leafe like unto a mans footestep, bearing a blacke fruit or Grape, in whose kernell there is a nerve or sinew whereof it was called Neurospactos; but Mat∣thiolus contradicteth them and sheweth that Pliny in setting downe the wilde Roses calleth one by a peculiar name Cynorhodos Rosa Canina and not Cynosbatos Camirubus, and the description of Dioscorides (saith he) shew∣eth he meant no sort of Rose for else it had beene easie for him to have said Cynosbbatos is like a wilde Rose, but he compareth the leaves to Myrtle leaves, and the fruit to be like Olive stones wherein lyeth downe hurtfull to the windpipe by sticking thereto if it should be drunke, but speaketh of no seeds or kernells to lye in that Downe but saith the fruit being dryed and drunke in wine doth bind the belly. Theophrastus lib. 3. cap. 18. saith Cynosba∣tos beareth a reddish fruit like unto a Pomegarnet, and a leafe not unlike to Aguus castus: Serapio speaketh of Cynosba∣tos Caninus Rubus among the other sorts of Brambles, whereby it is plaine as he saith that Cynorhodon, the wilde or dogge Rose doth much differ from Cynosbatos the dogge Bramble, and yet Lugdunensis in contrarying Mat∣thiolus his reasons striveth by finding fault with the text both of Dioscorides and Theophrastus and amending them as he thinketh fit, to reconcile them and make the Cynosbatos to be the wilde or Sweet Bryer but very unhand∣somly in my opinion. There is little variation of names among writers concerning the two first, but of the third and fourth I doe not finde that any hath written being bushes more peculiar to this Land then others: the fift Clusius calleth Rubus saxatilis sive petraeus sive Alpinus. Gesner in hortis calleth it Rubus Alpinus humilis, Thalius Rubus minimus and Bauhinus Chamaerubus saxatilis: the sixt and the two last are mentioned by Clusius by the names of Chamaemorus Anglica, Norwegica altera as they are in their titles: the seventh hath a name or title gi∣ven it as is fittest to expresse it, and to put all out of doubt concerning Gerards Cloud berry as hee hath expressed it from the rude draught of Master Hoskets doing as it is very likely, but the more exact figure is here exhibited. The Arabians call the Bramble Buleich and Haleicho, the Italians Rovo, the Spaniards, Carca (sarsa) the French Ronce, the Germans Brombeer Bremen and Bramen Braemen also, and wee in English Bramble or Blacke-berry bush; the fruit or berries are called in Greeke as Galen saith which some have made Vatina in Latine, Mo∣ra rubi, but in the Apothecaries shoppes Mora bati, and of some Mora bussi, the berries of the Mulberry tree being called by them Mora selsi. 
The Vertues. Galen lib. 6. simpl. med. saith that the buddes, leaves, flowers, fruit and roote of the Bramble are all of a great binding quality but yet somewhat in a differing manner, for the buddes, leaves and branches while they are fresh and greene have a cold earthly quality joyned with a warme watery substance, but little binding, and there∣fore they are then of good use in the Vlcers and putride sores of the mouth and throate, and for the Quinsie, and likewise to heale other fresh wounds and sores but the fruit when it is ripe because it is sweet hath a temperate warming juice therein, whereby and by that small astriction is in it it is not unpleasant to be eaten, but being not yet ripe it is of an exceeding cold and earthly substance, sower and very astringent, and being kept doe more strongly bind then when they are fresh: the flowers are of the same propertie that the unripe fruit is of, both of them are very profitable for the Blooddy flux, Laskes and the weakenesse of the parts comming thereby, and is also a fit remedy against the spitting of blood: the roote also beside the binding quality therein hath a thinne es∣sence whereby it is available, eyther the decoction or the powder taken to breake and drive forth gravell and the Stone in the Reynes and Kidneyes: the leaves of Brambles as well greene as dry are excellent good for lo∣tions, for the sores in the mouth and secret parts: the decoction of them and of the branches when they are dryed doe binde the belly much more, and is good for women when their courses come downe too abundantly: the berries saith Pliny or the flowers are a powerfull remedy against the most violent poyson of the Prester or Dipsas (which are most violent Serpents) the Scorpion and other venemous Serpents, as well drunke as outwardly ap∣plied, and helpeth also the sores of the fundament, and the painefull and bleeding Piles: the juice of the berries hereof mixed with that of Mulberries maketh the medicine more effectuall to bind and to helpe fretting or eating sores and Vlcers wheresoever, and is good for the stomacke, the sores in the mouth with the loosenesse of the gummes and teeth: the same being taken alone or mixed with some Hipocistis and Hony saith Pliny is a remedy for choller when it gnaweth the stomacke which some call hartburning, and is good also against the passions of the heart and faintings: the distilled water of the branches, leaves and flowers, or of the fruit is as sweete as that of Violets, and is very effectuall besides the facilitie and pleasantnesse in taking, in all hot fevers or distempera∣tures of heate in the body, the head, eyes, and other parts, and for all the purposes aforesaid: the leaves of Bram∣bles boyled in lye and the head washed therewith doth heale the itch, the mattering and running sores thereof, and maketh the haire blacke: the powder of the leaves strewed on cancrous and running Vlcers doth wonder∣derfully helpe to heale them. Some use to condensate the juice of the leaves and some the juice of the berries to keepe for their use all the yeare for the purposes aforesaid: the other sorts are very neare in qualitie unto it and therefore worke the same effects no doubt: but the Norway Knotberry is much commended against the Scor∣bute or Scurvey, and other crude putrid and melancholy diseases wherewith those Northerly people are much afflicted, which Clusius out of Hierus Epistle declareth at large, and the manner of the cure of a number infected therewith as well in Winter as in Sommer, whereunto I refer them that would understand it more fully. 
CHAP. XXVI. Rosae sylvestres. Wilde Roses or Bryer bushes. H Aving given you the knowledge of all or most of the manured Roses in my former Booke and with them some of the wilder kindes also as the Sweet bryer or Eglantine, the evergreene Rose which is very like thereunto, and the great Apple Rose which shall not be further related here, I am to shew you all the rest in this Chapter. 
Rosa Damas . The Damaske. 
1. Rosa sylvestris inodora sive Canina. The ordinary wilde Bryer bush.
The Ʋertues. Because I have spoken so much of the manured Roses in shewing their denominations, I thinke it not imper∣tinent also before I entreate of the qualities of the wild sorts, to set downe the properties and vertues of the Garden kinds somewhat more amply then I have delivered them in my former book. Both the white and the red Roses are cooling and drying, yet the white is taken to exceede the red in both those properties, but is seldome used inwardly in any medicine; the red as Galen saith hath a watery substance in it, and a warme joyned with two other qualities, that is, an astringent and a bitter: the flowers thereof (which wee call the seedes, but rather the yellow threads in the middle) doe binde more then the Rose it selfe and more drying also. Mesues sheweth that the Rose is cold in the first degree and dry in the second, compounded of divers parts or substances which yet may be separated, namely a watery meane substance and an earthly drying, an ayrie substance likewise sweet and aromaticall, and an hot also, whereof commeth the bitternesse, the rednesse, perfection and forme, and yet the force of the heate is stronger, which hath caused the forme and rednesse then that which causeth the bitter∣nesse, for being dryed that bitternesse vanisheth when the other two doe abide: the bitternesse therefore in the Roses when they are fresh, especially the juice purgeth choller and watery humours (which qualitie the Greeke authours it seemeth knew not) but being dryed and that heate that caused the bitternesse being consumed they then have a stopping and astringent power. Those also that are not full blowen doe both coole and binde more then those that are full blowne and the white Roses more then the red. The decoction of red Roses made with wine and used is very good for the head-ache and paines in the eyes eares throate and gums, the fundament also, the lower bowels and the matrix being bathed or put into them: the same decoction with the Roses remai∣ning in them is profitably applyed to the region of the heart to ease the inflammations therein, as also Saint An∣th cies fire and all other diseases of the stomacke: being dryed and beaten to powder and taken in steeled wine or water doe helpe to stay womens courses, they serve also for the eyes being mixed with such other medicines that serve for that purpose, and are sometimes put into those compositions that are called Anthera as is before said. The yellow threads in the middle of the red Roses especially (which as I said bee erroniously called the Rose seedes) being powdered and drunke in the distilled water of Quinses, stayeth the aboundance of womens courses, and doth wonderfully stay and helpe the defluxions of rheume upon the gummes and teeth, and preser∣veth them from corruption, and fastneth them being loose if they bee washed and gargled therewith, and some Vinegar of Squilles added thereto: the heads with seed being used in powder or in a decoction stayeth the Laske and the spitting of blood. Red Roses doe strengthen the heart, the Stomacke and Liver, and the retentive fa∣culties: they mitigate the paines that arise of heate, asswage inflammations procure sleepe and rest, stay wo∣mens courses both white and red and the Gonorrhea the running of the reines and the fluxes of the belly: the juice of them doth purge and clense the body from choller and flegme: the huskes of the Roses with the beards and the nailes of the Roses are binding and cooling and the distilled water of eyther of them is good for the heate and rednesse in the eyes, to stay and dry up the rheumes and watering of them. Of the red Roses are usually made many compositions all serving to sundry good uses which are these. Electuary of Roses, Conserve both moist and dry which is more usually called Sugar of Roses, Syrupe of dryed Roses and Hony of Roses: the cordiall powder called Diorrhodon Abbatis and Aromaticum rosarum: the distilled water of Roses, Vinegar of Roses, oint∣ment and oyle of Roses: and the Rose leaves dryed which although no composition, yet is of very great use and effect to be last of all spoken. To entreate of them all exactly I doe not entend for so a pretty volume of it selfe might be composed, I will therfore only give you a hint of every one of them, and referre the more ample declara∣tion of them to those that would entreat onely of them. The Electuary is purging, whereof two or three drams of it selfe taken in some convenient liquor, is a competent purgation for any of weake constitution, but may bee encreased unto six drammes, according to the qualitie and strength of the patient: this purgeth choller without any trouble, and is good in hot Fevers, in paines of the head arising from hot and chollericke humors and heare in the eyes, the Iaundies also and joynt aches proceeding from hot humors. The moyst conserve is of much use both binding and cordiall, for untill it be about two yeare old it is more binding then cordiall, but afterwards it is m re cordial then binding: some of the yonger conserve taken with Mithridatum mixed together is good for those that are troubled with the distillations of rheume from the braine into the nose, and defluxions of rheume into the eyes, as also for fluxes and Laskes of the belly, and being mixed with the same powder of Masticke is very good for the running of the reines, and for other loosenesse of humors in the body: The old conserve mixed with Diarrhodon Abbatis or Aromaticum rosarum is a very good cordiall against faintings, swownings and weakenesse and tremblings of the heart, it strengthneth also both them and a weake stomacke, helpeth digestion, stayeth casting, and is a very good preservative in the time of infection. The dry Conserve which is called Sugar of Roses is a very good Cordiall to strengthen the heart and spirits, as also to stay defluxions. The Syrupe of dryed red Roses strengthneth a relaxed stomacke given to casting, cooleth an overheated Liver and the blood in Agnes comforteth the heart and resisteth putrefaction and infection, and helpeth to stay Laskes and fluxes. Hony of Roses is much used in gargles and lotions to wash sores eyther in the mouth, throate, or other parts, both to clense and heale them, and stay the fluxes of humors falling upon them hindering their heating, it is used also in glisters both to coole and clense. The cordiall powders called Diarrhodon Abbatis and Aromaticum Rosarum doth comfort and strengthen the heart and stomacke, procureth an appetite, helpeth digestion, stayeth casting, and is very good for those that have slippery bowels to strengthen and confirme them, and to consume and dry up their moisture and slipperinesse. Red Rose water is well knowne and of familiar use in all occasions about the sicke and of better use then Damaske Rose water, being cooling and cordiall, refreshing and quickning the weake and faint spirits, eyther used in meates or brothes, to wash the temples or to smell unto at the nose, or else by the sweete vapours thereof out of a perfuming pot, or cast on a hot fireshovell, it is also of much use against the red∣nesse and inflammations in the eyes to bathe them therewith, and the temples of the head also against paine and ache therein: Vinegar of Roses is of much use also for the same purposes of paine and ache, and disquitnesse in the head, as also to procure rest and sleepe, if some thereof and Rosewater together be used to smell unto, or the nose and temples moistned therewith, but more usually to moisten a peece of a red Rose cake cut fit for the pur∣pose, and heated betweene a double foulded cloth with a little beaten Nutmeg and Poppy seede, strewed on that side shall lye next the forehead and temples, and so bound thereto for all night. The oyntment of Roses is much used against heate and inflammations in the head to annoint the forehead and temples and being mixed with some Populeon to procure rest, as also it is used for the heate of the Liver, of the backe and reines, and to coole and heale pushes wheales and other red pimples rising in the face or other parts. Oyle of Roses is not only used by it selfe, to coole any hot swellings or inflammations and to binde and stay fluxes of humors unto sores, but is put also into many other compositions both oyntments and plaisters that are cooling and binding, and restraining the flux of humors. The dryed leaves of the red Roses are used both inwardly and outwardly both cooling, binding, and cordiall for with them are made both Aromaticum rosarum Diarrhodon Abbatis and Saccharum rosarum, each of whose properties are before declared: Rose leaves and Mints heated and applyed outwardly to the stomacke stay∣eth castings and strengthneth a weake stomacke very much, and applied as an Epitheme or fomentations to the region of the Liver and Heart doth much coole and temper the distemperature in them, as also in stead of a Rose cake to the head and temples to quiet the overhot spirits, which will suffer no sleepe or rest to fasten on the sicke patient. Of the Damaske Roses are not made so many medicines or compositions, for beside the Conserve and Preserve, the Syrupe and Hony of those Roses (each whereof is called Solutive ) the water and the distilled oyle or spirit which serveth more for outward perfumes then inward Physicke, as the dryed leaves to fill sweete bagges and the like, I know not any other use made of them, and yet there is by many times much more of them spent and used then of red Roses, so much hath pleasure outstripped necessary use. The Syrupe of Damask Roses is both simple and compound and made with Agoricka: the simple solutive Syrupe is a familiar safe and gentle easie medicine, purging choller taken from one ounce or two unto three or foure, yet this is remarkable and wonder∣full herein, that the distilled water of this Syrupe should notably binde the belly: the Syrupe of Roses with Aga∣ricke is more strong and effectuall in working then the simple Syrupe, for one ounce thereof by it selfe will open the body more then of the other, and worketh as much on flegme as choller: the compound Syrupe is more forceable in working on melancholicke humors, and availeable against the Lepry, Itch, Tetters, &amp;c. and the French disease also. Hony of Roses solutive is made of the same infusion that the Syrupe is made of, and therefore worketh the same effect in opening and purging, but because the hony is neither so familiar to many or convenient to hot and aguish bodies, it is oftener given to flegmaticke then collericke persons, and is more used in Glisters then potions as the Syrupe made with Sugar is. The Conserve and Preserved leaves of these Roses are operative to the same effect in gently opening the belly. The simple water of the Damaske Roses is of so much use for fumes to sweeten all things as also to put into meats and broths, &amp;c. that it hath left almost no use for any Physicall purpose, yet it hath beene well observed by Costaeus in his commentary upon Mesues, that tenne ounces of Damaske Rose water drunke in the morning doth open and purge the belly, the dryed leaves of the Damaske Roses serve most to make sweete powders, and to fill sweet bagges or the like, yet the same Costaeus in the same place sheweth that the dryed leaves powdered and drunk in the whey of Goats milke worketh to the same effect in purging. The Muske Roses both single and double doe purge more forceable then the Damaske, and the single is be ' d to be stronger then the double, for although none of the Greeke writers have made any mention thereof, yet Mesues especially of the Arabians doth set it downe: twenty of the leaves of the single Rose must be taken saith Camerarius, but more of the double kinde to open the belly and purge the body. The wilde Roses are few or none of them used in Physicke, but yet are generally held to come neare unto the nature of the manured Roses both in the earthy and binding facultie, Pliny setteth downe in his eighth booke and fourth Chapter that the roote of the wilde Rose is singular good to cure the biting of a mad Dogge, which as he saith, (but how wee may be∣leeve him I know not) was found out by miracle: the fruit of the wilde Brier which are called Heppes being thorough ripe and made into a Conserve with Sugar according to the manner of divers other fruits, besides that it is very pleasant to the taste, doth gently binde the belly, and stayeth defluxions from the head upon the sto∣macke, and dryeth up the moisture thereof, and helpeth digestion: the pulpe of the Heppes dryed unto a hard consistence like to the juice of Licoris, or so dryed that it may bee made into powder and taken in drinke stayeth speedily the whites in women. With the fruit Cookes and their Ladies and Mistresses doe know how to prepare many fine dishes for their tables. The Brier ball is often used being made into powder and drunke to breake the Stone to provoke urine when it is stopped and to ease and helpe the collicke: some appoint it to bee burnt and then taken for the same purpose: in the middle of these balles are often found certaine white wormes, which being dryed and made into powder and some of it drunke, is found by long experience of many to kill and drive forth the Wormes of the belly. 
CHAP. XXVII. Capparis. Capers. T He Caper tree or bush that was knowne to Dioscorides and Theophrastus being but one sort was thorny, but there hath beene since some other sorts knowne, both that are and are not thorny, which for affinitie sake I thinke meete to joyne together, and with the Capers another plant, which for some likenesse beareth also the name of Capparis fabago or leguminosa, Beane Capers, not intending to joyne it to the pulses as some might thinke it should be. 
1. Capparis spinosa folio rotund . Round leafed thorny Capers. This Caper sendeth forth divers long weake trayling wooddy stalkes lying round about upon the ground, set with crooked thornes like hookes or as the Bramble, at each joynt come forth two round leaves like unto Asarum opposite one unto another, from whence springeth also a small round head upon a pretty long footstalke, which is the bud from the flower before it open (and is that small round Caper which wee doe usually eate at meate) which being then gathered and pickled up with great salt, are kept in barrells and brought into other countries, and are taken out of the salt afterwards and kept in Vinegar to be spent at the table as all know: but when it is open consisteth of foure white sweete smelling leaves, with foure other greene ones as the huske wherein they stand, having many yellowish threads and a long stile or pestle in the middle, which afterwards groweth to bee the fruit, and is long and round like unto an Olive or Acorne when it is ripe (which also are brought pickled to us, and are the long Capers which are used) wherein are conteined divers hard browne seede somewhat like unto the kernells of Grapes: the roote is great, white, long and somewhat wooddy covered with a thicke barke run∣ning and spreading much in the ground, so that it will quickely spread a whole field in the warme countries and make it barren, and is somewhat sharpe and bitter: the stalkes perish in Winter every yeare, and arise againe afresh in the Spring. 
2. Capparis spinosa folio acuto. Thorny Capers with pointed leaves. This other Caper differeth from the former neither in the thorny growing nor in the flowring, nor in any other thing then in the leaves, which with the roundnesse are pointed at the ends, and this is sufficient to know it by. 
3. Capparis non spinosa fructu majore. Egyptian Capers without thornes. The Egyptian Caper differeth not much in the manner of growing from the former, but that the stalkes grow 1. 2. Capparis spinosa folio rotundo &amp; acuto. Thorny Capers with round and pointed leaves. 
5. Capparis fabago sine leguminosa. Beans Capers. 
greater and more upright without any thornes on them, the leaves are round and stand two at a joyne like the former, the buds are greater and so are the white flowers in like manner, and the fruit greater then any of the former: this looseth not the leaves in Winter as the others doe, and herein consist the chiefe differences. 
4. Capparis Arabica non spinosa. Great Capers of Arabia. The Arabian Caper is a small shrubbe growing up with many upright stemmes without thornes, the leaves, flowers and fruit are greater and larger then the last Egyptian kinde, the fruit being of the bignesse of an Egge or Wallnut with divers seeds therein, of a sharpe and biting taste as Dioscorides hath noted, and others since his time of our later writers. 
5. Capparis fabago sive leguminosa. Beane Capers. The Beane Caper riseth up with divers greene herby and not wooddy stalkes like the other, branching forth from the very bottome, at the severall joynts whereof grow two leaves opposite one unto another which are alwayes two together at the end of the footestalke, being somewhat like unto Purslane leaves but in the posture and colour resembling the leaves of Beanes: the flowers come forth singly one at a joynt with the leaves, which before they are blowne open are very like unto Caper blossomes, being white standing in a greene huske and with many yellow threads in the middle, after which the fruit followeth somwhat long and round, and opening into severall parts, wherein is contained small brownish seede: the roote is long and woddy shooting forth long strings and branches under ground many wayes. 
The Place. The two first sorts grow naturally in the stony places of Italy, Spaine and some parts of France, as also in most of the hot countries Eastward, yet that with pointed leaves not so frequent as the other. Theophrastus saith that it will abide no culture, yet Pliny sheweth that in his time they used to plant it in Italy upon ridges cast up, and the deepe trenches filled up with stones to keepe in the roots from overspreading the field or ground where they were planted, or else that the stones would make them fructifie the better, the third Bellonius saith groweth in Egypt in a loose sandy field not far from the Lake Marcotis which is about halfe a mile from Alexandria; the fourth he also found as he saith in the clefts of the rockes on mount Taurus in Arabia. 
The Place. The two first sorts as I said before shoot forth their stalkes and leaves in the Spring, and their flowers shortly after, when as their fruit is not ripe untill the end of September: the other two keepe the same times of flowring and fructifying, but keeping their old leaves on and shooting fresh every Sping: the last flowreth and seedeth in the end of Sommer. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and Capparis also in Latine, Gaza Theophrastus his interpreter calleth it Inturis, Pliny semeth to thinke it was the Cynosbatos of Dioscorides, because among the bastard Greeke names in Dio∣scorides, Cynosbatos is one which hee saith was given to the Caper in his time. The first is mentioned by most writers, but the second but by a few, Alpinus in his booke of Egyptian plants, and Bellonius in his second booke of Observations and Chap. 21. maketh mention of the third by the name of Capparis non spinosa and arborescons: the fourth is also remembred by Bellonius in the said second booke and 66. Chapter, and by Rauwulfius in his Itinerarie: the last is called by all moderne writers Capparis Leguminosa, or Capparis Fabago, by Lugdunensis Fa∣bago Belgarum, by the Syrians as Rauwolfius saith Morgsani, and taketh it to be the Andirian of Rhasis and the Al∣difrigi of Avicen: Columna thinketh it most properly to agree unto the Telephium of Dioscorides: Bauhinus calleth it Capparis Portulaca folio, and saith it was called Peplus at Paris, and therefore Lugdunensis calleth it Peplus Pari∣siensium; all nations call Capers according to the Greeke and Latine, varying but the accent according to their dialect. 
The Ʋertues. The Capers, such as come over to us pickled up in salt doe nourish nothing, yet doe a little move the belly, but being washed from the Salt and steeped in Vinegar and so eaten do stirre up the appetite dejected or decayed and doe a little clense the bowells of flegme sticking to them and avoyd it, as also doe helpe to open the obstructions of the Spleene and Liver: Galen sheweth in septimo simpl. med. that the Barke of the roote of Capers consisteth of various qualities, namely first extreme bitter, next sharpe, then sower, by the bitternesse it clenseth, purgeth and cutteth, by the sharpenesse it heateth, cutteth, and digesteth, and by the sowernesse it contracteth▪ thickneth and bindeth, and thereupon saith it is a medicine above all other availeable for the hardnesse of the Spleene, whether it be applied outwardly of it selfe, or mixed with other things to annoint the place, or the rootes boy∣led in Vinegar or Oxymell and taken inwardly, or the powder of the roote mixed with the said decoction and taken, for it is certaine that it avoydeth grosse and viscous humors, not only by the urine but by the belly also, and oftentimes it bringeth away with it congealed and corrupted blood, and thereby giveth much ease to those that are troubled with Gouts or Palsies, with the Spleene or paines in the Hippes or Sciatica, weakenesse in the Nerves and Sinewes, and for women that have their courses stopped to procure them: it draweth from the head and other parts those offensive humors that are the originall cause of Ruptures, Convulsions and Crampes, and thereby give them much ease: the barke of the root of Capers is an especiall remedy to helpe fowle Vlcers, be∣ing made into a Pultis and applied, for it clenseth and mightily dryeth them, and is also good for hard swel∣lings and kernells under the eares and the Kings Evill: the fruit is also effectuall for the said purposes, and so are both leaves and stalkes, but all of them weaker then the roots; the seede bruised and heated in a little Vinegar and held betweene the teeth easeth the tooth-ach: the same rootes also boyled in oyle and dropped into the eares easeth the paines and killeth wormes breeding in them: the leaves and flowers, but especially the barke of the roote steeped or boyled in Vinegar clenseth the skinne of all morphew, freckles, spots or any other discoulouring of the skinne whatsoever: the oyle that is made of Capers is of very good use against the paines of the sides and Spleene. The Arabian sort is much more sharpe and almost exulcerating, and therefore as Pliny well saith, it is not fit to use so violent a stranger, better it is to use our owne Europian kindes. The Beane Caper is used by the Syri∣ans as Rauwolfius saith to kill the wormes in children and to drive them forth. 
CHAP. XXVIII. Oyacantha Dioscoridis quibusdam, id est, Spina acuta seu potius Spina appendix Plinij. The white Thorne or Hawthorne. T He Hawthorne hath not beene knowne formerly to be of any more sorts then one, but wee have in our time had the knowledge of two other which shall be presently shewed you. 
1. Spina appendix vulgaris. The ordinary Hawthorne. The common Hawthorne groweth up in some places to be a tree of a reasonable height if convenient dressing, pruning and keeping helpe it forward, otherwise it groweth to be but a shrubbe or hedge bush with divers shoots armes and branches, whereon are set in divers places sharpe thornes and faire shining leaves, some∣what broad, and cut in on the edges into divers parts: the 1. Spina appendix vulgaris. The ordinary Hawthorne tree. 
flowers are many standing together, comming forth both at the tops of the branches and upper joynts with the leaves, consisting of five white leaves a peece, with divers white threads in the middle, tipt with red, and of a very plea∣sant sweete sent, after which come berries somewhat long, with the roundnesse of a lively red colour when they are fully ripe and somewhat sweete in taste, contei∣ning within them divers white seedes lying in a flocky or downie substance which make it harsh in tasting, and if it should bee eaten it would sticke to the throate and hurt the winde pipe: the roote groweth farre and deepe. 
2. Spina acuta humilior. The low Hawthorne. The low Hawthorne never groweth so high or great as the former, the leaves are smaller but longer divided on the edges in the same manner: the flowers also are white and sweete and grow in tufts or clusters, but the fruit that followeth is yellow tending to a Saftron colour, in other things it differeth not from the other. 
3. Spina acuta biflora Britanica. Englands Hawthorne. We have another sort of Hawthorne growing in divers places of our Land well knowne to those that dwell about the places where they grow, yet not greatly regarded or wondered at by them nor yet by many of those that have seene them growing: but I doe not thinke fit that it should be so slightly passed over or so smally respected, for I sup∣pose it a strange worke of nature, or of the God of nature ather, to cause such a tree being in all parts thereof like unto the common Hawthorne, to blossome twice every yeare, the one time usually in May as all others of the kind doe, the other about Christmas, eyther somewhat before or somewhat after, according to the temperature of the Winter at that time, for if the Winter before bee wilde without either great frosts or other hard weather, it will be in blossome white all over as in May, sometimes in November, or else in December, but if it bee hard and sharpe weather it will not blossome untill Ianuary that the hard weather be over: it beareth also after these flow∣ers are past greene berries, even in the Winter before any greene leaves doe appeare or blossomes in May, so that it will have both ripe fruit and greene at one and the same time upon the tree: there hath not beene observed any other difference betweene this kind and the ordinary Hawthorne Some might thinke as it hath beene di∣sputed among divers that this happeneth, by reason of some hot springes that take their course by the rootes of this tree, which reason I grant hath some appearance of likelihood, but wisely sc nned and considered, is too light I thinke to hold weight, for how should one tree only blossome in a place, and none of all the other trees in the same tract or compasse of the same springes running; and besides this there are of these trees in divers places of the Land, as in Rumney Marsh in Whey street, as it is vulgarly called, but should bee rather High street, where standeth in a moorish ground though upon a banke beaten with cold and Northerly blasts, and exposed to the furious winds on all sides, having no shelter or defence, but standing in a flat and open soyle, where I thinke no hot spring eyther doth or is likely to breake forth or runne neare it: let the wise and judicious sean it throughly, if this come to passe by the nature of the soyle and springs, or the naturall kinde of the tree. 
The Place. The first groweth every where in the hedges and borders of fields and woods: the second in Germany: the t Glastenbury Abbey, and as is before said in High street or Whey street in Rumney Marsh, and neare unto wicke also in Cheshire by a place called white greene, which tooke the name as it was thought from the bushes of thornes which there they call greenes. 
The Time. The time of these to flower is specified to be ordinarily in May and extraordinarily about Christmas, sometimes a little before and sometimes a little after: the fruit is ripe on the ordinary trees in September, and doe hang on them all the Winter as meate for birds, or untill the frosts doe make them fall.
The Names. Very many (as Matthiolus, Lacuna, Turner, Bellonius, Lobel, Dodoneus, Camerarius, Casalpinus, Rauwolfius, Th ∣lius, Tabermontanus and some other) doe take this Thorne to be Oxyacantha of Dioscorides which hee describeth to be like the Peare-tree but lesser, and very thorny, bearing a berry like unto those of the Myrtle, but red, full and easie to breake, having a stone or Kernell within it, some also thinke that it is of Dioscorides, others take it to be the Oxyacanthus of Galen, which he likewise saith is like unto the wilde Peare-tree in forme, and not unlike it in qualitie, so that the ones masculine the others faeminine are but one bush or tree, by the judgement of many the best Herbarists although some take them to bee divers, as Camerarius who doth make the Barbery bush to be the Oxyacanthos of Galen, and not the Oxyacantha of Dioscorides, and so doe also Cordus upon Dioscorides and Taber ntanus, Hermolaus and Ruellius likewise doe take the Barbery to be Oxyacan∣tha, and so doe Fuchsius, Tragus, Cornarius, and some other whom Matthiolus justly gainesayeth, for there is no likenesse in the Barbery excepting the thornes (and yet in them there is a difference) unto Oxyacantha, being nei∣ther in forme of body like the wilde Peare, not in the fruit like unto a Myrtle, dry and fryable easie to breake, the Barbery being moyst and full of juice, Tragus saith that some tooke the Hawthorne to bee▪ Arbu . But Theo∣phrastus his Oxyacantha is neither Barbery nor Hawthorne, which in his first booke and 15. Chapter hee among those trees that are ever greene, which cannot be said of eyther Barbery or Hawthorne, for that in no place or countrey they are knowne to keepe their leaves, but to loose them in Winter, but by the judgement of the best and most expert Herbarists in our times, the Pyracantha as I have declared in my former booke is the Oxya∣cantha both of Dioscorides although hee hath not mentioned any sempiternitie of leaves, and Theophrastus also agreeing thereto in all things: Some there be also that would make the Spina appendix Plinij to bee the Barbery bush as Lugdunensis, but Clusius is against that opinion for that therein there are these two doubts, first that Pli∣ny if hee had meant the Barbery by his Spina appendix would not have forgotten the three thornes that grow to∣gether in the Barbery which is eminent enough therein: and next hee would not have forgotten the yellow co∣lour, both in the barke of the branches and rootes: but the most judicious of these later times, among whom is Gesner in hortis and Clusius in historia have determined that Spina Appendix Plinij, which sometimes also he calleth Spina simply, can be no other thorne then this Hawthorne, which Tragus and Lonicerus tooke to bee Cynosbat s Theophrasti, and Cordus in historia calleth it Sorbus aculeata, Anguilara Spina alba vulgo, and Spina acuta as Do∣doneus doth also. Bauhinus placeth it among the Medlars calling it Mespilus apij folio sylvestris spinosa sive Oxya∣cantha, and as a kinde thereof likewise putteth the Pyracantha, but in my opinion he had done better and more rightly, to have referred them both to the kinds of Services whereunto they better agree then unto Medlars, in that Services are smaller fruits as these are: the second here expressed is mentioned by Dodonaeus under the name of Spina acuta humilior: the last as a kind peculiar to our owne countrey as I thinke, I have here set forth unto you more exactly then Gerard, who onely had a superficiall notion or rather relation thereof. The Hawthorne is called by the Arabians Antirberis, by the Italians in some places Bugaio, and in others Amperlo, and Pana rs , by the Spaniards Pirlitero, by the French A ' ubespin (Ruellius saith that the vulgar sort doe call it Senelle, yet Quercetanus setteth a fruit downe in some of his receipts by the name of fructus Senellorum in his Pharmac p are∣stituta to be Paliurus unlesse hee thought the Paliurus to be the Hawthorne:) by the Germans Hagendoru, by the Dutch Hagendoren and by us in English Hawthorne, or Hedgethorne, Whitethorne and May or May -bush, because our ordinary sort seldome or never flowreth before May and never after. 
The Vertues. The berries or the seedes in the berries are generally held to be a singular good remedy against the stone, if the powder of them be given to drinke in wine: the same is also reported to bee good for the Dropsie: but whereas divers have attributed hereunto a binding or astringent qualitie Anguilara his judgement was (whom Matthiolus confuteth) that Tragus who saith that the leaves, flowers &amp; fruit are drying and binding, and that if the flowers be steeped three dayes in wine, and afterwards distilled in glasse, the water thereof drunke is a soveraigne reme∣dy for the Plurisie, and for inward tormenting paines: the distilled water of the flowers by an ordinary way stay∣eth, saith he, the Flux or Laske of the belly: the seeds cleared from the downe bruised and boyled in wine and drunke performeth also the same effect: the said distilled water of the flowers is not onely cooling but drawing also: for it is found by good experience that if clothes or spunges be wet in the sayd water and applyed to any place whereinto thornes, splinters, &amp;c. have entered and bee there abiding it will notably draw them forth: the vertues given by Galen unto Oxyacantha doe not pertaine hereunto, for saith he the fruit thereof is not sower or harsh, especially when it is ripe, but sweet and therefore more fit to open then to binde the belly, and fitter to bring downe then to stay womens monethly courses: but the last evinceth this errour. 
CHAP. XXIX. Sabina. The Savine tree or bush. O Ne sort of Savine I have expressed and set forth in my former Booke, the figure whereof I here shew you againe, the other sorts shall be exhibited in this Chapter. 
1. Sabina baccifera major. The greater berried Savine tree. The greater Savine tree that groweth with us spreadeth not so much as the former Savine doth, but riseth more upright to a mans height (but Bellonius saith in lib de coniferis that he saw it as high as an Almond tree on the mountaines Amanus and Olympus in Phrygia ) spreading forth armes and branches fully furnished with leaves, which at their first comming forth are somewhat like unto Tamariske leaves, but being growen old they are more like unto the leaves of the Cypresse tree, hard and pricking, and of a darke greene co∣lour with an eye of blew shadowing them of a sent lesse strong and nothing so sharpe as the ordinary: it hath not beene observed to beare any flowers but small round berries like unto Iuniper berries, but greater and of a sharpe taste, blacke when they are ripe with an eye of blew upon them like the Iuniper or the ordinary Savina, which divers have held to be barren, taking their authority from Pliny, who also saith that Rosemary beareth no seede Sabina vulgaris. The ordinary Savine Tree. 
1. Sabina baccifera major The greater berried Savine Tree. 
2. Sabina baccata altera. Gentle Savine with berries. 
both which are found untrue by good experience, as Fuchsius, Cor∣ , Gesner, Dodonaeus and Lugdunensis doe testifie, yet Camerarius saith it is true in one kind that it beareth no fruit, but not in the other, but Lobel saith the ordinary doth beare berries although but in a few places and but seldome, and both of them holding their fruit on the branches all the Winter, untill greene ones grow them, and never loosing their leaves. 
2. Sabina baccata altera. Gentle Savine with berries. This other Savine groweth somewhat higher then the last as it groweth in Europe, and almost unto the height of the Phenician or Cypresse like Cedar, spreading more slender and weake bran∣ches whereon are set small and long leaves, of a more gentle then the rest: on the branches among the leaves come forth such like berries as the other, and very like unto Iuniper, blacke also when they are ripe, and but little bitter in taste, not altogether unpleasant. 
The Place. The first groweth in Candy, Misia, and other those East coun∣tries▪ the second on the mountaine Taurus, Amanus and Olympus: the other upon the mountaines in Apulia and Calabria of Naples, as also on the plaines of the Alpes neare unto Gratianople. 
The Time. They abide ever greene, and shew their ripe berries not untill Winter. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and , Bratbus, Brathy and Barath on, in Latine Sabina and Savina and of some Savi∣na; why Pliny should call Sabina and herb all doe much won∣ ▪ for all knew and himselfe could not bee ignorant that both hereof mentioned by him were trees or shrubbes and not ▪ Dodonaus seemeth to allude unto the Greeke name, here he saith that Pliny in his 12, Booke and 19. Chapter men∣tioneth nta arbor, and thinketh as divers others did, that Bruta taken from Brathu by the transposition of a letter, and is Pliny Savin ra, which he saith was called Cupr ssus Cretica: but Lugdunensis denieth that Bruta arbor Plinij can be Thuya prima Massiliensiū, the Oxycedrus or Cedrus Lycia of Bel∣lonius, or Cedrus Phaenicea altera of Pliny and Theophrastus according to Lobel, and the Sabina major M p li∣ensium, which shall be shewed in the thirtieth Chapter. Tragus reporteth the wonderfull superstitions used in and before his time in his countrey, about the branches of the Savine tree on Palme Sunday, to be conjured or hol∣lowed as they say by the Priests, and then powerfull to drive away divells, and to keepe those houses that have it in them safe from lightning, and that those leaves that touched the Crosse or came nearest thereunto while the Priest was in hallowing it, should preserve them that shall weare them (more then the rest of the same branch that did not touch the Crosse) from charmes or witchcraft, and from the snares of the divell, and from the dan∣gers of the edges and points of swords and weapons, thus to draw their mindes from trusting in God to trust unto these conjured superstitious devises of men. Matthiolus much blameth Bellonius that libr de c f ris arbo∣ribus placed the great Iuniper tree, which he found on the mountaines Taurus, A anu and Oly among the resiniferous trees, but I would faine know if the Vernix or Gum Iuniperi, be not to be accounted a as well as Mastiche which is so accounted of all: but he is much more to be blamed as he saith also, the making the said Iu∣niper tree to be the Bruta arbor Plinij. The first is Sabina baccifera of Matthiolus, Ca and others Sabina altera by Dodonaeus, Sabina Cupresso similis by Cordus upon Dioscorides and Lugdunensis, the other Sabina altera baccata by Lobel and Lugdunensis, Sabinae alterius alterajcon by Dodonaeus, and Sabina f by Ta∣bermontanus. The Arabians call it Abbel but not Alharur, the Italians and Spaniards▪ Sabina, , the Germanes Sevembaum and Sibenbaum, the Dutch Savelboom, and we in English The Savine tree. 
The Vertues. Savine saith Galen is hot and dry in the third degree, and of very thin parts, by the strong drying and heating qualities it suffereth no consolidating or glewing propertie to be in it, but by reason of the great at imony therein it digesteth the more, and hath lesse bitternes then is in the Cypresse: it resisteth putrefactions as powerfully as the Cypresse, especially if they be of long continuance, and not easie to be holpen, for mixed with some Hony and ap∣plied, it clenseth the filth of Vlcers, and taketh away their blacknesse. It breaketh also or dissolveth Carbuncles and Plague sores: Matthiolus saith that a dram in powder mixed with three ounces of Niter and two ounces of Hony doth wonderfully helpe those that are short winded: the decoction thereof drunke doth provoke the cour∣ses, and draweth forth the birth and secondine, and destroyeth the living: the same outwardly applyed, or the fumes thereof taken underneath worketh to the same effect: the said decoction taken expelleth blood by Vrine, &amp; is profitable for the Kings Evill: it killeth the wormes in children, but it is safer to use it outwardly and to apply it to the Navell, or to annoint the belly with the oyle of Savine. The powder of the leaves of Savine mixed with Creame, or the greene leaves boyled in Creame and annointed on the heads of children, which have scabbes or running sores or dry sores, clenseth them throughly and healeth them, as also Saint Anthonies fire: the fresh leaves bruised and layd upon running and fretting Cankers and the like, killeth and destroyeth them: the powder of the leaves used with some other things, or strewed upon doth helpe those blisters that rise on the yard by inor∣dinate luxury, after they have beene bathed with the decoction of the leaves. The distilled water thereof is sin∣gular good to clense the skinne from spots or markes therein, and other deformities, and helpeth those that have a giddinesse in their braine: the smoake thereof burned cureth Hens that have gotten the pippe, and is effectuall for the Bottes in Horses or cattell to give it in their drinke: but it must bee warily given for feare of danger. 
CHAP. XXX. Iuniperus. The Iuniper Tree. T Here are two or three sorts of Iuniper Trees some greater others lesser, whereof I meane to entreat in this Chapter and shew you their varieties. 
1. Iuniperus vulgaris seu minor. The common Iuniper Tree. The common Iuniper Tree (in some places groweth nothing so high as they doe in others, even in our owne Land as well as in Germany, but of an exceeding great length in Italy and Spaine as Matthiolus and Clusius say, so that they doe there make Rafters and Beames for houses thereof) riseth up with a stemme or stocke covered with a reddish barke which often cleaveth and falleth away, the wood underneath being somewhat yellow hard and very durable (for as Pliny saith that Dianaes temple at Ephesus had the Beames and Rafters thereof for the more durabilitie and very sweet when it is burned, the coales that are made of the wood being burned and covered with its owne ashes, keepe fire in them a whole yeare as it is reported) from whence spread divers branches set with very small and long narrow blewish greene leaves, three for the most part alwayes together which are almost like unto thornes, but not so hard or pricking: the blooming is to be be perceived like a little yellow dust falling round about in the Spring of the yeare, after which come small greene berries, not ripening fully untill the second yeare after their first comming forth, which then will be blacke with an eye of blew thereon easely wiped away with touching, as it is in a ripe Damson, (some sort is round and of the bignesse of a Pepper corne, others as great as Sloes, and some a little long withall) so that there will bee alwayes upon the bearing trees both greene and ripe berries, wherein are contained small hard seede: the root is somewhat reddish and spreadeth many branches: this doth alwayes abide greene, and in the hotter countries of France, Spaine, Italy, &amp;c. doth yeeld a certaine hard and dry gumme in small peeces, somewhat like unto Ma∣sticke and whitish while it is fresh and growing yellowish by age, not cleaving together like Masticke when it is chewed but going to powder, Sterilie. and is of much use as you shall heare by and by. There is another sort of that Iuniper growing in sundry parts of this kingdome which bringeth onely yellowish threads for flowers, with∣out any berries succeeding. 
2. Iuniperus Alpina. The low or mountaine Iuniper. This low Iuniper seldome riseth to be two foote high, but groweth low spreading neare the ground, having short and thicke armes and branches as the former, which yet are plyane and easie to bend but not to breake: on these branches grow the like three leaves together, but they are shorter broader thicker and not so much prick∣ing 1. Iuniperus vulgaris seu minor. The common Iuniper tree. 
3. Iuniperus maxima Illyrica. The great Sclavonian Iuniper. 
or sharpe as they, and of the same blewish greene colour underneath but greene above: the fruit or berries re altogether like the other but a little longer, of a sweet sent and sweetish taste at the first but bitter afterwards and unpleasant like the other. 
3. Iuniperus maxima Illyrica. The great Sclavonian Iuniper. This great Iuniper Tree riseth to the height of a great tree, whose leaves are greater and harder more like unto es then the other: the berries likewise are much larger, of the bignesse of an Hasle nut in some places and as Olive in others somewhat long with the roundnesse, and more blew when it is ripe then the other which is wiped away, but abideth firmely thereon. 
4. Iuniperus major Americana. West Indian Cedar or Iuniper. This tree which they of our English colonies in the Bermuda and Virginia, &amp;c. call Cedar groweth very great and high (for I have seene boards of above twentie foote long, and halfe a yard broad brought from the Sommer i ds) fairely spread with branches, and small short leaves like those of the greater Iuniper growing thereon: the ies are small and blewish not much bigger then our ordinary Iuniper berries: the wood is more red and of a ger sent both burnt and unburnt then our ordinary Iuniper. 
The Place. The first groweth especially in Woods in Kent and sundry other places in the Land: the second groweth on the kes and stony places of the Alpes as Clusius saith: the third groweth on mount Taurus in Syria as Bellonius , and neare the Sea shore of the Venetian Gulph and Illyrium as Anguilara saith, and as some say also in ence of France: the last as is said in the West Indies in sundry places.
this manner. It spreadeth divers crooked greene stalkes, variously branched, and the branches foulded one within another, thicke set with small short, and somewhat sharpe, pale greene leaves, three or foure set together, thicke and closing the stalke at the bottome, forming as it were a great joynt, resembling the fruite of the Caltrope, in some plants and places the leaves will be twise as long, but in gar∣dens are never so sharpe or prickly, as in the naturall places; at the joynts upwards stand severall small yellowish greene flowers, which afterwards turne into small flat seedes, with∣in a three square prickly huske: the roote is small and long, perishing every yeare utterly, so that if it sow not it selfe, as in the naturall places it doth, it must be new sowne every yeare: the whole plant is almost without any taste, either of heate, or cold, or drying, yet more enclining to heate than cold, as many sea plants doe. 
The Place. This plant groweth neere the Sea side, not onely in other hot Countries where by the heate of the climate, the bran∣ches are harder, and the leaves more sharpe and pricking, but on our owne coasts also in divers places, although nothing so sharpe yet somewhat prickly. 
The Time. It flowreth not usually untill the middle of Iuly, and the seede is ripe in the end of August. 
The Names. Tragus is dictio, a word of many significations, for this is neither the Tragus of Dioscorides, which he saith some also called Scorpius, nor yet of Pliny which hee maketh the Scorpius of Theophrastus, nor yet the Tragos Cere∣alis, whereof you shall heare further in his place, nor yet the Tragum or Targum vulgare of Clusius, which is our Dit∣tander: but a prickly sea plant adjudged by Lobel and others, to be a kinde of Kali, and call it Kali spinosum, which Mat∣thiolus h s set forth for the right Tragus or Scorpius of Dioscorides, but confoundeth it with the Scorpius (or Nepo as stateth it) of Theophrastus: and therefore all others since his time call it Tragus, or Tragum Matthioli, and Lobel Tragus in Probus Matthiola. Auguilara calleth it Drypis and saith Tragon non est: Lobel hath set forth th figure hereof with longer leaves, and Camerarius also saith it did grow with him, then Matthiolus or Lug∣duneusis set forh this, yet Lugdunensis in his Booke of Sea plants giveth a figure differing from the former, viz. with leaves in rowels like Gallinor or Rubia: but the true Tragus of Dioscorides I have shewed you be∣ by the name of Polygonu baceiferu minus or Vna marina minor, which by the judgement of most the exercised herbarisme doth best agree with Dioscorides text in all points. Bauhinus in this as he doth in many other places teth two titles hereunto as if they were two plants, calling it Kali spinosum cochlantum and Kasi spinoso affinis, and appropriateth authors unto each, when as himselfe acknowledgeth they doe amisse that make them to bee but one, howsoever the figures doe vary. I have called it in English the Sea prickly plant untill a fitter can bee given. 
The Vertues. I cannot finde or learne of any property physicall whereunto this plant is serviceable, (onely Camerarius saith it is used as young Asparagus for a llet herbe to be eaten) but serveth to contemplate the Creator in his crea∣tures as many other the herbs and plants that grow out of the ground, whereof although we know no use in many or not halfe the use in most, yet he hath not made the least in vaine, and if we would be as industrious to search out their faculties as our forefathers have beene in their times we should know much more then we doe; and surely if we did not enjoy their labours, in what a world of darkenesse and ignorance should we abide? Let therefore the old adage worke effectually in all Non nobis natisumus and let every one endeavour to augment the talent that hath beene lent him, not for his owne particular onely, but for the benefit of others, so shall the savour of such a s eet oyntment spread farre, whereof others receiving the sent as well farre of as neare at hand, perpetuall odour of praise will rise from them and glory will crowne them from whom it commeth. 
FILICES ET HERBAE CAPILLARES. FERNES AND CAPILLARIE HERBES. CLASSIS DECIMA. THE TENTH TRIBE. CHAP. I. 1. Filix mas vulgaris. The common Male Ferne. O F the Male Ferne there is some diversitie as shall be shewed. The Male Ferne sendeth forth divers hard rough unbranched stalkes of winged leaves, naked or bare at the lower end, consisting of many leaves up to the toppes with one at the end, set on both sides thereof, not fully opposite but as it were in the middle betweene two on the contrary side, each leafe not fully devided but deepely nicked in on the edges, all of them of a pale greene colour, hard and dry or without sappe, broadest at the bottome and smal∣ler toward the toppe, on the backe 1. Filix mas vulgaris. The common male Ferne. 
side of whom there are certaine brow∣nish small spots which are the seeds, for by the falling of them young ones are encreased: this and all other sorts of Fernes and Capillarie herbes in this Classis mentioned, have no flowers nor other seeds then such spots, or scales whereby they as I said are en∣creased, although many have denyed that any of them have eyther flowers or seede, and some have beene reclaimed upon my instance of the place in Genesis 1.11.12. and so have declared it: the roote hereof is made of many thicke blacke threads descending from a browne scaly thicke head. 
2. Filix mas aculeata. The prickly Male Ferne. This other Ferne differeth not from the former, but onely that the winged leaves are not dented in, but whole, having a small pricke at the end of each of them and growing not so high. 
The Place. The first groweth as well on Heathes and open places of hills, as in shadowy places by the sides of fields, reasonable fre∣quent in all countries, but the second groweth. very few yet in the like places also. 
The Time. These seldome hold their stalkes with leaves greene in the Winter: but shoote out new from the roote in the Spring which at their first rising are brownish and foulded in round: The time when those heads on the backe of them are ripe and doe fall is Midsomer, and falling on the ground doe spring, for whereby else should it be encreased, seeing God in the be∣ginning appointed every herbe and tree to have the seede of their kind (and not of another) within them. 
The Names. It is in Greeke simply and , ptoris and pt rion; tause the leaves are like unto the wings of , Nicander in Theriacis calleth it and , in Latine Filix mas of most authors, yet Anguilara, Ges∣ rin hortis and Caesalpinus call it foemina, not onely contrary to all other in our times, but quite contrary also to Theophrastus his true distinction, which he sheweth is betweene the male and female, in his th booke and twen∣tieth Chapter in these words, differt foemina filix a mascula, quod folium unico artu porrectum haec habeat, &amp;c. the is remembred by Thalius and is his third fort of the male kind, for his second species is but a small difference the first; and Bauhinus in his Prodromus as I take it calleth it by the name of Filix mas aculeata minor, and may be also his major, for he describeth it with little difference. The male Ferne is called by the Arabians, Sa∣ by the Italians Felconaschio, by the Spaniards Nelotheyerva, by the French Fougere and Feuchiere masle, by the Germanes Wald arra, by the Dutch Varen manneken. 
The Vertues. I finde that all authors have appropriated the same vertues to the male Ferne that they have to the female, and therefore to avoyd a ca ologie or rehearsall of the same things againe; I will referre you to the next Chapter for . Of the ashes of Ferne is made a kinde of thicke or darke coloured greene glasse in sundry places in France, a in the Dutchy of Maine, &amp;c. (and in England also as I have beene told by some) out of which they drinke their wine. The seede which this and the female Ferne doe beare, and to be gathered onely on Midsom∣mer eve at night, with I know not what conjuring words in superstitiously held by divers, not onely Mounte∣ ar es and Quacksalvers, but by other learned men (yet it cannot be said but by those that are too superstitiously icted) to be of some secret hidden vertue, but I cannot finde it exprest what it should be▪ for Bauhinus in i Sy imies upon Matthiolus saith, these rales are neither fabulous nor superstitious, which he there saith he will shew in his History: but Matthiolus, Lugdunensis and others declaime against such opinions experience also shew∣eth that they beare seede, although Theophrastus, Galen, Dioscorides and Pliny following him, say they neither beare owers nor seede: for if about Midsommer (for then usually it is ripe) you gather the stalkes of Ferne and hang them up on a thread with some faire white Paper or cloth under them, you shall finde a small dust to fall from them which is the seede, and from them doe spring plants of the same kindes, and such young plants risen from the fallen seede have beene seene growing about the old plants, for as I said before no herbe growing on the th or in the water (except some with double flowers which are encreased by the roote) but doe beare seede, &amp;c. Dioscorides relateth a great contrarietie in nature betweene the Ferne and the Reede, that each one will perish where the other is planted, as if it were by a naturall instinct, which thing I thinke happeneth rather from the soiles, a Reede not joying in a dry ground nor the Ferne in a wet. Pliny in his 24. booke and 11. Chapter saith, that the roote of the Reede laid to the Ferne driveth it forth, as the roote of the Ferne in like manner doth the Reede: and Celsus before him sheweth that each of them is a remedy against the other, and Theophrastus that heweth whereas Corne and other herbes doe delight and are furthered by dung, the Ferne onely perisheth thereby. 
CHAP. II. Filix foemina. The female Ferne. O F the female Ferne likewise there is some diversi∣tie 1. Filix foemina vulgaris. The common female Ferne. 
more then formerly hath beene observed by others as you may here see. 
1. Filix foemina vulgaris. The common female Ferne. This Ferne riseth up with one or two, and sometimes more almost round stalkes from the roote somewhat higher then the formes, and branches with such like winged leaves growing on both sides therof equally for the most part one against another, every leafe being lesser then the male, and more divided or dented yet not sharpe but round pointed, of as strong a smell as the former, and having the like spots on the backside of them, which stalke if it be cut a slope somewhat long, will in the white pith thereof shew some marke of a splayed Eagles the roote hereof is long and slenderer then the former, of about a fingers thicknesse and blackish for the most part creeping un∣der the ground. 
2. Filix foemina pinnulis dentalis. Dented female Ferne. This other female Ferne hath the small winged leaves which are set on each side of the middle ribbe, somewhat sharpe poin∣ted, of a dde greene colour and narrower then the former, yet spared on the backside, but the maine stalke is fuller of , and not growing up so straight nor so high, and differeth little in any thing else. 
3. Filix foemina aculeatis pinnulis. Sharpe pointed female Ferne. This sharpe pointed female Ferne hath the maine stalkes about a foote long, bra hing out into wings each whereof is not dented but whole, ending in a small pricke or point. 
The Place. The first groweth more frequently than the male on barren heaths, and shady hedge sides, &amp;c. the other two grow rather on moist rockes and in the shaded hills. 
The Time. They flourish at the same time and perish in Winter, I meane the leaves. 
The Names. It is cal ' ed in Greeke &amp; the lypteris and nymphaea pteris in Latine Filix f emina: the first is generally by most authors called Filix foemina, yet Gesner in hortis calleth it Mas, and Bauhinus in his Pin Filix ramosa pinnulis obtusis non dentatis: the second is called by Thalius, Filix faemina altera te ifolia: the last i called by Bauhinus in his Pinax, Filix ramosa minor pinnulis dentatis, which Cordus in historia calleth Ptoridum masculum, as Thalius noteth it likewise, it is called in Italian Felce foemina, in Spanish Helecho, and French Fengiore femelle, in high Dutch Grosse Farnkraut, in low Dutch Ʋaren Wiffken, and we in English Brake or common Ferne.
1. Dryopteris repens. Creeping Oake Ferne. This small Ferne sendeth forth divers slender blackish stalkes little more then halfe a foote high, bearing many small winged leaves each against the other, somewhat like unto those of the female erne but much smaller and finer, and of a darkish greene colour, the backeside of whom have not browne but white spots on them set in a double row, as Lobel saith which 2. Dryopteris alba. White Oake Ferne. 
Dryopteris sive Filix querna repius. Creeping Oake Ferne. 
others mention not: the roote is small and blackish creeping under the upper crust of the earth, with divers small blacke fi∣ es growing from them, and are somewhat like unto the rootes Pollypody but much smaller and slenderer, of a more austere and stipticke taste then Pollypody. 
2. Dryopteris alba. White Oake Ferne. This other Ferne groweth not much higher then the former, but the leaves are broader shorter &amp; more deepely cut in on the ed∣ges, and of a paler greene colour, spotted also on the backside of them like unto the male Ferne: the roote is composed of many ish threads or fibres issuing from a thicke roote. 
The Place. Both these sorts grow in the shadowey thicke woods on the sometimes, and sometimes in the open valleyes neare them, and sometimes also out of the mosse of old bushes and other trees. 
The Time. They both loose their leaves in Winter and spring up a fresh late in the Spring. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Dryopteris, that is Filix querna, yet Oribasius calleth it Bryopteris Filix muscosa, Mosse Ferne of the growing among the Mosse on trees, the first is simply called Dryopteris by L bel, Matthiolus, Gesner and others; Dryopteris sive Filix arborea by Tragus, and Pterion famina by Cordus first Booke and eighteenth Chapter, and so also by Thalius in Harcynia sylva: but is not the Filix pu ila sa prima of Clusius as I shall shew you in the next Chapter save one, although it seeme to bee like it for the ro shew their difference. The other is called Dryopteris candida by Dodonaeus, and as Lobel saith is the Adiantum album Plinij, and of the Shoppes also: by Bauhinus Filicula fontana major sive Adiantum filicis folio. 
The Vertues. The first as Lobel saith was in former times used by the Apothecaries beyond Sea, in stead of Pollypody as not knowing a righter, neyther were they shewed by their Physitions to forbeare it and use any other, but rather ap∣pointed by them so to do, which as he saith some affirmed Rondeletius to say, that in stead of a purging quality pro∣per to Pollypody it had a pernitious operation in some of his sicke patients: it is a remedy to take away haires Dioscorides saith, if the rootes and leaves bee bruised together and applyed after sweating, Matthiolus saith th the rootes in powder with a little salt and Branne is given to Horses for the wormes. The other sort is mode in taste, somewhat drying, and therefore may safely be used in stead of the true Adiantum or Maidenhaire, as it is usuall now a dayes. Lobel saith that the last sorts was safely used in the Apothecaries shoppes of divers coun∣tries for Adiantum album and nigrum. 
CHAP. VI. Lanchitis aspera. Rough Splenewort. O F these Spleneworts there are divers sorts described by divers authors as shall be shewed, and first of the greater kinde of Matthiolus. 
1. Lonchitis aspera major Matthioli. The greater rough Splenewort. This greater Splenewort hath divers stalkes of leaves somewhat like unto Miltwast but nearer unto Pollypody, about a spanne long cut on both sides with uneven divisions, dented about the edges with sharpe points, and rough on both sides without such spots on the backes of them as Pollypody and Miltwaste have: the roote is composed of many reddish strings or fibres like as Harts tongue is. 
2. Lonchitis aspera minor. The smaller rough Splenewort. The lesser Spleenewort is somewhat like unto the former, but that the divided leaves set on each side of the soft brownish stalkes are narrower and longer, each separated from other, but not fully to the middle ribbe: in 1. Lonchitis asper a major Matthioli. The greater rough Splenewort. 
2. Lonchitis asper a minor. The smaller rough Splenewort. 
3. Lonchitis Aspera Maranthae. Bastard rough Splenewort. 
the middle of those outer leaves, rise up other bigger and thicker stalkes of narrower leaves, like unto them, but fully separated, and so finely dented about the edges that they seeme curled with brownish spots, or scales on the ickes of them as in other Fernes: the roote hath a thicke end covered with scales, lying one upon another, with di∣vers fibres at them. There is another of this sort lesser than this, sound about Colchester in Essex, and in other places, growing in the wet borders of fields, and by the hedge sides. 
3. L nchitis aspera Maranthae. Bastard rough Spleneworte. This bastard Splene wort hath browne rough stalkes a long, with winged leaves on them, somewhat like un∣to the female Ferne, but thicker and greater, by much greene on the upperside, and spotted with browne rough scales on the other, like Milt-wast, the roote is small, com∣posed of many long fibres. 
4. Lonchitis aspera Ilvensis. Island rough Splene worte. This small Splenewort hath browne stalkes, little above halfe a foote long with leaves set opposite one to another, and each cut in on the edges, but not so deepely as the last, greene on the upperside, and rough with browne scales or dust on the under: the roote is a small bush of blackish fibres. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in the moist Moores of Italy, the second and third, in moyst groves both there and in Germany, and in some places with us, if my memory faile me not: the last in the Island of Ilua which is in the Thirohene sea, and flowrisheth when others doe. 
The Names. The Greek name from Dioscorides is and so in Latine Lonchitis altera sive aspera, for his first Lonchitis is scarse knowne: The first is the Lonchitis aspera major of Matthiolus and others, or Lonchitis aspera minor of Matthiolus, by Tragus Asplenum sylvestre, Cordus and Thalius Struthiopteris, as if you would say the Estridges Ferne for the fine wings of the middle leaves, by Clusius Lonchitis altera Neotericorum, this is called Foxe Ferne in many places of this Land: the third is the Lonchitis Maranthae, or altera Maranthae by Clusius and others, and Matthiolus Pseudolonchitis Maranthae: the last is remembred by Lugdunensis, but Bauhinus as I sayd before in the chapter of Pollipodye, first confoundeth the Polypodium Ilvense of Lugdunensis, with his Lonchitis aspera Ilvensis, making them to be both one plant, and againe maketh the Lonchitis Maranthae to be one with the Lon∣chitis aspera Ilvensis and differing but in greatnesse which I am verily perswaded, differeth from it, although it seene somewhat to resemble it. 
The Ʋertues. The dryed leaves of this taken in Vinegar, is held to be good to dissolve the hardnesse of the Spleene, and the greene leaves to be singular good for wounds, and to keepe them from inflammations. 
CHAP. VII. Filix Saxatilis. Small or Stone Ferne. T He small or Stone Ferne also have some diversities as here shall be shewed.
1. Filix pumila saxatilis prima Clusij. The first small Stone Ferne of Clusius. This first small Ferne hath a long blacke and slender roote, creeping and spreading a slope, under ground, with a few slender hard fibres thereat, from whence spring divers stalkes a foote high, bran∣ched into sundry divided leaves, like unto Female Ferne, but much lesse, more finely divided, and farre tenderer or delicate than they, and spotted on the backe of them like other Fernes. 
2. Filix pumila saxatilis altera Clusij. The second Stone Ferne of Clusius. This other small Ferne hath divers straight round stalkes, greene at the first, but blackish being full growne, a∣bout an hand breadth high, shooting forth leaves from the middle upwards, with divisions on both sides, like un∣to the Male Ferne, but much lesse and finer, spotted on the backe of them as the former: the roote from a head such as the Male Ferne hath, sendeth forth many blacke heads, threads, or fibres. 
3. Filix saxatilis soliis non serratis. Small Stone Ferne with whole leaves. This is small and groweth somewhat like the Male Ferne, but the leaves are not dented, but whole like unto the water Ferne. 
1. 2. Felix pumila saxatilis prima &amp; secunda Clusii. The first and second stone Ferne of Clusius. 
5. Filix saxatilis bac ifera Americana. Berry bearing Ferne of America. 
 
4. Filix saxatilis crispa. Small curled Stone Ferne. This small curld Ferne hath a roote composed of many blackish threds or fibres, growing from above, whence spring up small stalkes, scarce an hand breadth high, set on both sides with tender soft strings of very small leaves so finely divided and dented, that they seeme curld, of a darke greene colour upwards, and paler below towards the bottome, having redish or brownish dust-like spots on the backesides as the Miltwaste hath, the figure hereof is by chance left out, you shall finde it in the Appendix. 
5. Filix saxatilis baccifera. Berry bearing Ferne of America. This Ferne of America riseth up with sundry long, round, hard stalkes of winged leaves, each leafe consisting of many parts as it were, or cut in deepely on both edges into many divisions, and of a fresh greene colour, ha∣ving in sundry places, all along of the middle rib on the backe side of them, small round seede like berries set, greene at the first, but blacke and sweetish being ripe, which then are so easily gathered that a small touch with the hand, or the shaking of the stalkes with the winde, will cause them to fall on the ground, where they will soone take roote and grow: the roote is composed of many browne fibres, somewhat harsh in taste: the leaves dye downe at the end of Autumne, and spring up new in Aprill, the berries being ripe about Saint Iames tide. 
6. Filicula fontana. Small rocke Ferne. This small Ferne groweth low, bushing with many very small and darke greene leaves, resembling the com∣mon sort, but much lesse than any of those before. 
7. Chamae filix marina Anglica. The small English Sea Ferne. This small Sea Ferne from a thicke brownish roote, composed of a multitude of threads, rise diverse bright shining blackish stalkes, two or three inches high, whereon are placed many rough, thicke, shining, blackish, greene leaves, after the manner of the Male Ferne, finely snipt about the edges, and with brownish markes on the backe of them as other Fernes have. 
8. Filix saxatilis Tragi. Naked stone Ferne. This stone Ferne from a thicke tufted roote, sendeth forth many hard and rough stalkes, bare or naked without leaves, with some spots on them as other Fernes have, and onely fo ked at the toppes, into two or three short parts, bowing or bending downe their heads, it agreeth, saith Tragus, with Ferne in smell and taste. 
The Place. These all doe grow in rockey and stony places, and the sixt, seaventh, and eighth kinde as Lobel saith neere the sea in Cornewall, in moyst rockie places. 
The Time. They flower with the rest of the Fernes. 
7. Filix marina Anglica. The small English Sea Ferne. 
8. Filix saxatilis Tragi. Naked stone Ferne. 
 
The Names. The first here set downe, is the first Filix pumila saxatilis of Clusius, according to his description, but the se∣cond figure doth answere thereunto, and not the first, as you may observe by the creeping rootes in the second fi∣gure, which he that onely regardeth the figure, and doth not compare the description therewith, may soone bee deceived, and this transposition Bauhinus observed well, although he doth not speake of it, but onely entituleth it Filix saxatilis romosa nigris maculis puncta, and questioneth if it be not the Filicula candida of Gesner in appendice: the second is the second of Clusius by the former name, and by Bauhinus Filix saxatilis non ramosa nigris maculis punctata, and questioneth if it be not the Filicula saxatilis of Camerarius; but the first figure in Clusius is set forth like the female branched Ferne: the third is the third Filix petrea foemina of Tabermontanus, and called by Bau∣hinus as it is in the title: the fourth is the Filix saxatilis crispa of Pona, in the description of Mount Baldus: the fift is mentioned by Cornutas among his Canada plants, which Mr. Iohn Tradescant the younger, brought home with him from Virginia, this present yeare, 1638. presently after the death of his father: the sixt is the Filicula fontana of Tabermontanus: the seventh is the Chamae filix marina Anglica of Lobel: and the last is the Holostium alterum of Lobel, and the Holostium petraeun of Tabermontanus, Tragus calleth it Filix nuda sive saxatilis, and Thalius Adianthum seu furcatum, and Bauhinus thereupon Filix saxatilis corniculata: but why he should referre it also to the Muscus corniculatus of Tabermontanus and Gerard, being different plants I know not. 
The Vertues. The faculties of these Fernes may be referred to the former. 
CHAP. VIII. Asplenum sive Ceterach. Smooth Splene worte, or Milt-waste. T He smooth Splenewort (I so call it in regard of the former which is rough) from a blacke threddy and bushy roote, sendeth forth many long single leaves, cut in on both sides, into round dents, even almost to the middle ribbe, which is not so hard as that of Pollipodye, each division being not al∣wayes set opposite unto the other, but betweene each, smooth and of a light greene on the upper∣side, and with a darke yellowish roughnesse on the backe, foulding or rowling it selfe inward, at the first springing up, as many other Fernes doe, and therein resembleth that Beare Worme that anglers use. 
The Place and Time. It groweth as well upon stone walls, as moyst and shadowie places, in many places of this Land, as about Bri∣st , and other the West parts plentifully, as also on Framingham Castle, on Beckensfeild Church in Barkeshire, Stroude in Kent, and else where, and like Pollipody, abideth greene in the winter.
6. Lupinus medius caeruleus. A midddle sort of the great blew Lupine. 
 
4. Lupinus Gadensis marinus flore caeruleo. The blew Sea Lupine. This Sea Lupine is somewhat like unto the smaller blew Lupine described in my former Booke, but lesser, or betweene it and the smallest blew last of all described: the flower is of a most excellent blew colour, with some white spots in them, the seede is small and round. 
5. Lupinus Arabicus. The Arabian Lupine. Having well considered this Lupine, I finde that I have described it among the Cinquefoiles, because the leaves did so neere resemble a Cinquefoile, and comming to me by that name, but since that having reade Pona his de∣scription of Mons Bauldus in the Italian tongue, I finde it there described by the name of Lupino Arabico, or if you will, Pentafillo peregrino; unto either of which it may be referred, but seeing it doth more resemble a Lupine than a Cinquefoile, I have so entituled it here, yet referre you to the description thereof in that place, because I would not repeate that there set downe, being, as I tooke it growing in my owne Garden, but yet because in some things it is defective, as in the cods &amp;c. and might be bettered, I will from Pona supply it: the leafe doth better resemble a Lupine leafe, the flowers are more purple than they shewed with me; and the middle pointell in them also is purple, the pods are long and pointed at the ends, full of small blacke seede and little: this I thought good to advertise you, that they are but one plant, although it hath two titles. 
6. Lupinus Indicus medius caeruleus. A middle sort of the great blew Lupine. This sort of Lupine is very like the greatest blew Lupine described in my former Booke, both for the tallnesse, woollinesse, and largenesse of the leaves, or a little lesser in all as the flower is also, and of as orient a blew co∣lour, with a whitish spot in the middle, which changeth to be reddish before the flower decaieth: the pods likewise are woolly, and almost as large, and so is the seede also, but still smaller, and a little discoloured, with a clear or hollownesse in the middle. 
7. Lupinus flore carneo. Blush flowred Lupines. Somewhat like unto the last is this Lupine also, but lesser and lesse woolly: the flowers which make the chiefest difference, are of a kinde of delaied reddish colour, which we usually call a blush: the pods also are lesse woolly and smaller, and the seede likewise. 
8. Lupinus flore obsoleto. Wee have had another sort of Lupine sent us from Boel by this name, but perishing in an intemperate yeare, we can describe it no further. 
The Place and Time. These Lupines grow naturally wilde, but wee doe nourish them all in Gardens; and doe flower in the end of Iuly or in August, in which time, or quickly after the seede will be ripe. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Thermos, in Latine Lupinus; Pliny thinking it tooke the name and qualitie from Lupus, but I finde no likelihood in that supposition, and therefore forbeare to expresse it any further; the two first are so called by the Authors that have written of them: the third was brought me by Boel out of Africa, and the fourth out of Spaine, but were both so tender, that I onely saved a little seede the first yeare I had them, and have lost them since: the fift is declared in the description: the three last have not beene remembred by any before: the Arabians call it Tarmus or Tormus; the Italians Lupino, the Spaniards Entramosos, the French Lupin, the Germanes Figboneu, the Dutch Ʋijchboonen and Lupines, from whence came the Faba ficulnea Germanis by Lobel: and we in English Lupine or flat Beene. 
The Ʋertues. Lupines by reason of their bitternesse, do open, digest, dissolve, &amp; clense, being steeped some daies in water, untill they have lost their bitternesse, they may be eaten, &amp; so are, as Galen saith, for necessitie, but they breede grosse and c de humours, are very hard to digest, and slowly passe through the body, yet doe they not binde any fluxe: the same being to steeped, and afterwards dried, beaten, and taken with some vinegar, taketh away the loathing of the stomacke to meate and provoketh the appetite: the decoction or infusion of Lupines taken with hony and vinegar killeth the wormes in the belly, but if you mixe Rue and Pepper thereto, you shall make it the more effe∣ctuall: the meale or pouder taken with hony and vinegar or in drinke doth the same: the said decoction taken openeth the obstructions of the liver and spleene, provoketh urine and womens courses, if it be taken with , and expelleth the dead childe: the decoction of them cleanseth all scabbes, morphew, cankers, tetters, and creeping or running ulcers and sores, and boyled in lye it clenseth the head from ulcers, scurfe, &amp;c. breeding therein: it also clenseth the face, and taketh away the markes that the Poxe doe leave after their healing, and all other markes, and blacke and blew spots in the skinne: and to cleare the face, and make it more amiable, many women doe use the meale of Lupines mingled with the gall of a Goate, some juyce of Lemonds, and a little Alumen saccharinum, made into a forme of a soft ointment: the meale thereof being boiled in vinegar and applied, taketh away pimples, and scattereth the nods or kernells that rise in the body, and breaketh carbuncles and im∣postumes: the burning of the huskes driveth away Gnats, Flies, &amp;c. whatsoever. The wilde Lupines are stronger and more effectuall to all purposes. 
CHAP. XV. Cicer sativum. Garden Cich Pease, or Rammes Ciches. O F the Pulse called Cicer, there are two sorts, the Garden and the wilde, but although I gave you the description of two or three sorts of the garden kind, in my former Booke: yet I thinke it not amisse to give you the descriptions of them here againe, with their properties more amply. Cicer sativum sive aristinum rubrum nigrum vel album. Garden red, blacke or white, Cich Pease, Rammes Ciches, or Cicers. All the sorts of Rammes Ciches, bring forth stalkes a yard long, whereon doe grow winged leaves that is many small and almost round leaves dented about the edges, Cicer sativum sive tinum nigrum v . Garden red, blacke, or white Cich Pease, Rammes Ciches, or Cicers. 
set on both sides of a middle ribbe: at the joynts come forth one or two flowers upon short foote stalkes, Pease fashion, either white, or whitish, or else purplish red, lighter, or deeper, according as the Pease that follow will be, that are contained in small thicke and short pods, wherein lie one or two Pease more usually, a little pointed at the lower end, and almost round at the head, yet a little cornered or sharpe: the roote is small, and perisheth yearely. 
The Place and Time. They are sowne in Gardens, or the Fields, as Pease, both in our owne and other countries, being sowne later than Pease, and are gathered at the same time with them▪ or somewhat after. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Erebinthus and is ad∣ded of some, because is areis, in Latine Cicer, of the Ara∣bians Chemps Hamos, or Alhamos, of the Italians Ceci, of the Spaniards Gravansos, of the French Ciche, &amp; pois Ciche, &amp; pois bechu, of the Germans Kichem and Kicherebs, of the Dutch; and we in English Cicers, Ciches, Rammes Ciches, and Ciche Pease: Dioscorides, Theophrastus and Pliny doe much vary one from another in setting downe the sorts of these Cicers, Dioscorides divideth it into sativum &amp; sylve∣stre, &amp; of the sativum he nameth Arentinum to be the other sort; Theophrastus saith it hath many differences, as in great∣nesse, taste, colour and forme, as Arietinum and Columbi∣num, &amp;c. Pliny doth somewhat follow Theophrastus, and maketh more sorts; but to avoid long disputes and contro∣versies, wee doe now generally hold but two sorts of the manured Cicers, white and red, or three, at the most as Matthiolus saith white, red, and blacke, but the red chan∣geth blacke with time, and therefore is not differing; Co∣lumbinum and Ʋenereum are all one with the white; and the Cicer Orobaeum of Theophrastus &amp; Pliny, is another plant, as shall be shewed hereafter: Matthiolus saith, that the Ger∣mans heretofore erred much in taking Pease to be Cicer Co∣lumbinum, we have shewed before that Tragus and others tooke Vetches to be Cicers. 
The Vertues. Cicers, as Galen saith, are no lesse windy meate than Beanes, but yet nourish more, they provoke venery, and is thought to, increase sperme, and therefore they give it their stalion horses. Cicers have in them a more clensing faculty than beanes, whereby they breake the stones gathered in the kidneyes: to drinke the creame of them being boyled in water, is the best way, it moveth the belly downeward, provoketh urine, and womans courses, and increaseth both milke and seede: the decoction of either of them saith Dioscorides, made with Rosemary, is good for the Dropsie, and the yellow Iaundise, and to ease the paines in the sides, for which pur∣pose this medicine is very powerfull: an ounce of Cicers, two ounces of French barly, and a small handfull of Marsh Mallow rootes, cleane washed and cut, being boyled in the broath of a chicken, and foure ounces taken in the morning, and fasting two houres after: the white Cicers are used more as meate than medicine, yet they have the same effect, and is thought more powerfull to encrease milke and seede: I have knowne it given with good successe, to women that were barren through an over hot constitution, an orderly course proceeding and following the taking thereof. Dioscorides saith that Cicers are hurtfull to those that have ulcers in their reines or kidnies, or in the bladder. Plutarch giveth this note, that no wormes breede in these Cicers, when as all other pulses are subject to them, and therefore in their nuptiall ceremonies, those were given in an allegoricall sense, of their mutuall incorruptible affections. 
CHAP. XVI. Cicer sylvestre. Wilde Cicers. T He wilde Cicers are of three or foure sundry sorts, as shall be shewed in this Chapter. 
1. Cicer sylvestre majus. The greater wilde Cicer. The greater sort hath very long winged leaves set on the stalkes, composed of many, every one of them being small, and longer than of the former garden kinde, not dented at all about the edges, and of a sad greene colour: at the toppes of the stalkes come forth many tufts of flowers, set together, of a pale yellowish colour, almost white, after which follow rough skinnie cods, in tufts also, of them small pointed at the end, with in which are contained other small smooth huskes, which ve many small flat yellow round seede, so saith Thalius, but Lugdunensis maketh the first of Dalechampius to flat seede, and not like unto the manured Cicers, and yet I take them to be both one, and that of Matthiolus also: Cicer sylvestre majus: The greater wilde Cicer. 
5. Cicer sylvestre triphyllum. Three leafed wilde Cicers. 
the roote is hard and wooddy, yet spreadeth farre about and living long. There is another sort in all things like the former, but much lesser in every part. 
2. Cicer montanum Lanuginosum. The woolly mountaine Cicer. This mountaine Cicer hath upright round stalkes a foote high, and soft or woolly, branching forth into small branches, whereon stand winged leaves, tenne or twelve on a side of the middle ribbe, with an odde one at the end, each whereof is soft or woolly and long like unto the Vetches, some broader and narrower then others: on the toppes of the branches stand a spike of rough pale coloured flowers, and the cods that follow are some∣what long and woolly, with a crooked thread at the end of them, and have small blacke seede in them.
3. Cicer montanum . Another mountaine Cicer without stalke. This other mountaine Cicer hath a root growing deepe if the rocky ground where it groweth hinder it not, from whence sundry hairy footstalks of leaves which are 12. or somewhat more on a side, somewhat round yet longer then those of the Garden Cicer, the edges of them being hairy, some of them being equally, others unequally set one against another, and an odde one at the end: the flowers grow hard above the roote, being somewhat long and pale, and after them come swollen cods, having two partitions, full of small yellow seede like unto those of the Medicas that is Kidney fashion. 
4. Cicer Alpinum. Mountaine Ciche Pease. This from a long roote parted below hath the leaves on the stalkes like the true Cicers, but rounder and dented: the flowes are blewish and the cods smaller them of the former, being somewhat hairy and groweth on mount I ra. 
5. Cicer sylvestre triphyllum. Three leafed wild Cicers. The three leaved wilde Cicer hath stalkes about two foote high divided into some branches spreading abroad, whereon are set upon long footstalkes one above another, leaves divided into three parts like the wild Trefoile and each of them bigger, thicker and rounder then those of the Garden Cicer, a little dented also about the edges: the flowers grow two or three together from a long footstalke at the joynts with the leaves, which are like the Garden Cicer flowers but larger: the cods that follow are small like unto the Garden kinde, but somewhat flat∣ter, having some small leaves at the bottome of them, within which lye much smaller seede and more flat, and like to those of Cicer ula. 
6. Cicer sylvestre alterum triphyllum. Another three leafed wilde Cicer. This other wild Cicer hath a thicke long branched roote, blackish without and white within: the stalkes are all of branches with leaves like unto Cicers, but three alwayes set together and no more: the flowers are red and the cods are like unto the other wilde Cicers but hairy and spotted with red spots. 
The Place and Time. All these sorts grow upon hills and in the woods, and sometimes by the hedges in fields, and flower and give fruit in Iuly, August and September. 
The Names. The first is the Cicer sylvestre of Matthiolus, and so called by Dodonaeus, Lugdunensis and others, being the Cicer sylvestre herbariorum of Lobel, and is also the first Cicer sylvestre of Dalechampius, and the Cicer sylvestre majus of Thalius as I said before: the lesser of this kind is Thalius his least kind: the second and third bee Bauhinus out of his Prodromus: the fourth is not mentioned by any before: the fift is the Cicer sylvestre v rius of Lobel, and called by others Cicer sylvestre alterum: the last is the Cicer sylvestre secundum Dalechampij by Lugdunensis. 
The Vertues. The wild Cicers are so much more powerfull then those of the Garden, by how much they exceede them in heate and drynesse, perceived by their sharper and more bitter taste, whereby they doe the more open obstructi∣ons, provoke urine, breake the stone, and all those other properties of cutting, opening, digesting and dissolving that are attributed to the former and that both more speedily and more certainly: yet saith Pliny if they be too largely taken they loosen the belly and cause torments and breed wind. 
CHAP. XVII. Orobus. The bitter Vetch. O F this Pulse there are properly in my judgement but three sorts which shall be declared in this Chap∣ter: but unto them I will adjoyne that small wild pulse for the names sake that is called Erv m syl∣vestre, or Catanance. 
1. Orobus vulgaris. The ordinary bitter Vetch. This small pulse shooteth forth divers weake slender branches leaning to the ground, and scarse ri∣sing up about a foote high, beset on all sides with many winged leaves, each whereof is very little, and a little longer then round set one against another as the Cicers, Vetches and divers other Pulses are, the flowers are small and whitish (for I never saw any purple) standing singly every one by it selfe at the joynts with the leaves, after which come small round long pods no bigger then the tagge of a point, bunched out in three or foure parts where the seede lyeth, which is almost full round small and of a pale colour: the roote is small and perisheth every yeare. 
2. Orobus Creticus. The better Vetch of Candy. This Orobus in the manner of growing is altogether like the former, but whereas Matthiolus and others fol∣lowing 1. Orobus vulgaris herbariorum. The ordinary bitter Vetch. 
3. Cicer Orobeum. Cornered Orobus. 
4. Ervum sylvestre sive Catanance. Wild glasse leafed Orobus. 
him say it is lesser, I have alwayes found it to bee rather larger then lesser, yet there is so little dif∣ference betweene them, that but for the names sake of Candy, I would make them both but one kind without diversitie of species. 
3. Cicer Orobaeum. Cornered Orobus. Divers would rather make this a Cicer than an Orobus, and indeede Lobel and Pena much doubted, whether they should call it the first of Dioscorides his Cicers, al∣though they were confident that it was Pliny his Cicer, that was the sweetest and likest to Orobus: but I rather referre it to the kinds of Orobus from the forme of the cods more like to Orobus whose description is thus. It riseth up with a crooked or leaning hollow stalke halfe a yard high and full of joynts set with many leaves on each side of a middle ribbe, which are somewhat long like to those of the Lentill; at the joynts, towards the top come forth long footstalkes, with many flowers set on them close together, which after give long and round cods, bunched out and dented in betweene where the seedes lye twise as bigge as those of Orobus a little cornered and not so round, of a pale or yellowish colour and differing little from them but in the darke colour. 
4. Ervum sylvestre sive Catanance. Wilde grasse leafed Orobus. This wilde Pulse hath sundry branches rising from the roote neare two foote high especially if it grow in any fertile soile, beset unorderly with many long and narrow darke greene leaves: smaller then divers grasses, at the toppes of the stalkes and branches grow pretty large Pease Blossom ' d flowers of an orient shining Crimson colour, after which come small slender long and almost round cods, conteining within them divers hard blackish seede: the roote is long and slender, with some fibres thereat, and perisheth every yeare as I ghesse by those that grew in my Garden from the seede sow∣en, whereof some bore white flowers and then pe∣rished towards Winter. 
The Place and Time. The two first are onely noursed up in Gardens with us, the second being naturall of Candy: the third as Lobel saith groweth wild in Narbone and Province in France; the last is usually growing in the fields about the hedges and bushes towards High-gate, Pancras Church, &amp;c. and are all flowring and seeding in the end of Summer. 
The Names. This is called in Greeke Orobus , quod boves eo saginentur as Galen saith, in La∣tine Ervum and Orobus also: the first is called Orobus sive Ervum by Matthiolus (who saith it was but lately in his time made knowne in Italy ) and by most other writers, onely Dodonaeus calleth it Cicer sativum and Mo∣chus when as Mochus indeede is this Orobus but not Cicer, Lobel calleth it Orobus receptus herbariorum, because the generall vote of these later times doth so call it not having found or knowne any truer: the second is called Orobus Creticus by Matthiolus, as if it differed from the former, but is not so as I have shewed in the discription before: the third is called by Lobel Cicer Orobaeum Theophrasti, &amp; by Bauhinus Orobus semine obtuso triangulo. The last is called Catanance by Gesner in hortis, by Dodonaeus in his French Herball and Lugdunensis: but Ervum sylve∣stre by Dodonaeus in his Latine Pemptades and Ervum sylvestre herbariorum by Lobel: but why Bauhinus should call it Lathyrus sylvestris minor I see no cause seeing it is not like any of the other nor hath no claspers as all the other Lathyri he there expresseth have, and besides breaketh that order he had proposed to follow, namely to set downe all such Pulses as had claspers in the first place, and then those that had none, and yet this having none is put above among those that have, because he would vary the title if he could by any meanes: It is called by the Arabians Erbum Keisene or Kersene, by the Italians Ervo, by the Spaniards Iervos, by the French Ers, and wee in English may call it the bitter Vetch, for Pliny confounds this with Ʋicia the Vetch, and from the quality of bit∣ternesse which the ancients say is in it, although ours have little that can be perceived: or Orobus after the La∣tine if you will. 
The Vertues. Orobus is dry in the second degree and hot in the first, and by the bitternesse cutteth clenseth and openeth ob∣structions, and was used in Galens time as hee saith to be steeped like Lupines (and that was to take out the bit∣ternesse) before they were eaten by men or given to their beasts, and that but in a dearth and great necessitie, because they are not onely very unpleasant to the taste but be of bad nourishment. Wee use saith Galen the Oro∣bus with Hony as a medicine to clense the breast and Lungs of thicke humors that offend them, the manner of the ancients preparation of the meale thereof was in this manner: being steeped in water a good while they after fryed or parched them untill the rindes broke, which then being ground and passed through a boulter they keepe this meale as of great use, both to move the belly downewards and to provoke urine, and to cause them that use it to be of a good colour, yet if it be two largely taken it causeth headach and paines in the belly, and causeth blooddy urines. Pliny saith it is recorded in the Emperour Augustus Epistles that he was cured by Ervum, (whose griefe it is probable was tough flegme, condensate in the Lungs and hard to be avoyded and spit forth) this Orobus Pliny saith that good authors doe affirme that if any take Orobus fasting every morning it will consume the Spleene: the meale hereof mingled with hony clenseth foule Vlcers, and taketh away the spots freckles and other discolourings of the face or other parts of the body: it suffereth no Cankers, Gangrenes or spreading, ea∣ting sores to breede in the body; it molifieth the hardnesse of the breasts, and taken in wine or Vinegar as Pliny saith it helpeth the bitings of Serpents and mad dogges and men, and taken with Vinegar it helpeth the stran∣gury, and that disease where one doth oft desire to goe to the stoole but can doe nothing, the said parched meale mixed with hony and taken helpeth those that rellish not their meate, and are bickockly disposed that is ready to fall into the hecticke Feaver or Consumption: a creame made of the meale of them &amp; the places bathed therewith that is troubled with an itch cureth it through the whole body, and made into a plaster with wine will breake Carbuncles if it bee laid thereon: the greene cods stalkes and all before they grow hard, being bruised together juiced and applied to the haire doth colour it blacke. 
CHAP. XVIII. Orobus sylvaticus. Wood or wild Orobus. N Ext to the true Orobus I thinke good to joyne the wild or wood kindes for the names sake, and be∣cause Clusius hath exprest divers differences as he found them. 
1. Orobus sylvaticus major purpureus. The greater purple Wood Orobus. This first kinde that I here propose groweth not much above a foote high, bearing many square stalkes and striped all along: the leaves that are set one by another on each side of a middle ribbe being six, eight or ten in number, are a great deale larger then any Orobus namely two or three inches long, and an inch or two broad, with three nerves or sinewes running through them: the flowers grow at the toppes many standing together in fashion of a spike or bush being larger then those of the Vetch, and of a daintie blewish pur∣ple colour, and when they begin to fade they will change their colour a little and become more pale, then fol∣low small long slender browne cods with small round seede within them yet sometimes they will be more long then round and variably coloured: the roote is long blacke and hard, bunching forth in some places with some small long strings and fibres fastned thereunto, and liveth many yeares.
3. Onobrychis floribus caerul e. Blew flowred Cockes head. 
9. Onobrychis minima. The least Cockes-head. 
flower: but this lesser groweth very low, not above an hand breadth high; the leaves likewise are small and narrow, the flowers are small, and of an excellent crim∣son colour, the seede vessells that follow are flat and rough, containing small seede within them, the roote is thicke and threaddy. 
8. Onobrychis clypeata levis. Small buckler Fetchling. This smooth Fetchling riseth up but wi h one stalke, or two at the most a foote high, set with joynts, where stand winged leaves, consisting of many smooth long leaves, and an odde one at the end: from the joynts of the leaves, spring up small and long stalkes, whereon the flowers stand in a spike fashion, of a blewish purple co∣lour, and have afterwards flat and smooth huskes buckler fashion, three for the most part standing one above an∣other, with small seede within them. 
9. Onobrychis minima. The least Cockes-head. This small plant, Pena saith, he found on the hills of Pro∣vence, with a small roote downeward, but thicke at the head, and a thicke barke, having many hairy stalkes, two or three inches long, with small leaves on them like unto Lentills or Astragulus, hoary, hard, and bare towards the toppes, and many small pale yellowish white flowers set together in a tuft of a drying taste, like Birds foote. Lobel in Adversaria calleth it Astragalus persimilis palmaris pusilla planta. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth under hedges, and sometimes in the open fields, in divers places of our Land, but all the rest are strangers and kept in Gardens with us, by them onely that are curious conservers of rare plants: and flower from the end of Iune to the end of August, and the seede ripeneth in the meane time. 
The Names. It is generally taken now adayes by all those that are judicious Herbarists to be the Onobrychis of Dio∣scorides, and Caput gallinaceum in Latine: the first is called Onobrychis by Dodonaeus, Clusius, Thalius, and many others, Gesner in hortis calleth it Glaux sive Onobrychis, Lobel Caput gallinaceum Belgarum, Lugdunensis saith it was called Polygala by many, the lesser hereof is called by Bauhinus in Prodromo Caput gallinaceum minus: the second here is the first Ombrychis Pannonica with Clusius, which Pona in the description of Mount Baldus calleth Cicer Astraga∣l ides: the third is the second with him: the fourth is his third: the fift is his fourth Onobrychis, and the sixt his fift: the seventh is, as I said before. The lesser sort of that Hedysarum clypeatum of Lobel, that I have set forth in my former Booke, being generally so called now adayes with most; and which Dodonaeus calleth Onobrychis altera; and Camerarius Securidaca clypeata; but Bauhinus calleth it Onobrychis clypeata asperat minor, as he doth the next, Onobrychis clypeata levis: the last is called by Lobel, as I said, Astragalo planta persimilis. The Italians call it Ʋpu∣paria de Maghi; the French Saint foin: and we in English Cockes-head or Medicke Fetchling. 
The Ʋertues. Galen saith hereof that it hath a power to raresie and digest, and therefore the greene leaves bruised and laid as a plaister disperseth knots, nodes, or kernells in the f esh, and if when it is drie it be taken in wine; it helpeth the strangury, and being anointed with oyle it provoketh sweate. Dioscorides and Pliny saith, the same things, and therefore neede not be repeated: it is knowne generally to be a singular foode for cattle to cause them to give store of milke. 
CHAP. XX. Astragalus. The milke Vetch. T HE knowledge of the true Astragalus hath troubled most of our moderne Writers, many of them having set forth divers plants for it, which others have misliked, and therefore in such a con∣fusion it is hard to determine of any certaintie, yet the most likely I will endeavour to shew you here. 
1. Astragalus Baeticus Clusij. The Spanish milke Vetch of Clusius. This Spanish plant hath sundry stalkes afoote high, of the bignesse of ones little finger being five cornered or crested all the lengh of them, hard, somewhat reddish and hoairy with all: the leaves are woolly or hoary many set oneach side of a middle ribbe, of an astringent taste at the first, and afterwards hot; the flowers stand at the tops of long footestalkes that shoot out from the joynts, and grow into a very long spike of large flowers, each as large as of the Beane or Lupine, wholly, of a white colour when they are blowne open, but of a brownish yellow being in the bud: after they are past, there follow full swollen long cods, of two inches and a halfe long, and one thicke like unto those of the wilde Pease, which being shaked when they are drie, the round seede in them will make a noise, and being tasted doe inflame the mouth and tongue mightily: the roote for the smallnesse of the plant is very great, about the length of ones hand, of the thickne of ones arme, and thence branching forth into sundry other smaller ones, rugged and blacke one the outside, and whitish within hard and wooddy, which when it is drie is harder than an horne. 
2. Astragalus marinus Baeticus. The Sea Spanish milke Vetch. This Sea Spanish milke Vetch (which Boelius brought me, with very many other things at my charge out of Spaine ) groweth often upright, and sometimes leaning downe with one or two round reddish stalkes, a little ha∣ry, set with sundry winged leaves on both sides of the stalkes, one above another, consisting of tenne or a dozen small fresh greene leaves, somewhat like to those of the lesser Sicklewort, from betweene the stalke &amp; the leaves, and at the toppes of them also come forth branches of the like leaves in some places, and at others many small pale coloured flowers, which turne into so many three square cleare skinned whitish cods, the inner edge being thin∣ner, and a little bowing, the other two forming, as it were a backe, dividing it selfe into two parts, with divers small hard yellowish seede within them, almost like Fenugreeke seede: the roote is small, long, and divided, perishing yearely with us. Altera supinus. I had from Boelius, above named, another sort hereof which he named Astragalus marinus Boeticus supinus, but what other chiefe difference it had from the other, but the leaning to the ground∣ward, I know not, for the plant dying with me that rose from the seede, I could not so exactly observe the varie∣tie, and since then could never get of the same seede againe. 
1. Astragalus Baeticus Clusij. The Spanish milke Vetch of Clusius. 
23. Astragalus marinus Bat us. Spanish Sea milke Vetch. 
3. Astragalus Syriacus. The milke Vtch of Syria. 
5. Astragalus Alpinus claviculatus magno flore. Great flowred mountaine milke Vetch. 
7. Astragalus purpureus montanus. The purple mountaine Milke Vetch. 
 
3. Astragalus Syriacus. Milke Vetch of Syria. The Syrian milke Vetch hath such like weake stalkes lying on the ground, or not rising much above it, and winged leaves also, but smaller and shorter: the flowers are larger, and growing into a thicker bush, of an excellent red colour very beautifull, the roote is great and thicke, spreding about. 
4. Astragalus Alpinus. Mountaine Milke Vetch. This hath from a single roote divers slender stalkes sometimes standing up∣right, and other whiles leaning downe; the leaves are longer, but more sparingly set on the middle ribbe than the Cicers, and not dented at all about the edges, but very neare resembling those of the first wood Orobus: the flowers are like to the Vetch or Cicer, of a blewish purple co∣lour: after which come long pods like to Vetches: the roote is tuberous or knobby, blacke and hard, with other such like smaller peeces growing unto it, fastened by long strings, this differeth much from the Chamaebalanus or Terra glandes, which is accounted by Columna, for the true Arachidnae of Th ophrastus. 
5. Astragalus Alpinus Claviculatus magno flore. Great flowred mountaine mike Vetch. This hath a long thicke, blacke, woddy roote two foote long, with some fibres thereat, divided above into thicke scaly heads, from whence rise sundry long winged small leaves lying on the ground, like unto those of Lentills: the flowers are large and grow many together at the toppes of naked stalkes, of a yellow colour, saith Lugdunensis of his, but Bauhinus saith, that that which grew with him (if it were the same) was of a purple colour; after whom follow small, long, blacke pods, with a small twining thread at the end like a claspers.
8. Astragaloides herbariorum. Base Milke Vetch. 
9. Astragaloides Helvetia. Germane base Milke Vetch. 
 
6. Astragalus purpureo c ruleus Hispanicus. Purple Spanish Milke Vetch. The Spaniards, saith Clusius, held another plant to be Astragalus which answered thereto in the faculties, but differing in the forme of the roote, it had many short and hard hoarie stalkes growing neare the ground, with small winged leaves like unto Cicers or Lentills, all hoary like∣wise, and of an astringent taste: the flowers are small, growing in thicke tufted heads, of a blewish purple co∣lour: the roote, saith Clusius is usually but single, and no way agreeing with the roote of Astragalus. 
7. Astragalus purpureus mountanus. The purple mountaine milke Vetch. This milke Vetch hath a great long wooddy roote, with some fibres set thereat, blackish without, and white within, from whence rise many hard stalkes, some lying as it were upon the ground, and others standing upright about halfe a foote high, the winged leaves that grow thereon are many, small and hoary, still keeping an equall number, upon every foote stalke, somewhat resembling the Astragalus Syriacus but longer, the stalkes are naked or bare of leaves from the middle upward, saving a few, that under the tuft of flowers at the toppes are round, and are like unto other Pulses, of an excellent purple colour, and the seede follow in small cods: it flowreth in May and Iune on the high hills of Sevena, but most plentifully neere a small towne called Mernes in the grove of wood next unto it, in horto dei, and the hills neerest thereto about Mompelier: it is utterly without any sharpe taste, and but onely a little saltish that can be felt. 
8. Astragaloides sherbareorum. Base milke Vetch. The base milke Vetch riseth up with sundry upright hard crested stalkes, a yard high set on all sides with win∣ged leaves foure or five couple against the middle ribbe, with an odde one at the end, of a very sad greene colour, no bigger than those of the Lentills: the flowers stand at the toppes of the stalkes and branches many set together which are small and short, of a dead purplish colour turning wanne with standing, and change into small blacke cods almost round; but pointed, within which are foure or five small blackish seede: the roote groweth great and thicke at the head, tough and wooddy, discending deepe, and abiding many yeares, but all the stalkes perish every yeare, fresh rising in the Spring. 
9. Astragaloides Helvetiae. Germane base milke Vetch. The slender stalkes of this plant, that beare many Pease blossom ' d flowers at the toppes of them, are not much above three inches high without any leaves upon them; the leaves themselves standing singly upon long foote stalkes, being somewhat long, broad, and round pointed, as the figure doth plainely delineate forth. 
The Place and Time. None of these grow wilde in our Land, that ever I could understand, but are nursed up with those that are cu∣rious lover of rare plants: they flower in July, and their seede is ripe in August or September. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke, and Astragalus in Latine: the first is called by Clusius Astragalus Baeticus, and by Lobel and others Astragalus Lusitanicus Clusij, by Bellus that sent it out of Candy to Clusius, as it is set downe in his fift Epistle Phaseoli novum genus, as Clusius in his Scolea under it thinketh, which I can not fully evince, not ha∣ving seene either of them (if they be divers as I thinke they be) growing: but Bellus there relateth that the seede was flat like unto a Kidney Beane, and that the Marriners did eate them while they were greene; and Clusius saith of his that the cods are long, and the seede round within them, burning and enflaming the mouth, for which cause it is probable that Amatus Lusitanus called it Apocynum: &amp; the Spaniards Atramosos de can, as being fit to kill dogs, so that these contrarieties doe rather argue them to be divers plants: the second was brought me out of Spaine by Boel, by the name expressed in the title, but came to us also from Leyden by the name of Astragalus marinus Pauwij, either because Pauwius the President of the Garden there had it from Boel, or from Spaine, where Boel gathered it: &amp; is also very likely to be the plant, that Bauhinus in his Prodromus calleth Glanci Leguminosae affinis, eing sent him from Verona by Pona who called it Aracus Ba icus, as by comparing may be seene. And like∣ ise as I thinke is the Vicia Sesamacea Apula of Columna: the third is called by Lobel Astragalus Syriacus, and may be that of Anguilara and Caesalpinus, and very probable also to be that Astragalus Dioscoridis that Rauwolfius d in Syria, as it is set forth by Lugdunensis, and is as he saith called Christiana radix by the Germanes: the fourth the second Astragalus of Clusius and called also Alpinus, which Pona calleth Cicer Astragaloides: Bauhinus also aith it is the Polygala of Camerarius in his Epitome, but surely his figure doth truly expresse the Glaux vulgari ; the fift is taken by Bauhinus to be the Anthyllis claviculata of Lugdunensis, and calleth it Astragalus Alpinus magno re I adde claviculata thereto: the sixt is the third Astragalus of Clusius, which some as he saith called Onobrychis, but untruly, and grew for sometime with him in the Low countries or Belgia, with the Astragalus Monspolien∣ (which we usually call Hedysarum m nus but perished before his going out of the country, and therefore I beleeve Clusius his judgement herein) could not be the same, although somewhat like as Bauhinus thinketh, not is it the Astragalus purpurens of Lugdunensis as Bauhinus also thought, for that is my seventh here set downe, Clusius saith the Spaniards called it Yerva di Santo Lorenzo: the eight is the second Orobus Pannonicus of Clusius, called by Dodonaeus Astragaloides, and by Lobel Astragaloides altera herbariorum, but Bauhinus not onely maketh it his sixt Orobus, but calleth it also Polygala major Massiliotica, and besides referreth it to the Polygala of Mat∣thiolus, which formerly he had called Astragalus, as also to the Polygala Valentina Clusii, but surely Clusius would not be so variable (as Bauhinus sheweth himselfe in many places) to call one herbe both Polygala and Orobus; the inth is not mentioned by any before: the last Lobel so called as is in the title: but Bauhinus maketh it to bee like kind of Ferrum aquinum and calleth it Ferro equino Gallico affinis. 
The Vertues. The true Astragalus is as Dioscorides and Galen say astringent, and that the roote taken in wine stayeth the laske nd doth also provoke urine, it dryeth and closeth up old Vlcers if the powder bee strewed or cast into them, it doth also stay bleeding, Pliny addeth that it is very profitably used against the foulenesse of the gummes. But Clusius saith that the Portugalls doe familiarly use the sixt sort here set forth, being first dryed in an Oven and powdered, to cast it into wounds and Vlcers. 
CHAP. XXI. Hedysarum sive Securidaca. Hatchet Vetch. T He ancient writers exhibited but one sort hereof which is the greater, our ater have added divers more as shall be declared: that which is usually called Hedysarum clypeatum I have described in my former Booke, yet I thought good to give you the figure of it here. 
1. Hedysarum majus sive Securidaca vera major. The greater Hatchet Vetch. The greater Hatchet Vetch (which is the truest the rest being but supposed from the likenesse) groweth not a∣bove Hedysarum clypeatum vulgaris. French Honysuckle. 
1. Hedysarum majus sive Securidaca major vere. The greater Hatchet Vetch or Sicklewort. 
2. Hedysarum minus. The lesser Hatchet Vetch or Sicklewort. 
a foote high, with divers winged leaves grow∣ing on the stalkes, which are weake and not stan∣ding upright, each of the leaves is small not very long and round at the end, at the toppe stand many small yellow flowers ( Matthiolus saith reddish but I thinke he was therein mistaken as he was also in the pods to say the ends were blunt) which turne into so many long flat thin cods and reddish, with a small crooked point: the seede is flat and reddish within them, so lying in them that they may be discerned in the cod where they lye, but not like an Hatchet as many have set it downe, thinking it therein to agree with Dio∣scorides his discription, for he doth compare the whole cod and not the seede thereunto: the root is small and perisheth yearely. 
2. Hedysarum minus sive Securidaca minor. The lesser Hatchet Vetch or Sikcle-wort. The lesser Hatchet Vetch is like unto the former but somewhat lesser, yet not much lower if it grow in any good ground, the flowers grow many together of a pale yellow colour, and after them come small crooked cods bowed as it were almost together, wherein lie pale browne seedes not fully round but square and lesser, the roote hereof likewise perisheth yearely with us. 
3. Securidaca major articulata. The greater joynted Hatchet Vetch. This Plant groweth greater and higher then the two former, and so are the winged leaves more in number and somewhat larger: from the joynts rise long stalkes with a great many flowers at the toppes of them, smelling somewhat strong, of blush and white mixed together, after which follow long round and not flat cods, a little hooked with divers joynts as it were▪ or bunched places like the true Orobus, wherein lye red seede somewhat long: the roote creepeth farre abroad and perisheth not. 
4. Securidaca articulata minor. The lesser joynted Hatchet Vetch. This lesser is like the former, but lower and lesser in stalkes, and fewer also in leaves upon the middle rib; the flowers also are smaller, but as many or more growing together at the toppes of the stalkes that rise from the joynts of the leaves, and are of a pale red or blush colour, in their places grow small round heads with crooked toppes much resembling a Billhooke, such as labouring countrey men doe use to cut their hedges withall; wherein lyeth but one seede as having but one bunch: the roote is hard and woody spreading under ground and endureth long. 
5. Securidaca peregrina Clusii. Strange Hetchet Vetch. This stranger groweth lower then any of the former being not a foote high with divers winged small branches, bearing some such like leaves on them but smaller, and at the toppe sundry small whitish flowers, and after them long broad thin and flat cods waved in on both edges, wherein lye divers flat browne seedes: the roote is small and stringy perishing yearely. 
6. Securidaca minima. The least Hatchet Vetch. This least sort hath stalkes a foote long p ead on the ground, having divers leaves set on a stalke, but the end hath alwayes three standing together, it hath many flowers on a stalke: the seede is reddish and biforked, lying in very small hooked short cods striped over art, this groweth by Mempelier.
2. Anthyllis leguminaso marina Baetica vel Cretica sive Auricula muris Camerarij. Sea kidney Vetch of Spaine or Candy. Having well considered this small plant, whose seed Boel brought me out of Spaine, and called it Anthyllis Baetica marina spinosis siliquis; I find it so neere to agree to that which Camerarius called Auricula muris semine &amp; leporis foliorum figura, that I dare say it is the same: for the leaves are very like the former Anthyllis both for fite and forme, but a little hoary or woolly, and yellow flowers, within a flat round huske, a little prickly about the edges, with kidney like seede within them: the roote is anuall as it is likely, for it perished yearely with me. 
3. Anthylis leguminosa vesicaria Hispanica. Bladder Pease or Kidney Vetch of Spaine. This small plant groweth low and leaning downe to the ground, with a few leaves next to it, which doe some∣times consist but of three leaves, but usually of five, the lowest whereof are smaller than the end leafe that is lar∣gest, and is somewhat broad, and round pointed, and a little hairie withall: on the stalkes grow the like leaves, and at the joynts with them come forth three or foure somewhat hairy soft swelling huskes, and at the toppes of them whitish flowers scarse appearing, which being past, the seede groweth in those huskes that then are more swollen and seeme like bladders, wherein usurlly are contained two small round pease like to those of Orobus: the roote is long, slender, and annuall. Camerarius in horto calleth it Trefolium Haluacabum, but saith it is rather a Lotus: Prosper Alpinus in his Booke De Plantis exorticis, calleth it Trifolium vesicarium; but Boel from whom I had it Anthyllis Baetica vesicaria. 
4. Anthyllis falcata Cretica. Crooked Kidney Vetch of Candy. This Kidney Vetch of Candy hath sundry leaves spread upon the ground, every one wherof is very like the lon∣gest or end leafe of the last, from among which rise up the stalkes, beset at the joynts with lesser leaves, sometimes but two at a place, otherwhiles three, foure, or five, standing some places close together, resembling the Trefoile or Cinquefoile leafe, without any footestalke to them; and some also will have the leaves separate on both sides of the stalke, one above and against the other: the flowers stand three or foure together at the tops of a yellow colour, like those of the horned Claver, after which come crooked cods of a skinny substance with small seede 6. Glaux Hispanica Clusij. Clusius his Spanish Milkewort. 
7. Scorpioides leguminosa. The Scorpion-like Pulse. 
within them: the roote consisteth of small strings and fibres: Alpinus calleth it Trifolium falcatum, but because I finde both this and the last better to agree in face with Anthyllis, have therefore put them together. 
5. Stella Leguminosa. The starre codded Pulse or Birds foote. This starre fashioned Pulse groweth also about halfe a foote high with upright stalkes, whereon are many win∣ged leaves set, consisting of very small leaves like unto the Birds foote, from the joynts of the stalkes with the leaves come a tuft of small pale yellow flowers at the toppes of small prickly fading stalkes, which turne into five or sixe small, long, crooked, pointed cods, standing one against another, like unto a starre, from whence rose the name, but not joynted as the Birds foote, having within them small brownish seede, of the taste of other Pulse, but a little clammy with all: the roote is small and yellowish. 
6. Glanx Hispanica Clusij. Clusius his Spanish Milkewort. The Spanish Milkewort of Clusius riseth up with three or foure hoary weake stalkes not a foote high, whereon grow many soft leaves, made of many small ones set together on both sides of a middle rib, like as those other Pul∣ses here before, of a greene colour above, and hoary white underneath, and a little bitter in taste: the stalkes are bare towards the toppes, where they beare a short spike of flowers set close together, each rising out of a hoary huske, and are of a pale blewish purple colour, after which come short round pods, with 4. or 5. small round seedes within them; the roote is small and threddy. 
7. Scorpioides Leguminosa. The Scorpion-like Pulse. This also is a small Pulse with winged leaves like the last, but rounder: the flowers also are small and yellow, standing on long naked stalkes, one or two together, which turne into long and flat joynted cods, ending in a small long crooked point, somewhat like a Scorpions taile: some have taken it to be a Securidaca. 
The Place and Time. The first is found in many places in this Land, and so is the fift, if I be not much deceived; the rest are strangers, their titles declaring it in most: they flower towards the end of Summer, and seede also. 
The Names. These Plants have not beene knowne to any of the ancient Greeke or Latine Authors that we know. The first is diversly named by diverse of our moderne Writers: Dodonaeus calleth it Anthyllis prior, and Anthyllis Lentisimilis, Lobel, Clusius, and others Anthyllis leguminosa, by Tabermontanus Lagopodium, by Thalius Arthetica Sax num, by Gesner in hortis Vulneraria rustica because his Country husbandmen called it Wundkraut or Klein Wundkraut; and those of Berne Guichheil, and Bauhinus Loto affinis Ʋulneraria pratensis: the second Camerarius, as I said, called Auricula muris, and Boel that brought it us, as it is in the title, and so likewise the third, which Camerarius, as I said, although hee called it Trifolium Halicacabum, as Alpinus did Trifolium vesicarium; yet judged it rather a Lotus: the fourth is onely mentioned by Alpinus, lib de exoticis, by the title of Trifolium falcatum Creticum which with the former I have rather thought fit to referre hither: the fift is called by Lobel Stella leguminosa, and as Bauhinus thinketh the Vicia Sesamacea of Columna: but is much mistaken therein, as I shewed you before in the Chapter of Astragalus: the sixt is called by Clusius Glanx Hispanica, and thinketh that no others so called, came so neare that of Dioscorides as this: it is very likely to be the Glanx maritima of Alpinus, lib. de exoticis; Dodonaeus calleth it Anthyllis altera lentisimilis; Bauhinus maketh it to be the Cicer sylvestre minus of Thalius or very like it: the seventh is called by Lobel Scorpioides leguminosa; but both this and the Stella legu∣minosa are referred by Bauhinus to the Orinthopodia, calling them Orinthipodio affines: Bauhinus among the Poly∣galas, doubteth whether Anguilara his Polygala should not be the Polygala Valentina prima Clusij, which he saith hath leaves like Lentills, but fatter, a yellow flower and seede in pods, which I thinke more likely to be this Scor∣pioides than any kinde of Polygala. 
The Ʋertues. The first is of much use among the Germans for their wounds and hurts, inward and outward, and so doe both wayes apply them, whence came their name: Thalius also sheweth by his name imposed thereon, that it was used for the gout. 
CHAP. XXV. Foenum Graecum. Fenugreeke. T He ancient Writers made but one sort of Fenugreeke, the latter have added some others unto it, and although some have set them among the Trefoiles, whereunto they are somewhat like, yet be∣cause Galen and others say, that they were eaten as Lupines, and the Egyptians and others eate the seedes yet to this day as Pulse or meate, and that Bauhinus thereupon, as I guesse placed them a∣mong the Pulse, I am content to doe so likewise. 
1. Foenum Graecum sativum. Manured Fenugreeke. The tame Fenugreeke riseth up sometimes but with one, &amp; sometimes with two or three hollow greene stalkes, parted into divers branches, whereon grow at severall spaces, many leaves, but three alwayes set together on a foote stalke, almost round at the ends, &amp; a little dented about the sides, greene above, and grayish underneath: from the joynts with the leaves come forth white flowers, and after them crooked flattish long hornes, small pointed, with yellowish cornered seedes within them, smelling somewhat strong and loathsome; the roote is made of many fibres perishing still before Winter. 
2. Foenumgraecum sylvestre. Wild Fenugreeke. This wilde Fenugreeke hath the like one or more stalkes branched, the leaves stand three together, and are some what like the former, dented about the edges, the flowers likewise are whitish, but stand more together at the end, and so doe the long cods, somewhat like unto them, with smaller and darker seede in them. 
3. Foenumgraecum alium sylvestre. Another wilde Fenugreeke. This other Fenugreeke hath but one slender stalke, seldome branched, of a foote high, and scaly as it were at the bottome, whereon grow such like leaves as the former, and at the joynts flowers like unto the manured stan∣ding single and lesser, but broader hornes afterwards, more flat, and ending in a small thread, the seede within is likewise lesse. 
The Place and Time. The first is manured every where that I can heare of: the others grow wilde in Spaine and other countries: they flower with us in the beginning of Iuly, and give their seede in the end of August and September. 
1. Foenum graecum sativum. Manured Fenugreeke. 
2. Foenum Graecum sylvestre. Wilde Fenugreeke. 
 
The Names. It is alled in Greeke by Dioscorides , and by other Greekes and , but Theophrastus calleth it , a corun, similitudine sive sit capri vel bovis, the crooked seede vessells being so like unto hornes; in Latine Foeumgraecum, because that, as Columna saith, it had two times of sowing, the one before Winter to be fodder or cattle, the other in February sot seede, and simply calleth it Siliqua. Ʋarro calleth it Silicula; and Pliny Si∣licis; all other now adayes call the first Foenumgraecum or sativum: and the second Foenumgrecum sylvestre, and Bauhinus Foenumgraecum sylvestre alterum polyceration; and thinketh it is the Hedysarum minimum of Lugdunensis: the Arabians call it Olba Hebbe, and Helbe, the Italians Fiengreco; the Spaniards Alfornus; the Germanes Bocks∣burs; the French, Dutch, and English, Fenugreeke.
The Vertues. The seede of Fenugreeke is onely in use with us, the herbe it selfe never used that I know, because it is seldome seene growing with us; and as Galen saith, is hot in the second degree, and drie in the first, it clenseth, digesteth, dissolveth and mollifieth: the powder of the seede taken with a little hony driveth forth many noysome humors out of the body, mollifieth inward Impostums and Vlcers in the Lungs and breasts, and easeth the griping paines of the intralls, but it doth overturne and breede a loathing in some stomackes, especially if they bee tender, but may well serve to robustious and countrey people invred to strong labour, for I know no Physitions in our dayes doe use it inwardly, yet Alpinus saith that the Egyptian women doe use to eate the seed, which Galen and divers authors said was used in their times (being buried a little in earth to make them sproute, whereof many Sacke fulls are sold in the markets daily) to make them grow fat. But outwardly applyed it hath many good uses of fami∣liar and daily experience, for the meale thereof heated with Vinegar and applyed outwardly to the Region of the Spleene, doth mollifie and waste the hardnesse thereof, as also other hard tumors and swellings; the decoction thereof mollifieth likewise the hardnesse, and other paines or heate of the mother, and openeth the obstructions of it, if they sit therein as in a bathe, or receive the hot fumes by sitting over it: the decoction thereof clenseth the head and haire from scurfe, dandraffe and the running sores thereof: it helpeth the disease called tenasmus, that is an often desire to the stoole without doing any thing, as also the Bloody flux when the excrements smell strong: a Pultis made with the meale thereof and Linseede, and the decoction of Mallowes, and a little oyle or Axungia put thereto asswageth the swelling and paines of the cods or privy parts of women, and generally all other swellings and tumors: the same also helpeth the Goute and other joynt aches that come of cold: the Muc∣cilage of the bruised seede steeped in water and strayned forth▪ boyled in oyle or axungia is of much good use for many of the foresaid griefes: the decoction or the muccilage applyed to the forehead with clothes dipped there∣in stayeth the flux of humors to the eyes, and easeth the paines and inflammations in them: used also in Glisters it is effectuall in the Stone by opening and mollifying the inward parts. Lobel saith, that of the seede is made an oyle of more vertue then would be beleeved, to dissolve scirrhous swellings in the intralls, and other hard knots and kernells. 
CHAP. XXVI. Tribulus terrestris. Land Caltrops. T He Land Caltrops (for that of the water Tribulus terrestris. Land Caltrops. 
shall bee spoken of in another Classis or Tribe) riseth up with divers small hard branches, with divers winged leaves on them made of many small leaves set on both sides of a middle ribbe like Orobus: at the joynts stand singly small pale whitish yellow flowers which turne int small rough prickly heads, of five or six cor∣ners, wherein lyeth a small kernell or seede: the roote groweth downewards with many long fibres thereat. 
The Place and Time. It groweth in the sandy fields among Corne beyond Sea, as also among rubbish, and the ruines of buildings and by wall sides; wee finde it many times in our owne Land: It flowreth in Iuly and ripeneth in August. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and in Latine also Tribulus terrestris quod siliqua planta muricata est. The Arabians call it Hasac or Has ck, the Italians Tribolo terrestre, the Spaniards Abr and Abrolhos, the French Saligot terrestre, the Germanes Waldt Kletlin, the Dutch , and wee in English Land Caltrops, from the forme of the fruit like those instruments of warre, that were cast in the enemies way to annoy their Horses: but why Pliny should account Tribulus, Loli∣nus, Carduus and Lappa no lesse th n Robus, to bee the diseases of Corne rather then Plagues and of the earth. I see no cause; and yet it seemeth it was a generall errour growen strong by tradition in those elder ages, as many other things were about the Metamorphosis of herbes, &amp;c. and Virgil seemeth to expresse the same of Pliny in these verses, Lappaeque Tribulique, niterque intentia culta, Infaelix Lolium, et steriles dominantur Avenae. For the Corne was no way otherwise hindered or spoyled, then as other Weedes would doe by their plentifull growing, to hinder the growth of the Corne, in sucking away the nourishment from the earth that should feede it, but by tearing the Legs of the Reapers; which faults or plagues rose from the earth wherein the seede of them lay hid, ready upon occasion to spring, and not in the Corne, which if it were sowen in a ground namely a well weeded Garden cleare of such weedes, would have none of them among it. 
The Vertues. The Land Caltrops are of an earthly cold qualitie and thereby astringent and hindering the breeding of inflam∣mations and Impostumes, and against the flux of humors: moreover being of thinne parts it doth much helpe to breake and waste the Stone in the Kidneyes: a Lotion made therewith healeth all sores and Vlcers in the mouth, and all corruptions that breede in the gummes and throate: the juice doth clense the inflammations and other hot rheumes in the eyes: it likewise cureth the venome of the Viper and other poysons, if a dram thereof bee taken in wine. The Thracians saith Pliny and Galen that dwell neare the River Strimon did feede their Horses with the greene herbe, and lived themselves of the fruit or kernells, making them into a sweete bread which bound the belly; Pliny addeth that the roote being gathered by a caste persons doth consume Nodes and Kernells: the seede bound to the swollen veines in the Legs, or other parts of the body taketh the swellings away, and easeth the paines. 
CHAP. XXVII. Glaux leguminosa sive Glycyrrhiza sylvestris. Licoris Vetch. O F this kinde of wild Licoris we have two or three sorts to set forth unto you, and unto these I will adjoyne the other two sorts of manured Licoris, which some good authors have likewise reckoned among the Pulses as I doe here. 
1. Glaux vulgaris leguminosa. The most common Licoris Vetch. This kind of Licoris Vetch sendeth forth many weake round hard stalkes trayling on the ground, branched upwards, set somewhat thicke with winged leaves made of many, set on both sides a middle ribbe, somewhat like as the Vetch hath, but much larger and pointed: the flowers come forth at the joynts, at the end of a long stalke many together, of a bleake white colour tending to yellow, which turne into crooked cods, con∣teining 1. Glaux vulgaris leguminosa. The most common Licoris Vetch. 
3. 4. Glycyrrhiza vulgaris siliquosa &amp; echinati. Codded and rough headed Licoris. 
two rowes of seede, cornered and grayish, of the taste of other Pulses: the roote is thicke and long, divi∣ding it selfe into two or three long strings running very deepe into the ground, sweete in taste like unto Licoris, which dyeth not but abideth long, shooting forth new branches every yeare in the Spring. 
2. Glaux altera leguminosa. Another Licoris Vetch. This other wilde Licoris hath such like stalkes and leaves as the former, but not spreading so farre, not leaning downe so much, the winged leaves also are not so large, of a darker greene on the upper side, and gray under∣neath, the flowers are of a purplish colour, the cods are brownish long and round, and the seede within them more round: the roote is like the former growing deepe and spreading, and as sweete as the other. Thalius saith that this is very like true Licoris except in some few things. 
3. Glycyrrhiza vulgaris siliquata. Common Licoris. This Licoris riseth up with many round wooddy stalkes, set at severall distances with many winged leaves, made of many small long ones set on both sides of a middle ribbe, very well resembling a young Ash risen from the seede: the flowers appeare at the joynts, after it hath stood divers yeares in a place without removing, set upon long stalkes, many set together one above another spike fashion, of a pale blew colour, which turne into long browne, and somewhat flat cods, with three or foure small, round hard, seedes in them: the roote groweth deepe into the ground, as great as a mans thumbe or more at the head, spreading divers long rootes from it, both downewards, and likewise suckers from the sides, whereby it will quickly encrease, browne without, and yel∣low within of a sweete taste. 
4. Glycyrrhiza echinata. Rough headed Licoris. This other Licoris groweth in the same manner that the former doth, with the like leaves and flowers, but of a deeper blew colour, and growing for the most part at the toppes of the branches, which are followed by rough browne heads, like to the burres of the Platanus Plane tree, as Dioscorides compareth them, being many rough ends like those of Lentills, set together in a bunch, with one browne flat seede in every cod: the roote grow∣eth as deepe as the other, but brancheth not under ground like it, and is of a stronger or more bitterish sweete taste. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in many places about Cambridge, in Claringdon Parke by Salisbury, and Thrapstone in North∣hamptonshire and many other places of our Land, the other I have not heard hath beene yet found with us, but in Germany, &amp;c. The first sort of Licoris is said to grow chiefely in Germany about Noremberg, the other in France, Spaine, Italy &amp;c. and flower with us late, and seede as late, if at all. Camden in his Britania saith, that Licoris groweth wilde at Worsop in Nottinghamshire, but I beleeve he was mistaken therein, for that they of that countrey plant great store in their fields, and thereof make good profit, as we doe in many other places in Gardens. 
The Names. The first is called Glycyrrhiza sylvestris by Gesner in hortis by Camerarius, and by Lugdunensis, Polygalom by Cor∣dus on Dioscorides, and in his Historie Polygalon Cordi by Thalius, Glaux, and Glaux vulgaris by Lobel and Clu∣sius, Foenumgraecum sylvestre by Tragus and Dodonaeus, &amp; Hedysarum glycyrrhizatum by Gerard, and many Herba∣rists, and by Bauhinus Glycyrrhiza sylvestris floribus luteo pallescentibus: the second is the Glycyrrhiza sylvestris of Thalius, and alia of Camerarius in horto, by Lobel Glauca vel Glaux quaedam leguminosa herbariorum, &amp; by Bauhinus Glycyrrhiza sylvestris altera floribus puniceis folijs Arachi: the third is called Glycyrrhiza Germanica by some, &amp; Le∣tis, or non Echinata by others, and siliquosa by Lobel and others, Dulcis radix by Tragus and Cordus, and Liqueritia in the Apothecaries shops: the last is called Glycyrrhiza echinata Dioscoridis by Lobel and Lugdunensis: Gly∣cyrrhiza Italica by Gesner and Dodonaeus, and simply Glycyrrhiza by Matthiolus and others; Theophrastus calleth it Herba Scythica; the Greekes and so the Latines Glycyrrhiza, that is, dulcis radix, and of some Glycyrrhizon: of the Arabians Sus, of the Italians Regolitia, of the Spaniards Rogoliza, of the French Reclisse, and Regalisse, of the Germanes Susholiz, of the Dutch Suethout; and we in English Licoris. 
The Vertues. The two sorts of wilde Licoris are not knowne to be used in Physicke by any, but are wholly neglected: for the other two sorts of true Licoris, their properties being both alike, I shall not neede to entreate distinctly as if the one had some other faculties that the other had not, for they are therein both alike, and as Galen saith, is very familiar to our temperature in that it is sweete, and having a little astriction joyned with it, making it tempe∣rate in heate and astriction, that it is the nearest unto our temper, and by both these qualities, as he saith, it doth lenifie the hoarsenesse of the throate, and is helpefull for the ulcers in the bladder; it hath also some moisture therein by reason of the sweetnesse, and thereby good to quench the thirst: Licoris is often boyled in faire wa∣ter, with some Maidenhaire and Figges, which maketh a good ptisane drinke, for those that have any dry cough, and to digest the flegme, and to expectorate it, or hoarsenesse, wheesing, and shortnesse of breath, and all other griefes of the breast and lungs, the tissicke or consumptions caused by the distillations of salt humours on them, which doe waste and consume them: it is good also in all the paines of the raines, the strangury, and heate of urine. The Scythians are said by chewing this in their mouthes, that it keepeth them from thirst in their long jour∣nies through the desarts for tenne or twelve dayes, and staieth hunger also: Licoris boiled in water, with a little Cinamon added to it, serveth in stead of drinke in many places, especially if it be set to worke with barme as beere is, and then tunned up, and will grow cleere, strong, and heady by time as beare will doe: the fine powder of Licoris blowne through a quill into the eyes that have a pinne and webbe, as they call it, or rheumaticke di∣stillations into them, doth clense them and helpe them: the juyce of Licoris is as effectuall in all the di∣seases of the breast and longs, the reines and bladder as the decoction: the juyce dissolved in Rosewater with some Gumme Tragacanth, is a fine lohoc or licking medicine for hoarsenesse, wheesings, and all other rough∣nesse in the mouth or throat, and to expectorate tough flegme, as also to condensate thinne rheumes, falling on the lungs: our English Licoris is more pleasant to the taste, wanting much of that astriction is in that which commeth to us from beyond sea. 
The Galega or Goates Rue should have taken up his place here, as being proper to this Classis, but as you may see before, I have drawne it and others into another Classis, for the reasons there specified. There yet remaines a number of Trefoiles to be spoken of, as being nearest to the Pulses; especially those that are peoperly called Lotus siliquosi; because their long cods are more eminent to be seene, which shall next follow, and the rest in these order. 
CHAP. XXVIII. 1. Lotus edulis Creticus. Trefoile Pease of Candy. T his Trefoile Pulse or Pease shooteth forth divers slender stalkes set with brownish greene leaves at se∣verall distances thereon; three alwayes standing on a foote stalke, which are sappy, a little thicke and pointed, the flowers are yellow, but like unto small Pease blossomes, which are followed by round cods, somewhat crooked, and great in comparison of the smallnesse of the plant, wherein lie round Pease of a sweete taste, like unto our ordinary Pease, and while they are young and greene usually sold in their markets, and as much desired of them, as our Pease with us: the whole Plant with stalkes and leaves are a little hairy: the roote is small, thready and annuall growing among their corne, and in the borders of their fields. 
2. Lotus quadripinnatis siliquis. Square codded Pease. This kinde of Pulse or Pease I have shewed you in my former booke, that it hath a crimson blossome, and long round cods, with foure filmes, two at one side, and two at another. 
3. Arbus seu Lotus Aegyptica. The Egyptian foure leafed Lotus. This small herbe growing not much above an hand breadth high, hath divers round Trefoile-like leaves grow∣ing on the hairy stalke foure most usuall together, at the toppe whereof standeth sundry white flowers, after whom the seede followeth that is like unto Peare kernells in the huskes.
The Vertues. The wilde Lotus as Dioscorides and Galen say is of an heating and drying quality, and thereby effectuall against the paines in the bladder if it be taken of it selfe or with Mallow seede drunke in wine: the powder of the herbe mixed with some Hony, and annointed taketh away the markes and blemishes in the face, &amp;c. the eight sort here expressed as I said before is held about Mompelier to be of singular good effect against the Piles or Hemorrhoides, for it hath a manifest astringent taste without any manifest heate or acrimony: the usuall dose of the dryed herbe (but the seede is much better) made into powder, and the quantitie of a dram or halfe a dram according to the age and disposition of the Patient taken in red wine which effect the learned there knowing have much reasoned the case among themselves, whether it worketh this effect by any hidden propertie, or by the astringent facultie to either of which opinion some have inclined: the Lotus Lybica as Galen saith is in the second degree of heate, and doth a little clense, the rest have no especiall propertie recorded by any or knowne to us. 
CHAP. XXIX. Trifolia montana. Mountaine Trefoiles. T He next Trefoiles that are to bee entreated of are those that grow on hills and the dryed grounds, whereof there are sundry varieties. 
1. Trifolium montanum majus purpuroum. The greater purple Mountaine Trefoile. This greater Trefoile groweth scarse a foote high, with divers leaves thereon which are large and three inches long sometimes, three alwayes together on long footstalkes, sharpe pointed and a little ly snipped about the edges, at the toppes stand large and somewhat long heads of gallant purple flowers, like the medow Trefoile but greater: This is also found with longer and narrower leaves, and a longer spiked of flowers. 
1. 2. Trifolium montanum majus flore purpures &amp; albo. The great purple and white mountaine Trefoile. 
4. Trifolium augustifolium Alpinum. Narrow leafed Trefoile of the Alpes. 
 
2. Trifolium montanum majus albo flore. The great white mountaine Trefoile. The stalke hereof is not so great or high, the leaves are smaller yet somewhat long and dented about the edges, growing many below, and few and smaller on the stalke, at the toppe whereof grow one or two short branches, with each a spiked head of small white flowers somewhat sweete: the roote is long and about a fingers thick∣nesse, brownish on the outside and white within, with some fibres thereat. 
3. Trifolium montanum obtuso crenato folio purpurascens. The blush mountaine Trefoile. This Trefoile is fuller of leaves on the stalkes then the last, which are long and narrow, not sharpe but round at the ends, and dented round about, but up higher on the stalkes they are very narrow, the flowers are fewer that stand at the toppes, and of a pale purple colour. 
4. Trifolium augustifolium Alpinum. Narrow leafed Trefoile of the Alpes. This mountaine Trefoile hath a long roote, somewhat hairy or scaly toward the toppe, and ending in some long fibres, whitish on the outside and somewhat hard and wooddy, of a sweete bitter taste like unto Licoris, (from whence some have called it Spanish Licoris: but farre unfitly as most of the vulgar appellations bee) from whence rise divers long small slender stalkes of leaves bowing downe to the ground, with two or three small narrow shreads of leaves on them towards the bottome, and three long narrow leaves at the ends of them, with small dents at the edges sensibly to be felt, from among these leaves rise one or two naked slender stalkes three or foure inches high, bearing large flowers as it were in a round spike, of an excellent purple crimson co∣lour standing in five cornered huskes. 
5. Trifolium Alpinum argenteum. Silver leafed Trefoile of the Alpes. This Silver Trefoile hath a great long reddish wooddy roote, shooting forth divers great branches with a num∣ber of small narrow leaves, three together at the toppes of them next the ground standing on short footstalkes which are soft, and of a Silver-like hoarinesse all over, from among which rise short stalkes not above foure fin∣gers breadth in height, naked untill a little under the flowers they have three lesser leaves then those below: each stalke beareth but one flower, which is not after the fashion of all other Trefoiles, that is, with Pease-like blossomes (and therefore I the more suspect that this cannot properly be referred to the company of Trefoiles but rather to the Ranunculi Gerania or some other according as the seede shall shew it to be which wee have not seene) but laid open like unto a Crowfoote or Cranes bill, and of a Rose or Peach colour, with many like colou∣red threds in the middle tipt with blackish pendents standing about a small boary head. 
6. Trifolium montanum lupulinum. Hoppe-like Trefoile. The Hoppe Trefoile riseth with smooth slender weake stalkes a cubit high, set with few leaves on them, which are small and round pointed for the most part, like the common medow trefoile standing severally on their foot-stalkes, the flowers stand at the toppes, made as it were of brownish yellow scales laid one upon another, very well resembling the head of an hoppe, whereof it tooke the name, and from whence some have called it Lupulus sylvaticus a wilde Hoppe, and groweth as Bauhinus saith on the bass above I ld in Germany, where it is likely Thalius also found it. 
6. Trifolium montanum Lupulinum. Hoppe-like Trefoile. 
9. Trifolium Glycyrrhizites Licoris Trefoile. 
 
7. Trifolium saxatile hirsutissimum. The hairy rocke Trefoile. The roote of this Trefoile is wooddy and creepeth under ground, with a reddish barke, and is but as it were the ocke of many heads or plants set together, being not above two or three inches high: the leaves are small, soft, oolly, and as it were Silver-like, in forme like a Trefoile, dented about the edges, and standing on short but very hairy footstalkes, among which rise small round heads standing on long stalkes, in the middle of whom role short and very soft yellow haires; wee have not yet seene any other flower it beareth nor seede: it was ga∣thered on the toppes of the highest of the Holvetian mountaines. 
8. Trifolium Scorpioides. Scorpion-like Trefoile. The leaves of this Trefoile are not much unlike the first Trefoile, but narrow and endented, the flowers are yellow and grow in a small tuft three or foure together which afterwards beare small crooked cods like a Scor∣ , or the Scorpioides l gun sa. This Boel gathered in Spaine and with it another like thereunto, Flore pal∣lidiore. but the en were of a paler colour. 
9. Trifolium Glycyrrhizites. Licoris Trefoile. T reete or Licoris Trefoile hath a great and long deepe spread roote, very like unto Licoris, from the head groweth out sundry short armes halfe a foote long, and divers leaves issuing therefrom, three alwayes together which are somewhat long and narrow, plaine on the edges, and each standing on a short footstalke, which rise short stalkes like the medow Trefoile, bearing such a like bush or tuft of purplish flow∣ers: this saith Lobel is not that of Pona or Alpinus yet very like. 
The Place and Time. These all grow on hills and mountaines, soule in Spaine others in Germany, and the last on a hill by Mompelier called Ho tus Dei, they flower and seede in the time that the others doe. 
The Names. Chasius and Thalius have made mention of the first and second by the names of Trifolium majus and montanum: the third is from Bauhinus, Pona in his Italian Ballius mentioneth the fourth, and is so called by Pona as it is in the le which Bauhinus calleth flor magno radice dulci, and by some Glycyrrhiza Astragaloides: the fift by that name is in the title; the sixt is called by Thalius Lupulus sylvaticus, and Bauhinus Trifolium montanum lupulinum, for I take them to be both one: the fewenth Bauhinus mentioneth in his Prodromus: the eight of both sorts is not men∣tioned by any before now▪ they Mompelier call the last Trifolium dulce montanum. 
The Vertues. The properties of none of these are recorded by any that have written of them, but it is likely they much participate of the qualities of the former.
The Vertues. The use of this first herbe was in former times more to feede Cattell then in medicines, for it was held to be so powerfull to fatten their Horses and other beasts that they would stint them to a quantitie for feare of suffocating them, by growing thereby too fat, the greene herbe saith Dioscorides hath a cooling propertie, and for that pur∣pose chiefely to be used, yet Avicen commendeth the oyle made of Cot or Alfalsasat against the tremblings of the heart, Gesner saith that a liquor drawen by fire out of the Alfalses of the Spaniards is good against the Stone, I suppose he meaneth an oyle drawen out of the seede, as the oyle from Almonds. Plutarch in his booke against Epicurus reciteth a pretty similitude taken from this Medica. Even as (saith he) the seed of Medica abideth a long time by reason of his many winding branches creeping on the ground, and by his sharpe roughnesse, even so greefe having fastened his crooked rootes in ones body, cleaveth thereto not for a day or a night, but for many yeares, and is hardl expelled but by other greefes as by stronger nailes. The rest here mentioned in this Chapter are not used against any disease that I know. 
CHAP. XXXV. Scorpioides. Scorpion grasse or Caterpillers. B Ecause these plants come nearest unto the Medica, both in their flowers, pods, &amp; seedes, although diffe∣ring in their leaves, yet I thinke I doe not greatly erre to set them at the taile of the rest of the Pulses, but I have given you the knowledge of two sorts of these Scorpion Grasses in my former Booke, there remaine three more to be remembred in this Chapter to finish this Classis of the Pulses. 
1. Scorpioides Bupleurifolio pluribus corniculis asperis. Small ordinary Caterpillers with many cods. This small Caterpiller also groweth in the same manner with trailing long branches as the first small rough sort doth, the leaves are likewise of a fresh greene colour, and of the same fashion, but somewhat lesser: the flowers also are small, and of a deepe yellow, foure or five oftentimes standing together, which are of the same bignesse and fashion with the other, but that it hath as many rough crooked cods together as there were flowers, the roote is very stringy but annuall. 
2. Scorpioides Bupleurifolio siliquis lenibus. Smooth codded small Caterpillers. This other is in all things like this former sort, but that it hath seldome two flowers together on a stalke, and the wormes that follow as few, being crooked and winding in the very same manner, are small and smooth, without any roughnesse at all, &amp; of the same pale browne colour that it is, the figure whereof is with the Medicas. 
3. Scorpioides Matthioli sive Portulacae folio. Matthiolus his Scorpion Grasse, or with Purslane leaves. This Scorpion Grasse of Matthiolus hath divers upright pale greene stalkes, and pale greene leaves set thereon, each whereof is somewhat long, broad, and round pointed like a Purslane leafe, sometimes having two small leaves joyned at the bottome of the greater, and oftentimes in many without them; at the toppes of the stalkes, and out at the joynts likewise stand small pale yellow flowers, much resembling those of Medica after which follow small long slender and crooked hornes, small at the end, joynted or parted, as it were, all the length of it somewhat resembling the long crooked cod of the Coluta a Scorpioides, but this is more conspicuously joyned; and of a pale colour, within lie small long whitish yellow seede: the roote is long and fibrous, perishing yearely. 
The Place and Time. Both the first were brought us out of Spaine by Boel, as the great one was also expressed in my former Booke: the last Pena saith groweth neere unto Mompelier, as well in their manured fields, as in their Vineyards plenti∣fully. 
Scorpioides Bupleurifolio major &amp; minor. The greater and smaller rough Caterpil∣lers or Scorpion Grasse. 
3. Scorpioides Matthioli sive Portulacae folio. Matthiolus his Scorpions taile or Cater∣pillers with Purslane-like leaves. 
 
The Names. No author hath made any mention before now of these, except the first by Lobel, who called it Scorpioides Blupleui folio repens, &amp; the last by Matthiolus by the name of Scorpioides, &amp; the bare figure without any description, and referred it himselfe unto the Scorpioides, yet as he saith, it was controverted in his time by some learned men, that from the authoritie of Nicander his Scholiaste would have it to be Telopheum Dioscoridis, Dodoneus refu∣seth that opinion, saying, it neither pleased him, nor many other learned, yet Guilandinus, Anguilara, and Casalpi∣nus, and with them Bauhinus hold it to be the true Tolephium of Dioscorides: Lobel putteth it to the question, whether it be that Telephium of Cratevas or no, and seemeth to leane to their opinion, saying they are not led thereunto by weake reasons; yet because Dioscorides giveth to his Teliphium, and Galen confirmeth it a drying and clensing qualitie, yet not very hot, and thereby conducing to heale foule ulcers, and the taste of this pulse is rather like the medow Trefoiles, I may, as I thinke yet continue it in suspence; but that it should be the Clyme∣num of Dioscorides, as Columna seemeth to thinke, being in my judgement mistaken, in making the leaves of this to be like the small Ribwort Plantane, when as the other Bupleurifolio commeth neerer thereunto, then this, not having three ribbes to be seene in the leaves, I see lesse reason, for Dioscorides, saith Clymenum hath a stalke like the Beane, foure square, but so hath not this, nor hath it those Folyperum cirrhi; but that Bupleurifolio, hath in∣deede some resemblance of these rough prickles, but not this which is smooth: Bauhinus also seemeth to make two sorts of this, the other which he referreth to this which is usually called Scorpioides Matthioli: the other he calleth Scorpioides Fortulacae folio; but I thinke he can finde no other Scorpioides Portulacae folio, but this of Mat∣thiolus, I have given my reason, let others correct with better if they can. 
The Ʋertues. The two first sorts being plants lately made knowne to us, we know of no propertie they have: the last is, as I said of the taste of the Medow Trefoiles, and cannot therefore but be neare of the same effects. If it were the Telephium of Dioscorides, it should have a propertie in it to clense the body from the foule scurse or leprosie: but must after sixe houres that it hath beene annointed, be washed away with Barly water, but this herbe hath no such clensing facultie therein, nor yet to heale up foule ulcers, as is spoken before, that the propertie should be in Telephium by Galens judgement. 
CEREALIA. CORNES. CLASSIS DVADECIMA. THE TWELFTH TRIBE. CHAP. I. Triticum. Wheate. H Aving finished the Classis of the Pulses, the next to follow in order unto them is of the Cerealia, that is, all the diversities of graine and Corne, whereunto I will adjoyne with all the severall Pultages and orderings of them, as the old Romanes and Greekes used them in their times for their foode, as meate or drinke, or for medicine which are Alica or Chondrus Crimnon, Tragus, Pfisana Zythum Curmi, and the rest: after which must follow the Grasses (for that all the sorts of Cornes are the most noble and usefull kindes of Grasses, and therefore preferred before them) Rushes, and Reedes. 
To beginne then with the most noble Graine of all others, namely Wheate, it is of divers sorts, some with beardes or aulnes, others without, some of a white colour, both stalke and eare, others with a redder, called red Wheate, and some blew or of other colours, some flat, o∣thers square, some with single heads, others with many, some with single rowes, others with double; and some to be sowne before Winter, and therefore called Winter corne, others onely in the Spring, called Sommer corne,: to give you ample descriptions of every ooe particularly, were to enlarge this Volume, and yet to small purpose: I will therefore give you a description of one that may serve for a generall explication of all the rest, with onely such differences as may not be omitted, and yet in as compendious a manner as may be. 
1. Triticum spica mutica. Bare or naked hite Wheate. The white Wheate riseth up from the creeping joynted roote, with three or foure or more stalkes, with faire broad and long greene glasse-like leaves, at every joynt one, &amp; at the fourth joynt usually commeth forth the long care or spiked head, one likewise on a stalke without any branches, which while the head standeth upright bloo∣meth small yellow aglets, and when it is full ripe, boweth downe the head a little with the weight thereof, and is set with two double rowes of seede or corne, wrapped up in divers chaffie skins or cotes, and is when it is clensed of a firme compact substance, somewhat yellowish and cleare with all, and is the chiefest Wheate of all making the purest white bread. We have in some countries of this Land another sort of bearded Wheate, which the country men call a red strowed Lammas; because the stalkes are redder, or else little difference in the eare. 
2. Triticum aristis munitum. Bearded or red Wheate. This sort differeth not in the manner of growing in any respects from the other, onely the head hereof is lar∣ger and redder than the former, with foure sides seeming to be foure square, and bended also: the meate whereof maketh not so pure white bread. Lobel calleth this Triticum Loca, from the Dutch appellation, and peradven∣ture may be the Faror Adoreum of Pliny, &amp;c. 
3. Triticum Lucidum. Bright eared Wheate. The eare hereof sheweth plainely the difference, which is somewhat longer and greater, of a right browne blew∣ish colour, long and rough, with beardes and aulnes, and the graine harder, and of a browner colour: this kinde is a course graine, yeelding much more branne than the former, making also a heavier and blacker bread, Lobel cal∣leth this Triticum Loca alterum. Lugdunensis seemeth to call it Tragus, and called, as he saith by the French Ble∣turguet. 
4. Triticum multiplici spica. Double eared Wheate. The double eared Wheate is like also unto the second sort, and differeth in the eare, chiefely which is shorter, and hath divers other small eares rising from the sides of the greater, the beards or aulnes are shorter, and so is the stalke also: the graine it selfe is looser and lesse compact. 
5. Trifolium Creticum. The wilde Wheate of Candy. The wilde Wheate of Candy groweth in stalke and leafe like unto ordinary Wheate, the eares are somewhat rougher and blacker, the beardes also shorter, and the cornes lesser and blunt at one end, more like to Rie than Wheate. 
1. Triticum spica mutica. Beare or naked white Wheate. 
2. Triticum aristis munitum. Bearded or red Wheate.
The Vertues. Barly and Wheate are the prime graines of all others, and the most profitable and useful for mans life, both for meate, drinke, and medecine, all the rest being as it were but degenerated from them, and partaking of the one or other of the natures and qualities of them; yea Barly may seeme to contend with Wheate for prioritie, as well as use, for although Wheate be the staffe of our life for bread now adayes in our Europe, yet it was not so with the antient Athenians in the Levant, and other of those parts of the world now, where Barly holdeth a fur∣ther extent that Wheate; but this place will not permit that ample discourse might be said of it; &amp; howsoever we acknowledge according as the antients have recorded of it, that it nourisheth lesse than Wheate, because it is a drier graine, yet besides the medicinall qualities in it, it maketh more wholsome drinke for our bodies, than what can be made of Wheate alone, which is too sweete, and too much stuffing the body with humours, and puffing it up with loose spungious fat and flesh, making them that use it unweldy and unfit to follow their necessary affaires; but hereof enough for this place. Barly in all the parts and compositions thereof, except Mault, is more cooling than Wheate, and a little cleansing, being in the first degree of cooling and drying: it provoketh urine, saith Dioscorides, it breedeth windinesse, and is adverse to the stomacke; but all the preparations thereof, as Barly wa∣ter, or creame Tisane drinke, or those other things made thereof, doe give great nourishment to macilent and h sticke and diseased persons, or troubled with feavers or agues, and heates in the stomacke, &amp;c. and many of them have beene, and still are received for good nourishment to the healthfull: the preparations, as they were anciently used, and those that are now in use with us, I meane to speake hereafter severally; I onely meane to shew you here how it is otherwise used. A pultis made of Barly-meale or flower boyled with vinegar and hony, and a few drie figges put to them, dissolveth all hard Impostumes, and asswageth inflammations being applied: and being boiled with Melilot and Camomill-flowers; and some Linseede, Fenugreeke, and Rue in powder, and applied warme, it easeth the paines in the sides and stomacke, and the windinesse of the spleene: the meale of Barly and Psyllium Flea-wort boiled in water made into a pultis, with hony and oyle of Lillies, applied warme, cureth tumors under the eares, throate, necke, and such like places: a plaister made thereof with Tarre, Waxe, and Oyle, helpeth the hard swellings of the throate, called the Kings Evill: boyled with sharpe vinegar in∣to a pultis, and laid on hot, helpeth the leprosie: being boyled in Red-wine with Pomegranate-rindes, and Mir∣ ells, staieth the laske or other fluxe of the belly: boyled with Vinegar and a Quince, it easeth the hot paines of the gout: Barly-flower, white Salt, Hony, and Vinegar mingled together, is used by divers to take away the itch speedily and certainely: the water distilled from the greene Barly in the end of May, is very good for those that have defluxions in the eyes, to stay the humours, and to ease the paines being dropped into them, or white bread laid to steepe therein, and bound thereto: if Barly halfe sodden be given to Hennes, that hardly or seldome lay Egges, it will cause them to lay both greater and more often. 
Now I am come to shew you both what hath beene in former times made of Barly, as what is used to be made thereof among us in these dayes: first I thinke it fit to speake of those preparations the ancients used, and then of those which we use. 
CHAP. XV. Of Polenta. P Olenta (which may well be called parched Barly) was antiently made after divers manners, for Pliny in his 18. Booke and 7. Chapter, sheweth that some Grecians used to make it as well of greene Barly ta∣ken out of the eare before it was ripe, steeped in water, and after beaten in a Morter, and washed in Baskets to take away the huskes, then dried in the Sunne, and afterwards steeeped and beaten againe, untill it was throughly clensed, and then dried and ground small, unto twentie pound whereof howsoever made, was put of Linseede, and Coriander seede, of each one pound and a halfe, and about two ounces of salt, all being well bruised, they mingled together. The Italians made it of parched Barly, without any moistening, ground small, and those things added thereunto aforesaid, and some Millet seede also. Other Grecians saith Pliny, made it of Barly moistened for a night, and then dried it, and parched or fryed it the next day, and then ground it. Galen commendeth that most that was made of fresh Barly, before it was throughly ripe, and the beardes or over-dry, and but indifferently parched, and addeth nothing else unto it Sundry Nations did use this Po∣lenta in stead of bread, and namely the Cypriots, who although they had Wheate growing with them, yet most used this. This drieth more than Barly it selfe, and bindeth the belly, being drunke with red wine, and allayeth inflammations; and drunke with water it quencheth thirst: it was often eaten with a little new wine, or sod∣den wine put unto it as every one liked. 
CHAP. XVI. Maza. M Aza is but Polenta, parched Barly moystened with some liquor, as every one thought meete, for some used nothing but Water, others put to it both water and oyle together, as Hesychius saith, and some as Hippocrates sheweth, did put sweete wine to it: and some put honey also: Galen declareth that Maza of it selfe doth hardlier digest in the stomacke, and doth trouble the belly with winde, if it a∣bide long therein, but it doth the sooner passe downe if it be much turned, and honey be put to it. 
CHAP. XVII. Of Ptisana. P Tisana the most praysed and prayse-worthy drinke, supping or pultage (call it how you will) was used anciently to be made of divers sorts of graine, and not altogether of Barly, for they had their Chondro Ptisana made of Zea, Pyrina Ptisana made of Wheate, and Pliny saith that Italy which was abounding in Rice, made Ptisana thereof, which others made of Barly, and Galen also sheweth it was made of Pulse, for he nameth Phacoptisana that is made of Lentills, but Ptisana simply with∣out any other addition, is alwayes understood of Barley, onely husked for the excellency thereof. The manner of making it is set downe by divers authors, as Pliny, Galen, Dydimus, and others, but because Hippocrates, who is accounted the Prince of Physitions, wrote a whole Treatise in prayse thereof, I will here set downe his words of making it fit for meate or medicine. Take, saith, he of the best Barley, and moysten it with water, let it so rest for 3. or 4. houres, then put it into a course bagge, and beate it with a mallet or pestell of wood, untill it have cast off the huskes, which then being washed, to take them away, drie it in the Sunne, and keepe it to use as oc∣casion serveth as Polenta: but to make it Ptisana; it is to be boyled gently in water untill it breake, and that the liquor be thicke like creame, which then is lenifying sweete and lubricke or slippery, and being moderately li∣quid, quencheth thirst, it hath no astriction, nor moveth perturbations, nor swelleth in the stomacke, for all the swelling is tooke away in the boyling, it sticketh not in the breast or stomacke, but by the lubricitie is easily di∣gested and quencheth thirst, by the moistening qualitie: these properties, saith Galen, recorded by Hypocrates, are availeable, both for the sicke and for the sound: Dioscorides further addeth; the creame of Ptisana, by rea∣son of the boyling, yeeldeth more nourishment than Polenta that is made of Barly, and is profitable to helpe the sharpenesse and roughnesse of the throate, and all exulcerations. This was the manner of the ancients Ptisana, for their manner of making and using; but our Physitions in these times use onely Barly husked and boyled in water, and then beaten and strained, putting some blanched Allmonds or Pompion seede, or other cold seedes bea∣ten, and strained with some Sugar and Rosewater; and this is their most usuall Tisane or Barly creame. Some appoint Barly to be lesse sodden, which is called Barly-water, and therewith is made either Tisane drinkes by ad∣ding Licoris, Raisons of the Sunne, Maidenhaire, or the like, for such as are troubled with coughes, shortensse of breath, &amp;c. or else with Almonds or cold seedes, make it into an Almond milke, with Suger and Rosewater, or given to hecticke or macilent and weake bodies: the Barly water alone, or made into a Julip with Syrope of Violet, or Lemonds, or the like, is a fit drinke for those that have hot or burning feaver on them, or are other∣wise distempered with heate, or used with some pectorall Syrupes for the cough, shortnesse of winde, hoarse∣nesse, or the like. There yet remaineth Zythum, and Curmi of the ancients to be spoken of, and both, as Dioscori∣des saith made of Barly, which because wee suppose in these dayes, they did point to our Ale and Beare, which are made with Mault, the substantiall part of the drinkes; I thinke meete first to speake of Mault. 
CHAP. XVIII. Byne sive Maltum. Mault. A ETius onely used this word Byne which by all is referred to Mault, and as the by manner of making set downe by him is shewed plainely: Maltum is a word made Latine from the Germans Manth and our Mault, both signifying one thing, that is, that manner of prepared Barly, as is fit therewith af∣terwards to serve to their use, that would make of it either Ale or Beare: the manner of making is as I take it in all countries alike without difference, and so well knowne to all that it is in a manner needelesse for me to set it downe, thereby to enforme any that having spent their time wholly thereon as being their profession, can tell better how to enforme me, but as in all the rest of this Worke, my endeavours are to enforme &amp; shew those that not knowing wil not refuse to heare and understand, and thus it is Barly is laid in wa∣ter to soake for two or three dayes and nights, which being swollen in that time, the water is drained from it, and is afterwardes spread equally on the floore of a garner, or such like place that is close, about halfe a foote thicke, and covered with clothes or other things warme, untill it beginne to sproute ready as it were to grow, (which will be performed within two or three dayes, if the weather be warme, or not very cold, or else it will lye longer then doe they turne it before it grow too hot, two or three times a day for a weeke or tenne dayes, both to coole and to drie it, then doe they bring it to the kill, and there dry it throughly with fire made of straw, or other such like light stuffe, to cause it to have the sweeter relish, for being dried with bavens or wood, the mault will taste bitter of the smoake and is soone perceived in the drinke, which will taste bittter. This mault before it can be used, is to be ground a little, and then serveth it for the Brewer to use. If Mault being ground, be tried and applied in a bagge, or double cloth hot to the sides or belly, pained with stitches or gripings, occasioned by cold or winde, it giveth much ease and helpe, and being made into a pultis, asswageth tumors and swel∣lings. 
CHAP. XIX. Of Zythum. T Heophrastus and Dioscorides onely, and no other authors before them, that I can finde, have made mention of Zythum, what it is, or whereof it was made, and yet they are so short therein, that we rather understand this by others relation, which thing sheweth it was so common a drinke there in those places of Greece, &amp;c. that they thought it not worth their labour further to ex∣plane it, even as Discorides hath done the like with many herbes that were most common in those times, for he onely saith it is a drinke made of Barly and no more: Diodorus Siculus saith that Zythum is a drinke made of Barly, and was used in Galatia where was neither wine nor oyle: Pliny after him hath a little further explained it by saying, Of sundry sorts of Graine drink is used to be made, as Zythum in Egypt, Celia and Caerea in Spaine (which as it is likely was so in Pliny his time, and that before their planting of Vines there which hath generally now banished that Barly broth, they now drinking eyther faire water alone or with a little Sugar, or to their water put more or lesse wine as they desire to drinke it) Cerevisia and other kindes of drinkes in Gallia, and other countries, thus saith Pliny: Now the generall Tenet of our times is that it is the same drinke which we now call Beere or Ale, or but varied according to the manner of the countrey where it is made, and according to the goodnesse, quantitie and diversitie of the graine whereof it is made, and also of the water: for first for the water, it is well knowne that there is no Beere can bee made in the low countries by reason of their b ackish water, but will taste thereof, and be farre inferiour to that is made in England; and againe it is ob∣served by many, that the water of our River of Thames about London doth make better and stronger drinke (kee∣ping equall proportion in all things) then that which is made of other Spring or River water else where: and for the goodnesse of the graine and the well ordering and making it into Mault, it is well knowne allo to make the drinke better or worse stronger or weaker; the diversities of graine also causeth diversitie of drinke: for if it should be made of Wheate alone it would be too thicke, too sweete and fulsome as I said before, or of Oates alone it would be too poore and thin: and for the quantitie that is all in all to make it mightie durable, even two or three yeares, or poore and weake not to laste a moneth. But Petrus Bellonius in his second booke of observa∣tions and 98. Chapter is of opinion that this Zythum of the ancient Graecians is the same drinke that the Latines called Posca or Pusca, wherof Columella, Serapio and Avicen also make mention: but differeth as hee saith from Cerevisia Ale, because it is white like milke, thicke and of a good nourishment, and fuming into the head causing drunkennesse if it bee too largely taken: and this kinde of drinke saith hee is usually sould in all the cities of Asia in the tappe houses appointed for it, and generally called with them Chousset; and to strengthen his opinion al∣ledgeth the place in Suetonius, where hee relateth that Caesars bondman that fled from him was found at Capua selling Posca in a tappe house, and therefore that Posca could not bee Oxycratum (which is Vinegar and water) but this Zythum but Scaliger in his annotations upon Bellonius as they are extant in Clusius his Exoticks, sheweth his manifold errours in this his so saying: the manner of making this Chousset of the Turkes I thinke not amisse breefely here to set downe, that you may see the differences of the compositions of drinkes in severall places. It is made saith he of meale made into paste and boyled in a great Ca on, and then being made into small balles is cast into water, which will presently boyle up of it selfe and grow hot without the helpe of any fire, and be∣come a kinde of thicke drinke: The spunie or yest thereof, saith he, is white and light, wherewith the Turkish women use to annoint themselves, especially when they are in bathing, making the rough skinne smooth and delicate, and this facultie the ancients attributed unto Zythum: and further Dioscorides saith, Zythum provoketh Vrine but hurteth the reines and the sinewes, especially the tunicles that cover the braine, it breedeth windinesse maketh in blood and humors, and engendreth the falling sicknesse. 
CHAP. XX. Of Curmi. T His likewise hath no further relation or explanation from Dioscorides, then that it is also a drinke made of Barly and was often used for drinke, nor yet by Pliny further then as is shewed before, that Cerevisia was made in Gallia and other kindes in other countries. We therefore in these times re∣ferre this Curmi to our Ale as wee did formerly Zythum unto Beere, and withall let me shew you that Ale was the most ancient drinke was made in this Land, whereof the Wolsh Curw (which is Ale with them in their Language) hath a shew of neare correspondence to Curmi, and that our good Ale was better knowne to other nations by the word then by the forme o taste but with us became a pro∣verbe, that it would make one have a rich and nose (meaning by the red pimples it would raise on their faces and noses that did use to stand to it and drinke it stoutly) yet a stranger both seeing it and r sting it here in Eng∣land gave his verdict thereon in these words, Nihil spissius dum bibitur, nihil: clarius du mingitur, unde constat m ltas faeces in ventre reliquit. But Cerevisia which we more properly transferre to Ale was it seemeth by Pliny, a word well knowne before his time, and more proper to Gaule or France then to Italy, as the matter it selfe also was, and which from them as it is likely hath beene transferred to us. This old English drinke hath lost much of his reputation since that Biera Beere came in use, and nothing so much desired as formerly it was, partly because our Ale in most places of this Land now adayes is not so well boyled to make it cleane and cleare drinke, being so muddy sweete and fulsome, that many loath it, at least refuse it for cause, and in especiall because Beere is a clearer drinke and of better rellish by the boyling, but chiefely that the hoppes make it more durable without sowring, lesse fulsome and much more wholsome. It remaineth now that I should shew you the properties of Beere and Ale for medecine what diseases they will helpe and what cures they will performe. The graines, that is, the Mault that is left after the drinke is drained therefrom besides the fodder it yeldeth for all Cattle or ullane, are of singular good use for those that are troubled with lamenesse in their Legs or Feete through cold or evill hu∣mors fallen into them or by the shrinking and paines in their sinewes or joynts, if they set their Legs up to the knees into a Barrell or Firkin filled with these graines while they are hot, or heated againe if they be cold, which will by using three or foure times as occasion requireth abate both swellings and painers and restore the joynts and sinewes to their proper strength. Strong or good Ale sodden so thicke that as hony it may be spread like a salve and applyed warme to the necke or throate troubled with the Kings Evill giveth much ease; and sundry by the use thereof have also found much comfort for their sinewes and joynts that have had much paine and weakenesse in them; the Yeast of Ale serveth our white Bakers of London in stead of Leaven to cause their bread to rise as Leven doth which else would be sad and heavie unfit to bee eaten: Of good Ale likewise distilled with other herbes, seedes, spice, as of Balme, Angellica, Anesseedes, &amp;c. and divers other the like is made an excellent good Aqua vitae as they call it, or strong Balme water, &amp;c. but of the dregs of Ale or Beere distilled the vulgar sort of Aqua vitae is made. The properties of Beere and Ale are very like, and therefore whatsoever is said of the one may very well be referred to the other, For of them is made Diet, Beere or Ale by putting in Spices or purging things, according as the patients disease requireth, and as the Physitians can appoint. 
CHAP. XXI. Avena. Oates. T Here are onely two sorts of Oates that may justly challenge any place among the Graines or Cornes which are the ordinary sowen field Oates, and the naked Oates, for the wild Oates are most truly reckoned among the Grasses. 
1. Avena vesca. Manured Oates. The ordinary Oates groweth up with divers tall joynted stalkes and leaves somewhat resem∣bling Wheate, bearing at the toppes a large spread tuft of many pointed aglets hanging downe like small winged birds from small thread-like stalkes within every one of which huskes lyeth a small and long round graine somewhat like unto Rie, but longer and more pointed: the roote is small and thready. 
1. Avena vesca. Manured Oates. 
2. Avena nuda. Naked Oates. 
 
2. Avena nuda. Naked Oates. The Naked Oates grow in all points like the former, saving that the graine being somewhat smaller and whi∣ter, lyeth not so fast enclosed in the huskes, but is very easily rubbed out with ones hand. 
The Place and Time. They are both sowen in our fields in sundry places, yet the naked Oates nothing so frequent, and doe love ra∣ther a moist cold ground then either hot or dry, and are usually the first seede is sowen upon these grounds that were woods and stocked up, they are Sommer cornes, that is, sowen in the Spring and mowen in Autumne. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and , and in Latine Avena peradventure say some it may come of , quod cibum significat, because as Pliny saith the people of Germany lived hereof: but I am no Pythagorian to beleeve migratio animarum, nor of Theophrastus or of Pliny his beleefe, that Oates are made of Zea as Theophrastus saith, or that Barly is changed into Oates as Pliny saith, but it is wonderfull that so great learned men in naturall Philosophie should be carried away with such strange and erronious opinions: but these and many more the like were too frequent with most of the old writers, as is plainely seene in many places of their workes. For how∣soever there is a lusus naturae many times, and in many things and plants, as by over aboundance or by defect or lacke of the just parts, yet that any one transmutation of one species in plants should be into another, I never saw nor can beleeve any can shew, naturally so growing other then casually as before said, unlesse as God of stones can make bread and of water wine, it come miraculously, which if it should so happen supernaturally it, must not be accounted any law or course in nature: but of this enough here, I have spoken else where somewhat more to this effect. All authors that have written of these two graines, doe so little vary their titles of them that they may easily be knowne: the Arabians call it Chartall, the Italians Ʋena, the Spaniards Avena and Avea, the French Av ina, the Germanes Habern, the Dutch Haver, and we in English Oates and Haver also. 
The Vertues. Oates as Galen saith are somewhat cold and drying withall, and thereby doe helpe the laske of the belly, yet is it temperate and nourisheth little, like unto Barly saith Galen, but Pliny saith the Germanes lived thereon which is very true, for to this day they doe so in many places, and even in some countries with us also, as Lincolneshire, Lanceshire, &amp;c. they make it not onely their bread corne or make cakes, &amp;c. thereof, but they make it also into Mault, and thereof make their drinke, and are thereby su∣stained Ʋstiligi Tritici &amp; Hordel. Burnt Wheate and Barley. 
&amp; live in as good health and strength of body, as those that live on Wheate onely, whereby wee may well per∣ceive that it hath a warming qualitie rather then a cold in nourishment, howsoever it may have a cooling in medeca∣ment. Oatemeale in broth is usually given to binde those that have a Laske or other flux, and with some Sugar is to good effect given to those that have a cough or cold. Whole Oates fryed with bay salt and applyed to the side, takes away the paines of Stitches and winde in the sides or belly, a pul∣tis made of the meale of Oates and some oyle of Bayes put thereto, helpeth the Itch and the Leprosie, as also the Fistu∣laes of the Fundament, and dissolveth hard Impostumes, the eale of Oates boyled with Vinegar and applyed taketh away freckles and spots in the face or other parts of the body. 
I should next unto these graines (if I thought it fitting to make a Chapter as others have done) speake of the burnt Cornes of these severall sorts before specified, but because there is nothing in them that is worth the Description or Place indeede among the rest, being but certaine eares of Corne here and there among the rest that are blasted by ca∣sualtie, I thinke them not worthy of more relation then that such are sometimes to be seene, or as our English proverbe is to m ke a long harvest of such bad Corne, yet I think it not amisse to give you the figures of them here. 
CHAP. XXII. Oryza. Rice. R Ice is numbred among the graines or Cornes that are used for sustenance, and therefore must bee set next to Oates, because it beareth the seede in a sparsed juba or tuft, yet in a different manner.
Asphodelus luteus minor. The Kings Speare. 
 
The Names. They are called both Asphodelus luteus palustris as Dodonaeus doth the first, and Pseudo asphodelus as Clusius doth but calleth the last Aspodelus pumilio folio Iridis. And although Bauhinus hath three sorts, making the Asphode∣lus Lancastriensis which Lobel saith he had out of Scotland, and saw it likewise in Norway to differ from the first, yet surely he is mistaken therein for it is all one sort. 
The Vertues. Wee have not knowne these used in Physicke for any purpose, but I have had intelligence from my good friend Doctor Anthony Salter of Exeter, that he having found it in some places neare unto him, could understand of the countrey people no other name thereof, or propertie appropriate unto it but knavery, which whether they named it so in knavery, or knew any use of knavery in it, I neyther can learne nor am much inquisitive thereafter. 
CHAP. VI. Acorus palustris sive Pseudoiris &amp; Iris lutea palustris. The yellow water Flag. T He water Flag groweth like the Flowerdeluces, but that it hath much longer and narrower sadde greene leaves joyned together in that fashion, the stalke likewise groweth oftentimes twise as high, bearing small yellow flowers, shaped somewhat like unto the Flowerdeluce, with three falling leaves and other three arched that cover their bottomes, but in stead of the three upright leaves as the flowerdeluces have, this hath onely three short peeces standing in their places, after Acorus palustris seu Pseudoiris lutea palustris. The yellow water Flagge. 
which succeede thicke and long three square heads, conteining in each part somewhat big and flat seede, like unto those of the Flowerdeluces: the roote is longer and slenderer then of the Flowerdeluce, of a pale brownish colour on the outside, and of an horse flesh colour on the innerside, with many hard fibres thereat, and very barsh in taste. Acorus A∣quatanicus. Lobel sheweth in his Adversaria that there was a great roote brought from Tholose, which was taken for Radix China, but deceaved many in that it was no such thing in effect, for it was in taste astringent, and in the proofe not much differing from the former. 
The Place and Time. It usually groweth in watery ditches, ponds, lakes, and moores sides, which are alwayes overflowne with water, as at Lambeth in the ditches on the bankes side may be yearely seene, and in ma∣ny other places, flowring in Iuly and ripening its seede in August. 
The Names. This is not which was called id est, consecratrix as Gaza translateth it, but is rather Pseudoiris a bastard brother of that stocke: in the former ages of our fathers it was held by ma∣ny to bee the true Acorus of Dioscorides, so ignorantly had the world beene trayned for many yeares, untill scruples began to arise in mens mindes, not finding the things answerable to their deliniations in old writers, which caused them in these later times to be somewhat more inquisite and diligent, to finde out the true and genuine plants, and give them their proper names (and hath it not so fallen out in Divinitie thinke you as you see it hath done in Philosophie) for thereupon although Brunfelsius call it Acorus, yet Tragus called it Adulterinus, and Cordus, Gesner, Matthiolus and others call it Acorus falsus, and Lobel Acorus palustris, Fuchsius Turner and others call it Gladiolus luteus, but Dodonaeus Pseudoiris, and others Iris palustris lutea which Clusius in speaking of the true Acorus saith that the most judicious take it to be the Butomos of Theophrastus. 
The Vertues. The roote of this water Flagge is very astringent cooling and drying, and thereby helpeth all Laskes and Fluxes, whether of blood or humors, as bleedings at mouth, nose or other parts, blooddy Fluxes and others of that nature, and womens too abounding courses: the destilled water of the whole herbe flowers and rootes is a soveraigne good remedy for watering eyes, both to bee dropped into them, and to have clothes or spunges wetted therein and applyed to the forehead, it also helpeth the spots or blemishes that happen in or about the eyes, or in any other parts: the sayd water fomented on swellings and hot inflammations of womens sore breasts, upon cankers also and those spreading ulcers called Noli me tangere doth much good: the same also helpeth such foule ulcers as happen in the privy parts of man or woman or else where. 
CHAP. VII. Tussilago. Coltsfoote or Folefoote. C Oltsfoote shooteth up a slender stalke with small yellowish flowers somewhat earlie, which fall away quickly, and after they are past, come up somewhat round leaves, yet sometimes dented a little about the edges, much lesser, thicker and greener, then those of Butter burre, with a little downe or freese, over the greene leafe on the upper side, which may be rubbed away, and whitish or mealy underneath: the roote is small and white, spreading very much in the ground, so that where it taketh, it will very hardly be clensed from it againe, if any little peece be abiding therein, and from thence springing fresh leaves. 
The Place and Time. It groweth in wet grounds usually, yet as well also in the dryer places, and flowreth in the end of February, the leaves beginning to appeare in March. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and Tussilago in Latine, a notissima utilitate quam prae ophthalmicis &amp; tussi vex∣atis, and in the Apothecaries shops Farfara, and Ʋngula Caballina, and of some Populago, from the likenesse of the leaves unto the white Popler leaves: many suppose that this may be Tiphyum of Theophrastus, as well as the Petasites, in that both of them bring their flowers before their leaves: Pliny calleth it Farranum, and Farrugium: All Authours call it Tussilago, but Camerarius maketh three sorts of Bechium, that is this and the Petasites, which he calleth Tussilago major, and the third he saith is the Caltha palustris, which as he thinketh may be used instead of Tussilago which is assuredly a great errour, the Caltha comming neerer to the nature of Ranunculus, then Tussilago. The Italians call it Farfara, and Farfarella, and Vnghia di cavallo. The French Pas de cheval, and Pas  '  asne. The Germanes Brandat lettich quasi Vstulorum lactuca, and Roshub that is, Vngula Caballina. The Dutch Hoef bladeren, that is foote leafe. And we in English Folefoote, and Coltsfoote, and Horse hoofe. 
The Vertues. Coltsfoote while it is fresh is cooling and drying, but when it is dry the cooling quality which remained in the moisture, being evaporate it is then somewhat hot and dry, and is best for those that have thinne rheumes and distillations upon the Lungs causing the cough, thereby to thicken and dry it, as the fresh leaves or juyce, or Sy∣rup made thereof, is fittest for an hot drycough, and for wheesings, and shortnesse of breath: the dryed leaves taken as Tabacco is in the like manner good for the thinne rheumes, distillations and coughes, as also the roote ta∣ken in like sort as Dioscorides and Galen say. The distilled water hereof simply or with elder flowers and Night∣shade is a singular remedy against all hot Agues, to drinke two ounces at a time, and to have some clothes wet therein and applyed to the head and stomack, the same also applyed to any hot swellings or any other inflam∣mations Tussilago Herba sive flore. Colts foote without flowers. 
Tussilago florens. Colts foote in flower. 
doth much good, yea it helpeth that disease called Saint Anthonies fire, and burnings also, and is singu∣lar good to take away wheales and small pushes that rise through heate, as also against the burning heate of the piles or of the privy parts, to apply wet clothes therein to the places. Matthiolus sheweth that in the roote of this Colts foote there groweth a certaine Cotten or white Wooll, which being clensed from the rootes and bound up in linnen clothes and boyled in lye for a while, and afterwards some salt niter added unto it, and dry∣ed up againe in the Sun is the best tinder to take fire, being stroke from a flint that can be had. 
CHAP. VIII. Cacalia. Great and strange Colts foote. O F this kinde of Colts foote as I may so call it there are two sorts described by authors which I mean to shew you in this place, and unto them adde another American plant which in my opinion com∣meth nearest unto the others. 
1. Cacalia incano rotundo folio. Hoary strange Colts foote. The hoary strange Colts foote hath a long white roote divided into many heads, with many long strings and fibres thereat, of a clammy taste like unto gum Tragacant, encreasing thereby much and shooting up many hoary reddish striped stalkes, with large round leaves on them, bigger and thicker then Colts foot, and more woolly also on the upper side, yet with a greenenesse to bee seene in them, but very woolly and white un∣der eath, with some ribbes and veines in them of a little bitterish unpleasant taste, from among which rise up the striped woolly yet reddish stalkes two or three foote high, having sundry lesser leaves on them, and all of them dented about the edges, branching forth at the toppe into sundry small sprigges of pale purplish flowers made of foure small leaves a peece, with some threds in the middle, which after they have beene a while blowne doe passe away into downe that is carried away with the winde. Dalechampius saith that in the middle of the flow∣ers are found hanging downe small white graines like pearles to make it answeare to Plinies description. 
2. Cacalia glabro folio acuminato. Smooth strange Colts foote. This other sort hath as large leaves as the former, but thicker harder greener and smoother and not hoary at all but dented or waved on the edges, and pointed also with the roundnesse and not open at the stalkes as the other, the stalkes are in like manner smooth and striped, bearing the like flowers at the toppes but somewhat pa∣ler; the roote also is alike. 
1. 2. Cacalia folio incano rotundo &amp; glabro acuminato. Hoary and Smooth strange Colts foote. 
3. Cacalia Americana. Colts foote of America.
7. Hydrolapathum majus. The greater Water Docke. 
8. Hydro lapathum minus. The lesser Water Docke. 
9. Lapathum maritimum Foetidum. The strong sented Sea Docke. 
10. Lapathum sanguineum. Bloodwort. 
and brancheth forth into sundry sprigges, bearing small reddish flowers, and browne triangular seede after them. 
2. Lapathum acutum minus. Small sharpe pointed Docke. The roote of this Docke is long and slender, parted diversly with small fibres thereat, and of a yellow colour on the inside, the leaves are narrow and long waved in on the edges, as if they were c mpled, the stalke and flowers, with seede following, is like unto the former, but that they stand not on such long sprigges, but closer together, some at the joynts, or compassing the stalkes, and others at the toppes, and of a darker colour. 
3. Lapathum acutum minimum. The smaller pointed Docke. This small Docke differeth little from the first, for forme and manner of growing, but in the greatnesse, this be∣ing much smaller and lower, the roote is small and more yellow. 
4. Lapathum sylvestre vulgatius. The Common wild Docke. The common Docke that groweth every where, differeth little from the Garden Docke or Patience, but that the leaves hereof are somewhat broader and rounder at the points, and the rootes more yellow, and of lesse use then it. 
5. Hippolapathum rotundifolium Africum. The round leafed Docke of Africa. This round Docke is very like in the leaves unto the other round leafed Docke, mentioned in the second Classis before in this worke, but somewhat thicker, the stalke riseth higher, the flower is greenish, and the roote is somewhat round like unto a Turneppe, but yellow both within and without, the whole plant and every part th reof is sweetish without any other manifest taste, and is therefore not cold as the other Dockes are, but hot in the first degree. 
6. Lapathum vnctuosum sive bonus Henricus. English Mercury. I must needes put this herbe among the Dockes, according as the best Herbarists doe, rather then with the wild Arraches, as some others have done, and shew you that it hath divers broad and long thicke fat darke greene leaves, upon long stalkes, pointed at the ends, and double pointed at the bottomes, somewhat like unto Sorrell, the stalkes are many, two foote high, full of leaves, and at the toppes many spikes of greenish flowers, and seedes after them, the roote is thicke great and long, and yellow like a Docke: the whole plant is often overspread with a mealy dust, like unto Arrache, which hath caused divers to referre it to them. 
7. Hydrolapathum majus. The greater Water Docke. This great Water Docke, groweth very like the common wilde Docke, but greater and higher, with larger and longer leaves, and not so round pointed, the rootes also are shorter, and fuller of fibres, and of a darke red co∣lour. 
8. Hydrolapathum minus. The lesser water Docke. The lesser Water Docke hath lesser leaves, long and narrow, and lower stalkes, fuller of branches, with flowers and seedes like unto the rest of the Dockes, and so are the rootes likewise, but smaller and full of long stringes and fibres. 
9. Lapathum maritimum foetidum. The strong sented Sea Docke Because Bauhinus putt th this herbe among the Dockes not knowing belike whereunto else to referre it, even so must I untill I see more of it, and say with him that the stalke is reddish, a foote high and bending divers waies: the leaves that stand on long footestalkes are somewhat round, and of a darke red colour, sometimes waved about the edges, and winged usually at the bottomes, or with two small peeces like eares: the stalke is parted into many branches, with the like but lesser leaves on them, and a little dented about the edges: at the toppe of the stalke standeth a spike of flowers, composed of foure mossie leaves a peece, after which follow leafed round heads, containing the seede. 
10. Lapathum sanguineum. Bloodwort. This Docke, because it is often used as a pot-herbe, is planted in Gardens, yet found wild also, having reddish long leaves, or greenish with red stripes, the rest of the plant comming neerest unto the red Docke, Lapath ru um C tense. but smaller as the roote is also, yet not so reddish. Caesalpinus mentioneth another sort hereof, with broader and rounder leaves. 
The Place and Time. All these Dockes except the fifth and the ninth, grow in moist and wet places on the Land, and those other in the like places neer the Sea, that of Africa neere Sophia, and the other neere Mompelier: And beare seede in the end of August at the furthest, and some earlier. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke quod valet ex nanire, &amp; pro ventrem levare usurpatur, the word is used by Aristotle, lib. 2, Physic, , id est verbigratia, ambulare, si est alvi le∣vande gratia. Lapathum also, and Rumex in Latine. The first is the Oxylapathum of Dioscorides, and so called by Fuchsius, Matthiolus, and others, but it is not the Oxalis, for Dioscoridis doth distinguish betweene them, the one from the sower juice the other from the sharpe leafe, for is referred both to the taste and forme. Cordus on Dioscorides calleth it Rumex acutus, Tragus, Lobel, and Dodonaeus, Lapathum acutum. The second is called by Bauhinus, Lapathum acutum folio crispo, as Tabermontanus did, whose figure Gerard used and called it Hydrolapa∣thum minus. The third is so called by Lobel, as it is in the title. The fourth is called Rumex agrestis by Cordus, and Lapathum folio minus acuto, or retuso by Lobel, Hippolapathum sylvestre by Tabermontanus, whose figure Gerard using, entituled it Hydrolapathum magnum. The fifth was brought us out of Africa by Boel, who for the likenesse of the leaves, and some other respects called it as it is in the title, which we have continued, not knowing where else to place it, untill we have further knowledge of it, then of the dryed plant which he brought. The sixt is u∣sually called Bonus Henricus by Matthiolus, Brunfelsius, Tragus and others, Rumex vnctuosus also by Tragus, and Rumicis genus by Fuchsius, Tota bona by Dodonaeus and Lobel, and Lapathi sylvestris secundum genus by Dalecham∣pius, and by Bauhinus Lapathum vnctuosum, by Gesner Atriplicis species, and by Lonicerus Atuplex Canina sylvestris. The seventh Tragus calleth Rumex palustris, Tabermontanus Lapathum palustre, Gesner, Matthiolus, and Dodonaeus, Hippolapathum sylvestre, Lobel and Lugdunensis Hydrolapathum magnum aquaticum or majus. The eighth is called Hydrolapathum minus by Lobel and Lugdunensis, and not sativum as Bauhinus setteth it downe in his Pinax. The ninth is by Bauhinus his appellation so called as it is in the title The last is called Lapathum nigrum by some, and r bru or rubens by others, Sanguis draconis herba by Gesner in hortis, and Lapathum sanguineum by Lobel. The Arabians call the Docke Humadh, and Hamad. The Italians Rombice and Lapacio. The Spaniards Labasa, and Paradella. The French Pareille. The Germanes Ampffer for the generall word as Sawr ampffer for Sorrell. The Dutch Patich and Peerdick. And we generally Docke, and then adde the severall denominations as sower Docke or Sorrell, wilde Docke, Garden Docke, &amp;c. The English Mercury is called by the Germanes Gooter Henrick and Schmerdel. The Dutch Garden Henri k and Lammekens hore. The French Herbe de Charpentier. 
The Ʋertues. All the sorts of Dockes have a kind of coo g but not all alike drying quality, for the Sorrels are more cold then any of the rest, and the Bloodwort more drying, but the seedes of most of them be drying and binding: some of them besides the Sorrell were used to e eat n. Theophrastus therefore put them inter oleracea, and for the most part the leaves were stewed or boyled, and so they did the more easily passe through the belly, without giving ei∣ther any great or good nourishment, saving a moisture to the body. The seede of most as I said, either of the Garden or the fieldes, doth ay and of all sorts, and the subversions or loathings of the stomacke through choller, and is as helpefull to that spit blood. The rootes likewise of the most of them except the or Rubarbe , and the red Dock are drying and binding, conducing to the same effects aforesaid, but all they have an opening quality in them fit to loosen and make the body soluble, and are therfore of greater use then all the other parts besides, opening the obstructions of the blood, and cooling and clensing the blood, and helping those that have the jaundice, and for that purpose are our English, and Munkes Rubarbe, the Garden and the wild red Dockes used with other thing to make or Beere: the seede being taken in wine helpeth the bitings of the Scorpion saith Dioscorides and Pliny. The rootes boyled in vinegar, helpeth the itch, scabbes and other brea∣kings out in the skinne; if they be bathed therewith▪ the distilled water of the herbe and rootes tendeth to the same effect, and besides clo seth the skinne of eckles, morphews, and all other spots and discolourings therein. The English Mercury as it is called, or good Henry the roote is drying and clensing the herbe is mollifying and loosen∣ing, by reason of the fa nesse or moist slip inesse therein taken inwardly, but applyed outwardly to woundes and sores, it clenseth the foulenesse and he leth and closeth them up afterwards wonderfully: The properties of the R barbes, and the Sorrels are severally declared before in their proper places. 
CHAP. XI. Raphanus palustris sive aquaticus. Water Reddish. T Here are two sorts of herbes entituled Water Reddishes, which I must therefore here set together, and shew you which they are. 
1. Rahpanus aquaticus. Water Reddish. The Water Reddish riseth up in the water with slender weake and bending stalkes, yeelding to and fro, whereon are set at every joynt a long and somewhat broad leafe, very deepely endented or cut in on the edges, unto the middle rib, at the toppe of the stalke commeth forth a small tuft of yellowish flowers, made of foure leaves a peece, after which follow small and almost round pods with round seede in them: the roote runneth in the mudde, shooting out fibres in sundry places. I have thought good to give you both Bauhinus his figure hereof, which he saith is more exact then that of Lobels, and Lobels also but surely Lobels life, as both he and I have seene such growing, it seemeth that Bauhinus his figure is of another sort. being to the 
2. Raphanus aquaticus alter. Another Water Reddish. This other Water Raddish groweth more upright, in that it seldome groweth in ponds of water, as the other doth, but in or neere watery ditches to be a yard high or better, with sundry stalkes rising from a long tough white roote, with divers strings and fibres thereat, whereon are set many long leaves, much torne or cut in on both edges, at the toppe of the stalkes stand large tufts of whitish or purplish flowers, which turne into short pods and seede in them, not so round as the former.
The Place and Time. The first groweth never but in waters or brookes, or where store of water is continually, the other as well in bottomes neere the waters as in small watery ditches sometimes and flower after Midsommer, the seed ripening above a moneth after. 
The Names. The first is called Raphanus aquaticus by Tabermontanus and Gerard, and Bauhinus addeth in profundas lacinias divisus, (who taketh it may be the Raphanus of Theophastus, that is like to Rocket) and palustris by Lugdunensis, Lo∣bel calleth it Raphanus sylvestris officinarum aquaticus, and Dodonaeus Radicula sylvestris. Caesalpinus called it Si∣symbrium sylvestre. The other is the Rapistrum aquaticum of Tabermontanus and Gerard, which Bauhinus calleth 1. Raphanus aquaticus Lobelij. Lobels Water Reddish. 
1. Raphanus aquaticus Bauhini. Water Reddish of Bauhinus. 
2. Raphanus palustris alter. Another water Raddish. 
Raphanus aquaticus alter, for finding it did better agree with the Reddish then with the Charlocke, he altered the title as I here declare it unto you: 
The Vertues. Neither of both these are properly used it Physicke that I know, yet they both taste somewhat hot in the mouth, and the former Water Raddish more then the o∣ther, and therefore I thinke may be used in the stead of Horse Raddish, to warme a cold stomacke, and to helpe both to pro∣voke rine and to expell winde, for which purpose, the seede is more effectuall then the herbe, and the roote of more force then the seede. 
CHAP. XII. Vaccinium palustre. Marsh Whortes. M Arsh Whorts, hath sundry slender brownish branches like threds, scarse a foote long, creeping upon the ground, and rising from a long white roote, that groweth aslope and not downeright, beset with many small leaves like those of Time, at certaine distances, greene on the upper side, and hoary un∣derneath oftentimes, the flowers rise out from the toppes, set upon long threddy footestalkes, consi∣sting of five reddish leaves, with an umbone in the middle, which turne into round reddish berries, spotted with fine small spots and prickes, with some lancke seedes in them, the berries have a sowrish taste, and the leaves are astringent. 
The Place and Time. It groweth in Moorish places, where it is often covered Ʋaccinium palustre. Marsh Worts. 
with osse, and flowreth in Iuly, the berries being ripe in August. 
The Names. Dodonaeus and Lobel, call this Vaccinia palustria. Gesner in hurtis, Rosa Alpina calleth it Acinnaria palustris. Cordus in his history Fol. 140. Oxycoccum: but Gesner doubteth it to be another sort from this, and Bauhinus Ʋitis Idaea palu∣stris saying it is the third Ʋitis Idaea of Clusius, wherein he is much mistaken, for he doth but onely name it there, and doth not say that it is the same, as any man that readeth the place may easily understand. 
The Vertues. Dodonaeus saith it is good against hot agues, and quench∣eth the thirst in them, and the heate of choller: it stayeth vo∣mitings, and restoreth a decayed stomacke, that hath lost the appetite by corrupt humours, and doth resist pestilentiall dis∣eases. 
CHAP. XIII. Marrubium aquaticum. Water Horehound. V Nto the Water Horehounds I must adjoyne two or three other plants, neerest thereunto both in face and place, which I reserved out from the former Horehounds, to set here. 
1. Marrubium aquaticum vulgare. Our ordinary Water Horehound. This Water Horehound groweth somewhat great and high, with strong square stalkes, having two somewhat large and long leaves set at every joynt, somewhat deepely dented about the ed∣ges, not hairy or rough at all, but smooth and greene: at the joynts with the leaves towards the toppes, stand small whitish flowers in rough greene huskes compassing the stalkes about: the seede that followeth is blackish and round, foure usually set together in the huske: the roote is a tuft of blackish strings. 
2. Marrubium aquaticum alterum. Hairy Marsh Horehound. This other Water or Marsh Horehound hath square stalkes, but hairy and a little hoary and rough, whereon are set leaves by couples, as in the former, hairy hard and hoary, much more cut in on the edges, even to the middle ribbe, making them seeme like the leaves of the great Mountaine Scabious, the ends being pointed and sharpe: the flowers are white and small, standing in rough sharpe pointed huskes compassing the stalkes at the joynts, as the former doth. 
3. Marrubium nigrum faetidum Ballote dictum. Stinking blacke Horehound. The stinking blacke Horehound hath divers square blackish hairy greene stalkes rising from the roote, whereon are set upon long footestalkes round darke greene leaves full of veines, a little hairy, and endented about the edges, smelling somewhat strongly two alwaies at a joynt: the flowers are gaping and of a purplish colour, somewhat like the red dead Nettle, in greenish huskes compassing the stalkes as the others doe, the seede likewise is blacke and round, and foure set together usually also: the roote is blackish and threddy. I have found this with white flowers, Flore Albo in the way to Rochester, halfe a mile from Gravesend. 
4. Marrubium nigrum Creticum. Candy blacke Horehound. This blacke Horehound of Candy, hath the first leaves that rise from a stringy roote, somewhat like unto that of a Primrose, being many larger and longer then those of the white Horehound, dented about the edges and sharpe pointed, as big as those of Balme, and of so blacke a colour as it may seeme to be so coloured or dyed by art, and so are both the square stalkes, and the many like leaves but lesser that grow together, at the severall joynts of them, up to the toppes, where the flowers stand compassing them, being in forme like unto those of Horehound, but blackish also, it is wholly without sent or taste. 
1. Marrubium aquaticum vulgare. Our ordinary Water Horehound. 
3. Marrubium nigrum foetidum Ballote dictum. Stinking Horehound. 
 
The Place and Time. These doe all grow in moist and wet grounds: the first and 4. Marrubium nigrum Creticum. Candy blacke Horehound.
1. Anagallis aquatica sive Becabunga. Brookelime. Brookelime sendeth forth from a creeping roote that shooteth forth fibres at every joynt, as it run∣neth 1. Anagallis aquatica vulgaris sive Becabunga. Brookelime. 
divers and sundry greene stalkes, round and sappy with some branches on them, somewhat broad, round, deepe greene▪ and thicke leaves set by couples thereon, from the bosome whereof shoote forth long footestalkes with sundry small blew flowers on them, like in forme unto the land Pimpernels, that consist of five small round pointed leaves a peece. 
2. Anagallis aquatica sive Becabunga major. The greater Brookelime. This differeth in nothing from the former, but in having larger and rounder leaves, and in the flowers which are of a paler blew colour. 
3. Anagallis aquatica folio oblongo crenato. Great Water Pimpernell. There is likewise little other difference in this sort from the former, but in the leafe which is longer pointed. and dented about the edges, and in the flowers, which are of a pale whitish blew colour. Minor. There is one also of this sort lesser then it, wherein consisteth the difference. 
4. Anagallis aquatica folijs pulegij. Small round leafed Water Pimpernell. The leaves of this Water Pimpernell are small and round, like almost unto Pennyroyall, two alwayes at a joynt, upon the stalkes, which are foure square, and beare blew flowers like the land Pimpernell: the white rootes deepe in the ground like the former. 
5. Anagallis aquatica tertia Lobelij folio subrotundo non cr nato. Lobels third Water Pimpernell. The roote of this Water Pimpernell runneth not, but is a small bash of white fibres, from whence spring many smooth pale greene leaves, small at the bottomes, and broad and round at the ends, the stalke is round, about a foote more or lesse high, with divers smaller leaves thereon, set one by one up to the toppe, where breake forth many branched spikes of whiteflowers. 
6. Anagallis aquatica angustifolia sive quarta Lobelij. Long Chickweed leafed Water Pimpernell. This small Water Pimpernell riseth not above halfe a foote high, with divers branches spreading from the weake square stalke, having two small leaves at a joynt somewhat like unto the greater Chickweede, but some∣what longer: the flowers are white, made of foure leaves a peece, standing on long footestalkes like the first sorts, and small seede in round heads after them. 
7. Anagallis aquatica angustifolia scutellata. Narrow leafed Water Pimpernell. The roote of this Water Pimpernell is reddish, fibrous, and creeping, the stalkes are smooth straked, joynted, and a cubit high, having two very narrow and long leaves at every joynt, pointed at the ends without any stalke unto them: at every joynt almost with the leaves come forth small upright branches, winding themselves one with∣in another, as if they had claspers, from whence spring smaller footestalkes on both sides, which sustaine small whi∣tish purple flowers like unto Chickeweede, consisting of three leaves a peece, after which succeede small flat double pods like a shield, that is, two set together with a thred betweene them, on both sides whereof lie the seede. 
5. Anagallis aquatica tertia Lobelij, folio subrotundo non crenato. Lobel his third Water Pimpernell. 
6. Anagallis aquatica angustifolia sive quarta Lobelij. Long Chickweed leafed Water Pimpernell. 
 
The Place and Time. All these grow in small standing waters, the three first, and the fifth often found in our owne Land, the fourth and the last in Germany, The sixth by Antwerpe. And flower in Iune and Iuly most usually, giving seede the next moneth after. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , in Latine Anagallis aquatica. The first is commonly called Becabunga, from the Germane word Bachpunghen, as is usuall with them to frame Latine words from their owne appella∣tions. Anguillara, Brunfelsius, Ericius Cordus, Fuchsius, and others, tooke it to be Sium of Dioscorides, but very erroniously, and thereupon Tragus and Gesner, call it Sium non odoratum▪ Turner, Dodonaeus, and Lugdunensis take it to be his Cepaea, but generally now adaies called Anagallis aquatica, and so Lobel, Dodonaeus, and others doe, yet Tabermontanus and Bauhinus call it minor, because he calleth the next major, and Thalius folio maximo. The third is called Berula major by Tabermontanus, and by Bauhinus Anagallis aquatica major folio oblongo, as he doth the lesser of this kinde minor. The fourth is called by Tragus Sium alterum, and Anagallis aquatica, and by Bauhinus Ana∣gallis aquatica folijs pulegij. The fifth and sixth is called by Lobel Anagallis tertia &amp; quarta, Guilandinus did di∣versly thinke of the fifth, taking it one while to be Alisma of Dioscorides, and another while to be Cochlearia, but neither truely. Some also tooke it to be Samolus of Pliny, lib. 25. c. 11. and Bauhinus calleth it Anagallis aquatica folio rotundo non crenato, but some of the others before have rounder leaves. The last is called by him as it is in the title. The Italians call it Gorgostrello. The French Birle, from whence rose Berula, yet Marcellus saith that Berula is the Greekes , Cresses. The Germanes as is said Bachpunghen, and Wasserpungen, or bungen as Tra∣gus hath it. The Dutch Water punghen and Beekpunghen. And we in English Brookelime usually for the first, and Water Pimpernell for the rest following. 
The Ʋertues. Tragus saith that Brookelime and Water Pimpernall, are both of a moist faculty, yet others say dry, being no lesse heating then Water Cresses, and are used both in meate and medicine, as Water Cresses are, yet weaker: Brookelime and Water Cresses are generally used together, much in diet Beeres and Ales, with other things ser∣ving to purge and clense the blood and body from those peccant humours that would overthrow the health there∣of, and the Scurvy also, for which they are very helpefull: they also helpe to breake the stone, and passe it away by urine, which it provoketh also being stopped, it helpeth likewise to procure womens courses, and to expell the dead birth, being fryed with butter and vinegar, and applyed warme, it helpeth all manner of rumours, and swel∣lings and Saint Anthonyes fire also, if it be often renewed. Farryers doe much use it about their horses, to take a∣way swellings, to heale the scab, and other the like diseases in them. 
CHAP. XIX. Nasturtium aquaticum. Water Cresses. I Doe distinguish betweene Sium and Nasturtium aquaticum, as Bauhinus and Gesner in hortis doe, hol∣ding them to be differing kindes of plants and not species ejusdem generis, and therefore entreate of them in severall places, as I also must doe in severall Chapters, and speake of those sorts, that for their likenesse unto Cardamon, Cresses may be called , Cardamon enudron Nasturtium aquati∣cum: for of the Cardamines, which are Field Cresses, I have entreated in the seventh Classis of this Worke, one of whose figures I give you here to shew their difference. 
1. Nasturtium aquaticum vulgare. Common Water Cresses. Our ordinary Water Cresses spreadeth forth with many weake hollow sappy stalkes, shooting cut fibres at the joynts and upward long winged leaves, made of sundry broad sappy and almost round leaves, of a brownish greene colour, the flowers are many and white, standing on long footestalkes, after which come small yellow seed contained in small long pods like hornes, the whole plant abideth greene in the Winter, and tasteth somewhat hot and sharpe like Cresses. 
2. Nasturtium aquaticum Italicum. Italian water Cresses. This differeth little from the former, but in that the stalke is crested, the leaves are cut in a little here and there on the edges, and dented, somewhat resembling Parsley leaves, and in the taste of both herbe and seede, more mild and pleasant, the roote likewise creepeth not as the others. 
3. Nasturtium aquaticum amarum. Bitter Water Cresses. This sort groweth greater then the first, with longer and more pointed leaves, when it runneth up to stalke, but the first leaves are very large and round, little differing else from the forme, but is so extreame bitter in taste, that none can away with it to eate it, unlesse it be boyled in water, and shifted againe into other fresh boyling wa∣ter, to take away the bitternesse, and so some doe eate it: this is often sound growing in Germanie as Thalius saith, with the former, and knowne asunder by the greatnesse. 
4. Nasturtium aquaticum minus. Sweete smelling Water Cresses. This small Water Cresse hath a small long white roote, with some fibres thereat, from whence spring sundry winged leaves made of many much smaller then the former, and somewhat long with the smallnesse, smelling reasonable well: the stalkes have divers white flowers upon them like unto the Cardamine, but smaller by much: the seedes are like in such slender pods and of the same taste. 
The Place and Time. All these grow in the small standing waters for the most part, yet sometimes in small rivulets of running water: they flower and seede in the beginning of Summer.
The Names. The first is generally taken to be the Sisymbrium alterum of Dioscorides, which as e saith sc re called Sium, and others Cardamine, being so like in taste thereunto, Matthiolus, Caesalpinus, and Tabermontanus call it, Sisymbrium 1. Nasturtium aquaticum vulgare. Common Water Cresses. 
2. Nasturtium aquaticum Italicum. Italian water Cresses. 
3. Nasturtium aquaticum amorum. Bitter water Cresses. 
Cardamine. Ladies Smockes. 
aquaticum, Cordus, Gesner and Thalius Sisymbrium alterum, Fuchsius and Lugdunensis Sisymbrium Cardamine: Do∣donaeus called it Sium and Laver, Ericius Cordus Cresso Laver doratum, and Lobel Sien Cratevae Erucaefolium: Anguillara tooke it to be Ʋella Galeni, and Tragus, Lonicerus, Dodonaeus and Bauhinus call it Nasturtium aquaticum, the second Matthiolus calleth Sium vulgare, which the Italians as he saith, call Crescione. Lobel and Lugdunensis call it Sium Matthioli &amp; Italorum, and Bauhinus Nasturtium aquaticum erectum folio l ngiore. The third Thalius remembreth in his Harcynia sylva, by the name of Sisymbrij alterius species secunda, and Bauhinus Nasturtium aquaticum majus &amp; amarum. The last is called by Camerarius in his Epitome of Matthiolus, Sisymbrium aqua∣ticum alterum vel minus, and by Lugdunensis Cardamine quarta Dalechampij. The Italians as is before said call it Crescione, the French Cressondeane, the Germanes Brunkressen, the Dutch Waterkresse, and we in English Water Cresses. 
The Ʋertues. The Water Cresses are hotter in taste then Brookelime, and more powerfull against the Scurvy, and to clense the blood and humours, and for all the other uses whereunto Brookelime is before said to be availeable, as to break the stone, to provoke urine and womens courses: the decoction thereof is said to be good to wash foule and fil∣thy Vlcers, thereby to clense them and make them the fitter to heale: The leaves or the juice is good to be ap∣plyed to the face or other parts troubled with freckles, pimples, spots or the like at night, and taken away or wash∣ed away in the morning, the juice mixed with vinegar, and the forepart of the head bathed therewith is very good for those that are dull and drowsie, or have the Lethargy. 
CHAP. XX. Sium sive Pastinaca aquatica. Water Parsnep. D Ivers Writers have made divers sorts of herbes to suite with the Sium of Dioscorides, some whereof I have shewed you in the Chapter before, the other that are held by the most judicious to be the truest and neerest thereunto shall follow in this. 
1. Sium Dioscoridis sive Pastinaca aquatica major. The greater Water Parsnep. This greater sort riseth up with great hollow and crested stalkes, two or three cubits high, parted into divers branches, whereon stand long wings of leaves made of many long and somewhat broad leaves pointed at the endes and dented about the edges, smooth thicke and sappy, every one whereof is as large as of a Parsnep, the flowers are white and stand in tufts or umbels, after which follow the seede which smelleth well, and is big∣ger and rounder then Anneseede, the roote is blacke with many fibres at the joints thereof, and of the stalke un∣der the Water neere the ground, the whole herbe is somewhat of a strong sweete sent. 
2. Sium minus sive Pastinaca aquatica minor. The lesser Water Parsnep. The lesser sort is very like the former, but lower and lesser, the leaves being long and narrow, and dented also 1. Sium Dioscoridis sive Pastinaca aquatica major. The greater water Parsneppe. 
2. Sium minus sive Pastinaca aquatica minor. The lesser water Parsneppe. 
2. Sium minus alterum. Another small water Parsneppe. 
3. Sium majus alterum angustifolium. Another vvater Parsneppe with narrow leaves. 
4. Sium minimum Noli me tangere, dictum sive, Impatiens Nasturtij sylvestris folio. The Quicke or Impatient Cresse. 
about the edges, the flowers are white and the seede small like the former, the roote likewise is very fibrous, and both it and the leaves smelling strong like Petroleum. Alterum minus. There is another of this sort lesser then it, whose white flowers stand in rounder tufts then the others. 
3. Sium majus alterum angustifolium. Another Water Parsnep with narrow leaves. The stalkes of this Water Parsnep are hollow like Hemlocke, a cubit or more high, whereon are set sundry winged leaves like the former, but divided into smaller leaves, and closer set together, each of them being dented about the edges, the flow∣er at the toppes of the branches, are of a pale yellowish greene colour, which turne into small seede like unto Parsley, but ta∣sting like Cummin or Candy Daukeseede, and the Citron rinde or rather somewhat hotter then they all, the roote consisteth of a number of slender writhed browne fibres, wrapped among themselves, and fastened strongly in the mudde. 
4. Sium minimum Nolimetangere dictum sive Impatiens Nasturtij sylvestris folio. The Quicke or Impatient Cresse. This small plant spreadeth at the first upon the ground many small winged leaves not much above an inch long, which so a∣bide from Autumne that it springeth up all the Winter, and in the Spring growing somewhat bigger, hath the leaves a little endented about the edges, the end leafe for the most part being the biggest, and then rising up with a slender stalke, hath sundry branches from the middle thereof to the toppe, at whose ends grow many very small white flowers with slender long poin∣ted cods after them, and small yellowish seede within them, when they are ripe, but so hard to be gathered, and impatient to bee touched, that the pod breaketh it selfe upon the least touch of hand or any thing else, and the seed flyeth out present∣ly, it hath little or no taste of heare in it. M r . George Bowles. A Gentleman of excellent knowledge in Herbarisme, gave me the seedes of another sort hereof, as he saith, which he had from another skillfull Gentleman a friend of his, but because I have not yet seene the face thereof, I can passe no further verdict thereon. 
The Place and Time. The first as it is thought groweth not with us unlesse the greatnesse make the difference, but in Germany. For the second which is very like it groweth in Kent in divers pooles, and watery ditches. The third neere Antwerpe as Lobel saith but hath beene found in our Land also. The last likewise in our owne Land. They all doe flower in the end of Summer, and seede before the end of August. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke, so called , a concutiendo quia quatitur vacillando{que} perp no succutitur praeter labentibus undis at{que} semper alluentibus, unde etiam laveris nomen latinis, nisi quis malit ab vrinis calculis{que} ciendie &amp; excutiendis dictum: it is also called Sium in Latine, and Lavers The first is called by Tabermontanus, Gerard, and Bauhinus, Sium majus and Latifolium: the second is the Sium verum Dioscoridis of Matthiolus Thalius and Lug∣dunensis and is the same that Master Iohnson in his Gerard called Sium majus angustifolium. It is the Sium odoratum of Thalius, and Gesner in hortis: Fuchsius called it Sij primum genus quod &amp; Laver, and setteth the figure of Apium palustre (following his country name of Wasser Eppich, which is the same) to it, thinking they did agree, but was mistaken, Anguillara called it Silaum Plinij, Cordus and Dodonaeus, Sium &amp; Laver, and so doth Lobel, and addeth Olusatri folio sive aquatica Pastinaca, The smaller of this sort Camerarius calleth Sium verum in his Epitome. The third is called by Lobel Sium alterum Olusatri facie: but Lugdunensis and Bauhinus, Sium erucae folio, Tabermonta∣nus calleth this Sium majus angustifolium, and not the former as Master Iohnson doth. The last was first remembred by Prosper Alpinus, in his Booke de plantis exoticis, by the name of Sium minimum, but with us as it is in the title. The Arabians call it Rocathal and Inhamehanella, or Hamehanella. The Italians as Caesalpinus ith, call the Sium Crescione, and Matthiolus saith, they call it Sio, and Gorgolestro. The Spaniards R bucas, as some say, and Berros or Agriris as others say. Tragus saith the Germanes call it Brunen petar , And we as neerer to the likenesse as I thinke, Water Parsneppe. 
The Vertues. Tragus and others, from their Countries erronious appellations of this plant, tooke it to be the Elios linon Dios∣coridis, or Apium palustre, and therefore attribute all the properties thereof unto this plant, neither have they or any other of our Moderine Writers left in record, any other particular knowne quality in it, more then Dioscorides and Galen have left us of it, which say it is of so much more heating facility, as it is sweete in taste, it also digesteth and provoketh urine and womens courses, and breaketh and expelleth both the stone in the kidneies, and the dead birth. 
CHAP. XXI. Eruca aquatica. Water Rocket. T His little herbe which is somewhat like the Eruca aquatica. Water Rocket.
1. Tribulus aquaticus major. The greater Water Caltroppe. This great Water Caltroppe hath sundry broad, and more then halfe round leaves, in some places spotted on the under side, and dented about the edges, set on long footestalkes which rise in the Wa∣ter from the head of the roote, every one by it selfe, being smaller at the lower end then they are next the leaves, among which rise up sappy round stalkes, no higher then the leaves, bearing whitish flowers at the toppes, and after them thicke, hard and wooddy, almost round heads, with three or foure sharpe points sticking out, of the bignesse of Hasell nuts in some places and blackish in others, as bigge as a great Wallnut, having a sweet white kirnell within it like unto a Chesnut: the roote groweth somewhat long and full of joynts with a tuft of haires or fibres at each of them. 
2. Tribulus aquaticus minor prior. The former small Water Caltroppe. The former of the two lesser sorts, from a long creeping joynted roote sending forth tufts of fibres at the joints, also at the lower joynts of the stalkes shoote forth very long flat slender and knotted stalkes, two or three cu∣bits long, according to the depth of the water wherein it groweth, (which being dryed are pliant and flexible, fit for many workes) divided towards the toppe, into many branches, carrying single leaves at the lower joynts, on both sides, being about two inches long and halfe an inch broad, thinne and almost transparent, so waved on the edges, that they seeme to be torne, of a reddish greene colour for the most part: but those on the branches upwards stand two alwaies by couples: from the joynts with the leaves come forth small footestalkes, bearing at their ends small whitish long and thicke flowers, set together in manner of a cluster of Grapes (others have found it with reddish flowers) to every of which when they are falne, succeede for the most part foure sharpe pointed graines joyned together, containing a small white kernell within them. 
3. Tribulus aquaticus minor alter. The other small sort of Water Caltroppe. There is another small sort hereof, growing usually in the ditches of cleere Water, whose stalkes is not flat but round, bearing leaves at every joynt, shorter and more pointed at the ends, and not crumpled or waved at the edges bearing also three or foure small flowers at the ends of long footestalkes, somewhat like to those of Mos∣chatelli 1. Tribulus aquaticus major. The greater Water Caltroppe. 
2. Tribulus aquaticus minor . The former small Water Caltroppe. 
3. Tribulus aquaticus minor alter. The other small sort of water Ca trope. 
Cordi: the fruite or head that succedeth, grow∣eth to be sixe square: the roote is not much unlike the former. 
The Place and Time. I cannot heare as yet that the first is found in any coun∣try of this Land, as the two others are: but in sundry Lakes in Germany, as also in Brabant, and in many places in Italy ▪ and neere the Sea also, as Matthiolus saith, but flower there and give their fruite in Summer. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and Tribulus aquaticus in Latine, Anguillara taketh the first to be Buto∣mos Damocratis, all other Authours call it Tribulus aqua∣ticus or Lacustris as Cordus doth, and the Apothecaries of Ʋenice and other parts beyond Sea Tribulus marinus, and the nuts Castaneae aquatiles. The other two sorts are cal∣led by Clusius Tribulus aquaticus minor and distinguished by him, and by Bauhinus referred to the Potamogeton, calling them Potamogeton folijs crispis sive Lactuca cana∣rum, and yet his next sort, is verily the former of these two sorts, as by comparing his words may be seene. Lobel calleth it Fontilapathum pusillum, and Tragus maketh it his second Alga. Master Finch, a London Merchant travel∣ling in the Mogols Country, in the East Indies, saw the greater sort growing like a weede, abounding in most tankes or ponds there, whose fruite hee tooke to be the Hermodactile, but was much therein deceived: the kernell of the nut as he saith is much eaten by the Natives and o∣thers, called Singarra by them, himselfe finding them very cold in his stomacke, that he alwayes after the eating of them desired some Aqua vitae to warme it againe. You shall find this relation and that of the Faba Aegyptiaca (as it is extant before in this worke folio 376.) in the fourth Booke of Master Purchas his Pilgrims, the fourth Chap∣ter and fifth Section, folio 429. The worthy relations of whose travailes there extant doth not onely in this but in many other excellent matters declare his industry, whereby many have reaped much profit thereby, I would we had many more such worthy Merchants continually. The Italians call it Tribolo acquatico. The French Ma∣cres and Saligot. The Germanes Wasser nuss. The Dutch Water noten and Minckijsers, and we in English Water Caltrops, or Water nuts or Saligot after the French. 
The Ʋertues. The leaves are cooling and represse inflammations being made into a pultis and applyed: the juice mixed with hony healeth the Cankers, and sores of the mouth and throate, and the rankenesse of the gummes being gargled, Pliny saith that the Thracians that inhabit about the river Strimon, do fatten their horses with the leaves and make bread of the nut kernels to feede themselves which doth binde the belly. 
CHAP. XXVII. 1. Stratioters sive Militaris Aizoides. Water Souldier. T He Water Souldier hath divers and sundry long narrow leaves sharpe pointed set close together somewhat like unto the leaves of Aloes for the forme, but much lesse and sharpely toothed about the edges like it also, from among which rise up short stalkes not much higher then the leaves, and sometimes lower bearing one greene threeforked head onely at the toppe much like unto a Lobsters claw, which is the huske, out of which commeth a white flower, consisting of three leaves with divers yellowish hairy threds in the middle: under these leaves there is a small short head, broadest next unto the leaves and smallest downewards, from whence doe proceede sundry long strings, like small wormes (wherewith as Dodonaeus saith, some crafty men and women leeches putting them into glasses with water to make them shew the greater, make others beleeve that they are wormes which came out of their bodies, to whom they have given medicines for that purpose) which take roote in the mudde under the Wa∣ter. 
2. Stratiotes Aquatica vera Dioscoridis, &amp; Aegyptiaca. The true Water Houseleeke of Egypt. This Water Houseleeke hath divers large and broad thicke, hard and hairy whitish greene leaves lying on the water in three or foure rowes, round compassed together, like unto those of the great tree Houseleeke, but greater, the outer most row of them being broadest, and the inner smaller and smaller, Alpinus sheweth them to be pointed, 1. Stratiotes sive Militaris Aizoides. The water Souldier. 
2. Stratiotes aquatica vera Dioscoridis &amp; Aegyptiaca. The true water Houseleeke of Egypt. 
but Veslingius round and plaited, and the ends a little foulded backwards as Veslingius hath it, which I give you here together, this hath not beene observed by either of them what stalkes or flowers it beareth, the roote as Alpinus saith, is a small thin peece of wooll that hangeth downe from under the leaves which lye on the water like Ducks meate, but Veslingius saith it hath smal threddy fibres passing downe to the ground, although Dioscorides said it had no rootes, the leaves are of a drying stipticke or astringent taste no lesse then Acacia. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in Germany, and the Low Countries also plentifully, and in Italy and other Countries also, the other hath beene observed in Egypt by Alpinus and Ʋeslingius, and no where there but in the watery ditches, neere Damiata or Pelusium. 
The Names. Dioscorides h s , whereunto is added or , that it may be knowne from his , is called by Matthiolus Stratiotes aquaticus in Latine, and so also by Lugdunensis, and is my second sort, here exprest in my judgement rather then the first because the leaves and the posture also doe more resemble Houseleeke then the former, which is like unto Aloes, although it be called also Sedum marinum, and againe, because it hath not beene observed any where but in Egypt as I said by Alpinus and Veslingius, however Lobel calleth the former Stra∣tiotes sive Militaris Aizoides, and Dodonaeus Stratiotes potamios &amp; sedum aquatile. Bauhinus placeth the former with the sorts of Aloes, and calleth it Aloes palustris, and the other he placeth among the Lenticulae, and calleth it Lenticula palustris Aegyptiaca sive Stratiotes aquatica folijs Sedo majore l ioribus. Alpinus saith that the Egyp∣tians call it with them Hayhalemel maoni, that is as much to say as Sedum aquaticum. It is probable that Theophra∣stus meant this plant, whereunto he giveth no name, speaking thereof in the end of the ninth Chapter of his fourth Booke, growing in ponds like a Lilly with many leaves of a greene colour, &amp;c. 
The Vertues. Each of these are very cooling and drying, and astringent withall, but Galen saith it is cold and moist, and as he and Dioscorides say stayeth the fluxe of blood that passeth from the kidneys, if it be taken in drinke, Pliny addeth thereunto some Olibanum, it stayeth likewise the swellings of wounds and causeth that they be not enflamed: it helpeth other inflammations called Saint Anthonies fire▪ and swellings in other parts, it healeth also all wounds and vlcers, and is good for fistulaes or hollow ulcers, Alpinus saith that the Egyptian women use the juice, decocti∣on or pouther of the herbe, a dramme every morning to stay their courses, or other issues of blood in any other part of the body: as also the Country people use it to heale any wound, in bruising the leaves and laying them thereon, which wonderfully healeth them, 
CHAP. XXVIII. Gladiolus lacustris Clusij sive Leucoium palustre flore subcaeruleo Bauhini. Water Gladioll. T His plant that was sent to Clusius from Groening by a worthy Apothecary there called Dortman, found by him in a great pond or Gladiolus Lacustris Clusij sive Leucoium pa ustre, flore subcaeruleo Bauhini. Water Gladioll. 
Lake of water where no o∣ther herbe did grow, besides in the Country of Drentia, neere unto a small village called Norcke and Westervelde, is set downe by him with this description. The leaves doe seldome exceede the length of nine in∣ches, being thicke and hollow severed with a partition like the cods of Stocke-Gilloflowers, or the like, but greene and sweete in taste, being an acceptable food for the Duckes that dive to the bottome of the water to feede on it, which is di∣vers elles depth under the water: yet the stalke that springeth from among those leaves is seene to rise above the water, furnished with white flowers, larger then those of Stockgilloflowers, the hol∣low and lowest part, which is next to the stalke, being of a blewish colour, somewhat resembling the forme of a Gladiolus, or Corne flagge, but yet not much like it consisting of five leaves, the two uppermost whereof doe turne backe∣ward to the stalke, the other three which are the larger hang downe: unto these flowers succeede round heads or seede vessels broad below and pointed at the end full of red seede. This was observed in flower in the end of July. 
The Place, Time and Names: Are related in the foregoing title and description, as much as can be said of it, for although Clusius would not alter the name thereof, whereby it was sent, that others might know with what title it came to him. Yet Bauhinus thinking it better to agree in leafe and flower unto the Leucoium, rather chose to call it Leucoium palustre flore subcaeruleo, but I dare not herein follow him, for it hath as little correspondence with the Stocke Gilloflower, as with the Gladiolus or Corne Flagge, neither leafe nor flower being like a Stocke gilloflower, but in that the leaves are made like the double huske or seede vessell of Leucoium, which maketh litt e resemblance of a plant, but the flowers doe more answer to the forme of the flower of Gladiolus, and therefore I so entitle it. And for the Vertues there is none knowne or made to appeare, that the neighbouring people make any u e of it in medicine, or any other wayes more then is before said, for the Duckes to feede on. 
CHAP. XXIX. Nymphaea. The Water Lilly. T Here are divers sorts of Water Lillyes both great and small, both white and yellow, as shal be shewed.
1. Nymphaa alba major vulgaris. The great common white Water Lilly. This Water Lilly hath very large, very round and thicke darke greene leaves lying upon the water (like unto those of Faba Aegyptia as Dioscorides saith, and that very truely as I have shewed before in the Chapter of Arum ) sustained by long and thicke footestalkes that rise from a great thicke round and long tuberous blacke roote, spongy or loose and with many knobs thereon like eyes and whitish within, from the midst where of rise other the like thicke and great stalkes, susteining one large white flower thereon greene on the outside but exceeding white on the inside, as pure snow consisting of divers rowes of long and somewhat thicke and narrow leaves, smaller and thinner, the more inward they be, encompassing a head within, with many yellow threds or thrummes in the middle, where after they are past stand round Poppy like heads full of broad oily and bitter seede. 
2. Nymphaea alba major Aegyptiaca sive Lotus Aegyptia. The great white Water Lilly of Egypt. This other great white Water Lilly, that is entituled of Egypt, sendeth up out of the Water divers faire broad leaves like the former, but somewhat lesser, and more waved about the edges, and with more veines in them ly∣ing on the superficies of the water, as they doe upon severall footestalkes also: the flowers also are faire large, and double, that is of many rowes of leaves in the like manner, inclosed in a huske, consisting of foure leaves, greene on the outside, and white within, the middle leaves of the flowers are often upon the first opening some∣what foulded inwards at the ends, but growing elder grow straight forth, all of them being white in the middle part, and yellowish towards the brims of a sweete sent like a Violet, in the midst of whom when they beginne to 1. Nymphaea alba major vulgaris. The greater common white Water Lilly. 
2. Nymphaea alba major altera sive Lotus Egyptia. The great white Water Lilly of Egypt. 
3. Nymphaea a ba minor. The small water Lilly. 
4. Nymphaea alba minima sive Morsus rana. The small white Water Lilly called Frogge bit. 
5. Nymphaea major lutea. The great yellow Wa er Lilly. 
6. Nymphaea lucea minor The lesser yellow water Lilly. 
decay riseth up a small head, which growing greater becommeth the seede vessell, not much unlike unto the other as bigge as a good Medl r, parted on the inside into cels longwise containing round seede like unto those of Cole∣wort , the roote is not uberous as the former, but small round and almost peere fashion, of the bignesse of an hens Egge, blacke on the outside and yellowish within, with many small fibres thereat, the inner substance being fleshy firme and hard, somewhat sweete and binding withall, which when it is boyled, or rosted under Embers, becom∣meth as yellow as the yolke of an egge, which the Egyptians familiarly care with broth or without, raw also often∣times, as well as roasted, this loseth both leaves and stalkes after seede time, especially upon the decay of the wa∣ter wherein it joyed, the roote abiding in the ground, which thereupon was called annuall, but I would rather call it restible. 
3. Nymphaea alba minor. The lesser white Water Lilly. This lesser Water Lilly differeth not from the former, but in the smallnesse both of roote and leafe, and in the singlenesse of the flower, which consisteth but of five small and pointed leaves, spread open and laid abroad, with yellow threds in the middle, and small heads with small seede in them. 
4. Nymphaea alba minimaquae &amp; Morsus ranae vovatur. Small white Water Lilly, called by many Frogge bit. The roote of Frogge bit is long and creeping, set full of joynts, sending downe from thence long fibres, and whereat spring divers small round leaves very like the last small water Lilly, but much smaller, from which rise also other stalkes, bearing on each head one small white flower, made of three small and round pointed leaves with some yellow threds in the middle: the heads and seede are small. This is in all the parts neerer resembling the last white Water Lilly, then any pond weede, whereof some have made it a species, and therefore I have placed it with them. 
5. Nymphaea lutea major. The great yellow Water Lilly. This greater yellow sort groweth much like the great white, with leaves almost as large as they, but some∣what longer, and standing on cornered stalkes, the flowers also that stand on the toppes of the crested stalkes, are not so thicke of leaves as the white (although Lugdunensis doth so describe it, and giveth a figure answerable) in any that ever I saw, but made of five large round shining yellow leaves, with a round greene head in the middle, compassed with yellow threds, which head when it is ripe, containeth within it greater seede then those of the white, and more shining: the roote is great and very like unto the former, yet not blackish, but somewhat whi∣tish on the outside as well as within; each of them being somewhat sweete in taste, and this more loose or spongy then it. 
6. Nymphaea minor lutea. The smaller yellow Water Lilly. The leaves hereof are round, but larger then those of the lesser white sort, and so are the flowers larger also, but yellow: the roote hath many strings fastened to a bigge head, and tasteth hotter then the other. 
7. Nymphaea lutea flore minore. Small yellow Water Lilly with lesser flowers. There is no other difference betweene this and the last, but in the smallnesse both of leaves and flowers, the roote groweth with long stringes strongly fastened into the mudde, 
The Place and Time. All these sorts except the second are found growing with us in sundry places of the Land, some in great pooles and standing waters, and sometimes in slow running Rivers, other in lesser ditches of water, as the Frogge bit, in many ditches about London, as well as in the ditches on the Banckes side, in Saint Georges fieldes. They flower most commonly before the end of May, or soone after, and their seede is ripe in August. 
The Names. in Greeke, and Nymphaea in Latine, quod loca aquos , be the chiefe appellations of these plants with their severall adjuncts, of alba and luteae, white and yellow, and called Nenup r in the Apothecaries shops, yet hath it also divers other names by divers Authours: Apuleus calling it Mater Herculana, Alga palustris, Pae∣p ver palustre. Clavus Veneris, and Digitus Veneris, and Marcellus an old Writer, saith it was called Clava Her∣culis, and Baditin in French, but the French at this time call it Blan de e, and , the Arabians Nila∣far, and Ninfar, the Italians Ninfea, the Spaniards Escudettes del rio and Hig del rio, the Germanes Se blumen, and Wasser Gilgon, the Dutch Plompen, and we Water Lilly. There hath beene controversies among the learned Herbarists, whether this Nymphaea be not the Lotus Aegyptia of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, because the description of the one so neerely resembleth the other, which made Clusius confident, upon Alpinus his Allega∣tions, in his Booke de plantis Aegypti, to determine them both one, when as there is shewed two maine d ff re ∣ces in them, besides that Dioscorides describeth them both in two severall Chapters, the one in the roote, that the Lotus roote was called Corsium, and was round of the bignesse of a Quince, which was used to be eaten, either boiled or rosted under the fire, which the roote of Nymphaea faileth in, (this is most probable to bee the Lotus Aegyptia of Dodonaeus: ) And then againe in the seede, which as Dioscorides sheweth, is flat in the head of the Nymphaea, and like Milium, that is round in the Lotus: but the leaves and flowers in both being so like, the other being hid under the water, caused Alpinus, as he saith himselfe to ake no further knowledge or marke any diffe∣rence in them then of a Nymphaea, (and I am halfe perswaded the like neglect hath happened to the Faba Aegyp∣tia, that it is not yet found in the waters of Egypt, because the leaves thereof also are round like the Lotus or Nymphaea ) but now in his Booke of Exoticke plants, he changeth his note, and sh weth there that this is the true Lotus Aegyptia, and all the parts thereof particularly desciphered. All th se sorts of Water Lillyes, are so called by all Writers almost as I doe, and therefore neede no further or amplification. But hereby all men may take a good caveat not to be too forward, either to condemne the Te t of the ancients as judging it er∣ronious, or to be too confident of their owne judgement, without well considering all parts: For the like here∣unto happened unto the Faba Aegyptia, which formerly was confidently supposed to be Colocassia, ignorance being the cause of error, which knowledge since by industry hath corrected. 
The Vertues. The leaves and flowers of the water Lillies are cold and moist, but the roote and seede is cold and dry: the leaves doe coole all inflammations, and both outward and inward heares of agues, and so doe the flowers also either by the Syrupe or Conserve, the said Syrupe also helpeth much to procure rest, and to settle the braines of franticke persons for it wonderfully helpeth the distemperature of the head arising from heate: the seede is some∣times used to stay fluxes of blood or humours, either of wounds or of the belly, yet is as effectuall as the roote, but the roote is of greater use with us, some taking the white roote (which is of the yellow sort) and some the roote of the white Water Lilly, which hath the blacke roote, to be the more effectuall to coole, binde, and restraine all Fluxes or defluxions in man or woman, as also the gonorrhea or running of the reines, and the involuntary passage of sperme in sleepe, and is so powerfull that the frequent use thereof extinguisheth Venerious actions: the roote likewise is very good for those▪ whose urine is hot and sharpe, to be boiled in wine or Water, and the decoction drunke: the blacke roote which beareth the white flowers, is more used with us in these times then the other, be∣cause it is more plentifully to be had, then that with yellow flowers: but the white roote of the yellow kinde is lesse pleasant, and more astringent and harsh in taste, and therefore not without just cause doe most preferre it be∣fore the other to stay womens courses, and mens spermaticall issues. The distilled water of the flowers is very effe∣ctuall for all the diseases a oresaid, both inwardly taken and outwardly applyed: it is much commended also to take away freckles, spots, sunburne, and Morphew, from the skinne, in the face or any other part of the body. The oyle made of the flowers, as oyle of Roses is made is profitably used to coole hot tumours, and the inflammations of ul∣cers, and wounds, and ease the paines, and helpe to heale the sores. The Frog bit as being a species as I said of the Nymphaea minor, and so likewise these lesser sorts, have generally a cooling quality in them, yet in a weaker mea∣sure then the greater sorts. But let no man mistake the yellow Marsh Marigold, instead of the yellow Water Lil∣ly, as it is likely, Serapio lib. simplicium cap. 144. and some other Arabian Authours did, that said there was ano∣ther kinde of Nenufar, which was sharpe and hot, and of subtill parts, and is fit to warme and give heate to cold griefes, for assuredly they meant hereby the Caltha palustris, which they mistooke to be a kinde of Nenufar, as is evident by this their relation. 
CHAP. XXX. Potamogeton sive Fontalis. Pondweede. O F the Pondweedes there are divers sorts, more found out and referred to them then was in former times, which are these that follow. 
1. Fontalis major latifolia vulgaris. The greater ordinary Pondweede. This greater Pondweede riseth up with sundry slender round stalkes full of joynts and branches, and faire broad round pointed darke greene leaves with long ribs in them like Plantaire, set si gly at the joynts and lying flat on the toppe of the water: at the toppes of the stalkes and branches usually, and seldome Potamogeton sive Fontalis major &amp; minor latifolia vulgaris. The greater and lesser broad leafed Pondweede. 
2. Fontalis major longifolia. The greater long leafed Pondweede. 
at the lower joynts come forth long spiked heads, of blush coloured flowers upon long footestalkes like unto those of Bistort, or Arsmart, whereon after they are past stand chaffie huskes, containing within them blackish hard seede: the roote creepeth to and fro in the mudde, with divers joynts and tufts of fibres at them, whereby they are fastened to the ground. There is another of this sort that is lesser, not much differing in any thing else. Minor.
5. Alfine palustris minor Serpillifolia. Small Marsh Chickweede. From a small fibrous roote springeth up sundry slender stalkes and branches, rooting againe as they lye, and spreading, with very small leaves thereon by couples, lesser then those of Serpillum, or Mother of Time: after the small white flowers are past, succeede small flat pouches, one on each side of the stalke, with small seede therein. 
6. Alfine recta flore caeruleo. Vpright blew Chickeweede. This Chickweede riseth up for the most part with divers upright stalkes, joynted in sundry places, and divers small leaves growing thereon at the severall joynts, somewhat divided like unto the leaves of Rue, or some∣what resembling a Trefoile leafe, at the toppes, as also at the joynts come forth small blew flowers, consisting of foure leaves a peece, after which come small round Chickeweede like heads with seede, the roote is white and long, with some fibres thereat. 
The Place and Time. All these sorts grow in or neere Waters, and are found in sundry places of the Land, flowring in the heate of Sommer. 
The Names. Tabermontanus and Gerard from him make mention of most of these sorts. The fourth Bauhinus saith was sent him by the name of Portulaca aquatica, yet calleth it Alfine palustris minor folio oblongo. The fifth be also calleth as it is in the title. The last was called by Tragus Hendlekraut, not well knowing what rifle to give it, having the leaves divided somewhat like to ones hand, and that made Thalius also to call it Dactilio botanon caeruleo flore, Lugdunensis saith that some in those parts called it Elatine triphyllos. Tabermontanus called it Alfine recta, and so doth Gerard also, but Bauhinus Alfine triphyllos caerulea. 
The Ʋertues. The properties of these Chickweedes, are no doubt like unto the other Chickeweedes, their place of growing forme and taste being insipide, watery and cold, declaring the same, and therefore whatsoever may be said of these is to bee found among the other, and therefore to avoid repetitions, I referre you to the rest spoken of before, where you may be abundantly satisfied. 
CHAP. XXXIII. Alga aquatilis &amp; Conferva. Fresh Water Excressences. T Here are an infinite number as I may so say, of Sea Excressences, called by sundry names as you shall further understand when I come to speake of them, which I would separate from those that grow in the fresh waters, and entreate of these in this Chapter, which although few, have yet severall titles whereby to be called. 
1. Alga sive Conferva fontalis trichodes. Water Maidenhaire. The water Maidenhaire groweth upon the stones in the bottome of springs, fastening itselfe thereto, and from 1. Alga sive Conferva fontalis trichodes. Water Maidenhaire. 
2. Alga aquatilis Capillacea sive Conferva Plinij alijs Linum aquaticum. The threddy or hairy water weede. 
thence shooteth forth sundry fine greene stalkes with many fine threds on them, of a cubits length sometime, growing smooth out at length, and sometimes foulded one within another, without any other leaves upon them which when they are dry turne to be somewhat browne, and are of little or no taste at all. 
2. Alga aquatilis Capillacea sive Conferva Plinij, alijs Linum aquaticum. The threddy or hairy Water weede. This Water weede groweth from the mudde in the bottome of lakes and other standing waters, and sometimes in slow running Rivers, which is wholly composed of a number of greene brownish threds or haires joyned to∣gether, floting thereon, passing and waving to and fro all the length thereof, as the current of the streame run∣neth, or the winde driveth them, and are sometimes a yard long or more. 
3. Fil Scoticum sive Germanicum. The Scottish or Germane blacke stringy plant. This likewise groweth from some small stone in the bottome of the cranckes of water neere the Sea shore, to be of two cubits in length, being nothing else then a number of thicke firme smooth, and blackish long strings, folded one among another, and hath neither roote leafe nor flower. 
4. Alga Bombycina. The Water Cotton plant. This excressence is like unto a long and much spread locke of soft Wooll or Cotton, growing close together, spreading somewhat in breadth of a ale greene colour on the upperside, and whitish underneath, and swimmeth on the toppe of the water in pooles . 
The Place and Time. The most of these doe grow in rivers and ponds, some not farre of this City, and others in other places, and are to be soone in the Sommer time onely floating upon the Waters. Lugdunensis saith that the second was found in the greater Lake of Lombardy, ne re M llane. 
The Names. The first is called by Lugdunensis Conferva trichode, vel Trichomanes aquatica, and Bauhinus Alga fontalis trichoi∣des. The second is the Conferva Plinij by Lobel, Lugdunensis and Anguilara before them, and as saith Matthiolus, called Li by the Flo entines. Impera s called this Linum aquaticum, as he doth another very like this Linum maritimum: Bauhinus calleth it Alga viridis capillaceo folio. The third Bauhinus calleth Alga nigra capillaceo folio, &amp; Filum maritimum Germante saying it was sent him out of Scotland. The last he also saith that he had from the Balticke Sea, and giveth it the same title that I have prefixed before it. I have also given them their English Etymologies, as is fitting unto them as I thinke. 
The Ʋertues. Pliny hath recorded that he knew one cured incredible quickly, with his Conferva of a fall from a tree, while he was lopping it, which fall brake almost all his bones, by having the herbe bound to his whole body when it was fresh, and moistened with the water thereof, as often as it grew dry, and but seldome changed. 
CHAP. XXXIIII. Lens palustris, sive Lenticula aquatica. Water Lentills. T Here are three or foure herbes to be referred to these Lentils, which are differing one from another, their place of breeding being their chiefest cause of affinity. 
1. Lens palustris sive aquatica vulgaris. Duckes meate. This small water herbe consisteth of nothing but small round greene leaves, lying on the toppe of standing waters, in ponds, pooles, and ditches, without either flower or seede that ever could be ob∣served, onely from the middle of each leafe on the underside, there grow certaine small threds finer than haires, which passe downe into the water, but are not thought to descend to the ground from thence to draw nourish∣ment. Matthiolus (and from him Lugdunensis ) reporteth a strange narration, and I may say incredible; That if it should happen (as sometimes it commeth to passe) by inundations, that these small Lentils or Duckes meate be car∣ried away into running rivers, as soone as they cleave to the shore, they are wonderfully encreased: for by the rootes that will grow from them like threds, they fasten themselves into the ground, and then growing, becom∣meth to be plantes like unto Sisymbrium water Mintes, or Ladies smockes; and that this thing hath beene observed by diligent searchers of nature, not without much wonder of the matter: scilicet. 
2. Lens palustris sive aquatica quadrifolia. Crosse leafed water Lentils or Duckes meate. This other Lens hath a small long slender roote shooting forth square slender weake and trailing stalkes, with sundry small leaves upon severall long foote stalkes, standing together at the joynts distinct one from an other, which are parted into foure leaves a peece, and sometimes it hath beene observed with six leaves, each end being round and lying in a square forme like a crosse upon the water: at the joynts likewise with the leaves, come forth diverse small heads of seede in clusters, wherein are enclosed small blackish seede like unto the fielde Lentils, but not so flat, being thicke and hard. Lugdunensis setteth forth this kinde of water plant, by the name of Lemma The∣ophrasti, in a much differing manner. 
3. Lens palustris latifolia punctata. Broad leafed spotted water Lentils. This water Lentill hath sundry round leaves set by couples on long stalkes, of an excellent greene colour on the upperside, prickt very full of very fine spots, and under them many small Lentill like heads cleaving unto them, some having but one, others two three or foure at a place, covered with a rough or rugged thin huske, very full of fine small yellowish seede: at the bottome of these winged stalkes of leaves grow the rootes, which are a tuft of long strings and fibers: it is onely of a waterish taste. 
4. Lenticula aquatica bifolia Neapolitana. Neapolitane water Lentils. The water Lentils of Naples, hath very fine long slender stalkes, with leaves set together by couples, lying a∣long upon the water, having seede vessels growing hard unto them, foure usually joyned together.
The Place and Time. The first onely of these is familiar in our land as I take it: the third Bauhinus saith, groweth in the watery dit∣ches at Padoa, in the river Auxeris by Pisa, and in Silesia neere unto Ʋratislavia, the rest are all strangers, and are in their freshest beauty in the beginning of the yeare. 
1. Lens palustris sive aquatica vulgaris. Duckes meate. 
2. Lens palustris quadrifolia. Crosse leafed water Lentils, or Duckes meate. 
 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , some take 3. Lens palustris latifolia punctata &amp; Lenticula aquatica Neapolitana. Broad leafed spotted Water Lentils, and that of Naples. 
it to bee of Theophrastus: in Latine Lens palustris, and Lenticula palustris &amp; aquatica, and so do all Authors call the first sort: the second is the Lens palustris altera of Matthiolus, and Lemma Theophrasti by Lugdunensis; as also the Lenticule alterum genus of Caesalpinus, which Bauhinus calleth Lenticula palustris quadrifolia: the third is called by Bauhinus in his Pinax, Lens palustris latifolia punctata, being better exprest in his Matthiolus, then in his Phytopinax, and by Caesalpinus taken to bee Stratiotes aquatica Dioscoridis: The last is mentioned by Columna by the name of Callitriche of Pliny li. 2 . 11. mervailing at Lobel for supposing the Cotylidon aquaticum, as it is er∣roniously called (being a marsh Crowefoote, as the hot sharpe taste thereof doth testifie) to be Callitriche of Pliny; but yet saith this of his is not the right, but taketh that Pliny meant the Trichomanes, by his Call triche, which I thinke cannot hold good, neither the one nor the other, for Pliny his words in the place before cited are these. Fit ex Callitriche sternitamentum, folia sunt Lenticulae similia, cau∣lis juneis tenuissimis, a ico minina noscitur in opacis &amp; hu∣midis gustatu fervens; thus much Pliny: which it is likely made Columna comparing his with this of Pliny, both for forme and quality, not to dare to affirme it the same, be∣cause saith Pliny it is gustufervens, which neither his nor Trichomanes is. Bauhinus calleth it Lenticula palustris bifo∣lis fructu tetragon . The Arabians call it Tahaleb, and Tha∣leb, the Italians, Lente de palude, and Lenticularia; the Spa∣niards, Lentille del lagua; the French, Lentille d ' eau; the Ger∣manes, Wasser linsen; the Dutch Water linsen, but more usu∣ally, Euden gruen, that is Duckes herbe; and so we in Eng∣lish, Duckes meate, and of some, Water Lentils: the se∣cond sort is called by the Italians, with whom it is plen∣tifull, Lente palustre del seme. 
The Ʋertues. It is cold and moist as Galen saith in the second degree, and is effectuall to helpe inflammations, and Saint Antho∣nies fire, as also the Goute, either applied by it selfe, or else in a pultis with barlie meale: it is also good for ruptures in young children. Some saith Matthiolus do highly esteeme of the destilled water of the herbe against all inward inflammations and pestilent feavers, as also to helpe the rednesse of the eyes, the swellings of the cods, and of the brests before they be growen too much, for it doth not weakely repell the humours: the fresh herbe applied to the forehead, easeth the paines of the headache comming of heate. Duckes do greedilie devoure it, and so will Hens if it be given then mingled with branne. 
CHAP. XXXV. Pseudo yp ri. Bastard or unsavoury Cyperus. I N the end of the first Classis or Tribe of this Worke, I have shewed you sundry sorts of sweete smel∣ling Cyperus: but there are many other sorts that smell not at all, called either bastard or unsavoury Cyperus, somewhat resembling the sweete sorts, both the round and long rooted Cyperus, and there are Grasses also growing in the moorish places like unto them in roote or leafe, and therefore called Cyperus Grasses. Of the former sorts called Vnsavoury Cyperus, I meane to entreate in this Chapter, and of the Grasses in the next following. 
1. Cyperus longus inodorus vulgaris. Vnsavoury Cyperus with long rootes. This long rooted Cyperus hath divers long and narrow rough three square leaves rising from the roote, enclo∣sing or encompassing one another at the bottome, from among which riseth up a three square stalke foure or five foote high, with some s ch leaves thereon, but smaller to the toppe, at each of whose upper joynts breake forth three or foure rough and almost round burres upon short footestalkes, the roote creepeth under ground somewhat like the true sweete long Cyperus, but blackish and with many more fibres thereat, and without any sent in them. 
2. Cyperus longus inodorus s aticus. Mountaine or Wood unsavoury Cyperus. This other ng roote Cyperus hath lo joynted reddish rootes, and many long and narrow rough greene leaves rising therefrom. is ning with a reddish skinne: neither stalke nor head hath as yet beene observed. 
3. Cypirus ro inod rus Anglicus. English round rooted unsavoury Sea Cyperus. Our round rooted Sea Cyperus hath divers round rootes fastened together by strings, almost after the manner of Filipen la rootes, shooting forth sundry heads of leaves that are long and narrow, three square and cornered, the 1. Cypirus longus inodorus. Vnsavoury Cyperus with long rootes. 
3. Cypirus rotundus littore s inodorus Anglicus. English unsavoury round rooted Cyperus. 
4. Cypirus rotundus littoreus inodorus Anglicus alter Another round rooted unsavoury Sea Cyperus. 
5. Cypirus rotundus inodorus aquaticut. Vnsavoury round rooted water Cyperus. 
stalke also is three square two foote high and more, at each upper joynt whereof with the leaves come forth long close heads, the whole plant is utterly without sent at all. 
4. Cypirus rotundus littoreus inodorus Anglicus alter. Another round rooted English Sea Cyperus. This other English sort is very like the last, both in rootes and leaves, but differeth from it in this, that it hath at the toppes of the stalkes three or foure blackish scaly heads set together at severall places with the leaves. 
5. Cypirus rotundus inodorus aquaticu . Vnsavoury water round rooted Cyperus. This sort of Cyperus hath sundry blackish round rootes, set with many small fibres as they spread in the ground from whence rise such like cornered leaves and stalkes, as in the former, at the toppes w ereof with the leaves come forth long pannickles. 
6. Cypirus rotundus inodorus aquaticus alter. Another Vnsavoury water round rooted Cyperus. This Cyperus is very like the last sort in the rootes, being 6. Cypirus rotundus inodorus aquaticus alter. Another unsavoury water round rooted Cyperus. 
somewhat long and round like Olives, and many fibres at them, but the leaves are much longer, and the stalkes sa e higher, the rough heades likewise or pannickles are shorter and more eminent, with some long leaves amongst them. 
The Place and Time. The first is often found with us in the borders of fields and in woods; the second in Germany, the third and fourth in our Sea coasts, in divers places both of Shepey, and Thanet in Kent, and in other places, the fifth on the banckes and in the ditches of the river Scheld by Antwerpe, and the last plen∣tifully in the low marshes beyond Ratcliffe, and are in seede in the end of August.
the Florentine and Venetian Dominions, there groweth, saith Lobel, this plant, which hath the long and narrow leaves of Scoparia or Broome Fiax, very thicke set on weak bending stalks, halfe a foote long and full of empty round skinny berries, like unto Lentils, from whence it came to be so called. Serratis folijs. There is another sort hereof called Lenticula marina ser∣ratis folijs, very like it differing onely in that it hath broa∣der and shorter leaves, dented about the edges. 
The Place, Time, Names and Ʋertues. Their Place is declared, and Time to be understood the Sommer. Lobel calleth it Lenticula marina Serapionis, and so doe Tabermontanus and Lugdunensis after him, who also saith is is called by some Vva marina. Bauhinus cal∣leth that with plaine leaves Fucus folliculaceus Linarie f li , and saith that Imperatus called it Acinariae marinae altera species, but the other with jagged leaves, he calleth Fuc fol c us serrato folio, and of Imperatus Acinariae ma∣rinae altera species, but to what use it may serve in Phy∣sicke hath not yet beene observed. Clusius in his Scholia on the last Chapter of Acosta his Booke of simples put∣teth it to the question whether that with dented leaves, should not be that herbe that is called Sarguaso, but Bau∣hinus in his Pinax setteth it downe as if it were certaine. These have been often seen covering the Sea, in sayling to the East Indies, betweene eighteene and thirty foure de∣grees of Northerly Latitude, which by hindering the ships passage, some of the Saylers in cleering the sides of the ship, brought it into the ship, and while it was fresh did eate thereof both raw and boyled, but grew hard and brittle when it was dry, and was of a clensing property for urine, as one of the Saylers troubled with foule hu∣mours and the stopping of those passage, found to his ease that did eate thereof. Acosta his description thereof is in this mauner. This plant groweth in a large smooth Sea covered therewith, as farre as the eye could discerne, whose bottome could not be reached unto by our plumme line, yet very likely to rise from the bottome, as might be discerned by the berries wrapped together thereon on the branches, and being pulled up was of an hands length, with leaves halfe an inch long, dented about the edges, and of a reddish colour, without taste but what it had from the Sea water: at every leafe it bore a berry like a Pepper corne, but hollow full of salt water, and of a white colour, or mixt of white and red: being fresh and new taken up it is tender, but brittle and hard when it is dryed. 
CHAP. XLV. 1. Parthenium Marinum. Sea May weed or Feathersew. T His spreadeth many short branches on the ground about an handbredth long, having divers long and narrow leaves set about them▪ cut in on the sides like to the greater Daisy leaves, of a strong or stink∣ing savour like unto the ordinary Mayweede, and having flowers not much unlike it also, the roote is long and slender, and shooteth sorth divers fibres from it. Panthani marinum. Sea Mayweed of Fearhersew. 
 
2. Chamaemel mar . Sea Camomill. The roote hereof is blackish spreading into many long fibres, sending forth sundry weake stalkes lying on the ground, set on both sides with larger leaves then are in the ordinary May weede, having a large white flower, and a yellow thrum in the middle. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth neere the Fishers Cottages at the foote of the hill Cestius in Narbone in France, the other in the sandy grounds neere the Sea shore, and flower in Summer. 
The Names. Lobel calleth the first Cotula sive Parthenium marinum minimum, Lugdunensis Parthenium marinum minimum. Bauhinus Matricaria maritima, and thinketh that it is the Chamamelum maritimum Dalechampij, set downe in the second place and called Cotula marina by Lobel. 
The Ʋertues. The first hath neither weaker, (saith Lobel ) nor differing properties from the ordinary Mayweede, which for to avoid a double repetition of one thing, I re∣ferre you to the Chapter of Mayweede in the first Classis of this Worke. Of the other there is no particular property recorded. 
CHAP. XLVI. Conyza marina. Sea Fleabane. T His kind of Conyza, that groweth in the Conyza marina. Sea Fleabane. 
fields neere the Sea Coasts, hath a long dry hard roote, and from thence riseth a round stalke, about a foote high, bran∣ched into sundry parts, set with long and narrow leaves somewhat like unto the smaller Ribbewort Plantane, almost without taste yet a little bitter: the flowers are yellow, standing in a close tuft together, and are blowne away with the wind when the head is ripe. 
The Place and Time. The place is declared before, and the Sommer is the time of its flowring. 
The Names. Lugdunensis calleth it Conyza marina, and Bauhinus as I said in the six and twentieth Chapter of the sixt Classis here before, would referre it to the Chondrilla altera Dioscoridis Ra wolfio, which I there said, I thinke to be erronious for the reasons there alledged. 
The Ʋertues. It is thought to have the same properties that the o∣ther Fleabanes have. 
CHAP. XLVII. Glaux maritima. Sea Milkewort. O Vr moderne Authours have mentioned divers sorts of Glaux, whereof that of Clusius and another cal∣led Vulgaris, have beene formerly handled before in this Worke. Dodonaeus, Lobel and others, have exhibited one that I meane to entreate of in this Chapter, which is the lesser, Cordus and Camerarius, a greater, and Alpinus one differing from them both, each supposing theirs to be the neerest unto Di∣oscorides his Glaux. 
1. Glaux maritima major. The greater Sea Milkewort. The greater of these Milkeworts hath sundry slender weake stalkes spread on the ground, beset with divers Lentill like leaves, yet a little larger, and of a grayish greene colour on the upper side, and more grayish under∣neath, the flowers are purple set at the joynts with the leaves, after which come small buttons with seede in them, the roote shooteth downe right, but the branches as they spread take roote againe. Bauhinus saith there is some variety observed herein: the greater sort having sometimes much larger leaves, and sometimes narrower, the lesser sort having the stalks thicker stored with leaves, especially upwards, the lower being falne away, leaving the stalkes bare, and as if they had great joynts. 
2. Glaux maritima minor. The lesser Sea Milkewort. The lesser sort differeth little from the former, in the manner of growing, but in the smallnesse both of stalkes and leaves, and that this is found growing in places neere the Sea or salt Lakes, and the other as well on the hils, &amp;c. as neere the Sea. 
3. Glaux maritima Veneta Alpino. The Ʋenetian Sea Milkewort of Alpinus. This Venetian Sea Milkewort riseth up from a slender long wooddy branched roote, with foure or five slender stalkes a cubit or more high, set at equall distances with sundry somewhat long and narrow leaves, greene on the upper side, and hoary white underneath, and at the toppes foure or five flowers standing together, as it were in an umbell for forme and bignesse, being very like unto the bastard Scorpion like podded Sena of Candy, but of a whi∣tish blush colour, and are succeeded by small short round pods, having small hard round seede within them, ta∣sting a little sweetish. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in many places of Germany, and was sent as Bauhinus saith, to him from out of Stotland, but the lesser is often found, both on the Kentish and Essex shores, and the last as Alpinus saith in the salt marshes neere unto Cl did, a City of the Ʋenetians, flowring and seeding in the end of Summer. 
2. Glaux xig a maritima. Small Sea Milkewort. 
3. Glaux maritima Veneta Alpino. The Venetian S. a Milkewort of Alpinus.
 
The Names The Greeke name is taken from , which is milke, and the Latines follow the Greeke name Glaux, and not as some thinke a glauco colore, for the Latine derivation cannot suite with the Greeke word. Pliny saith it is called also , because it restoreth the decayed milke in Nourses breasts. Cordus on Dioscorides, and Camerarius in horto, mention the first, which Bauhinus calleth Glaux latiore folio Thuringiaca. The second, Dodo∣naeus, Lobel, Camerarius, Tabermontanus and Lugdunensis speake of, and call it Glaux exigua maritima. The last is mentioned by Alpinus in his Booke of Exoticke plants, by the name of Glaux in maritimis, but Bauhinus would referre it to Clusius his Dorychuio congener, as if they were both one plant, and of the Family of the Trefoiles, or Lotus, yet surely howsoever they be in some things alike, they are most likely to bee different plants, and therefore I have placed it here, being of Alpinus his judgement, that it doth come as neerely if not more, unto Dioscorides his Glaux then any others. 
The Ʋertues. It was used to be eaten after it was boiled as a Sallet herbe, with oyle and salt, in generally by all, but in especiall by Nourses that wanted milke in their brests, to helpe to encrease it, for which purpose also it is used now a∣dayes. 
CHAP. XLVIII. Kali. Glasse wort. H Aving by I know not what chance left out some sorts of Kali from the other formerly exhibited, let me place them here among the Sea plants, rather then leave them cut altogether, 
1. Kali spinosum. Prickly Glasse wort. This sort of Kali or Glassewort riseth up with one hard stalke, three or foure foote long, some∣times branched from the very bottome, each of them three foote long for the most part, Whereon are set narrow leaves, without order, in some places but one at a joynt, at others two or three, stan∣ding opposite all along, and others two or three together, some longer then others, the longest being usually about two inches long, at severall joynts with the leaves, 1. Kali spinosum. Prickly Glassewort. 
both on the stalk &amp; branches come forth certain hard huskes, pointed out into sixe sharpe prickely ends, formed somewhat like a Starre, with a small white flower in the middle, which abideth not long, that middle part afterwards swelling somewhat higher, hath a small pricke thereat, in which head lyeth one seede, almost like a graine of Wheate: the roote is spread into some branches, and perisheth or withe∣reth at the first approach of Winter with us, al∣though it will abide in the forme as it grew a great while after it is withered and dry. 
2. Kali floridum repens Neapolitanum Columna. Columna his Neapolitan Glasse wort. This small creeping or spreading Glasse wort, shooteth forth sundry weake branches, lying for the most part upon the ground, and raising it selfe up but a little, parted likewise into branches, set confused∣ly with small, thicke round leaves, at the toppes of the severall branches whereof, stand many small white flowers clustering together, made of five or sixe small pointed leaves a peece, after whom suc∣ceede small heads, opening into five parts, each being pointed at the ends, containing within much very small long brownish seede, the roote is composed of ma∣ny small long strings and fibres at them: the whole plant is very salt and covered with a rough meali∣nesse, as many Sea plants are, which although in its naturall place, or in the warmer climates, it wil a∣bide in Gardens, yet will it not doe so in our Coun∣try. 
3. Kali longissimis folijs Aegyptiacum. The longest leafed Kali or Glassewort of Egypt. This Kali, that as Alpinus saith is more proper to Egypt then to any other plant, riseth up with a long weake and a little hairy bending stalke branched forth into divers parts, having the lower leaves ve∣ry long and narrow, a little b ring backewards and hairy with all, those on the stalke and branches, up∣wards, being like unto the other, but somewhat shorter, and at the toppes foure or five much smaller, and more bowing or bending downewards, from the middle of whom come forth many flowers, like unto Roses saith mine Authour: the whole plant hath a salt and sharpe taste, being smart upon the tongue. 
2, Kali floridus repens Neapolitanum. Columna his Neapolitan Glasse wort. 
3. Kali longissimis folijs Aegyptium. The long leafed Kali or Glassewort of Egypt. 
4. Kali Arabum primum genus Rauwolfio. Rauwolfius, his first Arabian Kals. 
 
4. Kali Arabum primum genus Rauwolfio. Rauwolfius his first Arabian Kali. It is a small plant (saith he) full of slender branches very orderly set or placed together, sending forth many small knotted joynts dispersedly thereon, and at them sundry small narrow tender and pointed leaves, being of an ash-colour on the upperside and whitish underneath, as the stalkes and whole plant is also. 
The Place and Time. The two former sor s grow neere the sea side, the former both in France and Italy, the other Columna first found on the Westerne shore of Naples, and flower and seede late in the yeare, the third Alpinus saith is most proper to Egypt, and the last to Syria. 
The Names. The first of these hath beene taken for Tragum Matthioli, but his is alwayes found growing lower and smal∣ler, and without leaves, and this never without, whereby it appeareth plainely that they are two severall plants, and so doth Antonio Donati of Venice account them. Bauhinus in making two sorts of Tragum, calleth one Kali spinosum cochleatum, but why cochleatum, I see no cause, for it is not Lobel his Kali cochleato semine, for that hee made the first of his Kalies in the foregoing Paragraph, and I thinke there is no other Kali cochleato semine be∣sides, the other he calleth Kali spinoso affinis, referring it to the Tragum of Matthiolus, as all Authours since him have called it, and saith withall that because Dioscorides, gave no leaves to his Tragum, therefore Matthiolus and Tabermontanus, did expresse their Tragum without leaves: but Lobel set leaves, to his Tragum, as he himselfe saith he found it on the Venetians Island called Lio: but Donatus as I said before, saith he found that sort also without leaves in the same Island. The second Columna calleth Kali storidum repens Aizoides Neapolitanum, and Bauhi∣nus Kali Cressulae minoris folio. The third is the third Kali of Alpinus in his Booke of Egyptian plants. The last is called by Rauwolfius Kali Arabum primum genus, which as he saith is called Ʋsuen by the Arabians, but by the Na∣tives where it groweth Schinan. 
The Vertues. The ashes of all these sorts, as well as of the former sorts are both used to make Sope and Glasse, and to purge the belly also, from a dust choller as Alpinus saith, especially of his sort, either the juice of the leaves or the pou∣ther of them taken in Wine. 
CHAP. XLIX. Crithmum marinum. Sampire. I N this Chapter I must joyne, for the name and places sake, three or foure other plants, because I would not make many of them. 
1. Crithmum marinum vulgaris. Rocke Sampire. The Rocke Sampire groweth up with a tender greene stalke, about halfe a yard or two foote high at the most, branching forth almost from the very bottome and stored with sundry thicke and almost round, somewhat long leaves of a deepe greene colour, sometimes three together, and sometimes more on a stalke, and are sappy, and of a pleasant hot or spicy taste: at the toppes of the stalke and branches stand umbels of white flowers, and after them come large seede bigger then Fennel, yet somewhat alike: the roote is great, white and long continuing many yeares, and is of a hot spicy taste likewise. 
2. Crithmum marinum majus. The greater Rocke Sampire. This greater sort differeth little in forme from the precedent, but in the largenesse, and in not being of so good a rellish or spicy taste as it, but smelling somewhat strongly of Smallage, and tasting more bitter. 
3. Crithmum maritinum spinosum sive Pastinaca marina. Sea Parsneppe. This Sea Parsneppe is very like the former Sampire, but it groweth greater and higher with shorter and nar∣rower 1. Crithmum marinum vulgatius. Rocke Sampire.
9. Penna aurea marina. The goulden Sea Feather. 
with sundry branches on both sides, and they againe divided into lesser, all of them plentifully stored with very fine leaves, as small as Camomill leaves, or finer then they if any other be finer, soft in han∣dling at the first, easie to be bended, and transparent if they be in∣terposed to the light, greene below at the lower part, and purplish above: this is not so brittle as Co lline when it is dryed, and groweth more rough by the drynesse, although it may well be refer∣red unto some kinde thereof, and retaineth a very salt taste with it, but being put into water o a while steeped therein, it will grow soft againe. 
3. Muscus maritimus tinctorius sive Alga tinctoria Lugdunensis. Dying red Sea Mosse. This small red Sea Mosse is somewhat like the last, but with more store of soft stalkes and fewer branches, and with as fine small leaves on them like unto Fennell of a reddish co∣lour, but with some whitenesse mixed together, this is used by divers to strike a deepe crimson, or reddish purple colour, which will last long. 
4. Muscus marinus vireus F eniculaceus. Short Fennell like Sea Mosse. This short Fennell like Mosse groweth up from blackish round and fibrous rootes, with divers fine short leaves like Fennell, of an herby or greene colour, among which an herby stalke riseth also with such like leaves on it, and having sundry swolne eminences thereon. 
5. Muscus marinus Ferulaceus. Long Fennell like Sea Mosse. The leaves hereof are very long and fine like unto the Ferula, or Fennell giant, growing from stalkes neere a foote long, divided into branches, this springeth from Rockes or the like. 
6. Muscus marinus Abrotonoides. The Southernewood like Sea Mosse. This also riseth up from the Rockes with thicke stalkes and branches, with fine cut leaves on them, somewhat like unto Southernewood, but much bigger, and of a brownish red colour. 
7. Muscus marinus argenteus plu formis. The silver like Sea Feather. This most beautifull Mosse groweth on the Rockes in the Sea, upon the dry shels of Fishes, and is also often found wrapped amongst the wrake or Sea weede, cast upon the shore, growing up as the figure sheweth, into many particular parts or branches, made as it were all of haires like other Mosses, but verily representing se∣verall sprigs of Feathers, of so pure a white silverlike colour, that it is to be wondered at, that any Sea Mosse should become so white by nature, or made by Art, the property whereof is to waste the Spleene applyed with Vinegar, it quickly also dissolveth the scrophules or kernels in the throate, or elsewhere: it helpeth the Drop∣sie in that it doth abundantly provoke urine: it clenseth likewise the reignes, and gravell or stones engendred in the kidneyes, if a dramme of it in pouther be taken in the distilled water of Erysimum, Hedge Mustard or Sea Holly with an equall proportion of the juice of Lemmons. 
8. Muscus marinus Ʋenetus Costi Inditiradicis effigie. The Venetian Costus like Mosse. This Venetian Mosse groweth on rockes in the Sea, which by the often agitation of the water, is broken from it, and carryed to the shore, not having any roote, but being made as it were of a tuft of small stickes set toge∣ther, and being dry resembleth the roote of Costus Ind eus, but whiter, and being moistened againe, openeth it selfe into the forme aforesaid, and as it is expressed in the figure, it is very salt, and full of it like sand. 
9. Penna marina aurea. The goulden Sea Feather. This Sea plant that for the beauty and excellency thereof, doth worthily deserve his name, although sent thus mai ed as it were, being but a peece as it is likely, of what it was when it grew, yet such as it is I here offer to your view, being of a most shining gold colour, both stalke and leaves, which very neately resembleth the Spar∣tum Austriacum of Clusius, which we call the Feather grasse. 
The Place and Time. Their places are all declared by their titles to be the stones on the shore, or Rockes in the Sea, and the shells of fishes, &amp;c. whereon many of them breede, and but few spring out of the ground as the fourth doth, some in o∣ther Countries, and some on our owne caus , and perish not in Winter or Summer. 
The Names. The Greekes call it , and Muscus marinus in Latine yet some promiscuously call these Fucus ma∣rinus, as well as Muscus, but Dioscorides distinguisheth betweene them, entreating of them in two sundry Chap∣ters, and although Pliny be inconstant herein, making Mosse sometimes an herbe, sometimes a shrubbe, and some∣times confounding both Muscus and Fucus together. The first of both sorts is mentioned by Antonio Donati, in his herbation of the Ile of Leo of the Venetians, and is also the Muscus marinus of Dioscorides, according to Con∣stantinus, his more exact consideration as Lugdunensis doth relate it, and the Fucus capillaceo folio of Theophrastus, as it is thought. The second is Clusius his Muscus marinus, which he received from Imperatus of Naples, and sent by the name of Palmula marina, but nothing agreeing with that of Theophrastus. The third is the Fucus sive Al∣ga tinctoria of Lugdunensis. The fourth is the Muscus marinus viteus, which Casalpinus calleth Muscus marinus herbaceus mollier. The fifth the Fucus Ferulaceus of Lobel. The sixth is his Fucus marinus folijs Abrotani ma∣ris, whom Lugdunensis followeth, calling it Muscus marinus folijs Abrotani. The seventh and the last are so called by Donatus as their titles declare them, and the eighth is mentioned by Pona in his Italian Baldus. The Arabi∣ans call the Sea Mosse Thahaleb and Thaleb, the Italians Mosco marinio, the Spaniards Malhoquiana yerva, the French Monsse de mer, the Germanes Meermoss, the Dutch Zee mosch. 
The Ʋertues. Most of these Sea Mosses doe binde much, and coole inflammations, and being applyed while they are fresh give much ease to those are troubled with the hot Gout, they have an especiall property in drying, thickning, &amp; cooling, what part soever standeth in neede of any of these qualities: both the sorts of the first, killeth wormes in the bo∣dy, and the second of them is very effectuall for watering red eyes, if the pouther mixed with some Fennell Wa∣ter be put into them: the same pouther taken with Vinegar stayeth vomiting, and strengtheneth the stomacke, but if the decoction thereof in wine be injected into the bladder by a s rings, it cleanseth the carnosity in the necke of the bladder and ulcers therein, prooved effectuall to helpe one troubled with that disease in a short time: the eighth likewise is said to helpe to cleanse foule ulcers of all sorts, either inward or outward, being made into pouther and given in wine, and clenseth the stone in the kidneyes: the vertues of the seventh are decla∣red in the description. 
CHAP. LII. Fucus marinus sive Alga marina. Sea wrake or Sea weede. O F this kinde of broader leafed Sea excressences, that are soft and herby, some more and some lesse, there are many sorts, as they shall be here expressed. 
1. Fucus marinus sive Alga marina graminea. Wrake or Sea weede, or Grasse. The roundish rootes hereof are hairy, and blackish on the outside, from whence rise up small and round and long white hairy heads, breaking out at the sides as it were into branches, on the toppes whereof stand three or foure very long and narrow soft greene leaves, some being an ell or more long, and about an inch broad: this hath neither seede nor stalke, but lyeth on the ground untill the tide raise it on the water, which being broken by the force of the waves, is carryed to the shore, where it is kept for many things. 
2. Fucus marinus crassus latifolius. Broad and thicke Sea Girdle. This differeth from the former in that the roote is wholly fibrous, the stalke rising from thence, thicke and round two or three inches high, and the leafe which is sometimes but one, and seldome two of a very great length, even divers feete or els long, and above foure inches broad, equall from a little above the setting on to the end, but some∣what waved or crumpled on the edges, being thicke and of a deepe greene colour, so soft and moist while it is fresh, that it is like unto moist glue or gelly, and will hardly dry unlesse it lie long in the Sunne, and will not be fit to be kept without rotting untill after many dayes drying. 
3. Fucus marinus latissimo tenni folio. Broad and thin Sea girdle. This is in all things like the last, but that the leaves are thinner broader and shorter, yet crumpled on the edges, and of a paler greene colour, and is like unto thin parchment. 
4. Fucus alatas sive phosganoides. Winged Sea girdle. This cleaveth unto stones, and shels of fishes likewise both in the deeper and shallower places of the Sea, ha∣ving a round darke reddish stalke of the bignesse of a Goose quill, which being growne to the full length is very weake, lying on the ground, unlesse the water raise it, and an ell long: on each side whereof groweth a wing, all the whole length of it, like unto a skinne or parchment with veines therein, which being like the feather of an arrow, is small below and broader above equally to the toppe, of two or three inches breadth: the leaves that grow next the ground are many (and some are set also on the stalke) of a yellower greenish colour, and of an hand breadth, being foure, six, or eight inches long, lither or of a skinny substance like unto the other girdles: the stalke doth very well resemble a two edged sword: and is used to be dressed and eaten by the inhabitants of the Sea coasts where it groweth after it is cleared from the skinny wings, and hath a little sweete taste with the salt∣nesse which maketh it the more acceptable. 
5. Fucus maximus polyschides. Great Sea girdle with many Labels. The manner of growing hereof, and the use likewise is alike with the last, but is the greatest of all these sorts of Sea weedes, having a stalke as thicke as that of Angelica, of a browne colour like a Chesnut on the outside, and so are the round leaves likewise, which are three or foure cubits long, being not so thicke as ones little finger, and ending in divers broad and short skinny Labels, in like manner as the lower part of the swords hangers, which are of a yellowish colour. Both these last sorts were sent unto Bauhinus from Aberdein in Scotland, by Doctor Cargillus, and as it seemeth this and the second are somewhat differing from Mr. Iohnsons figure and description, which containeth both of them in one, yet I have thought good to give you his figure, for want of them severall, although his groweth from a roote, and this from shels, &amp;c. 
6. Fucus marinus secundus Dodonaei. Narrow long and thicke Sea girdles. The roote hereof is round and flat, from whence spring two or three narrow thicke leaves, about a foote and a halfe long, divided into sundry flat thicke thongs like leather, some long and some shorter, and they againe divi∣ded 1. Fucus murinus sive Alga marina graminea. Wrake or Sea weede or Grasse. 
5. Fucus maximus polyschides. Great Sea girdles with many Labels.
3. Muscus marinus sive Corallina rubeus. Reddish Coralline. This sort of Coralline hath no branched stalkes like the for∣mer, nor spreading much, but growing more upright, hath lon∣ger leaves thereon then the other, as fine as Fennell, and of a red∣dish colour. 
4. Muscus marinus latifolius sive Corallina latifolia. Broad Coralline. This broad Coralline spreadeth leaves as it were on both sides of a middle stalke, each whereof is broad, and parted into sun∣dry divisions. 
5. Muscus marinus longifolius sive Corallina longa. Long Coralline. This Coralline hath divers upright stalkes set with two, three or foure long leaves by spaces, one above another, in three or foure rowes, each whereof is somewhat flat, and dented or cut in all along the edges. 
6. Muscus marinus squammatus sive Corallina squammata. Scaly Coralline. This sixt sort of Coralline hath sundry sprigs, with joynts at them, like unto scales, and small hairy Mosse like leaves on each side of them, being wholly white. 
3. Muscus marinus rubeus sive Corallina rubeus. Reddish Coralline. 
6. Muscus marinus squammatus sive Corallina squammata. Scaly Coralline. 
 
The Place and Time. All these Mosses are expressed to grow on the Rockes and stones, in and by the Sea, and are to be found growing at all times of the yeare. 
The Names. All these sorts may be referred to the Muscus marinus before set forth, both their place of bree∣ding and manner of growing declaring it, and came to be called Corallina chiefly from that sort that grew upon Corall it selfe. The first is the Muscus marinus of Matthiolus, Dodonaeus, Lugdunensis and others, Lobel calleth it Corallina, and Lugdunensis Fucus capillaceus. The second Bauhinus onely remembreth in his Pinax, to have re∣ceived it from the Balticke Sea, calling it Muscus capillaceus multisidus niger. The third is the Muscus marinus vulgatissimus of Lobel, and the second Muscus marinus of Dodonaeus, Tabermentanus and Gerard. The fourth is the Muscus Coralliformis of Lobel. The fifth is the Corallina minima in the new Gerard, whose description doth nothing answer the figure, for Gerards figure is quite differing from this, yet is answerable to his description. The last is called by Lobel Muscus candidus Coralloides squammulis loricatis, and is the third Muscus marinus of Dodo∣naeus, although the new Gerard doth entitle another figure by that name, and giveth a description farre differing from his figure. 
The Vertues. Coralline is in a manner wholly spent among us to kill the wormes in children, or in elder persons, and as the matter so the manner, not knowne but in these latter times to Authours, but by what quality it worketh this effect is not declared by any, for it is altogether insipide, or without taste of heate or cold, as Corall it selfe is, and if Corall be so much commended against the stone and fluxes, crampes, the falling sicknesse, and melancholly, &amp;c. as you shall heare in its proper Chapter, doe not thinke but these may conduce somewhat thereunto also. 
CHAP. LIV. Frutices Coralloides sive Corallinae fruticantes. Shrub Corallines. V Nto the Corallines mentioned in the last Chapter, I must adjoyne sundry forts of wooddy, gritty, or stony shrub like Corallines, as I may so call them, of severall differing matters and formes, which I would place in a Chapter by themselves, and neither mingle them with the former Corallines, nor with the next Corals, because different from both. 
1. Corallina fruticans alba. The white crusted Shrub Coralline. This white Shrub Coralline groweth up from the Rocke or some shell, in forme of a small shrub, or low tree, to a cubits height, more or lesse, with a flat stemme or trunke below, and sundry branches also issuing from it on both sides, and not round like an ordinary shrub or tree, which branches are divided into other smaller sprigs a∣bove, and those againe into lesser, it is wholly covered over or crusted with a white h d crust like unto Coralline, or white Corall, but rough or rugged, the middle part or heart being wooddy and bending like the branch of a tree, yet very hard also. 
2. Corallina fruticans rubra. Red crusted shrub Coralline. This red Coralline is like the former in all things, saving that the colour hereof is in some wholly of a reddish colour, Lutea. and in others the branches part white, and part purplish. And another sort there is also, that is of a whitish yellow, spotted, which as I take it Bauhinus calleth Corallina pallide flavescontis coloris, &amp; lutea punctata, for I thinke them both one. 
3. Corallina lignosa ruffescens Ericae facis. Brownish wooddy Coralline or Sea Heath. This sort also groweth flat like the former, and from some stone or Rocke riseth halfe a yard high or better, with divers spread branches, divided againe into other smaller ones, somewhat like unto Heath, spreading almost to a yards breadth, all covered with a thinne brownish barke, and a very hard wooddy substance underneath, set thicke with small knots or bunches, as if they were the buds of flowers, easily rubbed to pouther: the whole plant being of a saltish taste. 
4. Corallina plumata sive Myriophyllum Pelaginus Cortusi Clusio. The Sclavonian Sea Feather. This Sea Coralline (for so in substance it is not unlike, and Cortusus found the effects to be alike also) groweth not as the former, from some stone or shell, but out of the 1, 2. Corallina fruticans alba vel rubra. The white or red crusted shrub Coralline. 
ground in the Sea, from a roote fastened therein, with very hairy fibres, growing up with a slender stalke, (as Clusius ghessed by the sight of the figure about a cubits height) which did send forth branches of long leaves, very finely cut into many long parts on both sides and bending the toppe downe∣wards, very like to the branches of the Date tree, or as I may say, unto a Feather, of a pale or whitish colour: the upper leaves are smaller then the lower, else alike, and the toppe of the stalke endeth in a certaine head, composed as it were of of many scales wherein is no seede, these scales being as it were young plants, which falling to the bottome of the wa∣ter take roote therein, and grow up like the mother plant, this while it groweth in the water, or is fresh new taken forth is tender and plant to bee bended any way, but when it is dry it is as hard as Coralline or Glasse, and as brit∣tle. 
5. Corallina albimodosa. The knotted white Coralline or Barbary Feather. The stalke hereof is a foote high, white, hard, and wood∣dy, covered with a rugged white barke, having sundry straight but weake branches, issuing ou on all sides without order, three or foure inches long apeece, and some parted in∣to lesser once, of not above an inch long, on each stalke there stand divers, even thirty or forty small knots or buttons, for the most part bored through, composed of two halfe circles compassing it round about: this was brought out of Barba∣ry to Marcelles and there worne in hats like Feathers. 
6. Corallina rugosa duplex &amp; alia minus rugosa. Two sorts of rough Coraline and a smooth, The one of these is of a hard wooddy substance, without coare or heart, of a brownish colour, crusted over with a rough knotted or bunched coate or barke, of an ash colour, which is brittle, easie to be rubbed to pouther, from whence spring crooked or bending stalks and smaller branches from them, all of them crusted and 3. Corallina l gnosa Erica facie. Health like wooddy Coralline. 
bunched rough, as the stalke and ending in a blunt point, or end. Another is both whiter and smoo∣ther, but else not like it in stalkes and branches. There is another also whose crusted coate is pale yellow. 
7. Corallina reticulata pur purascens. The red Sea Fanne. The pleasant and delightfull Sea plant is of divers sises some greater and other lesser, yet all of growing that like a fanne or large lease with sundry greater bran∣ches spreading on both side the main and they again and smaller, ending in points, yet all and close together no separation of branches from another, by yet with sundry small or greater the mashes of a net, (yet some sorts have beene seene that have had no hole n them, but were whole w ome spots on them like unto oles, of a very hard and wooddy matter or substance sie to be cut with a brownish red colour yet tough or hard to breake, although it may bee somewhat e d, and covered in , in some more or lesse (but adventure all over, when it is first taken out of the Sea, or before it be rubbed with handling and carryage, with whitish saltnesse. This groweth to the Rockes, which the Seas goe over often times. Captaine Smith in the booke of the plants growing in the Bermuda Isles, compareth it to a Vine leafe, as some others that first saw it here did, and called it the Feather. It hath beene brought both from the East and West Indies to us.
17. There are two other sorts of so delicate a taste that they are eaten raw, the one is flat at the head, and of a reddish colour, giving a sweete milke when it is broken, and is the sixth sort of Tragus, the other is great, white and round, smelling very sweete and called Richione, as Baptista Porta saith, that is, the King of Mushromes, and for the pleasant taste may be given to the sicke without danger. 
18. Then there is one which Caesalpinus calleth Lingua, growing on the bodies of Chesnut trees, whose stalke is not so red as of the true Boletus, and the head is somewhat red. 
19. And then there is the true Boletus of the ancients, which is of so delicate a taste, that they are accusto∣med to the feeding on Mushromes, desire them more then any, and can never be satisfied with them, which Clau∣dius Caesar found to his cost, being killed with them: they are as white as an egge, and of the same forme when 30. Tubera terrae edi ilia &amp; Tubera cervina. Vnderground edible Mushromes. or Spanish Trubbes, and underground Deeres balles or Mushromes. 
they first spring up, but after two or three dayes the white skinne or coate breaketh above and sheweth yellow, like the yolke of an egge, which then groweth greater, and into the forme of a Mushrome (the white skinne fal∣ling away by little and little) being raysed somewhat higher in the middle, and of so gold a yellow colour, that it seemeth deeper coloured then the saffron it selfe, and lesse yellow underneath, with as many lines as in other Mushromes, the stalke likewise is yellow and an inch thicke, when it groweth old it breaketh into three or foure parts, and looseth the fresh colour above, becomming more pale, and underneath almost white: these being dres∣sed and served as a dish to the table where Clusius was, seemed unto him to be coloured with Saffron. 
20. There is some that are called Porcini or Suilli, Swines Mushromes, which are somewhat pointed, and of a smokie colour, spotted with white spots, and underneath with blackish lines, the upper part in some will be red, but Caesalpinus saith that those which were called suilli or porcini with them, were of a brownish yellow above, and of an ash colour underneath. 
21. Then are there such which those of Naples call Conocielle, as Baptista Porta saith, and peradventure may be those that Caesalpinus saith were called Scarogia, growing in medowes, the head being broad, and the stalke very long and of divers colours, this with Clusius is his eighteenth. 
22, Another sort is called Quercinus dipsacoides by Columna. The head hereof is white, and like unto the ordi∣nary sort for forme, but that the toppe is browne, and groweth to be spotted, but the chiefest matter of difference is in the stalke, which hath about the middle of it, or higher, a certaine hollow dish, like as the Teasell seemeth to have, being rough and browne, about the brimmes: the lower part of the stalke is as it were knobbed, and black∣ish next to the ground, with some hairy fibres thereat: it groweth among Oakes, this may be called the Teasell or Bason Mushrome. 
23. There is another that groweth on the Larche tree, besides the Agaricke, which is of an huge sise, contai∣ning thirty pound in weight as Matthiolus saith, and is of a gold yellow colour, somewhat torne about the edges, and is most pleasant. 
24. Then is there another called acris or piperitis, and peradventure may be that which Cordus on Dioscorides calleth Piperis sapore, being a white Mushrome, and tasting sharpe and hot like pepper. 
25. There is another sort which Caesalpinus saith the vulgar people called Primuli, being very small of an ash colour, and very sweete in sent. 
26. Another is branched and is the nineteenth with Clusius, being in some yellow, in others reddish, and in o∣thers of a pale white, which they call the Goates bearde, and adde their colour, the most conspicuous is that which i yellow and spotted with white spots, Clusius saith that these are some what like those Mushromes that Baptista Porta saith, were brought from mount Garganus, like young Asparagus buds, and then breaking out into bran∣ches. 
27. There are two other sorts called Digitatus major &amp; minor, and Digitelli by the Jtalians being of a large sise, and parted as it were into long white fingers, one whereof will suffice a man at a meale. 
28. Then is there a monstrous great kinde growing in Hungary, being of two foote in breadth, having many large torne leaves like scales lying upon it, and fashioned like an Oaken leafe, some of them of a darke red and some of a blackish white colour, with many blacke spots in the white, the stalke is halfe a foote high, and an hand∣bredth and a halfe in thickenesse. Clusius thinketh this to be that mushrome which Baptista Porta saith the Nea∣politanis call Gallinacia, being of so large a sise that it doth weigh fourescore pound, and that one will satisfie a great family, Bauhinus referreth it to the Fungus Leporinus of Clusius, which is his foureteenth, Clusius saith hee hath seene in Hungary those that have beene so great, that one might well suffice foure men at a meale. 
29. There is also one that is very small and a little long, formed like unto a tooth, and therefore called Den∣ tus. 
30. There is yet another kinde of mushrome (for so it may most fitly be termed, and not rootes, as some would ke them to be) that groweth not out or above the ground, as all the former sorts doe, but within or under the upper crust thereof, called in Greeke either and ab imbribus, or ab humore, in Latine Tuber and Tubera (or Tubera terrae to distinguish it from Tuber arbor ) in the Arabian tongue Ramech Alchamech, Tumer &amp; Kema, in Italian Tartuffi and Tartufole, in Spanish Turmas de tierra, in French Truffes and Truffles, in the Germane tongue Hirtz brunst, in English some call them Spanish Fussebals, because they are somewhat like our Fusse∣bals which are not edible, but containe a smoaky dust or pouther in them: but I would rather call them Vnder∣ground Mushromes, or Spanish Trubbes to distinguish them. Matthiolus saith there are three sorts of them, ( Pliny mentioneth two sorts, one whereof is gritty betweene the teeth, and are some bigger then a Quince, and some of a pound in weight, and saith, that hee knew in his time Martius Lacinius a Praetor and Iudge at Carthage in Spaine, that bowed a penny betweene his teeth, that was in that bit of the Tuber that he did eate, whereby is manifest that the earth did gather it within it of it owne nature, being a thing not to be planted) one whose inner pulpe or substance is white, another more browne, yet the barke or outer rinde of both is blacke and full of rifts or chaps, a third sort that groweth in the coast of Anania and Trent is lesse, the barke smooth and more browne, and lesse pleasant in taste or insipide. They grow as I said under the superfi∣cies of the earth, yet not cleaving thereto, causing it sometimes to swell, and sometimes to rift and cleave, where∣by it is discerned where they grow (yet Pliny saith the contrary, and that they have no seede, which will present∣ly be gaine said) being of a blacke or browne colour on the out side, and of a soft white substance within, having as Iohn Baptista Porta saith, under the outer skinne, certaine small blacke seede, like unto the seede of the Cypresse tree, whereby it not onely propagateth it selfe, where it is naturall, but as it hath beene often observed, there have some of them growne where the parings of them have beene cast. For the qualitie or property of them, they have none evident in them saith Galen: but Avicen saith, that they have a more earthy then watery substance, breeding grosse and melancholicke humours, more then any other foode, and that they that eate much of them are subject to the Appoplexy, and Palsie, and besides are hard of digestion, and trouble the stomacke, whether they be rosted under embers or otherwise boiled in broth, and eaten with pepper, oyle, and vinegar: Vnto Pamphylus or Diphylus, in Athenaeus, therefore we must not give credit herein, who saith that these Tubera ' s yeeld a good juice to the body, ease the belly by expelling the excrements, and by breeding winde, engender lust. And againe he saith that a certaine herbe groweth above, upon that ground where the Tubera breedes, which he calleth , but what that herbe is he hath not declared. 
Lugdunensis saith that Myconus sent two sorts of plants out of Spaine, which the Spaniards in Castile call Yerva turmera (and is the Cistus annuus, as I shewed you before,) that is Tuberaria, which peradventure may be it, for they suppose where they doe grow the Tubera doe breede. 
31. Tubera cervina. The Deares underground balles or Mushromes are another sort of these Tuberaes (where∣of Matthiolus first maketh mention in his third booke of Epistles, and the last thereof, and after him Lobel in his Dutch Herball, growing underground, in the woods of Bohemia, &amp;c. where Deare doe much haunt, especially where they couple as the former do (and thought to grow of their sperme that falleth on the ground, and is but the opinion of hunters and Country people, whose judgement in so secret a peece of naturall Philosophy, is not so readily to be admitted) which are like them, being alwayes round, but uneven or rugged, whose outer skinne is blackish, and the inner pulpe or substance whitish: these be not eaten in the same manner as the former, that is for meate or food, but as a medicament being cut into peeces, and dryed upon strings put through them, to be u∣sed upon occasion: while they are fresh they have a strong and evill sent, which they lose in the drying, and are u∣sed either alone one dramme and a halfe in pouther, taken with sweete wine, or with such other things as provoke venery, as also to increase milke in Nourses breasts, taken in some ptisane drinke, and a little long pepper added thereto: the smoake thereof when it is burned taken underneath, helpeth women troubled with the mother, and openeth the passages when they are close: they are thought also to expell poyson, and the venome of creatures, to be taken in pure wine, and also applyed outwardly, I much mervaile that Clusius having seene and set downe so many sorts of Mushromes, remembred none of these, but I presume that if he had not hope of overground good, he sought not for underground treasure. 
Vnto these Mushromes may also be adjoyned those which are made by art, whereof Matthiolus maketh menti∣on, that grow naturally among certaine stones in Naples, and that the stones being digged up and carryed to Rome, and other places, where they set them in their wine cellars, covering them with a little earth, and sprinkling a little warme water thereon, would within foure dayes produce Mushromes fit to be eaten at what time one will. As also that Mushromes may be made to grow at the foote of the white Poplar tree, within foure dayes after warme water wherein some leaves have beene dissolved, shall be powred into the roote, which must be slit, and the stocke above ground. 
To cause that the edible Mushromes may be lesse offensive, in that many doe too greedily desire them, it is held that if they be boyled with wilde peares, they may be eaten without danger, or for want of wilde ones to take a harder or harsher sort of other peares, the leaves also and barke are conducing to that purpose, and so is raw Gar∣licke taken with Vinegar. 
32. And lastly there is the Iewes eare, called Fungus Sambuciuus. (which I place among the edible sorts, and not among the venemous, as Clusius and others doe, because although it be not eaten in the substance as others are, (and yet Baptista Porta nameth one Sambucinus optimus omnium, ) yet the broth is used after the boyling, as I shall shew you by and by) which groweth on the Elder trees that are planted on Cony boroughes, for their sha∣dow and shelter, and not so frequently on them in other places, being as all know soft and limber, while they are fresh, not very thicke but transparent, and of a blackish colour, of differing formes and ses, for some will bee swolne or puffed up, in one place more then in another, having some resemblance to a mans eare, some thinne on the edge, and thicke in the middle, and some two or three growing together, all of them being dryed become of a blackish gray colour, and then may be kept a whole yeare or more, safe without spoyling to be used as you neede, for lotions for sore mouthes and throates, or when they are swolne, to be boyled in milke, or steeped in vinegar and so gargled, which is the onely use they are put unto that I know.
7. Eufragia lutea minor radice squammata. The lesser yellow Eyebright. This lesser sort hath a smooth hollow stalke a foote high or lesse, set with branches and leaves by couples on them, which are like unto the Germander, or Ivy leafed Chickeweede but longer pointed, the flowers are yellow, but like unto those of the common Eyebright, the seede is small blacke and round, and pointed at the ends, stan∣ding two together on a small footestalke: the roote is white and round like a bulbe, composed of foure thicke coates or scales lying close together, the whole plant is without taste, and somewhat resembleth Fumiterry, but Columna saith that the rootes are like the Dentaria major of Matthiolus, as the figure expresseth it. 
The Place and Time. The first and third are onely frequent in our Land, the former in many Meddowes and grassie places throughout our Country, and the other in many places of Kent, in the barron fields and waste grounds, both about Gravesend, and the tracts thereabouts, and in many other places, the rest some in Italy, and at Naples, or in Spaine and Austria, they all for the most part flower not untill the end of Summer, the seede ripening within a while after. 
The Names. It is called Eufragia and Eufrasia, and by some onely thought to be anciently called , (yet is Euphrosyne not knowne, nor described by any of the former Greeke or Latine writers,) for it is of later invention, and for the effects called Ophthalmica and Ocularia. The first is generally called Eufrosia and Eufragia, or Euphragia by all Writers. The second is called by Columna Eufragia linifolia, although the leaves bee farre lesse then those of Line or Flax: the third is the Eufragia altera of Dodonaeus, Lobel, and others, the Sideritis pratensis rubra of Lugdunensis, the Odontites of Tabermontanus, the Ericoides rubrum of Thalius, and the Crataeogonon Euphro∣syne of Gerard, who would needes make it a kinde of Crataeogonon, against the saying of Dodonaeus, from whom he hath the most that he hath, saying it cannot agree with Crataeogonon, by the defect in many parts, and yet his Cor∣rector doth so let it passe. The fourth Bauhinus called in his Phytopinax, Brunella Italica, but in his Pinax Eu∣phrasia pratensis Italica latifolia, and in his Prodromus Eufrasia purpurea minor, and is the third Eufrasia non scripta of Columna. The fifth is the Eufragia major sylvestris purpurea latifolia of Columna. The sixth is the Sideritis pra∣tensis lutea of Lugdunensis, Ericoides luteum of Thalius, Odontites flore luteo of Tabermontanus, and the Eufragia sylvestris major lutea angustifolia of Columna. The last Columna calleth Anonyma radice Dentariae, and Bauhinus Euphrasia lutea Alfinofolio radice squammata. The Italians and Spaniards call it Eufrasia, the French Eufrase, the Germanes Augencrost, the Dutch Ooghen troost, and we Eyebright. 
The Vertues. The bitter taste that is herein sheweth it to be hot and dry, and is especially used for all the diseases of the eyes, that cause dimnesse of the sight, for either the greene herbe or the dry, the juice or the distilled water is very ef∣fectuall for the said purpose, to be taken either inwardly in wine or in broth, or to be dropped into the eyes, and used for divers dayes together: Some also make a conserve of the flower to the same effect. Any of these wayes used, it helpeth also a weake braine or memory, and restoreth them being decayed in a short time. Arnoldus de Villa nova, in his booke of wines, much commendeth the Wine made of Eyebright, put into it when it is new made, and before it worke (which because we cannot make in our land, I could wish that the Eyebright might be tun∣ned up with our strong Beere in the same manner, which no doubt would worke the like effects, their Wine and our Beere having a like working, as we use with Wormewood, Scurvigrasse and the like) to helpe the dim∣nesse of the sight, and saith that the use thereof restored old mens sight, to read small Letters without spectacles, that could hardly read great ones with their spectacles before: as also did restore their sight that were blinde for a long time before. If this drinke be not to be made or had, the pouther of the dryed herbe either mixed with Su∣gar, a few Maces and Fennell seede, and drunke or eaten in broth, or the said pouthers made into an Electuary with Sugar, doth either way end to the same effect. 
CHAP. IV. Specadum Ʋeneris sive Viola pontagona. The Corne Violet. W E have in our Corne fieldes in this Land, two sorts of Corne Violets a greater and a lesse which shall be shewed to you in this Chapter. 
1. Speculum Veneris majus. The greater Corne Violet. The greater of these Violets hath sundry slender weake trayling stalkes, lying on the ground, and rising from the roote, divided and subdivided from every joynt into branches so plentifully, that one plant growing in a good Garden ground, will be h dly covered with a pecke measure, thicke set without order, with small and somewhat long leaves, slightly dented or rather waved on the edges, at every leafe from the upward; commeth forth of the bignesse of a two pence, so (that five hundred flowers a will be seene open at once, a goodly spectacle) set in a fine pointed greene huske, of a faire purplish blew of one whole leafe, plaited into five round pointed ends, white at the bottome, with a white pointell closing up every night, and opening in the day onely, the seed is yellow, and contained in small long heads, the roote is small threddy, and annuall. 
2. Specul Ʋeneris . The lesser Corne Violet. The lesser sort groweth more upright like unto the little Centory, with stiffer and fewer branches, more harsh or rough also in handling, the leaves are like unto the former but somewhat lesse, at each joynt almost come forth two or three flowers, standing at the ends of long like unto Lysimachia siliquosa, of the same fashion and co∣lour as the former, but so small as the eye of a little bird, never rising above the huske it standeth in, and not but in the heate of the day to be seene, which then onely layeth it selfe open, the seede is small and yellow as the former, the roote is small and annuall also. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in the Corne fields, betweene Greenehithe and Dartford in Kent, as also in the Corne fields a∣bout Lilly, a towne in the uttermost part of Hartfordshire, towards Bedford, the other about Hartfield, and in sun∣dry other places in this land, being more frequent by much, and flower from Midsommer untill the end of August almost the seede ripening in the meane time. 
The Names. We have not understood as yet by any that the lesser sort hath beene observed by any Authour beyond sea but onely the former, which is called Onobrychis and arvensis by Dodonaeus and Lugdunensis, and Onobrychi Belgarum by Lobel, Ʋiola anony s inodora by Gesner, and Viola arvensis, and Viola Pantagonia by Tabermon∣ us, but Speculum Ʋeneris by Gerard, from the Dutches Vnowen spiegel, which is Venus looking Glasse in English, 1. Speculum Ʋeneula majus. The greater Corne Violet. 
2. Speculum Veneris minus. The lesser Corne Violet. 
but because it usually groweth in Corne fields, and that some have called it a Violet, I have thought it fittest to terme it a Corne Violet, which if any list to alter they may at their pleasure. 
The Vertues. We have not understood that any hath made triall what vertues it is endued withall, and therefore I can say no more thereof. 
CHAP. V. Polygala. Milkewort. O F this Milkewort besides that there is a greater and a lesser kinde, and each of much variety in the co∣lour of the flowers, there are some other plants somewhat resembling them, which must be entrea∣ted of together. 
1. Polygala major. The greater Milkewort. This greater kinde shooteth from the roote five or sixe hard, slender, and flexible stalkes, a foote high or more, thicke set with somewhat long and narrow leaves like those of Diets weede: the flowers grow at the toppes in a long spike thicke together, somewhat like to those of Fumiterry, but larger and of a fine de∣layed reddish purple colour and shining withall, after which follow flat pouches, with two seedes in them usu∣ally, which are long blackish and hairy: iela . the roote is hard and wooddy, with divers fibres thereat, and abideth long. This hath beene found to very, the colour of the flower, especially in shadowy and moist places, to be ei∣ther blew or white, or mixed as the smaller kinde is. 
2. Polygala minor. The lesser Milkewort. The lesser kinde groweth in all things like the former, but with lower and slenderer stalkes, yet somewhat hard or wooddy, Alta spe∣ . not so many rising from a roote and with fewer and smaller leaves on them: the flowers also are a∣like but smaller and vary as much or rather more in their colour, some being of a blewish purple, others purple and white, some all white, other reddish or of a wan colour, or overworne red, &amp;c. There is also another sort hereof whose lower leaves that spread on the ground are many, and rounder them in any of the former, but those that grow on the stalkes are long like the rest, the flowers whereof are onely blew, without mixture or va∣riation. 
3. Polygala Monspeliaca. Milkewort of Mempelier. This French Milkewort hath upright stalkes a foote high, many rising from a small long white roote, with sun∣dry longer and narrower leaves on them set without order▪ the flowers grow one above another, in longer spikes then in the other smaller, and not fully like the other, but of a reddish colour, the seede that followeth is small contained in long cornered huskes. 
1. Polygala major. The greater Milkewort. 
2. Polygala minor. The lesser Milkewort. 
 
4. Polygala repens. Creeping Milkewort. This small Milkewort hath a number of stalkes, full of 4. Polygala repens. Creeping Milkewort.
CHAP. XXII. Chrysanthemum &amp; Buphthalmum. Corne Marigolds, and Oxe eye. T Here are sundry sorts of these Golds, or Corne Marigolds, to be entreated of here, some whereof grow plentifully enough, in our Cornefields, others being strangers, we have received from beyond Sea, and some I have set forth in my former Booke, whereof I thinke good to give you the figures, of some of them, and therewith of our garden Marigolds, and referre your to the Booke: and for the neere affinity betweene these and the Buphthalmum, I thinke it not amisse to joyne them here also. 
1. Chrysanthemum segetum nostras. The Corne Marigold of our owne Country. This Corne Marigold hath sundry tender pale greene herby stalkes, breaking forth into some few branches, with divers long blewish greene leaves, set without order on them, being narrow at the bottome, and broader at the end, cut in a little on both edges: the flowers grow singly at the toppe of every branch, being large, grow∣ing out of greene scaly heads, and of a shining yellow colour, both the thrumme and the border of leaves about it, each leafe being broad or flat pointed, and cut into three or foure parts, smelling a little sweete: the roote perisheth every yeare, and riseth from it owne sowing. Matthiolus hath set forth one of this sort, with leaves jagged like Feverfew. The chiefest difference in this from the former, consisteth in the leaves, Bellid∣folio which are whole small, long and round pointed like those of the Daysies. 
2. Chrysanthemum segetum Baeticum. Spanish Corne Marigold. The stalkes hereof are harder and browner then of the former, and stand more upright, the leaves are greener and not so much divided or cut in on the edges, the flowers are not of so shining a yellow colour, but somewhat deeper yellow, the seede is small and whitish, and is bitter as the former is, although the herbe is sweete and ea∣te as a Sallet herbe, and herein consisteth the chiefest difference. 
3. Chrysanthemum tenuifolium Baeticum Boelij. Boel his Spanish Marigold. In the leaves chiefly consisteth the greatest difference, betweene this and the last, for this hath sad greene leaves, very much jagged and cut into very small and fine parts, almost as small as Camomill, the flowers are yellow, and so like that but for the leaves, they could hardly be distinguished. 
4. Chrysanthemum Va entinum Clusij. Clusius his Spanish Marigold. Clusius his Chrysanthemum of Valentia in Spaine, riseth up usually, but with one stalke of a foote high, parted into some branches, beset without order, with finer leaves then the last, but of a hoary colour, the flowers stand singly like the rest, and of a shining gold yellow colour, but unlike in this, that this hath no border of leaves at all about the middle head, but is bare and naked. 
5. Chrysanthemum Hispanicum primum Clusij. The first Mountaine Corne Marigold of Clusius. This hath many long leaves next the ground, resembling those of the white Wormewood, in the forme and Chrysanthemum Croticum. Candy Corne Marigold. 
Calendula multiplex, &amp; prolifera. Double Marigolds, and Iacke anapes on horse backe. 
1. Chrysanthemum segetum nostras. Corne Marigold of our owne Country. 
4. Chrysanthemum Ʋalentinum Clusij. Clusius his Spanish Corne Marigold. 
5 6. Chrysanthemum Alpinum primum &amp; secundum Clusij. The first and second Mountaine Corne Marigold of Clusius. 
10. Buphthalmum Matthioli sive vulgare Millefolij folijs. The more vulgar Oxe eye. 
divisions, the stalke is a spanne high, set with finer cut leaves, and at the toppe many yellow flowers set together, like unto those of Raggewort, the roote hath many white fibres. 
6. Chrysanthemum Alpinum secundum Clusij. Clusius his second Mountaine Corne Marigold. The leaves of this sort is much more finely cut, most like unto those of Southernwood, of a pale greene colour, and of no unpleasant savour, but somewhat bitter in taste: the stalkes are divided into some branches, bearing each of them one or two flowers, greater then Camomill flowers, and without sent, of a yellow colour wholly, both the middle and the border, the roote hath blackish fibres. 
7. Chrysanthemum tertim ejusdem. His third Corne Marigold. Differeth little from the second in the leaves, being as fine cut, but are longer, thicker and greater, and the flow∣ers grow more together, and lesser then the former, and the roote hath white fibres. 
8. Chrysanthemum Hispanicum rotundioribus folijs. Spanish round leafed Golds. The greatest difference in this from the others, consisteth in the leaves, which are not divided at all, but are long and broad, somewhat round pointed, and onely dented about the edges, the flowers are greater that grow on the top of the branches and stalke, of a shining yellow colour, both border and middle thrum: the roote is wood∣dy, having many strings thereat. 
9. Chrysanthemum latifolium Brasilianum. Sweete Corne Marigold of Brassill. This sweete Marigold springeth up with a stalke about halfe a yard high, somewhat rough and crested, having sundry leaves set thereon, of foure or five inches long, and two broad, compassing it at the bottome, and growing smaller to the end, somewhat dented about the edges, with sharpe dents, from the bosome of whom come forth somewhat long footestalkes, sustaining each of them a faire yellow flower, set in a greene huske or cup, having seven or eight leaves for a border, dented at the ends, and compassing a middle thrumme, consisting of long threds, wherein afterwards lyeth the seede, very like unto the former Spanish kinde, the roote perisheth yearely in like manner, the herbe is so sweete that the Slugges and Snailes doe eate it above many other herbes in the Garden. 
10. Buphthalmum Matthioli sive vulgare Millefolij folijs. The more vulgar Oxe eye. The more common Buphthalmum, with us, hath sundry faire greene leaves, divided very much into sundry o∣ther leaves, somewhat resembling common Yarrow, and so taken to be by diverse that looke but superficially thereon, but heedfully marked differeth plainely from it, the divisions not being so thicke or small, the stalkes and branches, stand not up so strongly as Yarrow, and at the toppes of them beare but single flowers, lesser then the Corne Marigold, but wholly of a deepe yellow, and not shining, the seede followeth in the thrumme, the roote is fibrous and perisheth yearely, or abiding the second yeare after the first sowing, which the Yarrow doth not. 
11. Buphthalmum alterum Cotulae folio. Camomill-like Oxe eye. The weake sappy greene bending stalkes hereof, grow two foote long sometimes, with fine Camomill-like leaves set dispersedly thereon, and the branches, every of which beare a flower like unto the former Oxe eye, but the leaves hereof are somewhat larger, and fewer, and yellow, the middle thrumme being of a deeper colour, and somewhat hollow. 
12. Buphthalmum flore purpurascente. Oxe eye with purplish flowers. This Oxe eye with purplish flowers, differeth not much from the last, in the manner of growing, or forme of leaves and flowers, but herein chiefly, that the backe of the leaves of the flowers are either wholly purplish or else 11. Buphthalmum alterum Cotulae folio. Camomill-like Oxe eye. 
12. Buphthalmum flore purpurascente. Oxe eye with purplish flowers.
Paeonia faemina flore pleno purpureo. The ordinary double red Peony. 
Paeonia mas. The male Peony. 
1. Paeonia pumila Hispanica. The dwarfe Spanish Peony. 
 
7. Paeonia faemina flore pleno carneo major. A greater double blush Peony. From Count Aremberg, and Iohn Boisot, persons worthy of credit saith Clusius, I received intelligence, that at Brussells in the garden of the Lady Tisenac, who was the Presidents Widdow, they saw growing a blush double Peony, greater then the ordinary, and as great as the ordinary double red, yet holding the naturall property of the other double blush flower, which is to grow whiter by standing, and to hold the leaves without shedding for a long time. 
The Place and Time. The places of the most of them are declared in their titles, or descriptions, and their flowring, &amp;c is about May; with the other sorts. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , in Latine also Poeonia, many other names are given it both in Greeke and Latine as Pentorobos, (yet some have it Pentoboros) Orobelion, Haemagogon, Paeonion Pa thiceraton, Theodonion; Selenion, Selenogonon, Pthisis, Aglaophotis, Ideus dactylus, and some others: in Latine also Rosa fa uina. Herba Ca∣sta, Hasta regia, Rosa asinarum, and Glycyside or Dulcisida, from the red graines in the P mgarner, called Sida in Greeke, but Paeonia from Paeon, that famous Physitian in his time. And Aglaophotis from the shining rednesse of the red graines or seedes, from whence so many fabulous and detestable illusions of Aelianus his Aglaophotis, and Iosephus his Baciaras are referred and reported of Peony, as may be seene in the Writings of the Auncients. Tragus sheweth that in his time the male Peony rootes were sold for Dictamnus albus, but I thinke Tragus was therein deceived, for I verily thinke they were the same white rootes which now are taken and called Dictamnus albus, when they are the rootes of the Fruxinella, as I shewed before in that Chapter, for the rootes of the male Peony are not so white as they, which confirmeth me the more herein, because Tragus saith, the leaves of that Peony which he tooke to be the male, had leaves like an Ash, or Licoris, and such are the Fraxinella leaves, which also himselfe describeth reasonable exactly, in the seventh Chapter of his first Booke, with Dictanus Cretensis, but much mistaken in the sent to be like Cinamon, unlesse it be divers in the Rhyme tract from others. And I have shewed before also, that we want not couzeners, and deceivers, to sell the white rootes of the greater Oenanthe, for white Peony rootes. There needeth not any further explication of these sorts of Peonies, since Clusius hath made mention of all save one, and that Camerarius in horto, and Bellonius doe expresse, which is the fourth. The Arabians call it Feonia, the Italians Peonia, the Spaniards Rosa del monte, and Rosa Albardeira, the French Pivoine, the Germanes Peonien Rosen, Benedicten Rosen, Pfingst rosen, Kiinigs blumen, and Gichtwurtz, the Dutch Pioenen de Mast bloemen, and we in English Piony, or Peony. 
The Ʋertues: It is saith Galen of thin parts, and drying, yet not very notably hot, but according to our owne symmetry, or constitution, or rather a little hotter, an astringent quality also, with some sweetenesse it hath, and some acrimony likewise, and bitternesse joyned together, whereby it is effectuall to procure womens courses, if the bigge∣nesse of an Almond, in powder be taken in honied Wine: by the acrimony and bitternesse therein, it is good to open the obstructions of the liver, and kidneyes, and the yellow jaundise and stone: and by the astringent qua∣lity to stay the fluxes of the belly; but the more effectually if the decoction thereof be taken, that is made with harsh or red Wine: by the notable drying quality therein also saith he, I doubted not to helpe children there∣with that had the falling sicknesse, by tying it about their neckes. And indeede I saw a childe freed from that disease, that had for eight whole moneths together, worne a good peece of the roote about him, and that as soone as that peece by some chance fell from about his necke, or was taken away for tryall of the matter, he fell into the disease againe: but having a fresh one applyed to him againe, he became perfectly well: the reason where∣of may be, that the Spirits thereof drawne into the pores by the inward heate, and outward aire, pierced the pla∣ces, effected with the disease, and cured it: for after the same manner doth the Succus Cyrenaicus, that is the best Laser, or Laserpitium, cure the uvula, or palate of the mouth as we call it, when it is falne downe, or swolne through rheume: or as Nigella seede being fryed, and bound in a thinne warme linnen cloath, doth dry up the thinne and troublesome destillations of rheumes, by the hot breath thereof rising through the nostrils: as also if divers threds dyed in the purple fish colour, be bound about a Viper or Adders necke, and it thereby strangled, and they afterwards bound about their neckes that have swellings or other diseases in their neckes and throates, doe marvailously helpe them: these be Galens words: but our age hath not onely found Galens experiments true on children, the roote (of the male rather then the female, yea the male not the female, and that fresh and not dry, if you meane it should doe good) is to be hanged about their neckes, and that the decoction thereof is to be taken inwardly, to make it the more availeable, and that also in older persons, if the disease be not growne too old and past cure, for whom the roote of the male kinde washed cleane, stamped somewhat small, and laid to infuse in a sufficient proportion of Sacke for twenty foure houres at the least, after strained, and given first and last, a good draught for sundry dayes together, before and after a full moone, cureth that sickenesse, if there be a due and orderly preparation of the body afo ehand with poset drinke made of Betony, &amp;c. as the learned Phy∣sitian can best appoint: the roote also is effectuall for women that are not sufficiently cleansed after child-birth, and for such also as are troubled with the mother, for which likewise the blacke seed being beaten to powder is given in wine, the red seedes being taken for fluxes: the blacke also taken before bed time, and in the morning also is very effectuall for such as are in their sleepe troubled with the disease called Ephialtes, or Incubus, which Pliny calleth suppessio nocturna, we usually call it the night mare, which is a suppressing both of voice and breath, and oppressing the body as it were, with some heavy burthen, striving to be eased thereof, but seeming not to be able nor to call for helpe, Melancholly persons being for the most part subject to this disease: it is also good a∣gainst melancholly dreames, Matthiolus doubteth whether our Peony, be that which Galen used, because many Physitians as he saith in his time failed in the tryall thereof on young children, and I am in doubt that Tragus his male Peony spoken of here before, was that which they used, and then no marvaile if it proved not effectuall as they expected, yet saith Matthiolus our Peony seedes is availeable to restore speech to those that have lost it, if thir∣ty graines husked be made into powder and given in Wine: it is also saith he, good against the bitings of Ser∣pents not onely to be drunke but to be laid on the bitten place, which thing Tragus saith of his male Peony, which as I shewed you before, is the Fraxinella. The destilled water or Syrupe made of the flowers, worketh to the same effects that the roote and seede is applyed before, although more weakely. The male kinde being so scarse a plant and possessed but by a few, and those great lovers of rarity in this kinde, and the Female being more fre∣quent, the one is usually put instead of the other. 
CHAP. XXIX. Pappas sive Battatas. Potatoes. T Here are divers sorts of rootes that are called Potatoes with us, serving for foode or delight, more then for medicine whereof all that are truely knowne to us, what face or forme of leaves and flow∣ers they beare are expressed in my former booke: there are many more of the same quality; besides others that serve in stead of bread, familiar to the Natives both of the East and West Indies, whose names onely are extant in those Authours Workes that have written of them, without any further de∣claration either of forme or any property, but that the rootes are eaten by them, some being of better taste then o∣thers &amp; longer lasting, among whom as I take it the Igname or Inhame, is a principall one, whereof Scaliger first, and Clusius afterwards, have given us the best information. Clusius saying it is also called by some Camotes, A∣motes and Aies. All he saith of it is this, that some Portugall Ships that were taken by the Hollanders, had divers of these rootes in them some bigger then others: for some as he saith were as bigge as ones arme, and of a foote long or more, others lesser, and some thicke and short having some small tubers thrusting out at the lower parts of them, but all of them covered with an uneven and rugged barke, with many fibres at them: the substance of the roote within, being white, soft, sappy, tender, and as it were kernelly, and of no unpleasant taste (that is the raw roote for he saith he tasted it) at the first, but a little rough and sharpe afterwards: but being rosted under the embers it tasteth more tender then any Chesnut, and somewhat like a Peare, but saith he what stalke or leafe it bore hee could not understand of any: onely he saith he received one that was sent him that had a sprout at the head of it, which was broken off in the carriage, as the figure here expresseth it unto you, but Lobel in his Adversaria, saith he understood that those rootes of the Inhame, that were brought from Aethiopia and Guincy, bore Mallow-like leaves (and differeth from those of Spaine, and the Canary Islands, which are our ordinary great Potatoes) and such like leaves doth Lugdunensis give to an American plant called Hotich whose roote is somewhat like it and e∣dible. Clusius also speaketh of another sort of these Inhames, which as he saith some called Yeam Peru, but the Portugals Jnhame as the former, which although it were like the other, yet the barke was more uneven, and some as it were some knobbes thereon, with small fibres going from them, and from the head of the roote, went but hard great stringes, of a foote long, which were prickly for the most part. Clusius seemeth to referre the Ʋirginia Potatoes, to the Arachidna Theophrasti, and Lugdunensis saith some did the Manihot, and that this Jnhame was Battatas de Canada. The Frenches Battatas, or Hierusalem Artichokes. 
Battatas Virginiana. Potatoes of Virginia. 
Battatas Occidentalis Indiae &amp; In ume Orientalis Lusitanorum, The West Indian, and the Negros Potatoes. 
referred to Theophrastus his Araco similis. But Bauhi∣nus his Ovingum, or Ʋingum, and Oetum by Pliny, so variable are mens conceites, especially in things ob∣scure or unknowne, or when they doe raptim with∣out due consideration sententium proferre. But Scali∣ger Exercitat. 181.17. seemeth to know three o∣ther sorts, besides the ordinary, which will abide good without perishing for a whole yeare, and therefore the Spaniards use to bring them to Sea with them, and call it Jgname cicorero: the other will last nothing so long, whereof that which groweth in the Country of Benim, is of an excellent rellish, but that of Mani∣congo is the worst, and that of Saint Thome, which is as yellow as a Carrot, is of most esteeme: the planting hereof saith he, is wonderful, for it is not done by put∣ting the rootes into the ground, but a stalke taken therefrom cut in long peeces, and holding some barke thereon, and so thrust into the ground, will in five moneths be good to be gathered: it hath saith he, a leafe somewhat like unto that of the Citron tree, both in forme and luster, but smaller and thinner: it runneth on poles that are set for it like Hoppes: the roote like the Reede or Dragons hath foure or five suckers joy∣ned o it: this manner of planting this Inhame savou∣reth something of that of the Manihot or Iucca, wher∣of the Cassavi is made: if there be not a mistake, it is wonderfull that two rootes should be so propagated. 
CHAP. XXX. Rosa Hiericontea. The Rose of Hiericho. T Here hath beene observed two sorts of this small plant, called the Rose of Hiericho, the one accounted a wilde sort, and yet the one groweth in as barren places as the other. 
1. Rosa Hiericontea vulgo dicta. The vulgar Rose of Hiericho. The Rose of Hiericho is a small bushy plant growing full of wooddy brittle branches, set in a round compasse, and sundry small leaves on rhem, farre lesser rhen those of the Willow, and more neere unto the Privet: the flowers stand thicke clustring together, made of Rosa Hiericontea. 
foure white leaves growing out of long huskes, wher∣in afterwards is contained two small seede, the roote is long and wooddy. This is said to smell somewhat sweete, but I could never finde it so, and to taste some∣what sharpe. 
2. Rosa Hiericontea sylvestris. The wilde Rose of Hiericho. The wild sort groweth in the same manner, as the former, but the wooddy stalkes are stiffer and harder to breake, and hath (as it is said) neither smell nor taste. 
The Place and Time. Both these sorts grow in Syria and Arabia, as Bel∣louius and Ranwolfius have observed in their travailes. 
The Names. It is called Rosa de Hierirho, and Hiericcontea, and Rosa Mariae, by all that have written of it, (the Monkes as Bellonius saith, being the first inventers, of the name, and of the superstitions they added to it, when as he saith he found none hereof growing about Hiericho, but onely in Arabia, in the desart land neere the red Sea) except Cordus and his Father before him, who tooke it to be Amomum, but saith Anthonius Musa con∣traryed that opinion for divers respects, and yet hee contumatiously would uphold his fathers error, which sheweth how necessary it is to see the face of things growing as Camerarius and others, who having sowne the seede, doth say it doth in some sort represent a Thlaspi, having but a little sharpe taste in the branches onely and roote. Rauwolfius saith he found the other sort in Syria, growing among the rubbish, and on the houses, and therefore called it a wilde kinde. Cordus to put a distinction betweene these two sorts, called the former Amomum, and the later Amomis, comparing and fitting the description of Amomum in Dioscorides, unto the forme end parts thereof, yet how like soever he would make it, it commeth farre short of the true Amomum, as it is well knowne now adayes. Gerard on the contrary side would referre it to a Heath, who is as farre wide as the other. 
The Ʋertues. It is not found usefull in physicke for any respect that I can learne: this onely property is in it, that how dry soever the plant is, being brought from beyond Sea, yet if it be set in water for a while, it will dilate and open it selfe abroad, that all the inward parts may be distinctly observed how it groweth, and although the leaves are all lost, yet the seede and the vessells remaine, from whence if it be fresh, the seede taken hath growne, and will close up againe after a while, that it is taken out of the water, not as the superstitious Monkes, falsely fained that it did open miraculously, that night that our Saviour was borne, and that it would doe so in what house soever it is, when the woman with childe abiding therein, shall be neere her time of delivery: for with moysture as I said it will o∣pen, and not without it. 
ARBORES, ET FRVTICES. TREES AND SHRVBS. CLASSIS DECIMA SEXTA. THE SIXTEENTH TRIBE. CHAP. I. Quercus. The Oke. I N this Classis, I am to shew you all those kindes of Trees, whether they be tall and great, or lesser, usually called Shrubbes, which grow naturally in these Countries of Asia minor, the hether part of Africa, best and longest knowne to us, and Europe, and that have not beene dispersedly already spoken of heretofore: For the infinite kindes that grow in Asia major, the East India, and America, the West India, besides that we want the knowledge of the most of them; would furnish a capacious volume by them∣selves: and therefore in my last Classis I will onely give you a hint of some, either of best use, or best knowne, and in this, as I thinke is fittest, begin with the Oke.
The Trees that beare Acornes, called in Latine Glandiferae arbores, doe compre∣hend five severall kindes. which are Quercus, Ilex, Suber, Smilax Arcadum glaudi∣fera, and Phellodrys, and for want of fit English names to sort unto each, we are forced to call them all Okes, and to distinguish them, give them severall epithites, according to their qualities. The Quercus or Oke is parted a∣gaine into five sorts, all of them having divided leaves, called first, Platyphyllos Latifolia Quercus, Hemeris sive Ety∣modrys Veriquercus or Robur, Phagos Esculus, Aegilops Cerrus mas vel majore glande, and Haliphlaeos Cerrus faemi∣na sive minore glande: Of these and their severall species in this Chapter, and of the rest in the succeeding, every one in their order. 
1. Quercus latifolia. The broad leafed Oke. This Oke, which as I take it is the most common in our Land, groweth to be a great tree, and of long continu∣ance, especially if it grow in a fertile soyle, the truncke or body whereof is covered with a thicke rough barke, full of chops and clists: the armes or boughes likewise are great, dispersing themselves farre abroad, and bluntly cut in or gashed about the edges, smooth, and of a shining greene colour, whereon is often found a most sweete dew, somewhat clammy, and upon divers of them are found growing a round spongye substance, called an Oke Apple, whereof I shall speake more hereafter, among the sorts of excressences. It beareth small, yellowish mossie flowers, standing close together upon long stalkes, which wholly fall away in the beginning of the Spring. The fruite or Acornes rising up in sundry other places, upon short stalkes, two or three for the most part joyned to∣ether, whose outer rinde or skinne is browne being ripe and tough, the lower end being set or placed in a small rough hollow cup, the nut or kernell within being hard, cleaving into two parts, and of a reasonable sweete taste. The rootes are great, and spread farre and deepe, some thinking that they runne as deepe into the ground, as they grow high above it. The timber or wood is firme, strong tough and yellowish, with a smooth great graine, yet smoother and firmer in some places then in others, being the most durable either above ground or under, on the land, or in the water, beyond any other kind of timber almost, and enduring both moisture and drougth above all: the outer part being called the sappe, is as all know whiter and lesse durable. 
Some have made one or two sorts more of this kinde, one with greener, yet more hairy or woolly leaves, Alterae species. and with so many deepe cuts therein, that they seeme as curld thereby; another with a shorter leafe and more jagged at the bottome, both of them with smaller Acornes then the former. Clusius also saith that he found a dwarfe kinde hereof most likely, not farre from Lishborne not above a foote high, bearing broad leaves with sharper edges, whose acornes were as great as those of the common Oke, but very bitter, standing in a smoother cuppe, Humilis. and saith also that on the hils neere the Straights or Hercules pillars, Seuper vi∣reus. there are some growing that hold their green leaves all the Winter, and Dalechampius reporteth the same to be found on the Apenine hils, and those that are 1. Quercus nostras florens &amp; fructum ferens. The Oke with the blossomes and Acornes. 
1. Quercus humilis. The dwarfe Oke. 
2. Robur Cum Galla majore rugosa. The greater rough Gall of the Gall tree. 
2. Galla major altera laenis. Another great Gall that is smooth, of the Gall tree. 
called Audes, bordering on France, as Pliny out of Theophrastus speaketh of one in Thurino agro ubi Sybaris flui that did not spring till Midsommer, and kept the greene leaves in the Winter. 
2. Hemeris sive Robur. The strong or Gall Oke. The strong or Gall Oke (call it which you will, for both names fit it well, the one from the Latine word Ro∣bur that is strength, and the other because it especially beareth Galles) groweth not so high or great as the for∣mer, but shorter and more crooked, yet spreading faire branches, set with long leaves like the former, but more cut in on the edges, and hoary underneath: they flower and beare Ackornes like the former, but not so plenti∣full, and are greater, standing on longer stalkes, being sweeter also, besides which Ackornes, it beareth also a round wooddy substance which is called a Gall; the wood or timber hereof is hardly to be bored. 
Of this kinde there are divers sorts some growing much lower then others, some having their leaves lesse cut in or jagged on the edges, and some bearing more store of Galles, others no Ackornes at all, Galle di∣verse. some againe beare great Galles, other smaller, some knobbed or bunched, others smooth: some of one fashion, others of another, and of colour some white, some reddish, others yellow, and some small and greene, which is the Omphacitis. 
3. Phagus sive Esculus. The sweete Oke. This sweete Oke called in Latine Esculus (ab esca vel ab esu because the Ackorne is the sweetest in taste, and f test to be eaten of any) hath a short truncke or body in comparison of the first Oke, and like unto the Gall Oke; growing with thicke and more bushing branches, full of leaves which are thicker and narrower, and with more separate gashes, of a darke greene colour on the upper side, and whiter underneath: the Ackornes grow seldome two together on a short thicke stalke slenderer, more pointed and sticking faster in the rough prickly cuppes to the middle of them, but as I said is the sweetest of any other, comparing with the Chesnut, when it is rosted or sod, and in many places in Spaine, serve for the poore to feede on as their daily food, and the Rich for junkets at their table, as we use to doe with fruite of all sorts, according to the time of the yeare, and will as much intoxicate the braine as Darnell in bread. There is another differing sort hereof, whose Ackorne is greater, Altera glande ma∣jore. and will more easily fall out of the cuppe, by reason of the heavinesse of the Ackorne. They have in Ʋirginia a goodly tall Oke, which they call the white Oke, because the barke is whiter then of others, Altera Virginia whose leafe because it so neerely re∣sembleth this sweete Oke, I have joyned with it, the Ackorne likewise, is not onely sweeter then others, but by boyling it long, it giveth an oyle which they keepe to supple their joynts. 
4. Aegilops sive Cerrus mas. The male bitter Oke. The male bitter Oke so called of the extreame bitternesse of the Ackornes, seldome groweth neere any habita∣ble places, but most usually in great woods, and riseth up with a tall straight body, spreading large armes and bran∣ches, whereon grow thicke long leaves, with deeper gashes therein then in any other: the Ackorne is small short and blunt, and very bitter, almost wholly covered in the rough flat huske, which is set with sharpe prickles, of a grayish colour: the wood or timber is strong if it stand upright, and durable being kept dry, but in that it is of a looser substance it quicklyer rotteth, yet is a fit fewell for coales and the fire, if it doe not require any great heate 2. Galla minor. The lesser Gall of the Gall tree. 
3. Phagus sive Esculus nostras &amp; Folium Quercus albae Ʋirginiana. The sweete Oke, and a leafe of the white Oke of Virginia. 
4. Aegilops sive Cerrus mas majore glande. The male bitter Oke. 
5. Haliphloeos sive Cerrus faeminaminore glande. The female bitter Oke. 
Cerri faemina glaus immatura. The unripe Ackorne of the female bitter Oke. 
divers through necessity eate of the Ackornes, notwithstanding the bit∣ternesse, but they doe engender much headache: Dyers also use this to strike a blacke colour, but it will hold lesse then that which is made with Galls by much. 
5. Haliphlaeos sive Cerrus faemina. The female bitter Oke. This other bitter Oke (which from the Greeke name, might be called the thicke barkt Oke, or else from the thicknesse of the barke be reckoned a kinde of Corke tree, but that other things doe not agree thereunto) hath a reasonable tall thicke, but somewhat crooked body, covered with a ve∣ry thicke ashcoloured grayish barke, having such short branches, that it seemeth as continually kept lopt and poled, the leaves are like to the male kinde, but narrower and longer, whose cuts or gashes are not so broad open being hard, rough and of a darker greene colour: the Ackorne here∣of is smaller then in any other, except the Scarlet Holme Oke, hereafter set forth, and is so short that it scarse sheweth it selfe out of the sharpe and prickly cuppe, like to the male kinde, and is almost as bitter, the wood or timber hereof is loose, weake, and soft, neither firme nor strong, whereby it is the more subject to putrefaction, and unfit for building, or any other but small worke. 
There is another sort observed hereof in some woods, whose leaves are not so much gashed, and the Ackornes being greater, grow three or foure together, without any stalke, whose huske or cup is as sharpe and prickely as the other of these kindes. 
The Place and Time. The first Oke is the most generall throughout the land, growing on high or low grounds indifferently, yet flow∣rish best in a fruitefull ground: the other kindes that I can heare of, are not growing any where with us, al∣though there is some variety found in the timber of ours, some being of a finer graine, and smoother, shorter, and whiter wood, others a courser graine, tougher, stronger and more coloured: but they are most frequent in Italy, Spaine, and other hot climates, their long catkins or bloomings come forth early in the Spring, and fall away for the most part, before the leaves doe come forth, the fruite or Ackornes are not ripe untill October. 
The Names. The Oke is called in Greeke , and is a generall word for all trees that beare Ackornes, as the Latines Quer∣cus is, but more strictly taken, it signifieth this Oke, which is called by most in Greeke , in Latine La∣tifolia, after Gaza. The Italians call it Quercia, the Spaniards Quexigo, the French Chesne and Quesne. Dodo∣naeus calleth it Hemeris quercus quasi sativa vel vobana, and the second he calleth sylvestris, or Robur, when as the best Authours that I read make Hemeris to be Robur, Gaza translateth it sometimes Plaecida, and sometimes Quercus. Theophrastus saith that the Macedonians in his time called it Etymodrys, and by Gaza Ʋeri quercus, and of some Quercus robur, and Galla arbor: the Italians call it Rovero, the Spaniards Euzina, and some Portugalls Carvalla, the French Roblo, and Roure, in Dutch Eyckeuha . The third is called in Greeke Phagus in Latine Esculus, , as the Latines doe ab esca vel esu: Gaza in translating this unto Fagus, according had so done before him, hath beene the cause why so many have erred in taking this Phag s of Theophra∣stus, to be the Fagus of the Latines, which is in English the Beech tree, when as they might plainely see that Theo∣phrastus reckoneth it as a kinde of Oke, and that beareth the sweetest Ackones, but Fagus the Beech tree beareth Ackornes, but a three square nut like a chesnut: The Italians call it Eschia, the Romanes Esculo, the Spaniards , and the Ackornes Ʋ ll tas. The fourth is called in Greeke Aegilops, of the Macedonians , As , in Latine Cerrus, or Cerris as some have it, yet Pliny maketh mention both of Aegilops and Cerrus, some doe call it Cerrus mas, &amp; Cerris majore gland , in comparison of the next, Gerard calleth it the Holme Oke, and his Corrector letteth it so passe, when as the Ilex Cocoigera is more fitly to be so called, because the leaves there∣of are much more like unto the Holme or Holly bush, then this is; the Italians call it Cerro, they of Cyprus Sio, and other places in the bottome of the Straights, call the Ackornes hereof Galliones: the Word Aegilops doth al∣so signifie a kinde of wilde Oates, as is declared before among the Grasses. The last is called in Greeke , or as some read it , in Latine also Haliphleus, but of most Cerrus faemina, and of some Cer∣ris minore glande, Gaza translateth it Selficertex, thinking it tooke the name from which is sal, and , but the barke hereof is not more salt, but more thicke then others, and therefore it is derived from and , a corticis crassitudine, the Italians call it Farnia.
The Oke also beareth a Cachrys, which Theophrastus in his third Booke and seventh Chapter, expoundeth to be a round conception or gathering together of leaves, 15. Cachry growing betweene the last yeares shoote, and the young bud for the next to come. Cachrys also as Dioscorides sheweth in the Chapter of Libanotis, is the seede of the fruite bearing Li∣banotis, which burneth the tongue being chewed: but Pli∣ny being deceived by this double acception of the word, con∣foundeth them both together, and maketh them both but one thing, saying lib. 16. c. 8. the Oke beareth Cachrys, which is a small ball that hath the property of a cauteriall medicine: but Theophrastus sheweth in the place before set downe, that the Firre treee, Larch, Pitch, Line, Nut and Plane trees, doe beare a Cachrys after the leaves are falne, abiding on all the Winter. 
There is growing on the Okes in Cilicia as Dioscorides saith in the 43. Chapter of his fourth Booke a Coccus or graine, which the women there gather with their mouthes, and is like unto small Cockles or Snailes: 16. Coccu altera. this see∣meth not the same, which he in the same Chapter calleth Coccus Baphica, and groweth on a small shrubbe, &amp;c. as you shall understand hereafter: but some learned Writers have taken them to be both one, namely the Scarlet graine, gathered from the lesser Holme Oke: but surely Dioscorides meaneth another kind of graine, which from the use in Dying was called Coccus, and may peradventure be the same that Matthiolus saith he saw growing a∣bout the bodies of great Okes in Bohemia, not farre from Poggibrot, in a Hare Warren of the Emperours, which was neglected there and lost, but was carefully kept in Polonia, where it groweth also: or else that which Lobel speaketh of in the end of the Chapter of the Scarlet graine, which he saith groweth in the middle of the leaves, and on the bodies also sometimes of Okes, which graine is bigger then the other, and is round, reddish or yellow∣ish, and which he also saith groweth on the Okes, in the Woods by Bassill in Germany, and in divers other places of Italy, France, and Germany. 
There are sundry Mosses also growing on these Okes, some sweete and some not, whereof I have spoken alrea∣dy among the Mosses: as also some Mushromes mentioned among the Mushromes, 17. Musc . 18. Fungi. whereof it is needelesse to speake further here: but there groweth at the rootes of old Okes in the Spring time, and sometimes also in the very heate of Summer, a peculier kinde of Mushrome or Excressence, called Ʋva quercina, swelling out of the earth, many growing one close unto another, of the fashion of a grape, and therefore tooke the name, 19. Vva quercina. The Oke grape, and is of a purplish colour on the outside, and white within like milke, and in the end of Summer becom∣meth hard or Wooddy. 
There is a certaine venemous Serpent called Drymus, 20. Drymus. taking his name from the place of his breeding and chiefe abiding, which is the rootes of Okes. Theophrastus, Dioscorides, Galen, Nicander, and Aetius, have all made men∣tion of the wondrous venemous quality of this Worme or Serpent, and of the cure of the poyson. 
The worme named Rancae a raucedine forte, breed in the rootes of Okes: and so doe those called Galbae, 21. Rancae 22. Galbae. but e∣specially on the Esculus or sweete Oke. 
There is lastly found in our owne Land, a browne kinde of Gumme growing on Okes, which Master Edward Hassellwood found in Nottingamshire, and sent some of it to me. 23. Gummi. 
There are also found growing upon Okes, Misselto, Pollipody, Agaricke, Mushromes of sundry formes and sub∣stances, as Tonchwood, &amp;c. And the two first figures expressed in the Table, are of a differing forme from others. 24. Fungi peculiares. Manna also, or a kinde thereof, which we call in English a hony dew, found more plentifully on the Oken leaves then on any other trees: but because they are not peculier onely to the Okes, but grow upon other trees also, and that I have spoken of most of them in other places of this Worke, I forbeare further to mention them here, leaving the rest that have not yet beene entreated off, to their fit places. 
Their Place and Time are sufficiently expressed in their descriptions, and so are their Names also, saving that the Gall it selfe is called in Greeke , and in Latine Galla, whereof one kinde fit f r medicines is called Omphacitis both in Greeke and Latine, not that it is an unripe Gall, but that it hath more acerbity and stipticity in it, then the greater and the yellower have: the Oke Apple also is called of most Writers Pilula Quercus, Galla viridis also, and Mollis. 
The Ʋertues. The small Gall called Omphacitis is dry in the third degree, and cold in the second as Galen saith, and being a sowre harsh medicine is fit to draw together, and fasten faint and loose parts, as the overgrowing in the flesh: it repelleth and dryeth up rheumes, and such like fluxes, by staying them effectually, especially those that fall upon the gummes, almonds of the throate, and other places of the mouth: the other whiter Gall doth also binde and dry, but so much lesse then the former, by how much it hath a lesser quality of sowre harshnesse in it, and is good against the dissentery or bloody Flixe: the decoction of them in water is of a meane astriction: but in Wine is stronger, and in harsh or red Wine stronger then it: if women sit in or over this decoction being warme, that are troubled with the falling downe of the mother, it will helpe them: the Galles themselves after the boyling, being bruised and applyed to the fundament that is falne downe, or that hath any hot swelling or inflammation doth wonderfully helpe them: the coales of them when they are burned and quenched hot in Wine or Vinegar, are good to be applyed to stanch bleedings in any place, they also dye the haires blacke, and with them is made our writing incke, and the Dyers a blacke Dye as all know: the Oke Apple is much of the nature of the Gall, yet inferiour thereunto, but may be used in the want of Galles, for rheumes, fluxes, and such other like diseases, and that to good purpose. Matthiolus reciteth a tale of his Country Italians, as Gerard doth of our Kentish men, much to one purpose, saving that Matthiolus hath it of Galles, and Gerard of Oke Apples, but both a like true, as are a number of such prognosticating tales, of Saint Pauls day, and Saint Swithens day, and the like, which savour more of Paganisme then Christianity, to drive us from the confidence of Gods providence, to relye on such vaine and weake signes, or speculations, and yet maintained stiffely by a great many, which is, that in the Gall (in the Oke Apple saith Gerard ) there breedeth three small creatures, which will prognosticate the course of the succee∣ding yeare (in every Country, for the Gall or the Oke Apple doth grow I thinke in every Country) if a Flye saith Matthiolus, it presageth Warre, if an Ant saith Gerard, plenty of graine: if a creeping Worme be found in the Gall saith Matthiolus, it foretelleth scarsity of victuals: if a white worme like a magot saith Gerard, a murraine of beasts and cattle: but if a Spider say they both there will follow a pestilence or mortality: but least I grow too tedious in this discourse, little pertinent to this our History of Herbes, I must passe no further, but leave it to eve∣ry man as his minde is affected and to God the Judge of all mens affections. The Oke grape doth binde all fluxes, whether of blood or humours, and preferred by some, before either Gall or Oke Apple, especially by Eucelius, who is the first that I know hath written of it. Most of the rest of these Excressences are seldome used, but those that are, have the same quality of binding that the Gall or Oke Apple hath. The red graine that is found on the Okes in Polonia, and other places, is altogether used by the Dyers, but not used in any medicine, by any that I have read or heard. 
CHAP. III. Ʋiscum. Missellto. B Ecause the best Missellto groweth upon Okes sometimes, but more usually on other trees, I thought good to entreate hereof next unto the Gall, and the other excressences of the Oke, yet in a Chap∣ter by it selfe, not onely for the causes before alledged, but for that there are some varieties found herein. 
1. Ʋiscum vulgare. The ordinary Misselto. Missellto riseth up from the branch or arme of the tree whereon it groweth with a wooddy stemme, parting it selfe into sundry branches, and they spreading againe into many other smaller twigges, enterlacing themselves one within another, very much covered with a grayish greene barke, having two leaves set at every joynt or knot and at the end likewise, which are somewhat long and narrow, small at the bottome but broader toward the end: at the knots or joynts of the boughes and branches, grow small yellowish flowers, which turne into small round white transparent berries, three or foure together, full of a glutinous moisture, with a blackish seede in every of them, which was never yet knowne to spring, being put into the ground or any where else to grow. 
Policoccon. Camaerarius maketh mention of one sort hereof, that had many more berries growing together at a knot, then the former, but not to differ in any thing else. 
Baccis ru∣bris. Clusius and Bellonius have each of them recorded in their writings, to have found Missellto growing on Olive trees in sundry places, both in Spaine and in Turkie, that bore red berries not varying much in any other thing, but it maketh the trees barren that hath it growing on them. 
2. Ʋiscum Indicum. The Misselto of India. The Indian trees Excressence (which for want of a fitter name was called Misselto because it groweth on their trees) doth as it were runne or creepe upon the boughes, shooting up sundry whitish greene stalkes with foure or five joynts thereon, like to those of Grasses, but without any leafe at them, saving at the very toppe, where grow∣eth one large leafe like the Missellto leafe, but twice as great thicke and fleshy as it, with sixe round circles on either side of the middle ribbe toward the upper end: from the bottome likewise of each of these leaves riseth up a long spiked head of small leaves as it were, which abide greene all Winter long. 
3. Ʋiscum Peruvianum. Missellto of Peru. This other strange plant also, that is referred to the Misselto groweth like a bush of small rush like sprigges with broad scales foulded one over another at the bottome, as broad as ones hand, where it is fastened to the branch whereon it groweth, with small rootes like those of Onions, but ending in small points, all which doe encompasse an hollow reddish striped branched stalke, two or three cubits high, representing the chaffie tuft or eare of Oates, for the fashion, but Asclepias for the bignesse, and the silken downe with small seede therein like Conyza, of a sal∣tish unpleasant taste like Niter, perhaps taken from the Sea aire it feeleth. 
Viscus quercinus. Missellto of the Oke. 
2. Viscum Indicum &amp; Policoccon. The Missellto of India, and that with many berries together. 
3. Ʋiscum Peruvianum. Missellto of Peru. 
 
The Place and Time. The first groweth very rarely on Okes with us, but upon sundry other as well timber as fruite trees, plentifully in Woods, Groves, and the like, in all the Land, but that with many berries in Germany, &amp;c. the other two grow in the West Indies, from whence onely some branch or other was brought by a friend. Our Missellto flowreth in the Spring time, but the berries be not ripe untill October, and abide on the branches all the Winter, unlesse the Blacke birds, and other birds doe devoure them.
 
2. Phellodrys alba latifolia. The broader leafed white Corke Oke. This other white leafed Corke Oke is like unto the former in growth, and differeth in the barke, leafe and A∣corne of the tree, the leafe is white on the underside as the former, but broader then it, and lesse hard, and lesse den∣ted also, the barke as well of the branches as of the Acornes, are of a blackish red colour. 
3. Phellodrys nigra mediocrifolio. The greene leafed Corne Oke. This greene leafed Corke Oke groweth not so high as the former, the barke of whose branches are grayish, the leaves are of a meane sise, of a darke greene colour, and not at all white underneath, with but few snips or dents, and those not deepe, and very little prickly at the edges, the Acornes are of as bright a yellow colour as the first. 
4. Phellodrys nigra latissimis folijs. The broadest greene leafed Corke Oke. This differeth from the last in the leaves, being larger and broader then the last, and more deepely dented and very prickly, but greene as it is: the cups of all these Acornes are onely rough as the ordinary Acornes, and not prickly. 
5. Phellodrys muricatis folijs. The prickly Corke Oke. The prickly Corke Oke hath a grayish barke on the body and armes, the leaves are smaller, and of a pale greene colour, deepelier dented and with sharper prickles: the Acornes hereof are like the other, but the huske or cuppe is much more prickly then any of the rest. 
The Place and Time. These doe all grow on the hills neere the Rhodanus in France, in Italy also by Siena as Matthiolus saith, and in many places of Portugall also, where the two former sorts doe beare Galles likewise, they keepe the same time with the rest. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Phellodrys quasi Suberi quercus in Latine, but Theophrastus saith it is a meane be∣tweene the Ilex and the Oke, and therefore some did call it Ilex faemina. But because the Suber or Corke tree is so like unto the Ilex, it may as well be said to partake of the one as well as the other. The first is the Phellodrys of Matthiolus, Lobel and others, and is the Phellodrys alba angustifolia folio serrato of Lugdunensis, the rest are one∣ly mentioned in Lugdunensis, and Paulus Renealmus from him, the Greekes doe promiscuously call these sorts A∣cylaca, as they doe those in the last Chapter. The Jtalians call it Cerrosugaro, as partaking of Cerris, and Suber, it is not distinguished by any French name that I know of. 
The Ʋertues. There is nothing remembred of the faculties hereof, but as Matthiolus saith, it is of the like properties, and dif∣fereth not from the other Okes. 
CHAP. IX. Castanea. The Chesnut Tree. A Lthough the fruite of the Chesnut tree is not an Acorne, yet because some of the ancient Writers have assimiled it thereunto, and have given it the name of Sardinia glans. I thought it fittest to joyne it next unto them, wherof there are foure especiall sorts, yet one is not of ours, but the new world, and there∣fore 1. Castanea vulgaris. The ordinary Chesnut tree. 
2. Castanea equina. The Horse Chesnut. 
4. 3. Castanea Peruana, &amp; Castanea humilis. The Chesnut of Peru, and the dwarfe Chesnut. 
I shall give you but a bare description of the Nut, and not of the tree untill we can learne more of it. 
1. Castanea vulgaris. The ordinary Chesnut. The ordinary Chesnut tree groweth very great and high, equalling many times great and large spread Okes, the leaves are long great rough and wrinckled dented about the edges, the bloomings or catkins are long and somewhat like the Oke, but more greenish yellow: the fruite groweth betweene the leaves and the branches, towards the end of them, inclosed within three severall huskes, the outermost whereof is the whitish vrchin prickly huske, hairy and smooth on the inside, which when it is ripe openeth it selfe, and sheweth the nut being flat on the one side, and round, bunched out on the other whose shell or huske is smooth browne, and shining as it were on the outside and hairy within, tough also and not easie to breake, within which lyeth the nut it selfe, covered with the third huske, which is a thinne reddish bitter skinne or peeling, the kernell being of a firme sub∣stance and white, sweete and pleasant in taste, formed somewhat like unto an heart: the timber or wood hereof is rough and of a brownish colour. Some have made divers sorts hereof greater and lesser wilde and tame, but I doe not hold them differences, but as the climate causeth it. 
2. Castanea Equina. The Horse Chesnut. The Horse Chesnut groweth likewise to be a very great tree, spreading great and large armes and branches; the leaves are very beautifull, set by couples, and divided into five, but most usually into seaven divisions, every one being dented about the edges: the flowers grow at the toppes of the branches, on long stalkes consisting of foure white leaves a peece, the two uppermost whereof are larger then the two undermost, and have a round purplish violet coloured spot in the middle of the leafe, with many yellow threds and gold yellow tips rising from the middle: the fruite is contained in rounder and thicker prickely hu kes, the nut within this huske is rounder then the other, and covered with a thicker and browner shell, and having a whitish marke or spot at the head, where it is joyned to the outer huske: the nut within this shell is white, without any such thin skin or pee∣ling as the former hath. 
3. Castanea humilis. The dwarfe Chesnut. The dwarfe Chesnut tree doth alwayes grow low in comparison of the former, being like in leaves and fruite unto the former, but that they grow more together, and the nuts are no bigger then Hazell nuts, having alwaies more then one enclosed in every prickely huske, and is unpleasant in taste scarse fit to be eaten. 
4. Castanea Peruana. The Chesnut of Peru. What manner of tree this is that beareth these Chesnuts, or what forme the leaves carry that grow thereon, is not knowne I thinke to any in these parts, I must therefore as I promised in the beginning shew you of the fruit that it is almost round, yet a little pointed toward the stalke covered with a thicke barke easie to be broken, yet somewhat spongy, of a darke or brownish yellow colour, under which grow a number of prickles, sticking to the inner huske, that covereth the nut or kernell it selfe, which inner huske is tough and hard to breake, and con∣taineth within it a nut like an Almond out of the shell, both for colour and bignesse, but of the forme of a small kidney, and of a reasonable sweete taste like an Almond or the common Chesnut. 
5. Castanea Americana Cathartica. Purging Chesnuts of America. This tree saith Monardus groweth in the Continent of America, great and vaste, whose fruite is like unto a Chesnut but that the outer huske is smooth and not prickly, nor having any rough shell, but a thin skin that both compasseth the whole fruite which is almost foure square, and divideth it in the middle into two parts. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth on mountaines and in woods usually, both in the South and Northerne Countries, but the warme Countries for the most part breede the greater nuts. The second groweth in the Easterne Countries of Turky, for our Christian world hath first had the knowledge of it from Constantinople. The third groweth not farre from the Hill by Lyons in France, called Pilates hill, and not elsewhere as is knowne. The fourth in Peru in the West Indies. And the last neere the shore of Nicuragna, &amp;c. And flower in Aprill, after the leaves be come forth, the fruite is ripe in Autumne. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and , Castana and Castanaea, and Castanea in Latine, the fruite is also so called, and , that is, Sardianae glandes Iovis glandes &amp; Lopima: It hath also some other names given it, as Euboida or Euboica, and Heracleotica nux, yet Gaza translateth it out of Theophrastus Nux avellana Agelochus as Athenaeus saith, called it Mota and Amota: Pliny maketh divers sorts hereof, as by the names he giveth them should seeme, as Tarentina, Salariana, Meterana, Coreliana, Balanitis, &amp;c. When as the climate and soyle, make this diversity as it is in our dayes that the French, and Spanish great nuts, that are of a swee∣ter relish are called Marrons, which hath caused Matthiolus, Ruellius and others, to set downe two sorts of it, one to be wilde, and another tame, because one is greater then another, The first is generally called by all Wri∣ters Castanea, and the fruite Nux Castanea. The second is also called Castanea equina, by all Authours that have written of it, not being knowne as it is thought, to any of the auncient Writers, unlesse as Caesalpinus thinketh, it may be the Myrobalanus folio heliotropij of Pliny, lib. 12. c. 21. The Turkes call it At or Adcastanesi, which doth signifie as much as Castanea aquina. The third is called Castanea humilis by Lugdunensis, and Iohannes de Choul in his Historia montis Pilati. The fourth is remembred onely by Clusius, who had it from Abramus Ortelius, who received it from Benedictus Arias Montanus, brought out of the West Indies. The last Monardus called Fructus Cholugogus, and Lugdunensis from him, but Castor Durantes, Castanea purgatrix, and Bauhinus from him. The Arabians call it Sadianalach Castal and Stebulot, the Italians Castague, the Spaniards Marrons, and so doe the French, as is before said, and Castaignes also, the Germanes Kesten, and the Dutch Castanieboem. 
The Ʋertues. Our Chesnuts are much of the property of Acornes, being hot and dry in the first degree, with a certaine win∣dinesse in them, which is perceived by those that are put into the fire to rest, by skipping thereout suddenly with a great cracke or noise, but will not doe so if it be a little slit by thrusting the point of a knife into them, whereby the heate may expell the windinesse. Of all the kinds of Acornes saith Galen the Chesnuts are the best, and doe onely of all wild fruites yeeld unto the body commendable nourishment, yet not to be overmuch eaten, in that as he saith they breede thicke blood, and being windy procure headache, are hard of digestion, and binde the body by an astringent quality, whereof they pertake not a little. The inner skinne that covereth the white nut is so a∣stringent, that if the decoction thereof in wine or water, or the pouther thereof be taken in some convenient drink it will soone stay any super-purgation, or any flux of blood in man or woman. Dodonaeus saith that if the meale of Chesnuts be made into an Electuary with hony, it is very profitable for those are troubled with a cough or with spitting of blood. In many places where there are great store growing, they fatten up their hogges with the nuts as we doe in England with Acornes, and Beech-mast. The Horse Chesnuts are given in the East Coun∣try, and so through all Turkie, unto Horses to cure them of the cough, shortnesse of winde and such other diseases: the low or dwarfe Chesnuts by reason of the unsavoury taste, are not used by any: and the Chesnut of Peru, is not recorded of what quality it is more then that Clusius as is before said, saith the taste is like an Almond or an ordi∣nary Chesnut. The last sort Monardus saith purgeth gently, and choller especially, eaten when it is fresh, or bruised and drunke in Wine, but being dryed the pouther is given in broth, and if it be rosted it purgeth the lesse: but this is to be observed saith he, that the thinne skinne is to be taken away howsoever you take it, least it pro∣cure vomittings, laskes, and other daungerous symptomes.
The Vertues. Dodonaeus is of opinion that the fresh nuts are cold and moist, but Fuchsius saith they are drying in the first de∣gree, and warming in the second: the barke of the tree doth binde and dry very much, and the leaves are neere of the same temperature, but the nuts when they are older are heating and drying in the second degree, and of thin parts, and are harder of digestion then when they are fresh, which by reason of their sweetenesse are more plea∣sing, and better digesting in the stomacke, and taken with sweete wine, they moove the belly downewards, for being old they grieve the stomacke, and cause in hot bodies choller to abound, and the headache, and are an ene∣my unto those that have a cough: but they are lesse hurtfull to those that have colder stomackes, and are said to kill the broad wormes in the stomacke or belly: if they be taken with Onions, salt and honey, they helpe the bi∣ting of a mad dogge, as also the biting of any man, or any other venome or infectious poyson. Cueus Pompeus found in the treasury of Mithridates King of Pontus, when he was overthrowne a scroule of his owne handwriting, of a medicine against any poyson or infection (yet Galen attributeth it to Apollonius Murus, and Aetius taketh it out of Strutho his writings) which is this, two dry Wallnuts, and as many good Figges, and twenty leaves of Rue or Herbegrace, bruised and beaten together with two or three cornes of salt, which taken every morning fasting preserveth from danger of poyson or infection that day it is taken: the juyce of the outer greene huskes boyled up with hony, is an excellent gargle for sore mouthes, the heate and inflammations in the throate or stomacke: the kernels when they grow old are more oyly, and therefore are not so fit to be eaten, but then are used to heale the wounds of the sinewes, gangrens, and carbuncles: the said kernels being burned are then very astringent, and will stay laskes, and the feminine courses taken in red Wine, and stay the falling of the haire, and make it faire, be∣ing annointed with oyle and wine, the like will also the greene huskes doe, used in the same manner: the kernels beaten with Rue and Wine, being applyed helpeth the Quinsie, and bruised with some honey, and applyed to the eares, easeth the paines and inflammations of them: if they be eaten after Onyons, they take away the strong smell and sharpenesse of them, a peece of the greene huske put unto an hollow tooth, easeth the paines and con∣sumeth the marrow (the worme as they call it) within it: the catkins hereof taken before they fall thereof, dry∣ed and given a dramme weight in pouther with white wine, doth wonderfully helpe those women that are trou∣bled with the rising of the mother, some doe use the greene huskes, dryed and made into pouther instead of Pep∣per to season their meates, but if some dryed Sage in pouther be put unto it, it will give it the better rellish: in the same manner doe some use the young red leaves before they grow greater, and find it a seasoning not to be dispi∣sed of poore folkes: the oyle that is pressed out of the kernells (besides that it is farre better for the painters use, to illustrate a white colour then Linseede oyle which deadeth it, and is of singular good use to be laid on guilded workes, or on those workes of wood that are made by burning, such as are those walking staves that have workes on them or the like, to preserve the colour of the gold, or of the other worke for a long time with∣out decay,) is very profitably taken inwardly like oyle of Almonds, to helpe the chollicke and to expell winde ve∣ry effectually, taking an ounce or two at a time. The young greene nuts before they be halfe ripe, preserved whole in sugar, are not onely a dainty among other of the like nature, but are of good use for those that have weake stomackes and defluction . The d tilled water of the greene huske before they are halfe ripe i of excellent use both to coole the , to be drunke an ounce or two at a time, as also to resist the in∣fection of the Plague if some thereof also the sores thereof, the same likewise cooleth the heate of greene wounds and old ulcers, and to ho le them being bathed therewith, the destilled water likewise of the greene huskes being ripe when they are shaled from the nuts, is of very good use, to be drunke with a little vine∣gar, for those that are infected with the plague, so as before the taking thereof a veine be opened, this is of often experience: the said water is very good against the Quinsie to be gargled and bathed therewith, and wonder∣fully helpeth deafenesse, the and other paines in the eares, the distilled water of the young greene leaves in the end of May, performed to singular cure on foule running ulcers and sores, to be bathed with wet clothes or sponges applyed to them evening and morning: there resteth on the leaves of this tree a kinde of red thicke dew in the hottest time of Summer more then on any other tree round about it, which will be rather dry then bedewed at all, which honey dew being taken doth stake the thirst wonderfully: it is averred by some, that if the ripe nuts, huskes and all be put into hony, they will then be of so good efficacy for sores and ore mouthes, that thereof may fitly be made gargles and lotions, either inward or outward. 
CHAP. XIX. Nux Avellana. The Hassell nut. O F these small nuts there is both tame and wilde, those that are manured and planted in Orchards, are called Fillberds and the other growing wild, Wood nuts or Hasell nuts usually, unto which I must ad∣joyne some other sorts, brought from other farre countries. 
1. Nux Avellana sativa fructu rotundo albo. The round white Fillberd. The manured Hasell or Fillberd tree (of this kinde, as of the other tame sorts) groweth up into a taller and big∣ger body the the wild Hasell, or wood nut tree doth, but never to any great bulke or sise, and with fewer suckers or from the rootes, and spread into sundry branches, covered with a brownish speckled thin barke, and greene undermost, bearing large wrinckled or crumpled leaves, somewhat like unto the Alder leaves, cut in on the edges into some deeper dents, but not cut into divisions, of a sad greene colour above, and grayish underneath: the forth in the Winter before any leaves appeare, being then firme and close, of a reddish yellow and afterwards opening themselves, become more yellow, falling away when the leaves begin to appeare, 3. 5. Nux Avellana sativa &amp; sylvestris. The Fillberd, and the wild Hasell Nut. 
4. Nux Avellana Macedonica sive Bysantina. Filberds of Macedonia or Constantinople. 
the nuts breake forth at other places of the stalkes, three or foure or more together, each enclosed in a tough browne huske, which reacheth beyond the nut, and is parted at the end into sundry jagges, the nut with it is large and round, more then the long sort, with a white thinne shell on the outside, and a white peeling covering the kernell within which is very sweete, the wood hereof is smooth, white, and somewhat tough or hard. 
2. Nux Avellana sativa alba maximo fructu. The great white Fillberd. This differeth in no other thing from the former, but in growing higher and bigger, and the nuts larger by the halfe, but round and white like it. 
3. Nux Avellana sativa fructu longo. The long Fillberd. This Filberd differeth not in the bush or tree, in the leaves or catkins, in the Nut or the bearded huskes from the former, the onely difference consisteth in the nut it selfe, which is long and round, and hath a browner shell, which is distinguished into two sorts, the one hath the inner thinne skinne or peeling that covereth the kernell, red, and the other white, and each of them of a sweeter taste then the former, and the red of this sort, better also then the white. 
4. Nux Avellana Macedonica sive Byzantina. Filberds of Macedonia or Constantinople. Although Cordus, and Gesner gave the first knowledge of this Nut to the Christian world, and that but by a short relation, yet since them Clusius hath enlarged the description thereof by the often observations thereof, it groweth up straight and tall like a tree, as Cordus saith it was observed in Macedonia and Thracia, (but as Clusius saith, it was reported to him that it grew very low) covered with a whiter and more rugged barke, having such like large crumpled leaves, but somewhat longer, the catkins are like the other, but the nuts grow many together in a cluster, whose hard skin or tough huske is much more jagged at the head then the other, and somewhat like∣wise at the bottome, the Nut it selfe is round like our wood nut with a hard shell, the kernell within being very sweete and pleasant like the Filberd; since which time Clusius hath observed it to grow somewhat otherwise. 
5. Corylus sive Nux Avellana sylvestris. The Wood nut or Hasell nut. The Wood Nut groweth with more stemmes or suckers, from the roote then the manured kinde, yet some of a reasonable bignesse, branching fo th diversly, covered with a like discoloured barke to the former, the leaves are lesser and rounder, yet not lesse crumpled greene above and gray underneath, the catkins and nuts come forth in the same manner, but the Nuts are smaller and rounder whose huske is shorter and whiter, and never wholly co∣vereth the nut, but standeth therein like unto an Acorne in the cup, and herein consisteth the chiefest difference for the manner of growing. 
6. Corylus Ʋirginensis. Ʋirginian Hasell Nuts. The manner of the growing of those Nuts, we have not had sufficient instructions of all, though wee have seene and had the Nuts of a long time which are as small or rather smaller, and browner then our Wood nuts, shar∣per pointed and with a rougher shell not so hard or easie to breake: the kernell is somewhat sweete and white but not so pleasant as ours. 
The Place and Time. Filberds are planted in Orchards, and the wilde nuts, grow in woods and thickets, that are moist rather then dry delighting best to grow in such a soile, the catkins as is said appeare before the Spring, and the fruite is ripe in August or September at the furthest. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Nux Pontica, and Nux tenuis sive parva, in Latine Corylus &amp; Nux Abellina, from the Country which afterwards altered and fell to Avellana, as also Nux Prenestina, and Heracleo∣tica, the severall titles that they beare, decipher them out sufficiently, as wee and others have and can call them by. The Arabians call it Agilenz and Bunduch, the Italians Nocivole, Nocelle, and Avellana, the Spaniards Avel∣lanes, the French Noisettes, Noiselles and Avellaines, the Germanes Haselnutz, the Dutch Haselnoet, and we in English Filberd, for the manured kinde, and Hasell nut, Wood nut, or small nut, for the wilde kinde. 
The Ʋertues. These small Nuts while they are fresh are sweete, and much pleasing to the palate, but the much eating of them breed headache and windinesse in the stomacke, especially when they grow older, but if they be a little heated or parched by the fire, the oylinesse doth become lesse offensive, the parched Nuts made into an electuary, or the milke drawne from the kernels with some mede or honyed water, is very good to helpe an old cough, and being parched and a little pepper put to them and drunke, it doth digest the destillation of rheume from the head, some doe hold that these Nuts, and not Wallnuts, with figs and Rue, was Mithrid tes medicine, effectually against poysons, the oyle of the nuts is effectuall for the same purposes. The dryed huskes and shels to the weight of two drammes, taken in red Wine stayeth the laskes and womens courses, and so doth the red skinne that covereth the kernels, or is more effectuall to stay their termes: if a snake be stroke with an Hasell wand, it doth sooner stunne it, then with any other sticke, because it is so pliant, that it will winde closer about it, so that being deprived of their motion, they must need dye with paine and want and it is no hard matter in like manner, saith Tragus to kill a mad dog that shall be strooke with an Hasell sticke, such as men use to walke or ride withall. 
CHAP. XX. Nux Pistacia. The Fisticke Nut. T He Fisticke Nut groweth to be a tree of a reasonable large sise in the warme Countries, but very slenderly in ours dispersed into sundry branches, whose barke is of a darke russet colour, the leaves are winged three, five, or seven on a stalke, each whereof is broader and larger then those of the Ash, not sharpe but blunt pointed with us, smooth, almost shining, with divers veines therein, and of a pale yellowish greene colour. I never saw it beare either fruite or flowers in our Land, the climate being too cold for it, but else where it beareth white flowers, as I am gi∣ven to understand many set together, on a long cluster, after which come the fruite many together in the same manner which are somewhat long and round nuts, bigger then Filberds, pointed at the ends, with a rough outer shell somewhat like an Almonds outer shell but tough, and hard to breake, yet cleaving into two parts, and smooth and white on the inside thereof, having a full greene Nux Pistacia. The Fisticke Nuts. 
nut or kernell within, filling the whole shell, whose rinde or peeling is thicker and red, the kernell is very sweete and pleasant in taste, without any offensive quality therein: this in the warmer countries beareth also a long crooked stalke like as the true Turpentine doth. 
The Place and Time. It is naturall to Bactria, and other those parts neere to the East Indies, and from thence brought to Syria and Egipt, and from them unto our Europe, where at Na∣ples and other warme Countries of Italy, they th ive and prosper, and beare fruite in the end of the yeare, but not in any of these colder climates. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke Pistacia, of Nicander Phistacia, and in Theriacis Psittacion, by Possidonius Bistacia, in Latine Pistacia and Pistacium, and of some Nux Pistacia, Theophrastus calleth it Terebinthus Indica, for his description there∣of agreeth so exactly hereunto, that there can bee no doubt made of it. The Arabians call it Pustecke or Festich, the Italians Pistacchi, the Spaniards Alboca∣gos, and Fisticos, the French Pistaches, the Germanes Pimper nuszlin, and by that name they likewise call the bladder nut, not putting any difference betweene them, as the most judicious in former times did, the Dutch Fistiken boom, and we in English Pistackes, and Fisticke nuts or tree. 
The Ʋertues. The Pistacke kernells be little inferior in goodnesse unto the Pine kernels for they are very friendly to the stomacke, whether they be eaten or drunke, they are good against the stingings or bitings of serpents and o∣ther venemous creatures, by reason of the thin essence, and a little bitter and sweet substance is in them: and therefore they open the obstructions of the Liver, and are good also for the chest and lungs, there is also a little astringent quality in them, whereby they strengthen both the liver and the stomacke, to be put either in meates or medicines: they are also good to clense the backe and the reines of the gravell and stone breeding therein: they nourish more then any other nuts and helpe to encrease seede and Venery. 
CHAP. XXI. Nux Ʋesicaria. The bladder Nut. A S a bastard brother to the Pistacke, I must adjoyne this bladders nut, whose groweth is not much unlike rising up sometimes into a reasonable tree, and in other places shooting forth sundry suckers, whereby it becommeth rather an hedge bush to be plashed, and let spread, the barke whereof is of a whitish greene colour, the leaves are five for the most part set together on a stalke, each a little dented about the edges, and pointed at the ends, of a pale greene colour: the flowers grow on a long stalke ma∣ny set together, hanging downewards being all white, the small round cuppe in the middle, making them seeme like unto a white Daffodill: after them come swolne russetish greene skinny bladders, with one or two brownish nuts, lesser then Hasell nuts, with a tough hard shell not easie to breake, and a greenish kernell within it, at the first somewhat sweete, but afterwards loathsome and ready to make one cast, yet it is eaten by some Country people, whose strong stomackes are not so easily provoked: the wood is white, hard and firme. Mr. Tra∣descant hath brought a sort from Virginia, having divers nuts in the bladder. Altera Virginensis 
The Place and Time. It groweth in many places of this land, both as a hedge bush, and a standard tree at Ashford in Kent, and at Mil∣ton, three miles from Cambridge, and flowreth in May, the fruite is ripe in August or September.
The Names. There is no mention hereof among the ancient Authours, either Greeke or Latine, except it be taken for Pli∣ny his Staphylodendron, whereof some doe in some part doubt, because he saith the nuts grow in siliquis, but these are skinny bladders, yet the rest agreeing to his description thereof, causeth others to thinke his siliquae must be understood these bladders: the Germanes as I said call it by the same name they call the Pistacke, and therfore others call it Pistacium Germanicum. Matthiolus in his Epistles taketh it to be the Coulcoul, and Hebulbem of the Turkes, but that is said to be a nut, of the bignesse of both ones fists, and such this is not, and is of great respect for the pleasant taste among them. It is usually from the forme it carryeth now adayes, called Nux veficaria, and in some places Pistacia sylvestris, and so Scaliger taketh it to be a species of it, Gesner saith, that some Italians at Rome called it Sambucus vallida, and Anguilara saith Nux vesicaria sive Staphilode dron. The bladder Nut. 
the Italians in other places call it Albero de l ' vna, and Pistachio salvatico, the French Nez coupes, the Ger∣manes Pimpernuszlin, as they doe the former, the Dutch Pimpernoeten, and we Bladder nut. 
The Ʋertues. The Nuts are as is before said, loathsome and over∣turning their stomackes that eate them, although Sca∣liger commendeth them to be of the like taste and qua∣lity with Pistackes, but wee will give him leave to please his palate, and stomacke with them, and will not envy the good he shall get by them, we never yet could learne that they were accepted among our peo∣ple, except with some strong clownish stomacke, which can almost digest an horse naile. They have no use in Physicke, with any judicious that I know, but some Emperickes, that dare venture to give any me∣dicine, be it never so daungerous have boasted of the helpe they have given to those that were troubled with the stone, and others to procure Venery. 
CHAP. XXII. Fraxinus. The Ash tree. T He Ash according to Theophrastus and other of the later Writers, is distinguished into a taller and a lower sort, or as with us into the tame and the wilde sort, which shall be here declared. 
1. Fraxinus vulgaris. The common great Ash. The common Ash groweth high quickely, and in time becommeth to have a reasonable big trunke or body, covered with a smooth grayish barke, under which there is a thinner which being steeped in water a while, will give a blewish colour, spreading reasonable well, and bearing winged leaves of many, set on both sides of a middle stalke, and one at the end, each being long and somewhat narrow, gentle, of a pale green colour, and dented about the edges; at sundry joynts with the leaves commeth forth a bunche of flowers, and after them a thicke tuft of many thinne browne huskes hanging downewards, each upon a very small short footestalke, within which lyeth a small blackish browne long flat seed very like unto a birds tongue, tasting somewhat strong and hot in the mouth: It beareth also sometimes, and in some places certaine small round balles called apples, consisting of a clammy mosse, gathered into a lumpe with a hard knot in the middle, the wood is white strong and tough fit for many uses, for by the toughnesse, not being apt to cleave or rend, it is much employed about Coaches Carts, &amp;c. and for handles for tooles, and instruments of husbandry. Homer chaunts the praises thereof in Achilles speare, made of Ash, which holdeth good in all the speares, pikes, &amp;c. used in warre ever since. 
2. Ornus sive Fraxinus sylvestris. The wild Ash or Quicken tree. The Quicken tree groweth seldome to any great height, with sundry spread branches, covered with a more rugged and darker barke then the Ash, the leaves are winged like unto them, but are lesser and so is every par∣ticular one by it selfe, not so closely set together, dented about the edges, and of a deepe greene shining colour: at the end of the branches come forth white flowers in a reasonable great tuft or umbell, smelling pretty and sweete, after which follow small round berries, greene at the first, and darke red, when they are through ripe, of an unpleasant taste, ready to provoke casting, if one eate many of them, the wood is somewhat hard and firme, but of a browner colour then Ash. 
The Place and Time. The Ash delighteth best to grow in the wetter rather then in the dryer grounds and by Medow sides: the o∣ther groweth in sundry places of the Land, in woods chiefly, and those by Heigh gate in sundry parts, the balles or apples of the Ash come forth in the end of Winter, and then they are to be seene, but the seede and fruite of them both is not ripe untill September. 
The Names. The Ash is called in Greeke , and in Latine Francinus: the seede is called lingua avis, but the i er kernell is so called rather then the whole huske; the other is likely to be the , Fraxinus montano of Theophrastus, 1. Fraxinus vulgaris. The common great Ash. 
2. Ornus sive Fraxinus sylvestris. The Quicken tree, or wild Ash. 
which Pliny calleth in Latine Ornus, of some Orneoglossum, and Columella Fraxinus sylvestris. Tragus calleth it Fraxinea arbor, Dodonaeus Fraxinus bubula, and Gesner Fraxinus aucuparia. Ruellius, Gesner, Dodonaeus, and o∣thers call it Ornus, but Matthiolus, Cordus, Lobel, and others call it Sorbus sylvestris, Bellonius, Clusius, and Thalius, Sorbus aucuparia, because that boyes, and fowlers use the berries as baites to catch Blacke birds, Thrushes, &amp;c. and Lugdunensis Sorbus torminalis, without any sense or reason, but they that referre it to Sorbus the Service tree, are in my opinion as short in many things, as they that referre it to Fraxinus, the Ash resembling both of them in the leafe, which causeth the variation. The Italians call the Ash Fressino, the Spaniards Fresno, the French Fresne, the Germanes Escherbaum, the Dutch Eschen, and we in English the Ash tree, and the seedes Ashenkeyes: the wilde Ash is called by the Germanes, Grosser Mallbaum, because they have another they call Kleiner Mallbaum, as shall be shewed when we come to speake of it, we in English call it in some places wilde Ash, in others and that more generally, the Quicken tree. 
The Vertues. Both the leaves and the seede of the Ash are singular good against the biting of the Viper or Adder, or any other venemous creature, for if the young tender toppes with the leaves be taken inwardly, and some of them applyed outwardly, it will resist the poyson that it shall doe no harme, Serenus saith the same of the seede. Fraxineum se∣men eum Bacchi rore bibendum est: the wood and the barke is by others h ld to be effectuall hereunto also: and to this purpose Pliny writeth that those serpents will not abide the shadow that the Ash maketh in the morning and the evening which then are longest, nor will come neere i , and further saith of his owne experience, that if a fire and a serpent be encompassed within a circle of the boughes of the Ash tree▪ it will sooner flye into the fire then into them: the decoction of the leaves in wine, are very the obstructions of the liver and spleene as also to helpe to breake and expell the stone and to cure the : The water destilled from the young and tender branches and leaves of the Ash, is a singular good medicine take every morning asting a small quantity, for those that are subject to a dropsie, or be already grosse and fat, or tending thereunto, to abate their greatnesse, and cause them to be lancke and gaunt: Pliny was much mistaken in writing that the leaves of the Ash were deadly to beasts that carryed burthens, and harmelesse to the rest that chewed the cud, which he taketh out of The∣ophrastus, who saith of Taxus, and he referreth it to Fraxinus, the ashes of the barke of the Ash made into a lye, and those heads or other places infected with lepry, or other white scurfe or scall doth helpe them much: the seede called Ashen keyes, I meane the kernells within the uskes is used to be drunke against stitches and paines in the sides proceeding of winde helpeth the stone, and avoydeth it by provoking urine: it is likewise used with other things tending to that purpose to encrease seede and Venery. From the chippes of the wood by destillation per descensum as it is called, is drawne an oyle and a water: the water mixed with a fourth part of the destilled water of Violet flowers, and the face that is troubled with rednesse, pimples, and such like, being ba∣thed therewith will quickely heale it: the oyle as Monardus saith, conduceth much to those that are spleneticke or hepaticke: There is nothing extant that is certaine, concerning the wild Ash in any ancient or moderne wri∣ter that I can finde, neither can I give you any thing by magistrall experience, onely I must tell you of Symprosianus errour, that thought out of Ʋirgil his Verses concerning Ornus, that he had said that it bore flowers like the Peare tree, when as Ʋirgil, Georg. 2. entreateth onely of the inocula ng o grafting of one tree into another, that the Straw berrie tree bore Nuts, the Plane tree Apples, the Chesnut tree Beech mast, the wilde Ash the Peare trees blossomes, and Elmes Acornes, in these verses following. 
Inseritur vero ex faetunucis Arbutus horrida Et steriles Platani Malos gessere valentes Castaneae Fagos: Ornus incanuit albo Florepyri glandemque sues fregere sub Ʋlmis. CHAP. XXIII. Sorbus. The Service tree. B Ecause the true Service tree is so like unto the tame and the wild Ash in the leaves, and that the wild Ash is called a Service by divers, I thinke it meete to joyne it next unto them, and with it some other sorts that have obtained the name of Services, although differing much in forme from it. 
1. Sorbus legitima. The true Service tree. The true Service tree groweth in time to be a great and a tall tree, spreading sundry great bran∣ches, covered with a rough grayish barke, whereon grow large winged leaves, greater and longer then those of Ash, and each of them broader, more blewish greene, and harder, and more grayish greene underneath, and more dented also about the edges: the flowers grow in clusters, at severall places on the branches with the leaves consisting of foure white leaves a peece, after which follow the fruite as big as Wallnuts shaled out of the greene huskes, tending to yellow when they are ripe with broad browne kernels within them, in some round, which are accounted the best, in some ovall that is long and round, and in some almost Peare fashion, which like other Ser∣vices are hard and harsh when they are ripe, and must be hung up on strings in a warme roome, o laid covered with straw, chaffe, or some cloathes to make them mellow fit to be eaten, which then will be more pleasant than mellow Medlars, the wood is very firme and close, and yellower then the Ash. 
2. Srobus Torminalis sive vulgaris. Our common Service tree. Our common Service tree riseth up to a reasonable height and bignesse, spreading largely with a whitish colo∣red smooth barke, the leaves grow singly by themselves, which are not winged but broad and cut into sundry de∣visions and broad at the bottome next to the stalke, of a sad greene colour, the flowers grow in clusters of a whi∣tish colour at the end of the branches for the most part, which are succeeded with smaller round berries then the former, and browner also, containing within them small blackish hard kernels: these must likewise be mellowed to be eaten, or else let hung on the branches untill the frosts mellow them on the trees, unlesse the birds devoure them being neglected: the wood hereof is of a brownish yellow colour and hard. 
3. Sorbus sylvestris Anglicus. Red Chesse apples, or the English wild Service. This tree which we entitle a Service, from the harshnesse of the greene fruite, groweth not high usually, but ra∣ther 1. Sorbus legitima. The true Service tree. 
2. Sorbus Torminalis vulgaris. Our common Service tree. 
as a hedge bush, whose stemme and bran∣ches 4. Sorbus sylvestris Aria Theophrasti dicta. The wild Service tree called Aria. 
are covered with an hoary or grayish barke, the leaves are broad, somewhat like unto Ʋiburnum the Lithye tree, (which Gerard calleth the Wayfaring tree) not cut in nor dented at all about the edges, the flowers are of an over worne mossie colour, after which followeth fruite, of the bignesse of an hedge peare, and reddish on the outside, of an harsh taste like the unripe or hard Services, yet the Country peo∣ple doe often eate of them, being ripe from the tree, instead of better fruite, but after they have beene ga∣thered and laid by a while to mellow, become more pleasant. 
4. Sorbus sylvestris Aria Theophrasti dicta. The wild Service called Aria. This wild Service tree groweth to be a very great tall and farre spreading tree, with many boughes and branches, whereon are set large crumpled hard leaves of a deepe greene colour on the upper side, and gray or hairy underneath, with divers veines running al∣most upright therein, and dented about the edges, the flowers are of a white mossie colour, thicke clustring together, made of foure leaves a peece, which turne into brownish red berries, with a small tuft at the top, containing within them small blackish seedes, and are of a harsh taste like to the rest, yet very pleasant, more then any of the rest, after they are mellowed: the wood is very hard, and firme or close, and whitish withall. 
The Place and Time. The first is seene with us but in a few places, and those onely planted for their rarity. The second is found in many places of England. The third in West∣merland, on a hill that respecteth the Sea eight miles from Lancaster called Rootherslacke, but more plenti∣tifully in Wetherslacke Parke, as I am enformed: The last groweth likewise in some places here and there, throughout England, as in the parts not farre from Croydon, and one tree also groweth on Hampestead Heath alone by it selfe, without any other nereit on the left hand of the high way, as you goe on forward to Hendon, they do all flower before the end of May, and the fruite is ripe in October.
The Names. It is called in Greeke and , Oa and Oua, in Latine Sorbus: the first is the Sorbus legitima of Clusius, Sor∣bus esculenta of Camerarius, Sorbus domestica of Matthiolus and Lobel, who also thought it might be Ostrya Theo∣phrasti but erroniously, as by the discription thereof given before may be seene, all other authors call it Sorbus sim∣ply: the second is the fourth Sorbus of Pliny which hee calleth Torminalis, as Cordus, Tragus, and Matthiolus doe: although Lugdunensis misliketh of it saying that the leaves are nothing like the Platamas, whereunto Pliny com∣pared them, he therefore calleth that Sorbus torminalis, which is called Ornus or Fraxinus silvestris, as I have shewed you before, because he would call it Crataegus Theophrasti, as Anguilara did before him: which it is so not∣withstanding, nothing hindring but that it may as well be Crataegus Theophrasti, as Sorbi quartum genus Plinij dictum Torminalis, both the discriptions agreeing fitly hereunto, Clusius and Lobel, and divers others, and Gesner in hortis also call it Sorbus torminalis, who yet thinketh it might be a species of Mespilus Aronia, and peradventure may be Theophrastus his Anthenodonoides, which Gaza calleth Gallica. Bauhinus placeth it as one of the Medlars, as he doth also our Hawthorne, which in his eighth number he referreth to the Oxyacantha Pyrastrae similis of Dioscorides, and yet in his ninth number maketh that Oxyacantha Dioscoridis, to be Pyracantha of Lobel and Clu∣sius, which hath no such divided leafe as the Hawthorne hath, and yet both of them beare berries like Services, and not Apples like Medlars, some also tooke it to be the Hippomelis of Palladius. The third hath not beene di∣vulged in writing by any before me, and therefore that Latine name may stand untill a fitter may be found, the Natives there call them red Chesse apples, and Sea Oulers. The last is taken by all our Moderne Herbarists to be the Aria of Theophrastus, although Bellonius saith as is shewed before, that that kind of Ilex or Oke that is called A∣cylaca in Candy, doth hold the name of Aria in Mount Athos, as is shewed before, Lobel calleth it Aria Theo∣phrasti effigie Alni. Clusius Sorbus Aria cognominata, Gesner in hortis Aria Alpina vel pilosa, Bellonius calleth it Sorbus torminalis Gallorum, and Anguilara and Lugdunensis Aria also, and Theophrasti, as Camerarius doth, who saith Cordus called it Lanata arbor. The Service is called by the Italians Sorbe, by the Spaniards Servas, by the French Cormes, and Sorbes, and the tree Cormier, and Sorbier, by the Germanes Sp rwerbaum the tree, and Sperbie∣ren the fruite, the Dutch Sorben, and Sorbenboom, and we in English the Service tree or fruite: the last is called by the Italians Matallo, and by the French Alisier, and Cirier by some. 
The Ʋertues. Services unmellowed are very harsh, able to draw ones mouth awry almost to be eaten, or else to choke one, but made mellow they are more pleasant, and fit to be taken of most to stay flixes, scowrings, and castings, yet lesse then Medlars, although many doe eate them that neede not, for any such purpose: if they be dryed before they be mellow and kept all the yeare, they may be used in decoctions for the said purpose, either to drinke or to bathe the parts requiring it, and is in that manner to stay the bleeding of wounds, mouth or nose to be applyed to the foreh d, nape of the necke. 
CHAP. XXIV. espilus. The Medlar. T Here are observed sundry sorts whereof three were knowne to the auncient Writers, the rest are of later invention. 
1. Mespi ma ima sativa. The great manured Medlar. The great Medlar groweth n re o the bignesse of the Quince, but never so great as an Apple tree that ever I saw, spreading branches, re nable largely, with longer and narrower leaves then either Apple or Quince, and not dented at all about the ed es, at the end of the sprigges stand the flowers made of five white great broad pointed leaves, nicked in the midd with some white threds also: after which commeth the fruite, be∣ing round and halfe flat, of a brownish gr ene colour being ripe, bearing a crowne as it were on the toppe, which were the five greene leaves, as a huske wherein the flower stood before, which crowne of leaves being rubbed off or falne away, the head of the fruite seene to be somewhat hollow, the fruite is very harsh before it be mel∣lowed as is said of the Services before, and hath usually five hard kernells within it. 
2. Mespilus vulgaris sive minor. The ordinary or small Medlar. The ordinary Medlar differeth in nothing from the former, but that it hath some thornes on it, in severall pla∣ces, which the other hath not, and that the fruite is small and not altogether so pleasant. 
3. Mespilus minor folio serrato. The common Italian Medlar. This also differeth in nothing from the last that hath thornes, but that the leaves are dented about the edges, when as the other is not. 
4. Mespilus fructu albo magno. The great white Medlar. This differeth not from the first sort but in the fruite, which will be as great as it, and more white then it being ripe on the tree, and will not be so browne when it is mellowed, the kernels also within them are not so strong or hard. 
5. Mespilus Aronia sive Neapolitana. The Medlar of Naples. The Medlar of Naples riseth to be a reasonable great and faire spread tree, bearing broad leaves, cut in or divi∣ded on the sides into severall parts, but not to the middle ribbe somewhat resembling the Hawthorne leaves, with thornes set sometimes on the branches and sometimes without, the flowers grow in tufts like unto the Service 1. Mespilus maxima sativa. The great manured Medlar. 
2. Mespilus vulgaris. The ordinary Medlar. 
tree of a greenish colour, which turne into fruite, many clu∣ ring 5. Mespilus Aronia sive Neapolitana. The Medlar of Naples. 
together and hanging downe, smaller then the smallest Medlar, and with a lesser crowne of leaves, and hollownesse the toppe then it, reddish or yellowish when they are ripe having only three stones or kernells within it, and more sweet and pleasant also. 
The Place and Time. Three of these sorts grow with us here in our Land, the two first in many places, and the last with some few lovers of rkies, the other two have not as yet beene seene here: they flower in May for the most part, and beare ripe fruite in September and October. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and in Latine Mespilus and the fruite Mespilum. The first sort may bee the Mespilus Setanica of Theophrastus and Pliny, and taken by ma∣ny to be the Mespilus altera of Dioscorides, which he saith some called Epimelis, Tragus although he call it Mespilus yet taketh it to be Crataegus of Theophrastus, which it cannot be, for that Theophrastus saith Crataegus hath the leafe of Mespi∣lus Anthedon, which hath a divided leafe, for hee describeth no-other Mespilus, and is the same with Dioscorides his Me∣spilus Aronia, as you shall presently heare: it is also that which Lobel calleth Domestica, Cordus sativa, and Camerarius in b yto Setania majoribus vulgari fructibus, Tragus Mespilus fractu praestantiore, and Dodonaeus Mespilus Oxyacantho insita, or as Lugdunensis saith, insitione mitior facta. The second is termed sylvestris by Bauhinus, as well as Laurino folio, and Germanica being the more ordinary both with them and us. The third is set out by Matthiolus and Lugdunensis, but their figures do not expresse the leaves to be dented as they should be. The fourth is spoken of by Scaliger and Lugdunensis. The last is the Mespilus, called Aronia of Dioscorides, the Mespi∣lus Anthedon of Theophrastus and Pliny, and is the first Mespi∣lus of Matthiolus, and generally called Mespilus Aronia with all other Writers, onely Ruellius, and Gesner in hortis calleth it Paliurus Africana, and Cordus Mespilus tricoccos, and may peradventure be the Mespilus Gallica of Camerarius in horto. The Arabians call it Zarar or Zarur, and Alzarur, the Italians Mespoli (but they call the last which we call of Naples Azarolo, derived as it is likely from the Arabians Zarur ) the French Nefflier, Mesplier, and Me∣flier, and the fruite Nefle and Mesple, the Germans Nespelbaum, and the fruite Nespel, the Spaniards Nesperas, the Dutch Mespelboom, and we in English, the Medlar tree and fruite. 
The Ʋertues. Medlars have the like properties that Services have, but are more effectuall in operation to binde and stay any xes of blood or humours in man or woman, the leaves also have the same quality, but besides these effects the llowed fruite is often served among other sorts of fruite to the table, and e ten with pleasure by those that have no neede of physicke, but worketh in women with childe, both to please the taste as in others, and to stay their longings after unusuall meates, &amp;c. as also very effectuall for them that are apt to miscarry, and before their time to be delivered, to helpe that malady, and make them joyfull mothers: that of Naples is the more delicate, &amp; is also accounted the more effectuall for the said purposes: the decoction of them is good to gargle and wash the mouth and throate, and teeth, when there is any defluxion of blood to stay it, and of humours, which causeth paines and swellings, to binde those destillations and ease the paines: the same also is a good bath for women to sit in or o∣ver, that have their courses come downe too abundantly, or for the piles when they bleede too much: the same also serveth well both to drinke and to bathe the stomacke warme, that is given to casting to loath or not to hold and containe their meate and digest it, but if a pultis or plaister be made with dryed Medlars, beaten and mixed with the juyce of Red Roses, whereunto a few Cloves and Nutmegs may be added, and a little red Corall also, and applyed to the stomacke it will worke the more effectually: the dryed leaves in pouther strawed on bleeding or fresh wounds, restraineth the blood, and healeth up the wound quickely: both leaves and fruite are of singu∣lar good use to binde, and to strengthen whatsoever hath need of those qualities. The Medlar stones made into pouther and drunke in wine wherein some Parslye rootes have lyen infused all night or a little boyled, doe breake the stone in the kidnies helping to expell them. 
CHAP. XXV. Chamaemespilus &amp; Epimelis. Dwarfe Medlars and other such like small fruites. T Here are some other small fruites to be spoken of, that are fittest to be referred to Medlars and Services, though resembled to Quinces and Apples, by their Authours, and because they were not to be put in∣to the former Chapters, I thought to entreate of them next unto them, in a Chapter peculiar to them∣selves. 
1. Chamaemespilus. The dwarfe Medlar. This dwarfe Medlar which Gesner so called for some likenesse it had in the fruite, with the ordinary Medlar, although but a little, is a small wooddy shrub, covered with a reddish ash coloured barke, having small leaves growing thereon, every one by it selfe, somewhat like unto Bassill saith Gesner, but gray or hoary underneath, the blossomes are small and greenish, standing either singly or by couples on slender footestalkes, after which follow small reddish round berries, with a small crowne of leaves at the head like unto the Medlar, without any sappe or juyce therein, or very little, and having two or three small seedes like grape kernells within each: the leaves fall every yeare, and the roote liveth shooting up some twiggy stalkes. 
2. Epimelis Galeni. The small bastard Medlar. This differeth from the former in that it riseth with longer stemmes or stalkes, whose leaves are greene above and gray underneath, somewhat like unto the former, but 1. Chamaemespilus. The dwarfe Medlar. 
somewhat larger, the flowers hereof come forth upon a pretty long footestalke one above another, very like unto the blos∣somes of Arbutus the Strawberry tree, that is, like a little round bottle with small brimmes, and not as the Medlar, laid open into five leaves, which flowers are of a pale blush colour, and turne into small berries, of a yellowish red colour, with a little head or crowne like the other, but lesser, not so bigge as Hawthorne berries, but as dry and saplesse, with three or foure hard white seedes within them, of a little dry but no great harsh taste: the leaves hereof likewise fall away in Au∣tumne, and rise againe in the Spring. 
3. Cotonaster Gesneri. Gesner his bastard low Quince. This little shrub, ( Gesner sheweth to differ from his dwarfe Medlar, least any should suppose them to be both one,) hath larger and longer leaves, a little dented about the edges, yet hoary white, as the Quince tree leaves are, and hath berries not so round nor so red as it, but tending somewhat to yel∣low, with foure three square seedes in each berry. 
The Place and Time. Both the former and the later, grow in sundry places of Germany, and of France also, and so doth the other also, and their berries ripen in August.
The Vertues. The leaves and seede of the Chaste tree as Galen saith, is hot and dry in the third degree, and of a very thinne essence or substance, sharpe also and binding, for so it declareth it selfe to them that use it, yea the seede is percei∣ved plainely to be so hot that it procureth headache, yet being parched or fryed it will the lesse trouble the head, besides it dissolveth the winde in the stomacke or belly b ing fresh, but being fryed or parched much more: it restraineth also the instigations to Venery in any manner used and taken: thus farre Galen, unto whom Paulus and Aetius doe consent affirming the same things. The seede being drunke resisteth the bitings of venemous beasts, Spiders or the like, and helpeth the dropsie, and those that are troubled with the spleene, it also procureth milke in womens breasts, it procureth their courses, and the urine stopped, if a dramme thereof in pouther be taken in Wi e or with Pennyroyall: it troubleth the head and causeth sleepe: the decoction of the herbe and seedes is very good for women troubled with the paines of the mother, or inflammations of the parts: the hot fumes thereof taken underneath is no lesse effectuall: applyed to the head it easeth the paines thereof, and with oyle and vinegar, the Lethargy, and Frensie: the same also made into a pultis with Vine leaves, and applyed to the cods that are swolne and growne hard, doth helpe them: it is said to helpe an ague, being taken before the fit, and be∣ing annointed therewith made up with oyle to provoke sweate: the same also used to the limmes taketh away wearinesse upon travaile or labour: the leaves are almost as effectuall as the seede, for all the purposes aforesaid, and are good for wounds also: the seede used with Barley meale, doth mollifie hard swellings, and breake Im∣postumes: and with ni er and vinegar it helpeth freckles of the face; used with honey it helpeth the sores in the mouth and throate, Galen although so famous a writer and Physition contraryeth himselfe in this one plant, once or twis , for having affirmed before that the seede hereof is hot and dry lib. 1. Alimentorum, he saith, having spoken of the properties of Hempe seede, that the seede of Ʋitex doth restraine Venereous desires, and giveth lit∣tle nourishment to the body, and that because it is cooling and drying. In another place be saith (speaking of Ar∣chigenes medicines for the headache) among other things, that of the leaves of the Bay tree, the Poplar, and the Vitex or Chaste tree with vinegar and oyle, he made a medicine of differing properties: for the Bay tree leaves are very hot, and those of the Chaste tree moderately cold, and in the meane betweene both are the Poplar leaves: in both which places you see he maketh this Chaste tree to be cold, when before he had placed it; not among those that were temperate, but in the third degree of heate: yet some of good Wit to free Galen from this last errour, would invert the Text and say that the Bay leaves are the hottest, the Poplar the coldest, and the Chaste tree leaves a meane betweene them both. 
CHAP. XXXV. Olea. The Ollive tree. T He Ollive is distinguished into the tame or manured Ollive, and into the wild sort: for although the old Writers a Pliny, Columella, and others set downe ten sorts, which they called by se∣verall names, which whether it were in these as in the diversities of Vines, wee know not our climate not fitting their growing, or according to Wines, which according to the severall cli∣mates and soyles, gave sweeter or harsher, weaker or stronger Wine, one then another, and so greater or lesser Ollives, and sweeter or stronger oyle one then another: for divers doe account them to be differing in specie, one from another, as our Apples, Peares, and Cherries doe. 
1. Olea sativa. The manured Olive tree. The manured Ollive tree riseth in some place to be very tall, and very great, like a great Wallnut tree, in others not of halfe that height and greatnesse, with divers armes and branches, not very thickely set together, whereon grow somewhat long and narrow leaves like the Willowes but lesser, and shorter, thicke, fat, and sharpe poin∣ted with short footestalke▪ under them, greenish above and whitish underneath, never falling off the tree, of a bit∣ter taste and somewhat sharpe withall: the blossomes are many set together at the joynts with the leaves, small and of a greenish white colour, made of foure leaves a peece, after which come round and somewhat long ber∣ries, greene at the first and changing pale afterwards, and then purplish, and lastly, when they are full ripe, of a deepe blacke, and some white when they are ripe, as Clusius saith he observed: some are great others are small, and some of a meane sise betweene both, some are longer, and some rounder then others, some are fitter to eate, and yeeld not much oyle, others are not so fit to eate, and are smaller, yeelding more store of oyle, some againe are gathered unripe and pickled up in brine, (which are the Ollives we use to eate with meate) others are suff red to grow ripe, and then pickled or dryed, and kept all the yeare, to be eaten as every one list: Of those Ollives where∣of oyle is made, some oyle will be delicate sweete and neate, others more fat y or full and strong, some upon the taste will leave no bitternesse or heate in the mouth, but will taste as sweete as butter, others againe will be more or lesse hot and unpleasant in taste, the wood is faire, firme, and solid full of curld veines, and as apt to burne when it is greene as dry, and will not rotin a long time. 
2. Oleaster sive O ea sylvestris. The wild Ollive tree. This wilde Ollive tree groweth somewhat like unto the manured, but that it hath harder and smaller leaves, and thicker set on the branches, with sundry sharpe thornes among the leaves: the blossomes and fruite come 1. Olea sativa. The manured Ollive tree. 
2. Olea sylvestris. The wild Ollive tree. 
forth in the same manner that the other doe, and in as great plenty, yet much lesser, and scarse comming at any time to ripenesse even in the naturall places, but where they doe being ripe, they are small with crooked pointes and blacke: Of the Ollives hereof is sometimes made oyle, which is colder and more astringent in property then the other and harsher in taste, and greenish in colour, but the Ollives are much also respected and gathered to be eaten. 
The Place and Time. Both these grow in the warmer Countries onely, neither will they beare fruite in any cold climate, or rather scarse live out their Winters: the manured as I said before is wholly planted wheresoever it groweth, where according to the soyle and climate come greater or lesser Ollives, and more or lesse store, sweeter oyle also, or more strong in taste. Many doe thinke saith Columella, that the Ollive tree will not grow, or at the least not beare fruite if it doe grow, above three score miles from the Sea. For from the Isles in the Mediterrenean Sea, as Zante and Cerigo, &amp;c. is brought the finest and sweetest oyle, and from Majorca, &amp;c. a fuller or fatter oyle; from Pro∣tine in France a stronger and hotter tasted oyle, then either of them or some others: the wilde Ollive groweth naturally in Spaine, Portugall, Italy, and many other Countries. They flower in Iune and Iuly, and have not their fruite ripe untill November, or December, and as Clusius in Granado not untill February, the wilde in Ianuary and after. Virgil sheweth in these Verses that the Ollive being planted needeth no further dressing. 
Non ulla est Olivis cultura, neque illae Procurvam expectant falcem, rastrosque tenaces, Cum semel haeserunt arvis, anrasque tulerunt. The Names. The manured Ollive is called in Greeke , and Olea sativa in Latine, the wilde Ollive and , that is in Latine, Oleaster, or Oleasylvestris Cotinus, and Olea Aethiopica, as Dioscorides hath it: the fruite is called , and Oliva in Greeke and Latine, and when they are neere ripe Drupae, and Drupetes, and Colymbades when they are pickled or dryed to be eaten, yet the Greekes at this day call them Der∣matia. The manner to make Oyle as Matthiolus relateth is thus: after the Ollives are gathered they are laid a little to wither, and afterwards ground in a Mill, and then put into a strong presse, with some hot water powred on them to yeelde out the oyle, which after it hath stood and is settled, the pure oyle is drawne off from the foote or bottome and kept for use. The manner to pickle Ollives to have them keepe their greene colour, is saith Mat∣thiolus, to take six pound of quicke Limestones made into pouther, which dissolved in so much water as may make it thinne, you are to put thereto twelve pounds of fine sifted Oke ashes, dissolved in as much water as will be suffi∣cient, into which you are to put 25. pounds of fresh gathered greene Ollives, and let them lye therein eight or ten houres at the most, to take out their bitternesse, stirring them a little, and afterwards washed in many wa∣ters, shifted for five dayes together, which are lastly to be put into brine or pickle, wherein some Fennell stalkes and leaves have beene put into the boyling, and then put up into woodden or earthen vessels, as you list. The foote of the oyle is called Amurca in Latine. The gum saith Dioscorides, that the Ethiopian or wilde Ollive doth yeelde, is yellow, somewhat like unto Scammony, being in small droppes, and is hot or sharpe, biting upon the tongue: but that saith he, which is blackish resembling Gum Ammoniacum, or other gum, and burneth not up∣on the tongue, is adulterate and false, but saith Matthiolus, this gum is neither brought us now adayes, nor is in use: yet some thinke that our Gum Elemi is it, but therein saith he they are much deceived, in that it hath no biting taste in it, and besides it is mo e like unto a Rossen that will melt with the fire, then a Gum which will burne in the fire, and will not be dissolved without wine or vinegar, or other such liquor. The Arabians call the manured Ollive Zarton and Carton, the Italians Olivo domostico, the Spaniards Olivo and Azeytuno, the French Olivier, the Germanes Oelbaum, and Olivebaum, the Dutch Oliveboom, and we the tame or manured Olive tree: the wilde Ollive is called by the Italians Oliva salvatica, by the Spaniards Azebuche, and Azuche, by the French Olivier sanvage. And we in English the wild Ollive tree. 
The Ʋertues. The greene leaves and branches of the Ollive, but much more of the wilde Ollive doe coole and binde, espe∣cially the juyce with vinegar, all hot Imposthumes inflammations and swellings, Saint Anthonies fire, fretting and creeping ulcers, cankers in the flesh or mouth: the same also restraineth the bleeding of wounds, and womens too abounding courses, being applyed to the places: the said juyce dropped into the eyes, stayeth the destillati∣ons of hot rheumes into them, and cleereth the sight from filmes or cloudes that dimme the sight, and any ulcer that doth breede therein, or ulcers that breede in the eares. The pickled Ollives doe stirre up an appetite to meate, and although hard of digestion, yet pleasing to the stomacke, being apt to putrefie therein, are not good for the eyesight and breede headache, yet if they be dryed and applyed to fretting or corrhoding ulcers, doth stay them, and taketh away the scarres of carbuncles or plague sores: the pickled Ollives burned, beaten and applyed unto wheales, stay their further encrease, and hinder them from rising and cleanse foule ulcers, helpeth the gums that are loose and spongy, and fasteneth loose teeth. The water that is taken from the greene wood, when it is hea∣ted in the fire, healeth the scurfe and scabbes in the head or other parts: the Olive stones being burned are used for the said purposes, and also to stay foule spreading ulcers, and being mixed with fat and meale, they take away the ruggednesse of the nailes. Now to speake of the other parts of the Ollive, which are the oyle and the foote thereof: first the oyle is of divers variable properties, according to the ripenesse or unripenesse of the fruite, whereof it is made, and then of the time and age thereof, and lastly of the washing thereof, from the salt where∣with some is made, the oyle that is made of unripe Ollives, is more cooling and binding then that which is made of them when they are ripe: which when it is fresh or new is moderately heating and moistening, but if it be old it hath a stronger power to warme and to discusse, which properties are perceived by the sweetenesse, for if the oyle be harsh, it is more cooling then warming: and if that oyle be washed it taketh from it all harshnesse. The greene oyle of unripe Ollives while it is fresh, is most welcome to the stomacke, it strengtheneth the gums, and fasteneth the teeth, if it be held in the mouth for any time, and being drunke it hindereth their much swea∣ting that are given thereunto: the sweete oyle is of most use in Sallets and meates, being most pleasing to the taste, but the older the oyle is, the better it is for medicines, both to warme any part, and to discusse any thing that nee∣deth it, and to open and moove the belly downewards, and is most effectuall against all poysons, especially those that doe exulcerate the guts, or not being passed downe so low, but yet abiding in the stomacke, it bringeth it up by vomitting, or hindereth the malignity, from further spreading: it is also a principall ingredient into all salves almost, helping as well the forme, as the vertue in working. The foote or dregges of oyle, the older it is the better it is for divers purposes, as to heale the scabbe in man or beast, being used with the decoction of Lu∣pines: it is very profitably used for the ulcers of the fundament or privy parts, with honey wine and vinegar, it healeth wounds, and helpeth the toothache, being held in the mouth, if it be boyled in a copper vessell unto the thickenesse of honey, it bindeth much and is effectuall to all the purposes for which Lycium may be used: but if it be boyled with the juyce of unripe grapes to the thicknesse of honey, and applyed unto aking or corrupt teeth, it will cause them to fall out: if this foote or dregges of oyle be put into that morter that shall parger the walles or floores of your Wardrobs, where you meane to lay any woollen or silken stuffes or garments, in chestes or presses, it will not onely preserve the places dry, from gathering moisture, but warme also from over much cold, and will keepe away mothes, wormes, spiders, and flyes, nor will suffer any to breede therein. The gumme of the Ollive tree (whether tame or wilde) is used in ocular medicines to helpe the dimnesse of the eyes: the same also provoketh urine and womens courses, and helpeth the paines of hollow teeth: it causeth aborsement, it ex∣pelleth the dead childe, and healeth tetters, ring wormes, scabbes and lepry. 
CHAP. XXXVI. Oleaster Cappadocicus. The bastard or sweete wilde Ollive. T He bastard wilde Ollive, (and why I so call it I will shew you by and by) groweth by time to be a great tree, and well spread, whose barke is very rugged on the body, but smooth and whitish on the armes. which have very strong and sharpe thornes on them, the younger branches having none: the leaves are set on both sides of them without order, long and narrow, very like unto Willow leaves, but thicker, softer, and whiter, both the upper and under side, which enclineth to a silver shining colour: the flowers grow at the foote of the leaves, being small and of a pale white colour, very sweete and somewhat strong, sented even a farre of: after the flowers are falne, come round and somewhat long white berries, like unto small Ollive berries, with a point at the ends like unto thornes, with a sweete soft and spungy substance somewhat like a plumme, or the red Iujube fruite, having a chanelled hard stone, like an Ollive stone in the middle: but Lugdunensis saith the berry is as dry, and without substance as the Hawthorne, which peradven∣ture is so in those places neere him, but in the warmer Countries may be such as I have described them, from good Authours that have seene them to be such. 
The Place and Time. This groweth as Bellonius saith in divers places in Turkie, as he saw in his travailes through their Countries, and in the hedges of Granado in Spaine, as Clusius observed, and in most Orchards of note in France, Germany, and other places with us also: and flowreth in the begin∣ning Oleaster Cappadocicus. The bastard or sweete wilde Ollive. 
of Summer in the warmer Countries, but very late with us, the fruite ripeneth in Autumne in Spaine, &amp;c. but seldome with us, yet Matthiolus saith, hee saw fruite on the tree that grew in the Emperours Orchard in Vienna. 
The Names. This tree is diversly taken by divers learned Wri∣ters, for Matthiolus calleth it Olea Bohemica, and ta∣keth it to be Eleagnus of Theophrastus, because the name being deduced from Olea and Agnus, the Ollive and the Chaste tree, as like unto them both, this ha∣ving leaves and branches like the Chaste tree, and ber∣ries like the Ollives: but that it cannot be Eleagnus, let me shew you that this is a great tree. Theophra∣stus saith it is fruticosa planta, a shrubby plant, and a∣gaine, he saith the flower of the white Poplar which all know, doth grow in spiked heads not scatteringly on the branches, and lastly he saith, it beareth no fruit, and this is plentifull in any of those places, where The∣ophrastus chiefly gathered his knowledge of this and other Plants, and therefore as Theophrastus saith, be∣ing so like unto the kindes of Willowes, it is most probable to a kinde of Willow, which are thought to beare no seede or fruite, and therefore Amatus Lusita∣rus would make it to be Salix Amerina, without any good ground or reason. Bellonius, Clusius, and Came∣rarius call it Ziziphus alba Columellae, whereunto it is very like: Gesner also in hartis so calling it, and Ole∣astri species quibusdam also: Bellonius, Dodonaeus, and Lugdunensis, take it to be the Ziziphus Cappadocica Plinij. which it is very probable to be also, Lobel cal∣leth it Olea sylvestris Septentrionalium, and Aeleagnus also, and some likewise Olea Germanica, but in my opi∣nion Lobel and Bauhinus, and those in Gesners time do come neerest unto the name, whereby it may be most truely called Olea sylvestris or Oleaster, which I have followed and added Cappadocicus, because that in leafe it doth more neerely res mble the Ollive tree, then the Iujuhe, and that it is more naturall to be of Cappadocia then Bohemia, or any of these Northerly Regions: some also call it Arbor Paradisea, and some Thuia odorata, and some take it to be the Barba Iovis of Pliny lib. 6. c. 18. Rauwolfius saith it is called in Syria Seisefan. 
The Ʋertues. We have no especiall Physicall property alotted unto this tree, or the fruite, but that as Bellonius and Clusius have recorded, the fruite is eaten by the people where they grow, with delight and pleasure, and without any offensive quality. The flowers as Lugdunensis sheweth, might be employed to perfume gloves, or garments, or to be distilled into a sweete water as well as the flowers of Calef. which Bellunensis tooke to be this tree, and are used in the manner aforesaid. 
CHAP. XXXVII. Oenoplia spinosa &amp; non spinosa sive Napeca sive Ziziphus alba The white Iujube tree, with thornes and without. I N regard that this tree doth so neere resemble the other Iujube tree, mentioned here before in this Worke. I might have joyned them together, but that I could not assure it you to be of the same pro∣perty, I have therefore reserved it for this place, as partly partaking with the Ollive as the Iujube tree, and is of two sorts, the one bearing thornes, and the other none, in all other things so like, that one description may serve them both. Spinosa &amp; non spinosa It groweth to be a tree as great as a meane sised Peare-tree, whose body and branches are covered with a whitish ash-coloured barke, full of small short and sharpe prickes or thornes, two set at each leafe not farre in sunder, in the one sort, and without any in the other: the leaves are somewhat broad and short, very like to the leaves of the other Iujube tree but greater, round pointed for the most part, with three ribbes in each, running all the length, of a darke shining greene colour on the upper side, and somewhat tending to an ash-colour underneath, standing singly at the branches, one on this side and another on that up to the toppe; at the joynts with the leaves come forth divers small greenish white flowers, like the blossomes of the Ollive or Iujube tree for the forme, each standing on its owne small footestalke, after which being falne come many small round fruite, as bigge as a great Cherry, yet sometimes as great as a Wall∣nut, in some whitish, in others more yellow, and reddish on the one side like an Apple, of a very sweete taste, with a stone in the middle thereof, like an Ollive stone, but round and not long. 
The Place and Time. These grow in Syria, Egipt, Arabia, and the parts neere unto them, where they hold their greene leaves all the Winter without falling, but in Candy, and other the Napeca Nabca aut Oenoplia spinosa. The white Iujube tree with thornes. 
hether parts, they have beene observed to fall off, as other trees doe: they beare in the warmer Countries twise a yeare, yet the former fruite that commeth in the Spring of the yeare, seldome commeth to matu∣rity, because the moisture of the time spoyleth them, that they doe not ripen kindly, but in the Autumne the fruite is ripe and delicate. 
The Names. That sort which is without thornes is described by Alpinus in his Booke of Egiptian plants, who calleth it Nabca Paliurus Athenai credita, and very truely for Athenaeus in the foureteenth Booke of Deipnosophistes, calleth it Paliurus, and saith that Agathocles, in the third Booke of his History, describeth it by the name of Connarus, as those of Alexandria called it, and by Honorius Bellus that sent the fruite to Clusius, as it is set downe in his fifth Epistle to him called Oenoplia spinosa. That without thorne is set forth by Clusius, in his History of plants; as he received it also from Honorius Bellus of Candy, who calleth it Oenoplia seu Napeca Bellonij Connarus Alexandrinorui forte Athe∣nai: Serapio comprehendeth them both under the name of Sadar or Sudar, but as his manner is in other things, he confoundeth it with the Lotus of Diosco∣rides, from which it much differeth, it is called in Sy∣ria and Egipt, Nep and Nap, and as Guilandinus saith, put by many among the sorts of Iujubes. But Pliny seemeth to call it Prunus Aegyptiaca, an Egiptian Plumme. 
The Ʋertues. The fruite of both these before they are ripe, are cold and dry in the first degree, and binding, but when they are ripe they have some moisture in them, and are much used to strengthen the loosenesse of the sto∣macke and belly, by the juyce of them being taken at the mouth or given in a glister: the dryed fruit infused in water, and the infusion taken, is profitable against the slipperinesse and ulcers of the bowels, the decocti∣on or infusion of the ripe fruite, being dryed is of great use against pestilentiall feavers, for the fruite is held to have a wonderfull property against venomous qualities, and to resist putrefaction, and mightily to strengthen t e heart: the juyce of the fruite when it is throughly ripe, is very good to purge choller from the stomacke, and the first conduits of the veines: as also in all putride feavers, an infusion of them is familiarly taken to coole the heate and violence thereof. 
CHAP. XXXVIII. Azadarach Avicennae. The Bead tree. A Lthough this tree be in forme much diff ring from any of the last sorts, yet because some have cal∣led it Ziziphus, as they did the last save one. I thought it not amisse to insert it in this place, whose description is on this manner. It groweth to be high and vaste, spreading far and making a goodly shadow in the warme Countries where it best prospereth, the body and greater boughes are cove∣red with a rugged barke and full of chinkes, but that on the younger branches, is smooth somewhat like unto those of the Figge: the leaves are very largely spread and winged, having long foote-stalkes, somewhat like unto Ashen leaves, but larger, more spread and of a darke greene colour, dented about the edges, the end leafe being longest, yet in some places they are not so largely spread, from the foote whereof come forth long stalkes, bearing sundry blewish flowers laid open, with five small narrow leaves like a starre, and a small hollow cup more purple in the middle, after which come round fruite, of the bignesse of a Cher∣ry, greene at the first, and white when it is ripe, of a sweetish taste at the first, but after very bitter, unpleasant, loathsome, and stincking, containing a stone within it sixe square, somewhat like unto the Emblick Myrabolan stone, with two kernels within each, from whence usually rise two sproutes or stalkes of greene leaves, the fruite being drilled (which will be easily done, not being very hard) and drawne on stringes, serve people beyond Sea to number their prayers on, least they forget themselves and give God too many: this looseth all his leaves in Winter, fresh arising in the Spring.
The Place and Time. This groweth in none of these Christian Countries naturally, but are all planted wheresoever they grow, in Or∣chards or Court yards, for the shadow sake, being of little use beside, Clusius saith he saw divers of them in Spaine, and heard they were more frequent in Italy, it flowreth in Iune, and the fruite is ripe in Septem∣ber. 
The Names. This was called Ziziphus candida, by the Herba∣rists Azadar eth herbariorum. The Bead tree. 
at M mpelier as Lobel saith, and Sycomorus by I∣talians, as Matthiolus saith, but misliking that title he called it Pseudosycomorus, yet in other places of Italy it is still called Perlaro. Cordus, Gesner in hortis, and Bellonius call it Sycomorus Italorum, Lugdunensis set∣teth it downe by the name of Ziziphus alba. Gesner saith some learned men called it Myxus alba &amp; Lau∣rus Graeca Plinij. Caesalpinus tooke it to be Tuber can∣dida, of Pliny, and peradventure Zizipha Columellae, Dodonaeus hath it under the name of Azadarach, and so have Clusius and Camerarius, some Turkes in these dayes call it Thespic, and Rauwolfius saith that they of Tripoli call it Zenselacht, but generally now adayes, with most Azadarach or Asederaeth, yet the French call it Arbor sancta, because as is before shewed, the fruite helpeth their devotions, as the Spaniards doe, that call it Arbol parayso. 
The Ʋertues. The best use that this serveth for is, that the distil∣led water thereof will kill Lice, and causeth the haire to grow faire and long, if it bee mixed with white Wine, and the headed washed therewith, the fruite is dangerous if not deadly, if it bee eaten causing the like Symptomes that the Oleander doth, and is to be remedyed with the same helpes: Rauwolfius saith, that it will kill dogges, if it bee given them with their meate. 
CHAP. XXXIX. Phillyrea. Mocke Privet. O F this kinde of shrub there are foure or five sorts each differing from other in the broadnesse or narrow∣nesse of their leaves especially, as you shall heare. 
1. Phillyrea latifolia aculeata. Prickely mocke Privet. This first Mocke Privet riseth up with sundry stemmes, of the thickenesse of ones thumbe, covered with a greenish barke spotted with white: the leaves are set by couples at the joynts, all along the branches, which are somewhat thicke, hard, and prickely, dented about the edges very like the leaves of the Scarlet Oke bush but greater: the flowers come forth at the joynts of the leaves, the fruite is small, and blacke round berries hang∣ing downe about the branches, and are like unto the berries of Privet, or of the Masticke tree, but having a small stone within them. 
2. Phillyrea folio lato serrato. Toothed Mocke Privet. This other Mocke Privet groweth greater and higher, whose branches are covered with a whitish barke, ha∣ving somewhat broad and hard blackish greene leaves, pointed at the ends and dented about the edges, two al∣wayes see at a joynt, of a little sharpe and bitter taste. The flowers grow at the joynts with the leaves, as in the former, and the berries that follow are blacke and round like Pepper or Mirtle berries, with a thin brittle sheld stone within it. 
3. Phillyrea latifolia folijs fere non se ratis. The greater Mocke Privet with lesse dented leaves. This Mocke Privet groweth lower then the last, yet unto two mens height, with a whitish barke covering the branches as in the last, but somewhat more rugged. The leaves are set on the branches in the same manner as the former, but somewhat narrower, and but seldome dented at al about the edges, the flowers are of a whitish green colour, standing thicke together, about the setting on of the leaves, somewhat like unto the Ollive blossomes, af∣ter which come round berries like the last. 
4 Phillyrea angustifolia prima. The first narrow leafed Mocke Privet. This is a low bush not exceeding a mans height, but fuller of branches, yet smaller then the last, and covered with a blacker barke: the leaves are narrower and greener then it, like unto the wild Ollive, and not without some bitternesse in them: the flowers are white and grow after the same fashion, thicke set together, unto which being falne succeede blacke round berries like unto Mirtle berries, with a hard stone in them. 
5. Phillyrea angustifolia secunda. The other narrow leafed Mocke Privet. This other Mocke Privet shooteth forth many more suckers from the roote, which are slenderer and not very 1. Phillyrea latifolia aculeata. Prickely Mocke Privet. 
4. Phillyrea angustifolia prima. The first narrow leafed Mocke Privet. 
2. 3. 5. Phillyfolio lato serrato, &amp; fere non serrato, &amp; angustifolia secundas. Toothed Mocke Privet, and with lesse dented leaves, and the other narrow leafed Mock Privet 
easie to breake, nor so plentifull or thicke growing as the former, with leaves set one against another, narrower, longer, and of a darker greene colour, this was said to beare neither flower nor seede, which matter is disproved, and found to beare both, and like unto the last. 
The Place and Time. Clusius observed these five sorts in Spaine, Portugall, and France. They flower in the Spring, and their berries are not ripe untill it be very late in the yeare. 
The Names. Divers learned men did take the Phillyra of The∣ophrastus, which we have shewed you to be the Line tree, to be this Phillyrea of Dioscorides, being deceived by the vicinity of the names, untill Cordus, who better consi∣dered them, found them much to differ, as well in forme as in properties, since whose time all that have followed him have so accounted of them. Lobel saith, he would ra∣ther read it or Olea amasia, a kinde of wilde Ollive, whereunto it is most like, or little differing: The first is the first Phillyrea described by Clusius, and so is my second his second Phillyrea also: The third is the first Phillyrea of Matthiolus and Lobel, and the third with Clusius, and is the Phillyrea of Bellonius, and Gesner in hortis, Dodonaeus cal∣leth it Cyprus latiore folio, and Lugdunensis Alaternus ma∣jor Dalechampij, and of Caesalpinus Ilatrum, and Phillyra of Theophrastus, Bauhinus calleth it Phillyrea folio Ligustri. The fourth is the fourth Phillyrea of Clusius, the Phillyrea an∣gustifolia of Lobel, the Alaternus minor Dalechampij of Lugdunensis, and the Cyprus of Dodonaeus. The last is Clu∣sius his fifth Phillyrea also, and both these last are called by Lobel, Narbonensis. 
The Ʋertues. The leaves of this Mocke Privet are binding, as Diosco∣rides saith, and are of the same effect that the wilde Ollive tree leaves are, and used in decoctions are good against the ulcers in the mouth or to wash the teeth, the same also being drunke provoketh urine and womens courses. 
CHAP. XL. Alaternus sive Philyca Theophrasti credita. Ever greene Privet. T Here is so great affinity betweene the former Mocke Privet, and this ever greene Privet, that divers good Authours call the one by the others name, as you have in part heard in the former Chapter, and shall more in this, whereof there are two sorts a greater and a lesse. 
1. Alaternus major seu prior. The greater ever greene Privet. The former of these two shrubs, groweth sometimes tall like a tree, with long but not any great branches, nor yet much divided into lesser ones, and are covered with a whitish greene bark, and with another yel∣lowish one under it, or more inward, whereon grow somewhat broad leaves without any order, of a meane sise betweene the Ollive, and the ever greene Oke, but thicker, and slightly dented about the edges, and of a darke greene colour, of an unpleasant taste, and bitterish withall, the flowers are many tufting together at the setting to of the leaves, and are of a whitish greene colour, there hath not beene any fruite observed to follow them. 
2. Alaternus minor seu alter. The lesser ever greene Privet. This other groweth lower by much, with a whitish greene reddish barke mingled, the leaves are lesser, roun∣der, and dented about the edges, and of a paler greene colour, the flowers are greater and greener, set together like the former, unto which succeede small round berries, greene at the first, reddish afterwaards, and blackish when they are ripe, having three stones or seedes within each of them. 
The Place and Time. Both these were observed by Clusius in Spaine and Portugall. They flower there in their naturall place in Fe∣bruary, and the fruite is ripe in May.
The Place and Time. It groweth as a hedge bush, being often cut and plash∣ed by the Countrymen, to spread on the hedges in length to hinder it of the height, and is found very much in Kent, and in other shires of the land. And flowreth not until the end of May, and ripeneth the fruite in Septem∣ber. 
The Names. Although the signification of Ʋiburnum, doth properly entend the young twigge or shoote from the roote of a tree, yet it is not improbable that Ʋirgil in citing these verses. Quantum lenta selent inter Ʋiburna Cupressi s, should meane this tree also, called Viburnum, (that it might hold his comparison to the Cypresse, of the meanenes of other Cities unto the statelines of Rome ) as divers learned men think, which are Gesner, Matthiolus, Camerarius, Durantes and Lugdunensis, &amp;c. and because that the Italians in their vulgar tongue, call it Lantana (quod lenti sunt rami) Guilandinus, Gesner, Lobel and Caesalpinus, are content to cal it Lantana also, yet Ruellius, in writing of the Rhus of Theophrastus and Dioscorides, saith he found it without Paris, which the Country people called Blanche putain, and both he and Lobel, doe call it Ʋiorna Gallorum, as peradventure derived from Viburnum, and yet they call another ramping bush Viorna also, which I have shewed you before among the clamberers, to be the Atragene of Theophrastus, unlesse the French have two Viorna ' s, which is doubtfull, for Ruellius sheweth a shrub, which he saith the French call Blanche putane, and is the same they call, saith he, Ʋiorne and Hardeau also, Lugdunensis saith that Dalechampius did take this to be the Speiraea Theophrasti, because the pliant tough twigges may be writhed (in spiras ) into wreathes or round circles: but as I shewed you before, Clusius setteth forth another Speiraea, which he taketh to be the truer. Caesalpinus and Ruellius, doe both thinke it to be the Rhus Theophrasti, lib. 3. c. 18 which Gaza translateth Fluida from the Greeke word , but as they thinke is not sort of our Rhus, or Sumacke, because he there describeth it with the leafe of the Elme, but longer, &amp;c. and therefore they both referre it to this plant. Matthiolus saith, he was also of that opinion, untill having better perused Theophrastus, he refused that opinion, acknowledging himselfe to have beene in an errour. The Italians as I said, call it Lantana, and Vibur∣ ; the French Ʋiorne, as Ruellius saith, and Hardeau also, from the French word Hard, which signifieth a band or rope, the Germanes call it in some places Schlingbaum, but Tragus and Lonicerus, Kleiner Malbaum, Gerard calleth it in English the Waifaring tree, but I know no travailer doth take either pleasure or profit by it, more then by any other of the hedge trees. I have therefore from Tragus his mealy tree, put to the pliantnesse of the twigges and branches, and called it the pliant mealy tree. 
The Vertues. The leaves of this tree are harsh and binding, and are good to strengthen and fasten loose teeth: the decocti∣on of the leaves hereof, and of Ollive leaves together in vinegar and water, is of excellent good use to wash the mouth and throate that are swelled by sharpe rheumes falling into them, it is good also to set the Ʋvula or palate of the mouth into the right place, and to stay rheumes that doe fall upon the jawes: the kernels of the fruite here∣of, taken before they are ripe, dryed and made into pouther and drunke, doe stay the loosenesse of the belly, and all other fluxes. Of the rootes being steeped under the ground, and then boyled, and beaten a long time after∣ward, is made Birdlime, with which Fowlers use to catch smaller birds: the leaves boyled in lye, and the head or haires washed therewith doth keepe them from falling, and will make the haires blacke. 
CHAP. XLIV. Sumach sive Rhus. Sumacke. T Here are three or foure sorts of Sumacke to shew you, three of them of auncient knowledge and use, but one other of later invention: whereunto I must adjoyne another plant, which both for the names sake, and some likenesse thereunto, hath caused divers learned men to intitle it by their name. 
1. Sumach sive Rhus obsoniorum &amp; coriariorum. Coriars Sumacke. The Coriars Sumacke in some places riseth to be a reasonable great tree (but in dry barren grounds not above two or three cubits high, or where it is yearely or every other yeare pruined for the profit made of them) sprea∣ding sundry branches with large winged leaves, that is many set on bothsides of a middle ribbe, each of them dented about the edges, Theophrastus compareth them to Elme leaves, but lesser and longer, and Dioscorides to the leaves of the Ilex: at the ends of the branches come forth large spiked clusters of whitish flowers, which afterwards become reddish, round and flat seede like unto Lentils, with an outward skinny huske, which was, and is yet still in divers places in Turky, the condiment or seasoning for meate, being dryed and made into pou∣ther: the wood is whitish, which being dryed and ground serveth to dye blacke withall, as is well knowne to most. 
2. Sumach sive Rhus Ʋirginiana. Virginian Sumacke. The Ʋirginian Sumacke groweth up in some places to be a tree of a meane sise whose barke on the body and elder armes is rugged, and of a darke russet colour, those that are two or three yeare old, are smooth and not rugged, but those of the last yeare are of the same brownish red colour and softnesse, that the new velvet head of a deare sheweth to have, (that it might deceive a right good Woodman to see one cut of and presented him on the suddaine, yeelding a yellowish milke, when it is broken or wounded, which in a small time becommeth thicke like unto a gumme: the long winged leaves grow one above another on both sides of the branches very largely spread, having eight or tenne or more long narrow leaves set on each side of a middle ribbe, and one at the end, very smally dented about the edges, of a darke greene shining colour on the upper side, and paler greene under∣neath: at the ends of the branches come forth long and thicke browne tufts or heads, very soft and woolly in handling, made all of short threds or thrummes, from among which appeare many small flowers much more red or crimson then the tufts, which turne into a number of very red round flattish seede, thicke and close, set on the branches of the head together, lesser then the small Lentils, having a small blackish seede, under that outward skinny huske, whose shell is somewhat hard, enclosing a white kernell within it. the roote spreadeth much under ground, shooting forth suckers round about, and a good way of from the body of the tree. 
3. Rhus Plinij Mirtifolia. Mirtle leafed Sumacke. The Mirtle leafed Sumacke groweth seldome above the height of a man having many slender branches with leaves set thereon every one of the bignesse of the broad Mirtle leafe, set by couples, but not so closely, or alwayes just opposite one to another, nor so many together, and not dented about the edges: at the ends whereof come 1. Rhus ob oniorum &amp; coriariorum. Coriars Sumacke. 
forth many small purplish red threds, set upon or sticking out of a small head, one set above another, which afterwards turneth into a round and some∣what flat crested blacke berrie, containing therein small white and rough seede, somewhat like unto Grape kernels. This in some places dyeth downe to the ground every yeare, and springeth anew, which is the cause it can give no flower, much lesse seede, which never is found on the first yeares shoote in our Country, but in other places of our Land sheweth flowers, such as J have described, but never any fruite that I can learne. 
4. Coggygria sive Cotinus Coriaria. Ʋenice Sumacke. The Venice Sumacke is in some places a tree, ri∣sing to be of the bignesse of the Pomegarnet tree, in other places it is much lower, and shooteth forth many twigges, of two or three cubits long, and of the bignesse of ones finger, divided into many red∣dish branches, having sundry leaves set on both sides without order, somewhat broad, round poin∣ted, thicke, and full of veines, and small red footestalkes under them, a little waved about the edges, of a Rossenlike sent, not unpleasant, and of an harsh binding taste, growing to be of an ex∣cellent Rose colour, in the end of Summer; from the ends of the branches start forth a large and long head, consisting of many tufts, of whitish greene flowers, standing upon very fine red footestalkes, which afterwards spread themselves into so many tufts of feather-like haires or threds, having a∣mong them sundry small blackish and flat seede, formed somewhat like unto an heart, which toge∣ther with the silken threds are carried away by the winde: the roote is hard and wooddy, not grow∣ing deep nor much spreading: the wood is yellow∣ish, and serveth to give a yellow dye: but the 2. Rhus Virginianum. Virginian Sumacke. 
3. Rhus Plinij Mirtifolia. Mirtle leafed Sumacke. 
4. Coggygria sive Cotinus Coriaria. Venice Sumacke. 
5. Rhus sylvestris sive Myrtus Brabantica aut Anglica. Sweete Gaule. 
leaves and young branches, doe Dye a blacke colour; and with the barke they Tanne leather, as with the other. 
5. Rhus sylvestris sive Myrtus Brabantica aut Anglica. Sweete Gaule. This other plant which as I said is fit to be joyned to the rest, is a small low shrub or wooddy bush, not above a yard high, spreading slender branches; with many browne yellowish greene leaves somewhat long, narrow, thicke and fattish, round pointed, resembling both Boxe and Mirtle leaves in some sort, but smelling somewhat strong and sweete, the flowers are yellow, and stand upon short stalkes, comming forth at the joynts with the leaves in small tufts, many set together, which being past, the said stalkes are plentifully stored with cornered yel∣lowish seede, bedewed with a clammy moisture, of a very bitter unpleasant taste, but strong sweete sent: the roote is hard and wooddy. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in Syria and Pontus, as Galen saith; in Italy and Spaine as Pliny saith, and in divers other places, where it is manured as carefully as their Vines, and as Clusius saith he saw it so ordered in Spaine, which yeelded the Owners great profit, the second groweth naturally in Ʋirginia, from whence we had it. The third about Mompelier, and in sundry other places. The fourth in Savoy, and on the Appenine hils and elsewhere. The last groweth in many places of our owne Land, as well as beyond the Sea, as in Sussex, Hartfordshire, and Kent, and by old Windsor Parke corner. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and by Hippocrates , in Latine also Rhus, for Pliny saith it hath no Latine name although Gaza calleth it Fluida supposing the name to be derived from fluo, but it is rather a rubore vel colore coccineo acinorum, and therefore it was called , from whence the Latine Russus, and the French Roux came. It is called Rhus simply by some, as Matthiolus &amp;c. Rhus coriaria by Dodonaeus, and Rhus obsoniorum by Lobel, Camerarius, Clusius, and others, and Sumach both by shops and in Rauwolfius, or Sumach Arabum, because it was called Rhus Syriaca by some, it was thought to differ from the former, as also, that Rhus culinaria and iaria or rubra, did differ one from another, and were severall sorts, but Paulus Aegineta, doth plainely shew that the seede and juyce of Rhus coriaria was used by Physitions: another errour Celsus shewed, that tooke the Rhus Syriaca to be Ros Syriacus, a kinde of Manna, and therefore called it rorem Syriacum, instead of Rhoem Syriacum, and rorem sutorium for Rhoen Syriacum, or coriariorum, not sutorum, as it is in Columella: neither should it be Ros marinus, but Rhus marinus, or Rhus Orientalis in Marcellus who appointeth it for disenteries and the like. The second hath not beene set out by any before me, onely Bauhinus seemeth to touch upon it, calling it Rhus angustifolium, saying it was brought out from Braffile. The third is thought by most to be the Rhus sylvestris of Pliny, that hath Myrtle like leaves, and so called by Lobel, Dodonaeus, and Lugdunensis, and Rhus Plinij Myrti∣folia M nspeliensium by Gesner and Lobel: yet some doe thinke it better agreeth with the Dryophonon of Pliny: the fourth is the of Theophrastus, which Gaza translateth Prunus, but should be rather , which sheweth that Gaza was slenderly advised to give the word such a name that a Plumme should beare a seede to be carryed away with the winde, Pliny calleth it Coggygriea, or Coggyria, yet some have it Coccygria: some also thinke it to be the Cotinus Plinij, and for a distinction betweene it and the Oleaster, which is called Cotinus also, they call this Cotinus coriaria Plinij, in imitation whereof as it is thought, those that dwell at the toppes of the Apennine hils doe call it Scotano, and those at the foote Rossolo, of the red colour of the barke, and not of the Dye, as some thinke because Pliny saith, his Cotinus is, ad lineamenta modo conchylij c lore insignem, for this as is before said, giveth a yellow colour. The Savoy rs call the wood hereof which they loppe and tell for that purpose Fustet, and we Fusticke, which all Dyers know is of especiall use with them, both the old wood to give one yel∣low colour, and the young another. Matthiolus, Anguilara, Camerarius, and Gesner in hortis call it Cotinus, yet Gesner also calleth it Coccigria forte Barba Iovis Plinij, Dodonaeus Cotinus Coriaria, Coggygria by Clusius and o∣thers, and of Caesalpinus Scotanum vulgo, as the common people did. The last is liker to be the Rhus sylvestris and called by Lugdunensis, Rhus sylvestris altera, by Clusius Rhus herba Plinij, and thinketh it is the Dryophanon Plinij also, as Ruellius did before him, and Myrtus nemoralis, Cordus tooke it to be Elaeagnus, and Bellonius stir∣pium cultura, tooke it to be the Elaeagnus of Theophrastus, and Lobel therefore called it Elaeagnus Cordi, and Do∣donaeus Chamaelaeagnus, Lobel calleth it Gagel Germanorum, and Myrtus Brabantica, and Belgarum, but I may say as well Myrtus Anglica, for it is as plentifull with us as with them, but that Lobel did not know so much? The Arabians call the first Sumac, Adurion, Rosbar, Sadisticos, or Rosaidicos, the Italians Rhus, and Sumaco, the Spaniards Sumach and Sumagro, the French Sumac, the Germanes Gerberbaum, the Dutch Sumack and Sumack, and we in English Sumacke, and red Sumacke, the French call the last Pincentroyall, that is Royall Balme: the Germanes G ∣gel, as is before said, and we Gaule and sweete Willow. 
The Ʋertues. Sumacke both leaves and seedes, and the medicines made of them are cooling in the second degree, and drying in the third, the leaves of the first Sumacke have an astringent quality, that they may serve instead of Acacia, for those purposes it is used, the decoction of the leaves and seede is singular good for all sorts of fluxes in man or wo∣man, to take them in broth, or in meate or drinke, and to sit in the decoction while it is warme, as the bloody flix, the flux of the stomacke, womens courses, and the whites also, to be drunke or invected by glisters or otherwise, or in bathes, it stayeth the stomacke that is much given to casting, the decoction of the leaves or seede made with vinegar, and a little honey put thereto is good against Gangrens or Cankers, the juyce that is taken out of the dryed leaves by boyling them in water and after they be strayned to boyle them againe with some honey, hath the same properties that Lycium hath, the same helpeth the roughnesse of the tongue and throate: the seede likewise boyled in water, and the decoction thereof evapoured to the thickenesse of honey, is more effectuall then the seede it selfe: the decoction of the greene leaves maketh the haire blacke to be washed therewith: the juyce of them dropped into the eares dryeth up the moisture and running of them: the seede beaten and boyled into a pultis and applyed to any inflammation or hot Impostume, cooleth them much, and doth also take away the markes and paines of bruises and blowes, as also the frettings and gallings of the skinne, the same also helpeth the he∣morrhoides or piles when they bleede too much, if it be applyed with the fine pouther of Oken coales: it is sin∣gular good also to be applyed to ruptures, both inwardly and outwardly, and to stay defluxions of hot and sharpe rheumes into the eyes, and Damocrates used it in a medicine with Poppy heads, against destillations from the head, and against want of sleepe: the gum that is found oftentimes issuing out of the tree, is good for hollow teeth, to ease the paines, and the decoction of the seede is good to wash the mouth both to fasten loose teeth, and to heale pur d and rotten gummes. What the Virginia Sumacke will performe, I have not knowne any hath made the proofe, but it is probable it might worke some of these effects if any would make the tryall. Both the Myrtle leafed Sumacke and the Ʋenice, are in a manner as effectuall to all the purposes aforesaid, except that they are a little weaker. The Gaule is by the bitternesse and harshnesse found to be both drying and discussing, and is very effectuall to kill the wormes in the belly or stomacke: it mightily affecteth the braine, causing first pertur∣bations and then sopiting the sences: it is much used to be laid in Wardrobes, Chests, Presses, and the like, to keepe mothes from garments, and woollen cloathes as also to give them a good sent. 
CHAP. XLV. Myrtus. The Myrtle. H Aving spoken of the Gaule in the Chapter before, which some account a kinde of Myrtle both from the forme and sweetenesse, I thinke good to set the stocke of the Myrtles next thereunto, which are many, because although I have shewed you three of them in my former Booke, yet I have not shewed you all the properties they have. 
1. Myrtus latifolia maxima. The greatest open Laurell Myrtle. This greatest Myrtle hath great and thicke wooddy branches set with a double row of large leaves yet not so close as the next comming neere unto the smaller leaves of the Bay tree, but of a paler greene colour, abiding alwayes greene and very sweete: this sort saith Clusius even in Spaine seldome beareth either flowers or fruite, because they pruine it often, being kept in hedges for pleasure. 
Clusius maketh another sort hereof which differeth little from the former, but in the leaves which are some∣what smaller and thicker, whereas the former are thinner.
2. Myrtus latifolia exotica. The strange broad leafed close Myrtle. This Myrtle groweth higher then the former, and shooteth from the roote store of strong thicke stemmes more plentifully stored with large leaves, yet not fully so large as the first sort, but closer set together that they almost touch one another sometimes in a double row and sometimes in a treble, and very sweete: the flowers are white like unto others but larger, after which commeth the fruite, somewhat longer then in the small sorts, greene at the first, purplish before it be ripe, and blacke when it is full ripe, with many crooked white seedes within them. 
3. Myrtus latifolia vulgaris. The usuall broad leafed Myrtle. This usuall broad leafed Myrtle (which I so call because we have this onely in our Country, of all other sorts of broad leafed Myrtles) groweth to be foure or five foote high with us, and in the warme Countries to be a little tree full of branches and leaves, like a small bush, the leaves are somewhat large and great, yet not so large as the last, as 1. Myrtus latifolia maxima. The greatest open Laurell Myrtle. 
2. Myrtus latifolia exotica. The Arange broad leafed close Myrtle. 
5. 7. Myrtus Battica sylvestris &amp; minor acutofolio. The Spanish wild Myrtle and the small poynted Myrtle. 
6. Myrtus domestica minutissimis folijs fructu albo. The small white Myrtile. 
sweete as the other, and the flowers white like the rest, 9. Myrtus flore pieno. Double flowred Myrtle. 
and sweete likewise, the fruite hereof is blacke also. 
4. Myrtus angustifolia exotica. The strange narrow leafed Myrtle. This narrow leafed sort groweth in all parts like un∣to the second, but that the leafe is smaller, narrower, small pointed, and of a darker greene colour, the flow∣ers are alike, and so is the fruite blacke also, but greater and rounder, having crooked white seedes in them, as the others have. 
5. Myrtus Baetica sylvestris. The Spanish wild Myrtle. This wilde Myrtle groweth neither so high, nor so thicke with leaves, as the former manured sorts, but have slender and brittle branches, with broader leaves then the last, set more thinly on both sides then the rest, and of a darke greene colour: the flowers are like the rest, and the fruite is round, standing on long foote∣stalkes betweene the leaves in good plenty, greene at the first, and whitish afterwards, and blackish being ripe full of sweetish juyce, pleasant, with some astriction to the taste. 
6. Myrtus domestica minutissimis folijs fructu albo. The small white Myrtle. This white Myrtle groweth reasonable tall, with slen∣der reddish branches, thicke bushing together, being thicke set with very small (even the smallest of any o∣ther,) leaves, narrowest of any, and sharpe pointed, and somewhat darke greene also: the flowers are white like the rest, and so is the fruite likewise, but of a whi∣tish colour, tending to a little blush, and so abide, not changing blackish. 
7. Myrtus minor acuto folio. The small and pointed Myrtle. This small Myrtle riseth not so high as the third, or ordinary broad leafed sort, but groweth fuller of bran∣ches, and thicke set with small fine and greene, almost shining round leaves a little pointed at the ends, abi∣ding alwayes greene, as all the sorts of Myrtles doe, which and the flowers are sweete also, but grow not plenti∣fully in our Country on the branches, as in warmer places, and beareth blacke berryes, but never in these colder elimates, howsoever housed or defended. 
8. Myrtus minor rotundiore folio. Boxe leafed Myrtle, This other sort groweth in all points like the last, but that the leaves being as small and fresh, greene, thicke growing, are rounder at the ends, very like unto the small Box leaves, and beareth flowers as sparingly. 
9. Myrtus flore pleno. Double flowred Myrtle. Of the greater kinde of Myrtle, there hath beene of later times one noursed up in the Gardens of the chiefe Lovers of rarities, with as double flowers as the double Fetherfew, comming forth of a round reddish huske, continuing flowring at the least three moneths, and each flower a fortnight, and is not over tender to be kept, yet is not so hardy to endure the frosts, as Cornutus saith, which Master Tradescant can sufficiently witnesse, who by a little neglect lost a good plant overtaken with the frost. 
The Place and Time. Myrtles of many sorts are found generally upon all the Sea coasts of Spaine, Italy, and in divers other Countries also. The first two sorts Clusius found in Spaine, not growing naturally wilde, but in certaine Monasteries, and private mens Orchards. The third I thinke came out of Italy, because it is most like to that sort they so call. The fourth he likewise found in a Monastery, not farre from Corduba. The fifth in many places wilde, both of Spaine and Portugall. And the sixt in a private noble mans garden in Portugall. The two last save one, are noursed up most frequent in our Land, and better indure therein, with some good heede and looking unto: but generally even in the warme Countries they must be defended from the cold for feare of danger, as Ʋirgil sheweth in this Verse Eclog 7. Dumteneras defendo a frigore Myrtos, and Ovid in the like manner saith Metuentem frigora Myr∣tum, and yet Ʋirgil in another place saith, Amantes frigora Myrtos: Which how both should be true, I can ima∣gine no other, but that Ʋirgil speaketh of the first in a cold place, and of the other as they grow in a warme, that the cold place must have shelter and defence against the cold, as it is with us, who give them all the comfort we can: and that they that grow in a warme and hot Countrie must have shadow, for they love both shadow from the heate, and moisture in the warme Countries. The last hath no naturall place assigned. They flower in May, and the fruite is ripe about September. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , so called a Myrsine Atheniensi puella amica Palladis a qua cursu &amp; pa∣laestra, superata, invidia ducta interimit; arbuscula in demortuae vicem successit, semper ut olea Minerva chara: but Paena saith, sic vocatam volunt, propter amalam Myrrhae odoris gratiam, in ejus baccis recentibus: yet when we shew you here a Myrtus sylvestris, as well as sativa, or domestica, you must not understand the Oxymyrsus, that is Bruscus, which some called also Myrtus sylvestris to be it, but as in opposition to the tame or manured of the same kinde. Dioscorides maketh mention of both these sorts, and the white one also, although he hath described but one: but some doe much mervaile that Theophrastus that doth so often make mention of the Myrtle, yet hath in no place described it. The first sort here set downe is the first Myrtus with Clusius, called by him Myrtus Baetica latifolia domestica, and by Lobel Myrtus laurea secunda. The second is called by Clusius, Myrtus Baetica latifolia exotica. The third is as I take it the Italica Camerarij, which Matthiolus and others doe describe, and may be the Conjugula of Cato, which Pliny calleth nostras, that is Romana, and Lobel Laurea maxima, and is most likelly to be the nigra of Dioscorides. The fourth is the Myrtus Baetica angustifolia exotica of Clusius, which Lobel calleth Myrtus exotica Plinij, and although it have not six order of leaves, as Pliny his exotica, yet saith Clusius, the leaves grow thicke together, that it seemeth to have more then it hath. The fifth Clusius calleth Myrtus Baetica sylve∣stris, and is the Myrti majoris quinta species of Lobel, and Myrtus sylvestris of Matthiolus. The sixth is the Myr∣tus domestica fructu albo of Clusius, which Bellonius often remembreth in his Observations, and is the Myrtus nona angustifolia by Lobel. The two last save one are very likely to be the Tarentina, and so Matthiolus, and Clusius take them to be. Lobel calleth them Myrtus minor vulgaris, and so others, because as I said they best abid our Northerne Countries. The last is so called by Cornutus as it is in the title. The Excressence that is often found growing upon old Myrtle trees, is called Myrtidanum and Myrtadanum by Dioscorides, and Myrtidanum: Yet Pliny calleth Myrtidanum, the wine that is made of Myrtle berryes. There are likewise, saith Bellonius, in his Observations, certaine Coccos, or red berries, like unto the Chermes berries growing upon the Myrtles in many places of Turky, which have in them but one flye or worme, and used as the Chermes to dye withall. The A a∣bians call it Aes Alas and As, the Italians Myrto, and Mortello, the Spaniards Murta, and Raiam, the French Myrte and Meurtre, other Nations follow the Latine as neere as they can, the Apothecaries and Druggists shops call the berries Myrtillus, and we in English Myrtle berries. 
The Ʋertues. The Myrtle as Galen saith hath contrary quallities in it, for it hath a passing cold earthy quality in it, and a cer∣taine thinne warme essence also, and therefore it powerfully dryeth and bindeth. The dryed leaves are more drying and binding then the fresh, which being beaten and boyled with water, is good to drinke against ca∣tarres, falling to any part of the body, and doth helpe also the fluxes of the belly or stomacke, moist ulcers, and fretting or creeping sores, being applyed to the swellings and heate of the cods, the Impostumes of the funda∣ment, and Saint Anthonies fire: the decoction of the leaves is good for the resolution of the Arteries and joynts, and their weakenesse to sit in or over the same, as in a bath, and doth helpe to consolidate broken bones or out of joynt, that will hardly be cured, it helpeth the sorenesse of the nayles, and that rising of the skin about them, if the pouther of the dryed leaves be cast thereon: the juyce of the leaves is of the same effects, whether out of the fresh leaves, or taken from the dry, by infusing red Wine on them, and is safely used where there is neede of any binding medicine, or to heale the ulcers of the mouth or privy parts: the same also helpeth watering eyes or those that beginne to have a filme or skin to grow that will take away the sight. The seede is good for the trem∣blings and passions of the heart, and to helpe those that spit blood, or have the bloody flixe, it stayeth also wo∣mens immoderate courses, and the whites also, it helpeth the sting of Scorpions, and the bitings of venemous creatures, and of the Spider Phalangium, and the danger of Mushromes: being drunke in Wine, it helpeth a stink∣ing breath, and amendeth that which is not sweete, the same also heated with Wine healeth old ulcers, that are hard to cure: it helpeth the diseases of the bladder, and provoketh urine, it also bindeth the belly, and stayeth the fluxe of humours, the blanes, wheales, and other breakings out in the skinne: the decoction of them, is good for women to sit in or over, that are troubled with the falling downe of the mother, and is good also for the falling downe of the fundament, and the piles. The Excressence called Myrtidanum, is of greater force to dry and binde then either leafe, juyce, or seede: the juyce condensate of Myrtles is commended by Matthiolus for a better sub∣stitute, for Acacia, then the juyce of Sloes, which hath not that aromaticall sent, and strengthning quality that the Myrtle hath. 
CHAP. XLVI. Vitis Idaea sive Myrtillus Germaniea vel Ʋaccinium frutex. Whortle berries. T Here are divers sorts of these low shrubs, which must all goe under the name of Whorts or Whor∣tle berries, although there is much difference betweene them. 
1. Vaccinia nigra vulgaria. Blacke Whortes or Bill berries. This small bush creepeth along upon the ground, scarce rising halfe a yard high, with divers small darke greene leaves set on the greene branches, which it spreadeth abroad on both sides, but not alwaies one against another, somewhat like unto the smaller Myrtle leaves, but not so hard, and a little dented about the edges: at the foote of the leaves come forth small hollow pale blush coloured flowers, the brimmes ending in five points, with a reddish thred in the middle, which passe into small round berries of the bignesse and colour of Iuniper berryes, but full of a purple sweetish sharpe or sowre juyce, which doth give a sad purplish colour to their hands and lips that eate and handle them, especially if they breake them; containing with∣in them diver small seed: the roote groweth aslope under ground, shooting forth in sundry places as it creepeth: this looseth the leaves in Winter. 
2. Ʋaccinia nigra fructu majore. The greater Bill berry. This other Bill berry groweth greater and higher then the former, whose lower part of the branches are of an ash colour, but the upper part, greene and sometimes reddish, the leaves are somewhat rounder pointed, the flow∣ers and berryes, are like the other in all things, save that they are larger, but of the same colour being ripe, and of a more pleasant sweete and lesse sharpe taste: the roote creepeth in the same manner. 
3. Ʋaccinia nigra Panno ica. Hungarian Blacke Whorts. This Hungarian Whort hath tough slender stalkes, lying for the most part on the ground, and there taking 1. Vaccinia nigra vulgaria. Blacke Whorts or Bill berries.
2. Ʋaccinia nigra fructu majore. The great Bill berry. 
3. Vaccinia nigra Pannonica. Hungarian Blacke Whortes. 
4. Ʋaccinia rubra Buxeis folijs. Red Whortes with Boxe leaves. 
6. Vva Vrsi Galeni Clusij. The Spanish red Whort. 
7. Ʋitis Idaea tertia Clusij. The French Hony sweete Whorts. 
8. Vitis Idaea Cretica elatior The taller red Whorts of Candy. 
9. Ʋitis Idaea Cretica humilior. The lower Candy red Whorts. 
roote againe in some places, with many branches, scarfe raising up themselves above the Mosse, among which it groweth, having sundry long and somewhat narrow leaves, upon long footestalkes set without order on them, greene above and paler underneath, and a little nicked about the edges, with a few soft haires on them also, and of a very astringent taste: the flowers come forth at the end of the last yeares shootes or branches, which were not observed, but there stood blacke round berries, as bigge almost as Cherries, upon long footestalkes, hanging downe when they were ripe but reddish before, full of a not unpleasant juyce, conteining within them no stones like Cherries but five seedes for the most part, being flat and white: the roote is wooddy with some fibres joy∣ned thereto: this holdeth the greene leaves all the Winter. 
4. Ʋaccinia rubra buxeis folijs. Red whorts with Boxe leaves. This red Whort riseth up like unto the great blacke Whort, having sundry harder leaves like unto the Boxetree leaves, greene and round pointed standing on the severall branches at the toppes whereof onely, and not from the sides, as in the former come forth divers round and somewhat long hollow flowers, of a pale red colour, after which succeede round reddish sappy berryes, when they are ripe, of an acide and astringent taste: the roote run∣neth in the ground like the blacke: the leaves hereof fall not away in Winter. 
5. Vaccinia rubra longioribus folijs. Red Whorts with longer leaves. This other red Whorte is like a low creeping shrub, but groweth somewhat thicker and greater then the former red, the leaves whereof are longer narrower and sharper pointed then it, and growing reddish toward Autume, but yet abiding on the branches like the former, and not falling of in Winter: the flowers are like the other, and so is the fruite, but not sappy, or with juyce therein, but dry and saplesse, and without any manifest taste. 
6. Ʋva ursi Galeni Clusio. The Spanish red Whort. This Spanish Whort likewise differeth not much from the former red sorts, having slender flexible stalkes and branches, about a foote long, lying on the ground, covered with a reddish barke, somewhat like unto the tender branches of the Strawberry tree, having sundry leaves set thereon, neere resembling the Strawberry tree leaves but lesser, being thicke and sappy, but not hairy at all, and somewhat bitter with the astringent taste: at the ends of the branches grow divers bottle like or hollow round flowers, growing in clusters of the same whitish blush colour that they are of, after which follow round red berries, like unto small Cherryes, but of an acide taste; the leaves hereof likewise abide on the stalkes and fall not away in Winter. 
7. Vitis Idaea tertia Clusij. The French honey sweete Whortes. This riseth higher then any of the former, to be foure or five cubits high, with sundry thicke smooth wooddy stemmes from the roote, the lower parts being somewhat rough and covered with a blackish barke, the upper branches being greene, stored with many leaves thereon, set without order, which are somewhat long with the roundnesse, and a little dented about the edges, of a sad greene colour above and very hoary underneath: at the joynts with the leaves come forth many white flowers, consisting of five leaves a peece, after which come small round berries somewhat bigger then Hawthorne berries, and blacke when they are ripe, having a small crowne as it were of five small points which were the flowers, sticking at their toppes, and being sappy of a sweetish taste like honey, with sundry blackish seede within them. 
8. Ʋitis Idaea Cretica elatior. The taller red Whortes of Candy. This small shrubby plant sending forth sundry slender wooddy blacke shootes from the roote, the wood being hard and white without any sent, but somewhat heating the tongue on the tasting, parted into divers branches, furnished at the joynts, by unequall spaces, sometimes with single leaves, but usually with two, and sometimes with three or foure together, which are somewhat hard and almost round, dented also a little about the edges, be∣ing somewhat like unto Holly, but nothing so hard or prickely, of a sad greene colour on the upper side and gray∣ish the lower, at the ends of the branches, and at the joynts also with the leaves come forth sundry white Cher∣ry like flowers, each on a long footestalke, and after them small round and somewhat long reddish fruite, of a plea∣sant taste, of the bignesse of a Beane, having a freezy or woolly crowne at the toppes, and being dry turneth blacke and hard. 
9. Ʋitis Idaea Cretica humilior. The lower Candy red Whorts. This other Candiot groweth much lower, fuller of sprigges slenderer also and shorter whereon at unordinary spaces, stand unordinary leaves, three or foure sometimes together, being almost round like unto the last, but lesser softer, smoother and not so much dented about the edges, neyther yet of so sad a greene colour on the upperside, nor so gray on the under, at the joynts likewise with the leaves come forth long stalkes, with many the like white blossomes in a cluster, turning into smaller berries, of a darke red colour, and a little downy at the head, somewhat like unto Mirtle berries, which are familiarly eaten by the Shepheards, and others of the Country. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in many heathes, woods and barren hilly places of this Land, as Hampsteede Heath, Finche∣ley, and Saint Iohns wood, not farre from London, and in sundry other places. The first red sort in the North parts, as Lancashire, and Yorkeshire, on the hills, &amp;c. The rest grow in Hungaria, Bavaria, and Germany, and in other Countries also. The sixth Clusius found in Spaine, and the branches and berries were shewed me by Boel, that brought them out of Spaine. The seventh groweth as Lobel saith on every of the hils in Provence of France, and Clusius on the hils nigh Ʋienna. The two last in Candy. They all flower in March and Aprill, and the fruite of the blacke is ripe in Iune and Iuly, the other later. 
The Names. The first blacke sorts are taken generally by the best later Writers, to be the of Theophrastus, that is, Vitis ex parte Idae, quam vocant Phalacras, but Pliny falsly put in Alexandrina instead of Idaea, in Latine by them Ʋitis Idaea Th ophrasti, and because all the rest have a resemblance thereunto, they are all called Ʋites Idaea, likewise, with their severall distinctions, as you shall presently heare: they are many of them also called Vaccinia, by divers, thinking the black sort to be the Vaccinia nigra of Virgil, &amp; by the transposition of a letter Baccinia nigra parva quasi bacca; but that errour is exploded by many good Authours, that shew Virgil putteth his Ʋaccinia a∣mong flowers, and not fruites; for as he saith, Et sunt Ʋiolae nigrae, &amp; Vaccinia nigra, intending the colours were both alike, as a kinde of Hyacinth, which he might meane is as the Violet flower. Vitruvius and Pliny indeede have a Vaccinium which giveth a purple dye to servants or others garments, which may very wel be this, for such a purple colour will the juyce hereof give, if it be rightly ordered. It is also called Myrtillus, and by some Myrtil∣lus Germanica, because the Physitions and Apothecaries in Germany and those parts, tooke them to be true Mirtle berries, and so used them untill they were shewed their errour, and since have forsaken it, as we have done also. Gesner also in hortis sheweth, that some did take the Vitis Idaea, to be that Vine that beareth Currans, but saith he, that noble Vine groweth not on so high or snowy mountaines, but rather in the Planes and open hils, and ordered by the industry of men. The first Tragus calleth Myrtillus exiguus, and so doe Matthiolus and Lugdunensis. Do∣donaeus and Lobel, called it Vaccinia nigra, Anguilara, radix Idaea fructu nigro, Camerarius, Gesner and Clusius, Vitis Idaea vulgaris baccis nigris Caesalpinus Bagola primum genus. The second is called by Tragus, Myrtil us grandis, and is the Vitis Idaea major of Thalius, the Vitis Idaea secunda sive altera of Clusius, and the Ʋitis folijs suer otunais n lbidis, although he hath transposed some of these titles to his second, which is my third whereof onely Clusius maketh mention and calleth it his first, and Gerard Vaccinia Pannonica, and Bauhinus calleth Ʋitis Idaea folijs oblongis albicantibus. The fourth is called Ʋaccinia rubra, and Ʋitis Idaea rubra, by all writers thereof: Camerarius and Thalius say that some tooke it to be Rhus minor Plinij; and Clusius Vitis Idaea buxeis folijs, and Anguilara Radix Idaea fructu rubro, as he did the blacke before, Radix Idaea fructu nigro, and Lugdunensis doth thinke that this is most properly the Radix Idaea of Dioscorides. The fifth is mentioned onely by Camerarius in horto, who calleth it Ʋitis Idaea rubra Bavarica. The sixth is referred by Clusius to the of Galen in his seventh Booke, de composit, med. secundum locos. cap. 4. and thereupon he called it Ʋva ursi Galeni, Bauhinus refereth it to the Vitis Idaea, making it his sixth and calleth it Idaea radix Dioscoridis also. The seventh is called by Clusius Vitis Idaea ter∣tia, not thinking his former to be so worthy of that name, Lobel saith the French call it Amelanchier, and doubt∣eth if it be not that shrub which they call Al s er, Bellonius saith, that their Melanchier is called in Candy Agrio∣melea and Codomalo, but I thinke he is deceived, that having blacke, and this red fruite: Gesner in his Epistles, as Clusius saith (if he meant this plant) giveth it divers names, as Myrtomalis, Petromelis, Pyrus Cervina, and Pyras¦ter, Idaea. Dalechampius taking it to be Cotonaster Gesneri, calleth it Epimelis altera, but giveth it red berries, which therefore I suppose may be rather one of the two last. The two last are mentioned by Alpinus, in his Booke of Exoticke plants, by the name of Cerasus, and Chamaecerasus Idaea Cretica, thinking the former most neerely to be the Cerasus Idaea Theophrasti. The Italians did use to call the first Mirtillo, but now Ʋite Idaea, according to the Latine, the French Airelle and Aurelle, the Germanes Heidelbeer, the Dutch Crake besien, and we Whorts or Whortle berryes, and Bill berries with us about London. 
The Ʋertues. The Bill berries doe coole in the second degree, and doe a little binde and dry withall: they are therefore good in hot agues, and to coole the heat of the stomacke and liver and doe somewhat binde the belly, and stay castings, and loathings, but if that they be eaten by those that have a weake or a cold stomacke, they will much offend and trouble it saith Camerarius, and therefore the juyce of the berries being made into a Syrupe, or the pulpe of them made into a conserve with Sugar, will be more familiar to such, and helpe those paines, the cold fruite procured, and is good for all the purposes aforesaid, as also for those that are troubled with an old cough, or with an ulcer in the Lungs or other disease thereof: with the juyce of the berries Painters to colour paper or cards, doe make a kinde of purple blew colour. putting thereto some Allome and Galles, whereby they can make it lighter or sad∣der as they please. And some poore folkes as Tragus sheweth, doe take a potfull of the juyce strained, where∣unto an ounce of Allome, foure spoonefuls of good Wine vinegar, and a quarter of an ounce of the waste of the copper forgings, being put together, and boyled all together, into this liquor while it is reasonable, but not too hot, they put their cloth, wooll, thred or yarne therein, letting it lye for a good while, which being taken out and hung up to dry, and afterwards washed with cold water will have the like Turkie blew colour, and if they would have it sadder, they will put thereto in the boyling an ounce of broken Gaules: Gerard saith, that hee hath made of the juyce of the red berries, an excellent crimson colour, by putting a little Allome thereto: the red Whorts are taken to be more binding the belly, womens courses, spitting of blood, and any other fluxe of blood or hu∣mours, to be used as well outwardly, as inwardly. 
CHAP. XLVII. Iovis barba frutex. The silver Bush. T His beautifull fine bush groweth to the height of a Iovis barba frutex, The Silver Bush. 
man, with a number of slender branches, thicke bushing out on all sides, whereon grow long win∣ged leaves made of many small ones like Lentill leaves, but narrower, each set against other, with an odde one at the end, of a faire greene colour on the upper∣side, and of a silver white shining colour underneath, the young leaves being also of the same colour: at the ends of the branch standeth large umbels of yellow flowers, made after the fashion of broome flowers, set in grayish huskes, like the heads of the three leafed grasse, after which come small narrow short pods, soft and grayish likewise, with two or three small round, and somewhat long blackish gray seede in them: the roote is hard and wooddy: this is very tender, not induring our Winters, although housed, nor any where in our Country, but in a warme stove, where the fire may preserve it from the cold, which it will not abide early or late: that is, it must be hou∣sed betimes, and not set abroad too earely. 
The Place and Time. It groweth on the hill Setius, called Cap de sette of the French, not farre from Agatha, by Mompelier, as also upon M s niger, not farre from Ligorne in Tuscany. And flowreth in May in the naturall places, the seede being ripe in Iuly.
The Names. I finde none of our moderne writers, to have made mention hereof, before Anguilara (who found it on the blacke hill by Ligourne, as is before said, and in his first kinde of Barba Iovis ) since Pliny, who speaketh thereof lib. 16. c. 18. that it shunned the waters, and was called Iovis Barba, and was fit to make hedges and border up beds, to be fra∣med into any worke in a Garden, and Caesalpinus since him. Camerarius onely nameth it, and so doth Clusius, but Lugdunensis describeth it, and lastly Bauhinus in his Pinax, and all of them by the name of Barba Iovis, and yet the Sedum majus, great Houseleeke is also called by that name, but to put a distinction betweene them, this is called Barba Iovis arbor or frutex. 
The Ʋertues. There is nothing extant of any Physicall property, whereunto this plant may be applyed, and therefore thus much shall be sufficient untill the Vertues be better knowne. 
CHAP. XLVIII. Periclymenum sive Caprifolium. Woodbind or Hony Suckles. W E have divers sorts of plants under the name of Periclymenum, some that are winding about whatsoever standeth next them, and for the most part knowne throughout the Land, others are strangers, or not so well knowne: there are likewise divers that winde not, but stand upright, which I would separate in sunder as Bauhinus doth, but not make them kindes of bastard Cherries as hee doth, but joyne them in name, although I disjoyne them by Chapter , both because they have notable differences, and that I might not trouble you or my selfe with too many sorts in one Chapter. 
1. Periclymenum sive Caprifolium vulgare. Our ordinary Woodbinde. Our common Woodbind is well knowne to grow up with a wooddy stalke and branches, winding themselves, yet without claspers, so stricktly unto whatsoever branch of any other tree, that it leaveth an impression therein of the winding, set with sundry leaves by couples, which are somewhat broad and long, round pointed, and of a whitish greene colour above, and more whitish underneath: at the toppes of the branches come forth many long and hollow whitish and yellow flowers, laid open before, with many small threds sticking in the middle of them, of a fine sweete sent: after which succeede small bunches of red berries, wherein is contained small hard seede: the roote is wooddy with many fibres. 
2. Periclymenum sive Caprifolium Germanicum flore tubello. The Germane red Honisuckle. This Germane sort groweth higher and larger spread then the former, but ramping in the like manner, with the like leaves, but somewhat larger as the flowers are also, being red in the bud before they be blowne open, and continuing reddish on the outside, the bottomes of the flowers being wholly white on the inside. 
3. Periclymenum perfoliatum sive Italicum. Double Woodbinde or Honisuckles. The double Hony suckle groweth in the same manner as the other, but spreadeth more and farther, with whi∣tish ramping branches, and such manner of whitish greene leaves set on both sides of the branches up to the tops, 1. Periclymenum sive Caprifolium vulgare. Woodbinde or Honysuckles. 
3. Periclymenum perfoliatum sive Italicum. The double Hony suckle. 
4. Chamaepericlymenum. The Dwarfe Honysuckle. 
where it beareth many flowers, at two or three severall distances one above another, with two round leaves under them, at the joynts joyned so close together, that they seeme like sawsers to hold the flowers, which stand in the middle, and are of the same fashion and colour with the former, that is of a whitish yellow colour, with open mouthes, dasht over with a light shew of purple, with reds within them likewise, and as sweete: this beareth seede likewise, but not so many together. 
4. Chamaeperis lymenum. Dwarfe Hony suckle. This Dwarfe Hony suckle hath a creeping roote, run∣ning here and there underground, and shooting up stalkes with sundry leaves set by couples at the joynts, full of veines, and with five ribs running all the lenth of the leafe to the end, which is pointed, smooth and not dented about the edges, from the toppes of the stalkes grow forth two branches, with foure or five such like leaves as grow be∣low, and from betweene the foote of them commeth a small tuft of flowers, (which were not observed) and af∣ter them many red berries set in a bunch or knob together, like the Mulberry, but longer, and therefore I thinke it should rather pertaine to the family of the Chamaemori, but that, as Clusius to shew, not only his love to Doctor Penny, in letting it passe by his name, but also his judgement thereof by the name, so I, untill I can have better know∣ledge of the Plant, must let it so passe, but with my cauti∣on. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth every where in this Land, in the hed∣ges abundantly. The second in Germany. The third in Italy, Spaine, Provence of France, &amp;c. Both it and the second are onely kept in our Gardens, or Orchards, or set against an house side to runne about the Windowes, where they keepe the roomes coole, and make a goodly shew without. The last was found by Doctor Penny, as Clusius saith, by D tzicke, who gave him both the figure and the descrip∣tion as it is here expressed. The first is in flower in Iune, and the fruite is ripe in August. The second and third earlier, both for the flower and fruite, yet we never saw fruite of the second to follow any of the flowers. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , but the Greekes in these dayes, , in Latine Periclymenum also, and Caprifolium, but Pliny mistaking the word Periclymenum, setteth downe the properties of Clymenum for it, with some Matrissylva, Ʋolucrum majus, and Lilium inter spinas, and Vinciboscum by Caesalpinus, according as his Itali∣ans called it. The first and third are called by all Authours that have written of them, either Periclymenum or Caprifolium, some entitle the first Germanicum, and some vuigare Septentrionalium, but the second is more right∣ly termed Germanicum, because I thinke no Country h th it naturally but that. The third is Perfoliatum alterum, or grandius &amp; Italicum. But the last was first set out by Clusius, and from him Tabermontanus, Gerard, Bauhinus, and my selfe have it. The Italians call it Vincibosco, the Spaniards Madreselua, the French Chenrefneille, the Ger∣mans Geyss bladt, and Speck gilgen, the Dutch Gheytenbladt, and Memmekens, and we in English Wood binde, and Honysuckle. 
The Ʋertues. We in our Land have by tradition continued so long in this errour to use the leaves, and flowers, in all gargles, and lotions for inflammations in the mouth, or the sore privy parts of man or woman, that I thinke the custome is growne too strong by time for me with a few words to shew the inconvenience, that it may be reformed, for they are neither cooling nor binding, as they are taken to be: but are of a clensing, resolving, consuming, and digesting quality, as Hyssope, O iganum, and Winter Savoury are, that with Figges and Licoris, are effectuall to expecto∣ e flegme from the chest and lungs, wherewith they are filled: and that it is not fit to be used in inflammations the very taste of the herbe holding a leafe in ones mouth will declare, by the burning heate will be felt therein, and as Dioscorides and Galen say, that the decoction thereof being drunke sixe dayes together, will render the urine blood: although at the first they will but provoke urine onely, the fruite and leaves as well as the flowers, are of one effect: but the flowers and leaves are of more use then the seede, which is said to consume the spleene, and procure a womans speedy delivery, but whereas it is said to bring barrennesse to men that use it, it cannot pro∣perly be said of men, but of women to be barren, and of men to be unable to generation, or their seede unprofita∣ble upon sundry causes: the leaves or flowers in pouther or the distilled water of them, is much commended to clense and dry up foule and moist ulcers, and to clense the face and skinne from morphew, sunburne, freckles, and other discolourings of the skinne. The oyle wherein the flowers have beene infused and sunned, is good against , convulsions of the sinnes, and palsies, and any other benumming cold griefe. The double Honysuckle may safely be used to all these purposes, when the other is not at hand. 
CHAP. XLIX. Periclymenum rectum. Vpright Woodbinde or Hony suckle. O F this kinde of Periclymenum, there are three or foure sorts, as you shall presently heare. 
1. Periclymenum rectum fructu rubro. Red berryed upright Honysuckle. The divers stalkes of this Hony suckle, are somewhat straight and upright, about three or foure foote high, at the least, divided and spread into divers branches, covered with a very thinne whi∣tish barke: the leaves stand by couples on the branches and two likewise at every joynt, which are of a whitish greene colour, smooth, and lesser then those of the former winding Woodbindes: the flowers also stand by couples at the end of short stalkes, that come forth from the joynts with the leaves, and are much smaller then the other, and never opening or spreading much, of a pale whitish colour, after which come two red berries, long with the roundnesse, both of a bignesse in the naturall places, and in some open places, and seldome so with us, for one is usually withered and never commeth to perfection. 
2. Periclymenum rectum fructu nigro. Blacke berried upright Honysuckle. This groweth not so high as the first, nor spreadeth so much but groweth greater in the stemme and more up∣right, whose barke is not so white: the leaves grow in the same manner, but are somewhat longer and den d about the edges, the flowers stand upon small stalkes, as in the former, two usually together, yet sometimes but one, of a more purplish colour, and somewhat lesser, unto whom succeed blacke berries, full of juyce, of no unplea∣sant taste: the roote in both are hard and wooddy. 
3. Periclymeno rectum fructu caeruleo. Blew berryed upright Honysuckles. This is also a low shrubbe rising not much higher then the last, the stemme being greater and covered with a rugged blackish barke with divers small branches thereon, the youngest being reddish at the first, and hoary with∣all: the leaves stand by couples as in the rest, somewhat like unto the first, of a drying and bitter taste, the flowers grow by couples, small and pale of colour, as the first, after which commeth but one berry usually, somewhat long and round, of a blewish colour with a sweete and little tart juyce within them, colouring the hands red that han∣dle them, and have within them many flat seede. 
4. Periclymenum rectum fructu rubro singulari majore. The greater upright Honysuckle. The leaves hereof are greater then any of the former, and pointed at the ends, set in the same manner by cou∣ples, on the low stalkes, that are not above a cubit high, and they are harder in handling, greene above and gray un∣derneath: the flowers stand by couples as in the rest, and are of a purplish white colour, or somewhat deeper some∣times but unto them succeede but one berry, the biggest of them all even as large as a cherry, red, sappy, and tran∣sparent, having two markes at the top, where the flowers grew, but containing within it but one seede. 
1. Periclymenum rectum fructu rubro. Red berryed upright Honysuckle. 
2. Periclymenum rectum fructu nigro. Blacke berryed upright Honysuckle.
The Place and Time. This groweth plentifully about Mompelier, and abideth well any where in our Country: it flowreth in Iuly, but we seldome see ripe fruite the eon. 
The Names. It is called Polemonium Monspeliensium by Gesner, Lobel, Cameratius and Lugdunensis, and Trifolium fruticans by Do∣donaeus and Tabermontanus, who also calleth it Ruta bacci∣fera sive trifolia, and Gesner Ruta capraria Gallorum Mon∣speliensium, and by some Iasminum luteum Italicum, yet Columna calleth it, Iasmini species trifolia non videtur ad Polemonium accedere, B sler in horto Eystetensi, sheweth one with foure leaves, that are greener, and not so sharpe pointed, and Bauhinus Iasminum luteum vulgo dictum, bac∣ciferum, who also giveth this note of it, that at Mompeli∣er it is often found but with one leafe alone upon a stalke, although in Gardens it hath three. It is very doubtfull whe∣ther it should be the Polemonium of Dioscorides or no, for you have here the judgement of Columna, non videtur ad P lemonium accedere, although Lobel wou d make it agree in all things. Some would make it therefore a Cytisus, but it agree h thereto in nothing, but in having three leaves to∣gether. We cannot learne what Italian, French, or Dutch name it hath, but in English it may be called Shrubbe Tre∣foile, according to the Latine, but Gerard saith, it is called Make bare, yet I know not where nor by whom: it is usu∣ally called now adaies the yellow Iasmine from the likenesse of the flowers. 
The Vertues. We know not of any knowne property it hath for certaine, and therefore to give you the particular Vertues of Polemonium, when as peradventure not any one can belong thereunto, were needelesse, and the ground of a great errour. 
CHAP. LII. Syringa. The Pipe tree. A Lthough I have shewed you these five sorts of Pipe trees in my former Booke, yet I thinke it not unfit to present you with them againe here, and give you a full description of that sort that was de∣fective there. 
1. Lilac Matthioli sive Syringa flore caeruleo. The blew Pipe tree or Lilac. The blew Pipe tree riseth sometimes to be as great as a meane apple, yet usually it groweth no∣thing so great, having oftentimes suckers rising from the roote, the younger branches being covered with a grayish greene barke, and the elder with a darker, having within them a pith like the Elder, with two faire broad, smooth deepe greene leaves, small pointed at the ends, set at every joynt, which are some distance one from another, many of them folding the leaves inwards, standing on long footestalkes: at the toppes of many of the branches come forth many long hollow blewish purple flowers, ending in five leaves, in a long tuft toge∣ther, 1. Lilac seu Syringa flore caeruleo. The blew Pipe tree or Lilac. 
3. Syringa Persica sive Lilac folijs incisis Persicum, Iasminum Persicum dictum. The blew Persian Iasmine or Pipe tree. 
4 Syringa flore alba simplici. The single white Pipe tree. 
5. Syringa Arabica flore duplici. The double white Pipe tree. 
hanging downe, and are of a small sent; the flowers being past, there come sometimes, but not often in our Country, long and flat cods, consisting as it were of two sides, with a thin skin in the middle, wherein are contai∣ned two long flattish red seede: the rootes are strong and grow deepe in the ground. 
2. Lilac sive Syringa flore lacteo sive argenteo. The silver coloured Pipe tree. This Pipe tree differeth not from the former, either in stemme or branch, either in leafe or flowers, or manner of growing from the last, but onely in the colour of the flower, which is of a milky silver colour, which hath a shew of blew therein, comming somewhat neere unto an ashcolour. 
3. Syringa Persica sive Lilac Persicum incisis folijs Iasminum Persicum dictum. The blew Persian Iasmine or Pipe tree. This Persian Iasmine (or Persian Lilac, whether you will) is a shrub, or shrubby plant, never rising into a tree like the former, yeelding many twigges, or stems and suckers from the roote, whose wood is soft having a pith in the middle, as the other, seldome rising above a mans height, having a smooth blackish greene barke, with sundry winged leaves thereon, on all sides, some whereof as well those below as above, will be whole without any division therein, resembling a Privet leafe, others will be cut in on the one side or the other, or both, and di∣vers will be halfe like, or wholly like the posture, and divisions of the Catalonian Iasmine resembling it so neerely that thereby it came to be called a Iasmine: at the toppes of the sprigs and branches stand many tufts of flowers, in a long spike, of foure leaves a peece, so like unto the former Lilac, that at the first view of them you may truely, desine it to be a Lilac, the colour onely excepted, which in this is more purplish, and of as sweete a sent or ra∣ther stronger: after the flowers are past, follow the like small long blackish seede, inclosed in somewhat long and pointed huskes like the former but lesser. This doth in every part, except the growth and leaves, come neerest to our ordinary Lilac, and doth in nothing but the leaves resemble a Iasmine: for both the wood is white and pithy and the flowers grow in tufts or spikes, and appeare in May when no Iasmine doth, but the Lilac: the seed like∣wise is contained in hard huskes, as the Lilac and not as the Iasmine, like a Lupine, of a soft substance, and lastly the taste of this is somewhat harsh, with some astriction in the end, and the Iasmine hath a bitter sharpe biting taste, and very astringent withall. Yet as I said before, this is most likely to be Serapio his blew Iasmine. The roote spreadeth many branches with fibres to them, under ground, and may very well be propagated by the suckers: this holdeth his greene leaves in the Winter, no more then the others doe. 
This assuredly is the Iasminum caeruleum of Serapio, whereof formerly there was great doubt among Herbarists whether there were such a thing in rerum natura, very many denying it, because they either never saw this or ne∣ver considered it. 
4. Syringa flore albo simplici. The single white Pipe tree. This Bush never beareth any great stem or body, but shooteth forth most usually many pliant brownish twigs or shootes, and grayish when they grow elder, being pithy in the middle like the former, at each joynt stand two leaves somewhat like the former, but more rugged or crumpled, a little pointed at the ends, and dented about the edges: the flowers grow at the toppes of the branches, many set together, consisting of foure leaves, as large as the Muske Roses, and of the same creame colour, with many small yellow threds in the middle, of a strong sweet, full and heady sent, not pleasing to a great many, by reason of the strong quickenesse of the sent: after which followeth the fruite, flat at the head, with many leafy scales compassing it, wherein is enclosed small long seed: the rootes runne not deepe into the ground, but spread with many fibres thereat. 
5. Syringa Arabica flore duplici. The double white Pipe tree. The double Pipe tree from a short thicke stumpe, not rising high above the ground, shooteth forth divers long and slender branches, whereon grow large leaves, somewhat like unto the last, but not so rough or hard, nor den∣ted at all about the edges, two alwaies standing one against another at the joynts, but set or disposed on contrary sides, and not upon two onely; at the ends whereof come forth three or foure flowers, every one on a stalke by it selfe, which are long and hollow below, like the white Iasmine, and have a double row of white round poin∣ted leaves; five or sixe in a row at the toppe, seeming like unto a double white Iasmine flower but larger, with some yellownesse in the middle, which is hollow, of a very strong and heady sweete sent like the single kinde, and abide long flowring, especially in the hotter Countries, but is very tender, and not abiding the least cold wea∣ther with us, the cold windes greatly molesting it in the hotter Countries, and must therefore be kept with us as charily as Orenge trees, or rather more. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in Arabia as Matthiolus thinketh, who had it from Constantinople: but now is plentifully to be found in many Gardens of our Land as well as others. The second is a stranger with us as yet. The third is very like to come first out of Persia, as the name importeth, it is now to be seene with Master Tradescant, at South Lambeth. The fourth is almost as frequent as the first, but the originall place is not certainely knowne. The last hath the originall from Arabia, as the name importeth. The first, second, and third, doe flower in May, the fourth in June, and the last later. 
The Names. Some have taken these to be kindes of Iasmines, and that therefore the Arabians Sambac, doth as fitly agree to these as to the Iasmines, for Caesalpinus taketh the first, which Matthiolus called Lilac, and so divers others after him, to be the Iasminum caeruleum Mauritanorum, or the Ligustrum Orientale (neither of which it can be, for the Cyprus Plinij, as I have shewed you before, may most fitly be called by that name, and the blew Iasmine is as I said very probable to be the third, which we call the Persian Iasmine) Clusius, Camerarius and others, call it Syringa caerulea, and Lobel and others Syringa caerulea Lusitanica, it is thought that Bellonius understandeth this plant, where he saith that the Turkes have a shrub with Ivy leaves alwayes greene, bearing violet blew flowers on a long spi∣ked stalke many together, of the bignesse and fashion of a Foxetale, and thereupon called Foxetale in their tongue, yet this of ours beareth not greene leaves in Winter, as Bellonius saith. lib. 3. c. 50. that doth, whether it doe there∣in differ from ours, or whether he be mistaken, it resteth doubtfull. Some as Lugdunensis saith, have taken this plant to be the Ostrys or Ostrya, of Theophrastus, because it beareth small seede like unto Barley, and some would have the white Syringa here set forth, to be his Ostrys likewise for the same cause, but I have shewed you the true Ostrys Theorhrasti before, as Clusius hath sufficiently declared it. The second is remembred in no Authour but the hortus Eystetensis. The third is called by Prosper Alpinus, in his Booke de plantis exoticis Ligustrum nigru , by which name it came first to Bauhinus, as he saith, out of Italy, and afterwards from Signiour Contareni his Gar∣den, by the name of Syringa laciniatis folijs, which he altereth to Ligustrum laciniatis folijs, but it seemeth he had but onely a branch to see, without flower, as it is in his description, and therefore could not further determine up∣on it, but I have often seene it both in and out of flower, and doe here give you both a full and true description of the plant, and the name that both we and Iacobus Cornutus set it out by, in his Booke of Canada plants, viz. Agem∣lilag Persarum, which as he saith signifieth Lilac Persicum. Agem enim Persideni significat, &amp; Lilac florem, but came to us by the name of Iasminum Persicum, because many of the leaves are formed very like those of Iasminum Catolonicum, as I have shewed you in the description, yet the truest name to be imposed on it, is Lilac Persicum, as I have before shewed you, and this is that Lilac laciniatis folijs, that J gave you understanding of in my former Booke. The fourth is called Frutex coronarius by Clusius, and Syringa alba by all other Authours but Lobel, who calleth it Syringa Italica, not that he ever saw it growing naturally wilde in Italy, but that he there found it very frequent in their Gardens, Bauhinus calleth it Syringa alba sive Phyladelphus Athenaei. The last is called Sambac Arabum sive Iasminum ex Gine, so that it may not unfitly be referred to either, it is called Syringa Italica flore albo pleno, by Besler, who set out the great Garden of the Bishop of Eystot, although Bauhinus seeme to make two sorts of it, as his custome is in many other things, which it is likely he never saw, but upon Alpinus his resembling the leaves unto those of the Orenge tree, for thereby he maketh his distinction. We may call it in English, either the double white Syringa or Pipe tree, or the double white Iasmine, according as it is in Latine, which you will, although the single white hath nothing the like resemblance in the flower to a Iasmine. 
The Ʋertues. There is no use of any of these in Physicke, that I know, and are but as ornaments in a Garden, and for the beauty and sweetenesse of the flowers there cherished, unlesse any would make a perfume of the flowers, by in∣fusing them in the Sunne with oyle of sweete Almonds, or draw a Chymicall oyle out from the said flowers, by distillation, onely the last Alpinus sheweth the Egyptians doe use more for ornament to trimme up and perfume themselves, then for to helpe them in their diseases, neverthelesse, they make saith he an oyle thereof, which their women use in their bathings to mollifie the hardnesse and warme the coldnesse of the mother, for by their experience they have found it to be very helpefull for hard kernels and tumours in the flesh, and to cause a more easie and speedy delivery in travaile of childbirth by drinking this oyle warme and annoynting the wombe also: Some use likewise to drinke that oyle warme, and to annoint the stomacke outwardly therewith, against the cough and shortnesse of breath, and against the dangerous pleurisie, where one can hardly bring up the flegme, or their spittle, and against Impostumations in the lungs, and against the violent paines in the stomacke, bowels, or privities: the oyle is made after the manner aforesaid, either with oyle of Almonds or Sesamum, and the flowers steeped and sunned. 
CHAP. LIII. 1. Oleander sive Laurus Rosea. The Rose bay or Oleander. T Here is of this Rosebay two sorts, the one with 1. Oleander flore rubro. The Rose bay with red flowers. 
crimson coloured flowers, the other with white, which are both so like in leafe and growing, that very hardly they can be distinguished, before they be in flower, and therefore one description shall serve for them both, and so might one figure also, but that I had them both ready cut in my hand, as I had many others, that are inserted into this Worke. The stemme or trunke hereof groweth in rime with us (but much more in the hotter cli∣mates) to be as big below as a reasonable mans wrist, and di∣videth it selfe upwards into many stalkes, three for the most part rising at a place and from each of them likewise, three o∣ther branches, and so by degrees from three to three, as long as it groweth, the lowest part of the branches being bare with∣out leaves, and keeping them only at the tops al the Winter, be∣ing long &amp; somewhat narrow, more like to those of the Peach, then Bay tree, but thicker and harder, of a darke greene above and yellowish below, the flowers come forth at the tops one∣ly of the branches, of a deepe crimson colour while they are in the bud, and being blowne consist of foure long and narrow leaves, with round ends, somewhat twining themselves, of a paler red colour, tending to a deepe blush, and in the other are white, without any mixture of other colour therein, but the greene leaves are paler or fresher: after which come long ooked pods, hard or wooddy almost on the outside, and browne in the hot Countries, but was never seene to beare ripe pods. I thinke in our Country wherein is contained brow∣nish flat seede, wrapped in a great deale of most fine brownish yellow downe, as fine almost as silke, the pods being somewhat like unto the pods of Asclepias or Periploca, but larger, flatter, and harder. 
1. Oleander flore albo. The Rose bay with white flowers.
2. Nerij facie arbor Indica. An Oleander-like Indian tree. 
 
2. Nerijfacie arbor Indica. An Indian Oleander-like tree. Because Lobel onely hath set forth this branch comparing it to the Oleander, I thought good to joyne it next thereunto, although wee have no further knowledge thereof then his relation which is thus. Seven or nine of these together like unto sheathes of leather, a foote, or a foote and a halfe long, every one of them resembling a slender Lamprey, did hang downe from one place of the branch, which was like a pithy Marsh Elder knotty pale browne sticke, so neerely resembling the cast skin of a Snake, or the dead body it selfe, that it might very well fright children therewith, although stuffed on the inside with woolly skins, at the same knot with these skins came forth some flowers, growing out of small huskes, as the figure expresseth them unto you. 
The Place and Time. The first with red flowers groweth in Greece, Spaine, Italy, &amp;c. in many places but that with white in no place but Candy, that we can heare of, and flower in Iuly, the other is an unknowne stranger. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , Nerium, and Rhodendron, and Rhododaphnes, and so also in Latine by most Authours, but Laurus Rosea by Apuleius and Lobel, and Rhododaphne by Camerarius. The last is so entituled and desciphered as I here set it downe. 
The Ʋertues. We have nothing to relate of the last, but of the Rose bay, Dioscorides saith it is death to Mules, Dogs, Asses, and many other foure footed beasts, that shall eate thereof, but that it helpeth men that are stung by Serpents, the leaves and flowers, being taken in Wine, but Galen octo, simplicium, seemeth contrary hereunto, saying that out∣wardly applyed, it hath a digesting property, but inwardly taken it is deadly, both to man and all sorts of cattle. Matthiolus therefore to reconcile these two sayings, finely defineth Dioscorides, to understand such men as are bitten or stung by Serpents, Galen by such as are in health and not stung: For after the same manner, Cantharides saith Avicen, doth helpe those that are bitten by a mad dogge, and Euphorbium by the Scorpion, and so likewise divers other dangerous or deadly medicines, resist the venome of other things: But Cordus would interpret it an∣other way, that is, that taken inwardly it was poyson, but outwardly applyed it did resist it, and saith more∣over that the flowers are deadly, but in some places and at some times. Yet Dioscorides words are plaine, in∣wardly taken and drunke in Wine, with some Rue, and so Pliny also relateth it, as taken from Dioscorides. Ga∣len saith that the chiefe Champions in Wrastling and Running had their backes paid with Rose bayes. The Ho∣ney of Pontus also was accounted deadly, because the Bees there fed on the flowers hereof, as well as on those of Acomite. Lucius Apuleius in his Asses forme, and Lucian also, as they write of themselves, had like to have caught their banes by mistaking the flowers, hereof for Roses, which should have holpen them. 
CHAP. LIV. Cytisus. Tree Trefoile. H Aving in the last Chapter shewed you a Trefoile Iasmine, which some as I said, take to be a Cytisus. I thinke it not amisse to set downe the kindes of Cytisus, next unto it, and because there is such di∣versity among them, I would distinguish them into two sorts, that is, into the right Cytisus, and those that come neerest unto it: and into a bastard kinde, that is some that are very unlike in ma∣ny things, although like in some, and others like in many yet unlike in some: the sweetnesse in their taste and whitenesse in their leaves and stalkes▪ declaring their nighnesse unto the true sort: their blacknesse and bitternesse, to the bastard kindes: of the first we will speake in this Chapter, and of the other in the next. 
1. Cytisus Galeni creditus, Maranthae Cornutus. The supposed true Cytisus or horned tree Trefoile. This Cytisus (as Galen saith groweth to the height of the Myrtle, or as Pliny, Columella, and Straboto, to the heighth of a meane tree) which many tooke as Lugdunensis saith, for no other then the Medica Lunata, and is yet described by Besler, as it grew in the Bishop of Eystot his Garden (to be in some sort answerable to what Matthio∣lus setteth forth of it, for acknowledging his former errour, in mistaking the Trifolium caballinum to be Cytisus, and finding in Galen Cytisus was a shrub and not an herbe, he sheweth this plant, which he received from Cortu∣sus as the right, and therefore could be no Medica, which is a small creeping herbe, as all the sorts are) and grow∣eth to be two cubits high, covered with a grayish or ash-coloured barke, the wood whereof is firme and hard: the leaves are hoary white, as is the whole shrub, and grow without order three together on long footestalkes: the flowers are of a gold yellow shining colour like unto Broome: the seede groweth in broad crooked cods. 
2. Cytisus Creticas incanus sive Ebenus Cretica Belli. Candy tree Trefoile, or Candy Ebony. This Candy plant riseth up to above a mans height, that is, foure or five cubits growing writhed or crooked, and of the thicknesse of ones arme, covered with an ash-coloured barke, the leaves are gray or white, longer and nar∣rower then the former, and grow not alwayes three, but sometimes foure or five, upon a long footestalke, the flowers grow at the ends of the branches, in a tuft together like unto those of the Medow Trefoile, or common three leaved grasse, of a gold red colour, and greater then they: in the middle of each flower stand many silver white shining threds, as fine as haires, set in grayish huskes, wherein the seed is enclosed afterwards, which is like unto that Trefoile likewise: the wood is very firme and massie, and of the colour of blacke Ebony, from whence Honorius Belli, did call it so. 
3. Cytisus incanus Germanicus. The Germane hoary tree Trefoile. This Germane Cytisus shooteth from the roote sundry slender hoary stalkes, with three somewhat long leaves, at sundry places of them somewhat hoary also on the backeside, more then on the upper part, the middle rib being somewhat great, of a kind of sweetish taste, and a little sweete in sent also: the flowers are yellow like the other sorts or Broome flowers, standing many together one above 1. Cytisus Gyleni creditus Maranthae Cornutus. The supposed true Cytisus or tree Trefoile. 
another at the end of the branches, after which follow hai∣ry, and somewhat hoary, little long, narrow and flat cods, containing therein small seed like broome, tasting like a Vetch: the roote is wooddy, dispersing it selfe under ground divers wayes. 
4. Cytisus Hispanicus arboreus. The Spanish tree Cytisus, or tree Trefoile. This Cytisus riseth up with one stemme usually, covered with a darke grayish barke to the height of a man, saith Clu∣sius in Spaine, but higher with us, spreading sundry short branches all about, whereon are small pale greenish Trefoile leaves, on the upper side, and set with a little reddish hairy∣nesse underneath, the yellow flowers are somewhat longer then others, and come forth at the foote of the leaves, in sundry places, usually two or three at a place, which turne into small short and flat cods, lesser then Broome cods, and somewhat blackish when they are ripe containing small flat and blackish seed within them: as small as Broome seed, as we have observed them, although Clusius saith hee saw none. 
5. Cytisus incanus major folijs pinnatis sive quinti species altera Clusij. The great hairy tree Trefoile. This groweth greater and more upright then the third by much, whose branches also are thicker and more hairy: the leaves are twise as big, the flowers of a deeper gold yellow colour and the cods larger. 
6. Cytisus Hispanicus incanus sive sextus Clusij. The low Spanish hoary Cytisus. The shootes of this Cytisus are not above halfe a yard long, slender and hoary, whose Trefoile leaves on them have the two lowest smaller then the middlemost, which is twise as long, but of an hoary ash-colour, standing on short foote∣stalkes, of an astringent drying taste, the flowers stand with 2. Cytisus Creticus incanus sive Ebenus Cretica Belli. Candy tree Trefoile or Candy Ebony. 
3. Cytisus incanus Germanicus. The Germane hoary tree Trefoile. 
4 Cytisus Hispanicus arboreus. The Spanish tree Cytisus or tree Trefoile. 
6. Cytisus Hispanicus sextus Clusij. The low Spanish hoary Cistus. 
7. Cytisus Austriacus sive septimus Clusij. The Austrian or Hungarian low Cytisus. 
10. Cytisus octavus Gerardi. Gerard his eighth Cytisus: 
the leaves at the joynts all along the branches, two or three together sustained by soft hoary white huskes, where∣in they stand, why Gerard should call this kinde semper virens, and his Corrector after him so to let it passe, I know not, for neither Clusius first set it forth, not any since him that have written of it, have so related it.
7. Cytisus Austriacus sive septimus Clusij. The Austrian or Hungarian low Cytisus. The slender lithy twigges of this Cytisus are pliable and hard to be broken, lying on or neare the ground, which are bare of leaves, unto the branches whereon they stand without order upon long footestalkes, shorter and gree∣ner then those of the third or Germane sort, and more hairy, greenish above and gray underneath: the flowers grow two or three at a joynt as the last and at the ends of the branches also, yellow at the first, but before they are quite past, turne more gold yellow, so deepe that they seeme red withall: the cods are small flat and hairy, with small browne seede within them. 
8. Cytisus Pannonicus sive septimi species altera Clusij The hoary low Cistus. This is somewhat like the last in the slender pliable twigs, leaning downe to the ground and leaves like them: the flowers also are like unto them, but stand foure or five together, at the ends of the branches, and not at the joynts as in the last: the cods and seede differ not there-from, but the leaves are a little hoary, and so are the cods also. 
9. Cytisus albicans Alpinus. The whitish mountaine Cytisus. There is little difference in this, as by the notes thereof appeareth from others in the branches or leaves, but that at some places two or three trefoile leaves, are set at a joynt, and the flowers are paler. 
10. Cytisus octavus Gerardi. Gerard his eighth Cytisus. Gerard and his Corrector after him, mention this Cytisus as taken from Lobel and Pena, when as it agreeth with neither of those that are extant in their Adversaria, neither doth Bauhinus quote him for it, as he doth all others that he knew; for the eighth of Tabermontanus, which might seeme to be this, Bauhinus noteth to be his hirsutus: the chiefest difference therein as Gerard saith, is in the leaves, which are a little dented on the edges, which yet are not seene in the figure. 
The Place and Time. The first of these Bartholmeus Maranta found in Naples, and Honorius Bellus in Candy, as he did the second also: all the rest, except the sixth and last were found by Clusius in Hungary, Austria, and the parts thereabout: they all flower in the Spring of the yeare, but some earlier and some later, and give their seede in August and Sep∣tember. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and Cytisus in Latine, a Cythnio insula, as Pliny saith, from whence it was carryed to the Cyclades, to the Greekes, and after to the Latines, for the wonderfull fruitfullnesse it procureth both in men and cattle, but especially in their heards and flockes: the former times as Matthiolus and Tragus shew, by their mistakings of the true Cytisus, were smally verst in the knowledge of plants, in that hot the most part, whatso∣ever herbe offered it selfe next to hand, that had but some shew like the true, it was presently accepted for true, although after upon better examination it proved farre short thereof. The first of these is the Cytisus Maranthae of Matthiolus, Lobel, Lugdunensis, and all others, and taken by Camerarius and others, to be the Cytisus verus of Galen, Dioscorides, &amp;c. the Italian Pena, confounded this and the next together, as Bellus seemed to doe also, in calling it Cytisus Creticus, which he said is like unto that of Marantha, yea it is the same as he thought, having the like crooked cods, to be the Ebenus Cretica, but he afterwards corrected himselfe, in that it differeth much in the heads of flowers and seede, from that of Marantha, but Bauhinus saith, he received from Bellus branches of each of these to shew the difference, so that this first is the Lignum Rhodium, or Cytisus verus. And the second is that which he first called Cytisus Creticus, and by the Cretanes Arch ntoxylum, that is, nobile lignum, which for distinctions sake he calleth Ebenus Cretica. The third is the first Cytisus of Clusius in his history, and the Cytisus prior of Lobel, and likewise the Cytisus albus sylvestris of Cordus in his History, although Bauhinus doth sever them into three sorts, as who so will heedefully marke them, shall soone see that there is no such difference in them, to cause them so to be severed. The fourth is the third Cytisus of Clusius, which Lobel and Lugdunensis call quartus Hispanicus, because it is so in his Spanish Observations, but we take them all in this worke, according to the numbers expressed in his History of plants, as I have shewed you in divers places before. The foure last sorts have in their titles, the number that you shall finde them in Clusius. 
The Ʋertues. The leaves of all these sorts (for it is probable they doe not one differ from another) are cooling, and doe dis∣perse tumours, and hard swellings, if they shall be beaten with bread and so applyed, the decoction of them be∣ing drunke, provoketh urine, for as Galen saith, the leaves have a digesting quality, with some temperate humi∣dity in them also, as Mallow leaves have, Columella sheweth that in former ages, there was much profit made by the feeding of sheepe herewith to give store of milke, and not onely to fatten them, but Bullockes and Goates al∣so, and Hens, and all other sorts of cattell: but was planted also for Bees to feede on, as from whence they did gather more honey, then from any other plant whatsoever, and besides it abideth greene eight moneths of the yeare for their pasture, and may be kept dry the rest of the yeare following, as the dry fodder: if women that be Nurses have not any store of milke in their brests, let them steepe some of the leaves and young branches hereof in faire water all night, and being strained forth in the morning, let them take three parts thereof, with a fourth of wine, which will breede good store of milke in them, and make their children strong and able: the dryed leaves steeped all night in water, and boyled afterwards, strained and drunke is as effectuall as the juyce. 
CHAP. LV. Pseudocytisus. The bastard or base tree Trefoile. T Here are divers sorts also of this base or bastard kinde to shew you, whereof one is the most adulterate of them all, which therefore shall be last exprest. 
1. Pseudocytisus Hispanicus primus. The first Spanish base tree Trefoile. This first base tree Trefoile groweth up to the height of a small tree, whose body and branches are covered with a grayish barke, the younger twigges being hoary white, the leaves are many, and smaller then in any other sort of Cytisus, three alwayes set on a stalke, of a pale greene colour, and abiding in the Winter, con∣trary to any of the rest, of a bitterish taste, the flowers are yellower and smaller then Broome flowers, standing as it were spike fashion at the end of the branches, after which come rough hairy long pods, wherein is thicke flattish blacke seede, smaller then that of Broome: the roote is wooddy and spreadeth divers wayes, the wood is firme and yellowish. 
2. Pseudocytisus Hispanicus secundus. The second Spanish base tree Trefoile. This second Spanish sort, riseth not much above a yard high, full of shootes from the rootes, which are branched forth and wholly white, having hoary Trefoile leaves, never open but as it were folded together, the middle rib being great, of an extreame bitter taste: the deepe yellow flowers, are somewhat sweete and stand at the end of the branches like the former and the pods that follow are long and rough, of a blackish purple colour, the points being turned downewards, with greater and blacker seede in them: the roote is like the former. 
3. Pseudocytisus niger. Blacke base tree Trefoile. This base tree Trefoile groweth with the limber pliant shootes, it bringeth forth not so high, but straighter and greater then the last, the barke of them being of a darke grayish colour, beset with small Trefoile leaves, somewhat round, and a little bitter in taste, and of a darke greenish colour, the flowers grow at the toppes of the stalkes many together spike fashion, of a yellow colour and pretty sweete sent, like unto honey, the cods that fol∣low are somewhat long and flat, with brownish seede in them. 
4. Pseudocytisus folijs subrotundis. Base tree Trefoile with roundish leaves. The stem hereof hath sundry branches growing forth from it, and set with small roundish darke greene leaves, upon very short footestalkes: the flowers, are smaller then those of Broome, and yellow, but more store set toge∣ther at the ends of the branches, then the smallnesse of the plant might seeme to beare, of a pretty sweete sent and a pulselike taste, the pods and seede are small like the last. 
5. Pseudocytisus Hispanicus Bauhini. Bauhinus his Spanish base tree Trefoile. This Spanish base tree Trefoile hath hard round striped stalkes, foure or five foote high, branched into sundry branches, somewhat woolly, stored with divers small Trefoile leaves, of a pale greene colour, the flowers are small and yellow like the others, unto which succeede many small pods like unto those of Birds-foote, three, foure, or five joyned together on a stalke, with small flat blackish seede in them: this is not the same with the first of these base tree Trefoiles here set downe being much different. 
6. Cytisus facie quibusdam Alissum fruticans. A Cytisus-like unlike plant. Because others before me have placed this plant as last of the Cytisus, so must I for this time, which else might 1. Pseudocytisus Hispanicus primus. The first Spanish base tree Trefoile. 
Pseudocytisus Hispanicus secundus. The second Spanish base tree Trefoile. 
3. Pseudocytisus niger. Blacke base tree Trefoile. 
4. Pseudocytisus folijs subrot ndis Base tree Trefoile with roundish leaves. 
in some sort have beene set with the other Alyssa, the de∣scription 6. Cytisus facie quibusdam Alissum fruticans. A Cytisus-like unlike plant. 
whereof is thus. From a tough wooddy rootes grow up sundry pliant hoary greene stalkes, spreading into branches, set with divers hoary greene leaves together, con∣trary to all the other Cytisi s, yet each leafe by it selfe, some∣what like unto them, but thicker and hairy also, the flowers are many and yellow, that stand at the toppes, spike fashion, composed of foure leaves like to Stocke Gilloflowers, after which come seedes in round pods. 
The Place and Time. Three of these grow in Spaine, the former two found by Clusius, and the last by some other, the other two in France and Germany, and flower and seede in the time of the for∣mer.
The Names. The first of these is the first Cytisus of Clusius, which Lo∣bel and Lugdunensis call Cytisus Hispanicus primus, by Dodo∣naeus Pseudocytisus prior, and Bauhinus Cytisus minoribus folijs ramulis tenellis vill sis. The second is Clusius his second Cy∣tisus, called also Cytisus secundus Hispanicus by Lobel and Lugdunensis, and by Dodonaeus Pseudocytisus alter. The third is the Pseudocytisus seu niger Cordi, the Cytisus niger sive major of Camerarius. The fourth Cytisus of Clusius, the Cytisus minor of Gesner, which Lugdunensis calleth Cytisus Gesneri, and by Bauhinus Cytisus glaber nigricans. The fourth is the Cytisus alter minor of Lobel, which Eystetensis calleth Trifolium arborescens. The last Bauhinus onely hath descri∣bed in his Prodromus, by the same title I doe here give it you. 
The Ʋertues. We have nothing recorded of any particular, any of these base shrubbes are indued withall, and although some may thinke, that they are of the same quality with the former, I am not of that opinion, in regard they are all much more bitter then the former, and some intensively bitter, which can be no helpe to encrease milke, in any creature, nor yet to fatten them as the former doe. 
CHAP. LVI. Cupressus. The Cypresse tree. S Ome doe make two sorts of Cipresse trees, the male and the female, the one that spreadeth more then the other, which groweth more upright, not much differing in any thing else, which ma∣keth me thinke the diversity riseth from the soyle or some casualty, and that the male which sprea∣deth is not a distinct species, which preserveth the kinde naturally as all other things doe, especially seeing as Theophrastus saith, the one doth degenerate into the other, and that both doe beare nuts and seede alike. I shall therefore under one make mention of both sorts, if they be so, and shew you that the Cypresse groweth to be a great tall upright tree, spreading out the branches so even round about, that it seemeth to be so formed by Art, being small below, not farre above the ground, then spreading out larger, yet keeping a round close compasse and afterwards spiring up to the toppe, lesse and lesse, very well representing a Piramis or Spire steeple, the body and armes are covered with a reddish barke, the leaves are ever green, but loosing much of the verdure in Winter, which it regaineth the next Spring after, and somewhat long, slender, and flattish round, parted very much and somewhat resembling Savine, of a resinous sent and strong taste: some trees are seene in some places to be more spreading in their branches, and not abiding so close, especially when they grow old, and doe beare their small yellow flowers, and their fruite, or nuts, as they are called afterwards, which grow here and there among the boughs, cloven or opening into divers parts growing ripe, but close and hard while they are young, of a russet browne colour, wherein are contained small brownish seede, but not so small as motes in the Sunne, as Matthiolus and others make them to be: the roote spreadeth much, but not very deepe: the wood is reddish, very firme and durable, not subject to corruption or wormes, but defending all other things, by the strong heady sent it hath, from all mothes and wormes, it yeeldeth out of the body of the tree, a kinde of liquid Rossen, like unto that of the Larche and Turpentine trees, of a very quicke and sharpe taste. 
2. Cupressus Americana. The Cipresse tree of America. Although I doe not take this to be a true Cipresse tree, yet because it hath obtained that name by all our travel∣lers into the hether or Northerne parts of America, where it is found in sundry Countries thereof, let me joyne it here, untill by a better regard I may place it in a fitter. It groweth in some places to be a very goodly tall tree, fifty, sixty, yea eighty foote high, without any branch, and neere three fathome compasse at the lower end, and then spreadeth sundry large armes and branches, beset with many winged leaves, which are very fine, small, smooth, plaine, and not square, crumpled or plaited as the true Cipresse is, and somewhat longer also, set on both sides of the stalkes, without any certaine order, being not alwaies opposite: the nuts are somewhat like those of the Cipresse but greater, with thicker, more open scales and greater seede within them. The wood smelleth some∣what what sweete, which in part caused it to be termed a Ci∣presse. 1. Cupressus major sive sativus, The Cypresse tree. 
Whether this should be that Thuja, of Theophra∣stus, lib. 8. c. 15. that is both in stocke, branches, leaves, and fruite, like unto the wild Cipresse, it were somewhat worthy to be scanned, whose fruite it is likely, is that Habhel, that Paludanus brought home with him in his returne from his travailes, and said it was so called in the East Countries, the fi∣gure, whereof I here give you with this branch: the nut it selfe doth much resemble the nut of this, both for forme and large thickenesse of the scales. This looseth his leaves in Winter. 
The Place and Time. The ordinary Cypresse tree, groweth in sundry of the warme Countries, of the Levant, astwards, and in many of the Isles likewise in the Mediterranean Sea, as Rhodes, and Candy, where it is so familiar to the soile, that it sprin∣geth up every where, of it owne accord, in the Mountaines Ida, and Leuce, if the ground be stirred a little, and that nothing else be sowne thereon, and beareth ripe fruite from September, almost all the Winter. The other is as is said, in sundry Countries of the North America, whose seede was brought by Master Tradescant from Ʋirginia, and sown here, doe spring very bravely. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke and , id est, a partu parilium ramorum, in Latine Cypressus, and Cupressus also. The Arabians call it Suro, and Seru, the Italians Cypresso, the Spaniards El Cypres, the French, Dutch, and English, Cypres, and the Germanes Cypressen. 
The Ʋertues. The Cypresse cooleth, bindeth, and dryeth without either heate or biting sharpenesse, but so much as may put the a∣cerbity in action, yet it doth resolve and consume humidi∣ties, in putride ulcers, the pouther of the leaves with a little Myrrhe and wine, helpeth those fluxes that fall on the blad∣der, and provoketh urine being stopped, and without Myrrhe the fluxes also of the belly 2. Cupressus Americana, an Thuja Theophrasti Cupresso similis, cujus fructus Habhel hu c assimilatur. The American, or Virginia Cypresse with the fruite Habhel of Clusius which is like unto this. 
or stomacke, bleedings, and spit∣tings of blood: the decoction of them, performeth the same like∣wise, it helpeth also the cough, and shortnesse of breath, by taking fasting a small draught, and if the like draught be taken every mor∣ning for many daies together, it will helpe the rupture, so as some of the fresh leaves be applyed also to the place, and well bound on; which things the nuts do performe more effectually, and in all fluxes of blood and humours: the small chips or rasping of the wood, ta∣ken in Wine provoketh womens courses, and helpeth the biting of the Scorpion, as also procureth a good colour to the whole body: the leaves bruised and laid unto fresh wounds that bleede much, doth stanch the bleeding, and so consolidateth the wound: being u∣sed by themselves, or with fine Barley meale, it helpeth Saint An∣thonies fire, creeping ulcers, and carbuncles and the sores and ulcers of the privy parts in man or wo∣man, and helpeth the inflammati∣ons of the eyes, and applyed with a cerote to the stomacke doth much comfort and strengthen it against castings, and other the passions thereof upon defluxions of sharpe humours thereon, the leaves beaten with some dry figges, doe mollifie the hardnesse of tumours, and of the testi∣cles, and consumeth the Polypus of the nose, which is an excressence or peece of flesh growing therein: the same also boyled in vinegar and made up with the meale of Lupines, causeth rugged nailes to fall away, and helpeth the tooth ache, the mouth being often washed therewith: the same also taketh away the Morphew, freckles, spots, and the like in the skinne, the nuts boyled in Wine, and the haire washed therewith, causeth them to grow black, and if the ashes of them be mixed with the pouther of a Mules hoofe, and oyle of Myrtles, it will stay the falling of them: the branches and nuts of the Cypresse being burned, driveth away gnats, and other such like troublesome slyes: the leaves being laid among seedes of any sort, will keepe them from being eaten with wormes, and the wood in Wardrobes will preserve garments from Mothes: the wood it selfe is in no age subject to the worme, neither will the sent decay in many yeares, and therefore much desired in chests and boxes, Theves reporteth that he saw at Damiate in Egypt, a Cypresse chest that was digged ten foote deepe out of a moorish ground, and found uncorrupt in any part, which as was likely had lyen there since Sultan Selim subdued Egypt in the yeare. 1512. 
CHAP. LVII. Arbor Ʋitae. The tree of life. T His tree being in some sort like unto the Cypresse, I thought good to joyne next thereunto. It ri∣seth to be a reasonable great and tall tree, standing long in a place, covered with a darke reddish barke on the body, but more red on the branches, spreading many branches, and many small twigges bending downewards, which and the long leaves, that come from them, on both sides are flat, and plaited or braided, as it were like a braided lace, of a darke yellowish greene colour, soft and not hard or pricking, abiding greene, alwayes smelling without falling away, and tasting somewhat strong and resinous, not pleasing to many, but ready to provoke casting, Arbor Ʋitae. The tree of life. 
yet very cordiall, and pectorall also to them that can endure it, at the ends of the branches come forth small mossie yellowish flowers, which turne into small scaly yellowish heads, wherein lie small and long brownish seede: the wood is firme and hard, and of a brownish colour. 
The Place and Time. It first was brought from Canada by the French, in King Francis the first his time, and presented to him, and from the encrease thereof, is spread sufficiently through all the Countries neere it, and flowreth in Aprill, and May, and the fruite is ripe in August and September. 
The Names. This being a new found tree, hath no true, auncient Greeke or Latine name to call it by, for although most that have written of it, referre it to the Thuja of Theophrastus, lib. 5. c. 5. which he compareth both in branches leaves and fruite, unto the Cipresse tree, yet Omne simile non est idem, and although it hath some likenesse in the leaves, yet so it is not in the fruite, and I verily beleeve, that it is proprium sui ge∣nus, not to be parallelled, or made the same with a∣ny other we have, as most of the trees and herbes of America, are not equall to those that grow in Eu∣rope, the hether part of Africa and of Asia the lesse, as experience sheweth. Lugdunensis maketh it to be his Thuyae tertium genus. Some would make it a kinde of Cedrus Lycia, but that beareth red berries, which this doth not. Some also have called it Ar∣bor Paradisea: but it was presented to the French King by the name of Arbor Vitae, but upon what rea∣son or ground I know not, but ever since it hath con∣tinued that name of the tree of life. Clusius and Bau∣hinus say, that some would referre it to the Bruta arbor Plinij, but that as he saith hath whitish branches, and sweete being burned. 
The Ʋertues. Although we have no forraigne experience to report unto you, yet upon tryall of the leaves by some in our owne Land, we have found that they that were long time troubled with a purulentous cough, and shortnesse of breath, have beene much releived and holpen thereof, by the use of the leaves taken fasting with some bread and butter, as the most familiar way for some few dayes together, thereby expectorating the flegme stuffing the lungs, and so cleering the passages, as they found much good by it, and doubtlesse the resinous smell and taste, abiding dry∣ed as well as fresh, doth evidently declare the tenuity of parts therein, and a digesting and clensing quality, which if any would put into action they should soone see the effect. 
CHAP. LVIII. Tamariscus. The Tamariske tree. I Have three or foure sorts of Tamariske, to bring to your consideration, one whereof was never pub∣lished or made knowne to the world, before I gave you a hint thereof in my former Booke, which I meane to ranke with the rest here. 
1. Tamariscus folio latiore, The Germane or broader leafed Tamariske. The broader leafed Tamariske groweth but low in sundry places, over that it doth in other, for I have observed it growne in some places where it hath stood very many yeares to be a reasonable great tree, whose barke was somewhat thicke and rugged, of a darke reddish colour, the younger shootes being reddish at the first, greene after, and blackish when they are dry, beset all about with fine long darke greene leaves, as it were cri ∣ped because they are so small and short, that stand Myaica sive Tamariscus specierum. Tamariske of three sorts. 
about the longer, yet are they greater and broa∣der then the French kinde: at the end of the young shootes come forth a long spike of flow∣ers and leaves among them, each flower being made of five purplish leaves like threds, divers of them standing in a greene huske together, in which huskes when the flowers are past, grow seede lying among them, which together are carryed away with the winde: the leaves fall a∣way every Autumne, and spring anew in the Spring. 
2. Tamariscus folijs albidis. White Tamariske. Of this kinde I have seene another sort very beautifull and rare, brought me by Master Wil∣liam Ward, the Kings chiefe servant in his Gra∣nary, from his house at Boram in Essex, whose branches were all red, while they were young, and all the leaves white, abiding so all the Sum∣mer, without changing into any shew of gr ene like the other, and so abideth constantly yeare af∣ter yeare, yet shedding the leaves in Winter like the other. 
3. Tamariscus folio tenniore. The French or finer leafed Tamariske. This finer leafed Tamariske doth in many pla∣ces grow but into a small shrubbe also, but in o∣thers into a great thicke and tall tree, with many spreading armes and branches, whose leaves are set in the same manner, and grow after the same fashion, but finer and smaller like unto Heath, of a grayish greene colour: the flowers are smal∣ler, and grow spike fashion like the other, being purplish at the first, but white when they are blowne open, consisting of five leaves apeece, which turne into downe with the small seede in them, and falleth away as the Willow and Pop∣lar doe, but Lobel saith, they turne not into downe, but the fruite is round like Ollive stones, which as he saith being laid in the Sunne have stirred to and fro for three dayes together, having a worme within them, which was the chiefe cause of the motion, and having made a hole in the graine commeth forth: which of these is truest, seeing both affirme the matter as eye-wit∣nesses of the relation, I know not, never having seene the tree beare out his fruite or seede with us. 
4. Tamariscus Aegyptia gall ferens. The Egiptian Tamariske. This tree groweth in Egipt, and other places of Syria, Arabia, and Turkie, as Bellonius saith, who observed it to be a wondrous great and high tree, growing as well in dry ground as in moist, whole woods of them growing to∣gether in each soile, whose kind is of this last described, but besides, it beareth small hard excressences, like unto great Gaules, of divers formes, some longer, some shorter, some broad, others thicke or slender.
CHAP. LXII. Erica baccifera fructu albo. White berryed Heathe. T He white berryed Heath riseth up with stalkes a cubit high distributed into branches, and both covered with a blacker barke then any of the rest, the leaves likewise that are set in a triple order at every place, are of a blacker greene colour, and of a little heating as well as binding taste: it hath sundry small brave shining or transparent white berries like almost unto darke pearles, at the toppes of the branches full of an acide juyce, and three hard graines or seede within them, what flowers it bore hath not beene as yet observed. 
2. Erica baccifera nigra. Blacke berryed Heath. The branches of this Heathe, spread farre about upon the ground, and as they lye shoote forth rootes againe, taking up after a while, a great deale of roome, which a number of triple leaves doe compasse, and sometimes foure at every space, being thicker, somewhat like unto the former, at the first of a drying taste, and after some∣what sharpe and biting upon the tongue: the flowers stand at the joynts with the leaves, towards the toppes, consisting of three leaves a peece, of a whitish greene colour, with purplish threds within them, which turne into small blacke berries, like unto Iuniper berries, with a darke purplish juyce within them, and many trian∣gular graines or seed within them likewise. 
The Place and Time. Clusius saith he onely found the first not farre from Lishbone in Portugall, and the other on the Hills of Austria and Styria, and we may say in England and Ireland also in many places, and flower at the same time with the rest, or rather somewhat later. 
The Names. The first is called Erica baccifera by Lobel, and Erica baccifera tenuifolia by Tabermontanus and Gerard, and is the tenth Erica coris folio of Clusius, Amatus Lusitanus tooke it to be the Acacalis of Dioscorides, which the Por∣tingals 1. Erica baccifera fructu albo. White berryed Heath. 
2. Erica baccifera nigra. Blacke berryed Heath. 
call Tamarinhera, and the fruite Tamarinhas. The second is the Erica baccifera of Matthiolus, which Lo¦bel, Lugdunensis, and Thalius call Erica baccifera Matthioli, and is the eleventh Erica coris folio of Clusius: but th is not the Vaccinia palustria Dodonai, before set forth, which Lugdunensis calleth Erica baccifera Dodonaei, no the Oxycoccum Cordi, being all one. 
The Ʋertues. I have reserved the declaration of the Vertues of all the former, unto this place, that I might shew you the altogether. Heath is somewhat drying, and a little bitter withall, except the berryed sorts, as Clusius hath rela∣ted by the taste of most of them. Galen saith it hath a digesting quality, resolving the malignity of humours, b transpiration or sweating, which a decoction of the flowers being drunke, doth performe, and thereby giveth much ease to the paines within the body, and expelleth the wormes therein also: the leaves and flowers made into a decoction is good against the sting or bitings of Serpents, and other venemous creatures, and the same be∣ing drunke warme saith Matthiolus, for thirty dayes together, morning and evening, doth absolutely break the stone and drive it forth: the same also, or the destilled water of the whole plant, being drunke easeth th chollicke: the said water or the juyce of the herbe dropped into the eyes helpeth the weakenesse of the sight Clusius saith that Rondeletius at Mompelier used the oyle made of the flowers of Heath with good successe against the Wolfe in the face or any other foule or fretting and eating canker spreading over the whole face: the same also doth dissolve tumours: a bathe made by decoction of the herbe and flowers is good for them to sit in, that are troubled with the stone, or with the gout, for it giveth much ease to them both: the white berryes of the Heath saith Clusius, are brought to the markets in Spaine, and there sold to give to those that have hot agues, to coole the heate and quench their thirst; and besides are much desired saith hee, of women and children, to please their pallate: the hony that the Bees take from the flowers of Heath is called mel improbum, but we have not found any ill quality therein in our Land: onely it will be higher coloured then in those places where no Heath groweth. 
CHAP. LXIII. Agrifolium sive Aquifolium. The Holly bush or tree. S Ome have thought that there are divers sorts of Holly, some trees, some shrubs, some with prick∣ly leaves, and some with smooth, but the truth is, it is but of one sort, for although it hath beene seene in divers places to grow to be a great tree, as Gesner in hortis reporteth, of divers, and of one at Curia thirty foote high, whose leaves were smooth and not prickly, yet no doubt but it rose from a young shoote that was prickely at the first, for while it is suffered to shoote forth sundry roddes from the roote, or before any of them groweth to be great, the leaves are prickely, but growing old as the Ilex doth, it looseth the prickles and becommeth smooth, and onely prickely at the end, and sometimes not. It is with us most usually a bush, and with many shootes from the roote growing slowly, un∣lesse the ground be not gravelly, where it most frequently is found, but more mellow and gentle; the outer barke whereof is of a sad greene colour, but it hath also another inward, which is whiter: the leaves are set on the stalkes and branches on short footestalkes, being somewhat broad, hard, thicke and long, smooth shining, and of a very fresh yellowish greene colour, cut round about the edges, into round notches or dents, and every point of them very sharpe and prickely: the flowers grow close to the stalkes, at the foote of the leaves many comming forth together round about them, and consist of foure white leaves with foure threds in the middle standing about a greene round head, with groweth to be a small red berry when it is ripe, like unto a Hawthorne berry, but with a little Crowne at the toppe which parteth into foure small trian∣gular seede, with hard shels, and a small sweete kernell within them, abiding on all the Winter, almost in his greatest beauty: the roote groweth deepe, the wood is firme and hardly sinking in water, and of a whitish colour. 
2. Aquifolium undique echinatum. Holly with leaves wholly prickely. This differeth not from the ordinary sort, either in body, barke, fruite, roote, or use, onely in the leafe, which is no lesse armed with sharpe prickles, all upon as about the edges thereof. 
The Place and Time. Holly groweth in waste and untilled grounds, in divers Countries throughout the whole Land, and as I said seldome groweth with us to be a tree of any bignesse, it flowreth in Iune, and the berryes grow ripe, not untill the end of October, and then abide almost all the Winter long, being freshest at Christmas, the leaves doe alwayes abide greene. 
The Names. Theophrastus calleth it in Greeke , which Gaza rendereth Aquifolia, following Pliny therein, and yet he hath an Aquifolia Ilex, which is the Ilex coccigera declared before, by which name he would intimate that there is an Ilex, that hath dented prickly leaves, as the Aquifolium hath, and not that the Aquifolium is any kinde of Ilex, which beareth Acornes, and the rather in that the Aquifolium doth not endure such hot situations as that Ilex doth: some doe call it Agrifolium, as well as Aquifolium, Lacuna tooke it to be Dioscorides his second Paliu∣rus, and Guilandinus from Pliny, the Crataegus of Theophrastus, Dodonaeus saith that some called it Ruscus sylve∣stris, Caesalpinus doubteth whether it may not be the Hedera rigens of Pliny, which he saith, stat sive adminiculo, and therefore; sola omnium generum ob id vocata cissos, none of these Authours shewing any prickles in the leaves of those plants they set forth. The Italians call it Aquifoglio, the Spaniards Azebos, the French Houx, and Housson, the Germanes Walddistell, and of some Stechender Palmen, as Gesner in hortis saith, which is Palma aculeata, with∣out all reason, the Dutch Hulst, and we Holly, or Holme and Huluer. 
The Ʋertues. The berries are hot and dry, and of thinne parts, helping to breake winde saith Dodonaeus, and therefore good to helpe the chollicke, for saith he, I have it from them who have made tryall of them, that tenne or twelve of 2. Agrifelium sive Aquifolium The Holly bush or tree. 
2. Aquifolium folio leui &amp; aculeato toto. Holly with smooth leaves, and one all over prickely. 
the berryes being taken doe purge by stoole, grosse clammy and flegmaticke humours: Gerard appropriateth these words to himselfe, as if he had had the relation, and yet he saith within a few lines after, that Holly bea∣ten to pouther, and drunke doth stay fluxes and discenteryes, which are quite contrary one to another, upon a sud∣daine apprehension, but upon better consideration they may both stand for good that the fresh berries, by reason of their moist slipperinesse may move the belly downewards, and the berries being dryed, and thereby having lost their moisture and slipperinesse, doe then binde the belly as we have knowne by many experiences: but the barke of the tree, or the branches, is held to be much more effectuall to binde then the berries: Matthiolus saith that a decoction of the rootes of Holly (but saith he the barke of the roote is more powerfull) fomented on the places that have beene put out of joynt, doth helpe them much, both to mollifie and discusse the hardnesse and rumours, the places gather thereon, and helpeth also to consolidate the broken bones: some use to tie the bran∣ches with leaves upon their Bacon, and Martinmas Beefe, to keepe Rats and Mice from them by their prickles: the branches with berries, are used at Christ tide to decke up our houses withall, but that they should defend the house from lightening, and keepe themselves from witchchraft, is a superstition of the Gentiles, learned from Pli∣ny saith Matthiolus: with the flowers of Holly saith Pliny from Pithagores, water is made ice: and againe, a staffe of the tree throwne at any beast, although it fall short by his defect, that threw it will flye to him, as he ly∣eth still, by the speciall property of the tree: This I here relate, that you may understand the fond and vaine conceits of those times, which I would to God we were not even in these dayes tainted withall. The Birdlime made of the rootes of Holly, is as good as that made of Misseltoe, whereof neither is to be admitted into inward Physicke without certaine death or danger. 
CHAP. LXIV. Laurus. The Bay tree. V Nder the name of Laurus is described sundry sorts of plants by the ancients, as Laurus Alexandrina, Chamaedaphne, Daphnoides, and Laurus Tinus, and Taxa, and others, whereof I meane not to en∣treate in this place, having spoken of them already in others, but of those trees that are properly called Bay trees, which are two▪ onely knowne to us in Europe, the one with broader, the other with a lesser leafe (and yet Bellonius saith, he observed five sorts in Mount Athos and Greece ) where unto might be adjoyned the wilde Bay, but that I have shewed you the sorts thereof in another place, but unto them I will adde another sort of rare Indian Bay tree, lately knowne unto us. 
1, 2. Laurus latifolia major &amp; minor. The greater and the lesser Bay tree. 
3. Laurus Americana exhorto Farnessiano c ujus cortex Cassiae Ligneae multum assimilatur. A strange Indian Bay tree, or Cassia Lignea of the West Indies. 
 
1. Laurus major sive latifolia. The greater Bay tree. This Bay groweth with us in many places, very high, spreading armes and branches reasonable well, cove∣red with a darke greenish barke, the leaves are somewhat broad and long, hard, full of veines, of a darke greene colour, pointed at the ends, and smelling somewhat sweete, but of a bitter taste, and alwayes abiding on the trees, the flowers grow many together, and of a whitish greene colour, after which come somewhat long and round berries, with a tough blacke skinne or covering, somewhat wrinckled, with a hard firme kernell within, parting into two parts, the roote spreadeth under the ground, and groweth deepe also: the wood is firme, smooth, and white. 
2. Laurus minor. The lesser Bay tree. The lesser Bay tree groweth not so high, and doth runne more into suckers or shootes, whereon grow smaller thinner, and longer leaves then of the former, yet smelling well also, the rest of the parts doe not vary much, but that the berryes be smaller and rounder.
3. Laurus Americana cujus cortex Cassiae ligneae multum assimilatur. The strange Indian Bay tree, or Cassia Lignea of the West Indies. I must needs adjoyne this strange Indian Bay tree, both for the rarity and excellency thereof, which I take out of Tobias Aldinus his description of some plants that grew in Cardinall Farnesius his Garden at Rome, and grew from the berries were brought from the West Indies, in that Garden of the Cardinall 1620. which were blacke rugged, like Bay berries, and somewhat long like Ollives, pointed at the end, and divers growing together in a bunch, each upon a short footestalke, it shortly grew into a great height and bignesse, the leaves were very like unto Bay leaves, or rather in a meane betweene the great Kings Bay (which I take to be that we call Laurocera∣sus ) and the common Bay or the Citron tree, which being chewed, at the first are somewhat bitter, but after with a sweetnesse have some maccilaginousnesse or clammynesse in them, yet smelling like the common Bay, whose footestalke is thicker then of them, and the branches smaller and finer: but saith it is wonderfull to feele so much viscide and tough clamminesse in them, which made a doubt with some learned Herbarists, whether it were not the tree of Cinamon, or of Cassia or Canell, and that not by any light conjecture, for Garzias ab orta saith the leaves of the Canell tree are of the colour of Bay leaves, but neere the forme of the Citron tree leaves, and all Authours writing of the trees of Cinamon or Canell, say the leaves are like Bay leaves: the fruite also by Garzias of the Canell, is blacke and round, of the bignesse of an Hasell nut and like an Ollive. G ara, Carate, and Cieça say that the fruite groweth in clusters or bunches, Acosta that the fruite is blacke and shining, when it is ripe, the maccilaginous taste also in this plant, seemeth to be in that sort of Canell is thought with us to be the true Cassia lignea, yea the best Cassia with Dioscorides is called Daphnitis which is a word derived from Daphne which is a Bay: but saith he, I will shew you my opinion, that we have no true Cinamon, although I have read of many that affirme our Canell to be the true Cinamon of the Auncients, yet I have saith he, many reasons a∣gainst it, which for brevity I here omit, hoping to declare them in another place. 
The Place and Time. The Bay groweth wilde naturally in divers places of Narbone in France, Spaine, and Italy and in other warme Countryes where it groweth very great, especially neere the Sea, but is wholly planted with us, or raised from sowing the berries: it flowreth in May, the fruite is scarse thorough ripe either in October, or November. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke, quasi quod usta valde sonet, for nothing doth more crackle or make a noise in the fire then it: in Latine Laurus: much Gentilisme might be inserted here of Daphne, the Daughter of La∣dus, whom Apollo overtooke flying from him, and by the implored aide of her mother earth was transformed into a Bay, from whence taking a branch, he in honour of her, crowned himselfe: but under this rugged shell was id a smoother kernell: for the Bay was a token of prophecy, and by Apollo is signified wisdome: that is, that wisdome doth foresee events, when the passions be overruled: as also that they wore a Garland of Bayes to be kept safe from lightening and thunder: that wisedome knoweth how to avoide the judgements of God, when foolishnesse is liable to them, and must undergoe them. The Arabians call it Gaur or Gar, the Italiaas Lauro, the Spaniards Laurerro, the French Laurier, the Germanes Lorbe enbaum, the Dutch Laurusboon, and we the Bay tree: the berryes are called in Greeke , in Latine Lauri baccae. 
The Ʋertues. Galen saith that the Bay leaves or barke doe dry and heale very much, and the berries more then the leaves: the barke of the roote is lesse sharpe and hot, but more bitter, and hath some astriction withall, whereby it is effectu∣all to breake the stone, and is good to open the obstructions of the Liver, Spleene, and other inward parts, as the dropsie and jaundise: the berryes are very effectuall against all venome, and poyson of venemous creatures, and the stings of Waspes, and Bees, as also against the pestilence, or other infectious diseases, and therefore is put into sundry Treakles for that purpose: they likewise procure womens courses, and if seven of the berries be taken by a woman in sore travell of child birth, it will cause a speedy delivery, and expell the after birth also, and there∣fore women with child that have not gone out their time, must take heed of taking any, lest they procure an a∣borsement, or delivery before their time: they wonderfully helpe all cold and rheumaticke distillations, from the braine to the eyes, lungs, or other parts, and being made into an electuary with honey, they helpe the con∣sumption, old coughes, shortnesse of breath, and thin rheumes: they likewise helpe the Meagrome, and mighti∣ly expell winde, and provoke urine, and helpe the Ventofities of the mother, and kill the wormes: the leaves worke also the like effects, and boyled in fish broth, give a fine rellish, both to mea e and broth, and helpeth to warme the stomacke, and to cause digestion, without feare of casting, which taken by themselves they often∣times provoke: a bathe of the decoction of the leaves and berries, is singular good both for women to sit in that are troubled with the mother, or the diseases thereof, or with the stoppings of their courses, or for the diseases of the bladder, paines in the bowells by winde, and stoppings of urine: a decoction likewise of equall parts of Bay berries, Cuminseede, Hyssope, Origanum, and Euphorbium with some hony, and the head bathed therewith, doth wonderfully helpe destillations and rheumes, and setleth the pallate of the mouth into its place: the oyle which is made of the berries, is very comfortable in all cold griefes of the joynts, nerves, arteries, stomacke, belly or wombe, and helpeth palsies, convulsions, crampes, aches, tremblings, and numnesse in any part, wearinesse al∣so, and paines that come by sore travelling in wet weather, or foule wayes: all griefes and paines likewise pro∣ceeding from winde, either in the head, stomacke, backe, belly or wombe, by annoynting the parts affected there∣with, and by putting some of the oyle, or boyling the berries in the decoctions for glisters, doth breake wind and ease the torments of the belly by the winde chollike wonderfully: it helpeth also the paines in the eares, ei∣ther some of the oyle dropped thereinto, or a decoction of the berries being made to receive the warme fumes thereof into the eares by a funnell: the said oyle taketh away the markes of the skinne and flesh, by bruises, falls, &amp;c. and dissolveth the congealed blood in them: it also helpeth the itch, scabs, and wheales in the skinne. 
CHAP. LXV. Arbutus &amp; Adrachne. The Strawberry trees. T Hese two trees doe both goe under one English name of the Strawberry tree, because they are so like one unto another, both in their growth, leafe, and fruite, that one not very well acquainted with them, may soone mistake one for another, and therefore I have thought good to put them both into one Chapter. 
1, Arbutus. The Strawberry tree with dented leaves. This Strawberry tree (in some places, as in Mount Athos, as Bellonius reporteth, groweth to be a tree of very great heighth and bignesse) in most other places it groweth but low, or rather like unto a shrub tree then of any signesse, having a rugged barke on the body, and smooth or red on the young branches, and having many suck∣ers rising from the rootes, with faire fresh greene leaves, set without order thereon, very like unto Bay leaves, but thicker, shorter, and finely dented about the edges, and without any sent, as the Bay leaves have, with a red∣dish middle rib in some places, but not usually so with us, and abiding on the bushes like the Bay: at the ends of the branches come forth long stalkes, with very fine white flowers set thicke together all the length of them whose brimmes are a little red or blush colour, formed like unto little bottles, or the flowers of Lilly convally, which being past, there rise in their places, severall round berryes, greene at the first, yellowish afterwards, and of an excellent reddish colour, and somewhat hoary withall being full ripe, like unto a Strawberry, but much greater in the naturall warme Countries, as great as a plumbe, but with us, and in Ireland, where they have beene found growing of their owne accord, no bigger then a Raspis berrie, and neere unto the same, both forme and colour, that is, like a pallide clarret Wine, of an austere taste, and having certaine small seedes within them each of them covered with a thinne skinne. 
1. A butus. The Strawberry tree with dented leaves. 
2. Adrachne. The Strawberry tree with smooth leaves. 
 
2. Adrachne. The Strawberry tree with smooth leaves. This other Strawberry tree groweth low and never seene so high as the former; but so like thereunto that it is discerned from it onely by these markes; the barke of the tree and branches is not rough or rugged, but smooth and redder by much, both in young and old branches like unto Corrall, yet Theophrastus saith it hath a white barke, which it is like he meaneth of the under or new barke that commeth after the old falleth away in Summer, but the Arbutus doth not so: the leaves are so like unto Bay leaves, being also smooth and not dented on the edges that they are onely distinguished from them by the smell, these having no sent, and the berries hereof are of a darker red colour, and somewhat more sweete, the other being a little austere or harsh, and so tasting on the tongue in the eating. 
The Place and Time. Both these sorts grow in the warme Easterne Countryes abundantly as also in Greece, and the Isles of the Me∣diterranean Seas, especially in Candy, on the hills, and among the Rockes, but the first especially in Italy, Spaine, and some parts of France, and hath beene of late dayes found in the West part of Ireland, of a reasonable bigge sise for a tree, but with smaller fruite: it flowreth not onely in Iuly, in the warme Countries, but at other times of the yeare also, and the fruite scarse ripeneth in a whole yeare, for I have seene a fresh branch, that was brought me with fresh sprung flowers and ripe fruite thereon likewise, so that it is usually seene both with flowers and fruite at once. The Adrachne is every third yeare spoyled of the outer barke, and regaineth it quickely, and kee∣peth the same time with the other. 
The Names. The first is called in Greeke Comarus, and the fruite so also by some, or Memaecylon, as Dio∣scorides, Galen, and others say, in Latine Arbutus &amp; Ʋnedo, and by Ovid Fraga montana; some have thought that the Arbutus of Dioscorides, and Theophrastus were differing plants, because their descriptions were so divers, but by the judgement of the best they are both one, the other is called in Greeke , yet the most Greeke co∣pies have , but because Adrachne, is the herbe Portulaca, Purslaine, which some to distinguish would call this Portulaca arbor, but Pliny findeth the fault, and therefore calleth it Adrachne and Potulaca arbor, since which Gaza and others have followed him therein: but the Grecians generally now adayes, as well as those in Candy, call it Adrachla, as Honorius Bellus saith: all our moderne Writers call them, by the same names, and no other then are here set downe, except Guilandinus in Papyro, who attributeth all these names to one plant Omarum, Conarum, Arbutus &amp; Vnedo, And it is observed that Galen saith in Italy among the vulgar, Epimelis was called by the name of Ʋnedo, peradventure because the flowers of Epimelis are very like to those of Arbutus or Vnedo, when as Epimelis is defined by himselfe to be another plant, differing both from Arbutus, Ʋnedo, or any of Dioscorides sorts of Mespilus. The Arabians call the Arbutus Hatiladib, the Jtalians Albatro, the Spaniards Madronho, and Madromeiro, the French Arbousier, the Dutch as not knowne to them have no name that I can finde, and we call them both the Strawberry tree, but with the severall distinctions that I give them in their titles: yet it hath come to us from Ireland, by the name of the Cane Apple, with as great judgement and reason as many other vul∣gar names are. 
The Vertues. Dioscorides and Galen say of the Arbutus that it is troublesome to the stomacke, and breedeth head ache, and therefore adviseth those that have any paine in the head to forbeare the eating of that fruite, Amatus Lusitanus first setteth it downe, that the destilled water of the flowers and leaves of the Arbutus (but Matthiolus addeth the as de Corde cervi to be mixed therewith in pouther) is a soveraigne remedy and helpe against the pestilence, and all other venome to be given presently upon the first complaining of the griefe, it is astringent or binding, and therefore may well serve against fluxes: the properties of the other are not declared. 
CHAP. LXVI. Morus. The Mulberry tree. T Here are two or three sorts of Mulberries as I have elsewhere shewed, yet I must shew you them here also. 
1. Morus nigra vulgaris. The common blacke Mulberry tree. This groweth if it be suffered very great and tall, otherwise it will be led on Arbours, or as you will have it, the body being great, and both it and the greater armes covered with a thicke rugged barke, the younger boughes and branches being smoother, whereon are round broad leaves set, pointed at the end, dented about the edges, and sometimes gashed in on the edges, resembling a Vine leafe, the bloomings or flowers are short downie catkins, after which follow the fruite made of many graines set together greene at the first, red afterwards, and somewhat harshe or sowre, but blacke when they are full ripe, full of a sweetish juyce, that will dye the fingers and mouth of them that gather and eate them: wherein lye di∣vers small seed, the roote groweth not deepe, but spreadeth farre, being of a yellowish colour. 
2. Morus alba. The white Mulberry. The white Mulberry groweth not to that greatnesse, but riseth higher, more knotty and brittle, spreading rea∣sonable well, but not so thicke, the leaves are like the former, but not so thicke set on the branches, nor so hard in handling, of a paler greene, and somewhat longer, and more divided with longer stalkes: the fruite is smaller and closer set together, greene and somewhat harsh before they are ripe, but exceeding sweete, almost ready to procure loathing, when they are thorough ripe, and whitish, with the like seede as is in the former: the roote likewise is yellow but paler. 
1. Morus nigra vulgaris. The common blacke Mulberry tree. 
2. Morus alba. The white Mulberry tree. 
 
3. Morus Virginiana. The Ʋirginian Mulberry. The Virginian Mulberry groweth quickely with us to be a very great tree, spreading many armes and bran∣ches, whereon grow faire great leaves very like the last: the fruite or berry is longer and redder than the first when it is ripe, and very pleasant also.
CHAP. LXIX. Musa arbor. The Indian Figge or Plantaine tree. D Ivers doe make this tree (or plant, whichsoever you please to call it, in that it dyeth yearely) one of the sorts of Dates, but very erroniously, for it may in my judgement be more truely referred to the Figges, as divers others doe, and therefore I thinke meetest to be joyned unto them. It riseth up to the heighth of sixe or seven cubits, with a streight stemme or stalke, as bigge as ones thigh or arme, not wooddy at all, but of a soft substance, and as it were composed of a number of foulded leaves together, so that it may easily be cut downe with the blow of a sword, or with a knife, with a pith like marrow within, not spreading any branch at all, but compassed about with many very large leaves, foulding themselves as they rise, like the leaves of the flowring Indian Reede; which when they are spread open at large, are each of them a fathome sometimes or more, and usually foure or five foote long, and two foote, or sometimes a yard broad, hanging almost quite downe, with a great thicke rib running through the middle, and not cut in on the edges in any place: the lower leaves still falling away being dryed, and broken off with the winde, leaving the stemme or stalke bare, untill it have attained unto above a mans height, where it busheth forth a many the like large leaves, that are of a darke greene colour on the upperside, and paler underneath; in the midst whereof thrusteth forth a great long bunch of flowers; as bigge as an Estridge egge, of a russetish purple colour, divided into many clusters, Minor &amp; sapidior. each flower where∣of saith one is Lilionarcisso major, foliorum extrema substringens colore phaeniceus, after which succeede the fruite growing in the same manner in clusters, at severall spaces or distances of the great long stalkes, two or three hundred many times together, each whereof is long and round, in some places greater and smaller then in others, some a span long or more (and one sort in the Kingdome of Congo, is smaller, but better rellished then the ordi∣nary, yet rare and not to be found but in very few places else that I can learne) somewhat resembling a small Cowcumber, of a firmer substance then a Figge when it is cut, and without any graine or kernell within it, ha∣ving a little hollownesse in the middle, where it may seeme to be parted in twaine, and are of a darke greenish colour being unripe, but of a whitish yellow if they be suffered to grow to the full maturity, but many doe cut them downe before they are through ripe, and either hang them up in their houses to ripen, or to carry to Sea to spend afterwards, for being gathered ripe, they will not last long: the outer skinne is to be pared or peeled away before they are eaten, the inner substance being yellowish, Musa arbor. The Indian Figge or Plantaine tree. 
and of a fine sweete taste, not suddenly to be perceived, yet I having tasted of one that Doctour Pay gave me, did thinke I had tasted of an Orris roote, preserved with Sugar, which per∣adventure was not the naturall rellish thereof, but a scititious. Vnder the stalke with fruite, hangeth downe on another stalke, a tuft of leaves, which some while after will bee an∣other bunch of fruite, usually bearing twise, and in some places thrice every yeare: when the stalke is cut downe, some say that it yeeldeth a kinde of water like milke, both for colour and taste, some say also that the roote beareth but once or twise, or thrice at the most: but the certainety is, that it needeth to be but once planted, for that it continually sendeth forth new stalkes, as the old decay, and in some Coun∣tries are soone ripe after they spring, and will have ripe fruite, from some of the plants at all times. 
The Place and Time. This generally groweth in most Provinces of the East, as well Egipt and Syria, as the Indies; it groweth also in Bras∣sill, but is planted onely in the West Indies, in Cyprus also it will doe reasonable well, but not so in Candy, but in Spaine or Portugall, as I heare, it will not beare at all. Africa also and Ethiopia wanteth it not, and as is said, hath ripe and greene fruite almost all the yeare long. 
The Names. It is very probable that this plant was not knowne to The∣ophrastus unlesse it be that which lib. 2. c. 8. he saith groweth in Cyprus with a large leafe, and a much greater fruite, but is not savoury like the rest: and therefore Guilandinus refuseth it, nor yet since his time to Dioscorides or Galen, no nor to Pliny, unlesse as Clusius and others thinke, it may be his Pala, men∣tioned in his 12 Booke, and 6 Chapter, whose fruite was cal∣led Ariena, of a wonderfull sweetenesse, one whereof was able to satisfie foure men, the leafe thereof being three cubits long and two broad, which is somwhat likely, in that as Garsia saith, it is yet to this day called Palan, in the Country of Mala∣bor, which is on this side Ganges, and beyond Iudus: it is diver∣sly called, every Country almost, giving it a peculiar name, they of Malayo Pisan, they of Bengala Quelli, in other places of the Indies Melopalan∣da, Musae arboris fructus. The fruite of the said Indian Figge or Plantaine tree. 
in Malavaralso Chincapa∣lones, they of St. Thomas Island Abella: it is said that some doe call one sort Senorijns, and ano∣ther Cadolijns, the Portugals call them Figos dorta and Figos de Cananor, others Ficus Mar∣tabana, of some also Ficus Pha∣raonis, they of Ginney, and in the Realme of Congo Bananas: Lodonicus Romanus, and Bro∣card, who wrote the descripti∣on of the Holy Land call it A∣dams Apple, whom Cardanus, and others doe follow, suppo∣sing it to be the fruite that Eve tooke and gave to Adam: but the very text of the Scripture convinceth that errour, for it is there said, that they sowed Fig∣tree leaves together, to make them aprons to cover their na∣kednesse, when as one leafe hereof had beene sufficient. Some also as Bauhinus setteth it downe, call it Dudaim, but I thinke that name better agree∣eth to the Mandrake. Of the Arabians Serapio, and Avicen Mauz, Musa, Amusa and Ma∣um; of the Moores Muz, and Gemez, of some Greekes and Latines Margraita: they of Brassile call the tree Paquonere, and the fruite Pacova, Oviedus and Acosta call it Platanus, for what cause is not knowne, unlesse the largenesse of the leaves enforced that title, but from thence I thinke hath risen the name of Plantaines, whereby our English in all places call them by. The Italians, Spaniards, French, and others follow the Latine name Musa, and so would J it should be called, or the Indian clusterfigge, to distinguish it from the other sorts of Figges, that they be not confounded, but not Adams Apple as Gerard doth, from the superstitious con∣ceits of Brocard or others, for wee might as well follow that foolish Franciscane that would tranferre it to the Muses, as gratefull to them. The Portugals have a conceit, that if this fruite be cut either thwart or aslope, there will appeare the forme of a crosse therein, and therefore they will not cut any, but breake them all that they eate, which vaine conceit it is likely they have taken from the Maronite Christians, as Linschoten saith. 
The Vertues. It is generally held that no man ever tooke harme by eating the fruite hereof, onely by the much eating of them they have become loose and soluble in their bodies, but that they comfort the heart and refresh the spirits: they are also good for coughes, and hoarsenesse, and to lenifie the sharpenesse of humours, descending on the lungs: it is also profitable for those whose urine is hot and sharpe, and to provoke it being stopped, stirring up also bodily last: but they that have any feaver or ague must forbeare them, but are good for women with childe to nourish the birth: although this may seeme to be somewhat hard of digestion to weake bodyes and stomackes, yet to stirring and able persons it is not so: the fruite being cut in the middle long wise, and dryed in the Sun, is then more delicate then a Figge: being baked in an oven, it is no lesse pleasant or boyled in broth, yet it will not a∣bide any long boyling. The leaves being soft are commended to coole such as shall lye upon them, and keepe them temperate in the great heates: some also with good effect apply the juyce of the leaves to places burnt with fire. 
CHAP. LXX. Ficus Indicus spinosus. The prickely Indian Figge. W E have observed two sorts of this Indian Figge, the one greater, not to be preserved a Winter in our Country without a great deale of care and conveniency for it, the other lesser, abiding reasonable well with us: they that set forth the Pervan History, doe say that there is two sorts of wilde, one bearing no fruite, and another so prickely, that it serveth to no use, besides the manured which beareth the graine, but with these I must declare the breeding of the Cochenille, which is that graine which the Dyers use, and is said to be gathered from of these plants, or one of them. 
1. Ficus Indicus spinosus major. The greater Indian Figge. This greater Indian Figge groweth in some parts of the West Indies to have a body or trunke as bigge as ones arme or thigh, and from thence shooteth forth his leaves, but in other places, it groweth from a leafe first set into the ground, and there shooting 1, 2. Ficus Indica spinosa major vel minor. The greater or lesser prickely Indian Figge. 
forth rootes, and others rising out there∣of on all sides, and others out of them; and so one out of another, being for∣med into branches of such leaves, like unto branches of other trees, each of these leaves are very large, and as thicke as ones hand, and larger in many, beset with small sharpe, and somewhat long white prickes or thornes; dangerous if dadvisedly they be handled, but in Europe they are not so thicke set, nor so sharpe but in many places of the leaves, the knots or places where they stood are void: the flowers come forth at the toppe of the fruite, which is at the first like unto a leafe it selfe, and breake out on the side of the greater leaves sometimes, as well as on the tops composed of eight or twelve pale yel∣low leaves, set in a double row with certaine yellow threds tipt with red in the middle: after the flower is withe∣red, yet still abiding on the head of the fruite, it groweth greater and sheweth it selfe to be long, and rounder then the leaves, and flatter at the head, and like unto a Figge, which fruite also is ar∣med with prickes as well as the leaves, and is whitish, which is taken to be the better, or of a reddish or yellowish co∣lour on the out side, or greenish and very red within, full of a watery sub∣stance, tasting sweete and pleasant, with diverse seedes therein, and by eating them will cause the urine to be tincted like blood it selfe: the roote groweth neither deepe nor farre a∣broad. 
2. Ficus Indicus spinosus minor. The lesser prickely Indian Figge. This lesser Figge groweth more often with us, from leaves as farre as I can learne, yet J have knowne it rise from the sowne seede, and never into a body or stocke like the former, and is in all the rest as like it as may be, with out any difference but onely the greatnesse, which in this is neither halfe so great or thicke, or the growth halfe so high, and this declaration may be sufficient to describe it by comparing the former discourse herewith that I doe not make a double repetition of one thing. 
3. Cochenille sive Fici Indici grana. The Dyers graine called Cochenille. There hath beene much doubt and many variable opinions, concerning the breeding of the Cochenille, some taking it to be the Coccognidium verum, others to be the Chermes Arabum, and that it differeth not from the Coc∣cus Baphicus of the Grecians. Fragosus would seeme to know more then others, and in his third Booke and 15. Chapter, saith that they are Fici ejusdem Ind ci fructis. The fruite of either of the Indian Figge trees. 
certaine graines that grow in Peru, at the rootes of certaine small plants, that are like unto the common Burnet Saxifrage, cleaving to the rootes of it like wild Grapes, but is utterly erro∣nious for Peru, his opini∣on as it seemeth being ta∣ken from Anguilara, and Lacuna who say that there are certaine graines found in some places here with us, growing on the rootes of the Burnet Saxifrage, whose inner pulpe doth give a crimson dye, and is there∣fore called Coccus radicum, that is, the roote graine: some have taken them to be flyes, or such like cove∣red with a small thin skin or case, and sticking under the leaves of this Indian Figge: but Ioannes de Laet of Antwerpe, in his fifth Booke and third Chapter. page 229. of his description of the West Indies, sheweth us the truth hereof more exactly then Oviedus or many other that have written thereof I thinke, and saith that besides the two wild sorts, whereof one giveth no fruite and the other so prickely that it is of no use, and the tame or manured sort that beareth fruite that is very sweete and of a most pleasant taste, and either white which is esteemed the best, or red or purple, which dyeth the hands with a blooddy colour, even as Mulberryes will doe, and being eaten coloureth the urine also into the same blooddy colour. There is saith he another sort, called by the Indians Nochezcli Nopalli, or Nopall Nocheztli which although it beareth not such like fruite, yet it is more accounted of, and husbanded with more care and diligence because it beareth that precious graine Cochinille, so called by the Spaniards, as a diminitive from the Coccus of the auncients, so much sought after, and used by Dyers, for the excellency of the colour: This plant loveth those places that are temperate: Herrera describeth the manuring and ordering thereof, and de Laet from him in this manner: The graine Cochenille is bred on the tree, which is called Tuna, in very many of the Countries of the West Indies, and new Spaine, which hath most thicke leaves, whereby it is encreased in those places that are o∣pen, and yet defended from the North: It is a living creature, or rather a kinde of Insect or flye, not much dif∣fering, but comming neere unto a punie or wall louse, being somewhat lesse then a flea, when it first getteth to the plant, and bred from a seed no bigger then an hand worme, and doe so loade the trees, and fill the whole Gar∣den, that they must gather them twice every yeare from the trees, which they set in order and tend like their Vines, and free them from weedes, or what else may hurt them: the younger the trees be, the more plentifully will they beare, and the better graine, but especially it is necessary for them to cleere them from the other sorts of flyes, and no lesse keepe away their hens, who will devoure the graine: and to cleare their trees from the en∣crease of these other sorts of flyes, they use Foxetailes, and when they are growne full ripe, they gather them with great care, and kill them by casting cold water on them, and dry them in the shaddow, and keepe them in pots: some kill them by casting ashes amongst them, and afterwards wash them, and others choke or kill them by some other wayes: but it is the best way to kill them with cold water. But now this graine is adulterated by the Merchants, after divers manners, for there are foure sorts to be found hereof: the one giveth a colour of no great worth, as being a wilde sort and not manured: another is blacker, which groweth also of it selfe, with∣out care or husbandry, a third is a mountainous sort called Chichimeca, and of a meaner regard, all which they mingle together with the fourth, that is the best and manured. The divers sorts hereof among the Merchants have severall names, according as the Spaniards call them: every sort according to the goodnesse hath a name whereby they know it, as Silvester and Tuskaliobe, the two worst sorts, being of a blacke dull colour, yet the largest graine. Musteko is a gray sort, and is the most ordinary we have, but the Golhaca, is in colour betweene both, in sise no bigger, but in goodnesse much excelleth them all, and is not much inferiour to the Rosetta, which is the reddest in shew, and the richest in use of all. And Tlaxcala giveth the best sort of graine by far. Franciscus Zi∣ enez, writeth that this plant bringeth forth a certaine gumme, which doth temper the heate of the reines, and of the urine, and that the juyce or water distilled from it, is a wonderfull remedy against pestilentiall and chollericke feavers. The Chochenille or graine it selfe is held to be very cordiall, and to drive infection from the heart, for it is familiarly given both to the infected with Plague, Small poxes, or other infections or dangerous sicke∣nesse. 
The Place and Time. Both these sorts grow in the West Indies, the greater sort all the Indies over, from Florida, and the other on this side it, where the greater is not found, as being a colder Country then that the greater can live in it, and flowreth with us about the end of May, or in Iune, and the fruite ripeneth not with us kindly at all, but abideth on all the Winter, and the next Summer too, and yet will be greene on the outside, and waterish or unsavoury, although somewhat reddish within, but more red within than without, and sweete also in the naturall places. 
The Names. Divers Authours have given divers names unto these plants, for Matthiolus, Dodonaeus, Lacuna, Lobel, Caesalpi∣nus and others call it, Ficus Indica, divers of the Indians that be Islanders call it Tuna or Tunal, they of Mexico and thereabout Nochtli, and as I shewed before Nochezcli Nopalli or Nopall Nocheztli, and in some places also Cardi, but that I thinke is by the Spaniards, and thereupon it was called Cardaus Indicus, and Ficus Indiae: diverse did take it to be the Opuntia of Theophrastus and Pliny, but erroniously, for they both say, it is an herbe fit and sweete to be eaten, but the leaves of these are not used to be eaten, neither is it an herbe or plant, naturall to any of the nations of Europe, Africke or Asia, but a peculiar kinde of it selfe; but Opuntia is an herbe growing natu∣rally about Opuns, and is usually eaten, and therefore this cannot be it but another herbe as I have shewed in the Chapter of Opuntia marina, among the Sea plants: some also call it Pala arbor Plinij, as Bellonius and Anapallus also: The lesser sort is called by Lobel Indorum ferrumi natrix, and Opuntja Ostocollos, and by Bauhinus Ficus Jn∣dica folio spinoso fructu minore. 
The Ʋertues. It is said that the Indians use to lay these leaves bruised upon places that are put out of joynt, or the sinewes or Arteryes over stretched, and to helpe those that are bursten or broken to knit up the places againe: the juyce o the leaves is with good successe used in foule ulcers or sores: The vertues of the graine are set downe a little be∣fore at the end of the declaration thereof. 
CHAP. LXXI. Ficus Indica arenata. The arched Indian Figge tree. Ficus Indica Arenata. The arched Indian Figge tree. 
 
T His admirable tree for so it is called by many, groweth to be a great tree, and tall, spreading many armes all about, and very long which by reason of the slendernesse and length, bend downe to the ground, shooting forth certaine yellowish stringes at their ends, which as soone as they come to the ground, doe thereinto thrust themselves as strongly as the first, which againe send forth other branches after a while that they are well growne in the same manner as the first, for they also in time grow great, and spread their branches, which like∣wise bending downe take roote againe, and thus successively one after another, untill it hath taken up a great compasse of ground, even a mile as it is said in compasse, and made as it were a Grove or Wood from that one first tree, whereunder the In∣dians doe shelter themselves from the heate of the Sunne, and so prune away the under boughes, and branches that they make divers walkes and crosse wayes through these trees, leaving their branches over head as arches to passe under to and fro, and cutting out some looke holes as it were, to give light and ayre to a thousand men, and more that may be sheltered under the shaddow of this one tree, with the Suckers thereof, among so many of whom it is hard to finde out the originall or mother stocke, the leaves on the young branches are like unto Quince tree leaves, greene on the upper side, and hoary white like them underneath, wherewith Elephants are much delighted to feede, and whose branches they cut downe to give them: the fruite groweth among the branches no bigger then the end of ones thumbe, but fashioned like a Figge of blood red colour both within and without, somewhat sweete like unto them, but not so pleasant. 
The Place and Time. This tree groweth in divers places of the East Indies, as at Goa, Malacca. &amp;c. and abideth alwayes greene, giving ripe fruite at the time with others in that Country. 
The Names. This tree is mentioned first by Q. Curtius, lib. 9. who wrote the acts of Alexander, in his warres into the Indies, and by Theophrastus also lib. 4. c. 5. who lived neere that time, and calleth it Ficus Indica, as Pliny also lib. 12. c. 5. after him doth: Strabo also although hee gave it no name then, or of the admirable tree, yet here∣by you may perceive that it is no new found tree in these later dayes, but knowne and written of by the Anci∣ents. Goropius would draw this tree into Paradise, and make it the tree of the knowledge of good and evill, that God had planted in the midst thereof, and forbad Adam the eating, and of which by eating, he brought a woe on himselfe and his posterity, so bold is he to take upon him to know that which he hath no authority or proofe for, but onely led by fansie and strong conceit, about the river Acesine, in those parts where this groweth, and there∣fore Paradice must needs be there also. The Portugals call it Arbor de ray, that is the tree of rootes, and there∣upon Linschate in his Booke figureth a tree with a number of rootes thereto, rather out of fancy then sight which Clusius misliked. Some doe call it Arbor Goae, but of most Ficus Indica, and I have added arcuata for a diffe∣rence from others.
The Vertues. The fruite is good and wholesome to be eaten, but I cannot learne if ever it was applyed to cure any wound or ulcer in the body, or used in Physicke, for any disease. 
CHAP. LXXII. Pyrus. The Peare tree. B Ecause Peares are so like unto Figges in the outward forme of them, I thinke good to joyne them next thereunto, whereof there is both manured and wilde: the manured doe transforme them∣selves into so many severall fashions, colours, and tastes, that it would take up many leaves to de∣scribe them at large as they might be, for not onely every Country abroad, and beyond the Seas, have severall sorts, which we never saw or heard of, but in our owne Land also, there are so many that it is almost impossible that they should all come to one mans certaine and perticular know∣ledge (yet have I shewed you a many of them in my Orchard heretofore.) Of the wild sorts likewise there are 1. Pyrus sativa. The manured Peare tree. 
2. Pyrus sylvestris. The wilde or Choke Peare tree. 
both abroad and at home such variety, that a man might spend his whole time thoroughly to observe and set downe all the sorts that are knowne in other places. I will therefore endeavour but to shew you here a generall description of the tree, both tame and wilde, with some sorts that are not expressed in my former Booke. 
1. Pyrus sativa. The manured Peare tree. The manured Peare in generall groweth higher, but flower then the Apple tree, more upright also and not spreading the branches, and no lesse thicke, but rather greater in the bulke or body: the leaves are somewhat broa∣der and rounder, greene above and whiter underneath then those of the Apple tree: the flowers are smaller but whiter then the Apple blossomes, and the fruite more long then round for the most part, smaller also at the stalke, and greater at the head, of many differing fashions, sizes, colours, and tastes, and times both in gathering and spen∣ding, some being greene, some russet, other yellowish or reddish, some great, others small, or long, or round, or smooth, or bunched out, and so for tastes also, sweetish or lushious, or delicate or waterish, or hard and firme, and well rellished, or not so good to be eaten raw, as baked or roasted, and some to be spent as soone as they are ga∣thered, or soone after, being Summer fruite, others not to be spent untill the Winter be either come in, or neere or fully past; each particular to every fruite we e too tedious: for this Worke being growne already so volu∣minous, and seeing I have shewed them in part elsewhere: The wood is smooth close and firme, and serveth for many uses, both for formes to cut these figures or the like in, and instead of wainscot in many poore mens houses, and for many other purposes. 
2. Pyrus sylvestris. The Wilde or Choake Peare tree. The wilde Peare tree usually groweth tall and upright, like the manured kinde, and as little spreading, but sometimes low and crooked, but fuller of branches, which maketh them the more knotty, the barke is blacker and more rugged, cleaving also in many places, and easily to be pulled off; with prickes and thornes set here and there on them, but not so thicke as in the Crab, the leaves and flowers doe little vary, but that some will have larger and others lesser leaves and flowers, which will also be a little deeper coloured then others, as the fruite being greater or smaller, and of a more or lesse harsh taste, although all have some, and the colour likewise in some is greene or darke russet, and some will be so faire, yellow and red, that they would invite any that seeth them and knoweth them not to take and taste of them, which then are so different from their expectations, being harsh and unsavoury, that they presently out with their purses and bestow this a dage there on, Non est semper fides habenda fronti: yet this harsh unsavoury fruite, though later ripe then most of the manured sortes, by being in part mel∣lowed with the Autumnes coldes, and the standing of their juyce being pressed forth and made into Perry, doth in time so alter his former quality of harshnesse and unsavourinesse, that it becommeth fully as cleere, and almost as pleasant as white wine: the wood hereof is harder, firmer, and closer then the former, and so more knotty al∣so, whereby it becommeth more frangible and sooner broken. 
Of the manured Peares there is a sort that although it be a good Winter fruite, sweete and well rellished, Pyrus spinosa sativa. espe∣cially if they be stewed or baked, yet the tree hath thornes upon it, like unto the wild sort, this was brought as it is said from Naples into Lyons, where it is plenty, and called Poirier d ' espine, and the fruite Poire espine, that is, Pyrus sativa spinosa, the prickely Peare. 
The winged Peare hath a leafe alwayes, or two sometimes, growing to the sides of it, as if it came out of the Peare, and may therefore be called Pyrophilla, whereof Camaerarius, speaketh in horto. Pyrus foliara. Pomipy∣rus Pyrus sanguinea Pyrus Laxativa Pyrus flo∣re duplici. 
The Pome-peare, or Apple-peare, which is a small Peare, but round at both ends like an Apple, yet the tree is a Peare tree. 
The Blood Peare, whose inside is red, as the outside is. Camerarius in horto maketh mention hereof likewise. 
The Laxative Peare which looseneth the belly being eaten. Camerarius there also hath this. 
The double blossomed Peare. This bore double flowers with Master Ward, of the Kings Granary, but whether it be alive or dead, I am not assured; nor whether it kept the forme, or did alter. 
Pyrus sylvestris. The wilde Peare tree. 1. Of the wilde kinde there are the great red Choke Peare, whose colour and property, I have shewed you in the description. 2. The smaller Choke Peare. 3. The Hedge Peare. 4. The lowsie Hedge Peare. 5. The Crow wild Peare. 6, 7. Wild Peares of Candy, the one they call Achlades, the other Agusaga, as Bellonius saith. The Place and Time. The manured sorts are onely planted and preserved in Orchards for the purpose, the wilde sorts being some found in our owne Woods, and planted in the Hedge-rowes of fieldes, to save the ground of their growing, and yet have as much use of them as by being abroad, the wild flowring and ripening their fruite later then the ma∣nured. 
The Names. The manured Peare is called in Greeke , and in Latine Pirus, and Pyrus a fructus figura quod ad Pyramida∣lis similitudinem, elato in mucronem turbinetur: The wild Peare is called in Greeke, by Theophrastus, a pri∣vativo usu, quod non sit in usu fructus ejus ad humanum corpus, yet Dioscorides saith, is a kind of wilde Peare of it selfe, and , in Latine Pirus sylvestris, and Pyraster, or Piraster: all peaceable ages have beene much delighted with the variety of all sorts of edible fruites, and therefore Cato, Columella, and others, but especially Pliny hath set downe the names of a number, as they were well knowne in his time which how our age can pa∣rallell ours unto them, I cannot tell; yet Lugdunensis hath in some sort endeavoured it to his French names, but how truely I know not, nor is it greatly materiall for us to doe, because names are often given from the place where they best grow, or from the person that first brought them into their Country, or was much delighted with them, or from some other cause or accident, which names are not so fit for one Country as another: Wee have so many in owne Land, that I never knew any one that could be possessed of all sorts, although they strove to doe it as much as in them lay, for still they were informed of some they had not: And I have declared a ma∣ny of them in my former Booke. The Arabians call it Humectho, Cirmetre, and Kemetri, the Italians Pere, the Spaniards Pyras, the French Poires, the Germanes Bir Biren, and Firen, the Dutch Berr , and we Peare. 
The Ʋertues. Peares of any good or reasonable rellish are more spent for meate then medicine, and most of them eaten raw at severall times as they be fittest to spend, or else stewed or baked, as the kinde doth best sute, and every one list to use them: the sorts also that are fittest for the purpose are dryed in ovens to keepe all the yeare, being an excel∣lent repaste: some are preserved in Sugar, as other fruites are, and served in banquets among other sweet meates, or dryed up after they are preserved and so put among other dry candid Iunckets. The Warden is chiefly, yea onely admitted to be taken by the sicke, and aguish in that it hath no actriction therein to breede obstructions, which are the utter enemies to putrid feavers. The wilde Peares by reason of their harshnesse, are not eaten as the milder sorts are, except some good kinde stewed or baked, to serve the poore peoples dyet, the other scarse fit for the hogs to eate, and therefore are for the most part where store of them grow, beaten and pressed into a liquour which is called Perry, of especiall good use at Sea in long voyages, to mingle with their fresh water, to make it the more healthfull, or lesse offensive to those that must continually drinke water: and will after some time become so milde almost as Wine, and fit and wholesome to be drunke: The Physicall uses of them both are these: They are to be discerned best by their tastes, for according to Galens rule, the harsh or sowre doe coole and binde, the sweete doe nourish and warme, and those that are neither much sweete or sowre, but betweene both, have answerable qualities to their degrees: all the sweete or lushious sorts doe helpe to moove the belly downewards more or lesse, but that sort much more, which hath the name of the Laxative Peare: those that are harsh or sowre, doe on the contrary part binde the belly as much, and the leaves doe so also: those that are moist doe in some sort coole, but the harsh or wilde sorts much more, and serve well to use in all causes, where there is neede of repelling medicines, and if the wild sorts be boyled with Mushromes, it maketh them the lesse dangerous, and it is said also that the ashes of the Peare tree wood being taken in drinke, or the lye of them be∣ing drunk, doth helpe them that are like to be choked with eating Mushromes: The said Peares boyled with a lit∣tle hony, doth help the stomack very much, that hath any paines or oppression therein, all sorts of them some more or lesse, but the harsher sorts doe most coole and binde outwardly applyed: and serve well to be bound to greene wounds, to coole and stay the blood, and to helpe to heale up the wound without inflammation or further trou∣ble: Which course Galen himselfe as he saith was driven to use upon an exegent not having any other thing at hand for the purpose: Wild Peares therefore in the like case doe more close up the lippes of greene wounds then the other. Perry is a drinke that whosoever useth at home being not accustomed to it, will wring them a little by the belly, and will a little force it downeward, but being more used it worketh not so at all, but rather cooleth an hot or fainting stomacke, helping the digestion being temperately taken: but at Sea by the working thereof it is made more comfortable, taking away the crudity and rawnesse of the water. 
CHAP. LXXIII. Malus. The Apple tree. T He Apple likewise is divided into tame or manured, and wilde, the one serving for Orchards, to be tended and regarded, the other to be left to the Woods and Hedge rowes of fieldes, &amp;c. as I did there∣fore with Peares in the former Chapter so I meane to deale with Apples in this, give you a generall description both of tame and wilde, and the other sorts, that is, especially the Wildings or Crabbes, which were not mentioned in my former Booke. 
1. Malus vulgaris. The common Apple tree. The Apple tree in generall spreadeth his armes and branches more then the Peare tree, but riseth not to that height, the leaves are somewhat round, a little long pointed towards the ends of them, and dented about the edges greene both above and below: the flowers white and a little blush coloured about the edges, consisting of five leaves, the fruite that followeth in this as in the former, is of divers sizes, formes, colours, and tastes, and likewise of variable ripening and lasting, for some will be rotten before others be ripe, and some must be spent, before o∣thers be gathered. 
The double b ossomed Apple differeth from the former in nothing, but in the flowers, which are double, and that it beareth no fruite. Flore dupli∣ci. 
2. Malus sylvestris, The Wilding or Crabbe tree. The Crabbe groweth somewhat like the Apple tree, but full of thornes, and thicker of branches, the flowers are alike, but the fruite is generally small and very sower, yet some more then others, which the Country people to amend, doe usually rost them at the fire, and make them their Winters junckets: whereof some are redder or whiter, or greener, or yellower then others, being seldome much regarded, or distinguished more then to make Cyder or Verd juyce of all sorts being indifferently put together. 
3. Chamae malus. The dwarfe or Paradise Apple. The Paradise Apple is also a kinde of wilde Apple, yet no Crab, for it is not grafted like the manured sorts, but as the Crab, riseth without grafting to be a tree of low stature, not much higher then a man may reach, ha∣ving leaves and flowers like the former: the fruit is of a reasonable size, faire and yellowish, but light and spongy, of a bitter sweet taste, not pleasant, and will not last long but quickely shrinke and wither: the body and bran∣ches are much subject to the Canker, which will quickely eate it round and kill it, and besides will have many scabby bunches that deforme it and cause it to perish, and this as it groweth elder, for it is full of suckers, from the roote, which will be as faire and smoth, as of any other tree.
Of the manured sort there is one whose flowers are wholly white &amp; smaller, the tree lower and the fruit smaller. 
P manana. There is another which hath no kernels within the core. 
Of the manured kinde, the Holland Pippin must be remembred, which is a flat and yellowish greene Pippin, and of as good a rellish as most of the other Pippins, and of a meane size. 
Of Wildings or Crabs, there is the Towne Crab, the greater and lesser red Crab, the greater and lesser white Crab, and the small hedge Crabbe. 
Ma us. The Apple tree. 
Malus sylvestris. The Wilding or Crabbe tree. 
 
The Place and Time. The better sorts of Apples are planted in Orchards, and some of the other, as the dwarfe kinde, the Wildings or Crabs grow in Woods generally, yet are planted in the hedges in many Countries of this Land to make Cy∣der withall, the Apples in generall flower, and bud forth leaves later then Peares, and ripen earlier or later for the most part, according to the kinde. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and the fruite , in Latine Malus and Malum, or Pomus and Pomum, yet Po∣mum is a generall word including th fruites of many other trees, for some would distinguish all sorts of fruites into Pomum and Nacem, but Scaliger saith the opinion of those Grammarians is too ridiculous: it is therefore u∣sually called Malus, but yet that word likewise is referred to divers other kindes of trees, as Malus Cydoma sive Cotonea, Malus Medicavel Citria, Malus Limonia, Malus Auraea sen Aurantia, Malus Persica, Malus Punica, Malus Arminiaca vel praecocia, and many others, and Pliny numbreth Zizypha, and Tuberes among them, who re∣citeth the names of a number of sorts frequent with them, as he doth every where with other sorts of fruites, which to relate here were impertinent, especially to us, who can apply but very few of them to those sorts are knowne among us, and to save time to spend to better purpose. Cornarius taketh the Castiana mala which Colu∣mella calleth Sestiana, to be the Arantia Orenge: but Galen appointing the Castiana mala to be boyled, to give one for the head ache, did not meane the Orenge, which was neither knowne to him or in his time, nor yet is used to be boyled. The Arabians call it Tusa and Tufalia, the Italians Mele, the Spaniards Mansanas, the French Pomier and Pome, the Germanes Depffell and Apffell, the Dutch Appel, and we Apple. 
The Ʋertues. Apples in generall are cold and windy, and being of sundry tastes, Galen sheweth thereby how to distinguish them, for some have an austere taste, and are good for fainting stomackes and loose bellyes, others sowre good to coole and quench thirst, and some sharpe, fit to cut grosse flegme, some sweete soone distributed in the body, and as quickly passed away, yet sooner corrupting in the stomacke if they be stayed: the best sorts before they be thorough ripe, are to be avoyded; then to be rosted or scalded is the best way to take them, and a little spice or seedes mixed or cast upon them, and taken after meate, doe strengthen both stomacke and bowels, especially in those that either loathe their meate or hardly digest it, and for those that are given to casting, or have a flixe or laske; those that are not sweete, but rather a little sowre or harsh, used in that manner are fittest: Sweete Apples doe loosen the belly, and thereby drive forth the wormes that are therein: sower Ap∣ples stoppe the belly, and provoke vrine; Crabs for this purpose are the fittest: The sweete Apples, as the Pippin and Pearemaine helpe to dissolve Melancholly humours, to procure mirth and expell heavinesse, and there∣fore are fittest for Confectio Alkermes, and Syrupus de pomis: The leaves boyled and given to drinke in hot a∣gues, and where the heate of the liver and stomacke causeth the lippes to breake out, and the throate to grow dry harsh and furred, is very good to wash and gargle it withall, and to drinke downe some; this may to good purpose be used, when better things are not at hand, or cannot be had: the juyce of Crabs, eyther Verdjuyce or Cider is of singular good use in the heate and faintings of the stomacke, and against casting, to make a posset with some of it, and drinke, or take some thereof by it selfe: Cider is not onely called in the North Country Wine by those beyond Seas, but is used almost as wine in divers Countries of this Land where it is made, and as I said of Perry before, to a stomacke unacquainted with it, it will be somewhat troublesome thereto, and to the belly, yet by the often use of it, it becommeth familiar and helpefull to those that have fainting or weakenesse of the spi∣rits and stomacke, somewhat comforting and refreshing the vitall Spirits; it is of great use at Sea in long voya∣ges, and is more desired then Perry. The juyce of Crabs or Cider applyed with wet clothes therein, to scalded or burnt places cooleth, healeth, and draweth forth the fire: a rotten Apple applyed to eyes that are blood shotten, or enflamed with heate, or that are blacke and blew about them by any stroke or fall, and bound to all day, or all night helpeth them quickely: the distilled water of rotten Apples doth coole the heate and inflammations of sores, and is good to bathe foule and creeping ulcers, and to wash the face to take away spots, freckles, or other discolourings in the face, the destilled water of good and sound Apples, is of speciall good use to procure m rth and expe l melancholly; the oyntment called Pomatum if it be sweete and well made doth helpe the chaps in the lips or hands, or to smooth the rough skinne of the hands or face, parched with winde or other accident, to supple and make them smooth. 
CHAP. LXXIV. Malus Cydonia. The Quince tree. T Here are foure of five sorts of Quinces knowne to us in these dayes, which are as followeth. 
1. Malus Cotonea vulgaris. Our ordinary Quince tree. The ordinary Quince tree groweth oftentimes to the height and bignesse of a reasonable Ap∣ple tree, but more usually lower and crooked, with a rough barke, spreading armes and branches farre abroad; the leaves are somewhat round and like those of the Apple tree, but thicker, har∣der, fuller of veines, and white on the underside, not dented at all about the edges: the flowers are large and white, sometimes dasht over with a blush: the fruite that followeth is yellow, being neere to be ripe; and covered with a white freeze or Cotton, thicke set on the younger, and growing lesse, as they grow to be thorough ripe, bunched out oftentimes in some places, some being liker an Apple, and some a Peare, of a strong heady sent, and not durable to keepe, and is sowre, harsh, and of an unpleasant taste, to eate fresh, but being scalded, rosted, baked, or preserved becom∣meth Malus Cotonea vulgaris. The ordinary Quince tree. 
very pleasant. 
2. Cydonia Lusitanica. The Portugall Quince. The onely difference in this is in the fruite, which is of two sorts, the Apple Quince is great and yel∣low, seldome comming to be whole or seene with∣out chapping, it is so pleasant being fresh gathered that it may be eaten like an Apple without offence, but dressed after any the wayes aforesaid, it is much more pleasant: the peare Quince is like the other, but not fit to be eaten raw like the former, but must bee prepared after some of the wayes before set downe, and so it will take up lesse Sugar then the English, because it is pleasant of it selfe. 
3. Cydonia Barbarica. The Barbary Quince. This is like unto the last in goodnesse and plea∣santnesse, but lesser in bignesse, not cleaving at all. 
The Lyons Quince is a reasonable great Quince. like the English, Lugdunen∣sis. but not so yellow as the Portingall sort. 
The Brunswicke Quince is almost round, neither like peare nor Apple. Brunsui∣sensis. 
The Place and Time. The first is our English Quince, that best likes to grow neere ponds and water sides, and is frequent through the Land, the other have their places ex∣pressed in their titles: and flower not untill after the leaves be come forth; the fruite being ripe of the Portugall and Barbary, about the middle of Sep∣tember usually, the other later by a moneth, 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and in Latine Malus Cydonia, a Cydone Cretae oppido dicitur unde prima advecta saith Pliny Cato first called it Cotonea Malus, and Pliny after him; Dioscorides and Ga∣len have but two sorts, the one small and round, and the other greater but lesse usefull, called Struthia, which as Galen saith is so called in Asia, Columella setteth downe three sorts, Struthia great ones, Chrysomela gold colour, and Mustca earely ones, but little. Ʋirgill in his third Ecclog. calleth the Chrysomela a wild sort in these Verses. 
Quod potui, sylvestri ex arbore lecta Aurea mala decemmisi, cras altera mittam. But Pliny hath erred very much in saying that the Struthia or Struthiomela, are small, contrary to Dioscorides Galen, and Columella. The Arabians call it Saffargel, the Italians Melocotogno, the Spaniards Membrillio, and Marmello, and from thence is our Marmelate of Quinces called Marmelades, the French Coing, and Pomme de coing, the Germanes Kutten Quittenbaum, and the fruite Kuttenopffell, the Dutch Queboom and Queappel, and we Quincetree, and Quince.
The Ʋertues. Quinces have a cold and earthy faculty in them, and by the reason of their great binding, they moisten the body lesse then other fruites, for they are cold in the first, and dry in the second degree: they are acceptable to the stomacke, but much more baked, rosted, or scalded then otherwise: yet when they are greene they helpe all sorts of flixes in man or woman, and chollericke laskes, castings, and whatsoever needeth astriction, more then any way prepared by fire, yet the Syrupe of the juyce, or the conserve, is somewhat conducible for much of the binding quality is consumed by the fire: if a little vinegar be added, it stirreth up the languishing appetite, and the sto∣macke given to casting, and if some spices it comforteth and strengtheneth the decaying and fainting spirits, and helpeth the liver opprest, that it cannot perfect the digestion, and correcteth chollour and flegme: if you would have them purging, put honey to them in stead of Sugar, and if more laxative adde for chollour Rubarbe, for flegme Turbith, for watery humours Scamony: but if more forcibly to binde, use the unripe Quinces with Ro∣ses and Acacia, or Hypocisthis, and some torrefied Rubarbe: To take of the crude juyce of Quinces is held a pre∣servative against the force of deadly poyson, not suffering it to have any force in the body, for it hath beene of∣ten found most certaine true, that the very smell of a Quince hath taken away all the strength of the poyson of El∣leborus albus, which Hunters make to kill wild beasts, by dipping their Arrow heads therein: it hath beene also found certaine, that if Quinces be brought into a house where Grapes are hung up to be kept dry all the yeare, they will assuredly rot with the very smell of them: If there be neede of any outward binding and coo∣ling of any hot fluxes, the oyle of Quinces, or the other medicines that may be made thereof, are very availeable to annoynt the belly or the other parts therewith, it likewise strengtheneth the stomacke and belly, and the si∣nues that are loosened by sharpe humours falling on them, and restraineth immoderate sweatings: the maccilage taken from the seeds of Quinces, boyled a little in water, is very good to coole the heate, heale the sore breasts of women, who have them sore by their childrens default or otherwise: the same also with a little Sugar is good to lenefie the harshnesse and hoarsenesse of the throate, and roughnesse of the tongue: the cotton or downe of Quinces boyled in Wine and applyed to plague sores, healeth them up, and laid as a plaister made up with waxe, it bringeth haire to them that are bald, and keepeth it from falling, if it be ready to shed. 
CHAP. LXXV. Malus Medica vel Citria. The Pomecitron tree. A Lthough diverse have used this word of Malus Medica, to comprehend under it all the other kindes of Lemmons and Orrenges, yet I meane to distinguish them severally, and take it but for one kinde, which as the most principall, I will set in the first place and the rest to follow, whereof there hath beene observed in divers Countries, divers varieties, and their names set downe by sundry Au∣thours, which how they doe agree together I cannot tell, so few of them having beene seene in our Land. I will therefore here shew you those few that Clusius hath set downe, with some o∣thers of our owne observation. 
1. Malus Citria major. The greater Pomecitron tree. The greater Citron tree groweth not very high, in some places but with a short crooked body, but in others not much lower then the Lemmon tree, spreading sundry great long armes and branches set with long and sharpe thornes, and faire large, and broad fresh greene leaves a little dented about the edges, with a shew of almost invi∣sible holes in them, but lesse then the Orenge leaves have, of a very sweete sent, the flowers grow at the leaves all along the branches, being somewhat longer then those of the Orrenge, made of five thicke, whitish, purple or blush leaves with some threds in the middle, after which all the yeare long followeth fruite, for it is seldome seene without ripe fruite, and halfe ripe, and small, young and greene, and blossomes all at once: This kind bea∣reth great and large fruite, some as great as a Muske Melon, yet others lesser, but all of them with a rugged, bun∣ched out, and uneven yellow barke, thicker then in any of the other sorts, and with small store of sowre juyce in the middle, and somewhat great pale whitish or yellow seede with a bitter kernell lying in it, the smell of this Apple is very strong, but very comfortable to the senses. 
2. Citria malus minor sive Limonera, The lesser Pomecitron tree. This lesser Citron tree groweth very like the former, but the leaves are somewhat lesser and shorter, and so are the thornes also. The flowers are of a deepe blush colour, and the fruite lesser and longer then they, and no bigger then the lesser fruite of the former, the rinde also reasonable thicke and yellow, but not so rugged, having more store of sowre juyce within them, and fewer seedes. 
3. Citria malus sive Limonera praegnans. Bigge bellyed or double Citrons. This differeth not in the tree or any part thereof from the last, but in the fruite, which is as great as the last, and a little paler yellow on the outside, having another smaller fruite growing within it lying at the very top or head, yet not to be seene before you cut it, and is divided from the other fruite with a yellow rinde, covering the most part of it, and sticking onely to the other at the head or toppe, the greater fruite hath both juyce and seede within it, but the lesser hath no seedes, and but little or no juyce, and is more sweete then sowre: the Spaniards call it Li∣mones prennados. 
4. Limonera dulcis. Sweete Limoones or Limerones. In the fruit of this tree which the Spaniards as Clusius saith call Limones del Emperador, is the greatest difference from the last, which is smaller then it, but twice as big as a great Lemmon, of a deeper yellow coloured barke, and thinner by much, being full of juyce, but sweete Malus Medica vel Cinria. The Pomecitron tree. 
and pleasant and may be familiarly eaten, with the rinde and all. 
5. Limonera acida. Sowre Limoones, or Limerones. This sowre Limoone is very like this last, but somewhat bigger, more yellow rinded, and somewhat rugged, the juyce whereof is more sower then it, yet lesser then of a Lemmon. 
6. Limonera multiformis. Changeable Limoones or Limerones. The fruite hereof is wholly neere unto a flesh colour, and of divers formes, some being of one and some of another fashion, not constant in any; the Spaniards call it Limones de figuras. 
The Place and Time. All these sorts of Citrons grow in Spaine, with those that are curious, to nourse up rare fruites, but gained from sundry places abroad; and the last from the fortunate Islands. Their time is without time, even all the yeare throughout, flowring and bearing fruite. 
The Names. The first and great Pomecitron, is called in Greeke , that is, Malus medica, Theo∣phrastus saith lib. 1. c. 4. that it came first from Media and Persis, and therefore was called Ma∣lum Medicum and Persicum, and some have cal∣led it Malum Assyrium, others Malum Citrium or Citreum, as also Oedromela, and Citromela, and Citrangula: some also call it Citrus arbor, and some Cedrus Theophrasti &amp; Dioscoridis, and some Poncires quasi Pomacitria. And the se∣cond is called by Clusius Limonera, as he saith the Spaniards so call the tree, and the fruite Limones, as they doe the rest that follow, with their other severall deno∣minations, because both tree and fruite differ from the first or true Citron, which they call Cidras, the Italians Ce∣dri, and Citroni, the French Citrons, the Germanes Citrinoepffell, the Dutch Citreen, and Citreenboom, and we in English the Citron, or Pomecitron tree or fruite. 
The Ʋertues. All the parts of this fruite both the outer and inner rinde, both juyce and seed are of excellent use, and of con∣trary effects one unto another, as some hot and dry, others cold and dry: the outer yellow rinde is very sweete in smell, very aromaticall and bitter in taste: and dryed is a very soveraigne cordiall for the heart: and an excellent antidote against venome and poyson, against the plague or any other infection: it warmeth and com∣forteth a cold or windy stomacke, mightily dissolving the winde, and dispersing raw cold and undigested hu∣mours therein, or in the bowels: being chewed in the mouth it amendeth an evill breath, and causeth a good one: it also helpeth digestion, and is good against melancholly: these outer rindes being preserved with Sugar, are used as a junket, more then in any physicall manner, yet are they often used in cordiall electuaries, preserva∣tives against infection and melancholly, and other the diseases aforesaid. It also helpeth to loosen the body, and therefore there is a solitive electuary made thereof called Electuarium de Citro solutivum, to evacuate the bo∣dyes, or cold flegmaticke constitutions, and may be also safely used where choller is also mixed with flegme. The inner white rinde of the fruite is almost unsavoury and without taste, and is not used in any manner of physicke, but being preserved serveth to sort with other Suckets at banquets; the sowre juyce in the middle is cold and farre surpasseth that of Lemons in the effects, although not so sharpe in taste: it is singular good in all pestilentiall and burning seavers, to restraine the venome and infection, to suppresse the violence of choller, and hot distemper of the blood, and extinguish thirst, and correcteth the ill disposition of the Liver, stirreth up an appetite, and re∣fresheth the overspent and fainting spirits; resisteth drunkennesse, and helpeth the turnings of the Braine by the hot vapours arising thereinto, and causing a frensie or want of sleepe: the seede is the last to be spoken of, but not of the least property, for it not onely equalleth the barke, but surpasseth it in many particulars, although Galen and Avicen seeme herein to be opposite one unto another. Galen maketh the seede to be cold, which Matthiolus would excuse with diverting his intent to the juyce; and Avicen saying it is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second; the barke or rinde, hot in the first, and dry in the end of the second degree, the inner white substance be∣ing betweene the outer barke and the inner juyce, hot and moist in the first degree, and the acide juyce cold and dry in the third degree: these seedes are very effectuall to preserve the heart and vitall spirits, from the poy∣son of the Scorpion or other venemous creatures, as also against the infection of the plague, or poxes, or any other contagious disease, they kill the wormes in the stomacke, provoke womens courses, cause an aborsement, and hath a digesting quality and a drying, fit to dry up and consume moist humours, both inwardly in the body, and out∣wardly in any moist or running ulcers and sores, and take away the paines that come after the biting of any ve∣nemous creature: the whole fruite or the branches of the trees laid in presses, Chests, or Wardrobes, keepeth cloath, or silke Garments from Moths and Wormes, and give them a good sent also. 
CHAP. LXXVI. Limonia Malus. The Lemmon tree. O F Lemmons also there are divers sorts, some greater, some smaller, some with thicker, and more rugged rindes, others with smoother, some with a very sharpe and tart juyce, others with a milder. 
1. Malus Limonia acida vulgaris. The ordinary Lemmon tree. The Lemmon tree groweth usually great and high with great armes and slender branches ar∣med with long greenish thornes, the leaves are long and very like unto Bay tree leaves, but den∣ted about the edges, or like unto the Citron leaves Limonia Malus. The Lemmon tree. 
but lesser, and full of holes like unto them also; the flowers grow after the same manner as the former, but are wholly white and as sweete: the fruite that followeth is somewhat long and round, with a paler yellow rinde then in any of those before, somewhat rugged or uneven, and not so smooth as in other sorts, and somewhat thicker also, the juyce whereof within is almost as sharpe as the next, but yet may be discerned to have the taste as it were but of an hedge fruite, and such like seede as the Ci∣tron among it, but smaller and somewhat longer, if it be heedefully marked, though they may seeme both alike. 
2. Malus Limonia acida cortice tenui. The thin rinded sower Lemmon. There is no difference in the tree of this, from the former, nor in the fruite, but that it is a little bigger, the rinde of a fine pale yellow colour, smoother then the other, and much thinner also, wholly replenished with a most delicate sharpe juyce, and the like seedes among it. 
3. Malus Limonia acida fructu rotundo. Round Lemmons. The tree that beareth these Lemmons, is in all things like the last, but that it hath few or no thornes at all upon it, and the fruite having a thinne rinde like it, is somewhat rounder then it, with a small crowne at the head, the juyce within being as sower altogether. 
4. Malus Limonia dulcis major. The greater sweete Lemmon. This Lemmon hath this difference from the other, that it is greater then any of the former Lemmons, the rinde yellower and smooth, and the juyce with∣in it much more sweete and pleasant, that it may be eaten as an Orrenge. 
5. Malus Limonia dulcis minor. The Civill Lemmon. This Lemmon is so like the best sort of thin rinded sower Lemmons, that it is hard by the outside to know their difference, for it is of the same size, but of a little deeper coloured rinde, and the juyce within like the last, of a pleasant tart taste, that may familiarly be eaten, or rather having but little sharpe taste in it. 
6. Malus Limonia sylvestris minime. The last wilde Lemmon tree. This sort of Lemmon groweth wild in Syria and Egipt. Bellonius maketh mention of it also, that it groweth about Cairo, that as he saith, are no bigger then Doves or Pigeons egges.
The Place and Time. We have had all these sorts of Lemmons brought us from Spaine and the Islands at severall times, whereby we have described them unto you: and for their time it holdeth equall with the former, and the other that follow, that is, hold their leaves ever greene and beare blossomes, greene and ripe fruite all the yeare through. 
The Names. Neither the tree nor his fruite as it is likely, were knowne to the ancient Greekes or Latines, but it is in these dayes as in former times called Malus Limonia, and the fruite Limones. The Spaniards as Clusius sheweth, call the tree Limera, and the fruite Limas, all other nations follow the Latine, according to their dialect. 
The Vertues. Both the rinde and the juyce of Lemmons doe come somewhat neere unto the property of the Citron, though in a weaker degree, and in the want of the one, the other may safely be used to all the purposes before mentioned for the juyce, but the barke or rinde being thinne is seldome preserved or dryed to be used inwardly, but yet com∣meth somewhat neere it, if any will apply it although weaker to resist poyson, venome or infection, yet the juyce being sharper, cooleth more, but doth not equally resist putride humours like it: an ounce and a halfe of the juyce of unripe Lemmons drunke with a little Malmesy helpeth to clense and expell the stone out of the kidneyes and likewise killeth and driveth forth the wormes in the body of men or children: if an angell of gold, or so much weight of pure leafe gold be set to steepe in three or foure ounces of pure juyce of Lemmons for foure and twenty houres, and then taken out, or the juyce drained cleane from it, and some of it given in a cup of Wine, with a little pouther of Angelica roote unto any infected with the Plague, and dangerously sicke, (if there be any hope or likelihood of recovery) it will helpe them, the seedes of these are likewise almost as effectuall as of the Citrons, the juyce of the sweete Lemmons is neither so cooling nor so operative for any of the purposes afore mentioned. The destilled water in glasse from the inner pulpe or substance of Lemmons cleareth the skin from all freckles, spots or other markes in the face, or in any other part of the body, provoketh urine, and breaketh and expelleth the stone being drunke, and helpeth also the unning scab, and killeth lice in the head, the wormes, in the hands or nose, and pushes and wheales in the skinne. The juyce of Lemmons is singular good to use at Sea in long voyages, to put into their Beverage to keepe them from the Scurvy, whereto long Sea journies are much subject; as also the more abundantly to quench their thirst in those hot climates: it is no lesse usefull at home for Dyers, who spend much of it in striking sundry dainty colours which will never be well done with∣out it. 
CHAP. LXXVII. Malus Arantia. The Orenge tree. I Have likewise five sorts or rather kindes of Orrenges to shew you, which are these. 
1. Malus Arantia vulgaris. The ordinary Orrenge tree. The grafted or ordinary manured Orrenge tree groweth often to a very great heighth and big∣nesse, spreading large armes and branches with a rougher barke below, and smooth greene on the branches, yet it is also often found lesse in lesse fruitefull soiles, sparingly armed with sharpe but short thornes, the leaves are somewhat like unto those of the Lemmon, but that each leafe hath a peece of a leafe set under it, and are not dented at all about the edges, and are as full of small holes in them, as any of the former, the flowers are whitish, but of a stronger sweete sent then any of the rest, and used to many other purposes then either of the other: the fruite hereof is round, with a thicke bitter rinde, of a deepe yellowish red colour, which from it taketh the name of an Orrenge colour, having a soft white loose substance, next unto the outer coloured rinde, and a sower juyce lying mixed among small skinnes in severall parts, as in the other sorts, with such like seed also: the juyce of some is lesse sower Malus Arantia vulgaris. The ordinary Orrenge tree. 
then others; and of a taste betweene sower and sweet neere unto Wine. 
2. Malus Arantia sylvestris. The wilde or Crabbe Orrenge tree. The Crabbe Orrenge tree (as our Crabbe Apple tree) groweth wild, and is fuller of branches, and thicker set with thornes, the flowers and leaves are alike, but lesser, and the fruite is very small, and of a pale yellow colour, with a thicke rinde and little juyce or sharpe within it, but plainely tasting as a Crabbe with us, differeth from a good fruite. 
3. Malus Arantia cortice dulci eduli. The Apple Orrenge. This Orrenge differeth from others not so much in the colour of the outer barke which is of a deepe gold yellow∣ish red, but in the whole fruite, which is through out as firme almost as an Apricocke, and yet distinguished into parts on the inside, like others, which together with the barke or rinde is to bee eaten like an Apple, the barke or rinde not being bitter or tough like the rest: the Spaniards call this Naranja caxel. 
4. Malus Arantia unico grano. The Orrenge without seedes. This onely differeth from that Orrenge with the best sower juyce in having but one graine or seed in the whole juyce lying within it. 
5. Malus Arantia pumilio. The Dwarfe Orrenge tree. The stocke of this dwarfe tree according to his name is low, and the branches grow thicke, well stored with leaves, but they are lesser and narrower then the other, the flowers also are many, and thicke set on the branches, which beare fruite more plentifully then the former, but is lesse then the greater sorts, yet as well coloured. 
The Place and Time. All these sorts likewise we have seene being brought us from Spaine, and Portingall, the hedge or wilde Crabbe fruite from the hither parts of Spaine, and keepe time with the rest. 
The Names. It is thought that these Apples were knowne to the auncients who called them Mala aurea Hesperidum, being any where else, and therefore Hercules made it one of his taskes or labours to slay the Dragon that kept the Garden where they were, and brought them away with him: Some call them Aurantia a corticis colore aureo, and some Arantia a oppid dicta, some Pomum Naran ium, Dodonaeus Anarantium, and Lobel Malum , which name doth best suite with them for Golden Apples they are indeed: All nations call them ac∣cording to the Latine, and Clusius saith the Spaniards call them Naranjas, and the third sort here set downe Na∣ranja caxel, the Germanes call the Orrenge Pomerants, and the French Pommes &amp; Orenges. The flowers of the Orenge tree are called Napha, and the oyntment made of them Ʋnguentum ex Napha. 
The Vertues. The rinde of the Orrenges are bitterer and hotter then those of Lemmons, or Citrons, and therefore doe warme a cold stomacke the more, helping to breake the winde therein, and the flegme, and after the bitternesse is taken from them by steeping them in water for sundry dayes, and then preserved either wet or dry, besides their use in banquets, they are littlelesse effectuall for the strengthening of the heart and spirits, and the other qualities that Citrons have: the juyce is farre inferiour to either of them, and are fitter for meate then medicine, yet foure or five ounces of the juyce taken at a time, will drive forth putrid humours from the inner parts by sweat, and after strengthen and comfort the heart. The destilled water of the flowers, besides the odoriferous sent it th, fit for any perfume, it is good against contagious diseases, and pestilentiall feavers, to drinke thereof at sun∣dry times, it helpeth also the cold and moist infirmities of the mother: the oyntment that is made of the flowers is often used to annoint the stomacke to helpe the cough, and to expectorate the cold raw flegme, and to warme and comfort the other places of the bodyes. 
CHAP. LXXVIII. Malum Assyria vel Poma Adami. Adams Apple. T His tree for the most part groweth as great as the Orrenge tree, yet sometimes it is no higher then the Citron tree, and spreadeth faire great armes and branches with few, and those short thornes upon them, the leaves are faire and large, almost as great as those of the Citron or Lemmon tree, pounced with holes in the like manner, the flowers also are not much unlike, but the fruite that followeth is more like un∣to an Orrenge, yet two or three times bigger, pale Malum Assyria vel Poma Adami. Adams Apple. 
yellow rinded, thicke, rugged or uneven, and with s me rifts or chips thereon, as if it had beene bitten, (from whence was obtruded that fond opinion unto the vulgar, for wise men would be ashamed of so ri∣diculous an opinion, that it was the fruite that Adam tasted in Paradice, and that therfore the markes should remaine upon the whole kinde ever after but thus have you three or foure trees foisted into mens conceits by irreligious cozeners, for Adams Apple, like to the rest of the Rellickes in the World) a Spongy substance next to it, and with an acide sweete juyce, yet not so pleasant as others, lying in parts and round seedes a∣mongst it like the Citron, which may be eaten altoge∣ther like the Apple Orrenge as Clusius saith. 
The Place and Time. This groweth with the other sorts in sundry places of Spaine, among the Monasteries, or with others that are curious of rare fruites, and is in nature like the rest, ever green, and bearing flowers and fruite all the yeare long. 
The Names. This is called by some Pomum, and Malum Assyri∣ , as denoting forth the place of his originall, the more generall part Poma Adami, yet Cordus in historia, calleth it Citrius altera, the Spaniards as Clusius saith, call it Tor njas, and some Zamboas, as the Portingals doe, the Italians Lomie, and Pomi di Adam , the French Pon ires in generall. 
The properties hereof are referred to the Lemmons yet having a milder juyce, and therefore not so much regarded as the others: it is by some used to kill the itch and take away the scales, to cut one of these through the middle, and thereon to cast some fine pou∣ther of Brimstone, being heated under the cinders, and r bbed on the parts affected afterwards. 
CHAP. LXXIX. Malus Punica. The Pomegarnet tree. T He Pomegarnet tree is distinguished into the manured, bearing fruite, and into the wilde bearing none, each of these have likewise diversities in them: Of the manured fruite, there is both sower and sweete, and of a winy taste betweene sower and sweete, for so they are distinguished in the Coun∣tryes where they grow: the wilde kinde likewise is of two sorts, and both bearing double flowers, but one greater then another, but no fruite ever followeth them. 
1. Malus Punica sativa. The Pomegarnet tree bearing fruite. This Pomegarnet tree groweth not great in the warme Countries, and where it is naturall (and with us rising for the most part into sundry brownish twigges) not above seven or eight foote high, spreading into many slen∣der branches, here and there set with thornes, and with many very faire greene shining leaves like in forme and bignesse unto the leaves of large Myrtle leaves, every one upon a small reddish footestalke: among the leaves come forth here and there, the flowers which are like bell flowers, broad at the brimmes and smaller at the bottome, being one whole leafe, divided at the toppe into five parts, of an orient red crimson colour na∣turally, but much paler with us, and many veines running through it, with divers threds in the middle; and standing in a brownish hollow cup, or long hard huske: the fruite is great and round with a hard smooth brow∣nish red rinde, not very thicke, but yellowish on the inside, and a crowne at the toppe stored plentifully with a most cleare liquor or juyce like wine, either sweete or sower, or betweene both, full of seedes, inclosed in skins, and the liquour among them: sometimes this breaketh the rinde as it groweth which will cause it to rot quicke∣ly. Abs ue se∣minibus. Cordus in historia maketh mention of one that hath no kernell or seed within it, and doth also mention a wild kinde to grow in Spaine, and Africa, which I cannot beleeve to be any other than that wild kinde with double flowers, which followeth next to this to be described, for he maketh that which beareth fruite to have a double flower which is not so.
2. Malus Punica sylvestris major sive Balanstium majus. The greater double blossomed Pomegarnet tree. The great wilde Pomegarnet tree with us, groweth altogether into slender brownish branches, with some thornes among them, and shining greene leaves somewhat larger then the former, but into a shrubby low tree naturally, from the branches shoote forth flowers very double, as large as a double Province Rose, but with shorter small leaves, of an excellent bright crimson colour, tending to a silken Carnation, standing in brownish hard cups or huskes, divided into five parts: there followeth no fruite unto these. 
3. Balastium minus. The lesser double Pomegarnet tree. This smaller kinde differeth from the other but little, the leaves onely are of a sadder greene colour, the flowers smaller, and lesse thicke, and double, and of a sadder red Orrenge tawnie colour, set also in such like hard cups Malus Punica sativa. The manured Pomegranate tree. 
Mall Punicae sive Granata fructus. The fruite or Pomegranates. 
huskes. Of one of these two double sorts, it is said that there is one that beareth white flowers, and another that hath them mixed with white and red. Flore albo &amp; flore va∣rio. 
The Place and Time. The manured kindes grow in Spaine, Portugall, Italy, and in other warme Countries, but with us preserved and housed with great care: and the wild kinde with much more: They 2. Malus Punica sylvestris sive Balaustium majus. The great double blossomed Pomegarnet tree. 
flower very hardly with us, the first not untill May, and the other much l er. 
The Names. The Pomegarnet is called in Greeke and , and by Hippocrates , in Latine Malus Punica, and Malus Granata, and the fruite Ma∣lus granatum, or Punicum, because it is thought that they were brought over from that part of Africke, where old Carthaga stood, into that part of Spaine, which is now called Granado, and from thence called Grana∣tum: The flowers of the tame kinde as Dioscorides saith are called Cyti∣ni, yet Pliny maketh the flowers of the wilde kinde to be called Cytinus, and the flowers both of tame and wilde to he Balaustium, but properly as I take it, Cytinus is the cup, wherein the flower, as well of the tame as wilde kinde doth stand, for unto their likenesse, both the flowers and seed vessels of Asarum, and the seede vessels of Hyoscyamus are resembled, and not unto the whole flower, and Balaustium is generally with as taken to be only the double flowers of the wilde kind: the rinde of the fruite is called in Greeke and , and so also Psidium and Sidium in Latine but generally Malicorium or Cortex granatorum: The greater double blossomed kinde is called Balaustium Creticum and Cyprium, because it groweth in both places, and the last is called Romanum. The Arabians call it Kuman and Ruman, the Italians Melo granata, and Pomogranato, the Spaniards Granadas and Romanas, the French Grenadier the tree, and P e de Grenade, and Migraine the fruite, the Germanes Granatoepffel, the Dutch Grannetappel, and we in English Pomegranet or Pomegarnet. 
The Ʋertues. All the sorts of Pomegarnets breed good blood, but nourish little, and are helping to the stomacke, yet those that are sweete please best, but that they somewhat heate it and breede winde, and therefore forbidden in agues, because they breede choller: the sower doe binde, and are fit for an hot fainting stomacke, and stay casting, and provoke urine, and are somewhat offensive to the teeth and gummes, in the eating: those that are of a meane or winy taste, are indifferent to each part: the seedes within the fruite, or the rinde thereof doe binde very forcibly, ei∣ther the pouther or the decoction taken, and stay casting, the bloody flixe, womens courses either red or white, the spitting of blood, and the running of the reynes; it is said also that they are good for the dropsie: the flowers worke the same effects: the fruite is good against the bitings of the Sea Hare, and the bitings of the Scorpion, and stayeth the immoderate longings of women with childe, the decoction of the rinde, or seedes of the fruite, with a little Syrope put to it, is good against Cankers in the mouth, and ulcers in the privy parts, the fundament, or any other part of the body, and is good against the rupture, it helpeth also the ulcers or running sores in the eares or nose, or rheumes in the eyes, to be dropped or injected, and fastneth loose teeth, destroyeth the flat wormes in the body, and helpeth to take away wens, or the like out-growings in the flesh: with the rinde of Pomegarnets instead of Gaules, or else with the Gaules also, is made the best sort of writing incke, exceeding the ordinary, both for blackenesse and durability. 
CHAP. LXXX. Prunus. The Plume tree. O F Plummes there is so great variety, as I have shewed elsewhere, that it were but actum agere to re∣peate them here againe. I will therefore give you a generall description of the tree (I meane the ma∣nured kinde, for the wilde kinde which is our Blacke thorne or Sloe, is extant in another Classis of this Worke before) and that the fruite differeth in forme, colour and taste, one from another with the best properties they are serviceable unto. Vnto the Family of the Plummes belong both Apricockes, Peaches, and Nectarins, all of them being Plummes, but of severall kindes. I will therefore place the Apricocke in this Chapter as nearest to them, and the rest in the next Chapter following. 
1. Prunus vulgaris. The ordinary Plumme tree. The Plum tree for the most part riseth to be a great tall tree, whose body and armes are covered with a rug∣ged barke, more or lesse, the younger branches being smooth in all: the leaves are somewhat long and broad, and rounder in most then those of Cherryes, yet differing much among themselves, some being longer, larger or rounder then others: the flowers are white and small, made of five leaves a peece: the fruite is very variable in forme, some being ovall, or Peare fashion, or Almond like, or round, in colour some being white or yellow, red, greene, or blacke: and in taste, some being soft and waterish, others firmer and not so moist, some sweete, some sower, and others of a meane taste betweene both, or harsh, or of a taste differing from all these, wherein is contained a small smooth flattish stone, with a white bitter kernell within it. Flore du∣plici. M r . Tradescant had a sort that bore doubleflowers, but perished, not long continuing with him. 
Prun . The Plumme tree. 
Armeniaca malus sive Pracocia. The Apricocke tree. 
 
2. Malus Armeniaca sive praecocia. The Apricocke tree. The Apricocke tree, if it stand by it selfe as a standard tree, like other Plumme trees (which it seldome doth in our Country, for that it would hardly beare fruite in that manner) will rise to be as great as a Plumme tree, with great broad, and almost round leaves, but pointed at the ends and finely dented about the edges: the flow∣ers are white and like the former but larger, the fruite that followeth is round, with a cleft or open furrow in the middle, somewhat like unto a Peach, of a pale yellowish colour on the outside, as well as on the inside, and a little reddish on a side in most, yet whiter in some, and of differing sizes also, some smaller or greater; of a fir∣mer or faster close substance then any of the Plummes; a smooth flattish stone in the middle, great or little, ac∣cording to the fruite, which is ripe with or before the earlier sort of Plummes (and likely long before any of our earely sorts were knowne in former times) which was the cause of the name, and a sweete kernell within it, Nucleo . yet it is said there is one that hath a bitter kernell, which I have not seene. 
The Place and Time. All the sorts of them are planted, none of them growing naturally in our Country, and either in Orchards, for their private possessours, or in the Hedges, or other places of the Fields, Woods, or Parkes abroad, and flow∣er before eyther Apple or Peare, and the Apricocke before any Plumme, by a moneth or more, and is ripe by S t . Iames tide usually, the other sorts of Plummes comming on every one in their degree, some earlier, and some later. 
The Names. The Plume as it is thought is in Greeke the , of Theophrastus, lib. 4. c. 3. and the fruite , in Latine Prunus and Prunum, but I much doubt of it, because beside other things, not correspondent, he saith the leaves doe alwayes abide on the tree. Ingens Prunorum turba saith Pliny, even in his time, but I thinke more then twice so many now. Bellonius lib. 2. c, 91. saith, that the Damasco Plummes, that he saw dryed at Damasco, were bigger then a Wallnut, of a firme substance, and sweete taste, a little tart, with a stone within it, rather long and flat, then thicke and round, and were deare sold even there. The Apricocke is called and , in Latine Chrysomela. i. e. Mala aurea, Malus Armeniaca, and Praecocia by all Au∣thours, yet some call it Baracocca: The Plumme is called by the Arabians Anas, Avas, and Hagias, by the Ita∣lians Prune, and Succine, by the Spaniards Prunas, Audrinas, and Amexcas, by the French Prunier, and Prunes, by the Germanes Pflaumenboom, by the Dutch Pruymbonen, and we Plummes. The Apricocke is called by the Arabians Mex, and Mirmex by the Italians Armoniache, Moniache, Bachoce and Grisomels, by the Spaniards Al∣hiricoques, Alvaricoques, and Albarchigas, by the French Abricot, and Carmaignoles, by the Germanes Sir Iohan Pffersich, and by us Apricocke. 
The Ʋertues. There is much diversity in the faculty of Plummes, for some that are sweete, doe moisten the stomacke, and make the belly soluble, those that are sowre doe quench thirst more, and binde the belly, yet they are all in some sort cooling: the moister sort and more waterish, doe soonest corrupt in the stomacke, but the firmer doe nou∣rish more, and offend lesse taken plentifully, and those are the fittest to be preserved and kept all the yeare: but the dryed fruite, which are sold at the Grocers, under the name of Damaske Prunes, doe somewhat loosen the belly, and being stewed are often used with the poorer sort of people, both in health and sickenesse to rellish the mouth and stomacke, to procure an appetite, and a little to open the body, allay choller, and coole the stomacke: if a purging decoction with Sena Rubarbe, &amp;c. be made for them to be stewed withall, it maketh them the more purging, and the more readily to be taken by those that have weake stomackes; the leaves of the tree boyled in Wine, is good to wash and gargle the mouth and throate, to dry the fluxe of rheume to the palate, gummes, or al∣monds of the throate: the gumme that commeth out of the trees, is good to breake the stone, and doth serve as a glew to fasten any thing withall: the said gum or the leaves boyled in vinegar and applyed, killeth tetters, and ringwormes, The Apricocks have no use in Physicke that I know, but are wholly spent as a junket, eyther fresh and greene, or dryed preserved or candid, to sort with others, for the same purpose. Onely Matthiolus giveth us the use of the oyle, prest out of the kernels of the stones, as the oyle of Almonds is made, to be good against the inflamed piles or hemorrhodes, the tumours or swellings of ulcers, the hoarsenesse of the voyce, the rough∣nesse of the tongue and throate, and likewise the paines in the eares: five ounces saith he, of the said oyle taken with one ounce of Muscadine, driveth forth the stone, and helpeth the chollicke. 
CHAP. LXXXI. Malus Persica. The Peach tree. T He variety of Peaches is great, whereof the Nectarin is a kinde, which because I have already de∣clared them in my former Booke, I will onely here give you the descriptions of them in gene∣rall, and the speciall uses, as I said in the last Chapter: but hereunto I must adjoyne another strange tree of the West Indies, which Clusius tooke to be the Persea of Theophrastus, Dioscori∣des, Galen, Pliny, and others, which how it doth agree, you shall understand. 
1. Malus Persica vulgaris. The ordinary Peach tree. The Peach tree groweth not so great as the Apricocke, planted either by it selfe, or against a wall, but yet sprea∣deth branches reasonable well, from whence spring smaller reddish twigges, whereon are set long and narrow greene leaves, dented about the edges: the blossomes are greater then of any Plumme, and of a light purple co∣lour, after which followeth the fruite, round, and sometimes as great as a reasonable Pippin, especially some; for some are much smaller then others, as also differing in colours and tastes, as russet, red or yellow, waterish, or firme, with a frize or cotton, all over, with a cleft therein like the Apricocke, and a rugged, furrowed great stone Malus Persica. The Peach tree. 
Persea arbor. The Laurell Peach.
within it, and a bitter kernell within the stone. It sooner waxeth old and decayeth then the Apricocke by much. 
Amygda∣lo persicus The All∣mond Peach. There is another kinde of Peach, whereof Camerarius and Bauhinus in his Matthiolus, and Gesner in hortis make mention, whose kernels within the rugged stone is not bitter as others are, but sweete like an Almond. 
2. Nuci persica. The Nectarin. The Nectarin seldome groweth so great as the Peach, the body and elder boughes being somewhat whitish, and the younger branches very red, whereon grow long leaves, very like those of the Peach: the blossome like∣wise is reddish, but hath smaller and narrower leaves, and the fruite that followeth is as round and great as a small Peach, but smooth on the outside, and not rough or cottony as the Peach, nor having any cleft, of differing colours and tastes, some greene, others whitish or yellow, and some red more then others, all of them of a fast firme substance, and more delicate then the Peach, but with such a rugged stone as the Peach and a bitter kernell within it. 
3. Persia arbor Clusij. The Laurell Peach. This strange tree whereof Clusius onely first made mention, is a reasonable great tree, spreading pale greene branches, and faire stiffe greene leaves on them like unto the large Bay leaves, grayish underneath and some crosse veines running through them, sweete both in sent and taste, but a little stipticke and biting: the flowers are like those of the Bay tree, and grow many, and thicke set together in tufts, at the ends of the branches consisting of six pale coloured leaves a peece, after which come fruite, at the first greene and like a plumme, but growing ripe is long and formed like a peare, of a blacke colour and pleasant taste, having a long and round kernell within it, of the fashion of an heart, and of the taste of a Chesnut or Almond: this abideth alwayes greene, not loosing the leaves in Winter. 
The Place and Time. The two first are familiarly noursed up in our Orchards and gardens through the Land, but from whence is their originall I cannot shew you: The last Clusius saith was brought forth of the West Indies, and planted in a mo∣nastery in Spaine, where he saith he onely saw one tree, and none any where else, yet he understood from Doctor Tonar at Sivill, that he had such another growing with him: They all flower in the Spring and fructifie in Au∣tumne. 
The Names. The Peach is called in Greeke and also by some, in Latine Malus Persica, and Rhodacina, but not , as some would have it, to be derived from Duracina, for Doracia is distinguished by Paulus Aegineta, from Praecocia, and Armenia, and by him made all three to be better then Peaches: neither is the Greeke Do∣racia, derived from the Latines Duracina, but rather è contra. The Nectarin is called by Matthiolus and Cae∣salpinus, Nucipersica, because it resembleth the Wallnut in the round smooth outer rinde, and the Peach in the meate, substance and stone. Anguilara calleth it Persica nux, by the same intention, and Pliny Nuci prunum. The last Clusius maketh the question, whether it be not the Persea of Theophrastus lib. 4. c. 2. or no, which Diosco∣rides, Galen, Pliny, and others, doe make mention of also, and which Theophrastus describeth to be a great and a faire tree, and most like unto the Peare tree, both in leaves flowers and branches, but that this hath an everla∣sting leafe; it beareth much fruite, and is ripe at all times, the young still follow the old; the fruite is of the big∣nesse of a Peare, long and like an Almond, and of a greene colour, it hath a stone within it, like a Plumme, but much lesse, and of a softer substance, very sweete, thus farre Theophrastus. Now let me descant a little hereon, and compare them. First, the leaves of Persea, saith Theophrastus, are most like unto the leafe of the Peare tree, and this saith Clusius, is like unto the greatest Bay leafe, the one is almost as broad as long, and the other twice as long as broad, besides it is small pointed, the flowers of Persea are like the Peare tree, which are much larger then those of the Bay, and doe not grow so many together as this doth, nor at the ends of the branches like this: the fruite of Clusius is blace, of this greene, of that like a Peare, of this as bigge as a peare, but like an Almond, of this the stone is like a Plumme, of that like an Heart, which is round and not flat, as that plumme stone is, that hath ripe fruite onely in Autumne, this at all times of the yeare. And besides all these, which are differences suf∣ficient to distinguish them. I doe not finde almost any plant, either herbe or tree growing in the West Indies to be like unto those that grow in Europe, the lesser Asia, or the hither part of Africa, and therefore by all proba∣bilities, this of Clusius cannot be that of Theophrastus, yet this sheweth an excellent judgement in Clusius to re∣ferre this tree to that Persea, but in any judgement this Persea of Theophrastus is most likely to be some kinde of Myrobolane, or else some other fruite not knowne to us, It was called saith Clusius by them where he saw it, Mamay, but he was afterwards enformed by Doctor Tonar, that it was not Mamay, but called Aguacate, by the Indians. Some have thought this Persea, to be all one with the Persica arbor, as Palladius calleth it, or Ma∣lus Persica of Dioscorides. Gaza translating Theophrastus in some places, rendereth it Persica, and in others Persea, as Pliny in one place also confoundeth them both together, although in another he distinctly speaketh of Persea, and separateth it himselfe from Persica: but how much they differ one from another, the descriptions of both doth plainely declare to any: The Peach is called by the Arabians Sauch and Chauch, by the Italians Persiche, by the Spaniards Pexegos, by the French Pesches, by the Germans Pfersichbaum, by the Dutch Perseboom, and by us Peach. 
The Ʋertues Some are of opinion that the leaves of Peaches are of a cold quality, but Galen sheweth that the buds and leaves have an excellent bitter quality, that if they be bruised and laid on the belly, they will kill the wormes, and so will they doe also, if they be boyled in Ale and drunke, and open the belly likewise, and also is a safe medicine to discusse humours, being dryed; and the pouther of them strewed upon fresh bleeding wounds, doth both stay their bleeding and close them up: the flowers being steeped all night in a little Wine, standing warme, strai∣ned forth in the morning, and drunke fasting, doth gently open the belly, and move it downewards, and a Syrupe made of them by reiterate infusions, as the Syrupe of Roses is made is found to worke more forceably then that of Roses, for that it provoketh vomitting, and spendeth waterish and Hydropicke humours, by the continuance thereof: the flowers condited or made into a conserve, worketh to the same effect, the gumme or rather the li∣quour that droppeth from the tree being wounded is given in the decoction of Coltsfoote, unto those that are troubled with the cough or with shortnesse of breath by adding thereto some sweete wine, and putting some Saffron also therein, it is good for those that are hoarse, or have lost their voyce, helpeth all the defects of the lungs and those that vomit or spit blood. Two drammes thereof given in the juyce of Lemmons, or of Radish, is good for those that are troubled with the stone, it is said some given in Plantaine or Purslane water, stayeth the casting or spitting of blood: the kernels of the stones doe wonderfully ease the paines and wringings of the belly, through winde or sharpe humours, and are much commended to be effectuall to breake and drive forth the stone, which that they may the more powerfully worke, I commend this water unto you to drinke upon occasion, three or foure ounces at a time. Take fifty kernels of Peach stones, and an hundred of the kernels of Cherry stones, a handfull of Elder flowers, fresh or dryed, and three pints of Muscadine, set them in a closed pot, into a bed of Horse dung for ten dayes, which afterwards stilled in glasse, with a gentle fire, keepe for your use: The milke or creame of these kernells being drawne forth, with some Verven water being applyed to the forehead and temples, doth much helpe to procure rest and sleepe to sicke persons wanting it: the oyle likewise drawne from the kernels doth the same being annointed, the said oyle put into glisters doth ease the paines of the chol∣licke proceeding from winde, and annoynted on the lower part of the belly doth the like, and dropped into the eares easeth the paines of them, the juyce of the leaves doth the like, killeth the wormes and ulcers in them, being also annoynted on the forehead and temples; it helpeth the Megrome and other paines in the head: If the kernels be bruised and boyled in vinegar untill they become thicke, and applyed to the head, or other places that have shed the haire, and are bald it doth marvellously procure the haire to grow againe. The Peaches themselves being eaten, by reason of their sweetenesse and moisture, doe soone putrefie in the stomacke; and therefore Ga∣len adviseth that they be never taken after but before meate alwaies, so shall they make the rest to passe away the more speedily with them: or else taken after, they corrupt the rest in the stomacke with themselves. The Nectarin hath a firmer substance, and a more delectable taste, for which it is most accepted, being of no use in Physicke that I know. The Persea is not used with any. 
CHAP. LXXXII. Amygalus. The Allmond tree. T He Almond is so like unto the Peach in every part thereof, and yet differing from it, that I can doe no lesse then joyne it next, in a severall Chapter, and although there are sundry sorts of sweete Almonds, some great and some small, others long and some short; and a bitter kinde also, yet being in the whole surface, so like one unto another, that they can be distinguished by no other thing then the Allmond, I will onely give you one description, and shew you their differences herein, which I thinke shall be suffici∣ent. Amygdalus. The Allmond tree. 
The Allmond tree groweth greater and higher then any Peach (and is therefore usually planted by it selfe, and not against a wall, and never grafted that I have seene and knowne, that would take and abide, but is alwayes planted of a stone put into the ground, where you would have it to grow, for it hardly suffe∣reth a transplanting) the body thereof becomming very great, whereby it sheweth to be of long continu∣ance, spreading greater armes and smaller branches, but brittle, with long narrow leaves on them, very like unto the Peach tree: the flowers are of a paler purple colour then the Peach blossomes, and not so bitter, and the fruite very like the Peach, for the out∣ward forme, before it be ripe, but the outer rinde is a dry skinne without any cleft in it, or edible substance under it, as the Peach hath, and the shell under it is smooth and not rugged like it, and not so thicke a ker∣nell within, being bitter in one kinde, which are small like the Barbery Allmonds, and sweete in all the rest, whereof some are small, and called Barbery All∣monds, others long and slender, and are called Iord n Allmonds, and others short and broad, called Valentia Allmonds: it is observed that those that grow in the Isle of Cyprus, bend downe their heads, contrary to all in any other place. 
The Place and Time. They grow in all places planted, that I know, or can heare of in Syria. Barbery, Turkie, Spaine, Italy, and wheresoever, we have both the bitter and the sweete of that sort, that is, thicke and short, growing in many places of our Land, and blossome earlier then the Peach of any sort, and the fruite ripe also before them. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and the fruite and , in Latine Amygdalus, and the fruite Amygdalum, and Amygdalium, some thinke that Cato meant these by the name of Nuces Graeca, but yet some doe rather referre them to the Wallnuts. Columella ma∣keth mention of Nuces Graecae, Inglandes, and Amygdalae, as of three kindes, for many thinke the Almond was not knowne in Italy in Cato his time. Pliny out of Theophrastus setteth downe the way to make the bitter All∣mond tree to beare sweete Allmonds, and the sweete bitter: but with such fond conceits of alterations and trans∣mutations are the workes of the ancients according to their Gentilisme too plentifully stored, which we know is contrary to the law, that God hath set in it selfe to preserve the kinde, and although there be not onely lusus, but luxus naturae, as it hapeneth in many things, as in the Hermaphrodite, yet that altereth not the law of nature, and notwithstanding the example of the Mule. The Arabians call the fruite Iauz Kauz and Lauzi, the Italians Mandole, the Spaniards Almendres, the French Amandes, the Germanes Mandelkern, the Dutch Amaudel, and we in English Allmonds. 
The Vertues. The sweete Allmonds, are the pleasanter meate, formed into many fashions as every one liketh, but the bitter are the more physicall; the sweete are hot and moist in the first degree, the bitter are drying in the second: The sweete Allmonds blanched and dryed, that they may be made into pouther, and so taken by it selfe, or with other things helpeth to binde the loosenesse of the belly: the oyle of sweete Allmonds, mixed with the fine pouther of Sugar Candy is good for the dry cough, and for hoarsenesse, to take a little at once; the said oyle drunke either a∣lone or with some Syrupe of Marsh Mallowes, is good for those that are troubled with the stone, to ease the paines, by opening and making slippery the passages thereof: It is used also by women in Childbed after their sore travell: being mixed with oyle of Tartar, it maketh a creame called Lac Ʋirginis, that clenseth the skin, and lenyfieth the drynesse or roughnesse, parched with the winde or otherwise: it is used also by it selfe or with other things, to annoint the stomacke for the cold: The pouther of the Allmond cakes, after the oyle is pres∣sed from them, doth serve farre better then sope to clense the hands or skinne in any place, and to supple the parts and make them smooth: The greene fruite while they are very greene, are eaten to helpe the moist humours in the stomacke, and are eaten with pleasure by women with childe, and being preserved, are very delicate. The bitter Allmonds doe provoke urine, and womens courses, and helpe to mollifie the belly; they are good also taken with Amylum and Mintes, for the spitting of blood, and taken with water they are good for paines in the backe, and the inflammation in the lungs; or else taken with fine Turpintine, made into an electuary or licking medi∣cine, with honey and milke, they are good for the obstructions of the liver, for the cough and the winde chollicke taking the quantity of a Hasell nut at a time: the oyle of bitter Almonds is effectuall to all the purposes aforesaid and doth more effectually clense the skin then that of sweete Almonds: it is also used for the noyse and deafe∣nesse in the eares, to droppe thereof into them: the bitter Allmonds themselves beaten with oyle of Roses and Vinegar annointed on the temples, doe ease the paines in the head, and procureth sleepe and rest in hot agues, or phrensies: it doth mollefie the stiffenesse of the sinewes and joynts, and healeth the bitings of dogs and foule ul∣cers: if one doe eate five or sixe bitter Almonds before he fall into drinking company, it will keepe him from being overtaken more then the rest: and it is said that if they be given to a Foxe in his meate, it will kill him. 
CHAP. LXXXIII. Cerasus. The Cherry tree. T Here are as many sorts of Cherries almost as of plummes, the most whereof I have declared in my former Booke, but there are some other sorts both tall and low, that are not there mentioned, and are to be shewed in this place. And although I have there set forth, both the descriptions and figures in part of some that I doe here againe mention, both of the taller and lower sort, yet I also give you the figures of some there not set forth but described: the double repetitions being to shew the diffe∣rences. 
1. Cerasus vulgaris. The ordinary Cherry tree. The Cherry tree riseth to a reasonable heighth and greatnesse, spreading well and somewhat thicke, the leaves are neere the plumme for forme, but somewhat longer in most, and dented about the edges: the flowers come forth two or three, or foure at the most at a place or joynt together, every one on his owne footestalke, consist∣ing of five white leaves, with some threds in the middle, after which come round berryes, greene at the first, and red when they are through ripe, of a meane bignesse and pleasant taste, with a hard white small stone within it whose kernell is somewhat bitter, but not unpleasant. Some sorts are greater and pleasanter than others, some tart, some waterish, others firme, some red, others whiter. 
2. Cerasus Trapezautina sive Laurocerasus. The Bay Cherry, or Cherry Bay. Because this tree beareth berryes very like to faire great blacke Cherryes, and a stone within them, like unto a Cherry stone; I thinke it is most worthy to be referred to this stocke or kindred of the Cherryes, howsoe∣ver formerly I set it among some kindes of Bayes. It sometimes groweth to be a faire great tree, spred into ma∣ny branches, but usually with us it groweth as a shrubbe, shooting forth sundry greene branches, with goodly faire shining fresh greene leaves thereon, larger then any Bay leafe, the flowers are many and whitish, growing on a long cluster like unto the Padus Theophrasti, here also expressed, made of five leaves a peece, but much grea∣ter then they; after which commeth the fruite, being as large as any Flanders, and of a very blacke shining colour very sweete, with a round stone within them, very like unto a Cherry stone, this is taken to be the Lotus secundus Theophrasti by Lugdunensis, which may very well be. 
3. Cerasus racemosa putida Padus Theophrasti dicta. The strange long cluster Cherry. This tree as I said, is referred to the stocke or kindred of the Cherryes, although it doe not much resemble any of them. It groweth to be a great tree, whose body and greater branches are covered with a sad coloured barke, the younger branches being greene, whereon grow somewhat broad and short leaves, harder and more crumpled then any Cherry leafe, and dented about the edges: the flowers come forth at the joynts with the leaves in a long cluster many together, like those of Laburnum, the Beane Trefoile, but very small, and of a downy white 1. Cerasus vulgaris. The ordinary Cherry tree. 
Chamacerasus Alpina repeus. The creeping dwarfe Cherry tree of the Alpes. 
Cerasus avium racemosa, The cluster birds Cherry tree. 
Chamacerasus altera &amp; Hungarica. Another dwarfe Cherry, and one of Hungary. 
Cerasu Americana sive de Baccaleos. The Baccalaos, or new found Land Cherry.
2. Cerasus Trapezuntina sive Laurocerasus. The Bay Cherry, or Cherry Bay. 
3. Cerasus racemosa putida Padus Theophrasti dicta. The strange long cluster Cherry. 
4, 5. Machaleb Germanicum &amp; Syriacas The wild rocke Cherry of Austria, and perfuming Cherry of Syria. 
6. Chamaecerasus montana Acaris folio. The mountaine dwarfe Cherry. 
7. Cerasus exotica rotundifolia Indica. The strange or Indian Cherrie. 
colour, smelling somewhat strong and sweete, after which come the fruite, which are small blacke round berryes no bigger then small pease, with little substance upon them, and very small stones within them, every one on a short footestalke, but many together in a long cluster, like the wilde cluster or birdes Cherry, of an harsh taste, and of an evill sent while it is eating. The wood also smelleth strong or not well, from whence came the name. 
4. Machaleb Germanicum. The rocke wilde Cherry of Austria. This riseth sometimes to the heighth of a reasonable tree, on the branches whereof come forth certaine knots or knobs, and Cherry tree like leaves at them but lesser, and from among them a small long greene stalke, with eight or ten white flowers thereon, hanging in a cluster, made of five leaves a peece, like unto the Cherry blos∣some with a long pointell in the middle, compassed with five white chives, tipt with pendents, purplish at the first, and yellow after, as sweete as Hawthorne flowers, standing in greene huskes, divided into five parts, after which come small berryes no bigger then pepper cornes, and blacke on the outside: at the ends of the branches grow such like shining greene leaves as the other dented about the edges. 
5. Machaleb Syriacum. The perfuming Cherry of Syria. This Machaleb of the Arabians doth not grow to any bignesse, but with broad short leaves like the Line tree, pointed at the ends and dented about the edges, the flowers are white, and the berryes blacke, having a small stone within them like unto a Cherry stone, but lesser, and a brownish coted kernell within them, smelling hot and sweete, yet bitter withall, which many perfumers doe use to mixe with other perfuming sweetes. 
6. Chamaecerasus montana Aceris folio. The mountaine dwarfe Cherry. This dwarfe plant is reckoned also to the Cherryes, having broad leaves cut in or divided at the edges, resem∣bling those of the Maple tree: the fruite is round and red like unto a Cherry, and therefore reckoned as one, two for the most part standing together on a long stalke. 
7. Chamaecerasus exotica rotundifolia Indica. The strange or Indian Cherry. This Exoticke Indian, hath streight slender branches, with faire and somewhat broad leaves thereon, somewhat like unto those of the Cherry tree, yet some rounder and not pointed at the ends, but all finely dented about the ed∣ges: the fruite is small and red like a dwarfe Cherry. 
The Place and Time. The first kinde is alwayes planted in Orchards, where among divers other, it taketh up a roome. The second in Turkie, or Trabizond, and planted first in Italy, at Genoa, in the Prince Orias Garden, where Bellonius first, with tedious travell found it, and was sent from Constantinople, to Matthiolus and others. The third in some gravelly grounds in Savoy. The fourth, fifth and last, are exprest in their titles, and the sixth in Lombardy: And for the most part flower, and beare their fruite about the time that others of their sort doe. 
The Names. The Cherry tree is called in Greeke , and the fruite , in Latine Cerasus and Gerasa. Athenaeus writeth, and so doth Pliny, that the Cherry was not knowne in Italy, before the warre with Mith idates King of Pontus, and that Lucius Lucullus after he had overthrowne him, brought it from Cer sumta in Pontus, into Italy, and gave it the name Cerasum, from the place he had it. The second is called by the Turkes Trebizon Curmasi, that is, Dactylus Trapezuntica, but by Bellonius first, as I take it, Laurocerasus, and Cerasus Trape∣zuntina, Dalechampius tooke it to be Lotus Africana, but Clusius contesteth there-against. The third is taken by Dalechampius to be the Padus of Theophrastus, which Clusius taketh, or mistaketh rather, to be the Cerasus avium, or racemosa vulgo herbariorum, which is quite another tree, as I have shewed among the other sorts of Cherryes, and Bauhinus followeth him therein, making them both one. The Burgonians about the River of Seine, doe call it Pudis, (from whence it is likely Dalechampius tooke the name, to come neere to Padus ) and take it for a kinde of wilde Cherry, as the cluster Cherry is, and in the long clustering of the flowers and fruite together very like it, and because the wood smelleth strong, the Savoya s call it Putier, as also Cerisier blanc, Lugdunensis doth much confound this with the Guajacum Pavavinum of Pallopius, taking them to be all one, as also with the Lotus secunda of Dioscorides, and the Diospyros of Theophrastus, and the Paba Graeca of Pliny, with∣out all knowledge whereof he wrote as it seemeth. It came to me out of Italy, by the name of Laurus regia, but is most usually now called Laurocerasus, and in English as it is in the title. The fourth is most likely to be the Cerasus sylvestris of Tragus, and the Mahaleb, or Macaleb of Clusius, and the Petrocerasus, or Chamaecera∣sus petraea of Gesner, which Bauhinus foulely confoundeth with Matthiolus his Mahaleb, and the Chamaecerasus Syriaca of Gesner, which is the true Mahaleb to be both one, when as this fifth onely is the true kinde, as the sweete smelling fruite doth plainely declare, besides the diversity of the tree, as is before declared. The sixt came as a rarity from the Indies, whereof no more can as yet be said. The last is onely remembred by Gesner in hortis, and by Lugdunensis, who saith that Gesner sent a branch thereof to Dalechampius, by the name of Chamaecerasus montis Gener si. The Arabians call the Cherry, Sarasie, the Italians Ciregie, the Spaniards Cerazas, and Guindas, the French Cerises, and Guines, the Germanes Kirsen, and Kirschen, the Dutch Kriken, And we in English Cherry. 
The Ʋertues. Cherryes as they are of divers tastes, so they are of divers qualities, the sweete are more lubricke, and passe through the stomacke and belly more speedily, but are of little nourishment, the tart or sowre are more plea∣sing to an hot stomacke, and procure an appetite to meate, and helpe to cut tough flegme, and grosse humours, but when these are dryed, they are more binding the belly then being fresh, and doe give a fine rellish to broths and drinkes wherein they are boyled; being cooling in hot diseases, and welcome to the stomacke, and provoke urine; The Gum of the Cherry tree dissolved in Wine, is good for a cold cough, and hoarsenesse of the throate: helpeth to give one a better colour in the face, sharpeneth the eye-sight, stirreth up an appetite, and helpeth to breake and expell the stoue: the blacke Cherryes being bruised with the stones and distilled, the water thereof is much used to breake the stone, expell the gravell, and breake the winde: the true Mahaleb of Syria, was mistaken by Serapio to be the Phyllyrea of Dioscorides, when as the properties are much differing, for Mahaleb doth heate and mollifie, even by the testimony of Mesues and Rasis, and as Avicen saith, doth clense, attenu∣ate and resolve and ease paines: The oyle drawne from the kernels, doth much more ease the paines in the bow∣els and backe, being annoynted, then the kernels themselves which some use for the said purpose, and for soun∣dings, and faintings, to be taken with Mede or honyed water, and doe helpe the chollicke and stone in the kid∣neyes, kill the wormes in the belly, and provoke urine also. 
CHAP. LXXXIV. Cornus. The Cornell tree. T He Cornell is divided into male and female; the male is of two sorts, one bearing red berryes like Cherries, and another whitish: the female hath no diversity. 
1. Cornus mas fructu rubro. The male red Cornell tree. The Cornell or Cornellian Cherry tree groweth to be a reasonable tall and great tree, the body and branches are covered with a rugged barke, and the younger smooth, whereon grow smooth leaves, and plaine, not dented at all about the edges, the flowers are many small yellow tufts, as it were short threds set together, which come forth before any leafe, and so fall away likewise, before the leaves appeare much open: the fruite are somewhat long round berries, of the bignesse of small Ollives, with a small hard stone within them, like unto an Ollive stone, reddish when they are ripe, somewhat like a Cherry, of a reason∣able pleasant taste, Fructu ma∣gis rubro hu∣m la. somewhat austere withall: the wood is hard like an horne, and groweth slowly. Of this kinde Clusius maketh another sort, with redderberries, little differing in any thing else: and another that grow∣eth low, but yet hath beene observed upon the transplanting to grow much greater. 
2 Cornus mas fructu albo. The white male Cornell tree. This other Cornell differeth not from the first in any other more notable matter then in the fruit, which becom∣meth not so red, but whitish when it is ripe. 
3. Cornus faemina, The Dogge berry or Gatten tree. This never riseth to be a tree of any bulke or body with us (but Clusius saith that he saw in the Woods of Au∣stria, as bigge trees hereof as of the male, and Bellonius saith the same lib. 1. c. 56) but usually abideth as an hedge bush with many pithy strong twiggy stemmes rising from the roote, of a brownish colour and the sprigges more reddish, with a pith within them like unto Elder, having leaves thereon somewhat like the former, but a little shorter and broader, standing upon reddish footestalke, and the middle rib reddish likewise, the flowers are white and stand at the end of the branches, many growing together in a tuft or umbell, upon reddish footestalkes which turne into small berries, green at the first, and shining blacke when they are ripe, of a most unpleasant bitter. taste provoking casting. 
The Place and Time. The first is found wild in many places of Germany, and the other sorts hereof also, but the second is more 1, Cornus mas fructu rubro. The male red Cornell tree. 
3. Cornus faemina. The Dogge berry or Gatter tree. 
rare, the last groweth in every Country of the Land, serving for a hedge bush; the first flowreth very earely, as is before said, in March, and sometimes in February, the fruite is ripe in August. The last flowreth not untill May, and the fruite ripeneth not untill September be well over.
The Names. The first is called in Greeke in Latine Cornus and mas, to distinguish it from the other, which is called by Theophrastus Cornus faemina. There is much doubt and question among many of our later Wri∣ters, about this female Cornell (for of the male there is no doubt, all calling it Cornus mas, or sativa, ) whether it should be the Virga Sanguinea of Pliny, or the Hartriegell or Tragus, or his Faulbaum, some referring it to the one, some to the other, but the generall tenet of the most is, that in most things it answereth both to the Thely∣crania of Theophrastus, and may well enough agree with the Virga sanguinea of Pliny: Cordus calleth it Pseudo∣crania quas falsa Cornus, and Dodonaeus, besides that he calleth it Cornus faemina, taketh it to be the Opulus Colu∣mellae. Bellonius saith in the 56. Chapter of his first Booke of Observations, that he found that shrub, which the French in imitation of the Latines call des Sanguins, and the auncient Greeke Cornus faemina, betweene Philop∣pos, and Bucephala to be little inferiour unto our greatest male Cornellian trees, thereby esteeming them to be both one: The Italians as Matthiolus saith, call it Sanguineo, and Sanguinello, but whether it be Tragus Hartrie∣gel, we are not well assured, for he saith that the wood thereof is so hard that it can very hardly be bored, and therefore serveth for many Country instruments, and long lasting for the hardnesse, which we can not say so of this; we for the most part call it the Dogge berry tree, because the berries are not fit to be eaten, or to be given to a dogge. I heare they call this in the North parts of the Land, the Gatter tree, and the berries Gatter berries, yet some say they call the Enomymus so. 
The Vertues. The male Cornell is a fruite very good and wholesome, pleasant with the austerity, and helping to binde the belly subject or molested with a laske: both leaves and buds saith Galen, doe dry exceedingly, and therefore are good to soder up great wounds in strong bodies, but not so fit in small cuts, and more tender persons, because it dryeth too much in such cases: The Conserve made of the fruite, is of especiall use in all fluxes both in man and woman, the liquour that commeth out of the leaves or stalkes, being heated with an iron, that the iron touch them not, is good to heale etters, and ringwormes. The Female Cornell or Dogge berry, is put to no use that I know, yet Matthiolus saith that the people in Italy, by boyling the berries, make an oyle that serveth for their Lampes. If one that is cured of the biting of a madde dogge, shall within one twelve moneth after touch the Cornus faemina, or Dogge berry tree, or any part thereof, the disease will returne againe. Sckimkins observation. 
CHAP. LXXXV. Lotus. The Lote or Nettle tree. A Lthough divers Authours have published sundry trees, under the name of Lotus, as Iujuba, Laurocaera∣sus, and many others, yet there is knowne unto us but one true kinde, that is called Lotus, the Lote or Nettle tree, yet I thinke not amisse to joyne two or three other plants, which may not unfitly be re∣ferred to it. 
1. Lotus sive Celtis arbor. The Lote or Nettle tree. The true Lote or Nettle tree groweth to a great heighth, whose body and elder branches are covered with a smooth darke greene barke, the younger being more greene, whereon grow somewhat rough or hard leaves, long pointed, and somewhat deepely dented about the edges, like unto a Nettle leafe, of a darke greene colour, and often grow yellow toward Autumne: the flowers stand here and there scattered on the branches, after which come round berries like unto Cherries, hanging downewards upon long footestalkes greene at the first, whitish afterwards, and reddish when they are full ripe, but blackish if they be suffered to hang too long on the branches, of a pleasant austere taste, with an hard round stone within them. There is said by Theophrastus, if this be his first Lotus, ine ossi∣cu is. to be another sort without stones, whereof Wine was made, that would not last above two or three dayes. 
2. Arbor Guajacana sive Guajacum Patavinum. The Indian Date Plumme tree. The Indian Lote tree groweth great, with a smooth darke greene barke, shooting forth many large boughes, and slender green branches, beset with faire and somewhat broad green leaves, somewhat like unto the leaves of the Cornell tree, but larger, without any dents on the edges, the flowers grow along on the branches, close set unto them, without any or with a very short footestalke under them; consisting of foure greene leaves, as the huske, and foure other within, of a darke purplish red colour, the fruite that followeth standeth in the middle of the said huske, closing it round at the bottome, and is greene at the first, and very harsh, but red and round when it is ripe, and somewhat like a Plumme, with a small point at the head, and then of a reasonable pleasant taste or rellish, wherein in the hotter climates, but seldome in ours or not with me, are contained thicke and flat browne gristely seedes or kernels, somewhat like unto the kernells of Cassia Fistula, which may be somewhat easily cut with a knife. 
3. Guaj cum Patavinum angustifolium. The Indian Date Plumme tree with narrow leaves. This differeth little from the last, either in stemme or fruite, but onely in the leafe, which is longer and larger then it. 
Lotus arbor. The Nettle tree. 
2. Guajacum Patavinum. The Indian Date Plumme tree. 
3. Guajacum Patavinum angustoribus solijs. The Indian Date Plumme tree with narrower leaves. 
4. Pishanim Virginianum. The Virginian Date Plumme or Pishamin. 
 
4. Pishamin Virginianum. The Ʋirginian Date Plumme or Pishamin. This other kinde, which differeth but little from the second (if it be not all one with it, or at least a greater sort, whereof I am more then halfe perswaded, they doe so neere agree together) hath growne also with me, raised from the kernell were sent with the fruite out of Virginia, and grew in a short time to be of seven or eight foote high (which upon remooving perished) but there groweth to be a great tree, whose wood is hard and brittle, and somewhat whitish, but covered with a thin darke green barke: the branches are many and slender, with a thinner grayish barke on them, whereon are set many faire broad greene leaves, without any dent on the edges, and very like unto the former. It hath not borne flowers or fruite in our Country that I can heare of as yet with any, but the fruite as it came to us, was in forme and bignesse like a Date, covered with a blackish skinne set in a huske of foure hard leaves very firme like a Date, and almost as sweete, with three or foure great flat thicke kernels with∣in them, very like unto the former, but larger by the halfe. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in Italy in divers places, naturall as it is said: but in many especiall places there, and in Pro∣vence of France, and Mompelier, growne great trees, and so also in some places with us: The second came to me from Italy, by Master Doctour Iohn More: and groweth now in my Garden, but came as it is said out of the West Indies, for Dalechampius had it from Florence, where they called it Ʋva d '  India, and planted it about Lyons in France: The last as I said came from Virginia: The first flowreth earlie, and ripeneth the fruite also soo∣ner then the last. 
The Names. The Lote tree is called in Greeke , and so in Latine Lotus arbor, to distinguish it from all the other kindes of Lotus herba, which are very many. The first is the Lotus of Dioscorides, which Pliny calleth Lotus Cel∣tis, and suppo ed to be the first Lotus of Theophrastus, which grew in an Island called Loto phagia Insula, or Pharis, but now called Garhi: as also in Africa, where as Theophrastus saith, the army of Ophellus passing to Carthage, were led with the fruite of this tree for many dayes, they or the people where they grew most abundantly, being called Latophagi, Lote eaters, whereof Homer also lib. 9. Odyss. speaketh that Ʋlysses followers so liked the sweete fruite that they could not be driven from them without blowes, to their shippes againe, (yet some referre this narration to the Zizipha ) And is generally called Lotus Celtis or arbor, by all Writers, which Guilandinus saith the Italians call Bagolaro; and Anguilara Arbor del perlaro, and Perlaro. The French Micocoulier, and Cacavia by the Can∣ ts, as Bellonius saith. Theophrastus and Pliny make mention of another sort of this Lotus, without stones, where∣of was made a kinde of Wine, that would not endure above two or three dayes, which fruite is as yet un∣knowne in these dayes. The second is called Guajacum Patavinum Fallopio by Gesner in hortis, and Lobel, who also taketh it to be the Lotus vera Theophrasti, who are both in an errour, Fallopius that tooke it for Guajacum, and Lobel that taketh it for Lotus vera. Matthiolus calleth it Pseudolotus, and saith that it came from Angerius de Busbecke, who sent it from Constantinople by the name of Dactyli ex Trapesonda dulces, but assured∣ly either Busbecke or Matthiolus were deceived therein, a contrary fruit being given them under that name, for the name agreeth not with his description, which is indeed the description of this Guajacum, for by that name of Trabison Curmasi Dactylus ex Trapezunte, hath the Laurocerasus beene sent from Constantinople, as both Came∣rarius and Clusius doe set it downe, which is much differing from this. Camaerarius and Bellonius calleth it Guajacana, Caesalpinus Ermellinus, who also taketh it to be the Tuberum alterum genus Plinij. Lugdunensis as I said before, taketh it to be the Diospyros of Theophrastus, lib. 3. c. 13. and the Faba Graeca of Pliny. Matthiolus calleth the third Lotus Africana altera, or Loti Afrianae species. The last hath the name in the title, as it came to us, and for the likenesse I doe set it with them, if as I said it be not the very same: and is also likely to be the Loti Africanae altera species, as the figure thereof plainely sheweth. 
The Ʋertues. The berries of the Nettle tree doe binde the belly, and the shavings of the wood made into a pouther and drunke, or boyled in Wine or water and drunke, helpeth women that are troubled with the abundance of their courses, and the laskes of the belly also: the same decoction maketh the haire to become yellow, and stayeth the falling of them. The fruite of the other while they are greene and unripe are so harsh as they are able to draw their mouthes awry that shall eate them, but when they are full ripe are reasonable sweet and pleasant: but what other property they have, I have not yet understood. 
CHAP. LXXXVII. Lentiscus. The Masticke or Lentiske tree. T He Arbores resiniferae, come next to be entreated o , that is, those trees that beare Rossin-like Gummes, which are divided into two sorts, that is, into those that beare berries, and those that beare Cones. The berry bearing trees are these Oxycedrus, the prickely Cedar, Cedrus. Lycia, the Cypresse like Cedar, the greater and the lesser, Sabina utraque, both sorts of Sabine. Iuni∣peras major, the greater Iuniper tree, of all which I have before in this worke spoken, some adde Taxus the Yew tree, but I see no reason for it. There remaine some others to be intreated of, and the Masticke tree first, whereunto I thinke meete to joyne two other strange trees of the West Indies, which are referred hereunto for their likenesse; the rest of them which are the Turpintine tree, the Balsame tree, the Storax tree, and the Dragon tree shall follow each in their order. 
1. Lentiscus. The Masticke tree. The Masticke tree groweth like a tree, if it be suffered to grow up, and often also riseth but as a shrubbe, whose body and branches are in colour alike, that is of a reddish colour, tough and gentle: and doe somewhat bend downe their ends, whereon grow winged darke greene leaves consisting of foure couple, each of the bignesse of the large Myrtle leafe, standing one against another, without any odde one at the end, with a reddish circle a∣bout their edges, and some reddish veines on the underside also, smelling sweete and abiding greene alwayes on the bushes, the flowers grow in clusters at the joynts with the leaves, being small, and of a pale purplish greene colour, and after in their places stand small blackish berryes, of the bignesse of Pepper cornes, with a hard blacke shell under the outer skin, and a white kernell within, it beareth besides these berries certaine hornes, with a cer∣taine cleare liquour in them, which turneth into small flyes, that flye away: it giveth also a cleare white gumme in small droppes, when the stockes are wounded in sundry places, which is gathered with great care and attendance. 
2. Lentiscus Pervana. The Indian Masticke tree. This Indian Masticke groweth as high as any high Masticke tree, spreading long and pliant branches, bending downewards, covered with a tough reddish barke, set with long winged leaves, made of many leaves, set by cou∣ples, with an odde one at the ends, of a sad greene colour, and a white ribbe in the middle, with rugged veines transversing them, conspicuous chiefely underneath, being plaine and not dented about the edges, and being brui∣sed have no evill sent: the flowers come forth in sparsed tufts together on a stalke, an handbredth long, consisting of five small white pointed leaves a peece, after which succeed small round berries, like those of the former Ma∣sticke tree, upon short footestalkes, of the bignesse of Pepper cornes, greene at the first, red after, and blacke being ripe, and as sharpe and hot in taste as Pepper, somewhat oylie, covered with a thin skinne, and the inward ker∣nell of a very sharpe sent and taste. We have had a cleare white gumme in great lumpes or peeces brought us from some of our English plantations in the West Indies, which they called Masticke, and in the chewing was te∣nacious like Masticke, whether the tree from whence it was taken was answerable to this or the next, we are not certaine, because there was no relation sent thereof unto us with it. 
3. Lentisci Pecu ni similis Molle dicta. The Indians Molle. Clusius maketh mention of a tree called Molle, received from the West Indies, which as he saith might be the same with the former and differing but in age, but because there seemeth manifest difference betweene them, I thought good to sever them, and shew you it with this description that he hath given it. There rose saith he, two small plants, with the worthy Signiour Iohn Brancion, at Mechlin, from seedes that were called Molle by the West Indians, but perished by the extremity of the Winter, the third yeare after they sprang up: but the stems of them being young, were of a darke greene colour, with divers small ash-coloured spots thereon, the leaves were winged like those of the Ash, but much smaller, of a darke greene colour, dented about the edges, and the end leafe longest, yeelding a white, thicke, and glutinous sweete milke when they are broken, and being bruised smell like Fennell, having an astringent taste: it gave no flowers, but Lobel sheweth the flowers were yellow, but the berries that were sowne and sprung, were as bigge almost as Pepper cornes, covered with a reddish skin, and clustering together like unto a small cluster of Grapes: the gumme hereof is said to be sweete in smell. 
1. Lentiscus. The Masticke tree.
2, 3. Lentiscus Pervana &amp; Molle Clusij serratis foliis. The Indian Masticke tree, and the Indian Molle somewhat like it. 
 
The Place and Time. The first groweth as well in Provence of France as in divers places of Italy, and in Candy also, and in many places of Graecia, but yeeldeth little gumme there, but especially in the Isle of Chio, now called Sio; they tend, pruine, and manure it with as great paines and care, as others doe their Vines, which goeth beyond them in the profit of the gumme: It flowreth i Aprill, and the berryes ripen in September, and not at severall times, as these Verses of Aratus would intimate. 
Jam vero semper viridis semperque gravata Lentiscus, triplici solita est grandescere faetu. Ter fruges fundens, triatempora monstrat arandi. As it is there set downe. The second was brought from America, and grew, as Bauhinus relateth it, in Cardi∣nall Columna his Garden at Rome, where it grew great, which also as it is likely was the same that Clusius saith Everardus Verstius saw there, and as he saith likewise Doctor Tovar of Sivil in Spaine, sent him such like bran∣ches with the unripe fruite in clusters to see, but as he saith, called Molle by Tovar; Lobel also exhibiteth a branch hereof with the next that is dented, at the beginning of his tractate de Balsamo: Clusius himselfe also ha∣ving gained a branch hereof from some place not specifyed, setteth it downe as taken from a tree growne old. The last is mentioned likewise by Clusius in his Annotations upon Monardus, to grow as all the Chronicles, or Writers of the West Indians say, in all the Vallies and Champion grounds of Peru, and especially Cieza. Petrus de Osma also in his Letter to Monardus saith it grew at Lima in Peru. 
The Names. The Masticke tree is called in Greeke (not which is Iuncus odoratus) quasi fissilis quod facile &amp; frequenter in dentiscalpia findatur, and the berries and not , as some coppies have it, in Latine Lentis∣cus a foliorum lentore fortasse by which name all Authours call it, and the gumme Resina Lentiscina, and Mastiche, and Mastix by some, by the Arabians Gluten Romanum; Dioscorides maketh mention of a greene gumme as well as a white, and Galen of a blacke sort that was of Egypt, both which are not knowne in these dayes: in Candy and some other places, their trees yeeld a yellowish bitter Masticke, but no where so good, and so plentifull in all the world, as in the Isle of Sio in the Egean Sea: there is another sort of Masticke which is called Acanthice, or Spinalis as Gaza translateth it, because it is gathered from a prickly thistle, as I have shewed among the Thistles, in the Chapter of Chamaeleon and Carlina. In former times our Apothecaries shops were furnished with no other Xylobalsamum, then the sprigs of Lentiscus, I would the errour might not be con∣tinued: The second is called Molle by Tovar, as I said before, and by Clusius in his Curae posteriores; but by Bauhi∣nus Lentiscus Perva , and following Clusius saith, that it beareth the leaves according to the growth, being den∣ted while it is young, and without dents growing older, which how dissonant me thincks this is to reason, in this plant let others judge upon my judgement, &amp; the forme of the growing the one from the other, for the one that is dented hath an end leafe, bigger and longer then all the rest, which sheweth I am perswaded a manifest diffe∣rence in specie, from this that is not dented, for I cannot be perswaded that any plant, should so much differ in forme from it selfe in the time of age and youth. The last is also as I shewed called Molle by the Indian Writers, whose sent is like Fennell, when as the other is not so, and is for the likenesse referred to the Lentiscus Pervana by Bauhinus in his Matthiolus, &amp;c. following Clusius therein, to be both one, &amp; by Lobel joyned with the former and the Balsamum verum, making it to agree with the properties therof in many things, Baptista Ferrarius also in his Flora mentioneth it by the name of Tereanithus angustifolia pag. 372. citing the third Book, and 15. Chapter of that great Book of the West Indian plants, beasts, &amp;c. begun to be Printed more then twenty yeares ago at Rome, whose title is Thesaurus rerum medicarum novae Hispanae, &amp;c. The Arabians call the Lentiske tree Daru, the Italians Lentisco, the Spaniards Mata and Arveria, the French Lentisque, and those of Narbone Restiucle, the Germanes Masticbaum, the Dutch Mastickboom, and we in English the Lentiske or Masticke tree. 
The Vertues. The Lentiske tree is binding in the second degree, or in the beginning of the third, and temperately hot: all the parts thereof are binding, that is, both roote and branch, both barke and leafe, both fruite and gumme, and doe binde and stop all fluxes, and spittings or castings of blood, and is good to strengthen a weake stomacke, and helpe the falling downe of the mother or fundament: the decoction fomented, healeth up hollow sores, and so∣dereth broken bones, fasteneth loose teeth, and stayeth creeping sores, and doth as much as Acacia or Hypocistis, and even the juyce of the leaves is as good a substitute for Acacia as any other: the oyle that is pressed out of the berries, helpeth the itch, the leprosie and scabbes, both in men and beasts: the gumme Masticke doth binde and stay fluxes in like manner taken any way in pouther; or if three or foure graines be swallowed whole at night when you goe to bed, it not onely easeth all paines in the stomacke, but keepeth it from the like afterwards, the pouther of Masticke with Amber and Turpinte is good against the running of the reines, and for both whites and reds in women: the pouther thereof mixed with Conserve of red Roses, helpeth to stay the destillations of thinne rheume on the lungs, causing a continuall cough and spitting of blood, and if some white Francumsense in pouther be mixed with it also, it worketh the more effectually, the same also comforteth the braine, procu∣reth an appetite to meate in moist fluxible stomackes, stayeth castings, and maketh a sweete breath: the same being heated in Wine, and the mouth, gummes, and teeth washed therewith, clenseth and fasteneth the corrupti∣on, and loosenesse both of gummes and teeth: it is also much used in salves and plaisters, to mundifie and heale ulcers, and sores, to stay the fretting fluxes of humours to them, to dry them up, and to fill up the hollownesse: it strengthneth and bindeth also the parts, whereunto it is applyed, and comforteth the aking joynts and sinews wonderfully. The oyle that is made of Masticke by infusion and ebullition, secundum artem Pharmaceuticam, is singular good in all the aforesaid diseases, moderately comforting, mollifying and binding, and is effectuall against all the aforesaid diseases of the mother, against all paines in the belly, colon the chollick, and the stomacke, the hardnesse of tumours, and the paines of the joynts and sinewes, it likewise comforteth the braine, and streng∣theneth both the liver and heart, but one droppe of the pure Chymicall oyle drawne from Masticke is more ef∣fectuall then one ounce of the former oyle, for it deserveth more commendations then is given it. The effects of the Indian Molle is recorded by those have written of it first, that of the berries, they make a wholesome kinde of Wine or drinke being boyled with water, and according to the boyling of them either vinegar or honey: the decoction of the leaves is good to helpe cold griefes, and applyed warme to woundes after cloathes be dipped therein helpeth their cure more speedily, the pouther of the barke also of the tree, strewed or cast into them doth clense, ingender flesh, and heale them quickely and perfectly: with the decoction also of the barke, the swellings and paines of legges and thighs, are much comforted and helped; the said pouther of the barke doth helpe to fasten loose teeth, and loose gummes, and of the wood is made fine and good tooth kes: the gumme dissolved in milke and dropped into nhe eyes taketh away the dimnesse or mistinesse of them. 
CHAP. LXXXVIII. Tere binthus. The true Turpine tree. A Lthough Bauhinus in his Pinax doth make three sorts of Turpintine trees, taking his ground from Rau∣wolfius who maketh two sorts besides the ordinary one, yet I am of Clusius his opinion that the grea∣ter sort is the Terebinthus Indica of Theophrastus, which is the Pistake tree mentioned before, so that the other two sorts we hold well to be differing Turpintines with other good Authours, and to be here de∣scribed unto you: yet we doe not intend to distinguish them by mas and faemina, as Theophrastus doth, that the male is barren, and the female fruitefull, the one bearing red berryes which come not to ripenesse, and the other greene at the first, red afterwards, and blacke, and of the bignesse of a Beane when they are ripe: but Clusius saith, that enquiring diligently thereafter, he could heare of no such differences, unlesse it may be said to be a diffe∣rence when some fruite trees bring their fruite to ripenesse, when others are empty or idle, by some casualty or ill standing: but by the leaves, the one bearing broader and the other narrower leaves. 
1, Terebinthus latifolia. The broader leafed Turpintine tree. This Turpintine tree in many places groweth but like a shrubbe, yet in some to be a great tree, the barke of whose body and greater branches, are of an ash colour, the lesser being greenish, and red while they are young, sparingly set with large winged leaves like unto the Pistacke tree but larger, every leafe being as great as a Bay leafe, and pointed, not round which putteth the difference betweene them, and smelling somewhat like a Bay, falling away, and not holding on in Winter: the flowers are mossie like the Ollive blossomes, and grow on long stalkes comming out of certaine knots, from the ends of the branches, a number of them in small tufts set in a cluster together, of a purplish browne colour, which passe into small berryes, somewhat bigger and longer then those of the Masticke tree, and very like unto the true Carpobalsamum, greene at the first, reddish after, and of a blewish colour, tending to greene when they are ripe, glutinous in handling and sticking to their fingers that touch them, having a kernell within them: most of those berries that grow red before they be ripe, fall away being empty and idle: this beareth also certaine red hollow skinny bladders, like long hornes, full of a clammy black∣ish liquour, which breed small flyes or gnats in them: This being wounded in sundry places yeeldeth forth a liquid Rossen or cleere Turpentine, but nothing so thinne as that of the Larch tree. 
2. Terebinthus angustiore folio vulgatiore. The narrow leafed Turpintine tree. This tree is in all things like the former, but that it never ri∣seth Terebinthus flore &amp; corniculo. The Turpintine tree flowring and with the horne thereof. 
so high, and the leaves are long and narrow, much smaller then the former, the berryes are many of them red on the stalkes at their full time, which declareth them to be empty huskes, and no good seed, and but some that will be full and good. 
The Place and Time. The Turpintine tree groweth in Narbone, and Provence in France, in sundry places of Italy, and Spaine, Cyprus and Greece, where for the most part it abideth small, and low, but groweth very great and high in Syria, Arabia, Cilicia, Armenia, and other those Levant Countries, as Bellonius hath observed: the second as Lobel saith, is much the more frequent in all the places about Provence: They flower somewhat earely in the Spring, and the fruite is ripe in September and October. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and in Latine Terebinthus, and the Turpintine , resina terebinthina, the true Turpintine tree was not knowne in divers of these later ages be∣fore ours, for as Matthiolus saith, the liquid Rossen of the Larch tree had by time obtained the name of Turpintine, and so was used, no man thinking that there was any truer to be had, untill the search of diligent men, had brought the true Turpintine to light againe, that so long time had lyen hid from our Predeces∣sors. The first is the Terebinthus of Matthiolus, Lugdunensis, and others, and the Terebinthus Lentisci folio of Lobel. The o∣ther is the Pistachiae folio of Lobel, and the Terebinthus major of others. The Arabians call it Botin and Albotin, the Italians Terebinto, the Spaniards Cornicabra, the French Tereminthe, the Dutch Termentijn boom, and we in English the Turpintine tree. 
The Ʋertues The leaves, the barke, and the fruite of the Turpintine tree are hot and dry in the second degree, and doe binde, strengthen, and repell, but the Turpintine doth heate, clense, and purge, draweth, and mollefyeth and excelleth all other Rossens, yet Galen for some causes preferreth Masticke, that is, in binding and streng∣thening; the berryes being dry are very neere unto the third degree of drynesse so that they provoke urine, and are good for the spleene, and for the biting of the Spider Phalangium: of the berryes is made an oyle, as out of the berryes of the Lentiske tree, which heateth and bindeth, and is good in crampes, convulsions, hardnesse of the si∣newes, and to close wounds: the berryes themselves are much eaten by the people in Turkie where they grow and make them their daily food, warming, comforting, and opening the uritory passages, and withall provoke lust: the Turpintine heateth, mollefyeth, resolveth, digesteth and clenseth: if a dramme or two be taken in a reare egge it wonderfully helpeth the cough, which commeth by flegme, stopping the lungs, wheesings, and shortnesse of breath, and all imperfections of the chest by flegme: it clenseth the backe and reines, and stayeth the gonorrhaea, with a little dryed Rubarbe in pouther put thereto: it provoketh urine, and helpeth to breake and ex∣pell the stone and gravell, it ripeneth Imposthumes and helpeth to expell them, and mightily dissolveth winde in the paines of the chollicke, of the stomacke or sides, and is good also against the gout, Sciatica, and all paines in the joynts, as well to take it inwardly with some Chamaepitis, Sage, and Staechas, as to be made into a searcloath and applyed thereto: it is a speciall ingredient into those Balsomes that are to heale any greene wounds, and is singular effectuall in all wounds, and fractures in the head, all punctures in the flesh or sinewes, and all breakings out in the skinne, be it itch or scab, be they piles, pushes or wheales: it draweth forth splinters, thornes or the like out of the flesh, and healeth the chaps of the lips, hands, fundament or other parts: briefely it is put into all salves, oyles, oyntments, or plaisters, that serve to clense ulcers, to draw and heale any sores, or to warme and comfort any cold or weake parts: these things the true Turpintine performeth better then any other, which from hence hath drawne both the name and use: the Chymicall oyle of this Turpintine is wondrous effectuall in many of these diseases, if it be carefully applyed, for it is by farre of more subtill parts, being the purer and more subtill spirits, whereby they heate and penetrate much more, and therefore inwardly or outwardly must be used in lesser quan∣tity, and as it were but by drops. There are in the Easterne Countries of Turkie, as Bellonius recordeth, much use made of the young hornes of the Turpintine tree, before they are growne great, for he saith many thousand pounds weight of them are gathered while they are no bigger then Gaulles, to serve the Dyers there to dye their silke, which shall hold the colour fresher and firmer then any that is Dyed without them. 
CHAP. LXXXIX. Balsamum genuinum antiquorum. The true Balme or Balsame tree of the ancients. T O deliver unto you this Balsame tree as I should, and as it ought and deserveth, I somewhat doubt of my ability, for who is fit for so rare, so excellent a subject, being heretofore accounted as one of the greatest jewels, and richest endowments of the earth, and as a parcell of the treasure of great Kings, and Princes, and it is thought by many that the greatest and worthyest present that the Queene of Sheba did or could bring and give unto King Salomon, was some Balsame trees, which she brought out of her Country, that Salomon might plant them in his: and it was also Balsamum genuinum antiquorum. The true Balme or Balsamum tree of the ancients, 
one of the greatest Iewels the first Ptolomoy could bring away from thence into Egypt, as Authours doe record it: but now the times are so changed, that I thinke I shall scarce gaine credit, that the same true Balsamum is extant in rerum natura: but least my gates grow grea∣ter then my City, and so it runne out at them, let me leave any further preamble, and shew you the thing. The Balsame or Balme tree, never groweth very great, no not in the naturall places, being suffered to grow as it will, but unto five or sixe cubits high or thereabouts, and in others much lower, with divers small and straight slender branches issuing from thence, of a brownish red colour, especially the younger twigs, covered with a double barke, the red outermost, and a greene one un∣der it, which are of a very fragrant smell, and of an a∣romaticall quicke taste, somewhat astringent and gum∣my, cleaving to the fingers, the wood under the barke being white, and as insipide as any other wood; on these branches come forth sparsedly and without order sundry stalkes of winged leaves, somewhat like unto those of the Masticke tree, consisting some but of three leaves which are those that first come forth and the lowest, others of five or seven leaves, and seldome a∣bove, which are set by couples, the lowest smallest, and the next larger, and the end one largest of all, of a pale greene colour, smelling and tasting somewhat like the barke of the branches; a little clammy also, and abi∣ding on the bushes Winter as well as Summer: The flowers are many and small, standing by three together on small stalkes, at the ends of the branches made of six small white leaves a peece, which are succeeded by small brownish hard berries, little bigger then Iuni∣per berryes, small at both ends, crested on the sides and very like unto the berryes of the Turpintine tree, of a very sharpe sent, having a yellow hony like substance within them somewhat bitter, but aromaticall in taste, and biting on the tongue like the Opobalsamum: From the body hereof being wounded, commeth forth a li∣quour (and sometimes a little of it selfe without scarifying) of a troubled whitish colour at the first, which after some small time groweth cleare, being somewhat thicker then oyle in Summer, of so sharpe a piercing sent, that it will pierce the nostrils of them that smell thereunto, like unto oyle of spike almost, but as it groweth in age, so it decayeth both in the thinnesse of the substance growing thicker, and in the smell nothing so quicke, and in the colour becomming yellow like hony, or browne thicke Turpintine, as it groweth older. 
The Place and Time. Arabia faelix about Mecha, and Medin , and a small village neere them called Bedrunia, with the hils, vallies, and sandy grounds about them, and the Country of the Sabaeans next it, are thought by many to be the onely naturall places, where this tree hath beene ever knowne in these or the former dayes to grow, and from thence hath Iudaea and Egypt ever beene furnished, whatsoever hath growne therein as Alpinus relateth; but it is some∣what probable to me, that the hils of Gilead did nourish this tree long before the Queene of Shaeba brought any as it is thought to Salomon, in that the Ishmalites that bought Ioseph of his Brethren, as it is set downe Gen. 37. v. 24. are said to carry from Gilead, Balme &amp;c. downe to Egipt, and Gen. 43.11. Jacob willeth his Sonnes to car∣ry to Ioseph in Egipt, some of the best fruites of the Land, sc. Rossin &amp;c. which I take to be understood this Balme, or else Rossin simply, might be thought too simple a present for Ioseph, and not one of the best fruites of the Country: but I doubt of the truth of that tale that the Queene of Shaba did first bring the Balsame trees to Salomon, and that he planted them in the valley by Iericho, but rather that they were fetched from the hils of Gi∣lead, and planted by him there in Orchards, the better to be tended. Ieremy the Prophet doth also often men∣tion the Balme of Gilead. And yearely pruined both by the Iewes and Arabians, to have the greater store of liquor. It flowreth in the Spring with the Turpintine tree, and fructifyeth with it in the Autumne. 
The Names. From the Arabians who call it Balessan, have the Greekes called it , and the Latines Balsamum: the liquour they call Opobalsamum, or Balsamelaeon, and the berryes or fruite of the tree Carpobalsamum, and Cassamum, and the sprigs or young branches thereof Xy∣lobalsamum. Divers of the auncient Writers have made mention of this tree, but so diversly that many do thinke they wrote of a thing that was not, or that was not seene and knowne unto them, at the least the descriptions are so lame and seeme so to vary one from another, yet if they be warily and wisely considered, they may be brought in some sort to agree thereunto, but for me to argue much in this matter, and the particulars would re∣quire a great deale of time and roome, which cannot be spared here, I must referre them to Alpinus and Belloni∣us, that would be further satisfied herein, who have more largely entreated of this subject. 
The Ʋertues. This Balsame tree saith Galen, is hot and dry in the second degree, so that it is sweete in smell being of thinne parts: but the liquor or Opobalsamum, is of more thinne parts then the plant it selfe: the fruite or berryes is ve∣ry like it in quality, but farre inferiour thereunto in the subtility: The liquour or Opobalsamum, is of great good use against all poysons and infections, both Vipers, Serpents and Scorpions, the pestilence and spotted fevers; and all other putride and intermissive agues that rise from obstructions, and crude cold humours, to take a scruple or two in some drinke for some dayes together, and to sweate thereon, for this openeth the obstructions of the liver and spleene, and digesteth those raw humours in them, cherishing the vitall spirits, radicall moisture, and naturall heate in them and is very effectuall in all cold griefes and diseases of the head or stomacke, helping the swimmings and turnings of the braine, weake memories, and the falling sicknesse: it cleareth the eyes of filmes or skinnes, over growing the sight, and easeth the paine in the eares, and their deafenesse and other diseases, to be dropped into the eyes or eares, it helpeth the cough shortnesse of breath, and consumption of the lungs, by warming and drying up the distillations of rheume upon them, and all other diseases of the stomacke proceeding of cold or winde, the cold or windy distempers also of the bowells, wombe or mother, procuring torments and paines, or the cold moistures procuring barrennesse, procureth the courses, delivereth the dead birth and after birth: the fluxe also of the whites and the stopping of urine: it clenseth also the reines and kidneyes, and freeth them from the generation of stones in them, and expelleth the gravell or stones in them: it is singular good against the pal∣sie, crampe, tremblings, convulsions or shrinking of sinewes, and for greene wounds, the most speedy operatour of any: from the singular effect whereof all other medicines made for the health of the body or to heale wounds were called Balsamum, Balme. The women in Egypt, herewith as Alpinus sheweth, preserve their beauty, and young forme for a long time, the berryes are especiall good against poysons and infections, the falling sicknesse, the swimmings and paines in the head, the cough, and diseases of the lungs, the windy paines and stiches in the sides, the restrain of urine, and the rising of the mother and other diseases thereof to sit in a bathe made of them: the wood worketh the same effects but in a farre weaker manner. 
CHAP. XC. Styrax arbor. The sweete Storax tree. B Esides the Storax tree, that hath usually been knowne and described by allmost all Writers of Herbs, and which I am now about to shew you, Bauhinus from Honorius Bellus in Candy, hath exhibited another sort, whereof he is so briefe, that little more can be assured thereof by his relation, then the name, and the confidence of his judgement from whom he had it, that it may be referred here∣unto. A third sort is the Storax rubra. whereof we have lesse knowledge then of the last. 
1. Styrax arbor vulgaris. The usuall Storax tree. This Storax tree groweth very like unto the Quince tree, both for forme and bignesse, the leaves also are long and round, and somewhat like but farre lesse, whitish underneath and stiffe. The flowers stand both at the joynts with the leaves, and at the ends of the branches, consisting of five or sixe large whitish leaves, like unto those of the Orrenge tree, with some threds in the middle, after which come round berries, set in the cups that the flow∣ers stood in before, of the bignesse of Hasell nuts, pointed at the ends, and hoary all over, each standing on a long footestalke, containing within them certaine kernels in small shells: this yeeldeth a most fragrant sweete gum, and cleare, of the colour of browne hony, if we might have it sincere without mixture, which yet wee in small drops have had.
2. Styrax folio Aceris. A Storax with Maple leaves. From a round blackish rugged roote covered with a crested, or as it were joynted barke come forth out of knots three or five broad leaves like unto those of the Maple or Plane tree, standing on small blackish long stalkes, and are divided in three or five parts, full of veines dented about the edges, and pointed at the ends. 
3. Storax rubra. Red Storax. This thing that formerly was called Storax rubra, was a barke of some kind of tree, and thought to be the Nascaphthum, or Nascaphtum of Dioscorides, but Cordus on Dioscorides scanning the matter somewhat more seri∣ously determineth it to be a thing utterly unknowne to him in his time, and by the cheapenesse of that barke that went under that name, saith plainely it was too cheape to be right, Dioscorides making Nascaphthum, to be like the barke of the Sycomore tree, as some coppies have it, or the Mulberry tree as others and brought from In∣dia, being of a sweete or pleasant sent in fumigations as well by it selfe as mixt with other perfumes: but Mat∣thiolus taketh Nascaphthum, to be that which was called Tigname in shops, which as he saith the Italians called Agallocho, that is Lignum Aloes, and so Cordus also saith, that one Iohannes Rodericus a Portugall tooke the Nascaphthum to be that which in their shops was called Palo daguilla Lignum Aquilae, that is the same with Lignum Aloes, as aforesaid, but Cordus misliketh that opinion, the Lignum Aloes being a wood and the Nascaphthum a barke, yet although this long discourse be somewhat from the matter in hand, yet seeing it fell so fitly to speake of Na∣scaphthum, I could not doe otherwise then shew you what others have thought thereof, in that as I said divers tooke it to be Storax rubra, when as no auncient Authour mentioneth it: but both Serapio and Avicen divide Styrax into liquida and sicca, by liquida understanding the pure gumme flowing from the tree, and not that liquida which we have now adaies by that name, and by the sicca, the faeces of the expressed oyle from the fruite, but some of our modernes take the Calumita to be Rubra. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in Provence, of France in Italy, Candy, Greece, and other these hither parts of Turkie, where it yeeldeth no gumme, but in Syria, Cilicia, Pamphilia, Cyprus, and other of those hotter Countries, it giveth much, but is so adulterated that I thinke scarse none in Styrax arbor vulgaris. The Storax tree. 
our age hath seene any sincere come over unto us, as by that sincere stuff , that which we have drawn out of the best gumme we could get, is plainely to be discerned, so much grosse faeces remaining behind, after the expressi∣on, and by the comparing of it with Dioscorides his notes: It flowreth in the Spring, yeelding fruite in September, the other Bauhinus as I said, had it from Bellus of Candy, but where it grew is not signifyed. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and in Latine Styrax arbor, as the Gumme is called Gummi Styrax, or Sto∣rax, and in shoppes Storax or Styrax Calamita, which for what cause it was so called, Galen declareth, that because the best and most sincere came from Pamphilia, they used to put it into Canes, the better to preserve, not onely the sent as most say, but even the substance too, as I thinke, for the pure sincere gumme is so pier∣sing that no barrell can be made so close, but that it will search the joynts, and draine through them, which o∣pinion of mine although it may seeme strange, as not being heard of before, yet I have many reasons both to induce me therunto, &amp; some to contrary theirs that ob∣ject the transportation of handfuls of Dictamus, in Canes or Ferula stalks in the like manner, which are of far dif∣fering natures: the one a dryed herb, which needed not any such inclosure, to preserve the sent, whereof it hath not so much that they needed so to put it up for feare of loosing, and besids the cask was so smal that abundance of them could containe but a little merchandize, some other cause they had surely, if they did put them, the leaves and stalkes I meane, into the Canes (whereof I somewhat doubt, but that they put them rather with Canes to keep them from breaking) &amp; this other a gum that required some tight cask to containe it, for feare of leaking, and the Cane between the joynts, as not having any chinke, was the fittest with them I thinke to containe it, and thereof I thinke came the name of Calamita, to confirme which opinion, I have found the sincere gumme of Storax, which I have by Art and the presse onely (and not by any distillation) purified and made to be so pure that it would pierce even through a woodden vessell in the heate of Summer, and therefore was forced to keepe the said sincere gumme in a glasse or gally pot, which was so fluent that it would runne upon any small occasion eaning downe the vessell, a long time after the extracting. There is some doubt also with many, what our Storax liquida should be, for none of the ancients have made mention of any such thing: some would have it a kinde of Storax from the tree, and to that purpose Dutante hath figured out a Storax tree, appropriating the Storax liquida, to issue from thence, which is besides the text, and more then he can prove: others from the A∣rabians I thinke, take it to be the extraction of pure fat Myrrhe, called Myrrhae stacte, which I cannot see how it should be so, seeing the Storax liquida, is of so strong and piercing a sent that no Myrrhe, from whence they say it should be taken hath any the like: it is therefore assuredly some other thing, whereof as yet we have not at∣tained the knowledge, Bauhinus lastly in describing this Styrax folio Aceris, in his Prodromus entituleth it Styrax liquida, which how much or little it sorteth thereunto, I know not, the time hereafter may declare. The Sto∣rax rubra something hath beene spoken thereof here before, yet some travailers have affirmed that the tree there∣of groweth in Cyprus, but (unlesse they meane the first Storax tree) untill it be further confirmed, I shall rest doubt∣full thereof. 
The Vertues. There is no part of this tree in use with us, but the gumme that issueth out of it, and it is hot in the second de∣gree, and dry in the first, it heateth, mollefyeth and digesteth, and is good for coughes, catarrhes, destillations of rheumes and hoarsenesse: it provoketh womens courses, and mollefieth the hardnesse and contractions of the Mother, it gently looseneth the belly, if a little of the true Turpintine be put unto it, and so made into pilles and taken: it resisteth those poysons that kill with coldnesse, as the Hemlocke doth, and the like: a small quan∣tity thereof taken saith Pliny, doth drive away sadnesse from the minde, but if it be taken too much or too often, it doth contrarily bring and encrease it, and worketh paine and heavinesse in the braine, and cause troublesome sleepes. Vsed as a pessary it draweth downe mightily, both the courses and the afterbirth, dropped into the eares, it taketh away the singings and noyse in them, applyed to the hippes, shoulders or joynts afflicted with cold aches it resolveth and comforteth much, and is good to be put into the bathing are made for lamenesse in the joynts, and wearinesse by travaile, it is also of good use to be put with white francumsence, to perfume those that have ca∣tarrhes, rheumes and defluxions from the head into the nose, eyes or other parts, by casting it on quicke coales and holding their heades over the smoke, and to aire their night caps therewith, wherein they meane to lie: it dissolveth hard tumours in any part, as those about the throate called the Kings Evill, and other nodes or tumours in the flesh or on the joynts: It serveth also as a perfume to burne in houses or chambers, either alone or with other things, it is put also among sweete pouthers in bagges, for chests and wardrobes. 
CHAP. XCI. Draco arbor. The Dragon tree. I Must needes adde this tree to the rest of the berry bearing Resinous trees, because it agreeth with them, whose description is on this manner. It is a goodly faire great tree to behold, rising as high as a Pine tree, with a great body, covered with a rugged barke, full of chappes and clifts, bearing eight or nine great armes, equally spreading from the toppe of the truncke or body thereof, each of them bare, for a cubits length, and then thrusting forth at their heads three or foure smaller bran∣ches, yet of an armes thickenesse, and bare also for a certaine space, and bearing at the toppes of each of them, divers very long and narrow leaves joyned together at the bottome, and compassing one another like as the Flowerdeluces doe, each of them being a cu∣bit Draco arbor. The Dragon tree. 
in length, and an inch in breadth, growing narrow∣er to the end, where it is pointed with a thicke middle rib, running through the middle, all the length of them, and being reddish about the edges, which are sharpe like the Iris leaves, abiding alwayes greene: from among the leaves at the heads, come forth long footestalkes, of about a footes length, branched forth into other lesser stalkes, bearing at certaine spaces, divers fruites or berryes in clu∣sters (for the flowers have not beene observed) each of them like unto a small Cherry, of a sowrish or tart taste, and of a yellowish colour, when they are ripe with a stone within them, very like a Cherry stone, and a like kernell also (but here is no shew of any Dragon here in to be seene, as Monardus fableth, and others that from him have set it forth, which sheweth how necessary it is to have judicious and conscionable men to be the first relators of strange or unknowne things) out of this tree being slit or bored, commeth forth a thicke (not cleare as Matthiolus saith) darke red gumme or Rossin, which hardneth quickely, and will melt at the fire, and flame be∣ing cast therein, yet somewhat dryly, being bruised it sheweth a very orient red crimson or bloody colour, yet is very hardly mixed with any liquour, eyther water or oyle: the wood is very hard and firme, and hardly ad∣mitteth to bee cut: but the younger branches are more tender. What if Master Hamonds flesh tree, growing in Magadascar, set forth in his Paradox, yeelding liquor like blood, may not prove to be this tree, if the tendernesse of the wood, cutting as he saith like flesh, either hinder not the identity, or be not an hyperbole. 
The Place and Time. This tree groweth in the Islands both of Madera, and the Canaries, and in Brassill also, as I am given to under∣stand, where it groweth vast, but Clusius saith that he found it in the Orchard, belonging to the Monastery of our Lady of grace in Spaine, planted among some Ollive trees on a small hill: the Time is not expressed. This is so tender, that although it hath sprung with us from the stones that were set, yet it would scarse endure to the end of Summer, but perished with the first cold nights. 
The Names. It is most probable that neither Dioscorides nor any of the ancient Greeke or Latine Authours had any know∣ledge of this tree, or could give any description thereof, but of the gum or Rossin onely, yet neither knew whe∣ther it came from herbe or tree, or was a minerall of the earth, but called it in Greeke, and thereafter Cimnabaris in Latine, Dioscorides saith that it was so scarse to be had, that the Painters could not get sufficient for their workes, but yet saith some called it Sanguis draconis, so ancient is the name, and by which onely the moderne Writers are led to thinke that the gumme of this tree continuing the name to this day, the rest of this declaration agreeing likewise thereunto, is the right Cinnabaris of Dioscorides: but Pliny in his 33. Booke and 7. Chapter, for the elder world hath fabled (no lesse then Monardus from his Bishop of Carthage in this as is afore∣said) and set it downe for a truth that Cinnabaris, is no other thing but the blood of a Dragon or Serpent crusht to death by the weight of the dying Elephant killed by him, and that both their bloods mingled togethers, was the Sanguis draconis that the Painters used, and was also used in medicines. Iulius Solinus also affirmeth the same thing: but assuredly the true cause of the name hereof was the bloody colour that the gum gave, however they coloured the truth from others knowledge by the name of a Dragon. 
The Ʋertues. There is no part of this tree put to any use in Physicke with any that I know, but the gum onely, yet no doubt in the naturall places, or where it groweth, both barke and fruite might be applyed for such like diseases as the gumme is put unto, which is very astringent, serving to restraine the fluxe of blood or humours, from any parts, both in man and woman, as laskes, the menstrues whites, and the gonorrhea: it is also said to helpe the strangury, and stoppings of the urine, to fasten loose teeth, and is very availeable for the gummes are spongy or with loose flesh: it is good also to stay the watering of the eyes, and to helpe those places that are burnt with fire: The Goldsmiths and Glasiers use it much in their workes, the one for an enamell, and to set a foile under their preti∣ous stones, for their greater luster; and the other by fire to strike a crimson colour into glasse, for Windowes or the like. I doe not know that Painters can bring it to be a fit colour to be used in their workes. 
CHAP. XCII. Cedrus magna Conifera Libani. The great Cedar of Libanus. T He rest of the Arbores resinifferae, those trees that beare Rossins are to follow, which are these that beare Cones, being the great Cedar, the Pine tree, and all the sorts thereof both tame and wild, the Pitch tree, the Firre tree, the Larch tree, the Cypresse, and the Arbor vitae, or tree of life; and first of the great Cedar. This great Cedar groweth up with a great thicke upright body, taller then any other tree whatsoever stored with branches on all sides, but so ordered that the lower branches spread largest, and still upward they grow smaller up to the toppe, representing the forme of a Pyramid or Su∣gar loafe, to them that view it a farre of; the greater and lowest branches with the body are somewhat rugged and full of chappes, but that of the upper branches is very Cedrus magna Conaea Libani. The great Cedar of Libaijus. 
smooth, and of an ash colour, and being rubbed away with ones nailes, appeare h greene underneath, and reddish un∣der that: the branches so e say grow all upright, but others straight out, and as it were crosse wise, strong, but brittle, and easie to be broken, not to be bended and so placed about the body, one above another that they yeeld an easie ascent up to the toppe, as it were by steps: the leaves grow many toge∣ther, out of a knot, which are small long and narrow, like unto those of the Larch tree, somewhat hard, but not sharpe at the end as they are, and so set, the longest being in the middle, and the lesser on the sides, that they represent the forme of a Painters pensell, abiding alwayes greene on the trees, being somewhat sweete in sent, a little sowre, bitter and astringent in taste: it beareth Cones that grow upright like as the Firre doth, not hanging downe as others doe, slen∣derer then those of the Pitch tree, and thicker, greater, and harder then those of the Firre, somewhat yellowish and round at the end, made of many scales, with a short foote∣stalke to it, but so firmely set to the branch, that without breaking away some of the wood of the branch, it cannot be pulled away, yet the scales opening of themselves, will fall away, leaving the stalke bare that went through the middle of them, but this it will not doe untill the next yeare after it be ripe, for it requireth one whole yeare to ripen, within which is the seede, as bigge as Grape kernells, somewhat sweete in taste, bedewed with an oylie substance, that is of a good sent: out of this tree there commeth two sort of Rossin called Cedria, the one thinne like unto that of the Firre tree, which commeth forth by piercing the tree at the sundry knots while they be young and not covered with a rugged barke, and putting thereto an horne, out of which it must runne: the other Rossin floweth forth of it owne accord, growing hard of it selfe thereon, which will sticke so fast to the teeth if it be chawed, that it will hardly be pulled away againe, and being smelled unto giveth a very sweete sent; the Wood is durable above all other, and not in many ages yeelding to cor∣ruption. 
The Place and Time. This Cedar groweth on sundry mountaines in Syria, and the parts neere thereunto, and the coldest parts of them that are covered with snow as Amanus, Taurus and Libanus, and not in many places else that have beene observed, the time is declared in the description to be a whole yeare in perfecting the fruite, and as Pliny saith, new come forth before the old are ripe. 
The Names. This Cedar is called in Greeke (not knowne to Dioscorides, Galen or Pliny, as their workes testifie, for theirs is the Oxycedrus, that beareth berries like to Iuniper, or the Mirtle) and quasi Cedrabies, because it groweth high, like the Firre, Theophrastus calleth it Cedrus Phaenicea, which Gaza unfitly translateth Punica, and in the Groponickes Dendrolibanus, Cedria you have heard before what it is, namely Rossin that flow∣eth out of the tree, when it is bored or peirced, as in the Firre and other trees: but Cedriu , which some call Cedrelaum or Cedroaleum is the first liquid substance that commeth out of the stickes, while they are in the burning such as we call tarre, that is, the liquour of the Pine and Pitch tree stickes when they burne) before the hand Pitch commeth forth, with which as well as with the Cedria, in former times the Egiptians embalmed the bo∣dies of the dead, to cause them to abide for ever uncorrupted: but many Writers confound these and the Pitch of the Cedar together, that issueth out in the burning after the first, calling them Cedria, when as they are divers. The Arabians call the tree Serbin, (and the Rossin or Tarre Kitran Alkitran; and Ketran ) the Italians Codr , the Spaniards Cedro, the French Cedro, and we Cedar. 
The Vertues. There is no part of this tree put to any Physicall use, but the Cedria, or Rossin that commeth out of it which is hot in the fourth degree, and preserveth the dead bodies from rotting, and therefore was called the life of the dead, and the death of the living, because if it be laid on garments or skins, it will burne and consume them: yea and to the tender flesh of the living, it will worke like a causticke: yet is it effectuall to cleare the sight from filmes or skinnes that are growne over it, and taketh away the scarres of wounds and sores, and mixed with a little vinegar and dropped into the eares, it killeth the wormes, and with the decoction of Hyssope, being put in taketh away the noyse and humming in them, if a little of it be put into an hollow tooth it easeth the paines, and breaketh the tooth, if it be mixed with a little vinegar, and they washed therewith it will doe the like: it helpeth the disease of the throate called the Quinsie, and killeth both nits and lice: it resisteth the poyson of the Sea Hare taken in sodden Wine, and if it be laid with salt on the biting of the venemous serpent called Cera∣sus, it will helpe it: it helpeth the leprosie also, if it be either annointed or taken inwardly, and purgeth the ul∣cers of the lungs, and healeth them if a small quantity thereof be taken: it also helpeth the itch and scabs in man or beast, it killeth the living childe in the mothers body, and expelleth the dead, and taketh away all hope of con∣ception if the privy parts be touched therewith. 
CHAP. XCIII. Larix. The Larch tree. T He Larch tree groweth oftentimes as high as either the Pine or Firre tree, but most usually lower, co∣vered with a very thicke barke, rugged and full of chappe, and reddish on the inside, the branches grow one above another, in a comely order, having divers small yellowish knobs or bunches set at severall distances, from whence doe yearely shoote forth many small thicke long and narrow, soft and smooth greene leaves, as it were in a tuft together, like the former Cedar, but shorter, smaller and blunter pointed then the leaves of either Pine or Firre tree, which doe not abide any Winter as they doe, but fall away as other trees that shed their leaves, and gaine fresh every Spring (which is peculier to this alone, among all the other kindes of Rossin-bearing trees) the blossomes are very beauti∣full Larix. The Larch tree. 
and delectable, being of an excellent fine crimson colour, and very sweete, which afterwards turne into small soft cones, like unto Cypresse nuts while they are close, but longer then they, made of many fine and thin small scales, one lying upon another, standing on a short stalke, having small seede on the inside of every scale, formed like a small Bird, with two wings, and a small sweete kernell within them like the Pine ker∣nell: the wood is very firme, hard, and close; long in growing and long lasting, and maketh the best coales for all Smiths worke, and for Miners to melt the Ore of mettall, above any other wood to hold fire longest and strongest, although Pliny saith, lib. 16. c. 10. that it burneth no other wise then a stone, nor maketh any coales, which how it can b , that a Rossinous tree should not burne any may judge: it yeeldeth forth a liquid Rossin being bored, very cleare and white, which we call Venice Turpintine: there is also ound upon the bodies, and greater boughes hereof, a kinde of hard and dry Mushrom , called Agarich , whereof I have spoken with the Turpintine of this tree, in the second Cl ssis of this Booke, which is of purging Plants. 
The Place and Time. It groweth not in all Greece, for neither Dioscorides nor Theophrastus, hath made any mention thereof, but most plentifully in the Woods by Trent, and in all that tract betweene Germany, and Italy, and many other places of Germany, it shooteth forth as is said young leaves every Spring, with the blossomes presently af∣ter, and ripeneth the fruite before Winter. 
The Names. It is called in Greeke , and the Turpintine , in Latine also Larix, and the liquid Rossin Rosina Laricea, or Larigna, or T r inthina Venetia, Pliny faulted many times in mistaking the Picea of Theophrastus for this, applying those things to the La∣rix, which he doth to Picea, as Lugdunensis sheweth very amply. Ʋitruvius also erred with Pliny, in say∣ing that the wood of the Larch tree did burne no otherwise then a stone in the fire: that Fuchsius also was in an errour Matthiolus sheweth, that thought the Venice Turpintine was taken from the Firre tree, for he protest∣eth that upon his owne knowledge and sight, it came from the Larch tree, he also insisteth against Brasavolus, that thought other trees had produced Agaricke: but those of other trees were hard Mushromes, such as we call Touchwood, which serveth like tinder to receive fire strucke from the flint, &amp;c. all Authours call it in Latine La∣rix, the Italians and Spaniards Larice, the French Melese, the Germanes Lerchenbaum, and we the Larch tree.
1. Resinae Cedri. The Cedar Rossins. There commeth out of the great Cedar tree, a dry Rossin of it owne accord, hardning upon the tree, which be∣ing chewed sticketh so fast to the teeth that it can hardly be pulled from it. 
There is another also drawne from it that is liquid, and both of them called Cedria, but this liquid especially, for that there is more store of it gathered, and is of more use also, and is drawne from the tree by boring it at the young knots before the barke be rugged, and setting an hollow horne to the hole, that it may runne out thereat into vessels set under to receive it, and is of as sweete a sent as the Strawberry saith Lugdunensis, and not as Dio∣scorides saith of a grievous sent, for Matthiolus out of a very auncient manuscript amendeth the word to be of a strong sent, or strong sweete sent as Virgil his verse doth intimate. Ʋrit odorat in l ina Cedrum: which may be understood of the wood also, but there is a certaine liquour called Cedrium by Pliny, an others, which is like our Tarre, and taken in the same manner from it, for they of Syria make Pitch of this Cedar, as also of the Oxycedrus the prickely Cedar, as we in Europe do of the Pine and Teda, that is, cut into stickes to burne this liquour commeth first from it in the burning, which is of that force and efficacy, that in Egipt they did be∣smeare the dead bodies therewith sundry times, which preserved them perpetually from putrefaction, for being of a causticke quality, it did feede upon, and consume the moisture in the carkase, and so kept it from putrefy∣ing, but divers have confounded both the Cedria and the Cedrium together, and the pitch likewise calling them promiscuously, some while Cedria, or Oleum Cedrinum, which is Cedrelaeon ex malis Cedri, saith Pliny, and at other times Cedrium, when as properly Cedria is the Lachrymacruda Cedri, or resina Cedri, and the Cedriumis, the Pix liquida Cedri, and the pitch it selfe is Pix Cedrina, yet both the Cedria, and the Cedrium are of one operation: They in Syria, by Pliny his words in making pitch hereof, and of the Turpintine tree did use a kinde of furnace, wherein they piled their stickes, and made a fire round about the furnace, but put no fire within it, as we in Eu∣rope doe, in making pitch, as I shall shew you hereafter, when I come to speake of the pine and pitch trees, Bello∣nius saith that of any of the Resinous trees as well as of the Cedar is made Cedria, which both Matthiolus and Lug∣dunensis doe worthily reprehend for so manifest an errour: The Vertues and properties whereof are set downe before, and neede not a repetition here againe. 
2. The Oxycedrus or great prickly Cedar tree giveth a certaine dry Rossin or Gumme as it is called, somewhat like unto the Masticke, but that the graines are long, and of a more yellowish colour, but so dry if it be chewed betweene the teeth, that it will not be wrought into a paste like Masticke: but will be as a pouther in the mouth continually: this I take is called Gum Iuniperi, in the Apothecaries shoppes, and Ʋernix also, and Sandarach likewise, because the tree is so like unto Iuniper, and Lugdunensis saith that both the gum of Iuniper, and of the Oxycedrus are called Vernix. Hereof is made a most stinking Tarre, called by the French huile de Cade, when as they make pitch of the wood, as they do of the pine and pitch trees. This is most likely to be the sweet Cedar of the Bermudas. 
3. Resinae Lariceae, The Larch tree Rossins. The Larch tree yeeldeth likewise two sorts of Rossin, one breaking out at the chinkes of the barke on the body and elder boughes, which is cleere and white like unto white dryed Turpintine, and smelleth reasonable well, which will not be kept in drops, but will runne together into lumpes, untill in time it will grow dry and hard. It yeeldeth forth also a liquid Rossin, when the tree is bored to the heart as is before said, yeare after yeare, one or other, but not the same trees every yeare, one hole above another for eighth or tenne foote above the ground, which when they have so done on one side, they doe so to another, still closing up the hole close with a pinne or wedge, this yeeldeth saith Pliny, lib. 16. c. 10. a liquour of the thicknesse of thinne hony, which never groweth hard, and againe in another place he saith, The Larch tree yeeldeth forth a thinne Rossin of the colour of hony, smelling strong, notwithstanding that he had said that it burneth no more then a stone, nor yet maketh any coales. Vitruvius also lib. 24. c. 6. saith the Larch tree yeeldeth a liquid Rossin of the colour of the hony of Athens, which is good for those that have a ptisicke: but in that they say it was of the colour of hony, you must not un∣derstand the colour of our red hony, but such as that Country of Athens gave, which was nothing so high colou∣red as ours, and which I do in part beleeve, led by divers reasons, to thinke, that that liquid Rossen which flow∣eth out of the Firre tree, being somewhat neare the colour of our hony was the Turpentine used formerly in the Apothecaries shops but as Matthiolus assureth us, the cleare white Turpentine that is in most use in the Apothe∣caries shoppes for inward medecines, and called Venice Turpentine (in imitation of the true Turpentine which commeth out of the Turpentine tree, as divers Liquours are called Balsames, in imitation of the true Balsame) is taken from the Larch tree, whose properties are declared before. 
4. De Resina Pini, &amp; Picea. Of the Rossins, of the Pine tree, and of the Pitch. The Pine tree yeeldeth forth a kinde of fatty or gummy Rossin, that is of a whitish yellow colour, made up with a great deale of drosse for the most part, and but little cleane Rossin in severall parts to be seene in it, which doth quickely become dry, and to be made into pouther, smelling somewhat strong and sweete, and is our or∣dinary or common Francumsence that is usually burned in houses and chambers, to aire and perfume them, called also Parrossin, and in shops Resina pini in France Garipot: this Rossin runneth out of the trees of it owne accord, and especially as Matthiolus and Lugdunensis say, out of the Cermolo or Teda, as being the sweetest, and falling upon the ground, is gathered from thence with what drosse it hath gathered into it in the spreading, and so put up with whatsoever sticketh to the barkes of the trees likewise, whereby it becommeth so foule as we have it, and therefore had neede to be melted and strained before it be used, and then will grow hard and fit to be used, there is a kinde of dry Rossin also gathered from the nuts or apples called Resina Strobilina, which Galen maketh the chiefest and best of all other Rossins, although Dioscorides maketh it the last and worst. It yeeldeth no other liquid Rossin that I can learne: but from it and the sorts thereof, before it turne into Teda as after, but especially then, as having most store of pitchy matter in it, is made the best pitch and most store, and is made in Europe, where the trees grow, somewhat after the manner of making charcoales with us: For having prepared a place for the purpose, paved in the middle, and raised up also a little, with a trench round about it, for the pitch to runne into, they pile up the stickes and cloven wood, setting them upright to a sufficient heighth and breadth, this pile or heape they cover with the branches of the tree, plashed close together, and very well limed or lomed on the outside, quite all over, that no chinke be therein, for if any happen it must be presently stopped with lome, that no flame or fume passe out thereat, for feare of loosing all, and onely one hole left below, where the fire is to be kindled, which also must be stopped up after the fire is well kindled, and that the liquour beginneth to runne in∣to the trench, which must have severall gutters from it to be led from thence into others fit to receive the pitch as it runneth out: the Tarre and water with it runneth first out, which is kept together, and the pitch that com∣meth out after by it selfe, and then barrells are filled up with them severally: the thinner liquour is called Pix liquida in Latine, and in Greeke, and when it is boyled againe and made harder and Pix arida vel sicca, and recocta, but the Fissasphaltum is a bituminous or hard pitch, taken out of the earth, and was used to be melted with Tarre to temper it, and make it serviceable for ships. The Vertues whereof being not specified before, shall be shewed hereafter in the end of the Chapter. 
5. Resina Picea. The pitch tree Rossin. The pitch tree likewise thrusteth forth a whitish Rossin gathered betweene the barke and the tree, and breaking out into drops, so like unto Thus or Olibanum, that many did counterfeit it therewith, as Galen saith lib. 2. decomp. med. secund gener. c. 2. and lib. 3. c. 2. who calleth it Piceae bulla, and this peradventure may be that Rossin of the pitch tree, made in Asia, and called there Sphagas as Pliny saith, who also in another place saith hereof, that the pitch tree giveth a great deale of Rossin so like unto Thus, that being mingled together, they can scarse be discerned to be severall: this Rossin also is used to be mixed with the pine tree Rossin before spo∣ken of, which is likely to be Galen his , and with them the Resina strobilina mixed all together: out of this tree likewise being wounded as in other trees for that purpose, is drawne forth a liquid Rossin, like unto that of the Firre Tree, called by Pliny Pix Brutia, as I take it, which is redder then the ordinary Rossin, and perad∣venture may be also the Colophony of the ancients, which was like Resina fricta, and brought from Colophony, but more tenacious, as betweene Rossin and pitch, which I take to be that which is usually called with us now a dayes Burgony pitch, which while it is fresh is somewhat soft in working, and sharpe in sent, but afterward grow∣ing as dry as a dry Rossin, that will easily be made into pouther. Of the wood and stickes hereof as of the pine, either together or separate is made pitch, as is before shewed. 
6. Resina Abiegna, The Firre tree Rossin or Turpintine. Some doe say that there is gathered from the Firre tree, a dry kinde of Rossin passing out thereof voluntarily as is before said of the pine and pitch trees, and put altogether to make our common Francumsence, which how true or false it is, I cannot either maintaine or disprove, the knowledge of many such things, although of daily use is not easily attained, by them that dwell farre from the naturall places of their growing, From this Firre tree be∣ing bored to the heart, as is done in other the like, and some say out of the pitch tree as well, issueth forth in the younger trees a cleere yellowish Turpintine or thinne Rossin, but from the elder somewhat thicker, which be∣ing put into great cauldrons is boyled with a double quantity of water, but I thinke twice double will not serve, so long even two or three dayes continually night and day, untill it become so throughly boyled and dryed, that it will not yeeld to a thrust, when it is cold, but will be hard and dry, and then is called yellow Rossin, and being molten a new is cast into great cakes, of an hundred weight a peece more or lesse, and according as the Turpin∣tine is in clearenesse and goodnesse so will the Rossin be, and this is the of the Grecians, and Resina fricta of the Latines. 
7. Resina Cupressina. The Rossin of the Cypresse tree. There is sometimes found on this tree, a certaine kinde of dry Rossin, but so little that we have little know∣ledge thereof, and lesse use, Dioscorides and Pliny doe both make mention of a liquid Rossin, to be taken out of it as out of the Turpintine tree Larch tree and others. 
8. From the Savine trees likewise of both sorts, in the hot Countries is taken a dry Rossin. 
9. From the Cedrus Lycia, the Cypresse like Cedars of both sorts, is taken such like dry Rossins as from the Oxy∣cedrus in small peeces falling to pouther in the chewing like unto it. 
10. From the Arbor vitae sometimes is taken a dry Rossin in small peeces and small quantity. 
11. From the Arbor Thurifera is gathered the Thus or Olibanum, but what the tree is from whence it was ta∣ken we know not, nor they that have made mention of it, for some say one thing and some another, so that I dare say no more of it here, but in the next Classis. 
12. Of the dry or liquid Rossins taken from the Lentiske or Masticke tree, from the Balsamum or Balme tree, from the Styrax or Storax tree, and from the Turpintine tree, I have spoken sufficiently before, saving onely that I would give you further to understand that in Syria, and the parts neere thereunto they make pitch of the Tur∣pintine in the same manner as they doe of the Cedar, besides the cleere true Turpintine that is drawne forth by piersing the tree, as in other Rossin bearing trees. 
The Vertues of Rossin and Pitch. Rossin in generall as Galen saith, that is of all sorts, is hot and dry, but they differ much one from another, in being more or lesse sharpe and hot, and of thin parts: the Strobolina, that is, the Rossin taken from the nuts of the pines is the hottest, and that from the Turpintine tree the most temperate, the dry white Rossin of the pitch tree is hot and dry, but yet is not so-drying as the Strobolina, although more heating: that of the Firre tree is as a meane betweene them both, even as that Colophony, which smelleth and is like Thus or Olibanum is temperate likewise, the moistest of them all is that other sort of the Larch tree Rossin, which is the sharper, of the stronger sent, and more bitter taste: The huile de Cade or stinking Tarre, comming from the Oxycedrus or prickely Cedar when it is burned, healeth all scabbes and itch in man or beast, and other deformityes in the skin, as the Lepry morphew and the like, and performeth in a manner whatsoever the Cedria it selfe can doe. The Ve∣nice Turpintine boyled to a dry Rossin, is farre better then any other ordinary boyled Rossin to stay the flux of Gonorrhea. The common Francumsence, Parrossin, or Rossin of the pine tree besides the uses to burne and per∣fume a house as is before said, it serveth in salves as a principall ingredient, to heale and fill up with flesh hollow ulcers, and to warme and comfort any cold griefe or part of the body: The Rossin of the pitch tree, called Bur∣gony pitch, in being sharper and more hot, is much used for searcloathes against cold aches, and all sorts of paines and griefes proceeding of cold, and by reason of the sharpe and quicke sent, is the more piercing: The pitch it selfe is hot and dry in the second degree, yet mollefyeth hard knots tumours and swellings, it bringeth boiles and sores to supparation, and breaketh carbunckles, and blanes, disperseth and scattereth botches and emposthumes, draweth forth corruption in sores, and healeth them by causing flesh to grow up in them, and is used in many salves, both oyntments and plaisters that serve to draw and to heale: The Tarre water that commeth first out and with the Tarre, doth kill any Tetter or Ringworme being used thereon, and likewise any itch, and healeth up scabbes or scalles in the head, the Tarre it selfe is hotter then the pitch, and is used saith Dioscorides, against poysons, as also is good for those that have the Tissick or cough, or rotten flegme stuffing the lungs, and for hoarse∣nesse and tough flegme, that will not easily be expectorated: being rubbed with salt on a place that is bitten by a Serpent helpeth it, and being mixed with as much waxe it taketh away the ruggednesse of the nailes, it helpeth the hardnesse of the mother, the rifts in the fundament, the chaps on the hands or feete, it stayeth also spreading ulcers, it breaketh or dissolveth the kernels under the eares and throate, called the Kings evill, being made up into a pultis with Barley meale, and a boyes urine, and applyed warme: it is likewise dropped into the eares with a little oyle of Roses to cleanse the mattering of them: it stayeth creeping ulcers applyed with Brimstone or the barke of the pine tree, or with branne: The blacking that is made of the pitch when it is burned, healeth watering eyes, and the fretting sores in the corners of them: and with it and ordinary Turpintine well mixed, is made the Printers Incke where with they print Bookes, but not our ordinary Incke now adayes, howsoever it might be in use in Dioscorides his time. The Turpintine that commeth out of the Firre tree is sharper and hotter then that of the Larch tree, and more nausious to be taken inwardly as I said before, and therefore more usually put into salves, and for outward remedies: The Rossin that is made thereof is neere unto the property of Pitch clensing heating drawing, and mollefying as well, and drying more then pitch: the pouther of Rossin is almost as effectuall as Amber pouther in the running of the reines, experimented by sundry Chirurgions, who have used it instead of the best sort of dryed Turpintine, which is for the same purpose, either to try conclusions or to save charges: it is used with pitch in many salves, or without it for all the purposes whereunto pitch serveth for all greene wounds to heale them, and for all old sores and ulcers to clense them, incarnate and heale them up after∣wards: it may be used in fumes with Olibanum, Masticke, and other things that are burned, and the head ayred with their smokes to helpe to dry cold rheumes, catarrhes, and distillations from the head. The Rossin of the Cypresse tree is heating and binding, and serveth effectually for all the purposes that is spoken before of the nuts or leaves, or what else thereof is used: The Rossins of the small Cedars are neere the property of the prickely Cedar, although not so effectuall or violent. In the like manner whatsoever droppeth or runneth forth from the Sabine trees is sharpe and hot like the leaves, &amp;c. of the tree: and for the Arbor vitae, although there hath been sometimes a kinde of Rossin found sticking to the barke of the tree, yet it hath beene in so little quantity, that I have not learned what use any hath made of it. The other Rossins of the Balme tree. Turpintine, Lentiske and Storax trees are spoken of sufficiently in their proper Chapters, and need not a repetition he e againe, of the same things there delivered: The Vertues of the Thus or Olibanum, you shall have in the next Classis with the rela∣tion thereof. 
CHAP. XCVIII. De Gummis arborum &amp; herbarum earundemque succis condensatis. Of the Gummes of trees, and herbes, and of the dryed juyces of them. T He Rossins of all sorts being declared in the former Chapter, there remaineth to speake of Gums issuing both out of Herbs and Trees, and the condensate juyces of plants, yet I must except out of this number and Chapter the gummes and dryed juyces, whose plants are not knowne to us, from whence they proceede, and that are brought of old or of later dayes, from the East or West Indies, which are of use in physicke, for I determine to handle them in the next Classis, with the forraigne drugges in the Apothecaryes shops. I have as you see here joyned the condensate juyces unto the gummes, because to them that know not their manner and nature, they seeme to be gummes, one as well as another: and that I may shew you the difference betweene a gumme and a dryed juyce, and both of them from the Rossins before spoken of, thus they are: Gummes are of two sorts, one that is of a watery or earthy substance, and will dissolve in warme or cold water, wine, or the like, and not in or with oyle, nor melt of themselves, being set to the fire, and will burne without flaming, and such are the Gummes of many trees. The other is oylious or unctuous and in part resinous, in that it cleaveth so fast to any thing toucheth it, and that will not dissolve with cold water, wine, or vinegar, but onely with warmed wine or vinegar, and will also bet∣ter dissolve of themselves being set to the fire, then the other gummes will, and will give a flame in the bur∣ning, yet nothing so much as the Rossins, which as I shewed before are wholly unctuous, melting with the heate of fire, and burning with a flame like oyle and such like unctuous matter being set on fire: Another difference of a Rossin from a Gumme is this, that all Rossins although liquid (some sooner or later then others,) will be dryed to be made into pouther; the juyces have scarse any of them any unctuous matter in them, being onely composed of a watery and earthy substance, condensate together, which wholly dissolveth with water and burneth like earth: to begin therefore. 
1. Gummi Arabicum. Gumme Arabecke. Is a certaine cleare white Gumme that is brought from the parts beyond the Seas, and is taken to be the Gumme that commeth out of the Acacia tree of Egipt by many good Authours, Bellonius also confirming it, who travai∣led through those parts, and observed it, and Alpinus who lived a while in Egipt, yet some have taken it to be the gumme of plumme trees, or of other trees growing in those parts: It is of sundry formes and colours, for some are in round hard dry peeces, of the bignesse of a Tennis ball, or bigger, or not halfe so great or lesse, all of them rugged and not smooth on the outside, but whitish for the most part, which being broken is cleare pure, white and transparent, yet some more or lesse then others, and some are very small long peeces, and therefore called vermiculatum, and held for the best, being in substance like the other peeces of the same greater size, are reddish, yet cleare and transparent also, which some take to be the gumme of some other tree, because it is of such a dif∣ferent colour, but that is no sufficient reason to disprove it, for we see in divers others sorts of gummes, that the severall peeces doe not all hold one forme or colour, and yet are true: this dissolveth of it selfe in water, and serveth as a glew to stiffen binde, or fasten many things: the tree hereof shall bee declared the second Chapter after this, for the manner thereof, it distilleth or droppeth out of the tree in bigger or lesser peeces, as either nature list to thrust it forth, or as it is helped by cutting the barke and giving it way to issue forth, which sticking too, and not falling off or upon the ground, is so gathered and reserved. 
2. Gummi Prunorum &amp; Cerasorum. Plumme tree and Cherry tree Gumme. The Gums of both these trees come forth in the same manner that is said of the former, being of severall co∣lours each of them, that of the Plumme tree for the most part being whiter then the other, which is redder: yet both of them cleere and more clammy then the former, and vary, some of the Plumme trees being reddish, and of the Cherry trees white. 
3. Gummi Amygdalarum &amp; Persicorum. Almond and Peach tree Gummes. Both these trees likewise yeeld Gummes very like unto the Plumme and Cherry tree, that it is somewhat hard to distinguish them, but that they are somewhat whiter and a little dryer. Thus having shewed you all the Gummes of the Trees that are knowne to us, let me in the next place shew you the other sorts of Gums, taken for the most part from the rootes of Herbes and plants. 
4. Gum Tragacantha. Gum Tragacanth. This Gumme as I have shewed before in speaking of the plant called Goates thorne is taken from the rootes hereof as they grow, a pit being made round about the roote, which will in the greatest heate of Summer, be∣ing deepely wounded, thrust forth very slender small peeces, crooked or writhed, seldome greater then a tagges point, or ones fingers end, and most usually a great deale smaller; some very pure white, and others a little yel∣lowish, and some more reddish, much of it gathering drosse, which sticketh fast unto either barke or stones, or earth, or the like: the gumme it selfe is sweetish in taste, and quickely relenting in water into a gelly, like made starch, and glewing things together as firme as starch or glew, in small and thin materials. The properties hereof are declared with the plant. 
5. Opopanax. The Gumme Opopanax. This gumme taken from Panax, the All heale of Hercules is a yellow gumme, very browne on the outside and yellow within being broken, the best is pure or sincere, that is, not mixed with stickes or drosse, but cleane gum, and in small drops, yet sticking fast together, of a sowrish sent, and somewhat strong, and being dissolved with wine or vinegar, will make it looke yellow, even as the herbe it selfe, being broken will yeeld a yellow sap or juyce in our owne Land: from the rootes chiefly and not from the stalkes is this gumme taken, in the like man∣ne as I shewed you of the gumme tragacanth by digging a hole round about the roote, and laying boordes or tyles or the like, round about and in the bottome to keepe the gumme cleane, from earth, stones, or any other thing that might foule it, falling among it after the roote is cut in three or foure places, as some doe, or making a hole or two therein as others doe, whereunto the gumme will be drawne, and from thence flow forth: in the Classis of Vmbelliferous plants are the Vertues expressed whereunto I referre you.
6. Galbanum. The Gum Galbanum. The great Ferula or Fennell giant of one sort, is the plant from whence this gumme is taken, and that not in every Country for that onely which groweth in Syria, as Dioscorides saith yeeldeth Galbanum, the rootes being wounded in the same manner as is before said of the Panax: the gumme smelleth strongest of any of the Feru∣laceous gummes, and is if it be sincere a little yellowish, with white peeces amongst it, and divers parts of stickes or stalkes broken among it, and sometimes the seedes also, so clammy and tenacious that one can hardly touch it without cleaving to their fingers, and dissolving onely with wine or vinegar. 
7. Sagapenum. The Gum Sagapen. As Syria bringeth forth the Ferula, from whence Galbanum is taken, so is Media the nourse plot, as Dioscori∣des saith, where the same or another Ferula groweth, from whence the gumme Sagapenum or Serapinum is ta∣ken in the same manner that the former is, and doth not much differ from it, but that it is not so clammy, or gum∣my, but dryer, and of a redder colour, and smelleth not halfe so strong or stinking as it doth: The Vertues both of Galbanum and Sagapenum, are amply set forth under the title of Ferula. 
8. Gum Ammoniacum. The Gum Ammoniacum, This gumme likewise is taken from a Ferula as it is said, growing in Cyrene of Africa, so that you see the di∣versity of the climate, although in one and the same plant produceth diversities of gums, differing both in form and operation: this gumme is much whiter then any of the three last mentioned, pure and sincere without any sticke or stalke in it, and with many whiter peeces among it, and not smelling any thing so much as the Saga∣penum doth, which also being dissolved, will be whiter then any of the former. The properties of this Gum is very like unto the two last of the Ferulous gums, and thereunto you may referre it. 
9. Euphorbium. The gum of the burning thorny plant. This gum is taken from the thorny plant Euphorbium, as we have beene alwayes informed from others, and not from any kind of Ferulous plant, as Dioscorides saith, the forme of which plant, as it hath come from beyond the Sea unto us, even a small plant, we have here before exhibited unto you, the gum is of a browne yellowish colour, and somewhat whiter within, in almost as small graines and drops as Masticke, of a most violent burning hot piercing sent, piercing the nostrils if it be but a little stirred, but much more and allmost intollerable to him that shall beate it, and more to them that shall take it inwardly, the properties hereof are declared with the de∣scription of the plant. 
10. Sarcocolla. Sarcocoll. This is a small reddish and whitish gum in very small peeces and pouther, little bigger then Poppy seed, some∣what bitter in taste, and ready to provoke casting, but of no sent almost at all, Dioscorides saith it is taken from a tree in Persia, which neither he describeth, nor we have any further knowledge of, it clenseth and dryeth, it closeth up greene wounds, and stayeth catarrhes, defluxions and rednesse in the eyes. 
11. Gum Hederae. Gum of Ivy. The gum that is gathered in the hot Countryes from the stems and greater branches of the Ivy tree is of a very darke red or browne colour, comming to us in small drops, cleaving fast together in lumpes, a little cleare, and of somewhat a strong sent, but very sharpe and burning: it killeth nits and lice, and some doe put it into a hollow tooth to helpe the ach, being mixed with things convenient for it: some use this gumme with other things, and some alone, made up with a little hony and crummes of bread into a paste, and cast it into standing pooles and ponds of fish to make them turne up their bellies and lye as dead above the water for a small time, that they may be taken, which will returne to their senses againe. 
12. Scammonium. Scammony. I have made a long narration hereof in the second Classis of this Work, whereunto I must referre you, and one∣ly shew you here that the generall vote of the Writers thereof, is that the juyce hereof is taken from the rootes of the plant, ordered in the same manner that is shewed in gathering the gummes of Panax and Ferula, &amp;c. but I am halfe perswaded it is otherwise, and made in another manner, because it doth not condensate into graines or small peeces as those aforesaid, but is made into a whole uniforme lumpe or masse, of a darke grayish colour, somewhat light and not ponderous, a little spongy also, or with some holes in it, somewhat cleare and not muddy of drossie, of a strange and strong taste, almost procuring casting, and giving a shew of milke upon the moistening with the tongue, but not burning in the mouth or throate, for that is a signe of adultering: The qualities are ex∣pressed at large in the place before named. 
13. Aloes, Aloe succotrine. The Herbe Aloe, or Sea Houseleeke, I have likewise largely entreated of in the said second Classis before, with the whole manner of drawing out and preparing the juyce, whereunto I must referre you, so to save a tautologie or repetition of the same things againe, which were too tedious. 
14 Opium. Opium. This also with all that can belong thereunto, I have expressed in the Chapter of Poppy before, and cannot adde unto it any thing, more then is there set downe with the Vertues and Cautions, in as ample manner as I can. 
15. Elaterium. Elaterium. After I had given you the description of the wild Cowcumber, in the second Classis before, I declared the ma∣king of the Elaterium of two sorts, both greene and white, as may be sufficiently gathered from what is there said, and therefore I shall forbeare to say any more thereof in this place, referring you thereunto, where the properties are also expressed. 
CHAP. XCIX. Palma. The Date tree. A Lthough there be divers kindes of trees that goe under the name of Palma in Latine, whereof Pliny in his time mentioned three score and one, and since his time many others not knowne to him, have beene brought to light, yet there is but one kinde of Date tree properly so to be called without variety, how∣soever the climate where they grow, seeme to make a diversity, of greatnesse or goodnesse one from another in the fruite, such as Theophrastus and Pliny reckon, and although againe, for want of a fitter English name, as the former Wri have thought, they have beene called Date trees generally: yet I would if I could avoid that improper name, and rather call them Palmes for the distinction of them: I will therefore in this place give you onely the description of the true Date tree, and thereto adjoyne two other called Palmitos, which o∣thers doe account low or wilde Date trees; when in truth they have little or no resemblance thereunto, saving a little in the leaves, and speake of such other Palmes, as have come to our knowledge, in the next Classis. 
1. Palma vulgaris. The ordinary Date tree. The Date tree usually groweth very great and tall, yet in some places nothing so high as in others, bare of branches unto the toppe, the barke whereof is not so well to be said scaly or rugged, as knaggy, having short knagges, which are the ends of the middle ribbes of the leaves, sticking out round about the body, which give an easie footing like steps, to climbe or get up into the toppes of the trees to gather the fruite, the leaves that grow at the toppe are very long and large, made as it were of divers parts, and foulded together double; the middle rib being thicke and almost wooddy, but spongy within, which doe alwayes abide greene, and hang downewards with their ends: the flowers are enclosed in a long skinny sheath, hanging downe from the lower branches of leaves and sometimes higher, which opening it selfe at the end into two parts, shew forth a number of white Saffron-like small flowers, hanging by small threds in great bunches together; after which come the fruite, upon the said threddy footestalkes, greene at the first, and reddish when they are ripe, with a hard firme small long and round whitish stone with a furrow in the middle: some sorts are small, and some great, some of a soft sub∣stance some firmer and harder, some whitish, some yellowish, or reddish, or blackish, some round like an Apple, others long with the roundnesse, some having the toppe soft, and some none at all, some so sweete and lushious that they will not keepe long, unlesse they be pressed into cakes to be kept; others will abide whole for a long time, and fit to be sent also into any farre Country: yet all of them having a small round hard crowne or cap at the head, which with rubbing one against another falleth off: the stones within the fruite, notwithstanding that they are so sollid and firme as a very stone, and can hardly be broken with an hammer, yet having a small hollow place in the middle of them, with so small a kernell therein, that it would not be thought to spring thereby, yet being put whole into the ground hath shot forth long narrow hard leaves, and have abiden in a convenient warme place divers yeares, without any great progresse, so little it liketh so cold a climate. 
2. Palma humilis sive Chamaeriphes vel Palmites. The wilde or low Date tree called the Palmito tree. The Palmito or low or wilde Date tree groweth in divers places of Europe, not to be above a yard high in the stocke or body, shooting out leaves from thence very like unto the former Date tree, but much lesser and shorter: this beareth a round head at the side of the leaves, composed of many foulds of skinnes, which breaking open, shew forth a number of white flowers, standing upon small thready stalkes: this head being cut off, before it o∣pen it selfe for flowers, is very delicate to eate like a Coleflower or Cabbage, and more pleasant then either Hartichoke, Chardon, or Tartouflibe, and are served to rich mens tables for a sallate of great delight. 
3. Palma Chamaerops Plinij sive Chamaeriphes spinosis folijs. The Thorny Palmito. This groweth in a manner wholly like the last, but the leaves being made as it were of many hard plaites have many sharpe and short prickes or thornes, on the backe of them, and the stalkes of them likewise, whereby it differeth from the other, whether the heads and fruite be alike, I cannot certainely heare. 
The Place and Time. The manured Date tree groweth in all the Easterne Countries generally, Galen and Pliny, with others commen∣ded those especially above others, that grew in Iudaea, and in the valley of Hiericho: Bellonius saith, they deser∣ved not commendations, neither were they ripe about Ierusalem, above a moneth after they had beene gathe∣red in Egypt: they grow also in Italy where they are planted but beare no fruite, and in Spaine by the Sea side, Palma vulgaris &amp; tegetima. The ordinary and true Date tree. 
Palmae spathacum fructu &amp; floribus. The blooming and fruite of the Date tree. 
2. Palma humilis sive Chamaeriphes. The wild or low Palme, called the Palmito tree. 
3. Palma Chamarops Plinij sive Chamaeriphes spinosis foliis. The thorny Palmito. 
but the fruite is nothing so good as in Cyprus and Levant. The other two sorts grow, the first in Sicilia, Candy, &amp;c. the other in Spaine: they flower in Aprill, and are ripe in November or later. 
The Names. The Date tree is called in Greeke Phaenix, in Latine Palma, and the fruite Palmulae and Dactyli; the sheath or skin which encloseth the flowers, is called Elate, and Spatha, and some thinke one kinde of Date is called Palma Elate: the best sort of Dates are called Caryotae and Phaenicobalanis, which were also called regiae, because they were fittest for the dyet of Kings. Thebanes were the leane dry Dates, that had little substance in them: the ancient Writers have set downe many things of Dates, that there is male and female, and that they both beare fruite, so that they be within the sight one of another, or else they will not beare, but I pray you account this among the rest of their fables. The second is called by Theophrastus, and Chaemaeriphes in Latine by Lobel, Lugduensis, and Palma humilis also by Matthiolus, and Palmites or Palmito by the vulgar in Italy, Spaine, &amp;c. the Greekes also call that head that is used to be eaten , the Italians and Spaniards Cefaglioni, The other is called by Lugdunensis Chamaerops Plinij. The Arabians call the Date tree Machla, and Nachal, and the fruite Tamar, the Italians Palma the tree, and Dattoli the fruite, the Spaniards Palmeira, and Tamaras, and Dattiles the fruite, the French Palmier, and Dactier, and Palmes, and Dactes: the Germanes Dattelbaum, and Dattelz, the Dutch Dayeboom, and Dayes, and we in English Date tree, and Dates.
The Vertues. The unripe Dates are very harsh and binding, and the ripe also while they are fresh more then when they are dry, staying womens courses, vomittings, and the laske of the belly, and stay also the bleeding and falling downe of the fundament and piles, being taken in red wine: if they be used that are dry, they helpe the hoarsenesse and roughnesse of the throate, the sharpe cough by reason of sharpe rheume falling on the breast and lungs, the decoction of them taken, alayeth the force of hot agues, and stayeth spittings of blood, the paines in the stomacke and bowels, because of a flux, and boyled in old hydromel, that is, mede or honyed water, and taken doth re∣fresh the spirits: used likewise in brothes or meates they doe the like, and somewhat provoke unto enery, but being taken too often, or too liberally, they breed head ach, and a kinde of perturbation of the braine, like unto drunkennesse, and the leprosie also as it is said, the sheath out of which the flowers breake, is very astringent, and so are the leaves also in the cases aforesaid: the decoction thereof maketh the haire blacke, being often used, and stayeth fretting ulcers, and helpeth the weakenesse and paines in the backe, in the bladder, and in the bowels: the Date stones being burned and washed serveth in stead of Spodium, to binde and restraine the fluent humours into the eyes, and to consume the pinne and web in them, and to dry up pushes being used with Spik nard, it stay∣eth the falling of the haire from the eyebrowes: being mingled with wine and used, it helpeth any excressences out of the flesh, as wennes and such like, and bringeth foule ulcers to cicatrising: Diaphaenicon, which is the E∣lectuary made of Dates, purgeth choller and flegme very effectually, so it be taken with good caution and advise, and that from two drammes unto sixe in white wine, or a decoction of Sene, as shall be thought fit, and is conve∣niently given in compound and long agues, and in those diseases that are bred of raw humours, as in the chollicke the paines of the backe and mother. The head of the Dates, or Date braines, is very pleasant and savoury to the taste, and is much used where they grow to be eaten with a little Pepper and salt: of the leaves of the Palmito they use to make Broomes to sweepe the house, which last a long time; of them likewise they make Mats, and Baskets. 
CHAP. C. Acacia sive Spina Aegyptia. The Egiptian thorne or binding Beane tree. D Ioscorides hath made mention of two sorts of Acacia, the one of Egipt, and the other of Cappadocia, and Pontus: Theophrastus also speaketh of two sorts, blacke and white: that of Egipt is reasona∣ble well knowne, but of that sort of Pontus, there is some controversie among Writers, some ta∣king one bush to be it, and others denying it to be it, the differences of Theophrastus sorts are one∣ly expressed in the wood, as it is likely, the white to rot quickely, and the blacke to be long lasting and of very good use to many purposes, Dioscorides having described them. I shall therefore here shew you them, and with them adjoyne another sort of Acacia brought out of the West Indies, mentioned by Aldinus in his Farnesian garden. 
1. Acacia sive Spina Aegyptia vera. The true Acacia, that is Egiptian thorne or binding Beane tree. The Egipt an Thorne groweth in some places to be a great tree, and rather crooked then straight or rising high, covered with a blackish barke, spreading abroad great armes and branches, full of sharpe thornes, with many winged leaves set on both sides of them, that is, with foure winges of leaves on a side, made of sundry small ones, set opposite on a middle rib, without any odde one at the end, although it be so expressed, Bellonius saith that he counted 350. of those small leaves, that were upon the whole branch, and yet all of them might but cover his thumbe: the flowers grow among the branches, like flockes of wooll, of a whitish yellow colour, where after come somewhat large and thicke huskes, like unto the Lupine or flat beane cods, blacke when they are ripe, and bunched forth against the places where the seedes lye, in some three or foure, and in some more, each as bigge as a small wild Beane, round, and of a grayish or ash colour, almost shining: the tree abideth alwayes with greene leaves thereon, and yeeldeth of it owne accord a white gumme in small curled peeces like great wormes, and greater round peeces if it be wounded. 
2. Acacia Americana Farnescena. The West Indian Acacia or binding Beane tree. This Indian Acacia groweth like unto the Hasell nut tree saith Aldinus, with many stemmes if they be not cut away that it may rise to be a tree, with slender and flexible branches, covered with a smooth thinne barke, like the Hasell, the young ones being of a greenish ash-colour on the North side, but that next the Sunne more pale, spotted with white spots: the leaves hereon are variable, which although they be all winged, yet some have but foure leaves on a side, some have five, sixe, seven, or eight, with an odde one at the end, each paire set opposite, and 1. Acacia vera sive Spina Aegyptiaca. The Egiptian Thorne or binding beane tree. 
2. Acacia Americana Farnesiana. The VVest Indian Acacia or binding beane tree. 
like unto Lentilles, closing or foulding themselves upon the Sunne setting, and opening againe after the rising, having at the foote of every stalke two long thornes set, reddish at the first, and white after: the first flowers come forth in the beginning of Iuly, after some few leaves have shot forth from the old wood, but not in any plenty, yet bring the fruite to ripenesse after: but in the beginning of September more plentifully, yet without any fruite following them: these flowers at the first are greene, and like a small Strawberry, growing yellow∣ish after, and whitish within two or theee dayes like unto a pill, or small round ball, consisting of a flocky or woolly substance, many of them set together, and have many small threds in the middle with yellow tips, of a very sweete sent, like unto the sent of Wall flowers, which hold their sent long after they are dry: from the middle of the flower come forth divers cods, yet sometimes but one or two, or three, and sometimes more, greene at the first, and blacke when they are ripe, like crooked round hornes, while they are greene, of a very harsh and binding taste, but growing ripe they are lesse astringent and the huske more sharpe, and then doe somewhat resemble the cods of Lupines, but a little crooked, being halfe a foote long, and about an inch thicke, somewhat round and bunched out, where the seedes lye, which huske is very tough when it is dry, wherein are divers hard blacke seedes, like unto those of the sweete Beane or Carob tree, thrust thicke together without order, the wood hereof is hard and whitish, but blackest at the heart, without either sent or taste: this doth in many things agree with the former, but the greatest difference is in the huskes with seede, this having many, and the other but three or foure at the most, The like hereunto Lobel mentioneth in his Adversaria, pag. 409. that he saw with Master Morgan Queene Elizabeths Apothecary. 
3. Acacia secunda sive altera Dioscoridis. The true second Acacia of Dioscorides. This bush hath an upright stemme three cubits high or more, covered with a smooth sad greene barke, the wood being soft and easie to breake, and not very thicke of long thornes, the leaves are small, standing three to∣gether upon the branches, the flowers are small and yellow, whose succeeding seede seated in small huskes, are round, hard, flat and yellowish, somewhat like to Broome seed: This shrub seemeth very like to the Aspalathus secundus of Dioscorides, but differeth notably therefrom, in that the Aspalathus is thicker set with greater whiter and sharper thornes, with fewer and smaller leaves, flowers, and seede vessels, and the wood thereof is hard, and not easie to be broken. 
The Place and Time. The first groweth in Arabia plentifully in many places, and mount Sinai, and in Egipt also, and flowreth and beareth fruite twice a yeare, whereby we may well say, it beareth ever greene leaves: the other came out of the West Indies, Aldinus saith his came from Saint Domingo, but from whence that which Master Morgan Queene Elizabeth her Apothecary had long agoe, as Lobel setteth it downe in Adversaria, is not knowne whether it came from thence or no, the seedes springing in Cardinall Farnesius his Garden in Rome as it is set forth by the said Aldinus in his description of some rare Indian 3. Acacia secunda seu aliera Dioscoridis. The true Acacia of Dioscorides. 
plants growing therein, and flowred and bore fruite as it is expressed in the description. The last in Candy and Graecia, as Pona saith. 
The Names. Dioscorides calleth it in Greeke , and Acacia in Latine also, and Theophrastus Spina simply without any other adjective, whereof he maketh two sorts as I said, alba and nigra, the white being weake and quickely rotting, the blacke being strong, fit to build houses, and ships, &amp;c. Alpinus maketh them to be mas and faemina, the male fuller of thornes and without fruite, the female having fewer and gentler thornes, and those within the branches, bearing plen∣tifully. Pliny also calleth it Spina Aegyptia in some places, distinguishing it from the Arabica, and in o∣thers confoundeth it with the Spina Arabica, which are much differing, this being a Thistle as it is shew∣ed among them, and that a Thorny tree: Some have thought that the Acanthus baccifera of Virgill, men∣tioned in the second of his Ge rgickes, in these words Quid tibi odorato referam sudantia ligno Balsamaque &amp; baccas semper frondentis Acanthi, should be this tree, as Servius Grammaticus, and Christoferus Landus both of them Commenters upon Ʋirgill say; but without true judgement as Guilandinus noteth it, who would referre it to the Acanthus Aegyptia of Athanaeus; Marantha referreth it to that kinde of E∣benus, whereof Pliny, lib, 12. c. 5. maketh mention, but there is as little certainety in this, as in the former, for concerning this it is not specified by Pliny, that it either beareth berryes, or yet abideth over greene, and for the former, this Acacia beareth not berryes, such as no doubt Virgill meant: but it is most proba∣ble he intended, the Pyracantha, that we most usu∣ally so call, for Pliny so called it also, and Spina as some have it, or Spinus lib. 15. c. 24. where he saith Baccae Aquifolij &amp; Spinae sine succo. But now con∣cerning the juyce of Acacia, the true and not the substitute should be used in those two famous compositions, Mithridatum, and Theriaca Andromachi, and there is no doubt, but our Apothecaries might have sufficient of the true to use, and expunge the substitute, if they would bespeake the true to be brought, being made there in Egipt, where the tree groweth of the greene cods, which Acacia will be reddish, such as I have seene with Master Bo e the Drugist, which is the best: or else made of the cods which will be blacke, for if the Apothecaries would them∣selves extract the juyce out of them, and condensate it secundum artem, they might have enough of the cods brought them for that use. Lobel mentioning the Acacia, in the place before recited, saith that Sequinus Martinellus, a Physitian and Apothecary of Venice sent his brother Albertus, divers sackes full of these cods, whereof some was reduced into juyce, and some of the seedes were planted and grew into trees, as Lobel there mentioneth. The hardned juyce likewise is called Acacia: some have called it Spina Christi, thinking that Christs Crowne was made of the boughes of this tree, but it is more probable it was made of the Paliurus, it is now generally through all Turkie called A ia, and so likewise of the Egiptians, as Alpinus saith, and Sant also: Rauwolfius saith that the Arabians at Haleppo, call it Scamuth, and Schacke. The Gumme that commeth out of the tree, whether voluntary or by incision is called Gummi Arabicum, although divers doe doubt that the gumme that beareth that name, is not the gum of this tree but some other, yet it is assured to be right by Alpinus, Bellonius, and others, yet there is a small sort of gumme likewise brought to us, of the like whitenesse and clearenesse with the other, but is Ʋermiculosum, in small crooked peeces like unto short thicke wormes. The second is called by Aldinus Acacia Indica Farnesiana, who hath made a long comparison betweene it and the former Egiptian. The last is remembred by Pona in his Italian Baldus. 
The Ʋertues. The hardned juyce extracted by decoction out of the cods of this tree, and called Acacia as I said, with the gumme thereof are the most especiall parts thereof we know are used, yet the juyce of the leaves and the rest worketh like them, but farre weaker: the juyce being used in all such diseases as neede binding, cooling, and strengthning, and staying vomitting, used inwardly or outwardly: and is available in the defluxions of hot hu∣mours into the eyes to stay them, and the abundance of womens courses, with the falling downe of the pallate, and of the fundament, and the flux of the belly, and the spitting of blood, and all bleedings, it resisteth also creeping ulcers, Saint Anthonies fir in the beginning, and helpeth the ulcers of the mouth, and secret parts, kibes, and chil∣blanes, and the growing of flesh over the nailes, and to fasten loose teeth, and the fluxe of humours to the joynts, that weakeneth them, and when they have beene bruised or put out of their place: the same also made into a decoction and the haire rubbed or washed with it, maketh it blacke, and is much commended to those that have the gout: the gum hath a property of thickening, and cooling, and to represse and coole the heate, and sharpe∣nesse of humours, and to binde or close up the open passages of the skinne, and keepeth the places from blistering that are burnt with fire, being used with the white of an egge: it serveth also for Limmers to fasten their colours for Dyers also in their Dying, for inke, and many other externall civill uses. 
CHAP. CI. Arbores aliae spinosae &amp; siliquosae Indica. Certaine other thorny Indian trees, bearing cods. I Have certaine Indian Thorny trees to bring to your consideration that beare cods, whereof some have beene entitled Acacia, but I call Pseudoacacia: Another very like thereunto, called by our Colony in Ʋirginia, Locus: whereunto I have adjoyned a third which hath growne with us, and a fourth cal∣led the Corall tree, and because they are differing much from those in the former Chapter, I have thought it fit to make a Chapter of them peculiarly. 
1. Pseudoacacia Americana Robini. Robinus his false Acacia of America. Because Jacobus Cornutus in his Booke of Canada plants, hath entituled this tree Acacia, although with little judgement; I have given it a place with another Ʋirginia like it, but not with the true ones as is most fit. The body (saith he) is smooth, covered with a comely smooth blackish barke, without any thornes thereon at all, spreading the armes and branches very farre, which while they are young are pithy within, beset with many cru∣ell sharpe thornes, flat at the bottome, ending in a small sharpe point: the leaves are many set on both sides of a middle ribbe, from seven or eight, to tenne or more on a side, and an odde one at the end, each leafe foulding it selfe double every evening upon Sunne setting, and opening againe upon the rising: the flowers are white, somewhat like Pease blossomes, or those of Cytisus Tree Trefoile, many set together on a stalke, standing upright and not hanging downe, shewing themselves in August, after which follow hard rough prickly pods, but I and others had from Robinus such smooth pods as is expressed in the figure, under the other, in each whereof was enclosed one or two small browne Lentill-like seedes. By this description you may plainely see how much it differeth both from the true Acacia of Dioscorides, and the other American of Aldinus, having nothing therein but thornes answerable; and therefore in my judgement it doth better agree with some Spartum spinosum, then A∣cacia, but that it is a tree. 
2. Arbor siliquosa Virginensis spinosa, Locus nostratibus dicta. The Virginian Locus tree, A very like tree hereunto hath beene sent and brought us out of Ʋirginia, growing to be a very great tree, and of an exceeding height with Master Trad scant, whose body is covered with a smooth barke, the young bran∣ches being greene, and set with somewhat sharpe prickles at every joynt, where the winged leaves come forth, 1. Pseudoacacia Americana Robini. Robinus his false Acacia of America. 
2. Arbor siliquosa Virginensis spinosa Locus nostratibus dicta. The Ʋirginia Locus tree. 
3. Arbor spinosa Indica muricatis siliquis. The prickly codded Indian tree. 
4. Siliquosa &amp; spinosa trifolium Indica arbor dicta. The Indian Corall tree. 
which are set in the like manner with the other, with an odde one at the end, and some not, but are somewhat shorter and rounder: we have not seene the tree to beare any flowers with us as yet nor fruite, but the cods that came to us, were small, long, and somewhat flat like unto the pods of Laburnum Beane trefoile, but longer thin∣ner and blacker, containing small grayish shining flat and round seede. 
3. Arbor spinosa Indica muricatis siliquis. The prickely codded Indian tree. The seede taken out of the prickly huskes of a tree that was brought from the West Indies, was sowne by Ma∣ster George Willmer at Stratford Bow, and rose up that yeare to be three or foure foote high, branched forth on all sides, and set with small sharpe crooked thornes, both on the maine stemme and branches, having sundry winged leaves set on them, very much resembling the last Virginian Locus. I can give you no further relation hereof, in that the plant perished in the next Winter after the first springing, for want of such due keeping as was fit for such tender plants, that come out from warme Countries: The figure of the prickely huske or pod, you may see set on the side of the figure, with the grayish pease taken thereout also, which was as hard as a stone, with a white kernell within them, yet not sinking in the water. 
4. Siliquosa &amp; spinosa trifolia Indica Coral arbor dicta. The Indian Corall tree. Clusius first, and since him Baptista Ferrarius by the sight thereof, growing both at Rome and in Spaine, hath en∣larged the description of this tree, which I will contract into one, and tell it you thus. It riseth up with many stemmes, whose younger barke is smooth and greene, the elder paler and more rugged, spreading fairely with branches, armed with small crooked whitish thornes, and with faire broad fresh greene and almost round leaves, like unto those of Arbor Iudae, Iudas tree, but that they end in a point, whose footestalkes also as Clusius hath ex∣pressed, have the like crooked thornes on them, which leaves are three alwayes set together, the two lowest opposite on short footestalkes, the end one on a longer: the flowers are Pease fashion, or like those of Phaseolus the Kidney Beane, of an orient red colour like Corall, of which colour also are the Beanes or fruite in pods, like unto other Phaseoli: it is very tender to keepe, not abiding the least cold aire, for as Clusius setteth it downe Sig∣nior de Tonar, the chiefest Physitian of Savill ▪ in Spaine in his time, having two trees hereof growing, which by one Winters over sharpenesse had them both spoyled therewith. I have not altered the name hereof, whereby it is generally knowne, but if I might adopt one, as I thinke more fitting thereunto, I would entitle it Phaseolus arboreus spinosus Indicus floro allin .
The Names. It is not certainely knowne that either Dioscorides or Theophrastus, have made mention of this tree in all their Workes, for although some have taken it to be that Colytaea of Theophrastus, which he mentioneth in his third Booke and foureteenth Chapter, but unto this he attributeth a leafe like unto Willow, which this is utterly unlike, others againe, that is, those of Mompelier as Clusius saith, unto that Colytaea of Ida, that Theophrastus mentioneth in the seventeenth Chapter of the said third Booke, whereunto he attributeth the leafe of the lar∣ger leafed Bay tree, but larger, rounder, and somewhat like the Elme leafe, yet somewhat long with all, greene above and whitish underneath, and whereunto saith Clusius, he in the foureteenth Chapter of the said third Booke attributeth cods, the descriptions of both which saith he, being contracted into one, agree well unto this Arbor Iudae: but by Clusius his leave, this cannot hang together; for although they in both those Chapters, that is, the 14. and 17. are called Colytaa; yet they are plainely distinguished by Theophrastus both in their leaves, the one like a Willow, the other like a Bay leafe, but rounder; and also in their fruite, that with the Willow leafe hath cods saith Theophrastus like unto Pulses: but that with broad Bay leaves, hath a Chachrys or Amentum as Gaza translateth it, and is said to be without flower or fruite, and besides hath yellow rootes: so that you may see plainely both those cannot be contracted to make one plant, their leaves being declared to be so divers: Some therefore would referre this tree unto the Cercis Theophrasti mentioned in two places, the one in the said foureteenth Chapter of his third Booke, where he saith it is like the white Poplar tree, both in greatnesse and whitenesse of branches, with the leafe of Ivy, &amp;c. which Clusius thinketh is but an ample description of the third kinde of Poplar called Lybica the Aspen tree (which Gaza translated Alpina ) the other place is in the first Booke and 18. Chapter, where he reckoneth Cercis to be one of those trees that beareth fruite or seedes in cods, as Colutea of Liparae doth, so that you see in this Clusius was also mistaken, as Matthiolus was also before him: but indeed this description of Corcis commeth neerest unto this Arbor Iudae, of any other tree that hath beene likened unto it. Some have called this tree in Latine Fabago, from the likenesse of the cods unto Beane cods, and some to be Laeburnam or some kinde thereof; but the most currant name is Arbor Iudae, yet Clusius calleth it Siliqua sylvestris, not as he saith, because it doth agree with the Siliqua of the Auncients, but because the Spaniards cal∣led it Algarovo Lo o which is as much as Siliqua fatua, and those of Castile Arbold amor, the French call it Guainier because the cods are like knive sheathes, we have no other English name to call it by, then Iudas tree, untill some other can impose a more apt for it. It is judged by many that Matthiolus his first Acacia, in his former edi∣tions, was but a counterfeit figure of this Arbor Iudae, whereunto he caused thornes to be put to make it seeme the more probable. 
The Vertues. There is no remembrance of any Physicall property appropriate hereunto either by ancient or modern Wri∣ters, nor hath any later experience found out any: but from Virginia, we heare they account the flowers to be an excellent sallat ingredient. 
CHAP. CIV. Vitis. The Vine. T Here is a wondrous great variety of Vines that are manured, as I have shewed else where in my for∣mer Booke, some there are that grow wild, which shall be declared in this Chapter, with a recitall of some of the choysest of the other. 
1. Ʋitis Vinifera. The manured Vine. The manured Vine in places where it hath stood long, hath a great stemme as bigge as ones arme sleeve and all, spreading without end or measure if it be suffered, many slender weake branches, that must be sustained from falling downe, the young being red, and the old of a darke colour, with a pith in the middle, at the sundry joynts whereof, grow severall large broad greene leaves, cut into five divisions and dented also about the edges, at the joynts likewise against the leaves come forth long twining tendrels, clas∣pling or winding about whatsoever it may take hold of: at the bottomes of the leaves, come forth clusters of small greenish yellow flowers, and after them berries, thicke set together in bunches of severall formes, great∣nesse, colour and taste, in some the clusters are close, and others are more open, and some being round, others more long, and some tending to a square; some likewise are very small, as the Curran Grape, others great, and some a meane betweene both: some againe are white, others blacke, or blewish, or red, or parti-coloured, and for tastes, they are so variable that I cannot describe them, both sweete according to the severall climates they grow in, and sower or harsh, or mixt, more or lesse pleasant one then another, within which there are usually one two or three kernels: They that keepe their Vines in the best manner doe keepe them low, and cut them of∣ten, both Winter and Summer, whereby they grow the better, and take up lesse roome, bringing their Grapes both fairer and sweeter. 
2. Vitis laciniathis folijs. The Parsely Vine or Grape with thin cut leaves. This also groweth as other Vines doe, the difference chiefely consisting in the leaves, which are very much in∣tised or cut into many parts, en almost to the middle, and dented, the Grapes which are white and great, are like unto the white Muscadine Grape, and of as good a rellish, bearing gr t bunches, and ripening with the middle sort of Grapes. 
3. Labrusca sive Ʋitis sylvestris Eurepaea. The wild Vine of Europe. The wild Vine in gard it is naturall, and therefore neglected, lyeth for the most part on the ground, and there∣by is made lesse fruitefull, unlesse it meete with some hedge or tree, whereon it may clime, and then spreadeth 1. Vitis Vinifera. The manured Vine. 
Ʋitis Laciniatis folijs. The Parsly Vine or Grape. 
the manured, being both in branches, leaves, and tendrels, like unto the manured Vine, as also in blossomes, but beareth either little or no fruite, or seldome comming to ripenesse, and what it doth is small and blacke, and no way comparable unto any of the manured Vines, being rather binding and sowre then sweete. 
4. Ʋitis sylvestris Ʋirginiana. The wild Vine of Virginia. This one sort of the Vines of Virginia, like all other wild sorts runneth on the ground, and taketh hold of whatsoever it meeteth with, being in all things like the former wild sorts, but that the Grapes are small and white, Alba. Caerulea. Ʋulpina. and with little sappe or juyce in them, and the kernell twice as bigge as others. There is another sort that hath bigger blew Grapes, and sowrer in taste. A third they call the Foxe Grape, and hath a more rugged barke, a very broad leafe, without any division almost but dented, and the Grape is white, but smelleth and tasteth like unto a Foxe. 
5. Vitis sylvestris trifolia Canadensis. The wild Vine of Canada. This wilde Vine of Canada groweth like unto other the wilde Vines of those parts with slender reddish bran∣ches, climing where it can get whereon; but the leaves on them being little more then halfe so large as the ma∣nured Vine, hath onely three partitions in every leafe, but each cut in deepe, even to the long smooth stalke, whereon they stand, making them seeme as three leaves, which are of a darke greene colour, and somewhat thicke also: the fruite is like the other wild sorts, having more skinne and kernell then substance or juyce. 
The Chiefest Grapes are these: The Damasco white Grape, which is the true Ʋvae Zibebae, that the Apothecaries should use in sundry of their compositions. The Muscadine Grape both white and red. The Frontignacke or Muske Grape. The party coloured Grape. The Raisin of the Sun Grape. The Curran Grape is the small blew Currans that the Grocers sell, and have no kernells, whereof there is ano∣ther sort that beareth red berries, almost as small but not so sweet, or rather a little tarter. The small earely blacke Grape. The blacke Grape of Orleance. There is a Grape without stones growing in sundry places, as by the River Soreke neere Ascalon in Palesti , giving a red wine, as also in divers places of Arabia, &amp;c. and in the Maderas, &amp;c. There is reported also to be one that beareth greene leaves continually, yet yeeldeth fruite but at the time that others doe. There is said likewise to be some that beare twise in a yeare, and some oftener, having both ripe and greene fruite together at one time upon the tree. The Place and Time. The manured kindes are planted every where, and according to the soile and climate is both the rellish and strength of every sort, for the Vine that groweth in the Canary Islands, is the same with that at Malaga and She∣ris, and yet the one still excelleth the other in strength and sweetnesse. The other wild sorts are all expressed in their titles: the first wild sort in sundry places of Europe, both Italy, France and Germany. The wild sorts flower somewhat later then the tame or manured, and therefore what fruite they beare, must likewise be later ripe then others. 
The Names. The manured Vine is called in Greeke and , and in Latine Ʋitis Ʋinifera, and sativa or culta: the wilde is called , and in Latine Vitis sylvestris: Ʋitis a vino, vel quia invitetur ad uvas pariendas dicitur, but there is another Ʋitis sylvestris of the Grecians, that is the Clematis urens of the Latines by some, and the Amaradulcis by others, when as this is called Labrusca, to cause it to be knowne asunder: the juyce of the unripe Grapes of the manured Vine, or rather of the Grapes of the wilde Vine, which come not to ripenesse are called in Greeke Omphacium, and Agresta in Latine, in English Varjuyce: The Grapes when they are dryed in the Sunne are called Ʋnae passae, and Passule solis Rasins: the juyce or liquour pressed out of the ripe Grapes is called Ʋinum wine: the kernels are called acini, the dregs or setling of the Wine, are called Ʋinifaeces, Wine lees while they are moist, but being dryed is called Tartarum, Tartar or Argoll, the de∣stilled Wine is called Spiritus vini, or Aqua vitae, the spirit of Wine or Aqua vita. In the wild Vine the flowers are called , and Oenanthe, that is Viniflos in Latine, which was of much use in former times, but now is wholly neglected. The Arabians call the Vine Harin, Karin or Karni, the Italians Vite viniferera, the Spaniards Vid and Parra. The French Ʋigne, the Germanes Weiureb, the Dutch Wijn gaert oft Wijnstacke. 
The Ʋertues. The Vine hath in it divers differing and contrary properties, some cold, some hot, some sweete, some sower, some milde and some sharpe, and some moistening, and others drying: for the leaves and young branches are cooling and binding, and good to be put into lotions for sore mouthes, or other parts, and in drinkes against fea∣vers: Sarmenta et folia. The branches and leaves. Cineres cla∣vellatae &amp; eorum lixi∣vium. Vine ashes and the lye of them. being bruised, and with Barley meale applyed to the temples easeth the head ache comming by heate; and applyed to the stomacke, easeth the inflammations; and heat thereof: the juyce of them being drunke stayeth the laske, castings, spittings of blood, and womens immoderate longings. The ashes of the burnt branches, or pressing, made into a lye and drunke, is very effectuall for the stone and gravell in the kidneyes: being mixed with a little vinegar, it consumeth the warts of the fundament, and the inflammation thereof being bathed there∣with, it doth marvellously ease the paines, and taketh away the swelling. The said lye of Vine ashes, is good to wash places out of joynt, or burnt with fire, and used with Rue and vinegar, is good for the swelling of the spleene: and used with wine, it helpeth Saint Anthonies fire: the said lye also helpeth frettings and gallings in any place: the ashes made up with axungia, is good against hard tumours, clenseth fistulaes, and hollow ulcers, and healeth them up afterwards, helpeth the paines and shrinking of the sinewes, and being mixed with oyle easeth those places that are bruised by falls or otherwise, and cureth the bitings of Scorpions, and dogges: Lachryma vitis. The Vine water or bleeding Gummi. The gum, used with vinegar and niter, it wasteth away Wens and other excressences in the flesh. The water that droppeth from the Vine, when it is cut out of due time, being drunke helpeth to expell and wash downe the gravell and stone in the kidneys. The Gum that issueth out of it selfe sticking to the barke, being drunke in wine doth the same, (but that we seldome see any such in our country, and therefore may safely use the water in the stead thereof) and being bathed on the skinne taketh away scabbes, tetters, the morphew, and the leprous scurfe, if the places be first washed with niter: The said Gumme or the water that droppeth from the greene branches, when they are burned, being used with a little oyle taketh away haires and warts. The fresh Grapes being eaten, Ʋvae &amp; Passulae. Grapes and Raisins. Acini sive Arilli. The Grape ker∣nels. doe breede a little windinesse (which is incident unto all sorts of raw fruite) but stirre up the appetite, and are plea∣sant to the stomacke, helping to stay spittings of blood, but affect the head and the bladder: and are forbidden in agues: being hung up and dryed a little, or made into Raisins, they doe helpe to loosen the belly, especially if they be taken without the kernells, which are more drying and binding, to be taken in pouther of themselves then any other part of the Vine: Those which are called Rasins of the Sunne are the best for this purpose with us, and for any other use in physicke: and herewith are made Tisane drinkes, to helpe coughes, hoarsenesse of the throate, shortnesse of winde, toughnesse of flegme, causing it the more easily to be expectorate, and doe lenefie sharpe and nauseous humours, that offend the mouth of the stomacke: they serve likewise to open the obstructions of the liver, spleene and bladder, and taken by themselves they nourish much, by reason of their thicke sweete and temperate substance, whereby also they stay not long nor prutrifie in the stomacke. Passulae Ce∣rinthiacae Currans. Pussula Da∣mascenae. Damasco Raisins, Agresta sive Omphacium. Varjuyce. The small Raisins or Cur∣rans are very nourishing likewise, and somewhat opening the belly, especially being stewed with some other things conducing thereunto, as with a decoction of Sema, Rubarbe, and other such like things, according as occa∣sion shall neede: The Damasco Raisins have a little tartnesse in them, whereby they are most gratefull to the stomacke, and excelleth the Raisins of the Sunne for all the purposes aforesaid. The juyce of the Grape is of two sorts, that is, made of unripe Grapes which is called Varjuyce, or of the ripe Grapes called Wine: The Var∣juyce is a fine tart liquour fit to be used in brothes, meates, or sawses, to sharpen the stomacke, to get an appetite, and to refresh and quicken fainting spirits: Of this juyce is made a syrupe of especiall use in the like causes: the Wine is of so many sundry sorts, as not onely the Grapes, but the severall climates and soyles wherein they grow . The weake Wines are very rheumaticke, and clense much: the strong wines are very heady, and enflame the blood very much; those of a middle temper are most proper for our bodyes (who use not willingly or or∣dinarily, to allay or temper our wine with water, unlesse the Vintner doe it without our knowledge or consent) most wholesome for our health, and most in use for Physicke, both to boyle in drinkes, and to serve as the V iculum, to extract the Vertues of whatsoever shall be steeped in it, And is distributed into many parts, for of it is made both Sapa and Defrutum, in English Cute, that is to say, boyled wine, and both made of Mustum, Wine, the later boyled to the halfe, the former to the third part. Then there is Lora which is a small kind of wine, like our small beere, by putting water to the pressings, and pressing them over againe, Lora. Small VVine. but because we have no use of such with us, I forbeare to speake further of it, Acetum, Vinegar, that is, sowre wine, which is as the other ingenij non naturae opus, as Pliny speaketh of the former, for it is made by setting in the Sunne, which exha∣ling the purer spirits, and by the heate causeth the other to grow acide, and is of great use, both in health and sickenesse, both in meate and medicine: but now adayes we have such a bastardizing, and falsification thereof, that we scarse can get any right to use. Sapa Cute The Sapa and Defrutum differing but onely in the manner of boyling, I may comprehend them both under Cute, and was devised to serve instead of hony, as Pliny saith, it helpeth the cough and shortnesse of breath, and to expectorate tough flegme from the chest and lunges, it also easily passeth through the belly, Acotum Vinegar. and maketh it soluble, Vinegar contrariwise is cooling and drying, as the Cute is heating and moistening, and therefore serveth to correct the heate in feavers, and to resist putrefaction, it cutteth tough flegme, that is hard baked, and not easily brought up and spit forth: it is sharpe and penetrating, and very usefull in scabbes, itches, tetters, ringwormes, and fretting and creeping ulcers, to correct their malignity, and extirpate their corroding quality, but is offensive to the sinewes, by its piersing and drying property, causing them to shrinke. But the destilled vinegar is of a more fiery and penetrating quality, which it gaineth by the destillation thereof, Acetum destillatum Destilled Vinehar. the manner and order in this being quite differing from the destilling of Wine, wherein the purest and strongest spirits doe first rise and come forth, when as in vinegar almost two third parts are taken from it, which are the weakest, before the last and strongest riseth, but not the last which is the Empyreuma, and serveth even as the vinegar it selfe doth, but with more force, and as the Ʋehiculum, wherein the tincture and spirits of simple medicines are reserved: But to speake of Wine, from whence all these are made and derived, is to enter upon a little sea of matter: Vinum Wine. Ʋina com∣posita sive artificia¦lia. Artifi∣ciall wines Parilitas vi i nosta Septentri∣onatis. Our compound wines of Ale or Beere. Ʋmaem Hippocra∣ticum Hi∣pocras wine. Metheglin. for to shew you all the severall colours, sents, strength, ages, and tastes of simple wines, were too tedious and needlesse also, and so is it likewise to shew you all the sorts of compound or artificiall wines which are as infinite as the herbes, rootes, seedes, or other parts of them are, and take their names from the seve∣rall ingredients that compound them, as for example Wormewood wine, Eyebright wine, Scammoniate wine or wine of Squilles &amp; sic in infinitum, as I may so say, each whereof hath the property of that herbe, roote, &amp;c. that was put into it, while it was Must, that so they might worke together, but simple Wine being not made with us, these artificiall Wines are not in use with us, yet might be paralleld almost, if the things were put into our new Ale, or Beere, to worke in them, as wee use to doe with out dyet Beere. Yet other sorts of compounded Wines might be made for sundry physicall uses, after the manner of our Hipocras wine, which is according to the spices put thereinto, cordiall and comfortable, &amp;c Metheglin is a Welsh (strange) drinke, not made of Wine, and therefore I would not reckon it among these Wines, being fit for some stout Welsh stomackes that affect it. The receipts of many whereof are extant in Lobels Appendix to his Adversaria, whereunto I referre you. I will therefore touch onely the particuler properties of wine it selfe, both as it is medicinable and nourishing, for ta∣ken moderately, and by them that are of a middle age, or well stept in yeares, or are of a cold and dry disposition, and (not very young, and so their blood too hot for to abide Wine) it encreaseth blood and nourisheth much: it procureth an appetite, and helpeth to digest being taken at meate, it provoketh urine and driveth forth raw hu∣mours thereby, strengtheneth the vitall spirits, and procureth a good colour in those that want it, or are maci∣lent, drawing to a consumption, so as it be not accompanyed with a fever, it expelleth feares, cares, and heavi∣nesse, and breedeth alacrity, mirth, and bodily pleasure, and by the moist warme vapours, causeth quiet rest and sleepe, both to the sound and sicke that lacke it; it likewise comforteth and warmeth all the cold infirmities of the stomacke, liver, spleene, and wombe, and helpeth windy swellings in the body, and generall evill dispositions thereof, the greene sickenesse, and the dropsie, and the over travelled, over wearyed body and minde, it is also the remedy against Hemlocke, Coriander, Poppy, and Opium, Wolfebane, Mushromes; and Mandrake, or what∣soever cold poyson or dangerous herbe, or roote is taken; These be the effects of the moderate drinking of Wine: when as on the contrary side, the excesse thereof breedeth a distraction in the senses, the Appoplexie, and Lethar∣gy or drowsie evill, the trembling of the joynts, the palsie, and the dropsie, but is used to heale up old ulcers, and sores, Spiritus vini The Spirit of wine and Aqua vitae no other moisture being admitted in the cure. The spirit of Wine and aqua vitae, were of so neere affinity in former times one unto another, that there was no more difference betweene them then betweene the stronger and the milder Wine, for Aqua vitae being made wholly of Wine, with the addition of spices made the spirits to be the stronger, and the wine simply without spices to be the milder; but now there being not one droppe of Wine in the Aqua vitae, is wholly destilled from the tilts or dregges of Ale or Beere, being their low Wines as it is called, and after distilled againe with a few Anneseedes, or as some doe with a little Ginny Pepper, to make it the stronger without any other spice, commeth farre short of those auncient receites for the making of that which was good and whosesome: to tell you therefore the effect of our Aqua vitae, were not to tell any part of the nature or quality of wine, but of Barley and Hoppes, which make Ale and Beere, I will therefore shew you the properties of the spirit of Wine, which if you will transferre to Aqua vitae you may, but to farre wea∣ker effects: for hereby shall you know the goodnesse and strength, by setting it on fire, with a paper lighted, the pure spirits burning fiercely, and will allmost be wholly consumed: the other burning but little, and leaving an insipide and much watery part behind it: the purer therefore that it is, the stronger it is, and the lesser of it to be taken at a time, and that not of it selfe, but in some Wine or other liquour, for feare of inflaming the blood and spirits, and chiefly upon symptomes and passions of the heart: and then taken with respect and good consi∣deration, it worketh much more effectually then the Wine it selfe doth, to all the purposes aforesaid, in com∣forting and nourishing the naturall heate in elder persons, giveth strength and quickenesse to the sences, and nerves, repaireth memory, and the cold and moist diseases of the braine, helpeth the fainting and trembling of the heart, warmeth a cold and moist stomacke, helpeth digestion, expelleth winde from the sides and belly, and all cold poysons: being outwardly applyed to the temples, it easeth the paines in the head, and cold destillati∣ons, and the toothach, being gargled a little, and cicatriseth all sores, yet respect must be had, that it be not given where any feaver is, or where the disease proceedeth of heate, or is accessary thereunto, for feare of hardning the liver and spleene, and making chollericke persons the more enflamed: These spirits of Wine, as well as the Wine it selfe, serves as a Ʋehiculum or menstrue, to draw out the tincture of divers things. And now lastly to speake of the Lees of Wine, Tartar or Argoll. which being hardned is called Tartarum, Tartar or Argoll, and that which is taken from the whitest Wines is accounted the principall best for any medicine: but the red sort serveth Gold smiths and others, to pollish their silver, and Dyers in setting their dyes: the best white Tartar is either given of it selfe simply being made into pouther and taken, the quantity of a dramme at a time in some convenient drinke or broth, for some time together in dropsies or evill dispositions of the body, to expell both by urine and siege, those wheyish watery humours thereof, and applyed to womens brests that are over full of milke, doth dry them up, but the Cremor Tartari which is the purer part thereof, and especially if it be made as cleare as Cristall, (the highest worke of art in that kinde) doth worke more safely and more effectually then the Crude Tartar can doe: but this Tartar that is calcined untill it be white, hath then put of all purging quallity, and hath gained a causticke burning property, that will corrhode and eate away scabbed nailes and warts, and soone be brought into a salt, and will also soone be resolved into an oyle or liquour, if it be either laid upon a stone, or hung up in a linnen bagge, in a moist seller to be received as it droppeth downe, and is the most admirable opifex in Alchimy that ever was knowne, and not to be paralleld with any other thing, that I know: but to shew the operation of it in severall medicines by precipitation or otherwise, is not for this Worke, it must be sought out of those professed Authours of the Spagyricke Art, to whom I must referre you: There is another kinde of oyle of Tartar, of a farre milder temper, and is more like unto a cleare water, which is very effectuall to clense the skinne from all manner of spots, scarres, morphew, or discolourings whatsoever, and maketh it smooth and amiable, and where there is cause to apply it, will helpe to bring on haire on the places decayed. The wild Vines are in property no lesse cooling, Labrusca. The wild Vine. but more binding then the branches of the manured, staying the laske and spitting of blood, provoking urine, and pleasing to an hot stomacke, or that loatheth meat: the leaves hereof are as good for lotions, as of the other for sores in the mouth the privy parts and the fundament; the ashes of the branches are likewise used to cleare the eyesight of filmes, and what else may offend them, to clense fores and ulcers, and to take away the over growing skinnes of the nailes of the hands or toes. 
CHAP. CV. Berberis. The Barbery bush or tree. T He Barberry bush shooteth forth many slender stemmes or stalkes from the roote, sometimes to a great heighth, covered with a smooth whitish rinde or barke, and yellow next the Wood, which is white ea∣sie to breake, and pithy in the middle, set full of sharpe small white thornes, and three at every leafe all∣most, which are somewhat small and long, finely dented about the edges, and of a fresh greene colour: the flowers come forth at the joynts with the leaves, many standing on a long cluster, yellow while they are fresh, which turne into small long and round berryes, hanging downe in long bunches, upon a small stalke white at the first, but very red when they are through ripe, of a sharpe sowre taste, able to set their teeth on edge that shall eate them, the roote is yellow and spreading. 
There is another sort, whose berryes are thrice so bigge as the former, not differing in any other thing. Fructu ma∣jor . Absque aril∣lis. 
There is another also, whose berryes for the most part are without any stones or kernels in them, or but Berberis. The Barberry bush or tree. 
here and there some. 
The Place and Time, It groweth in many of the woods in Austria. Hun∣garia, and in France also, the blossomes come forth in May, and the fruite is ripe in September, and Octo∣ber. 
The Names. It hath formerly beene held by very good and lear∣ned Authours, that this bush is the Oxyacantha of Di∣oscorides, and hath continued to this day, especially a∣mong the Apothecaries, yet Cordus accounted it an errour, and therefore would rather call it the Oxya∣canthos of Galen, then the Oxycantha of Dioscorides, and so doth Camerarius also, but we have shewed elsewhere what the true Oxyacantha of Dioscorides is, even the Pyracantha which hath ever greene leaves, and red friable berryes, neither of which can agree with this Barbary bush. Others againe have taken it to be the Spina appendix Plinij, but Clustias hath shew∣ed the unlikelinesse of that opinion. Matthiolus and Cesalpi call it Crespinus, because the vulgar Itali∣ans doe call it Crespino, and some thereafter in Latine Ʋva crespina, which some attribute to the Goose∣berry, but many others doe call it Berberis, and so the generall vote goeth now adayes. The French call it Espine vinette, the Germanes Erbsel, Sawracke, and Versing the Dutch Sawerboom, and we in English Barberryes. 
The Vertues. The leaves of Barberries make a fine tart sawse like unto those of Sorrell, and serve to coole and refresh a fainting hot stomacke and liver, and repressing sowre belchings of choller, and is therefore good for aguish people: but the fruite is much more cooling and bin∣ding, quenching thirst, and restrayning chollericke and pestilentiall vapours, and is of very good use in either of the agues of that nature, if the conserve or the depurate juyce, or the syrupe thereof be taken with the syrupe of Violets: the said juyce also or the berryes themselves preserved, is often used for those that loath their meate, to procure an appetite, and represse the force of choller, rising from the liver thereinto, and that which passeth in∣to the bowells procuring sharpe laskes: it helpeth likewise to stay womens immoderate courses, and if it be ta∣ken with a little Southernwood water, and sugar, it killeth the wormes in the body: it is good also for those that spit blood, and to fasten loose teeth, strengthen the gummes, and coole the inflammations of the palate and throat, and stayeth rheumes and destillations upon those parts: it helpeth likewise to dry up moist ulcers, and to soder up greene wounds: the said depurate juyce called wine of Barberyes, serveth to dissolve many things chymical∣ly: the inner yellow barke of the body, branches or roote is with good successe given to those that have the yel∣low jaundise being boyled and drunke: Clusius setteth downe a secret that he had of a friend, which is, that if the yellow barke were laid in steepe in white wine for the space of three houres, and afterwards drunke, it would purge one very wonderfully.
CHAP. CVI. Ʋva crispa sive Grossularia. Gooseberryes. T Here are sundry sorts of Gooseberryes, chiefly varying in the fruite, some being larger or smaller then others, some red some greene or yellow, some blew, some round, some long and some smooth, and some hairy or prickely, which although I have shewed them elsewhere, yet it shall not be amisse, to remember them here againe. 
1. Grossularia vulgaris. The common Gooseberry. The common Gooseberry bush seldome riseth up to the height of a man, with a stemme as big as ones thumbe, or more, at the lower part, covered with a smooth darke coloured barke, cleere of thornes thereon, and so like∣wise for the most part on the elder branches, or with a few onely, but the younger are whitish, armed with very sharpe crooked thornes, which no bodies hand can well avoid that toucheth them, whereon grow small cornered greene leaves, cut in on the sides, but broad at the bottome next the stalke: the flowers are small, and grow at each of the leaves, one or two together, of a purplish greene colour, hollow and turning up the brims a little: af∣ter which follow the berryes, bearing the flowers on their heads, and are of three sorts, that is small, or great that are round, pecies res. or that are a little longer then round, greene before they are ripe, and with a thicker skinne then the other, but of a greenish yellow colour when they are ripe, striped in divers places, cleere and almost transparent, 1. Vva crispa sive Grossularia sylvestris. The common Gooseberry. 
2, 3. Grossularia rubra &amp; caerulea. Red and blew Gooseberryes. 
with small blackish seede lying within the pulpe, which is of a pleasant winy taste, acceptable to the stomacke, and without offence, although one doe eate many of them: the longer berry hath the thicker skinne, and the wor∣ser taste. 
2. Gossularia rubra. Red Gooseberryes. The red Gooseberry is of two or three sorts; one hath slenderer stemmes and fewer thornes on the younger white branches, which bend downe more then the former: the leaves are made after the same manner, but a little larger, the flowers and berries are like the other, but are of a darke brownish red colour, almost blacke when they are through ripe, of a fullsome sweetish taste, and never beare many in a yeare, which make them the lesse regarded: Another sort is like the former in growing with little difference; onely the berries are smaller, red∣der, and of a pretty tart taste, and sweet withall: A third sort groweth very like the ordinary sort of yellow, both in heighth, branch, and leafe, the berries are as large as the largest sise of the other, and of a very fine red co∣lour, untill they be suffered to hang long on the bushes, which then are of a darkish red colour, very pleasant in taste. 
3. Gossularia cerulaea. The blew Gooseberry. The blew Gooseberry riseth up to be a small bush, having broader and redder leaves at the first shooting out, then the second red Gooseberry, the berryes are more sparingly set on the branches also, and for bignesse neere unto the small red Gooseberry, but lesser, and somewhat sweete, and of a blewish colour like a Damion, before the colour be wiped off. 
4. Gossularia viridis hirsuta. The hairy or prickely greene Gooseberry. This greene Gooseberry is very like unto the ordinary Gooseberry, in stemme and branches, but not furnish∣ed with such sharpe prickles as it, the younger branches also have smaller greene leaves: the flowers are alike, and so are the berryes; of a middle size, but greene when they are through ripe, with a shew of small haires or prickes on them, which yet are as harmelesse as if there were none, but of a more pleasing reliish then any of the other: the seede hereof hath produced bushes bearing smooth berries, with few or no haires on them. 
The Place and Time. The ordinary sorts grow usually in the hedges, in sundry places of France, but I thinke rather planted there for defence onely, rather then that they are naturall to the Country, for even there as well as here, they are plan∣ted in Gardens and Orchards also: all the other sorts likewise are kept in Gardens: they all flower very earely in the Spring, presently after the leaves begin to come forth, and the berries are ripe from the middle of Iuly to the end of August, or as the yeare proveth. 
The Names. It cannot be certainely knowne that any of these fruites were knowne to any of the ancient Greeke or Latine writers, for although some have referred some of them unto the Isos, or Oesos of Theophrastus, where∣of he saith one hath a white flower and fruite, and another both blacke, yet he remembreth no thornes in it, as that hath, which so curious a Writer would not have omitted, and therefore is not likely to be this: some againe would have it to be Vitis precia of Pliny, but that cannot be, because he numbreth it among the other sorts of Vines, that beare wine as one of them: Gesner in hortis taketh it to be the Ceanothus spina of Theophrastus, but Anguillara rather judgeth his Ceanothos to be a kinde of Thistle, whereof we have entreated among the Thistles: it is called Ʋvacrispa by divers, and Ʋvacrispina, because the leaves seeme to be crispt or curld, and Gossularia by others, because they are like Grossos small greene Figges, and by some also Ʋva marina, but I know not upon what cause. The Italians call it Ʋva spina, the Spaniards Ʋva crespe, and Espina, the French Groselles, the Germanes Krussbeer, and Kruselbeer, the Dutch Stekelbesien Knoselen, and Croesbesien, and we in English Goose∣berries, but in some places Feaberries, and Wineberries. 
The Ʋertues. The greene and unripe fruite of the ordinary sorts are somewhat sharpe and tart, and serve to rellish brothes for the sicke (as neede requireth,) as well as the sound to stirre up a fainting or decaying appetite, or overcome with chollericke humours, but otherwise yeeld small nourishment to the body, and that but cold and crude, for they doe a little helpe to binde the belly and stay fluxes of blood in man or woman, and stay their longings; yet they are not to be tollerated to cold or windy stomackes, least by breeding more winde they bring the chollicke, and griping paines in the belly: the juyce of the berries or of the leaves, is helpefull to coole and restraine hot swellings and chollericke inflammations, called Saint Anthonies fire: the ripe fruite is more pleasant, and more desired for the sweetenesse to be eaten at pleasure, then for any proper or speciall effect for any disease, but by rea∣son of their good and sweete rellish, and moist lubricity, they easily descend out of the stomacke without any of∣fence at all. 
CHAP. CVII. Ribes fructu rubro, albo, nigro. Red, white, and blacke Currans. T He stemme or stocke of the red Curran bush, hath a very thinne brownish outer barke, and gree∣nish underneath, and of the bignesse of a good great staffe, wholly without thornes on any branch, whereon grow large cornered blackish greene leaves cut in on the edges into five parts somewhat like a Vine leafe, but a great deale lesse, the flowers come forth at the joynts of the leaves, many together on a long stalke, hanging downe about a fingers length, of an herby colour, after which follow round berries, greene at the first, and of a cleere red colour when they are ripe, of a little pleasant and tart taste withall, wherein lye small seed: the roote is wooddy, and spreadeth diversly. 
There is another sort hereof, whose berries are twise as bigge as the former, and are of a better rellish. Fructu rubro ma∣jore. Ribes alba 
The white Curran bush hath a taller straighter stemme, a whiter barke, smaller leaves, and such like berries upon long stalkes, and of the same sise and bignesse with the first or most ordinary, but of a shining transparent 1. Ribes fructu rubro majore. The greater red Currans. 
2. Ribes fructu albo. White Currans. 
3. Ribes fructu nigro. blacke Currans. 
whitenesse almost like Pearles, the seed within them being plainely to be descerned as they hang on the bushes, and of a more pleasant winy taste, much more acceptable then the former. And is called Gozel as I am informed, in some places of Kent. 
The blacke Curran riseth higher then the last, more plentifully stored with branches round about, and more pliant also, the younger covered with a paler, and the elder with a browner barke: the leaves are somewhat like the former but smaller, and often with fewer cuts or devisions therein, the flowers also are alike, but of a greenish purple colour, which turne in∣to small blacke berries like the former: both leaves and fruite have a kinde of strong evill sent, but yet are wholesome, although not so pleasant as any of the former, and eaten by many. 
The Place and Time. All these sorts have beene found growing naturally wild, some in Savoy, and Switzerland, as Gesner saith, and some in Austria as Clusius saith he observed: the white sort is not knowne, or at least recorded by few, but kept in Gardens as the more rare sort and last knowne to us. They flower and fructifie at the same time with Goose∣berries but abide longer on the bushes before they fall or are withered. 
The Names. The name of Ribes and Ribesius frutex is generally given to these plants for some likenesse, not onely in the berries, but much more in the properties to the Ribes of Serapio, which as he saith hath reddish greene tendrels large round greene leaves and berries, whose taste is sweete with some tartnesse, and are cold and dry in the se∣cond degree: This is the description of Serapio his Ribes, and although all doe generally consent it is not that of Serapio, as not having tendrels nor large round leaves, yet is it generally received in the stead thereof, onely Dodonaeus would frame it into the same mould, but I doubt his skill is too weake, and his allegations too much wrested or too selfe conceited. Some have tought this to be more answerable unto Theophrastus his Isos because this hath no thornes as the Gooseberries have as Lobel doth also. But Bellonius in his Booke de coniferis arboribus, and Rauwolfius doe both say they found the Ribes Arabum on the mount Libanus. Bellonius describeth it with sixe or seven leaves of a Docke, but greater and rounder, rising from the roote, and with red berries hanging downe in clusters, comming out from the middle of a leafe, like as the Ruscus, and Laurus Alexandrina doe. Rauwolfius saith, he found it onely with two large round leaves like unto the Petasites, from whose stalkes a sowre juyce is pressed that is pleasant, and used of the richer sort, whereof because we have no further knowledge, we here leave them. Gesner calleth this Ceanothus levis: most doe account it a kinde of Grossularia, and therefore call it Gros∣sularia rubro, and Grossularia ultramarina. Clusius only and Besler in horto Eystetensi, make mention of the white Ribes, and Bauhinus who calleth it Grossularia hortensis margaritis similis: The blacke sort it generally called Ri∣bes fructu nigro, yet Gesner in horto sheweth that some would make it to be a sort of Amomum, and therefore cal∣led Amomum falsum or Pseudoamomum, and some Pipirella as Lugdunensis saith. The Italians call it Vnettarossa, the French Groiselles do remer, the Germans St. Johans trenblin and Sant Iohans beerlin, and Keozbeer, as Gesner saith, the Dutch Besicke s over zee, and we Red Currans, the white Ribes as I am given to understand, is called Gozell in some parts of Kent. 
The Vertues. The red and white Currans are good to allay the heate and fainting of the stomacke, to quench thirst, and to provoke an appetite, and therefore are safely permitted in hot and sharpe agues, for it tempereth the heat of the liver and blood, and the sharpenesse of choller, and resisteth putrefaction: it taketh away likewise the loathing of meate, and the weakenesse of the stomacke by much casting, and is good for those that have any loosenesse of the belly: Gesner saith that the Swissers about Berne where it naturally groweth, use it for the cough. The blacke Currans are used in sawses and so are the leaves also by many, who are well pleased with the taste and sent of them, although some doe mislike them for both.
EXOTICAE, ET PEREGRINAE PLANTAE. STRANGE AND OVT∣LANDISH PLANTES. CLASSIS VLTIMA. THE LAST TRIBE. CHAP. I. Agallochum sive Lignum, Aloes. E NTRING now into my last quarter, so to consummate this revolution, I must use another manner of Method, then formerly I have done in the precedent Tribes; for intending to shew you as well those Out-landish Plants, that are called spices and drogues in our Apothecaries shoppes, as other fruites and strange trees, grow∣ing in the East or West Indies, I would first perfect the more usuall Physical part of them in an Alphabeticall order and with them insert a few other, the more princi∣pall things, although not plants, or taken from them that are for the most part in our shops used in medicines, shewing the place and names of them all in a continu∣ed stile, and not in fractions, as in the foregoing parts. 
Lignum Aloes, or the wood of the Aloe tree. Agallochum and Xyloaloe in Greeke, is called also Agallo∣chum sive Lignum Aloes in Latine, and so in English, or the wood of the Aloe tree, is a drogue rare to be had, and of much worth: but (as it is with many other things that come out of the East Indies unto us) of small know∣ledge what it is, and where and how it groweth. For but that Garcias ab Orta saith, that the tree is like unto an Ollive tree, and sometimes greater, and that he had the Agallochum sive Lignum Aloes. Lignum Aloes. or the wood of the Aloe tree. 
branches of the tree brought him to see, but neither flow∣er nor fruite, the places being very dangerous by the haunt of Tigers therein, we should not know what forme it bore; none of the Ancients either Greekes or Arabians, ha∣ving set downe any thing thereof, although they have all mentioned it, and the choyce of the best, with the Vertues: onely Serapio in the 197. Chapter of his Booke of Simples, saith it beareth small berries like unto Pepper, but red: yet Garcias maketh some doubt thereof, as he doth of sundry other his relations in that Chapter. For although Serapio in that place reckoneth up divers sorts, and Ruellius spea∣keth of foure; yet Garcias saith, he knew but one true sort of Lignum Aloes, which grew in India, and that the other sorts that were so called, were but sweete woods assimula∣ting it, but were not the true and right wood, which the Arabians call Agalugin and Huud, and they of Surrat and Decan. Vd, as it is likely from the Arabians Haud, which word with them properly signifieth but Lignum wood, and , praestantissimum; but they of Malacca and Sumatra where the true groweth, call it Garro, and the best Calambac: yet as Garcias saith, that that sort of sweet wood that commeth from Comorin, and Zeilan, and there called Aguila brava, that is to say, Lignum Aloes sylvestre, is not true Lignum Aloes, which true sort as all the Auncient Authours doe set it downe, is a blackish wood in peeces, some accounting the greater peeces to be the better, but yet somewhat discoloured with veines, (some Authours saying it is so weighty and heavy, that it will sinke and not swimme being put into water: but others doe not allow of that note, saying that the best that it will swimme) and full of an oyleous substance, of a fine sweete and aromaticke sent, which it will sw e forth, when it is burned: Now to come to our later times and shew you, that for many yeares together (as many o∣ther such like rare drogues) true Lignum Aloes was not knowne to the Physitions or Apothecaries of Eu pe, for they used instead thereof a kinde of Lignum Rhodium, which Ruellius tooke to be Aspalathus, and but that the Ʋenetians of late dayes by their travell and search, both in Cairo and the East Indies, caused some of the true sort to be sent unto Venice, and was upon view and tryall approved, the Portugalls Sea voyages to the East In∣dies, did first make it knowne in these later times to Christendome: but now in our Droguist and Apothecaries shops there is much variety and counterfeit stuffe obtruded on the ignorant, divers sorts being to be seene, and yet scarce one of them true Lignum Aloes, having those markes and notes formerly set downe, and acknowled∣ged by the Ancients, which are the onely true notes whereby to know the best: and such no doubt is our best sort, which are knobbed or uneven peeces, very brittle, and breaking short, somewhat blacke on the outside, and more gray and discoloured within, of a very small sent, untill it be burned; yet I have seene with Master Tradescant the elder before he dyed, a great peece of true Lignum Aloes, and of the best sort, as bigge and as long as a mans legge, without any knot therein, which as he said our King Charles gave him with his owne hands, but was here kept before, and accounted by many, as a great religious rellicke, even to be a peece of the wood of that Crosse, whereon our Saviour was crucified, and therefore was fetched away againe from his Sonne, to be kept as a monument or rellicke still: but this is like all the other rellickes in the world, even meere Impostures, for assuredly if all those peeces of wood, that are or were to be found in the world, said to be parts of that Crosse, were all set together, they would goe neere to make one, yea many cart loads full: yet so fond and superstitious are men to beleeve lies rather then truthes, that they will rather kill the gainesayers, and thinke that therein they doe God good service, then be wise to see their errours. The other sorts which are smooth and plaine, with long graines, are no true Lignum Aloes, although so called, being neither of that worth in price, nor goodnesse in effect. The propertyes whereof are very cordiall for the heart, and comfortable for the head and braine, helping the memory, and warming and drying up the defluxions of rheumaticke humours on those parts, for it is hot and dry in the second degree, a little astringent and bitter, and of subtill parts, it much conduceth to weake livers and fainting spirits, and strengtheneth also a languishing stomacke, helpeth disentries or laskes, and the Pleuresie. 
Although the subject matter of this whole worke is the description of Plants, and of no other things, yet I thinke it materiall to this Classis and among the other Physicall Drogues, to treate of a few others that are not so, especially such as are best knowne. 
CHAP. II. Ambra Citrina. Yellow Amber. Y Ellow Amber is called by the Greekes, Succinum by the Latines, and Carabe by the Arabi∣ans, and in the Apothecaries shops, and is of sundry colours, some peeces being whitish, some yellow, paler, or deeper, and some of a very deepe red colour, and darke, all the other being cleere and transparent, but much more being polished: It is generally taken to be a kinde of liquid Bitu∣men, whose Springs and Fountaines are in the Germane Seas, and running into peeces, some grea∣ter and lesser then others, and is taken up with iron hookes, being soft under water, but hardning in the aire like Corall: that which is white, as being accounted the lighter and sweeter is the best for as the yellow for mechanicke uses, and being rubbed a little while, will then draw unto it strawes, and other such like small things, as the Loadstone doth iron, it will also burne like Rossin or Bitumen, with a ¦dy sent, and the pouther thereof cast into the flame of a candle or other light, will make a sudden flash ∣tening, and being so bituminous it yeeldeth an oyle, being destilled in a recor , which although at the first it is very red, and smelleth very fierce and strong of the fire, almost odious, yet by being sundry times re-distilled, it becommeth so rectifyed, that both sent and colour is so farre amended, that it is then fit to be used. The Physi∣call properties of Amber are many, for being moderately hot and dry, being burned on quicke coales, the fumes received to the head, doe much helpe the moist destillations thereof on the eyes, teeth, nose, or stomacke, and is ve∣ry convenient for those that have the falling sickenesse, to lessen their fits, and to restore them: it is good to pro∣voke womens courses, and singular good to helpe the strangling of the mother, and helpeth women with child, both to goe out their full time with eas , and to hinder their miscarrying that are subject thereunto, to take halfe a dramme of the pouther in a reare egge, or in Wine three or foure mornings together, and this also helpeth them that have the whites, and men that have the gonorrhaea or rum ing of the reines, constraineth the flux, and strengthning the parts very much, and is a certaine remedy for those that have their urine stopped many dayes to∣gether, causing it to avoid plentifully, being taken in Saxi rage water; it is also very good for old cougher, and those that are fallen into a consumption, to take the pouther thereof mixed with Conserve of red Roses in the mornings fasting, and is very availeable for joynt aches, and the running gout. The Chimicall oyle of Amber being taken inwardly, three or foure drops in a little Musead doth wonderfully ease the stone, and the stop∣ping of urine, or strangury king it by droppes: two or three drops used outwardly on the ples, th nape of the necke, or behind the eares, doe war and dry a cold moist br e, discusseth wi de in the eares and head, and strengtheneth the memory, and is a singular help in all cop litall diseases. 
CHAP. III. Amber grisea. Ambergrise. A Mbergriese is better knowne to most by sight what sort is better then other, then what it is, or whereof it commeth: the opinions of Authours are very variable hereof, some supposing it to be the spawne of the Whale, others the recrement of long continuance in the belly of the true Whale (that hath no teeth and eateth soft fishes) which it casteth forth at certaine times, and by the agitation of the sea is cast on shore: some others take it to be the excrement of certaine great sea fishes, and some to be the some of the sea: all which opinions are utterly erronious, having no shew of truth in them: for although Amber in the Ethiopian language, signifieth a Whale, as well as Ambergrise, and yellow Amber also, from whence rose that vulgar o∣pinion of being the spawne of the Whale, or because that in the belly of a Whale (as Monardus relateth it) taken about the Canary Islands, there was neere an hundred pound weight of Amber found, but in an hundred more taken afterwards, was none at all found; Yet the most likely and certaine received opinion of the most judicious is, that it is a kind of Bitumen (as the yellow Amber is before said to be, and therefore have both one name of Amber, being so neere one to another in their originall) whose springes are in the Rockes of the Sea (or as some of the Auncients supposed grew on the Rockes, like Mushromes on trees) condensate into that forme and substance usually observed, having that oylinesse or unctiousnesse is in; it from it owne originall, and being light is carryed by the waves of the sea, unto the shores of sundry Countries and climates: Iosua Fer∣rus relateth the originall thereof as of his owne knowledge, and that untill it hath attained the full maturity, it hath not that true sent of Amber, as after, and saith that he had seene divers such great peeces, that had not attai∣ned their true sent. And although the Ethiopian coast, from Mozamlique and Sofala to the Islands of Maldiva, and beyond them to the East, doe most abound with Ambergrise, yet are not the coasts of the West Indies in sundry places without it, nor yet these of Europe, in severall parts, and even our owne, and the Irish coasts have yeel∣ded it oftentimes, and in severall peeces and quantity, yet neither so much nor so great as in other Countries: for Garcias ab Orta saith, the greatest peece that ever he saw, was a peece of fifteene pound weight; but there hath beene seene as it is set downe by Authours, some peece well neere an hundred pound weight. For the choyse thereof, seeing there is much variety in the colour, and some in the substance, as white more or lesse, or gray lighter, or darker, or enclining to rednesse or blackenesse: that which is not very white, as being usually very dry, but grayish more or lesse, and either with spots and veines, or without, so as it be fat, that is, upon a knives point, or such like thing, heated will shew oylie, is accounted the best, having the peculier sent belonging thereto, which is most neere unto dry cow dung, in my opinion, the blacke sort is the worst. The properties of Amber∣grise are these: it is hot and dry in the second degree, it warmeth, resolveth, and strengtheneth, what way soe∣ver it be taken: it easeth the paines in the head, being dissolved in a warme morter, and mixed with a little oyntment of Orenge flowers, the temples and forehead being annoynted therewith: it comforteth also the braine, warmeth and resolveth the cold defluxions of humours thereon, and on the nerves and sinewes: it doth likewise comfort and strengthen the memory, the vigour also and spirits of the heart, it is singular good for women trou∣bled with the mother, to be applyed to the place, it helpeth barrennesse proceeding from a cold cause: it is con∣ducible to Epilepticke persons, to smell often thereunto, which causeth their fits to be both lesse violent and permanent: it doth most conveniently agree with aged persons, to warme, comfort, and strengthen their cold de∣cayed spirits, adding vigour and lustinesse to them, and is accounted conducible to venereous actions. 
CHAP. IV. Amomum. Amomum. E Ven as I said before of Lignum Aloes, and in the last Classis of the true Balsamum, so much more may be said of Amomum, that the foregoing times for many ages had utterly lost the know∣ledge thereof, and is yet to this day held doubtfull, as the Balsamum is, with many learned men, both in other and our owne Country, whether the right be to be found in rerum natura or no, and therefore formerly many did obtrude divers things for it, as the Rosa Hiericutitina by some, and Pescolumbinus by others, which is a kind of Cranes bill, called Doves foote, both which errors Mat∣thiolus hath sufficiently confuted, Quatranius also took the Myrtus Brabantica our Gaule to be it, and then as Mat∣thiolus saith, a small seed came to be taken for it, and therefore called Amomum Germanicum: but Garcias ab Orta, who lived many yeares in the East Indies, declareth that he saw a branch of Amomum, which the Physiti∣ons of Nizamalucco, the King of Decan gave him, being brought as they said among other drogues out of Asia, Persia, and Arabia, for the Kings use, which as he saith, he found agreeable to Dioscorides his description there of, and withall was very like unto a Doves foote, and called Hamama by the Arabians, which signifieth the same thing, that is, a Doves foote: but both he and Valerandus Doures were deceived with the same thing, brought from Ormus, in being so taken there generally, &amp; both the Amomum &amp; Amomis are set forth in the figures by Clu∣sius in his Scholia on the same place in Garcias and here also. All these opinions and every of them are utterly false, and no way answering the truth of the thing, and Dioscorides his description: for of late dayes there hath been sent to Venice from the East Indies, by one Martinellus a famous and curious Italian, in the search of rare drogues, the true Amomum, which although it hath beene opposed by divers learned men, yet Maroneus of Padoa, hath in a little treatise thereof, so exemplified it and comented upon every part of it, and comparing Dioscorides with Pliny together, that it is now generally accepted of almost every where, to be the right and genuine thing, the descrip∣tion whereof, I meane so much as was sent, is on this wise: It is a bunch or cluster of whitish round berries, some∣what like unto Grapes for the outward forme and bignesse, but else very like unto Cardamomes within, yet big∣ger and rounder, having within the outer whitish thinne shell or skinne, sundry blackish browne seedes close Amomum genuinum &amp; spurium. True and false Amomum. 
2. Amomum aliud quorundam &amp; Garyophyll m Plinij Elusie suspicatum. Another sort of bastard or false Amomum suspected by Clusius to be Pliny his Garyophyllon. 
thrust together, very like to the inner seedes of Cardamomes, but larger and of somewhat a fiercer piersing sent, smelling somewhat like unto oyle of spike, which made Clusius to thinke it had beene seasoned therewith, and of a sharpe hot and quicke taste. The properties whereof are these: It is heating, binding, and drying, procu∣ring sleepe and rest, and easing paines in the head, being applyed to the forehead, it digesteth and discusseth in∣flammations and Imposthumes, and helpeth those that are stung by Scorpions: being used with Bassill, it helpeth gouty persons, and mervailously easeth the griping paines in the belly and bowels by reason of wind, to swallow three or foure of the seeds, and for the mother in women, taken in that manner, or made into a pessary and so u∣sed, or else in a bath, it is convenient both for the liver and reines, and is an ingredient of chiefe account, in great Antidotes that are preservatives. The false or bastard Amomum, which as it is likely is the same that Garcias saith was held for true in the Indies, and which Clusius saith in his Annotations upon that Chapter of Amomum of Garcias, Ʋalerandus Donres received from Ormus, is by him thus described. They were like the toppes of some bushes consisting of a number of small branches, so thicke set with very small leaves that scarse any stalkes could be seene but leaves onely, somewhat like unto the stalke with leaves of the sea Spurge, the ends of them so clo∣sed that they did in some sort resemble a flower or Rose, and the whole branches together, the foote of a feather footed Dove, from which likenesse it is probable arose the falsification, this had no singular good sent or taste to commend it. The very like hereunto saith Clusius he received at Ʋienna in Austria from Constantinople, which they there used for Amomum. 
2. Amomum aliud quorundam &amp; Garyophyllon Plinij a Clusio suspicatum. Another sort of bastard or false Amomum suspected by Clusius to be Pliny his Garyophyllon. Because this also hath beene by divers received for Amomum, and so sent to our Drugists, I thinke good to adjoyne it therewith, for some resemblance of the whole branch, although Clusius setteth it with the Cloves, which as he saith it is somewhat like in sent, but I thinke he referreth it to the Cloves, rather for Pliny his name of Garyophyllon, for in my sent and taste, it hath little affinity therewith, but yet hath some correspondence with Pliny his briefe notes or desciption thereof, and therefore I will give you Clusius his figure and description. Iames Garret while he lived, an Apothecary after he had beene a Druggist in Limestreete London, in the yeare sixeteene hundred and one, sent Clusius some of this fruite as they grew, which were somewhat like Pepper cornes (but those that I have by the name of Amomum, and I thinke are the same with his, are browner and bigger all for the most part, then any Pepper graine,) some bigger and lesser, rugged and browne, and easie to be bro∣ken, which had blacke round seedes within them, to be divided into two parts, smelling as well as tasting like Cloves: this fruite or berries grow many clustring together like a bunch of Grapes, (each whereof hath a little crowne at the head, somewhat like an Hawthorne berry) two or three sometimes together on a stalke: this had likewise some leaves still abiding on the branch, and were of sundry sizes, although all of one forme, that is some∣what long and round, and round pointed, not dented at all about the edges, but smooth, and many veines therein, of a brownish ash-colour, and growing opposite on the stalkes. This is the cheife parts of his description. We have not knowne it used for any disease, more then that being obtruded for Amomum, some more audatious then wise, have put in their compositions instead of the right, but by the taste as Clusius also noteth it, it might seeme to be availeable to many good uses if they were tryed. 
CHAP. V. Anacardia. Anacardes or Malacca Beanes. A Nacardium is a fruite like unto an heart, growing on trees plentifully in Cananor and Calecut, Cambaya and Decan, as Garcias saith, (and as some say on those mountaines in Sicilia that cast forth fire, but I somewhat doubt thereof) greater then our greatest Beane, and called by the Portugals Fava de Malac∣qua, of the Arabians Balador, and of the Indians Bibo, whose outer skin or huske is of a darke red colour, betweene which and the white edible kernell, lyeth a cer∣taine Anacardi. Anacardes or Malacca beanes. 
liquour or viscous substance, of a fiery red colour while it is fresh, and of a sweetish, but some what hot taste, which is the true Mel Anacardinum, but instead thereof, be∣cause we cannot have them so fresh, that we might take forth this substance, some use to boyle the fruite being bro∣ken or bruised in honey, and then call it Mel Anacardinum, but of farre lesse effect. The whole fruite saith Garcias, is familiarly eaten while they are fresh, as also being pickle∣ed like Ollives, in all those parts where they grow, but as he saith, when they are dry, they use them as a causticke, to take away wens, &amp;c. The qualities hereof are set downe by Serapio and Avicen, who although they make it to be of a delitery and poysoning property, by overhea∣ting and burning th blood, being hot and dry in the third, if not in the fourth degree, which Garcias beleeveth not; yet they say that the fruite helpeth the sences that are weake, and the memory that is decayed, and comforteth the braine, and nerves that are subject to the palsie that commeth through cold: Garcias saith that in India they use to give the whey wherein the fruite hath beene stee∣ped, to those that are short winded, and to those that have the wormes. 
CHAP. VI. Cajous. The Cajous or Apple Beane. B Ecause this fruite comming from Brasill Cajous arborcum suo &amp; tenella planta, 
and called by the people there Cajous, is in divers things like unto the Anacar∣des, I thought it not amisse to give you the knowledge thereof next thereunto, with the description of it, as Clusius hath recorded in his Scholia, on the Anacardes in Garcias, for I finde some other Authours to have made menti∣on of it, as Christophorus a Costa, Lugdunensis, Linscho∣ten; Baptista Ferrarius who set forth a small plant thereof of one yeares growth, yet none have added a∣ny thing unto him. This tree (saith he) is great, ha∣ving leaves like the Peare tree, but rather like Bay leaves in those that are new sprung up, thicke and of a pale greene colour: the flower is white like to the O∣renge flower, but thicker with leaves, but not so sweet as they, the fruite is like unto a Goose egge, both for forme and greatnes, of a very yellow colour, &amp; sweet, full of a liquour like unto that of a Citron, that is cal∣led Lima, which is eaten by them with great delight, yet somewhat sharpe, and Acosta saith the same, and as it encreaseth the nut groweth lesse▪ (although The∣vet in the 61. Chapter of his description of America, contraryeth this manifest truth) not having any seed within it, but at the end of this fruite groweth forth this nut, which being put into the ground doth spring up like the stones or kernells or any other fruite, being of the fashion of an Hares Kidney, of an ash-colour sometimes declining to rednesse: this nut hath a dou∣ble rinde, or shell betweene which is a certaine spon∣gy substance, full of a most sharpe and burning oyle, the kernell within being as sweet as a Pistack nut, covered with a thin ash coloured skin, which is to be taken a∣way, and is said to be a stirrer up of Venerious actions, and therefore used by them, being first lightly toasted: the sharpe liquour or oyle is used by them against scabbes, and is good also for running tetters, and ringwormes. I have here given you the figure of the nut it selfe, and of the first yeares shooting of the tree, as Baptista Ferrarius hath exhibited it in his Booke deflorum cultura. Acosta further saith, that they use in the Indies to pickle them as they doe Ollives, and eate them to procure an appetite, to stay castings, and to helpe the weakenesse of the stomacke. 
CHAP. VII. Anisumexoticum Phillipinarum Insularum. A strange Anisseede like seede of the Indies. W E can give you no knowledge of either roote leafe stalke, or flowers of this strange plant, brought from King Phillips Islands neere unto China, and thereupon called Phillippinas ) but of Anisum exoticum Phillippinarum Insularum. A strange Anisseed like seed of the Indies. 
the toppes onely, with the huskes and seed in them, brought by Sir Thomas Candish, in his voyage of the Globes circum-navigation, and given to Master Morgan, Queene Elizabeths A∣pothecary, and to Master Iames Garret, of whom Clusius received them, and giveth this description thereof. It was a stalke with flat umbels of seed, as large as those of Archangelica, and peradventure larger, sustained by thicke footestalkes, and set round at the toppe, in a round forme one by ano∣ther, consisting of sixe, eight, or more huskes of seed, which were not parted in two like our ordi∣nary Anisseede, but each of them had divers round smooth shining ash-coloured seed within them, like unto Orobus, the huskes were about an inch broad of a brownish colour on the outside and rugged, o∣penning at the toppe into two equall parts, and al∣though divers were empty, yet some contained such seed as aforesaid, the smell and taste of them was very like unto Anisseed, whereupon it was called Anise by them that sent it: but Master Garret sent the right name, whereby it was called in the Islands, one of them being brought along with them, who set the name in China Characters, which as Clusi∣us saith he could not imitate, but was Damor, every letter being written under the other downe∣wards. 
CHAP. VIII. Asa dulcis &amp; faetida. Assafetida and the other Asa. A Lthough I have spoken somewhat of Asa dulcis sive oderata &amp; Assafetida in the Chapter of Laserpitium among the umbelliferous plants, yet because I said but little of them there, reserving them for this place, I will here entreate of them more largely. There is none of the ancient Authours either Greeke, Latine, or Arabian, that hath made any mention of Asa, either dulcis or faetida, but was first depraved by the Druggists and Apothecaries in forraigne parts, that in stead of Laser said Asa, from whence ever since the name of Asa hath continued, and afterwards divided into Dulcis or odorata, and faetida, from the differing sorts of goodnesse purenesse and sent thereof, when as they are both of a strong smell, yet one much more then ano∣ther, the Asa faetida being of so evill a sent, that the Germanes call it Teuffellz drech, that is, diaboli stercus, Devils durt, and is very neere the sent of Storax liquida, if it be not the same, relented and brought into a liquid forme, the foote or sediment declaring it plainely, and is accounted with them to be sweet, being of a strong unpleasant favour, rather then sweet to us, so is the Asae dulcis &amp; odorata, called sweete in comparison of the other, called faetida, because being purer, it hath a more unpleasant sent and taste. For as Garcias saith Asa is called Altiht by the Arabians, which is the Laser of the Greekes and Latines, as the plant being called by them Anjuden, and Silphium by the Greekes and Latines, but Jmgu and Imgara by the Indians, the one when it is clensed and puri∣fied from the drosse being cleere and yellow as Amber, the other foule and impure, and are so familiarly eaten, as Garcias saith by the Indians, in their meates, brothes, and sallets, and medicines, that they scarse eate any thing, that is not seasoned therewith, and is very pleasant to them being used unto it, but loathsome to others, the richer sort using the purer, and the poore the course: divers heretofore have mistaken Benzoin for Asa dulcis, and I doubt the errour is not yet quite extinguished, and Matthiolus confesseth his former errour therein, which upon better consideration he amended. Benzoin being the gumme of a tree, and being not so hot as Laser, which by Galen his appointment had for its substitute Euphorbium being growne old. The Asa dulcis being in former times well knowne and used, is now adayes quite lost and forgotten, being not brought into these parts, but the Assafeiida hath a continuall residence and recourse unto us, and is as Garcias saith, the true and onely Laser, or Laserpitium of the ancients, and so accepted generally by the Arabians in India, and say they erre mightily that make them differing. It is generally used in our dayes for the rising of the mother in women, as all strong and evill sented things be, which depresse it, and is singular good to be put into hollow aking teeth, to ease and take away the paines: One saith he tasted of it for a tryall in a cold time of the yeare, and after a little walking he found himselfe possessed with a gentle sweate, both head, armes, and body, and shortly after found his stomacke better disposed to his dinner then at other times before, and digesting it better. Garcias saith the Indians use it to take away the loathing of the stomacke to meate, and to strengthen the weakenesse of it also, and is much u∣sed by them to provoke unto Venery, and causeth one to expell winde mightily, which thing was tryed by a Portugall as Garcias relateth it upon an Horse, whom the King of Bisnager would have bought, but that he was over subject to breake winde, but after that the Portugall had cured him thereof the King bought him, and asking how he cured him, he answered him with Assafetida given in his provender, no mervaile said the King, if he were cured with the gods meate, yea rather with the devils said the Portugall, but softly, and in his owne language for feare of being overheard. 
CHAP. IX. Balsamum Peruvianum, The West Indian Balsamums. O F the true Balsamum I have entreated in the last foregoing Classis or Tribe, but there have beene divers other sorts of liquours called Balsamum for their excellent vertues, brought out of the West Indies, every one of which for a time, after their first bringing were of great account with all men, and bought at great prices, but as greater store was brought, so did the prices diminish, and the use decay, when as it was the same thing and of the same vertue it formerly was, such is the inconstant course of the world in all things. One sort of Balsamum which is of most frequent use with us, is called blacke or browne Balsamum, because the colour is blackish, and tending to browne being dropped forth, which as Monardus Fructus sive theca Balsami Occiden∣talis arboris. The fruite of the West Indie Balsame tree, 
saith is gathered from a tree, somewhat bigger then a Pomegarnet tree, (whose fruite or long pod I here shew you, as I received it, with a very browne almost blacke colour, and smelt so like this Balsamum or Benzoin, that I am certainely perswaded it was gathered from this tree) not by in∣cision, as the juyces, liquours, and gummes of other trees (which yet this tree doth also in small quantity, yet being white, and so precious with the Indians, that they will not part with any of it) but made after the manner that the Indians use to draw forth the juyces and liquours out of all their o∣ther trees, which is by cutting the branches, and the bodies also sometimes of trees into small peeces, which after the boyling in a great quantity of water, the oyle swimming on the toppe, after it is cold is scummed of by them and reserved. This is of a thicke, yet running consistence, and of a sharpe and somewhat bitter taste, but of an excellent fine sent, comming neerest unto Benzoin, but will not long endure, being rubbed on any thing that is kept in the ayre, but never loseth it sent being kept close in a glasse or the like. This is used inwardly and outwardly for divers good uses, and although in some it causeth a kinde of loathing to the stomacke, if it touch the tongue, in drinking foure or five droppes in wine fasting, yet it helpe∣eth the weakenesse of the stomacke, the Tissicke, and shortnesse of breath, those that are pursie and the paines and difficulty in making water, it mo∣veth also womens courses, and causeth a good colour, and a sweete breath, rectifieth the evill disposition of the liver, openeth obstructions, and pre∣serveth youthfullnesse even in aged persons that have much used it, and hel∣peth the barrennesse in women: being outwardly used, it is singular good to heale any fresh or greene wound, and old ulcers, and sores also: it easeth paines in the head or necke, and swelling in any part of the body, the places thereof being annoynted therewith, or a cloth wet therein and applyed: it helpeth digestion, strengtheneth the stomacke, dissolveth winde, easeth the spleene, and the Sciatica, the strangury and stone, and discusseth all nodes and hardnesse of tumours, being ap∣plyed warme to the places pained: it warmeth and comforteth the sinewes, and keepeth them from shrinking. 
Balsamum album. Another white and very cleere Balsame of a very sweet sent Monardus saith, was brought likewise from the continent of America in some good quantity, which was taken by incision from very great trees full of bran∣ches to the bottome, whose outer barke is thicke like Corke, under which there is a thinner, from whence being slit the Balsamum droppeth forth, the fruite hereof is very small even no bigger then a Pease, and of a bit∣ter taste, inclosed in the end of a long thinne white cod, wherewith the Indians doe smoake their heads against the paines thereof, and rheumaticke destillations: This liquour or Balsamum is accounted of much more vertue then the former, one droppe being said to be of more force and effect then a great deale of the other. There is another sort of precious Balsamum saith Monardus brought from Tolu, Balsamum de Tolu. which is a Province betweene Cartha∣gena and Nombre de Dios, and is gathered by incision from small low trees, like unto low Pines full of branches, but with the leaves of the Carob tree abiding greene alwayes, the manured yeelding more liquour then the wild, and is of great account with the Indians and Spaniards, being taught by them: it is of a gold red colour, of a mid∣dle consistence and very clammy or glutinous, of a sweete and pleasant taste, not provoking vomit, as other sorts of Balsamum will doe, and of an excellent sent like unto a Lemmon, whereof a droppe being let fall into the hand, will smell egregiously through all the place. Vnto this Monardus attributeth all the vertues of the true A∣rabian Balsame, and much more then unto any of the former, which because I would not make a double repetiti∣on of things, I referre you unto them.
CHAP. X. Bdellium. The Gumme called Bdellium. A Lthough Dioscorides hath given no description of the tree that beareth Bdellium ▪ nor any part thereof; yet Pliny in his twelfth Booke and ninth Chapter setteth it downe, that it is blacke or of a sad forme, and of the bignesse of the white Ollive tree, having leaves like an Oke, and fruite like the wild Fig tree, which how truely expressed resteth doubtfull, for Lobel setteth forth a sticke of a thorny tree, found among drugges, with divers peeces of gumme cleaving to it, most likely to be Bdellium or Myrrhe, which are very like one unto another, being both gathered from cruell thorny trees, and Thevet saith, that he saw in one wood of trees, two thousand of these Bdell fruct quibusdam acceptus quem potius cuci Theophrast fructum opitatur. 
sorts growing mixed together, and that in such countries that are subject to snow, yet the best Authours say that Arabia is the chiefe place where they grow, which I thinke never saw or felt snow, yet in Genesis 2. verse 12. we read that Bdellium, and the Onix stone, beside Gold, grew in the Land of Havilah, which is interpreted to be Eastward from Persia: so that both the tree and the gum thereof are called by one name, for the choyse wherof Di∣oscorides setteth downe that it should be cleere like glew, fat on the inside, easily melting or dissolving, pure or cleane from drosse, sweete in the burning like unto Vn∣guis odoratus, (for so I construe it although divers Au∣thours doe diversly interpret those words, some making Vnguis to be a note of white peeces in the gumme, like the naile of ones hand, but in my judgement the Vnguis is referred by Dioscorides to the sweete fumes of Bdellium in the burning, whereunto it is like, for having said that it was suffitu odoratum, he would rather shew what sent it had, namely of unguis odoratus ) and bitter in taste, which are such no es as we can hardly find in any that is brought to us, for we find little bitternesse in any, and lesse sweet∣nesse in the burning of it or Vnguis odoratus, but strong and unpleasant rather, neither is it soft or easie to be dis∣solved, but hard and not to be dissolved equally, but into graines or knots without warmth, yet is ours of a sad browne colour somewhat like glew, and much like unto Myrrhe, so that they are often mistaken one for another, but that Bdellium is harder, dryer, and browner: but there are sundry sorts thereof as Matthiolus sheweth, and Bau∣hinus in his note upon him that he hath seene, for not one∣ly in former times there was much dulterating of drogues, by the Indians as it was supposed, but most probable by the Arabians who were the chiefe Merchants for those places, and for those things, and I thinke the Iewes learned that art of them, and have exceeded them in cunning. The properties hereof are heating and mollefi∣eth ha d tumours, and the nodes of the necke, throate, or sinewes, or of other parts, any way applyed; it pro∣voketh urine and womens courses, and breaketh the stone: it is good for the cough, and for those that are bit∣ten or stung by Serpents: it helpeth to discusse the windinesse of the spleene, and the paines of the sides: it is good also for those that are burst and have a rupture: it mollefieth the hardnesse of the mother, and dryeth up the moistnesse thereof, and draweth forth the dead birth. 
CHAP. XI. Behen album &amp; ru rum. White and red Ben. T He ancient Authours have beene both very briefe in declaring these two sorts of Drogues, and are also not a one among themselves what the true Ben album &amp; rubrum should be, for Actuarius and Myrepsus ma the Her llis to be Ben, how then can any of our Moderne Writers, find out the true Ben of the Ancients, yet divers have appropriated sundry herbes unto them, but they have all come farre short thereof, not onely in the thing, but especially in the properties, Clusius setteth forth a kinde of wild Ca ion, which a he saith, the le ned Professours at Salamanca in Spaine tooke to be the Ben album of the ancients, but is nothing fo Dod setteth downe the Papaver sp eum which he calleth Po mon to be it, and some take the wild Parsnep to be it: for the Ben rubrum, they of Mompelier call a small sort of w , others the red Valerian of Dodonaeus, Matthiolus the Limomum, and others take the Bistort roote for it; Garcias saith that some tooke the Zedoaria for one of them; Anguilara and Camaerarius also suppose that the garden red Car∣ret, and the white wild kind of it, which the Italians Beh n abiad. White Ben. 
call Carotta bianco are the red and the white Ben, which they and I also suppose may passe reasonable well as sub∣stitutes for them, untill the true may be knowne. But those things that goe under their names in the Druggists, and Apothecaries shops, are not knowne, what they are, but are certainely false, and not the things they should be. Rauwolfius saith that he found the true white Ben grow∣ing at the foote of mount Libanus, in a moist shadowy place, which the Inhabitants call Behmen Abiad, as they call the red Behmen ackmar: the description of the white sort he setteth downe thus: the leaves are great long and thicke, like unto the sharpe pointed Docke, upon long footestalkes, but having at the bottome of each leafe, foure other small ones standing by couples each against o∣ther, those that grow on the stalke are lesse, and without any footestalke, the toppe of the stalke is parted into some branches, each bearing at the toppes a knap or yel∣lowish scaly head, out of which breaketh a yellow flow∣er: the roote is long and full of joynts, but without any or very few fibres, very like unto Licoris both for forme and greatnesse, but white inwardly. They are say Sera∣pio, Mesues, and other Arabians, hot and moist in the first or second degree, they comfort the heart, and are stirrers to Venery. 
CHAP. XII. Benzoin. Benjamin. T He tree from whence this sweet gumme Benzoin is taken, is very great, faire, and high, largely spread and set full of branches, in a comely order, the leaves whereof are somewhat like unto those of the Citron tree, but lesser and not so greene, but grayish on the underside: from the body hereof which is great and thicke, and the wood very hard and firme, by wounding it as they doe other trees, is drawne forth the gumme, which is of divers sorts, for foure is very red, and full of barkes and stickes which some take to be the sweetest, others is more pure or cleane, nothing so red, having many great and small white peeces of gumme in it, which is called the Allmonds of the gumme, another sort is blackish, which is said to come from the younger trees, and called as Garcias saith B ini de B inas, and is sweeter then the last. Some saith he, call Benzoin Benjaoi quasi filius Iavae, (which Scaliger correcteth, saying Garcias was mistaken in thinking that Ben in the Arabian tongue, signifyeth filius, when as he saith it is lachry , and so Benja , is lachry∣ma Iavensis ) and some, as Ruellius Ben Iudaeum, deceived either by the neerenesse of the name, or because he thought that Iudaea was the naturall place thereof, and that it was a kinde of Asadulcis, but without any truth or ground of reason, which opinion is yet held with divers who will still use it inwardly in place of Lasor: it is u∣sually called in shoppes Benjuinum, and of some Belzoinum, and Benzoin, or Benzoinum: and of the Indians Co∣minham: There hath been sundry errours among learned men, about this gumme, for finding it to be so sweete, and of so delicate a substance and shew, they straight imagined that it could not be but of some singular vertue, and not unknowne to the Auncients: some therefore thought it to be Cancamum of Dioscorides, but yet as Gar∣cias sheweth, it chiefly groweth in Sumatra, and Sian, and Martaban neere thereunto, of the Arabians Lovan j oy quasithus ex Iava, and Vdo at Surrat, &amp;c. and not in Arabia, as Dioscorides saith Caucamum doth: some it to be the best Myrrha called Myrrha Aminea, and some as I said before to be Asa dulcis, but Ben b ¦sides that it was not knowne to the Ancients, it is not used inwardly in Physicke, neither by the Indians, nor us that mistake it not, but is wholly spent in perfumes either water or oyle, pouther, Pomande , ing per∣fumes or the like and is of an excellent sent, where or howsoever it is used. Bauhinus seemeth to referre that slender long fruite of Clusius, Exot. lib. 4. c. 11. unto Alpinus his Felfeltavil, and that it was naurall of Florida, but Ʋeslingius showeth it to be farre otherwise, as shall be shewed in the Chapter of Pepper, but I rather thinke it is the fruite of this Benjamin tree, or of the browne American Balsame before set downe. 
CHAP. XIII. Bitumen Iudaicum. Dry Pitch of India. T He Bitumen or dry Pitch, which the dead Sea in Iudaea casteth up at a certaine time of the yeare is set downe by Dioscorides to be of a shining purple colour, but that which is blacke, is adulterate, and Matthiolus saith that the Asphaltum, or Bitumen of the shops in Italy (and so with us is a mixture, and not the true thing: Dioscorides saith it is had from Phaenicia (wherof Iudaea is but a part) from Babylon, the Island Zacynthus and Sydon: but that of Babylon which hath beene seene by many in these dayes, is held to be another thing, even the same that the builders of Babel used instead of morter to cement their bricks; but that of the dead Sea is only in use and the best, which dead Sea or Lake is of a great extent, yet diversly propor∣tioned by Writers thereof, for Pliny as I find Matthiolus quoteth him, maketh it to be an hundred miles long, and in the broadest place five and twenty miles over, but Sir Walter Ralegh in his Chronicle, relateth Pliny to make it lesse then our Moderne Travailers doe, who judge it to be eighteene Dutch miles in length, that is 72. of ours. and two Dutch miles and a halfe in breadth, that is tenne of ours, accounting one Dutch mile to be foure English, Iosephus saith it is 180. Furlongs in length, that is two and twenty and a halfe of our miles, and 150. Furlongs in breadth, that is eighteene miles and somewhat more of ours, such variety there is in Writers: This Lake or dead Sea is (called by Galen Lacus Asphaltites ) the same place where Sodome and Gomorrha with the other Cities stood, mentioned in Genesis, being then the pleasantest and most fruitefull valley of all those parts, exceeding Hiericho, and the parts thereabouts, which is about fifteene miles from it, and whose River runneth into it, and so drowned therein, yet no fish entereth into it; but now the tract of ground about it for a great compasse bea∣reth a sad face, and is either utterly barren and fruitelesse, or beareth such fruite as is onely faire without and dust within, and the aire noysome and pestilent, by the thicke infectious vapours arising from it, and is neither mo∣ved by the wind, nor will suffer any thing to sinke therein, but will swimme on the toppe, and is not onely of a salt but bitter taste, which will corrupt any thing rather then preserve it, as salt Sea water will. There are o∣ther sorts of Bitumen in the World, as Historians report, as in Cuba, and sundry Fountaines neere the sea shore, casting it forth as blacke as Pitch, Another sort is in a Province of Peru, where the place is voyd of tree or plant, and giveth a fat liquid Bitumen in this manner: Turfes of the earth, being laid on hurdles, the liquour dropping from them, by being set in the Sunne, is kept to heate and comfort any place affected with cold humours and tumours, cureth wounds, and is used for those griefes whereunto Caranha, and Tacamahaca serve: it is of a strong smell, and of a blackish red colour. The Inhabitants about this Lake, gather this Bitumen or Pitch, being an oyle or liquid substance on the water, and hardned by the aire, and spend it chiefly in pitching their Ships, but medicinally it discusseth tumours, and swellings, and mollefyeth the hardnesse of them, and keepeth them from inflammations, and is of singular good use for the rising of the mother, and for the falling sickenesse, to be burnt and the fumes thereof which are strong smelled unto: it bringeth downe womens courses taken in Wine, with a little Castoreum, it helpeth the biting of Serpents, the paines of the sides and the hippes, and dissolveth con∣gealed blood in the stomacke and body. 
Petroleum quasi petrae oleum or oyle of Peter, is a thinne reddish liquour, thinner than oyle of Ollives, and al∣most as thin as water, and is accounted to be a liquid Bitumen, and thought to be the Naphtha of Dioscorides by Matthiolus, because it is so apt and easie to take fire, even by the ayre thereof, and is gotten in sundry places of Italy, distilling of it selfe out of a Mine in the Earth, and in Hungary also, in a certaine place, where issuing forth in a well together with the water, the owner of the place thought to have the chinkes stopped up with morter, which could not be done without light, the workeman therefore taking a close lanthorne with a light in it, went about it, and being gone downe into the well to stoppe it, very suddainely, the Peter oyle taking fire, flew round about the sides of the Well, and with a hideous noyse and smoke, like the cracke of a peece of great Ordinance shot of, it not onely cast forth the Workeman dead, but blew up the cover of the Well into the aire, and set on fire also some bottles of the oyle that stood by the Well, and many persons that stood thereby were scorched with the flame. This oyle of Peter is a speciall ingredient to make wilde fire, and is of a very hot and piersing sent and quality, and therefore is used for cold aches crampes and goutes, and to heale any greene wound or cut, suddainely, a little thereof being put into the oyle of Saint Iohns wort and used. 
CHAP. XIV. Blatta Byzantia sive Ʋnguis odoratus. The sweete Indian sea fish shels. T His Indian shell, of some sea fish, hath beene the subject of some controversie among the learned: for Fuchsius would make the Onyche or Dioscorides, and the Blatta Byzantia or Ʋnguis odoratus, to be differing things, and then againe, he would make the Blatta Byzantia to be a bone in the mouth or fore part of the nose of the shell fish Purpura, or purple Periwinkle, and this he doth twise expresse in his Annotations on Nichotaus Myrepsus, in the composition of Aurea Alexandrina, and in Diamargariton, into both which compositions the Blatta Byzantia are to be put, but Mat∣thiolus contesteth against this his opinion, and saith that these sweete shells called Conchula Indica or Ʋnguis odo∣ratus are taken by Serapio and Avicen, and the latter Greeke writers, to be no other thing then the Blatta By∣zantia. And againe that never any Writer accounted that bone in the nose of the fish Purpura, to be sweete or numbered among other sweete things, but that the ashes of their shells being burned was drying, and served to clense the teeth, and to restraine the excressences in the flesh, to clense ulcers, and to bring them to skinning: but on the contrary side, the Arabians have alwayes used the Blattae Byzantiae; because they were of an astringent quality, of thin parts &amp; did participate of a kind of sweet∣nes, Blatta Byzantia sive unguis odoratus. The sweete Indian Sea fish shell. 
and is good in the diseases and weakenes of the sto∣macke, the ill disposition of the Liver, the fainting of the heart, and the rising of the mother in women, and as Dioscorides saith is good also for the falling sicknesse, to burne them under their noses, that the fumes may ease their fits, and that none of these qualities were ever at∣tributed to the purple Periwinckle shell. Dioscorides writeth that the best come from the red sea, and are white and fat, that is, will easily burne (but such did I never see) and that those that come from Babylon are blacke, but the fumes of both are like unto Castoreum, which argues those not to be right that are in our shops, although some doe differ from others in the sise, as is expressed in the table. Yet Matthiolus setteth forth in his Commentaries on Dioscorides, a certaine small long hollow shell, almost like a tooth, which I rather take to be the Dentali of the ancients for Ʋnguis odora∣tus, being likely such as were used in his time, which I have here expressed, in the same table with those sorts that our Drugists impose on us, being of two sorts, of broad and somwhat hollow brown shels, the one smooth, and the other rugged, and the one smaller then the other. 
CHAP. XV. Bolus Armenius. Bolarmoniacke. T He severall sorts of Bole or Bolarmoniacke that are to be seene at sundry times with us, doe testifie that we scarce know which to accept for the right, for Galen saith it is of a pale colour, and Pliny making three sorts, red, and lesse red, and a middle sort, sheweth that both red and pale were so called, and used alike, and most of the sorts that we have, have the notes and markes of the true, that is, it is a firme or close earth, heavy without gravell or stone, and for the most part wholly of one colour, without discoloured parts, which doth shew that not onely that Bolus Armenius which some call Ori∣entalis, but many other of the finer sorts, found in other places, not onely as a mine of it selfe, but in the mines chiefly of iron, and some in those both of gold, silver, and copper, may safely be used for some of the same purpo∣ses: but because they all or most of them doe colour the hands or fingers of them that touch them, many have supposed that it may not unfitly be referred to Galens Rubica Lemnia, which was differing from the Terra Lemnia, because it coloured the touchers hands, which Terra Lemnia did not: or may be the Rubrica Sinopica of Diosco∣rides, which was of a liver colour, although peradventure in his time the Alexipharmicall qualities were not knowne to him or in his time; as his Rubrica Fabrilis, so called because Carpenters did use to strike their lines therewith, as we doe now with chalke, may be our common Bolarmoniacke, which is courser, more brittle, and used onely outwardly to stanch bleedings. All the best sorts of Bole with us, have such a clammy or sticking quality, which the ancients mention not, that is, if it be touched with the tippe of the tongue, it will cleave ve∣ry fast thereto, and the stronger it cleaveth, and the harder it commeth from the tongue, the better is the Bole ac∣counted of. And is used as a speciall remedy in all contagious diseases of the pestilence, small poxe or the like, and in pestilent feavers, and against poysons, and the venome of Serpents: it hath also a binding property to re∣straine all fluxes of the belly or of the sperme, or of womens courses. 
CHAP. XVI. Borax. Borace. B Orax or Borrax called by the Greekes Chrysocolla from the property of sodoring of gold; and Tincar, or Tincal by the Arabians, is said by Garcias to be a Minerall matter, gotten out of a Mine of earth, in a mountaine, about an hundred miles off from Cambayette, but this is not the Chrysocolla of the Aun∣cients, Dioscorides, Galen, and Pliny, which in their times was of a greene colour, found in Mines of sundry mettals, made into pouther and washed often, and prepared for the purpose; but ours is made by many in our owne land as well as in others, by art as Allome is, into small pure white peeces. of no taste or but wal∣lowish; and is easily beaten into pouther; the substance whereof it is made, being brought us out of the East Indies, and no place else that I know, and is certaine white stones, put into, or wrapped in fat or grease, which is called unrefined Borace, and so brought to us, untill it be refined, as we have it to use: the properties where∣of besides the sodering of gold, silver, copper, &amp;c. is of good efficacy, not onely inwardly taken to binde fluxes of the belly, as laskes and the like, but the gonorrhea passio, or running of the reines, but outwardly to soder up any cut or fresh wound in the flesh, and is often used also with other things as a fucus for the face, &amp;c. 
CHAP. XVII. Cambugio quibusdam Catharticum Aureum. The golden yellow Indian purger. T His Cambugio as it is of late importation, so it is likewise of small knowledge unto us, whereof it is made, for but onely what we see of it to be a solid peece of substance, made up into wreathes or roules, yellow both within and without, and giving a yellow colour upon the moistening of it, we know not as yet, neither can we learne truely, whether it be a gum or hardned juyce, which it is the more likely to be of the two, because it will so easily dissolve in water, although some suppose it to be the juyce of Euphorbium, others of the purging Thorne: some thinke it to be made of Scammony, or Ti∣thymall, others of Spurge; and some of the greater Celandine, other of the middle rinde of the Aldar tree, and lastly Bauhinus, because he would say somewhat, maketh a quid si forte, what if it be not the juyce of the flowers of Ricinus dryed, and I say it is most likely to be the juyce of a peculiar herbe of that Country, that giveth such a yellow juyce as Aloes. It hath gained a number of names, partly from the sundry nations languages, and part∣ly from the mistakings and ignorances of people: as Ghitta jamaa, or Gutta gemou, or Gama gitta, or Gutta ga∣mandra, or Cattagauma, or Cambici, or Crambici or Cambugio, and some others also, which I willingly omit: it is brought unto us out of the East Indies, and some say from China. The properties hereof are to purge both by stoole and by vomit, and is of much use with divers persons of good judgement and quality, who give from three or foure graines unto ten or twelve, or to a scruple or halfe a dramme, according to the age and strength of their bodyes, and worketh gently with some, evacuating forth crude flegmaticke humours from the stomacke, and wheyish from the bowels without any trouble: but contrarily with others it worketh very churlishly, and with much perturbation of the stomacke: Some also use to make small pilles of it, and give it in that forme, espe∣cially if the humours be stiffe, and not easie to be avoyded, and for that cause some will adde a little Scammony unto it to helpe the slow working in some bodyes, some also to correct for the tenderer bodies will give it in the pulpe extracted from Currans in white Wine, as a corrector of the quallities, and some in the infusion of Roses. 
CHAP. XVIII. Champhora. Camfire. C Amfire, called Caphura from the Arabians Cafur, is such a subtle thing, both in substance and na∣ture, that although it is the gum or liquour of a great vast tree, (like to a Wallnut tree, whose wood is somewhat solid and firme, and of an ashcolour like unto Beech, or somewhat blacker, the leaves are whitish like unto Willow leaves, but neither flower nor fruite have beene observed, yet is likely to beare both) partly distilling forth of it owne accord, but chiefly by incision, which commeth forth cleare and white, and hath no spot therein, but what it acquireth from their foule hands that touch it, yet what we have and use, seemeth plainely to be so made by art, being cast as it were or sublimed into broad round pannes or dishes, and little above the thickenesse of ones thumbe, cleere, white, and transparent, but not to be made into powther of it selfe, (although it is somewhat brittle, and will breake into many small peeces) without the helpe of a blan∣ched Allmond, or some other such like unctuous thing, which hereby will reduce it into fine pouther: neither will it be easily dissolved in cold water, but by warmth will be resolved like unto fat, being easily set on fire, and will burne in the water, serving for wild fire with the other things, and is of a very strong fierce sent, both sent and substance vanishing away, if it be exposed for a while to the open aire; yet the wood being made into severall workes, will smell thereof a long time: Some take it to be hot, because it is of such tenuity of parts. Rhasis saith it is cold and moist, but Avicena saith it is cold and dry, and that it causeth watchings and wakefullnesse, and quieteth the senses of those that are hot, which are contrary one to the other, as Garcias, and Scaliger upon Garcias noteth it. Camfire doth coole the heate of the liver and backe, and all hot inflammations and distempers of heate in any place of the body, easing the paines in the head, and restraining fluxes, either of blood out of the head and nostrills, being applyed to the forehead with the juyce of Houseleeke or with Plantaine water, and some Nettle seed, or the fluxe of sperme in man or woman, using it to the reines or privy parts, and extinguisheth Venery, or the lust of the body: It is a preserver from putrefaction, and therefore is put into divers compositions and anti∣dotes to resist venome, poysons, and infection of the plague or other diseases: it is good in wounds and ulcers to restraine the heate, and is of much use with women that desire to preserve their beauty, by adding a luster to the skinne. 
CHAP. XIX. Caranha. The Gumme Caranha. C Aranha, Carauna, or Caragna, is a gumme brought from the West Indies, whose tree is not described by any that have written of it, but is a soft kind of Gum, wrapped up in leaves that one peece should not sticke unto another, for it is very cleaving, and is of a darke or muddy greenish colour, having somewhat a sharpe piersing sent: but there is another sort as Monardus saith, that is as cleere as Christall, which I never saw: It is a most especiall and speedy helpe, when Tacamahaca could not as Monardus saith be had, for all cold aches, and paines in the nerves and joynts, and the swellings and paines therin, the defluxi∣ons also of humours on them, or on the eyes, or on any other part to be laid on the temples or behind the eares: it is also used as well as Tacamahaca for the toothach to be laid on the temples like Masticke. 
CHAP. XX. Cardamomum. Cardamomes. T Here hath beene formerly much controversie concerning Cardamomes, whether we have either that of the Grecians, or those of the Arabians, some supposing we have neither, and that the Cardamomes we daily use, agree with neither of all their descriptions. Theophrastus, Dioscorides and Galen, among the auncient Greekes, and Pliny among the Latines mentioning but one sort, and the Arabians two, Melignette sive Cardamomum maximum et Grana Paradisi. Ginny graines. 
Cardamomum minus &amp; vulgare, The ordinary lesser sorts of Cardamomes. 
Cardamomum majus vulgare. The greater sort of Cardamomes. 
Cardamomum medium &amp; minimum. The two smallest sorts of Cardamomes. 
a greater and a lesser, but Fuchsius and Ruellius thought the Capsicum or Siliquastrum, our red Indian Pepper in long horned huskes, was the Arabians Cardaemomum minus, which Matthiolus disproveth as improbable, yea impossible, the difference both in forme and property so farre disabling it, and some supposing the Melegueta or grana Paradisi, which we call usually graines, or Ginney graines, to be the Grecians Cardamomum, and the Monkes that commented upon Mesues, tooke the said Melegueta to be the lesser Gardamomes of Serapio, all which and many other opinions may now be buryed, and we better resolved that Dioscorides his Cardamomum, not onely agreeth with Galens, whereof divers made a doubt, because Dioscorides maketh his to be sharpe in taste, and fierce in sent, piersing the senses, and Galen pleasant, and not so sharpe or hot as Cresses: for Galen no doubt understood the same of Dioscorides, when in a receipt that he had from Pamphilus, 7 de comp. med. secund. loco . c. 3. he appointeth Cardamomum delibratum; Cardamomes that were hu ked to be taken, as also in secund anti∣dot, Zeno casteth away the huskes, and in the Theriaca of Damocrates in verse, Cardamomes in huskes are named, and Dioscorides mentioneth not any huskes, or other forme thereof, because i was so familiarly knowne in his time, but that it was not easie to be broken, which the huske being tough doe declare but it also agreeth with those we use in our shoppes, and with that which Pliny mentioneth, who a I said in the Chapter of Amomum, saith Cardamomum like thereunto, that is to Amomum, both in name and growth, but that the seed is longer meaning the huske with the seed in it, as it is used to be taken by him and others in many things. And that of Dioscorides agreeing with that we use in our shops, cannot be any other also then that of the Arabians, usually brought to all these Christian parts, from the East Indies as Garcias confesseth, and especially the lesser, which as Garcias saith is the better, although as he saith, they be both of one kinde, differing in bignesse, the bigger sort being somewhat longer and rounder, and the small shorter and not so great, but as it were three square. Now as concerning Garcias his opinion that the Arabians Sacolaa quibir, and ceguer Cardamomum majus &amp; minus was not knowne to the ancient Grecians or Latines, assuredly he was mistaken therein, for the notes and markes of Dioscorides his Cardamomum doe in all things agree both with ours in use, brought from India, and that of Pliny as I said before, so that now seeing both Greekes, Arabians, and Latines are thus reconciled together, there needeth not for any further doubt hereof to use our Cardamomes in any of their receipt : but the Melegueta or Gr a Par disi, which is in forme like to a Figge, and full of reddish seed, although it be good and safe spice to be used, yet can it not be the Cardamomum majus, as divers have formerly taken it, and to this day is so suppo∣sed by many, but as Garcias saith, it may be the Combasbogue of Avicen, greater and lesser Cardamomes differ not in kind but in greatnesse, the one from the other, and is called as Garcias saith by the Merchants of Ma∣lavar Etrimelli, by them of Zeilan Ensal, in both which places it groweth plentifully as Garcias saith, in B ngala and Surrat Hil, and of some Elachi, but generally of the common people Dore; in all those places: The Ver∣tues whereof are these: it is hot and dry in the third degree: it breaketh the stone, provoketh urine when it is stopped or passeth with paine: it resisteth poyson and the sting of the Scorpion, or other venemous creatures, and killeth the birth if they be perfumed therewith: it is good against the falling sicknesse, the cough, the broad wormes, and the torments or griping paines in the guts, or bowels, and expelleth winde powerfully, both from the stomacke and entralls, easeth those that by falls or beatings are bruised and broken, those that have loose and weake sinewes, and the paine of the Sciatica or hip gout, and used with vinegar it is good against scabbes: it is used in many of our compositions, cordialls, Antidotes and others: the Indians as Garcias saith, put this to the composition of their Betro leaves, which they continually chew in their mouthes. 
CHAP. XXI, Caryophylli. Cloves. A Lthough Cloves and Nutmegs, and some other spices and drogues were not knowne to Dioscorides, Gal , and the other auncient Greekes, for Serapio in citing Galens authority for Cloves, is ei∣ther false or mistaken, for Paulus Aegi ta a later Greeke writer doth not mention it, neither yet doe the Latines, or Pliny in his time (for his Caryophyllon, or Garyophyllon lib. 12. c. 7. is a round graine like Pepper, as is shewed before with the Amomum, but greater and more brittle, and was taken by some in these dayes to be Amomum, and by others Carpobalsamum ) yet were they knowne to the later Greekes by meanes of the Arabian Authours, who have brought a more ample and exact knowledge of the Indian com∣modities, and of many other things, then were formerly knowne, so that now what by the Portugals travels, the Dutch and ours by sea unto those parts; the tree hath beene well observed, to be great and tall, covered with an ash-coloured barke, the younger branches being more white, having leaves growing by couples one against another, somewhat long and narrow like unto the Bay-tree that beareth narrow leaves, with a middle rib, and sundry veines running there through, each of them standing on a long footestalke, the ends of the bran∣ches are divided into many small browne sprigs, whereon grow the flowers on the toppes of the Cloves them∣selves, which are white at the first, with their sprigges, greene afterward, and lastly reddish before they be beaten off from the tree, and being dryed before they be put up grow blackish as we see them, having foure small toppes at the heads of them, and a small round head in the middle of them, the flower it selfe standing betweene those, consisteth of foure small leaves like unto a Cherry blossome, but of an excellent blew colour it is con∣fidently reported with three white veines in every leafe, and divers purplish threds in the middle of a more dainty fine sent then the Clove it selfe, which is a small slender fruite, almost like a small nay e, and called Clavus by many, and from thence the Dutch call them Naegelen, being of a hot quick and sharpe taste, which are first ripe and gathered, but those that doe abide longer on the trees, doe grow somewhat thicker and greater, and are not o halfe the others goodnesse, being called by most Fusses, yet some call the stalkes of the Cloves Fustes, and grow of their owne falling, and are not grafted: Hereout likewise commeth a certaine darke red gum, and are found usually put together; These grow chiefly in the Malucc Islands, where they gather them twise every yeare, that is, in Iune and December, the leafe, barke and wood, being nothing so hot in taste as the Clove: they grow also in Amboy , where they grow well, and beare plentifully, being there Caryophyllorum affigies spu a. A false figure of the Clove tree.
Caryophyllorum t lis ge ina affigie. A branch of the Clove tree with the fruite truely expressed. 
planted by the Dutch, in other places of the Indies more scarsely and lesse fruitefull then there, which are called generally by the Indians Calefur, and by those of the Maluccas, and in some other places Chanq . The proper∣ties of Cloves are many and excellent, being hot and dry in the third degree, yet some say the second, and of much use both in meate and medicine, comforting the head and the heart, and strengthening the liver, the stomacke, and all the inward parts that want heate, helping digestion, to breake winde, and to provoke urine: The oyle chymically drawne is much used for the tooth-ache, and to stop hollow aking teeth, as also to be put into perfumes for gloves, leather and the like, the Cloves themselves for their excellent sent, serving as a speciall part in all sweet powthers, sweet waters, perfuming pots, &amp;c. Garcias saith that the Portugall women distill the Cloves while they are fresh, which make a most sweet and delicate water, no lesse usefull for sent, then profitable all the passions of the heart, the weakenesse of the stomacke, &amp;c. and with the pouther of Cloves applyed to fore∣head helpe the head ach comming of cold, as also by eating them procure a sweet breath: So as he saith pro∣cure sweating to those that have the French disease, by giving Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, long and blacke per, but this hath no use with us. Christophorus a Costa saith that they binde the belly, and sharpen the eye sight, clen∣sing them and taking away filmes, or clouds that darken it, if their water be dropped into them, and that foure drammes of the pouther of Cloves taken in milke, will procure and stirre up venery or bodily lust. 
CHAP. XXII. China radix officinarum. The roote China. T He roote called China, is like to the roote of a great reed, some flattish, others round, nor smooth, but bunched or knotty, reddish for the most part on the outside, and whitish, or sometimes a little reddish on the inside, the best is solid or firme, and somewhat weighty, fresh and not worme eaten, and without any taste, but as it were drying: it groweth up with many prickely branches of a reasonable great bignesse, like unto Sarsa parilla, or the prickely Bindeweed, winding it selfe a∣bout trees, and hath divers leaves growing on them like unto broad Plantaine leaves, the rootes grow sometimes many together, and may be eaten while they are fresh, and so the Indians doe with their meate, as we doe Car ets or Turneps▪ it not onely groweth in China, but in Malabar, Cochin, Crangan , Ta r, and o∣ther places there, and is called La patan by the Chineses, and Chophchina by the Arabians and Persians. The pro∣perties whereof are many, and of great use with us in divers cases▪ it was at the first knowledge thereof to the Christians, and others that dwelt in India, chiefly used for dyet drinkes in Lua Ʋexerea, the French disease, but since it is found profitable in agues, whether quotidian or intermittant, or pestilentiall, and also hectickes and con∣sumptions, China rozix officinarum. The true China roote. 
Pseudochina. Bastard China. 
to rectifie the evill disposition of the liver, the inveterate paines in the head and stomacke, and streng∣theneth it, and to dry up the defluxions of rheumes, to helpe the jaundise and the burstings in children or others by drying up the humour, which is the cause thereof: it helpeth also the palsie, and all the other diseases of the joynts and bladder, the gout and Sciatica, and the nodes also, and ulcers of the yard, and is good in all cold and melancholicke griefes, some take it to be a great incendiary to lust: the manner of taking it is divers, for some boyle it being sliced thinne, and steeped for a good while in water onely, and some adde wine thereto, and some boyle it in the broth with a chicken, tyed up in a linnen cloath, and to take from a quarter to halfe an ounce or more at a time, as the quantity of drinke or broth you will provide, or as the party can beare. We have had a kinde of roote brought us from the West Indies in forme somewhat like unto this true, but harder, redder, Pseudochina and more knotty, which some called bastard China, and was not used by any that I know, Monardus saith that the true was planted in the West Indies, and brought from thence very fresh into Spaine. 
CHAP. XXIII. Cinamomum, Canella &amp; Cassia. Cinamon and Cassia. I Know that divers learned men are of opinion that Cinamon, Canell, and Cassia are three distinct things, differing each from other, and that we have no true Cinamon brought to us (which con∣troversie is too long to insert in this place) but that which we usually have, is as they call it Canell or Cassia, and not Cinamon, yet Garcias sheweth that the Chinesse and Arabian Merchants, and others were the cause of this plurality of names given to one thing, and of the fables that are ex∣tant in Herodotus and others of it, and other things; and that the diversity of goodnesse, either thick∣nesse or blacknesse, or other outward forme, or quicke and sharpe taste, or dull and lesse sapid, or the place of grow∣ing made the severall sorts that passe under severall names, both now and heretofore with the ancient writers; for if one would be curious now to search among the great store of Cinamon, that commeth from the East Indies yearely unto us, as Clusius and others have done, he might finde as much diversitie both in goodnesse and colour as he or any other did at one time or another: for being the barke of a tree, the goodnesse followeth usually, ei∣ther the place of growth, one being better then another, or the oldnesse of the trees, the younger being the thin∣ner and still having the quicker taste and the fresher colour, all the Arabians as Garcias saith doe generally call it, be it of what sort soever, Querfaa, or Querfe (or Kerpha, which in Avicen is a worse sort, as Scaliger noteth, in Zeilan Cuards, by the Persians Darsini, that is, the wood of Sina, which the Portugalls first corruptly called China, and from thence is the name China used by all others: but whereas Garcias saith that the name of Cina∣momum was given by those of Ormus that bought it of the Chineses, as though it were Chinae Amomum. Scaliger in C namoni folium &amp; bacillum. A leafe and sticke of Cinamon. 
Corten Cinamomi vel Cassia lignea officinarum. 
Xilocassia Lobelij. Lobel his Cassia lignea. 
his notes on him saith nothing could be more unfitly or foolishly spoken, for China as is shewed, is but the cor∣rupt pronuntiation of the Portugalls, and what affinity saith he hath Amomum with Cassia, Cinamomum being so ancient a word, that we finde it in sundry places in the Bible, by the Hebrewes named Kinnamon, as Exod. 30.23. Cantic. 4.14. and Prov. 7.17. But herein I thinke Scaliger is too quicke and selfe conceited, for Garcias sayings notwithstanding may hold good, the Sinenses or Chineses, having beene anciently the greatest Merchants for those parts as Garcias sheweth. And although it were rare in Europe, at a thousand denarios (or drachmas, for I thinke them all one) for a pound as Pliny saith, and chiefely kept by Princes as part of their treasury, yet we read in the Scripture that the Ishmaelites, Midianites and others, were the Merchants of spicery for those parts, whereof Cinamon in those three places aforenamed was one no doubt. But Galen his description of the Cinamon tree (which was wholly brought in a chest to Rome, of foure cubits and a halfe in length, having some sixe or seven stemmes, more or lesse, rising from a roote with sundry branches thereon, whose youngest and tenderest, as he saith, were the quickest and chiefest to be used, the longest of them being not above halfe a foote long, of a colour saith he, as if unto milke some blacke colour, and a little blew were mixed together) so differing as it may seeme from that we now so call, that it hath caused many to say, that the true Cinamon is utterly lost, even as Opobalsamum and Amomum was thought to be, and peradventure all alike, for if it be granted that wee have Cassia, as many doe, then assuredly true Cinamon will not be farre to seeke, for Galen in the place before cited, in the end of the said narration of Cinamon hath these words, Ʋniversa autem Cinamomi natura, similis est quodam∣modo optima Cassiae, Cinamo∣mum Ame∣ricanum. that is Cinamon is in some sort like unto Cassia: And therefore all that Aldinus hath said, seeming to himselfe to have said something materiall, is little or nothing to any purpose. Monardus also in the place before cited, mentioneth a West Indian Cinamon which is onely a blackish purple flat kind of fruite, like a peece of silver, the Spaniard call a ryall of eight, or a Dutch Dollar, but higher in the middle, and of that thickenesse on the edges, and rough on the outside and tasting like Cinamon, the pouther being used in meates and brothes, the tree being of a meane size, with leaves like Bayes, and evergreene, the leaves tasting a little like the fruit, but no part of the tree else having any taste. The Cinamon tree is described by Garcias to be as great as the Ollive tree or somewhat lesse, with many straight branches without knots, covered with a double barke like the Corke, whose inner rinde is the Cinamon, and is so barked every third yeare, and being cut into long peeces, as if it were the bark of the whole tree, is cast on the ground, where in drying it is rouled together, as we see it, &amp; is better or worse, blacker or better coloured, as is said before, or by the greater or lesser heat of the Sun, somewhat more changed: the leaves are of a fresh greene colour, and like unto those of the Citron tree (and not like the Flower-deluce leafe, as some have fabulously written) or as Christophorus a Costa saith with three ribs, but Garcias disa∣voweth it: the flowers are white, and the fruite blacke and round like Hasell Nuts or small Ollives, and not like Acornes, but the best groweth in Zeilan with leaves like Willowes rather then Bayes, with spreading branches and fruite like Bay berryes, whereof they make an oyle. Now concerning Cassia, whether it differ in genere or spe ie from Cinamon, called Canell in some countryes resteth to be shewed: both Garcias, and Monardus spea∣king of the West Indian commodites in the 25. Chapter of his Booke, say that the tree is but one that beareth both these sorts, and that the variety of places maketh the difference onely: but because Dioscorides and the o∣ther auncient Authours have not onely made them as it were two kindes, but appointed them both to be put into one medicine, especially Mithridatum, and Theriaca Andromachi, and in the holy annoynting oyle in Exodus, we will a little more exactly scan the matter, for although we finde that all the Cassia or Casia lignea, that commeth to us or was formerly knowne is the barke of a tree, and either rouled together like Cinamon, or not rouled but in small or great smooth peeces, and therefore may well be perceived to be a sort of Cinamon, yet the taste being glutinous lesse sharpe and quicke, and more stipticke then Cinamon, argueth it to be the barke of another sort of tree, although of the same kinde, and peradventure may be that kinde whereof I entreated in the 64. Chapter of the last Classis of trees, which I there call Laurus Americana. And although that which we have alwayes u∣sed come to us from the East Indies, yet that letteth not but that it may grow also in the West. And however both Ʋirgill and Pliny call that herbe Cassia, which was sowne or planted in Gardens, as well for Garlands as to feed Bees with their flowers, as hath beene shewed before, yet they both doe mention a tree Cassia. Ʋirgill se∣cundo Georgicorum understandeth this tree Cassia, as it is likely in these words, Nec Casia liquidi corrump tur usus Olivi. And Pliny lib. 12. c. 29. in these words, Cassia that groweth where Cinamon doth, is a shr b of three cu∣bits high, but on the hills whose thicke branches have their barke more like unto leather, which must be empti∣ed or hollowed in a contrary manner, unto that of Cinamon, for being cut into stickes of two cubits long, they are sowed into fresh beasts skinnes, that the wormes may eate out the wood, and leave the barke whole, by rea∣son of the sharpenesse and bitternesse: the three sorts of colour therein sheweth their goodnesse, that which is white for a foote high next to the ground is the worst; the next thereunto for halfe a foote is reddish, which is next in goodnesse, from thence upward which is blackish, and the best, and is to be chosen fresh, of a milde sent and of a very sharpe taste rather then biting, of a purplish colour, light in weight, and with a short pipe, not easily broken: Thus farre Pliny, which for the most part he borroweth out of Theophrastus, lib. 9. c. 5. where he saith Cassia is a shrub, like the Salix Amerina, which because it is hard to be barked, men have invented the way by beasts skinnes, as is before said out of Pliny: The barke being onely to be used, which I rather thinke to be a fable of report then truth: the rest that followeth in Pliny, is out of Theophrastus in his narration of Cinamon, where Theophrastus maketh five sorts, the lowest the worst, because it had least barke, and the uppermost the thickest as the best (which how likely it is that the barke of any shrub or tree, should be thinnest below, and thick∣est above, when as the contrary is alwayes seene in all sorts of trees, with us and others too I thinke) Galen in acknowledging Cinamon to be a tree with sundry branches, saith he hath observed not onely the branches of Ci∣namon to be converted, and very like those of Cassia, but those of Cassia also to be in all parts like Cinamon, and that which bore the name of Zigi, was so like to Cinamon, that divers sold it for Cinamon, when it was but true Cassia. And againe saith that the Junior Andromachus mentioneth a kind of thicke grosse Cassia, which he called Cassa fistula, because it was rouled together like a Pipe. And therefore Serapio, Avicen, and Mesues, in their compositions appointing Cassia fistula to be used, which as Matthiolus doubteth whether it were their owne or their transcribers fault, this Cassia is not to be taken, but that which hath hard canes, and a blacke pulpe, more fitly termed Cassia solutiva or nigra, and which many yet doe use in stead hereof; but as Leovicen saith, their errour is too great to be excused, that appoint the shels of that Cassia solutiva, to be used to move womens cour∣ses, to helpe their hard travels in childbirth, and to expell the secondine or afterbirth. By all which that is now said, you may see plainely that Cassia differeth not much from Cinamon, and yet that is differing from it. Xylocas∣sia Lobeli. Lobel gi∣veth us the figure of another sort of Cassia, which was as thick as ones thumb rugged &amp; in taste like unto the thick courser sort of Cinamon. Having thus shewed you the whole description of these things, and the various passages of them, let me also give you the Vertues which are these. Cinamon is hot and dry in the second degree, of very subtle parts, and very aromaticall, it is very cordiall, comforting the heart and strengthening a weake stomacke, easing the paines of the winde chollicke, especially the distilled water of it, the stopping of the urine and womens abounding courses, it causeth a good colour in the face, and a good sweete breath, and resisteth the poyson of venemous creatures, it is much used also in laskes to binde the body, the destilled water is most effectuall in all these griefes, but the chymicall oyle thereof is much more hot and piersing. 
I thinke it not amisse in this place to make mention of some other barkes of trees and rootes, that have beene brought both out of the East and West Indies: The first whereof called white Cinamon, being in long roules, Canella alba. white both within and without, turned together like unto Cinamon, is thicke and more tough then Cinamon, the taste is somewhat hot, and resemble Cloves rather then Cinamon both in taste and sent, being very aromaticall, yet lesse in each quality, then Cloves, so that one would thinke he had smelt and tasted weake Cloves. 
Another sort rouled like Cinamon, not very thicke, which the Dutch as Clusius said lib. Exot. 4. c. 2. An Cassia veterum Clusio. brought out of India, comming from the Moluccas and Iava, and which he doubteth whether it be not the Cassia of the ancients, or some of the sorts whereof Dioscorides maketh mention: some of it was whitish on the outside, and some more browne, like the worser sort of Cinamon, of no unpleasant taste, yet not so sharpe as Cinamon, and having a little clamminesse in the chewing, the people use the pouther in their meates. 
Another Clusius maketh mention of in the same Booke and third Chapter, which was a foote long or more, Canella alba ex arbore. and three inches in circuite at the lower end, and two inches at the top, had the outer barke thinner, then the in∣ner, for it had two, and was very rugged, full of chinkes and with some holes, and sometimes two at a place in a certaine order, all the length thereof but set a thwart thereon, which seemed to be the places where the leaves grew, both the barkes were of an excellent sweete and aromaticall sent and quicke taste especially the outer∣most. 
Monardus speaketh of a Canell of the new world, growing in Quito: Canella novi orbis. the trees saith he that beareth this Ci∣namon are of a meane bignesse and ever greene (as most of the Indian trees are) the leaves are like to those of the Bay tree, the fruite is like unto a little hat, as broad as a Doller, or Spanish peece of eight, and sometimes greater, the brimmes being of their thickenesse, and both inside and outside, of a darke purplish colour, smooth within and rugged without, the toppe being higher, and had a stalke whereby it did hang, and was fastened to the tree, this fruit was in taste very like unto that of Cinamon, with some astriction joyned thereto, and the pouther of them strewed on their viands, was used for Cinamon, the barke of the tree was thicke, and had no taste or smell of Cinamon, the fruite onely being of use, and good to comfort the heart and stomacke, dissolve winde, mend a stin∣king breath, procureth a good colour in the face, and to provoke womens courses. 
CHAP. XXIV. Coculus Indus. Cocculus Indi. T Hese berryes or round seed the Italians call Cocco di Levante, and the French accordingly, they are of a blackish ashcolour on the outside, Coculus Indus. Coculus Inde. 
having a white kernell within them of an hot taste, drawing water into the mouth, and as it seemeth grow many together like Ivy berryes, yet each by it selfe on a stalke, some thinking them to grow upon a kinde of Nightshade, others on a kinde of Tithymall, or Spurge. Caesalpinus calleth them Galla orientalis, others Baccae ori∣entales. They are wholly spent either to make baites to catch fish, with other things for that purpose, or the pou∣ther used to kill lice and vermine in childrens heads. 
CHAP. XXV. Costus. Costus. T Hese hither parts of Asia minor, and Africa, besides all Europe as it is supposed for many ages of these later times, have wanted not onely the use, but the knowledge of the true Costus, of any of the three sorts, that Dioscorides mentioneth, especially Europe, and it was the Arabians that first brought in the devision thereof into sweete and bitter, when as neither Dioscorides nor Pliny make any men∣tion Costus Indicus Clusij. 
Costi diversae species. Divers sorts of Cotes exhibited for Costus. 
of bitternesse, although Galen doth, but of sweetenesse in taste, none of them all but Actuarius onely, who is one of the later Greeke Writers: Garcias to excuse the Arabians, of this their division of Costus into dul∣cis and Amarus saith, that it might be that while the Costus was fresh it is white, and hath no bitternesse in it, but growing old, it groweth blacke and gathereth some bitternesse to it, by the decaying, but the Apothecaries shops, especially in Europe, shew two sorts, farre differing the one from the other, both in forme and sub∣stance. Of late dayes indeed they have beene more carefull and industrious to know the right, and to search for it and use it, the Portugals therefore from the Indies brought in one sort, which as Garcias saith was onely used there and no other, but as Clusius noteth it in his Scholia thereon, this being a ferulous spongy stalke, with the toppe onely of the roote to it, differeth from those of Dioscorides and Pliny, the one intimating it to be a roote, by saying it was used to be adulterated or falsefyed by obtruding the rootes of Helemium Comagenium for it, which were neither very hot, nor very sweete in sent, and Pliny saying plainely it is a roote: but there hath beene very lately brought unto us a sort of roote called Costus, and taken by many to be the Syriacus, yet some thinke it to be the Arabicus of Dioscorides, being somewhat yellowish on the outside, and white within, smelling and tasting somewhat sweete like Orris, which therefore I judge cannot be right, which as Pliny saith is very hot in taste and very sweete in sent, and Galen giveth it such a degree of heate, besides the bitternesse, that it will exulcerate the skinne: many therefore have substituted Zedoaria in the want thereof, which is the best substitution that can be, agreeing both in forme and degree, most of all thereunto; and therefore divers have contended that it was the true Costus, but in regard Zedoaria hath more bitternesse and lesse sweetnesse therein, it cannot be Costus, yet may be admitted as the substitute thereof, but omne simile non est idem: Some againe hold Angelica to be the blacke or Indian Costus, but being a homebred plant so, it cannot be, and besides hath no such bitternesse and sharpe∣nesse therein, as Galen giveth to Costus. The Arabians call it Cost or Cast, those of Surrat Ʋplot, and in Malacca where they much use it Pucho. The Vertues hereof as Dioscorides hath set them downe of the true Costus, (which as is beforesaid is doubtfull whether we have or no) are these. It provoketh urine and womens courses, and helpeth the diseases of the mother, as well by bathing as fuming: two ounces thereof being drunke, helpeth the biting of Vipers, and is good against the paines of the brest, convulsions, or the windy stitches, swellings or puffings in the stomacke, sides or body, being taken with wormewood in wine, and being taken with sweet wine it provoketh Venery, it killeth the broad wormes of the belly: it is used with oyle to annoynt the body, before the cold fit of agues to warme it, and thereby to expell it, as also against the weakenesse of the sinewes, and the hip-goute, and amendeth the discolouring or blemishes of the skinne and face, using it with hony and water, and as Galen addeth by reason of the light bitternesse, and much sharpenesse and heate, it will exulcerate. 
CHAP. XXVI. Cubebae. Cubebs. C Vbebs are small berries somewhat sweete, no bigger then Pepper cornes, but more rugged or crested not so blacke nor solid, being either hollow or with a kernell within it, of a hot glowing taste, not fierce as Pepper, and having each a small short stalke at them like a taile, and therein very like to a kind of Pepper, was for a while wont to be brought to us, which the Portugals called Pimenta del rabo, Piper caudatum, Pepper with a taile, and was forbidden by the King of Portugall to be brought any more least it should spoyle the sale of the other Pepper: this saith Garcias groweth on trees lesse then Apple trees, with leaves thereon narrower then Cubeba. Cubebs. 
those of Pepper running on trees like Ivy, or rather like Pepper, but not like unto Ruscus, called Myrtus sylvestris, as Matthiolus Silvaticus thought, as Serapio set it downe but falsely: the flower is sweete, and the fruite groweth clustring together, yet not in bunches as Grapes, but more separate. Caesalpinus tooke them to be Amomum, many o∣thers out of Avicen and other Authours, tooke them to be the Carpesium of Galen, and some to be the seed of Vitex, or Agnus Castus. The Arabians call them Quabebe, and Quabebe chini, but in Java where they grow plentifully enough, and are there of so great account, that it is said, they boyle them in water before they part with them, fearing they might be sowne and grow in some other place and use them much to stirre up Venery, and to warme and strengthen the stomacke overcome with flegme or winde, and doe purge the brest of thicke tough humours, helpe the spleene, dissolve wind and are very profitable for the cold griefes of the wombe: being long chewed with Masticke they draw much flegme and rheume from the head, and strengthen the braine or memory.
CHAP. XXVII. Curcama. Turmericke. I T is very likely that Turmericke is Dioscorides his Cyperus Indicus, which he saith hath a roote like Ginger, giving a yellow colour like Saffron, being bitter in taste, and a present helpe to take away haire: all which notes agree notably hereunto, the roote being much liker to Ginger then unto any kinde of Cyperus, and therefore we may marveile the more why Dioscorides should referre it to Cyperus, unlesse he had understood of those that had seene it, that it did grow like unto a Cyperus, and is very yellow both within and without, bitter in taste, and may serve for the haire, as it is specified, although peradventure the force is halfe lost by the long carriage, but this is not the Curcuma of Serapio or Avicen, as Mat∣thiolus hath well noted, which is no other then the greater Celandine, whose roote is yellow, and therefore the Apothecaries in former times tooke it for Curcuma, and put it into the composition called Diacurcuma. Garcias and Christophorus a Costa call it Crocus Indicus, and say that the Indians call it Alad, and Manjale, the A∣rabians Habet and Curcum, the Turkes and Persians, Saroth, and Darsard, that is lignum luteum: it beareth lar∣ger and thinner leaves then Millet, of a paler greene co∣lour, Curcuma. Turmericke. 
a stalke full of leaves, compassing one another to the toppe: the roote is slender and yellow, neere unto the forme of Ginger, nothing so bitter, being fresh by reason of the moisture in it, as when it is dry. It is of great use with many for the yellow jaundise, either the pouther or the decoction being taken, for it doth open the obstructions of the gall and other parts, it is of very good use in old and inveterate griefes and sickenesses, and an evill disposition of the body called Cachexia, and is very profitable against the dropsie: it is much used to colour divers small workes of wood instead of Saf∣fron, the Indians use it much both to season and colour their meates and brothes, because it is to be had better cheape than Saffron, and as Garcias saith is put into those medicines are made for the eyes, and for the itch, if some juyce of Orrenges, and the oyle of the Cocar or Indian nut be mixed with it. 
CHAP. XXVIII. Folium Indum sive Malabathrum. Folium Indum or Indian leafe. T Hat Dioscorides and the other Auncient writers had divers false relations of drugges and other things brought unto them; which they have set downe in their writings, may be well discerned by this called Malabathrum, which they said as they were informed, did grow in ponds and watery places swim∣ming thereon as the Lens palustris, Duckes meate doth: for it is well knowne now and so set downe by Garcias ab Orta, and other the later writers, that they are the leaves of a great tree growing on land farre from waters in Cambaia, as well as in divers other places of the East Indies, and called Tamalapatra by them, which by corruption was first changed into the Greekes and then into Malabathrum but by the Arabians Cadagi Indi, that is, Folium Indum, and Folium Indum sive Molabathrum. Folium Indum or Indian leafe. 
are faire broad leaves with three ribbes onely in them, a little pointed at the ends, which have beene brought un∣to us, although very sparingly, and among them some yet abiding on their branches, two usually at a joynt tasting somewhat hot like unto Bay leaves, the barke of the bran∣ches also tasting like unto them; among these leaves like∣wise have beene found sometimes a small fruite like unto an Ackorne in the cup, which it is most probable is the fruite of the tree, and gathered with the leaves: but hath beene formerly supposed by some to be the fruite of the Cinamon tree, and by others obtruded for Carpobalsa∣mum: Some have taken these to be the leaves of the Clove tree, but they are therein much deceived, for they have not those three eminent ribs in them that these have, which is a note to distinguish them from all other leaves almost, but some more probably have taken the leaves of the tree called Betre or Tembul to be folium Indum, be∣cause they have also some ribs in them, as Marcus Oddo doth in his examination of Theriaca Andromachi, but is also deceived, for the Folium Indum is not familiarly ea∣ten as the Tembul or Betre leaves are: but whereas the substitute for these by our later Physitians appointment is the Maces which is the skinny covering of the inner shell of the Nutmegge, I find that Avicen lib. 2. c. 259. appointeth Thalisafar to be taken, which he describeth in the same Booke, and 687. Chapter, and by the most judicious is the Macer of the ancient Greeks, which they knew better then Macis, which was utterly unknowne to them, but as if they were one and the same thing, it hath beene generally so appointed, and is yet so taken to this day by most, but that Macer is not Macis: Pliny in his time sheweth plainely lib. 12, c. 8. saying Macer is the reddish barke of the roote of a great tree, called by the said name, comming from India, but there would need fewer substitutes by many in our medicines as well Mithridatum as others, if our Apothecaries would be most carefull and industrious to give instructions to the Merchants travailing into those parts, and out of those Authours that have written of them to give the Arabian or Indian name, whereby they might get the genu∣ine drugges: for as Garcias saith there might easily be procured so much of this Folium Indum, as would serve all Europe if it were but sought after, and so I may say likewise for divers other things. The properties are to pro∣voke urine powerfully, and is very beneficiall to the stomacke, warming and strengthening it, and maketh a sweet breath, it resisteth the force of venomes and poysons, and therefore is put into Antidotes and other com∣positions that are cordiall or stomachicall: it hath the properties of Nardus, but more effectuall being heated in Wine, it helpeth the inflammations and rednesse in the eyes being bathed therewith. 
CHAP. XXIX. Galanga major &amp; minor. The greater and lesser Galanga. T Here are two sorts of Galanga a greater and a lesse: the greater is the weaker and duller in operation, and groweth in Iava and Malabar, to be two cubits high, having leaves foulding about the stalke at the lower end, being somewhat long and narrow, and pointed at the end somewhat like a speares head, of a sad greene colour on the upperside, and paler above: the flower is white but without any sent, the seed is small and neglected: the roote is somewhat great at the head like the reed (but Clu∣sius taketh it to be more like unto a Flower de luce, then unto an Asphodill as Acosta compareth it, and that the plant may be a kind of Iris ) of a blackish colour on the outside and whitish within, and use it familiarly in their meates as well as in their medicines: The lesser kind riseth not above a foote high, having leaves like the Mirtle, the roote is small and bunched, firme and somewhat tough, red both within and without, and smelleth a little sweet or aromaticall, it groweth in China, where it is called Lavandou, the greater being called in Iava Lancuaz yet both of them are usually so called: it is more commonly planted by the roote as Ginger is, then of the seed, yet is both wayes encreased: There is great controversie among the later writers, concerning Calamus, Acorus, and Galanga, for some have held opinion, and is yet continued by many, that the Galanga major, is the true Aco∣rus of the Ancients, which is an errour easily confuted if they that so thinke would but compare the notes of A∣corus given by Dioscorides with this Galanga: others deny our Calamus in the Apothecaries shops, to be the true Acorus, which Matthiolus, Clusius and others have most evidently maintained, and as I have shewed before in the end of the first Classis of this Worke. Some also have set downe in their writings that Galanga is the roote of Schaenanthos, but I may say enarrasse est confutasse. The lesser Galanga is both of more use, and of greater effect, and indeed is to be used onely in all the compositions wherein Galanga is appointed, and is very profitably given to cold and weake stomackes, and in the griping paines of the belly by winde, the diseases of the mother, and stop∣ping Galanga major &amp; minor. The greater and lesser Galanga. 
Galanga major ad vivum ut fartur. The Plant of Galanga as it groweth. 
of urine, in which disease it hath a mervailous speedy operation, to clense the uritories from slimy flegme and stones gathered in them, or the passages in the necke of the yard, as also to waste and consume away fleshy excres∣sence in the necke of the bladder or yard: it also causeth a sweet breath, being sometimes chewed in the mouth, and helpeth a cold moist braine: it helpeth the trembling of the heart, and the wind chollicke. 
CHAP. XXX. Gummi Elemi. Gum Elemni. T His Gum being not mentioned with the former because we have not as yet attained the knowledge of the tree, from whence this Gum Elemni is taken; I reserved for this place: for although some have taken it to be the liquour or gum that floweth out of the wild Ethiopian Ollive tree, yet it is most certaine it cannot be it, for it is said that the gum of the Ollives will not burne like Rossin, nor melt with the heate of fire, as the Gum Elemni will doe, which is a yellowish kinde of Gum, cleere and transparent, which being broken sheweth more white and gummy within, quickely taking fire, and both burning and melting thereat, of a little quicke sent and taste. It is of especiall use in all wounds and fractures of the head and skull, to be mixed with the Balsames and oyntments used for that purpose: it is also often used for the toothache, when the paines come by the defluxion of rheume into them, to lay a plaister thereof on the tem∣ples as they doe with Masticke. 
CHAP. XXXI. Guajacum sive Lignum Sanctum. Lignum Ʋite. T He Lignum vitae that groweth in some parts of the Indies, is much better then in others, yet is the wood of all, hard, firme, close and heavy, so that it will sincke in water more then Ebony and not swim, of an hot sharpe and resinous taste, somewhat burning in the throate: the blacker or browner is better then the yellow, being in a manner all heart, the yellow being as it were but the sappe: The tree groweth great with a reasonable thicke greenish gummy barke, spread with sundry armes and branches both great and small, and on them winged leaves set by cou∣ples Guajacum sive Lignum sanctum. Lignum Ʋite. 
Guajace Occidice similis arbo . A West Indian tree like Guajacum. 
one against another, which are but small thicke, hard, and almost round, with divers veines in them, abiding ever greene on the branches: at the joynts and ends of the branches come forth many flowers, standing in a tuft together, every one on a long footestalke consisting of sixe whitish yellow leaves, not very great with some threde in the middle, which afterwards turne into flat yellowish gristly fruite, of the fashion of the seed vessell of a Thlaspi or Bursa pastoris, that is, with two divisions, and in the one side a hard gristly seed, as hard as an horne almost, the other being for the most part empty, hanging downe together by their long foote∣stalkes: it yeeldeth forth also a gumme or Rossin, of a darke colour, which will easily burne; it grow∣eth in sundry places of the West Indies, where they call it Guayacan, and wee in Latine thereafter Gua∣jacum, by some Lignum Sanctum, and Lignum Indicum, and taken by some to be a kinde of Ebony, for the firme∣nesse and weightinesse, others a kind of Boxe. But as I have said heretofore in sundry places of this Worke, most of the Trees and Herbes that grow in the Indies are differing from those that grow in Europe. 
Guajace Occiduo similis arbor. A West Indian tree like Guajacum, The branch of this tree I have here exhibited unto you, as Lobel hath set it forth before, not having had the like brought since his dayes that I know, which sheweth a more supine negligence in all our Sea men, then here∣tofore was usuall, which he hath described in this manner. The tree is great from whence this was taken, grow∣ing upright, whose barke was like unto that of the Iudas tree: the greene leafe, of the forme of a Pomecitron leafe, but thicke and smooth like unto the Bay, but larger and shorter, with sundry veines running therethrough, at the toppes of whose branches grow cods, of a leather like substance, and round forme in a manner flat like a peece of mony, in whose middle is contained flattish seed, like unto a Lentill, both for colour and forme, and bitterish taste. 
Falum Sanctum Indiae Occiduae. A differing Indian Guajacum. Lobel hath remembred this also in his Adversaria after this fashion: Divers have thought this to be a Palme like the last, or Palus Sanctus, a stake of such a holy tree, which yet is differing from it or Guajacum, howsoe∣ver it was so signified: for the tree is not very great like unto an Ash, but smaller, and the barke much like it in colour: the leaves were like Plaintaine leaves but thicker, fatter, smaller and shorter: the fruite was of the big∣nesse of a Wallnut, which served them to purge their bodies. 
The diseases for which the usuall Guajacum is appointed, that is, both the wood, the barke, and gum, are sun∣dry, helping all cold flegmaticke and windy humours, and although they are good, and with effect used for E∣pilepsies or the falling sicknesse, catarrhes, rheumes and cold destillations on the lungs, or other parts, coughes also and consumptions, the gout and all other joynt aches, and many other the like diseases, and to make the teeth white and firme, if they be often washed with the decoction thereof: yet was it first onely used for the French disease, as we and the Spaniards call it, the Neaepolitane as the French call it, the Spanish pippe as the Ger∣mans call it, but as it is indeed the Indian contagion: for when Christophorus Colonus, commonly called Columbus, first opened the West Indies to the Spaniards, they companying with the Indian women, got this their familiar and naturall country disease from them, and brought it with them from Santo Doningo, being the first place the Spaniards possessed there, unto the King of Spaines campe, which was then at Naples, treating of a peace with the French King, in Anno 1493, bringing of the Natives with them, both men and women: The Physitions in those times not knowing this disease or the causes thereof were of divers opinions, some taking it to proceed from the corrupt victailes that the souldiers were forced to eate, which bred melancholicke and adust blood, and humours, others to the conjunction of Saturns and Mars, and thereupon (not knowing it to be a new disease) they called it by divers names, as the Leprosie, the running scabbe, the poxe and the like, referring it to some of the ancient knowne diseases, but all in vaine: the cure hereof by this wood, first was knowne from whence it first sprung: for a Spaniard being plagued with this disease, having an Indian that played the Leech, to be his servant, was cured thereof by drinking the decoction of the wood given him by the Indian, which cure was presently divulged, not onely to the rest of the Spaniards in the Indies, but in Spaine also, and so consequently to the whole world. 
CHAP. XXXII. Hermodactylus. Hermodactiles. H Ermodactiles are to be numbred among the unknowne Drugges, the shame of the Physitions in all ages and countries, who (although they put of the matter to the Apothecaries, and the Apotheca∣ries to the Merchants that bring many sackes full into their Countries with other commodities, but they also take no further care to know what they are, or where or how they grow to declare it) should be skillfull in the knowledge of all Plants, and should give order that the unknowne might be made more manifest: but what doe I in so saying? runne my Barke on the Rockes and put her in danger of splitting. Divers of the later Writers, as well Greekes, as Arabians and Latines have made menti∣on of the Hermodactile (although none of the Ancients) and have set downe the properties, well knowne by ex∣perience unto them, but no one hath ever declared either the place or manner of the growing thereof, but onely Mesuas, who maketh a shew of description, which is almost as good as nothing, saying it is a roote of a moun∣taine herbe, whereof some are long like a finger, and are round, white both within and without, which every one may see by the sight, but that any should be long like a finger, is but rather his supposition from the name, then that he ever saw such indeed, and therefore divers have imagined diversly, some taking them to be the rootes of Colchicum, but they are dangerous if not deadly, besides the unlikenesse in forme, colour and substance: o∣thers take the Deus Caninus to be they, but they are more unlikely, for they are small and long, not thicke and short, as the Hermodactiles are: besides the quality no way agreeth, therewith Matthiolus first tooke the Orchis Serapias, called Palma Christi, the handed testicle to be they, because the word signifieth Hermetis or Hermidactyles, Hermes fingers, and these rootes being like the fingers of ones hand, may well be so called, but having himselfe refused this errour, he fell into another as bad, taking Iris tuberosa, the Velvet Flower de luce to be Hermodactiles, for the same cause that the rootes thereof runne out like fingers, which are such silly opinions that he may justly be beaten with his owne rod, that is, be taxed as he doth others, that in referring Plants doe not examine and well perpend each part, rather then any one, before they determine of any thing: for Hermo∣dactiles notwithstanding the Etimology of the word, have no shew or likenesse of fingers, but are small and somewhat flat, thicke and short white rootes, yet some are blackish which are not good, of the fashion almost of an heart, as it is painted on the Cardes, of substance firme, yet soft and easie to be cut or made into pouther, and of little or no taste, but drying, Master Finch our London Merchant was herein deceived, by taking the ker∣nells of the Tribulus aquaticus Water Caltroppe, for Hermodactiles as I thinke, as I have shewed you in that Chapter: Yet I would we might be better informed of the truth herein, that if any can finde that bigger fruite, growing in any of the ponds or waters in our Land or elsewhere, by breaking the wooddy shells of them, and comparing the kernells with our Hermodactiles in shops, that so thereby we be fully assured of the truth hereof. It is most effectuall in purging flegmaticke, slimy, and watery humours from the joynts, and therefore conduceth to helpe the gout and other running joynt aches, it is also of much use with other things for dyet drinkes, that are made of Guajacum, Sarsa and the like, and to very good purpose. 
CHAP. XXXIII. Lacca. Gum Lake. L Acca is no gumme distilling out of trees as other gummes doe, although it will melt with heat and burne with fire as they will, but is a certaine peculiar matter, elaborate and wrought by certaine great wing∣ed Ants that breed in the ground, and sucking out from great trees of divers sorts but especially from that which is called Mala Indica, hereafter set downe, from which they take the substance of what they work, about the smaller branches (as Bees doe their hony and hony combes) and make this Lacca, which is a darke red substance, somewhat transparent, somewhat like, but harder then any Gumme, which being chewed will make the spittle looke red, and is first wrought on stickes by the Natives of the Countries (the Ants I meane) then melted being cleered from the stickes, and the winges of the Ants, and made into cakes or thin peeces, which are so brought to us as well as on the stickes, and is the originall of the hard waxe, wherewith Letters are sea∣led by the helpe of a candle, whose colloures of red, greene, yellow or blacke, are added in the new melting of it againe, and making into such roules as we buy it to spend, but some to adulterate it, and make it cheaper, put usually waxe into it, which maketh it softer and runne quicker: it is called as Garcias saith by the Indians in Pegu, and Martaban, where the best is made, Tree, Lacca. Gum Lacke. 
but elsewhere generally by the Arabians, Persians, and Indians Loc, and Loc Sumutri, as though it were made in Sumatra, but that saith he is not so, for it is but imported thither, and exported againe into other Countries. Great controversies are extant about this Lacca, whether it should be the Cancamum of Diosco∣rides or no, for the name of Lacca was neither knowne to him, nor any of the Grecians or Latines, nor yet to Paulus Aegineta, a later Greeke writer, or in the age wherein he lived, as Scaliger setteth it downe in his notes upon Garcias, although Avicen and Serapio seeme to cite Paulus to be of that opinion: but Garcias saith that neither Avicen nor Serapio knew Lacca, be∣cause they make it to be like Myrrhe, and that it is sweete (as Dioscorides saith Cancamum is) and there∣fore used as a perfume, both which properties are wanting in Lacca, and further saith Avicen, that it hath some properties of Carabe Amber, although unlike it in substance, and yet Carabe is knowne to be drying and binding, and Lacca is an opener of obstructions: And againe he saith that Lacca falleth from the aire, upon Service trees, when as neither any Service nor Medler trees grow in India as Garcias saith, and that it is the gumme of a tree growing in Arabia, and that it is brought from Armenia, which things if they be true concerning Cancamum, they are not so for Lacca, for so they say it is the Cancamum of Dioscorides, and from their opinions have the succeeding ages beene led to hold the same errour for the most part: for the Monkes that commented upon Mesues, substituted Sanguis draconis for Cancamum, whom Matthiolus confuteth sufficiently: Some againe tooke Benzoin to be Cancamum, which is as erronious as any: Amatus Lusitanus, and Garcias doe both agree, that the true Cancamum is the Gum Anime, called by some Anijmum, especially that sort that is whitish and cleere, like unto white Amber, for there are three sorts brought from Ginny, and those parts by the Portugals: The second sort is blackish, somewhat like unto Co∣lophony, which Amatus taketh to be the Myrrha Aminea of Dioscorides. The third sort is yellowish and dry like Rossin, but all smell sweet being burned, and are good against cold griefes. The Lacke or Laake, which is a colour for Painters, is made of Brassill or other dying stuffes, &amp; hath in former times been put very ignorantly by some A∣pothecaries into the composition called Dialacca, but that error is well reformed since the true Lacca was brought and made knowne to them. Lacca is hot in the second degree, it strengtheneth both the stomacke and liver, and freeth them from obstructions, and dissolveth the hardnesse of the Liver, helpeth the yellow jaundise and driveth forth the watery humours of the dropsie, provoketh urine and helpeth to breake the stone both in the kidneyes and bladder. Turners may herewith set a firme and dainty red colour into their Workes, by holding it thereto in the turning, 
CHAP. XXXIV. Lapis Bezar. The Bezar stone. T He Bezar stone that is now frequent with us, but not that minerall Bezar stone of Serapio, and the other Arabian, whose knowledge is now quite lost, is of so high esteeme, even next unto Vnicornes horne, and of so much and excellent use in Physicke that I could not leave it out from the number of those especiall drugges we have for use in our shoppes. There are two sorts thereof to be had, the one brought from the East, the other from the West Indies, and knowne by the severall names of their Countries: the East Indie Bezar is the best, both in estimation and use, and commeth to us in sundry formes, and of sundry sizes, for some are great, and those are for Princes and great persons, because they are not onely more rare to be found, but thought to be of the more efficacy, and therefore as Diamonds, Pearles, &amp;c. the price of them riseth according to their greatnesse, Garcias saith he had one weighing almost five drammes, as if it were rare to have one of that bignesse, but I have seene some that have weighed above foure ounces, and some much more (but I am in doubt that they were counterfeit, and made so great by art, that they might be of the more esteeme, for I accounto the small ones or those of a meane size to be the truest and best, if any be) some are round, others long or somewhat flat, yet all of them for the most part of one colour, that is of a darke ash-colour, or greene darke Ollive colour, and smooth shining, (as if they were made out of one masse of stuffe and pollished) with sundry coates, scales or fouldes like Onions, some more, some lesse, according to the greatnesse of the stone, and the scales thicker or thinner also thereafter, having in some a straw or peece of haire wrapped close toge∣ther, or a little pouther in the middle whereabouts the stone is formed, and is accounted the best and truest, o∣thers have small stones of fruites, or other things in the middle of them, which are not thought so good, but ra∣ther counterfeited, being of a firme substance being broken, I meane the scales: the best is gritty, and easie to be bruised into pouther, and as some say dissolving in water, if it lye long therein (which I am in doubt is a signe of imposture) and is insipide without Lapis Bezar cum ungula &amp; curnuario malis. The Bezar stone with the hoofe and horne of the beast. 
any taste at all. The West Indie Bezar is likewise of divers formes, sizes, and colours, some having scales thicker or thinner, and some none, with either pouther or peece of a roote, or some o∣ther thing in the middle of the stone, but is of nothing that account with us as the East Indian Bezar is, although some thinke they are taken from one kind of beast, and as Iosua Ferrus saith in his Booke of secrets, Printed in the Italian tongue, (on whose relations concerning these beasts, and the Bezar taken from them, Baptista Cortesius, hath commented in his eighth decade Miscelaneorum medicinalium. ) there are six sorts of these beasts, in the West Indies in whom they breed, but that those onely are of most vertue that are taken from those beasts that live on the hils and mountaines, and feed on the more vertuall herbes there growing, and namely Contrayerva as the Spaniards call it, which maketh the stone to be the more effectuall (for as Ferrus saith, some of the roote hath beene found in the middle of the stone,) they for the most part grow in the Plaines and Champion grounds: the beast as Monardus describeth it, be∣ing but one of the sixe sorts, is almost as bigge as a stagge, and of the like quicknesse and agility, but bodyed like a Goate, with hornes turned backe∣wards (the figure whereof as Clusius was informed, he hath set forth with the forme of an hoofe, as it is in his Scholia upon Garcias, and I here exhibite their formes unto you with the stones) and therefore the Natives call them mountaine Goates (ye shall have Ferrus his full relation of them all, in another worke hereafter) but more properly peradventure as Clusius saith, Rupi caprae Rocke Goates. (but Petrus de Osma in his Letter to Monardus describing that beast or Goate, which onely as he saith breedeth in the Mountaines of Peru, and in no other Countryes in those Indies beside, and out of which they gathered their Bezar, said that they had no hornes) and are of a reddish browne colour for the most part, so swift of foote that they were onely to be caught when they were killed or shot with their Musquets, the stones grow as he saith there, in a certaine purse or skinne in the maw of the beast, wherein the wholesome herbes that they eate are received and kept, untill by rumination and chewing them anew, they passe them into their bodies, and saith moreover, that the stones that breede in the beasts that feed on the mountaines, are of much more vertue then of those that feed on the plaines: those of the East Indies as Garcias saith are had from Malacca, and divers other places, as well as Persia, but none are like in goodnesse unto those that are brought from Persia: The Moores he saith are so excellent in the knowledge of them, that by sight they can tell of what Country breeding they be, and whether they be counterfet or no, by crushing them in their hand a while, and then breath on them, and if any wind passe through them they pronounce them false. The stone is called as Garcias saith Pazar by the A∣rabians and Persians from Pasan which signifieth a Goate, but we call it corruptly Bezar, and the Indians Bazar, (but Scaliger correcteth this errour in him, and sheweth that the Arabians unanimously call it Balzahar, that is Alexipharmacum, for they tooke the word from the Persian word Bedezahar, because it resisteth poyson, and we thereupon doe call all those things Bezardica that are resisters of poyson, as Antidotes and the like. But the ancient Arabians had a minerall Bezar of divers colours, which they celebrated to be of as great or greater effi∣cacy then this stone, the true knowledge whereof as I thinke is either utterly lost, or as Monardus saith of his owne experience of no worth. This Bezar stone is not onely used against poysons and venomes, but against the pestilence, and contagious diseases, in malignant feavers also, and in many other diseases to provoke sweate, and thereby to expell evill vapours from the heart and vitall spirits, and for swounings, and against melancholly also, and the diseases that rise from thence, and to preserve strength and youth, by taking it foure or five dayes toge∣ther, ten graines or lesse at a time, after the evacuation of the body: the pouther thereof put on the place that is bitten by any venemous creature, doth free them from danger of death, and likewise put into a plague sore that is opened, it doth the like, Monardus hath set downe many experiments of the Bezar stone, upon sundry and se∣verall persons infected with sundry diseases, as who will may read them at length in that treatise which he wrote concerning this Bezar, and the herbe Scorsonera: but especially against poyson or venome, and citing the testi∣mony of Rabbi Moses Aegyptus, saith, these three are by experience the most effectuall in the world there∣fore, that is the seed of the Citron fruite, the Smaradge or Emerald stone, and this Bezar stone. These testi∣monies I thinke are sufficient to evince that opinion is held by many that there is no vertue, or at least no such ver∣tue in the Bezar stone as it is related, which they thinke by some tryall that they have made thereof, and not an∣swering their expectation doth confirme them the more in that opinion: but if they have orderly proceeded, and heedfully observed, not for one but many times, and in many persons, and have been sure of right and good stones, that they have given, and yet have done no good, I would rather say there is some defect in the constitution of our bodies, by the moisture, &amp;c. of our climate, then disable the verity of such reports of famous and worthy men. 
CHAP. XXXV. Liquid ambar. Liquid amber. L Iquid Amber is a thicke Rossinlike Gumme, dropping of it owne accord onely by incision from certaine huge great trees in the West Indies that are full of branches, covered with a thicke ash-coloured barke, having leaves like unto Ivy leaves, which gumme is of a very strong sweet sent, somewhat like unto Storax liquida, and may well be used instead thereof, but there is another courser sort, made by boyling the branches, and scumming of the uppermost fatnesse that is ga∣thered there, which is thought to be that Storax liquida, that is usually sold in the Druggists and Apothecaries shops: out of the first sort while it is fresh and laid in the Sunne, there droppeth a certaine cleare reddish yellow oyle, called the oyle of Liquid Amber, and of some that know no other, Liquid Amber it selfe: which because it is the purer part is more effectuall and of the milder sent, some using it with other sweetes to per∣fume gloves withall, but is of singular good use, either of it selfe or mixed with other things, to comfort and warme a cold moist braine, used like unto an oyntment, and easeth all paines and griefes that rise of a cold cause, being applyed thereto: it wonderfully comforteth and strengthneth a weake stomacke, helping digestion and pro∣curing an appetite, but more effectually if it be mixed with some Storax, and a little Muske, and Amber, and laid as a plaister to the stomacke: it likewise is profitable in all cold griefes of the mother, warming mollefying and dissolving all tumours, and opening the obstructions and the courses that are stopped, it is hot almost in the third degree, and moist in the first.
CHAP. XXXVI. Macer Graecorum. The Graecians Macer. M Any taking Macer to be Macis, and both one thing, have erred egregiously for of Macer, Dioscori∣des, Galen, and Pliny, have written and shewed the faculties; but of Macis, which is one of the barkes or coverings of the fruite of the Nutmegge tree, they have not made any mention, being a thing utterly unknowne unto them, for if they had knowne it, they must needes have heard and knowne of the Nut or Nutmegge, whose covering it is; but Macer is as they all say, a yellow∣ish barke, which must needes be understood of some tree, Galen saith that Macer is of a cold and earthly essence, and but little hot: but Macis is of much heate and no cold. And Pliny saith plainely that it is the barke of a great roote, and Avicen and Serapio, both knew the difference, and entreate of them distinctly in severall Chapters, calling this Thalisofar. This Macer being called Macre by the Indians as Acosta saith, is a vaste and large spread tree, (the barke onely of whose rootes they use) greater then any Elme, whose leaves are sixe or seven inches long, and two inches broad, of a pale greene colour on the upperside, and deeper greene on the un∣derside, bearing a small yellow fruite no bigger then a penny, heart fashion, tasting like an Allmond or Peach kernell, covered with a double thin transparent skin like a bladder, close joyned together, and growing out of the middle of a leafe, which is as bigge as the rest on the tree, but that it is a little rounder pointed, and nar∣rower towards the stalke, being of a colour betweene red and yellow, and crumpled with divers veines therein, and like unto the bladders of the Elmetree leaves: every part of this tree giveth milke as the Mulberry tree doth, and hath very great and faire spread rootes like the Ilex or Evergreene Oke, covered with a thicke, rugged and hard barke of an ash colour on the outside, and white within, full of milke while it is fresh, but turning yellow∣ish when it is dryed, very astringent and a little sharpe or biting withall, which vanisheth quickely: it loveth to grow in moist sandy grounds, and killeth all the herbes that would grow about it, and is found in Malabar Cochin, Cranganor, and many other places and Islands in the East Indies; the Portugals call it Arbore de las Ca∣meras, and some Arbore de Sancto Thome, and Macruyre. The barke of the roote is used much in all the Hospi∣talls, and of great account with the Indians to cure laskes and fluxes of the belly, or blood, and give it either in pouther mixed with some sowre milke, or steeped in whey all night and taken in the morning, and sometimes if it be needfull as Acosta saith, they put some Opium to it to make the medicine the stronger, and the Arabians put both Opium and Nutmegs to it and so cure them: the said barke also stayeth vomitings or castings, and strengthneth the weake stomacke. 
CHAP. XXXVII. Manna granata &amp; liquida. Manna in hard graines and liquid or thin. M Anna is of two sundry sorts, the one hard and in peeces, either greater or lesser, the other liquid or thin like the thinner or at least lesse thicke hony, yet some have thought that the Manna thuris was that Manna that was used in shops, but Monardus in one of his Epistles confuteth that errour, shew∣ing that it is but the small peeces and dust of the Thus or Ohbanum, that became so by the bruising and rubbing of one peece against another in the carriage. Of the dryer or hard sort there is some diversity for that which is gathered in Arabia differeth from that in Persia, and called Transchibil, Arabica. being in small graines somewhat like unto Coriander seed, and is gathered as Ranwolfius saith, from those trees the Arabians call Agull or Alhagi. Another sort is reddish and gathered from herbes and plants. That of Persia is called Xircast, that is, Alia rubra, Persiana. Lac arbo∣rum, the milke of trees and is white like that of Calabria, whereof some is as small as Hempeseed, others as big as Allmond Comfits, yet Garcias saith that the liquid sort is so called by them. Another sort is gathered in Ar∣menia, in great lumpes as Ranwolfius saith of a brownish colour. Another sort is affirmed by Aphrodiseus, Armeniac , cited by Niger, that falling as an honie dew on mount Libanus in Syria, is by the heat of the Sunne congealed into a hard Sugar which the Inhabitants call Sacchar, for whence came the Latine word Saccharum. Syriaca. All these sorts are re∣corded by sundry Authours, some contrarying one another as is aforesaid, and might be much more amplyfied, if this place were fit for it, and therefore as I take it I have taken the truer reports: but whereas some have thought that some of these smaller white sorts might be the Manna of the Israelites wherewith they were fed, and therefore called bread, and that from heaven, yea Angels food, not that Angels feed thereon, but , per excellentium, the choysest and chiefest, for forty yeares together in the wildernesse of Sinai and Ara∣bia, it sheweth that such have had little conversation with the holy Scriptures, as a learning not fit for them to understand, which is flat against such conceites divers wayes. First that this of theirs had no purging, but a nutri∣tive quality: secondly it was not so Sugar sweete as ours in taste: thirdly it fell not on certaine dayes, that is on their Sabbaths, although it did all the weeke after: fourthly it fell all the yeare long, and not the Summer onely as our Manna doth: fifthly it vanished away as soone as the Sunne grew hot upon it, but ours is condensate there∣by: sixthly it would putrefie if it were kept but two dayes except the Sabbath: And lastly as it is in Joshua, the 5. Chapter, and 22. verse. That Manna ceased to fall any more, after they had eaten the corne of the Land, which was the morrow after the Passeover, whereby you may see how vaine the conceites, and long altercations of men are, about those things whereof they are ignorant, or not sufficiently instructed: this is but obiter, and therefore to proceed. In Europe we have Manna, and called Calabrina, as being thought not to be found in any Country besides, but both Matthiolus and Bellonius, and some others also doe testifie there against, upon their owne sight and knowledge, as Matthiolus that in Goritensi, and Tridentino agris, hee gathered it himselfe and Bellonius in Brianson, and others in other places, but there is a great controversie and contension amongst many learned men: first whether it be onely a dew of heaven condensate by the cold of the night, or whether it be as a gumme issuing from trees, being incised or wounded as other trees are that yeeld gummes: The Monckes that commented on Mesues, and so likewise divers others were confident that it issued from wounded trees like gumme, and was no dew from heaven, for proofe whereof they alledge that the trees being overspread or co∣vered with any cloath or the like, there would not be found in the morning that any dew had falne thereon, and yet the trees yeelded the Manna, which Matthiolus thinking to disprove, saith it cannot sound to reason or the course of nature, but rather that the matter happeneth in this sort, that the dewes falling on the dry barkes of those trees were drunke up by them, and was forced forth againe in small peeces like gumme in the heate of the yeare, not being the proper juyce of the trees, but what it had gained as aforesaid, and that this kinde of Manna was more loose and spongy, and lesse operative then the other, and that this happeneth by the secret and hidden property in nature, especially of those trees to containe this dew in them in lumpes, and not to be liquid as on o∣thers all about them: A second controversie is whether Manna be gathered onely from the manured or wilde Ash or no, some affirming it strongly, and others denying it as stoutly, as is before said, that Matthiolus and Bellonius doe declare: A third controversie is, whether it be onely peculiar to Calabria, and Apulia, or not, which although some affirme for Calabria, yet ye heare as before, it is to be found in many other places. The other sort that is liquid or thin, is gathered both in Asia and Europe alike, but that of the Levant is both more plentifull, and more both usefull and operative, for although in many European Countries, and in our Land like∣wise a kind of honey or sweete dew hath beene found on trees and herbes in the heate of Summer, and in some places so clammy, that the Mowers sithes cold hardly cut the grasse, for the clamminesse thereon, untill the Sunne had beene some time thereon to consume it and dry it up. The Arabians and others call it Terenjabin and Tran∣gibin, the Greekes as Galen saith &amp; , and Cordus thereafter Drosomeli, Pliny calleth it Mel ex acre, or as others, Mel acreum, Mel roscidam, or as Hipocrates, Cedrium mel, and others Manna liquida, or as Matthi∣olus, Manna purgatoria: but a little to shew you my minde concerning these sorts of Manna, that as the liquid sort is both for substance and property alike, but that the European is not so plentifully to be gathered: So I verily thinke that the diversities in the other dryer, both for forme of greater or smaller peeces, or colour of white browne, or reddish, is rather from the climate and dispositions of the Heaven to be hotter or more temperate: but it seemeth to me very strange if true, that in Calabria onely the Fraxinus or Ornus should sweat out Manna, by lancing their barkes, when as in other countries both of Europe and Asia, it is gathered from sundry other trees, where no sort of Ashes grow, and that no Authour mentioneth any cutting of their barkes, to cause them yeeld Manna. You heare my opinion, whether true or false, I leave to them that can verifie or disprove it, by proofe, and true judgement. The properties of both these sorts of Manna are neere alike in purging, being of a meane temper, yet a little more enclining unto heate, or as Averrhoes saith, hot and moist, for by their gentle working they may safely be given to children, and women with child, and put with other purgers they helpe their wor∣king and evacuate choller: but because the grained Manna is both more frequent and more of use with us (the other being seldome seene or used) I will rather insist on the properties thereof which is that beside the purging quality, it quencheth thirst and doth lenifie the hoarsenesse of the throate, and allay the sharpenesse of choller, and the nauseous humours in the stomacke: the often use thereof for those that are much given to be costive is very profitable, to be either taken alone or to be put instead of Sugar into brothes, drinkes, or other things. 
CHAP. XXXVIII. Moschus. Muske. M Vske is a precious matter, and both is and hath beene of great worth and esteeme, not onely to per∣fume things with, but for medicine to great good use: The beast is deciphered out by some to be a kind of wild Goate, or Bucke Goate, that is, betweene a Bucke or Deere and a Goate, and there∣fore some call it Dorcas Moschi, others Gazella Indica, and some Capreolus Moschi; others make it to be like a Foxe, others like a Greyhound, and some a goodly reddish beast Gudderi, some againe say it breedeth onely in Golchanda, and some say in Pegu, a Country in the East Indies, and most store in the Country of the Tumbascanes, others say in China or Cathaya, others againe say none breede in China, but is brought thether from other places: It hath a big body, and two tuskes say some, others say two above and two below, in the lower mandible of the jaw, sticking forth like a Bore or Hogge, and without hornes say some. This beast as it is said by some, when it is in the heate of lust hath a certaine swelling rising thereby at the stomacke, the blood and matter gathering together, raiseth an Impostume or bile, which the beast desirous to be eased of, refusing meate and drinke in the meane time untill it be ripe, doth then rub it selfe against the stones and stumpes of trees, where∣by the Impostume breaking the matter congested sticketh on those thinges, which by the heate of the Sunne and temper of the climate is hardned, and all the ill sent (if it have any) consumed thereby, the perfect sweet sent remaining, and this is the best and choysest Muske is to be had, and gotten by great persons, chiefly to serve their use. Others report that every full Moone it hath neere the navell under the belly an empostume, or bladder full of blood, which the hunters after they have taken them, doe cut of and dry them in the sun, which becom∣meth the best Muskes. But there are other sorts besides those that are more plentifully to be had and sold to the Merchants, gotten and made by art: for having hunted those wilde Goates and killed them, they cut them in peeces, presse out the blood, and dry it, and sometimes putting a little of that purer Muske thereto, they put it up into small purses as it were made of the said beasts skin, and this is the usuall Muske sold by these counter∣feiters and false deceivers. Besides the great use of Muske, for all sorts of perfumes, and to weare about one, it is very beneficiall to comfort the heart and fainting spirits, and taketh away the passions and trembling thereof, maketh it merry and joyfull, and helpeth to expell sadnesse, it comforteth warmeth and refresheth the braine and senses, quickening the dullnesse thereof, and is a helpe unto Venery: it is put into many cordiall pouthers in our shops, and into many other compositions for the same purposes, as also for delight into many other things. It hath beene observed by some that the dung of a small beast, that is like a Weasell called a Marterne, smelleth somewhat like Muske. The female Crocodile also hath a small bladder or skin about the maw, which smelleth so strongly of Muske, that the waters wherein they breed, and are plentifull of them smelleth so strongly thereof, that few can abide to drinke thereof, and most doe refuse it therefore. There is also a kinde of great water-Rat that smelleth like Muske, &amp;c. But I reserve the relation of the many wonderfull Workes of God in nature, to another Worke. 
CHAP. XXXIX. Mumia. Mumme. T Hat which is called Mumia, of Pomponius Mela, Condita corpora &amp; Medicata funera, of Pliny, Servata corpora (being of much and excellent use in all Countries of Europe ) is the very body of a man or wo∣man; (brought chiefly from Egypt or Syria adjoyning, and no other part of the world so good) Em∣balmed after the manner was used in those Countries onely, (and not with Aloes, Myrrhe, &amp;c. as being those things the Iewes and others used to embalme their dead bodies, nor yet with Pissalpalthum, as it is likely other nations did) which was with Cedria and Nitar, that did so consume the moisture of the carkase, and preserve it from putrefaction, that it was thereby made to endure entire and unconsumed for ever: for the E∣giptians in former times being wonderfull ingenious, and of a most subtle knowledge in all humane wisedome, (as it is recorded of Moses to be learned in all the wisdome of the Egiptians, Acts. 7.22.) misliking as it should seeme the custome of the Latines, which was to burne their dead bodies to ashes, and to preserve them in an urne: as also that of the Greekes to bury them whole in the ground: would to excell them take another way to preserve their bodies, (expecting a resurrection as it is thought) from either fire (which as they were taught by their Phylosophers was a monstrous beast, that devoured all things untill it was full, and then perished or dyed with that which it had devoured) or water, or earth that wormes should not consume them, and therefore with Nitar as with salt they preserved the carkase from corrupting and stench, and with that Tarre, and Tarre water, called Cedria (which was made from the stickes of both the Cedars burnt, as is used to make Pitch, and Tarre, from Pine and Pitch tree stickes with us) they besmeared oftentimes the body all over, and wrapping them in many fouldes of linnen, which did so burne as it were, and consume by time all the moisture both of flesh and bones, that it became wholly blacke, as if Mumia. Mumme. 
it had beene burned in the fire, and hard that it was not to be parted in sunder without strokes and bea∣ting; but those things that were put into the belly of the dead bodie, could not preserve the whole body, and make every part blacke alike, as I thinke. All the dead bodies of Egipt, and Syria likewise being thus embalmed were they never so poore, but with more sumptuousnesse and cost peradventure, of Aloes, Myrrhe, Saffron, Balsamum, and other precious things, if they were rich, or the Princes or Kings &amp; were carryed into a desart or barren place in Egypt, and laid with some monument or heape of stones on them, which is the place where the Pyramides now stand (as it was the custome in all places to bury the dead in those places which were most barren, and not fit for husbandry, tillage, or pasture) and is about foure miles from Cairo, the River Nilus, or some branch thereof being be∣tweene, which they must passe over either by bridg or boate, before they come there, and this as it is most likely, was the originall of the Greekes fables of Lethe, Stix, Charon, &amp;c. The store of Mumia, that hath, and is yearely spent in all Countries, doth testifie the innumerable store of bodies buryed there sought for and brought from thence, which are all alike in substance, without any great or mani∣fest difference. There hath beene much contro∣versie hereabouts, the Arabians taking Mumia to be Pissalphaltum, and so did Matthiolus also, Bra∣savolus to be Asphaltum Iudaicum, and to be used insted thereof, which Matthiolus misliketh, and seemeth to allow better of the Pisasphaltum, or the Aloes, Myrrhe &amp;c. wherewith the bodies were stuffed, being altered in time by the moisture of the carkase in the grave, as is be∣fore said then of the body it selfe, which is called Mumia, and therefore would have bodies to be so embalmed and kept, that the embalmings might be used, but assuredly, neither the one nor the other can be called Mumia rightly, nor are of the effect, for although Serapio and Avicen say that Pissasphaltum and Mumia are all one, and therefore whatsoever property Dioscorides appointeth unto Pissasphaltum, the same they attribute unto Mumia, which was their errour, yet Galen and Paulus Aegineta, by saying that Fix liquida, is a fit substitute for Pissal∣phaltum doe intimate that it is of another quality then Mumia is, and commeth farre short thereof: It is hot and dry in the second degree, and easeth the paines in the head, comming of cold and moisture, the Megrome swim∣mings, and falling sicknes taken in a decoction of Marjerome, &amp; helpeth a cough taken in ptisane drinke, it is cor∣diall for the heart and preventeth the danger of poyson, or the venome of the Scorpion and other serpents, dis∣solveth winde both in the stomacke, spleene and bowels, stayeth the hickocke and bleedings, both inward and out∣ward, dissolveth the congealed blood of bruises by fals or otherwise, and helpeth the ulcers of the bladder, and the retention of urine, being taken in Goates milke: it is also very profitably used against palsies, crampes, and distentions of the mouth, the hardnes and shrinking of the sinews, and lamenes in the feete through cold and wet. 
CHAP. XL. Myrrha. Myrrhe. M Yrrhe is the gum of a certaine tree growing in Arabia Aethiopia, and other places, as it is thought The∣ophrastus and Pliny declare the various reports of the face or shew it beareth, one contrary to ano∣ther, so that it may be doubted whether any of them be true, seeing they be but guesses at the likelyest report. I have not heard or read, that any now adayes hath seene the tree that beareth it. Dioscorides saith that it is not unlike to the Egiptian Thorne, meaning Acacia, without mentioning any report, and is got∣ten by cutting or wounding the tree, that the gumme may flow forth, in the canicular dayes, as other gummes are gotten. We have many sorts thereof, in goodnesse some better or worse then others, as in great and small peeces, fat and dry, pulverilentous like, pale and more red all alike, or else discoloured, with some whitish pee∣ces in it, which is the best, for whereas Dioscorides commendeth that which is somewhat greene, I have not seene any such, nor read that any hath ever seene it, and it is very likely that the Greeke word , which Dioscorides useth, may be used pro colore pallescente, as well as subviridi, and so Rondeletius noteth it in his Chap∣ter de Gobio pisce, and to be taken here in the former sence. Myrrhe as I said before is in sight so like unto Bdelli∣um, that they are soone mistaken by those that are not expert, but hath these notes and differences: it is extreame bitter, and so is not Bdellium, it is paler, fatter, easier to be broken, and of a more quicke sharpe sent, so that the best Myrrhe, may be both knowne of it selfe and hereby from Bdellium, that it is of a purplish browne colour, in great peeces and fattish (for the greater peeces retaine their fatnesse longer, and are not so soone dryed by the ayre) with some whitish peeces or veines therein, extreame bitter in taste, and smelleth somewhat sharpe and bit∣ter withall. Divers have diversly thought of Myrrhe, some supposing Myrrhe to be Benzoin, and Bdellium to be Myrrhe, and that we had no true Myrrhe, &amp; e contra, that we had Myrrha truncus cum Gummi. 
Mirrhe and no true Bdellium, because so little that was good, was formerly brought to be used, that they might be plaine∣ly distinguished, and the rather because that Galen saith Myrrhe, will be sometimes changed into Opocalpasum, which is venemous and deadly, and is so like it, that as he saith in his time many were killed therewith, who yet finding it to be ve∣ry effectuall for sundry diseases of the eyes, thought it might be as effectuall for inward diseases: the notes of which Opo∣calpasum (as Galen calleth it, or Opocarpasum the juyce of Car∣pasum as Dioscorides calleth it in his sixth Book and 13. Chap∣ter among the venemous plants, but maketh no description thereof in any of his former Bookes) as I finde them set down in Weckers Antidotarie in the examination of Myrrhe) are these: because saith Wecker true Opocalpasum is not usually to be seene to compare it with Myrrhe, yet if you shall per∣ceive in Myrrhe some peeces to be much differing both in sent and taste from true Myrrhe, you may wel &amp; not without good reason judge that it is changed into Opocalpasum, for although both in colour and substance it be like to the best Myrrhe, with whitish veines therein like unto the nailes of ones hand, yet examining it more thoroughly, it will be found not to be Myrrhe, and that there will likewise some reddish cleere spots appeare therein: it behoveth therefore to be cautelous in the choyse of Myrrhe, that you be not deceived with the shew or likenesse, but observe that it have all the true notes of true Myrrhe, least while you thinke you have all the true Myrrhe, you have this poyson, if it be inwardly taken, which consumeth the corrupt mattering and watering of the eyes to be used outwardly: which metamorphosis (if it be true, or that Galbanum should be changed into Sagapenum or Cassia into Cinamon were very miraculous yet herein the old Authours are very frequent, but I thinke of these miracles, which are the conversions of substances, as I doe of their transmigration of soules) Dioscorides maketh no mention of it, but saith that the juyce of Carpasum (whe∣ther herbe or tree) was venemous as Taxus, Cicuta, and many other was, and to be cured with the same remedies that Cicuta was, Dioscorides saith that out of the fattest Myrrhe called Pediasimos, being pressed is taken Stacte; yet Pliny saith that the trees doe sweate out Stacte, of their owne accord before they be cut, which is accounted to be the Styrax liquida of our shoppes, both by the Arabians and other later writers as Matthiolus saith, himselfe also being of that opinion, whereof I cannot but mervaile that he or any other duely considering our Styrax liqui∣da, both the forme and sent so farre differing from Mirrhe, should thinke it to be pressed out of fat Myrrhe, being of so fine a sharpe bitter aromaticall sent, and the Styrax liquida, rather loathsome then pleasant. Dioscorides maketh mention of one sort of Myrrhe called Aminnea, which Galen calleth Minea (Matthiolus taking them to be divers, and not one sort of Myrrhe) which some thinke to be the Gumme Anime, called by the Portugalls Gum Anijmum, comming from Ethiopia, for there is another of the West Indies whereof I shall intreate hereafter, but herein I thinke they are deceived. Galen saith that Myrrhe is hot and dry in the second degree, and therefore is good for wounds in the head: and by the bitternesse which is not little, it killeth the wormes in the belly, and the living childe, expelling the dead: it hath in it also a binding quality, whereby being mingled with eye me∣dicines it helpeth ulcers and great scarres, and for the same cause is good to be put among those things are good for an old cough and shortnesse of breath, the bitternesse not harming the winde pipe or throate, but gently clensing and heating, it helpeth the roughnesse of the winde pipe or throate, saith Dioscori∣des, and those that are hoarse, and have lost their tongue as we call it: it is good also against the paines of the sides, the laske and bloody flix, and rheumaticke destillations; it speedily procureth womens courses and molli∣fyeth the hardnesse of the matrix; it also taketh away the shivering fits of agues, being taken two houres before it come: but Matthiolus saith that by taking a dramme of Myrrhe in Muscadine, using it three times, an houre before his fits, he was cured of a quartaine ague, but he did therewithall presently after the taking thereof sweat moderately in his bed: pilles likewise saith he made with it and Treakle, is effectuall for the same purpose, to take one at a time as bigge as a pease, an houre before the fits for many dayes together: it is also a great preservative in the Plague or pestilence, and against the venome or poyson of Serpents and harmefull creatures, and therefore is put into Antidotes and counter poysons: it is a singular remedy for a stinking breath, fasteneth loose teeth, and stayeth the shedding of the haire, being used with Ladanum, and the wine of Mirtles, it helpeth mattering eares and watering eyes, and taketh away the filme or skinne that beginneth to grow over and darken the sight, it helpeth to breede flesh in deepe wounds, and to cover naked bones, Matthiolus commendeth it as a singular fucus for the face to take away wrinckles that come by age, and to make it smooth and youthfull to be made into an oyle as it is called, or rather the liquour of Myrrhe, which is made with egges boyled hard, cut in the middle, the yolkes taken forth and filled up with pouther of Myrrhe, then put into a glasse and set in a Wine celler or moist place, and with this liquour to be bedewed: As also another way, that is, by sprinckling with white wine, a new iron dish or pan made hot in the fire, and taking first the fumes thereof unto the face, being covered over with a cloth, and then the fumes of Myrrhe in pouther, afterwards cast on it being heated againe, and the head covered as before, and this still to be used before bed time, for eight dayes together. 
CHAP. XLI. Nardus Indica sive Spica Nardi. Spicknard. G Arcias ab Orta, intreating of this Spikenard testifieth that there is but one sort knowne, and used as well by the Indian and Turkish, as the Persian and Arabian Physitions, and although some would intimate that this is not that was used by the Ancients, in that Pliny setteth it downe lib 12. c. 12. that it was not to be had but at an excessive price, yet that hindereth not, in regard both all the Coun∣tryes of the Indies are better husbanded then heretofore, and especially that since the Portingalls had opened the way by Sea, all sorts of Drugges were provided better and better cheape by much, the charge of Caravans being excessive chargeable by their long journey and travaile, but I thinke both the Drugges and the Indies, by being more sought by Ʋenetians and other Christians was the beginning of the reformations, for when Arabians and the like were the chiefe Merchants, Nardus Indica. Spicknard. 
much bad Merchandize was dearely sold, howsoe∣ver cheapely bought, and I thinke much more adul∣terated both by them and Iewes, and the Indians al∣so were not behind to sophisticate whatsoever they could, which the Christians I verily suppose did somewhat alter, when they became great Merchants for Europe, and since is rectified more and more, when onely the sincere and pure is bought, and the o∣ther left on their hand to mend if they can, but yet it falleth out that the blinde eateth many a flye, I meane the ignorant is often deluded, who through cove∣tousnesse oftentimes letteth passe the better to take the worser at cheaper rates: but to the purpose in hand. This Spicknard groweth not in many places, and where it doth, it is not very plentifull; it is a roote yet called a Spike, because it shooteth up hairy stalkes of hairy like Spikes, many set together, of a brownish colour, and whereas Dioscorides saith the roote is of no use, yee must understand the word in a double sense: the rootes that Dioscorides meant, be the short fibres, whereby it draweth its nourishment and en∣crease from the earth, and these indeed be unprofi∣table and of no use; but the rootes that Galen spea∣keth of, are the Spikes themselves or Spicknard, for so he calleth them both, lib. 1. De Antidotis, thus saying; Iubet Andromachus adijcere Nardum Indi∣cam, ea vero est quam spicam vocant non quod spica fit radix enim est, sed quod spicae formam referat. And in lib. 9. de comp. med. sec, locos. He useth some∣what neere the same words: but in that some object, it is not of a sweet sent, such as Dioscorides recordeth of it, Garcias saith while it is fresh it is sweete, but time may decay some part of the sent, and besides sweete smells were otherwise taken with the Aunci∣cients then with us, witnesse many things, as Galbanum Allium, &amp;c. were reckoned sweete, much differing from the opinions now received, but thus I have shewed you the acception of the roote and Spike of this Nardus and the sweetnesse: Both Dioscorides and Pena, have recorded that it doth beare a stalke and leaves, yet have not mentioned what flowers it hath, neither is the other bastard or French Spikenard of Lobel shewed to have any, which I have exhibited in the first Classis of this Worke, but the like was found in Ʋirginia by Master Iohn Tradescant the younger, with such like long greene leaves as is desciphered in that, the roote also answering so neere unto the French Nardus, but of a paler blackish colour, and without any sent that I could perceive, and besides all this, he found it with the spike of flowers and seed at the toppes of the stalkes, which were turning or winding, the head standing on a small naked stalke, somewhat like (I meane in the turning) unto the Scoro∣do prassum anguinum, or Convoluto capite, the great Turky Garlicke with a twined head, consisting of two or three rowes of small bright brownish chaffie huskes, hairy as it were at their ends, and standing all on one side of the stalkes, for foure or five inches long. This bastard kinde bearing such an head, doth perswade me to thinke this Indian kinde to have also some other, whether the like or no is not to be determined but by sight, The proper∣ties of this Indian Spikenard are these: It is of an heating and drying quality, provoking urine, and staying laskes, and both the reds and whites in Women: it taketh away the loathing to meate, and the gnawing of the stomacke usually called the heart-burning, it conduceth helpe to swellings, to the stone in the kidneyes, and to the Kings Evill: the decoction helpeth the inflammations of the mother if they sit therein: it helpeth to bring haire on the baire eye lids: it is not onely an ingredient into the two famous Antidotes, Theriaca Andromachi, and Mi∣thridatium, but into sundry other compositions appointed by the Ancients, but because I would not make a double repetition of the same things, having declared the properties hereof at large in the 42. Chapter of the first Classis of this worke, I must referre you thereunto. 
CHAP. XLII. 1. Palma sive Nux Indica vulgaris ferens Coccos, The ordinary Indian Cokar Nut. T Here cannot be found in the world, a tree that hath so many necessary commodities for mens uses to be had from it, as this Cokar Nut: the tree groweth to be huge great and vaste, whose body or stem is covered with a smooth barke, bare or naked without any branch to a great height (for which cause the Indians doe either bore holes therein at certaine distances, and knocke strong pegs into them which sticke out so much as may serve for footing to get up into the tree, to gather the juyce or li∣quour and the fruite, or fasten ropes with nayles round about the tree at spaces which serve as steppes to goe up into it) and toward the top spread sundry great armes which bowe themselves almost round, with large leaves on them like the Date tree but greater, whose middle ribbe is very great, abiding alwayes greene, and with fruite also; continually one succeeding another: from betweene the lower boughes come forth smaller stalkes hanging downe, bearing sundry flowers on them like unto those of the Chesnut tree: after which succeed large great three square fruite or nuts, ten or twelve, or sometimes twenty thereon together, as big as ones head, or as a small Pompion almost round, but a little smaller at the end, covered with a hard tough darke ash-coloured barke, and within it an hard round wooddy brownish shell, but blacke being polished, having at the head or toppe thereof three holes, somewhat resembling the nose and eyes of a Monckey, betweene which outer barke and this shell, grow a number of grosse threds or haires, or such like stuffe, whereof is made cordage, stronger and more durable in the salt Sea, then any made of hempe; within the wooddy shell, there is a white kernell, cleaving close to the inside thereof, of the thicknesse of ones finger or thumbe, or thinner, as sweete and pleasant as an Almond while it is fresh, having in the middle thereof a pint, two or three, of cleare dainty sweet water, as pleasant as milke, Palma vel Nux Indica Cocos ferens. The Indian Cokar Nut tree. 
Nucula Indica racemosa. A small Indian Nut many growing together. 
Fructus integer Nucis Indicae Cocus dictus. The whole Cokar Nut as it is taken from the tree 
Nux Indica interior. The inward Cokar Nut with the hard blacke shell thereon. 
Nucula Indica alter. A little Indian Nut, and another called Mehenbethem. 
but as it groweth either to be over ripe, or being kept to be older, so much lesse pleasant will this liquour be, and either grow sower or thicke by time, and be quite spent and consumed, it hath beene ob∣served that sometimes there will be floting in this liquour a small lumpe or ball, as cleere as a pearle, and very sweet in taste, which is as the sprout, which have sprung forth a stalke rising through one of the holes at the head, and rising two palmes above it hath shot forth fibres for rootes. The name and uses whereunto this tree, and the fruite, and those things that are made thereof serve, are these. The tree it selfe is called generally by the Indians Maro, in Malaca Trican: but in Malabar Tengamaran, by Avicen Giausi al heud, which is Nux Indica, by Serapio and Rhasis, as Garcias saith, Iarel∣n re, yet that word is not found saith Clusius in our Bookes, but Ne∣regill: the Latines call it Palma Indica &amp; Coccifera, to distinguish it from the alma Dactylifera, the timber whereof is not spongy or like the Ferulas as Garcias saith, but solide and firme, blacke and shining like the Wallnut tree, fit for building of houses or ships, and other things, as Garcias himselfe saith a little after, this tree saith Garcias is of two sorts (or rather as I thinke kept for two uses) the one to beare fruite, the other to extract the liquour issuing thereout, when the branches are cut, or when it is bored and received into Gourdes, or other such like things tyed thereto, which liquour they call Sura, and is like troubled Wine in shew, but in taste like new or sweete wine which being boyled is called Orraqua, and being de∣stilled is made like unto Aqua vitae, which they use to the same purpose that we doe ours, and will burne like it, and is called Fula, and being set into the Sunne will become good vinegar, but that which runneth last being suffered to abide in the Sunne untill it grow hard, or boyled to the hardnesse will be Sugar, which they call Iagra. The branches saith Garcias (but Ferdinandus Lopes saith the leaves) are called Olla, and serve as umbrels to keepe off Sunne and Raine, and in such like leaves, saith he, was written the first Letter that the King of Calecut sent to Emanuel King of Portugall, upon the Portugals first arrivall into his Country, they serve likewise to cover houses, to be defended from raine, the fruite is called by the Indians generally Narel, which is common both with the Persians and Arabians, but in Malabar Tenga, and while it is greene and not ripe Eleni, the Portugals call it Coquo, that is a Monckey, of the likenes of a Monkeys face, and from thence hath risen the word Cocus or ra∣ther Coqus, which the three holes represent, and at Goa Lanha, of the hairy stuffe or hardes which is next the outer barke of this Nut, called by the Indians Cairo, are made not only Cordage and Tackle for ships, but cawking stuffe, which is better to cawke ships then any other stuffe, and being beaten, the finer stuffe is made into girdles and cawles for women, (sailes cloathes also, but not any fine stuffe or cloath like any fine linnen) both of the meaner and better sort at Lishbone, as Clusius saith he saw and observed, but as Garcias saith, while this Nut is young it hath a tender barke which may be eaten, and tasteth like an Artichoke; of the browne hard inner shell, being pol∣lished and made blacke and shining, is not onely made cups, to drinke in, set in silver or other mettall, which made Sepulveda to draw the Portugalls to thinke that it doth helpe those that have the Palsie to drinke out of them, but Garcias saith it hath no likelihood: but being burned into coales serve the Gold smithes for their uses: who goe about in the streetes crying for worke, and carrying some necessary tooles for the purpose with them; of the inner white kernell, which is hollow, cleaving fast to the inside of the hard wooddy shell, which is an inch or two or lesse thicke, firme and fast tasting sweet like an Allmond, they make bread especially while it is fresh, for the fresh∣er the Nuts are, the sweeter will the meate thereof be, and doth nourish much, being good for macilent bodies, and to encrease sperme and Venery, and is good to lenefie the harshnesse of the throate, and the hoarsenesse of the voyce, and eaten oftentimes with Iagra before recited, or with Sugar, or else being broken and bruised they draw forth a milke, like unto Allmond milke, wherewith they boyle Rice, and is as sweet as the milke of Kine, or Goates, or else herewith, and the flesh of beasts or birds, they make certaine meates, which they call Carib. The fresh kernels being broken and dryed after the outer rinde is pared away, are called by them Copra, and is sent as a merchandise into other Countryes, that have either none or not sufficient store to serve their use: which taste much pleasanter then any of those that are brought from thence into these parts, it is used also as a stirrer up of Venery, and to encrease sperme or seed: Out of this Copra or broken kernells is made two sorts of oyle, the one pressed forth (after the same manner that oyle of Allmonds is made) and is a most cleare oyle in good a∣bundance, which serveth not onely to burne in Lampes, but to put to their boyled Rice: the other is made by putting warme water to them after they are broken to peeces and boyled, by scumming off the oyle that swim∣meth above the water, after they are pressed together, which oyle is used as a gentle purgation to evacuate the bowels, some put thereunto the pulpe of Tamarindes, which maketh it a little tarter, and fitter for hot and chol∣lericke bodies, the other oyle serveth to mollefie the hardnesse and shrinking of the sinewes, and old paines in the joynts and for this purpose they use to put the patient after he is annointed, into a great and capatious tub or vessell being heated, that may hold him, and therein suffer him to abide for a good while, untill he have slept therein, and this bringeth him a great deale of ease and comfort: but whereas Avicen saith, that it killeth wormes, Gar∣cias saith he had not tryed it, neither thought it probable, because it is well knowne, that the eating thereof in∣gendreth wormes, in all the Inhabitants that eate much thereof, and is a disease incident unto them: and where∣as Serapio saith, by the authority of Mesues, that by the eating of these Nuts, the loosenesse of the belly is stayed; it disagreeth not with reason, saith he, that the Nut itselfe, which hath much earthy parts in it, should binde the body, and the oyle which is of many thinne and aerious parts should loosen it: in the middle or hollow part of this kernell is contained, as is before said, a great quantity of cleere sweet liquour, pleasant to drinke, and not bringing any offence to the stomacke, but rather refresheth the spirits, the other sort of these trees are reserved saith Garcias, that the head sprout or top thereof is taken to be eaten, which tasteth more pleasantly then either tender Chesnuts, or the head of the wild or dwarfe Date tree, called Palmito, and by the Italians Cefaglioni: The older the tree is, the pleasanter is this head, but when it is taken away, the tree dyeth, so that he may well be said to devoure the whole tree, that hath eaten one of these heads. 
Nucula Indica racemosa. A small Indian Coker Nut many growing together. This small Indian Nut which Clusius described singly, in the second Booke of his Exotickes, the six and twen∣tyeth Chapter, and 54. page, and the second Nut was afterward sent unto him from Mounsieur de Peiresc, in Pro∣vince, but came a while after his death. The tree that beareth these fruites is in great account with the Natives where it groweth, for with the leaves they make their drinke, being boyled with water, and of the kernels of the fruites they make their bread, that is sweet and pleasant, which fruite groweth in a tuft or spike, many toge∣ther, and all upon a great thicke stalke, they are inclosed in a certaine hairy huske or skinne, breaking open upon the ripening, and each one also hath a hairy huske or covering, under which was another shell or covering, not much unlike to a Filberd, being an inch long, and an inch or better in compasse, being firme and solid, not having any loose or broken kernell within it, whereby to make any noise, but a firme white kernell fit to be eaten, which inner shell had an oylinesse about it, like unto oyle of Allmonds. 
Nucula Indica altera. Another small Indian Cokar Nut. The tree that beareth this Nut groweth in great plenty about the Castell de minas in Ginney, called Palmes by the inhabitants, being tall and as great as a good ships mast, bearing leaves at the toppe, of a dozen or fifteene foote long, hanging downewards, cut in like unto Reed leaves, from under which leaves grow branches, the fruite being then as bigge as a mans head, containing within them many divers small nuts greater then Plummes of a gold yellow colour, from whose kernels being bruised, they draw a cleere oyle, which they call the oyle of Palme, which they put into their viands, both for the colour and sents sake: this oyle brought into these parts groweth thicke like butter, and is very yellow, which some that brought it used for the cure of their fresh wounds, and annoynted their arteries and sinewes pained with crampes, and convulsions, whereby they finde much helpe and ease. Clusius describeth these Nuts to be three square, and to have three holes as it were, at the heads of them like unto the Cokar Nut, covered with a hairy huske, but the shell saith Lobel, is harder then a bone and blacke, whether these be all one I am in some doubt. Further it is said that the Inhabitants by boring the tree, there commeth forth a sweet liquour, almost like the whey of milke, unto which they put a little wild honey, and thereof make their drinke, which they call the wine of the Palme, which will inebriate being largely taken. 
Mehenbethene. The Indian Nut Mehenbethene. This Indian Nut which Clusius saith Cortusus sent unto him for Mehenbethene, but did little agree, saith he, unto the description thereof, Lobel saith it was found among Nutmegs at Antwarpe: It is saith Lobel both in colour, forme, and greatnesse like unto a Nutmegge (which therefore Clusius saith it might be better referred to the kinds of Nutmegs, yet very untowardly I thinke) being about an inch long, and three square, whose shell was hard and wooddy like a Cokar Nut, and being broken had three cels or divisions within it, in each whereof was a small long white kernell, of a sweete and pleasant taste. 
2. Coccus de Maldiva. The Cokar Nut of Maldiva. This kinde of Nut is accounted as another Coccus, it is in many things so like the other, for although it was never seene growing on any tree, as the Indians doe report, the Nuts being onely found upon those Islands of the Maldiva ' s, as the Sea casteth them on the shores, and in no other part of the world besides, and are not lawfull to be reserved by any, on the paine of their heads, but are all brought to the King or his Officers, in that all wrackes &amp;c pertaine to him, and are onely sent by him as presents of great account to other Indian Princes and great per∣sons, &amp;c. Vnlesse by stealth and concealement, some are diverted otherwayes, nor was never seene to have a∣ny such rough huske as the Cokar Nut hath, yet in the inner hard shell, inclosing the inner kernell it is almost in all points like the other: the whole Nut carrying this proportion: it is farre greater, longer, and rounder then the other (yet there are of smaller sizes also) and of an ovall forme, containing two parts which are so conjoyned Coccus de Maldiva. The Cokar Nut of Maldiva. 
together in the middle almost all the length, that it is but a little separate both above and below, the upper part be∣ing somewhat bigger then the lower, that it seemeth as if two long nuts were set together, but cannot be separated by strength of hands onely, but must be sawed in sunder, the shell being so hard that it scarse yeeldeth thereunto without great labour, it is also on the outside much blacker then the other and being polished with the stone Tripel (Tripoly we call it) in pouther with water, rubbed with a woollen cloath, (but not with oyle on no hand, for that will give it an evill savour) it will become both blacker and more sweete and shining then the other, as also much thicker, it hath also two holes at the toppes, no lesse then the other Cocus, and may be cut into two long boatelike cups, to be edged and footed with silver, &amp;c. as every one please, or else each of them again cut into two other, to be bordered with mettall, the lower brims to be raised therewith, and the holes stopped, as it pleaseth every one to doe, or to keepe them for boxes. Clusius setteth forth in the 19 . page of his Booke of Exotickes, the figure of the one halfe of these Nuts curiously set in silver, which as he saith, he received from Iaques Garret of London, being taken by us in a great Carracke of the Portugals, comming from the East Indies, which was four∣teene inches long, and seven broad. The inner kernell hereof is also somewhat white on the inside, but covered with brownish skinnes both outside and inside, which hath some rifts or clefts, the outside having none, but is much harder then the other, even allmost as hard as a bone, and is a little separated from the woodden shell, which may soone be perceived when it is opened, but may also before, being as it were loose, as may be knowne by the shaking: it is hollow also as the other, as if it contained liquour likewise, but was never seene with any being as it should seeme, wholly consumed by the long time before they were gotten: it hath likewise a small lumpe, as white and cleare as a pearle, sticking to the head of the inner kernell, a the other, which no doubt is the bud which would spring: the kernels on both sides are conjoyned in the middle also. It is usually called by all the Christians and some others in those parts. Coccus de Maldiva, by Augerius Clutius in his Tractate thereon, Nux Medica Maldivensis, but by the Islanders Tavarcare. The properties both of the kernell and outer shell, is as Garcias saith, generally held to be good against poysons of all sorts and pestilentiall diseases, to be taken the weight of ten graines in fine pouther (which is best to be made in a morter, by beating it, for it very hardly yeeldeth to a File, or any other iron raspe or toole, the kernell being allmost as hard as the outer shell) more or lesse accor∣ding as the case requireth: divers great personages have a peece tyed to a chaine, which they put into their drinke letting it abide therein a little while before they drinke, which they account to be as effectuall. It is also saith he, held by divers worthy persons to be availeable against the chollicke palsie, and falling sicknesse, and other the diseases of the head, nerves, and sinewes, and by the use thereof, either of the drinking out of the cups thereof, or the drinke, wherein a peece of the kernell hath beene steeped as is aforesaid, to keepe them safe and sound from all other diseases: yet Garcias scarse beleeveth any of these things, and Clusius as being led by his ill sample ac∣counteth such relations to be fabulous and commentitious: but Augerius Clutius before spoken of, in his tractate of this Nut is bold to publish the sundry cures he performed hereby, that is, both the Nut and the shell, not one∣ly for the poyson of Arsenicke, but in Feavers, Epilepsies, Cachexia ' s, and many other diseases there mention∣ed, but especially in the sore and tedious travailes of child-birth, giving halfe a dramme of each, or two scruples for ad se, either alone or with other co-adjutors.
Some thing yet remaines, wherein I would deliver mine opinion concerning some particulars, belonging to this History of the Nut of Maldiva. First concerning that opinion is held, that all those Islands have beene for∣merly joyned to the Continent, which is said to be 150. Leagues distant from them, and broken away by tem∣pests, and innundations, which may be as likely as that our Isle of great Brittaine, was also joyned to the Firme land of France, and both I thinke alike true, for Caesar found them thus in his Progresse hither, and the Sea hath not in this part gained from the Land, as can be shewed by any good Record. Then that these Nuts because found onely upon the shores cast up by the Sea, that the trees either grow on some of the drowned Islands, their rootes abiding still firme in the ground, yeelding the fruite yearely, and so swimming to Land is taken, where the winde and waves drive them, or that they grow in the bottome of the Sea, as Amber doth, which may be both also alike true, that is neither. Againe, that there is a certaine Island called by them Palloyes, whereon some others thinke that the tree that beareth these Nuts should grow, and falling when they are ripe, are carryed by the winde and waves to those Islands are next thereunto, (which I thinke in some part may be probable) but that they adde, that this Island is seene by some that looke not for it, but cannot be found by them that seeke it, al∣though as they say, the King hath caused sundry times search to be made for it, still they that have beene sent have returned afrighted and terryfied by spirits, that they have given it over and returned with such answers, which in my opinion are meere fables and noysed of purpose to keepe the Nut in more estimation. But in my judge∣ment if the truth might be searched exactly, by stout and not timerous persons, by religious not superstitious, as most of the Indians are, and by judicious and industrious men, and not weakelings, and fooles, the tree that bea∣reth these fruites would be found to grow on the Land, whether Continent or Island is no matter, and that if it be true that these Nuts are onely found on the shores, as the Sea casteth them up, for even of that report I am more then halfe doubtfull) when they are ripe and falne, the windes carry them from off the Land whereon they are falne, into the Sea, and so are taken up on those Islands: but yet me thinkes it is somewhat hardly to be belee∣ved, that these Nuts should be carryed by the Sea to the coastes of no other Countries, but these Islands although they be so many, for the report is that they are not found in any part of the world besides. And lastly, to finish this tedious discourse to shew my opinion how these (if they be fables) may be blowne away, and the truth cer∣tainely knowne, viz. if either these Islanders, that is, the King, or some of the Naturalls, or else some Christi∣ans, or others in those parts would make choyse of the freshest they could finde of these Nuts, and to put both divers of them, and at sundry times into the ground, to see whether they would not sprout forth, and spring, for it is probable, that as they are in the inner kernell, like to the ordinary Cokar Nut, which hath a bud therein that hath and will grow, as is shewed before, This Nut also so neerely resembling it, as is shewed, might at one time or another spring and grow, and take away all other doubts and fables, whatsoever are forepassed: This my opinion how it will be accepted I know not, but if any by the tryall thereof should raise a tree or more, it would prove a worke no lesse gainefull then memorable to all posterity. 
CHAP. XLIII. Nux Moschata. The Nutmegge tree, T He Nutmegge tree, and so likewise the fruite are of two sorts exactly observed by Clusius, and by him called mas and faemina, the mas beareth the greater and the longer Nutmegge, the lesser and roun∣der the female, and the most ordinary with us, the tree whereof is reported by them that have seene them, to be very great, and as tall allmost as our Peare trees, spreading many branches, which are greene while they are young, having faire broad leaves set thereon, somewhat longer then Bay leaves, or to compare them more truely, like unto the Orrenge tree leaves, but without the lower peeces, and Nucis Moschatae termes germina. A true branch of the Nutmegge tree, with the fruite. 
Nux Moschata sen fructus integer comisus cum tegumento Macis, cor ise nigro &amp; nuce interiore rotundo &amp; longo. The whole Nutmegge cut in the middle, the hard shell with the Macis both on it, and of it, and the Nutmegs both long &amp; round. 
not so hard not dented about the edges, but set on a short stalke not one against another, but unequally on the branches, and abide alwayes greene thereon, the fruite (for flowers have not beene observed) groweth at the end of the young branches, and not as Matthiolus seeteth them forth, among the leaves, which are as bigge as Peaches, standing singly for the most part, but sometimes two together on a long thicke footestalke, having an outer thicke huske furrowed in the middle, which divideth it selfe into two parts, and growing ripe openeth it selfe, shewing the Nut within, covered with the Macis, cut into severall peeces as it were, and so strictly clea∣ving to that blacke hard shell whereon it lyeth, that it leaveth the print of the lying of it thereon, and is of an orient crimson colour, while it is fresh and the huske newly separated for it to lye open, but by little the ayre changeth the colour to be more dead and yellowish, as we see it brought dry unto us, being taken of from that blacke, thinne, hard shell, that encloseth the Nutmegge it selfe within it, which is somewhat round and firme or solid, diversly discoloured in veines within, somewhat heavy also, I meane the best, and not light or hollow, and yeelding an oylie moisture upon the pricking thereof with a pinne or needle, and of an excellent aromaticall both sent and taste, yet not so quicke and hot as either Pepper, Ginger, or Cloves. 
The other whose Nutmegge is longer and accounted the male, a branch whereof Clusius exhibiteth a part from the other, and describeth it as he received the branch, which was of a foote and an halfe in length, and as thicke as a writing pen of a goose quill, retaining some of the old wood of the last yeare, whose barke was of an ash-colour, but the new sprung branch of a brownish red colour, and very pithy in the middle, this branch had seven or eight leaves on it, being much larger and with a thicker footestalke then the former, and were neere a foote long, but not much thicker then they, and three or foure inches broad, somewhat hoary underneath and greene and shining above, with divers veines thwarting the middle ribbe: the fruite groweth in the same manner as the former, at the ends of the branches, but more in number set together, in all things like the former, but longer and greater, and nothing so aromaticall in sent and taste, yet it is said that the Macis of this sort is much more orient in colour then the last. They have received sundry names, for in Banda where they grow best they call them Palla, and the Macis Bunapalla, but in Decan, Iapatri, and the Macis Jaifol: of Avicenna Iausi band, that is, Nux Bandonsis, and the Macis Befbase. This was not knowne to the ancient Greeke writers, Theophrastus or Diosco∣rides; no nor to Galen or Pliny, for although some have thought it might be Galen his Chrysobalanos, yet they are farre awry therein, the later have called it Nux Aromatites, Nux Myristica, and Moschata, as if it were de∣rived a Musco, for the sweetnesse thereof. They are used in all the cold griefes of the head or braine for pal∣sies, the shrinking of sinewes, and the diseases of the mother, they are hot and dry in the second degree, and are somewhat astringent, serving to stay the laske, they cause a sweet breath and amend a stincking, they helpe to discusse winde, either in the stomacke or bowels, it helpeth to quicken the sight, and to comfort the spirits, and provoke urine, and are comfortable to the stomacke, and helpe those that are feeble or macilent to grow fat as also helpeth Venery and encreaseth sperme, they helpe to procure rest and sleepe by allaying the distemper of the spirits, being applyed to the temples. The Macis are of the same property, but somewhat more warming and comforting, the thicke oyle that is drawne both from Macis and Nutmegges, are either of them of good use in pectorall griefes to warme a cold stomacke, and the cough, and to dry up rheumaticke destillations of raw and cold flegme thereunto or upon the lungs. The chimicall oyle of either is of more efficacy both for pectorall and cephaticall diseases, but must be cautelously and sparingly used. 
CHAP. XLIV. Nux Ʋomica. The Vomiting Nut or Nux vomica. A Lthough we have no true knowledge of the tree that beareth these Nuts (as they are called now a∣dayes ordinarily in our shops) more then what Serapio saith of it, that the tree of the Nux methel, is like the tree of the Nux vomica, whereby we thinke that our Methel, which is the Stramonium minus with us so called, is the Methel of Serapio, but are much deceived, for his differeth much from it that we so call, in that Serapio saith of his Methel, that it beareth an oily fruite like Mandragoras, with an hairy skin or barke, and of no unpleasant taste, and of his Nux Ʋomica he saith also (differing notably from ours) that as one Abraham had informed him, it was a fruite bigger Nux Vomica. The Vomitting nut. 
then an Hasell Nut, full of nodes or brunches, and of a colour betweene white and blew, and speaking of the properties of them both, he saith that the Methel is cold in the fourth degree, so that if two drams be taken inwardly it killeth, if a lesser quantity it causeth a kinde of stupefying like drunkennesse: and of the Vomica, he saith onely that two drammes thereof taken with a decoction of dill, or with salt, doth marvellously provoke vomit, but giveth no deadly quality un∣to it, as he doth to the Methel: whereby it is thought that his Me∣thel is our Vomica, and that his assimilating it to Mandrake is rather to be understood of the quality then of the forme, whereunto it an∣swereth, but Avicen describeth the Nux Methel to have short and thicke prickles upon it, and a seed like unto Mandrake; and such in∣deed is the Stramonium so; that you may plainely see that Se∣rapio confoundeth both these together, both for forme and proper∣ty: and is likely that he never saw either of them, and therefore the Physicians and Apothecaries were in former times as much mista∣ken in appointing the one for the other: both pro &amp; contra: but now seeing that they are better knowne, and well distinguished in sunder, they are used each according to their property: yet because the fruite or nuts are not usuall in our shoppes, but hath beene formerly appointed to bee put into Antidotes and Alexipharmica ' s (as namely into the Electuarium de Ovo, according to the Phisitions of Augusta their receipt: but for their dangerous qualitie thought fit by our Phisitions in the Pharmacopaea Londinensis to be expunged and left out) I thought good to shew you them and the uses they are put to for the most part with us: The fruit, as is generally seene are flat, round, of the thicknesse of halfe ones finger, almost like unto Lupines but greater, hol∣lowish on the one side, and a little bunched round on the contrary, of a grayish colour with a kinde of Freese or soft Cotten covering the whole, and of so hard a horny substance that they will no way bee beaten into pouther, but must be grated on a small Spice grater, but take heed not to grate Spice thereon after. The chiefest use that they are put unto is to kill Dogs and Cats, and other creatures, by mixing some of it with their meate; as also to give unto Crowes, Ravens, and other such like troublesome birds that by their noyse disquiet mens sleepe or studies, or upon pleasure to strew thereof upon flesh, a little sprinkled over with Aquavitae, tied fast to some stake or other such like thing, which will make them after they have eaten thereof seeme as it were drunke for a time, tumbling off from the poast or tree upon the ground, there fluttering for a while untill the operation is past and then they will flye away. Some that give it inwardly three or foure graines at a time say that it expelleth pestilentiall vapours from the heart, and procureth sweate but not vomit as farre as I can learne, notwithstanding the name, and therefore Matthiolus would have it called Nux Canina rather then Vomica. 
CHAP. XLV. O libanum sive Thus. White Frankumscense. T He generall tenet both of old or ancient and new writers is, that the Francumscence tree doth grow in Arabia, yet Dioscorides saith in India, but Garcias saith none groweth there; and as some say, the Mir he and Frankumsence grow in the woods promiscuously together, but the description of the tree in particular was kept close (as it was anciently related) religiously by those that gathered the Gum, but those no doubt were but meere fables and tales to hold it in estimation, as that of the religious Assirian youth, slaine through envy, and therefore Thus the more accepted by the gods; for since the rites of Gentilisme here ceased, and Turcisme crept in place, the knowledge thereof by accesse unto places is as hard now as before, onely Theophrastus saith the leaves are like Bay leaves: but Thevet maketh it like the Pine tree, and Garcias saith that it is a low tree with leaves like the Masticke tree, and that the Gum of the mountaine sort is the best, and last∣ly, Lobel and Pena in their Adversaria give us the figure of a strange leafe to bee the leafe of this tree which con∣sisteth of a double fould from the lower end, where it is small and pointed, to the toppe being broad and wide, like unto a Funnell, having as it were a small flippet or peece hanging down, which of all others is the most unlik∣ly to be the leafe of this tree, the forme being of such an extraordinary likenes, and may more likely be the leafe of Clusius his Limonio conger, as I have before shewed you. I Arbor Thurifera. The Olibanum, or Incense tree. 
have therfore here given you the figure of the tree as Lug∣dunensis setteth it forth. Some have thought that the bark of this tree may be the Narcaphthum (which as some say should be rather Nascaphthum ) of Dioscorides, and called Thus Indaeum, for the Iews use it as Incense, and to such u∣ses Dioscorides saith it was applyed, and for the Mother in women. The Gum droppeth from the tree in reasona∣ble plentie into round peeces, some bigger and lesser then others, and scarce any exceeding the end of ones thumbe, the best is pure, without eyther barke, wood or any other thing, white, yea and the whiter the better, reasonable gummy or fat, not dry like Rossin, and consuming quick∣ly and wholly into smoake. It is hot in the second degree and dry in the first and binding withall. It restraineth bleedings, stoppeth the laske and the Gonorrhea, helpeth the memory, avoideth sadnesse and melancholly, and com∣forteth the heart mixed with other things for that cause; it is also very pectorall and good for the cough, for thinne rheumes and distillations, and the Plurisie also, mixed with conserve of Roses and taken fasting, the fumes thereof when it is burned, being taken in at the mouth and nose, the head being covered is very availeable both for the Cough of the Lungs, and those thinne distillations thereon causing it: the fumes thereof taken beneath, or the appli∣cation of it in ointment, helpeth the Piles and the Tenas∣mus, which is a disease provoking one often to the stoole without doing any thing, it is a singular good medecine for the rednesse and paines in the eyes, or in the eares: Mirrhe and Olibanum mixed with the white of an egge being beaten and laid on the temples helpeth the Me∣grome and paines in the head: it is of especiall use and ac∣count in Balmes, Salves, Plaisters, and Ointments for wounds and Vlcers, after their clensing to incarnate and heale them speedily, and in fractures of the skull most ef∣fectually, so that the pia mater be not perished. The barke of the tree was in former times in much use by the ancients but is utterly neglected now a dayes which was more drying and binding then the Gum it selfe: they had also Manna Thuris, which some tooke to be a sort of that dewy Manna that is gathered from trees but were deceived, for it is but the small peeces of pouther of the Oli∣banum which is broken by the carriage: they used also the fuligo or soote of it when it was burned being made as blacking for shooes, &amp;c. is made, but is wholly out of use now adayes. 
CHAP. XLVI. Piper ejusque species nigrum album longum, &amp;c. Divers sorts of Pepper, as blacke, white and long, &amp;c. H Ow fabulous and untrue were the relations of Indian Drugs brought to the ancient writers, Dioscori∣des and others may be plainely discerned, by their description of the plant of Pepper, and the fruit thereof, for Dioscorides saith of it, that it groweth on a small tree, and that the fruit at the first is long, which is the long Pepper, having within it small graines like unto Millet seede, which in time grow∣ing ripe becommeth blacke Pepper, by spreading forth the branches and the graines of Pepper upon them as they are seene: and that the white Pepper is taken before it is ripe, the roote is like unto the Castus and not to Ginger as some say, thus farre he: but the truth is farre otherwise: for Pepper, whether blacke or white dif∣fereth not either in manner of growing, nor in forme of leafe or fruite; the long also groweth after the same man∣ner, but differeth in the fruit: now all the sorts are sufficiently knowne by our Navigations and frequent trans∣sicke into the East Indies, to grow each on a severall climing bush, but after one manner, that is, as Hoppes doe with us, so that if they be not sustained by some tree, pole, cane or the like, whereon they may clime and spread, will lye downe on the ground, and thereon runne and shoot forth small fibres at every joynt, as hath beene truely observed: but the usuall manner is to plant a branch taken from the bush, neare unto some tall and great tree, or as I said some great Cane or such like, and so it will quickly by winding it selfe about it (but not with tendrells as a Vine doth) get to the very toppe thereof, being full of joynts, and shooting forth faire and somewhat large leaves one at a joynt, being almost round, but ending in a point, greener above and paler underneath, with a great middle ribbe, and foure other ribes somewhat lesser, spreading from it two on each side, and smaller veines therein also unto the edges which are not dented but smooth and plaine, not thicke but somewhat thinne, and set on a pretty long footstalke, the fruit or Pepper it selfe, whether blacke, white, or long, groweth at the same joynt, but on the contrary side opposite to the leafe, and not betweene the stalke and the leafe, as some have falsly set it downe round about a long stalke, somewhat thinly set all along thereon, or not so thicke as a bunch of Grapes: the roote hath sundry joynts creeping in the ground with fibres at the joynts, the white Pepper is very hardly Piper nigram vel albam. Blacke or white Pepper. 
Piperis albiracamus. A branch of white Pepper. 
distinguished from the blacke by the very inhabitants and planters thereof, untill it come to ripenesse (for the white and the blacke Pepper doe grow on severall trees or bushes) but that the leaves are of a little paler greene colour: the graines or berries are white, solid, or firme without wrincles, and more aromaticall. Clusius first and Bauhinus from him would make a certaine strange fruit brought to Clusius to be the Bresma or Brasma of Diosco∣rides, as Lib. exot. 2. cap. 22. fruct. 4. but surely Clusius and Bauhinus, yea and Cordus also as I verily thinke were deceived in this their opinions, to Piper Lorgum. Long Pepper. 
Fructus Piper lorgum. 
Piper Aethiopicum Matthioli &amp; Piper candatum Orientule. Matthiolus his Ethiopian Pepper, and a kind of East India fruite called Pepper with a taile. 
Piper longum maritimum Africanum sive Felsel cavil Alpin . Long Pepper of Africa. 
thinke that Dioscorides Brasma was a sort of Pepper differing from the blacke, when as it is but the light graines of Pepper that have no substance in them, as it hap∣pens to many other graines or berries, some to idle and nothing worth, and therefore wee call it light Pepper. The long Pepper hath leaves very neare to the same forme and largenesse, but a lit∣tle longer pointed, of a paler greene colour, thinner also, and with a shorter footstalke, and not having foure so emi∣nent ribs passing from the middle one, as in the other, but foure or five on each side or more sometimes according to the largenesse of the leafe, with many other smaller veines therein likewise, and of little lesse acrimony and hot taste then the blacke: the fruite of this also grow∣eth in the same manner as I sayd before opposite to each leafe at the joynts, which are closer set together then in the blacke, some being greater or lesser, shorter or longer then others, yet none thicker or longer then ones finger, con∣sisting of many small graines as it were set close together in rowes, and not open and separate as in the blacke and white Pepper, of an ash colour when it is ripe as is plainely seene in all that is brought unto us. The blacke Pepper is of much use both with the Indians and other nations for they use to eate the leaves, chawing them a while and spitting them out againe and the Pepper it selfe also doe they use to chew, and from the branch take every graine one after another while they are fresh and therein take great pleasure, we use it most in our meats and sauces to season them, and because it is moderat∣ly hot, if not taken too much at once, it is the better accepted and more pleasing to warme the cold stomacke, and to stirre up an appetite and to consume crude and moist humours therein, or distilling from the head; it help∣eth to breake and dissolve winde in the stomacke or bowels, to provoke urine, to helpe the cough and other di∣seases of the breast, and is effectuall against the bitings of Serpents and other poisons, and is therefore put into the great Antidots: but the white Pepper as being more hot, sharpe, and aromaticall is of more effect in medi∣cines, and so is the long also being more used to be given for Agues to warme the stomacke before the accesse or comming thereof, thereby to abate the rigour and shakings, all of them are used against the Quinsie being mixed with hony, and taken inwardly as well as applyed outwardly, Piper Mat and disperseth the kernells as well in the throate as in any other part of the body. Matthiolus maketh mention of a kinde of Pepper, as he called it Piper Aethiopium, or Aethiopicum brought with other wares from Alexandria into Italy, and groweth in long cods like beanes or pease, but many cods set together at a place, whose graines within them being like Pepper both in forme and taste, but smaller, and sticke very close to the inside: this sort Serapio setteth downe by the name of Granum Zelin, which some erroniously tooke for Carpesium and some for Amomum. Monardus also maketh mention of a kinde of long Pepper that groweth in all the tract of the continent of the West Indies which is halfe a foot long, Piper lon¦gum Ocen dentale Monardi. and of the thicknesse of a small rope consisting of many rowes of small graines set close together as in the head of Plan∣tane and is blacke being ripe, and hotter in taste, more aromaticall and more pleasant and sweet then Capsicum, and preferred before blacke Pepper, it groweth saith he on high trees or plants. 
Piper longum maritimum Africanum sive Folfel tauil Alpino. Long Pepper of Africa. This strange plant shooteh from the roote a great many low round stalkes somewhat like unto Rushes, having here and there some other smaller springing from them, like branches almost as thick as a finger, having thereon a few small leaves in the Spring time, but quickly falling away, scarcely abiding a moneth, and at the tops of some of them come forth small whitish flowers, each standing in a small long huske, in which after groweth the seed, the stalkes being cut or broken, yeeld out a whitish yellow milke or juyce, of a very hot and burning taste, more then ordinary Pepper, Ranunculus, or Tithymall, which caused Imperatus to referre it to the Tithymals. Yet some tooke it to be Xabra, or Camarrones of Rhasis, Bauhinus calleth it Piper longum angustifolium ex Florida. 
Piper Candatum racemosum. Pepper with a taile in bunches. About the yeare 1590. there was brought to Lishborne by the Portugale, from some parts of the East In∣dies, which afterwards wee understood to bee Guinney, a kinde of graine, which they called Pimenta del rabo, that is Pepper with a taile, and grew many together on a long stalke, thicker set then in the ordina∣ry Pepper, every one by it selfe on a short footestalke, being blackish, round, and firme like Pepper, with a little point or end, wherein it chiefely differed from blacke Pepper, and tasting hot, somewhat like Pepper, but of a sharper and differing aromaticall rellish, and a little lesse then the best sort of Pepper, but with a rugged skinne thereon like it, whether it grew after the same manner of Pepper, none could tell that brought it, but as it is probable by the sight of some of the stalkes, they seemed rather to grow from some upright bush. The King of Portugall forbad the bringing home any more of that sort, lest it should villefie the other. 
Piper Canarinum cavum. A hollow kinde of Pepper of Canara. Garcias ab Orta, maketh mention of this kinde of Pepper, which in the Malabar language is termed of Ca∣nara. It is a kind of hollow graine, of a blewish colour on the outside, and having sundry graines within the hollownesse thereof, which the poorer sort of people doe eate, and therefore as it is thought called Canarijnum as if you should say Rusticall or Clownes Pepper for the meanenesse thereof, and therefore not used to be ex∣ported. 
CHAP. XLVII. Santalum album, citrinum &amp; rubrum. White, yellow, and red Sanders. W E have in our shops for our use in physicke, onely these three sorts of Saunders, whereof the white and the yellow are sweet woods, and the yellow is the sweetest, the red hath no sent. The Saunders tree, as Garcias saith, groweth to be as bigge as the Wallnut tree, having fresh greene leaves like unto the Masticke tree, and darkish blew flowers, the fruite being like unto Cherries for the size, but without any taste, blacke when they are ripe, and quickely falling away, the wood it selfe is without sent, as it is said, while it is living, and fresh, and smelleth sweete onely when it is dry, the white and the yellow woods, are so hard to be distinguished before that time, as it is said, that none but those Indians that usually fell those trees, doe know their difference before hand, and can tell which will prove better then others: the chiefest part, and smelling sweetest being the heart of the wood, and as the trees doe grow in severall places, so are their goodnesse, being more or lesse plentifull in the substance of the heart, for there∣after are they accounted: The ancient Graecians have made no mention hereof, but the Arabians onely, who generally call it Sandal, but the Natives in the Island Timor, and all the Provinces of Malacca, Chandama, and those of Canara, Decan, and Surrat, Sercanda; the Latines call that sort pallidum, which others call Citrinum from Avicen, who reckoning three sorts, Citrinum Rubrum &amp; Citrinum alterum ve gens ad albedinem quod qui∣dam nominant Makassari quod alij dicunt melius &amp; validus, which words in Avicen explaine the word Makassari which Garcias saith he could not understand, and the Pandectarij converted odoriferum: they of Malabar have a certaine sweete wood like unto white Saunders (as there are many other sweete woods in other places) but yet is not the right, although they use it as the true is, and instead thereof, calling it Sambarane in the Malabar language. The red Saunders differeth much from both the former, both in place growing farre one from ano∣ther, and in forme, also colour and sent: it differeth also from the Brassill wood, in that Saunders is neither sweete in taste, nor giveth any Dye as the Brassill doth, and besides, the Saunders is heavier then it, and will sinke in water, it is also a harder and shorter grained wood, and more brittle in breaking short. They are all both coo∣ling and cordiall, and used together in sundry cordiall medicines, but the white, and the yellow are the more cordiall and comfortable by reason of their sweetenesse, and the red more cooling and binding, which quality yet neither of the other want, although in a lesse proportion, for the red is used often to stay defluxions of thinne rheume from the head, and to coole hot inflammations, hot gouts, and in hot argues, to coole and temper the heat: but the white and yellow are both cordiall and cephalicall, applyed with Rosewater to the temples, procuring ease in the head ache, and are singular good for weake and fainting stomackes, through heate: in the hot fits of agues also, they are very profitably applyed in Epithemes or Fomentations, both for the stomacke, and for the spirits, and palpitations of the heart, which also doe comfort and strengthen them, temperate the melancholly humour, and procureth alacrity and mirth, which qualities are attributed to the yellow more then the white, which is used more to stay and binde fluxes of the sperme in man or woman, for which purpose, either the pou∣ther taken in a reare egge or mixed with other things for the purpose, or steeped in red Wine, and kept in an hot Balneo, or in hot embers close stopped all night, and strained forth and drunke in the morning and evening, both stayeth the Gonorrhea, or running of the reines in men, and the whites in women: applyed also to Maides or womens great brests, mixed with the juyce of Pu slane, abateth their greatnesse, and represseth their overmuch growing,
CHAP. XLVIII. Pseudosantalus Cretica Abolicea dicta. Bastard red Saunders of Candy. T His tree groweth in Candy, and made Pseudosantalus Cretica Abolicea dicta. Bastard red Saunders of Candy. 
knowne to Alpinus, whose figure was sent him as I here shew it you, with this de∣scription following. It is a tree that grow∣eth to a reasonable great height, &amp; straight upright, furnished with many armes and branches, very beautifull to behold, set with faire greene leaves one at a place, like unto those of Alaternus, but rounder and deeplier endented about the edges: the flowers were not observed what forme or colour they bore; but the fruite was round, and of the biggenesse of Pepper cornes, of a darke greenish colour which were not perfectly ripe, when this tree was found. The wood it selfe is somewhat sweete, hard, and reddish so that it see∣med like red Saunders especially being made into pouther from whence I thinke saith he, it may not unfitly be called Bastard red Saunders of Candy, some of the wood saith Pona, hath beene brought into Italy, and there sold for Saunders: but it differs from it in that it is nothing so hea∣vy as the true red Saunders is. 
CHAP. XLIX. Sassaphras. The Sassafras or Ague tree. T He first knowledge of this Sassafras or Ague tree came by the French to our Christian world, and to the Spaniards by driving out the French, who had seated themselves somewhat neere the Flo∣rida, which they claimed for themselves for they having gotten Agues, and swellings in their legges, and other diseases by lying on the ground in the open aire by bad victualls and raw drinke of water, as the French before them had, by a French man that remained among them, were taught the use of this tree, which he and his Country men had learned before of the Natives, to helpe themselves in these extremities: some Indians call the tree Pavame, and some Winanke: but the French (whom the Spaniards and all other Nations since that use it follow) Sassafras, upon what ground or cause is not knowne. The tree groweth great and tall, bare of branches unto a reasonable height covered with a grayish browne barke somewhat thicke, being in taste hotter and quicker then the wood or roote by much: towards the toppe it spreadeth forth many goodly armes and branches into a round compasse or forme, having large darke greene leaves growing thereon one at a place: standing on the contrary side, each to other, tasting like the roote but more weakely, some cut into three divisions, somewhat resembling Figge tree leaves, but lesser by the halfe for the most part, with a middle ribbe running through each division, and two others to the inner cuts, with veines besides, and some with little or no division at all upon them, for both sorts wee have seene growing on the same tree, smooth also and not dented about the edges: the flowers are small and yellow made of threds very like to the Male Cornel tree as Master Iohn Tradescant saith and the fruite small blackish berries, set in small cups upon Sassafras. The Sassaphras or Ague tree 
long footestalkes many clustring together: the rootes are not very great nor grow deepe, in the like manner as all other sorts of Indian trees doe, but are covered with the like brownish barke, that the trunke and branches are but somewhat redder, which are most in use, being of greater force and efficacy then any other part of the tree, and taste somewhat spicelike, rellishing Fennell seede withall, but Clusius compareth the taste thereof unto the herbe Tarra∣gon, and is hot and dry in the beginning of the third de∣gree. The decoction whereof is familiarly given in all cold diseases and obstructions of the Liver and spleene, as also in cold rheumes and defluxions of the head, on the teeth, eyes, or lunges, warming and drying up the moi∣sture, and strengthning the parts afterwards, and there∣fore is availeable in coughes, and other cold diseases of the brest, stomacke, and lungs, and restraineth castings, and helpeth digestion, breaketh and expelleth winde, the gra∣vell and stone in the kidneyes, and provoketh urine, and womens courses, it also warmeth, heateth, and dryeth up the moisture of womens wombes, which is in most the cause of barrennesse, and causeth them to be the more apt to conceive: it is of especiall good use in tertian and quo∣tidian agues that come of humours, or are of long conti∣nuance: it is thought also to be good in the time of the pestilence, to weare some thereof continually about them, that the smell of it may expell the corrupt and evil vapours of the pestilence: it is generally used in all the diseases that come of cold and raw, thin, and corrupt humours, the French disease, and other of the like foule nature: the In∣dians use the leaves being bruised to heale their wounds, and sores of whatsoever quality they be. 
CHAP. L. Spermacaeti. Parmasitty. S Permacaeti, that is the spawne of the Whale, usually called in English Parmasitty, is found in the head of one onely sort of Whale fish called Trumpa, which hath no finnes in his mouth, but teeth about a spanne long, and as thicke as ones wrist: it lyeth in a hole therein, as it were a Well, which is taken out and brought home, after their fishing for Whales, in barrels, and is afterwards pressed in a presse, that the thinne oyle may runne from the thicker substance, which is that Parmasitty we use, and the more it is pressed the whiter it will be, and of little or no smell, yet the oyle is somewhat strong: this sort of Whale hath but one hole in the head▪ whereby it spouteth out water, all other sorts having two, his head is bigger then o∣thers, and bigger then his whole body besides, which is also of a more gray colour: in this Whales entralls, Ambergreise is said often to be found in more plenty then in other, which it is more likely that they swallow as food, finding it swimming on the Sea water, then that it should breed in them, as diverse have supposed, for I have here shewed you the generation of Ambergreese: this Whale also yeeldeth a kind of oyle, as other Whales doe, but it groweth both white and hard, when it is cold, when as all other are liquid like oyle, and never glow hard like it, and therefore it is alwayes kept by it selfe, and not put to others. 
CHAP. LI. Tacamahaca. The Gum Tacamahaca. T His Gum, which the West Indians call Tacamahaca, the Spaniards and all other Nations retaining the same name, is said to be gathered from a great tree like unto a Poplar, that is, very sweete having a red fruite or berry like unto those of the Peony, more we cannot as yet learne of it. The Gumme is of good and much use for outward remedies, not being knowne to be given inwardly for any in∣firmity, although I doubt not but that it might safely and to good purpose, if judgement were joyned with the triall thereof, but as it is now generally used, it serveth much, yea and most of all in womens diseases to retaine the Mother in its place, by laying a plaister thereof upon the navell: as also when it riseth up and is ready to strangle them, and for the strengthening thereof, some put Muske and Amber to it, or a little Civet in the middle of the plaister: This Gumme being spread on leather and applyed to the side or spleene, that is growne hard and windy, dissolveth the tumours, disperseth the winde and bringeth much ease and helpe to the disqui∣eted part, and is no lesse effectuall in all tumours, griefes, paines and torments in the body or joynts, proceeding of cold raw, and windy humours, applyed plasterwise thereon: to be applyed to the stomacke, with a third part of Storax, a little Ambergriese, and some waxe, is a singular helpe to strengthen the weaknesse thereof to helpe digestion, to provoke the appetite, and to dissolve wind: it is of excellent use in the head-ache, and to strengthen the braine and memory, as also in all defluxions from the head, into the face, eyes, eares or teeth, causing swellings therein, with paines, rednesse, and much perplexity, to be applyed to the temples, or put into the eare, tyed in a little fine silke or cloath: it helpeth also all running humours, and paines thereby in the shoul∣ders or armes, or any other part of the body, the joynts likewise, goutes and Sciatica, giving besides the scat∣tering of the humours, much ease of the paines, and by the astriction whereof it partaketh not a little, streng∣theneth the parts wonderfully against the virulency of the humours: it marvellously helpeth all punctures and wounds in the joynts, and that speedily; healing them and hindering any spasme or convulsion that may happen therein, so that this gumme serveth as a remedy in most outward griefes that doe not rise from much heate, and yet therein is not defective, being warily applyed, that is in the declination of the heate to discusse those humours that remaine: for being hot to the entrance of the third degree and dry in the second, with much astriction also, it is most proper for those before recited griefes, and others of the like property. The choyse of the best is, that it be pure and cleane without drosse, cleare also, in some sort of a whitish browne colour, and more whitish in some parts, of no strong but a little quicke and sharpe sent, and quickely consuming into smoake being cast on quicke coales. 
CHAP. LII. Terra Lemnia vel sigillata. Terra sigillata or sealed earth. B Ecause this is, and hath beene a drugge of much respect and use in physicke, although no herbe, I could not over passe it, but shew you the thing, and the many doubts and falsifications with the u∣ses thereof, that my Brethren in profession, and all others also that shall have occasion to use it, may both know the right and refuse the counterfet and false: for that is the whole scope of my labours in this Worke. viz. to enforme all of the genuine and right things, that they may desire, and know them, and also the best true uses whereunto they serve. First for the Place it is cer∣tainely agreed by all, that the Isle of Lemnos seated in the Aegean Sea, called Terra Lemnia vel Sigillata. 
by the Italians and others in these dayes Stalimene, was in all former ages and yet is in these times, the place where onely this earth is to be had, which hath beene and still is of much estimation in physicke, for the excellent Ver∣tues therein above all the earthes in all other places, and therefore the seve∣rall ages had severall rites whereby to ennoble it the more: Dioscorides saith of his time that they used to mixe the blood of a Goate with the earth, which Galen in his time (which was long after Dioscorides ) being desirous to know, and what proportion of blood was put to the earth, he sailed twice to Lemnos for that purpose, but missing of the place the first time, at the se∣cond he came both to see the place from whence it was taken, and the man∣ner of ordering of it, which was differing from Dioscorides his relation, for neither blood nor any thing else was mixed therewith, and Galen as he saith himselfe, was laughed at by the people of the better sort, who well under∣stood the course of their Country for many foregoing ages, for asking such a question of the mixing of Goates blood with it: but the Priest that was then ready prepared to fetch home a cart full thereof, upon his arrivall there, onely cast a certaine number of Wheate and Barley cornes to the earth, as a pacification therewith, and some ceremonious rites, according to the Re∣ligion of his Country, caused it to be carryed home, where, having put it in∣to water, they washed the pure earth from the stones and sand, or any other thing in it, which afterwards being dry againe, they make it into small cakes, some bigger or lesser then others, and seale them with the figure of a Goate, the badge of Diana: and therefore they were called Sphragida aegios, that is sigillum caprae, or Sphragis Lemnia sigillum Lemnium, and the La∣tines Terra Lemnia or Terra sigillata. Those rites of Gentilisme being ceased, others were brought in and used by the Christians, and when the Ʋenetians were Lords of this Isle, as of many other in those Seas, they imposed this order, that but onely one day in a yeare the earth should be digged and carryed away to be used: Forbid∣ding any upon great penalties to take any privily without leave: which custome the Turkes strictly observe to this day, but the hill in this Isle is much controverted, being suspected not to be the same from whence the earth was taken in Galens time, yet the Greekes of the Isle affirme constantly, they never heard or knew of any other place: The earth as Galen saith of it in his time, was called of some Miltos Lemnia, Rubrica Lemnia: because it was in colour reddish like Rubrica Ruddle, but that it did not colour the fingers, as Rubrica Ruddle doth, and this the Priest onely as is before said sealed: Another sort is the Rubrica which wee take to be our ordinary Bolearmoniacke, and some thinke that our finest and best Orientall Bole, is the true Terra Lemnia, because it is of the same reddish colour, not tainting the fingers, and that the Terra Lemnia or sigillata, that we have in these times much differeth from it, and very divers in it selfe one unto another, for some is whitish or very pale red, and that in lumpes or peeces not sealed, others that are sealed now adayes with Arabian Cha∣racters, which are interpreted Ti imachton, that is Terra sigillata, are not without some doubt of counterfet∣ting, so that of two and twenty sorts of these small cakes of sealed earth, which Bellonius saith he had sought out and gotten in the shops of the Druggists in Constantinople, it was hard to judge which of them, or whether any of them were right or no, for as he saith, some cakes were much greater then others, and some of a pale brow∣nish colour, of a fatty substance like tallow, easie to be chewed, and without any grittinesse therein, which some others have, that were more red, and somewhat acide in taste: Some againe had divers red spots in a whi∣tish earth; and some smell so sweete that it may be thought to be so made; And some againe of a wan colour, tending to yellow, others very gritty betweene the teeth being chewed: these and divers other varieties, doe shew that covetousnesse (this being of much esteeme) is the cause of counterfetting, and besides experience sheweth us, that the earthes of sundry other Countries are found to be of excellent properties, both to provoke sweate, to resist poyson, and notably to dry and bind fluxes, catarrhes, &amp;c. all which are attributed to the best Terra Lemnia, but Galen in his time had the tryall of the Bolus, or Terra, or Lapis Armenius, which you please to call it, for sundry especiall remedies wherein it was effectuall, as also in a great Plague time in Rome, which he compared to that was in Greece in Thucydides time, for as he saith, whosoever tooke of that Bolus Armenius, dis∣solved in thinne wine or water, were saved if they were to be saved, for no other thing could if that did not: and therefore seeing we have so little right Terra Lemnia or sigillata wherein to trust, and so much counterfet, where∣of we have cause to beware, my advise is rather to use the best fine Bole (which both in forme and quality com∣meth neerest to the truest Terra Lemnia, ) then any other substitute or new found earth, going under the name of the right, although they have divers good properties in them. Let no man impute this as a temerity in me, for could I be assured that we could have true Terra Lemnia, or that the true that now is to be had were of that ex∣cellency that Dioscorides, Galen and others report of that in their times, I would spare my advise and speake o∣therwise. But seeing I have commended the fine Bole for the best substitute unto Terra Lemnia, let me also de∣clare unto you, although I have said somewhat before of Bole, the speciall uses of both of them, that by compa∣ring their properties, you may see how little they differ in quality: The chiefest effect of Terra Lemnia, accor∣ding to Dioscorides, is to resist the venome of Serpents, and other deadly poysons, for which cause it is put into the great Antidotes against them, and is good also against laskes and fluxes: but Galen setteth them forth more largely, for as he saith, having had a Booke given him when he was in the Isle of Lemnos, by one of the chiefest men, containing all the properties of Terra Lemnia, he sheweth that besides the remedies of venome and deadly poysons, he had experience of the helpe it gave to those that had eaten of the Sea Hare or of Cantharides, de∣fending them from all the fits that doe accompany those that have taken of them, as also the biting of a mad dog, and that it wonderfully helpeth old sores that are hard to be cured, and fresh wounds also to consolidate them. The fine Bole of Armenia, Galen sheweth to be admirable effectuall in the plague, as is before said, it also is sin∣gular good in laskes, blooddy flixes, and spitting of blood, for the catarrhe, or defluxion of rheume and thinne hu∣mours upon the brest and lungs, and shortnesse of breath, marvellously drying and helping them, and likewise against the foule ulcers in the mouth, the ulcers in the lungs or other parts, and the fistula in any, without applying any other thing that might clense it, or take away the callous skinne therein, this onely dryed it, and healed it up. 
CHAP. LIII. Turbith officinarum. The usuall Turbith. H Aving said something before in the Classis of purging Plants, concerning the various sorts of Tur∣bith, as divers did take them, and account of them, whereof I meane not to speake againe in this place, but yet I thought good here, to say somewhat more of the true Turbith, which is a forraigne Drugge, and used in the Apothecaries shops, not knowne to us or any other certainely, that hath written thereof, what forme or face the plant truely beareth, whose roote it is: for although Gar∣cias saith, that he saw the plant growing greene and in flower (yet he saith himselfe that it differeth from that which we use in our shoppes) which he describeth to have no great or long roote, whose stalke is like unto Ivy, spreading on the ground, of a fingers thickenesse or more, and two hands long, and some times much longer: the leaves are like unto those of the Althaea, Marsh Mallow, and so are the flowers of a reddish white, and sometimes all white, but not changing three times a day, as some report of it: that part of the stalke that is next unto the roote and is gummy, is onely used, the rest being too small is of no use: sometimes the roote is gathered with the stalke, which is unprofitable, the stalke onely being of use in Physicke: the whole is insipide without taste: so that you may perceive by this description, that this Turbith of Garcias, is but the stalke of an herbe as it seemeth (but our Turbith in shops is plainely deserned to be a roote, yet somewhat small, and of an ash-colour on the outside, and white within, having a pith in the middle, which is cut out and cast away as un∣profitable, and some peeces, but not all gummy at the ends having no manifest taste) which by bruising of it while it is greene, as he saith, yeeldeth forth a juyce that hardeneth into a gumme; yet doth Garcias appropriate this Turbith in his following discourse to that which was with them of daily use, saying that the Arabians, Per∣sians, and Turkes call it all by the name of Turbith, by the Indians in Surrat, where it groweth plentifully Bar∣caman, and in Canara, whereof Goa is a part Tigmar: It groweth also as he saith in other places of India natu∣rally wilde: but that of Bisnager or Goa, is not used by the Physitions there, but that of Guzatate, which is the best, from whence also as he saith, it is transported into Persia, Arabia, Asia minor and Portugall. In this discourse of Garcias, I finde some contrariety as I take it, at least such intricacy, as maketh me doubt it was not so advised∣ly written, as so worthy a man (whose Workes and la∣bours Turbi h off uinarum. The usuall Turbith. 
were as directions to posterity) should have done; for first he saith that the stalke is of use, the roote is un∣profitable, and yet he saith this very same is both called Turbith, and used by the Physitions there, of all nations as the Turbith of the ancients, which that the Indians ga∣ther it to sell to the Merchants, that carry it into their Countries, and yet it was never seene that any such gum∣my stalkes were brought into these parts of Christendome that I can learne, and sold by the name of Turbith. A∣gaine, Garcias saith that this his Turbith is farre differing from that which the Arabians describe, and namely that of Mesues, which he describeth with those notes that are agreeable unto that Turbith that is every where to be round in all our shops, and yet Garcias taxeth him of erronious describing of it, as though those notes did not agree to the true Turbith that is brought out of the East Indies, by the Portugalls, into Christendome, when as we never saw any other brought from thence, so that I cannot see how Garcias can be freed from the imputati∣on of much oversight, that tooke his Turbith to be the stalkes, and not the rootes of the Turbith plant: for I verily thinke his Turbith and ours to be all one, and that his errour rose onely from being too confident on his Kinsmans relation thereof, to be the stalkes, who as he saith, informed him of the plant, the manner of the ga∣thering and usage thereof by the Indians, and that him∣selfe was present with the Indians, and saw the whole ordering of it, and is probable was but his owne conceit and fained to make Garcias beleeve it: for how else could that be differing from that of Mesues, which verily is the same with that, which as I thinke hath beene alwaies brought us for Turbith, and yet be the same the Portugals brought with them from thence, to serve all Christen∣dome. The notes of Mesues his Turbith, which as I said agree so justly with our Turbith, that you may know how to chuse the best are these; but first he saith that it is the roote of an herbe, which hath Ferula like leaves but lesse (which how true it is I cannot say, Mesues peradventure never having seene the plant growing, giveth that note rather by information, which Garcias it may be sheweth by his owne sight but of the roote, which served him for his daily use, he was an eye-witnesse and testifyeth of it) and was of the kind of those plants that give milke (and yet not of any Tithymall for divers other plants give milke that are not hot in taste as the Tithymalls) and was of divers sorts, manured, and wild, great, small, white, blacke, and yellow, and growing in dry places as may be perceived by the thickenesse of the juyce (the gumminesse he meaneth) and both greater and smaller rootes, white, and blackish, and yellow, are many times seene altogether with us (which blacknesse or yellownesse may come by the ill drying of the roote, or the taking of some wet in the drying or after) he maketh two markes of the choysest: that it be white (within) hollow within like a reed or cane (that is when the hard pith of the roote is taken out) gummy with an ash-coloured barke or outside, smooth, and not rugged, easie to be broken, fresh, and not very great or thicke, which is not so good, these notes doe all agree to our Turbith officinarum. Turbith is more used to be given in pou her, and that seldome alone but mixed with other things, or else made into an electuary, then in decoction, and purgeth flegme very notably, and tough clammy humours that fall on the joynts, or on those parts that are more remote: it looseneth the belly of those excrements that sticke close thereto, and clenseth the brest from thicke flegme: it is very profitably given to those that have a dropsie, the leprosie, or the French disease, as also those that are troubled with those diseases that rise from adust humours, the blacke jaundise and the like, it helpeth day agues, and in generall all other diseases bred of flegme, 
CHAP. LIV. Ʋnicornu sive Cornu Mono cerotis. Vnicornes Horne. V Nicornes Horne likewise is a precious Iewell of high esteeme, and with Princes kept alwayes in their treasury to be used upon occasion for themselves, whose worth poore men could not easily reach or attaine unto. There are divers beasts that beare two hornes both male and female, as the Oxe, others the males onely, as Deere, Sheepe &amp;c. Some beate three hornes, as certaine Oxen in India, as Solinus reporteth, and some foure, as divers Ramm s in sundry Countries hath beene observed, yet casually, not by kinde, and some againe beare but one, whereof some beare it on their nose, as the Rhinoceros, and some in their forehead, as the Indian wild Asse, with a whole hoofe as other Asses have, where∣of Aristoles and Pliny speake, and Orix with a cloven hoofe, related by them also and Columella: as also cer∣taine Kine in Zoila, a City in Aethiopia, and Camphur, a certaine beast plentifully breeding in the Molucca Islands, that liveth both in the water and on land. Some other creatures also there are that beare but one horne, as cer∣taine Fishes, breeding plentifully in the Indian Seas, whereof Vlerif so called (which I take to be the Sea Vni∣corne) is one, and the Sword fish, and certaine birds in Aethiopia as Aelianus maketh mention: but of all these creatures with one horne, none are said or found to have white hornes but the Vnicorne (of the Sea as well as the Land) called by the Hebrewes Rem and Reem (famoused in the Scriptures) by Avicen Achercheden, by some other Arabians Barkaran, by the Greekes Monoceros, and by the Latines Vnicornus, for some are said to be blacke others red, Aelianus describeth the Indian Asse to have his horne to be whitish at the bottome, reddish at the toppe, and blacke in the middle: the received opinion of the Vnicorne is, that it is a beast of the sise of a meane horse (but I thinke it cannot be possible but he must be much greater, to beare so large so long, and so massie a horne, such as are to be seene in sundry places of Europe, (if such be the horne of any beast) for as Bellonius saith there are twenty whole hornes, and as many that are not whole but broken, to be seene in severall places in Eu∣rope, one whereof which is the greatest and most noble, is that which is kept in the Church of Saint Dennis by Paris, which is seven foote long at the least, so that a tall man can hardly reach the toppe thereof with his hand, it weigheth 13. pound and foure ounces, no man can graspe it wholly in his hand, being five inches in the dia∣meter or thicknesse, and an handbredth, and three inches in the circumference, it is straight like a torch or staffe, but writhed about on the outside, from the right hand to the left smooth, smooth and not bunched out, save at the lower end next unto the head, where it is greatest, and falling still smaller unto the end, of a brownish colour on the outside, but white like Ivory within, without any line in it, and having but a ring about the outside, it is also hollow at the bottome, a foote upwards, whereby it may plainely be discerned that it falleth not off of it owne accord, which maketh it to be of the more account) the beast is said to be of the colour of a Weasell, or somewhat more red (yet some say grayish) having a head like a Hart, the necke and maine not very long, with thinne haires, and falling to one side, with a small beard like a Goate but lesser and shorter, the thighes and legs, not great, the hoofe parted and the taile like a Boare: but none of the auncient Writers, have made mention of any Physicall properties therein, Aelianus onely accepted lib. 4. c. 52. who yet saith the horne is blacke. The property of the Vnicornes horne is chiefly to resist poyson, and the bitings of venemous creatures, it is also given against the plague; and other contagious diseases, to expell melancholly likewise, and to cherish, exhilirate, and strengthen the vitall spirits, and more noble parts. It hath alwayes beene accounted of great worth, and not but for great persons and Princes, for the beast being rare and seldome to be seene or had, being so wilde and fierce that he is not to be made tame (howsoever some have written that they will grow milde at the sight of young Maidens, and be brought to sleepe neere unto them) and the hornes not to be had (in that they doe not cast them as some other beasts doe) but by the death of the beast, that liveth so farre remote from these parts, and in huge vast Wildernesses among other most fierce and wilde beasts, Tigers, and Panthers, &amp;c. and especially because the Indians hunt them not either for their pleasure, or to make any profit by them, the Merchants not see∣king after them, the hornes I say, must needes be rare and scarce to be had, and of great worth and price, if they be had, which keepeth them in the more high esteeme. And therefore there want not Imposters, that for lucre sake, doe counterfet it, and worke Ivory, and other hornes artificially into peeces of severall shapes and formes, and obtrude them for Vnicornes horne, to many ignorant persons, but the true and right horne is in part described here before, but to adde further, that the true horne being broken, sheweth to have some thicke fouldes or coates one over another, the inside is white, though the outside is not so white but brownish, and a very smooth graine, without any line veine, or curled waving therein, having onely a circle sometimes about the edge or brimme. Much Vnicornes horne as they say, is to be had with our Druggists and Apothecaries, which is in small long round peeces, some no thicker then ones finger or thumbe at the most, or seldome bigger, that is very white, somewhat heavy and solid, with a smooth graine, which because I cannot thinke so much of the right Land Vnicornes horne is to be had so readily, and so small: I verily beleeve it to be of the Sea Vnicorne, which whether it hath that efficacy that the other is said to have I know not. 
And it is somewhat probable that even all those hornes formerly mentioned both in France, Venice, or else∣where, and that also of our Kings, kept at Windsor, or the Tower, is but of the Sea Vnicorne, for even such as is before described was brought home by Sir Dudley Digges, as I take it found on the shore, and cast up by the Sea in some place towards the North-West, and given to our King Charles, who for the tryall caused his Physiti∣ons and others to view it and make report thereof to him. And my selfe having seene it, did well perceive it to be writhed on the outside, in the manner before said, and was wonderous white within also, and of a close firme graine: The horne was not fully whole; but broken off a little at the end, and hollow at the bottome. 
CHAP. LV. Zedoaria &amp; Zerumbeth. Setwall. T He Setwall that we have usually in our shops, doth not alwayes hold one uniforme face and fashion, but divers, for some is thicke and short, others more long and round, some great, others small, some whole, others broken, as it is usuall in all things almost, either forraigne or domesticke, and yet the severall varieties of formes, being of so little difference cannot make them severall things, e∣specially seeing their taste and quality is all one, or but so little differing that any judicious may soone determine the controversie. Garcias ab Orta distinguisheth betweene Zedoaria and Zerumbet, making them to be two divers things and therefore speaketh of them in two severall Chapters, wherein as it seemeth he maketh Zedoaria to be the Geiduar of Avicen, which yet he saith Avicen knew not, because it groweth in the Chineses Country, and is very rare to be seene or had, but from such vagabond Indians, called Iogues, as travaile begging through all those Countries, which Geiduar or Gedwar, as Garcias saith is of the bignesse of an Ackorne, and neere unto the same forme, weighing about halfe an Zedoriae longa &amp; rotunda ge ina effigies item que &amp; Geidwar Arabum. The true figure of the long and round Zeboaria, and of the Arabians Geidvar: 
ounce, and of a cleere colour, but Clusius giveth us the description and figure of it a little larger, which as he saith he had from Pona of Ʋerona, and compa∣reth them to the smaller rootes of Asphodill, or the rootes of Anthora of an ash-colour on the outside, and yellowish within, and of an hot sharpe taste. Zedo∣aria is called Zurumbet by Serapio, and saith they are rootes like unto the round Aristolochia, but of the colour and taste of Ginger, and brought from China: Avicen saith that Zedoaria is like unto Aristolochia, but lesser, and afterwards saith, that it is likely to be Gei∣duar or Algeiduar, and giveth unto it the same quali∣ties that Serapio doth to his Zedoaria or Zerumbet: Rhasis maketh Zedoria and Zerumbet all one, and Me∣sues also seemeth to agree unto them, but differeth onely in a degree of heate; so that you may plainely see that all these sorts are made by these Authors to be of little or no difference, and so they seeme unto me, as they have also to others before me, who have as I have done, seene all these diversities of forme come over together unto us: Lugdunensis setteth downe very truely the figure of Zedoaria and Zerum∣bet, as they grow together, the longer peeces joy∣ning to the round like the Asphodill rootes, to one round head. Garcias ab Orta saith, that Zerumbet (or Zerumba, although he maketh them differing as I said, in one Chapter, yet all one in the next) grow∣eth plentifully wild in Malavar Calecut, and Cana∣nor, and is also planted by divers in sundry places, cal∣ling it wild Ginger, those of Surrat, Decan, and Ca∣nara call it Chachoran, and those of Malavar Sua, and hath leaves like unto Ginger but greater, longer, and broader. There have beene some that have thought Zedoaria to be some of the kindes of Costus that Dioscorides describeth, because it agreeth in many things therewith, Zedoaria being not specified by him, or the auncient Greekes, and indeed both forme and quality comming so neere may cause it well to be accepted as the substitute thereof. All these sorts as they are made divers by the writers of them are said by them to be effectu∣all against poysons of all sorts, and venomes of virulent creatures, and we have found them of much use and pro∣fit in the pestilence and other contagious diseases, as also to warme a cold stomacke, and to expell winde mer∣vailously, to represse vomitings, to dry up and consume catarrhes and defluxions of rheume, to dissolve the Im∣postumes of the matrix, and to stay the loosenesse of the belly, and is also very powerfull to stay or disperse the unsavoury belchings of those spirits that Garlicke, Onions, &amp;c. or wine have caused. 
CHAP. LVI. Zingiber. Gingër. G Ingër as Garcias saith groweth in all the Coutries of the East Indies, either planted by the roote or sowne or seed, (the roote saith an English rare traveller, spreadeth in the ground, and hath leaves like wild Garlicke, which they cut every fornight, to put into their brothes and meates:) It groweth saith he, with leaves like the water Flagge, or Corne Flagge, and not like the Reed, thus saith he, and so saith Monardus also, but Acosta saith that it hath leaves very like to the greater sorts of Millet, Iobs teares, and with a thicke stalke like Asphodill leaves thereon, close to the stalke, so that it seemeth to be small Reed, and Lobel Zingiber forte Brasilie use nigra ro e. Brassill Ginger with a blacke roote. 
Zingiberis iliqu &amp; semen. The seed pod, and seed of Ginger. 
Zingiber orientale florescens. The figure of the orientall Ginger with the flower. 
setteth forth the figure of Ginger as it grew he saith with Adrian Meuleneere in the Prince Mauritius a Nassan his Garden, having sundry stalkes about a foote high, shewing like unto a Reed new sprung up, and condemneth that old figure as false, that was for∣merly accounted the right, which had leaves of the fashion of an Iris or Flowerdeluce, which contrarie∣ ies are as some may thinke, hardly to be reconciled, yet I will endeavour to make both these assertions to be true although they seeme so much to vary, thus: We have two sorts of Ginger brought unto us, plaine∣ly differing in the substance and colour of the rootes, but not in the forme, saving that the one is more slen∣der which is the blacker, then the white, for the one is white within and cutteth soft, which is the Ginger wholly in use for meates and medicines with us, the other is hard and almost wooddy, and cutteth black∣ish within, so that it is very likely that the one sort which I take to be the East Indie sort, with the soft white roote, hath Flagge-like leaves, and hath beene seene in flower in Germany, as Emanuel Zwerts hath set out the figure (and I here unto you, and the seed vessell also, with the seed not much unlike that of an Iris ) with this title Zinziber flore albo folio Iri∣dis. The other roote that is more slender and blacke, yet of the same fashion, may be that which beareth Reed-like leaves, as Lobel hath set it forth, rather to be preserved then for ordinary use with us, and which as I thinke is the Mechinum of Lobel, or Zingiber fuscum: whereof he giveth the figure of a more excellent sort, that was joynted like Doronicum parts, and therefore ac∣counted by Pona to be the true Doronicum, as is shewed before in this worke, in the Chapter of Doronicum, and brought from Brassill: So that the matter being thus reconciled, and each of them sorted as they should be, let me shew you that both sorts are preserved while they are fresh and greene, and the blacke sort as well also, af∣ter it hath beene dryed, by new steeping it, and boyling to make it tender, but I cannot finde that the white sort will so well serve to be preserved after it hath beene dryed, but is the best being preserved greene, such as the China and Bengala Ginger is. The properties of Ginger is to warme a cold stomacke, and to helpe disgestion, to dissolve wind both there and in the bowels, while it is fresh it is eaten in fallets with the Indians, the roote be∣ing sliced and put among the herbes, and helpeth to mollefie and loosen the belly by the moisture therein, which then abateth much of the heate which being dry it hath, and helpeth to bind the belly. The preserved Ginger is most acceptable and comfortable to the stomacke, and is availeable to all the purposes aforesaid. 
CHAP. LVII. Zibettum. Civet. C Ivet, called Algalia by the Indians, and the beast from whence it is taken Algali or Aligali, is well knowne now adayes to all, to be an excrementitious moisture, or condensate sweate of a cer∣taine beast somewhat like unto a great Cat, and thereon called a Civet Cat, gathered from a pe∣culiar place or purse in that Cat, prepared by nature for that speciall purpose, and is taken forth with small spoones of Ivory or wood, and that by strong hand, the beast being held very close and hard for feare of biting, while they are in taking it forth, for it is very fell and fierce, being moved and angered, and then most when they are about that businesse. I shall not need to describe the beast unto you, which Clusius hath done in figure very exactly in his Curae Posteriores, and is so frequent, not onely in our Land, with a great many that keepe them for the profit or use of the Civet, but in divers other Countries in Europe. The Civet is used as a perfume or sweete sent generally, either by it selfe or mixed with other sweete things, it is used also to comfort the head and braine, and to helpe the deafenesse and dissinesse in the eares, being put there∣into, wrapped in a little blacke wooll, it is much commended against the suffocations or rising of the mother, to be used in a plaister, or but put on the middle of the plaister and laid on the Navell, or some put into the Navell. I know none that ever used it inwardly, but in outward remedies: it is said that women are much delighted therewith, and helping sundry of their defects. 
Having thus shewed you here most of the chiefest Drugges in our Apothecaries shops, that come to us from forraigne parts, that are not formerly expressed in this Worke in severall places: Let me now lastly to close up this whole Worke, shew you other strange and rare Plants, both Herbes and Trees, with their Gummes, Seeds, Rootes, and Fruites, &amp;c. growing in the East, and West Indies, and those parts neere unto them, as they have beene observed by those that in their travells saw them, and brought many of them into Europe; that wee may contemplate the wonderfull Workes of God, that hath stored those Countries with such differing Herbes and Trees from ours, and yet it is very certaine that there is much more unknowne then is already made knowne un∣to us. I will first beginne with Herbes, and the parts thereof, as seedes and rootes, whether medicinable or admirable, and then with the Trees and their fruites that are pleasant to eate; and lastly with those which for the most part have some medicinall use.
CHAP. LVIII. Payco herba. Indian Plantaine for the stone. T Here groweth in Peru in the West Indies, an Herbe whose leaves are like unto our Plantaine, which be∣ing dryed are very thinne, and taste hot and extreame bitter. The pouther of them taken in Wine, helpeth the chollicke and the stone, whether proceeding of wind, or of any cold cause, the leaves boy∣led and applyed warme to the pained part, worketh the same effect. 
Herba ad renum mor∣bi utilis. Lactuc si is. Another Herbe likewise was sent from thence like unto Lettice new sprung up, and of the same colour, being without taste and very profitable for the stone in the kidneyes, comming from heate, the juyce being applyed to the place mixed with some oyntment of Roses, and the leaves also laid thereto: the juyce thereof likewise cooleth inslammations, Saint Anthonyes fire and the like hot eruptions in the skinne, and easeth the paines. 
From Peru likewise saith Monardus came the seed of a bushy plant, there called Cachos, being very small and taken from the fruite thereof, Cachos se∣men. which was like unto the Mala insana, Madde Appels, flat on the one part, and round on the other, of an ash colour on the outside, and of an excellent greene colour but thinne, and of a round forme. It is of much esteeme with the Natives, for the especiall vertues thereof, in provoking urine, and expelling gra∣vell and the stone, yea and breaking the stone in the bladder, if it be not growne hard by long continuance, dissol∣ving it into sand, and casting it forth with the urine, the seed in pouther being taken in some water convenient for the purpose, whereof they have had very many and notable experiences, which sand after it is expelled will grow hard as into stones againe. 
CHAP. LXIX. Coca. The herbe Coca. T He seed of this Coca is sowne with great care by the West Indians in beds, by rowes, and riseth to be a plant of three or foure foote high, with a stalke as bigge as a good wand, and somewhat greater leaves then the Myrtle, having as it were another leafe in the middle thereof, being soft, and of a pale greene colour: the berries are red before they be ripe, but blackish afterwards, growing clu∣string together, and then they gather the leaves, laying them to dry, that they may be kept all the yeare and carryed to and fro into severall Countries, for thereof is the Natives chiefe Merchandise to provide them of all necessaries for life, being instead of money, which is generally used by the Americanes to be chawed, as well in their long journeyes to preserve them from hunger and thirst abroad, as for pleasure at home, which they use after this manner: they burne Oyster shells, and with the powther of them they mixe the pouther of the leaves of this Coca first chewed in their mouthes, and so made up as it were into a paste or dough (but take lesse of the pouther of the Oyster shells then of the leaves) whereof they make small pellets trochisses or trossis, laying them to dry, and to use them one by one, holding them in their mouthes, rolling them to and fro, and sucking them untill they be quite spent, and then take another, which maketh them able to travaile many dayes with strength, without either meate or drinke, through uninhabited places, where none is to be had: If they stay at home, they use the Coca alone, chewing them sometimes a whole day without ceasing, untill the substance be sucked forth, and then use another: if they would have them to be stronger, able to intoxicate their braines like unto drun∣kennesse, or to be as it were senslesse, they put the leaves of Tobacco to it and take great pleasure in those cour∣ses. 
CHAP. LX. Betre, Betle, Betele, sive Bethle. The Indian Bindweed called Betle or Betre. T He East Indians doe use the leaves of this Betle, much after the same manner that they of the West doe the last recited Coca, and therefore I thought good to joyne them together. It groweth very like unto a Bindweede, wrapping and winding it selfe about the trees, up to the toppes almost, or other things that it is planted against to uphold it, or lye on the ground and rot, and therefore they for the most part, plant it against the tree Fausel or Areca, or such other like tall and great trees, in the same manner as they doe Pepper, whereunto it is so like that a farre off, those that are not well exercised in the knowledge of them, may soone mi∣stake one for another (and therefore Gerard called it Bastard Pepper, when as it is neither in fruite, taste, or use like unto Pepper) having onely leaves somewhat like to Pepper, but more like unto Bindeweed, yet thicker, of a yellowish greene colour, Betre sive Betle. The Indian Bindeweed called Betle or Betre. 
with three great thicke ribbes therein (which the In∣dians with the nailes of their hands, kept long and poin∣ted for this purpose and not round like ours, doe nippe or pare away before they dry them, whose taste is some∣what a romaticall but bitter; the fruite is slender, and a∣bout two inches long, writhed or consisting of five cods writhed one about another like unto a cord or rope, of a yellowish colour, tasting pretty spicy or aromaticall, the plant is much tended and often watered to cause it grow the better, and because it delighteth not in any very hot or cold Country, and seldome groweth in the up∣land Countries, but continually neere the Sea side, or not farre distant from it. Physically this is used to streng∣then the head and stomacke, after the clensing of them from rheume and flegme, to comfort the heart, and to breake or discusse winde in the stomacke or bowels: it fastneth loose teeth, and maketh them yellow, causing also a sweet breath, yet their breath stincketh fowlest that using daily to take it, doe forbeare for a while from it: but generally throughout all the East Indies, the leaves are used both of the Princes and people, the grea∣ter persons make certaine compositions for themselves, with the leaves hereof, Camfire of Burneo, Lignum A∣loes, Muske, and Ambergriese, others put Cardamomes, and Cloves to them, but the ordinary manner of prepa∣ring them is, that after the ribs be taken away with their nayles, they chew those leaves in their mouthes, and spit out the first juyce that commeth from them, which is like blood, and put unto them a little of the calx of burnt Oystershells, and the fruite of Areca or Fanfell beaten small which give them a pleasant taste, and is generally eaten by them all, and none of the meaner sort or others that have not presently before eaten thereof, will in civi∣lity speake with any great person, but they will hold their mouthes that their breath doe not offend them. It is called Betre in Malavar and am, in Decan and Guzarate but in Malayo Siri, Garcias saith that he as well as others tooke these leaves to be the Folium Indum, or Malaba∣thum of the Greeke Authours; but was deceived therein. 
CHAP. LXI. Guacatane. Indian Pilewort. T His small herbe as Monardus saith was sent out of that part of America or the West Indies that is called Hispania nova being white like unto Folium montanum but without any Guacatane. Indian Pilewort 
sweet sent, and is much commended to helpe the swelling and falling downe of the Piles or hemorrhodiall veines if the herbe be boyled in wine so as there be no heate, or else in water and the grieved place somented with the warme decoction for a while then gently wiped and the pouther of the herbe cast thereon being bound thereunto: it also easeth aches and paines in any part of the body if the grieved place be first annointed with molten Rossin not too hot, and the pouther of the herbe strewed thereon (which is an homely manner of dressing) and cloathes layd presently upon it which will sticke so fast as that untill it hath wrought the effect it will not be plucked from the skinne and flesh: the pouther of this herbe cast upon any small wound or sore, especially those in the groine, doth clense them and heale them afterwards. 
CHAP. LXII. Herba Indica ad rupturas utilis. Indian Rupture-wort. A Nother small herbe was likewise sent from those parts, whose forme could not be discerned by reason of the ill carriage and breaking thereof being dry: but highly commended to helpe Ruptures or burstings in young or old: the herbe being fresh bruised and applied to the place whereunto a trusse afterwards was bound that had no shoulders, yet sate as close as those that had, and this Ligature the Indians use, which kind of trusse saith Monardus lying so firme and close as he reported that was cured thereby, is sufficient of it selfe to helpe any Rupture without any other medecine, and as he saith he saw a leech of Corduba that hel∣ped all burstings with such unshouldred trustes or bindings onely, and many hee knew then living that were so cured. 
CHAP. LXIII. Planta Indica sanguinalis Panacea, id est, sanguineos sudores excitaus. The Indian Allheale, blood sweating plant. A Certaine Indian Leech as it is recorded in Petrus de Osma his letter to Monardus did usually in the City Pasto cure all manner of diseases onely with the juice of a certaine herbe annointing the Arteries and the grieved place therewith, and afterwards laying them to sweate in their beds being well covered, whose sweat was well neere as blood, &amp; in this manner he proceeded untill he saw they had sweat suffi∣ciently, causing them to use in the meane time an excellent fine diet of wholesome meats: sundry desperate di∣seases were cured by him, yea they seemed more young and lustie that used this order then they were before; but no intreatie or promise of reward, nor all the meanes that could be used to him, would make him reveale this secret to any, or tell what herbe it was whose juice he used. 
CHAP, LXIIII. Herba vitamant mortem in morbis praenuntians. The Indian Fortune teller of life and death. A Certaine Indian of chiefe account comming into the count de Nieva his house that was in Feru upon some occasion of businesse, saw a woman servant of the house very sad and sorrowfull, for that her husband lay then very sicke of a grievous disease, he asked her if shee would faine know whether her husband should thereof live or dye, she saying yea, he sent her a branch of an herbe which he willed to be put into his left hand, and there to hold it fast, which would make him seeme pleasant and merry if he were to live, but sad and sorrowfull if he should dye, which she so using it and finding her husband sodainly to become sicke that she thought he would presently have departed this world, she pulled the herbe out of his hand and threw it away, but within a short time after this her husband dyed: but Monardus saith he doubting of the truth thereof enquired of divers and it was affirmed unto him by a noble man that had long lived in Peru that it was true, and that it is usuall with the Indians to doe so in diseases, which is a matter of great admiration and wonder. 
CHAP. LXV. 1. Herba Viva. The Herbe of life or love. T Here are two sorts of this kinde of plant that are to be distinguished in sunder, and not to be accoun∣ted all one as divers have thought that are knowne to us of late (and yet I thinke verily there be some others of the same nature, not sufficiently yet made knowne to us, which I gather out of the wri∣tings and relations of divers. The one is an herbie plant without any prickes or thornes thereon, for any thing that I can learne thereof, and is this I am now about to shew you: The other is both a shrubbe, or as some say a tree, and thorny also which shall follow. Garcias ab Orta first maketh mention thereof to grow in divers places of the East Indies but giveth it no name. Acosta saith it is called by the Christians there generally Herba viva, and of the Indians Herba amoris, of the Arabians and Turkes Suluc and Suluque: The leaves are compared by them unto the leaves of Pollipody, but Acosta rather compareth them to the leaves of Orobus, foure or five, or divers rising from the roote, each upon its footstalke, being winged with many smaller ones then those of Orobus, set on both sides of the stalkes, which are about two inches long a peece, of a pleasant greene colour very beautifull; among which leaves rise up divers slender bare naked stalkes, each of them bea∣ring one flower at the toppe in forme somewhat like unto a Pinke, but of a yellow colour without any sent at all. The admirable propertie hereof is, that if any shall touch it with their hand, and some say that if any man doe but breath upon it, it will presently draw it selfe together, and if one would take it into their hand it will close together as if it were dead. But that which is more admirable is, that if they shall withdraw their hand it will quickly after as it were revive againe and spread it selfe as it was before it was touched, and this it will doe many times in a day if it be touched and let alone againe without touching. Other properties it is sayd to have, as to restore Virgins that have beene defloured, if ye will beleeve it, to procure love betweene man and woman, and as Acosta saith he was informed by an Indian Phisition of good credit, that he would cause any woman to be at his will and pleasure, so that he would but declare her name, and use it (or rather abuse it) as he would appoint him, but the fact being unlawfull, he refused the condition. 
2. Frutex sensibilis Herba Mimosa dicta. The Mimicke herbe called the sensitive thorny shrubbe. This other Mimick, Mocking or Sensitive plant groweth to be a wooddy Shrubbe, yea some say to be a tree, having divers sprigs rising from the root, and branching forth sundry leaves set here and there, with short thornes or prickles, leaning as Acosta unto other trees or walls, but Clusius saith it spreadeth on the ground taking roote at the joynts, and sundry wings of fresh greene leaves thereon, which upon the touch of any man, or his breath∣ing onely, and not of any thing else would shrinke and seeme as withered; but neither flower nor fruit hath Acosta mentioned, but I am enformed from Mounsieur Iohn de Laet out of a Spanish relation thereof in a booke printed at Mexico, that it beareth flowers and fruit somewhat like unto the Chesnut, many of them hanging downe together in a cluster, being greene at the first and afterwards red, these be others relations: but let mee shew you what I have seene of the living plant as it grew in a pot at Chelsey in Sir Iohn Davers Garden, where di∣vers seeds being sowne therein about the middle of May, 1638. and 1639. some of them sprang up to be neare halfe a foot high, yet others were inferiour, the tallest shot two or three stalkes from the root, somewhat hard and wooddy, with divers joynts on each side, and severall branches thereat, as also a small short thorne at each 1. Herba Viva. The herbe of Life or Love. 
2. Frutex sensibilis Herba Mimosa dicta. The thorny sensitive Shrub or Plant. 
joynt, which branches had severall paires of winged leaves set opposite each unto other, containing some eight some ten small leaves on a side without any odde one at the end, set very close together, being narrow, smooth, and of a full but fresh greene colour, not fully round pointed nor dented, foulding themselves upward close to the middle ribbe, upon any touch thereof, this in the elder growne plant, but in that which was young the whole stalke with leaves would fall downe and shrinke up the leaves: this I proved in those two severall yeares before recited: the former yeares plants as they grew in the pot, I caused a cunning hand to draw to the life, which I here exhibite unto you with the other, that you may see the difference betweene it and others formerly set forth from the sight of a dryed plant. If this could have beene preserved in our Winters, our Sommers would have declared a more ample and full demonstration thereof. This is said to be not so quicke in apprehension as the former. It is said also that the stalkes have the smell and tast of Licuris, and are used by the natives usually to helpe the cough, shortnesse of breath, hoarsenesse of the throat and voice, to cause flegme easily to be expectorate, as also to ease the paines of the stone in the Kidneyes, and healeth up fresh wounds. That Spanish Author before recited relateth also that it procureth sleepe being applyed to the head, but sooner with the American s then the Spaniards: said also by them to procure love, but could not shew how or by what way; it helpeth the Flux or Laske of the bel∣ly by that astringent and glutinous qualitie therein perceived by the taste; as also tertian Agues, and the inflam∣mations and rednesse of the eyes. The said author saith that he understood, yet hee knew not how truely that in the Philippinas they have such another plant yet differing in some particulars, for it is said theirs shooteth forth ten or a dozen straight twigs from a root, each of the bignesse of an Hens quill, one whereof had a dozen leaves on them in foure rowes set at distances, six inches betweene, being like unto Reddish leaves: the flowers were blew like unto a birds tongue before they were open, and divided it selfe afterwards into three leaves. This upon touch or breathing thereon would not fall downe as in the former and rise againe, but said to fall away, that is, the lower leaves and so likewise the upper leaves if they were touched againe, but the stalke also would breake off and fall downe upon the touch or breathing, and if they should be broken by any ones hand, the place would seeme as blacke as were burned: but that it would not doe so if it were toucht with a sticke or wand. The Herba Mi∣mosa scemeth likely to be the Aeschinomenes of Apollidorus, whereof Pliny, lib. 24. c. 17. maketh mention. As also that tree that Theophrastui saith, lib. 4. cap. 3. grew about Memphis in Egypt which differed not from other trees, either in forme leaves or branches, but in the event for the outward face thereof was thorny, and the leaves like Ferne (as Gaza translateth it) but Pliny much better like feathers which being touched shranke as withered and dry, and by and by after revived againe. The Earle of Cumberland in Queene Elizabeths dayes brought from the sacke of Portricco some of these plants, but lived not long in the ayre of England, some of the dried and dead ones being afterwards sent to Clusius by Iaques Iarret, whose figure is that he exhibited in his Christophorus Acosta. 
CHAP. LXVI. Stirpa nimans seu Frutex impatiens. The shrinking shrubbe. S Omewhat like unto those before remembred is this shrubbe, which our English which went with Sir Iames Lancaster found by chance travailing neare the Sea shore on the East side of the Ile of Nicubar as also on Sombrero, an Iland which is neare Nicubar &amp; Sumatra, the younger sized, being like small bushes, halfe a yard or two foote high, at the toppes of whom grew foure or five branches full of leaves some∣what round like unto Mirtle leaves, as greene as Sorrell and full of sap or juice; which bushes being strucke by ones foot or otherwise as they passed by, were observed to shrink downe as low as the branches would let them, and rise againe by and by after to the former height; the reason hereof was, that every plant grew out of the mouth or belly of a long living worme within the earth, which drew downe the plant being strucken; but in the elder or greater growne plants the worme was consumed, and the rootes of these bushes being plucked up af∣ter they had remained a day two or three above the ground became as hard as Corall: the rest of the bushes re∣mayning as wooddy as other shrubbes. This threefold change or alteration in nature, first from a living worme to a vigetative plant, and then to a stony substance, maketh it more admirable above any. 
CHAP. LXVII. Plantanimaleu Borametz Agnus Scythicus. The Scythian Lambe. T His strange living plant as it is reported by divers good authors is called by the Natives Borametz quasi agnellus, by others either Planta Ruthenica agno similis, or Agnus Scythecus, or by some Planta animal; it groweth among the Tartares about Samarcanda and the parts thereabouts rising from a seede some∣what bigger and rounder then a Melon seede, with a stalke about five palmes high, without any leafe thereon, but onely bearing a certaine fruit on the toppe, in forme resembling a small lambe, whose coate or rinde is wolly like unto a Lambes skinne, the pulpe or meate underneath which is like the flesh of a Crevise or Lobster, having as it is sayd blood also in it, it hath the forme of an head, hanging downe, and feeding on the grasse round about it, untill it hath consumed it and then dyeth, or else will perish if the grasse round about it bee cut away of purpose: it hath foure legges also hanging downe: the Woolves much affect to feede on them. 
CHAP. LXVIII. Manobiforte Brasilianorum. Indian earth nuts, or Pease. T Here is growing in sundry places in Brassil and in America also, neare the River Maranon a cer∣taine fruit or Pease breeding under the ground like as puffes doe, without either leafe or roote as it is sayd, but they are no bigger then great Pease, and inclosed in a small grayish thicke and short cod, very like a small Pescod, with one or two Pease therein, of a pale reddish colour, on the outside and white within, tasting like unto an Almond, which will rattle being shaked in the skinne, growing many together and tyed by small strings. The fruits are eaten as junkets with great delight, for their pleasant tastes sake eyther fresh or dryed, but a little tosted make them rellish much bet∣ter, and are served to the table of the better sort as an after course, and doe dry and strengthen the stomacke very much, but taken too liberally breed head ach and heavinesse. 
CHAP. LXIX. Radix Sancta Helenae. Saint Helens beads, or Indian round sweet Cyperus. N Eare the Port of Saint Hellen which is in Florida, grew certaine rootes very long and full of knots, or round joynts as great as ones thumbe, blacke Radix Sancta Helene. Saint Helens Beads, or Indian round sweet Cyperus. 
without and white within, tasting somewhat aromaticall like Galanga, which when they are dry are as hard as an horne, the leaves are large and very greene, growing on stalkes that spread on the ground: it groweth in moist grounds, and is drying in the begin∣ning of the second degree, and heating in the end of the same, the pouther of them taken in wine is used against the paines of the stomacke and bowels, easing the col∣licke and stone in the Kidneyes, and provoking urine. The Indians use to sprinkle the pouther of the rootes all over their bodies, being ready to goe into the Baths, because as they say, it bindeth the skinne and strength∣neth the members of the body by its sweet sent. They use there to disjoynt these round knots of the rootes, which being drilled and strung serve them in stead of Beads to tell God how many prayers they will give him at a time. Clusius thinketh these roots may not unfitly bee referred to some kind of Cyperus, but I thinke the large leaves contradict it.
CHAP. LXX. Radix Quimbaya. Carthagenas purging roots. P Etrus Cieca maketh mention of these roots in the first part of his Peruvian history that they are slender, of about a fingers thicknesse, growing among the trees in Quinbaya, a Province in Feru whose cheife city is Carthage: if some of these roots be taken and steeped in a good quantitie of water all night, they will drinke up most of the water, but yet three ounces thereof remaining being drunke doe purge the body so gently and without trouble or perturbation, as if it had beene purged with Rubarbe, this hath beene often tryed. Clusius thinketh that these rootes were the same or very like unto such as was sent him by a friend by the name of Bexugo vel Peru, which he tooke to be no other then the branches of Atragene or Viorna of that Countrey, they were so like. 
CHAP. LXXI. Rhabarbarum Americanum. Rubarbe of America or West Indie Rubarbe. M Onardus saith, that among other things were sent him out of the maine of the West Indies he had a peece of a roote which they called there by the name of Rubarbe, and was very like the East In∣dian kind, for as hee saith it was round, with a brownish coate and reddish core or inside, which being broken, had some whitenesse mixed among it, and coloured the spittle yellow like Saffron, being bitter withall, but what leaves it bore was not signified. This is not the white Rubarbe of America, for that as is sayd in its place in the Mechoacan. 
CHAP. LXXII. Carlo Sancto. The Indian Hoppe-like purger. O Vt of the Province of Mexico commeth this root which they there call Carlo Sancto, for what cause is not well knowne, it groweth after the manner of Hoppes, climing on poles or other high things, or else it will lye on the ground: the leaves are like unto Hoppe leaves, of a very sad greene co∣lour, and of a strong heady sent: it is not knowne whether it beare eyther flower or fruite: the roote is great at the head, having sundry smaller sprayes issuing from it, each of the bignesse of ones grea∣ter finger and white, the barke or tinde whereof is easily separated from the rest, and is of most use, smelling somewhat sweet, and tasting bitter and somewhat sharpe withall: the pith of the roote consisteth as it were of many small and very thinne filmes which may easily Carlo Sancto. The Indian Hoppe-like purger. 
be separated one from another: it is hot and dry in the beginning of the second degree. The barke of the roote being a little chewed in the mouth draweth downe from the head much flegme, whereby rheumes catarrhes and destillations therefrom are voyded, and the parts much eased of paines and other griefes, in some also it causeth a vomit, avoyding thereby much choller and flegme from the stomacke, that oppressed it before and strengthned it afterwards, the decoction thereof worketh better thereon; if a purgation fitting the person be taken before this evacuation upwards, it will doe the more good: the barke being chewed helpeth loose gummes, putrid and rugged teeth, and maketh a sweete breath, but it were good to wash the mouth with a little wine afterwards to take away the bitternesse: the pouther thereof taken in a little white wine, or the decoction thereof with Maiden haire and a little Cinamon easeth women of the obstructions of the mother, the staying of their courses, and consumeth winde in their bodies being formerly purged and prepared, and using Liquidambar &amp; Ʋng Dealthaea of equall parts mixed together, to annoint the lower parts of the belly all the while: the same also helpeth the Simp∣tomes of the heart, as swounings and other the passions thereof, especially rising from the defects of the mother. This decoction likewise is very beneficiall for them that are so troubled, that is to take two drams of the barke, and boile it in three pints of faire water, putting in at the end thereof foure drammes of the barke of Pomcitrons and two drammes of Cinamon, which afterwards being strained, six ounces of this decoction is to be taken with a little Sugar every morning, the body being purged before hand. This pouther and decoction is commended likewise against the French disease, the Epilepsie or falling sicknesse in the younger sort: the pouther thereof hath beene often found to cause women to have a speedy delivery, and to take away the passion and faintings in their tedious travailes, being taken either in wine or in some Orenge flower water, the continuall use thereof beene tryed to amend a cold and weake stomake, and to helpe such as could digest no meate: the like use given remedy and perfect cure to those that have beene bursten, so that they have not used any Trusse themselves being perfecty helped thereby. 
CHAP. LXXIII. Fabe sive Phaseoli purgantes. Purging Beanes. M Onardus speaketh of certaine purging Beanes that grow about Cartagena and Nombre de Dios very like unto our ordinary Beanes but lesser, with Fabae sive Phaseoli purgantes. Purging Beanes. 
a thinne outer skinne, dividing it in the mid∣dle which was to be cast away, least it might procure too violent evacuation both upward and downe∣ward, even to the hazard of life. With the Indians this is a famous and familiar medecine, purging without trou∣ble flegme, and choller, and grosse humors, and that very gently, the quantity to be taken is from foure of them or more according to every ones abilitie, but you must regard that every one of them bee rosted well before they be used, but Clusius saith he could never see such beanes as are here described, but hath had a certaine kind of Phaseoli Kidney beanes sent him under the name of Fabae purgatrices, whose figure is here exhibited, being round and flat on both sides, about a fingers thicknesse and two in breadth or more, yet a little hollow on that side where it grew to the huske: the outer haske is hard, and in a manner woody, smooth, and of a darke red co∣lour, being white, and of a firme substance within parting into two as most other pulses do, of the like taste also at the first, but quickly hot and sharpe upon the tongue, from whence commeth as it is likly the purging quality: because in some sort these resemble the forme of a heart, there∣fore some called them Cor Divi Thomae, Saint Thomas hearts, and besides because they grow in Saint Thomas Island. Clusius thinketh that this is the Beane of the Phasiolus Brasilinus, whose pods I have shewed you in page 1057. Avellanae purgatrices 
Monardus also speaketh of purging nuts, which he calleth Avellanae purgatrices, which grew in Santo Domingo that were very like unto Hasell nuts, but three square and browne on the outside, with a tough thin shell the kernell being white and sweete withall, whereby many were deceived: for they purge very violently both upwards and downewards choller and flegme, even almost to the danger of life, which by roasting of them before the taking is avoyded: they helpe the Chollicke, and expell winde, and are often put into glisters for that purpose; but I have knowne a glister given in this manner to good purpose: a glister being ready to be given with a bladder, the small end of a Tobacco pipe was put into the bladder and tyed (but so that it might bee drawne clo∣ser after the pipe is pulled out) that had Tobacco in the Bole, which onely blowing the smoake thereof into the bladder and so given hath given present ease. 
CHAP. LXXIIII. Faalim Theveti. Mombazas Antidote or Counterpoyson. A Ndraeas Thevet mentioneth this herbe in his Cosmography to grow in the Island of Mombaza, ha∣ving many long leaves like unto Faalim Theveti. Mombazas Antidote or Counterpoyson. 
Elecampane, which Island as it aboundeth with many singular good herbes, both for meate and medecine, so it doth also with venomous Serpents: for whose remedy it is also espe∣cially provided of other powerfull herbes, a∣mong whom this one is accounted a principall: the experience whereof saith hee I have seene upon divers people bitten by a most vi∣rulent Serpent, there called Alefah, part∣ly living in the waters and partly upon land, whose venome was present death, if the pa∣tient were not suddenly succored here∣with. 
CHAP. LXXV. Herba Malucana. The poore mans Chirurgery. T His herbe riseth usually to be two or three cubits high, but in more fertile places to be above five cu∣bits, of a fresh greene colour, the stalke is slender weake and hollow, leaning unto something to uphold it, or else it will lye on the ground, where it will take roote againe, it spreadeth into sundry branches, having tender soft leaves thereon like in forme and bignesse unto Elder leaves, but dented about the edges, the flowers are like Camomill but all yellow and greater; it is greene all the yeare through; those of Canaria call it Brungara aradua, and the vulgar sort, Poore mens remedy and Chirurgions bains, because the common people of India doe generally plant it being naturally of Maluca, and use it for all hurts, eyther alone or mixed with other things that serve for the purpose: the manner whereof is thus, They boyle the bruised leaves in oyle, which after it is well boyled and strained they make an ointment thereof with a little yellow Wax; and herewith they dresse their sores, be they old or young, blooddy, putrid, malignant or fistulous, and especially is good in the foule sores of the legges, Another way they have to use it by taking the middle or inner rinde, the outermost being taken away, which is as easily done as in Hempe, and annointing it with the oyle of the Indian Nut, they rowle it in the leaves thereof, and rost it under the hot embers, which being growne soft, they beate it and then apply it to all such wounds and sores aforesaid, which are perfectly cu∣red within a few dayes, without inflammations or Impostumes, to the wonder of all that knew it not before: it likewise easeth all paines, and stayeth all fluxes of blood, and is a singular helpe to the joynts that are pricked or wounded, and briefly serveth the people that use no other remedy to helpe themselves in any case of necessity, without the use of a Chirurgion, and trust thereto as unto an undoubted remedy; the oyntment is carryed into sundry other Countryes also. Caxella. Another herbe called Centella groweth in the West Indies, mentioned by M ∣nardus out of Petrus de Osma his Letter to him, who without any description thereof, saith that the Indians doe familiarly use it, and the Spaniards from them, being bruised and laid to any tumour in the legges or thighes, comming from a cold cause, would cure them by raising blisters that the humours might be let out, and the swel∣ling asswaged. H bae folia sanguinem ilico sistens. Gramen quod ad pi∣tu am. Another herbe also Monardus there remembreth from him likewise, that would stanch the blood of any wound suddenly, seene, and tryed by certaine captive Indians, that through hunger cut off the calves of their owne legges and did eate them, and presently applyed the leaves to them, which stanched the blood to the great admiration of all that saw it. The same de Osma saith there, he used a kinde of herbe growing like grasse, which of himselfe tooke the name, which being chewed would draw downe much flegme, and there∣fore good for rheumes in the head, and defluxions into the throate, and to make lotions to helpe those diseases thereof. 
CHAP. LXXVI. Herba Ioannis Infantis. Iohn the Infants herbe. T His is a small herbe growing in the West Indies having leaves like unto Sorrell, but somewhat rough and hairy, and tooke the name from one Iuan Infanta an Indian, the sonne of a Spaniard, who used it to cure wounds, and to stanch their bleeding, helping all hurts, prickes, and wounds in the sinews, or in any other part of the body, digesting, clensing, and healing them by laying some of the greene herbe bruised thereunto: or else the pouther of the dryed herbe strowed thereon, which is thought to be better then the greene herbe. 
CHAP. LXXVII. Lactuca slvestris pumila. A Lettice for the tooth ache. A Nother herbe was sent unto Monardus out of Peru, that was like unto Lettice leaves, but of a darke greene colour, and very bitter in taste, the decoction whereof kept a good while in the mouth, on that side that the tooth doth ake, will ease and take away the paine: the juyce of the greene leaves put into an hollow tooth will doe the same. 
CHAP. LXXVIII. Mungo. Indian Coriander like seed for an Ague. T He Indians of the East have a small round seed very like unto Coriander seed, which is greene be∣fore, but blacke when it is ripe, being fodder given to horses, and men doe also eate of them: they of Guzarate and Decan, use the decoction thereof against agues, and giving, Mungo similis fructus. Indian Coriander like seed 
the seed also being husked, and boyled like Rice, unto their aguish patients causing them to abstaine from either meate, of bread of Wheate, for many dayes together: It is held that Avicen mentioneth this in the 481. Chapter of his second Booke, by the name of Messe, Bellunensis his interpreter hath it Mens, but Garcias saith it should be Mex, and so in another place he nameth it. 
Mungo si∣milis. There hath beene sent also another small crested graine or seed, of the bignesse of Pep∣per cornes, so like unto Coriander seed, that at the first sight, one might be soone mista∣ken, but that it is greater and blacke, this might be thought to be the former Mungo, but that this is hot, and the Mungo is cold, as it is thought fit for such patients. 
CHAP. LXXIX. Arbor Bon cum fructu suo Buna. The Turkes berry drinke. A Lpinus in his Booke of Egiptian plants, giveth us the description of this tree, which as hee saith, hee saw in the garden of a certaine Captaine of the Ianissaries, which was brought out of Arabia felix, and there planted as a rarity, never seene growing in those places before. The tree saith Alpinus, is somewhat like unto the Evonymus Pricketimber tree, whose leaves were thicker, harder and gree∣ner, and alwayes abiding greene on the tree; the fruite is called Buna, and is somewhat bigger then an Hazell Nut and longer, round also, and poin∣ted Arbor Bon cum fructu suo Buna. Turkes berry drinke. 
at the one end, furrowed also on both sides, yet on one side more conspicuous then the other, that it might be parted into two, in each side whereof lyeth a small long white kernell, flat on that side they joyne toge∣ther, covered with a yellowish skinne, of an acide taste, and somewhat bitter withall and contained in a thinne shell, of a darkish ash-colour: with these ber∣ries generally in Arabia and Egipt, and in other places of the Turkes Dominions, they make a decoction or drinke, which is in the stead of Wine to them, and ge∣nerally sold in all their tappe houses, called by the name of Caova; Paludamus saith Choava, and Rauwolfius Chaube. This drinke hath many good Physicall pro∣perties therein: for it strengtheneth a weake stomacke, helping digestion, and the tumours and obstructions of the liver and spleene, being drunke fasting for some time together. The Egiptian, and Arabian women use it familiarly white their courses hold, to cause them to passe away with the more ease, as also to cause those to flow that are stayed, their bodies being prepared and purged aforehand. 
CHAP. LXXX. Curcus. White Nuts. T Here groweth saith Garcias in divers places of Malavar, a certaine Plant which is sowen and hath the fruite thereof hanging downe from the branches that are like unto Hazell Nuts, but not so round, and white of colour, whose kernell is sweet somewhat like unto Mushromes, or Spanish puffes, when they are boyled and dressed: they call it Quiviquilenga in some places (which sig∣nifyeth saith Garcias a small Inhame, but Clusius saith he knoweth it not, except it be the Trasi dolce, or Juncia avellanada ) and in Malavar Curcas, and in Cambaya Carpata: these saith he, are not put to any use in physicke that he knew: he doth conjecture that Serapio meaneth this fruite by the name of Habacoulcoul, which saith he, breedeth abundance of sperme, but bringeth the passion of the chollicke therewith. 
CHAP. LXXXI. Caceras Indorum. Indian Trafi rootes, T His roote groweth within the ground like as Trasis doe, shooting forth stalkes in the dry time of the yeare, having leaves like the water Flagge, or Corne Flagge, one foulded within another: these rootes being dryed taste like unto Chesnuts: but while they be greene or before they be dryed, they are unpleasant. Clusius thinketh that these rootes be the Malinathalla of Theophrastus, lib. 4. c. 10. or the Anthalium of Pliny. About the River Maragnon in Peru, grow certaine fruits under the ground like Spanish balles, of the length and bignesse of halfe ones fingers, round and somewhat writhed, Fructus terranasc as. Quere an Mano supra. of a brownish colour, having within it a small nut like an Allmond, which will rattle being shaked when it is dry, browne without and white within, parting in two parts as an Allmond, of as good a taste as a Filberd, both raw and roasted, but procuring headache if too liberally eaten: they dry and strengthen the stomacke, and are esteemed as junkets with the Indians and Spaniards. 
CHAP. LXXXII. Bangue. The Indian dreamer. T His herbe groweth up with hard stiffe square stalkes like unto Hempe, yet tough and not easie to breake nor so hollow as Hempe, whose Bangue. The Indian dreamer.
barke may be drawne into threds as well as Hempe (yet Gracias saith the stalke is wooddy, with but a little barke) of a pale greene colour: the leaves are like unto those of Hemp, dented about the edges, greene on the upper side, and gray or hoary underneath, of a dry insipide taste: the seed is like unto Hemp seed, but lesse and not so white. The Indians of the East Countries use both leaves juyce and seed thereof, for many purposes both good and bad to stirre up an appetite to meate, and the validity of ve∣nerious actions, whereunto they are mighty prone and proclive, and wherein is their chiefe felicity, eating the leaves or seed alone, or with some Sugar, divers al∣so doe diversly compound or mixe it, some putting thereto in pouther Faufel or Nutmegges, or Cloves, or choyse Camfire or Muske, or Ambar, according to e∣very ones fancy and ability, or as they would be intoxi∣cated, for it will drive them into sleepe, and then grow great dreamers▪ according to their humours and dispo∣sitions, but if they take it with Opium, as the great men and Souldiours oftentimes doe it, will cause deepe sleepes to make them the more able to undergoe their sore labours, travaile, and watchings in the warre, and to forget them also. But the women oftentimes abuse their husbands hereby in giving it them to fulfill their lust before their faces. Although this plant be in face like unto Hempe, yet the qualites are quite contrary. 
CHAP. LXXXIII. Hiucca sive Mandioca ex qua Cazavi fit. The true Indian Hiucca whereof the Indians bread Cazavi is made. T He plant hereof groweth like a small shrub or bush of Elder, and is accounted to be of two diff ring sorts of leaves, and riseth to be sixe or seven foote high, with sundry wooddy stalkes, bearing many faire broad leaves thereon, divided into sundry parts, like unto Helleboraster, or the fingers of ones hand, seven or eight together, upon a long footestalke, each part of them being halfe a foote long, and three inches broad, but not endented about the edges, abiding alwayes greene: the one sort of leaves are some∣what broad towards the points, the other narrower, it hath saith my friend that gave me the intelligence, a small spotted flower, but what fruite followed, hath not yet beene signified by any: the roote groweth quickely great, for it is usually planted every yeare, or every other yeare, and becommeth as great and long as a good great Carrot roote, browne on the outside, and very white within, the manner to propagate it is, to cut off a stalke about a foote long, and put it more then halfe way into the ground, where it will quickely take roote, and within a yeare or little more be fit to take up and use againe. Of this roote did the Americanes, notwithstanding in many places they had Ma x, which is Indian Wheate, both in the Isles and in the Continent, for many hun∣dreds of yeares make their bread whereon they lived in this manner: Having pared away the rinde, they ∣ped or broke small the roote, which is white, sappy, and full of substance, from whence they pressed out the juyce which they kept by it selfe, having an evill smell, whereof whosoever tasted, either man or beast, dyed without remedy, and that quickely, but if they boyled it to the halfe, it would become a good wholesome drinke although like small Ale, and if set in the Sunne it would be as good as vinegar as might be of Wine, and if it were boyled thicke, it would be sweete as hony, and serve for that purpose: the masse from whence the juyce was pressed, they did put into a panne and set it over the fire to make it grow thicke, and being dry, they made it into pouther, and putting water thereto they formed it into small cakes, and dryed them in the Sun, which they kept for their use, and would abide good for a long time, twenty yeares without corrupting, giving good nourish∣ment to the body, although it would exasperate the jawes and throate in eating thereof, for which purpose they had need of water, or other liquour, to moisten it often, or else it would be hard to swallow, being somewhat harsh and sharpe in the throate. This ordering of the roote to make poyson wholsome, is no lesse admirable then Hiuccae sive Mandioca genuina Mexicana species dua solijs Cannabinis. Two sorts of the true West Indian Hempe leafed Hiucca. 
Hetich Americanum. Mallow leafed Potatoes. 
that the juyce of this roote groweth on the Vpland in the Continent, is not any whit hurtfull, as it is said, although it be hurtfull in the Islands: &amp; this bread was used by all the people of America, from Florida to Pe∣ru, and about to the Straights of Magellane, above a thousand miles, yet had they Maiz also, that is, Indian or Turky Wheate, in most of those places. The Names hereof are very various, according to the Country, for it is called Manihot by some, Hiurca, Hiucca, or Iucca, according to others, and Cazavi, as they call the bread which the Spaniards doe write Cacavi, that is Casavi, which is the most generall name through all places. We have not heard that the Indians used either herbe or roote to any Physicall remedy. 
Like hereunto is that which is called Hetich by the Indians, whose leaves are round like Mallowes, Hetich A∣vericum. Mallow leafed Po∣tatoes. and the roote like unto great long Turneps, being of two sorts, the one being yellowish the other white, when they are boyled or baked into bread, and is planted from peeces cut off from the roote. Some would referre this to the Vingum of Theophrastus, which Pliny calleth Oetum. 
CHAP. LXXXIV. Cevadilla sive Hordeolum causticum Americanum. The Indian Causticke Barley. M Onardus saith that among other rare seedes Cevadilla sive Hordeolum causticum Americanum. The Indian causticke tree. 
and plants, that were sent him from Hispa∣niola, he had this also, which they there cal∣led Cevadilla, that is to say Hordeo∣lum, Small Barley, from the likenesse of the spiked head of seed unto an eare of Barley but lesser, having the seed enclosed in the like chaffie huskes, but is like unto Linseed, yet greater, whose property is more ad∣mirable then ever was heard of in any other herbe or seed, for neither Sublimatum nor fire it selfe can effect more in a cautery to be used, therefore it will kill the wormes that breed in foule ulcers, and clenseth those that are foule and stincking, by casting some of the pouther thereinto, yet with discretion, according to the greatnesse and foule∣nesse of the sore, and using those remedies that are for it, but if it chance to worke too eagerly or sharpely they use to dippe tents in Rosewater, or Plantaine water, and put them into the ulcers, it is used in the like manner, for the sores of beastes: this seed is hot in the fourth degree, and beyond it, if there were any further degree to be reko∣ned, 
Millo is a graine or kind of Corne like Millet, Millo. used both for bread and drinke in the Kingdome of Saho in Guinea remembred in the Sea voyages of Vanderllagus, in Clusius his Cura posteriores. 
CHAP. LXXXV. Anana seu Pina. The West Indian delitious Pines. T He Pines (so much esteemed for the most excellent and pleasant sweete fruite in all the West Indies) is the fruite of a kinde of Thistle, growing with many long, hard, rough stiffe and narrow leaves, thick∣est in the middle, and thinne, cut in and dented about the edges, with reddish points, seeming pricke∣ly like a Thistle, but are not, from the middle whereof riseth up a round and shorter stalke, then that of the wilde sort set with the like leaves but lesser, and at the toppe one head, of the bignesse of a reasonable Muske-Melon, or Pome Citron, of a yellowish greene before it be ripe, and more yellowish, being through ripe, shewing as it were scaly like an Artichoke at the first view, but more like to a Cone of the Pine tree, which we call a Pine Apple for the forme, yet the outside hath no hardnesse at all therein, but may be pared and cut like unto a mellow Cotone Peach, being so sweete in smell that they may be perceived where they be afarre off, of a farre more plea∣sant sweete taste and substance then it, tasting like as if Wine, Rosewater, and Sugar, were mixed together, ha∣ving no seede at all in it, whereby it may be encreased: but as some others say, it hath whitish seed like a Muske-Melon, but lesser and longer; this fruite beareth a bush of leaves at the toppe, and some small heads on small branches underneath it, which being taken from it and planted halfe way deepe in the ground will take roote, and beare fruite the next yeare, which is the onely manner of propagating. In Brassill is said that they have sun∣dry sorts hereof, one they call Iajama, which is longer and pleasanter then any other, and of a yellowish sub∣stance: another they call Bonjama, being whiter within, and of a mawmish taste, with the lusciousnesse: a third they called I jagna, white also within, but tasting like sweete Wine with a little tartnesse. The roote is great with many strings thereat, but perisheth with the stalke after the fruite is ripe. It was first brought from Santa Cruise in Brassill where it is naturall, into both West and East Indies, being not naturall to either of them, but is onely manured there, and now is growne plentifull: they of Brassill call it Nana, others Anana, the Spa∣niards and Portugalls Pinas, from the likenesse, and so doe most Countryes, following that name, Oviedus in his History calleth it Iajama, and Thevet in his singularities maketh mention of another fruite very like hereunto but growing upon a tree like the Mulberry, with long broad leaves like Angelica, in an Island of the East India called Necumere, which fruite they call Melenken, and tasteth as if Sugar and a little Nutmegge were mixed to∣gether, which the Natives eate to quench their thirst. The chiefest time of their ripenesse is in the Lent, when they are sweetest. But this Pina as I said, surpasseth all other fruites of the West Indies, for pleasantnesse and wholesomenesse, so that many eate them abundantly, and thinke they cannot sufficiently be satisfied with them, Anna seu Pina. The West Indian delitious Pines. 
Anana sylvestris. Wild Indian Pines. 
but the surfet of them is dangerous, even as it is usuall of the best fruits: it is not used Physically hitherto that I can learne, but obsaporis gratiam wholly spent and eatens the Phisitions there forbid it their sicke patients, because it is somewhat too hot and might breed inflammations. Some admirable things are reported thereof, one is that if one of these fruits be cut through the middle with a knife and they joyned together againe, the peeces will joyne and sticke so fast together as if it had not beene cut at all: another propertie it hath, that if one cut the fruit with a knife and leave the knife sticking therein untill the next day, so much of the blade thereof as stucke within the fruit will be found wholly consumed and wasted, or as it were eaten away: the knife also that did cut one of them if it be not sodainly wiped but let alone unwiped will seeme as if it had beene eaten in with Aqua fort . 
There is another wild kinde of Pinas growing naturally both greater higher and more prickly or histlelike, ha∣ving a great tuft of leaves at the bottome of their stalkes or stems next the ground seeming to be Aloe leaves a far off but lesser, and of a pale greene colour set with sharpe prickes, it is encreased by the of sets, one rising from another: from the maine stem grow sundry branches bearing at their ends, heads of soft tender leaves closed round together, which are nothing but the flowers, and are of a yellowish colour smelling very sweet out of these heads rise spikes not unlike to those of the Reede but thicker, closer set and farre more beautifull, smelling like the Cedar: from the branches hang downe the fruit called by the Portugalls Ananas bravas, that is, wild Ananas or Pinas which doe somewhat resemble the former or manured kinde, of the bignesse of a Melon, of a beautifull red colour very pleasant to be hold which is divided into parts like unto Cipresse nuts when they are dry, and set with bunches or knobs, very neare resembling a Cone or Pine Apple, which are nothing so good although a little pleasant, yet somewhat harsh withall, whereof few doe eate or take pleasure in them, and give as little good nou∣rishment when they are eaten, and is therefore more Phisically used, for six or eight ounces of the juice taken in a morning fasting with some Sugar, is a most present and certaine remedy against the heate or inflammation of the liver or backe, as also against the Vlcers of the Kidneyes, and foule purulentous urines and the excoriations of the yard: all which diseases this cureth upon three times taking. 
CHAP. LXXXVI. Melo carduus Americanus. The Melon Thistle. T His admirable plant or fruite hath neither leafe nor stalke, but riseth immediatly out of the ground, from a small whitish rough stringy roote and many small fibres thereat, into the forme of a Muske Melon for the bignesse, but made Cone Melo carduus Americaum. The Melon Thistle. 
fashion, that is, broad and flat below, and smaller up to the toppe, having round a∣bout it foureteene ribbes set with sharpe crooked prickes ten or twelve together like a starre in six, se∣ven or eight places of every ribbe and furrowed be∣tweene, of a yellowish greene colour: from out of the toppe whereof thrusteth forth sundry silkelike downe or Cottony threds, as the Artichokes and other Thistles doe, within which lye when they are ripe small long slender pointed sheathes or cods, of a perfect crimson colour, resembling the long codded Capsicum or Ginny Pepper, wherein is contained small round seed like the Amaranthus, set with hard yellowish prickes at the head: the rinde hereof is hard and thicke like unto a Melon, which may be pared away like it, under which the pulpe or meate lyeth white in colour, fatty in fee∣ling of an unsavory sow e taste, waterish and cooling. This plant groweth neare the Sea shores in divers Islands of the West Indies as Saint Margets, Saint Iohns, and others neare nto Puer o ri c . One of the fruits hath beene brought from thence to us that hath weigh∣ed seven pounds and twelve ounces. We know of no other use this fruit is put unto, but that in the hot time of the yeare they eate it to quench their thirst and coole the heate of their stomackes. 
CHAP. LXXXVII. Carduus Pitahaya Americanorum. The blood red ball Thistle. T His Thistly fruit is described by Oviedus, growing in the Island of Hispaniola which is round, and as bigge as ones fist, and somewhat Carduus Pitahaya Americanorum. The blood red ball Thistles. 
long, having a shew of seales on the outside: the barke or rinde whereof is thick but may easily be cut or pared, under which the pulpe or meate is like unto a Figge with graines or kernells among it, as it hath, but of a pleasant deepe crimson colour, which co∣loureth their fingers like Mulberries that eate them, and after two or three houres that they have eaten them their urine will looke whitish, the fruite hath neither leafe nor branch, but riseth up in the middle of many great foure square armes of six foot long a peece channeld in the middle, and both there and at the edges set full of most sharpe but small prickes, three at a place together at certaine distances one from another, the whole plant and fruit is of a pale greene ash co∣lour. 
CHAP. LXXXVIII. Cereus spinosus Americanus. The Torch Thistle of America. T His small plant seemeth somewhat like the last, but that it riseth up with divers stalkes 19. or 20. cubits high, with some outward ribbes Cereus spinosus Americanus. The Torch Thistle of America. 
all the length of them, and set at seve∣rall spaces with small short thornes standing like small starres, the forme of them very like unto the Melon Thi∣stle, these stalkes have some short branches, and at the toppes flowers like the purple Foxglove, and fruite following of a bright crimson colour like a Figge, but without taste, the stalkes are wooddy of the bignesse of ones wrist of a gristly substance, and of a bitter gum∣my tast like Aloes. 
CHAP. LXXXIX. Planta pinnata arundinacea spinosa. The winged thorny Reede. T His Reedelike thorny plant came likewise with the two last recited plants from the West Indies which was like a staffe of a Reede full Planta pinnata spinosa &amp; Rubifacie senticosa planta. The starre Thistle-like plant of America, and a bramble bush-like stalke of America. 
of pith of eight or ten cubits in length having a threefold waved skinny welt of a fingers breadth set thereon all the length thereof and at the outer ends of the waved welt small starres of sharpe pricks or thornes: more hereof cannot be said for that more was not brought, but that thereby you may behold the admirable workes of God in plants as well as in all his other creatures.
Hereunto is adjoyned another thorny plant brought from these parts, Rubufacis senticosa planta. which seemed either the body or the branch of a blacke berry like tree, being a solid firme heavy wood, armed very thicke with great long and stronge thornes at certaine tubers or knots, the barke being thicke and blackish. 
Observe I pray you that the former of these two de∣scriptions belongeth to the Cereus spinosus and that de∣scription to be set in the place of it. 
CHAP. XC. Canna Indicae portentosae longitudinis. Indian Reede staves. O N the Westerne side of Sumatra and in other places also of those Indies grew Canes (for wee know not how else to terme them) or Reedes called by them Ruttan of an incredible length, for rising from the ground, they will mount up to the toppe of the highest tree in growth there next unto them, and descending to the ground againe, it will runne thereon on a great way, and sometimes divide it selfe to severall wayes, and afterwards coile it selfe as a Cable is laid on shipbord or else where, to the length of thirtie fathome by computation, and then runne againe over a tree sometimes or else coile it selfe againe as formerly, so that neither beginning or end thereof is found: it hath not beene observed that it hath any leaves on it, but are very plyant and bending as one will while they are fresh and greene, and would serve in stead of ropes: but when they are old and dry, they will serve in stead of walking staves, as they are much used with many of us now a dayes or to any other such pur∣pose, they are no harder or bigger then an ordinary cudgell, yet may one strike fire from them by striking one a∣gainst another, which neverthelesse are porous and hollow as it were in the middle, so that one may blow winde through them at never so great a length, and at a reasonable staffes length almost so strongly, to blow out a candle set at the further end, at the least sensibly to be felt, yet no appearance of holes therein. I take it to be the same that is called Iuncus Indicu perosus in Clusius his Curae posteriores, but why Iuncus I see no reason. 
CHAP. XCI. Canna ingens Mambu vel Bambu dicta. Huge great treelike Canes or Reeds. T Here hath beene brought us from the East Indies Canes or Reeds of a wondrous bignesse and height, (as may be guessed by the broken peeces) growing in Malabar chiefly about the Sea coasts, whereof the inhabitants make posts to build their cottages withall, as also doe cut them at a certaine length like unto a Cowlestaffe to beare burthens, and bend them while they are fresh that they may bee a little crooked and hollowish, to hange a Palankin, that is a couch or litter wherein persons may bee carried in their journying from place to place or otherwise for state or ease, by two or foure Indians: one peece having six joynts was Canna ingens Mambu vel Bambu dicta. Huge great treelike Canes or Reedes. 
eight foote long, each space betweene the joynts being a foote and foure inches: it was five inches over at the bigger end, and almost as much at the lesser: the circumference or compasse about at the lower end; being sixteene inches and almost as much at the upper: the thicknesse of the wooddy compasse of the Cane was about three inches by measure: and was all over∣layd with Laak or Gum Lacca, or hard Wax to keep it from the weather, and from cracking in the Sunne, being found in the great Admirall Carrack or shippe of the Portugalls, that brought home the Viceroy of the Indies, and was taken by our English 1593. as a Prize; but greater and longer Reedes were brought from those parts by the Hollanders, yet not whole but broken, the least whereof was 26. foot long, with 19 joynts therein, being 17. inches about at the lower end and 14. at the upper: a greater was a foote and a halfe longer and three inches more in compasse then the former, the distance betweene the joynts being neare the length of the circumference, or not much differing any where; the thicknesse likewise being three inches or thereabouts as in the former: by these peeces may bee guessed of what huge height these Canes were: at the plants of their Pepper doe they oftentimes fasten downe these Reedes, that the Pepper in the growing may leane thereunto, and be sustained by them which without some Proppe or stay would lye downe on the ground and become unprofitable. In some places of the Indies say both Garcias and Acosta these Reed like trees grow so great, that some∣times of them are made small boates, sufficient to hold two naked Indians, which they cleave in the middle and cut off beyond the two joynts, so that an Indian sitting at each end, joyned knee to knee, and a small Oare in each of their hands of halfe a yard long, they will so nimbly force the Boate, yea even against a streame that it is wonderfull to behold, which as Acosta saith he saw in the River Cranganor where ma∣ny Crocodils breede which are most fierce and tetrible, and will assaile shippes and other smaller vessells to get some prey out of them: but as it is said will never make assault against any of the boats made of this tree or reede, nor against them in it. Of the roote of this tree being burned is made Tahaxir, that is, the Spodium of the anci∣ent Authors, as Avicen thought, and o Gerardus Cremonensis and Bellunensis doe alwayes translate the word Ta∣baxir, but Gracias sheweth that it is a very false interpretation, there being but one Spodium of the Greekes which is our Lapis tuti used by them onely in outward medecines, for Tabaxir being a Persian word signifieth nothing else but a milky juice or liquor growne thicke, and hereby the Arabians do still call that concrete or harde∣ned liquor that groweth betweene the joynts of this Reede or Tree, but the Natives of Sacar Mam∣bu, that is Sugar of Mambu, but is not found in all places as Garcias saith, but in Bisnagar, Batecala, and some part of Malabar chiefly, and is seene to bee of sundry colours, as white like Starch which is the best, yet is it found sometimes of an ash colour or blackish, which yet is not to be misliked, for so it is to be taken out of the Canes, and hath beene in former times esteemed of the value of silver, and yet holdeth a great price even with the Indians, &amp;c. there had neede therefore of great caution of using Spodium (as it is taken) in the Arabians medecines, which are for the most part all inward which is farre differing from Tabaxir as you here see, and of all is taken for the fittest Antispodium, and those other of Oxe bones burned and the like to be utterly cast away. The tree hath leaves saith Garcias like an Olive but longer: the properties whereof are effectuall eyther in outward or inward heates, hot chollerick Agues and fluxes that come of choller to coole, temper and binde them. And now that I have shewed you all the Physicall herbes let me descend to the trees and prepose them that have delightfull and pleasant fruits, that you may take therein some pleasure to mix with the profitable or admirable that shall follow: and the first that I will propound as Garcias saith is the chiefest and choysest fruite in all the Indies. 
CHAP. XCII. Mangas. The Indian hony Plumme. T His tree groweth tall like a Peare tree, with somewhat long leaves, more like unto a Peach then a Plumme: the flowers grow from among the leaves, many being set on a long footestalke like the long Birds Cherry, or cluster Cherry, after which follow the fruite, some being as bigge as a small Melon, and weigh neere about two pound, the lesser about the bignesse of a Goose egge, and others betweene these sizes, as the climates and fertility of the soile causeth them, all of them being longer then a Plumme, and with a thinne skinne, greene before they be ripe, but of a yellowish greene and some reddish when they are ripe and shining withall, smelling very well, but tasting much better, and sweeter, so that some are to be eaten when others are reserved to stand, having a long stone in the middle, like unto a long Allmond in the shell, but covered with a whitish downe or freeze, and a white bit∣ter kernell within: Some trees beare twice a yeare, in the Spring and Fall: but generally they are ripe according to the heate, and temperatenesse of the climate even from Aprill unto November in one place or another, for they are found in many Provinces of India, as Malabar, Balagate, and Bengala, Guzarate, Fegu, Malaca, Goa, &amp; Ormuz, which are accounted the best, and called generally Mangas. The Indian Hony Plumme! 
Mangas by the Indians, yet by some Ambo, and by the Turkes and Persians Amba. The fruite is orde∣red many wayes, as either preserved in Sugar, or pickled up like Ollives before they be through ripe, and are then somewhat harsh and binding: or ea∣ten fresh, being cut into slices and dipped in Wine or without and so eaten. They are cold and moist, and yet the Indian Physitions, as well as the vulgar doe hold them to be hot, saying they breed cholle∣ricke feavers, inflammations, itches, and scabbes, un∣to all which diseases they are subject, which eate none of them at all, in respect of the heate of the yeare, when those fruites are chiefely ripe and are eaten. Acosta pictureth this tree with flowers, and the fruite much differing from this of Linschoten. 
There is another kinde found growing in some places, but much more rarely, whose fruite hath no stone within it, else not differing. 
There is likewise a wild kind hereof called Man∣gas bravas, Mangas sive ossiculo. whose tree is lesser then the manured, with shorter and thicker leaves also, and the fruite is of a pale greene colour, having a thicke skinne, and but little pulpe therein, of the bignesse of a Quince, and with a hard gristly stone within it, yet give they store of milke: they grow generally through all Malabar. If any one eate of these fruites although it be but a little, it is so present a poyson that they dye instantly, and herewith the Indians usually destroy one another, some putting oyle thereto, which maketh it the more speedy in opera∣tion, but howsoever it is taken it doth so quickely dispatch them out of this life, that there hath not beene hitherto found a remedy against it. Boyes, there doe usually in sport throw these fruites one at another, as in Spaine they use to doe with greene Orrenges, 
CHAP. XCIII. Genipat. The twining American Peach. T His tree is of two sorts, the fruite of the one is edible and greater then the other, which is not to be eaten bearing leaves like the Wallnut tree, and fruite at the end of the branches, being both for co∣lour and bignesse like unto Peaches, one set upon another in a wonderfull manner: that which is not edible hath a certaine cleare blewish juyce therein like unto Indico, wherewith the Savages dye or colour their bodyes when they have any solemne meeting of friends, or goe to the slaughter of their enemies, and they with this ornament thinke themselves as finely decked as we in our bravest silkes. 
CHAP. XCIV. Guanabanus Oviedi. The Indian Scaly Muske Melon. T His delicate fruite groweth on a goodly tall tree in sundry places in the West Indies, whose wood is but weake, having large and long leaves, like unto those Guanabanus Oviedi. The Indian Scaly Muske Melon. 
of the Pomecitron tree, and very greene: the fruite is some∣time, as bigge as any Melon, and sometimes of the large∣nesse of a middle sized Melon, covered with a thinne scaly greenish rinde, somewhat like to a Pine apple for the forme, which may as easily be pared away as a peare, the meate or pulpe within is very white, sweete, and delicate, and relenting in ones mouth like unto creame: the seedes within are great, like unto Gourdes seed, but somewhat larger and blackish, and are dispersed through the inner pulpe. This fruite is cold and moist, and therefore of especiall use in the heate of the yeare to coole their thirst, and giveth no offence to the stomacke, although one should eate an whole one. 
Oviedus mentioneth another fruit called Anon, which he compareth with the Guanabanus, saying that not onely the tree, but the fruite are very like but exceedeth it in goodnesse, being of a firmer substance. 
Thevet maketh mention of one very like hereunto called by those of the Iland of Zipanga where it groweth Chivey, which in the Syriack tongue signifyeth a Figge. The branch being ripe is yellow, and very pleasant in taste, like unto Manna, melting in ones mouth, containing seede with∣in them like unto those of Cwcombers. The leafe is very round and greene. 
CHAP. XCV. Guanabanus Scaligeri. The Ethiopian sowre Gourde. T He Ethiopian sowre Gourde groweth in Mozambique, and other parts of Ethiopia, on a faire great tree, having large fresh greene leaves, larger Guanabanus Scaligeri. The Ethiopian sowre Gourde. 
then Bay leaves, &amp; comming neerest to those of the Pomecitron tree, the flowers are of a pale whitish colour, and the fruite as great as a Melon, but longer then it, and ending in a round point, whose rinde is hard and thicke, with sundry ribs thereon, and covered with a greenish freeze or cotton: the pulpe or meate within is whitish while it is fresh, but somewhat reddish being dry, and then is very brittle al∣so, that it may be easily rubbed into pouther, having di∣verse large seed running through it of the forme of a thicke short kidney or the seedes of Anagyris, the great beane Trefoile fastened therein with small fibres to the hollow middle part which pulpe as well dry as greene is of a pleasant sharpe taste, yet more tart or sowre, when it is dry then greene: this is used in the extremities of the hot weather to coole and quench thirst, and is effectu∣all also in all putride and pestilentiall seavers, the pulpe or juyce thereof taken with Sugar, or the dryed pouther put into some Plantaine water, or the decoction or infu∣sion thereof, both for the aforesaid causes and to stay the spitting of blood, or any other hot fluxe of blood or hu∣mours in man or woman; this is very like to be the Aba∣vo that Honorius Bellus writeth of in his fourth and fifth Epistles to Clusius and the Bahobab of Alpinus. 
Ficus Ni∣gritarum. Somewhat like hereunto is that fruite which Thevet calleth Ficus Nigritarum, the leaves of the tree are lar∣ger then any of those former sortes, and hath some divi∣sions therein very like unto Figge leaves: the fruite is sometimes two foote long and thicke, according to the proportion. 
Higuero Oviedi. Not much unlike also is the Higuero of Oviedus, which he describeth in his Indian History: The tree (saith he) is as great as a Mulberry, and the fruite sometimes like unto a long Gourde, &amp; sometimes unto a round, of which round sort the Indians make themselves dishes, platters, and sundry other vessels: The timber whereof is strong Higuero fructus Clusij Motrice like Bells. 
Ahovai fructus. The poysonous fruite of the stincking tree. 
and fit to make stooles, chaires, saddles, and the like: the leafe is long and narrow towards the stalke, and broa∣der towards the end, but growing lesse from thence to the point: the meate or pulpe thereof is like unto Gourds, which they often eate in want of better food: This tree groweth in Hispaniola, and other the Islands of the West Indies, as well as on the Continent also. Clusius setteth forth other certaine fruites tyed unto strings and stones within to sound in dancing with them, which he entituleth Higuero, farre differing from this.
Ahovai Theveti. The stincking tree with his poysonous fruite. It groweth as high as a Peare tree, with leaves three or foure inches long, and two broad, yeelding white milke, if any branch bee broken: the wood stincketh most abhominably, bearing a white three square fruite, somewhat like unto the Greeke letter Δ. whose kernell within is most poysonous and deadly, and therefore the Indians doe give great caution to their children that they eate none of them, and themselves abstaine also from using of the wood to burne, but having taken the kernell they putting small stones within the shells, and tying them with strings they serve them for bracers for their legges to dance with, as Moris dancers doe with bells with us. 
CHAP. XCVI. Mamay. The West Indian Peach plumme. S Caliger saith this tree is like the Chesnut tree with like leaves yet greater: but Oviedus in his histo∣ry of the West Indies, describeth it to be a faire great tree like unto the Wallnut tree, and with such like leaves, but larger, thicker, and greener on the one side then on the other: the fruite is either perfect round or a little longer then round, as bigge as a good great Quince, some greater, others lesser, covered with a yellow thicke skin or coate, that is somewhat rough and not smooth, the pulpe or meate whereof is very pleasant like unto a Peach, but firmer, and not so sappy as a Plumme, of a yel∣lowish colour, and is of a finger or two in thickenesse, having in the middle two or three kernels, separated by thinne skinnes, that are of a peeled Chesnut colour and taste, but very bitter in the inner kernell. 
CHAP. XCVII. Guayava. The West Indian Bay Plumme. T His tree (which is very frequent and well Guajava arboris ramus &amp; frustus. The West Indian Bay Plum. 
knowne through all the West Indies, and which they call Guayabo, as they doe the fruite Guayaba, ) groweth great like unto an Orrange tree, but thinner of branches, bearing large leaves on them, two alwayes set together, and opposite which are like unto Bay leaves but larger▪ even foure inches long, and one and a halfe, or two inches broad, gray or of an hoary ash-colour underneath, with great ribs and smaller veines therein, but of a sad greene a∣bove, smooth, and without any shew of nes almost, somewhat hard in handling, and both smelling and ta∣sting somewhat like a Bay leafe: the flowers are like those of the Orrenge or Pomecitron tree, smelling sweete like the asmine▪ after which followeth the fruite, as great as a small apple, and like unto a Plum, that is, somewhat long, greene before it is ripe, and yellowish after ( et Clusius saith that he received one from Doctor Tovar out of Spaine, that was blackish, light and shrunke, which he imputeth to the unripe∣nesse of it) some having a reddish pulpe within, and some a white very sweete and delicate in taste, divi∣ded as it were into foure parts, in each whereof lye ma∣ny small graines or hard white kernells. The proper∣ties of the fruite besides the delicacy to be eaten, hath an astringent power therein to stay laskes, especially if they be eaten while they are greene and not ripe. 
CHAP. XCVIII. Ambares. The hard gristly Plumme of India called Ambare. T He leaves that grow on this great tree, called Ambare by all the Nations there abiding, although they seeme somewhat like those of the Wallnut Ambares. The hard gristly Plumme of India called Amb r . 
tree for the largenesse, yet are they not of that fashion, for being small at the bottome, and they are broadest at the end, and a little dented the middle thereof, elaborate with many , and of a pale greene colour: the flowers are small and white, and the fruite that followeth of the bignesse of a Wallnut, with a smoother and paler greene skinne, of a strong heady sent, and sowre harsh taste be∣ing unripe, but yellow when it is ripe, and of a more pleasant sent, containing a hard gristly substance within them, with sundry crosse hard nerves or threds running through, yet of so pleasant a tart sowre taste that com∣mendeth it much, and therefore are used by the Natives and strangers also instead of vinegar, or such like sawse, to rellish their meate, and stirre up an appetite, being eaten with salt and vinegar, while they are fresh or pickled to serve for the yeares following, which endure very well: they use to give the fresh fruite also to those that have hot agues, to coole their blood and humours. 
CHAP. XCIX. Melo Corcopali. The American Quince Melon tree. C Orcopall, is a Province of the Indies, wherein as also neere the Promontori Comari, groweth a tree like unto the Quince tree, both for forme and leafe, bearing a large fruite as great as a Melon, with ribbes on the outside like thereunto, very sweete and pleasant to be eaten, and physicall also, within which lye three or foure graines or kernells like Grape stones, which are as bitter as Cherry stone kernells: the sicke as well as the sound doe eate of this fruite, having a quality therein to evacuate evill humours. 
In the same Province also of Corcopall groweth a white Medlar as great as an Apple. Mespil n album. 
CHAP. C. Darian. The Melon like bearing Orrenge. T His bearing Orrenge is a fruite called in Sumatra, Darian, is also somewhat like unto the forest Cor a , which is as great as a Citrull Cowcumber, having within it five fruites in shape and biggenesse like Orrenge but longer, and taste like unto fresh sweete butter. 
CHAP. CI. Carcapuli. The Indian yellow Orrenges of Malavar. A Costa maketh mention of a great tree in Malabar called Carcapuli differing from the Durian, for the fruite he saith is like an Orrenge, when Corcapuli. The Indian yellow Orrenge of Malabar. 
the outer pill is taken away, which consist∣eth of sundry lumpes of pulpe, not to be se∣parated as they may be in the Orrenge, whose rinde is thinne, smooth, and shining as gold when it is ripe, of an austere taste, and binding quality, yet pleasant, and are good to stay s a es of all sort, and to refresh a de∣jected appetite, taken with sowre milke or boyled Rice; the Midwives give it women in hard labour, to cause a speedy delivery, as also to expell the after∣birth: the juyce is profitably used to cleare the eyes of mists and rheumes. 
CHAP. CII. Mala Indica Lusitanis Ber &amp; Bor Acostae. Small Indian Apples. T He tree that beareth this fruite is great, full of branches and leaves, which are somewhat like Apple-tree leaves, but longer and not so round Mala Indica Lusitanis Ber &amp; Bor Acostae. Small Indian Apples. 
of a sad green on the upper end, &amp; hoary or woolly on the underside, astringent in taste: the flowers are white, made of fine small leaves without any sent, the fruite is of the bignesse and likenesse of the Iujube fruite or plant, some greater and lesser as well as pleasanter then others, yet in the ripest (which it is seldome seene, that they come to perfect maturity, neither will they last to be transported into other Coun∣tries) they hold a certaine binding property, and are good therefore to binde the loose belly, but are not so good as Iujubes for the stomacke. In Canara and Decan they call the tree Bor or Ber, and in Ma∣layo Videras, but the Portugals Mansanas de la India, that is Mala Indica, whom wee have followed: those that grow in Malaca are preferred before those of Malabar. In Summer these trees are con∣tinually seene loaden with those flies (or winged Antes) that worke gum Lacca thereon. 
CHAP. CIII. Iamboloins. Indian Ollives. T His tree is somewhat like the Lentiske tree in the barke thereof, but the leaves are like the Straw∣berry tree with dented leaves, tasting like the Mirtle leaves when they are greene, the fruite is very like unto ripe Ollives, but of an harsh and binding taste, able to draw ones mouth awry, yet being pickled up like Ollives, they rellish reasonable well and serve to procure and whet the appetite, being eaten with boyled Ryce. 
CHAP. CIV. Carambolas. Furrowed tart Indian Apples. T He fruite, which they of Malabar call Carambolas, and Camarix or Carabeli, by those of Canara and Decan, and Bolimba in Malayo, groweth on a tree much like to a Quince tree, whose leaves are longer then Apple tree leaves, of a sad greene colour, and bitterish in taste: the flowers are of a dainty blush colour but without sent, and of a sower or tart taste like to Sorrell: the fruite is of the bignesse of a good egge, but somewhat long withall, yellow on the outside, hanging by and short stalke, and set in the small huske, that Carambolas. Furrowed tart Indian Apples. 
formerly held the flower, being pointed at the end, divided as it were into foure parts, with furrowes, which being deepely impressed therein, make it the more gracefull, of a pleasant tart taste, very pleasing to the palate and stomacke, in the middle whereof are contained small seedes. These fruites are much used as well to please and stirre up the appetite by reason of their pleasant sharpenesse, as in hot and chollericke agues also, either the juyce of them made into a Syrupe, or the whole fruite preserved in Sugar, or pickled up in brine to serve for aftertimes: some use the juyce thereof with other ocular medicines for to take away the haw, or the pinne and web in the eyes, or any filme be∣ginning to grow over them. 
CHAP. CV. Iambos. Blood red, and blush Peares of India. T Here is another Indian fruite wor∣thy Iambos. Red and blush coloured Peares of India. 
to be remembred as well for the beauty it beareth in the shew there∣of, and the sweete sent and taste it carryeth to the other senses, as chiefely for the excellent medicinall properties is now daily found out more and more in it. The tree groweth vaste, or huge equalling the grea∣test Orrenge tree in Spaine, largely spread with great armes which make a spacious shaddow: the body and branches are covered with a gray∣ish barke, the leaves are very faire, and smooth an handfull long or more with a thicke middle ribbe, and other smaller veines therein, of a sad greene on the upperside, and paler greene under∣neath, the flowers are of a lively purplish red colour, with divers threds in the middle, very pleasant and standing in a great huske, and ta∣sting like Vine branches: the fruite is of the big∣nesse and fashion of a King Peare, growing out of that large huske, wherein the flower was for∣merly seated, and are of sundry kindes, for some are of so deepe a red colour that they seeme all∣most blacke, some have no kernell or stone with∣in them, when others have one, which are the best: another sort is of a whitish red colour, and shining cleare, having a hard stone within it like to a Peach stone, but smooth, and covered with a white rough skinne, which although it must give place to the former, yet may well be accepted to a dainty palate, the skinne being so tender that as in a Plumme or Cherry, it cannot be pared away, the smell of each resembleth the Rose, and in property is cold and moist. The tree is never without greene and ripe fruite thereon, and blossomes also at all times, which falling abundantly on the ground, make it seeme all red therewith, the ripe fruite by the shaking of the tree are soone made to fall, and gathered from under it, as also easily gathered by hand. The Indians of Malabar and Canara call it Iambolin, the Portugalls that dwell there Iambos, the Arabians and Persians Tupha, and Tuphat, the Turkes Alma. They there use to eate this fruit before meate most usually, yet they are not refused at other times also: both flowers and fruite are preserved with Sugar, and kept to give to those that have hot agues to coole their stomackes and liver, and to quench thirst. 
CHAP. CVI. Iangomas. Indian Services. I Angomas are Indian fruites like Services, growing on trees not much unlike our Service tree, both in leaves and flowers, but set with thornes, and are manured or planted in Orchards as well as found wild abroad: the fruite is harsh like an unripe Sloe when it is ripe, and must therefore be rowled betweene the fingers, to make it mellow before it can be eaten, and is generally taken to binde or restraine, whensoever there is cause of such an operation. 
CHAP. CVII. Lencoma. The Indian Chesnut. T His tree groweth very great, and the wood is strong and firme, having leaves like to the Strawberry tree, the fruite is very like to our Chesnut, as well in colour as bignesse, as also in that white or spot thereon, but it seemed to have the kernell loose within it, for that it giveth a noyse in shaking, the fruit is edible and pleasant, yet a little astringent.
CHAP. CVIII. Charamci. Purging cornered Hasell nuts. T Here are two kindes of this tree, called Charamci by all the Indians generally, but the Persians and A∣rabians Ambela, the one is as great as the Med∣lar Charamci. Purging cornered Hasell Nuts. 
tree, with Peare tree pale great leaves, and yellowish fruite, somewhat like to Hasell or Fillberd Nuts, ending in sundry corners, of the taste of sowre Grapes, yet more pleasant, which they pic∣kle up as well being ripe as unripe, and usually eate them with salt. The other kinde is of the same bignesse, but hath lesser leaves then the Apple tree, and a greater fruite, which the Indians use being boyled with Saunders &amp; give the de∣coction against feavers: the barke of the roote of the for∣mer kinde, which groweth by the water sides, is chiefely used (so as it grow farre from the sea) which yeeldeth milke, by taking foure fingers length thereof, which being bruised with a dramme of Mustard seed, they give to those that are pursie and short winded: for it purgeth mightily both upwards and downewards: but if a superpurgation chance thereupon, they give one of the fruits of Carambolas to helpe it, or else a draught of the vinegar of Canara (which is nothing else but the decoction of Rice set by for a day, two or three, untill it grow sower. The fruite is fa∣miliarly eaten through all parts, unripe as well as ripe, and pickled, or eaten with salt and vinegar to procure an appe∣tite, putting it to their meates to give them a rellish by rea∣son of its tartnesse. 
CHAP. CIX. Iaaca or Iaca. The Diamond fashioned Chesnut Gourd. T His tree groweth in sundry of the Indian Ilands neare the water sides to be of a vaste bignesse, having leaves of an hand breadth with a thicke hard ribbe all the length thereof, and of a pale greene colour: the fruite is very great (not growing from the Iaaca vel Iaca. The Diamond fashiond Chesnut Gourd. 
younger branches or with the leaves, but out of the body, and elder boughes thereof) long and thick, the least whereof is greater then the greatest Gourd, having a hard thicke rinde of a darke greene colour, set with short Diamond pointed like blackish prickes, which a farre off threaten danger in the handling, but shewing favour in doing no harme, which when they are ripe smel sweet, and grow somewhat soft, that they will yeeld to the pressing of ones hands, and being cut longwise, not athwart, have a thicke yellowish white meate within them, devided into sundry cells or par∣titions full of long and thicke Chesnut like fruites, greater then any Date, with an ash coloured outside, and white substance within like a Chesnut, which while they are raw taste harsh and breed much winde, but being roasted as Chesnuts use to be, or sodden, taste savory and stirre up venery, for which purpose the people eate them much: the whitish pulpe or substance wherein these lye is of a pleasant taste but hard of dis∣gestion, and breedeth that pestilent disease called Mo∣ xi, if they be much or often eaten, or that they lye cor∣rupted in the stomack: Those that grow in Malabar are accounted the best, and better then those of Goa; Linschote saith the two sorts hereof are called Girasol and Chambasol, but Paludanus Barca and Papa, and that those other names doe signifie the goodnesse or meannesse of wares. 
CHAP. CX. Cachi &amp; Ciccara. The Pine apple like Chesnut Melon. T Here is a prickly or thorny tree growing in Malabar which they call Cachi &amp; the fruit thereof Ciccara, the tree is as great as a Fig tree, with Datelike leaves, and hard wood like Box, which they put to many uses: the fruit groweth not on the branches, but out of the body, and elder boughes as the true Sycamore or Egiptian Fig doth, and is a foote in length, of the thicknesse of ones thigh, and of a brownish yellow outside when it is ripe, being formed somewhat like a Pine apple, and having ma∣ny severall cells or partitions within it as a Pomegarnet hath; the inner substance whereof is somewhat firme and well sented, but tasting like a Muske Melon, a Peach, a sweete Orrenge and hony together; these cells con∣taine in them 250. or 300. small fruits in shape and taste like Figges without skinnes, within every of which fruit is another lesser, resembling a Chesnut, which is eaten roasted by the fire as Chesnuts are, and will cracke like them in the roasting. 
CHAP. CXI. Duriones. The prickly fruitfull Melon. T He Duriones may seeme the same with the former Iaca, because they come neare in some things but they much differ in others, as you shall perceive by this description. The tree groweth to be very great and tall, the Timber whereof is strong firme and sound, covered with a thicke ashco∣loured barke, spreading plentifully into branches and store of fruit, having leaves that are some∣what long and pointed, dented about the edges, of a brownish greene colour on the upper side, and pale greene underneath: the flowers are of a pale or whitish yellow colour, and the fruite groweth to the bignesse of a Muske Melon, Duriones. The prickly fruitfull Melon. 
with a thicke greenish rinde set full of shorte and thicke but sharpe prickles, having some strakes thereon as the Melon hath: it hath with∣in it being opened foure cells or divisions all the length of it, in every one of which lye three or foure white fruits as bigge as Hens egges (for if they containe five a peece they are not held to bee so good, neither yet if they looke yellowish, and not white they judge them spoi∣led by the wet falling into the chinkes) like un∣the Mangar blanco of the Spaniards, but not so soft or muccilagie and taste like unto Creame, smelling somewhat sweet also: each of these fruits have enclosed within them a kernell like unto that of the Peach stone, which is some∣what long and insipide, yet making the throate harsh like unto an unripe Medler, and there∣fore are not eaten: These fruits are to be light∣ly troden on to breake them because of the prickes, which to them that never did smell them or eate of them before, may seeme to smell like rotten onions, but having tasted of them wil thinke them both to taste and smell better then other meats: for among the natives they are held in so good account that they thinke they can never be satisfied with them: but if any by eating too liberally of them shall feare to fall in∣to a Surfeit, or to take any other harme by them, they shall be instantly helped and eased, if ey∣ther they lay a leafe of Betre upon the stomack or eate some of the leaves thereof: for so great an antipathy there is between these two plants, that if some leaves of Betre be brought into a shippe or house, where these fruits are layd and kept, they will all rot and putrefie: so that it hath not beene knowne that any have taken harme by eating of them. 
CHAP. CXII. Totecka Americana Pervana. The Indian fruitfull Gourd bearing Almond, or the Indian Almonds of Clusius. T He tree that beareth this fruite groweth very great and high, the body being bare of branches or leaves unto a very great height where it spreadeth into branches standing in compasse together almost like a Crowne, with faire great broad long leaves set on them greater than ones hand, somewhat like but much greater then those of Diepanboome of a darke greene colour on the upper side, and some∣what white or mealy underneath: the flowers breake forth among the leaves in severall places, and are of a darke greene colour, after which come the fruit, very great when it is ripe and round like a Bowle, but flat on one side whose shell is as hard as a bone, hardly admitting to bee bored or filed, and of a darke brow∣nish colour dented in, striped and crumpled almost like unto Corke, so great that one can hardly com∣passe it with both ones hands and the fingers stretched out at length, the height also being neare the same size; this fruite in the inside is divided into six cells or particions by hard skinnes, in every one whereof is conteined eight, ten or twelve nuts lying orderly piled as it were one upon another, each of which are three square, some∣what long, and pointed more at one end then another, Totocka Americana sive Amygdala Pernana Clusii forte. The Indian fruitfull Gourd bearing Almond, or the Indian Almonds of Clusius. 
not so much rugged as the outer shell nor so hard but they may be crakt with the teeth, some of them grea∣ter then others, and all of them two or three inches in length, and an inch and a halfe in thicknesse, the kernell within being in taste not so like an Almond as a Wal∣nut, more oily in a wet yeare then a dry, which the Indians by pricking sundry of them upon a sticke, and lighting of them, they will burne like a Torch to shew them their way, and continue long in burning, and give an Oily or Turpentine-like flame, having a blacke coale which turneth to ashes: The outer shell hereof is of the thicknesse of halfe an inch, containing within it a pint and a halfe of liquor Antwerpe measure, and weighed 17. ounces or more the emptie shell. The Indians seldome gather these fruites, but gather them after they are fallen, for they are afraid least they should fall upon their heads which were sufficient to beate out their braines, and when they are forced to passe them as in their warres, &amp;c. they carry Bucklers over their heads to defend them. They make much account of these kernells, and use to eate them chiefly to provoke them to venery, whereunto they are too much proclive of themselves, and make it their chiefest felicitie having this proverbe with them Pignean sac∣cumâ pingean Totocka, which is, Si ambires veneremede Totockam. It groweth in high places and not in low grounds under the Line and on both sides thereof in the West Indies, and beareth fruit twise every yeare, that is, about Aprill and in November, and call it Totocke. It is very probable that this is Clusius his Amydala Per∣vana, as any by comparing that little he hath delivered thereof may soone determine. 
Many other fruites, as well Melon like as Gourde like and others, are used by the Indians and the Christi∣ans likewise living there among them in some sort, but these here mentioned are the choisest and chiefest of them; I will now therefore lastly shew you sundry other sorts of fruits of trees that have medecinall qualities for the most part in them, and so finish this worke. 
CHAP. CXIII. Pinei nuclei Maluccani. Malucca Pine Kernells. S Ome Orchards in Malabar as well as the wild Pinei Nuclei Maluccani. Malucca Pine Kernels. 
woods doe nourse up a certaine tree growing to the bignesse of a Peare tree, whose leaves are soft and tender, of a darke greene on the upper side and pale underneath, tasting very sharpe and biting upon the tongue for a good while, the fruite is of the bignesse of a Filberd and triangular, divided on the in∣side into sundry partitions, contayning within them small white hard kernells, like unto the kernells of Pineapples, whereupon they have so called them, and which the Indians use as well in the cure of diseases, as to performe their wicked designes: they use to give two of these ker∣nells, the skins that cover them being first taken away mix∣ed up in a glister to purge and procure ease to those that have the Sciatica or hip gout, &amp; in the broth of a Chicken to those that have their urine stopped or make it with paine, and to cause tough, thicke and cold humours to be avoyded: they give them likewise to those that are short winded or have a cough, for which they much commend them, and often use them being dissolved in water, and the face or other parts of the body annointed therewith doth give helpe and heale Tetters, Ringwormes and Scabbes, being a little rubbed before the using, for they are causticke or burning as experience sheweth: Wicked women and harlots give foure graines or kernells of them to their husbands or others thereby to kill them: those of Canara doe call them Gepala, and are in frequent use with the Indians where they grow plentifully for purgations: 
Monardus maketh mention of another kinde of purging Pine kernells, growing in Hispaniola, &amp;c. within such like cones but greater and longer, Lux let pi∣zera ij. thinner sheld and blacker then the usuall sort, whose kernells being white and sweete, tempt divers to eate of them without suspition of evacuation, yet five or six according to the ability of the patient, being given in wine doe purge strongly both upwards and downewards, avoyding grosse humours especially; but being a little terrefied at the fire they worke not so violently or with such torments and gripings: 
CHAP. CXIIII. Fenoabson. The Apple bearing poysonous Almond tree. T Hevet sheweth in his description of America, that in some parts thereof there groweth a tree, the barke whereof is of a strange and mervailous sent, having leaves like unto Purslane, very thick and alwayes greene: it beareth fruite as great as large sised Apples, and as round as an hand-ball which are not to be eaten for they are poyson: but they containe within them six other fruits, very like unto Al∣monds but flatter and broader, each lying in a severall cell, which are wonderfull profitable to the people, to heale their wounds by darts or otherwise in their warres, for out of these fruits they presse a kind of red oyle with which they are quickly cured. 
CHAP. CXV. Cacao sive Cacavate. The Peare bearing wholsome Almond tree. B Enzo in his description of America, remembreth a tree growing in Nicarragne a Province of the West Indies somewhat like unto the last described, but because it is another sort you shall have the relation thereof as he setteth it downe. It is the fruite of a meane sised tree growing onely in warme and wet, yet shadowed places, and therefore must be defended from the sight of the Sunne by having a tall tree planted to the Sunne ward of it, which must be fitted and plashed that it may be as an Arbor unto it, or else it will wither and perish: the fruite doth somewhat nearely in forme resemble a Peare, or Peare fashioned Gourd, with a thicke shell or Cacaeo sive Cacavate. The Peare bearing wholsome Almond tree. 
rinde, and within lyeth an Almond like fruite, halfe as big againe as a Wal∣nut, inclosed in a hard round shell, the kernell being blackish without, and brownish ashcoloured veines within, but bitterish and unpleasant, yet very sweete and pleasant to the Indians. After they have gathered the fruite they breake the outer rinde and lay the inner fruite upon Mats to dry in the Sunne, untill the moisture within them be consumed, and then they keepe them both for their meate and merchandise, for shippes loaden with them are carried from Gnatimale to new Spaine, and other places thereabouts, and trucke with them for other commodities in stead of mony, and give of them to the poore in stead of an almes. A drinke likewise the Indians make thereof called Chocolate, well pleasing and accepted with the greatest a∣mong them, who account nothing of more esteeme; but to the Christians, at the first it seemeth a wash fitter for hogs, yet by use even accepted by them also in the want of better. 
CHAP. CXVI. Areca sive Faufel seu Avellana Indiana versicolor. The discoloured small Indian Nut. T His tree groweth great and very tall, but the wood thereof is spongy and not easie to breake, without any branches unto a great height, and towards the toppe spreading many faire bran∣ches, and leaves thereon greater and longer then the Coker Nut tree, the flowers are white without sent, and grow many together on a long stalke hanging downewards from the lower branches, the fruit following on every one, being longer but smaller then the Nutmeg with all the outer rindes and shells, and hath the outer rinde covered with a yellow Cotton like silke, the inner kernell being very like unto a Nutmeg, somewhat round, and small at one end and flat at the other, with the like discoloured veines therein, but without any heate in taste or sent, and is therefore held to be cooling and drying: it groweth in sundry places of the Indies more or lesse plentifull in one or another place, and chiefly neare the Sea coasts: With the twigs hereof that are of two fingers thicknesse the Natives use to hunt the Cro∣codils as well in the water as on land, for if they can thrust these stickes into their mouthes they are sure they cannot breake them, because they are so lithye and spongy, and thereby they doe retaine and take them, it is called Faufel by the Arabians, but some falsly Filfel, by the chiefest tians Areca by those of Gazarate, and De∣can Supari, in Malabar Pac, in Malaca Pinan, in Couchin Chacani: it is profitably used in all hot diseases, to helpe the tooth ach, and to fasten loose teeth in the head or the loose gummes: the Indians use this fruite abundantly eyther unripe to stupefie their senses like to drunkennesse, or ripe, being mixed with the leaves of Betell or Areca vel fan el sive Avellana Indiana versicolor. The discoloured small Indian Nut. 
Nun Faufel cum suo in volucro et eodem exempto. 
Areca sive Avellana Indica versicoloris genus oblongum Clusij. A kind of long small Indian discoloured Nut. 
Betre, the ribbes therein being first taken away, some put sundry other things to them, as Lycium, Camphire, Lignum Aloes and Ambe∣grise according to their qualities that take delight in it, which is generally through all the countries of India, with the chiefe persons most, and with the inferiour in some sort also. Garcias saith he distilled a water from them being fresh, which he used with good successe in all hot or chollericke fluxes of the belly.
Areca sive Avellanae Indicae versicoloris genus oblongum Clusij. A kind of small long discovered Indian Nut of Clusius. Clusius in his scholia upon the Fanfel of Garcias exhibiteth another kind of Areca or Faufel, whose kernells hath discoloured veines there∣in like a Nutmeg, or the former sort, and with a blacke covering over it, the chiefest difference from the other consisting in being longer then the other. Lobel supposeth it may be the kernell of a nut of his Palma Pinus. 
Linschoten also saith that there is another sort of Areca which is smaller, blacker and harder then the former, and called by the Natives Checaninas, which causeth a lightnesse in the head. 
Clusius also relateth of another as large as a Walnut, with the outer greene rinde, but the shell was hard and smooth of a Chesnut colour, long and pointed at both ends, flat on the one side and bunching out on the other, the kernell within being white and sweete. Another was about a finger long, and as thicke as two, flattish on the lower end, and of a rugged ash colour, the upper end being smooth and of a brownish colour, see∣ming like some small ticke, covered with a thicke hard shell, having a kernell within it. 
Divers other fruits are mentioned by Clusius and many others wee have seene our selves, but because wee doe not know any use of them or propertie in them, I rather forbeare their relating, then stuffe the worke with un∣profitable matter, it being growne so voluminous already. 
CHAP. CXVII. Arbor Brasilia. The Brassill tree. T He tree that beareth the Brassill wood Arbor Brasilia. The Brassill tree. 
which serveth the Dyers use, and to make Ink is a goodly faire great tree growing in divers places of the coun∣trey of Brassill, and in no other place as it is thought, and the chiefest about Fernam∣buck from whence have risen the appellations to the weod: the leaves wherewith it is cloathed are as small as Box leaves, thicke and evergreene like them, the barke is of an ash colour, and the wood red, especially the core or heart thereof which is the best, and as it is said is no bigger then a mans heigh, though the tree be so bigge in com∣passe that three men cannot fathome it. This as it is said also beareth neither fruit nor gum, but I wonder then how so many could be found grow∣ing there? could the earth of it selfe thinke you without seede bring forth that aboundance? or will not time consume them all? surely it cannot be but that it beareth seede, and is thereby pro∣pagated although not observed &amp;c. 
CHAP. CXVIII. Arbor Tristis. The sorrowfull tree. T He tree that beareth this name from the properties riseth to be a reasonable tall, spreading sun∣dry slender branches and faire leaves set by couples on Arbor Tristis. The sorrowfull tree. 
them, very like unto the large or great Myrtle leaves and smaller then those of the Plum tree, little or no∣thing snipt about the edges, a little rough, and greene on the upper side and gray underneath: at each joynt with the leaves towards the ends of the branches on both sides come forth slender reddish yellow footstalkes wherewith they co∣lour their broths and meates yellow like Saffron, bearing three or foure, or more flowers together thereon, composed of sundry small white leaves pointed at the ends, making a double flower, with divers small threds in the middle, smelling so sweet that they are thought to exceede eyther the Orrange or Iasuime flowers, whose propertie is never to blow open in the day time, but in the night onely (when its time of flowring is) for so soone as the Sunne shineth thereon in the morning, they all for the most part fall downe under the tree, and the whole tree with the branches seeme as withered and dead untill the evening, eyther through the ten∣dernesse of the stalke, or by a naturall antipathy unto the Sunne, not to abide the shining face thereof, for some of the flowers doe abide on these branches that are most shadowed from the Sunne: the following fruite they give is flat somewhat like a Lupine with a thicke skinne, (it must be but small store, for what quantitie of fruite can this tree beare if all or the most of the flowers doe fall away) yet heart fashion, and of a greenish ash colour, with a divi∣sion in the middle, in each part whereof is contained small flat beanes or kernells, like unto those of the sweet beane or Carob tree, heart fashion likewise, and covered with a greenish skinne or pee∣ling, the inner kernell being white and somewhat bitter. This tree hath been much desired to be transplanted into our Christian world, but as some have sayd it would not abide, notwithstanding all the care of earthen and woodden vessells, wherein it was planted to be brought into Spaine or Portugall, neither ever would the seede spring as it is affirmed, but I have lately under∣stood by a catalogue of the Plants growing in the garden of Signor Corvino of Rome that it groweth there, being one of the plants named therein. It plentifully groweth in Malabar and brought thence to Goa, and sundry other places of the Indies, where every branch being put into the ground will take roote and grow. It is called in Ma∣labar Mogli, in Malayo Singadi, in Decan Pul, of the Arabians Guart, of the Persians and Turkes Gul, but at Goa and Canarin Parizataco from a certaine Nobleman so called (as the Natives thinke and therein very neare inti∣mating one of Ovids fabulous metamorphosis) whose faire daughter the Sun having espyed fell in love withall, and having deflowred her &amp; forsaken, for another, she slew her selfe; from whose ashes of her burnt carkisse rose up this tree, which is ever since ashamed to behold the face of the Sunne. In many places of the Indies they distill the flowers for their sweet sent sake, and keepe it for use; which in Malabar they call the water of Mogli after the trees name: the said water is good for sore eyes to coole their heate and rednesse, if linnen cloathes being dipped therein be layd upon them: the Indian Phisitions doe hold opinion that both flowers and fruite doe comfort the heart, and refresh the fainting spirits thereof, for they have some bitternesse in them, it hath not beene observed that the Indians apply this tree to any other use then is formerly expressed, and the colouring of their meates like as Saffron is used for the same purpose in Spaine and other countries. 
CHAP. CXIX. Arborfolijs ambulantibus. Walking leaves. N Eare unto the Ile of Cimbubon and in the Ile it selfe, there groweth a tree bearing leaves like un∣to those of the Mulberry tree, having two small short and prickly feete as it were set on ey∣ther side of them, which falling to the ground doe seeme as it were to creepe as if it were some living creature, and being touched by any will presently move it selfe▪ Master Anthony Piga∣fetta saith that he kept one of these leaves in a continuall motion in a platter for eight dayes (the motion whereof is likely to come by the ayre) and then it ceased. 
CHAP. CXX. Arbor aquam fundeus. The fountaine tree of water. I N one of the Ilands of the Canaries called Ferro, there groweth a reasonable great but faire spread tree bearing leaves like unto Wallnut tree leaves but larger, abiding thereon and ever greene: it beareth fruite like unto an Ackorne hanging downe from the branches, which hath a kernell within of a very pleasant taste and almost like spice. In some parts of the world besides are found the like tree, the leaves whereof and branches doe perpetually droppe water Arbor aquam fundeus. The fountaine tree of water. 
(in the whole Iland there being no other water to be had) a thicke mist as it were or cloud encompawng it continually, except when the Sunne shineth bright thereon; which water being kept as it were in a fountaine made for the purpose to retaine it, serveth the whole Iland for their use. Our Countrey man Master Lewis Iackson dwelling in Holburne, told Master Purchas as he hath set it downe in his seventh booke of Pilgri∣mages Fol. 1639, that in the yeare 1618. he had beene in the said Iland Ferro, and had seene that tree, and saith it is as bigge as an Oake of a middle size, the barke white like Hardbeame, six or seven yards high with ragged boughes, the leafe like that of of the Bay, white underneath and green above: it beareth neither fruit nor flower: thus saith he, but it hath some other different relations which who so would see, let them reade the place be∣fore recited: the Ilanders call this tree Garoe, the Spaniards Arbor Sancta: but the ancient Historians call it Til. It is thought that Solinus and Pliny in his lib. 6. c. 32. meant this Iland under the name of Ombriom and Pluvialis, for hee there saith that in the Iland Ombrion grow trees like unto Ferula from whence wa∣ter is wronge out, from the blacke ones commeth bitter wa∣ter water, and from the white that which is sweete and plea∣sant to drinke. 
I might here insert the Barnacle tree but that it is found to be a fable, Ar r tifer. The Barnade tree of the Goose. and that the Geese hatch their young as other Birds and fowles doe, and therefore I forbeare to speake of it. 
CHAP. CXXI. Quercus natalitijs Divirens. The Christtide greene Oake. I N the new Forrest in Hampshiere neare a place called the Castle of Malwood groweth an old great doating Oake, which by the relation of the neare Villagers, is alwayes observed to shoot forth fresh but small greene leaves every yeare a little before Christide, which abide not long thereon after that time, but fall away, others springing out in the due time that other Oakes doe, bearing both leaves and fruit as usually other Oakes doe in their season. King Iames in his time understanding of this tree, went and saw it, and caused it to be paled about and benches made thereat, both for people to sit and contemplate the wondrous workes of God therein, and to keepe unruly persons from breaking and spoy∣ling it: but (nitimur invetitum semper) the more it was intended to be preserved, the more wilfull people were bent to breake and spoyle it (being the more famoused by that provision) and breake downe the pales and carry them away. I have had both leaves and Ackornes brought me from this tree, taken by Master John Goodier each in their season. 
CHAP. CXXII. Arbor Venereos stimulos domans. The Chaste making tree. P Etru de Osina in his letter to Monardus maketh mention of a certaine tree growing there in the West Indies whose mber was of a spongie substance whereof the Indians would never take a sticke to burne, neither by any meanes, although they were treatned to death could be brought to burne it or abide where it was burned, for they said that whosoever came neare the fire or flame thereof, or whom∣ever the smoake onely touched, was made utterly impotent and unabled to any venereous acts. 
CHAP. CXXIII. Arbor Farinifera. The Bread tree. S Ome that accompanied Sir Francis Drake in compassing the whole world did relate that in the Iland of Ternate, which is neare the Equinoctiall line, towards the North pole groweth a strange kinde of tree about ten foot high, whose toppe is formed like unto a Cabbidge, in the middle whereof is found a fine white meale which the poore Ilanders gather, and by putting a little water thereto and letting it ferment they make past or dough, whereof they make thinne flat square Cakes, and bake them in certain long earthen pans, with fire put round about them which they eate while they are hot, for when they are growne older and hard, they steepe them in warme water, and bring them to a kinde of pultage and so eate them, but this Cake or bread is in a manner without taste or rellish, but when some Pepper or Cinamon with Sugar is put thereto, it is a pleasant food to many, but Marcia Po us Venetus recordeth a more strange bread tree growing in the kingdome of Fanfur, Arbor v sta sa∣ i fera. whose trunke two men could scarse fadome, the barke whereof being thicke, and taken away, the wood thereof about three inches thicke in compasse is as hard as Iron being so heavy tha it sinketh instantly in water, whereof the natives make them short pikes or speares sharpe∣ning and burning them at the end, so that they will be able to pearce Armour▪ but the whole middle of this tree is soft like unto a meale, which putting in water and stirring it to take away all the drosse that swimmeth above, they mould up the residence into cakes, and divers other sorts of viands fit to be eaten, and whereof as hee saith he brought some with him to Venice. 
CHAP. CXXIIII. Arbor sive Palma saccifera. The Bagge bearing Nut tree. C Ertaine Dutch Marriners having by a casualtie lost their shippe, wherein they with others were sayling to the West Indies, in their returne home, in their shippe boate lighted on a desart Iland called Coronopez, wherein they found whole woods full of these kindes of strange trees, and others growing among them whose fruits being round Nuts, as bigge as Wallnuts with their greene outer shell, and within them other smaller Nuts so round as a ball, and with so hard a shell, yet not very thicke that they could hardly be broken with an Iron hammer, and a white hollow kernell in the middle tasting like Pease at the first, but a little bitter afterwards, Arbor sive palma saccifera. The bagge bearing Nut tree. 
like a Lupine, were inclosed in a long sheathe or hollow hose, resembling an Hipocras or Syrupe bagge, some be∣ing twenty two inches long, others two foot and a halfe long, yet all being very small at the end and growing larger up to the toppe, where they were about seven inches wide, and composed of a number of brownish threds or haires dispersed all over the case, some running at the length and some crossewise by a wonderfull worke of na∣ture. 
CHAP. CXXV. Arbor metrosideros. The Iron hearted tree. S Caliger maketh mention of a certaine small tree, is reported to grow in the Ile of Iava major, whose heart or core is as impenitrable as Iron, from the bottome to the toppe: and the fruit which it beareth is likewise as hard, but the report saith he, is of so little credit and so neare a falsitie, as I am from beleeving it: yet Nicholaus Costinus in his Iournall doth report the same thing. 
CHAP. CXXVI. Arbor Gehuph. The Splene tree of Sumatra. I N the Ile of Sumatra anciently called Trapoba∣na Arbor Gehuph. The Splene tree of Sumatra. 
or Taprobana as Thevet relateth it, groweth a tree not very great, called there Gehuph, and in the Indies Cobbam, whose leaves are many smal ones set on a rib together, somewhat like unto the Cassia solutiva, or purging Cassia leaves, set on short branches covered with a yellowish barke: the fruit is somewhat thicke and as round as a ball, where under is contained a Nut as big as an hasel Nut, with a very bitter kernel with∣in it, yet tasting like an Angellica roote; they use the fruit to quench thirst: but the bitter kernell is the most effe∣ctuall in the diseases of the Liver and Spleene, where∣with they are much afflicted, and therefore draw an oyle out of the kernells of the Nuts, which they take for eight dayes together in which time the disease is much abated and quickly after cured: those that cannot by rea∣son of the bitternesse take it so willingly, as women and children, it is appointed unto them to be annointed with the oyle on the belly, back bone and sides, which worketh the cure alike: the said oyle is in much use with them also, and of great account for the singular helpe and remedy it giveth to all joynt aches, gouts and the like: the gum likewise of this tree being dissolved with a little oyle and spread plasterwise is applyed to the grieved places with good effect. The inhabitants doe plant this tree neare their Houses in their Orchards and Gardens for to have the be∣nefit thereof nigh at hand.
CHAP. CXXVII. Beretinus fructus. The Beretine Ackorne. C Lusius in his second booke of Exoticks and seventeenth Chapter, maketh mention that he obtained some of these fruites, from those that accompanied Sir Francis Drake in his Circumnavigation of the world returning in the yeare 1580. by the meanes of some of his friends here as Beretium fructus. The Beretine Acorne. 
Master Garth and Master Morgan, which were affirmed to be gathered in some Islands (whereinto they put both for fruit and victuall standing in neede of both) from very great and tall trees bigger then Oakes, whose leaves were like unto Bay leaves, not dented at all about the edges but thicke and shining: the fruit were like the Ackornes of the Ilex or evergreene Oake, but without any cup, for as hee saith he enquired thereof of some of them, whose outer rinde was thinne and of an ash colour, and some blackish, the inner kernell being somewhat long and white, without any manifest taste within but covered with a thinne skinne, which they found good to be eaten without any harme following, and therefore in their want being taught by the Ilanders they boyled them like Pulse or Pease, and so eate them or beate them to pouther and boiled them like Rice or Wheat, untill it became a pultage and so eate them for hunger: yet afterwards they found the like trees and fruit to grow in the Islands of the Moluccas as they affirmed: But with what other propertie they were indued, neyther they nor any other hath manifested to any that I know. 
CHAP. CXXVIII. Vhebebasou. The Indian Hony tree. T Hevet maketh mention of this tree among his other American singularities to be very tall, spreading the branches so uniformely, that it is a great Vhebebasou. The Indian Hony tree. 
pleasure to behold, in that they seeme so disposed by art and not by nature, having leaves on them like to Coleworts, (which I beleeve is mistaken, the figure not expressing such a forme) and fruit of a foot long. In the hollow parts of this tree above other, the Bees doe make their Hony and Wax, whereof the naturalls make much account, for with it they sea∣son their foode made of roots, &amp;c. Vnto this tree resorteth familiarly a certaine beast some∣what like a Cat, but of a browne colour, called by them Heyrat that is the Hony beast to feed on the the honey, which it carefully pulleth out with the feete without hurting the Bees or being stung or hurt by them. 
CHAP. CXXIX. Pruna insana quae Nuces insanae a Clusio dicuntur. Mad Indian Plums or Nuts. T His Indian fruit mentioned by Clusius in second booke of Exoticks, page 53. and 54. is thus re∣lated by him. The Dutch after much wandring in the unknowne Seas fell by chance into a certaine Bay, scituate in 11. degrees 45. minuts of Northerly Latitude where they found certaine trees as big as Cherry trees, with long and narrow leaves like Peach leaves, whose fruits they saw the Monkies there eating, wherupon divers of them gathered some and eate them, which were fully round, grow∣ing for the most part singly each upon its stalke, and sometimes Pruna insana quae Nuces insanae a Clusio dicuntur. Indian Plums or Nuts. 
two together, being about two inches or not much more either longwise or round, with a firme but not very thicke shell, brow∣nish on the outside and not very smooth, but smooth within, and of a brighter colour, containing a certaine fruit within some∣what like unto a blacke Sloe, both for forme and size, spot∣ted with somewhat a large white spot at the bottome where it stood upon the stalke, having a stone under that Plum which was grayish and hard, and a kernell with it, those persons which had eaten of these Plums felt no harme, but some of the company steeping both stones and kernells, and boyling and ea∣ting of them fell into divers distemperatures, according to each mans severall humour, one thought his Cabin was made a Brew-house, and bad take away the woman that was there: another called his Mates together, asking them if they would buy his fish, whereof he had varietie: another lying in his Cabin com∣plained that his flesh was torne from his bones, another cryed out loudly that they were building a great ship in his Cabin, another in his Cabin broke foure or five Chinay dishes, saying that many men were comming to take away his Cabin from him, another calling to the Maister of the shippe said, doe yee not see the Divell sitting in the Sterne catching Fish; another sayd that he saw the Anchors in the bottome of the Sea through the bulke of the Shippe; the Masters sonne said to his father, O my father I see a number of little men running upon your nose, but after they had slept all these imaginations vanished, yet some of them slept for a day and a halfe, and some two whole dayes before they waked, and some thereby were troubled with the laske: many other fancies fell among the rest which were too long to recite; but among them all saith he as it were in scorne among the rest there was an English man distracted, who looking upward said he saw the heavens open and cryed with a loud voyce, O Lord I will willingly follow thee, and with divers other gestures moved the company to laugh∣ter. Clusius sheweth that in the same table with these Plums or Nuts hee set another small Nut not much unlike an Hasell nut which made no noyse of any kernell therein, and knew not whether it had any cup to hold it as an Acknorne hath or no. 
CHAP. CXXX. Mamoera mas &amp; faemina. The male and female Dugge tree. T He forme of these two sorts of tres are Mamoera mas &amp; faemina. The male Dugge tree. 
both alike, not differing the one from the other, but in this that the male bea∣reth no blossomes, but fruite like unto a small Pompion many growing toge∣ther towards the toppe out of the bo∣dy of the tree which hath no armes or branches but onely large broad leaves much like unto the Plane tree or Maple tree leafe, each standing on a very long stalke: the trunke or stocke of the tree is neate two foot thicke, and about nine foote high: the flowers are of a pale yellow colour like unto Elder blossomes which serve to no use, the fruit is round and fleshy, yellowish when it is ripe, and serving them to loo∣sen the belly when they are eaten and conteine with∣in them many round blacke shining graines as bigge as Pease which likewise are put to no use with them. The propertie of these trees is said to be, that unlesse the male kinde bee planted to grow neare the female it will beare no fruit at all; of which nature a kinde of Date tree is said to be also. This tree groweth in that part of Brassill that the Fortugalls called Baya de todos los Sanctes. 
CHAP. CXXXI. Moringa. The Bezar tree. T His tree groweth not great, nor spreadeth Moringa. The Bezar tree. 
with many branches, but is like unto the Lentiske or Masticke tree both for great∣nesse and leaves, being full of knots, very easie to be broken, of a very faire but sad greene co∣lour and of the taste of Turnip leaves: the fruit is a foot long, and of the bignesse of a Reddish root having eight edges or corners of a greenish ashcolour with a white substance within devided into certaine cells wherein lye small round seede like unto small Pease but greene and tender, and of a sharper taste then the leaves: the whole fruit sliced in peeces is boyled in the broth of flesh and sundry other wayes. But the roote of this tree is a soveraigne Antidote or Counterpoison, as effectuall as Vnicornes horne or Bezar stone ot any Treakle, for the natives doe usu∣ally take thereof, both against all kindes of poisons and the bitings of the must venomous creatures, yea even that serpent which the Portugalls call Culebras de capillo, which is accounted the most dangerous of all, taking thereof both inwardly and applying it to the outward place. They have found it also to bee lesse effectuall against the Leprosie, for many have beene thereof cured by often using of it, it is mixed also with those medecines that purge melancholy. It groweth plentifully in all the Province of Malabar, where they bring the fruit into the msrket to sell as beanes and pease or elsewhere. The Arabians and Turkes call Morian, the Persians Tame, but they of Gazurate Turina. 
CHAO. CXXXII. Negundo mas &amp; faemina. The male and female wound tree. T He Indians make two sorts hereof, the one Negundo mas &amp; faemina. The Male wound tree of the Portugals. 
they call Varolo Nigundo, that is the male and the other Niergundo the female, in Mala∣bar Noche, in Balagate Sambali, in Decaen Be∣che, and so also by the Persians and Arabians, but Ait by the Turkes, and Norcila by the Portugalls: these trees are of much esteeme in the province of Malabar, and ofso frequent use with all sorts of people, for all their griefes and diseases, that if they were not ground will take roote and grow, they had beene wholly consumed or growne so scarse that they would have beene at an excee∣ding great price. The male groweth like the Almopnd tree with rough leaves like unto Sage, greene above and hoaty underneath, and dented about the edges somewhat resembling Elder leaves a farre of. The female kind groweth greater and hath larger and rounder leaves, re∣sembling those of the white Poplar tree and not dented about the edges: the leaves of both sorts smell and taste like Sage, but yet are more sharpe and bitter, many of them having a white frorth on the backside of them, com∣ming on them in the night: the flowers of both are of a pale blew or ashcolour much like unto those of Rosema∣ry: the fruit of both likewise is like unto blacke Pepper but nothing so sharpe and hot as Pepper comminh nearee unto the taste of Ginger. Both leaves flowers and fruit bruises and boyles in water or oyle are usually applyed to all diseases by the vulgar sort especially to all Joynt aches, tumours and contusions proceeding from any hot cause, and that with singular good effect: the leaves also bruised and and laid upon old Vlcers doth wondrously helpe to digest the matter, cleanse them and bring them to cicatrising, so as the body be not foule but prepared and purges before hand. And certainly they are found so available in all wounds, Impostumes and bruises, that the people using these, seeke for no Chirurgian. The women use to wash their whole bodies with the decoction of these leaves at all time and seasons, and are so perswaded of their effect to helpe them to conceive children. that they that should goe about to perswade them the contrart, they would stone them to death. 
Nimbo. Another healing or wound tree. T His other tree is more rare and scarse then the last, called by those of the countries in India where it is Nimbo. Another healing or wound tree. 
knowne Nimbo, but by those of Mala∣bar Bepole, and is of much account both with the Christians there and Gentiles. It is as bigge as an Ash, whereunto a farre off it is very like, the leaves are very greene on both side, dented about the edges and pointed at the ends, it is plentifully stores with both leaves and flowers which are small and white, with five leaves a peece and some yelow threads in the middle, and of the smell of the Trifolium odoratum, sweet Trefoile, after which the fruit appeareth which art like unti small Ollives with a yellow thin skinne. The leaves are somewhat bitter, but very wholesome being bruised and mixed wiwth a little juice of Le∣mons, &amp; dropped into foule Vlcers or those that are hollow or fistulous, or eith hard skins therein ey∣ther clensing, healing and skinning htem: the Juice of the leaves is a most familiar and knowne remedy in Malabar to kill the wormes of all sorts in the body, whereunto they are much subject, whether taken alone or with other things for the purpose into the body, ot used outwarly to the Navell: the flowers &amp; fruit also are much used against the gout and the paines, swelling, wealnesse and Imporstumations of the joynts or parts, the Oyle likewise pressed outh of the fruit is singular good in the paines and greefes of the sinewes, and therewith doe those of Malabar cure both wounds in the flesh, punctures and pricking of the Nerves and Sinewes, and con∣tractions or distortions of the members. 
CHAP. CXXXIIII. Hyvourabe. The Americans vice Guajacum. T His tree is very tall having a barke of a whitish silverlikecolour, but the wood is reddish under it of a little brackish or salt sweet taste, resembling the wooddy part of Licoris: it beareth fruite of the big∣nesse of a meane Plum, and of a good yellow colour, with a kernell within it, of a most sweet and de∣licate taste: but which maketh it the more wonderfull, so seldome bearing fruit that as it is said, a man in his life time shall scarse see the fruit above fourer or five times on the tree, being fifteene years betweene one and the others bearing. The barke of this tree is of a wonder vertue and effect in curing the Indian (which we call the French ) disease and is of the same account with the Indians where it groweth that Guajacum is with us, and while it is fresh cut or peeld from the tree giveth a white milke, this barke being cut in slices, they boyle in water three or foure houres untill it become of a Claret wine colour, which decoction they drinke for fifteene or twentie dayes together, using in the meane time a spare diet, by which meanes they are not onely cured of that disease but of any other that proccedeth of cold and flegmaticke humours: Lat Pi∣nipini∣chi. the kernell of the fruit is much used by the sicke whose appetite is lost to quicken it and get it againe. Neare all the coasts of the continent saith Monar∣dus, is gather by the Indians a certaine white liquor like milke taken from the branches, and small Apple like trees being wounded, which they call Pinipinichi, which sone groweth thicke, and is somewhat clammy, three or foure drops whereof being taken pugeth very violently, being in wine: but if any finde it to worke above their streght or desire, by taking eyther a littlebrith, wine or other drinke, it stayeth the working presently. 
CHAP. CXXXV. Achanaca Treveti. The blacke Moores Guajacum. T He Ethiopians on both sides of the Ri∣ver Achanaca Treveti. The Ethiopian vice Guajacum. 
Senaga, neare unto Cape verd as Thevet saith, doe abound with the Ve∣nereous disease, which holdeth them chiefly in the privie members which in men is called Asab, in women Asabates, the di∣sease it selfe Borozail or Zail: but by the skill of the Phisitions of whom they have many, and skil∣full in their profession called Biarins, they have found out growing with them an herbe of assured helpe and remedy therefore, which groweth up with a great stalke as bigge as a mans legge, and many great leaves thereon, cut in or jagged on both edges, somewhat resembling a Colewort leafe, but nothing so thicke eyther in the leafe or middle ribbe and double pointed at the end, from among whom groweth the fruit, of the bignesse of an egge, and of a yellow colour, which they call Alfard, the decoction of this herbe above all others, al∣though they use divers, is of sufficient validitie to cure it, for they have no other Guajacum for their helpe, and therefore use this in stead thereof. 
CHAP. CXXXVI. Winteranus cortex. Captaine Winters Cinamon. C Aptaine William Winter that in a shippe by himselfe accompanied Sir Francis Drake in part of his voy∣age over the whole world, but left him at the Straights of Nagellon returning from thence home into England againe in the yeare 1579. in the Winteranus Cortex. Captaine Winters Cinamon. 
parts thereabouts cut downe certaine trees, whose barke was somewhat like unto the thicker sort of Cinamon, both for substance and colour, yet for the most part thicker, and some of it of an ash colour, and some brownish on the outside and rugged like Elme barke, some of it having chinkes or riftes on the inside, and some smooth and firme, of a smel not unpleasant, but of a very sharpe taste like many spices together, heating the mouth more then Pepper; the leafe of the tree is of a whitish greene, not unlike the Aspen leafe, the berries grow in clu∣sters like the Hawthorne, with divers seedes in each of them. They at the first knew not of any properties therein, and therefore boyled some of it in hony, to make it the more pleasant to be taken and dryed other some and made it into pouther, putting it in stead of Cinamon in their meats: but afterwards they found it to be singular good against the Scurvey, for divers in the shippe being troubled with that disease found remedy thereby in using it a while. Some of our com∣pany of Apothecaries, and those not of the meanest doe use to call the Canella alba mentioned here before Cortex VVinterani, and have used it in their dispen∣sation of Mithridatium as a substitute for Costus, whereof I gave you a touch in the Classis of Cardui and Spinosae, in the last Chapter thereof save one, but now by comparing the one with the other you may easily see the errour, for the Canella alba is a white barke, rowled like Cinamon, and not much thicker then it, of an hot taste but neither like Cinamon nor Pepper, and this Cortex Winteranus is thicker then the thickest Ci∣namon, not caste into rowles or hollow pipes like it, and tasting much quicker, besides the colour is of a duskie browne in most, comming nearest unto Cinamon, I thought good a little to explaine this matter here, because I finde many possessed so strongly with that errour that Canella alba is Cortex Winterani, that all may see how true their opinion is. This barke might seeme to be that whereof Monardus saith he had a peece from Bernardino de Burgo an Apothecary, but that his had a more excellent smell and taste, excelling that of the Nutmeg, and as plea∣sant as Cinamon, and more cordiall, which is not found in this barke of Win s, Monardus likewise maketh mention of another thicke barke which was taken from a tree as great as an Elme and like in forme, growing scarse in any other part of the West Indies, then neare the Rivers sides about 25. leagues distant from Lima: it is hot saith he above the second degree: the Indians use to put it up into their nostrills, the fine pouther of the barke when they are troubled with rheumes and defluxions from the braines, or with other paines in the head, for it plentifully draweth downe humors whereby they finde ease. 
CHAP. CXXXVII. Coru arbor. The costive or binding tree. T His tree is somewhat like unto a dwarfe Orrenge tree both for forme and leafe, but having a thicke middle ribbe and eight or nine other smaller ones running to the sides: the flower is yellow with∣out sent, the barke of the roote onely is in use which is of a pale greene colour, and being broken yeeldeth much milke, which is somewhat clammy, having little taste, but some bitternesse; &amp; is more drying then cooling. The juice or milke of the barke of the rootes hereof, although unpleasant is much used by the natives of China, Iapan, Malaca and Bengala as well as Christians in all manner of Fluxes and Laskes comming from what cause soever. Those of Canarin call it Corn, they of Malabar Curo and Curo dapala, and the Branchmenes Cura.
CHAP. CXXXVIII. Pavate. Another Costive tree. T His other tree which is more frequent to be had then the last, and called Pavate in Malabar is there∣fore in more use though not altogether of so strong and speedy effect, for the staying of Laskes and Fluxes, but is of excellent propertie to coole Pavate. Another Costive tree. 
all hot inflammations, and eruptions of cho∣lericke matter in the skinne and S. Antho∣nies fire: the roote of this tree is of chiefest use, and some∣times the wood steeped in the decoction of Rice, which will grow sower after it hath stood a few houres, and then they call it Cania, with this decoction they wash also the outward parts inflamed or spotted which cooleth much, and helpeth all those heates: it is also drunke being steeped as aforesaid against the heate of the Liver, and in hot Fevers: a few leaves of Tamarinds being put thereto they use to wash the sides of Vlcers and wounds that are inflamed, and have defluxions of humours to them to stay the Flux and coole the heate. The tree is not greater then the former, having but few branches and such like leaves of the Orrenge, but without that small leafe underneath it, and of a fresh greene colour: the flowers are whitish like unto the Hony succkle with small round blackish seede likeunto those of the Masticke tree: the barke is of an Ash-colour, and the root white. The Brackmenes and those of Canarin call it Vasaveli, the Portugalls Arbol contra las erifi polas. 
CHAP. CXXXIX. Pacal. The Tetter tree. T His tree groweth neare the Rivers sides in the West Indies, part whereof being sent to Monar∣dus had this commendations that the ashes of the wood mixed with a little Sope, the Indians used to annoint on those places that had Tetters, Ring-Wormes or the fowlest spreading Vlcers, and scarres that could be, either in the head or any other part of the body to cure them and leave the place faire againe. 
CHAP. CXL. Lignum Nephriticum. The tree against the stone. F Rom Hispaniola and the pa thereabouts hath beene of tear sent many years since at well as of late, though now in farre lesse esteeme, a certaine sin both light and white wood, the tree whereof is as bigge as a Peare tree, without knots: the wood being sliced final and to ept in pine Chodait or Spring water will within halfe an houre, o thereabouts (if it be right) discolour the water into a fine light blew colour, which lying longer therein will cause it grow of a deeper colour, this infusion , although it be altogether insipide and without any taste as if nothing had beene put into the water, is found yet to be hot and dry in the first degree, and singular availeable against the stone in the kidneyes and the difficultie in making urine, and is found also by good experience to open the obstructions of the Liver and Spleene, the water or infusion is being drunke of it selfe, or mixed with wine and so taken: but there is another wood very like unto this, which often obtruded on many in stead thereof which being infused in water in the like manner will discolour the water yellow, and therefore without tryall the right is hard to be discerned. 
CHAP. CXLI. Lignum Molucense. The Moluccas tree against venome and poyson. I N the Ilands of the Moluccas is a certaine tree rather planted every where in Orchards then grow∣ing naturally being as bigge as a Quince tree, whose leaves are broad and cut into disivions, some∣what like unto those of the Mallow, the fruit is like to Hasell nuts but lesser, and with a softer and blacker shell, whereof the natives make so great account that they will scarse suffer any strangers to see it, much lesse to know any of the properties of it, which they keepe from others as secret as may be: but yet this their secresie hath caused it to be sought for and searched into nearer then otherwise perad∣venture it would have beene: For some Portugalls have found out in part by the sight of the cures the Indians performed, and partly by their relations, which by meanes they made unto them they obtained of them, and partly by their owne judgement and practise also at sundry times in the Spittles there, and in the shippes among Ma∣riners, that the wood made into pouther and taken in a convenient quantitie, according to the strength of the venome and the patient that shall take it, so as the quantitie for a time exceede not ten graines taken in broth or water, or other liquor is a most certaine speedy remedy against the venome of the most virulent Serpents that are, even the Viper Regulus (that is a Serpent that hath like a cappe or crowne on the head) the Aspis or any other, and the pouther strewed on the bitten place: they use to file the wood small either with the Sea dogges skinne, or a fine Iron file: in the same manner likewise they give halfe a scruple of the pouther in warme water, or the broth of a Chicken or Hen to them that are wounded with poisoned arrowes, which they much use one against another and put on the pouther into the wound: being taken in the morning betimes asting, having made a spare supper over night before: it helpeth to evacuate al tough thicke and melancholy humors, and herebe helpeth quartaine and quotidian Agnes, prevaileth against the Iliacke and Chollick passions of winde or humors, the dropsie also, the gravell and stone in the backe o kidneyes, the difficultie of urine and the most cruell chollerick passion, and other old griefes likewise in the joynts and legges, as well schirrous as scrophulous, that is, have hard swellings or nodes and knots in them, the same also killeth the wormes in the body of all sorts: it regaineth a dejected or lost appetite, and if the purgation worke too fiercely upon any to the patient is given halfe a small cup full of Cania (that is the decoction of Rice) to stay the working suddenly, or else by eating a small Birde, so that it is in the Phisitions or the Patients power to be purged as much as they will: by the taking of this mede∣cine there not hath bin found any trouble to the stomack, or other ill symptomes, although taken without obser∣ving any diet, or defraining their businesse abroad, yea in the working thereof living most loosely: it is obser∣ved likewise to be avaleable in the old paines and griefes of the ead, the Megrime, Falling sicknesse and Apo∣plexye, in the diseases of the belly and wombe, as also the shortnesse of breath, the noyse and singings in the eares, and the goute or joynt aches; it is given in all seasons to all ages to differing natures or dispositions, and that with∣out eyther danger or trouble: but that onely in chollerick persons and that have hot stomackes and Livers, it breedeth some perturbations in them untill that they have taken some meate, and insome it hath procured a vo∣mit; but to the hot and chollericke persons being given with the Syrupe of Vinegar or in the fruit of a Charambola being preserved, or in a Pill with Conserve of Ros s, it taketh away all those troubles. In some also it causeth an itch in the fundament, and sometimes excoriation, and the Piles also in some, but very few, which are soone helped by other remedies. These cures have beene often performed, and yet the Indians performe many other no doubt, which they conceale from the Christians all that they can. This wood is called by them Panava, the seede hereof is much used through all the Provences of the Indies to catch birds, being carryed thither to bee sold, for some thereof mixed with boiled Rice and cast to the wild Birds causeth as many as take it to fall downe to the ground, as being stoned for a time, but if any take thereof too greedily. It will kill them if they bee not helped by cold water put on their heads, but Dawes above all other Birds are soonest kild hereby. 
CHAP. CXLII. Lignum Colubrinum. Snake wood. T Here are divers sorts of Snake woods, Acosta hath set forth two or three, that he knew used by the Indians against the bitings of Vipers, Water Snakes, or the like Serpents, and yet as Clusius saith none of those agreeth with these three that Garcias maketh mention of, Bauhinus calleth them all Clematis Indica. The first of Garcias is rather a roote then a wood, Garzlae pri∣mum. and groweth with foure or five slender branches, about two foote high, the leaves are like Peach leaves, but more shining, the flowers grow many together on a long stalke in clusters, of a brave red colour, the berries are like those of the Elder, clustering together, and red and hard. The roote, which is most in use, is full of knots or heads, growing above ground, with many small strings under them, being of a whitish ash-colour, and of a firme substance, with a little bitter∣nesse in the taste: it is called by the Inhabitants Lametal, and by the Portugals Pao de cobra, that is Snakewood: This roote being beaten into pouther i given in wine or some cordiall water to those that are bitten by any Ser∣pent, and likewise taketh away spots and pushes, or wheales, or other fretting sores in the skinne, and is held to be good against that cruell disease, which they call Mordexi, and some take to be Plague, or other dangerous infectious disease, and some call it the Chollericke passion, it is held also to be good against agues, Secundum. an ounce there∣of bruised and steeped in water, purging much choller by vomit. His second sort as he saith when it standeth alone, groweth to be a tree, and is like the Pomegarnet tree, set with thicke, short, and hard thornes, with a whi∣tish thicke and firme barke, full of rifts, and a little bitter, but not so much as the former, the leaves are of a yel∣lowish greene colour, very pleasant to behold: but if it grow by any other tree, it will clime thereon by the bran∣ches unto the toppe like a Gourd: they use to give both the wood and the barke hereof, but especially the roote in the same manner aforesaid, and for the said purposes: it groweth in the Ille of Goa. Tertium. His third sort was brought to the Vice Roy, in certaine small bundles of wood with their rootes to them, being slender, hard, blacke and sweete smelling, which rootes they of Iasana patan, being an Isle nigh unto Zeilan, did wonderfully commend against venome or poyson. It groweth up with a few slender branches, foure or five cubits long, which if they be not tyed or held up will lye on the ground, having a few thinne long leaves like unto those of the Ma∣sticke tree for the forme, yet not greene but spotted, with whitish blacke markes upon them. The first of these as Garcias saith, was found to be effectuall against the venome of those virulent Serpents, by this meanes. They have there breeding with them, a certaine small beast, as great as a Ferret, which they call Quil, o Quirpole, be∣ing a deadly enemy unto the Serpent Regulus, with whom when soever it fighteth, it eateth of the heads of one of those rootes, that is bare above ground, which having chewed, he casteth his spittle upon his head, and over the rest of his body, and his fore feet also▪ and then fighteth with that serpent, and will not leave it untill he have Lignum Colubrinum Primum Acosta. Acosta his first Snake wood. 
Lignum Colubrinum secundam Acosta. Acosta his second Snake wood. 
killed it. Many Portugalls at severall times have beene eye witnesses to these battels: for they not onely keepe this small creature in their houses, to sport themselves with these combates, but to kill their Mice, whom they most eagerly hunt and kill. There are also certaine wandring beggers called Jogues who doe often carry about with them these serpents Regulus tame, making men beleeve they have enchanted them, and some likewise that are fierce, whom for a reward they will suffer these Ferret-like beasts to fight with. 
Lignum Colubrinum primum Acostae. Acosta his first Snake wood. The first sort of Snake wood that Acosta maketh mention of, groweth in Malabar, somewhat after the manner of Ivy, spotted like unto the stalke of Dragons, and so like unto a serpent, that he that should see it at the first, not having seene it before, would take it for a very serpent, especially beholding it in the Moone light. The first leaves it hath are broad, and whole without any cut or devision on the edge, but those that come after are like allmost unto Bryony leaves with a ribbe in the middle of them, and five or six others, running from thence to the edges, and lastly, some cut into divisions like a Vine leafe, all these sorts of leaves being to be seene at one time on the stemmes and branches, that they would seeme not to be the leaves of one and the same plant: This wood is held to be the most soveraigne remedy against the venome of all sorts of serpents wherewith they abound that by the onely sent thereof, carrying it continually about them, the serpents will flye from them as they walke in the fields, and if they doe touch any of them therewith, it will make them to breake in peeces and dye. 
Lignum Colubrinum secundum Acostae. Acosta his second Snake wood. Another sort groweth low and small, having onely three leaves set together, which are soft, long, and narrow, smooth, and of a darke greene colour, it hath not beene knowne to beare either flower or fruite; the roote is long and slender, smaller then ones little finger, running along under the surface of the ground, and knotted in divers places, the outer rinde being very thin and of an ash-colour, having at the first little or no taste therein at all, but after a while it yeeldeth a fine sent and taste like Muske, this barke chappeth in many places, shewing under it another thicker, and yellow, of the sent of Trifolium odoratum, Sweete Trefoile, and tasting sweete like Licoris, but not abiding long, the substance whereof is wooddy, and called in Canarin, Duda Sali: this roote being bea∣ten into pouther and taken in Wine or Water is said to be a certaine and present remedy against the bi ings and venome of any serpent whatsoever: it is much used likewise in tertian and day agues, the weaknesse of the stomacke, the trembling and passions of the heart, or swounings, and against all sorts or poysons: many have af∣firmed that no serpent had power to doe him harme that but held it in his hand. and that the sight thereof would make the serpents slye from it to some other place: it is held also to be good for those that have stinking breathes, or have stincking foule hollow teeth that give an evill savour, to hold it in their mouthes, or to put it into the hol∣lownesse of the tooth 
A third sort is found in the same Provinces, and is a tree of a very large size and greatnesse, whereof peradven∣ture that was a peece that Clusius saith he had of Doctor Hector Nunes, the Portugall Physition here at London, the wood being like a peece of Ash, firme or close with certaine veines running therein, the rinde or outer barke being of a whitish ash-colour, and tasting somewhat bitter. 
CHAP. CXLIII. Cohyne. The Indians rattling God. T He Portugalls possesse a certain Country Cohyne. The Indian ratling God. 
in America, called Morpian, which is ful of very good fruits, and among the rest the Nana or Pinas. There is also grow∣ing a tree whose fruite they call Cohyne, having leaves like to those of the Bay tree, and fruit as bigge as a Melon, formed like unto an Estridge egge, which although it is not eaten by any of them yet is very beautifull hanging on the tree The Sa∣vages use to make drinking cuppes of them, but be∣sides that they commit Idola ry there with, which is wonderfull, and to be lamented, for having emp∣tyed and made hollow these fruites, they fill them with the seedes of Milium or some other thing, which being shaken with ones hand, or with the winde, will make a noyse: then doe they fasten a pole into the ground, and sticke this fruite full of those seede on the toppe thereof, and fasten about it the most beautifull feathers of birdes they can get: Every house h th two or three of these fruits deck∣ed up in this manner sticking on the poles, which they have in great reverence, thinking some god to be in them, because when they are shaken they make a noyse and their priests and prophets make them beleeve their God, whom they call Toupan, speaketh and telleth them what they should doe, and what shall come to passe▪ and it is not to be found that they worship any other thing▪ Clusius saith that this fruite is called Maraka, and mara∣ka; but I thinke these names smell somewhat of a Greeke Godfather, as the Tamalabathra from Tamalapatra: yet others say they are their hand rattles wherewith they dance. 
CHAP. CXLIV. Palma Hairi. The thorny American Palme tree. T His tree groweth in some parts of America, both in shape of body and leaves like unto the Date tree, but full of sharpe thornes, Palma Hairi. The thorny American Palme tree. 
bearing fruite as bigge as an hand∣ball, but pointed at one end, having within it a fine snow white ker∣nell: the wood of this tree is as blacke as blacke marble, and sincketh in water because of the heavinesse, and therefore some have thought it to be Ebony, but Thevet contra∣dicteth that opinion with these reasons: first that Ebony is a wood more blacke or shining, and then that Ebony beareth no thornes, and lastly, Ebony is not found in America, but in Ethiopia, and the East Indies, about Calecut, &amp;c. The In∣dians of this wood make them swords, which for the massinesse give a mighty blow▪ and will breake both scull and bones, where it lighteth on any, although it doth not cut as our swords doe: they make also arrowes of them, which by rea∣son of their hardnesse like iron, and the points of them burned, to make them so penitrable, that they will be able to pierce a good corselet. 
CHAP. CXLV. Palma scriptoria &amp; aliae arbores, cujus folia &amp; cortices chartae vicem praebent. The writing Palme tree and sundry others, whose leaves and barkes have supplyed the office and want of Paper. T Here are sundry sorts of trees growing both in the East and West Indies (although none of the Nations of the West Indians, except the Mexicanes know any use of writing, or Letters, be∣fore the Spaniards first entrance among them, but the Spaniards there made use of divers in the want of paper) whose leaves and barkes have beene used to write on (besides the ancient paper Reed, which served the former Greekes and Latines to that purpose for many ages, whereof Pliny hath largely intreated, and Guilandinus as largely commented upon him, Palmeta humilia scriptoria. and whereof I have entreated also in another place of this Worke) as namely sundry dwarfe Date trees, whose leaves have so smooth a surface that they served them very finely to write on, that is, with a small pointed iron, to engrave their characters therein. There is also growing in the Country of Mangi, Tal. which is neere the Tartars and Chineses, a certaine tree called Tal, and Vguetal, whose leaves are very large, and through all those Coun∣tries are used to be written on: it beareth fruite like unto great Turneps, whose meate under the outer rinde or barke is tender, sweete and edible. Oviedus maketh mention of two certaine trees growing in Hispaniola, Guajaba∣ra. the lesser called Guajabara by the Indians, and by the Spaniards Ʋuero, because the fruite thereof are like Grapes: the wood whereof is reddish, sound, and thicke, and fit to make coales, it beareth the fruite more loosely separate in sunder then the Grape, and of the colour of the Mulberry or Rose, having little substance thereon to be ea∣ten, for they be as great as an Hasell Nut, and a stone within it is almost as great: the leaves of this tree are broad and round, as bigge as the palme of ones hand, as thicke as two Ivy leaves, and greene, and sometimes red∣dish, whereon the Spaniards used to write with an iron pen or pointell on both sides of the leaves, but they must be fresh gathered and presently written upon, which Letters then will appeare white, in the greene or reddish leaves that they may be easily read, notwithstanding the middle ribbe, and the other veines therein, in that they will not hinder ones hand very much. Cop y. The other tree they call Copey, growing greater and taller, whose leaves are round like unto the other, but twice as large and thicke as they, and therefore better to write on, the middle ribbe and veines being also smaller, and thereby Copey. Thicke writing leaves or Printed Cards. 
Guiahara. New Spaines thin writing leaves. 
hindering the pointell from the graving thereon so much the lesse: these leaves also the Spani∣ards made use of for playing cards, engraving the formes of Kings, Arboris so∣lia sex bra∣chiorum. Queenes, &amp;c. thereon, and would not easily be broken. Nicholaus Costinus in his journall setteth downe that neere the City Cael where pearles are found, there groweth a tree, whose leaves are so large that two or three men may be kept dry in their journeyes, having one of them spread to cover them, for they are of sixe braces or fathomes in length, and as many in breadth, which leaves also serve them very fitly to write upon, each of them being so thinne and plyable withall, that being foulded up hand∣somely together, one may carry one of them in their hand. Metl sive Maguey Mexicano∣rum. Duret also among his admirable plants remembreth the Melt or Mangey of the Mexicanes, or rather Metl and Maguei, which is the Aloe Americana, set forth in the second Classis of this Worke, of whose leaves they made use to write or engrave what Records they would keepe, Papyrisera arbor clusij prima. or what else they thought good. Clusius also maketh mention in his first Booke of Exotickes, and fourth Chapter, of two sorts of barkes of trees fit to write on: the one white and like unto the thinnest parchment which was gotten in Iava, by those that returned home with Sir Francis Drake, in his long voyage over the world, which by tryall was found fit to write on. And as he saith it might be was taken from that tree that Antonius Pigafetta maketh mention of in his journall, that in the Island Tidore, the women cover their privy parts, with a certaine cloath made of the barke of a tree in this manner: after it hath beene steeped so long in water that it is growne soft, they beate it with woodden mallets unto what length and breadth they please, making it so thinne as silke, having the crosse veines running through it: And it may as likely be such as the Chineses make their paper, some Bookes of herbes being brought into the Low Countries as Clusius saith, having both the figures of the herbes in them, and the descriptions, Secunda. and vertues also peradventure, for they had Chineses Characters on the sides of the figures. The other barke of the tree was not white, but somewhat reddish, but of so smooth and fine a polished surface, as no paper could be smoother and plainer, and was not thicke or grosse but without any difficulty might be par∣ted into six leaves, each of them very well enduring to be written on with our ordinary incke, and yet not sinke any whit through it, which barke as he saith might have beene separated into more leaves if one would have been curious about them. 
CHAP. CXLVI. Palma pinus sive Conifera. The Pine or Conebearing Palme tree. T His strange kinde of tree being brought by certaine English Merchants, or Marriners, from the parts of Guinea where they traded, was of a wonderfull composure, for the toppe bough with the fruite thereon, was as it were mixed, of the nature of the Date, and Pine tree together, the wood being light and spongy, and wholly made of threds or haires, the outside or barke being like scales: it had about forty or fifty round yet somewhat flat branches, a foote long in the same manner scaly, or as it were set with hollow joynted cuppes or boxes, and from the joynts broke forth small cones like to those of the Cedar tree, set with thicke scales of a pollished shining brownish colour, the outer shell being of the thickenesse of the Indian Nut shell, containing within it a certaine kernell like unto a long Ackorne or Chesnut, of two inches long or lesse, very hard and not easie to be made into meale, yet serving the Natives instead of bread. 
Fructus squamosus Palmae alterae similis. Another kinde of scaly fruite like the other Palme. Another scaly fruite like hereunto was sent unto Clusius, but came a little after his death, which sheweth the stalke of the fruit divided into long fibers, the fruite also divided, whose inner substance betweene the outer shell and the inner kernell was blacke, the smaller end of which kernell lay next the bottome of the fruite, differing from those in the Cokar Nuts.
10. Marum Aegyptiorum Alpino. The Egyptians Marum by Alpinus without sent. This plant saith Alpinus accounted a Marum with the E∣giptians and growing among rubbish and in dry places doth somewhat resemble a wild Cl ry in the leaves and growing, being voyd of taste or savour, especially the lowest, yet those that rise up with the stalke and flowers, are strong and not un∣pleasant, the leaves thereon being of a cubits height are white and hoary, and the flowers like those of Clary, the seed is small and round like Cabbage seed. They use to lay it among their garments, and Physically to expell winde powerfully, and to a∣bate swellings. 
5. Origanum Indicum. Indian Organy, or bastard Marjerome. Prosper Alpinus in his Booke of Egiptian plants setteth forth one, he saith is there called Zatarendi, and decscribeth it to grow slowly with sundry branched stalkes and almost round thicke whitish leaves on them, full of sap or juyce, and very sweet, bearing neither flower nor fruite: they use it in their meates as others doe Origanum: thus much Alpinus. But Ʋe∣slingius taking upon him to correct and amend him saith, that the plant called Satarhendi by them is this plant (whose figure I here give you from him, and as he saith did spring with Sig∣nior Coutarini of Ʋenice, if there be not some fallacy or mistake in the matter, for besides that Alpinus figure hath little simili∣tude unto this, he saith, who it is likely observed it long by saying it grew slowly, he observed in all the time of his abode in Egypt that it bore nothing: but as soone as it came into Contarinis hands, it bore according as other sorts of Origanum both flowers and fruite yet larger. I put this but as a doubt in the matter) and describeth it in this manner. This dainty plant riseth up to a footes height, with straight stalkes and soft tender Marjerome like leaves, upon them, covered with a whitish downe, or wooll, being almost round but pointed at the ends, with sundry pale coloured veines in them: It beareth many white flowers at the tops of the stalkes, bowing their round heads a little, which are made of many small leaves set together. It is somewhat aromaticall in taste with some pleasing acrymony, and a little astringent withall, but exceedeth in sweetnes that of Candy. 
2. Origanum Onitis Matthioli. White Organy of Greece. p. 15. 
5. Origa Indicum. Another Indian Organy, or bastard Marjerome, p. 15. 
10. Polium Guaphaloides. The hoary Poley mountaine. 10. Polium Guaphaloides. Hoary Poley mountaine. p. 25. 
This kind of Poley mountaine is wholly very hoary white all over, and having small leaves like small Myrtle leaves, a little dented about the edges, so thicke set on the lower crooked stemme, that they cover it, from whence a∣rise divers other stalkes or branches, thinly set with the like leaves, and at the toppe of each of them a round head or um∣bell, upon a long bare stalke, consisting of divers yellow flowers, standing in their small cups, which growing ripe are turned into downe, and with the yellowish small seed is carryed away with the winde: the roote is small, slender, and long. Alpinus only maketh mention hereof lib. de plan∣tis exoticis. 
11. Origanum fistulosum Cornato sed potius Mentastrum fistulosum Americanum. A wild Mint of America. The roote of this plant is wholly composed of long and small fibres, which shooteth forth sundry square hairy stalkes halfe a yard high, set with two long and somewhat broad leaves at the joynts, somewhat resembling those of the Wil∣low herbe: at the joynts come forth also divers branches with such like leaves thereon, but lesser up to the tops, where stand ten or twelve smal leaves in compasse, under the round head, composed of a number of pale reddish purple flowers, resembling the head of a Scalion, each flower being long and hollow, biforked at the end, with two or three threds tipt with purple: in the middle of this round head shooteth forth sometimes such another round head of flowers, with leaves under them: the whole plant both stalke and leaves are covered with an hoary downe, and smelleth like Savory but tasteth sharpe and fiery like Arsmart, yet the roote hath no taste at all. 
13. Origanum fistalosum Corunto, sed potius Mentastrum fistulosum Americanum. A wild Mint of America. p. 34. 
2. St ohas flore albo. White flowred Cassidony. p. 67. 
Scordium spinosum odoratum. Thorny sweete Scordium, or water Germander. p. 110. 
2 Nardus montana Cretica. Mountaine Nardus of Candy. p. 120. 
18, 19. Aster Americanum pr c c r &amp; scr ti us lati olius &amp; angustisolius. Two sorts of Virginia Starreworts. p. 132 
Scordium spinosum odoratum. Thorny sweet Scordium, or Water Germander. This annuall Scordium riseth up with square soft and hai∣ry stalkes full of joynts or branches, which are fatty or clam∣my, whereat grow sometimes two, but at the greater joynts three leaves, which are variously formed, the lowest being largest, are dented or cut on the edges, like unto the ordi∣nary or Water Germander, but still up higher the smaller and lesse dented, at the joynts of the branches grow many times long thornes, but alwayes end in a small long soft pricke or thorne, and at the leaves also come forth small Ger∣mander like flowers, but whitish, with three small threds within them: in the huskes that contained the flowers, be∣ing falne rise fowre small seeds which must be sowne every yeare: the roote is very long and fibrous, and perishing af∣ter seed time: the whole plant smelleth almost as sweet as Bassill, and was gathered upon some of the dry, barren and sandy mountaines in Spaine, and mentioned onely by Cor∣nutus in his Canada relations. 
Having another figure of this Ʋalerian by me, differing in some things from the former, I thought good to exhibit it likewise unto you, that you may see how the alteration of climates causeth such formall diversities as are here percei∣ved in rootes, leaves, and flowers. 
2. Scammo ed macro hyzos Cretita. Long rooted Scammony of Candy. p. 164. 
4. Laurus sylvestris Cretica Alpini. The shrubby wild Bay of Cand