 
 Cedar. A very sweet wood, and fine timber, whereof if nests of chests be 
 there made, or timber thereof fitted for sweet and fine bedsteds, tables, 
 desks, lutes, virginals, and many things els, (of which there hath bene 
 proofe made already) to make vp fraight with other principall commodities, 
 will yeeld profit. 
  
 Wine. There are two kindes of grapes that the soile doth yeeld naturally, 
 the one is small and sowre, of the ordinary bignesse as ours in England, 
 the other farre greater and of himselfe lushious sweet. When they are 
 planted and husbanded as they ought, a principall commodity of wines by 
 them may be raised. 
  
 Oile. There are two sorts of Walnuts, both holding oile; but the one farre 
 more plentifull then the other. When there are mils and other deuices for 
 the purpose, a commodity of them may be raised, because there are infinite 
 store. There are also three seuerall kindes of berries in the forme of 
 Oke-akornes, which also by the experience and vse of the inhabitants, we 
 find to yeeld very good and sweet oile. Furthermore, the beares of the 
 countrey are commonly very fat, and in some places there are many. Their
others then welwillers might be there withall acquainted, not to the good 
 of the action, I haue wittingly omitted them: knowing that to those that 
 are well disposed, I haue vttered, according to my promise and purpose, 
 for this part sufficient. 
  
  
  
 The second part of such commodities as Virginia is knowen to yeeld for 
 victuall and sustenance of mans life, vsually fed vpon by the naturall 
 inhabitants; as also by vs, during the time of our abode: and first of 
 such as are sowed and husbanded. 
  
  
 Pagatowr, a kinde of graine so called by the inhabitants: the same in the 
 West Indies is called Mayz: English men call it Guinywheat or 
 Turkey-wheat, according to the names of the countreys from whence the like 
 hath beene brought. The graine is about the bignesse of our ordinary 
 English peaze, and not much different in forme and shape: but of diuers 
 colours: some white, some red, some yellow, and some blew. All of them 
 yeeld a very white and sweet flowre: being vsed according to its kinde, it
maketh a very good bread. We made of the same in the countrey some Mault, 
 whereof was brewed as good Ale as was to be desired. So likewise by the 
 helpe of Hops, therof may be made as good Beere. It is a graine of 
 maruellous great increase: of a thousand, fifteene hundred, and some two 
 thousand folde. There are three sorts, of which two are ripe in eleuen and 
 twelue weeks at the most, sometimes in tenne, after the time they are set, 
 and are then of height in stalke about sixe or seuen foot. The other sort 
 is ripe in fourteene, and is about tenne foot high, of the stalks some 
 beare foure heads, some three, some one, and some two: euery head 
 containing fiue, sixe, or seuen hundred graines, within a few more or 
 lesse. Of these graines, besides bread, the inhabitants make victuall, 
 either by parching them, or seething them whole vntill they be broken: or 
 boiling the flowre with water into a pap. 
  
 Okingier, called by vs Beanes, because in greatnesse and partly in shape 
 they are like to the beanes in England, sauing that they are flatter, of 
 more diuers colours, and some pide. The leafe also of the stemme is much 
 different. In taste they are altogether as good as our English peaze. 
  
 Wickonzowr, called by vs Peaze, in respect of the Beanes, for distinction
sake, because they are much lesse, although in forme they little differ: 
 but in goodnesse of taste much like, and are far better then our English 
 Peaze. Both the beanes and peaze are ripe in ten weeks after they are set. 
 They make them victuall either by boiling them all to pieces into a broth, 
 or boiling them whole vntill they be soft, and beginne to breake, as is 
 vsed in England, either by themselues, or mixtly together: sometime they 
 mingle of the Wheat with them: sometime also, being whole sodden, they 
 bruse or punne them in a morter, and thereof make loaues or lumps of 
 doughish bread, which they vse to eat for variety. 
  
 Macocquer, according to their seueral formes, called by vs Pompious, 
 Melons, and Gourds, because they are of the like formes as those in 
 England. In Virginia such of seuerall formes are of one taste, and very 
 good, and do also spring from one seed. There are of two sorts: one is 
 ripe in the space of a moneth, and the other in two moneths. 
  
 There is an herbe which in Dutch is called Melden. Some of those that I 
 describe it vnto take it to be a kinde of Orage: it groweth about foure or 
 fiue foot high: of the seede thereof they make a thicke broth, and pottage 
 of a very good taste: of the stalke by burning into ashes they make a
kinde of salt earth, wherewithall many vse sometimes to season their 
 broths: other salt they know not. We ourselues vsed the leaues for 
 pot-herbs. 
  
 There is also another great herbe, in forme of a Marigolde, about sixe 
 foot in height, the head with a floure is a spanne in bredth. Some take it 
 to be Planta Solis: of the seeds hereof they make both a kinde of bread 
 and broth. 
  
 All the aforesayde commodities for victuall are set or sowed, sometimes in 
 grounds apart and seuerally by themselues, but for the most part together 
 in one ground mixtly: the maner thereof, with the dressing and preparing 
 of the ground, because I will note vnto you the fertility of the soile, I 
 thinke good briefly to describe. 
  
 The ground they neuer fatten with mucke, dung, or any other thing, neither 
 plow nor digge it as we in England, but onely prepare it in sort as 
 followeth. A few days before they sowe or set, the men with woodden 
 instruments made almost in forme of mattocks or hoes with long handles: 
 the women with short peckers or parers, because they vse them sitting, of
growing many together one by another in ropes, as though they were 
 fastened with a string. Being boiled or sodden, they are very good meat. 
 (M306) Monardes calleth these roots, Beads or Pater nostri of Santa 
 Helena.(97) 
  
 Okeepenauk are also of round shape, found in dry grounds: some are of the 
 bignesse of a mans head. They are to be eaten as they are taken out of the 
 ground: for by reason of their drinesse they will neither rost nor seethe. 
 Their taste is not so good as of the former roots: notwithstanding for 
 want of bread, and sometimes for variety the inhabitants vse to eat them 
 with fish or flesh, and in my iudgement they do as well as the housholde 
 bread made of Rie here in England. 
  
 Kaishucpenauk, a white kinde of roots about the bignesse of hennes egges, 
 and neere of that forme: their taste was not so good to our seeming as of 
 the other, and therefore their place and maner of growing not so much 
 cared for by vs: the inhabitants notwithstanding vsed to boile and eat 
 many. 
  
 Tsinaw, a kind of root much like vnto that which in England is called the
China root brought from the East Indies. And we know not any thing to the 
 contrary but that it may be of the same kinde. These roots grow many 
 together in great clusters, and do bring foorth a brier stalke, but the 
 leafe in shape farre vnlike: which being supported by the trees it groweth 
 neerest vnto, will reach or climbe to the top of the highest. From these 
 roots while they be new or fresh, being chapt into small pieces, and 
 stampt, is strained with water a iuice that maketh bread, and also being 
 boiled, a very good spoonmeat in maner of a gelly, and is much better in 
 taste, if it be tempered with oile. This Tsinaw is not of that sort, which 
 by some was caused to be brought into England for the China root; for it 
 was discouered since, and is in vse as is aforesayd: but that which was 
 brought hither is not yet knowen, neither by vs nor by the inhabitants to 
 serue for any vse or purpose, although the roots in shape are very like. 
  
 Coscushaw some of our company tooke to be that kinde of root which the 
 Spanyards in the West Indies call Cassauy, whereupon also many called it 
 by that name: it groweth in very muddy pooles, and moist grounds. Being 
 dressed according to the countrey maner, it maketh a good bread, and also 
 a good spoonmeat, and is vsed very much by the inhabitants. (M307) The 
 iuice of this root is poison, and therefore heed must be taken before any
thing be made therewithall: either the roots must be first sliced and 
 dried in the Sunne, or by the fire, and then being punned into floure, 
 will make good bread: or els while they are greene they are to be pared, 
 cut in pieces, and stampt: loaues of the same to be layd nere or ouer the 
 fire vntill it be sowre; and then being well punned againe, bread or 
 spoonmeat very good in taste and holesome may be made thereof. 
  
 Habascon is a root of hote taste, almost of the forme and bignesse of a 
 Parsnip: of it selfe it is no victuall, but onely a helpe, being boiled 
 together with other meats. 
  
 There are also Leeks, differing little from ours in England, that grow in 
 many places of the countrey; of which, when we came in places where they 
 were, we gathered and eat many, but the naturall inhabitants neuer. 
  
  
 Of fruits. 
  
  
 Chesnuts there are in diuers places great store: some they vse to eat raw,
some they stampe and boile to make spoonmeat, and with some being sodden, 
 they make such a maner of dough bread as they vse of their beanes before 
 mentioned. 
  
 Walnuts. There are two kinds of Walnuts, and of them infinite store: in 
 many places where are very great woods for many miles together, the third 
 part of trees are Walnut trees. The one kind is of the same taste and 
 forme, or little differing from ours of England, but that they are harder 
 and thicker shelled: the other is greater, and hath a very ragged and hard 
 shell: but the kernel great, very oily and sweet. Besides their eating of 
 them after our ordinary maner, they breake them with stones, and punne 
 them in morters with water, to make a milke which they vse to put into 
 some sorts of their spoonemeat: also among their sodde wheat, peaze, 
 beanes and pompions, which maketh them haue a farre more pleasant taste. 
  
 Medlars, a kinde of very good fruit: so called by vs chiefly for these 
 respects: first in that they are not good vntill they be rotten, then in 
 that they open at the head as our Medlars, and are about the same 
 bignesse: otherwise in taste and colour they are farre different; for they 
 are as red as cheries, and very sweet: but whereas the chery is sharpe
sweet, they are lushious sweet. 
  
 (M308) Mutaquesunnauk, a kinde of pleasant fruit almost of the shape and 
 bignesse of English peares, but they are of a perfect red colour as well 
 within as without. They grow on a plant whose leaues are very thicke, and 
 full of prickles as sharpe as needles. Some that haue bene in the Indies, 
 where they haue seene that kind of red die of great price, which is called 
 Cochinile, to grow, doe describe this plant right like vnto this of 
 Metaquesunnauk; but whether it be the true Cochinile, or a bastard or 
 wilde kinde, it cannot yet be certified, seeing that also, as I heard, 
 Cochinile is not of the fruit, but found on the leaues of the plant: which 
 leaues for such matter we haue not so specially obserued. 
  
 Grapes there are of two sorts, which I mentioned in the merchantable 
 commodities. 
  
 Strawberries there are as good and as great as those which we haue in our 
 English gardens. 
  
 Mulberies, Applecrabs, Hurts or Hurtleberies, such as we haue in England.
drie vpon hurdles made of reeds, with fire vnderneath, almost after the 
 maner as we dry Malt in England. When they are to be vsed, they first 
 water them vntill they be soft, and then being sod, they make a good 
 victuall, either to eat so simply, or els being also punned to make loaues 
 or lumps of bread. These be also the three kinds, of which I sayd before 
 the inhabitants vsed to make sweet oile. 
  
 Another sort is called Sapummener, which being boiled or parched, doth eat 
 and taste like vnto Chesnuts. They sometime also make bread of this sort. 
  
 The fift sort is called Mangummenauk, and is the acorne of their kinde of 
 Oake, the which being dried after the maner of the first sorts, and 
 afterward watered, they boile them, and their seruants, or sometime the 
 chiefe themselues, either for variety or for want of bread, do eat them 
 with their fish or flesh. 
  
  
 Of Beasts. 
  
 
Deere, in some places there are great store: neere vnto the Sea coast they 
 are of the ordinary bignesse of ours in England, and some lesse: but 
 further vp into the countrey, where there is better food, they are 
 greater: they differ from ours onely in this, their tailes are longer, and 
 the snags of their hornes looke backwards. 
  
 Conies. Those that we haue seene, and all that we can heare of are of a 
 gray colour like vnto Hares: in some places there are such plenty that all 
 the people of some townes make them mantles of the furre or flue of the 
 skinnes of those which they vsually take. 
  
 Saquenuckot and Maquowoc, two kinds of small beasts greater then Conies, 
 which are very good meat. We neuer tooke any of them our selues, but 
 sometime eat of such as the inhabitants had taken and brought vnto vs. 
  
 Squirels, which are a grey colour, we haue taken and eaten. 
  
 Beares, which are of blacke colour. The beares of this countrey are good 
 meat. The inhabitants in time of Winter do vse to take and eat many: so 
 also sometime did we. They are taken commonly in this sort: In some
Islands or places where they are, being hunted for assoone as they haue 
 spiall of a man, they presently run away, and then being chased, they 
 clime and get vp the next tree they can: from whence with arrowes they are 
 shot downe starke dead, or with those wounds that they may after easily be 
 killed. We sometime shot them downe with our calieuers. 
  
 I haue the name of eight and twenty seuerall sorts of beasts, which I haue 
 heard of to be here and there dispersed in the countrey, especially in the 
 maine; of which there are onely twelue kinds that we haue yet discouered; 
 and of those that be good meat we know only them before mentioned. The 
 inhabitants sometime kill the Lion, and eat him:(98) and we sometime as 
 they came to our hands of their Woolues or Wooluish dogs, which I haue not 
 set downe for good meat, least that some would vnderstand my iudgement 
 therein to be more simple then needeth, although I could alleage the 
 difference in taste of those kinds from ours, which by some of our company 
 haue bene experimented in both. 
  
  
 Of Fowle. 
 
Europe, which yeeld most sweet savours farre from the shoare, the 
 propertie whereof we could not learne for the cause aforesayd, and not for 
 any difficulty to passe through the woods, seeing they are not so thicke 
 but that a man may passe through them. Neither doe we thinke that they 
 partaking of the East world round about them, are altogether voyd of drugs 
 and spicery, and other riches of golde, seeing the colour of the land doth 
 so much argue it. And the land is full of many beastes, as Stags, Deere 
 and Hares, and likewise of Lakes and Pooles of fresh water, with great 
 plentie of Fowles, conuenient for all kinde of pleasant game. This land is 
 in latitude 34. degrees, with good and wholesome ayre, temperature, 
 betweene hot and colde, no vehement windes doe blowe in those Regions, and 
 those that doe commonly reigne in those coasts, are the Northwest and West 
 windes in the summer season, (in the beginning whereof we were there) the 
 skie cleere and faire with very little raine: and if at any time the ayre 
 be cloudie and mistie with the Southerne winde, immediatly it is dissolued 
 and waxeth cleere and fayre againe. The Sea is calme, not boysterous, the 
 waues gentle: and although all the shore be somewhat sholde and without 
 harborough, yet it is not dangerous to the saylers, being free from rocks 
 and deepe, so that within 4. or 5. foote of the shore, there is 20. foote 
 deepe of water without ebbe or flood, the depth still increasing in such
lodged, visited, and serued of all the inhabitants of that Citie, and all 
 his companie had their lodgings freely: those which desired to goe into 
 the countrie, were diuided by foure and foure, and sixe and sixe in the 
 farmes or granges, according to the abilitie of the owners of the farmes, 
 and were furnished by them with all things necessarie. 
  
  
  
 Chap. V. Of the inhabitants which are in the Citie of S. Iago, and in the 
 other townes of the Island: and of the qualitie of the soile, and fruites 
 that it yeeldeth. 
  
  
 The Citie of S. Iago hath fourescore houses which are great and well 
 contriued. The most part haue their walls made of bords, and are couered 
 with thatch; it hath some houses builded with lime and stone, and couered 
 with tiles. (M603) It hath great Orchards and many trees in them, 
 differing from those of Spaine: there be figgetrees which beare figges as 
 big as ones fist, yellow within, and of small taste; and other trees which 
 beare a fruit which they call Ananes, in making and bignes like to a small
Pineapple: it is a fruite very sweete in taste: the shel being taken away, 
 the kernel is like a peece of fresh cheese. In the granges abroad in the 
 countrie there are other great pineapples, which grow on low trees, and 
 are like the Aloe tree:(126) they are of a very good smell and exceeding 
 good taste. Other trees do beare a fruit, which they call Mameis of the 
 bignes of Peaches. This the Islanders do hold for the best fruit of the 
 country. There is another fruit which they call Guayahas like Filberds, as 
 bigge as figges. There are other trees as high as a iaueline, hauing one 
 only stocke without any bough, and the leaues as long as a casting dart: 
 and the fruite is of the bignesse and fashion of a Cucumber, one bunch 
 beareth 20. or 30. and as they ripen, the tree bendeth downeward with 
 them: they are called in this countrie Plantanos; and are of a good taste, 
 and ripen after they be gathered, but those are the better which ripen 
 vpon the tree it selfe: they beare fruite but once: and the tree being cut 
 downe, there spring vp others out of the but, which beare fruite the next 
 yeere. (M604) There is another fruit; whereby many people are sustained, 
 and chiefly the slaues, which are called Batatas. These grow now in the 
 Isle of Tercera, belonging to the Kingdome of Portugal, and they grow 
 within the earth, and are like a fruit called Iname, they haue almost the 
 taste of a chestnut. (M605) The bread of this countrie is also made of
rootes which are like the Batatas. And the stocke whereon those rootes doe 
 grow is like an Elder tree: they make their ground in little hillocks and 
 in each of them they thrust 4. or 5. stakes; and they gather the rootes a 
 yeere and an halfe after they set them. If any one, thinking it is a 
 Batata or Potato roote, chance to eate of it neuer so little, he is in 
 great danger of death: which was seene by experience in a souldier, which 
 assone as hee had eaten a very little of one of those rootes, hee died 
 quicklie. They pare these rootes and stamp them and squese them in a thing 
 like a presse: the iuyce that commeth from them is of an euill smell. The 
 bread is of little taste and lesse substance. Of the fruits of Spaine, 
 there are Figges and Oranges, and they beare fruite all the yeere, because 
 the soile is very ranke and fruitfull. (M606) In this countrie are many 
 good horses, and there is greene grasse all the yeere. There be many wild 
 oxen and hogges, whereby the people of the Island is well furnished with 
 flesh: Without the townes abroad in the Countrie are many fruites. And it 
 happeneth sometimes that a Christian goeth out of the way and is lost 15. 
 or 20. daies, because of the many paths in the thicke groues that crosse 
 too and fro made by the oxen: and being thus lost, they sustaine them 
 selues with fruites and palmitos: for there be many great groues of Palme 
 trees through all the Island: they yeeld no other fruite that is of any
