Seeing your fructus horarii (such as Cher∣ries, Plums, Apricocks, &amp;c. ) are profitable to at∣temperate the Summers heat, but are hurtful and dangerous through their easie corruption, they ought to be taken as much cooled as may be; because seeing corruption is wrought by external heat, be-being cooled they will continue without putrefying till they are concocted, and will attemperate much more: On the contrary being hot they do not at∣temperate at all, and easily turn into a salt Phlegm or a serous kind of Choler: whereby it comes to pass, that almost all that eat hot fruits, commonly fall into Tertians or other worser Fevers, and not a few into the cholera morbus (or Vomiting and Loos∣ness:) whereas many by cooled fruits are freed from Agues, though otherwise they be occupied in Business and Exercises. All therefore, I think, will greatly commend the custom of cooling your fructus horarii by putting Snow to them: for if any find his Stomach offended by the coldness of the fruits, he may know for certain that he needs them not, nor must such an one be advised to eat them hot, but to eat either very little, or none at all. But it is otherwise with Drink, for many are offen∣ded by cold Drink, that nevertheless stand in need of that which is as cold as Ice: whence it is manifest that Snow is far more necessary for horary Fruits, than for Drink; though for this also it be profita∣ble for many during the Summer and a good part of the Autumn, but at other times though it may be pleasant to some, yet it is hurtful to all. And therefore I would both begin and end the use of Snow with horary fruits, and in the mean while very much cool the fruits with it, and would have every one take as much as he needs, according to the nature both of the whole man, and also of the Belly alone, which nature is either hot or cold, dry or moist, or some mean between these, and according to the Custom and Experience that every one has of his own Body: But Drink is not alike convenient for all, but for every one his own way, consideration being made according to the same scopes, Valles. comm. in 5. Epid. p. 498. for thus many things would be profitable that most now dispraise. 
 XXXIII. As to Fruits, Avicen pronounces gene∣rally, that they are all bad for Persons in Fevers, whom yet all the Greeks oppose. Galen (1. ad Gl. ) grants such in the cure of a Tertian as are easily con∣cocted: Trallianus prescribes Peaches both raw and boiled, Musk-melons and ( Melopepones or) Cucumbers, and chides some Roman Physicians that abstained from Pompions because they bred choler, from Gal. 2. de Alim. when yet Galen says in that place, that Pompions breed the cholera morbus if they be eaten too plentifully: Yet he prescribes Pompions an hour before the Fit, and also orders the Patient to drink after them a good quantity of temperate Water; for much choler being thereby evacuated by Stool or Sweat, the Ague has ceased: Therefore he adds, In every hot intemperies of the Kidneys, Liver, Sto∣mach, Head, in a Tertian Ague or continual Fever, nothing is better than a Pompion or Cucumber, which latter also he prefers before a Pompion, be∣cause it is altogether harmless. Hippocrates himself (in Lib. de Affect.) writes thus of Pompions: The Cucumber-Pompion provokes Stool and Ʋrine, and is light; and the other Pompion does in some kind cool and allay thirst: both of them afford but a thin nourishment, and yet no harm that  '  s worth speaking of proceeds from either. Besides, the sweetness of Musk-melons and their grateful Scent commend them: But we at this day know not what are the Pepones, Melopepones or Cucumeres of the Ancients, and therefore to come to our own: Our Musk-Melons, which many esteem for a dainty, for their admirable sweetness of taste and smell, are yet unwholsom; they easily putrefie in an hot Sto∣mach, for they are very moist, as appears in that from a small root they grow into a great bulk; they are presently corrupted by every quality of the Air, and they alwayes lie upon the ground, whence by eating of them, putrid and serous Humours are by degrees heaped up in the Veins, whence Fevers or Agues encrease and are lengthened out, or if they be not present; they are procured, so that these are accounted the most unwholsom of all ho∣rary fruits. What some alledge of their sweetness and grateful odour, makes nothing towards their commendation; for this ought to be meant of the same kind of meat, and not of divers, for very ma∣ny that are most grateful, are more pernicious than those that are less grateful. But our Cucumbers that use to be eat young and unripe, though they cannot be called wholsom, yet they ought to be reckoned less hurtful, both because they have a kind of sowrness, and also because they are corrected with Vinegar and Salt; but in the plenty of so ma∣ny Remedies   '  tis better to abstain from them than to run the hazard. To come to other fruits; They are various, hot, cold, moist, easily corruptible, horary, acid, sweet, fresh, dry: The hot, when the indication is taken from a Fever, are wholly hurtful; yet in respect to the febrile cause or some Symptom, they may be granted, as Figs to cleanse, or if the Colick accompany: The cold are good with respect to a Fever, and they profit the Hectick and those that are taken with an Ephemera (or a Fever that lasts but for a day:) but though by cooling they may benefit in putrid Fevers, yet in regard of the putre∣faction they hurt, because they are easily inflamed and boil in a hot and foul stomach, which is chiefly to be understood of the horaei, such as Straw-berries, Mulberries, Plums, Peaches, Cherries. Now (from whence horaeus is derived) is the Summer, and the Fruits that are gathered in that Season cannot be kept for their great moisture, but are suddenly cor∣rupted unless they be dried or preserv  '  d; and all those Fruits that the Latins call fugaces, are of a bad juice, and windy, and when they are corrupted, become like to Poisons: But the Fruits which may be kept, as Grapes, Almonds, Damsons dried, and Prunes may be allowed: as also all acid Fruits, as Lemons, Oranges, Pomegranats, for they temper the febrile heat, allay thirst, stir up an appetite, hinder the ascent of vapours: But yet the too great plenty of acid Fruits is to be avoided, because if one take too much of them, or unless they be tem∣per  '  d by boiling, as they are wont to be when made into Syrups, they breed great Obstructions; other∣wise they profit very much by cooling, inciding, resisting Putrefaction. Some also of the horaei may be granted because they are corrected by boiling and by putting Sugar to them; from which yet if we abstain in bilious Fevers, or at least use it spa∣ringly, it will be better, because it heats and turns it self into choler, as sweet things are wont. So in an exquisite Tertian Avicen commendeth sweet Pomegranats, Prunes, the Indian Melon, because it loosens, provokes Urine, allays heat, and moves sweat in some manner. Fresh Fruit also in some particulars is better than that which has been longer gathered, for some Fruits grow musty in time, as Almonds, Pine-Apples; likewise these when they are long kept, become oily, and therefore are not so fit in acute Fevers, because the oily part is easily inflamed and turned into choler, and there∣fore in the Milk which we call Almond-milk we must have great care that the Almonds be not ran∣cid or musty, for the fresher they are, the better. Some boil that Milk, but the raw is better than the boiled, for it cools more because of the admixture of much watriness, which is consumed by boiling, and therefore it alters less and is made thicker, and less apt to temper the febrile heat. On the contra∣ry some Fruits are the better for being cold, as Raisins, Prunes, and all such as abound with too much moisture when they are new, and may be reduced to a more wholsom nature by being laid up. Primiros. de Febr. p. 144 
 XXXIV. Pot-herbs and others are profitable in Fe∣vers to alter, 1. Cold; as Lettuce, E dive, Spinach, in bilious Fevers; 2. Hot, as Tyme, Hyssop, Majo∣ran in Phlegmatick; but we must not use them alone, for they have no nourishing vertue in them, or but little, they are rather Medicinal, therefore they are prescribed to be boil  '  d in Broths, that there may be Medicin with Aliment. The Sick there∣fore may not have leave to feed upon Herbs and Roots, for most of them use to be turned into a porraceous (or leeky) choler in the Stomach; and Galen having dispraised almost all Herbs in relation to food, seems to grant Lettuces only, as being less hurtful: Let them therefore be taken boiled with other Aliments for alteration. 
 XXXV. Moreover Salads are not disallowed of some. Galen (1. ad Glaucon. cap. 9. and 10.) grants not only Lettuces, but also Garden orach, Mallows, Sorrel: and if Vinegar be added, it will stir up the Appetite, resist Putrefaction, cut tough Humours, open Obstructions: yet but a little Oil is to be added, because it is easily inflam  '  d in Fevers. But Vinegar being used with Salads or other Meat, in a little quantity, cannot dry much, but rather, ac∣cording to Galen, resists Putrefaction, stirs up Appe∣tite, makes Victuals pass down well, colliquates and attenuates the thick; and so Olera, as Cabbage, Spinach, &amp;c. with Vinegar are not so hurtful; they nourish but little, are cold and moist, excite appetite, and being boiled in Broth and pre∣pared or dress  '  d with Salt and Vinegar, Primiros. de Febr. p. 143. may be good. 
 XXXVI. Galen (in Arte parva) commends Wine as a Restorative for old Men and such as are recovering from Sickness; but so it is that Wine dries and does not moisten? I answer, that Galen allows of Wine of an indifferent age, such as is pure and clear in sub∣stance, namely that which is a little yellowish or whitish, smells well, and as to the taste seems nei∣ther altogether watry, nor exceeds much in any quality, whether sweetness, or acrimony, or bit∣terness; but such Wine as this does not dry, but moisten. This we note from this place against almost all the Moderns, who think that all Wine dries: for if the Wine described by Galen dried, doubt∣less it would be bad for Persons recovering from Sickness, and old Men, who are already too dry: therefore we say that the Wine proposed by Galen for taking away the dry disposition of Persons re∣covering from Sickness and old Men, has a faculty to moisten substantially, and is temperate as to heat, and dries not; Sanctor. art. parv. c. 99. for no temperate quality can dry or moisten, heat or cool. 
 XXXVII. It is observable that Hippocrates used Wa∣ter for drink in a drying Diet, and neither Wine, nor Wine and Honey, though both of these moisten less than Water: which he did, not that he suspected Wine for any reason; for besides that he grants black racy Wine in an exulceration of the Womb, if he had suspected Wine, he should have prescribed some other Drink, and not simple Water. Hippo∣crates therefore approves of Water, inasmuch as it affords very little or no nourishment to the Body, the principal action of which nourishment is to re∣cruit and moisten the radical moisture of the Body which is continually spent, and so it happens by accident that water dries. Add also that Drinks that nourish the Body are sooner distributed through it, and by consequent moisten it, than Water; which because, as Hippocrates said, P. Martian. comm. in v. 183 Sect. 3. l. 1. de Morb. mul. it stays longer in the Hypochondres, it does not proceed so to moisten the Body, as other Drinks that are more pleasant to Nature. 
 XXXVIII. Santorellus (Lib. 26. Antepr. c. 8.) admires that Avicen has written that Snow-water is good, where he says (2. 1. Doctr. c. 16.) But Snow and Water turn  '  d to ice, seeing it is clean and not mixt with any other thing that has a bad quality, whether it be melted and Water be made of it, or other water be cooled by it by l ying it on the outside of the vessel, or it self be put into water, it will be good. But the admiration will fall, if you understand Avicen of a Morbous state, wherein if you give Water diluted with Snow, as a Medicine, you will not err. 
 XXXIX. Those do ill that let many enter into the Patient  '  s Chamber, because the breaths of many People corrupt the Air. Galen (10. Meth. cap. 8.) sayes that a crowd of Friends heat the Chamber. On that account the Windows are to be kept open, for by shutting them the Chamber is not only heated, but seeing the Putrid steams are not ventilated with the inspiration of pure Air, the Patient falls into a worse condition. And let none object that the Skin is made dense and obstructed by the colder Air; for by the inspiration of cold Air there ari∣ses greater benefit to the Patient, than there does hurt by densating the Skin. But though the con∣densation of the Skin be the cause of heat, this in∣convenience may also be avoided by covering the Patient, and the cold Air being breathed in will cool the internal Viscera, for nothing sooner changes the temperatures of the Humours than the Air, as Galen says 3. de humor. comment. 2. Indeed in malig∣nant and continual Fevers there is perhaps no errour greater, Sanctor. M th. Med. V. H. l 13. c 4. See Gal. in m. m. than to keep the Patients in close hot places, and such as are full of a crowd of People. 
 XL. To change the Patient  '  s Linnen often seems a hainous thing to the vulgar; for they think that Sick Persons are made weaker thereby. But Hippo∣crates commands all things to be kept clean about the Sick, and Galen endeavours by all means to keep transpiration free, that cold Air may be breathed in and steams excluded, especially in continual Fe∣vers, which happen for the most part through con∣striction of the Pores: And therefore when they are obstructed both by the sordes and Sweat, there follows a retention of the vapours and steams, whence the pre-existent Fever is increased, or a new one is kindled: on the contrary that man shall hardly fall into great Diseases whose Body has a good perspi∣ration. Comm. in l. 1. de vict. Acut. In which thing (says Vallesius ) vulgar Phy∣sicians offend, who will not permit their Patients either to put on a clean Shirt, or change their Sheets, or wash their Face or Hands, or to do any thing else that belongs to cleanliness, not though the Di∣sease be long, or as if this did not encrease all Putrefaction. 
 XLI. In some Diseases great respect is to be had to the Patient  '  s manner of living, otherwise they will be very hardly cured. A cleanser of Jakes ha∣ving smelt too good odours, fell Sick, and was at length cured by the smells he had been used to. Zacutus placed a Patient that liv  '  d by the Sea-side, in the Sand and cover  '  d him with it, that he might cure him. A Physician cured a Countrey-man, that others had given over, by allowing him Pulse and Rye bread. And that the Region wherein we live makes many impressions upon us, which we must have regard to, I have observed, that as we that live upon the Land grow nauseous, and vomit in a Ship, which Symptoms cease when we are returned to our accustomed Land; so I have seen a Sea-man, namely a Venetian, that endured the same Nausea by riding on Horse-back that we do on the Sea. Pore us, Obs. 59. ent. 3. 
 XLII. Sleep procured by Art gets the Physician great esteem. A certain Physician said, that the way whereby he curried favour with his Patients, was, that they might have quiet rest the Night after he was called; which he procured with the Syrup of d P ppies, which he prescribed for that Night: I my self also being delighted with this Stratagem, often please my Patients by giving them a magisterial Anodyne. But how comes it to pass that Sleep coming either of its own accord, or procured by the use of Soporiferous Medicines, is often very offensive to the Sick, who when they awake com∣plain of a great weariness and uneasiness, and find fault with those that wait upon them for letting them sleep so long, desiring them to waken them if perhaps they should drop asleep? I answer, that even the healthful when they sleep immoderately, are said to be soakt, because their flesh is made more moist, and the habit of their Body pufft up or bloated, through the suppression of the fuliginous Excrement which ought to be digested and exhale by waking: and the same thing happens sometimes in Persons ill of Fevers: yet we must not therefore abstain either from spontaneous Sleep, into which a man falls when his Spirits are enervated with heat, or from that which is procured by Art; Rolfinc. de febribus c. 133. for all the uneasiness goes off in a little while, and the Spirits are refreshed. 
 The Diet of Febricitant Persons in general. The Contents. Whether Food is always to be denied in an Ague-Fit. I. Whether simple Food be alwayes best. II. Whether the Food should be alwayes moist. III. Whether the Meat be to be seasoned with Salt. IV. Whether Milk may be granted. V. Whether Fruits are to be denied altogether. VI. Whether Fish be proper. VII. Whether Eggs be hurtful. VIII. Raw Lettuce may be granted. IX. Whether the juice of unripe Grapes or Verjuice, &amp;c. be rightly put to their Meat. X. The use of sweet things is hurtful. XI. Ptisan is extreme good. XII. Whether Wine be good in Putrid Fevers. XIII. Whether simple water be to be granted. XIV. Beer is not to be denied. XV. How Drink is to be given to People in acute Fevers. XVI. It may be granted in the Paroxysms. XVII. It is to be given sometimes cold, sometimes hot. XVIII. The same cooling Drink is not to be given to all without diffe∣rence. XIX. Whether Barley water be to be rejected. XX. Water is not to be boiled long. XXI. Cold water is not to be given through the whole course of the Disease. XXII. Whether the Sick are to be fed more liberally in the Winter than in the Summer. XXIII. When Sleep does good, when hurt. XXIV. I. IN an Ague-fit food is not to be given, according to Hippocrates aph. 11. 1. For Nature (as Galen in comm. teacheth) by the concoction of the new aliment is called off from the concoction of the morbifick Humours: And besides, in the it all the Body is defiled with an impure vapour, which taints and in a great measure corrupts the meat that is newly taken. But if the Fit be so long, or the Body of the Patient so hot and dry, lean and of so thin a texture, that it is easily dissolved, and cannot hold out to the end of the sit, he must eat somewhat even in the fit it self, which will be bet∣ter done in the state than at other times, although even in the beginning and augment meat may be given if necessity urge. So Galen. 10. meth. c. 5. in Agues was forced to allow victuals even in the be∣ginning of the Fits, to such as were of an hot and dry temper, who can least indure fasting, lest they should faint away. In imitation of him Amatus Lu∣sitanus (cur. 68. cent. 4.) gave to one in the begin∣ning of the Fit, that vomited clean Choler, (up∣on which he swooned) bread soaked in water and sprinkled with Vinegar and so he hindred the foresaid Symptoms. River. That hurt which may happen from giving of meat in such like cases, is obviated by giving some Veal or Chicken broth cold; (in France they call it Veal or Chicken water, because it has a middle consistence betwixt mere water and broth thoroughly boiled) for by this means the a∣crimony of the heat is attemperated, and the immi∣nent driness is hindered; and yet Nature is not called off from her office of concocting the Morbi∣fick matter, which she more easily conquers when the acrimony of the Humours is mitigated, and the fear of driness avoided. 
 Hippocrates sayes, ( aphor. 1. 11.) It is hurtful to give meat in Fits; we must therefore abstain the whole Fit, if it may be; but if not, then till its declension: but if we may not do that neither, however we should avoid the beginning and three hours before, unless in picrocholis, or those who vo∣mit up Choler, who faint away through the acri∣monious Choler that at that time flows plentifully towards the Mouth of the Stomach, unless there be some fresh food there, by the mixture wherewith, it may be dulled; for if meat be put off in these, as it is wont to be in other febricitant Persons, of an intermittent there is often made a continual Fe∣ver, and for a simple one, and one that would end with sweat, if meat should be given in the begin∣ning, there ensues a syncopal or swooning one, and for one that would end in health, a mortal. But if meat be given even in the very time of the Fit, it sometimes not only hinders these dangers, but also prevents the Fever it self, which chiefly hap∣pens in those that vomit Choler: Yea and more∣over in others in whom there begins to be moved a Choler that is not so much, thick and putrid, as little in quantity, thin and very adust and fumous, through the twitching whereof the sensible parts begin in many to be pricked and quake; and yet this Choler, by taking something to eat presently, or perhaps by drinking some Wine diluted with water, is so attemper  '  d, that they give over shak∣ing or to be feverish at all. But it is certain that this happens seldom, or scarce ever, but in those that are very hot and dry by Nature, Valles. m. m. l. 1. c. 9. for it seem∣eth to be agreeable to this nature only. ¶ Oribasius speaking of old Men says, that when they have Agues, they must necessarily have food allow  '  d them in the very Fit: for they abound with a glassie Phlegm which in them passes not into ali∣ment; and therefore they must often and impor∣tunely be refreshed with meat, See Zacut. P. H. p. 539. though there be instant danger of death. 
 II. Some Practitioners prescribe Ptisan (a very con∣venient aliment, which tempereth the Blood and Choler, cuts and detergeth viscid matter, allayeth thirst, takes away the roughness of the mouth and, in general, of all the Pneumatick Organs, makes the Breath easie, &amp;c. ) I say they prescribe ptisan with sweet Almonds bruised; yea at the same meal they allow an Egg, Panada and Flesh, against Galen   '  s opinion ( l. 2. de v. ac. ) who sayes that ma∣nifold meats and such as are of different faculties cause a pertubation of the Belly. But   '  tis an∣swered, those things which are given, either all of them come under the notion of meat, (or at least one;) Then, the Fever is either short, and then   '  tis b tter to give simple meat, or at least to min∣gle meats together, that are of a simple faculty; or Chronical, and then it is best to give fewer sorts of meat: at the same time yet because the Disease is long, and the Patients cloy  '  d and queasie-Sto∣mach  '  d, several meats, as Eggs, Panada, Flesh, Fruits, may be allowed at several times: Or some of them come under the notion of sawce which may be mixed with the meat; for the aliment keepeth its proper vertues, and by the sawce is made more pleasant to the smell and taste, Capiv c. lib. 6. c. 2 . and more effectual against the morbifick matter. 
 As to the quality of the food, Hippocrates declareth ( aph. 16. lib. 1.) Moist food is good for all febricitant peo∣ple, &amp;c. For seeing a Fever is an hot and dry Di∣stemper, by the rule of contraries it re uires cool∣ers and moistners: f r according to G len (lib. m. m.) cooling is most proper for Fevers; inasmuch as heat is wont always to off nd in them, but dri∣ness is not always troublesome; and Hippocrates himself (lib. de morb s) in several places directs, to cool a Fever as quickly as we can: Seeing this is manifest to all, he makes no mention (in the afore∣said aphorism) f a cooling but only of moist food, because it is not so plain, that moistning is conve∣nient for Fevers. By moist food we may either understand that which is moistening, or that which is liquid and may be supp  '  d: That which is moist∣ning is very profitable for Fevers, both because it corrects the driness which the febrile heat acce∣lerates, and also because it tempers the preternatu∣ral heat, for driness is the file of heat, and moist∣ure blunts it: That which is liquid and may be supt is alwayes prescribed by him, Galen asserting, both because it is the most easily concocted in the Stomach, and also more easily enters into the rest of the Body and into the remoter Veins; for the natural heat being tainted by an extraneous, con∣cocts more weakly, nor is it to be wearied with more solid meats, lest if they remain crude, they be corrupted, and thence encrease the Fever: for which cause we must beware of either roasted or boiled Flesh, which although perhaps they may be potentially moist, yet their substance is too hard to be well enough concocted by the weak heat of febricitant persons; whence Flesh-broth is better than Flesh it self. But though the food ought al∣ways to be such as may be supt, yet it should not always be cooling and moistning; for in regard of the cause which is joined with the Fever, or of some other Disease, or Symptom, it should some∣times be hot, sometimes dry, as in Fevers proceed∣ing from Phlegm and Quartans, Pepper is allowed: also if the Fever be accompanied with a Dropsie, the Colick or obstruction, herein we must not use moisteners and coolers, Primiros. lib. de feb. p. 153. but hot openers accord∣ing to Galen   '  s comment on the foresaid aphorism. 
 IV. Whether are their meats to be seasoned with Salt? Capivaccius is against it ( l. 6. c. 28.) and altogether rejects Salt: but I think it may be granted, if it be so administred as not to make the meat Salt or powder  '  d, but to take away its unsa∣voriness and unpleasantness. First, because that which relisheth, nourishes, according to Avicen: and most meats are unsavory without it, whence they do not only not nourish, but they also cause a nausea, whence other harms spring. Secondly, Salt Meats, according to Galen (3. de al. fac. ) cause dejection and open obstructions: Himself (7. m. m. ) in the cure of a dry Stomach grants salted Bread; and by a stronger reason it is agreeable for febrici∣tant persons. Add hereunto Aphor. 2. 38. 
 V. Whether is Milk to be granted? It seems to be hurtful, both by reason of its cheesie substance which turns into nidour, encreases thirst, fills the Head with vapours, encreases the fervour, and cau∣ses obstructions; and also of its Buttery part which is apt to be inflamed through its fatness; Bilious pro∣ceeds from fat, says Hippocrates (6. Epid. 5. 14) and last∣ly of its serous part which partakes of a nitrous quality. Milk is either used as nourishment, in which sense it is condemned by Hippocrates aph. 5. 64. or as Medicine, especially that of Asses, for this being more watry may be drunk even in a burning or continual Fever, according to the prescription of Hippocrates (l. de rat. vict.) or it is used for refrige∣ration, or for evacuation by stool, but in a great quantity, for so it descends more quickly, and makes no stay in the Stomach, so that hence it is neither concocted nor assimilated; It washes down the choler, purges out the fifth of the Guts, moistens and greatly cools. 
 VI.   '  Tis doubted whether Fruits be good. Avi¦cen sayes they all do hurt by their ebullition and corruption in the Stomach: Galen writes that no Fruit almost is of a good juice, but that the fugaces or horary have plainly a bad juice, so that unless they be quickly cast out by stool, or if they be corrupted in the Stomach, they breed a juice not unlike to poyson: others on the contrary grant several Fruits, especially the cooling, as Melons and the like. But we must know, that if any fruits are granted, they are granted rather as Medicine than Aliment: And it cannot be denied that most of them are easily corrupted, especially in a Sto∣mach indisposed by a febrile heat, and that vicious Humours are thence generated that very much encrease the Fever: And by how much any fruit is otherwise the apter to be corrupted, by so much the easilier is it corrupted in Fevers: for most of them do not transpire well, yea hinder transpirati∣on, as Melons: but if our Patient be so dainty that we must indulge them, we must rather permit them to taste them than to eat them freely according to Galen (1. ad Gl. 9.) otherwise that food is to be ap∣pointed which Hippocr. prescribed, viz. of the juice of Ptisan, till the crisis, or some such like. Yet acids may be granted more easily, to extinguish too great thirst and heat, such as are Pomegranats, Ci∣trons, Lemons, Barberries, or their juice, Goose∣berries, Cherries; all which yet are rather ali∣ments than Medicines. Sennert. See Zac. P. h. l. 4. c. 3. 
 VII. Some quite reject Fish, as easily Putrefying, others admit them: but here is need of a distinc∣tion of Fevers and Fish; for Fish are more fitly given in Cholerick Fevers: Yet alwayes such are to be chosen as yield a better nourishment, Sennert. as those that live in stony Rivers.
