This money made them quite happy; for the poor creatures were very 
 hungry, and had no other way of getting anything to eat. 
  
 The faggot-maker sent his wife out immediately to buy some meat; and 
 as it was a long time since she had made a hearty meal, she bought as 
 much meat as would have been enough for six or eight persons. The 
 truth was, when she was thinking what would be enough for dinner, she 
 forgot that her children were not at home; but as soon as she and her 
 husband had done eating, she cried out, "Alas! where are our poor 
 children? how they would feast on what we have left! It was all your 
 fault, husband! I told you we should repent leaving them to starve in 
 the forest!--Oh mercy! perhaps they have already been eaten by the 
 hungry wolves!" The poor woman shed plenty of tears: "Alas! alas!" 
 said she, over and over again, "what is become of my dear children?" 
  
 The children, who were all at the door, cried out together, "Here we 
 are, mother, here we are!" 
  
 She flew like lightning to let them in, and kissed every one of them. 
 
The faggot-maker and his wife were charmed at having their children 
 once more with them, and their joy for this lasted till their money 
 was all spent; but then they found themselves quite as ill off as 
 before. So by degrees they again thought of leaving them in the 
 forest: and that the young ones might not come back a second time, 
 they said they would take them a great deal farther than they did at 
 first. They could not talk about this matter so slily but that 
 Hop-o ' -my-thumb found means to hear all that passed between them; but 
 he cared very little about it, for he thought it would be easy for him 
 to do just the same as he had done before. But though he got up very 
 early the next morning to go to the river ' s side to get the pebbles, a 
 thing which he had not thought of hindered him; for he found that the 
 house-door was double-locked. Hop-o ' -my-thumb was now quite at a loss 
 what to do; but soon after this, his mother gave each of the children 
 a piece of bread for breakfast, and then it came into his head that he 
 could make his share do as well as the pebbles, by dropping crumbs of 
 it all the way as he went. So he did not eat his piece, but put it 
 into his pocket. 
  
 It was not long before they all set out, and their parents took care
going on that I do not know of." 
  
 As soon as he had spoken these words, he rose from his chair and went 
 towards the bed. 
  
 "Ah! madam," said he, "you thought to cheat me, did you? Wretch! thou 
 art old and tough thyself, or else I would eat thee up too! But come, 
 come, this is lucky enough; for the brats will make a nice dish for 
 three Ogres, who are my particular friends, and who are to dine with 
 me to-morrow." 
  
 He then drew them out one by one from under the bed. The poor children 
 fell on their knees and begged his pardon as humbly as they could; but 
 this Ogre was the most cruel of all Ogres, and instead of feeling any 
 pity, he only began to think how sweet and tender their flesh would 
 be; so he told his wife they would be nice morsels, if she served them 
 up with plenty of sauce. He then fetched a large knife, and began to 
 sharpen it on a long whetstone that he held in his left hand; and all 
 the while he came nearer and nearer to the bed. The Ogre took up one 
 of the children, and was going to set about cutting him to pieces; but
his wife said to him, "What in the world makes you take the trouble of 
 killing them to-night? Will it not be time enough to-morrow morning?" 
  
 "Hold your prating," replied the Ogre; "they will grow tender by being 
 kept a little while after they are killed." 
  
 "But," said his wife, "you have got so much meat in the house already; 
 here is a calf, two sheep and half a pig." 
  
 "True," said the Ogre, "so give them all a good supper, that they may 
 not get lean, and then send them to bed." 
  
 The good creature was quite glad at this. She gave them plenty for 
 their supper, but the poor children were so terrified that they could 
 not eat a bit. 
  
 The Ogre sat down to his wine, very much pleased with the thought of 
 giving his friends such a dainty dish: this made him drink rather more 
 than common, and he was soon obliged to go to bed himself. Now the 
 Ogre had seven daughters, who were all very young like Hop-o ' -my-thumb
The merchant in vain tried to reason with Beauty, who still 
 obstinately kept to her purpose; which, in truth, made her two sisters 
 glad, for they were jealous of her, because everybody loved her. 
  
 The merchant was so grieved at the thoughts of losing his child, that 
 he never once thought of the chest filled with gold, but at night, to 
 his great surprise, he found it standing by his bedside. He said 
 nothing about his riches to his eldest daughters, for he knew very 
 well it would at once make them want to return to town; but he told 
 Beauty his secret, and she then said, that while he was away, two 
 gentlemen had been on a visit at their cottage, who had fallen in love 
 with her two sisters. She entreated her father to marry them without 
 delay, for she was so sweet-natured, she only wished them to be happy. 
  
 Three months went by, only too fast, and then the merchant and Beauty 
 got ready to set out for the palace of the beast. Upon this, the two 
 sisters rubbed their eyes with an onion, to make believe they were 
 crying; both the merchant and his sons cried in earnest. Only Beauty 
 shed no tears. They reached the palace in a very few hours, and the 
 horse, without bidding, went into the same stable as before. The
merchant and Beauty walked towards the large hall, where they found a 
 table covered with every dainty, and two plates laid ready. The 
 merchant had very little appetite; but Beauty, that she might the 
 better hide her grief, placed herself at the table, and helped her 
 father; she then began to eat herself, and thought all the time that, 
 to be sure, the beast had a mind to fatten her before he ate her up, 
 since he had provided such good cheer for her. When they had done 
 their supper, they heard a great noise, and the good old man began to 
 bid his poor child farewell, for he knew it was the beast coming to 
 them. When Beauty first saw that frightful form, she was very much 
 terrified, but tried to hide her fear. The creature walked up to her, 
 and eyed her all over--then asked her in a dreadful voice if she had 
 come quite of her own accord. 
  
 "Yes," said Beauty. 
  
 "Then you are a good girl, and I am very much obliged to you." 
  
 This was such an astonishingly civil answer that Beauty ' s courage 
 rose: but it sank again when the beast, addressing the merchant,
 
 As soon as Beauty awoke, she told her father this dream; but though it 
 gave him some comfort, he was a long time before he could be persuaded 
 to leave the palace. At last Beauty succeeded in getting him safely 
 away. 
  
 When her father was out of sight, poor Beauty began to weep sorely; 
 still, having naturally a courageous spirit, she soon resolved not to 
 make her sad case still worse by sorrow, which she knew was vain, but 
 to wait and be patient. She walked about to take a view of all the 
 palace, and the elegance of every part of it much charmed her. 
  
 But what was her surprise, when she came to a door on which was 
 written, BEAUTY ' S ROOM! She opened it in haste, and her eyes were 
 dazzled by the splendour and taste of the apartment. What made her 
 wonder more than all the rest, was a large library filled with books, 
 a harpsichord, and many pieces of music. "The beast surely does not 
 mean to eat me up immediately," said she, "since he takes care I shall 
 not be at a loss how to amuse myself." She opened the library and saw 
 these verses written in letters of gold on the back of one of the
books:-- 
  
 "Beauteous lady, dry your tears, 
 Here ' s no cause for sighs or fears. 
 Command as freely as you may, 
 For you command and I obey." 
  
 "Alas!" said she, sighing; "I wish I could only command a sight of my 
 poor father, and to know what he is doing at this moment." Just then, 
 by chance, she cast her eyes on a looking-glass that stood near her, 
 and in it she saw a picture of her old home, and her father riding 
 mournfully up to the door. Her sisters came out to meet him, and 
 although they tried to look sorry, it was easy to see that in their 
 hearts they were very glad. In a short time all this picture 
 disappeared, but it caused Beauty to think that the beast, besides 
 being very powerful, was also very kind. About the middle of the day 
 she found a table laid ready for her, and a sweet concert of music 
 played all the time she was dining, without her seeing anybody. But at 
 supper, when she was going to seat herself at table, she heard the 
 noise of the beast, and could not help trembling with fear.
 
  
 There was a woman who had three daughters, the eldest of whom was 
 called Little One Eye, because she had only one eye in the middle of 
 her forehead; the second, Little Two Eyes, because she had two eyes 
 like other people; and the youngest, Little Three Eyes, because she 
 had three eyes, one of them being also in the middle of the forehead. 
 But because Little Two Eyes looked no different from other people, her 
 sisters and mother could not bear her. They said, "You with your two 
 eyes are no better than anybody else; you do not belong to us." They 
 knocked her about, and gave her shabby clothes, and food which was 
 left over from their own meals; in short, they vexed her whenever they 
 could. 
  
 It happened that Little Two Eyes had to go out into the fields to look 
 after the goat; but she was still quite hungry, because her sisters 
 had given her so little to eat. She sat down on a hillock and began to 
 cry, and cried so much that two little streams ran down out of each 
 eye. And as she looked up once in her sorrow, a woman stood near her, 
 who asked, "Little Two Eyes, why do you cry?"
 
 Little Two Eyes answered, "Have I not need to cry? Because I have two 
 eyes, like other people, my sisters and my mother cannot bear me; they 
 push me out of one corner into the other, give me shabby clothes, and 
 nothing to eat but what they leave. To-day they have given me so 
 little that I am still quite hungry." 
  
 The wise woman said, "Little Two Eyes, dry your tears, and I will tell 
 you something which will keep you from ever being hungry more. Only 
 say to your goat,  ' Little goat, bleat; little table, rise, '  and a 
 neatly-laid table will stand before you with the most delicious food 
 on it, so that you can eat as much as you like. And when you are 
 satisfied and do not want the table any more, only say,  ' Little goat, 
 bleat; little table, away, '  and it will all disappear before your 
 eyes." Then the wise woman went out of sight. 
  
 Little Two Eyes thought, "I must try directly if it is true what she 
 has said, for I am much too hungry to wait." So she said, "Little 
 goat, bleat; little table, rise;" and scarcely had she uttered the 
 words, when there stood before her a little table, covered with a
white cloth, on which was laid a plate, knife and fork, and silver 
 spoon. The most delicious food was there also, and smoking hot, as if 
 just come from the kitchen. Then Little Two Eyes said the shortest 
 grace that she knew, "Lord God, be our guest at all times.--Amen," 
 began to eat, and found it very good. And when she had had enough, she 
 said as the wise woman had taught her--"Little goat, bleat; little 
 table, away." In an instant the little table, and all that stood on 
 it, had disappeared again. "That is a beautiful, easy way of 
 housekeeping," thought Little Two Eyes, and was quite happy and merry. 
  
 In the evening, when she came home with her goat, she found a little 
 earthen dish with food, which her sisters had put aside for her, but 
 she did not touch anything--she had no need. On the next day she went 
 out again with her goat, and let the few crusts that were given her 
 remain uneaten. The first time and the second time the sisters took no 
 notice; but when the same thing happened every day, they remarked it, 
 and said, "All is not right with Little Two Eyes; she always leaves 
 her food, and she used formerly to eat up everything that was given 
 her; she must have found other ways of dining." 
 
In order to discover the truth, they resolved that Little One Eye 
 should go with Little Two Eyes when she drove the goat into the 
 meadow, and see what she did there, and whether anybody brought her 
 anything to eat and drink. So when Little Two Eyes set out again, 
 Little One Eye came to her and said, "I will go with you into the 
 field, and see that the goat is taken proper care of, and driven to 
 good pasture." 
  
 But Little Two Eyes saw what Little One Eye had in her mind, and drove 
 the goat into long grass, saying, "Come, Little One Eye, we will sit 
 down; I will sing you something." Little One Eye sat down, being tired 
 from the unusual walk and from the heat of the sun, and Little Two 
 Eyes kept on singing, "Are you awake, Little One Eye? Are you asleep, 
 Little One Eye?" Then Little One Eye shut her one eye, and fell 
 asleep. And when Little Two Eyes saw that Little One Eye was fast 
 asleep, and could not betray anything, she said, "Little goat, bleat; 
 little table, rise," and sat herself at her table, and ate and drank 
 till she was satisfied; then she called out again, "Little goat, 
 bleat; little table, away," and instantly everything disappeared. 
 
Little Two Eyes now woke Little One Eye, and said, "Little One Eye, 
 you pretend to watch, and fall asleep over it, and in the meantime the 
 goat could have run all over the world; come, we will go home." Then 
 they went home, and Little Two Eyes let her little dish again stand 
 untouched; and Little One Eye, who could not tell the mother why her 
 sister would not eat, said, as an excuse, "Oh, I fell asleep out 
 there." 
  
 The next day the mother said to Little Three Eyes, "This time you 
 shall go and see if Little Two Eyes eats out of doors, and if anyone 
 brings her food and drink, for she must eat and drink secretly." 
  
 Then Little Three Eyes went to Little Two Eyes, and said, "I will go 
 with you and see whether the goat is taken proper care of, and driven 
 to good pasture." But Little Two Eyes saw what Little Three Eyes had 
 in her mind, and drove the goat into long grass, and said as before, 
 "We will sit down here, Little Three Eyes; I will sing you 
 something." Little Three Eyes seated herself, being tired from the 
 walk and the heat of the sun, and Little Two Eyes began the same song 
 again, and sang, "Are you awake, Little Three Eyes?" But instead of
singing then as she should, "Are you asleep, Little _Three_ Eyes?" she 
 sang, through carelessness, "Are you asleep, Little _Two_ Eyes?" and 
 went on singing, "Are you awake, Little Three Eyes? Are you asleep, 
 Little _Two_ Eyes?" So the two eyes of Little Three Eyes fell asleep, 
 but the third did not go to sleep, because it was not spoken to by the 
 verse. Little Three Eyes, to be sure, shut it, and made believe to go 
 to sleep, but only through slyness; for she winked with it, and could 
 see everything quite well. And when Little Two Eyes thought that 
 Little Three Eyes was fast asleep, she said her little sentence, 
 "Little goat, bleat; little table, rise," ate and drank heartily, and 
 then told the little table to go away again, "Little goat, bleat; 
 little table away." But Little Three Eyes had seen everything. Then 
 Little Two Eyes came to her, woke her, and said, "Ah! Little Three 
 Eyes, have you been asleep? you keep watch well! come, we will go 
 home." And when they got home, Little Two Eyes again did not eat, and 
 Little Three Eyes said to the mother, "I know why the proud thing does 
 not eat: when she says to the goat out there,  ' Little goat, bleat; 
 little table, rise, '  there stands a table before her, which is covered 
 with the very best food, much better than we have here; and when she 
 is satisfied, she says,  ' Little goat, bleat; little table away, '  and
everything is gone again; I have seen it all exactly. She put two of 
 my eyes to sleep with her little verse, but the one on my forehead 
 luckily remained awake." 
  
 Then the envious mother cried out, "Shall she be better off than we 
 are?" fetched a butcher ' s knife and stuck it into the goat ' s heart, so 
 that it fell down dead. 
  
 When Little Two Eyes saw that, she went out full of grief, seated 
 herself on a hillock, and wept bitter tears. All at once the wise 
 woman stood near her again, and said, "Little Two Eyes, why do you 
 cry?" 
  
 "Shall I not cry?" answered she. "The goat who every day, when I said 
 your little verse, laid the table so beautifully, has been killed by 
 my mother; now I must suffer hunger and thirst again." 
  
 The wise woman said, "Little Two Eyes, I will give you some good 
 advice; beg your sisters to give you the heart of the murdered goat, 
 and bury it in the ground before the house-door, and it will turn out
usual, at the door. Jack had disguised himself so completely, that she 
 did not appear to have the least recollection of him; however, when he 
 pleaded hunger and poverty, in order to gain admittance, he found it 
 very difficult indeed to persuade her. At last he prevailed, and was 
 concealed in the copper. When the giant returned, he said furiously, 
 "I smell fresh meat!" But Jack felt quite composed, as he had said so 
 before, and had been soon satisfied. However, the giant started up 
 suddenly, and, notwithstanding all his wife could say, he searched all 
 round the room. Whilst this was going forward, Jack was exceedingly 
 terrified, wishing himself at home a thousand times; but when the 
 giant approached the copper, and put his hand upon the lid, Jack 
 thought his death was certain. However, nothing happened; for the 
 giant did not take the trouble to lift up the lid, but sat down 
 shortly by the fireside, and began to eat his enormous supper. When he 
 had finished, he commanded his wife to fetch down his harp. Jack 
 peeped under the copper-lid, and saw a most beautiful harp. The giant 
 placed it on the table, said "Play!" and it played of its own accord, 
 without anybody touching it, the most exquisite music imaginable. 
 Jack, who was a very good musician, was delighted, and more anxious to 
 get this than any other of his enemy ' s treasures. But the giant not
being particularly fond of music, the harp had only the effect of 
 lulling him to sleep earlier than usual. As for the wife, she had gone 
 to bed as soon as ever she could. 
  
 As soon as he thought all was safe, Jack got out of the copper, and 
 seizing the harp, was eagerly running off with it. But the harp was 
 enchanted by a fairy, and as soon as it found itself in strange hands, 
 it called out loudly, just as if it had been alive, "Master! Master!" 
  
 The giant awoke, started up, and saw Jack scampering away as fast as 
 his legs could carry him. 
  
 "Oh you villain! it is you who have robbed me of my hen and my 
 money-bags, and now you are stealing my harp also. Wait till I catch 
 you, and I ' ll eat you up alive!" 
  
 "Very well; try!" shouted Jack, who was not a bit afraid, for he saw 
 the giant was so tipsy he could hardly stand, much less run; and he 
 himself had young legs and a clear conscience, which carry a man a 
 long way. So, after leading the giant a considerable race, he
So all ended well, and nothing was ever beard or seen of the wonderful 
 Bean-stalk. 
  
  
  
  
 GRACIOSA AND PERCINET. 
  
  
 Once upon a time there lived a king and queen, who had an only 
 daughter. Her incomparable beauty, sweetness, and intelligence caused 
 her to be named Graciosa. She was all her mother ' s joy. Every day she 
 had given her a different dress, of gold brocade, velvet, or satin; 
 yet she was neither conceited nor boastful. She used to pass her 
 mornings in study, and in the afternoon she sat sewing by the queen ' s 
 side. She had, however, plenty of play-time, and sweetmeats without 
 end, so that she was altogether the happiest princess alive. 
  
 At the same court was an elderly young lady named Duchess Grognon, who 
 was the very opposite of Graciosa. Her hair was fiery red, her face
fat and spotty, and she had but one eye. Her mouth was so big that you 
 might have thought she could eat you up, only she had no teeth to do 
 it with; she was also humpbacked and lame. Of course she could not 
 help her ugliness, and nobody would have disliked her for that, if she 
 had not been of such an unpleasant temper that she hated everything 
 sweet and beautiful, and especially Graciosa. She had also a very good 
 opinion of herself, and when any one praised the princess, would say 
 angrily, "That is a lie! My little finger is worth her whole body." 
  
 In course of time the queen fell sick and died, and her daughter was 
 almost broken-hearted. So was her husband for a year, and then he 
 began to comfort himself by hunting. One day, after a long chase, he 
 came to a strange castle, which happened to be that of the Duchess 
 Grognon. She, informed of his approach, went out to meet him, and 
 received him most respectfully. As he was very hot with hunting, she 
 took him into the coolest place in the palace, which was a vaulted 
 cave, most elegantly furnished, where there were two hundred barrels 
 arranged in long rows. 
  
 "Madam, are these all yours?" inquired the king.
 
 "Yes, sire, but I shall be most happy if you will condescend to taste 
 their contents. Which wine do you prefer--canary, hermitage, 
 champagne?" and she ran over a long list, out of which his majesty 
 made his choice. 
  
 Grognon took a little hammer, and struck "toc, toc," on the cask, from 
 which there rolled out a handful of silver money. "Nay, what is this?" 
 said she, smiling, and passed on to the next, from which, when she 
 tapped it, out poured a stream of gold coins. "I never saw the 
 like--what nonsense!" and she tried the third, out of which came a 
 heap of pearls and diamonds, so that the floor of the cave was strewn 
 with them. "Sire," she exclaimed, "some one has robbed me of my good 
 wine, and put this rubbish in its place." 
  
 "Rubbish, madam! Why, such rubbish would buy my whole kingdom." 
  
 "It is yours, sire," replied the duchess, "if you will make me your 
 queen." 
 
as I do." 
  
 Saying this, he placed himself in the chair with the cat upon his 
 knee, for nobody saw him, because he had his little red cap on; 
 finding Bluet ' s plate well supplied with partridge, quails, and 
 pheasants, he made so free with them, that whatever was set before 
 master puss disappeared in a trice. The whole court said no cat ever 
 ate with a better appetite. There were excellent ragouts, and the 
 prince made use of the cat ' s paw to taste them; but he sometimes 
 pulled his paw too roughly, and Bluet, not understanding raillery, 
 began to mew and be quite out of patience. The princess observing it, 
 "Bring that fricassee and that tart to poor Bluet," said she; "see how 
 he cries to have them." 
  
 Leander laughed to himself at the pleasantness of this adventure; but 
 he was very thirsty, not being accustomed to make such large meals 
 without drinking. By the help of the cat ' s paw, he got a melon, with 
 which he somewhat quenched his thirst; and when supper was quite over, 
 he went to the beaufet, and took two bottles of delicious wine. 
 
"Grandmother, what great ears you have!" 
  
 "That is to hear you the better, my dear." 
  
 "Grandmother, what great eyes you have!" 
  
 "That is to see you the better, my dear." 
  
 "Grandmother, what a great mouth you have!" 
  
 "That is to eat you up," cried the wicked wolf; and immediately he 
 fell upon poor Little Red-Riding-Hood, and ate her up in a moment. 
  
  
  
  
 PUSS IN BOOTS. 
  
  
 A Miller, dying, divided all his property between his three children.
This was a very simple matter, as he had nothing to leave but his 
 mill, his ass, and his cat; so he made no will, and called in no 
 lawyer, who would, probably, have taken a large slice out of these 
 poor possessions. The eldest son took the mill, the second the ass, 
 while the third was obliged to content himself with the cat, at which 
 he grumbled very much. "My brothers," said he, "by putting their 
 property together, may gain an honest livelihood, but there is nothing 
 left for me except to die of hunger; unless, indeed, I were to kill my 
 cat and eat him, and make a coat out of his skin, which would be very 
 scanty clothing." 
  
 The cat, who heard the young man talking to himself, sat up on his 
 four paws, and looking at him with a grave and wise air, said, 
 "Master, I think you had better not kill me; I shall be much more 
 useful to you alive." 
  
 "How so?" asked his master. 
  
 "You have but to give me a sack, and a pair of boots such as gentlemen 
 wear when they go shooting, and you will find you are not so ill off
as you suppose." 
  
 Now, though the young miller did not much depend upon the cat ' s words, 
 still he thought it rather surprising that a cat should speak at all. 
 And he had before now seen him show so much adroitness and cleverness 
 in catching rats and mice, that it seemed advisable to trust him a 
 little farther, especially as, poor young fellow! he had nobody else 
 to trust. 
  
 When the cat got his boots, he drew them on with a grand air, and 
 slinging his sack over his shoulder, and drawing the cords of it round 
 his neck, he marched bravely to a rabbit-warren hard by, with which he 
 was well acquainted. Then, putting some bran and lettuces into his 
 bag, and stretching himself out beside it as if he were dead, he 
 waited till some fine fat young rabbit, ignorant of the wickedness and 
 deceit of the world, should peer into the sack to eat the food that 
 was inside. This happened very shortly, for there are plenty of 
 foolish young rabbits in every warren; and when one of them, who 
 really was a splendid fat fellow, put his head inside, Master Puss 
 drew the cords immediately, and took him and killed him without mercy.
Then, very proud of his prey, he marched direct up to the palace, and 
 begged to speak with the king. He was desired to ascend to the 
 apartments of his majesty, where, making a low bow, he said, 
  
 "Sire, here is a magnificent rabbit, killed in the warren which 
 belongs to my lord the Marquis of Carabas, and which he has desired me 
 to offer humbly to your majesty." 
  
 "Tell your master," replied the king, politely, "that I accept his 
 present, and am very much obliged to him." 
  
 Another time, Puss went and hid himself and his sack in a wheat-field, 
 and there caught two splendid fat partridges in the same manner as he 
 had done the rabbit. When he presented them to the king, with a 
 similar message as before, his majesty was so pleased that he ordered 
 the cat to be taken down into the kitchen and given something to eat 
 and drink; where, while enjoying himself, the faithful animal did not 
 cease to talk in the most cunning way of the large preserves and 
 abundant game which belonged to my lord the Marquis of Carabas. 
 
into the wood to seek for provender, and before setting off she called 
 all seven to her and said, "Dear children, I am obliged to go into the 
 wood, so be on your guard against the wolf; for if he gets in here he 
 will eat you up, feathers, skin, and all. The villain often disguises 
 himself, but you can easily recognise him by his rough voice and black 
 paws." 
  
 The children answered, "Dear mother, we will take great care; you may 
 go without any anxiety." So the old lady was comforted, and set off 
 cheerfully for the wood. 
  
 Before long, some one knocked at the door, and cried, "Open, open, my 
 dear children; your mother is here, and has brought something for each 
 of you." 
  
 But the goslings soon perceived, by the rough voice, that it was the 
 wolf. "We will not open," said they; "you are not our mother, for she 
 has a sweet and lovely voice; but your voice is rough--you are the 
 wolf." 
 
Thereupon the wolf set off to a merchant and bought a large lump of 
 chalk; he ate it, and it made his voice sweet. Back he came, knocked 
 at the door, and cried, "Open, open, my dear children; your mother is 
 here, and has brought something for each of you." 
  
 But the wolf had laid his black paw on the window-sill, and when the 
 children saw it, they cried, "We will not open; our mother has not 
 black feet like you--you are the wolf." 
  
 So the wolf ran off to the baker, and said, "I have hurt my foot, put 
 some dough on it." And when the baker had plastered it with dough, the 
 wolf went to the miller and cried, "Strew some meal on my paws." But 
 the miller thought to himself, "The wolf wants to deceive some one," 
 and he hesitated to do it; till the wolf said, "If you don ' t do it at 
 once, I will eat you up." So the miller was afraid and made his paws 
 white. Such is the way of the world! 
  
 Now came the rogue back for the third time, knocked and said, "Open 
 the door, dear children; your mother has come home, and has brought 
 something for each of you out of the wood."
Now there was a young king of a neighbouring country, very handsome, 
 very rich, and wanting nothing but a wife to make him happy. He heard 
 so much of the various perfections of the Fair One with Golden Locks, 
 that at last, without even seeing her, he fell in love with her so 
 desperately that he could neither eat nor drink, and resolved to send 
 an ambassador at once to demand her in marriage. So he ordered a 
 magnificent equipage--more than a hundred horses and a hundred 
 footmen--in order to bring back to him the Fair One with Golden Locks, 
 who, he never doubted, would be only too happy to become his queen. 
 Indeed, he felt so sure of her that he refurnished the whole palace, 
 and had made, by all the dressmakers of the city, dresses enough to 
 last a lady for a lifetime. But, alas! when the ambassador arrived and 
 delivered his message, either the princess was in a bad humor, or the 
 offer did not appear to be to her taste; for she returned her best 
 thanks to his majesty, but said she had not the slightest wish or 
 intention to be married. She also, being a prudent damsel, declined 
 receiving any of the presents which the king had sent her; except 
 that, not quite to offend his majesty, she retained a box of English 
 pins, which were in that country of considerable value. 
 
When the ambassador returned, alone and unsuccessful, all the court 
 was very much affected, and the king himself began to weep with all 
 his might. Now, there was in the palace household a young gentleman 
 named Avenant, beautiful as the sun, besides being at once so amiable 
 and so wise that the king confided to him all his affairs; and every 
 one loved him, except those people--to be found in all courts--who 
 were envious of his good fortune. These malicious folk hearing him say 
 gaily, "If the king had sent me to fetch the Fair One with Golden 
 Locks, I know she would have come back with me," repeated the saying 
 in such a manner, that it appeared as if Avenant thought so much of 
 himself and his beauty, and felt sure the princess would have followed 
 him all over the world; which when it came to the ears of the king, as 
 it was meant to do, irritated him so much that he commanded Avenant to 
 be imprisoned in a high tower, and left to die there of hunger. The 
 guards accordingly carried off the young man, who had quite forgotten 
 his idle speech, and had not the least idea what fault he had 
 committed. They ill-treated him very much, and then left him, with 
 nothing to eat and only water to drink. This, however, kept him alive 
 for a few days, during which he did not cease to complain aloud, and 
 to call upon the king, saying, "O king, what harm have I done? You
therefore sit down to supper." 
  
 The trunkless hands then placed the dishes on the table, and the 
 prince and white cat seated themselves at it. The first dish was a pie 
 made of young pigeons, and the next was a fricassee of the fattest 
 mice. The view of the one made the prince almost afraid to taste the 
 other, till the white cat, who guessed his thoughts, assured him that 
 there were certain dishes at table which had been dressed on purpose 
 for him, in which there was not a morsel of either rat or mouse: 
 accordingly, he ate heartily of such as she recommended. When supper 
 was over, he perceived that the white cat had a portrait set in gold 
 hanging to one of her feet. He begged her permission to look at it; 
 when, to his astonishment, he saw the portrait of a handsome young 
 man, who exactly resembled himself! He thought there was something 
 most extraordinary in all this: yet, as the white cat sighed and 
 looked very sorrowful, he did not venture to ask any questions. He 
 conversed with her on different subjects, and found her extremely well 
 versed in everything that was passing in the world. When night was far 
 advanced, his hostess wished him a good night, and he was conducted by 
 the hands to his bedchamber, which was different still from anything
he had seen in the palace, being hung with the wings of butterflies 
 mixed with the most curious feathers. His bed was of gauze, festooned 
 with bunches of the gayest ribands, and the looking-glasses reached 
 from the floor to the ceiling. The prince was undressed and put into 
 bed by the hands, without speaking a word. He, however, slept little, 
 and in the morning was awakened by a confused noise. The hands took 
 him out of bed, and put on him a handsome hunting-jacket. He looked 
 into the courtyard, and perceived more than five hundred cats, busily 
 employed in preparing for the field--for this was a day of festival. 
 Presently the white cat came to his apartment; and having politely 
 inquired after his health, she invited him to partake of their 
 amusement. The prince willingly acceded, and mounted a wooden horse, 
 richly caparisoned, which had been prepared for him, and which he was 
 assured would gallop to admiration. The beautiful white cat mounted a 
 monkey; she wore a dragoon ' s cap, which made her look so fierce that 
 all the rats and mice ran away in the utmost terror. 
  
 Everything being ready, the horns sounded, and away they went: no 
 hunting was ever more agreeable. The cats ran faster than the hares 
 and rabbits; and when they caught any, they turned them out to be
hunted in the presence of the white cat, and a thousand cunning tricks 
 were played. Nor were the birds in safety; for the monkey made nothing 
 of climbing up the trees, with the white cat on his back, to the nests 
 of the young eagles. When the chase was over, the whole retinue 
 returned to the palace; the white cat immediately exchanged her 
 dragoon ' s cap for the veil, and sat down to supper with the prince, 
 who, being very hungry, ate heartily, and afterwards partook with her 
 of the most delicious wines. He then was conducted to his chamber as 
 before, and wakened in the morning to renew the same sort of life, 
 which day after day became so pleasant to him that he no longer 
 thought of anything but of pleasing the sweet little creature who 
 received him so courteously: accordingly, every day was spent in new 
 amusements. The prince had almost forgotten his country and relations, 
 and sometimes even regretted that he was not a cat, so great was his 
 affection for his mewing companions. 
  
 "Alas!" said he to the white cat, "how will it afflict me to leave 
 you, whom I love so much! Either make yourself a lady, or make me a 
 cat." She smiled at the prince ' s wish, but offered no reply. 
 
brought him into trouble, for the queen, afraid lest he might grow too 
 large for a pet, took advice of dog-doctors, who ordered that he 
 should be fed entirely upon bread, and that very sparingly; so poor 
 Cherry was sometimes nearly starved. 
  
 One day, when they gave him his crust for breakfast, a fancy seized 
 him to go and eat it in the palace-garden; so he took the bread in his 
 mouth, and trotted away towards a stream which he knew, and where he 
 sometimes stopped to drink. But instead of the stream he saw a 
 splendid palace, glittering with gold and precious stones. Entering 
 the doors was a crowd of men and women, magnificently dressed; and 
 within there was singing and dancing, and good cheer of all sorts. 
 Yet, however grandly and gaily the people went in, Cherry noticed that 
 those who came out were pale, thin, ragged, half-naked, covered with 
 wounds and sores. Some of them dropped dead at once; others dragged 
 themselves on a little way and then lay down, dying of hunger, and 
 vainly begged a morsel of bread from others who were entering in--who 
 never took the least notice of them. 
  
 Cherry perceived one woman, who was trying feebly to gather and eat
slave? Who knows how much more wickedness I might not have done to her 
 and others, if heaven ' s justice had not stopped me in time?" 
  
 While he lay thinking and repenting, he heard a window open, and saw 
 Zelia throw out of it a bit of dainty meat. Cherry, who felt hungry 
 enough by this time, was just about to eat it, when the woman to whom 
 he had given his crust snatched him up in her arms. 
  
 "Poor little beast!" cried she, patting him, "every bit of food in 
 that palace is poisoned: you shall not touch a morsel." 
  
 And at the same time the voice in the air repeated again, "Good 
 actions never go unrewarded;" and Cherry found himself changed into a 
 beautiful little white pigeon. He remembered with joy that white was 
 the colour of the Fairy Candide, and began to hope that she was 
 taking him into favour again. 
  
 So he stretched his wings, delighted that he might now have a chance 
 of approaching his fair Zelia. He flew up to the palace-windows, and, 
 finding one of them open, entered and sought everywhere, but he could
After that he began to eat, and said, "Margery, what are you crying 
 for? Brother will be sure to come back. Oh, wife," continued he, "how 
 delicious this food tastes; give me some more." And the more he ate, 
 the more he wanted; and he said, "Give me more, you shall not have any 
 of it; I feel as if it were all mine." And he ate and ate, throwing 
 the bones under the table, till he had finished it all. 
  
 But Margery went to her drawers, and took out of the bottom drawer her 
 best silk handkerchief, and fetched out all the bones from under the 
 table; she tied them up in the silk handkerchief, and took them out of 
 doors, and shed bitter tears over them. Then she laid them under the 
 Juniper-tree in the green grass; and when she had put them there, she 
 felt all at once quite happy, and did not cry any more. 
  
 Soon the Juniper began to move, and the twigs kept dividing and then 
 closing, just as if the tree were clapping its hands for joy. After 
 that there went up from it a sort of mist, and right in the centre of 
 the mist burnt a fire, and out of the fire flew a beautiful bird, who, 
 singing deliciously, rose up high in the air. When he was out of 
 sight, the Juniper-tree was just as it had been before, only the
and have a child, and he grow up, and we, perhaps, send him down to 
 this cellar to tap the beer, the hatchet which has been left sticking 
 up there may fall on his head, and so kill him: and do you not think 
 this is enough to weep about?" 
  
 "Now," said Hans, "more prudence than this is not necessary for my 
 housekeeping; because you are such a clever Alice, I will have you for 
 my wife." And, taking her hand, he led her home, and celebrated the 
 wedding directly. 
  
 After they had been married a little while, Hans said one morning, 
 "Wife, I will go out to work and earn some money; do you go into the 
 field and gather some corn wherewith to make bread." 
  
 "Yes," she answered, "I will do so, dear Hans." And when he was gone, 
 she cooked herself a nice mess of pottage to take with her. As she 
 came to the field she said to herself, "What shall I do? Shall I cut 
 first, or eat first? Ay, I will eat first!" Then she ate up the 
 contents of her pot, and when it was finished, she thought to herself, 
 "Now, shall I reap first or sleep first? Well, I think I will have a
nap!" and so she laid herself down amongst the corn, and went to 
 sleep. 
  
 Meanwhile Hans returned home, but Alice did not come, and so he said, 
 "Oh, what a prudent Alice I have! She is so industrious that she does 
 not even come home to eat anything." By-and-by, however, evening came 
 on, and still she did not return; so Hans went out to see how much 
 she had reaped; but, behold, nothing at all, and there lay Alice fast 
 asleep among the corn! So home he ran very fast, and brought a net 
 with little bells hanging on it, which he threw over her head while 
 she still slept on. When he had done this, he went back again and shut 
 to the house-door, and, seating himself on his stool, began working 
 very industriously. 
  
 At last, when it was nearly dark, the Clever Alice awoke, and as soon 
 as she stood up, the net fell all over her hair, and the bells jingled 
 at every step she took. This quite frightened her, and she began to 
 doubt whether she were really Clever Alice, and said to herself, "Am I 
 she, or am I not?" This was a question she could not answer, and she 
 stood still a long while considering about it. At last she thought she
