 The estimation which this firm ' s products command throughout throughout the breadth and length of this country must be at all times accepted as the true and proper measure of their established renown and as a house in which there are characterised the best traditions of the wine trade during half-a-century. 
 Messrs. 
 Ballantine maintain a commercial commercial standing and prestige of which no development of modern trade competition can dispossess them. 
 To Messrs. 
 Ballantine rich and poor are alike indebted for many of the trading systems which have simplified and cheapened the acquisition of pure liquors at prices far beneath those that formerly rendered genuine highclass highclass wines and spirits prohibitive. 
 In no branch of lan ti n e , being made from the finest ingredients ; and possessing the real Schiedam flavour, it is not only more palatable than what is usually to be obtained, obtained, but will be found more beneficial beneficial when required for medicinal purposes. 
 purposes. 
 their comprehensive mercantile operations operations has this fact been more strikingly illustrated than in the buying of clarets, clarets, which, for over twenty years, have constituted a leading leading feature of their business. 
 With facilities of import only attainable by the existence of commercial foresight foresight and capital not open to many firms, Messrs. 
 As Cigar Merchants Merchants Messrs. 
 Ballantine have led the way in the supply of high-class cigars at a reasonable reasonable price. 
 Ballantine have, from first to last, taken a bold initiative initiative in this direction, stopping short of no enterprise likely to prove profitable to their constituents and frequently frequently securing the entire produce of an estate or vineyard vineyard on the most favourable terms. 
 In Glasgow they hold a stock of these wines estimated at some 10,000 dozens, and of these exquisite dinner wines the greatest quantity arriving in the metropolis passes through their hands. 
 No house in the trade has ever superseded the firm of Messrs. 
 Ballantine in this one direction, and the special list of clarets and champagnes issued by the firm affords an insight into the varieties of a wine collection collection that exhausts the entire gamut of production from the most inexpensive Medoc to the richest and most magnificent brand of Lafite at 120/- per dozen. 
 The accretion of prices from 50/- to more than twice that sum represents a corresponding degree 01 excellence and merit thoroughly appreciable by connoisseurs connoisseurs as well as by the less cultured palate. 
 To those who can afford so plutocratic a price as half-a-sovereign per bottle for the genuine port wines of other days, the Until 1S70 Edinburgh was the only centre of the firm ' s business, being that in which it was first inaugurated inaugurated over sixty years ago by Mr. 
 Geo. 
 Ballantine, Sen. 
 , who remained at the head of its affairs until shortly before his death in 1891.
The business is now controlled by his two sons, Messrs. 
 George &amp; Archibald Ballantine, the latter of whom directs more particular attention to the management of the Edinburgh establishment establishment (situated at the North Bridge), while the Glasgow business is in the hands of Mr. 
 George Ballantine. 
 The premises, situated in Union Street, are a very imposing feature of that thoroughfare, presenting presenting a magnificent window frontage and being arranged and appointed on a degree of refinement and taste appropriate to the high character of the business. 
 The abundant resources of the house are fully represented in the repleteness of the stores and wine vaults, and everything is here preserved under splendid conditions. 
 From Granton, and from Maxwell Street, Glasgow, the firm command a large wholesale and The Grand Tour 352 nearly a thousand feet above the sea, from which we view fair Loch Tay and Ben Lawers. 
 On the way, we have passed a hotel that anglers and other sportsmen know well. 
 Killin, 4 miles off, is a village that sits in the heart of an enchanting region. 
 Down wild Glen Ogle, we quickly emerge far above Loch Earn, and see its embosomed embosomed waters. 
 At its hotel we can alight, or, if we choose, skirt its wooded margin by coach to Crieff and Perth. 
 A little further homewards we pass within a short distance of the Braes of Balquhidder, where the reader of Scott may find located the graves of Rob Roy, his wife, and sons. 
 BEN MORE. 
 Past Strathyre and along the Pass of Leny, with pre- As we climb the hill, we gain a clear view of Loch Linnhe and the hills on the Island of Mull ; and then in succession we pass Dunstaffnage Castle, Loch Etive, and Taynuilt, with Ben Cruachan lifting itself aloft ahead of us. 
 We skirt the base of the mountain, along the Pass of Brander, beside the Awe, till we catch sight of richly-studded Loch Awe and reach the village of Dalmally, where the hotel invites the tourist to remain. 
 Up the steep and bleak strath we climb to Tyndrum, till we see Ben More and Ben A ' an showing their tw7in peaks in striking grandeur. 
 At Crianarich Crianarich we can diverge, and cross by coach to Loch Lomond, and back to Glasgow. 
 Skirting Ben More and Loch Dochart, our train drags us up to Killin, LOCH ECK. 
 Historical Glasgow. 
 14 humbly to join with Renfrew, Dumbarton, and its old royal rival and neighbour, Rutherglen, in sending a single member to speak its many-voiced mind in St. 
 Stephen ' s.
to dissociate from their minds all the usual ideas that a great iron founding establishment usually suggests. 
 The mass of grimy and dilapidated-looking buildings, the house of smoke and stifling fumes, in whose lurid gloom demonaic-looking Cyclops move to-and-fro, may meet the ordinary idea of a foundry, but finds no illustration in this great representative concern, ft would be difficult difficult indeed to imagine from a merely external survey to what branch of enterprise the ornate and attractive buildings of the Saracen Foundry appertained. 
 Cover- monument of the taste of the firm. 
 Twenty years ago the site of the Mansion House and grounds of Sheriff Allison, the historian, were acquired, and thereon were erected the present Works. 
 The founder, the late Walter Macfarlane, personally directed the great enterprise, which, since his decease, has been carried on with the same successful spirit and enterprise that characterized the firm during his lifetime. 
 The members of the present firm have all been in a sense born and bred in the business, while the old lines and reputation are jealously maintained by the present head of the firm, Mr. 
 Walter Macfarlane, nephew and namesake of the late founder, ing a square of some fourteen acres in area, regularly and handsomely designed, and presenting a clean cut and unsoiled aspect, it required an effort of the imagination imagination to conceive that this is the great centre of one of the most important branches of the Glasgow ironworking ironworking industry and the source of supply of useful and artistic foundings for all parts of the civilised and, we might add, the uncivilised world. 
 Yet such is the case ; nor, on second thoughts, is it to be wondered at that the firm, in whose productions the artistic element is supreme, supreme, should embody the same element in the architecture architecture of the foundry itself. 
 The associations of the firm with the Glasgow iron-founding trade reach back half a century. 
 Founded at first in Saracen Lane, the rapidly expanding enterprise soon found a second location in the architecturally splendid range of buildings, buildings, in Washington Street, still standing as a striking The interior of the Saracen Foundry does not belie the promise of the exterior. 
 Entering by an imposing and spacious entrance the visitor finds himself in a range of handsome offices, about 260 feet in length, and fitted up in the most exquisite modern style. 
 Adjoining are the palatial showrooms, the whole covering about threequarters threequarters of an acre. 
 Passing through these, department after department of the spacious foundries and workshops workshops may be visited till the mind becomes bewildered at the multiplicity of operations being carried on beneath the ten acres of roof that covers the executive portion of the Saracen Foundry. 
 Some idea of the magnitude of the endless variety of castings undertaken by the firm may be gained from the fact that their catalogue extends to some two thousand quarto imperial pages and contains contains six thousand illustrations. 
 The firm ' s castings are well known all over the world as sharp, clean, and Commercial Glasgow. 
 57 J. 
 &amp; B. 
 STEVENSON, Cranstonhill and Plantation Bakeries, Glasgow ; and Battersea Bakeries, London, S. 
 W. 
 That magnificent spirit of enterprise in the industrial arena, which in these days of busy progress has contributed so manifestly to the national advancement, is in no single department of trade more thoroughly exemplified than in that of the bread baker, and preeminent preeminent among the names of colossal firms that have added distinction to an invaluable business must be mentioned the world-renowned establishments conducted conducted both in London and Glasgow under the style of Messrs.
Buchanan naturally became his successor. 
 His first concern was to alter and completely modernize the premises, and, as they now stand, they can command the most favourable criticism. 
 The frontage is large and handsome, including four brilliant show windows to the ground floor warehouse. 
 The interior of the main shop is beautifully fitted up in polished woods, conveniently shelved all round, and tastefully relieved at intervals with handsome wall cases, floor stands, etc. 
 Both in the window and shop dressing the hand of an expert is visible, and the whole appearance of the concern speaks plainly the spirited character of the management. 
 The stock shown, or held in bulk in the immense stores and cellars to the rear, is too varied to bear enumeration here. 
 Among the groceries the place of honour is held by the fine and favourite teas, all of the freshest and best selection and representing the best growths of China, India, and Ceylon. 
 Provisions may be designated the speciality of the warehouse, and include, inter alia, Belfast and home-cured hams (bearing world-repute brands), Wiltshire bacon, home and foreign cheese in variety ,-fresh dairy produce, and a hundred and one varieties of tinned meats, fish, etc. 
 , from boar ' s head CRICHTON ' S RESTAURANT, 4, Argyle Street, Rothesay. 
 There are few more popular establishments in this Queen of Northern watering places than that which, under the title of Crichton ' s Gridiron Restaurant, is familiar to every visitor to Rothesay as one of the best managed houses of entertainment to be met with on the coast. 
 Mr. 
 Alexander Crichton, who now conducts the establishment, has had a long and varied experience as a restaurateur and chef, having served in the latter capacity for many years to His Grace the Duke of p\rgyle at Inverary Castle, a position he relinquished in order to take an appointment as chef on Messrs. 
 Donald Currie ' s well-known boats, afterwards joining the Orient Line Company to fulfil similar duties; also on George Smiths &amp; Son ' s well-known steamers, City Line to India ; and it may be mentioned that this gentleman still undertakes engagements of this character during the winter season, when business is quiet in Rothesay. 
 The restaurant premises at 4, Argyle Street, are situated facing the Esplanade and Bay, and comprise well-appointed shop with single wdndow, displaying, with attractive taste, a tempting array of delicacies, and in the rear is the handsome dining saloon containing ample accommodation for eighty guests. 
 The establishment is thoroughly well equipped throughout with every modern convenience for a business of this description, enabling the proprietor to undertake, on the shortest notice, the purveying of marriage dinners and suppers and other social functions for any number of guests. 
 The daily menu of the restaurant includes a varied selection of soups, fish, joints, entrees, pastries, jellies, &amp;c, served in the highest style at town prices, a staff of neat attendants being employed for this department under the personal supervision of the principal, whose thoroughly practical experience ensures perfection in every detail of the cuisine, service, and appointments of this well-ordered dining saloon. 
 The establishment is widely patronised in the season by tourists and visitors bent on enjoying the beautiful and picturesque scenery of the district, with whom the proprietor has, by his genial courtesy, firmly established himself in popular and thoroughly well-deserved favour. 
 In conclusion, we would strongly recommend to those of our readers intending a tour through the Highlands a visit to Crichton ' s as a satisfactory solution of that all-important question to holiday-makers — to Mr. 
 Alex. 
 Crichton will, owing to increased business, probably shortly have to occupy larger premises.
In 1872 this was completed by the addition of what is now the female department. 
 Ten years after the erection of the first house it was resolved by Mrs. 
 Crichton toerect the second house,  '  Built and en- dowed solely from the funds of the late James Crichton, Esq. 
 , of Friars '  Carse, and dedicated to his memory by his widow, '  which was opened with 200 beds, gradually increased by repeated extensions of the building until now the full number accommodated is 400, mainly pauper lunatics of the counties of Dumfries, Kircud- bright, and Wigtown, and private patients of the less affluent class, the total number of patients on the 1st of June being The fnstitution is situated amidst the most charming surroundings, standing on the side of the valley of the River Nith, commanding splendid views of the beautiful scenery in the locality extending as far as the Solway Firth, and centred in the midst of lovely pleasure grounds laid out in walks and drives and interspersed with flower beds, the whole forming one of the most picturesque spots in Scotland. 
 The grounds also afford ample facilities for cricket, lawn tennis, croquet, and other outdoor sports, whilst carriage exercise is provided for by a well-appointed stud of horses and carriages under the charge of steady and experienced coachmen. 
 The main building presents a handsome and attractive frontage, and the interior is decorated and embellished in elegant and artistic taste. 
 Every provision is made for the moral and physical welfare of the inmates, who are entertained by weekly concerts, dances, and frequent lectures, readings, theatricals, &amp;c, and there are reading and billiard rooms and other sources of indoor recreation. 
 Work is also found for those patients, physically capable, in the new farm buildings now in course of erection, and the trustees and directors having recently decided on boring an artesian well for obtaining an additional supply of pure water have just completed this work at a cost of In 18S9 the trustees and directors, in order to specially mark the jubilee year, resolved to erect a handsome church in memory of Mrs. 
 Crichton, the foundress, and for this purpose plans were prepared, and the work is now being proceeded with. 
 The Institution has, since it was opened, been under the superinten- dence of some of the most distinguished physicians ot the age, the first of whom, Dr. 
 W. 
 A. 
 F. 
 Browne, was celebrated as the pioneer in the inauguration of more enlightened and humane methods of treatment for the insane, and on this gentleman ' s resignation in 1857, on his appointment as a Commissioner in Lunacy for Scotland, the charge of the asylum was committed to the care of the late Dr. 
 James Gilchrist, who was suc- ceeded, on his retirement, in 1879, by Dr. 
 James Adam, on whose resignation, in 1883, Dr. 
 James Rutherford, the present Medical Superintendent, received the appoint- ment. 
 This gentleman ' s qualifications for this respon- sible and onerous office are evidenced by his high pro- fessional attainments as Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, Edinburgh ; Foreign Associate of the Medico- Psychological Association of Paris; Corres- ponding Member of the Italian Psychological Associa- tion of Milan ;• Honorary Member of the Society of Mental Medicine of Belgium, &amp;c. 
 The terms of admission to the Institution range in scale from to per annum, according to the social status and requirements of the patient. 
 The asylum is maintained not for pecuniary gain, but entirely for benevolent objects, as intended by the generous foundress.
Here, too, is generally a number of elegant vehicles ready for despatch, or, it might be, lingering bashfully for a little, before dashing into the great world where their destiny lies. 
 This workshop extends in a wing towards the left, and adjoining is the smiths '  shop with a double forge. 
 Here we became acquainted with the fact that the whole steel and iron work of the various machines is forged and finished on the premises, down to the springs themselves. 
 themselves. 
 The perfection of design and finish displayed by the productions of the smithy surprised us not a little — the lightness and elegance of the iron and steel work of the various machines we inspected passing all praise. 
 Ascending to the second floor, we found ourselves ourselves in the paint shop, where several vehicles were undergoing the indispensable ornamentation. 
 Some had already received the regulation number of coats, and were standing glittering in all the glory of shining copal or japan. 
 A Victoria here, exquisitely designed and finished, spoke well for the skill of the establishment establishment ; but even more interesting were the examples of the species dog-cart. 
 One of these, with bent felloes to the wheels, ash framing, and walnut panels, and fitted, moreover, with a sliding tiger ' s seat, was far the best machine of the kind we have ever seen. 
 But the ingenuity of Mr. 
 MTntosh goes further, and, by a new mode of suspension, the body is rendered almost independent independent of the up and down motion of the shafts or the inequalities of the roadway. 
 No moie comfortable machine of the kind could possibly be made, and the improvement in the common design deserves every commendation. 
 Here, too, landaus, waggonettes, and other favourite vehicles were to be seen in various stages of painting and varnishing. 
 The floor above is used as a timber store and seasoning loft, aud contains a selection of well-chosen hard and fancy woods. 
 What is most surprising, no machinery is used, the whole work being carried out by hand. 
 The heads, however, of the different departments are experts in their own line, and the ingenious proprietor supplies the rest. 
 The house is principally engaged in turning out orders for Scottish patrons, and does occasional work for England. 
 If this notice shall have the happiness to further make known the merit of Mr. 
 M ' Intosh ' s establishment, its purpose will be attained, as we have no wish to coin terms of flattery, however deserved, but rather to point out to our readers the merits of a business whose light it would be a pity to see hid under a bushel. 
  '  T2 318 Commercial Auchterarder.
The establishment possesses all the various modern conveniences conveniences with the seclusion and refinement of a home. 
 The substantial structure contains a large number of rooms, each one of which is admirably appointed and furnished. 
 The dining, sitting, smoke, and private apartments are both cheerful and comfortable, while the bedrooms possess all the advantages of perfect sanitation coupled with delightful and far-reaching views from the windows over a magnificent range of country. 
 The cuisine is liberal and served with due regard to the most sensitive taste, whilst the wines and spirits are selected with the utmost discrimination from the most reliable sources. 
 One of the most important characteristics of the Luib Hotel is the moderate nature of the tariff, to which abundant testimony is borne by a large circle of patrons who have from time to time recorded their satisfaction in the visitors '  book of the establishment. 
 establishment. 
 The visitors staying at this hotel are permitted to enjoy, free of charge, the privilege of fishing on five miles of the River Dochart, which is admittedly one of the best salfnon and trout streams in the West of Scotland. 
 There are also splendid facilities afforded for trout fishing on Loch Dochart and Loch Nubhair, boats being provided free to the guests sojourning at the hotel. 
 We need hardly add that in the vicinity of Luib are to be found many places of historical and romantic interest, including Rob Roy ' s house, immortalised to fame in the splendid novel by the Both postal and telegraphic arrangements are very perfect, and, in short, there is no obstacle in the way of a visitor passing a most enjoyable sojourn in the district. 
 This comfortable little hostelry has recently been acquired by Mr. 
 Donald McNaughton (a brother of the late Mr. 
 Robert McNaughton, the former proprietor), who is very ably assisted in the management by his wife, who personally personally attends to the comforts of her guests, making her house home from while Mr. 
 McNaughton attends to the visitors '  comforts and pleasures out of doors. 
 His genial courtesy and thorough business aptitude give promise of highly successful results in his present sphere of activity. 
 B. 
 &amp; M. 
 McNAB, Family Bread and Biscuit Bakers, Shortbread Manufacturers to Her Majesty the Queen, Callander. 
 The above-named business establishment represents one of the oldest bakery concerns to be met with in the Western Highlands of Scotland, having been founded nearly half-a-century ago and conducted during the whole of that period with an energy and enterprise which, in the present day, have culminated in a most valuable connection extending over the entire range of the United Kingdom and embracing among its patrons all classes of society from Her Most Gracious Majesty downwards. 
 The premises, situate in the main thoroughfare of Callander, occupy a neat single -fronted shop fitted up in a thoroughly practical style. 
 The Commercial Glasgow.
Robert M ' Cuaig, Proprietor. 
 This popular establishment was inaugurated about thirty years ago by Mr. 
 James Young, an Ex-Inland Revenue Supervisor, and has been controlled by the present enterprising and accomplished owner for the last eighteen years. 
 The hotel faces the Bay, and is a handsome and substantial structure of the solid type of architecture, characteristic of the last age, preserving the same features in the heavy mantles, strong doors, and fine carved work of the interior. 
 The ground floor is appropriated appropriated to the buffet, sitting rooms, and culinary departments, and the first floor to dining and commercial rooms. 
 Part of the first floor, however, and the whole of the third flat are devoted to bedrooms, the total accommodation being sufficient for about a hundred guests. 
 Further accommodation is provided in a large canvas-covered saloon, facing the Bay, for dining extra visitors, when a renders it necessary, or when large excursion parties have to be catered for. 
 The striking feature of the place throughout is its comfort and home-likeness, a feature now almost banished from the hotel world. 
 Mr. 
 M ' Cuaig himself is the good genius of the establishment, and possesses the rare faculty of hosting in a remarkable degree. 
 Knowing how to make his guests at home, and doing so, he is also indefatigable in providing for their creature comforts. 
 The cuisine of Lloyd ' s Hotel is famous far and wide, being only excelled by the reputation of its cellars, which contain one of the finest and most complete selections of rare beverages in the Kingdom. 
 The attendance — thanks to the large and select staff maintaine maintaine — is prompt and courteous, and the tariff, by general admission, is the most moderate in these parts, The popular and widely-known proprietor has his heart in the business, and of it him it might be said Hospes nascitur non Beyond the limits of his local business Mr M ' Guiag is a general caterer for Argyleshire, and particularly for the Volunteers, he himself being an enthusiastic citizen For fifteen years he has creditably provided for the summer encampments in Argyleshire, and what this means will be understood when we state that this year he is responsible for the mess of some fifteen hundred men at Inverary, certainly no small undertaking. 
 But whatever he undertakes he undertakes with his and no man is better known in the West than he, not even the Macallum More himself. 
 In Campbeltown, especially, his name is a household word, and the visitor or business man who knows not the genial proprietor of Lloyd ' s must be a new Rip Van Winkle. 
 The Grand Tour. 
 349 powder-mills stand at a safe distance from human habitations. 
 In front of us a low, flat Island, Inch Marnock, with its old Chapel, is lost in the remoter mountains of Arran, dark Goat Fell leaping 3,000 feet up into the sky. 
 we get on board the steamer bound for Oban. 
 Now we have a taste of the Atlantic, broken only by the Western Islands, and a view of the wilder, lonelier, sterner cliffs and mountains of Jura, Mull, Scarba, and Easdale.
A noticeable feature of the place is the number of women, or, rather, girls, employed in several of the operations, and it was evident that their taste and lightness of touch qualified them in an especial manner for their employment. 
 Steam power is used throughout, and the heat of the boiler house is ingeniously used for drying the wood by means of open floors above. 
 It is important to note that this operation is thoroughly carried out, and the material goes to the cabinet-makers in the driest, as well as in the best seasoned, condition. 
 The production of the Messrs. 
 Gardiner is of the highest class both for design and workmanship, and covers the whole range of dining room, drawing room, and parlour furniture. 
 Both modern and previous periods are well represented in the stock shown on the top flat of the main building ; and the skill displayed in original work or in reproducing the types of the famous periods of art, as perfected in different European centres, is of the first order. 
 Chairs and sofas are noted specialities of the firm, but their goods in suites are no less worthy of commendation. 
 Messrs. 
 J. 
 &amp; J. 
 Gardiner manufacture principally for the Glasgow market, and the splendid connexion they control there is the best evidence that could be desired of their high standing in the industry. 
 The working staff numbers 46 hands and is personally directed by Mr. 
 Gardiner. 
 He is a practical man and has had a life-long experience of the business. 
 His accurate knowledge of its modern requirements and his skill in meeting them have been the great secrets of his success, success, and account for the progress of this factory from its humble beginning to its present honourable and distinguished position. 
 Commercial Glasgow. 
 212 JAMES DALY &amp; CO. 
 , General Drapers and Outfitters, Tron House, 60 — 68, Trongate, Glasgow. 
 Glasgow affords few more notable examples of what can be achieved in the industrial domain by w7ell-directed enterprise and indomitable perseverance than is afforded by the wTell-known firm of drapers and outfitters, Messrs. 
 James Daly and Co.
, of the Tron House, Trongate. 
 Its career, from the date of its inception in 1846, has been one unbroken record of prosperity and progress, and it cannot fail at the present day to be a gratifying subject of contemplation to Mr. 
 James Daly, sen. 
 , the founder of the establishment, that he has succeeded so conspicuously in creating a business that is so unques- commanding windows on the ground floor. 
 Entering the premises from the Trongate, the ribbon, lace, and flower departments first attract attention. 
 All leading styles and newest varieties in shade and pattern of ribbon are abundantly en evidence. 
 The display of lace reveals some very superior material and some exquisitely old patterns. 
 In flowers there is an endless variety, many of the specimens displayed possessing remarkable features of resemblance to their natural prototypes. 
 In the feather department a great variety is displayed ; while in the adjoining sections, devoted to silk scarves tionably a great factor in the commercial system of Glasgow. 
 The foundations of the business were laid at No. 
 96, Trongate, in premises which were known to ancient Glaswegians as Mein ' s and now occupied occupied by a branch establishment of the Clydesdale Banking Banking Company. 
 The present premises of the firm are of very great magnitude and rare attractiveness. 
 We do not recollect in the Scottish kingdom a more elaborate specimen of pure Scottish Baronial devoted to business purposes than the splendid corner presents. 
 The entire structure is in admirable keeping, and renders the establishment one of great architectural attractiveness, the effect of which is greatly enhanced by the magnificent magnificent display of goods shown in the eleven lofty and and embroideries, all the items presented are characterised characterised by admirable taste in selection and excellence of material. 
 Passing over the boot and shoe department, which contains a most comprehensive assortment of goods, we pass to the domestic and household drapery sections, and here will be found an unsurpassed stock of bleached and unbleached cottons, napery, English and Scotch blankets, iron bedsteads, bedding, quilts, curtains, curtains, and other furnishing requisites of the household. 
 The hosiery, glove, shirt, and umbrella departments also well merit notice by reason of the superior character of the goods displayed, but as it is impossible within the limits at our disposal to enter minutely into a detailed review of their several excellences, we must pass to Commercial Campbeltown. 
 269 MR. 
 DANIEL MATHEWS, Cabinet Maker, Upholsterer, and General House Furnisher, Insurance and Shipping Agent, etc. 
 , Back Street and Bolgam Street, Campbeltown. 
 It is no easy matter for a stranger to obtain a footing in a small town, and when he not only does so, but in a comparatively short period finds himself at the head of the most important and flourishing concern of its kind ever known there, he is obviously a man of no common parts.
Let us glance now hastily at what we may find to attract us in the Venice of the so that we may survey more particularly at our leisure the points of great importance. 
 This large city, if dingy with smoke and often veiled in tawny-coloured fogs that London cannot rival, is solidly built in freestone. 
 Its streets are placed at right angles ; its houses regularly numbered numbered ; and the names of the streets are very clearly HISTORICA GLIMPSES. 
 boy appeared on the scene, and as time rolled on, the child took his place on the school benches of the worthy man beside the other pupils. 
 Little Kentigern, as he came to be called, was soon widely known for his wordly shrewdness and book-lore, and he began also to earn much sanctity in the country-side for wonders wrought by him through faith and prayer. 
 He had tamed a little robin to come and perch on his hand whenever he whistled for it; but rough playmates, in handling the little creature, deprived it of life. 
 Then the gentle boy-saint by a miracle brought the poor bird to life again. 
 Many are the tales by which a credulous and child - like age attests the piety and beneficence of one. 
 who, after all, must have been a centre of genial influence to the rude tribes around him. 
 We are told that he once let the fire go out which should have been ready for matins in the cruel winter mornings. 
 Catching up a dry twig, it was at once lit, while in his hand, by a spark from Heaven, and so the wrath of man was turned to veneration. 
 Glasgow is essentially a modern city, and its Institutions, with the exception, perhaps, of the University, have a thoroughly modern and democratic flavour about them. 
 Yet the seat of St. 
 Mungo can claim some respect for its hoary antiquity, dating, as it does, back to the middle of the sixth century, 500 years before the Norman Conquest. 
 Traces of the old mediæval life of the town are now few and far between, and modern zeal for improvement has long ago swept away many interesting links of connection with the days of yore which might well have been spared to the lovers of all quaint remnants of antiquity. 
 The old Cathedral (as we shall have occasion more particularly to show) presents, w7ithin the accretions of its own grand structure, records of many centuries of change and progress, from the dim period when the monk Kentigern came to missionise the rude and barbarous Kelts, and to make his cell by the wooded heights close to the quiet Molendinar, where trout were wont to gieam and salmon merrily to leap. 
 When Queen Langueth lost her wedding ring, her husband doubted her fidelity, so she was at last cast into prison. 
 Pitying her, the holy man sent someone to fish in the river, who at length drew forth a salmon, within whose belly the missing ring was discovered in the presence of St. 
 Kentigern. 
 So the lady was shown to be pure, — how is not quite so clear as might be — and the King ' s jealous suspicions were allayed.
The birth of St. 
 Kentigern, or St. 
 Mungo, as may be gathered from the old monkish legends, was on this wise. 
 Once upon a time, his mother Taneu was at sea, when a great tempest arose, and after much tossing on the deep, the ship that bore her was dashed, an utter wreck, upon the shore. 
 Hard by the spot where the catastrophe took place, a pupil of the great St. 
 Palladius, whose own name was St. 
 Servanus, patiently taught a few boys their letters, in a little school, at Culross. 
 Seeing that the woman greatly needed help in her delicate condition, the good man kindly gave her such shelter and comfort as his poor cell might afford. 
 For long after that a yearly procession took place, at Culross, in memory of good St. 
 Serf, or Servanus. 
 By and by a bright little If anyone doubts these pretty, old tales, it is enough to point them to the old seals of the Bishops, or to the Municipal Arms of the city, where, as every child can tell you, there you behold the tree to which the twig belonged, the robin-red-breast very like a jackdaw, the salmon with the very identical lost ring in its mouth which the poor Queen broke her pure little heart over Commercial Dumfries. 
 292 JOHN CALLANDER, Family Grocer and Provision Merchant, 141, High Street, Dumfries. 
 The commercial enterprise of Dumfries in its retail aspect is adequately represented by Mr. 
 John Callander, whose widely appreciated establishment fully merits conspicuous recognition in this work. 
 The business was commenced in 1869 by Mr. 
 Callander at 141, High Street, and to this day occupies the position of one of the leading houses in the trade in this district. 
 The premises comprise a handsome and commodious double-fronted shop, with large plate glass windows, one of which is devoted to the display of high-class groceries and the other to best quality provisions. 
 The interior is well appointed with excellent taste, and provides convenient facilities for stocking the various goods held by the proprietor. 
 Amongst those we note a well-selected assortment of the choicest growths of new season ' s teas, blended with discriminate judgment and unrivalled in the district for purity, flavour, and strength ; coffees of the finest quality, fruits, spices, preserves, pickles, and a great variety of household requirements of every description. 
 The provision side shows a splendid stock of hams, bacon, butter, cheese, and other provisions, specially selected for this trade from the leading produce markets in the Kingdom.
Mr. 
 Chicken is himself an influential and highly respected gentleman, a Member of the School Board and of the Police Commission for Maxwelltown. 
 He is very popular with all classes, and enjoys the esteem of a host of friends in business and social circles. 
 JAMES S. 
 DONNAN, Furnishing Ironmonger, Queensberry Street, Dumfries. 
 The very fine business of James S. 
 Donnan, furnishing ironmonger, was established ten years ago by Mr. 
 Donnan at the present really handsome premises in Queensberry Street, consisting of a very large threestorey threestorey building, upon the ground floor of which is a splendid and perfectly-appointed shop running back to a distance of forty-five feet, with magnificent plate-glass windows extending along the whole front. 
 Here is displayed displayed a ve-y large and valuable stock of furnishing ironmongery of the latest designs and finest quality, electroplate goods, table cutlery, and other similar ware of the very best class. 
 The second floor comprises a very large and splendidly-arranged showroom, where Mr. 
 Donnan has set out his first-class goods in the furnishing department, all of the best description and highly-finished workmanship. 
 Over this there is still another showroom, where a very considerable stock of iron and brass bedsteads of various sizes and patterns is kept to suit the taste and pockets of all who may be in want of this very necessary piece of furniture. 
 At the rear of the premises proper Mr. 
 Donnan has very extensive storerooms measuring from front to back one hundred and forty feet, so enabling him to keep constantly in hand a very large and varied stock of ironmongery and other goods of the several descriptions descriptions before mentioned. 
 He also has a very fine selection of marble and slate mantels, stoves, &amp;c, &amp;c, and combines with his other business that of furnishing builder and agricultural ironmonger. 
 In these different branches of manufacture the business, which he has so successfully carried on for some years past, possesses a very wide and firmly-established connection, thus testifying testifying to the ability and energy of its courteous proprietor. 
 proprietor. 
 Commercial Glasgow. 
 115 FREDERICK BRABY &amp; Co. 
 (Limited), Eclipse Iron Works, Petershill Road; and 47 to 51, St.
Their special reputation with British cabinet makers is something to be proud of, not to speak of the important part they have played in building up the industry in Beith. 
 In conjunction with its cabinet and chair manufacturers they have carried the name of that prosperous town and the pleasant valley of the Garnock to all quarters of the globe, and added a new and brilliant chapter to the history of British industry. 
 MESSRS. 
 HUNTER, HAMILTON, &amp; CRAWFORD, Calder Cabinet and Chair  ' Works, Lochwinnoch, N. 
 B The above firm hold a leading position as cabinet and chair makers in this district, and carry on the industry on a large scale and with the most flattering reputation and success. 
 The business has been in existence for ten years, and is conducted under very favourable conditions in the Calder Works. 
 The premises cover half an acre, and are entirely modern in their construction and equipment. 
 A large factory of five floors serves for the accommodation of the several departments. 
 The sawing and shaping appliances are conveniently located on the ground floor and are driven by a steam engine of twenty-horse power. 
 Several of the machines now in use in the trade are of special construction ; and the plant of the above firm well illustrates the improvement that has taken place in labour-saving appliances. 
 Above this department are two floors devoted to cabinet and chair making, a third appropriated to polishing, upholstering, etc. 
 , while the top flat contains the important carving department. 
 A portion of the premises serves for packing and dispatch and there is also a suitable range of offices. 
 A noticeable noticeable feature of the Calder Works is the large quantity of cabinet woods undergoing the long seasoning process which is necessary to fit them for the workshop ; and to this important matter of seasoning, no less than to the selection of the woods themselves, the firm devote particular attention. 
 Chairs of all kinds — plain or elaborately carved — are the principal product, though general cabinet work is also carried on extensively. 
 The firm enjoy a special reputation for their ship chairs, and are the principal makers of this class of goods in Scotland. 
 Both frame and finished work is turned out for the trade, and uniformly of the finest quality. 
 Messrs. 
 Hunter, Hamilton, and Crawford command a large business with the principal buyers of the United Kingdom, and rank among the foremost manufacturers manufacturers of Scotch cabinet furniture. 
 PETER WATSON, Wine Merchant and Italian  ' Warehouseman, Pierhead, Largs.
This is an honour to be proud of, and speaks well for the skill of Dumfries craftsmen. 
 Mr. 
 Fallas has in no way suffered the high standing of the business to be lost, and has ably maintained and enhanced it. 
 He commands a connection of the first order both with home and foreign customers, and receives, we need not say, not a few repeat orders. 
 He is an excellent man of business and is highly esteemed on all hands. 
 HUGH RODGER, Wholesale and Retail Glass and China Merchant, 129, High Street, Dumfries. 
 The rapid development of art institutions, schools of design, and other facilities for educating popular taste in the direction of refinement in the surroundings of even the humblest households has led to a corresponding corresponding demand for articles having some pretention to artistic design, and in no trade is this fact more apparent than the glass and china industry. 
 This department of activity is adequately represented in Dumfries by Mr. 
 Hugh Rodger, of 129, High Street, a visit to whose attractive establishment will amply confirm the marked progress in artistic excellence suggested in our prefatory sentences. 
 The business conducted by this gentleman is of old-established standing, having been founded in 1869 by Mr. 
 James Rodger, who was succeeded by the present proprietor in 18S4. 
 The premises are of commodious commodious proportions, comprising handsome shop extending extending 70 feet to the rear, fitted throughout with excellent taste, and fully provided with the necessary conveniences for displaying the immense stock to the best advantage. 
 The windows form an attractive feature of the establishment, establishment, and the upper part of the building is also utilised as show rooms, of which there are four in number, stocked to repletion with goods of a useful and ornamental ornamental character. 
 The stock embraces a large and varied assortment of elegantly designed dinner, tea. 
 dessert, and breakfast services in all the newest styles, selected from the leading makers and unrivalled in quality and price in the district. 
 Toilet sets in all patterns ; glass for table and ornamental purposes, cut in the most artistic designs ; and a great variety of Minton, Wedgwood, and other ware from the principal ceramic manufacturers at home and abroad. 
 A large wholesale and retail trade is done, and has secured an extensive and valuable private connection. 
 The business is conducted throughout with great energy and enterprise under the personal management of the principal, whose unremitting attention is devoted to supplying the requirements of popular taste at prices within the reach of all classes, a system of trading which has been consistently pursued by Mr. 
 Rodger throughout throughout his business career with the most gratifying and successful results, and has gained for the establishment which he so ably conducts a well-deserved measure of substantial patronage and support. 
 THOMAS H.
With the special aptitude and proficiency of a firm versed and skilled in every essential of the art industry exemplified, they carry out the work in the best possible style, and the whole manufactures of the house may be said to illustrate the most exquisite ideals of jewellery-making art. 
 The whole operations of the trade are undertaken on a scale of completeness highly creditable to the versatility of the firm ' s handiwork, and everything that can be produced from silver or gold is subjected to capable treatment. 
 It is the best evidence of the high qualifications of everything emanating from this establishment establishment that its productions command a ready disposal among jewellers whose standing and reputation in the trade must be maintained by the sale of only first-class goods. 
 Mr. 
 Scott has earned the personal esteem of his constituents by his constant anticipation of their requirements, and his assiduous endeavour to maintain the high artistic standard of the industry has been well rewarded in the continued prosperity of the old and influential concern with which his name is identified. 
 Commercial Glasgow. 
 157 ALEXANDER RILEY, 42, Gordon Street, Glasgow, Merchant Tailor, Hosier, Glover, Shirtmaker, Home, Colonial, and Foreign Outfitter The tailoring and outfitting business forms a department department of industrial activity in Glasgow necessarily of very considerable value and importance, and many of the leading city houses engaged therein enjoy a reputation reputation quite as widespread and as well merited as do some of the most representative firms of London, Oxford, or Cambridge. 
 A leading house, possessing more than a local celebrity in this department of industrial industrial enterprise, is that of Mr. 
 Alexander Riley, whose business, established in 1868 under the style of Messrs. 
 Riley, Webster, and Borland, is now conducted under the sole proprietorship of Mr. 
 Riley at his new premises in Gordon Street. 
 The premises are of considerable extent, and consist of a handsome shop, showrooms, and commodious well-appointed and thoroughly ventilated workrooms. 
 It is perhaps hardly necessary to say that each department of the establishment is fitted up in the most convenient manner for the proper and efficient administration of the business. 
 The splendid street facade affords abundant facilities for the adequate display of a stock which, in respect of elegance and superiority, is absolutely absolutely without its peer. 
 So great is the patronage extended to Mr. 
 Riley ' s establishment by his fashionable fashionable clientele, that upwards of eighty skilled salesmen, cutters, journeymen tailors, shirtmakers, and other workpeople find regular employment. 
 Mr. 
 Riley carries out to the letter the instructions of his patrons in the matter of style, but they are the wiser who leave it to Mr. 
 Riley ' s own good taste to fix the various details of cut. 
 fit, style, and general tout ensemble ol the garments required.
; essence of beef (Jib. 
 tins), 1 38 lbs. 
 ; rusks, 38 lbs. 
 The price list issued by the firm includes every kind of dried fruit, jam, biscuits, arrowroot, malt and hops, hams, cheese, and all sorts of candles, soda, soap, dried fish, tinned goods, spices, preserved meats and vegetables, tobacco and cigars, lime juice, wines, and spirits; in fact every article of food which may be required by crew or passengers on ships in any service whatever for long or short voyages. 
 The long experience of the firm in these matters and the vast extent of their business are a sufficient guarantee that the goods supplied are of the finest quality at a reasonable price, and that orders will be executed with that promptitude, despatch, and certainty which is one of the first requirements of such a business. 
 Commercial Glasgow. 
 128 ROBERT SMITH &amp; Co. 
 , Globe, Stove, Grate, and Fender Works, go, 92, and 92. 
 A, Commerce Street, Glasgow. 
 An important factor in the material progress and development of this great commercial centre is to be found in the energetic enterprise which directs to a successful issue undertakings of the representative type conducted by Messrs. 
 Robert Smith &amp; Co. 
 , Stove, Grate, and Fender Manufacturers, to which we have pleasure in directing the attention of our readers. 
 The business was established by the present head of the firm in 1875, and has since that date been extended to the important proportions it has now attained. 
 The premises occupied by the firm are entitled the Globe works, and are centrally situated at 90, 92, and 92A, Commerce Street, having a frontage of 60 feet to that thoroughfare with first-class show windows, and possessing every facility for the display of the goods. 
 The ground floor of the front building, which is four storeys in height, is utilised for the well-appointed offices and spacious show rooms, the latter displaying a large assortment of ranges, stoves, and heavy ironmongery goods. 
 On the first floor may be inspected a splendid stock of fenders, fire-irons, tiled hearths, chandeliers, and gas-fittings in great variety ; and the second and third floors are fitted up for the arranging and stocking of their various manufactures, etc. 
 The extensive works of the firm are situated in the rear of the establishment and are conveniently arranged for the operations of the business, including spacious smiths '  shop and foundry, grinding, polishing, and japanning shops on the ground floor ; and above, similar accommodation for the manufacture manufacture of all kinds of sheet iron goods. 
 The works are fully equipped with steam-power machinery and appliances of modern construction, and a lift is provided for the conveyance conveyance of heavy goods and material from floor to floor, the whole arrangements of the establishment being conveniently conveniently adapted for facilitating the various processes of production. 
 Amongst the leading specialities manufactured manufactured by the firm may be enumerated the Excelsior open and close fire range, which no building and can be set the open and close range, and the Clutha portable cooking range, which also requires no building; also parlour and kitchen fenders, of which several new registered designs have taken exceedingly well with buyers, and are having a large sale. 
 A large number of skilled hands are employed in the works in addition to the regular staff of clerks and assistants retained in the sale departments, the entire business management being undertaken by the principal, whose persevering efforts are devoted to maintaining the efficiency and completeness of the working arrangements.
, was founded as far back as at the close of last century — the founder, Mr. 
 William McEwan, having first commenced business in 1794. 
 The position of the business at the time of the Georges, and its distinction at the present time, may be said to afford a very striking contrast. 
 As we learn from the published records of the house, the original establishment establishment was dingy, and and formed one of the conspicuous landmarks of ancient cwt. 
 , which they did by a graduated scale on all sugars and on tea to 1/- per lb. 
 , by which the consumption of both these articles was placed within the reach of all classes of the This high tribute to the firm ' s enterprise — at a time when representations to the legislature were regarded as ineffectual, and when all the most ambitious efforts of combined trading agitation would have been certainly inoperative — will speak for itself; and to the firm ' s operations then — as well as during the intermediate development of this business — the trade of Glasgow must ever stand indebted. 
 The firm have at all times taken a leading part in improving the appearance of their premises, and their well-known establishment in the Trongate (with the ornamental steam engine in the J. 
 &amp; A. 
 Ferguson Wine Cellar. 
 Glasgow. 
 It was not until 1827 that the premises assumed a more dignified appearance, and the introduction introduction by Mr. 
 McEwan of plate-glass windows was the first step in the direction of shop display of which there is any intelligible record. 
 As an example of the early part which this house bore in bettering the position and interests of the grocery trade, we may quote the following from Glasgow, Ancient and Modern : — window) was a fine evidence of that taste for artistic display which the firm continue to manifest. 
 It was in 1879 that the present partners, Messrs. 
 Ferguson, removed to the busy and prominent thoroughfare of Union Street, and their operations have extended to the Cowcaddens, where there are now for the most part carried on the elements of the old business of Messrs. 
 J. 
 Henderson &amp; Coy. 
 , to which the firm succeeded, and of which they were long the practical managers. 
 The latter establishment is one which more than fully justifies its claim to age and dignified attractiveness. 
 The fittings and appointments are in superb taste, and bear all those features appropriate to the class of trade they represent.
Miller, may be regarded as the most positive positive proof of the excellent system of management under which it has been rendered a popular and leading centre of the City ' s hosiery and outfitting trade. 
 The business was established ten years ago at No. 
 227, Cambridge Street, and so greatly expanded beyond the space limits at that address that it was found necessary to acquire those additional premises at 195 and 201, Cambridge Street, the recent opening of which has afforded ample scope for the outlet of what has become a very progressive progressive and always extending trade. 
 The new premises possess the advantage of a splendid corner frontage, and the series of windows facing both Cambridge Street and West Graham Street are a study in tasteful dressing and arrangement which many tradesmen might do well to imitate. 
 Internally the same features of departmental setting and regularity predominate, and under all the most attractive conditions there are submitted to inspection inspection assortments of hats and caps for gentlemen and boys which may at all times be accepted as representative representative of the ruling fashions and styles. 
 The elements of completeness and profusion that are embodied in this department also characterise the whole other sections of the business, and the main points of variety, elegance, and fashionable taste are alike noted in hosiery, gloves, shirts, scarves, and in all the several branches of personal personal attire represented in the supplies of this emporium. 
 Among the meritorious items submitted in these lines special attention may be directed to cambric handkerchiefs handkerchiefs and also to the very numerous varieties in lambswool lambswool goods, the latter illustrating the best attainable examples of hygienic underclothing made in this country by a well-known representative of the industry. 
 All are hand-knitted and are of a quality worthy of the highest recommendation from a health point of view. 
 In ties Mr. 
 Miller possesses a range of exquisite novelties, and as one of the most important traders in every class of gloves, he holds, it is believed, a stock that is not surpassed by any in this City either in respect of extensiveness extensiveness or value. 
 With a knowledge of the proper resources, gained by long dealing and experience in this From every point of view, Mr. 
 Miller ' s establishment establishment fully justifies its position in the support of a very general trade, adapting itself to all classes^and all means by reason of the proprietor ' s adherence to the approved principle of buying as well as selling for cash and his conferring the advantages of that system upon his patrons. 
 He invariably tries to please, both as regards the value given and the attentive courtesy with which all transactions are carried out ; and being young, energetic, and enterprising, he imparts to the conduct of the business that necessary stimulus by which it has already been placed a degree beyond its contemporaries. 
 The house occupies a sound and enviable position, and being in the heart of the busy thoroughfare which joins the West End to the City proper, it affords much promise promise of enhanced success in the future, so long as it is guided under the same active and persevering. 
 systems that have helped to cultivate its present reputation. 
 WILLIAM CHRISTIE, Tobacco-pipe Manufacturer, Craignestock Street, Calton, Glasgow. 
 Among the smoker ' s paraphernalia the clay pipe, though the least expensive of articles, will, no doubt, long continue continue to hold its place of honour with the connoisseur. 
 In porosity and lightness it is equalled, perhaps, by none except the most costly meerschaum. 
 The above pipe factory, which we propose taking for the subject of this brief sketch, is one of the most celebrated in Scotland, and enjoys a widespread reputation. 
 The business was founded in 1857 by Mr.
The business is admirably organised in each department under the skilful management of the principal principal and an efficient staff, the perfection of order and system prevailing throughout the Works, which are conducted with that clockwork regularity so essential to the successful administration of an undertaking of this magnitude. 
 In addition to the duties devolving upon him in the direction of this business, Mr. 
 Kay finds leisure for conducting the valuation, assessment, and appraisement of fire losses, in which his wide experience, experience, sound judgment, and strict impartiality render his professional services invaluable, and in which he enjoys a rapidly increasing practice. 
 The Works are placed in telephonic communication in connection with the National Telephone Exchange (No. 
 514), and the workshops workshops are connected by a private wire. 
 The telegraphic address of the firm is Hopetoun, In concluding concluding this brief notice we may add that the firm have been successful in gaining the esteem of a numerous business clientele throughout the district, and that the skill and care displayed by them are held in estimation by the leading authorities in the City — sufficiently indicated indicated by the fact that for the past five-and-twenty years they have been entrusted with the important duty of collecting and hanging the valuable works of art at most of the fine art exhibitions in Glasgow during that period, and were selected to perform this work by the Executive Council of the Fine Art Sections of the recent International International Exhibition of Glasgow ; also the recent East End Exhibition. 
 Commercial Glasgow. 
 174 THE GLASGOW CLOTHING CO. 
 , 59 to 63, Argyle Street, Glasgow. 
 One of the most striking examples of the remarkable industrial and commercial prosperity achieved by the characteristic energy, enterprise, and determination of Glasgow men is afforded by the business house w7e select for special distinction in these reviews of the successes of the leading mercantile establishments of this great city of the Clyde. 
 It is doubtful if in the whole of the United Kingdom — the Metropolis itself not excepted — another establishment could be mentioned, connected with this branch of commercial activity, of such magnitude as that controlled by the Glasgow Clothing Company, whose colossal establishment at the corner of Argyle Street and Dunlop Street, forms the subject of this notice. 
 In order to convey an adequate idea of the magnitude magnitude and importance of this great undertaking it will be requisite to present to our readers a few interesting particulars of the history and rapid expansion of the venient utilisation of space, to the exigencies of the warehousing of the immense stock required to keep pace with the ever increasing demands of the trade. 
 The vast showrooms — we can find no qualifying phrase so appropriate in indicating their dimension dimension — are admirably lighted, and eminently adapted to the effective display of the immense and varied stock in each department, which, in novelty of design and uniform standard of quality and value, remains to this day unrivalled in the annals of this trade in Great Britain. 
 The ready-made department for gentlemen effectually effectually dissipates the erroneous idea that garments of this character are conspicuous in their deficiency of style, cut, and make, by an exhibit of the most superior quality of clothing, in which are apparent all the prominent attributes hitherto associated only with bespoke or ordered goods, and which would do no Company ' s business. 
 Like most of our leading mercantile houses its foundation was laid in a modest and comparatively small way in 1870 ; the premises then acquired by the Company comprising the ground floor portion only of their present magnificent establishment, the whole of which now barely suffices for the requirements requirements of their vastly expanded trade. 
 The building, which was considerably enlarged and improved in  ' 1878-79, now forms a strikingly effective feature of the architecture of this great thoroughfare, presenting a bold and handsome frontage to both Argyle and Dunlop Streets, one of the busiest corner positions in the city. 
 The edifice stands on the site of the historically historically famous old Buck ' s Head f nn, and is surmounted by the sculptured recumbent figure of a buck in commemoration of this interesting association. 
 The interior arrangements and appointments of the establishments have been designed with the perfection of good taste, and essentially with a view to the con- discredit to the productions of the leading West-end houses. 
 All goods in this department are made on the premises, an efficient staff of first-rate cutters and workpeople ensuring the perfection of fit and workmanship, workmanship, while the materials, selected from the leading manufacturers in the kingdom, are irreproachable in fashionable style and design. 
 The department department is by no means an insignificant item in the business of the Company ; orders of this description being executed with the exceptional skill only to be successfully attained by the unlimited resources possessed by the proprietors, and which has secured for the firm one of the best and most influential trade connections in the city.
Mitchell and Co. 
  ' s Spring Bank Distillery, which has an established reputation, having been founded in 1828 and been since then owned by representatives of the same family. 
 The present proprietor proprietor is Mr. 
 John Mitchell, a gentleman of high business qualifications and practical skill. 
 Having regard regard to the fact that the product of this distillery, which in the aggregate amounts to 150,000 gallons yearly, is despatched throughout the kingdom, the site upon which the Spring Bank Distillery stands is a most convenient convenient one, being about half a mile from the pier, so that, prior to shipment, the cartage of the whisky in casks is minimised as much as possible. 
 For Campbeltown, Campbeltown, it must be borne in mind, though somewhat inaccessible by land, is very accessible by water, and the whisky manufactured there, which is world-famous, can be readily put on board and shipped for Glasgow or London, whence, of course, it can be distributed by rail to all parts of the country. 
 While, therefore, Campbeltown Campbeltown enjoys in one sense the advantages of isolation, it is, for trade purposes, by no means too remote. 
 And then it must be borne in mind that, in this neighbourhood, is to be found the finest quality of water for whisky distillation. 
 distillation. 
 The water used at the Spring Bank Distillery is obtained from Cross Hill Loch, one of tw7o charming lakes adjacent to the town. 
 The Cross Hill Loch is on the south side of Campbeltown, under the shadow of Bengullion, or Hill of the Wind, which bounds the southern side of Campbeltown Bay and attains the respectable altitude of 1,124 feet. 
 The Bay, it may be mentioned, is two miles long, over one mile broad, and extremely deep. 
 It is almost enclosed by land, the channel constituting its inlet and outlet being a splendid roadstead. 
 The Spring Bank whisky is redolent of the soil, and the suggestion of peatiness peatiness in its flavour is like a whiff from the exquisitely grand and beautiful district where it is manufactured. 
 There are other distilleries in Campbeltown, of course, but the Spring Bank is in the very centre of industrial activity, and occupies a huge range of buildings extend- ing from Long Row to Glebe Street. 
 The firm own over ten acres of ground, three of which are occupied by the distillery. 
 This fact suggests how vast must be the business carried on and the position of importance to which the distillery has attained. 
 That position was won by degrees during the sixty-three years of the distillery ' s existence, but it is one which is now un- assailable, and it gives promise of still greater promi- nence in the future. 
 The admirable quality of the fine whisky here manufactured has commanded universal acknowledgment, and the demand for it is now not only immense, but growing. 
 To keep pace with the exi- gencies of a developing trade, the distillery has, from time to time, been amplified and improved till now not only is it one of the largest in Campbeltown, but one of the best and most perfectly appointed, which is saying To some extent it may be true that, if a visitor sees one distillery in Campbeltown, he has seen all, because the processes in each are practically identical, inasmuch as all good Scotch whisky is characterised by certain invariable qualities.
There are, however, notable divergencies divergencies in respect of potency, flavour, and so forth, and the Spring Bank whisky possesses certain distinctive characteristics which account for the great appreciation in which it is held. 
 Of course the visitor will not be able to see how these are acquired, but if opportunities for comparison be afforded him, he will be impressed by the scale upon which operations are carried on, the automatic regularity with which the manufacture in its various stages is conducted, the attention which is devoted to the minutest details, the efficacy of the improved improved appliances in use, and the superb excellence of the product. 
 For the mechanical requirements of the distillery there are a large boiler and a sixteen-horsepower sixteen-horsepower steam-engine. 
 Immense quantities of barley are consigned to this distillery, and the grain, after being stored in two large granaries, each 140 feet by 45 feet, is let down from the lofts to the malt barns, tftere to undergo the first vital process in the manufacture of good whisky. 
 There are four malt barns, the dimensions dimensions of which are equivalent to those of the granaries — namely, 140 feet by 45 feet. 
 Two kilns for drying the malt are in use, and in these, as is customary, peat is burned. 
 The malt deposit department adjoins the kilns. 
 The other departments include the mill with malt crushers, the grist loft, whither the ground malt from the mill is raised by elevators, the mash-house with mash tun 14 feet in diameter and 5 feet deep, where also are a huge hot water tank, a Morton ' s refrigerator, and an under back, the tun room with seven wash backs each capable of holding six thousand gallons, a wash charger holding seven thousand gallons, and the still house with three stills, the respective capacity of which is 3,000, 1,700, and 1,500 gallons. 
 Above are the chargers and receivers, and outside are the worm tubs. 
 In the spirit stores the whisky is vatted, and adjoining these are free warehouses, exceedingly spacious, where the spirit is kept in cask. 
 Hence it is sent, as occasion requires, to Glasgow and London, from which centres it is distributed by wholesale merchants to retailers throughout throughout the country. 
 Commercial Dumfries. 
 285 shown another large store set apart for potatoes, of which useful articles seeds of every known variety are kept in stock. 
 Another compartment we find devoted entirely to garden seeds, and the contents include beans, beet, cabbage, carrot, cress, leek, lettuce, onion, parsley, peas, radish, and hundreds of varieties of flower seeds. 
 It is characteristic of the go-ahead policy of the firm that they offer to cottager and farmer alike a full and ample supply for his garden of all the above seeds named, including twelve varieties of lovely flower seeds, for the very modest sum of five shillings. 
 These are forwarded. 
 carriage paid to any address, and, as if this were not enough, a copy of their sixpenny garden guide — a very useful, instructive, and interesting publication — is included with each parcel. 
 After a tour through other stores, etc. 
 , our courteous guide, who seemed never to tire of giving us all the information respecting the firm ' s specialities, conducted us to the nursery. 
 Here we discovered a choice selection of fruit trees, including apples, pears, cherries, plums, gooseberries, currants, etc.
The productions of the firm in each branch of the business are held in high repute repute for their superior excellence, many specimens of the work executed in coloured litho printing being worthy of the highest commendation for its artistic merit and finish. 
 The services of a large staff of skilled workpeople are employed employed in the several departments of the business, which is conducted throughout with marked ability under the personal direction of the principals, to whose energetic administration, promptitude, and careful attention to the requirements of their numerous clientele are attributable the conspicuous success of this deservedly prosperous commercial undertaking. 
 One of the most striking evidences of the advance in arts and sciences in these modern days is supplied by the immense improvements effected in recent years in every branch of the printing trade, in which, by the application of new mechanical inventions and scientific principles, an era of perfection has been reached unparalleled in the industrial history of the world. 
 In connection with this branch of productive activity we must congratulate the citizens of Dumfries on the possession possession of a leading house of the representative type of that successfully conducted by the old-established firm of Messrs. 
 J. 
 Maxwell and Son, Lithographic and Letterpress Printers, Stationers, Account Book Manufacturers, Manufacturers, ctc, to which we have pleasure in directing the attention of our readers. 
 The business was founded by the present head of the firm as far back as 1847, this gentleman being subsequently joined in the proprietary by his son, trading under the title indicated above. 
 The premises occupied by the firm are of handsome appearance, appearance, and, situated at 97 and 99, High Street, form a familiar landmark of the locality. 
 The shop is of spacious proportions, w7ell appointed throughout, and presents every convenience for the effective display of the stock. 
 This includes a comprehensive assortment of plain, fancy, commercial, and general stationery ; standard works by all the most eminent authors ; and a great variety of fancy goods suitable for presents, local souvenirs, and other purposes. 
 The newsagency department department is well supplied with all the London and Provincial papers, magazines, &amp;c, which are received immediately on publication by the earliest trains and delivered to order. 
 The printing department is situated in the rear of the shop, extending a distance of 200 feet back, the premises having been recently entirely reconstructed to meet the demands of the rapidly increasing trade. 
 The building includes a lofty room, lighted from the roof, in Commercial Glasgow. 
 204 HARLEY &amp; SONS, Fruiterers, Florists, and Seedsmen, Covent Garden, 369, Sauchiehall Street, Glasgow. 
 are enabled to provide the product of the vine unaffected unaffected in price by any fluctuation of the season. 
 The same may be said of their salads and vegetables, which have become one of the most important features of the firm ' s merchandise, while as floral decorators they maintain maintain resources and facilities that may be aptly described as unsurpassed. 
 Dinner and supper tables, w7edding breakfasts, and other festive occasions are provided for with an exactitude that is best assured in the firm ' s own cultured perception and taste with reference to the requirements of each case. 
 Posies and bouquets, composed composed of rare and choice exotics and blossoms, are draped and arranged with artistic taste, and in strict accordance with the formula: of prevalent fashions. 
 Similar artistic precision is observed in the adaptation of memorial wreaths, crosses, and chaste funeral decorations decorations to each particular occasion of solemnity, and Messrs. 
 Harley carry out this department of the business business with the facility and promptitude which the charming and unique varieties of their nurseries render available.
It would be impossible within present space limits to detail the many interesting features of a business and industry where the characteristics of perfection perfection are so notable in every department. 
 The firm ' s catalogues afford an exhaustive and interesting index to the several items of seed and floral trade which they have, specialised ; and a view of their nurseries is a delightful privilege to all who can admire the magnificent magnificent stocks therein exhibited in process of cultivation. 
 Probably one of the most notable features of this eminent and widely-supported business is presented in the fact that it is directed under the administration and guiding power of Mr. 
 William Harley, by whom it was founded upwards of 40 years ago. 
 He has witnessed the whole developments of the trade during that lengthy period, and has evinced continuous enterprise in the expansion expansion of his business from its unpretentious inauguration inauguration to its present commercial distinction and magnitude. 
 He now receives able and active assistance from his sons Louis, Eben, and John Harley who all combine to maintain the high repute and prestige of the firm. 
 Mr. 
 Eben Harley is entrusted with the management of the Glasgow section of the business, and is well known among an influential clientele all over the West of Scotland for his zealous interest in all matters affecting the progress of the trade, with which his name and the name of the house he represents have been long and creditably identified. 
 They have had the honour on several occasions of making bouquets and posies for Her Majesty, the Princess of Wales, and other ladies of the Royal Family. 
 The eminent progress that has been effected in the seed and floricultural trade, as one of the most prosperous prosperous branches of national industry, has been largely contributed to by the enterprise of those who have successfully combined the resources of home growth and production with the more commercial phases of the industry ; and there is no better existing example of this than in the operations of the old and influential concern of Messrs. 
 Harley and Sons, a house which has been prominently and creditably identified with the fruit, slower, and seed trade of Scotland since the year 1 85 1. 
 Messrs. 
 Harley are not only seed and flower merchants but are also extensive growers, and we believe that their vineyards and nurseries at Vinehill, Perth, Camperdown, Broughty Ferry, are unrivalled in extent and capacity, as they are already more than famous for the excellent varieties of plants, flowers, and fruit dainties that are cultivated in their prolific soils. 
 Messrs. 
 Harley have three branch establishments exclusively devoted to business purposes : at 1, George Street, Perth ; 29, Reform Street, Dundee ; and 68, South Clerk Street, Edinburgh ; and each of these establishments — known by the title Covent Garden — presents a study in rich display as well as artistic arrangement, and, whether in summer or winter seasons, the houses are invested with a luxuriance in floral beauty and taste that the most uncultured would at once admire. 
 The w7hole establishments bear so many features of similarity in setting, appointment, design, and floral elaboration, that a stranger in either of the towns mentioned mentioned would at once recognise the premises of Messrs. 
 Harley and Sons. 
 In the summer seasons especially Messrs. 
 Harley present to an admiring public most attractive arrays of those fresh cut flowers and salads which mark the advent of Spring ; and are invariably first in the market with the best products of their own gardens and nurseries. 
 The Sauchiehall Street establishment establishment is both extensive and handsome.
The yards and sheds in the works are fitted with every appliance for the saving of time and labour wherever possible. 
 The peculiarity and chief characteristic characteristic of this industry, however, is that the work, to be done properly, must be done slowly. 
 If hasty processes are resorted to they too often result in the spoiling of a valuable block of marble or granite. 
 Mr. 
 Dods owns large granite quarries near Dumfries, and is thus enabled to work this material at a considerably less cost than he otherwise would be able to do. 
 The trade of the firm is ever on the increase, and the thorough manner in which every business transaction of the firm is carried out by Mr. 
 Dods (who, by the way, is an officer in the Dumfries Volunteers), has been largely instrumental in bringing this about. 
 ALEXANDER ' S STUDIO OF HIGH-CLASS PORTRAITURE, Dumfries. 
 The gentleman who presides over this elegant studio with such marked ability and success is one of a family of artists whose name is not only distinguished throughout throughout Scotland, but may be said to be cosmopolitan in its wide reputation. 
 you know in Dumfries, who has retired finally from the Glasgow house in favour of his native town, an idea which he has long cherished and now so happily realised. 
 The studio off English Street is all that can be desired for elegance and utility. 
 The approach by a carriage drive leads to the grounds, laid out with much taste and beauty. 
 Trees, shrubs, and flowers form a very charming surrounding. 
 On entering the studio itself, you are delighted with the very evident artistic feeling which dominates everywhere ; the portraiture we see around us (and this embraces all styles and variety) is characterized by uniform excellence. 
 Altogether it is the studio of an artist not only experienced and competent, but thoroughly devoted to his art con amore. 
 His work is appreciated as it deserves and responded to by all classes of the community. 
 community. 
 He maintains to the full the reputation of a distinguished name. 
 Before the advent of photography, their father, John Alexander, was a noted miniature painter on ivory, widely known in Liverpool and throughout his native county of Dumfriesshire ; and it may be here remarked that he was the first artist in Scotland who brought his brush to bear on Photography, then in its infancy, and this took place in Dumfries nearly forty years ago, when the late Mr. 
 McNab, on the success of this confederacy of camera and brush, persuaded Mr.
Alexander to accompany accompany him to Glasgow, and there the famous firm of Alexander Brothers arose and flourished. 
 Managed by his sons, the one of whom we write is now the Man 64 Commercial Glasgow. 
 to~say, with double tongues and mortice holes. 
 The upper mortice is smaller than the lower one, the technical technical explanation being that the upper part of the rim is supported by the tyre, the lower part therefore requires the greater Another store room is filled with spokes, felloes, tyres, and sectional requisites of various kinds. 
 Storage accommodation is likewise provided for a still more miscellaneous collection of To technical readers, it is likely to be exceedingly interesting interesting ; and, as regards the varnishing room in particular, particular, merits quotation. 
 My main painting he said, is on the top floor of a three-storey building, is 70 feet from north to south by 36 feet from east to west. 
 The varnishing room is at the south end of this, divided from it by a glass partition. 
 Its length is the same as the width of the painting loft, namely, 36 feet ; and its width 18 feet ; with light on all sides and a borrowed light from the roof. 
 It is heated by two rows of hot-water pipes on the east, west, and south sides. 
 Please observe that, in the varnishing room, the joists which support the floor run lengthways; and, in order to get fresh air introduced, I have the walls of this room pierced on the outside, immediately the flooring and _ between the joists, with openings, east and west, 18 by 15 inches in size. 
 These openings are never closed from the outside, the air travelling, from either side, the whole length of the room, where it is let into the inside by openings in the This extract, apart from its descriptive serviceableness, serviceableness, suggests how painstaking is the attention Mr. 
 John Robertson bestows upon the details of his business. 
 That unconscious self-revelation affords a clue to the secret of his success. 
 He is always contriving how some improvement may be effected here, some novelty introduced there, or how the methods of production may be rendered more invariably accurate. 
 This faculty, added to his vigorous energy, his absorption in the business he is justly proud of having founded, his unwearied application, his quickness to perceive the effectiveness of new developments and modifications, and his personal integrity are the factors which have accessories, ranging from nails to costly velvets and sumptuous upholstery materials. 
 oDta. 
 8 Before referring to the work rooms, with which the three upper floors are mainly occupied, it may be mentioned mentioned that, at the factory entrance, there is a storage place for rough timber, including such ornamental woods as ash, mahogany, and pine. 
 Of these there is a very large stock. 
 It is the rule of the estab- r— lishment to classify the timber according to the date of its delivery, so that the degree of maturity maturity it has attained is thus indicated. 
 Proper seasoning of the wood is, in carriage building, a matter of vital importance, and, to ensure that desideratum, the best methods are here adopted.
The timber is kept dry under cover, but the place where it is stored is thoroughly permeated by currents of air. 
 The numerous upstairs rooms are distinguished as sectional workshops. 
 There is, for example, the body shop, the fitters '  shop, the finishing shop, the paint shop, the varnishing varnishing shop, the blacksmiths '  shop, and so forth. 
 The fact that constant employment is provided in the establishment for between seventy and a hundred hundred hands will convey some idea of the magni- gg ttide of the business. 
 All the rooms mentioned are admirably adapted for the particular class of work carried on in each, and are well provided with mechanical contrivances such as lifts and trollies. 
 Mr. 
 John Robertson, who is a vicepresident vicepresident of the Institute of British Carriage Manufacturers Manufacturers (Incorporated), gave an interesting description, at the meeting of that body in Glasgow, three years ago, of his painting and varnishing rooms. 
 That description was contained in a paper on coach varnishing read by him— a paper which, as setting forth the writer ' s practical experiences, was deemed by the members of the Institute a most valuable contribution. 
 contributed to his preeminence as a carriage builder. 
 None are readier to recognise his good qualities and his business acumen than his trade congeners. 
 Already it has been mentioned that he is a vice-president of the Institute of British Carriage Manufacturers. 
 It may further be cited, as an evidence of the appreciation in which he is held, that the National Scottish Association for the Repeal of the Carriage Tax did him the honour Commercial Glasgow. 
 152 MESSRS. 
 BARNET &amp; COMPY. 
 , Upholsterers, Trimming Manufacturers and Warehousemen, 12, Cadogan Street, Glasgow. 
 Technical art in its most attractive forms is probably exemplified in high-class upholstery, but when w-e admire beautiful specimens thereof, we are, perhaps, rather prone to give the upholsterer more credit than is due to him. 
 Let it not be assumed that this is said in any depreciatory spirit ; on the contrary, a thoroughly good upholsterer must be endowed with taste, as well as possess skill far above that which the average handicraftsman handicraftsman can boast of. 
 But we must not confound his manipulative contribution to high-class furnishings which impress us with the creative art of the manufacturer manufacturer who supplies him with the most ctfscs^ m fore, this firm are unapproachable, and in this connection it may be stated that Messrs. 
 Barnet &amp; Co. 
 are the only makers in Scotland of the fine plush cord used in artistic trimmings.
James Weir. 
 This may be described as one of the several representative representative establishments whose longevity and general features must at all times enhance the interest and value of any literary work devoted to a survey of Glasgow ' s trade and commerce. 
 Two years before the accession of Her present Majesty there was no establishment in Glasgow purveying directly for the requirements of families, and to the late Mr. 
 Campbell-Blair may be credited the inauguration of the first family grocery house in the City. 
 While the Metropolis now teems with establishments establishments professing to cater for what is understood as family business, the house of Mr. 
 Campbell-Blair maintains maintains its original pre-eminence in the trade, and its prosperity has become largely based on the system of cash trading which was early adopted by this firm. 
 Much credit is due to the skilful and discriminate guidance of Mr. 
 James Weir, who has been connected with the business since boyhood, and who was manager for Mr. 
 Campbell-Blair long before his personal acquisition of the business. 
 From the once-famous Gushet House in Main Street, and more recently from Jamaica Street, the business was transferred to its present location in Howard Street, where the entire floorage space at disposal represents a cumulo extent of little less than 6,000 feet. 
 The premises are a very commanding feature of the thoroughfare, and in point of general fitting and arrangement are unsurpassed by any house in the trade. 
 The appropriate character of the situation may be understood when we say that the establishment is in close proximity to the largest houses in the tea and grocery line in this City. 
 The visitor to this house will be at once gratified by the impressions of taste that prevail, and the attractive manner in which the whole departments are submitted to inspection. 
 The great speciality of this house is their famous Ceylon, Indian, and China Teas. 
 In sugar of strong-grained rich qualities, biscuits, fruits, general groceries, pickles, and Italian table dainties, there are shown most ample assortments, and the whole goods of the house bear those features of excellence which, considering considering the antiquity and eminence of the house, it is obviously needless to specialise. 
 The processes of roasting and grinding coffee are carried on daily, and with the reduction in tea duties, Mr. 
 Weir is enabled to offer a range of no fewer than ten different blends and qualities, all of the same high quality that has done so much to sustain the reputation of the house during the last fifty-six years. 
 As regards the merits of a valuable wine and spirit stock, it need only be said that all are alike superior for dietetic and general use. 
 The list of seals, brands, and prices, conveys a very forcible idea of the extent and varieties of the whole collection, and for the information of those unfamiliar with the methods of the house, it may be here added, with reference to all wines and spirits bottled on the premises, that there is invariably branded on the cork, besides the trade mark of the firm, the signature of a name that is eminently associated with the best interests of Glasgow ' s wine and spirit trade and commerce. 
 Exceptional value is at all times offered in whiskies, a large stock of the finest kinds being held under bond — four to six years old — and representing the best attainable attainable products of the Laphrvaig and Lagavulin Glenlivet, Glenlivet, Glenfoyle, and Gleniffer Distilleries.
I. 
 78 Commercial Glasgow. 
 FRAZER &amp; GREEN, Pharmaceutical Chemists to the Queen, 127, Buchanan Street ; 469, Sauchiehall Street ; 1, Charing Cross ; and 1, Belmont Place, Hillhead, Glasgow. 
 counters extending the whole distance, while elegant fittings and glass show cases everywhere abound. 
 The gasaliers are all fitted with wires and connections for the electric light, which, it is intended, will be installed as soon as a central station is established. 
 Electric bells and speaking-tubes are fitted up throughout. 
 The show cases are filled with various proprietary articles, and are placed in the most attractive positions, so as to give an air of elegance and finish to the whole of the extensive extensive interior. 
 Everything is in perfect taste, and the large and select stock of goods is displayed to the very best advantage. 
 The dispensing department is equipped with every appliance for the conduct of a large and first-rate family trade. 
 The whole establishment is chastely decorated after the manner adopted by those chemists who more especially cultivate the professional side of their business and cater for the requirements of the educated classes. 
 The remarkably large stock embraces pretty well everything found in the very best pharmaceutical emporia, and includes all the leading patent medicines, proprietary articles, and toilet requisites, requisites, with a complete stock of the best and newest drugs and chemical preparations. 
 Messrs. 
 Frazer and Green control well-known West Knd establishments establishments at 469, Sauchiehall Street, Charing Cross Corner, and Belmont Place, Hillhead, the total rentals amounting to some a year. 
 Each of these is conducted on no less high-class lines than the parent house, and reflects infinite credit on the principal, who is a dispensing chemist of the highest standing in the profession. 
 So highly valued are the medicines dispensed dispensed at Messrs. 
 Frazer and Green ' s establishments, that the Royal Warrant, constituting them Pharmaceutical Pharmaceutical Chemists to the Queen, has been held by them for over fifty years. 
 A special feature not hitherto referred to in connection with the firm is the large business business done in the supply of medicine chests, both for family, Colonial, and sea-going use. 
 In the latter class, inter alia, the firm have supplied the palatial steamship City of Paris, the steamer China, three Canadian Pacific steamers, and some of the largest vessels engaged in the East India trade. 
 Ærated waters are also manufactured by the firm, and command a large patronage throughout the West of Scotland. 
 We conclude our review of one of Scotia ' s greatest pharmaceutical concerns with the remark that the commercial relationships of the house ramify through every quarter ot the globe, the house drawing its support from a clientele which, in respect of social influence and aristocratic standing, has no superior in the kingdom.
Even the work of boxmaking, as applied to this branch, is carried out on the uppermost uppermost flat of the four-storey block, which comprises the complete industry. 
 There is a special workshop for the making of tin canisters, and in the different rooms the filled tins are placed upon racks in a manner which admits of great orderliness and facilitates their enumeration enumeration when they come to be consigned to the covering, labelling, warehouse, and dispatch departments, which all occupy one end of the main building towards the front. 
 The amount of baking sugar contained in one of the apartments adjacent to one of these rooms is of itself a telling evidence of the magnitude of an industry wherein several tons of cognate commodities are daily absorbed. 
 The making of peel is not only an interesting but extensive process, and from the apartment in which it is carried on an elevator is continually in motion. 
 The immense sugar stores in conjunction therewith and the candying processes, as well as the careful selection of the various ingredients, all tend to endorse the importance JAMIESON &amp; CO. 
 , Oil Refiners and Oil Merchants, 105, Clyde Street, Anderston, Glasgow. 
 stantial block of building, having a splendid freestone frontage of 150 feet, comprises three floors, the offices and cart entrance being on the ground floor. 
 The internal internal arrangements are of the most complete description, description, and both the public and private apartments are appointed in every degree of first-class taste. 
 To the rear of the main building is a spacious store fitted and equipped with all the accessories of the oil refining industry, the immense tanks indicating the magnitude of the firm ' s output ; and the whole premises bear evidence evidence of the thorough knowledge of detail and organisation, organisation, of public requirements, and the care and attention promptly taken to provide for them possessed by the partners and their able and efficient coadjutors in the management of the business. 
 The entire interests of this old and valuable concern are preserved under the combined enterprise of Messrs. 
 James and R. 
 F. 
 pMexander, the only partners of the firm, and as makers in special of all kinds of compound vegetable oils for marine engines, their productions have been advanced in public appreciation and demand. 
 In Glasgow alone the firm command a most extensive trade, and for the excellence of their merchandise, as well as the liberal and satisfactory character of their dealings, few firms are better known among the entire shipping trade of this country than that of Messrs. 
 Jamieson &amp; Co. 
 In controlling the routine of a business which is already well founded in half a century ' s undiminished repute and commercial importance, the above-named gentlemen have evinced active zeal and energy towards attaining perfection in the branch of manufacturing and productive productive activity they represent, and the advances of mechanical science at the present day, particularly in marine engineering, have brought their eminent specialities specialities into wide and well-merited recognition. 
 Probably no branch of representative productive activity activity in Glasgow has been brought to greater perfection, in operation and result, than that of oil refining in combination with the manufacture of oil for special purposes, purposes, a department of industry whose improved features during the past fifty years may be, in a large measure, attributed to the successful operations of the eminent undertaking controlled under the firm name of Messrs. 
 Jamieson &amp; Co. 
 This important concern has been in active existence for upwrards of half a century, and during that lengthy period Messrs. 
 Jamieson have adopted every means, mechanical and otherwise, to attain attain the perfect output of oils suitable to a variety of uses and adaptations.
Lillie and Russell at 86, Gordon Street. 
 The concern in question is one of considerable antiquity, having been founded in the very infancy of Glasgow ' s commercial importance, and long before even the most sanguine dreamer had grounds for picturing, in imagination, the splendour of our Glasgow as it The house of Lillie and Russell was founded, upwards of seventy years ago, by Mr. 
 Lewis Ferguson, who subsequently assumed the present Mr. 
 Lillie ' s father into partnership. 
 Then the business was successfully carried on for a number of years as Ferguson and Lillie. 
 On the decease of Mr. 
 Lillie, senr. 
 , his son, Mr. 
 James Lillie, the present sole partner, assumed Mr. 
 Thos. 
 Russell, a gentleman well known in commercial circles in the City of Glasgow, as his partner, when the present trading designation of the firm wTas adopted. 
 Mr. 
 Lillie conducts an extensive and high-class trade. 
 The premises have an excellent business-like appearance and possess an exceptionally attractive frontage. 
 The interior of the establishment is of spacious dimensions, possessing a rearward extension of fully ioo feet, and is appointed in an exceedingly tasteful and elaborate style. 
 The manner in which the entire stock is exhibited certainly reflects very high credit upon the cultivated taste of the proprietary, and cannot fail to convince patrons that, in transacting business with Messrs. 
 Lillie and Russell, they are bestowing confidence on a most practical and reliable firm. 
 The house confines its attention to an exclusively order trade, and, in this, its connection is not only numerically strong, but intrinsically influential. 
 The departments comprise general tailoring, ladies '  tailoring and habit making, yachting, clerical, military, and court tailoring, and the making of gentlemen ' s buckskin riding and hunting breeches. 
 The workrooms, situate on the roof of the building, are incomparably the most commodious and best sanitated in the city, and afford ample accommodation for a staff of eighty workmen.
workmen. 
 The tradesmen employed in this department are, without exception, men of reliable taste and judgment, w7ho thoroughly understand the very minutia of their business ; the inevitable result being that only work of the best description is turned out. 
 Mr. 
 Lillie ' s cutters are fully abreast of all the requirements of a difficult profession, one of the assistants devoting special attention attention to breeches cutting, and, from the success which has invariably attended this department, the firm are enabled, with confidence, to invite the support of patrons. 
 The attention which is systematically paid to the perfect fit, finish, and style of naval, military, and volunteer officers '  uniforms has secured, in this department of the sartorial art, a wide clientele for the firm ; and no less celebrated are Messrs. 
 Lillie and Russell for the superiority and moderation of charge in connection with the making up of servants '  liveries. 
 The principal of this estimable house is personally a gentleman of the most superior business qualifications. 
 He possesses a most accurate intimacy with the full technique of his profession and conducts his establishment on those conscientious principles which not merely deserve but command success. 
 To those who have experienced the worry and annoyance of misfits, such a firm as that of Messrs. 
 Lillii: and Russell becomes an absolute boon ; and that the house is fully appreciated as such is conclusively proved not only by the prosperous condition of the trade done in Glasgow and throughout the West of Scotland, but by the still more convincing testimony afforded by a valuable business connection among influential patrons in all parts of the civilized world. 
 J. 
 EDWARDS &amp; Co. 
 , The Western Cycle Works, 3, 5, and 7, Gibson Street, Hillhead, Glasgow. 
 Since the invention of the steamboat and the locomotive we doubt if there has been invented a vehicle of conveyance conveyance which has sprung into such rapid and universal popularity among all sections of the community as has the bicycle and its nearly related fellow, the tricycle. 
 With the development of the public taste for cycling has been brought about a commensurate improvement in the character and construction 01 the machine itself, and the contrast between the • '  Puffing of the great Stephenson ' s day is not more marked than is that between the modern or other equally improved instrument of road locomotion, and the now antiquated or of our schoolboy days. 
 The manufacture of high-class machines has, within the past fifteen or twenty years, called into existence a distinct distinct mechanical industry, and in this particular branch of industrial enterprise not only are great fortunes being amassed, but the rehabilitation of an ancient English city has been brought about entirely through the facilities it has afforded for the economic settlement of cycle manufacturers in its midst. 
 Nor is the great Scottish industrial metropolis oblivious to the branch of activity in question, as a visit to the splendid establishment establishment of Messrs. 
 J. 
 Edwards &amp; Co. 
 , of the Western Cycle Works, 3, 5, and 7, Gibson Street (West End Park Gate), abundantly demonstrates.
S. 
 Macnair is to Campbeltown, Kintyre, and the Isles. 
 His establishment is the centre of fashion and interest, par excellence, for the residents, and particularly for the fair residents of the West, whose homes lie beyond the estuary of the Clyde. 
 The business has held this flattering position since its inauguration by Mr. 
 Macnair in 1872 — no small testimony to the business savoir faire of that gentleman. 
 The establishment has an excellent position in Campbeltown, and, though not presenting anything anything of the external glitter of a catchpenny City establishment, establishment, has solid attractions of its own. 
 The main shop occupies the ground floor, has two excellent show windows for the display of novelties, is suitably arranged and appointed, and contains a choice stock — ranging from silk mercery of the choicest selection to the latest fancy material, from napery to hosiery, from Meltons to hard - wearing tweeds — and covering completely the whole range of a caterer in dress materials and small wares for both sexes and all classes. 
 To the rear are the office and stockroom, and behind all, in an adjoining building, the tailors '  workshop. 
 A stairway leads to the floor above, where we find the sanctum sanctorum of the concern — the ladies '  showroom — a bright and neatly fitted department, where the female heart can dote on costumes, mantles, and millinery in all the newest materials, materials, styles, and designs. 
 Here the expert visitor can find evidence in abundance of the close touch maintained maintained by Mr. 
 Macnair with the movements of fashion in London and Paris — one great factor in his striking success. 
 On this floor are further stockrooms, and on the next the workrooms of the modistes and couturieres, whose executive skill has done so much to maintain and heighten the reputation of the house. 
 His display of goods for the 1891 season has included model garments for spring and summer wear. 
 The exquisite taste by which these novelties are characterised accounts for the enviable celebrity which his productions have acquired. 
 Ladies would do well to note that for bridesmaids '  frocks, going-away and reception gowns, etc. 
 , special designs are prepared to meet particular requirements — this department, as well as that devoted to millinery, being managed by a modiste of exceptionally high-class experience gained in London and Paris. 
 Gowns, cloaks, and coats for walking, driving, and travelling are also made of the best materials in the very latest fashions. 
 The enterprise thus displayed by Mr. 
 Macnair in respect respect of dressmaking is likewise manifested in respect of millinery. 
 But the sterner sex is not forgotten, and an experienced cutter and a select staff ot workmen are retained in its behalf, though not exclusively, as a large amount of ladies '  tailoring also passes through their hands.
Taste and discrimination in the selection of the stock, skill and intelligence in the executive departments, and long experience and administrative administrative ability in the management are the characteristics characteristics of this emporium. 
 No expense nor trouble is spared to procure the newest and best goods for its numerous patrons or to maintain its skilled staff at the highest point of excellence. 
 Mr. 
 Macnair has good reason to congratulate himself on his long-continued success and to feel proud of that widespread appreciation appreciation and support he has met with during his long and prosperous career. 
 Personally he is a gentleman of courteous and pleasing manners, and one of the most accomplished in his own line we have had the pleasure to meet. 
 ALEXANDER MUIR, Baker, Reform Square, Campbeltown. 
 The oldest baking business in Campbeltown, now owned and controlled by Mr. 
 Alexander Muir, was originally established in 1828 by his father, Mr. 
 Samuel Muir, who died about nine years ago. 
 Mr. 
 Alexander Muir has had a life-long experience of the business, having for many years assisted in its management prior to his father ' s decease. 
 During the lengthened period of the control of the late owner the business grew rapidly, and gradually extended its connection over a wide district. 
 The late owner, too, was deservedly one of the most popular men in Kintyre, and left a worthy name to his successor, which we are pleased to record has been fully sustained, the present owner inheriting his father ' s popularity as well as his business. 
 Mr. 
 Muir ' s premises consist of a neat shop in Reform Square, suitably fitted up, together with a baking establishment in Custom House Close near by, fitted up, too, in admirable admirable style. 
 We understand that one of the mysteries mysteries of history is associated with this bakehouse which, in the title deed, is designated Castle Clouts;  '  but who were the builders, or whose the original heritage, tradition sayeth not. 
 Some of the traces of its olden glory may yet be seen in its antique fireplaces and mantels, which remain in situ ; and, if the Muse of History should ever produce the record of its past, no doubt it would be found as interesting as any of those appertaining to this home of the Campbells. 
 But to return to the modern aspect of the bakery ; we were pleased to observe the neat and orderly arrangement of the place, and the care that had been evidently given to the perfecting of its equipment. 
 Both plain and fancy bread is made, only the finest brands of flour being used. 
 The ovening is done to a nicety, and cannot fail to secure the admiration of all lovers of thoroughly baked bread.
The trade is local, and gives employment to a numerous and select staff. 
 Mr. 
 Muir himself attends to the general direction of the establishment, and is well known to a wide circle of friends and clients, by whom he is held in the highest esteem. 
 Commercial Glasgow. 
 203 the first quality of Mocha, Jamaica, and Ceylon coffees, which are in good demand for their superior excellence, and are supplied in wholesale quantities to the numerous customers of the firm. 
 Messrs. 
 Cron have had considerable considerable experience in the trade, and their judgment in selection and critical taste in blending various qualities and growths of teas have gained for these gentlemen a widespread and well-deserved reputation as experts in this branch of commercial knowledge. 
 The services of a staff of travellers, clerks, warehousemen, &amp;c, are employed in the business under the direction of the members of the firm, Messrs. 
 John and William Cron, who have, by their unremitting devotion to the interests of their ever-increasing clientele, secured the confidence and support of the leading members of the trads in the City and surrounding districts. 
 EDWARD, DAVISON, &amp; Co. 
 , Gentlemen ' s Outfitters, 68, Sauchiehall Street; and 114, Renfield Street, Glasgow. 
 The fashionable thoroughfares of Sauchiehall Street and j Renfield Street present many fine establishments establishments to the view of the passer-by, all furnishing their quota to make up the splendid trading ensemble of these two great arteries of the City. 
 Sauchiehall Street, in increase in the volume of business. 
 The main speciality is fine sixty-shilling suits, unsurpassed at the price in any city. 
 Another novelty in connection with this firm is the Deltoid Linemeter (patent) — invented by Mr. 
 Alexander Edward — an instrument for taking the exact measurement and shape of the shoulder, by which erect, sloping, or hunchback figures are measured and fitted with the same ease and certeinty as the most symmetrical, symmetrical, thus rendering misfit impossible and fitting-on almost unnecessary. 
 All garments made by Messrs. 
 Edward, Davison, and Co. 
 under this system give entire satisfaction, fitting with ease and comfort, yielding to every movement of the body without displacement, and producing the ne plus ultra suit — so desirable to a welldressed welldressed gentleman. 
 As it is no easy matter to describe such an inge- particular, is, without without doubt, the street in Glasgow which, beyond all others, would suggest to an unprejudiced visitor the idea of a beautiful and picturesque thoroughfare.
The portion of the premises facing p\rgyle Street was raised some sixteen years ago by the addition of one storey. 
 Curiously enough, both the Argyle Street and the Glassford Street frontages cover what were formerly the sites of two hotels, the Black Bull and the Commercial Hotel respectively. 
 The ill-starred City of Glasgow Bank formerly occupied a portion of the firm ' s Virginia Street block, and one of Historical Glasgow. 
 21 The scholarships and prizes which are competed for are worth annually about and liberal donors are constantly adding to their number, so that students of ability are now attracted in great numbers from all parts of these Islands, and even from the Colonies. 
 There are twenty-eight professors, with lecturers in addition, and some of those appointments are worthy the struggles of ambitious and able men to reach them. 
 There are at present some 2,200 students enrolled, and the fees amount to a large sum. 
 GATEWAY OF OLD COLLEGE, RE-BUILT. 
 Commercial Glasgow. 
 195 HOWARD PENMAN, The City of Glasgow China Warehouse, 161, Sauchiehall Street, Glasgow. 
 There is no branch of industrial activity which more fully demonstrates the marked advance in the development development of art than that of the potter ' s craft, which has within the past half-century made such gigantic strides towards perfection in grace of outline and detail, and has, in the hands of our leading makers, invested the commonest article of daily use with a beauty of design quite undreamt of by our forefathers. 
 An apt illustration of this acknowledged development in ceramic excellence is afforded by a visit of inspection to the well-known establishment of Mr. 
 Howard Penman, proprietor of the City of Glasgow China Warehouse, 161, Sauchiehall Street, which contains an immense variety of every description of the highest class examples of art productions, bearing convincing evidence of the correctness of our prefatory remarks. 
 The business is of every old standing in the commercial world, having been founded as far back as 1857 by Mr. 
 David Penman, who was subsequently joined by his son, trading under the style of Messrs. 
 David Penman and Son. 
 The title was afterwards altered to Messrs. 
 Penman and Patrick, and finally the undertaking was acquired by the present sole proprietor, Mr. 
 Howard Penman. 
 The premises occupied by this gentleman comprise the handsome block of buildings situated in the best part of this leading thoroughfare, with spacious showrooms, elegantly appointed throughout, and possessing an extensive window frontage, dressed with attractive taste and displaying to effective advantage the beautiful selection of goods submitted for inspection. 
 The exigencies of space will not permit more than a brief resume of the comprehensive stock exhibited at the establishment, which includes amongst its leading specialities Fine China Tea Sets in Worcester China, Crown Derby, Wedgwood, Fine French China, and all the best makers ; Toilet Sets in all the newest and prettiest patterns, complete sets of Table Crystal in the favourite pattern, Plain Crystal Tumblers and Wine Glasses, the Hygienic Tea Pot, with removable tea brewer to prevent the infusion of and the Anti-tannic Tea Infuser, for making a single cup of tea without tannin ; Oval Crystal Fruit Dishes,.
, Mercantile Stationers, Letterpress Printers and Lithographers, 34, Ann Street, City, Glasgow, E. 
 C. 
 , and 75, Finsbury Pavement, London, E. 
 C. 
 Telephone : — No 3344- A leading house among the many representative undertakings which contribute to Glasgow ' s commercial activity is that of Alexander Malcolm and Co. 
 , the well-known firm of letterpress printers and lithographers, whose trading operations have extended all over the United Kingdom. 
 It is now fifteen years since this concern was founded by Mr. 
 Alexander Malcolm, whose son, Mr. 
 James S. 
 Malcolm, now controls its affairs in conjunction with Mr. 
 Robert Thomson, the only other partner of the firm. 
 As the natural outcome of the enterprise, enterprise, which has been characteristic of the house from first to last, it has rapidly assumed a high place in the branch of commerce it represents. 
 The ostensible desire of the firm to anticipate correctly the general requirements of the mercantile community has been fully and amply recognised in the immense trade which has been developed, developed, and the famous B. 
 Time Tables and Diary which are issued by this firm have done much to extend and popularise the name of the house in almost every part of the country. 
 The Time Table and Diary is a much-prized vade mecum to all classes, and, as one which is not confined to local information, it embodies a number of matters of universal interest, and is, consequently, consequently, useful under all conditions. 
 Alexander Malcolm and Co. 
 have manifested considerable foresight foresight in discovering the exact requirements of the entire trade, and, while primarily and distinctly letterpress printers and lithographers, have been enabled to provide - — both for the trade and the general public — evetything to which their operations as high-class printers and lithographers could be effectively applied. 
 Their Chromo '  Calendar work especially bears a general appearance of elegance and taste which manifests that the firm do not indulge in the production of meaningless designs, but of all classes of sound and well-finished lithography tending to please, not only the firms or houses whose orders in this line are fulfilled, but also the various adherents and patrons of each business, and to represent and convey a correct and favourable impression to customers of the style or status of the house with which they deal. 
 In printing, as in lithography, Messrs. 
 Malcolm manifest a refined taste, and elegance is also a feature in all the other kindred operations — of ruling, paging, bookbinding, or account-book making.
All descriptions of billiard tables are here manufactured, as well as every item that justly enters into the category of billiard room furnishings. 
 The connection of the firm extends over the whole of the United Kingdom, and orders have been executed with the utmost precision for patrons in India and other distant parts of the earth. 
 Messrs. 
 Henry Nelmes &amp; Co. 
 number among their patrons the elite of the Kingdom, and many of the leading clubs of Scotland have the good fortune to possess tables manufactured by this enterprising enterprising firm. 
 As showing a special feature in connection with the firm ' s manufacture, we venture to quote the MESSRS. 
 CRON BROTHERS &amp; Co. 
 , Wholesale Tea Merchants, Street, Glasgow. 
 37, Hutcheson It would be difficult to indicate in the history of mercantile mercantile enterprise a more pertinent illustration of rapid development than that which has of recent years characterized the tea trade in this country, and in this connection it is impossible to acknowledge the extent and influence of firms like Messrs. 
 Cron Brothers in fostering a taste for this now universal beverage. 
 These gentlemen have recently succeeded to the important business successfully conducted for the past twenty-five years by Mr. 
 John Latta, occupying for this purpose the extensive ground floor and basement premises at 37, Hutchescn Street, which are conveniently adapted forthe requirements of the trade. 
 The ground floor is arranged as offices, sample and tasting-room, with spacious stores and warehouse in the rear, and the basement is utilized as the blending and mixing department. 
 The stock held by the firm includes the choicest growths of Ceylon, India, and China teas, selected with experienced judgment and blended with discriminating taste to suit the varying requirements of the trade. 
 These teas are widely appreciated and in favourable request by the principal retail dealers in Scotland, and are unrivalled in the local markets for their purity, fragrance, flavour, and strength. 
 Messrs. 
 Cron also hold a large stock of Commercial Galashiels 310 MESSRS. 
 ROBERTS, DOBSON &amp; CO. 
 , Cheviot and Saxony Yarn Manufacturers, Bristol Mill, Galashiels. 
 The spinning of the finer classes of tweed yarns, such as those used in the manufacture of Saxonies and Cheviots, is an operation requiring considerable experience and the most improved plant.
Ross, established in 1877, and now occupying a position of the first importance and distinction in the umbrella manufacturing trade. 
 This business has indicated a progressiveness consistent with the energy that has been brought to bear upon its control, and its constant increases in popular favour are the outcome of well-applied tact and enterprise. 
 From 141, New City Road — where the business was first located — it became extended to Argyle Street, and, in consequence of further accumulations, the proprietor, in 1890, entered upon the handsome and well-appointed establishment in Renfield Street, where the principal trade of the house is now concentred. 
 The premises in this busy thoroughfare have been thoroughly brought up to date in all matters of arrangement and appoint- ment, and all the elements of artistic taste and elegance are presented in the interior, where large upright glass show cases are made available for the purposes of display. 
 The utmost precision and care is manifested in the disposal of the numerous departments, and the miscellaneous arrays of umbrellas and walking sticks (both plain and mounted in gold and silver) are submitted to inspection under the most brilliant and effective conditions. 
 The most fastidious taste will be readily gratified by the selections shown throughout this estab- lishment and those also at Argyle Street and New City Road ; while the finish, substantiality, and artistic taste by which every item is characterised may be said to recommend the productions of this firm to the considera- tion of all classes. 
 As a manufacturer whose aim is to provide handsome and w7ell made umbrellas at the minimum over the cost of production, Mr. 
 Ross has so manipulated his mechanical and general resources as to attain this object in a manner satisfactory to the interests of the trade as well as to those of his world- wide clientele. 
 In the colonies where the manufacture of umbrellas has not yet been developed to any material extent (if at all engaged in), Mr. 
 Ross ' s umbrellas are in constant demand and requisition. 
 He sends these goods as far as India and China, and the growing taste for ornamentation in this indispensable item of personal equipment is well provided for in the choice novelties and specialities that emanate from the factory in Great Clyde Street. 
 Here the entire industry of umbrella making is represented on a standard of admirable completeness, and the simple fact that the making and finishing of an umbrella in 30 minutes, and the covering of one in 20 minutes, can be accomplished at any time, or to any special order, will no doubt appear surprising to those who are unacquainted with the manner in which Mr. 
 Ross has embodied in his operations every ingenious device and contrivance tending to improve the character and resources of his well-organised industry. 
 As the medium of an immense wholesale trade, the business is a factor of great and increasing value in the advancement of the industry it represents, and the quality and excellence of its productions have already acquired well-deserved celebrity without the aid of any form of ostentatious trading or advertisement. 
 Commanding the operations of a large staff of work-people and shop assistants, Mr. 
 Ross is enabled to provide for all the exigencies of a trade the ramifications of which manifest unlimited development ; and at the head of what is undoubtedly one of the most flourishing concerns of its kind in the western metropolis, Mr. 
 Ross maintains his reputation and noteworthiness with the ability and tact whereby those enviable marks of commercial distinction have been already gained. 
 Commercial Maybole 305 additional lever acts upon a powerful brake, and which can be instantly applied when travelling empty, or round a headland, or down sloping land. 
 The new patent brake is most effective and more convenient than any draught pole arrangement. 
 The quadruple actions of the patent lifting lever are — 1.
A. 
 Campbell is now the sole representative representative continuing to trade under the style indicated at the head of this notice. 
 The premises occupied by the firm are situated in 178, Hope Street, and comprise handsome and commodious double-fronted shop, comprehensively comprehensively stocked with a well-selected assortment of English and Continental wall papers and other decorative decorative materials, and with extensive warehouse and office. 
 There is also a sunk flat utilised as stores and workshop. 
 workshop. 
 The firm has also a branch establishment at 8, St. 
 James '  Street, Paisley Road, which provides accommodation for their numerous south side clients. 
 The class of work undertaken by the firm includes every description of painting and decorating of private and public buildings and ecclesiastical edifices, which is executed in a superior and artistic style by a large staff of experienced workmen specially selected for their skill in the various departments. 
 An extensive local connection has been secured by the firm, which includes the leading builders and property owners in Glasgow and the surrounding districts, and a first-class private trade has also been established. 
 The business is conducted conducted with great ability under the careful management of Mr. 
 Campbell, who personally superintends every detail of the work, and whose artistic perception and good taste are evidenced in the execution of every order entrusted to his skilful hands for completion. 
 Mr. 
 Campbell is widely known and respected in trade circles, and has by the energy and enterprise which have characterised his conduct of the undertaking, well sustained the eminent reputation so long and deservedly enjoyed by this old-established business house. 
 236 Commercial Beith. 
 MESSRS. 
 HUGH MELVILLE &amp; CO. 
 , Roebank Print  ' Works, near Beith, Ayrshire. 
 One of the most interesting industries of Scotland is represented by the above firm. 
 The business dates back over fifty years, and was established by Mr. 
 Hugh Melville, his brother, and others, in premises now forming but an inconsiderable part of the extensive works of the firm.
These form the ground, and are wrought into various patterns dear to the Oriental taste. 
 Portions of the pattern are left of the natural creamy white of the silk, and on others are impressed portions of the pattern in colours, the contrast heightening the brilliant effect. 
 The handkerchiefs are made in pieces of eight squares, and more than a thousand pieces are turned out per diem, indicating a very extensive business. 
 The printing done for the home trade is also of the highest class, including the printing of Art curtains for the London market. 
 The business is as flourishing as it is reputable and extensive. 
 The Messrs. 
 Melville have carried it to a rare point of perfection and success, and their skill in hitting the critical taste of Eastern aristocrats is simply marvellous. 
 Their long experience of the business has given them a rare mastery of its requirements ; for the rest, it is perfectly evident, they are not likely to be found wanting. 
 CALEDONIA CABINET &amp; CHAIR WORKS. 
 Mr. 
 Matthew Pollock, Beith, Ayrshire. 
 The great and representative Cabinet-making and Chair manufacturing works of Mr. 
 Matthew Pollock, in Beith, now- form one of the main centres of the industry industry in Scotland, and, in some respects, are unrivalled in the United Kingdom. 
 Mr. 
 Pollock has had a life-long experience of the business, having been apprenticed at an early age to Mr. 
 James Dale, one of the most reputed craftsmen of his day. 
 In partnership with his brother, Mr. 
 John Pollock, he laid the foundation of the modern development of the cabinet-making business in Beith by establishing the celebrated Victoria Cabinet Works. 
 This took place in 1857, and from that date to 1879 he w7as devoted to the promotion of the enterprise, watching watching over its evolution and supporting it with undeviating attention. 
 When he started the above splendid concern the success of the enterprise in Beith was already assured — thanks to the many ingenious inventions for woodworking woodworking introduced by the firm of Messrs.
line of arches that curve southwards, we are on the site of Old Commercial Glasgow, and can hardly now realise how stupendous a change has taken place in the scene. 
 Up till the beginning of the 14th century Glasgow, apart from its ancient ecclesiastical importance, was Commercial Glasgow. 
 215 ROWAN &amp; CO. 
 , Boys '  Outfitters and Merchant Tailors, 104, Argyle Street, Glasgow. 
 A specially important department of commercial activity is represented in Glasgow by the eminent firm of Messrs. 
 Rowan &amp; Co. 
 , the well known Boys '  Outfitters and Merchant Tailors, whose popular establishment at 104, Argyle street, forms one of the most attractive features of that leading thoroughfare of the City. 
 The business is of very old standing having been established as far back as 1846, by Messrs. 
 Macintosh &amp; Fleming, from ,. 
 Messrs. 
 Rowan have cultivated with conspicuous success a special line in Boys '  and Youth ' s clothing, possessing for this purpose unrivalled facilities and resources, they are enabled to supply Boys '  and Youth ' s complete outfits for Schools and Colleges in all the newest styles, and of unexceptional cut, material, and workmanship. 
 It is necessary in connection with this department to disabuse the minds of parents and guardians of the idea that what are called the Appointed Outfitters Outfitters in certain public educational establishments are the only merchants permitted permitted to supply scholars '  outfits. 
 That this idea is sal - lacious is evidenced by the fact that Messrs. 
 Rowan have for a considerable period supplied complete outfits to most of the principal principal schools and colleges throughout the country, of which we may instance and many other High Scholastic Scholastic Institutions in the Kingdom. 
 Kingdom. 
 whom it was acquired several several years ago by the present proprietors. 
 The premises occupied by Messrs. 
 Rowan in Argyle Street, are of noble proportions, having been entirely re-modelled and rebuilt rebuilt at considerable cost about eight years since, and now present one of the handsomest and most commodious commodious business establishments establishments in the provinces. 
 The exterior is designed with artistic artistic taste, the magnificent facade forming a specially noteworthy feature of the building, and with the extensive frontage of brilliant brilliant plate glass reflects the highest credit on the builder ' s builder ' s and architect ' s skill. 
 The interior is of spacious proportions and is fitted throughout in recherche style, presenting every facility for the effective display of the high-class goods submitted for inspection.
The unwavering unwavering support of a large clientele at home and abroad constitutes an unimpeachable testimony alike to the merits of their goods and the liberality, courtesy, and attentiveness attentiveness with which these continue to be purveyed. 
 Messrs. 
 Ballantine have not only gained steadily in mercantile renown but have also, as gentlemen of ability and integrity, proved themselves worthy of the confidence and respect of all social circles, among whom both partners are personally well known ; and in Glasgow, where the firm ' s name is indelibly associated with all that is honourable in commerce and trade, Mr. 
 George Ballantine Ballantine has ably and creditably sustained the interests of the house under those principles instituted by his late esteemed father, and which have not been permitted to suffer any infraction. 
 McPHERSON BROTHERS, Cutlers, r56, Argyle Street, and 134, Trongate, Glasgow. 
 The important and prosperous cutlery business now conducted conducted at Glasgow by Messrs. 
 McPherson Brothers presents an interesting example of rapid commercial advancement, considering that the firm only commenced some ten years ago, and have since acquired a noteworthiness noteworthiness and distinction consistent with the enterprise under which their business has been developed. 
 Messrs. 
 McPherson first began business at 134, Trongate, and the rapid extension of trade that followed their operations operations necessitated such outlet as was afterwards provided by the acquisition of the Argyle Street establishment, long occupied by Messrs. 
 Reid &amp; Sons in the same line of trade. 
 Both houses are now thoroughly representative representative of the high-class cutlery trade, and are fitted and appointed in a manner that renders them attractive features of the two busy thoroughfares in which they are respectively located. 
 Besides all the miscellaneous items embraced in a first-class cutlery stock, both establishments are replete with every description of tradesmen ' s tools, ironmongery, fishing tackle, guns, revolvers, &amp;c. 
 ; and sporting men will here find everything everything requisite for shooting or fishing, from a single article to a complete equipment, at terms equallyfavourable equallyfavourable with those of the several depots devoting exclusive attention to these branches. 
 The Trongate shop, with its large frontage and admirable facilities for display, is one of the most attractive in its row, while the other at the corner of Mitchell Street and Argyle Street admits of a series of five show windows, wherein everything is effectively admitted to the inspection of the public. 
 The entire appearance of the house is suggestive suggestive of its high standing and importance as one of the City ' s leading cutlery emporia. 
 Everything in the windows is priced on neat hand-printed labels, this artistic work being executed by one of the partners, and the arrangement of the whole items is in perfect accordance accordance with good taste. 
 While it is beyond the scope of the present sketch to specialise the merits of each department represented, attention may be directed to the two specialties for which Messrs. 
 McPherson are the Mandarin Razors by the inventor of the celebrated Gem Air Guns these have been acknowledged at home and abroad as being as near to perfection as it is possible to attain. 
 Produced from a specially fine brand of English steel, forged very fine throughout and hardened and tempered with great care, the Mandarins possess every qualification that gentlemen accustomed to shave will readily appreciate. 
 They never require grinding, also very little stropping, and, under careful usage, are guaranteed to last a lifetime, giving at all times a luxurious and comfortable shave.
S. 
 E. 
 , on Paterson ' s Malt Preparations, published in Health, May 7th, 18S6. 
 Speaking on that subject, that eminent authority, Dr. 
 Milner Fothergill, who testifies to the strength, excellence, excellence, purity, and digestive power of this preparation, after an examination of specimens of pure Malt Extract made by Paterson ' s Chemical Manufacturing Company, Company, says: — use of malt extracts is the direct outcome of the practical aspect of chemical knowledge in its bearing upon clinical medicine. 
 The chemist observed that, in the process of malting, the starch of the barley underwent precisely the same change as does starch in the human mouth, viz. 
 , a conversion of the starch into grape-sugar under the action of a ferment (diastase). 
 The identity of the change led to the utilization of the diastase of cereals for the needs of human infants where the digestion of starch is defective. 
 As a consequence, malt extracts form a most useful food where the digestion is gravely impaired, whether in infants or adults. 
 They constitute, indeed, a food of a highly nutritious character in small bulk, and are therefore therefore available w7hen the stomach resents the presence of any bulk of These words should be sufficient guarantee that valuable use may be made of an extract such as that of the Paterson ' s Company not only as an aid to digestion fer infants and invalids, but in the ordinary w_ork of assimilation in heahhy individuals. 
 Another product oi Paterson ' s Chemical Company is a preparation of Cod Liver Oil with Malt Extract. 
 This is an admirable preparation in every way ; the sickness and disagreeable symptoms so often present where ■ordinary cod liver oil is used are entirely disposed of, for the preparation is palatable to the taste and easily assimilated ; it is therefore remarkably well adapted for the nutrition of invalids and children. 
 The Company are also large manufacturers of Epsom Salts, and do a substantial trade in this article, the Salts put up by the firm in all kinds of packages up to J-ton casks. 
 The Keiserite from which the Salts are made is obtained direct from Prussia in very large quantities, being shipped to Grangemouth, and coming from thence to the gates of the works by canal boats. 
 The works of the Company are pleasantly situated quite in the country, surrounded by green fields and hills in the distance. 
 Trains from Glasgow are available for the transit of goods to and from the works direct to the gates. 
 The works are specially conveniently situated in this respect, for they are bounded on the one side by the railway and on the other by the Forth and Clyde Canal. 
 From the canal bank the raw material used in the manufactures may be shot direct from the boats into the store sheds. 
 The Company, ever alive to the importance importance of easy facilities for the transit of goods, are at present having a siding put through the works direct from the railway. 
 The works cover some four acres of ground and consist mainly of extensive extensive buildings on the shed principle.
The malt barn is an exceedingly fine and substantially built brick structure of two flats, both being used for the preparation of malt. 
 The top flat is lighted from the roof, and the fittings and appointments of the barn are very similar to those in large breweries. 
 Cleanliness and good ventilation are everywhere apparent, and the greatest care is exercised in all the processes in the manufacture of the useful preparations of the Company. 
 Adjoining the malt barns are the kilns for drying and curing the green malt, &amp;c. 
 The Company are large maltsters, making malt themselves from the barley, this being one of the specialities of the firm. 
 The manufacturing, manufacturing, finishing, and packing departments are all nicely appointed, each being well fitted with all appliances appliances the requirements of each department demand. 
 The offices are commodious, comfortable, and conveniently conveniently situated, and are well lighted and ventilated. 
 The works are fitted with the newest and most approved machinery in all the different departments, especially noticeable being two well-made boilers and engines largely used in the manufacture of the various specialities specialities of the Company. 
 In a special shed devoted to this branch we notice several immense crystallizing pans used in the manufacture of Epsom Salts. 
 As the extract of malt manufactured by the Company is largely used by bakers in making malt bread, so highly recommended by the medical profession, it will be at once understood that enormous quantities of this preparation are sent to all parts of the country. 
 Mr. 
 Paterson, the manager of the Company, is a gentleman of great experience and ability, widely known, respected, and esteemed. 
 The Company employ some 40 women and girls and a large number of men at the works, and the constantly increasing increasing trade of the firm is a satisfactory token that the public are appreciating the energy and enterprise of the Company in placing a really useful and valuable article ot consumption in the market. 
 It is the more satisfactory to note the appreciation, because the Company have had, in a sense, to educate the taste of the public. 
 The registered offices of the Company are at 43, West Regent Street, Glasgow ; the telephone communication number of the Company being 1337 and the code telegraphic telegraphic address 218 Commercial Glasgow. 
 our readers for further information. 
 This gentleman makes a special feature of the supply of school books and educational literature generally, and in this branch of the business Mr. 
 Gibson has established a most substantial substantial and valuable connection with many of the leading leading schools and scholastic institutions in the kingdom, for which the services of an adequate staff of travellers are employed. 
 The establishment is also widely patronised by the general public, and under the personal direction of the principal is one of the favourite haunts of the lovers of books — whose names are legion — in the City and the surrounding districts. 
 of this review that all our old and wTell-loved companions companions of our youth are here : Dickens, Scott, Thackeray, and all the popular standard authors, together together with the latest additions to the roll of literary fame ; works on travel, theology, law7, philosophy, art, sciences, manufactures, and industries ; sports, games, and pastimes ; poultry, pigeons, and rabbits ; birds, bees, the horse, the dog, cattle, and a multitude of other subjects of interest to some section of the hydra-headed public.
The building has a frontage of 40 feet and is of three storeys, handsomely ornamented. 
 ornamented. 
 The windows and interior fittings are arranged after modern ideas, and do no small credit to the architect. 
 The interior saloon is devoted to a display of that excellent cabinet work and furniture for which Scotland has long been celebrated, comprising rosewood inlaid cabinets, bookcases; drawing-room, dining-room, and bedroom suites, after the styles of various periods; hall and library furniture, cheffoniers, sideboards, wardrobes, tables of various kinds, and, in a word, high-class furniture of every description. 
 Here also is the office. 
 The auction hall is alongside, and is a spacious and commodious locale for carrying on this branch of the business. 
 Its dimensions are 80ft. 
 by 20ft. 
 , and it is fitted with large folding doors to facilitate the receipt and dispatch of goods. 
 The first floor contains several showrooms devoted to carpets of all kinds, Axminster art, Brussels, Kensington, etc. 
 , together with hearthrugs, tapestries, cretonnes, brass and iron bedsteads, bedsteads, etc. 
 The third floor is devoted to sundry articles of furniture and bedding. 
 To the rear are very extensive showrooms. 
 Ample workshops are also provided, for carrying on the cabinet making and upholstery, fitted up with all the necessary appliances. 
 Near by are the wood stores for storing and seasoning the several hard woods employed. 
 There is employed a large and efficient staff of competent workmen. 
 The undertaking department is provided for on the same liberal scale, and is completely equipped. 
 Mr. 
 Muir does a large business in all departments, and enjoys a steady and rapidly-increasing patronage. 
 He is thoroughly at home in the auctioneering business, holding periodical sales in his own auction mart, or conducting sales on the spot for clients in town or country.
Ramsay &amp; Ramsay, whose establishment at Sauchiehall Street — opened only last year — has already become a widely-favoured and influential centre of West End commerce. 
 With characteristic push and enterprise the firm have evinced considerable promptitude in responding to the busy and increasing demands which the merits of their business have elicited, and to the original departments of the house (which have been subjected to complete re-arrangement) they have now added those of millinery, black dress goods, and mournings. 
 The paramount consideration that has been devoted to the comfort and convenience of lady patrons is well noted in the furnishing of the fitting room and mantle saloon, both of which are replete with attractions calculated to engage the admiration of the most fastidious. 
 Ladies may here survey at perfect leisure the many handsome novelties in coats, capes, paletots, and jackets, and Messrs. 
 Ramsay &amp; Ramsay possess excellent facilities for the practical adaptation of these — if need be — to the purchaser ' s express washes or taste. 
 With a keen regard for the fluctuating choice which the caprices of fashion are apt to develop on the part of customers, the firm make a special study of the prevalent modes, and these are reproduced with an accuracy and exactitude only ensured by prompt anticipation anticipation of the season ' s mutations. 
 On the occasion of the writer ' s visit, Messrs. 
 Ramsay &amp; Ramsay were inaugurating their first spring show, and this is apparently apparently destined to become a great and popular feature during the prosperous career of the house in time to come. 
 Wherever the eye rests in this fashionable. 
 business. 
 business centre it is at once gratified with the pervasion of genuine novelties, alike in black and coloured silks, Scotch, English, and French fabrics, and becoming head-dresses, of all of which the firm maintain a magnificent profusion, embracing every tempting specialty of the home and continental markets. 
 In millinery, especially, the designs illustrate all the most artistic developments of the day, while choice Parisian models are represented in tea gowns, dinner dresses, and costumes of all kinds, ladies '  tailor-made gowns, tailor-made jackets and coats, all cut and designed with Metropolitan taste. 
 In these as well as in perfect-fitting trousseaux, Messrs. 
 Ramsay &amp; Ramsay have cultivated a special feature, and the range of silks and dress goods, submitted submitted for selection and comparison in the windows and all round the establishment, are all alike recherche in tint, fabric, and general design. 
 The external appearance of the house is dignified by its large and very attractive frontage, and of the interior, which extends rearwards over a stretch of 90ft. 
 The front portion comprises the shop and warehouse, while the back portion forms the show rooms, and is effectively lighted from the large glass roof. 
 The fitting and work rooms are adjoining, and all practical details are under the immediate supervision supervision of the principals, by whom everything is closely scrutinised before being sent out. 
 Messrs. 
 Ramsay &amp; Ramsay have so far superseded the usages of high-class trade as to be able to produce and provide the best class of goods at exceptionally moderate prices, a principle which has found ample recognition in the support and growing patronage of a better-class clientele. 
 The future of the firm is well indicated in the rapid success they have attained during the first year of business ; and notwithstanding the competitive aspects of modern times there is everything to justify the assertion that, with combined energy, perseverance, and judiciously applied capital, Messrs.
The business is constantly experiencing extension in scope and, through Mr. 
 Adam ' s influence, becomes more widely known every day. 
 Prize medals were obtained for excellence at the London and Edinburgh Exhibitions, and, what is probably to the firm a more valuable tribute of commendation, commendation, the patronage of the house is ever receiving the most flattering augmentation from among circles critically alive to the merits of their artistic productions. 
 As an evidence of the high popularity attained by the house, we may mention that within the past ten years Mr. 
 Adam has completed for patrons no fewer than two hundred and twenty stained glass memorial windows windows in various parts of the world. 
 Prominent among these may be mentioned the James Baird memorial in Alloway Church; also the and windows in Old Greyfriar ' s, Stirling ; the Spier ' s memorial, Paisley Abbey ; the Ramsden memorial, Todcaster Parish Church, Yorkshire ; Houldsworth memorial, Coltness Church ; Colonel Buchanan ' s gift of windows to Coatbridge; the Corry memorial, Elmwood Elmwood Church, Belfast ; Kidston memorial, Cambuslang Cambuslang ; Smollett memorial, Bonhill ; Clark memorial, Paisley, etc. 
 , etc. 
 , etc. 
 Every specimen of the firm ' s work is characterised by extreme breadth and mastery of detail, rich harmony of colouring, and perfect technique, and no connoisseur can fail to appreciate the artistic taste displayed in every detail of the work carried out. 
 Mr. 
 Adam is a native of Midlothian, having been born at Bonnington, Edinburgh, in 1848. 
 He received his art training in the Government School of Art and the Haldane Academy, where, at an early age, he evinced phenomenal talent and carried off prize medals for skill and studious application. 
 He subsequentl subsequentl — while still a young man — commenced in his present business, wherein he has met with the highest success. 
 Mr. 
 Stephen Adam is a gentleman of exceptional exceptional culture and erudition. 
 He is a prominent member member of the Philosophical Society and of the Society of Literature and Arts. 
 His views on decorative art are well known by his lectures before the leading philosophical philosophical and architectural societies, while his published works on Glass; its History and modern Deve and Truth in Art have secured for him a high reputation. 
 As an art critic his abilities were expressly recognised by his appointment to a position on the Executive of the Glasgow East End Exhibition. 
 In every sphere in which this gentleman exercises his influence he is a decided acquisition, and his counsels are are received with the most marked respect and attention. 
 Commercial Ardrossan.
Murchie enjoys a first-class patronage from both landsmen and seamen, and his stock is necessarily large and select. 
 The finer grades of groceries and provisions are well represented, and high-class teas, blended on the premises, are a speciality. 
 The range of whiskies, brandies, and foreign spirits presents several features of special interest ; to one of which we may refer, namely, the famous Goat Fell wdrisky, -a pure Scotch distillation distillation of full maturity and fine flavour. 
 Mr. 
 Murchie has agents in America and Australia for this whisky, and commands a large trade. 
 The business is an excellent one throughout, and is ably controlled by Mr. 
 Murchie in person. 
 Commercial Glasgow. 
 209 JOHN DOVE &amp; SONS, Wholesale and Export Bottlers, Aerated Water Manufacturers, 49, 51, and 55, Pitt Street, Glasgow. 
 In reviewing the progress and present standing of the very important bottling and aerated water manufacturing manufacturing industry of the City, the above firm is one of the first to attract attention. 
 Established by Mr. 
 John Dove in Vicarage Street, Hope Street, in the latter end of the last century, its name soon became a household word in and around the City. 
 Under the name of its founder, the firm was carried on with increasing popularity and success till 1878, when the present designation was assumed. 
 The partners now are Messrs. 
 John, Peter, and Daniel Dove, all of whom are entirely devoted to the interests of the business, which, after all, are the interests of the public. 
 The premises comprise comprise the usual factory, office, yard, and stabling accommodation, accommodation, the factory being, of course, the most interesting interesting department. 
 There may be seen all the latest improved appliances of the trade : generators, syruping, filling, and corking machines, of the most ingenious construction, washing apparatus, &amp;c. 
 The name of Fielding &amp; Smith, of Belfast, appears on several of the machines, and this alone is a guarantee to the initiated of the most improved form of appliances. 
 The washing washing arrangements are specially noteworthy, and so effective are the mechanical appliances used in this department department that a blind attendant can do the work with the greatest ease. 
 All through the factory, the means adopted for securing purity in the water and syrups, and cleanliness in the process of manufacture, are praiseworthy praiseworthy in the highest degree, being, indeed, the vital point of the manufacture.
93 vans, boxes, and cases of all kinds for distributive purposes. 
 ; ice-making machines,. 
 vacuum or ether; ice cream freezers, machinery fittings, shafting, couplings, plummer blocks, etc. 
 ; and, in a word, all the thousand and one accessories of the trade down to a lemon squeezer or a pair of pincers. 
 All the parts of their machines are duplicated and kept in stock, so that if an accidental breakage should occur, any ordinary mechanic can put the matter right. 
 Messrs. 
 Bratby (ffi\ n (gh by a new process, and warranted to mix perfectly bright with syrups or water, imparting at the same time a rich aromatic flavour. 
 Specialities in this department are their Citrocloric Acid, for acidulating aerated beverages, and their Special Belfast Ginger Ale Extract or Elixir, indispensable for making that now universal drink. 
 We may add that the firm possess a dazzling array of medallic honors and certificates of merit, gained in all parts of the world. 
 One of the most perfect and complete trade catalogues we have seen is also issued by this prominent firm, consisting of over a hundred folio pages, on finished paper, beautifully bound, and full of the best engravings of machinery that have ever been produced for trade purposes, together with a complete descriptive letterpress. 
 They also supply the Practical Mineral Water Manufacturer, a book containing full instructions on all things connected with the manufacture. 
 We must not omit to mention, in drawing this brief notice to a close, that this firm hold an immense stock of second-hand machinery by all makers which they dispose of at easy prices, take charge of the registering of clients '  trade marks, conduct valuations, arrange partnerships, and negotiate businesses. 
 As their goods are kept in stock by the principal firms abroad and in the Colonies, their connexion may be considered international ; while in business capacity, enterprise, reputation, and executive power, it is not too much to say that Messrs Bratby and Hinchliffe, Limited, occupy a position in the trade of which any firm might be proud, and which, so far, is certainly unrivalled. 
 andI^Hinchliffe, Limited, are also well known for the preparations of their laboratory, and supply the trade with Derezinized Soluble Fruit Essences, manufactured BALLANTYNE &amp; DRUMMOND, Merchant Tailors, 76, Robertson Street, Glasgow. 
 The eminent Glasgow firm of Messrs. 
 Ballantyne and Drummond rank prominently among the representatives representatives of high-class trade in this City, and for upwards of fifteen years their operations have, to a large degree, contributed to the prosperity of Merchant Tailoring, a branch of work in which they are well known to excel. 
 The business was originally founded by Mr. 
 Ballantyne, and Mr. 
 Dykes was for some time a partner of the firm. 
 Upon his retirement, Mr.
Drummond was assumed as partner, and during the past two years the firm have been known under the title that heads this brief sketch. 
 their numerous lady patrons. 
 The fitting room, office and wotk rooms are all towards the rear, and the basement is devoted to the purposes of damping and shrinking, a class of work whereby the firm are enabled to rely upon the sound quality and excellence of every class of tailoring productions they provide. 
 All cloths brought into the establishment are tested with strong acid in order to ascertain the fastness of the dyes and to the absolute quality of their fabrics. 
 Messrs. 
 Ballantyne and Drummond devote an amount of attention and consideration well calculated to increase as well as preserve the confidence and appreciation of their large clientele. 
 They are, at all times, in advance of the prevalent fashions, and display an exactitude in style only attainable by close observance of the various mutations in public taste. 
 Style, fit, quality, and finish of workmanship are features in which Messrs. 
 Ballantyne and Drummond have acquired a high standard fitted to resist all the possibilities of modern competition. 
 Both gentlemen are well-known and esteemed for their zealous interest in maintaining the essentially high-class characteristics of the tailoring trade ; and while these are in no instance subordinated to mere cheapness, the firm have made moderate prices and good quality a standing rule, and are unsurpassed by any competing house in that fashionable art of which they have already proved themselves capable and intelligent masters. 
 The situation of the house is, from any point of view, most favourable to the class of business represented, the firm ' s premises being the first from Argyle Street ; and, being substantial in appearance and tastefully arranged and appointed, they form a pleasing feature of the Robertson Street thoroughfare. 
 Here are exhibited all the latest and best fabrics in Cheviots, Meltons, Fancy Coatings, Vicunas, Serges, and Killarney Tweeds ; and there are an exhaustiveness and variety in the shades, textures, and patterns which afford ample choice to the most refined or the most fastidious taste. 
 Many handsome cloths are shown in their varied adaptations to Ladies '  Tailor-made Dresses, Jackets, Ulsters, and Riding Habits ; and in this department alone Messrs. 
 Ballantyne and Drummond have acquired a reputation consistent with the splendid finish and style they illustrate in carrying out the wishes of Commercial Dunoon. 
 264 Biography, etc. 
 , etc. 
 , all find places on the innumerable shelves, the library forming a really handsome collection of high-class literature. 
 The shop is admirably fitted with show cases, the contents of which are very artistically artistically arranged. 
 The stock is large and in great variety, containing, in addition to the general run of stationers '  goods, a fine collection of Artists '  Materials tiy the well-known firm of Winsor &amp; Newton, for whom Mr. 
 Smith acts as Agent in the district; an unique selection of Photographs of Scottish Scenery by the eminent houses of Wilson, Valentine, &amp; Poulton; Bibles and School Books; Magazines; and Field Glasses of all descriptions and makes.
The business was inaugurated in November of last year by Messrs. 
 James Fraser and John Ross, both gentlemen having had considerable experience in the trade, the former with the eminent firm of Messrs. 
 Mann, By ' ars, &amp; Co. 
 , by whom he was retained for seven years as head cutter and manager of their readymade readymade factories, Mr. 
 Ross also being in the service of this firm for the past eight years. 
 The premises occupied for the business comprise a handsome block of three flats at 106, Brunswick Street, with well-appointed offices and stock rooms on the first floor, the upper flats being utilised for cutting, finishing, and machine rooms. 
 The productions of the firm include every description of gentlemen ' s, youths ' , and juvenile readymade readymade clothing in all the latest and most fashionable styles, and of the highest quality of material and finished workmanship. 
 The firm exclusively confine themselves to this trade, w7hich enables them to give Mr. 
 Fraser is Vice-President of the National Federation of Foreman Tailors of Great Britain, and an enthusiast in his trade. 
 JOHN M. 
 PICKEN, Refreshment Contractor, 375, 377, 379, Paisley Road, Glasgow. 
 provided with first-class cooking apparatus. 
 An important important and special feature of the business is the catering and contracting for the supply of refreshments, plant, linen, plate, glass, napery, &amp;c, for ball suppers, wedding breakfasts, dance and soiree parties, trial trips of ships and steamers, and camp messes. 
 This department department is admirably organised, Mr. 
 Picken, from his long experience, being fully capable of undertaking contracts of any magnitude, and in connection with catering for regimental necessities, it is nothing unusual for this gentleman to provide for as many as 1,000 people at a time. 
 This certainly requires a great amount of patience, skill, and resource, qualities which are evidently evidently abundant in Mr. 
 Picken ' s case, enabling him to satisfy the requirements of a multitude on the shortest notice. 
 Before leaving this branch of the business, we may mention that at the time our representative visited the establishment he was permitted, in a brief view behind the scenes, to witness the operation of converting half-a-dozen large hams into sandwiches, this being accomplished with great celerity by about the same number of stalwart assistants, who, with keen, glittering blades, rapidly reduced the meat to the necessary proportions proportions for providing in sandwich form the delicacies soon to be demolished by a school feast in the vicinity. 
 Wedding Cakes are quite a speciality of Mr. 
 Picken ' s business.
The services of a large number of sale assistants, assistants, waitresses, pastrycooks, bakers, &amp;c, are employed in the business in supplying the requirements of the wide circle of patrons of the establishment, the whole management being ably conducted by the principal, who is young, energetic, and enterprising — qualities which cannot fail to gain for him the success which his great abilities entitle him to command. 
 In estimating the commercial importance of a great centre like Glasgow, we are greatly impressed with the innumerable business undertakings whose magnitude is evidenced by their appearance of substantial stability, and in this connection it becomes our pleasant duty to direct the attention of our readers to the noteworthy establishment conducted by Mr. 
 Picken, refreshment contractor, 375, 377, and 379, Paisley Road. 
 The above-named gentleman commenced business operations operations ten years ago at the present address, acquiring for this purpose the handsome block of buildings which forms an attractive feature in this popular thoroughfare. 
 The premises are centrally situated near the Shields Road, and have an extensive frontage, comprising five splendid plate-glass windows and two large doorways. 
 The interior is very elegantly appointed, and is conveniently conveniently arranged in three divisions, the bakery occupying one side and the dining saloons and confectionery '  department the others. 
 Dealing with them in this order, we find the first-named stocked with all kinds of plain, fancy, and dietetic bread, cakes, &amp;c, of the highest quality, produced by special modern and improved improved appliances, ensuring the utmost purity and cleanliness in the various processes of preparation. 
 The dining saloons are spacious and comfortably furnished apartments, and are daily patronised by hundreds of visitors for dinners, teas, &amp;c, which are deftly served by neat and civil attendants. 
 The confectionery department department is notable for a display of high-class goods of this description, many of which may be classed as artistic examples of the confectioner ' s art. 
 The bakery is situated in the basement, and, as we have already observed, is constructed on modern scientific principles, and is of sufficient capacity for the production of enormous enormous quantities of bread, cakes, &amp;c, and is also Commercial Glasgow. 
 146 MESSRS. 
 DAVIDSON JUNIOR &amp; DAVIDSON, Wholesale Tea Dealers, 48, York Street, Glasgow. 
 Begun in the year 1870, and established by Mr. 
 John McCulloch, this enterprise has, under its new and most energetic proprietors, already reached a high degree of prosperity, which, as a visit to Messrs. 
 Davidson ' s establishment will show, gives every promise of long continuance and fuller development. 
 development. 
 York Street, which runs from the leading thoroughfare, Argyle Street, to the harbour, might almost be called the Mincing Lane of Glasgow, and in a most favourable situation there Messrs. 
 Davidson Junior and Davidson occupy the ground floor with a very commodious, well-lighted, and handsome suite of offices, admirably adapted in every respect for the special purposes of the trade. 
 Besides well-appointed and comfortable rooms for the more private transaction of business, there are suitably equipped sample and tasting rooms, in which experienced tea-tasters may be seen busy at work estimating the quality and value of various newly imported samples, or trying to attain an attractive blend for the now most fastidious palates of modern connoisseurs in tea. 
 Besides these departments, and stretching to the rear, are airy and spacious warehouses, warehouses, fragrant with the long imprisoned aroma of the precious leaf brought across the seas.
The floors literally groan under the costly load of quaintly adorned chests from the smiling fields of far Cathay, the steamy valleys of Assam, the wooded heights of the Himalayas, or the palm-fringed Island of Ceylon. 
 Indeed, no known quality of Tea — and their name is now legion — but seems to be fairly and even liberally represented here, and great skill is shown, in catering for the different tastes of a varied population whose wants are numerous and divergent, and who are becoming, year by year, more critical as to the quality of the tea supplied to them, as the market ' s capacity to furnish definite qualities developes with the higher skill now brought to bear on the preparation and growth of this most important important beverage of civilized man. 
 However great may be the care manifested by local growers in selecting and cultivating particular plants, and in choosing the most favourable soil, a vast deal can now be done to improve tea for the home market by a judicious blend of qualities noted for strength, flavour, or aroma, as furnished by different brands grown perhaps under entirely different conditions, though all pure teas. 
 In Messrs. 
 Davidson ' s is to be seen in active operation machinery of the most improved kind and designed for all the different operations operations required to perfect the process of mixing tea. 
 In all the departments of this enterprise, Mr. 
 Davidson Davidson Junior has brought to bear a ripe experience obtained obtained in a first-class London house, and he has evidently applied his knowledge of detail with great practical intelligence and deserved success to the supply of the tea market in the wide and populous area which has its centre in the City of Glasgow. 
 McNAUGHTAN &amp; SINCLAIR, Wholesale, Mercantile, and Export Stationers ; Bookbinders, Paper Rulers, Lithographers, and Printers, 24, West Nile Street; 20, Union Street; and 46, Mitchell Street, Glasgow. 
 One of the leading representative houses engaged in this important department of commercial activity is that of the old-established firm of Messrs. 
 McNaughtan and Sinclair, Wholesale, Mercantile, and Export Stationers, Stationers, Bookbinders, Paper Rulers, Lithographers, and Printers. 
 The business was founded nearly a quarter of a century ago by Messrs. 
 McNaughtan and Sinclair, and although the co-partnery was dissolved so long ago as 1875 by the retiral of Mr. 
 McNaughtan, the present partners — Messrs. 
 Alexander Sinclair, sen. 
 , Alexander Sinclair, jun. 
 , and Robert D. 
 Sinclair — still trade under the title so long associated with the firm. 
 The headquarters of the business are situated at 24, West Nile Street, and comprise a commodious double shop, with large plate glass windows utilised for the display of mercantile mercantile and general stationery, etc. 
 Below and behind this is a sunk flat, occupying an area of over 6,000 square feet, which is utilised as a warehouse for the extensive stock of papers of every description, from the thinnest tissue to the heaviest packing paper, and also all qualities and sizes of book and writing papers, both handmade and machine made. 
 Here also a number of girls are occupied in paper-folding and packing and in making address labels, for which special machinery, capable of turning out a large quantity of work, has been laid down.
B. 
 Proprietor — Mr. 
 A. 
 H. 
 McPherson. 
 This magnificent establishment, which, in respect of situation, commodiousness, and genera) attractiveness, occupies a pre-eminent position among the hotels of Loch Lomond district, is most capably conducted under the proprietorship of Mr. 
 A. 
 H. 
 McPherson, whose intimate acquaintance with every department of hotel management ensures, for the numerous guests visiting the establishment, those comforts which, awa)7 from home, are so gratifying to the tourist in pursuit of rest, health, and pleasure. 
 The Tarbet Hotel commands a view of surpassing beauty. 
 Ben Lomond can be seen in all his native grandeur and magnificence, while a thousand other beauties arise on every hand to render which has been devoted to the comfort and convenience of guests, and, apart from the superior furnishing and equipment of the entire suite of dining and sitting rooms, the appurtenances and large number of bedrooms are models of perfect taste and management. 
 Among recreative adjuncts must be noted the magnificent lawn where croquet, lawn tennis, and kindred kindred games are wont to be played during the season. 
 Complete privacy and unobtrusiveness are also evident features of this hotel, and single parties or families may here have their best wishes in this matter fully assured ; special arrangements being made — where necessary — for children, fn every respect the Tarbet Hotel is well the situation a perfect Eden. 
 The hotel is now of great magnitude, having, of late, been enlarged by the addition of a fine billiard room (wherein two excellent tables have been placed), a number of private sitting rooms, ladies '  drawing rooms, bedrooms, etc. 
 The longestablished longestablished supremacy of the Tarbet Hotel continues to be enhanced and preserved in a manner creditable to its first associations. 
 Elegance and refinement are its predominating qualifications, both internally and externally, and the imposing facade presents a striking evidence of the immense accommodation at disposal, the series of windows all affording an idea of the magnitude and importance of the establishment as the centre of a constant and high-class body of tourists to the locality. 
 Internally there are evidences of the unsparing attention calculated to meet the taste of the most fastidious, and as a genuinely first-class hotel, moderate in tariff, unexceptional in the excellence of its cuisine, and provided with every modern essential, it holds pre-eminent rank among kindred establishments, and it certainly has no superior throughout the country. 
 Politeness, attentiveness, attentiveness, and courtesy are freely proffered, and Mr. 
 A. 
 H.
Church, St. 
 Andrew ' s Hall, and the head 186 Commercial Glasgow. 
 JAMES WALLACE, Carver and Gilder, 313,  '  Dumbarton Road, uiasgow. 
 Amongst the leading attractions of this fine thoroughfare special distinction must be assigned to the well-known and highly popular art repository of Mr. 
 James Wallace, Carver and Gilder, 313, Dumbarton Road, to which we have pleasure in directing the attention of our readers. 
 The business was originally established by Mr. 
 Wallace about ten years ago, at premises in the vicinity, from which he subsequently moved, to meet the requirements of his trade, to Great Western Road (in which place he was for some years), and from thence to his present address. 
 The establishment in Dumbarton Road is of extensive proportions, comprising handsome and commodious commodious double-fronted shop fitted throughout with appointments of a tasteful character, offering every convenience for the effective display of the large and comprehensive stock of high-class goods exhibited by the proprietor. 
 The windows contain an attractive assortment of choice etchings, engravings, and prints of the leading popular artists; water-colour drawings and a wide selection of artists '  materials, colours, and other requisites. 
 requisites. 
 The interior presents a very recherche appearance, the walls being painted in subdued colours, enhancing the effect of the beautiful works of art which are displayed with attractive taste on either side; and here may also be inspected an extensive stock of English and Continental gilt and other mouldings suitable for frames in every style. 
 At present Mr. 
 Wallace does not manufacture on the premises, but has the frames manufactured outside by some of the best workmen in Scotland. 
 Mr. 
 Wallace has in contemplation the establishment of workshops for the production of every desctiption of gilt and other frames and in order to meet the numsrous requiremsnts of his clients in this direction. 
 The business connection already secured by the proprietor is of a most influential character, embracing connoisseurs and art patrons in the City and surrounding districts ; and Mr. 
 Wallace is also well supported by the general public, whose confidence has been established by the exceptionally superior quality of the articles supplied from this deservedly popular emporium of art. 
 Mr. 
 Wallace is well known as one of the best judges of pictures in Glasgow, and, in addition to having had long experience in art matters, Mr. 
 Wallace for five or six years passed through a curriculum at Glasgow University.
MTNNES &amp; M ' LACHLAN, Gas Heating and Cooking Apparatus Manufacturers, Lamp Manufacturers, Tinsmiths and Gasfitters, 258, George Street, Glasgow. 
 In recording in permanent form the history and position of the leading industrial enterprises of Glasgow, we are pleased to notice the above firm, which has gained a leading place among those associated with the modern developments of gas heating as applied to fires and cooking operations. 
 The present proprietors, Messrs. 
 David M ' Innes and Archibald M ' Lachlan, entered into partnership May, 1889, with a view to carrying on a department of industrial enterprise which had previously been carried on by Messrs. 
 R. 
 and A. 
 Main, the eminent firm of gas cooking and heating stove manufacturers. 
 Mr. 
 M ' Innes for sixteen years had held an important position in connection with the firm of Messrs. 
 R. 
 and A. 
 Main, and the fact that they handed over a branch of their business to Mr. 
 M ' Innes is an evidence of the esteem and confidence in which that gentleman was held by his former employers. 
 Mr. 
 M ' Innes had also previously been engaged with the great cooking stove firm of John Wright and Company, of Birmingham, where heacquired great experience in connection with his important art. 
 Nor is Mr. 
 M ' Lachlan less experienced in his special line of business ; and wTork entrusted to the firm is certain to receive prompt and careful attention. 
 In the hands of the present firm the business has greatly developed. 
 Messrs. 
 M ' Innes and M ' Lachlan are widely known as first-class makers of gas apparatus, as general gas fitters, and tinsmiths.
They also make a specialty of the manufacture of plain and fancy lamps for all purposes, and their services are in constant demand in this department of industry. 
 The premises occupied comprise a large flat with very attractive show windows and showrooms to the front. 
 Here may be seen in endless variety samples of every section of their work, from the neat and well-designed cooking stoves, which form one of its main features, down to the smallest item of gas fitting. 
 In ordinary gas-heating stoves and lamps, all types and sizes are shown, many of no small artistic merit. 
 To the rear of the show rooms are the business offices, and behind these the spacious and well-found workshops of the firm, manned with a large and busy staff. 
 Great skill is displayed in the design and fitting up of their several specialities, and reflects no small credit on the workmen, many of whom must be no mean artists. 
 We need hardly intimate that the trade done in all departments is unusually unusually large. 
 The firm are very favourably known in and around Glasgow, and both partners are well known besides as practical experts in the business. 
 Mr. 
 M ' Innes travels himself, and attends to the wants of the clients with great success, placing the whole of his extensive skill and experience at their service. 
 The house holds a leading place in trade circles, where both partners are highly popular and respected. 
 Under their skilful management and energetic control, and by their untiring exertions, the house has attained its present honourable position and a certain promise of still greater influence in the future in the rising department of industry to which it is devoted. 
 Commercial Loch Awe. 
 321 Rob Roy ' s Cave ; the Islands on Loch Lomond, on some of which are the remains of feudal strongholds ; and, within a few yards of the hotel, Inversnaid Falls, rendered rendered famous by Wordsworth ' s celebrated poem, To a Highland Coaches to and from Loch Katrine run in connection with the steamers there, and there are also admirable services of coaches between Inversnaid and the Trossachs. 
 In the control of these various enterprises, Mr. 
 Robert Blair has evidently displayed displayed magnificent business aptitude and power of organisation. 
 His methods tend to secure the pleasure of his patrons, and in all parts of the world, among a most influential clientele, his name and the names of his several undertakings are both identified with the highest degree of merit that can attach to the commercial enterprises of a business man. 
 THE TAYCREGGAN HOTEL, North Portsonachan, Loch Awe. 
 Messrs. 
 A.
There is no more attractive establishment in this favourite watering place than the fine emporium of Messrs. 
 Clark and Co. 
 , the leading drapers in the town, which fully merits the attention of the readers of this work. 
 The business is of old-established standing, having been founded as far back 1816 by the late Mr. 
 James Clark, who was succeeded by Mr. 
 Thomas Clark, and was ultimately acquired by the present proprietor, Mr. 
 Craig, in 1887. 
 The premises occupied by this gentleman are centrally situated at 47, Main Street, the busiest portion of the town, and comprise handsome double-fronted shop fitted throughout with excellent taste, the appointments setting off with much advantage the comprehensive and varied stock submitted for inspection. 
 This comprises a well-selected assortment of goods in the various departments, which include general furnishing and household drapery and a varied range of all the latest novelties. 
 The furnishing department is, as in all coast towns, a leading branch, and includes carpets, floorcloths, floorcloths, lace curtains from all the leading makers ; while the napery, sheetings, and cottons are direct from the leading English and Irish houses, only the leading makes — Messrs. 
 Horrocks '  cottons and sheetings and Messrs. 
 Rylands '  celebrated Dacca cottons being kept in stock. 
 Gloves, umbrellas, and corsets are always shown in the latest novelties. 
 The firm are the local agents for Messrs. 
 Dent, Allcroft, &amp; Sons '  well-known makes of gloves and Thomson ' s stays. 
 Special attention is directed by the firm to the dressmaking department, in which they employ the services of a staff of first-class workpeople on the premises under efficient management. 
 An extensive and high-class trade has been secured by the proprietor, the connection embracing the leading families resident in the district and the substantial patronage of the numerous visitors who throng the town in the tourist season. 
 T. 
 MACKAY, Junr. 
 , Baker, Confectioner, and Purveyor, 33, Main Street, Largs, N.
Reid &amp; Co. 
 do a good business with fishermen and fishing companies in Scotland, and their goods, so far as they have been yet tested, are found to be both strong and durable. 
 As one of the younger representatives of the industry which has carried the fame of Kilbirnie to all parts of the globe, we congratulate them on their success, and have no doubt that they will divide the honors and rewards of the industry with the best firms in the trade. 
 Commercial Glasgow. 
 187 MESSRS. 
 JAMES THOMSON &amp; SON, Clothiers, 84 and 86, St. 
 Vincent Street, Glasgow. 
 Among those old and influential Glasgow houses that have so well sustained the dignity and importance of the City ' s high-class clothing trade, that of Messrs. 
 James Thomson and Son possesses an especial eminence eminence both by reason of the highly respectable character of its connections and the simple historic fact that it is the oldest representative of this branch of commerce at present existing in the Scottish capital. 
 It was inaugurated inaugurated at the time of the Georges, and during the greater part of a century and a half it has formed a leading and pioneer centre of the trade it represents, and has been prominently associated with all the fashionable innovations and developments that have taken place within the course of that lengthy period. 
 At the time of the Second Jacobite Rebellion the establishment establishment came under the depredations of the Highlanders, Highlanders, and its then valuable stocks of clothing were made subjects of the general plunder that followed Prince Charlie ' s unwelcome visit to Glasgow. 
 For many years the house was known under the firm title of Messrs. 
 Ewing and Wingate, but since so far back as 1857 it has been identified by the present name, and the firm bear that standing and repute in City commerce which, considering the antiquity and unimpeachable prestige of the business, it would be impossible to displace. 
 displace. 
 All the characteristics of the high-class tailoring emporia of the present day are fully embodied in the fitting and appointment of the St. 
 Vincent Street house, where every detail is in full accordance with the essentials essentials of elegance and good taste. 
 The immense variety of materials submitted affords due insight into the re- sources of the firm, which enable them to offer a range of choice that is altogether unexampled. 
 They deal in no fabrics but the finest that can be obtained, and their productions consequently embody every desirable qualification qualification of durability and excellence. 
 With the aid of a staff of tailors, whose skilful workmanship has greatly tended to enhance the renown of the house, the firm make up everything that comes within the scope of the high-class clothing and outfitting trade. 
 They operate under special appointment as robe makers to the University, University, while their pulpit gowns possess a celebrity that is not of yesterday ' s origin.
This handy little volume contains a mass of useful information conveniently arranged for reference in the concise form, with plain directions for the homœpathic treatment of common complaints, and a list of common remedies, the indications for their use, with suitable doses, &amp;c. 
 This admirable little work has already reached its ninth edition, and should find a place on the bookshelf bookshelf of every household. 
 BUCHAN AND PETRIE, Fairfield Drapery Mansion House, 2, 4, 6, 10, Helen Street, Govan, Glasgow. 
 The constant expansion and development of trade and commerce on the borders of the Mercantile Metro- polis have brought into deserved prominence many notable instances of rapid and successful business enter- prise, among which may be mentioned the immense business concern of Messrs. 
 Buchan &amp; Petrie, who, within a period of ten years, have developed what is now undoubtedly the largest house of the kind in this City ' s suburban trade. 
 The Fairfield House, so designed after the famous shipbuilding yard which it closely adjoins, occupies the most prominent location in Govan, •whether from a structural or commercial point of view, and the manner in which it has been adapted, arranged, and planned to suit the purposes of a large and com- prehensive drapery trade reflects the highest credit on the foresight of Messrs. 
 Robert Buchan and William Thomson Petrie, the esteemed partners of the firm. 
 Situated at the corner of Helen Street and Morrison Street, and directly facing the Govan Cross and Govan Road, the Fairfield House stands as one of the great familiar features of this vicinity ; and its large window frontage facing Helen Street, Morrison Street, and Govan Road at once presents to the public a clear and attractively arranged index to the many features and trading departments which the firm specialise and exemplify. 
 The warehouse comprises three flats : the first in the basement, the second on the street level, and the third above. 
 The principal sale department is on the street level, and here the magnitude and variety shown in all the details of general and fancy drapery attest how fully and exhaustively the firm enter upon the whole phases of the trade with the view of satisfying every possible requirement of the widespread family connections by whom the Fairfield House is patronised. 
 Visitors will find much to admire in the distinct system of departmental supervision observed, each section being in charge of a capable and experienced assistant. 
 The basement is reserved for a large stock of cottons, linens, blankets, flannels, sheeting, and all kinds of heavy or furnishing draperies, and, like the floor above, it is spacious, commodious, and well arranged. 
 By a hand- some new stairway access is gained to the large upper flat, the range of windows all round which convey effective light, and here are illustrated the various specialties in mantles, millinery, ready-mades for men and boys, carpets, waxcloths, and bedding. 
 While it is impossible to devote adequate attention to each of these departments within the space at our disposal, it may be said that each division of the stock is representative in its particular line, and that the goods shewn embrace the products of the best centres of supply purchased in the most advantageous markets, and listed at prices fully in accordance with every requirement of a pushing and competitive age. 
 The workrooms are apart, though possessing every convenience and facility to secure alike due promptitude in all orders and the sound excellence and finish for which the productions of the Fairfield House are more than locally famed. 
 Besides carrying through the operations of general drapers, milliners, mantle makers, clothiers, fancy goods and small wares merchants, hosiers, glovers, and gents '  mercers, Messrs. 
 Buchan &amp; Petrie have set aside a special branch of their premises, further up Helen Street, as a first-class hat emporium for the supply of all the latest novelties in men ' s and boys '  hats and the other details of minor outfit. 
 In bespoke tailoring they employ a large staff of well-selected workmen trained in every specialistic phase of the sartorial art, producing excellent, wellmade, wellmade, and fashionable garments at less than onehalf onehalf of the prices charged by many City houses. 
 Being a practical tailor and cutter, long experienced in the mutations of taste and season, Mr. 
 Buchan himself undertakes the work of designing, with results that have placed this house first in the tailoring trade of Govan.
On the other hand, Mr. 
 Petrie bestows entire personal attention to buying and the general conduct of the business, and the management of a staff of about 40 hands. 
 Both gentlemen are well known, not only in Govan, but all over the south side and in the City, where their sociable, genial, and agreeable dispositions have earned universal esteem. 
 As a firm ever zealous in promoting the interests of the middle and working classes, for whom they more especially cater, their ostensible aim is to provide for the wants of a large and appreciative community in a manner profitable alike to themselves and their constituents. 
 Their annual clearing sales are anticipated with eagerness by the people of Govan, and in the systems and methods adopted by the firm to render the Fairfield House a popular and satisfactory satisfactory medium of domestic supply, the ability and commercial commercial talents of the principals are well signalised. 
 Hz 176 Commercial Glasgow MESSRS. 
 R. 
 A. 
 PEACOCK and SON, Bakers, Cooks, and Confectioners, &amp;c, Paisley Road Toll, Glasgow. 
 unique reputation for artistic taste in design and sterling quality of the ingredients. 
 These cakes are manufactured manufactured under the personal supervision of the proprietor, who has always made this branch his special forte, and who supplies the artistic portion of the work with his own skilful hands. 
 Orders for cakes of this description are executed for all parts of the United Kingdom, and many are supplied to wealthy patrons in the Colonies, India, and America, the prices ranging from one to fifty guineas. 
 It may be mentioned here that Mr. 
 Peacock keeps a photographic record of the many varied and beautiful designs of wedding-cakes manufactured manufactured at this establishment, and that intending purchasers purchasers may inspect this splendid album for the purpose of selecting a design to suit their taste. 
 The plain and fancy bread baked at the establishment is also held in great favour for its nutritive qualities, and is daily supplied to the leading residents in Glasgow and district. 
 district. 
 An important branch of the business of the firm also deserving special mention is the catering department, department, in which they undertake the purveying of dinners, luncheons, wedding breakfasts, suppers, pic-nics, trial trips, and all kinds of social and festive functions for large and small parties on contract terms or by agreement. 
 agreement. 
 Messrs. 
 Peacock provide for this purpose all the necessary requisite tables, seats, silver, plate, cutlery, china, glass, napery, &amp;c, &amp;c, of which the firm hold an immense stock, being on an emergency able to cater for the requirements of the largest gatherings in the highest style of efficiency and taste.
Handsome plate glass window ' s window ' s with extensive street frontage are devoted to the display of the high-class stock, and present a splendid exhibition of the leading specialities of the house. 
 The interior is elegantly appointed and decorated with great taste, and here the visitor has an opportunity of inspecting inspecting a very large and most comprehensive assortment of goods of this description. 
 This includes in the various departments ladies '  or gentlemen ' s silk and other umbrellas, with handles and mounts of modern design ; portmanteaus, bags, and travelling trunks of solid leather and sound workmanship ; gentlemen ' s waterproof coats and ladies '  capes and indiarubber goods ; football and cricketing requisites, and an immense variety of richly mounted dressing cases, desks, work boxes, albums, book slides, hand mirrors, purses, pocket books, and every description of fancy leather goods, &amp;c. 
 Spacious work rooms in the basement provide accommodation for the manufacturing operations of the business, and repairs of every description are also executed by skilled workmen workmen employed for this purpose. 
 As an instance of the promptitude with which this class of work is completed at this establishment, it is worthy of note that the proprietor proprietor undertakes the re-covering of an umbrella within the very short space of 30 minutes, an evidence of the order and system with which the department is conducted. 
 Mr. 
 Wilkie is also proprietor of a branch establishment situated at 286, Argyle Street, which was founded by the father of this gentleman upwards of half a century ago, and which is stocked with similar goods to the Candleriggs emporium, the whole business being conducted under the personal supervision of the principal, who has by his energetic management and courteous attention to the requirements of his numerous patrons established a connection embracing the leading nobility, clergy, and gentry in all parts of Scotland. 
 Mr. 
 Wilkie is widely known and esteemed in commercial commercial circles, and the ability, prudence, and enterprise which have distinguished his conduct of this remarkably developed business concern, place him in the foremost category of the mercantile successes of the country. 
 The Grand Tour 350 enjoy, — to Loch Etive, Glencoe, and Ballachulish, where stands a good hotel ; to Fort William by the Devil ' s Staircase, to Loch Linnhe, and to Loch Awe, as well a« to Staffa, Iona, Skye, Stornoway, &amp;c. 
 Castle on its rocky prominence, pronounced one of the most picturesque ruins in all bonnie Within four miles of Oban stands what is left of Dunstaffnage Castle, once the seat and centre of Scottish monarchy, where, too, lay for long the Crowning Crowning Stone or Stone of Destiny, afterwards enthroned at No place can offer such a splendid variety of health ROTHESAY CASTLf ISLE OF BUTE. 
 Scone, and now under the Crowning Chair of Westminster Westminster -Abbey. 
 Certain over-wise men tell us that hither the stone was brought by Jeremiah, and that it is the same as the stone on which Jacob laid his head when he saw the angels ! It would be impossible to describe all the excursions which the Obanese can and interest, of mountain, sea, and island, as Oban ; and a visit to such scenes as it commands will never be forgotten. 
 The return journey ought to be made by rail, through carriages running to Glasgow by every train. 
 Commercial Fort William. 
 337 distilleries. 
 The pot still is used in the newer as in the older distillery, three wash stills of a capacity of 8,000 gallons, and five feint stills with a capacity of 2,500 gallons, completing the distilling equipment. 
 Both steam and water power are supplied. 
 As might be expected, there are appliances and arrangements of great interest in the newer premises. 
 Thus the grain barrows or trollies contain five bushels each, and so act as measures in receiving the grain, and gravitation does the work of transference wherever possible ; for instance, between the washbacks and the stills shoots and elevators abound for transporting the grain ; the residuum from the mash tun or being dried by one of Hecking ' s Patent Grain Drying Machines, so that, if not immediately disposed of for feeding purposes, they do not deteriorate.
Lawrence ' s perpendicular refrigerators have displaced, too, the older horizontal is as white as snow, and the utmost order and regularity are apparent throughout. 
 As to the distilling process, it is the same as that usually followed in making Highland malt. 
 But the element of experience plays so large a part in distilling, that nothing else can supply its place, and, fortunately, the Ben Nevis distilleries are not deficient here. 
 The staff, from the managers to the workmen, all know what they are. 
 about, and possess a wide general knowledge of the conditions of successful distilling beyond the limits of any special department. 
 A happy esprit de corps animates all, and the staff, no less than the proprietor, is proud of the position held by the distillery. 
 We may add that only a single quality is made, and is despatched pure and unblended. 
 A pier at Fort William and a fleet of steamers belonging to the firm serve to expedite transit. 
 Mr. 
 Donald Peter McDonald, the head of the concern, has long been ably assisted by his son, Mr. 
 John McDonald, who is also a popular captain in the Inverness Militia. 
 But, though the memory of the founder will not soon fade in Lochaber, it is to the present proprietor that the modern character of the enterprise and its immense development are due. 
 To say he is as constructive as a beaver is to pay that useful animal a high compliment, but, in plain English, the enterprising, go-ahead, self-dependent spirit is his in unusual measure. 
 His name and distillation distillation are known throughout the world. 
 The crest of the clan Donald— a hand bearing a cresset cross— has been long the trade mark of the house, and no other motto could be more applicable to its than that of the Per Mare Per arrangements, a small Lawrence refrigerator doing the work better than hundreds of feet of tubing. 
 A supply of hot air to the peat fires of the drying kilns is secured by a most ingenious arrangement, so that the drying is not only facilitated, but certain other niceties in obtaining spirit of the true Highland flavour are secured. 
 The water comes from Ben Nevis, and may, without much doubt, apart from its suitability for distilling, be regarded as the purest water in the Kingdom. 
 The grand sights, however, of the distillery are its great malt and barley floors and bonded warehouses. 
 The stock is, of course, enormous, having been held for many years, in order to acquire in the wood that mellowness which the finest distillations, distillations, not excepting Long John do not possess on leaving the spirit vat. 
 The exterior of the premises 158 Commercial Glasgow.
Hugh Morrison &amp; Co. 
 has long maintained a position of unrivalled precedence and distinction in those branches of high-class Costume and Outfitting trade which its operations have successfully specialised. 
 After a career of some forty-one years in the front rank of Metropolitan trade and commerce, the firm now stand alone— in respect of their transactions in Naval and Military Outfitting ; and their business, with its valuable and much accumulated interests, is un- questionably the largest concern of the kind in the United Kingdom. 
 Messrs. 
 Hugh Morrison &amp; Co. 
 are identified in every part of the universe with the pro- duction of genuine Highland costumes, the popular taste and appreciation for which their operations have done much to preserve ; and in this the special feature of their trade the firm have acquired a reputation and renown insusceptible to, and undiminished by, any of the competitive phases of modern trade. 
 Not only are the firm Highland costume makers by special appointment, but they are also robe makers by appointment to the F. 
 E. 
 J. 
 S. 
 Institute and other s;hools and colleges ; shirt makers, juvenile outfitters, and general home and colonial outfitters, in each and all of which trading capacities they command the un- reserved support and patronage of an aristocratic clientele at home and abroad. 
 As a firm who have made a lengthy and exhaustive study of every essential of the high-class costumier ' s art, Messrs. 
 Morrison capably anticipate the imitations of public taste and fashion, and the unexceptionable excellence of every class of cloths they submit tends to retain their well-merited reputation as purveyors of pure wool fabrics. 
 The firm ' s tartans are all of the most attractive nature, every one of the great Highland clans being represented with absolute fidelity in design, colour, and texture ; and Messrs. 
 Morrison may be said to be in advance of any existing firm in perpetuating and increasing the demand for these interesting and beautiful fabrics. 
 On the correctness of the various patterns they are recognised as a leading authority, the designs being not only brought out exclusively for their special trade but also reproduced in their own factory, and not attainable in any other house. 
 The tartans and regimentals constitute most elegant costumes, and are designed, cut, and finished by a staff of artistes expressly conversant with this branch of trade. 
 Highland costumes of every kind — including those for pipe bands and Highland societies — are forwarded to all parts of the universe, London receiving a large proportion of the firm ' s trade ; and to Messrs. 
 Hugh Morrison &amp; Co. 
 may be partly attributed the spirit of toleration with which English- men are prone to regard and adopt the Scottish national dress for travelling, and as memorials of any northern tour— reminding them of Scottish characteristics ever interesting t