 From hence therefore, I determine the Gaul to be a vital Bowel, and its very Body to be a bitter Liquor prepared of the best venal bloud, containing the Balsam of the Liver, and Ar∣terial bloud: But whatsoever it by chance casts back of it self, into the bowel Duodenum, is the excrement of it self, and a Liquor now despised of the Gaul. 
 But that these things have themselves after this manner, I have at sometime shewen under the impostures of Choler, by the example of a Calf, who e motherly, and sweet milk waxeth sour, and is coagulated in the stomach, and therefore affords Runnet for Cheeses: For milk is made a watery Cream, but little of coagulated milk: But that Cream contains Urine and venal bloud; but another coagulated Body, which of pale, begins to wax yellow, is made dung: But that baggage straightway falling into the Duodenum doth proceed unto the Ileos, being coagulated, and waxeth of a Citron colour, the more, by how much it hath departed farther from the stomach; and at length it waxeth green; yet there is not bitterness in the yellow, but a nitrous taste: But in the green, the smell of Dung doth now plainly appear: But the wheyie Cream is presently drawn and supped up with greediness by the meseraick veins, for the use of sanguification. Likewise Milk is stirred in Infants, whence also those that are the more young ones do cackie all yellow, not from the plenty of Choler, neither by reason of the domination of the Chest of the Gaul; but surely, because the ferment of their Dung is feeble. Therefore the ferment of the Gaul doth not change the sourness of the stomach into bitter, but into Salt, for the reasons explained concerning the Spirit of life. Spare me ye more ten∣der eares, because I ought to treat of Dungs. I will therefore shew, that the savour of Dung excludes the Gaul, that it befools the use of the Gaul invented by the Schools, and convin∣ceth Choler of a fiction. 
 A Boy of four years old had fowled in Bed; but being much afraid of whipping, he ate his own Dung, yet e could not blot the sign out of the sheets: wherefore being asked by threat∣nings, he at length tells the chance. But being asked of its savour, he said it was of a stink∣ing, and somewhat sweet one: For among other things, he had eat Pease-pottage; but he complained, that the undigested husks or brans of the Pease were notably soure: for there is not an equal vigilancy of the ferment of the Gaul, over thick, and undigested Dungs, as there is over transparent things, and those things which are to be prepared into the dignity of venal bloud. I came by chance unlooked for, the same day, and I diligently enquired, a price being also added, whether those things which he had eaten, were bitter. He answered negatively, and the same as before. Likewise Nuns did Board noble Maids sufficiently so∣ber, at their Table: but they continually preached, that they who did eat dainty fare, should have their parts with the rich Glutton; but that they onely should be saved, who by the eve∣ry way denyal of mortification, did eat any the most vile things. Therefore a noble little Virgin being very desirous of her Salvation, and much moved by the aforesaid perswasion, eats her own Dung, and was weak or sick. But she was called home again by her Parents, and at length told the chance: She was asked thereupon, of what savour it was, and she an∣swered, it was of a stinking, and waterishly sweet one. Thirdly, a Painter of Bruxels, being mad between whiles; about the beginning of his madness, escapes into a Wood near by, and was there found far from the sight of men, to have lived 23 dayes by his own Dung. He was straightway brought home; I went to see him, and the Lord healed him. But he was per∣fectly mindeful of all things past at the time of his madness. I asked him, whether he re∣membred of what savour his Dung was: He said, it savours as it smells: And being after∣wards examined by me through the Capital tasts, he answered, it was not sour, not bitten, sharp, salt, but waterishly sweet: Yea, he said, that by how much the oftner he had re-earen it, by so much it had alway been the sweeter. But being asked, for what cause he had ra∣ther eat Dung, than return home? He said, that he throughout his whole madness abhorred men, being perswaded by his own fury, that men sought to destroy him by a snare. There∣fore it is manifest, that there is not even the least drop of Gaul in the Dung: for the Gaul being once burst, however a Fish may afterwards be most exactly washed, yet the bitterness of the Gaul conceived by the least touching, is never laid aside. 
 For if yellowness should bewray the Gaul, the dung of Infants should be especially gawly, which notwithstanding is licked by Dogs, because it hath as yet retained some kinde of savour of the milk: But whatsoever hath not been fully subdued in the stomach, nor hath assumed the beauty of a transparency, may not hope to be digested in the bowels by the ferment of the Gaul, although it be tinged with a yellow colour; Because it goes not to the second, or third, but thorow the absolute first. Whatsoever therefore is thick, and tinged with heat in the Ileos, that is wholly banished into an excrement, and under a certain sweetness, doth attain the savour of putrefaction; No otherwise than as soure fruits wax sweet by a little heat: But whatsoever was before sour in the stomach, that is made salt in the Duodenum, and is severed from the Dung: but if any thing do persevere sour, which may resist the fer∣ment of the Gaul, wringings of the bowels, &amp;c. do presently follow: But the excrement of man doth putrifie, because the ferment of the dung is chief over that place: But that which slides out of the stomach undigested, also is not digested in the bowels; It is cast out whole, but it keeps, and now and then increaseth the part of sournesses which it assumed in the sto∣mach: For from hence do the brans in bread, provoke the stool, by reason of sharpness; but other things do wax more sharp, and stir up wringings of the guts: Therefore from the Duo∣denum, the Chyle doth forthwith begin to exchange its own sharp volatile Salt into an equall saltness, it being resolved in the Cream: But the remaining, and more corporal substance of the Cream doth expect a sanguification in the veins of the mesentery, from the inspired fer∣ment of the Liver: The salt Liquor in the mean time being attracted by the Reins thorow the Liver, is it self committed to the Reins and Bladder for expulsion. Therefore the third digestion begins in the veins of the mesentery, which is terminated in the Liver: For the ve∣nal bloud as long as it is in the mesentery, is not yet digested, not yet thredded, or perfect: For the venal bloud of the mesentery, doth therefore not grow together in the Bloudy flux: But otherwise, a vein of the stomach being burst, the venal bloud doth forthwith wax clotty in the stomach. 
 But the Gout, as it tends to without, so the Character thereof doth not so much affect the secret chamber, or seat of the soul, as the Archeus the President or chief Ruler of the dige∣stions: which things do therefore happen, because an hereditary character of the Gout is stamped on the Young, from the beginning of Generation, and long before its quicking: And therefore, it respecteth only the Archeus (but not the soul) which then alone bare the whole burden on himself. But he that hath gotten the Character of the Gout by the exorbi∣tances of his life, although it shall come to him being a man in years, yet it keeps the nature of its own property: whence it is made manifest, that the stamp or character of every disease is promiscuously to be admitted into the lap of the sensitive soul. 
 First of all, I have elsewhere shewn, that vulnetary or wound-herbs do operate, by virtue of a certain in-bred Alcali or Lixivial Salt. Indeed I have taught, that vulnetary Mercury, as well the praecipitate, as sublimate, are easily to be revived, a clarified juyce being imbibed by boiling: Whence it follows, that those herbs are the more excellent in this degree, that juyce of whom, being boiled with the praecipitate, and afterwards washed away, shall the more easily and plentifully revive the Mercury. Wherefore also in healing, the stone of Crabs doth excell, if it be drunk with wine, more than if in water; because that stone, in wine, doth most easily put on the virtue and savour of a Lixivium or Lye. Neither I pray, therefore, let the Physitian abhor the use of wine in a wound, or fever, &amp;c. For at that very time that it savours of an Alcali, it loseth the virtues &amp; property of wine: For so, the Lixivial Salt of the Teil-tree is successfully given to drink, no otherwise than that powder of Crabs. For the goodnesse of God hath invited us, that by reason of the rarenesse whereby that stone doth subsist in a little space, mortals may be drawn into an admiration thereof, and thereby also may learn its vir∣tues, and may sift out its property alike wonderful, whereby it profiteth wounded, bruised people, and those that have fallen head-long from an high place. 
 And here presently a wonder not yet declared, comes to light; to wit, that a wound in the foot, and also in the leg, or in the most remote parts from the mouth, is healed; whither notwithstanding no Alcali hath ever obtained accesse; to wit, as the Lixivial Salt of this Stone doth correct the sharpnesse, which is kindled in the utmost members, or habit of the body, and which is prepared to be kindled. For neither doth the force of the Alcali passe from the Stomach thorow the Veins, even into the Toes: But neither is it admitted thither: and although it should be admitted, yet it could not proceed free and unbroken, thorow the foregoing questions and examinations of digestions: For there is no man, which may be ig∣norant of this, and not grant me what I have said. 
 Therefore from thence it is altogether manifest, that that Alcali, although it go not ma∣terially even unto the habit of the body; yet it is sufficient, that it doth disperse its proper∣ty even thitherto, beamingly onely, that it shall forbid a sournesse or sharpnesse in the sto∣mach, the Fountain of Digestions, and the chief Court-house of life; wherein is manifested the power of the Stomach over all the families of digestions. Wherefore from a contrary sense, they have sometime perceived, that wine, because it easily waxeth sour within us, it en∣flames, and perverts wounds, unlesse by a vulnerary Lixivial fixed Salt being administred, that sharp faculty of the wine become mild: For truly the hurt or dammage of a wound is onely an inward fermental sharpnesse, which being absent, the lips of that which was continued, do hasten to run together. Wherefore the Schools being deceived, have universally forbidden wine to those that are wounded; which thing the use of a vulnerary remedy at this day hath disallowed, to the disgrace of the Schools: For neither doth an Alcali go materially unto places far off, to restrain sharpnesse; seeing neither indeed is it able to pierce unto the Spleen, the seat of a Quartan Ague. Therefore it sufficeth, that it restraineth sharpnesse in the Stomach, the ruler of all the digestions: Not indeed that it destroyeth the sour fer∣ment of the Stomach, but as it is corrected, and the translation of the ferment unto remote places, is hindered: which thing also the aforesaid Paradox it self confirmeth, to wit, that the digestion of the Stomach is chief over the particular digestions of a thousand kitchins. 
 And then, that there is not made a wandring of Lixivial Salts, materially; &amp; that it is better to drink the Alcalies of these stones, than calcined Shell-fishes: Because that although they do help, and the Alcali in calcined things is far more powerful; yet it hath under an actu∣al vigour, vitiated the ferment of the Stomach, or at least doth incline it: Whereas the Stone of Crabsis carried not so much into the ferment, as into the product of the ferment. Also there is a plain reason, why that Stone, and herbs like unto it, do heal great and remote wounds, yet that they do not any thing help small ulcers in the throat, wind-pipe, or blad∣der. 
 But if indeed the Stone of Crabs be a provoker of urine, it is not that therefore the com∣ing thereof even into the bladder is to be hoped for, or that its virtue remains untouched, and unbroken; Far be it: For let it be sufficient, if that Stone do spoil the whole drink of a souring faculty; because it is that which onely, how little soever of it be brought down in the urine, belongs to the breeding of the Strangury or pissing by drops, Dysury or difficulty of pissing, and heats familiar in the disease of the Stone: For the sharpnesse, although it be most excellently subdued by a sound gaul; yet the least quantity of it may be hostile in the urine, and to the parts subservient unto it, and no lesse unto the whole remaining family of digestions. Now at length I return unto the Authority of the Duumvirate, that it may be manifest in what sort the soul doth divers ways exercise its own commands in its own body, and doth act by way of a command, government, rule, as also of cruelty, fury, and tyranny; neither that to this end, it stands in need of pipes, winds, vapours, smoaks, and least of all, of the help of heats, colds, and defluxions. The Schools beholding the ef∣fects of the Duumvirate, and thinking to knit causes to them all, have transferred all things into heats, or humours, and the declinings or cessations of these; as if those things which na∣turally happen in us, should happen only through an urgent necessity of weights, heats, and imaginary humours. 
 And seeing they have gone back from the Soul, from living strength, unto the artificial, or dead examples of learning by demonstration; at length they have quieted themselves, that they wrought in vain, with the admiration, unwilling experience, and wonted obseruation of the vulgar, that many diseases being among the catalogue of incurable ones, or the number of wonted diseases, are of their own accord cured under the care of the Kitchin; so that they had but forsaken the vein, and the paunch, oft-times unto the death, or voluntary wearinesse of rhe sick. And at last, for the most part, a Jugler or Fortune-teller, or an aged old woman cu∣reth them, whom the very experiences of Physitians had deserted. 
3. Seing all food ought to be changed into a Cream, and an exquisite chewing is that which makes the digestions easie; hence I most strictly commend chewing at all times. For truly one onely morsel, being not rightly chewed, makes more adoe in the body, than three which are well bruised in eating. For therefore birds, because they want teeth have need of a double stomack, however most powerful otherwise, they were in digesting. Eve∣ry Beast also which cheweth the cud, as it was greatly esteemed in the Law, so it seriously insinuates unto us, that the necessity of chewing is not to be despised. Yea for that cause, a bruit which chewes the cud, is in the holy Scriptures chosen for a clean Beast. 
 4. In the next place, whatsoever things are taken in gluttony, beyond the power of the Ferment of the Stomack, are indeed made hot within, and do putrifie, neither also, are they for that cause digested; as in Feavers is most plentifully to be seen. But as much of the more tender meats as is taken under gluttony, is indeed digested, and slides out of the Stomack: but it carries headlong with it, a great heap of that which is undigested, as well by reason of the extension of the vessel, as the negligence of nature being loaded, and forsaking the raines. But if that which is most exceeding tender, shall be digested, and that stayeth in the Stomack longer than is meet, that retained food doth also of ne∣cessity wax too sharp, or plainly putrifie, is brought over into a bitter excrement in the morning, being oft-times rejected by Vomit: And the which, the Schooles have falsly called Choller. For Diers do by one onely Kettle of Dye, change above a hundred diverse colours, if the Cloaths be first diversly affected: So also one only wandering ferment of the Stomack, doth diversly dispose and determine of the cream, by reason of the diversity of its parts (else single or simple) if it containeth in it, diversities not as yet plainly digest∣ed. So that, although it ordinarily tingeth nothing but the digested part of the cream with its ferment; yet it ceaseth not to affect the undigested part, and wrongfully to sea∣son it, by reason of the defect of the receiver. Wherefore most things do thus grow to an exorbitancy in the kitchin of the first digestion. 
 5. Whatsoever accustomed thing is not taken as malignant, but desired; that also, fulnesse being absent, is the more easily digested, and in Diseases, is safely admitted, if it be soberly and moderately taken. Because the ferments do easily subdue those things which are accustomed, and especially if they are desired. For Hippocrates perswades us to use a most slender food, in sharp Diseases, to wit, until an appetite doth arise again. For I praise the more thin Ales or Beers, as much as I (trusting to the words of Galen) do despise sweet Drinks and Barley-broths. 
 Barley (saith he) being a little boyled, causeth Ventosities or windinesses; but stoppages, if it shall be somewhat better boyled. Wherefore, our Ancestors believing that Barley is not unhurtful, being any way boyled, do constrain that to bud (which they then call Malt) by which work, they prevent, aswell windinesses, as stoppages. But of Malt and Hop, they make Beers or Ales. 
 These things, I had thus concluded with my self concerning Diet, and the consideration of Food, within those few common rules abovesaid; I did measure according to the course of Nature, before I had obtained the greater Remedies. Yet knowing, whatso∣ever is converted in the Stomack, in the likeness of a transparent cream, by virtue of its ferment, that that hath received the beginnings of a vital juyce, although not yet life; and for that cause, not so readily or voluntarily to putrifie. But whatsoever, is either not dissolved, or if in it self it be dissolved, neither yet hath received a ferment, as the la∣tex, the brine of Salt; that very thing, is either an excrement, or is easily made such, or is obvious or ready for corruption. Therefore in the consideration of Diet we must especi∣ally give heed unto the Diseases, and Meats, which by reason of the Disease, the sick par∣ty is averse to, or desireth. For we must be hand-maides to Nature, but never command her; To wit, the ferment, which ought to concoct the meats, prescribeth those, but not the Physitian according to his own appetite or desire; neither may he take out of Authors one form for every shooe. As if the various nature of men, should not have it self by way of relation unto some particular thing. 
 THe Art of Healing is every where drawn into the Tragedies and scorn of the vul∣gar. Because Physitians will not be wise, but according to the custom of the Schools. For what they read, they believe, and what they believe, they deliver to the trust of the Apothecary, his Wife, and Servant or Family, to be put in execution. For thereby every maker or seller of Oyles or Ointments, and old Women, do thrust themselves into Medi∣cine, scoffe at Physitians, because also, they oft-times excel them in many things. For they were wont in antient time to reserve some things to themselves for a pledge of fame and family. But afterwards, sloath overcame, and gain disposed of Medicine as a plough, and by the just judgement of God, all things grew orse. 
 Before my entry of the Shop, I cannot but be angry at the describers of simples: For although there be no field more spacious, plentiful, and delightful in the face of the whole earth, and where the mind is more delighted, than in Herbarism; yet there hath scarce been a less progress made in any other thing. For truly the Arabians, Greeks or Gentiles, Barbarians, wild country People, and Indians, have observed their own Simples much more diligently than all the Europeans. For even from the dayes of Plato (wherein Dias∣corides a man of War, lived) nothing almost hath been added to Herbarism: but much diminished. 
 There were also afterwards, others, who would observe signatures in Herbs, as it were a Palmestry: and this Meditation, the root of Satyrion or dog-stones, hath notably promoted. And therefore through the desert hereof especially, they have introduced a sealed knowledge, or essayed Anatomy, that is, new names, and great swelling Titles, embroidered with their own boldnesses. I believe by Faith, that man was not of nature, and therefore likewise, that nature is not the Image, likeness, or engravement of man. God out of the eternal providence of his goodness and wisdom, hath abundantly pro∣vided for future necessities. He himself hath made and endowed Simples for the appoin∣ted ends of all necessities. Therefore, I believe, that the Simples, in their own simpli∣city, are sufficient for the healing of all Diseases. Therefore we must more study about the searching into the virtues, than about disputing any hard questions: Seeing that in Sim∣ples there is a perfect cure, and healing of all Diseases: And by consequence, that Dis∣pensatories, which will us to compound and joyn most things together, do destroy the whole, and through a hidden blasphemy, do as it were strive to supply divine insuf∣ficiency. 
 Hence Paracelsus rightly writeth to Chyrurgions: To what end do ye over-adde unto Sym∣phytum or the root of greater Comfrey, Vinegar, Bole, and such like wan additaments? when as God hath composed this Simple as altogether sufficient against the ruptures of bones? finally, whatsoever thou shalt adde unto it, thou makest, as if thou wouldest by thy correction, supply the place of God. Thou dost grievously erre. 
 In like manner, I also think, that God hath perfectly, and sufficiently composed in Simples, compleat Remedies of any Diseases whatsoever. 
 In the next place, I infallibly know, that there is in the Archeus of vegetables, no anatomical alliance or affinity with us, whether we regard the whole, or at length, their parts. For the endowments of Simples, are by creation: but not from an usurpation of possession: for properties were already in their-own Herbes, before sin, death, and ne∣cessity. 
 That good man declareth his ignorance of Principles, not knowing, first of all, that eve∣ry Ice, beginning, maketh dented or tooth-like points, like the shape of the leaf of a net∣tle: And then, that the Archeus is the figurer of the thing to be generated, which is burnt up by the fire, long before a coal or ashes is made. 
 Thirdly, if a Lixivium should express the seminal Being of Herbes, surely it ought to resemble, not the leafes; but the root, stalk, flowers and fruits. But the figurative power of the Seeds, lurketh in the Archeus, the Vulcan of herbs and things capable of genera∣tion, which cannot subsist with fleshly eyes. It is to be begged only of God, that he may vouchsafe to open the eyes of the mind, who to Adam, and who to Salomon, demonstrated the properties of things at the first sight. St. Theresa, having once, mentally seen a Crucifix, perceived it to be the eyes of her soul; the which she thenceforth kept open for her life-time, and the flesh hath shut them up in us, through the corruption of nature. For neither for the future, do we else, know natures from a former cause; neither do we now know the interchangeable courses of the Archeus, but by a naked observation. Many Simples are indeed assigned us; but for the most part, false and disagreeable. Neither doth the reading of Books make us to be knowers of the properties, but by observation: No otherwise than as a Boy who sounds or sings the Musick, doth notwithstanding, not compose it, as neither hath he known the first grounds of harmony, by means whereof, the tunes or notes were so to be disposed. If this thing thus happen in sensible things which are to be known by sence, the reason whereof, the hearing measureth: what shall not be done in Medicinal affairs, wherein the virtues of Simples are not penetrable by any sense? But the descriptions of all kind of Medicines, are read, being delivered in the Shops, with a defect of the knowledge of properties and agreements. For I speak concerning a knowledge of vision, such a one, as the soul hath, being separated from the Body, and such a one, as God bestoweth in this life, on whom he will, and hitherto hath he removed this knowledge from the company of those who ascribe all reverence unto heathenish Books. The Father of Lights therefore is to be intreated, that he may vouchsafe to give us knowledge, such as once he did unto Bezaleel and Aholiab, for the glory of his own Name, and the naked charity towards our Neighbours: For so, the Art of Medicine should stand aright in us, under every weight. But it is to be feared, lest he who hath suffered the Books of Salomon to perish, may reserve this knowledge of Sim∣ples for the age of Elias the Artist. For the Schools have by savours or tastes, promised an entrance unto the knowledge of Simples: That as it were the crafts-men of all proper∣ties, they by sharp, bitter, salt, sweet, astringent, soure, and un-savoury, heats and colds, would measure them. But proud boastings are made ridiculous by the effect. For truly, also Opium being very bitter, the which in this respect, they will have to be hot; yet they teach it to be exceeding cold. So sharp or tart Camphor, according to their Rules, ought to be hot; yet they declare it to be (without controversie) cold. 
 In like manner also Aqua fortis, oyle of Vitriol, Sulphur, &amp;c. being soure things, ac∣cording to the Rules of tastes, ought to be exceeding cold. But I am to shew, at some∣time, in its place, that the Schools have not yet beheld the faculties of things, as to the outward bark or shell of them; and therefore that they have passed by the fountains of their seminal properties. Finally, there is in every thing, a specifical savour, which ought to teach their property, if there be any other external signates: To wit, there is in Cinnamon, besides a quick sharpness, a peculiar grace or acceptableness in savour, the which thou canst scarce find in any Simple besides. So Gentian, Elecampane, &amp;c. have besides common bitterness, a specifical savour, which (by reason of a singularity proper to any kinde of Simples) cannot be reduced under Rules, and is the alone accuser, as al∣so distinguisher of all properties.
 1. First of all, it is an undoubted truth, that Duelech is not of a calcinous or limy con∣dition, however Paracelsus may be carried on the contrary. 1. Because a calcining de∣gree of heat is wanting in us. 2. And then, because every Alcali, is rather that which is destructive to a rocky stone, than a Coagulater thereof. 3. Because a Calx or Lime pre∣supposeth a Chalky-stone, and therefore Duelech should be calcined before it were a stone, 4. From the composing parts of Duelech it shall by and by be made manifest, that it is not possible for Lime to be in it; yea, nor that Duelech himself is calcined, or doth send forth a Lixivium or Lye. Likewise, neither is Duelech of the nature of a gowty Chalk: because he growes together in the midst of the urine: but that Chalk is coagula∣ted from the Sunovia. But the Sunovie is a living seedy muscilage, which degenerated in the journey of nourishment, and from a transparent and Crystaline matter, hath passed over into a thick, white, and slimy matter (as of Gouty persons elsewhere) from a mat∣ter without savour, I say, it is transplanted into a sharp one, though the tartnesse where∣of indeed, it hath attained a thickness or grossness: For then also it is unfit for a total diflation or transpirative dispersing of it self: To wit, whereby the nourishable Li∣quor is wholly consumed without any remainder: But the Sunovie being once infected with a tartness, its watery parts are pufft away; but the gross remainder waxeth dry by de∣grees, into the utmost dryth and hardnesse of a Sand-stone. But Duelech attaines to the utmost hardness of it self in one onely instant of time. The Gouty Chalk therefore, differs from Duelech in its whole matter and efficient cause. For therefore such a Chalk is hardned out of the water, because indeed by drying. Neither for that cause doth it imitate the hardness of a rocky stone: but onely of a sandy stone. I have spoken these things to that end, that it may be manifested, that Duelech differs from any other coagu∣ted Bodies whatsoever, in its different kind of Agent and matter. And seeing notwith∣standing, I as yet knew not the manner or process of the birth of Duelech; but I knew in the mean time, that Bodies do nor receive the limitation of their hardning, but by the actions, appointments, and properties of their own seeds. 
 Lastly, Since I knew, that whatsoever things do act corporally, are altogether sluggish, slow, and idle, as for the coagulation of Duelech: therefore I enquired into fermental sa∣vours and Odours, as the Authors of many seeds. Therefore I found the savours and acti∣ons of Salts, to be indeed famous ones: but not any thing reaching the vertue of the salt of Urine. 
 Therefore in the lee of my urine, I distinguished of two salts: one indeed a Sea-ee salt; being not so long agoe assumed, and as yet remaining safe, and unchanged (as else∣where I have shewn concerning the boyling of Salt-peter). But the other is of the U∣rine it self, being bred in our digestion, and from not a salt, transchanged into one: but it differs from the Sea-ee salt. 
 1. If for some days there shall be no use or need of any Sea-ee-salt; yet the urine failes not of its own salt. 2. The Sea-salt coagulates it self into graines of a point-like sharp∣nesse: but the salt of urine growes together into Gemmie Dyes and square Cubes. 3. The Sea-salt alwayes shewes forth its antient tast, even when it is digested out of Jakes ' s with Salt-peter; but the salt of urine, savours alwayes of urine. 4. The Sea-salt in its cool∣ing, adheres to a wooden Vessel, even as while it is separated from Salt-peter; But the salt of urine growes together in the bottome of the Liquor. 
 Furthermore, the fixed salt of urine distinguisheth it self from the Volatile salt there∣of. 1. By fire and flight. For the one flyes away, the other remaining. 2. The fixed salt, is separated from the lees, by an extraction, in moisture: but the Volatile salt, is se∣questred by fire. For although meats and drinks wax universally alike sowr in the stomach: yet the salts sprung from thence, are not alike volatile; Because that ferment of the stomach is received after the manner of the Receiver; and so it varies. Even as neither is Chrysulca dissolving the whole and homogeneal mettall, therefore made totally alike volatile. And this diversity doth not break forth from essential properties; but by rea∣son of a partic pation of the properties of the middle life of things. 
 Neither finally, is that ferment of the stomach, a naked sharpness or sowrness; but a vital and specifical Endowment; whose end indeed is for transchanging of the food into the Chyle of mans digestion. For truly many the more fixed Beings are received with the meats: which notwithstanding, ought to undergoe the like condition with vo∣latile Juyces, if they ought the more fully to passe unto the root of Life. In which point especially, the efficacy of Nature shines forth: the which, of a lump that is altoge∣ther similar or alike, frameth bones and the fibers of flesh, &amp;c. In the next place, it re∣duceth bones in the stomach of a Dog, unto Chyle, that blood may again from thence be made. 
 The two aforesaid Salts therefore, are the more fixed. But one is exceeding volatile in urine; but an Alcali, or any thing like to a Lixivium ot Lye, never appeared unto me from urine. For if but any Lixivial matter shall be received inwardly; that is presently fil∣led with sharpnesses, so that it layes aside its Lixivial disposition. 
 Therefore the Spanish Sea well nigh wants a vapoury salt, is stronger, and the more expels putrefaction, and Duelech. On the contrary, the Seas of Lorraine, abound with a vapoury salt, and it in part, waxeth sower in the stomach. Also, that vapoury spirit of salt (which is sublimed, being as it were the flowre of salt) differs from the distilled spirit of salt; just even as Oyl of Olives doth from Oyl of Bricks. For the spirit of Oyl of Olives which departs in its first moity, with me doth at length dissolve a silver thred in a Bottle: But Oyl of Olives preserves Iron from rust. And far more powerfully, doth that re∣maind of Oyl, from whence the aforesaid half or moity was withdrawn, preserve rustinesse. Therefore it is to be noted, that there is not a more pure and , than that which is re-cocted or re-boyled from the brine of Swines-flesh. For seasoning, or operating on the Swines-flesh its object, it lost its more vapoury spirit by coagulation. And so the residing salt being almost fixed and freed from its earth∣linesse, is found to be clear and most fit for Sawces. It being also cast into an Hogs∣head of sowring Ale or Beer, preserves the same, which other salt doth not so do. Where∣fore it drinks up into its self, and transchangeth the superfluous sharp spirits in us, which are the Authours of all Corruption, if they shall be out of the shops of the first digesti∣on. It being thus re-boyled with Spanish-salt, it is almost equal in goodnesse, with that which was at first dissolved in the bright burning-pot: Since therefore Sea-salt is not of the composition of urine, but is wholly a forreigner unto it, and so remaines: yea, since Sea-salt being detained in the urine, keeps its nature unmixed and unchanged, even until the last extraction of things, and separation of the Salt-peter; it is certain, that it hath not any businesse with Duelech. And therefore, that neither is the least of Sea-salt ever found in the composition hereof; seeing it more destroyes the native birth of Duelech, than it doth promote it. Therefore Sea-salt is forbidden by the Schooles unto those that have the stone without a foundation. Thus much of Salts. 
 But I had hitherto learned, that Duelech was an irregular coagulated matter, bred from the salt of Urine, which had not its peere in the whole Universe: for that Mans urine is never found, out of man; For therefore it irked me not, many times to distill Urine. 
