 
 84. IT IS IN HER PREPARATION OF THE DINNER that the cook begins to feel 
 the weight and responsibility of her situation, as she must take upon 
 herself all the dressing and the serving of the principal dishes, which 
 her skill and ingenuity have mostly prepared. Whilst these, however, are 
 cooking, she must be busy with her pastry, soups, gravies, ragouts, &c. 
 Stock, or what the French call _consommé_, being the basis of most made 
 dishes, must be always at hand, in conjunction with her sweet herbs and 
 spices for seasoning. "A place for everything, and everything in its 
 place," must be her rule, in order that time may not be wasted in 
 looking for things when they are wanted, and in order that the whole 
 apparatus of cooking may move with the regularity and precision of a 
 well-adjusted machine;--all must go on simultaneously. The vegetables 
 and sauces must be ready with the dishes they are to accompany, and in 
 order that they may be suitable, the smallest oversight must not be made 
 in their preparation. When the dinner-hour has arrived, it is the duty 
 of the cook to dish-up such dishes as may, without injury, stand, for 
 some time, covered on the hot plate or in the hot closet; but such as 
 are of a more important or _recherché_ kind, must be delayed until the 
 order "to serve" is given from the drawing-room. Then comes haste; but
watery parts have evaporated; or some of the thickening materials, above 
 mentioned, should be added. When soups and gravies are kept from day to 
 day in hot weather, they should be warmed up every day, and put into 
 fresh scalded pans or tureens, and placed in a cool cellar. In temperate 
 weather, every other day may be sufficient. 
  
 89. VARIOUS HERBS AND VEGETABLES are required for the purpose of making 
 soups and gravies. Of these the principal are,--Scotch barley, pearl 
 barley, wheat flour, oatmeal, bread-raspings, pease, beans, rice, 
 vermicelli, macaroni, isinglass, potato-mucilage, mushroom or mushroom 
 ketchup, champignons, parsnips, carrots, beetroot, turnips, garlic, 
 shalots, and onions. Sliced onions, fried with butter and flour till 
 they are browned, and then rubbed through a sieve, are excellent to 
 heighten the colour and flavour of brown soups and sauces, and form the 
 basis of many of the fine relishes furnished by the cook. The older and 
 drier the onion, the stronger will be its flavour. Leeks, cucumber, or 
 burnet vinegar; celery or celery-seed pounded. The latter, though 
 equally strong, does not impart the delicate sweetness of the fresh 
 vegetable; and when used as a substitute, its flavour should be 
 corrected by the addition of a bit of sugar. Cress-seed, parsley, common
thyme, lemon thyme, orange thyme, knotted marjoram, sage, mint, winter 
 savoury, and basil. As fresh green basil is seldom to be procured, and 
 its fine flavour is soon lost, the best way of preserving the extract is 
 by pouring wine on the fresh leaves. 
  
 90. FOR THE SEASONING OF SOUPS, bay-leaves, tomato, tarragon, chervil, 
 burnet, allspice, cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg, clove, mace, black and white 
 pepper, essence of anchovy, lemon-peel, and juice, and Seville 
 orange-juice, are all taken. The latter imparts a finer flavour than the 
 lemon, and the acid is much milder. These materials, with wine, mushroom 
 ketchup, Harvey  '  s sauce, tomato sauce, combined in various proportions, 
 are, with other ingredients, manipulated into an almost endless variety 
 of excellent soups and gravies. Soups, which are intended to constitute 
 the principal part of a meal, certainly ought not to be flavoured like 
 sauces, which are only designed to give a relish to some particular 
 dish. 
  
  
 SOUP, BROTH AND BOUILLON. 
 
are _white, and without gravy_ when cooked, is, that the large quantity 
 of albumen they contain hardens, or becomes coagulated. On the other 
 hand, the reason why beef and mutton are _brown, and have gravy_, is, 
 that the proportion of albumen they contain, is small, in comparison 
 with their greater quantity of fluid which is soluble, and not 
 coagulable. 
  
 93. THE QUALITY OF THE FLESH OF AN ANIMAL is considerably influenced by 
 the nature of the _food on which it has been fed_; for the food supplies 
 the material which produces the flesh. If the food be not suitable and 
 good, the meat cannot be good either; just as the paper on which these 
 words are printed, could not be good, if the rags from which it is made, 
 were not of a fine quality. To the experienced in this matter, it is 
 well known that the flesh of animals fed on farinaceous produce, such as 
 corn, pulse, &c., is firm, well-flavoured, and also economical in the 
 cooking; that the flesh of those fed on succulent and pulpy substances, 
 such as roots, possesses these qualities in a somewhat less degree; 
 whilst the flesh of those whose food contains fixed oil, as linseed, is 
 greasy, high coloured, and gross in the fat, and if the food has been 
 used in large quantities, possessed of a rank flavour.
osmazome, and albumen, it is requisite to know that the FIBRES are 
 inseparable, constituting almost all that remains of the meat after it 
 has undergone a long boiling. 
  
 98. FAT is dissolved by boiling; but as it is contained in cells covered 
 by a very fine membrane, which never dissolves, a portion of it always 
 adheres to the fibres. The other portion rises to the surface of the 
 stock, and is that which has escaped from the cells which were not 
 whole, or which have burst by boiling. 
  
 99. GELATINE is soluble: it is the basis and the nutritious portion of 
 the stock. When there is an abundance of it, it causes the stock, when 
 cold, to become a jelly. 
  
 100. OSMAZOME is soluble even when cold, and is that part of the meat 
 which gives flavour and perfume to the stock. The flesh of old animals 
 contains more _osmazome_ than that of young ones. Brown meats contain 
 more than white, and the former make the stock more fragrant. By 
 roasting meat, the osmazome appears to acquire higher properties; so, by 
 putting the remains of roast meats into your stock-pot, you obtain a
better flavour. 
  
 101. ALBUMEN is of the nature of the white of eggs; it can be dissolved 
 in cold or tepid water, but coagulates when it is put into water not 
 quite at the boiling-point. From this property in albumen, it is evident 
 that if the meat is put into the stock-pot when the water boils, or 
 after this is made to boil up quickly, the albumen, in both cases, 
 hardens. In the first it rises to the surface, in the second it remains 
 in the meat, but in both it prevents the gelatine and osmazome from 
 dissolving; and hence a thin and tasteless stock will be obtained. It 
 ought to be known, too, that the coagulation of the albumen in the meat, 
 always takes place, more or less, according to the size of the piece, as 
 the parts farthest from the surface always acquire _that degree_ of heat 
 which congeals it before entirely dissolving it. 
  
 102. BONES ought always to form a component part of the stock-pot. They 
 are composed of an earthy substance,--to which they owe their 
 solidity,--of gelatine, and a fatty fluid, something like marrow. _Two 
 ounces_ of them contain as much gelatine as _one pound_ of meat; but in 
 them, this is so incased in the earthy substance, that boiling water can
dissolve only the surface of whole bones. By breaking them, however, you 
 can dissolve more, because you multiply their surfaces; and by reducing 
 them to powder or paste, you can dissolve them entirely; but you must 
 not grind them dry. We have said (99) that gelatine forms the basis of 
 stock; but this, though very nourishing, is entirely without taste; and 
 to make the stock savoury, it must contain _osmazome_. Of this, bones do 
 not contain a particle; and that is the reason why stock made entirely 
 of them, is not liked; but when you add meat to the broken or pulverized 
 bones, the osmazome contained in it makes the stock sufficiently 
 savoury. 
  
 103. In concluding this part of our subject, the following condensed 
 hints and directions should be attended to in the economy of 
 soup-making:-- 
  
 I. BEEF MAKES THE BEST STOCK; veal stock has less colour and taste; 
 whilst mutton sometimes gives it a tallowy smell, far from agreeable, 
 unless the meat has been previously roasted or broiled. Fowls add very 
 little to the flavour of stock, unless they be old and fat. Pigeons, 
 when they are old, add the most flavour to it; and a rabbit or partridge
The albumen will first dissolve, afterwards coagulate; and as it is in 
 this state lighter than the liquid, it will rise to the surface; 
 bringing with it all its impurities. It is this which makes _the scum_. 
 The rising of the hardened albumen has the same effect in clarifying 
 stock as the white of eggs; and, as a rule, it may be said that the more 
 scum there is, the clearer will be the stock. Always take care that the 
 fire is very regular. 
  
 V. REMOVE THE SCUM when it rises thickly, and do not let the stock boil, 
 because then one portion of the scum will be dissolved, and the other go 
 to the bottom of the pot; thus rendering it very difficult to obtain a 
 clear broth. If the fire is regular, it will not be necessary to add 
 cold water in order to make the scum rise; but if the fire is too large 
 at first, it will then be necessary to do so. 
  
 VI. WHEN THE STOCK IS WELL SKIMMED, and begins to boil, put in salt and 
 vegetables, which may be two or three carrots, two turnips, one parsnip, 
 a bunch of leeks and celery tied together. You can add, according to 
 taste, a piece of cabbage, two or three cloves stuck in an onion, and a 
 tomato. The latter gives a very agreeable flavour to the stock. If fried
onion be added, it ought, according to the advice of a famous French 
 _chef_, to be tied in a little bag: without this precaution, the colour 
 of the stock is liable to be clouded. 
  
 VII. BY THIS TIME we will now suppose that you have chopped the bones 
 which were separated from the meat, and those which were left from the 
 roast meat of the day before. Remember, as was before pointed out, that 
 the more these are broken, the more gelatine you will have. The best way 
 to break them up is to pound them roughly in an iron mortar, adding, 
 from time to time, a little water, to prevent them getting heated. It is 
 a great saving thus to make use of the bones of meat, which, in too many 
 English families, we fear, are entirely wasted; for it is certain, as 
 previously stated (No. 102), that two ounces of bone contain as much 
 gelatine (which is the nutritive portion of stock) as one pound of meat. 
 In their broken state tie them up in a bag, and put them in the 
 stock-pot; adding the gristly parts of cold meat, and trimmings, which 
 can be used for no other purpose. If, to make up the weight, you have 
 received from the butcher a piece of mutton or veal, broil it slightly 
 over a clear fire before putting it in the stock-pot, and be very 
 careful that it does not contract the least taste of being smoked or
burnt. 
  
 VIII. ADD NOW THE VEGETABLES, which, to a certain extent, will stop the 
 boiling of the stock. Wait, therefore, till it simmers well up again, 
 then draw it to the side of the fire, and keep it gently simmering till 
 it is served, preserving, as before said, your fire always the same. 
 Cover the stock-pot well, to prevent evaporation; do not fill it up, 
 even if you take out a little stock, unless the meat is exposed; in 
 which case a little boiling water may be added, but only enough to cover 
 it. After six hours  '   slow and gentle simmering, the stock is done; and 
 it should not be continued on the fire, longer than is necessary, or it 
 will tend to insipidity. 
  
 _Note_.--It is on a good stock, or first good broth and sauce, that 
 excellence in cookery depends. If the preparation of this basis of the 
 culinary art is intrusted to negligent or ignorant persons, and the 
 stock is not well skimmed, but indifferent results will be obtained. The 
 stock will never be clear; and when it is obliged to be clarified, it is 
 deteriorated both in quality and flavour. In the proper management of 
 the stock-pot an immense deal of trouble is saved, inasmuch as one
of water, the meat, and all the other ingredients. Cover the stewpan, 
 and place it on a sharp fire, occasionally stirring its contents. When 
 the bottom of the pan becomes covered with a pale, jelly-like substance, 
 add 4 quarts of cold water, and simmer very gently for 5 hours. As we 
 have said before, do not let it boil quickly. Skim off every particle of 
 grease whilst it is doing, and strain it through a fine hair sieve. 
  
 This is the basis of many of the soups afterwards mentioned, and will be 
 found quite strong enough for ordinary purposes. 
  
 _Time_.--5-1/2 hours. _Average cost_, 9d. per quart. 
  
  
 ECONOMICAL STOCK. 
  
 106. INGREDIENTS.--The liquor in which a joint of meat has been boiled, 
 say 4 quarts; trimmings of fresh meat or poultry, shank-bones, &c., 
 roast-beef bones, any pieces the larder may furnish; vegetables, spices, 
 and the same seasoning as in the foregoing recipe. 
 
discouraged, as apt to impart a slightly unpleasant flavour to the 
 stock, and, consequently, all soups made from it. 
  
  
 TO CLARIFY STOCK. 
  
 109. INGREDIENTS.--The whites of 2 eggs, 1/2 pint of water, 2 quarts of 
 stock. 
  
 _Mode_.--Supposing that by some accident the soup is not quite clear, 
 and that its quantity is 2 quarts, take the whites of 2 eggs, carefully 
 separated from their yolks, whisk them well together with the water, and 
 add gradually the 2 quarts of boiling stock, still whisking. Place the 
 soup on the fire, and when boiling and well skimmed, whisk the eggs with 
 it till nearly boiling again; then draw it from the fire, and let it 
 settle, until the whites of the eggs become separated. Pass through a 
 fine cloth, and the soup should be clear. 
  
 _Note_.--The rule is, that all clear soups should be of a light straw 
 colour, and should not savour too strongly of the meat; and that all
white or brown thick soups should have no more consistency than will 
 enable them to adhere slightly to the spoon when hot. All _purées_ 
 should be somewhat thicker. 
  
  
 ALMOND SOUP. 
  
 110. INGREDIENTS.--4 lbs. of lean beef or veal, 1/2 a scrag of mutton, 1 
 oz. of vermicelli, 4 blades of mace, 6 cloves, 1/2 lb. of sweet almonds, 
 the yolks of 6 eggs, 1 gill of thick cream, rather more than 2 quarts of 
 water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil the beef, or veal, and the mutton, gently in water that 
 will cover them, till the gravy is very strong, and the meat very 
 tender; then strain off the gravy, and set it on the fire with the 
 specified quantities of vermicelli, mace, and cloves, to 2 quarts. Let 
 it boil till it has the flavour of the spices. Have ready the almonds, 
 blanched and pounded very fine; the yolks of the eggs boiled hard; 
 mixing the almonds, whilst pounding, with a little of the soup, lest the 
 latter should grow oily. Pound them till they are a mere pulp, and keep
come from Malaga; the inferior qualities are brought from 
 Valentia and Italy. _Bitter_ almonds come principally from 
 Magadore. Anciently, the almond was much esteemed by the nations 
 of the East. Jacob included it among the presents which he 
 designed for Joseph. The Greeks called it the Greek or Thasian 
 nut, and the Romans believed that by eating half a dozen of 
 them, they were secured against drunkenness, however deeply they 
 might imbibe. Almonds, however, are considered as very 
 indigestible. The _bitter_ contain, too, principles which 
 produce two violent poisons,--prussic acid and a kind of 
 volatile oil. It is consequently dangerous to eat them in large 
 quantities. Almonds pounded together with a little sugar and 
 water, however, produce a milk similar to that which is yielded 
 by animals. Their oil is used for making fine soap, and their 
 cake as a cosmetic. 
  
 APPLE SOUP. 
  
 111. INGREDIENTS.--2 lbs. of good boiling apples, 3/4 teaspoonful of 
 white pepper, 6 cloves, cayenne or ginger to taste, 3 quarts of medium
stock. 
  
 _Mode_.--Peel and quarter the apples, taking out their cores; put them 
 into the stock, stew them gently till tender. Rub the whole through a 
 strainer, add the seasoning, give it one boil up, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour. _Average cost_ per quart, 1s. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from September to December. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 10 persons. 
  
 [Illustration: APPLE AND BLOSSOM.] 
  
 THE APPLE.--This useful fruit is mentioned in Holy Writ; and 
 Homer describes it as valuable in his time. It was brought from 
 the East by the Romans, who held it in the highest estimation. 
 Indeed, some of the citizens of the "Eternal city" distinguished 
 certain favourite apples by their names. Thus the Manlians were 
 called after Manlius, the Claudians after Claudius, and the
russets. As a food, the apple cannot be considered to rank high, 
 as more than the half of it consists of water, and the rest of 
 its properties are not the most nourishing. It is, however, a 
 useful adjunct to other kinds of food, and, when cooked, is 
 esteemed as slightly laxative. 
  
 ARTICHOKE (JERUSALEM) SOUP. 
  
 (_A White Soup_.) 
  
 112. INGREDIENTS.--3 slices of lean bacon or ham, 1/2 a head of celery, 
 1 turnip, 1 onion, 3 oz. of butter, 4 lbs. of artichokes, 1 pint of 
 boiling milk, or 1/2 pint of boiling cream, salt and cayenne to taste, 2 
 lumps of sugar, 2-1/2 quarts of white stock. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the bacon and vegetables, which should be cut into thin 
 slices, into the stewpan with the butter. Braise these for 1/4 of an 
 hour, keeping them well stirred. Wash and pare the artichokes, and after 
 cutting them into thin slices, add them, with a pint of stock, to the 
 other ingredients. When these have gently stewed down to a smooth pulp,
put in the remainder of the stock. Stir it well, adding the seasoning, 
 and when it has simmered for five minutes, pass it through a strainer. 
 Now pour it back into the stewpan, let it again simmer five minutes, 
 taking care to skim it well, and stir it to the boiling milk or cream. 
 Serve with small sippets of bread fried in butter. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour. _Average cost_ per quart, 1s. 2d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from June to October. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
  
 ASPARAGUS SOUP. 
  
 I. 
  
 113. INGREDIENTS.--5 lbs. of lean beef, 3 slices of bacon, 1/2 pint of 
 pale ale, a few leaves of white beet, spinach, 1 cabbage lettuce, a 
 little mint, sorrel, and marjoram, a pint of asparagus-tops cut small,
the crust of 1 French roll, seasoning to taste, 2 quarts of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the beef, cut in pieces and rolled in flour, into a 
 stewpan, with the bacon at the bottom; cover it close, and set it on a 
 slow fire, stirring it now and then till the gravy is drawn. Put in the 
 water and ale, and season to taste with pepper and salt, and let it stew 
 gently for 2 hours; then strain the liquor, and take off the fat, and 
 add the white beet, spinach, cabbage lettuce, and mint, sorrel, and 
 sweet marjoram, pounded. Let these boil up in the liquor, then put in 
 the asparagus-tops cut small, and allow them to boil till all is tender. 
 Serve hot, with the French roll in the dish. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether 3 hours. _Average cost_ per quart, 1s. 9d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from May to August. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
  
 II.
seacoast plants; and, in this state, asparagus may still be 
 found on the northern as well as southern shores of Britain. It 
 is often vulgarly called, in London, _sparrowgrass_; and, in 
 it  '  s cultivated form, hardly bears any resemblance to the 
 original plant. Immense quantities of it are raised for the 
 London market, at Mortlake and Deptford; but it belongs rather 
 to the classes of luxurious than necessary food. It is light and 
 easily digested, but is not very nutritious. 
  
 BAKED SOUP. 
  
 115. INGREDIENTS.--1 lb. of any kind of meat, any trimmings or odd 
 pieces; 2 onions, 2 carrots, 2 oz. of rice, 1 pint of split peas, pepper 
 and salt to taste, 4 quarts of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the meat and vegetables in slices, add to them the rice and 
 peas, season with pepper and salt. Put the whole in a jar, fill up with 
 the water, cover very closely, and bake for 4 hours. 
  
 _Time_.--4 hours. _Average cost_, 2-1/2d. per quart.
importance. 
  
 CABBAGE SOUP. 
  
 118. INGREDIENTS.--1 large cabbage, 3 carrots, 2 onions, 4 or 5 slices 
 of lean bacon, salt and pepper to taste, 2 quarts of medium stock No. 
 105. 
  
 _Mode_.--Scald the cabbage, exit it up and drain it. Line the stewpan 
 with the bacon, put in the cabbage, carrots, and onions; moisten with 
 skimmings from the stock, and simmer very gently, till the cabbage is 
 tender; add the stock, stew softly for half an hour, and carefully skim 
 off every particle of fat. Season and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in winter. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
 
the Greeks and Romans ascribed many of the most exalted virtues 
 to them. Cato affirmed, that the cabbage cured all diseases, and 
 declared, that it was to its use that the Romans were enabled to 
 live in health and without the assistance of physicians for 600 
 years. It was introduced by that people into Germany, Gaul, and, 
 no doubt, Britain; although, in this last, it may have been 
 suffered to pass into desuetude for some centuries. The whole 
 tribe is in general wholesome and nutritive, and forms a 
 valuable adjunct to animal food. 
  
 SOUP A LA CANTATRICE. 
  
 (_An Excellent Soup, very Beneficial for the Voice_.) 
  
 119. INGREDIENTS.--3 oz. of sago, 1/2 pint of cream, the yolks of 3 
 eggs, 1 lump of sugar, and seasoning to taste, 1 bay-leaf (if liked), 2 
 quarts of medium stock No. 105. 
  
 _Mode_.--Having washed the sago in boiling water, let it be gradually 
 added to the nearly boiling stock. Simmer for 1/2 an hour, when it
I. 
  
 120. INGREDIENTS.--4 quarts of liquor in which a leg of mutton or beef 
 has been boiled, a few beef-bones, 6 large carrots, 2 large onions, 1 
 turnip; seasoning of salt and pepper to taste; cayenne. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the liquor, bones, onions, turnip, pepper, and salt, into a 
 stewpan, and simmer for 3 hours. Scrape and cut the carrots thin, strain 
 the soup on them, and stew them till soft enough to pulp through a hair 
 sieve or coarse cloth; then boil the pulp with the soup, which should be 
 of the consistency of pea-soup. Add cayenne. Pulp only the red part of 
 the carrot, and make this soup the day before it is wanted. 
  
 _Time_.--4-1/2 hours. _Average cost_ per quart, 1-1/2d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from October to March. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 10 persons. 
  
 
II. 
  
 121. INGREDIENTS.--2 lbs. of carrots, 3 oz. of butter, seasoning to 
 taste of salt and cayenne, 2 quarts of stock or gravy soup. 
  
 _Mode_.--Scrape and cut out all specks from the carrots, wash, and wipe 
 them dry, and then reduce them into quarter-inch slices. Put the butter 
 into a large stewpan, and when it is melted, add 2 lbs. of the sliced 
 carrots, and let them stew gently for an hour without browning. Add to 
 them the soup, and allow them to simmer till tender,--say for nearly an 
 hour. Press them through a strainer with the soup, and add salt and 
 cayenne if required. Boil the whole gently for 5 minutes, skim well, and 
 serve as hot as possible. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/4 hour. _Average cost_ per quart, 1s. 1d. 
  
 [Illustration: TAZZA AND CARROT LEAVES.] 
  
 THE CARROT.--There is a wild carrot which grows in England; but 
 it is white and small, and not much esteemed. The garden carrot
taste, 1 lump of sugar, 1/2 pint of strong stock, a pint of cream, and 2 
 quarts of boiling water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the celery into small pieces; throw it into the water, 
 seasoned with the nutmeg, salt, and sugar. Boil it till sufficiently 
 tender; pass it through a sieve, add the stock, and simmer it for half 
 an hour. Now put in the cream, bring it to the boiling point, and serve 
 immediately. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from September to March. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 10 persons. 
  
 _Note_.--This soup can be made brown, instead of white, by omitting the 
 cream, and colouring it a little. When celery cannot be procured, half a 
 drachm of the seed, finely pounded, will give a flavour to the soup, if 
 put in a quarter of an hour before it is done. A little of the essence 
 of celery will answer the same purpose.
 
 CELERY.--This plant is indigenous to Britain, and, in its wild 
 state, grows by the side of ditches and along some parts of the 
 seacoast. In this state it is called _smallaqe_, and, to some 
 extent, is a dangerous narcotic. By cultivation, however, it has 
 been brought to the fine flavour which the garden plant 
 possesses. In the vicinity of Manchester it is raised to an 
 enormous size. When our natural observation is assisted by the 
 accurate results ascertained by the light of science, how 
 infinitely does it enhance our delight in contemplating the 
 products of nature! To know, for example, that the endless 
 variety of colour which we see in plants is developed only by 
 the rays of the sun, is to know a truism sublime by its very 
 comprehensiveness. The cause of the whiteness of celery is 
 nothing more than the want of light in its vegetation, and in 
 order that this effect may be produced, the plant is almost 
 wholly covered with earth; the tops of the leaves alone being 
 suffered to appear above the ground. 
  
 CHANTILLY SOUP.
the voluptuous Anacreon pronounces this beautiful herb the 
 emblem of joy and festivity. It has an elegant leaf, and is 
 extensively used in the culinary art. When it was introduced to 
 Britain is not known. There are several varieties,--the 
 _plain_-leaved and the _curled_-leaved, _celery_-parsley, 
 _Hamburg_ parsley, and _purslane_. The curled is the best, and, 
 from the form of its leaf, has a beautiful appearance on a dish 
 as a garnish. Its flavour is, to many, very agreeable in soups; 
 and although to rabbits, hares, and sheep it is a luxury, to 
 parrots it is a poison. The celery-parsley is used as a celery, 
 and the Hamburg is cultivated only for its roots, which are used 
 as parsnips or carrots, to eat with meat. The purslane is a 
 native of South America, and is not now much in use. 
  
 CHESTNUT (SPANISH) SOUP. 
  
 124. INGREDIENTS.--3/4 lb. of Spanish chestnuts, 1/4 pint of cream; 
 seasoning to taste of salt, cayenne, and mace; 1 quart of stock No. 105. 
  
 _Mode_.--Take the outer rind from the chestnuts, and put them into a
THE CHESTNUT.--This fruit is said, by some, to have originally 
 come from Sardis, in Lydia; and by others, from Castanea, a city 
 of Thessaly, from which it takes its name. By the ancients it 
 was much used as a food, and is still common in France and 
 Italy, to which countries it is, by some, considered indigenous. 
 In the southern part of the European continent, it is eaten both 
 raw and roasted. The tree was introduced into Britain by the 
 Romans; but it only flourishes in the warmer parts of the 
 island, the fruit rarely arriving at maturity in Scotland. It 
 attains a great age, as well as an immense size. As a food, it 
 is the least oily and most farinaceous of all the nuts, and, 
 therefore, the easiest of digestion. The tree called the _horse 
 chestnut_ is very different, although its fruit very much 
 resembles that of the other. Its "nuts," though eaten by horses 
 and some other animals, are unsuitable for human food. 
  
 COCOA-NUT SOUP. 
  
 125. INGREDIENTS.--6 oz. of grated cocoa-nut, 6 oz. of rice flour, 1/2 a 
 teaspoonful of mace; seasoning to taste of cayenne and salt; 1/4 of a
and moderation of temper. 
  
 CUCUMBER SOUP (French Recipe). 
  
 127. INGREDIENTS.--1 large cucumber, a piece of butter the size of a 
 walnut, a little chervil and sorrel cut in large pieces, salt and pepper 
 to taste, the yolks of 2 eggs, 1 gill of cream, 1 quart of medium stock 
 No. 105. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pare the cucumber, quarter it, and take out the seeds; cut it 
 in thin slices, put these on a plate with a little salt, to draw the 
 water from them; drain, and put them in your stewpan, with the butter. 
 When they are warmed through, without being browned, pour the stock on 
 them. Add the sorrel, chervil, and seasoning, and boil for 40 minutes. 
 Mix the well-beaten yolks of the eggs with the cream, which add at the 
 moment of serving. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. 2d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from June to September.
 
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. 3d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 _Note_.--In summer, green peas, asparagus-tops, French beans, &c. can be 
 added. When the vegetables are very strong, instead of frying them in 
 butter at first, they should be blanched, and afterwards simmered in the 
 stock. 
  
 SORREL.--This is one of the _spinaceous_ plants, which take 
 their name from spinach, which is the chief among them. It is 
 little used in English cookery, but a great deal in French, in 
 which it is employed for soups, sauces, and salads. In English 
 meadows it is usually left to grow wild; but in France, where it 
 is cultivated, its flavour is greatly improved. 
  
 KALE BROSE (a Scotch Recipe).
 
 132. INGREDIENTS.--Half an ox-head or cow-heel, a teacupful of toasted 
 oatmeal, salt to taste, 2 handfuls of greens, 3 quarts of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Make a broth of the ox-head or cow-heel, and boil it till oil 
 floats on the top of the liquor, then boil the greens, shred, in it. Put 
 the oatmeal, with a little salt, into a basin, and mix with it quickly a 
 teacupful of the fat broth: it should not run into one doughy mass, but 
 form knots. Stir it into the whole, give one boil, and serve very hot. 
  
 _Time_.--4 hours. _Average cost_, 8d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year, but more suitable in winter. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 10 persons. 
  
  
 LEEK SOUP. 
  
 I.
 
 133. INGREDIENTS.--A sheep  '  s head, 3 quarts of water, 12 leeks cut 
 small, pepper and salt to taste, oatmeal to thicken. 
  
 _Mode_.--Prepare the head, either by skinning or cleaning the skin very 
 nicely; split it in two; take out the brains, and put it into boiling 
 water; add the leeks and seasoning, and simmer very gently for 4 hours. 
 Mix smoothly, with cold water, as much oatmeal as will make the soup 
 tolerably thick; pour it into the soup; continue stirring till the whole 
 is blended and well done, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--4-1/2 hours. _Average cost_, 4d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in winter. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 10 persons. 
  
  
 II. 
 
COMMONLY CALLED COCK-A-LEEKIE. 
  
 134. INGREDIENTS.--A capon or large fowl (sometimes an old cock, from 
 which the recipe takes its name, is used), which should be trussed as 
 for boiling; 2 or 3 bunches of fine leeks, 5 quarts of stock No. 105, 
 pepper and salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Well wash the leeks (and, if old, scald them in boiling water 
 for a few minutes), taking off the roots and part of the heads, and cut 
 them into lengths of about an inch. Put the fowl into the stock, with, 
 at first, one half of the leeks, and allow it to simmer gently. In half 
 an hour add the remaining leeks, and then it may simmer for 3 or 4 hours 
 longer. It should be carefully skimmed, and can be seasoned to taste. In 
 serving, take out the fowl, and carve it neatly, placing the pieces in a 
 tureen, and pouring over them the soup, which should be very thick of 
 leeks (a _purée_ of leeks the French would call it). 
  
 _Time_.--4 hours. _Average cost_, 1s. 6d. per quart; or, with stock No. 
 106, 1s. 
 
"BEETON  '  S DICTIONARY of UNIVERSAL INFORMATION:"--"It probably 
 originated from the custom of _Cymhortha_, or the friendly aid, 
 practised among farmers. In some districts of South Wales, all 
 the neighbours of a small farmer were wont to appoint a day when 
 they attended to plough his land, and the like; and, at such 
 time, it was the custom for each to bring his portion of leeks 
 with him for making the broth or soup." (_See_ ST. DAVID.) 
 Others derive the origin of the custom from the battle of 
 Cressy. The plant, when grown in Wales and Scotland, is sharper 
 than it is in England, and its flavour is preferred by many to 
 that of the onion in broth. It is very wholesome, and, to 
 prevent its tainting the breath, should be well boiled. 
  
 MACARONI SOUP. 
  
 135. INGREDIENTS.--3 oz. of macaroni, a piece of butter the size of a 
 walnut, salt to taste, 2 quarts of clear stock No. 105. 
  
 _Mode_.--Throw the macaroni and butter into boiling water, with a pinch 
 of salt, and simmer for 1/2 an hour. When it is tender, drain and cut it
best wheaten flour, with a small quantity of water. When it has 
 been well worked, it is put into a hollow cylindrical vessel, 
 pierced with holes of the size of tobacco-pipes at the bottom. 
 Through these holes the mass is forced by a powerful screw 
 bearing on a piece of wood made exactly to fit the inside of the 
 cylinder. Whilst issuing from the holes, it is partially baked 
 by a fire placed below the cylinder, and is, at the same time, 
 drawn away and hung over rods placed about the room, in order to 
 dry. In a few days it is fit for use. As it is both wholesome 
 and nutritious, it ought to be much more used by all classes in 
 England than it is. It generally accompanies Parmesan cheese to 
 the tables of the rich, but is also used for thickening soups 
 and making puddings. 
  
 SOUP MAIGRE (i.e. without Meat). 
  
 136. INGREDIENTS.--6 oz. butter, 6 onions sliced, 4 heads of celery, 2 
 lettuces, a small bunch of parsley, 2 handfuls of spinach, 3 pieces of 
 bread-crust, 2 blades of mace, salt and pepper to taste, the yolks of 2 
 eggs, 3 teaspoonfuls of vinegar, 2 quarts of water.
 
 _Mode_.--Melt the butter in a stewpan, and put in the onions to stew 
 gently for 3 or 4 minutes; then add the celery, spinach, lettuces, and 
 parsley, cut small. Stir the ingredients well for 10 minutes. Now put in 
 the water, bread, seasoning, and mace. Boil gently for 1-1/2 hour, and, 
 at the moment of serving, beat in the yolks of the eggs and the vinegar, 
 but do not let it boil, or the eggs will curdle. 
  
 _Time_.--2 hours. _Average cost_, 6d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 [Illustration: LETTUCE.] 
  
 THE LETTUCE.--This is one of the acetarious vegetables, which 
 comprise a large class, chiefly used as pickles, salads, and 
 other condiments. The lettuce has in all antiquity been 
 distinguished as a kitchen-garden plant. It was, without
milk, and stir it over the fire till it thickens. Do not let it curdle. 
 Pour it upon the bread, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--3/4 of an hour. _Average cost_, 8d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 10 children. 
  
  
 ONION SOUP. 
  
 138. INGREDIENTS.--6 large onions, 2 oz. of butter, salt and pepper to 
 taste, 1/4 pint of cream, 1 quart of stock No. 105. 
  
 _Mode_.--Chop the onions, put them in the butter, stir them 
 occasionally, but do not let them brown. When tender, put the stock to 
 them, and season; strain the soup, and add the boiling cream. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. per quart.
 
 _Seasonable_ in winter. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 persons. 
  
  
 CHEAP ONION SOUP. 
  
 139. INGREDIENTS.--8 middling-sized onions, 3 oz. of butter, a 
 tablespoonful of rice-flour, salt and pepper to taste, 1 teaspoonful of 
 powdered sugar, thickening of butter and flour, 2 quarts of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the onions small, put them in the stewpan with the butter, 
 and fry them well; mix the rice-flour smoothly with the water, add the 
 onions, seasoning, and sugar, and simmer till tender. Thicken with 
 butter and flour, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--2 hours. _Average cost_,4d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in winter.
 
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 [Illustration: ONION.] 
  
 THE ONION.--Like the cabbage, this plant was erected into an 
 object of worship by the idolatrous Egyptians 2,000 years before 
 the Christian era, and it still forms a favourite food in the 
 country of these people, as well as in other parts of Africa. 
 When it was first introduced to England, has not been 
 ascertained; but it has long been in use, and esteemed as a 
 favourite seasoning plant to various dishes. In warmer climates 
 it is much milder in its flavour; and such as are grown in Spain 
 and Portugal, are, comparatively speaking, very large, and are 
 often eaten both in a boiled and roasted state. The Strasburg is 
 the most esteemed; and, although all the species have highly 
 nutritive properties, they impart such a disagreeable odour to 
 the breath, that they are often rejected even where they are 
 liked. Chewing a little raw parsley is said to remove this 
 odour.
 
 PAN KAIL. 
  
 140. INGREDIENTS.--2 lbs. of cabbage, or Savoy greens; 1/4 lb. of butter 
 or dripping, salt and pepper to taste, oatmeal for thickening, 2 quarts 
 of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Chop the cabbage very fine, thicken the water with oatmeal, put 
 in the cabbage and butter, or dripping; season and simmer for 1-1/2 
 hour. It can be made sooner by blanching and mashing the greens, adding 
 any good liquor that a joint has been boiled in, and then further 
 thicken with bread or pounded biscuit. 
  
 _Time_--1-1/2 hour. _Average cost_, 1-1/2d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year, but more suitable in winter. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 THE SAVOY.--This is a close-hearted wrinkle-leaved cabbage,
sweet and tender, especially the middle leaves, and in season 
 from November to spring. The yellow species bears hard weather 
 without injury, whilst the _dwarf_ kind are improved and 
 rendered more tender by frost. 
  
 PARSNIP SOUP. 
  
 141. INGREDIENTS.--1 lb. of sliced parsnips, 2 oz. of butter, salt and 
 cayenne to taste, 1 quart of stock No. 106. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the parsnips into the stewpan with the butter, which has 
 been previously melted, and simmer them till quite tender. Then add 
 nearly a pint of stock, and boil together for half an hour. Pass all 
 through a fine strainer, and put to it the remainder of the stock. 
 Season, boil, and serve immediately. 
  
 _Time_.--2 hours. _Average cost_, 6d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from October to April. 
 
 
  
 WINTER PEA SOUP (YELLOW). 
  
 143. INGREDIENTS.--1 quart of split peas, 2 lbs. of shin of beef, 
 trimmings of meat or poultry, a slice of bacon, 2 large carrots, 2 
 turnips, 5 large onions, 1 head of celery, seasoning to taste, 2 quarts 
 of soft water, any bones left from roast meat, 2 quarts of common stock, 
 or liquor in which a joint of meat has been boiled. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the peas to soak over-night in soft water, and float off 
 such as rise to the top. Boil them in the water till tender enough to 
 pulp; then add the ingredients mentioned above, and simmer for 2 hours, 
 stirring it occasionally. Pass the whole through a sieve, skim well, 
 season, and serve with toasted bread cut in dice. 
  
 _Time_.--4 hours. _Average cost_, 6d. per quart. _Seasonable_ all the 
 year round, but more suitable for cold weather. _Sufficient_ for 12 
 persons. 
 
eaten cooked in the same way as kidney-beans. They are called 
 _sugar_ peas, and the best variety is the large crooked sugar, 
 which is also very good, used in the common way, as a culinary 
 vegetable. There is also a white sort, which readily splits when 
 subjected to the action of millstones set wide apart, so as not 
 to grind them. These are used largely for soups, and especially 
 for sea-stores. From the quantity of farinaceous and saccharine 
 matter contained in the pea, it is highly nutritious as an 
 article of food. 
  
 PEA SOUP (inexpensive). 
  
 144. INGREDIENTS.--1/4 lb. of onions, 1/4 lb. of carrots, 2 oz. of 
 celery, 3/4 lb. of split peas, a little mint, shred fine; 1 
 tablespoonful of coarse brown sugar, salt and pepper to taste, 4 quarts 
 of water, or liquor in which a joint of meat has been boiled. 
  
 _Mode_.--Fry the vegetables for 10 minutes in a little butter or 
 dripping, previously cutting them up in small pieces; pour the water on 
 them, and when boiling add the peas. Let them simmer for nearly 3 hours,
or until the peas are thoroughly done. Add the sugar, seasoning, and 
 mint; boil for 1/4 of an hour, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--3-1/2 hours. _Average cost_, 1-1/2d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in winter. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 12 persons. 
  
  
 POTATO SOUP. 
  
 I. 
  
 145. INGREDIENTS.--4 lbs. of mealy potatoes, boiled or steamed very dry, 
 pepper and salt to taste, 2 quarts of stock No. 105. 
  
 _Mode_.--When the potatoes are boiled, mash them smoothly, that no lumps 
 remain, and gradually put them to the boiling stock; pass it through a 
 sieve, season, and simmer for 5 minutes. Skim well, and serve with fried
bread. 
  
 _Time_.--1/2 hour. _Average cost_, 10d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from September to March. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
  
 II. 
  
 146. INGREDIENTS.--1 lb. of shin of beef, 1 lb. of potatoes, 1 onion, 
 1/2 a pint of peas, 2 oz. of rice, 2 heads of celery, pepper and salt to 
 taste, 3 quarts of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the beef into thin slices, chop the potatoes and onion, and 
 put them in a stewpan with the water, peas, and rice. Stew gently till 
 the gravy is drawn from the meat; strain it off, take out the beef, and 
 pulp the other ingredients through a coarse sieve. Put the pulp back in 
 the soup, cut up the celery in it, and simmer till this is tender.
Lancashire, in England, and was, at first, recommended to be 
 eaten as a delicate dish, and not as common food. This was in 
 1587. _Nutritious Properties_.--Of a thousand parts of the 
 potato, Sir H. Davy found about a fourth nutritive; say, 200 
 mucilage or starch, 20 sugar, and 30 gluten. 
  
 PRINCE OF WALES  '  S SOUP. 
  
 148. INGREDIENTS.--12 turnips, 1 lump of sugar, 2 spoonfuls of strong 
 veal stock, salt and white pepper to taste, 2 quarts of very bright 
 stock, No. 105. 
  
 _Mode_.--Peel the turnips, and with a cutter cut them in balls as round 
 as possible, but very small. Put them in the stock, which must be very 
 bright, and simmer till tender. Add the veal stock and seasoning. Have 
 little pieces of bread cut round, about the size of a shilling; moisten 
 them with stock; put them into a tureen and pour the soup over without 
 shaking, for fear of crumbling the bread, which would spoil the 
 appearance of the soup, and make it look thick. 
 
of this circumstance, the _Times_ said,--  '  The significance of 
 this event is, that it marks the period when the heir to the 
 British throne is about to take rank among men, and to enter 
 formally upon a career, which every loyal subject of the queen 
 will pray may be a long and a happy one, for his own sake and 
 for the sake of the vast empire which, in the course of nature, 
 he will one day be called to govern. The best wish that we can 
 offer for the young prince is, that in his own path he may ever 
 keep before him the bright example of his royal mother, and show 
 himself worthy of her name.  '   There are few in these realms who 
 will not give a fervent response to these sentiments. B. 
 November 9th, 1841." 
  
 POTAGE PRINTANIER, OR SPRING SOUP. 
  
 149. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 a pint of green peas, if in season, a little 
 chervil, 2 shredded lettuces, 2 onions, a very small bunch of parsley, 2 
 oz. of butter, the yolks of 3 eggs, 1 pint of water, seasoning to taste, 
 2 quarts of stock No. 105. 
 
quarts of white stock. 
  
 _Mode_.--Throw the rice into boiling water, and let it remain 5 minutes; 
 then pour it into a sieve, and allow it to drain well. Now add it to the 
 stock boiling, and allow it to stew till it is quite tender; season to 
 taste. Serve quickly. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. 3d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 [Illustration: EARS OF RICE.] 
  
 RICE.--This is a plant of Indian origin, and has formed the 
 principal food of the Indian and Chinese people from the most 
 remote antiquity. Both Pliny and Dioscorides class it with the 
 cereals, though Galen places it among the vegetables. Be this as 
 it may, however, it was imported to Greece, from India, about
 
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 SEMOLINA.--This is the heart of the _grano duro_ wheat of Italy, 
 which is imported for the purpose of making the best vermicelli. 
 It has a coarse appearance, and may be purchased at the Italian 
 warehouses. It is also called _soojee;_ and _semoletta_ is 
 another name for a finer sort. 
  
 SOUP A LA SOLFERINO (Sardinian Recipe). 
  
 154. INGREDIENTS.--4 eggs, 1/2 pint of cream, 2 oz. of fresh butter, 
 salt and pepper to taste, a little flour to thicken, 2 quarts of 
 bouillon, No. 105. 
  
 _Mode_.--Beat the eggs, put them into a stewpan, and add the cream, 
 butter, and seasoning; stir in as much flour as will bring it to the 
 consistency of dough; make it into balls, either round or egg-shaped, 
 and fry them in butter; put them in the tureen, and pour the boiling 
 bouillon over them.
into this country. Its nutritive properties are large, and as a 
 food for persons of delicate digestion, or for children, it is 
 in great estimation. "No amylaceous substance," says Dr. 
 Christison, "is so much relished by infants about the time of 
 weaning; and in them it is less apt to become sour during 
 digestion than any other farinaceous food, even arrowroot not 
 excepted." 
  
 TURNIP SOUP. 
  
 157. INGREDIENTS.--3 oz. of butter, 9 good-sized turnips, 4 onions, 2 
 quarts of stock No. 106, seasoning to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Melt the butter in the stewpan, but do not let it boil; wash, 
 drain, and slice the turnips and onions very thin; put them in the 
 butter, with a teacupful of stock, and stew very gently for an hour. 
 Then add the remainder of the stock, and simmer another hour. Rub it 
 through a tammy, put it back into the stewpan, but do not let it boil. 
 Serve very hot. 
 
vegetable, it is excellent, whether eaten alone, mashed, or 
 mixed with soups und stews. Its nutritious matter, however, is 
 small, being only 42 parts in 1,000. 
  
 VEGETABLE-MARROW SOUP. 
  
 158. INGREDIENTS.--4 young vegetable marrows, or more, if very small, 
 1/2 pint of cream, salt and white pepper to taste, 2 quarts of white 
 stock, No. 107. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pare and slice the marrows, and put them in the stock boiling. 
 When done almost to a mash, press them through a sieve, and at the 
 moment of serving, add the boiling cream and seasoning. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. 2d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in summer. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
 
[Illustration: VEGETABLE MARROW.] 
  
 THE VEGETABLE MARROW.--This is a variety of the gourd family, 
 brought from Persia by an East-India ship, and only recently 
 introduced to Britain. It is already cultivated to a 
 considerable extent, and, by many, is highly esteemed when fried 
 with butter. It is, however, dressed in different ways, either 
 by stewing or boiling, and, besides, made into pies. 
  
 VEGETABLE SOUP. 
  
 I. 
  
 159. INGREDIENTS.--7 oz. of carrot, 10 oz. of parsnip, 10 oz. of potato, 
 cut into thin slices; 1-1/4 oz. of butter, 5 teaspoonfuls of flour, a 
 teaspoonful of made mustard, salt and pepper to taste, the yolks of 2 
 eggs, rather more than 2 quarts of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil the vegetables in the water 2-1/2 hours; stir them often, 
 and if the water boils away too quickly, add more, as there should be 2
quarts of soup when done. Mix up in a basin the butter and flour, 
 mustard, salt, and pepper, with a teacupful of cold water; stir in the 
 soup, and boil 10 minutes. Have ready the yolks of the eggs in the 
 tureen; pour on, stir well, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--3 hours. _Average cost_, 4d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in winter. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
  
 II. 
  
 160. INGREDIENTS.--Equal quantities of onions, carrots, turnips; 1/4 lb. 
 of butter, a crust of toasted bread, 1 head of celery, a faggot of 
 herbs, salt and pepper to taste, 1 teaspoonful of powdered sugar, 2 
 quarts of common stock or boiling water. Allow 3/4 lb. of vegetables to 
 2 quarts of stock, No. 105. 
 
_Mode_.--Cut up the onions, carrots, and turnips; wash and drain them 
 well, and put them in the stewpan with the butter and powdered sugar. 
 Toss the whole over a sharp fire for 10 minutes, but do not let them 
 brown, or you will spoil the flavour of the soup. When done, pour the 
 stock or boiling water on them; add the bread, celery, herbs, and 
 seasoning; stew for 3 hours; skim well and strain it off. When ready to 
 serve, add a little sliced carrot, celery, and turnip, and flavour with 
 a spoonful of Harvey  '  s sauce, or a little ketchup. 
  
 _Time_.--3-1/2 hours. _Average cost_,6d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year. _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
  
 III. 
  
 (_Good and Cheap, made without Meat_.) 
  
 161. INGREDIENTS.--6 potatoes, 4 turnips, or 2 if very large; 2 carrots, 
 2 onions; if obtainable, 2 mushrooms; 1 head of celery, 1 large slice of
bread, 1 small saltspoonful of salt, 1/4 saltspoonful of ground black 
 pepper, 2 teaspoonfuls of Harvey  '  s sauce, 6 quarts of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Peel the vegetables, and cut them up into small pieces; toast 
 the bread rather brown, and put all into a stewpan with the water and 
 seasoning. Simmer gently for 3 hours, or until all is reduced to a pulp, 
 and pass it through a sieve in the same way as pea-soup, which it should 
 resemble in consistence; but it should be a dark brown colour. Warm it 
 up again when required; put in the Harvey  '  s sauce, and, if necessary, 
 add to the flavouring. 
  
 _Time_.--3 hours, or rather more. _Average cost_,1d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. _Sufficient_ for 16 persons. 
  
 _Note_.--This recipe was forwarded to the Editress by a lady in the 
 county of Durham, by whom it was strongly recommended. 
  
  
 VERMICELLI SOUP.
copper, with the 10 gallons of water, and stew for 1/2 an hour. Cut up 
 the vegetables, put them in with the sugar and beer, and boil for 4 
 hours. Two hours before the soup is wanted, add the rice and raspings, 
 and keep stirring till it is well mixed in the soup, which simmer 
 gently. If the liquor reduces too much, fill up with water. 
  
 _Time_.--6-1/2 hours. _Average cost_, 1-1/2d. per quart. 
  
 _Note_.--The above recipe was used in the winter of 1858 by the 
 Editress, who made, each week, in her copper, 8 or 9 gallons of this 
 soup, for distribution amongst about a dozen families of the village 
 near which she lives. The cost, as will be seen, was not great; but she 
 has reason to believe that the soup was very much liked, and gave to the 
 members of those families, a dish of warm, comforting food, in place of 
 the cold meat and piece of bread which form, with too many cottagers, 
 their usual meal, when, with a little more knowledge of the "cooking." 
 art, they might have, for less expense, a warm dish, every day. 
  
  
 MEAT, POULTRY, AND GAME SOUPS.
 
  
 BRILLA SOUP. 
  
 166. INGREDIENTS.--4 lbs. of shin of beef, 3 carrots, 2 turnips, a large 
 sprig of thyme, 2 onions, 1 head of celery, salt and pepper to taste, 4 
 quarts water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Take the beef, cut off all the meat from the bone, in nice 
 square pieces, and boil the bone for 4 hours. Strain the liquor, let it 
 cool, and take off the fat; then put the pieces of meat in the cold 
 liquor; cut small the carrots, turnips, and celery; chop the onions, add 
 them with the thyme and seasoning, and simmer till the meat is tender. 
 If not brown enough, colour it with browning. 
  
 _Time_.--6 hours. _Average cost_, 5d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 10 persons.
 
 THYME.--This sweet herb was known to the Romans, who made use of 
 it in culinary preparations, as well as in aromatic liqueurs. 
 There are two species of it growing wild in Britain, but the 
 garden thyme is a native of the south of Europe, and is more 
 delicate in its perfume than the others. Its young leaves give 
 an agreeable flavour to soups and sauces; they are also used in 
 stuffings. 
  
 CALF  '  S-HEAD SOUP. 
  
 167. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 a calf  '  s head, 1 onion stuck with cloves, a very 
 small bunch of sweet herbs, 2 blades of mace, salt and white pepper to 
 taste, 6 oz. of rice-flour, 3 tablespoonfuls of ketchup, 3 quarts of 
 white stock, No. 107, or pot-liquor, or water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Rub the head with salt, soak it for 6 hours, and clean it 
 thoroughly; put it in the stewpan, and cover it with the stock, or 
 pot-liquor, or water, adding the onion and sweet herbs. When well 
 skimmed and boiled for 1-1/2 hour, take out the head, and skim and
GIBLET SOUP. 
  
 168. INGREDIENTS.--3 sets of goose or duck giblets, 2 lbs. of shin of 
 beef, a few bones, 1 ox-tail, 2 mutton-shanks, 2 large onions, 2 
 carrots, 1 large faggot of herbs, salt and pepper to taste, 1/4 pint of 
 cream, 1 oz. of butter mixed with a dessert-spoonful of flour, 3 quarts 
 of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Scald the giblets, cut the gizzards in 8 pieces, and put them 
 in a stewpan with the beef, bones, ox-tail, mutton-shanks, onions, 
 herbs, pepper, and salt; add the 3 quarts of water, and simmer till the 
 giblets are tender, taking care to skim well. When the giblets are done, 
 take them out, put them in your tureen, strain the soup through a sieve, 
 add the cream and butter, mixed with a dessert-spoonful of flour, boil 
 it up a few minutes, and pour it over the giblets. It can be flavoured 
 with port wine and a little mushroom ketchup, instead of cream. Add salt 
 to taste. 
  
 _Time_.--3 hours. _Average cost_,9d. per quart. 
 
_Seasonable_ all the year. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 10 persons. 
  
  
 GRAVY SOUP. 
  
 169. INGREDIENTS.--6 lbs. of shin of beef, a knuckle of veal weighing 5 
 lbs., a few pieces or trimmings, 2 slices of nicely-flavoured lean, ham; 
 1/4 lb. of butter, 2 onions, 2 carrots, 1 turnip, nearly a head of 
 celery, 1 blade of mace, 6 cloves, a hunch of savoury herb with endive, 
 seasoning of salt and pepper to taste, 3 lumps of sugar, 5 quarts of 
 boiling soft water. It can be flavoured with ketchup, Leamington sauce 
 (_see_ SAUCES), Harvey  '  s sauce, and a little soy. 
  
 _Mode_.--Slightly brown the meat and ham in the butter, but do not let 
 them burn. When this is done, pour to it the water, and as the scum 
 rises, take it off; when no more appears, add all the other ingredients, 
 and let the soup simmer slowly by the fire for 6 hours without stirring 
 it any more from the bottom; take it off, and let it settle; skim off
I. 
  
 170. INGREDIENTS.--A hare fresh-killed, 1 lb. of lean gravy-beef, a 
 slice of ham, 1 carrot, 2 onions, a faggot of savoury herbs, 1/4 oz. of 
 whole black pepper, a little browned flour, 1/4 pint of port wine, the 
 crumb of two French rolls, salt and cayenne to taste, 3 quarts of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Skin and paunch the hare, saving the liver and as much blood as 
 possible. Cut it in pieces, and put it in a stewpan with all the 
 ingredients, and simmer gently for 8 hours. This soup should be made the 
 day before it is wanted. Strain through a sieve, put the best parts of 
 the hare in the soup, and serve. 
  
 OR, 
  
  
 II. 
  
 Proceed as above; but, instead of putting the joints of the hare in the 
 soup, pick the meat from the bones, pound it in a mortar, and add it,
behind it. The hare feeds in the evenings, and sleeps, in its 
 form, during the day; and, as it generally lies on the ground, 
 its feet, both below and above, are protected with a thick 
 covering of hair. Its flesh, though esteemed by the Romans, was 
 forbidden by the Druids and by the earlier Britons. It is now, 
 though very dark and dry, and devoid of fat, much esteemed by 
 Europeans, on account of the peculiarity of its flavour. In 
 purchasing this animal, it ought to be remembered that both 
 hares and rabbits, when old, have their claws rugged and blunt, 
 their haunches thick, and their ears dry and tough. The ears of 
 a young hare easily tear, and it has a narrow cleft in the lip; 
 whilst its claws are both smooth and sharp. 
  
 HESSIAN SOUP. 
  
 171. INGREDIENTS.--Half an ox  '  s head, 1 pint of split peas, 3 carrots, 6 
 turnips, 6 potatoes, 6 onions, 1 head of celery, 1 bunch of savoury 
 herbs, pepper and salt to taste, 2 blades of mace, a little allspice, 4 
 cloves, the crumb of a French roll, 6 quarts of water. 
 
_Mode_.--Clean the head, rub it with salt and water, and soak it for 5 
 hours in warm water. Simmer it in the water till tender, put it into a 
 pan and let it cool; skim off all the fat; take out the head, and add 
 the vegetables cut up small, and the peas which have been previously 
 soaked; simmer them without the meat, till they are done enough to pulp 
 through a sieve. Add the seasoning, with pieces of the meat cut up; give 
 one boil, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--4 hours. _Average cost_, 6d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in winter. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 16 persons. 
  
 _Note_.--An excellent hash or _ragoût_ can be made by cutting up the 
 nicest parts of the head, thickening and seasoning more highly a little 
 of the soup, and adding a glass of port wine and 2 tablespoonfuls of 
 ketchup. 
  
 
MOCK TURTLE. 
  
 I. 
  
 172. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 a calf  '  s head, 1/4 lb. of butter, 1/4 lb. of lean 
 ham, 2 tablespoonfuls of minced parsley, a little minced lemon thyme, 
 sweet marjoram, basil, 2 onions, a few chopped mushrooms (when 
 obtainable), 2 shallots, 2 tablespoonfuls of flour, 1/4 bottle of 
 Madeira or sherry, force-meat balls, cayenne, salt and mace to taste, 
 the juice of 1 lemon and 1 Seville orange, 1 dessert-spoonful of pounded 
 sugar, 3 quarts of best stock, No. 104. 
  
 _Mode_.--Scald the head with the skin on, remove the brain, tie the head 
 up in a cloth, and let it boil for 1 hour. Then take the meat from the 
 bones, cut it into small square pieces, and throw them into cold water. 
 Now take the meat, put it into a stewpan, and cover with stock; let it 
 boil gently for an hour, or rather more, if not quite tender, and set it 
 on one side. Melt the butter in another stewpan, and add the ham, cut 
 small, with the herbs, parsley, onions, shallots, mushrooms, and nearly 
 a pint of stock; let these simmer slowly for 2 hours, and then dredge in
 
 (_More Economical_.) 
  
 173. INGREDIENTS.--A knuckle of veal weighing 5 or 6 lbs., 2 cow-heels, 
 2 large onions stuck with cloves, 1 bunch of sweet herbs, 3 blades of 
 mace, salt to taste, 12 peppercorns, 1 glass of sherry, 24 force-meat 
 balls, a little lemon-juice, 4 quarts of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put all the ingredients, except the force-meat balls and 
 lemon-juice, in an earthen jar, and stew for 6 hours. Do not open it 
 till cold. When wanted for use, skim off all the fat, and strain 
 carefully; place it on the fire, cut up the meat into inch-and-a-half 
 squares, put it, with the force-meat balls and lemon-juice, into the 
 soup, and serve. It can be flavoured with a tablespoonful of anchovy, or 
 Harvey  '  s sauce. 
  
 _Time_.--6 hours. _Average cost_,1s. 4d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in winter. 
 
_Sufficient_ for 10 persons. 
  
 THE CALF--The flesh of this animal is called veal, and when 
 young, that is, under two months old, yields a large quantity of 
 soluble extract, and is, therefore, much employed for soups and 
 broths. The Essex farmers have obtained a celebrity for 
 fattening calves better than any others in England, where they 
 are plentifully supplied with milk, a thing impossible to be 
 done in the immediate neighbourhood of London. 
  
 MARJORAM.--There are several species of this plant; but that 
 which is preferred for cookery is a native of Portugal, and is 
 called sweet or knotted marjoram. When its leaves are dried, 
 they have an agreeable aromatic flavour; and hence are used for 
 soups, stuffings, &c. 
  
 BASIL.--This is a native of the East Indies, and is highly 
 aromatic, having a perfume greatly resembling that of cloves. It 
 is not much employed in English cookery, but is a favourite with 
 French cooks, by whom its leaves are used in soups and salads.
 
 MULLAGATAWNY SOUP. 
  
 174. INGREDIENTS.--2 tablespoonfuls of curry powder, 6 onions, 1 clove 
 of garlic, 1 oz. of pounded almonds, a little lemon-pickle, or 
 mango-juice, to taste; 1 fowl or rabbit, 4 slices of lean bacon; 2 
 quarts of medium stock, or, if wanted very good, best stock. 
  
 _Mode_.-=Slice and fry the onions of a nice colour; line the stewpan 
 with the bacon; cut up the rabbit or fowl into small joints, and 
 slightly brown them; put in the fried onions, the garlic, and stock, and 
 simmer gently till the meat is tender; skim very carefully, and when the 
 meat is done, rub the curry powder to a smooth batter; add it to the 
 soup with the almonds, which must be first pounded with a little of the 
 stock. Put in seasoning and lemon-pickle or mango-juice to taste, and 
 serve boiled rice with it. 
  
 _Time_.--2 hours. _Average cost_, 1s. 6d. per quart, with stock No. 105. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in winter.
 
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 _Note_.--This soup can also be made with breast of veal, or calf  '  s head. 
 Vegetable Mullagatawny is made with veal stock, by boiling and pulping 
 chopped vegetable marrow, cucumbers, onions, and tomatoes, and seasoning 
 with curry powder and cayenne. Nice pieces of meat, good curry powder, 
 and strong stock, are necessary to make this soup good. 
  
 [Illustration: CORIANDER.] 
  
 CORIANDER.--This plant, which largely enters into the 
 composition of curry powder with turmeric, originally comes from 
 the East; but it has long been cultivated in England, especially 
 in Essex, where it is reared for the use of confectioners and 
 druggists. In private gardens, it is cultivated for the sake of 
 its tender leaves, which are highly aromatic, and are employed 
 in soups and salads. Its seeds are used in large quantities for 
 the purposes of distillation. 
 
A GOOD MUTTON SOUP. 
  
 175. INGREDIENTS.--A neck of mutton about 5 or 6 lbs., 3 carrots, 3 
 turnips, 2 onions, a large bunch of sweet herbs, including parsley; salt 
 and pepper to taste; a little sherry, if liked; 3 quarts of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Lay the ingredients in a covered pan before the fire, and let 
 them remain there the whole day, stirring occasionally. The next day put 
 the whole into a stewpan, and place it on a brisk fire. When it 
 commences to boil, take the pan off the fire, and put it on one side to 
 simmer until the meat is done. When ready for use, take out the meat, 
 dish it up with carrots and turnips, and send it to table; strain the 
 soup, let it cool, skim off all the fat, season and thicken it with a 
 tablespoonful, or rather more, of arrowroot; flavour with a little 
 sherry, simmer for 5 minutes, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--15 hours. _Average cost_, including the meat, 1s. 3d. per 
 quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time.
177. INGREDIENTS.--2 ox-tails, 2 slices of ham, 1 oz. of butter, 2 
 carrots, 2 turnips, 3 onions, 1 leek, 1 head of celery, 1 bunch of 
 savoury herbs, 1 bay-leaf, 12 whole peppercorns, 4 cloves, a 
 tablespoonful of salt, 2 tablespoonfuls of ketchup, 1/2 glass of port 
 wine, 3 quarts of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut up the tails, separating them at the joints; wash them, and 
 put them in a stewpan, with the butter. Cut the vegetables in slices, 
 and add them, with the peppercorns and herbs. Put in 1/2 pint of water, 
 and stir it over a sharp fire till the juices are drawn. Fill up the 
 stewpan with the water, and, when boiling, add the salt. Skim well, and 
 simmer very gently for 4 hours, or until the tails are tender. Take them 
 out, skim and strain the soup, thicken with flour, and flavour with the 
 ketchup and port wine. Put back the tails, simmer for 5 minutes, and 
 serve. 
  
 _Time_.--4-1/2 hours. _Average cost_, 1s. 3d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in winter. 
 
_Sufficient_ for 10 persons. 
  
  
 PARTRIDGE SOUP. 
  
 178. INGREDIENTS.--2 partridges, 3 slices of lean ham, 2 shred onions, 1 
 head of celery, 1 large carrot, and 1 turnip cut into any fanciful 
 shapes, 1 small lump of sugar, 2 oz. of butter, salt and pepper to 
 taste, 2 quarts of stock No. 105, or common, No. 106. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the partridges into pieces, and braise them in the butter 
 and ham until quite tender; then take out the legs, wings, and breast, 
 and set them by. Keep the backs and other trimmings in the braise, and 
 add the onions and celery; any remains of cold game can be put in, and 3 
 pints of stock. Simmer slowly for 1 hour, strain it, and skim the fat 
 off as clean as possible; put in the pieces that were taken out, give it 
 one boil, and skim again to have it quite clear, and add the sugar and 
 seasoning. Now simmer the cut carrot and turnip in 1 pint of stock; when 
 quite tender, put them to the partridges, and serve. 
 
consider the bird as wholly palatable. It is an inhabitant of 
 all the temperate countries of Europe, but, on account of the 
 geniality of the climate, it abounds most in the Ukraine. 
  
 PHEASANT SOUP. 
  
 179. INGREDIENTS.--2 pheasants, 1/4 lb. of butter, 2 slices of ham, 2 
 large onions sliced, 1/2 head of celery, the crumb of two French rolls, 
 the yolks of 2 eggs boiled hard, salt and cayenne to taste, a little 
 pounded mace, if liked; 3 quarts of stock No. 105. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut up the pheasants, flour and braise them in the butter and 
 ham till they are of a nice brown, but not burnt. Put them in a stewpan, 
 with the onions, celery, and seasoning, and simmer for 2 hours. Strain 
 the soup; pound the breasts with the crumb of the roll previously 
 soaked, and the yolks of the eggs; put it to the soup, give one boil, 
 and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--2-1/2 hours. _Average cost_, 2s. 10d. per quart, or, if made 
 with fragments of gold game, 1s.
leaves are comparatively harmless, and the Cherry-laurel, which 
 is the one whose leaves are employed in cookery. They have a 
 kernel-like flavour, and are used in blanc-mange, puddings, 
 custards &c.; but when acted upon by water, they develop prussic 
 acid, and, therefore, but a small number of the leaves should be 
 used at a time. 
  
 RABBIT SOUP. 
  
 181. INGREDIENTS.--2 large rabbits, or 3 small ones; a faggot of savoury 
 herbs, 1/2 head of celery, 2 carrots, 1 onion, 1 blade of mace, salt and 
 white pepper to taste, a little pounded mace, 1/2 pint of cream, the 
 yolks of 2 eggs boiled hard, the crumb of a French roll, nearly 3 quarts 
 of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Make the soup with the legs and shoulders of the rabbit, and 
 keep the nice pieces for a dish or _entrée_. Put them into warm water, 
 and draw the blood; when quite clean, put them in a stewpan, with a 
 faggot of herbs, and a teacupful, or rather more, of veal stock or 
 water. Simmer slowly till done through, and add the 3 quarts of water,
 
 182. Ingredients.--Any bones and remains of any cold game, such as of 
 pheasants, partridges, &c.; 2 carrots, 2 small onions, 1 head of celery, 
 1 turnip, 1/4 lb. of pearl barley, the yolks of 3 eggs boiled hard, 1/4 
 pint of cream, salt to taste, 2 quarts of stock No. 105, or common 
 stock, No. 106. 
  
 _Mode_.--Place the bones or remains of game in the stewpan, with the 
 vegetables sliced; pour over the stock, and simmer for 2 hours; skim off 
 all the fat, and strain it. Wash the barley, and boil it in 2 or 3 
 waters before putting it to the soup; finish simmering in the soup, and 
 when the barley is done, take out half, and pound the other half with 
 the yolks of the eggs. When you have finished pounding, rub it through a 
 clean tammy, add the cream, and salt if necessary; give one boil, and 
 serve very hot, putting in the barley that was taken out first. 
  
 _Time_.--2-1/2 hours. _Average cost_, 1s. per quart, if made with medium 
 stock, or 6d. per quart, with common stock. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from September to March.
 
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
  
 SOUP A LA REINE. 
  
 I. 
  
 183. INGREDIENTS.--1 large fowl, 1 oz. of sweet almonds, the crumb of 1 
 1/2 French roll, 1/2 pint of cream, salt to taste, 1 small lump of 
 sugar, 2 quarts of good white veal stock, No. 107. 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil the fowl gently in the stock till quite tender, which will 
 be in about an hour, or rather more; take out the fowl, pull the meat 
 from the bones, and put it into a mortar with the almonds, and pound 
 very fine. When beaten enough, put the meat back in the stock, with the 
 crumb of the rolls, and let it simmer for an hour; rub it through a 
 tammy, add the sugar, 1/2 pint of cream that has boiled, and, if you 
 prefer, cut the crust of the roll into small round pieces, and pour the 
 soup over it, when you serve.
 
 _Time_.--2 hours, or rather more. _Average cost_, 2s. 7d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 _Note_.--All white soups should be warmed in a vessel placed in another 
 of boiling water. (_See_ BAIN MARIE, No. 87.) 
  
  
 II. (Economical.) 
  
 184. INGREDIENTS.--Any remains of roast chickens, 1/2 teacupful of rice, 
 salt and pepper to taste, 1 quart of stock No. 106. 
  
 _Mode_.--Take all the white meat and pound it with the rice, which has 
 been slightly cooked, but not much. When it is all well pounded, dilute 
 with the stock, and pass through a sieve. This soup should neither be 
 too clear nor too thick.
 
 _Time_.--1 hour. _Average cost_, 4d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 persons. 
  
 _Note_.--If stock is not at hand, put the chicken-bones in water, with 
 an onion, carrot, a few sweet herbs, a blade of mace, pepper and salt, 
 and stew for 3 hours. 
  
  
 STEW SOUP OF SALT MEAT. 
  
 185. INGREDIENTS.--Any pieces of salt beef or pork, say 2 lbs.; 4 
 carrots, 4 parsnips, 4 turnips, 4 potatoes, 1 cabbage, 2 oz. of oatmeal 
 or ground rice, seasoning of salt and pepper, 2 quarts of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut up the meat small, add the water, and let it simmer for 
 23/4 hours. Now add the vegetables, cut in thin small slices; season,
season with pepper and salt. 
  
 _Time_.--3-1/4 hours. _Average cost_, 4d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in winter. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 _Note_.--This soup may be made of the liquor in which tripe has been 
 boiled, by adding vegetables, seasoning, rice, &c. 
  
  
 TURKEY SOUP (a Seasonable Dish at Christmas). 
  
 188. INGREDIENTS.--2 quarts of medium stock, No. 105, the remains of a 
 cold roast turkey, 2 oz. of rice-flour or arrowroot, salt and pepper to 
 taste, 1 tablespoonful of Harvey  '  s sauce or mushroom ketchup. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut up the turkey in small pieces, and put it in the stock; let 
 it simmer slowly until the bones are quite clean. Take the bones out,
and work the soup through a sieve; when cool, skim well. Mix the 
 rice-flour or arrowroot to a batter with a little of the soup; add it 
 with the seasoning and sauce, or ketchup. Give one boil, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--4 hours. _Average cost_, 10d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at Christmas. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 _Note_.--Instead of thickening this soup, vermicelli or macaroni may be 
 served in it. 
  
 THE TURKEY.--The common turkey is a native of North America, and 
 was thence introduced to England, in the reign of Henry VIII. 
 According to Tusser  '  s "Five Hundred Points of Good Husbandry," 
 about the year 1585 it begun to form a dish at our rural 
 Christmas feasts. 
  
 "Beef, mutton, and pork, shred pies of the best,
drawn down in the following manner:--Lay the slices of ham on the bottom 
 of a very large stewpan, over them the knuckles of veal, according to 
 the size of the turtle; then the inside flesh of the turtle, and over 
 the whole the members. Now moisten with the water in which you are 
 boiling the shell, and draw it down thoroughly. It may now be 
 ascertained if it be thoroughly done by thrusting a knife into the 
 fleshy part of the meat. If no blood appears, it is time to moisten it 
 again with the liquor in which the bones, &c. have been boiling. Put in 
 a large bunch of all such sweet herbs as are used in the cooking of a 
 turtle,--sweet basil, sweet marjoram, lemon thyme, winter savory, 2 or 3 
 bay-leaves, common thyme, a handful of parsley and green onions, and a 
 large onion stuck with 6 cloves. Let the whole be thoroughly done. With 
 respect to the members, probe them, to see whether they are done, and if 
 so, drain and send them to the larder, as they are to make their 
 appearance only when the soup is absolutely completed. When the flesh is 
 also completely done, strain it through a silk sieve, and make a very 
 thin white _roux;_ for turtle soup must not be much thickened. When the 
 flour is sufficiently done on a slow fire, and has a good colour, 
 moisten it with the liquor, keeping it over the fire till it boils. 
 Ascertain that the sauce is neither too thick nor too thin; then draw
before it is used, is generally preferable, the flavour being more 
 uniform. Be particular, when you dress a very large turtle, to preserve 
 the green fat (be cautious not to study a very brown colour,--the 
 natural green of the fish is preferred by every epicure and true 
 connoisseur) in a separate stewpan, and likewise when the turtle is 
 entirely done, to have as many tureens as you mean to serve each time. 
 You cannot put the whole in a large vessel, for many reasons: first, it 
 will be long in cooling; secondly, when you take some out, it will break 
 all the rest into rags. If you warm in a _bain marie_, the turtle will 
 always retain the same taste; but if you boil it often, it becomes 
 strong, and loses the delicacy of its flavour. 
  
 THE COST OF TURTLE SOUP.--This is the most expensive soup brought to 
 table. It is sold by the quart,--one guinea being the standard price for 
 that quantity. The price of live turtle ranges from 8d. to 2s. per lb., 
 according to supply and demand. When live turtle is dear, many cooks use 
 the tinned turtle, which is killed when caught, and preserved by being 
 put in hermetically-sealed canisters, and so sent over to England. The 
 cost of a tin, containing 2 quarts, or 4 lbs., is about £2, and for a 
 small one, containing the green fat, 7s. 6d. From these about 6 quarts
and most delicate parts. The soup, however, is apt to disagree 
 with weak stomachs. As an article of luxury, the turtle has only 
 come into fashion within the last 100 years, and some hundreds 
 of tureens of turtle soup are served annually at the lord 
 mayor  '  s dinner in Guildhall. 
  
 A GOOD FAMILY SOUP. 
  
 190. INGREDIENTS.--Remains of a cold tongue, 2 lbs. of shin of beef, any 
 cold pieces of meat or beef-bones, 2 turnips, 2 carrots, 2 onions, 1 
 parsnip, 1 head of celery, 4 quarts of water, 1/2 teacupful of rice; 
 salt and pepper to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put all the ingredients in a stewpan, and simmer gently for 4 
 hours, or until all the goodness is drawn from the meat. Strain off the 
 soup, and let it stand to get cold. The kernels and soft parts of the 
 tongue must be saved. When the soup is wanted for use, skim off all the 
 fat, put in the kernels and soft parts of the tongue, slice in a small 
 quantity of fresh carrot, turnip, and onion; stew till the vegetables 
 are tender, and serve with toasted bread.
 
 _Time_.--5 hours. __Average cost_,3d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 12 persons. 
  
  
 HODGE-PODGE. 
  
 191. INGREDIENTS.--2 lbs. of shin of beef, 3 quarts of water, 1 pint of 
 table-beer, 2 onions, 2 carrots, 2 turnips, 1 head of celery; pepper and 
 salt to taste; thickening of butter and flour. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the meat, beer, and water in a stewpan; simmer for a few 
 minutes, and skim carefully. Add the vegetables and seasoning; stew 
 gently till the meat is tender. Thicken with the butter and flour, and 
 serve with turnips and carrots, or spinach and celery. 
  
 _Time_.--3 hours, or rather more. _Average cost_, 3d. per quart.
 
 _Seasonable_ at any time. _Sufficient_ for 12 persons. 
  
 TABLE BEER.--This is nothing more than a weak ale, and is not 
 made so much with a view to strength, as to transparency of 
 colour and an agreeable bitterness of taste. It is, or ought to 
 be, manufactured by the London professional brewers, from the 
 best pale malt, or amber and malt. Six barrels are usually drawn 
 from one quarter of malt, with which are mixed 4 or 5 lbs. of 
 hops. As a beverage, it is agreeable when fresh; but it is not 
 adapted to keep long. 
  
  
  
  
 FISH SOUPS. 
  
  
 FISH STOCK. 
 
crumb of 1 French roll, a little lobster-spawn, seasoning to taste, 2 
 quarts of medium stock, No. 105, or fish stock, No. 192. 
  
 _Mode_.--Shell the crayfish, and put the fish between two plates until 
 they are wanted; pound the shells in a mortar, with the butter and 
 anchovies; when well beaten, add a pint of stock, and simmer for 3/4 of 
 an hour. Strain it through a hair sieve, put the remainder of the stock 
 to it, with the crumb of the rolls; give it one boil, and rub it through 
 a tammy, with the lobster-spawn. Put in the fish, but do not let the 
 soup boil, after it has been rubbed through the tammy. If necessary, add 
 seasoning. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour. _Average cost_, 2s. 3d. or 1s. 9d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from January to July. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 [Illustration: CRAYFISH.] 
 
THE CRAYFISH.--This is one of those fishes that were highly 
 esteemed by the ancients. The Greeks preferred it when brought 
 from Alexandria, and the Romans ate it boiled with cumin, and 
 seasoned with pepper and other condiments. A recipe tells us, 
 that crayfish can be preserved several days in baskets with 
 fresh grass, such as the nettle, or in a bucket with about 
 three-eighths of an inch of water. More water would kill them, 
 because the large quantity of air they require necessitates the 
 water in which they are kept, to be continually renewed. 
  
 EEL SOUP. 
  
 194. INGREDIENTS.--3 lbs. of eels, 1 onion, 2 oz. of butter, 3 blades of 
 mace, 1 bunch of sweet herbs, 1/4 oz. of peppercorns, salt to taste, 2 
 tablespoonfuls of flour, 1/4 pint of cream, 2 quarts of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Wash the eels, cut them into thin slices, and put them in the 
 stewpan with the butter; let them simmer for a few minutes, then pour 
 the water to them, and add the onion, cut in thin slices, the herbs, 
 mace, and seasoning. Simmer till the eels are tender, but do not break
the fish. Take them out carefully, mix the flour smoothly to a batter 
 with the cream, bring it to a boil, pour over the eels, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour, or rather more. _Average cost_, 10d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from June to March. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 _Note_.--This soup may be flavoured differently by omitting the cream, 
 and adding a little ketchup or Harvey  '  s sauce. 
  
  
 LOBSTER SOUP. 
  
 195. INGREDIENTS.--3 large lobsters, or 6 small ones; the crumb of a 
 French roll, 2 anchovies, 1 onion, 1 small bunch of sweet herbs, 1 strip 
 of lemon-peel, 2 oz. of butter, a little nutmeg, 1 teaspoonful of flour, 
 1 pint of cream, 1 pint of milk; forcemeat balls, mace, salt and pepper 
 to taste, bread crumbs, 1 egg, 2 quarts of water.
OYSTER SOUP. 
  
 I. 
  
 196. INGREDIENTS.--6 dozen of oysters, 2 quarts of white stock, 1/2 pint 
 of cream, 2 oz. of butter, 1-1/2 oz. of flour; salt, cayenne, and mace 
 to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Scald the oysters in their own liquor; take them out, beard 
 them, and put them in a tureen. Take a pint of the stock, put in the 
 beards and the liquor, which must be carefully strained, and simmer for 
 1/2 an hour. Take it off the fire, strain it again, and add the 
 remainder of the stock with the seasoning and mace. Bring it to a boil, 
 add the thickening of butter and flour, simmer for 5 minutes, stir in 
 the boiling cream, pour it over the oysters, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour. _Average cost_, 2s. 8d. per quart. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from September to April. 
 
198. INGREDIENTS.--2 quarts of fish stock or water, 2 pints of prawns, 
 the crumbs of a French roll, anchovy sauce or mushroom ketchup to taste, 
 1 blade of mace, 1 pint of vinegar, a little lemon-juice. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pick out the tails of the prawns, put the bodies in a stewpan 
 with 1 blade of mace, 1/2 pint of vinegar, and the same quantity of 
 water; stew them for 1/4 hour, and strain off the liquor. Put the fish 
 stock or water into a stewpan; add the strained liquor, pound the prawns 
 with the crumb of a roll moistened with a little of the soup, rub them 
 through a tammy, and mix them by degrees with the soup; add ketchup or 
 anchovy sauce to taste, with a little lemon-juice. When it is well 
 cooked, put in a few picked prawns; let them get thoroughly hot, and 
 serve. If not thick enough, put in a little butter and flour. 
  
 _Time_.--hour. _Average cost_, 1s. 1d. per quart, if made with water. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 _Note_.--This can be thickened with tomatoes, and vermicelli served in 
 it, which makes it a very tasteful soup.
 
 [Illustration: THE PRAWN.] 
  
 THE PRAWN.--This little fish bears a striking resemblance to the 
 shrimp, but is neither so common nor so small. It is to be found 
 on most of the sandy shores of Europe. The Isle of Wight is 
 famous for shrimps, where they are potted; but both the prawns 
 and the shrimps vended in London, are too much salted for the 
 excellence of their natural flavour to be preserved. They are 
 extremely lively little animals, as seen in their native 
 retreats. 
  
  
  
  
 [Illustration] 
  
 FISH. 
  
 
was one of these. On being informed by his physician that he was 
 going to die of indigestion, on account of the quantity he was 
 consuming of a delicious fish, "Be it so," he calmly observed; 
 "but before I die, let me finish the remainder." 
  
 213. THE GEOGRAPHICAL SITUATION OF GREECE was highly favourable for the 
 development of a taste for the piscatory tribes; and the skill of the 
 Greek cooks was so great, that they could impart every variety of relish 
 to the dish they were called upon to prepare. Athenaeus has transmitted 
 to posterity some very important precepts upon their ingenuity in 
 seasoning with salt, oil, and aromatics. 
  
 At the present day the food of the Greeks, through the combined 
 influence of poverty and the long fasts which their religion 
 imposes upon them, is, to a large extent, composed of fish, 
 accompanied with vegetables and fruit. Caviare, prepared from 
 the roes of sturgeons, is the national ragout, which, like all 
 other fish dishes, they season with aromatic herbs. Snails 
 dressed in garlic are also a favourite dish. 
 
214. AS THE ROMANS, in a great measure, took their taste in the fine 
 arts from the Greeks, so did they, in some measure, their piscine 
 appetites. The eel-pout and the lotas  '  s liver were the favourite fish 
 dishes of the Roman epicures; whilst the red mullet was esteemed as one 
 of the most delicate fishes that could be brought to the table. 
  
 With all the elegance, taste, and refinement of Roman luxury, it 
 was sometimes promoted or accompanied by acts of great 
 barbarity. In proof of this, the mention of the red mullet 
 suggests the mode in which it was sometimes treated for the, to 
 us, _horrible_ entertainment of the _fashionable_ in Roman 
 circles. It may be premised, that as England has, Rome, in her 
 palmy days, had, her fops, who had, no doubt, through the medium 
 of their cooks, discovered that when the scales of the red 
 mullet were removed, the flesh presented a fine pink-colour. 
 Having discovered this, it was further observed that at the 
 death of the animal, this colour passed through a succession of 
 beautiful shades, and, in order that these might be witnessed 
 and enjoyed in their fullest perfection, the poor mullet was 
 served alive in a glass vessel.
inhabitants. Louis XII. engaged six fishmongers to furnish his board 
 with fresh-water animals, and Francis I. had twenty-two, whilst Henry 
 the Great extended his requirements a little further, and had 
 twenty-four. In the time of Louis XIV. the cooks had attained to such a 
 degree of perfection in their art, that they could convert the form and 
 flesh of the trout, pike, or carp, into the very shape and flavour of 
 the most delicious game. 
  
 The French long enjoyed a European reputation for their skill 
 and refinement in the preparing of food. In place of plain 
 joints, French cookery delights in the marvels of what are 
 called made dishes, ragouts, stews, and fricassees, in which no 
 trace of the original materials of which they are compounded is 
 to be found. 
  
 217. FROM GAUL WE CROSS TO BRITAIN, where it has been asserted, by, at 
 least, one authority, that the ancient inhabitants ate no fish. However 
 this may be, we know that the British shores, particularly those of the 
 North Sea, have always been well supplied with the best kinds of fish, 
 which we may reasonably infer was not unknown to the inhabitants, or
likely to be lost upon them for the lack of knowledge as to how they 
 tasted. By the time of Edward II., fish had, in England, become a 
 dainty, especially the sturgeon, which was permitted to appear on no 
 table but that of the king. In the fourteenth century, a decree of King 
 John informs us that the people ate both seals and porpoises; whilst in 
 the days of the Troubadours, whales were fished for and caught in the 
 Mediterranean Sea, for the purpose of being used as human food. 
  
 Whatever checks the ancient British may have had upon their 
 piscatory appetites, there are happily none of any great 
 consequence upon the modern, who delight in wholesome food of 
 every kind. Their taste is, perhaps, too much inclined to that 
 which is accounted solid and substantial; but they really eat 
 more moderately, even of animal food, than either the French or 
 the Germans. Roast beef, or other viands cooked in the plainest 
 manner, are, with them, a sufficient luxury; yet they delight in 
 living _well_, whilst it is easy to prove how largely their 
 affections are developed by even the prospect of a substantial 
 cheer. In proof of this we will just observe, that if a great 
 dinner is to be celebrated, it is not uncommon for the appointed
III. As food for invalids, white fish, such as the ling, cod, haddock, 
 coal-fish, and whiting, are the best; flat fish, as soles, skate, 
 turbot, and flounders, are also good. 
  
 IV. Salmon, mackerel, herrings, and trout soon spoil or decompose after 
 they are killed; therefore, to be in perfection, they should be prepared 
 for the table on the day they are caught. With flat fish, this is not of 
 such consequence, as they will keep longer. The turbot, for example, is 
 improved by being kept a day or two. 
  
  
 GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR DRESSING FISH. 
  
 219. IN DRESSING FISH, of any kind, the first point to be attended to, 
 is to see that it be perfectly clean. It is a common error to wash it 
 too much; as by doing so the flavour is diminished. If the fish is to be 
 boiled, a little salt and vinegar should be put into the water, to give 
 it firmness, after it is cleaned. Cod-fish, whiting, and haddock, are 
 far better if a little salted, and kept a day; and if the weather be not 
 very hot, they will be good for two days.
 
 220. WHEN FISH IS CHEAP AND PLENTIFUL, and a larger quantity is 
 purchased than is immediately wanted, the overplus of such as will bear 
 it should be potted, or pickled, or salted, and hung up; or it may be 
 fried, that it may serve for stewing the next day. Fresh-water fish, 
 having frequently a muddy smell and taste, should be soaked in strong 
 salt and water, after it has been well cleaned. If of a sufficient size, 
 it may be scalded in salt and water, and afterwards dried and dressed. 
  
 221. FISH SHOULD BE PUT INTO COLD WATER, and set on the fire to do very 
 gently, or the outside will break before the inner part is done. Unless 
 the fishes are small, they should never be put into warm water; nor 
 should water, either hot or cold, be poured _on_ to the fish, as it is 
 liable to break the skin: if it should be necessary to add a little 
 water whilst the fish is cooking, it ought to be poured in gently at the 
 side of the vessel. The fish-plate may be drawn up, to see if the fish 
 be ready, which may be known by its easily separating from the bone. It 
 should then be immediately taken out of the water, or it will become 
 woolly. The fish-plate should be set crossways over the kettle, to keep 
 hot for serving, and a clean cloth over the fish, to prevent its losing
Butter gives a bad colour; lard and clarified dripping are most 
 frequently used; but oil is the best, if the expense be no objection. 
 The fish should be put into the lard when boiling, and there should be a 
 sufficiency of this to cover it. 
  
 224. WHEN FISH IS BROILED, it must be seasoned, floured, and laid on a 
 very clean gridiron, which, when hot, should be rubbed with a bit of 
 suet, to prevent the fish from sticking. It must be broiled over a very 
 clear fire, that it may not taste smoky; and not too near, that it may 
 not be scorched. 
  
 225. IN CHOOSING FISH, it is well to remember that it is possible it may 
 be _fresh_, and yet not _good_. Under the head of each particular fish 
 in this work, are appended rules for its choice and the months when it 
 is in season. Nothing can be of greater consequence to a cook than to 
 have the fish good; as if this important course in a dinner does not 
 give satisfaction, it is rarely that the repast goes off well. 
  
  
 
the whole through a sieve. Put it by in small pots for use, and 
 carefully exclude the air with a bladder, as it soon changes the colour 
 of anchovies, besides spoiling them. 
  
 _Average cost_ for this quantity, 2s. 
  
  
 POTTED ANCHOVIES. 
  
 POTTED ANCHOVIES are made in the same way, by adding pounded mace, 
 cayenne, and nutmeg to taste. 
  
  
 ANCHOVY TOAST. 
  
 228. INGREDIENTS.--Toast 2 or 3 slices of bread, or, if wanted very 
 savoury, fry them in clarified butter, and spread on them the paste, No. 
 227. Made mustard, or a few grains of cayenne, may be added to the paste 
 before laying it on the toast. 
 
Armenian." The anchovy itself, when imported, is of a dark dead 
 colour, and it is to make it a bright "handsome-looking sauce" 
 that this red earth is used. 
  
 BARBEL. 
  
 229. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 pint of port wine, a saltspoonful of salt, 2 
 tablespoonfuls of vinegar, 2 sliced onions, a faggot of sweet herbs, 
 nutmeg and mace to taste, the juice of a lemon, 2 anchovies; 1 or 2 
 barbels, according to size. 
  
 _Mode_--Boil the barbels in salt and water till done; pour off some of 
 the water, and, to the remainder, put the ingredients mentioned above. 
 Simmer gently for 1/2 hour, or rather more, and strain. Put in the fish; 
 heat it gradually; but do not let it boil, or it will be broken. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether 1 hour. _Sufficient_ for 4 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from September to November. 
 
the Linnaean orders of fishes, and is a numerous tribe, 
 inhabiting only the depths of the ocean, and seldom visiting the 
 fresh waters. They have a smooth head, and the gill membrane has 
 seven rays. The body is oblong, and covered with deciduous 
 scales. The fins are all inclosed in skin, whilst their rays are 
 unarmed. The ventral fins are slender, and terminate in a point. 
 Their habits are gregarious, and they feed on smaller fish and 
 other marine animals. 
  
 COD  '  S HEAD AND SHOULDERS. 
  
 232. INGREDIENTS.--Sufficient water to cover the fish; 5 oz. of salt to 
 each gallon of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cleanse the fish thoroughly, and rub a little salt over the 
 thick part and inside of the fish, 1 or 2 hours before dressing it, as 
 this very much improves the flavour. Lay it in the fish-kettle, with 
 sufficient cold water to cover it. Be very particular not to pour the 
 water on the fish, as it is liable to break it, and only keep it just 
 simmering. If the water should boil away, add a little by pouring it in
at the side of the kettle, and not on the fish. Add salt in the above 
 proportion, and bring it gradually to a boil. Skim very carefully, draw 
 it to the side of the fire, and let it gently simmer till done. Take it 
 out and drain it; serve on a hot napkin, and garnish with cut lemon, 
 horseradish, the roe and liver. (_See_ Coloured Plate C.) 
  
 _Time_.--According to size, 1/2 an hour, more or less. _Average cost_, 
 from 3s. to 6s. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 6 or 8 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from November to March. 
  
 _Note_.--Oyster sauce and plain melted butter should be served with 
 this. 
  
 TO CHOOSE COD.--The cod should be chosen for the table when it is plump 
 and round near the tail, when the hollow behind the head is deep, and 
 when the sides are undulated as if they were ribbed. The glutinous parts 
 about the head lose their delicate flavour, after the fish has been
 
 236. INGREDIENTS.--2 slices of cod; pepper and salt to taste; 1/2 a 
 teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, 1 large blade of pounded mace, 2 oz. of 
 butter, 1/2 pint of stock No. 107, a paste crust (_see_ Pastry). For 
 sauce, 1 tablespoonful of stock, 1/4 pint of cream or milk, thickening 
 of flour or butter; lemon-peel chopped very fine to taste; 12 oysters. 
  
 _Mode_.--Lay the cod in salt for 4 hours, then wash it and place it in a 
 dish; season, and add the butter and stock; cover with the crust, and 
 bake for 1 hour, or rather more. Now make the sauce, by mixing the 
 ingredients named above; give it one boil, and pour it into the pie by a 
 hole made at the top of the crust, which can easily be covered by a 
 small piece of pastry cut and baked in any fanciful shape--such as a 
 leaf, or otherwise. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour. _Average cost_, with fresh fish, 2s. 6d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from November to March. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 6 persons.
 
 _Note_.--The remains of cold fish may be used for this pie. 
  
  
 CURRIED COD. 
  
 237. INGREDIENTS.--2 slices of large cod, or the remains of any cold 
 fish; 3 oz. of butter, 1 onion sliced, a teacupful of white stock, 
 thickening of butter and flour, 1 small teaspoonful of curry-powder, 
 1/4 pint of cream, salt and cayenne to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Flake the fish, and fry it of a nice brown colour with the 
 butter and onions; put this in a stewpan, add the stock and thickening, 
 and simmer for 10 minutes. Stir the curry-powder into the cream; put it, 
 with the seasoning, to the other ingredients; give one boil, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--3/4 hour. _Average cost_, with fresh fish, 3s. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from November to March. 
 
_Sufficient_ for 4 persons. 
  
 THE FOOD OF THE COD.--This chiefly consists of the smaller 
 species of the scaly tribes, shell-fish, crabs, and worms. Their 
 voracity is very great, and they will bite at any small body 
 they see moved by the water, even stones and pebbles, which are 
 frequently found in their stomachs. They sometimes attain a 
 great size, but their usual weight is from 14 to 40 lbs. 
  
 COD A LA CREME. 
  
 238. INGREDIENTS.--1 large slice of cod, 1 oz. of butter, 1 chopped 
 shalot, a little minced parsley, 1/4 teacupful of white stock, 1/4 pint 
 of milk or cream, flour to thicken, cayenne and lemon-juice to taste, 
 1/4 teaspoonful of powdered sugar. 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil the cod, and while hot, break it into flakes; put the 
 butter, shalot, parsley, and stock into a stewpan, and let them boil for 
 5 minutes. Stir in sufficient flour to thicken, and pour to it the milk 
 or cream. Simmer for 10 minutes, add the cayenne and sugar, and, when
liked, a little lemon-juice. Put the fish in the sauce to warm 
 gradually, but do not let it boil. Serve in a dish garnished with 
 croûtons. 
  
 _Time_.--Rather more than 1/2 hour. _Average cost_, with cream, 2s. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from November to March. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 3 persons. 
  
 _Note_.--The remains of fish from the preceding day answer very well for 
 this dish. 
  
  
 COD A LA BECHAMEL. 
  
 239. INGREDIENTS.--Any remains of cold cod, 4 tablespoonfuls of béchamel 
 (_see_ Sauces), 2 oz. butter; seasoning to taste of pepper and salt; 
 fried bread, a few bread crumbs. 
 
_Mode_.--Flake the cod carefully, leaving out all skin and bone; put the 
 béchamel in a stewpan with the butter, and stir it over the fire till 
 the latter is melted; add seasoning, put in the fish, and mix it well 
 with the sauce. Make a border of fried bread round the dish, lay in the 
 fish, sprinkle over with bread crumbs, and baste with butter. Brown 
 either before the fire or with a salamander, and garnish with toasted 
 bread cut in fanciful shapes. 
  
 _Time_.--1/2 hour. 
  
 _Average cost_, exclusive of the fish, 6d. 
  
 THE HABITAT OF THE COD.--This fish is found only in the seas of 
 the northern parts of the world, between the latitudes of 45° 
 and 66°. Its great rendezvous are the sandbanks of Newfoundland, 
 Nova Scotia, Cape Breton, and New England. These places are its 
 favourite resorts; for there it is able to obtain great 
 quantities of worms, a food peculiarly grateful to it. Another 
 cause of its attachment to these places has been said to be on 
 account of the vicinity to the Polar seas, where it returns to
spawn. Few are taken north of Iceland, and the shoals never 
 reach so far south as the Straits of Gibraltar. Many are taken 
 on the coasts of Norway, in the Baltic, and off the Orkneys, 
 which, prior to the discovery of Newfoundland, formed one of the 
 principal fisheries. The London market is supplied by those 
 taken between the Dogger Bank, the Well Bank, and Cromer, on the 
 east coast of England. 
  
 COD A LA MAITRE D  '  HOTEL. 
  
 240. INGREDIENTS.--2 slices of cod, 1/4 lb. of butter, a little chopped 
 shalot and parsley; pepper to taste, 1/4 teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, 
 or rather less, when the flavour is not liked; the juice of 1/4 lemon. 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil the cod, and either leave it whole, or, what is still 
 better, flake it from the bone, and take off the skin. Put it into a 
 stewpan with the butter, parsley, shalot, pepper, and nutmeg. Melt the 
 butter gradually, and be very careful that it does not become like oil. 
 When all is well mixed and thoroughly hot, add the lemon-juice, and 
 serve.
253. INGREDIENTS.--1 lb. of eels, a little chopped parsley, 1 shalot; 
 grated nutmeg; pepper and salt to taste; the juice of 1/2 a lemon, small 
 quantity of forcemeat, 1/4 pint of béchamel (see Sauces); puff paste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Skin and wash the eels, cut them into pieces 2 inches long, and 
 line the bottom of the pie-dish with forcemeat. Put in the eels, and 
 sprinkle them with the parsley, shalots, nutmeg, seasoning, and 
 lemon-juice, and cover with puff-paste. Bake for 1 hour, or rather more; 
 make the béchamel hot, and pour it into the pie. 
  
 _Time_.--Rather more than 1 hour. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from August to March. 
  
  
 COLLARED EEL. 
  
 254. INGREDIENTS.--1 large eel; pepper and salt to taste; 2 blades of 
 mace, 2 cloves, a little allspice very finely pounded, 6 leaves of sage, 
 and a small bunch of herbs minced very small.
 
 EELS A LA TARTARE. 
  
 255. INGREDIENTS.--2 lbs. of eels, 1 carrot, 1 onion, a little flour, 1 
 glass of sherry; salt, pepper, and nutmeg to taste; bread crumbs, 1 egg, 
 2 tablespoonfuls of vinegar. 
  
 _Mode_.--Rub the butter on the bottom of the stewpan; cut up the carrot 
 and onion, and stir them over the fire for 5 minutes; dredge in a little 
 flour, add the wine and seasoning, and boil for 1/2 an hour. Skin and 
 wash the eels, cut them into pieces, put them to the other ingredients, 
 and simmer till tender. When they are done, take them out, let them get 
 cold, cover them with egg and bread crumbs, and fry them of a nice 
 brown. Put them on a dish, pour sauce piquante over, and serve them hot. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. 8d., exclusive of the sauce 
 piquante. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from August to March. _Sufficient_ for 5 or 6 persons. 
 
VORACITY OF THE EEL.--We find in a note upon Isaac Walton, by 
 Sir John Hawkins, that he knew of eels, when kept in ponds, 
 frequently destroying ducks. From a canal near his house at 
 Twickenham he himself missed many young ducks; and on draining, 
 in order to clean it, great numbers of large eels were caught in 
 the mud. When some of these were opened, there were found in 
 their stomachs the undigested heads of the quacking tribe which 
 had become their victims. 
  
 EELS EN MATELOTE. 
  
 256. INGREDIENTS.--5 or 6 young onions, a few mushrooms, when 
 obtainable; salt, pepper, and nutmeg to taste; 1 laurel-leaf, 1/2 pint 
 of port wine, 1/2 pint of medium stock, No. 105; butter and flour to 
 thicken; 2 lbs. of eels. 
  
 _Mode_.--Rub the stewpan with butter, dredge in a little flour, add the 
 onions cut very small, slightly brown them, and put in all the other 
 ingredients. Wash, and cut up the eels into pieces 3 inches long; put 
 them in the stewpan, and simmer for 1/2 hour. Make round the dish, a
the end of winter, and, after passing a few months in fresh 
 water, returning again to its oceanic residence. It is most in 
 season in March, April, and May, but is, by some, regarded as an 
 unwholesome food, although looked on by others as a great 
 delicacy. They are dressed as eels. 
  
 FISH AND OYSTER PIE. 
  
 257. INGREDIENTS.--Any remains of cold fish, such as cod or haddock; 2 
 dozen oysters, pepper and salt to taste, bread crumbs sufficient for the 
 quantity of fish; 1/2 teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, 1 teaspoonful of 
 finely-chopped parsley. 
  
 _Mode_.--Clear the fish from the bones, and put a layer of it in a 
 pie-dish, which sprinkle with pepper and salt; then a layer of bread 
 crumbs, oysters, nutmeg, and chopped parsley. Repeat this till the dish 
 is quite full. You may form a covering either of bread crumbs, which 
 should be browned, or puff-paste, which should be cut into long strips, 
 and laid in cross-bars over the fish, with a line of the paste first 
 laid round the edge. Before putting on the top, pour in some made melted
butter, or a little thin white sauce, and the oyster-liquor, and bake. 
  
 _Time_.--If made of cooked fish, 1/4 hour; if made of fresh fish and 
 puff-paste, 3/4 hour. 
  
 _Average cost_, 1s. 6d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from September to April. 
  
 _Note_.--A nice little dish may be made by flaking any cold fish, adding 
 a few oysters, seasoning with pepper and salt, and covering with mashed 
 potatoes; 1/4 hour will bake it. 
  
  
 FISH CAKE. 
  
 258. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of any cold fish, 1 onion, 1 faggot of 
 sweet herbs; salt and pepper to taste, 1 pint of water, equal quantities 
 of bread crumbs and cold potatoes, 1/2 teaspoonful of parsley, 1 egg, 
 bread crumbs.
 
 _Mode_.--Pick the meat from the bones of the fish, which latter put, 
 with the head and fins, into a stewpan with the water; add pepper and 
 salt, the onion and herbs, and stew slowly for gravy about 2 hours; chop 
 the fish fine, and mix it well with bread crumbs and cold potatoes, 
 adding the parsley and seasoning; make the whole into a cake with the 
 white of an egg, brush it over with egg, cover with bread crumbs, and 
 fry of a light brown; strain the gravy, pour it over, and stew gently 
 for 1/4 hour, stirring it carefully once or twice. Serve hot, and 
 garnish with slices of lemon and parsley. 
  
 _Time_--1/2 hour, after the gravy is made. 
  
  
 BOILED FLOUNDERS. 
  
 259. INGREDIENTS.--Sufficient water to cover the flounders, salt in the 
 proportion of 6 oz. to each gallon, a little vinegar. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pat on a kettle with enough water to cover the flounders, lay
271. INGREDIENTS.--1 lobster, 2 oz. of butter, grated nutmeg; salt, 
 pepper, and pounded mace, to taste; bread crumbs, 2 eggs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pound the meat of the lobster to a smooth paste with the butter 
 and seasoning, and add a few bread crumbs. Beat the eggs, and make the 
 whole mixture into the form of a lobster; pound the spawn, and sprinkle 
 over it. Bake 1/4 hour, and just before serving, lay over it the tail 
 and body shell, with the small claws underneath, to resemble a lobster. 
  
 _Time_.--1/4 hour. _Average cost_, 2s. 6d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
  
  
 LOBSTER SALAD. 
  
 272. INGREDIENTS.--1 hen lobster, lettuces, endive, small salad 
 (whatever is in season), a little chopped beetroot, 2 hard-boiled eggs,
a few slices of cucumber. For dressing, equal quantities of oil and 
 vinegar, 1 teaspoonful of made mustard, the yolks of 2 eggs; cayenne and 
 salt to taste; 3 teaspoonful of anchovy sauce. These ingredients should 
 be mixed perfectly smooth, and form a creamy-looking sauce. 
  
 _Mode_.--Wash the salad, and thoroughly dry it by shaking it in a cloth. 
 Cut up the lettuces and endive, pour the dressing on them, and lightly 
 throw in the small salad. Mix all well together with the pickings from 
 the body of the lobster; pick the meat from the shell, cut it up into 
 nice square pieces, put half in the salad, the other half reserve for 
 garnishing. Separate the yolks from the whites of 2 hard-boiled eggs; 
 chop the whites very fine, and rub the yolks through a sieve, and 
 afterwards the coral from the inside. Arrange the salad lightly on a 
 glass dish, and garnish, first with a row of sliced cucumber, then with 
 the pieces of lobster, the yolks and whites of the eggs, coral, and 
 beetroot placed alternately, and arranged in small separate bunches, so 
 that the colours contrast nicely. 
  
 _Average cost_, 3s. 6d. _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
 
_Seasonable_ from April to October; may be had all the year, but salad 
 is scarce and expensive in winter. 
  
 _Note_.--A few crayfish make a pretty garnishing to lobster salad. 
  
 THE SHELL OF THE LOBSTER.--Like the others of its tribe, the 
 lobster annually casts its shell. Previously to its throwing off 
 the old one, it appears sick, languid, and restless, but in the 
 course of a few days it is entirely invested in its new coat of 
 armour. Whilst it is in a defenceless state, however, it seeks 
 some lonely place, where it may lie undisturbed, and escape the 
 horrid fate of being devoured by some of its own species who 
 have the advantage of still being encased in their mail. 
  
 LOBSTER (a la Mode Francaise). 
  
 273. INGREDIENTS.--1 lobster, 4 tablespoonfuls of white stock, 2 
 tablespoonfuls of cream, pounded mace, and cayenne to taste; bread 
 crumbs. 
 
_Mode_.--Pick the meat from the shell, and cut it up into small square 
 pieces; put the stock, cream, and seasoning into a stewpan, add the 
 lobster, and let it simmer gently for 6 minutes. Serve it in the shell, 
 which must be nicely cleaned, and have a border of puff-paste; cover it 
 with bread crumbs, place small pieces of butter over, and brown before 
 the fire, or with a salamander. 
  
 _Time_.--1/4 hour. _Average cost_, 2s. 6d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 CELERITY OF THE LOBSTER.--In its element, the lobster is able to 
 run with great speed upon its legs, or small claws, and, if 
 alarmed, to spring, tail foremost, to a considerable distance, 
 "even," it is said, "with the swiftness of a bird flying." 
 Fishermen have seen some of them pass about thirty feet with a 
 wonderful degree of swiftness. When frightened, they will take 
 their spring, and, like a chamois of the Alps, plant themselves 
 upon the very spot upon which they designed to hold themselves. 
 
saltspoonful of salt, pounded mace, grated nutmeg, cayenne and white 
 pepper to taste, egg, and bread crumbs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pick the meat from the shell, and pound it in a mortar with the 
 butter, and gradually add the mace and seasoning, well mixing the 
 ingredients; beat all to a smooth paste, and add a little of the spawn; 
 divide the mixture into pieces of an equal size, and shape them like 
 cutlets. They should not be very thick. Brush them over with egg, and 
 sprinkle with bread crumbs, and stick a short piece of the small claw in 
 the top of each; fry them of a nice brown in boiling lard, and drain 
 them before the fire, on a sieve reversed; arrange them nicely on a 
 dish, and pour béchamel in the middle, but not over the cutlets. 
  
 _Time_.--About 8 minutes after the cutlets are made. 
  
 _Average cost_ for this dish, 2s. 9d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year. _Sufficient_ for 5 or 6 persons. 
  
 ANCIENT MODE OF COOKING THE LOBSTER.--When this fish was to be
served for the table, among the ancients, it was opened 
 lengthwise, and filled with a gravy composed of coriander and 
 pepper. It was then put on the gridiron and slowly cooked, 
 whilst it was being basted with the same kind of gravy with 
 which the flesh had become impregnated. 
  
 TO DRESS LOBSTERS. 
  
 276. When the lobster is boiled, rub it over with a little salad-oil, 
 which wipe off again; separate the body from the tail, break off the 
 great claws, and crack them at the joints, without injuring the meat; 
 split the tail in halves, and arrange all neatly in a dish, with the 
 body upright in the middle, and garnish with parsley. (_See_ Coloured 
 Plate, H.) 
  
  
 LOBSTER PATTIES (an Entree). 
  
 277. INGREDIENTS.--Minced lobster, 4 tablespoonfuls of béchamel, 6 drops 
 of anchovy sauce, lemon-juice, cayenne to taste.
No novel customs learns in different seas, 
 But wonted food and home-taught manners please." 
  
 POTTED LOBSTER. 
  
 278. INGREDIENTS.--2 lobsters; seasoning to taste, of nutmeg, pounded 
 mace, white pepper, and salt; 1/4 lb. of butter, 3 or 4 bay-leaves. 
  
 _Mode_.--Take out the meat carefully from the shell, but do not cut it 
 up. Put some butter at the bottom of a dish, lay in the lobster as 
 evenly as possible, with the bay-leaves and seasoning between. Cover 
 with butter, and bake for 3/4 hour in a gentle oven. When done, drain 
 the whole on a sieve, and lay the pieces in potting-jars, with the 
 seasoning about them. When cold, pour over it clarified butter, and, if 
 very highly seasoned, it will keep some time. 
  
 _Time_.--3/4 hour. _Average cost_ for this quantity, 4s. 4d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
 
 
  
 SALMON AND CAPER SAUCE. 
  
 302. INGREDIENTS.--2 slices of salmon, 1/4 lb. batter, 1/2 teaspoonful 
 of chopped parsley, 1 shalot; salt, pepper, and grated nutmeg to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Lay the salmon in a baking-dish, place pieces of butter over 
 it, and add the other ingredients, rubbing a little of the seasoning 
 into the fish; baste it frequently; when done, take it out and drain for 
 a minute or two; lay it in a dish, pour caper sauce over it, and serve. 
 Salmon dressed in this way, with tomato sauce, is very delicious. 
  
 _Time_.--About 3/4 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. 3d. per lb. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from April to August. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
  
 THE MIGRATORY HABITS OF THE SALMON.--The instinct with which the
salmon revisits its native river, is one of the most curious 
 circumstances in its natural history. As the swallow returns 
 annually to its nest, so it returns to the same spot to deposit 
 its ova. This fact would seem to have been repeatedly proved. M. 
 De Lande fastened a copper ring round a salmon  '  s tail, and found 
 that, for three successive seasons, it returned to the same 
 place. Dr. Bloch states that gold and silver rings have been 
 attached by eastern princes to salmon, to prove that a 
 communication existed between the Persian Gulf and the Caspian 
 and Northern Seas, and that the experiment succeeded. 
  
 COLLARED SALMON. 
  
 303. INGREDIENTS.--A piece of salmon, say 3 lbs., a high seasoning of 
 salt, pounded mace, and pepper; water and vinegar, 3 bay-leaves. 
  
 _Mode_.--Split the fish; scale, bone, and wash it thoroughly clean; wipe 
 it, and rub in the seasoning inside and out; roll it up, and bind 
 firmly; lay it in a kettle, cover it with vinegar and water (1/3 
 vinegar, in proportion to the water); add the bay-leaves and a good
seasoning of salt and whole pepper, and simmer till done. Do not remove 
 the lid. Serve with melted butter or anchovy sauce. For preserving the 
 collared fish, boil up the liquor in which it was cooked, and add a 
 little more vinegar. Pour over when cold. 
  
 _Time_.--3/4 hour, or rather more. 
  
 HABITAT OF THE SALMON.--The salmon is styled by Walton the "king 
 of fresh-water fish," and is found distributed over the north of 
 Europe and Asia, from Britain to Kamschatka, but is never found 
 in warm latitudes, nor has it ever been caught even so far south 
 as the Mediterranean. It lives in fresh as well as in salt 
 waters, depositing its spawn in the former, hundreds of miles 
 from the mouths of some of those rivers to which it has been 
 known to resort. In 1859, great efforts were made to introduce 
 this fish into the Australian colonies; and it is believed that 
 the attempt, after many difficulties, which were very skilfully 
 overcome, has been successful. 
  
 CRIMPED SALMON.
 
 304. Salmon is frequently dressed in this way at many fashionable 
 tables, but must be very fresh, and cut into slices 2 or 3 inches thick. 
 Lay these in cold salt and water for 1 hour; have ready some boiling 
 water, salted, as in recipe No. 301, and well skimmed; put in the fish, 
 and simmer gently for 1/4 hour, or rather more; should it be very thick, 
 garnish the same as boiled salmon, and serve with the same sauces. 
  
  
 _Time_.--1/4 hour, more or less, according to size. 
  
 _Note_.--Never use vinegar with salmon, as it spoils the taste and 
 colour of the fish. 
  
 [Illustration: THE SALMON.] 
  
 THE SALMON TRIBE.--This is the Abdominal fish, forming the 
 fourth of the orders of Linnaeus. They are distinguished from 
 the other fishes by having two dorsal fins, of which the 
 hindmost is fleshy and without rays. They have teeth both on the
tongue and in the jaws, whilst the body is covered with round 
 and minutely striated scales. 
  
 CURRIED SALMON. 
  
 305. INGREDIENTS.--Any remains of boiled salmon, 3/4 pint of strong or 
 medium stock (No. 105), 1 onion, 1 tablespoonful of curry-powder, 1 
 teaspoonful of Harvey  '  s sauce, 1 teaspoonful of anchovy sauce, 1 oz. of 
 butter, the juice of 1/2 lemon, cayenne and salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut up the onions into small pieces, and fry them of a pale 
 brown in the butter; add all the ingredients but the salmon, and simmer 
 gently till the onion is tender, occasionally stirring the contents; cut 
 the salmon into small square pieces, carefully take away all skin and 
 bone, lay it in the stewpan, and let it gradually heat through; but do 
 not allow it to boil long. 
  
 _Time_.--3/4 hour. _Average cost_, exclusive of the cold fish, 9d. 
  
 GROWTH OF THE SALMON.--At the latter end of the year--some as
salmon. 
  
 SALMON CUTLETS. 
  
 306. Cut the slices 1 inch thick, and season them with pepper and salt; 
 butter a sheet of white paper, lay each slice on a separate piece, with 
 their ends twisted; broil gently over a clear fire, and serve with 
 anchovy or caper sauce. When higher seasoning is required, add a few 
 chopped herbs and a little spice. 
  
 _Time_.--5 to 10 minutes. 
  
 SALMON A LA GENEVESE. 
  
 307. INGREDIENTS.--2 slices of salmon, 2 chopped shalots, a little 
 parsley, a small bunch of herbs, 2 bay-leaves, 2 carrots, pounded mace, 
 pepper and salt to taste, 4 tablespoonfuls of Madeira, 1/2 pint of white 
 stock (No. 107), thickening of butter and flour, 1 teaspoonful of 
 essence of anchovies, the juice of 1 lemon, cayenne and salt to taste. 
 
_Mode_.--Rub the bottom of a stewpan over with butter, and put in the 
 shalots, herbs, bay-leaves, carrots, mace, and seasoning; stir them for 
 10 minutes over a clear fire, and add the Madeira or sherry; simmer 
 gently for 1/2 hour, and strain through a sieve over the fish, which 
 stew in this gravy. As soon as the fish is sufficiently cooked, take 
 away all the liquor, except a little to keep the salmon moist, and put 
 it into another stewpan; add the stock, thicken with butter and flour, 
 and put in the anchovies, lemon-juice, cayenne, and salt; lay the salmon 
 on a hot dish, pour over it part of the sauce, and serve the remainder 
 in a tureen. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/4 hour. _Average cost_ for this quantity, 3s. 6d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
  
  
 PICKLED SALMON. 
  
 308. INGREDIENTS.--Salmon, 1/2 oz. of whole pepper, 1/2 oz. of whole 
 allspice, 1 teaspoonful of salt, 2 bay-leaves, equal quantities of
vinegar and the liquor in which the fish was boiled. 
  
 _Mode_.--After the fish comes from table, lay it in a nice dish with a 
 cover to it, as it should be excluded from the air, and take away the 
 bone; boil the liquor and vinegar with the other ingredients for 10 
 minutes, and let it stand to get cold; pour it over the salmon, and in 
 12 hours this will be fit for the table. 
  
 _Time_.--10 minutes. 
  
 TO CURE SALMON.--This process consists in splitting the fish, 
 rubbing it with salt, and then putting it into pickle in tubs 
 provided for the purpose. Here it is kept for about six weeks, 
 when it is taken out, pressed and packed in casks, with layers 
 of salt. 
  
 POTTED SALMON. 
  
 309. INGREDIENTS.--Salmon; pounded mace, cloves, and pepper to taste; 3 
 bay-leaves, 1/4 lb. butter.
BAKED SEA-BREAM. 
  
 310. INGREDIENTS.--1 bream. Seasoning to taste of salt, pepper, and 
 cayenne; 1/4 lb. of butter. 
  
 _Mode_.--Well wash the bream, but do not remove the scales, and wipe 
 away all moisture with a nice dry cloth. Season it inside and out with 
 salt, pepper, and cayenne, and lay it in a baking-dish. Place the 
 butter, in small pieces, upon the fish, and bake for rather more than 
 1/2 an hour. To stuff this fish before baking, will be found a great 
 improvement. 
  
 _Time_.--Rather more than 1/2 an hour. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in summer. 
  
 [Illustration: THE SEA-BREAM.] 
  
 _Note_.--This fish may be broiled over a nice clear fire, and served 
 with a good brown gravy or white sauce, or it may be stewed in wine.
 
 THE SEA-BREAM.--This is an abundant fish in Cornwall, and it is 
 frequently found in the fish-market of Hastings during the 
 summer months, but it is not in much esteem. 
  
 MR. YARRELL  '  S RECIPE. 
  
 "When thoroughly cleansed, the fish should be wiped dry, but 
 none of the scales should be taken off. In this state it should 
 be broiled, turning it often, and if the skin cracks, flour it a 
 little to keep the outer case entire. When on table, the whole 
 skin and scales turn off without difficulty, and the muscle 
 beneath, saturated in its own natural juices, which the outside 
 covering has retained, will be of good flavour." 
  
 TO DRESS SHAD. 
  
 311. INGREDIENTS.--1 shad, oil, pepper, and salt. 
  
 _Mode_.--Scale, empty and wash the fish carefully, and make two or three
blade of pounded mace, cayenne to taste; when liked, a little nutmeg. 
  
 _Mode_.--Have ready a pint of picked shrimps, and put them, with the 
 other ingredients, into a stewpan; let them heat gradually in the 
 butter, but do not let it boil. Pour into small pots, and when cold, 
 cover with melted butter, and carefully exclude the air. 
  
 _Time_.--1/4 hour to soak in the butter. 
  
 _Average cost_ for this quantity, 1s. 3d. 
  
  
 BUTTERED PRAWNS OR SHRIMPS. 
  
 313. INGREDIENTS.--1 pint of picked prawns or shrimps, 3/4 pint of stock 
 No. 104, thickening of butter and flour; salt, cayenne, and nutmeg to 
 taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pick the prawns or shrimps, and put them in a stewpan with the 
 stock; add a thickening of butter and flour; season, and simmer gently
SOLE OR COD PIE. 
  
 322. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold boiled sole or cod, seasoning to 
 taste of pepper, salt, and pounded mace, 1 dozen oysters to each lb. of 
 fish, 3 tablespoonfuls of white stock, 1 teacupful of cream thickened 
 with flour, puff paste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Clear the fish from the bones, lay it in a pie-dish, and 
 between each layer put a few oysters and a little seasoning; add the 
 stock, and, when liked, a small quantity of butter; cover with puff 
 paste, and bake for 1/2 hour. Boil the cream with sufficient flour to 
 thicken it; pour in the pie, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--1/2 hour. _Average cost_ for this quantity, 10d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 persons. 
  
 
SOLES WITH CREAM SAUCE. 
  
 323. INGREDIENTS.--2 soles; salt, cayenne, and pounded mace to taste; 
 the juice of 1/2 lemon, salt and water, 1/2 pint of cream. 
  
 _Mode_.--Skin, wash, and fillet the soles, and divide each fillet in 2 
 pieces; lay them in cold salt and water, which bring gradually to a 
 boil. When the water boils, take out the fish, lay it in a delicately 
 clean stewpan, and cover with the cream. Add the seasoning, simmer very 
 gently for ten minutes, and, just before serving, put in the lemon-juice. 
 The fillets may be rolled, and secured by means of a skewer; but this is 
 not so economical a way of dressing them, as double the quantity of cream 
 is required. 
  
 _Time_.--10 minutes in the cream. 
  
 _Average cost_, from 1s. to 2s. per pair. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
 
This will be found a most delicate and delicious dish. 
  
 THE SOLE A FAVOURITE WITH THE ANCIENT GREEKS.--This fish was 
 much sought after by the ancient Greeks on account of its light 
 and nourishing qualities. The brill, the flounder, the diamond 
 and Dutch plaice, which, with the sole, were known under the 
 general name of _passeres_, were all equally esteemed, and had 
 generally the same qualities attributed to them. 
  
 FILLETED SOLES A L  '  ITALIENNE. 
  
 324. INGREDIENTS.--2 soles; salt, pepper, and grated nutmeg to taste; 
 egg and bread crumbs, butter, the juice of 1 lemon. 
  
 _Mode_.--Skin, and carefully wash the soles, separate the meat from the 
 bone, and divide each fillet in two pieces. Brush them over with white 
 of egg, sprinkle with bread crumbs and seasoning, and put them in a 
 baking-dish. Place small pieces of butter over the whole, and bake for 
 1/2 hour. When they are nearly done, squeeze the juice of a lemon over 
 them, and serve on a dish, with Italian sauce (see Sauces) poured over.
 
 _Time_.--1/2 hour. _Average cost_, from 1s. to 2s. per pair. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 6 persons. 
  
 WHITING may be dressed in the same manner, and will be found very 
 delicious. 
  
 THE FLAVOUR OF THE SOLE.--This, as a matter of course, greatly 
 depends on the nature of the ground and bait upon which the 
 animal feeds. Its natural food are small crabs and shell-fish. 
 Its colour also depends on the colour of the ground where it 
 feeds; for if this be white, then the sole is called the white, 
 or lemon sole; but if the bottom be muddy, then it is called the 
 black sole. Small-sized soles, caught in shallow water on the 
 coasts, are the best in flavour. 
  
 FRICASSEED SOLES.
 
 325. INGREDIENTS.--2 middling-sized soles, 1 small one, 1/2 teaspoonful 
 of chopped lemon-peel, 1 teaspoonful of chopped parsley, a little grated 
 bread; salt, pepper, and nutmeg to taste; 1 egg, 2 oz. butter, 1/2 pint 
 of good gravy, 2 tablespoonfuls of port wine, cayenne and lemon-juice to 
 taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Fry the soles of a nice brown, as directed in recipe No. 327, 
 and drain them well from fat. Take all the meat from the small sole, 
 chop it fine, and mix with it the lemon-peel, parsley, bread, and 
 seasoning; work altogether, with the yolk of an egg and the butter; make 
 this into small balls, and fry them. Thicken the gravy with a 
 dessert-spoonful of flour, add the port wine, cayenne, and lemon-juice; 
 lay in the 2 soles and balls; let them simmer gently for 6 minutes; 
 serve hot, and garnish with cut lemon. 
  
 _Time_.--10 minutes to fry the soles. 
  
 _Average cost_ for this quantity, 3s. 
 
brighter they are, so are they the fresher. 
  
  
 SPRATS FRIED IN BATTER. 
  
 330. INGREDIENTS.--2 eggs, flour, bread crumbs; seasoning of salt and 
 pepper to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Wipe the sprats, and dip them in a batter made of the above 
 ingredients. Fry of a nice brown, serve very hot, and garnish with fried 
 parsley. 
  
 Sprats may be baked like herrings. (_See_ No. 268.) 
  
  
 DRIED SPRATS. 
  
 331. Dried sprats should be put into a basin, and boiling water poured 
 over them; they may then be skinned and served, and this will be found a 
 much better way than boiling them.
 
 [Illustration: THE SPRAT.] 
  
 THE SPRAT.--This migratory fish, is rarely found longer than 
 four or five inches, and visits the shores of Britain after the 
 herring and other kinds of fish have taken their departure from 
 them. On the coasts of Suffolk, Essex, and Kent, they are very 
 abundant, and from 400 to 500 boats are employed in catching 
 them during the winter season. Besides plentifully supplying the 
 London market, they are frequently sold at sixpence a bushel to 
 farmers for manuring purposes. They enter the Thames about the 
 beginning of November, and leave it in March. At Yarmouth and 
 Gravesend they are cured like red herrings. 
  
 BAKED STURGEON. 
  
 332. INGREDIENTS.--1 small sturgeon, salt and pepper to taste, 1 small 
 bunch of herbs, the juice of 1/2 lemon, 1/4 lb. of butter, 1 pint of 
 white wine. 
 
_Mode_,--Cleanse the fish thoroughly, skin it, and split it along the 
 belly without separating it; have ready a large baking-dish, in which 
 lay the fish, sprinkle over the seasoning and herbs very finely minced, 
 and moisten it with the lemon-juice and wine. Place the butter in small 
 pieces over the whole of the fish, put it in the oven, and baste 
 frequently; brown it nicely, and serve with its own gravy. 
  
 _Time_.--Nearly 1 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. to 1s. 6d. per lb. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from August to March. 
  
 [Illustration: THE STURGEON.] 
  
 THE STURGEON.--This fish commences the sixth of Linnaean order, 
 and all the species are large, seldom measuring, when 
 full-grown, less than three or four feet in length. Its flesh is 
 reckoned extremely delicious, and, in the time of the emperor 
 Severus, was so highly valued by the ancients, that it was 
 brought to table by servants crowned with coronets, and preceded 
 by a band of music. It is an inhabitant of the Baltic, the
flat tops, and on the top of each pyramid, put rather more than a 
 tablespoonful of white of egg beaten to a stiff froth. Over this, 
 sprinkle finely-chopped parsley and fine raspings of a dark colour. 
 Arrange these on the napkin round the fish, one green and one brown 
 alternately. 
  
 TO CHOOSE TURBOT.--See that it is thick, and of a yellowish white; for 
 if of a bluish tint, it is not good. 
  
 [Illustration: THE TURBOT.] 
  
 THE TURBOT.--This is the most esteemed of all our flat fish. The 
 northern parts of the English coast, and some places off the 
 coast of Holland, produce turbot in great abundance, and in 
 greater excellence than any other parts of the world. The London 
 market is chiefly supplied by Dutch fishermen, who bring to it 
 nearly 90,000 a year. The flesh is firm, white, rich, and 
 gelatinous, and is the better for being kept a day or two 
 previous to cooking it. In many parts of the country, turbot and 
 halibut are indiscriminately sold for each other. They are,
 
 BAKED FILLETS OF TURBOT. 
  
 339. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold turbot, lobster sauce left from 
 the preceding day, egg, and bread crumbs; cayenne and salt to taste; 
 minced parsley, nutmeg, lemon-juice. 
  
 _Mode_.--After having cleared the fish from all skin and bone, divide it 
 into square pieces of an equal size; brush them over with egg, sprinkle 
 with bread crumbs mixed with a little minced parsley and seasoning. Lay 
 the fillets in a baking-dish, with sufficient butter to baste with. Bake 
 for 1/4 hour, and do not forget to keep them well moistened with the 
 butter. Put a little lemon-juice and grated nutmeg to the cold lobster 
 sauce; make it hot, and pour over the fish, which must be well drained 
 from the butter. Garnish with parsley and cut lemon. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether, 1/2 hour. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
 
_Note_.--Cold turbot thus warmed in the remains of lobster sauce will be 
 found much nicer than putting the fish again in water. 
  
  
 FILLETS OF TURBOT A L  '  ITALIENNE. 
  
 340. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold turbot, Italian sauce. (See 
 Sauces.) 
  
 _Mode_.--Clear the fish carefully from the bone, and take away all skin, 
 which gives an unpleasant flavour to the sauce. Make the sauce hot, lay 
 in the fish to warm through, but do not let it boil. Garnish with 
 croutons. 
  
 _Time_.--5 minutes. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year. 
  
 THE ANCIENT ROMANS  '   ESTIMATE OF TURBOT.--As this luxurious 
 people compared soles to partridges, and sturgeons to peacocks,
so they found a resemblance to the turbot in the pheasant. In 
 the time of Domitian, it is said one was taken of such 
 dimensions as to require, in the imperial kitchen, a new stove 
 to be erected, and a new dish to be made for it, in order that 
 it might be cooked and served whole: not even imperial Rome 
 could furnish a stove or a dish large enough for the monstrous 
 animal. Where it was caught, we are not aware; but the turbot of 
 the Adriatic Sea held a high rank in the "Eternal City." 
  
 TURBOT A LA CREME. 
  
 341. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold turbot. For sauce, 2 oz. of 
 butter, 4 tablespoonfuls of cream; salt, cayenne, and pounded mace to 
 taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Clear away all skin and bone from the flesh of the turbot, 
 which should be done when it comes from table, as it causes less waste 
 when trimmed hot. Cut the flesh into nice square pieces, as equally as 
 possible; put into a stewpan the butter, let it melt, and add the cream 
 and seasoning; let it just simmer for one minute, but not boil. Lay in
 
 _Note_.--Large whitings may be filleted, rolled, and served as fried 
 filleted soles (_see_ Coloured Plato A). Small fried whitings are 
 frequently used for garnishing large boiled fish, such as turbot, cod, 
 etc. 
  
  
 WHITING AU GRATIN, or BAKED WHITING. 
  
 346. INGREDIENTS.--4 whiting, butter, 1 tablespoonful of minced parsley, 
 a few chopped mushrooms when obtainable; pepper, salt, and grated nutmeg 
 to taste; butter, 2 glasses of sherry or Madeira, bread crumbs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Grease the bottom of a baking-dish with butter, and over it, 
 strew some minced parsley and mushrooms. Scale, empty, and wash the 
 whitings, and wipe them thoroughly dry, carefully preserving the livers. 
 Lay them in the dish, sprinkle them with bread crumbs and seasoning, 
 adding a little grated nutmeg, and also a little more minced parsley and 
 mushrooms. Place small pieces of butter over the whiting, moisten with 
 the wine, and bake for 20 minutes in a hot oven. If there should be too[                    ]	0  	much sauce, reduce it by boiling over a sharp fire for a few minutes, 
 and pour under the fish. Serve with a cut lemon, and no other sauce. 
  
 _Time_.---20 minutes. _Average cost_, 4d. each. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year, but best from October to March. 
  
 _Sufficient_.--This quantity for 4 or 5 persons. 
  
  
 WHITING AUX FINE HERBES. 
  
 347. INGREDIENTS.-1 bunch of sweet herbs chopped very fine; butter. 
  
 _Mode_.--Clean and skin the fish, fasten the tails in the mouths; and lay 
 them in a baking-dish. Mince the herbs very fine, strew them over the 
 fish, and place small pieces of butter over; cover with another dish, 
 and let them simmer in a Dutch oven for 1/4 hour or 20 minutes. Turn the 
 fish once or twice, and serve with the sauce poured over. 
 
_Time_.--1/4 hour or 20 minutes. _Average cost_, 4d. each. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year, but best from October to March. 
  
 _Sufficient_, 1 small whiting for each person. 
  
 THE WHITING POUT, AND POLLACK.--About the mouth of the Thames, 
 and generally all round the English coasts, as well as in the 
 northern seas, the pout is plentiful. It bears a striking 
 resemblance to the whiting, and is esteemed as an excellent 
 fish.--The _pollack_ is also taken all round our coasts, and 
 likewise bears a striking resemblance to the whiting; indeed, it 
 is sometimes mistaken by the inexperienced for that fish; its 
 flesh being considered by many equally delicate. 
  
 TO DRESS WHITEBAIT. 
  
 348. INGREDIENTS.--A little flour, hot lard, seasoning of salt. 
  
 _Mode_.--This fish should be put into iced water as soon as bought,
lemon and brown bread and butter, a tempting dish to vast 
 numbers of Londoners, who flock to the various taverns of these 
 places, in order to gratify their appetites. The fish has been 
 supposed be the fry of the shad, the sprat, the smelt, or the 
 bleak. Mr. Yarrell, however, maintains that it is a species in 
 itself, distinct from every other fish. When fried with flour, 
 it is esteemed a great delicacy. The ministers of the Crown have 
 had a custom, for many years, of having a "whitebait dinner" 
 just before the close of the session. It is invariably the 
 precursor of the prorogation of Parliament, and the repast is 
 provided by the proprietor of the "Trafalgar," Greenwich. 
  
 FISH PIE, WITH TENCH AND EELS. 
  
 349. INGREDIENTS.--2 tench, 2 eels, 2 onions, a faggot of herbs, 4 
 blades of mace, 3 anchovies, 1 pint of water, pepper and salt to taste, 
 1 teaspoonful of chopped parsley, the yolks of 6 hard-boiled eggs, puff 
 paste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Clean and bone the tench, skin and bone the eels, and cut them
into pieces 2 inches long, and leave the sides of the tench whole. Put 
 the bones into a stewpan with the onions, herbs, mace, anchovies, water, 
 and seasoning, and let them simmer gently for 1 hour. Strain it off, put 
 it to cool, and skim off all the fat. Lay the tench and eels in a 
 pie-dish, and between each layer put seasoning, chopped parsley, and 
 hard-boiled eggs; pour in part of the strained liquor, cover in with 
 puff paste, and bake for 1/2 hour or rather more. The oven should be 
 rather quick, and when done, heat the remainder of the liquor, which 
 pour into the pie. 
  
 _Time_.--1/2 hour to bake, or rather more if the oven is slow. 
  
  
 FISH SCALLOP. 
  
 I. 
  
 350. INGREDIENTS.--Remains of cold fish of any sort, 1/2 pint of cream, 
 1/2 tablespoonful of anchovy sauce, 1/2 teaspoonful of made mustard, 
 ditto of walnut ketchup, pepper and salt to taste (the above quantities
are for 1/2 lb. of fish when picked); bread crumbs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put all the ingredients into a stewpan, carefully picking the 
 fish from the bones; set it on the fire, let it remain till nearly hot, 
 occasionally stir the contents, but do not allow it to boil. When done, 
 put the fish into a deep dish or scallop shell, with a good quantity of 
 bread crumbs; place small pieces of butter on the top, set in a Dutch 
 oven before the fire to brown, or use a salamander. 
  
 _Time_.--1/4 hour. _Average cost_, exclusive of the cold fish, 10d. 
  
  
 II. 
  
 351. INGREDIENTS.--Any cold fish, 1 egg, milk, 1 large blade of pounded 
 mace, 1 tablespoonful of flour, 1 teaspoonful of anchovy sauce, pepper 
 and salt to taste, bread crumbs, butter. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pick the fish carefully from the bones, and moisten with milk 
 and the egg; add the other ingredients, and place in a deep dish or
ANCHOVY SAUCE FOR FISH. 
  
 362. INGREDIENTS.--4 anchovies, 1 oz. of butter, 1/2 pint of melted 
 butter, cayenne to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Bone the anchovies, and pound them in a mortar to a paste, with 
 1 oz. of butter. Make the melted butter hot, stir in the pounded 
 anchovies and cayenne; simmer for 3 or 4 minutes; and if liked, add a 
 squeeze of lemon-juice. A more general and expeditious way of making 
 this sauce is to stir in 1-1/2 tablespoonfuls of anchovy essence to 1/2 
 pint of melted butter, and to add seasoning to taste. Boil the whole up 
 for 1 minute, and serve hot. 
  
 _Time_.--5 minutes. _Average cost_, 5d. for 1/2 pint. 
  
 _Sufficient_, this quantity, for a brill, small turbot, 3 or 4 soles, 
 &c. 
  
 ANCHOVY BUTTER (_see_ No. 227). 
 
[Illustration: THE CAPISCUM.] 
  
 CAYENNE.--This is the most acrid and stimulating spice with 
 which we are acquainted. It is a powder prepared from several 
 varieties of the capsicum annual East-India plants, of which 
 there are three so far naturalized in this country as to be able 
 to grow in the open air: these are the Guinea, the Cherry, and 
 the Bell pepper. All the pods of these are extremely pungent to 
 the taste, and in the green state are used by us as a pickle. 
 When ripe, they are ground into cayenne pepper, and sold as a 
 condiment. The best of this, however, is made in the West 
 Indies, from what is called the _Bird_ pepper, on account of 
 hens and turkeys being extremely partial to it. It is imported 
 ready for use. Of the capiscum species of plants there are five; 
 but the principal are,--1. _Capsicum annuum_, the common 
 long-podded capsicum, which is cultivated in our gardens, and of 
 which there are two varieties, one with red, and another with 
 yellow fruit. 2. _Capsicum baccatum_, or bird pepper, which 
 rises with a shrubby stalk four or five feet high, with its 
 berries growing at the division of the branches: this is small,
oval-shaped, and of a bright-red colour, from which, as we have 
 said, the best cayenne is made. 3. _Capsicum grossum_, the 
 bell-pepper: the fruit of this is red, and is the only kind fit 
 for pickling. 
  
 APPLE SAUCE FOR GEESE, PORK, &c. 
  
 363. INGREDIENTS.--6 good-sized apples, sifted sugar to taste, a piece 
 of butter the size of a walnut, water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pare, core, and quarter the apples, and throw them into cold 
 water to preserve their whiteness. Put them in a saucepan, with 
 sufficient water to moisten them, and boil till soft enough to pulp. 
 Beat them up, adding sugar to taste, and a small piece of butter This 
 quantity is sufficient for a good-sized tureen. 
  
 _Time_.--According to the apples, about 3/4 hour. _Average cost_, 4d. 
  
 _Sufficient_, this quantity, for a goose or couple of ducks. 
 
 
 BROWN APPLE SAUCE. 
  
 364. INGREDIENTS.--6 good-sized apples, 1/2 pint of brown gravy, cayenne 
 to taste. 
  
 _Mode_. Put the gravy in a stewpan, and add the apples, after having 
 pared, cored, and quartered them. Let them simmer gently till tender; 
 beat them to a pulp, and season with cayenne. This sauce is preferred by 
 many to the preceding. 
  
 _Time_.--According to the apples, about 3/4 hour. _Average cost_, 6d. 
  
  
 ASPARAGUS SAUCE. 
  
 365. INGREDIENTS.--1 bunch of green asparagus, salt, 1 oz. of fresh 
 butter, 1 small bunch of parsley, 3 or 4 green onions, 1 large lump of 
 sugar, 4 tablespoonfuls of sauce tournée. 
 
_Mode_.--Break the asparagus in the tender part, wash well, and put them 
 into boiling salt and water to render them green. When they are tender, 
 take them out, and put them into cold water; drain them on a cloth till 
 all moisture is absorbed from them. Put the butter in a stewpan, with 
 the parsley and onions; lay in the asparagus, and fry the whole over a 
 sharp fire for 5 minutes. Add salt, the sugar and sauce tournée, and 
 simmer for another 5 minutes. Rub all through a tammy, and if not a very 
 good colour, use a little spinach green. This sauce should be rather 
 sweet. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether 40 minutes. 
  
 _Average cost_ for this quantity, 1s. 4d. 
  
  
 ASPIC, or ORNAMENTAL SAVOURY JELLY. 
  
 366. INGREDIENTS.--4 lbs. of knuckle of veal, 1 cow-heel, 3 or 4 slices 
 of ham, any poultry trimmings, 2 carrots, 1 onion, 1 faggot of savoury 
 herbs, 1 glass of sherry, 3 quarts of water; seasoning to taste of salt
and whole white pepper; 3 eggs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Lay the ham on the bottom of a stewpan, cut up the veal and 
 cow-heel into small pieces, and lay them on the ham; add the poultry 
 trimmings, vegetables, herbs, sherry, and water, and let the whole 
 simmer very gently for 4 hours, carefully taking away all scum that may 
 rise to the surface; strain through a fine sieve, and pour into an 
 earthen pan to get cold. Have ready a clean stewpan, put in the jelly, 
 and be particular to leave the sediment behind, or it will not be clear. 
 Add the whites of 3 eggs, with salt and pepper, to clarify; keep 
 stirring over the fire, till the whole becomes very white; then draw it 
 to the side, and let it stand till clear. When this is the case, strain 
 it through a cloth or jelly-bag, and use it for moulding poultry, etc. 
 (See Explanation of French Terms, page 44.) Tarragon vinegar may be 
 added to give an additional flavour. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether 4-1/2 hours. _Average cost_ for this quantity, 4s. 
  
 WHITE PEPPER.--This is the produce of the same plant as that 
 which produces the black pepper, from which it is manufactured
by steeping this in lime and water, and rubbing it between the 
 hands till the coats come off. The best berries only will bear 
 this operation; hence the superior qualities of white pepper 
 fetch a higher price than those of the other. It is less acrid 
 than the black, and is much prized among the Chinese. It is 
 sometimes adulterated with rice-flour, as the black is with 
 burnt bread. The berries of the pepper-plant grow in spikes of 
 from twenty to thirty, and are, when ripe, of a bright-red 
 colour. After being gathered, which is done when they are green, 
 they are spread out in the sun, where they dry and become black 
 and shrivelled, when they are ready for being prepared for the 
 market. 
  
 BECHAMEL, or FRENCH WHITE SAUCE. 
  
 367. INGREDIENTS.--1 small bunch of parsley, 2 cloves, 1/2 bay-leaf, 1 
 small faggot of savoury herbs, salt to taste; 3 or 4 mushrooms, when 
 obtainable; 2 pints of white stock, 1 pint of cream, 1 tablespoonful of 
 arrowroot. 
 
_Mode_.--Put the stock into a stewpan, with the parsley, cloves, 
 bay-leaf, herbs, and mushrooms; add a seasoning of salt, but no pepper, 
 as that would give the sauce a dusty appearance, and should be avoided. 
 When it has boiled long enough to extract the flavour of the herbs, 
 etc., strain it, and boil it up quickly again, until it is nearly 
 half-reduced. Now mix the arrowroot smoothly with the cream, and let it 
 simmer very gently for 5 minutes over a slow fire; pour to it the 
 reduced stock, and continue to simmer slowly for 10 minutes, if the 
 sauce be thick. If, on the contrary, it be too thin, it must be stirred 
 over a sharp fire till it thickens. This is the foundation of many kinds 
 of sauces, especially white sauces. Always make it thick, as you can 
 easily thin it with cream, milk, or white stock. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether, 2 hours. _Average cost_, 1s. per pint. 
  
 [Illustration: THE CLOVE.] 
  
 THE CLOVE.--The clove-tree is a native of the Molucca Islands, 
 particularly Amboyna, and attains the height of a laurel-tree, 
 and no verdure is ever seen under it. From the extremities of
introduced to Cayenne. It is generally employed as a condiment; 
 but it should never be forgotten, that, even in small 
 quantities, it produces detrimental effects on inflammatory 
 constitutions. Dr. Paris, in his work on Diet, says, "Foreign 
 spices were not intended by Nature for the inhabitants of 
 temperate climes; they are heating, and highly stimulant. I am, 
 however, not anxious to give more weight to this objection than 
 it deserves. Man is no longer the child of Nature, nor the 
 passive inhabitant of any particular region. He ranges over 
 every part of the globe, and elicits nourishment from the 
 productions of every climate. Nature is very kind in favouring 
 the growth of those productions which are most likely to answer 
 our local wants. Those climates, for instance, which engender 
 endemic diseases, are, in general, congenial to the growth of 
 plants that operate as antidotes to them. But if we go to the 
 East for tea, there is no reason why we should not go to the 
 West for sugar. The dyspeptic invalid, however, should be 
 cautious in their use; they may afford temporary benefit, at the 
 expense of permanent mischief. It has been well said, that the 
 best quality of spices is to stimulate the appetite, and their
worst to destroy, by insensible degrees, the tone of the 
 stomach. The intrinsic goodness of meats should always be 
 suspected when they require spicy seasonings to compensate for 
 their natural want of sapidity." The quality of pepper is known 
 by rubbing it between the hands: that which withstands this 
 operation is good, that which is reduced to powder by it is bad. 
 The quantity of pepper imported into Europe is very great. 
  
 BENTON SAUCE (to serve with Hot or Cold Roast Beef). 
  
 370. INGREDIENTS.--1 tablespoonful of scraped horseradish, 1 teaspoonful 
 of made mustard, 1 teaspoonful of pounded sugar, 4 tablespoonfuls of 
 vinegar. 
  
 _Mode_.--Grate or scrape the horseradish very fine, and mix it with the 
 other ingredients, which must be all well blended together; serve in a 
 tureen. With cold meat, this sauce is a very good substitute for 
 pickles. 
  
 _Average cost_ for this quantity, 2d.
 
 BREAD SAUCE (to serve with Roast Turkey, Fowl, Game, &c.). 
  
 I. 
  
 371. INGREDIENTS.--1 pint of milk, 3/4 of the crumb of a stale loaf, 1 
 onion; pounded mace, cayenne, and salt to taste; 1 oz. of butter. 
  
 _Mode_.--Peel and quarter the onion, and simmer it in the milk till 
 perfectly tender. Break the bread, which should be stale, into small 
 pieces, carefully picking out any hard outside pieces; put it in a very 
 clean saucepan, strain the milk over it, cover it up, and let it remain 
 for an hour to soak. Now beat it up with a fork very smoothly, add a 
 seasoning of pounded mace, cayenne, and salt, with 1 oz. of butter; give 
 the whole one boil, and serve. To enrich this sauce, a small quantity of 
 cream may be added just before sending it to table. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether, 1-3/4 hour. 
  
 _Average cost_ for this quantity, 4d.
 
 _Sufficient_ to serve with a turkey, pair of fowls, or brace of 
 partridges. 
  
 [Illustration: MACE.] 
  
 MACE.--This is the membrane which surrounds the shell of the 
 nutmeg. Its general qualities are the same as those of the 
 nutmeg, producing an agreeable aromatic odour, with a hot and 
 acrid taste. It is of an oleaginous nature, is yellowish in its 
 hue, and is used largely as a condiment. In "Beeton  '  s 
 Dictionary" we find that the four largest of the Banda Islands 
 produce 150,000 lbs. of it annually, which, with nutmegs, are 
 their principal articles of export. 
  
 II. 
  
 372. INGREDIENTS.--Giblets of poultry, 3/4 lb. of the crumb of a stale 
 loaf, 1 onion, 12 whole peppers, 1 blade of mace, salt to taste, 2 
 tablespoonfuls of cream or melted butter, 1 pint of water.
preferable. As, however, in cooking, so much depends on appearance, 
 perhaps it would be as well for the inexperienced cook to use the 
 artificial means (No. 108). When no browning is at hand, and you wish to 
 heighten the colour of your gravy, dissolve a lump of sugar in an iron 
 spoon over a sharp fire; when it is in a liquid state, drop it into the 
 sauce or gravy quite hot. Care, however, must be taken not to put in too 
 much, as it would impart a very disagreeable flavour. 
  
 BEURRE NOIR, or BROWNED BUTTER (a French Sauce). 
  
 374. INGREDIENTS.--1/4 lb. of butter, 1 tablespoonful of minced parsley, 
 3 tablespoonfuls of vinegar, salt and pepper to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the butter into a fryingpan over a nice clear fire, and 
 when it smokes, throw in the parsley, and add the vinegar and seasoning. 
 Let the whole simmer for a minute or two, when it is ready to serve. 
 This is a very good sauce for skate. 
  
 _Time_.--1/4 hour. 
 
 
 CLARIFIED BUTTER. 
  
 375. Put the butter in a basin before the fire, and when it melts, stir 
 it round once or twice, and let it settle. Do not strain it unless 
 absolutely necessary, as it causes so much waste. Pour it gently off 
 into a clean dry jar, carefully leaving all sediment behind. Let it 
 cool, and carefully exclude the air by means of a bladder, or piece of 
 wash-leather, tied over. If the butter is salt, it may be washed before 
 melting, when it is to be used for sweet dishes. 
  
  
 MELTED BUTTER. 
  
 I. 
  
 376. INGREDIENTS.--1/4 lb. of butter, a dessertspoonful of flour, 1 
 wineglassful of water, salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the butter up into small pieces, put it in a saucepan,
dredge over the flour, and add the water and a seasoning of salt; stir 
 it _one way_ constantly till the whole of the ingredients are melted and 
 thoroughly blended. Let it just boil, when it is ready to serve. If the 
 butter is to be melted with cream, use the same quantity as of water, 
 but omit the flour; keep stirring it, but do not allow it to boil. 
  
 _Time_.--1 minute to simmer. 
  
 _Average cost_ for this quantity, 4d. 
  
 II. 
  
 _(More Economical.)_ 
  
 377. INGREDIENTS.--2 oz. of butter, 1 dessertspoonful of flour, salt to 
 taste, 1/2 pint of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Mix the flour and water to a smooth batter, which put into a 
 saucepan. Add the butter and a seasoning of salt, keep stirring _one 
 way_ till all the ingredients are melted and perfectly smooth; let the
whole boil for a minute or two, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--2 minutes to simmer. 
  
 _Average cost_ for this quantity, 2d. 
  
  
 MELTED BUTTER (the French Sauce Blanche). 
  
 378. INGREDIENTS.--1/4 lb. of fresh butter, 1 tablespoonful of flour, 
 salt to taste, 1/2 gill of water, 1/2 spoonful of white vinegar, a very 
 little grated nutmeg. 
  
 _Mode_.--Mix the flour and water to a smooth batter, carefully rubbing 
 down with the back of a spoon any lumps that may appear. Put it in a 
 saucepan with all the other ingredients, and let it thicken on the fire, 
 but do not allow it to boil, lest it should taste of the flour. 
  
 _Time_.--1 minute to simmer. 
 
_Average cost_, 5d. for this quantity. 
  
 [Illustration: THE NUTMEG.] 
  
 NUTMEG.--This is a native of the Moluccas, and was long kept 
 from being spread in other places by the monopolizing spirit of 
 the Dutch, who endeavoured to keep it wholly to themselves by 
 eradicating it from every other island. We find it stated in 
 "Beeton  '  s Dictionary of Universal Information," under the 
 article "Banda Islands," that the four largest are appropriated 
 to the cultivation of nutmegs, of which about 500,000 lbs. are 
 annually produced. The plant, through the enterprise of the 
 British, has now found its way into Penang and Bencooleu, where 
 it flourishes and produces well. It has also been tried to be 
 naturalized in the West Indies, and it bears fruit all the year 
 round. There are two kinds of nutmeg,--one wild, and long and 
 oval-shaped, the other cultivated, and nearly round. The best is 
 firm and hard, and has a strong aromatic odour, with a hot and 
 acrid taste. It ought to be used with caution by those who are 
 of paralytic or apoplectic habits.
only; put them in a strong brine for 3 days, changing it every morning; 
 then take them out, lay them on a cloth, with another one over them, 
 until they are perfectly free from moisture. Boil sufficient vinegar to 
 cover them, with mace and nutmeg in the above proportions; put the pods 
 in a jar, pour over the vinegar when cold, and exclude them from the air 
 by means of a wet bladder tied over. 
  
  
 CAYENNE VINEGAR, or ESSENCE OF CAYENNE. 
  
 386. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 oz. of cayenne pepper, 1/2 pint of strong spirit, 
 or 1 pint of vinegar. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the vinegar, or spirit, into a bottle, with the above 
 proportion of cayenne, and let it steep for a month, when strain off and 
 bottle for use. This is excellent seasoning for soups or sauces, but 
 must be used very sparingly. 
  
  
 CELERY SAUCE, FOR BOILED TURKEY, POULTRY, &c.
 
 387. INGREDIENTS.--6 heads of celery, 1 pint of white stock, No. 107, 2 
 blades of mace, 1 small bunch of savoury herbs; thickening of butter and 
 flour, or arrowroot, 1/2 pint of cream, lemon-juice. 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil the celery in salt and water, until tender, and cut it 
 into pieces 2 inches long. Put the stock into a stewpan with the mace 
 and herbs, and let it simmer for 1/2 hour to extract their flavour. Then 
 strain the liquor, add the celery and a thickening of butter kneaded 
 with flour, or, what is still better, with arrowroot; just before 
 serving, put in the cream, boil it up and squeeze in a little 
 lemon-juice. If necessary, add a seasoning of salt and white pepper. 
  
 _Time_.--25 minutes to boil the celery. _Average cost_, 1s. 3d. 
  
 _Sufficient_, this quantity, for a boiled turkey. 
  
 This sauce may be made brown by using gravy instead of white stock, and 
 flavouring it with mushroom ketchup or Harvey  '  s sauce. 
 
with milk (No. 380), 1 blade of pounded mace; salt and white pepper to 
 taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Wash the celery, boil it in salt and water till tender, and cut 
 it into pieces 2 inches long; make 1/2 pint melted butter by recipe No. 
 380; put in the celery, pounded mace, and seasoning; simmer for three 
 minutes, when the sauce will be ready to serve. 
  
 _Time_.--25 minutes to boil the celery. _Average cost_, 6d. 
  
 _Sufficient_, this quantity, for a boiled fowl. 
  
  
 CELERY VINEGAR. 
  
 389. INGREDIENTS.--1/4 oz. of celery-seed, 1 pint of vinegar. 
  
 _Mode_.--Crush the seed by pounding it in a mortar; boil the vinegar, 
 and when cold, pour it to the seed; let it infuse for a fortnight, when 
 strain and bottle off for use. This is frequently used in salads.
 
  
 CHESTNUT SAUCE FOR FOWLS OR TURKEY. 
  
 390. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 lb. of chestnuts, 1/2 pint of white stock, 2 
 strips of lemon-peel, cayenne to taste, 1/4 pint of cream or milk. 
  
 _Mode_.--Peel off the outside skin of the chestnuts, and put them into 
 boiling water for a few minutes; take off the thin inside peel, and put 
 them into a saucepan, with the white stock and lemon-peel, and let them 
 simmer for 1-1/2 hour, or until the chestnuts are quite tender. Rub the 
 whole through a hair-sieve with a wooden spoon; add seasoning and the 
 cream; let it just simmer, but not boil, and keep stirring all the time. 
 Serve very hot; and quickly. If milk is used instead of cream, a very 
 small quantity of thickening may be required: that, of course, the cook 
 will determine. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether nearly two hours. _Average cost_, 8d. 
  
 _Sufficient_, this quantity, for a turkey.
[Illustration: GARLIC.] 
  
 GARLIC.--The smell of this plant is generally considered 
 offensive, and it is the most acrimonious in its taste of the 
 whole of the alliaceous tribe. In 1548 it was introduced to 
 England from the shores of the Mediterranean, where it is 
 abundant, and in Sicily it grows naturally. It was in greater 
 repute with our ancestors than it is with ourselves, although it 
 is still used as a seasoning herb. On the continent, especially 
 in Italy, it is much used, and the French consider it an 
 essential in many made dishes. 
  
 CHILI VINEGAR. 
  
 393. INGREDIENTS.--50 fresh red English chilies, 1 pint of vinegar. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pound or cut the chilies in half, and infuse them in the 
 vinegar for a fortnight, when it will be fit for use. This will be found 
 an agreeable relish to fish, as many people cannot eat it without the 
 addition of an acid and cayenne pepper.
however, a stronger stock is desired, either put in half the quantity of 
 water, or double that of the meat. This is a very good foundation for 
 all white sauces. 
  
  
 CRAB SAUCE FOR FISH (equal to Lobster Sauce). 
  
 396. INGREDIENTS.--1 crab; salt, pounded mace, and cayenne to taste; 1/2 
 pint of melted butter made with milk (_see_ No. 380). 
  
 _Mode_.--Choose a nice fresh crab, pick all the meat away from the 
 shell, and cut it into small square pieces. Make 1/2 pint of melted 
 butter by recipe No. 380, put in the fish and seasoning; let it 
 gradually warm through, and simmer for 2 minutes. It should not boil. 
  
 _Average cost_, 1s. 2d. 
  
  
 CREAM SAUCE FOR FISH OR WHITE DISHES. 
 
397. INGREDIENTS.--1/3 pint of cream, 2 oz. of butter, 1 teaspoonful of 
 flour, salt and cayenne to taste; when liked, a small quantity of 
 pounded mace or lemon-juice. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the butter in a very clean saucepan, dredge in the flour, 
 and keep shaking round till the butter is melted. Add the seasoning and 
 cream, and stir the whole till it boils; let it just simmer for 5 
 minutes, when add either pounded mace or lemon-juice to taste, to give 
 it a flavour. 
  
 _Time_.--5 minutes to simmer. _Average cost_ for this quantity, 7d. 
  
 This sauce may be flavoured with very finely-shredded shalot. 
  
  
 CUCUMBER SAUCE. 
  
 398. INGREDIENTS.--3 or 4 cucumbers, 2 oz. of butter, 6 tablespoonfuls 
 of brown gravy. 
 
down with bladder, and in a few days they will be fit for use. 
  
 [Illustration: LONG PEPPER.] 
  
 LONG PEPPER.--This is the produce of a different plant from that 
 which produces the black, it consisting of the half-ripe 
 flower-heads of what naturalists call _Piper longum_ and 
 _chaba_. It is the growth, however, of the same countries; 
 indeed, all the spices are the produce of tropical climates 
 only. Originally, the most valuable of these were found in the 
 Spice Islands, or Moluccas, of the Indian Ocean, and were highly 
 prized by the nations of antiquity. The Romans indulged in them 
 to a most extravagant degree. The long pepper is less aromatic 
 than the black, but its oil is more pungent. 
  
 CUCUMBER SAUCE, WHITE. 
  
 400. INGREDIENTS.--3 or four cucumbers, 1/2 pint of white stock, No. 
 107, cayenne and salt to taste, the yolks of 3 eggs. 
 
_Mode_.--Cut the cucumbers into small pieces, after peeling them and 
 taking out the seeds. Put them in a stewpan with the white stock and 
 seasoning; simmer gently till the cucumbers are tender, which will be in 
 about 1/4 hour. Then add the yolks of the eggs well beaten; stir them to 
 the sauce, but do not allow it to boil, and serve very hot. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether, 1/2 hour. 
  
  
 CUCUMBER VINEGAR (a very nice Addition to Salads). 
  
 401. INGREDIENTS.--10 large cucumbers, or 12 smaller ones, 1 quart of 
 vinegar, 2 onions, 2 shalots, 1 tablespoonful of salt, 2 tablespoonfuls 
 of pepper, 1/4 teaspoonful of cayenne. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pare and slice the cucumbers, put them in a stone jar or 
 wide-mouthed bottle, with the vinegar; slice the onions and shalots, and 
 add them, with all the other ingredients, to the cucumbers. Let it stand 
 4 or 5 days, boil it all up, and when cold, strain the liquor through a 
 piece of muslin, and store it away in small bottles well sealed. This
vinegar is a very nice addition to gravies, hashes, &e., as well as a 
 great improvement to salads, or to eat with cold meat. 
  
  
 GERMAN METHOD OF KEEPING CUCUMBERS FOR WINTER USE. 
  
 402. INGREDIENTS.--Cucumbers, salt. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pare and slice the cucumbers (as for the table), sprinkle well 
 with salt, and let them remain for 24 hours; strain off the liquor, pack 
 in jars, a thick layer of cucumbers and salt alternately; tie down 
 closely, and, when wanted for use, take out the quantity required. Now 
 wash them well in fresh water, and dress as usual with pepper, vinegar, 
 and oil. 
  
 [Illustration: THE CUCUMBER.] 
  
 THE CUCUMBER.--Though the melon is far superior in point of 
 flavour to this fruit, yet it is allied to the cucumber, which 
 is known to naturalists as _Cucumia sativus_. The modern
each day, to draw out the salt. Put the sugar, with 1/4 pint of water, 
 in a saucepan over the fire; remove the scum as it rises, and add the 
 lemon-peel and ginger with the outside scraped off; when the syrup is 
 tolerably thick, take it off the fire, and when _cold_, wipe the 
 cucumbers _dry_, and put them in. Boil the syrup once in 2 or 3 days for 
 3 weeks; strengthen it if required, and let it be quite cold before the 
 cucumbers are put in. Great attention must be paid to the directions in 
 the commencement of this recipe, as, if these are not properly carried 
 out, the result will be far from satisfactory. 
  
 _Seasonable_.--This recipe should be used in June, July, or August. 
  
 [Illustration: SALT-MINE AT NORTHWICH.] 
  
 COMMON SALT.--By this we mean salt used for cooking purposes, 
 which is found in great abundance both on land and in the waters 
 of the ocean. Sea or salt water, as it is often called, 
 contains, it has been discovered, about three per cent, of salt 
 on an average. Solid rocks of salt are also found in various 
 parts of the world, and the county of Chester contains many of
now an essential for culinary purposes; but as an antiscorbutic 
 its value is still greater. This juice, which is called _citric 
 acid_, may be preserved in bottles for a considerable time, by 
 covering it with a thin stratum of oil. _Shrub_ is made from it 
 with rum and sugar. 
  
 GREEN DUTCH SAUCE, or HOLLANDAISE VERTE. 
  
 406. INGREDIENTS.--6 tablespoonfuls of Béchamel, No. 367, seasoning to 
 taste of salt and cayenne, a little parsley-green to colour, the juice 
 of 1/2 a lemon. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the Béchamel into a saucepan with the seasoning, and bring 
 it to a boil. Make a green colouring by pounding some parsley in a 
 mortar, and squeezing all the juice from it. Let this just simmer, when 
 add it to the sauce. A moment before serving, put in the lemon-juice, 
 but not before; for otherwise the sauce would turn yellow, and its 
 appearance be thus spoiled. 
  
 _Average cost_, 4d.
considered as less pungent and heating to the system than might 
 he expected from its effects on the organs of taste, and it is 
 frequently used, with considerable effect, as an anti-spasmodic 
 and carminative. 
  
 EGG BALLS FOR SOUPS AND MADE DISHES. 
  
 408. INGREDIENTS.--8 eggs, a little flour; seasoning to taste of salt. 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil 6 eggs for 20 minutes, strip off the shells, take the 
 yolks and pound them in a mortar. Beat the yolks of the other 2 eggs; 
 add them, with a little flour and salt, to those pounded; mix all well 
 together, and roll into balls. Boil them before they are put into the 
 soup or other dish they may be intended for. 
  
 _Time_.--20 minutes to boil the eggs. _Average cost_, for this quantity, 
 8d. 
  
 _Sufficient_, 2 dozen balls for 1 tureen of soup. 
 
roux. Add the wine, and, if necessary, a seasoning of cayenne; when it 
 will be ready to serve. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour. 
  
 _Average cost_, 2s. per pint. 
  
 _Note_.--The wine in this sauce may be omitted, and an onion sliced and 
 fried of a nice brown substituted for it. This sauce or gravy is used 
 for many dishes, and with most people is a general favourite. 
  
  
 FENNEL SAUCE FOR MACKEREL. 
  
 412. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 pint of melted butter, No. 376, rather more than 
 1 tablespoonful of chopped fennel. 
  
 _Mode_.--Make the melted butter very smoothly, by recipe No. 376; chop 
 the fennel rather small, carefully cleansing it from any grit or dirt, 
 and put it to the butter when this is on the point of boiling. Simmer
 
 413. INGREDIENTS.--1-1/2 oz. of cayenne, 2 tablespoonfuls of walnut 
 ketchup, 2 tablespoonfuls of soy, a few shreds of garlic and shalot, 1 
 quart of vinegar. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put all the ingredients into a large bottle, and shake well 
 every day for a fortnight. Keep it in small bottles well sealed, and in 
 a few days it will be fit for use. 
  
 _Average cost_, for this quantity, 1s. 
  
  
 FORCEMEAT BALLS FOR FISH SOUPS. 
  
 414. INGREDIENTS.--1 middling-sized lobster, 1/2 an anchovy, 1 head of 
 boiled celery, the yolk of a hard-boiled egg; salt, cayenne, and mace to 
 taste; 4 tablespoonfuls of bread crumbs, 2 oz. of butter, 2 eggs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pick the meat from the shell of the lobster, and pound it, with 
 the soft parts, in a mortar; add the celery, the yolk of the hard-boiled
egg, seasoning, and bread crumbs. Continue pounding till the whole is 
 nicely amalgamated. Warm the butter till it is in a liquid state; well 
 whisk the eggs, and work these up with the pounded lobster-meat. Make 
 into balls of about an inch in diameter, and fry of a nice pale brown. 
  
 _Sufficient_, from 18 to 20 balls for 1 tureen of soup. 
  
  
 FORCEMEAT FOR COLD SAVOURY PIES. 
  
 415. INGREDIENTS.--1 lb. of veal, 1 lb. of fat bacon; salt, cayenne, 
 pepper, and pounded mace to taste; a very little nutmeg, the same of 
 chopped lemon-peel, 1/2 teaspoonful of chopped parsley, 1/2 teaspoonful 
 of minced savoury herbs, 1 or 2 eggs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Chop the veal and bacon together, and put them in a mortar with 
 the other ingredients mentioned above. Pound well, and bind with 1 or 2 
 eggs which have been previously beaten and strained. Work the whole well 
 together, and the forcemeat will be ready for use. If the pie is not to 
 be eaten immediately, omit the herbs and parsley, as these would prevent
it from keeping. Mushrooms or truffles may be added. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 2 small pies. 
  
 [Illustration: MARJORAM.] 
  
 MARJORAM.--Although there are several species of marjoram, that 
 which is known as the sweet or knotted marjoram, is the one 
 usually preferred in cookery. It is a native of Portugal, and 
 when its leaves are used as a seasoning herb, they have an 
 agreeable aromatic flavour. The winter sweet marjoram used for 
 the same purposes, is a native of Greece, and the pot-marjoram 
 is another variety brought from Sicily. All of them are 
 favourite ingredients in soups, stuffings, &c. 
  
 FORCEMEAT FOR PIKE, CARP, HADDOCK, AND VARIOUS KINDS OF FISH. 
  
 416. INGREDIENTS.--1 oz. of fresh butter, 1 oz. of suet, 1 oz. of fat 
 bacon, 1 small teaspoonful of minced savoury herbs, including parsley; a 
 little onion, when liked, shredded very fine; salt, nutmeg, and cayenne
to taste; 4 oz. of bread crumbs, 1 egg. 
  
 _Mode_.--Mix all the ingredients well together, carefully mincing them 
 very finely; beat up the egg, moisten with it, and work the whole very 
 smoothly together. Oysters or anchovies may be added to this forcemeat, 
 and will be found a great improvement. 
  
 _Average cost_, 6d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for a moderate-sized haddock or pike. 
  
  
 FORCEMEAT FOR VEAL, TURKEYS, FOWLS, HARE, &c. 
  
 417. INGREDIENTS.--2 oz. of ham or lean bacon, 1/4 lb. of suet, the rind 
 of half a lemon, 1 teaspoonful of minced parsley, 1 teaspoonful of 
 minced sweet herbs; salt, cayenne, and pounded mace to taste; 6 oz. of 
 bread crumbs, 2 eggs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Shred the ham or bacon, chop the suet, lemon-peel, and herbs,
taking particular care that all be very finely minced; add a seasoning 
 to taste, of salt, cayenne, and mace, and blend all thoroughly together 
 with the bread crumbs, before wetting. Now beat and strain the eggs, 
 work these up with the other ingredients, and the forcemeat will be 
 ready for use. When it is made into balls, fry of a nice brown, in 
 boiling lard, or put them on a tin and bake for 1/2 hour in a moderate 
 oven. As we have stated before, no one flavour should predominate 
 greatly, and the forcemeat should be of sufficient body to cut with a 
 knife, and yet not dry and heavy. For very delicate forcemeat, it is 
 advisable to pound the ingredients together before binding with the egg; 
 but for ordinary cooking, mincing very finely answers the purpose. 
  
 _Average cost_, 8d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for a turkey, a moderate-sized fillet of veal, or a hare. 
  
 _Note_.--In forcemeat for HARE, the liver of the animal is sometimes 
 added. Boil for 5 minutes, mince it very small, and mix it with the 
 other ingredients. If it should be in an unsound state, it must be on no 
 account made use of.
 
 [Illustration: BASIL.] 
  
 SWEET HERBS.--Those most usually employed for purposes of 
 cooking, such as the flavouring of soups, sauces, forcemeats, 
 &c., are thyme, sage, mint, marjoram, savory, and basil. Other 
 sweet herbs are cultivated for purposes of medicine and 
 perfumery: they are most grateful both to the organs of taste 
 and smelling; and to the aroma derived from them is due, in a 
 great measure, the sweet and exhilarating fragrance of our 
 "flowery meads." In town, sweet herbs have to be procured at the 
 greengrocers  '   or herbalists  '  , whilst, in the country, the garden 
 should furnish all that are wanted, the cook taking great care 
 to have some dried in the autumn for her use throughout the 
 winter months. 
  
 FORCEMEAT FOR BAKED PIKE. 
  
 418. INGREDIENTS.--3 oz. of bread crumbs, 1 teaspoonful of minced 
 savoury herbs, 8 oysters, 2 anchovies (these may be dispensed with), 2
oz. of suet; salt, pepper, and pounded mace to taste; 6 tablespoonfuls 
 of cream or milk, the yolks of 2 eggs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Beard and mince the oysters, prepare and mix the other 
 ingredients by recipe No. 416, and blend the whole thoroughly together. 
 Moisten with the cream and eggs, put all into a stewpan, and stir it 
 over the fire till it thickens, when put it into the fish, which should 
 have previously been cut open, and sew it up. 
  
 _Time_.--4 or 6 minutes to thicken. 
  
 _Average cost_, 10d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for a moderate-sized pike. 
  
  
 FRENCH FORCEMEAT. 
  
 419. It will be well to state, in the beginning of this recipe, that 
 French forcemeat, or quenelles, consist of the blending of three
burning, and when quite dry, put in a small piece of butter. Let this 
 again dry up by stirring over the fire; then add the yolks of 2 eggs, 
 mix well, put the panada to cool on a clean plate, and use it when 
 required. Panada should always be well flavoured, as the forcemeat 
 receives no taste from any of the other ingredients used in its 
 preparation. 
  
  
 Boiled Calf  '  s Udder for French Forcemeats. 
  
 421. Put the udder into a stewpan with sufficient water to cover it; let 
 it stew gently till quite done, when take it out to cool. Trim all the 
 upper parts, cut it into small pieces, and pound well in a mortar, till 
 it can be rubbed through a sieve. That portion which passes through the 
 strainer is one of the three ingredients of which French forcemeats are 
 generally composed; but many cooks substitute butter for this, being a 
 less troublesome and more expeditious mode of preparation. 
  
 [Illustration: PESTLE AND MORTAR.] 
 
PESTLE AND MORTAR.--No cookery can be perfectly performed 
 without the aid of the useful instruments shown in the 
 engraving. For pounding things sufficiently fine, they are 
 invaluable, and the use of them will save a good deal of time, 
 besides increasing the excellence of the preparations. They are 
 made of iron, and, in that material, can be bought cheap; but as 
 these are not available, for all purposes, we should recommend, 
 as more economical in the end, those made of Wedgwood, although 
 these are considerably more expensive than the former. 
  
 Veal Quenelles. 
  
 422. INGREDIENTS.--Equal quantities of veal, panada (No. 420), and 
 calf  '  s udder (No. 421), 2 eggs; seasoning to taste of pepper, salt, and 
 pounded mace, or grated nutmeg; a little flour. 
  
 _Mode_.--Take the fleshy part of veal, scrape it with a knife, till all 
 the meat is separated from the sinews, and allow about 1/2 lb. for an 
 entrée. Chop the meat, and pound it in a mortar till reduced to a paste; 
 then roll it into a ball; make another of panada (No. 420), the same
size, and another of udder (No. 421), taking care that these three balls 
 be of the same _size_. It is to be remembered, that equality of _size_, 
 and not of weight, is here necessary. When the three ingredients are 
 properly prepared, pound them altogether in a mortar for some time; for 
 the more quenelles are pounded, the more delicate they are. Now moisten 
 with the eggs, whites and yolks, and continue pounding, adding a 
 seasoning of pepper, spices, &c. When the whole is well blended 
 together, mould it into balls, or whatever shape is intended, roll them 
 in flour, and poach in boiling water, to which a little salt should have 
 been added. If the quenelles are not firm enough, add the yolk of 
 another egg, but omit the white, which only makes them hollow and puffy 
 inside. In the preparation of this recipe, it would be well to bear in 
 mind that the ingredients are to be well pounded and seasoned, and must 
 be made hard or soft according to the dishes they are intended for. For 
 brown or white ragoûts they should be firm, and when the quenelles are 
 used very small, extreme delicacy will be necessary in their 
 preparation. Their flavour may be varied by using the flesh of rabbit, 
 fowl, hare, pheasant, grouse, or an extra quantity of mushroom, parsley, 
 &c. 
 
GHERKINS.--Gherkins are young cucumbers; and the only way in 
 which they are used for cooking purposes is pickling them, as by 
 the recipe here given. Not having arrived at maturity, they have 
 not, of course, so strongly a developed flavour as cucumbers, 
 and, as a pickle, they are very general favourites. 
  
 GOOSEBERRY SAUCE FOR BOILED MACKEREL. 
  
 429. INGREDIENTS.--1 pint of green gooseberries, 3 tablespoonfuls of 
 Béchamel, No. 367 (veal gravy may be substituted for this), 2 oz. of 
 fresh butter; seasoning to taste of salt, pepper, and grated nutmeg. 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil the gooseberries in water until quite tender; strain them, 
 and rub them through a sieve. Put into a saucepan the Béchamel or gravy, 
 with the butter and seasoning; add the pulp from the gooseberries, mix 
 all well together, and heat gradually through. A little pounded sugar 
 added to this sauce is by many persons considered an improvement, as the 
 saccharine matter takes off the extreme acidity of the unripe fruit. 
  
 _Time_.--Boil the gooseberries from 20 minutes to 1/2 hour.
 
 _Sufficient_, this quantity, for a large dish of mackerel. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from May to July. 
  
 [Illustration: THE GOOSEBERRY.] 
  
 THE GOOSEBERRY.--This useful and wholesome fruit (_Ribes 
 grossularia_) is thought to be indigenous to the British Isles, 
 and may be occasionally found in a wild state in some of the 
 eastern counties, although, when uncultivated, it is but a very 
 small and inferior berry. The high state of perfection to which 
 it has been here brought, is due to the skill of the English 
 gardeners; for in no other country does it attain the same size 
 and flavour. The humidity of the British climate, however, has 
 doubtless something to do with the result; and it is said that 
 gooseberries produced in Scotland as far north as Inverness, are 
 of a very superior character. Malic and citric acid blended with 
 sugar, produce the pleasant flavour of the gooseberry; and upon 
 the proper development of these properties depends the success
of all cooking operations with which they are connected. 
  
 GLAZE FOR COVERING COLD HAMS, TONGUES, &c. 
  
 430. INGREDIENTS.--Stock No. 104 or 107, doubling the quantity of meat 
 in each. 
  
 _Mode_.--We may remark at the outset, that unless glaze is wanted in 
 very large quantities, it is seldom made expressly. Either of the stocks 
 mentioned above, boiled down and reduced very considerably, will be 
 found to produce a very good glaze. Put the stock into a stewpan, over a 
 nice clear fire; let it boil till it becomes somewhat stiff, when keep 
 stirring, to prevent its burning. The moment it is sufficiently reduced, 
 and comes to a glaze, turn it out into the glaze-pot, of which we have 
 here given an engraving. As, however, this is not to be found in every 
 establishment, a white earthenware jar would answer the purpose; and 
 this may be placed in a vessel of boiling water, to melt the glaze when 
 required. It should never be warmed in a saucepan, except on the 
 principle of the bain marie, lest it should reduce too much, and become 
 black and bitter. If the glaze is wanted of a pale colour, more veal
than beef should be used in making the stock; and it is as well to omit 
 turnips and celery, as these impart a disagreeable bitter flavour. 
  
 TO GLAZE COLD JOINTS, &c.--Melt the glaze by placing the vessel which 
 contains it, into the bain marie or saucepan of boiling water; brush it 
 over the meat with a paste-brush, and if in places it is not quite 
 covered, repeat the operation. The glaze should not be too dark a 
 colour. (_See_ Coloured Cut of Glazed Ham, P.) 
  
 [Illustration: GLAZE-KETTLE.] 
  
 [Illustration: THE BAIN MARIE.] 
  
 GLAZE-KETTLE.--This is a kettle used for keeping the strong 
 stock boiled down to a jelly, which is known by the name of 
 glaze. It is composed of two tin vessels, as shown in the cut, 
 one of which, the upper,--containing the glaze, is inserted into 
 one of larger diameter and containing boiling water. A brush is 
 put in the small hole at the top of the lid, and is employed for 
 putting the glaze on anything that may require it.
 
 THE BAIN MARIE.--So long ago as the time when emperors ruled in 
 Rome, and the yellow Tiber passed through a populous and wealthy 
 city, this utensil was extensively employed; and it is 
 frequently mentioned by that profound culinary chemist of the 
 ancients, Apicius. It is an open kind of vessel (as shown in the 
 engraving and explained in our paragraph No. 87, on the French 
 terms used in modern cookery), filled with boiling or nearly 
 boiling water; and into this water should be put all the 
 stewpans containing those ingredients which it is desired to 
 keep hot. The quantity and quality of the contents of these 
 vessels are not at all affected; and if the hour of dinner is 
 uncertain in any establishment, by reason of the nature of the 
 master  '  s business, nothing is so certain a means of preserving 
 the flavour of all dishes as the employment of the bain marie. 
  
 GREEN SAUCE FOR GREEN GEESE OR DUCKLINGS. 
  
 431. INGREDIENTS.--1/4 pint of sorrel-juice, 1 glass of sherry, 1/2 pint 
 of green gooseberries, 1 teaspoonful of pounded sugar, 1 oz. of fresh
butter. 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil the gooseberries in water until they are quite tender; 
 mash them and press them through a sieve; put the pulp into a saucepan 
 with the above ingredients; simmer for 3 or 4 minutes, and serve very 
 hot. 
  
 _Time_.--3 or 4 minutes. 
  
 _Note_.--We have given this recipe as a sauce for green geese, thinking 
 that some of our readers might sometimes require it; but, at the 
 generality of fashionable tables, it is now seldom or never served. 
  
 [Illustration: SORREL.] 
  
 SORREL.--We gather from the pages of Pliny and Apicius, that 
 sorrel was cultivated by the Romans in order to give it more 
 strength and flavour, and that they also partook of it sometimes 
 stewed with mustard, being seasoned with a little oil and 
 vinegar. At the present day, English cookery is not much
indebted to this plant (_Rumex Acetosa_), although the French 
 make use of it to a considerable extent. It is found in most 
 parts of Great Britain, and also on the continent, growing wild 
 in the grass meadows, and, in a few gardens, it is cultivated. 
 The acid of sorrel is very _prononcé_, and is what chemists term 
 a binoxalate of potash; that is, a combination of oxalic acid 
 with potash. 
  
 GENERAL STOCK FOR GRAVIES. 
  
 432. Either of the stocks, Nos. 104, 105, or 107, will be found to 
 answer very well for the basis of many gravies, unless these are wanted 
 very rich indeed. By the addition of various store sauces, thickening 
 and flavouring, the stocks here referred to may be converted into very 
 good gravies. It should be borne in mind, however, that the goodness and 
 strength of spices, wines, flavourings, &c., evaporate, and that they 
 lose a great deal of their fragrance, if added to the gravy a long time 
 before they are wanted. If this point is attended to, a saving of one 
 half the quantity of these ingredients will be effected, as, with long 
 boiling, the flavour almost entirely passes away. The shank-bones of
mutton, previously well soaked, will be found a great assistance in 
 enriching gravies; a kidney or melt, beef skirt, trimmings of meat, &c. 
 &c., answer very well when only a small quantity is wanted, and, as we 
 have before observed, a good gravy need not necessarily be so very 
 expensive; for economically-prepared dishes are oftentimes found as 
 savoury and wholesome as dearer ones. The cook should also remember that 
 the fragrance of gravies should not be overpowered by too much spice, or 
 any strong essences, and that they should always be warmed in a _bain 
 marie_, after they are flavoured, or else in a jar or jug placed in a 
 saucepan full of boiling water. The remains of roast-meat gravy should 
 always be saved; as, when no meat is at hand, a very nice gravy in haste 
 may be made from it, and when added to hashes, ragoûts, &c., is a great 
 improvement. 
  
 [Illustration: GRAVY-KETTLE.] 
  
 GRAVY-KETTLE.--This is a utensil which will not be found in 
 every kitchen; but it is a useful one where it is necessary to 
 keep gravies hot for the purpose of pouring over various dishes 
 as they are cooking. It is made of copper, and should,
consequently, be heated over the hot plate, if there be one, or 
 a charcoal stove. The price at which it can be purchased is set 
 down by Messrs. Slack at 14s. 
  
 GRAVY FOR ROAST MEAT. 
  
 433. INGREDIENTS.--Gravy, salt. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put a common dish with a small quantity of salt in it under the 
 meat, about a quarter of an hour before it is removed from the fire. 
 When the dish is full, take it away, baste the meat, and pour the gravy 
 into the dish on which the joint is to be served. 
  
 SAUCES AND GRAVIES IN THE MIDDLE AGES.--Neither poultry, 
 butcher  '  s meat, nor roast game were eaten dry in the middle 
 ages, any more than fried fish is now. Different sauces, each 
 having its own peculiar flavour, were served with all these 
 dishes, and even with the various _parts_ of each animal. 
 Strange and grotesque sauces, as, for example, "eggs cooked on 
 the spit," "butter fried and roasted," were invented by the
cooks of those days; but these preparations had hardly any other 
 merit than that of being surprising and difficult to make. 
  
 A QUICKLY-MADE GRAVY. 
  
 434. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 lb. of shin of beef, 1/2 onion, 1/4 carrot, 2 or 
 3 sprigs of parsley and savoury herbs, a piece of butter about the size 
 of a walnut; cayenne and mace to taste, 3/4 pint of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut up the meat into very small pieces, slice the onion and 
 carrot, and put them into a small saucepan with the butter. Keep 
 stirring over a sharp fire until they have taken a little colour, when 
 add the water and the remaining ingredients. Simmer for 1/2 hour, skim 
 well, strain, and flavour, when it will be ready for use. 
  
 _Time_.--1/2 hour. _Average cost_, for this quantity, 5d. 
  
 A HUNDRED DIFFERENT DISHES.--Modern housewives know pretty well 
 how much care, and attention, and foresight are necessary in 
 order to serve well a little dinner for six or eight persons,--a
dinner which will give credit to the _ménage_, and satisfaction 
 and pleasure to the guests. A quickly-made gravy, under some 
 circumstances that we have known occur, will be useful to many 
 housekeepers when they have not much time for preparation. But, 
 talking of speed, and time, and preparation, what a combination 
 of all these must have been necessary for the feast at the 
 wedding of Charles VI. of France. On that occasion, as Froissart 
 the chronicler tells us, the art of cooking, with its 
 innumerable paraphernalia of sauces, with gravy, pepper, 
 cinnamon, garlic, scallion, brains, gravy soups, milk _potage_, 
 and ragoûts, had a signal triumph. The skilful _chef-de-cuisine_ 
 of the royal household covered the great marble table of the 
 regal palace with no less than a hundred different dishes, 
 prepared in a hundred different ways. 
  
 A GOOD BEEF GRAVY FOR POULTRY, GAME, &c. 
  
 435. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 lb. of lean beef, 1/2 pint of cold water, 1 
 shalot or small onion, 1/2 a teaspoonful of salt, a little pepper, 1 
 tablespoonful of Harvey  '  s sauce or mushroom ketchup, 1/2 a teaspoonful
of arrowroot. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut up the beef into small pieces, and put it, with the water, 
 into a stewpan. Add the shalot and seasoning, and simmer gently for 3 
 hours, taking care that it does not boil fast. A short time before it is 
 required, take the arrowroot, and having mixed it with a little cold 
 water, pour it into the gravy, which keep stirring, adding the Harvey  '  s 
 sauce, and just letting it boil. Strain off the gravy in a tureen, and 
 serve very hot. 
  
 _Time_.--3 hours. _Average cost_, 8d. per pint. 
  
  
 BROWN GRAVY. 
  
 436. INGREDIENTS.--2 oz. of butter, 2 large onions, 2 lbs. of shin of 
 beef, 2 small slices of lean bacon (if at hand), salt and whole pepper 
 to taste, 3 cloves, 2 quarts of water. For thickening, 2 oz. of butter, 
 3 oz. of flour. 
 
were but little known to the ancients, and Pliny appears to be 
 the only writer who mentions them; and he says, vaguely enough, 
 that some were brought to Rome, very similar to grains of 
 pepper, but somewhat longer; that they were only to be found in 
 India, in a wood consecrated to the gods; and that they served 
 in the manufacture of perfumes. The Dutch, as in the case of the 
 nutmeg (_see_ 378), endeavoured, when they gained possession of 
 the Spice Islands, to secure a monopoly of cloves, and, so that 
 the cultivation of the tree might be confined to Amboyna, their 
 chief island, bribed the surrounding chiefs to cut down all 
 trees found elsewhere. The Amboyna, or royal clove, is said to 
 be the best, and is rare; but other kinds, nearly equally good, 
 are produced in other parts of the world, and they come to 
 Europe from Mauritius, Bourbon, Cayenne, and Martinique, as also 
 from St. Kitts, St. Vincent  '  s, and Trinidad. The clove contains 
 about 20 per cent. of volatile aromatic oil, to which it owes 
 its peculiar pungent flavour, its other parts being composed of 
 woody fibre, water, gum, and resin. 
  
 BROWN GRAVY WITHOUT MEAT.
 
 437. INGREDIENTS.--2 large onions, 1 large carrot, 2 oz. of butter, 3 
 pints of boiling water, 1 bunch of savoury herbs, a wineglassful of good 
 beer; salt and pepper to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Slice, flour, and fry the onions and carrots in the butter 
 until of a nice light-brown colour; then add the boiling water and the 
 remaining ingredients; let the whole stew gently for about an hour; then 
 strain, and when cold, skim off all the fat. Thicken it in the same 
 manner as recipe No. 436, and, if thought necessary, add a few drops of 
 colouring No. 108. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour. Average cost, 2d. per pint. 
  
 _Note_.--The addition of a small quantity of mushroom ketchup or 
 Harvey  '  s sauce very much improves the flavour of this gravy. 
  
  
 RICH GRAVY FOR HASHES, RAGOUTS, &c. 
 
438. INGREDIENTS.--2 lbs. of shin of beef, 1 large onion or a few 
 shalots, a little flour, a bunch of savoury herbs, 2 blades of mace, 2 
 or 3 cloves, 4 whole allspice, 1/4 teaspoonful of whole pepper, 1 slice 
 of lean ham or bacon, 1/2 a head of celery (when at hand), 2 pints of 
 boiling water; salt and cayenne to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the beef into thin slices, as also the onions, dredge them 
 with flour, and fry of a pale brown, but do not allow them to get black; 
 pour in the boiling water, let it boil up; and skim. Add the remaining 
 ingredients, and simmer the whole very gently for 2 hours, or until all 
 the juices are extracted from the meat; put it by to get cold, when take 
 off all the fat. This gravy may be flavoured with ketchup, store sauces, 
 wine, or, in fact, anything that may give additional and suitable relish 
 to the dish it is intended for. 
  
 _Time_.--Rather more than 2 hours. 
  
 _Average cost_, 8d. per pint. 
  
 [Illustration: PIMENTO.]
 
 ALLSPICE.--This is the popular name given to pimento, or Jamaica 
 pepper, known to naturalists as _Eugenia pimenta_, and belonging 
 to the order of Myrtaceae. It is the berry of a fine tree in the 
 West Indies and South America, which attains a height of from 
 fifteen to twenty feet: the berries are not allowed to ripen, 
 but, being gathered green, are then dried in the sun, and then 
 become black. It is an inexpensive spice, and is considered more 
 mild and innocent than most other spices; consequently, it is 
 much used for domestic purposes, combining a very agreeable 
 variety of flavours. 
  
 GRAVY MADE WITHOUT MEAT FOR FOWLS. 
  
 439. INGREDIENTS.--The necks, feet, livers, and gizzards of the fowls, 1 
 slice of toasted bread, 1/2 onion, 1 faggot of savoury herbs, salt and 
 pepper to taste, 1/2 pint of water, thickening of butter and flour, 1 
 dessertspoonful of ketchup. 
  
 _Mode_.--Wash the feet of the fowls thoroughly clean, and cut them and
the neck into small pieces. Put these into a stewpan with the bread, 
 onion, herbs, seasoning, livers, and gizzards; pour the water over them 
 and simmer gently for 1 hour. Now take out the liver, pound it, and 
 strain the liquor to it. Add a thickening of butter and flour, and a 
 flavouring of mushroom ketchup; boil it up and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour. _Average cost_, 4d. per pint. 
  
  
 A CHEAP GRAVY FOR HASHES, &c. 
  
 440. INGREDIENTS.--Bones and trimmings of the cooked joint intended for 
 hashing, 1/4 teaspoonful of salt, 1/4 teaspoonful of whole pepper, 1/4 
 teaspoonful of whole allspice, a small faggot of savoury herbs, 1/2 head 
 of celery, 1 onion, 1 oz. of butter, thickening, sufficient boiling 
 water to cover the bones. 
  
 _Mode_.--Chop the bones in small pieces, and put them in a stewpan, with 
 the trimmings, salt, pepper, spice, herbs, and celery. Cover with 
 boiling water, and let the whole simmer gently for 1-1/2 or 2 hours.
Slice and fry the onion in the butter till it is of a pale brown, and 
 mix it gradually with the gravy made from the bones; boil for  1/4 hour, 
 and strain into a basin; now put it back into the stewpan; flavour with 
 walnut pickle or ketchup, pickled-onion liquor, or any store sauce that 
 may be preferred. Thicken with a little butter and flour, kneaded 
 together on a plate, and the gravy will be ready for use. After the 
 thickening is added, the gravy should just boil, to take off the rawness 
 of the flour. 
  
 _Time_.--2 hours, or rather more. 
  
 _Average cost_, 4d., exclusive of the bones and trimmings. 
  
  
 JUGGED GRAVY (Excellent). 
  
 441. INGREDIENTS.--2 lbs. of shin of beef, 1/4 lb. of lean ham, 1 onion 
 or a few shalots, 2 pints of water, salt and whole pepper to taste, 1 
 blade of mace, a faggot of savoury herbs, 1/2 a large carrot, 1/2 a 
 head of celery.
 
 _Mode_.--Cut up the beef and ham into small pieces, and slice the 
 vegetables; take a jar, capable of holding two pints of water, and 
 arrange therein, in layers, the ham, meat, vegetables, and seasoning, 
 alternately, filling up with the above quantity of water; tie down the 
 jar, or put a plate over the top, so that the steam may not escape; 
 place it in the oven, and let it remain there from 6 to 8 hours; should, 
 however, the oven be very hot, less time will be required. When 
 sufficiently cooked, strain the gravy, and when cold, remove the fat. It 
 may be flavoured with ketchup, wines, or any other store sauce that may 
 be preferred. 
  
 It is a good plan to put the jar in a cool oven over-night, to draw the 
 gravy; and then it will not require so long baking the following day. 
  
 _Time_.--From 6 to 8 hours, according to the oven. 
  
 _Average cost_, 7d. per pint. 
  
 [Illustration: CELERY.]
these), a few mushrooms, when obtainable; 1 blade of mace, salt to 
 taste, 3 pints of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut up the ham and veal into small square pieces, put these in 
 a stewpan, moistening them with a small quantity of water; place them 
 over the fire to draw down. When the bottom of the stewpan becomes 
 covered with a white glaze, fill up with water in the above proportion; 
 add the remaining ingredients, stew very slowly for 3 or 4 hours, and do 
 not forget to skim well the moment it boils. Put it by, and, when cold, 
 take off all the fat. This may be used for Béchamel, sauce tournée, and 
 many other white sauces. 
  
 _Time_.--3 or 4 hours. _Average cost_, 9d. per pint. 
  
  
 CHEAP GRAVY FOR MINCED VEAL. 
  
 443. INGREDIENTS.--Bones and trimmings of cold roast or boiled veal, 
 1-1/2 pint of water, 1 onion, 1/4 teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel, 1/4 
 teaspoonful of salt, 1 blade of pounded mace, the juice of 1/4 lemon;
thickening of butter and flour. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put all the ingredients into a stewpan, except the thickening 
 and lemon-juice, and let them simmer very gently for rather more than 1 
 hour, or until the liquor is reduced to a pint, when strain through a 
 hair-sieve. Add a thickening of butter and flour, and the lemon-juice; 
 set it on the fire, and let it just boil up, when it will be ready for 
 use. It may be flavoured with a little tomato sauce, and, where a rather 
 dark-coloured gravy is not objected to, ketchup, or Harvey  '  s sauce, may 
 be added at pleasure. 
  
 _Time_.--Rather more than 1 hour. _Average cost_, 3d. 
  
  
 GRAVY FOR VENISON. 
  
 444. INGREDIENTS.--Trimmings of venison, 3 or 4 mutton shank-bones, salt 
 to taste, 1 pint of water, 2 teaspoonfuls of walnut ketchup. 
  
 _Mode_.--Brown the trimmings over a nice clear fire, and put them in a
stewpan with the shank-bones and water; simmer gently for 2 hours, 
 strain and skim, and add the walnut ketchup and a seasoning of salt. Let 
 it just boil, when it is ready to serve. 
  
 _Time_.--2 hours. 
  
 [Illustration: THE DEER.] 
  
 VENISON.--Far, far away in ages past, our fathers loved the 
 chase, and what it brought; and it is usually imagined that when 
 Isaac ordered his son Esau to go out with his weapons, his 
 quiver and his bow, and to prepare for him savoury meat, such as 
 he loved, that it was venison he desired. The wise Solomon, too, 
 delighted in this kind of fare; for we learn that, at his table, 
 every day were served the wild ox, the roebuck, and the stag. 
 Xenophon informs us, in his History, that Cyrus, king of Persia, 
 ordered that venison should never be wanting at his repasts; and 
 of the effeminate Greeks it was the delight. The Romans, also, 
 were devoted admirers of the flesh of the deer; and our own 
 kings and princes, from the Great Alfred down to the Prince
Consort, have hunted, although, it must be confessed, under 
 vastly different circumstances, the swift buck, and relished 
 their "haunch" all the more keenly, that they had borne 
 themselves bravely in the pursuit of the animal. 
  
 TO DRY HERBS FOR WINTER USE. 
  
 445. On a very dry day, gather the herbs, just before they begin to 
 flower. If this is done when the weather is damp, the herbs will not be 
 so good a colour. (It is very necessary to be particular in little 
 matters like this, for trifles constitute perfection, and herbs nicely 
 dried will be found very acceptable when frost and snow are on the 
 ground. It is hardly necessary, however, to state that the flavour and 
 fragrance of fresh herbs are incomparably finer.) They should be 
 perfectly freed from dirt and dust, and be divided into small bunches, 
 with their roots cut off. Dry them quickly in a very hot oven, or before 
 the fire, as by this means most of their flavour will be preserved, and 
 be careful not to burn them; tie them up in paper bags, and keep in a 
 dry place. This is a very general way of preserving dried herbs; but we 
 would recommend the plan described in a former recipe.
 
 _Seasonable_.--From the month of July to the end of September is the 
 proper time for storing herbs for winter use. 
  
 HERB POWDER FOR FLAVOURING, when Fresh Herbs are not obtainable. 
  
 446. INGREDIENTS.--1 oz. of dried lemon-thyme, 1 oz. of dried winter 
 savory, 1 oz. of dried sweet marjoram and basil, 2 oz. of dried parsley, 
 1 oz. of dried lemon-peel. 
  
 _Mode_.--Prepare and dry the herbs by recipe No. 445; pick the leaves 
 from the stalks, pound them, and sift them through a hair-sieve; mix in 
 the above proportions, and keep in glass bottles, carefully excluding 
 the air. This, we think, a far better method of keeping herbs, as the 
 flavour and fragrance do not evaporate so much as when they are merely 
 put in paper bags. Preparing them in this way, you have them ready for 
 use at a moment  '  s notice. 
  
 Mint, sage, parsley, &c., dried, pounded, and each put into separate 
 bottles, will be found very useful in winter.
 
 [Illustration: CORK WITH WOODEN TOP.] 
  
 CORKS WITH WOODEN TOPS.--These are the best corks to use when it 
 is indispensable that the air should not be admitted to the 
 ingredients contained in bottles which are in constant use. The 
 top, which, as will be seen by the accompanying little cut, is 
 larger than the cork, is made of wood; and, besides effectually 
 covering the whole top of the bottle, can be easily removed and 
 again used, as no corkscrew is necessary to pull it out. 
  
 SAVORY.--This we find described by Columella, a voluminous Roman 
 writer on agriculture, as an odoriferous herb, which, "in the 
 brave days of old," entered into the seasoning of nearly every 
 dish. Verily, there are but few new things under the sun, and we 
 don  '  t find that we have made many discoveries in gastronomy, at 
 least beyond what was known to the ancient inhabitants of Italy. 
 We possess two varieties of this aromatic herb, known to 
 naturalists as _Satureja_. They are called summer and winter 
 savory, according to the time of the year when they are fit for
gathering. Both sorts are in general cultivation throughout 
 England. 
  
 HORSERADISH SAUCE, to serve with Roast Beef. 
  
 447. INGREDIENTS.--4 tablespoonfuls of grated horseradish, 1 teaspoonful 
 of pounded sugar, 1 teaspoonful of salt, 1/2 teaspoonful of pepper, 2 
 teaspoonfuls of made mustard; vinegar. 
  
 _Mode_.--Grate the horseradish, and mix it well with the sugar, salt, 
 pepper, and mustard; moisten it with sufficient vinegar to give it the 
 consistency of cream, and serve in a tureen: 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls of 
 cream added to the above, very much improve the appearance and flavour 
 of this sauce. To heat it to serve with hot roast beef, put it in a bain 
 marie or a jar, which place in a saucepan of boiling water; make it hot, 
 but do not allow it to boil, or it will curdle. 
  
 _Note_.--This sauce is a great improvement on the old-fashioned way of 
 serving cold-scraped horseradish with hot roast beef. The mixing of the 
 cold vinegar with the warm gravy cools and spoils everything on the
 
 467. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 pint of melted butter, No. 376; 1 heaped 
 tablespoonful of chopped parsley, salt and pepper to taste, the juice of 
 1/2 large lemon; when liked, 2 minced shalots. 
  
 _Mode_.--Make 1/2 pint of melted butter, by recipe No. 376; stir in the 
 above ingredients, and let them just boil; when it is ready to serve. 
  
 _Time_.--1 minute to simmer. _Average cost_, 9d. per pint. 
  
  
 MAYONNAISE, a Sauce or Salad-Dressing for cold Chicken, Meat, and other 
 cold Dishes. 
  
 468. INGREDIENTS.--The yolks of 2 eggs, 6 tablespoonfuls of salad-oil, 4 
 tablespoonfuls of vinegar, salt and white pepper to taste, 1 
 tablespoonful of white stock, No. 107, 2 tablespoonfuls of cream. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the yolks of the eggs into a basin, with a seasoning of 
 pepper and salt; have ready the above quantities of oil and vinegar, in[                    ]	0  	separate vessels; add them _very gradually_ to the eggs; continue 
 stirring and rubbing the mixture with a wooden spoon, as herein consists 
 the secret of having a nice smooth sauce. It cannot be stirred too 
 frequently, and it should be made in a very cool place, or, if ice is at 
 hand, it should be mixed over it. When the vinegar and oil are well 
 incorporated with the eggs, add the stock and cream, stirring all the 
 time, and it will then be ready for use. 
  
 For a fish Mayonnaise, this sauce may be coloured with lobster-spawn, 
 pounded; and for poultry or meat, where variety is desired, a little 
 parsley-juice may be used to add to its appearance. Cucumber, Tarragon, 
 or any other flavoured vinegar, may be substituted for plain, where they 
 are liked. 
  
 _Average cost_, for this quantity, 7d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for a small salad. 
  
 _Note_.--In mixing the oil and vinegar with the eggs, put in first a few 
 drops of oil, and then a few drops of vinegar, never adding a large
quantity of either at one time. By this means, you can be more certain 
 of the sauce not curdling. Patience and practice, let us add, are two 
 essentials for making this sauce good. 
  
  
 MINT SAUCE, to serve with Roast Lamb. 
  
 469. INGREDIENTS.--4 dessertspoonfuls of chopped mint, 2 
 dessertspoonfuls of pounded white sugar, 1/4 pint of vinegar. 
  
 _Mode_.--Wash the mint, which should be young and fresh-gathered, free 
 from grit; pick the leaves from the stalks, mince them very fine, and 
 put them into a tureen; add the sugar and vinegar, and stir till the 
 former is dissolved. This sauce is better by being made 2 or 3 hours 
 before wanted for table, as the vinegar then becomes impregnated with 
 the flavour of the mint. By many persons, the above proportion of sugar 
 would not be considered sufficient; but as tastes vary, we have given 
 the quantity which we have found to suit the general palate. 
  
 _Average cost_, 3d.
 
 _Sufficient_ to serve with a middling-sized joint of lamb. 
  
 _Note_.--Where green mint is scarce and not obtainable, mint vinegar may 
 be substituted for it, and will be found very acceptable in early 
 spring. 
  
 [Illustration: MINT.] 
  
 MINT.--The common mint cultivated in our gardens is known as the 
 _Mentha viridis_, and is employed in different culinary 
 processes, being sometimes boiled with certain dishes, and 
 afterwards withdrawn. It has an agreeable aromatic flavour, and 
 forms an ingredient in soups, and sometimes is used in spring 
 salads. It is valuable as a stomachic and antispasmodic; on 
 which account it is generally served at table with pea-soup. 
 Several of its species grow wild in low situations in the 
 country. 
  
 MINT VINEGAR.
time. They should not boil longer than necessary, as they would then 
 lose their colour and flavour. Rub the whole through a tammy, and serve 
 very hot. After this, it should be warmed in a bain marie. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether, 1/4 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from August to October. 
  
  
 II. 
  
 _A More Simple Method_. 
  
 476. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 pint of melted butter, made with milk, No. 380; 
 1/2 pint of button mushrooms, 1 dessertspoonful of mushroom ketchup, if 
 at hand; cayenne and salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Make the melted butter by recipe No. 380, and add to it the 
 mushrooms, which must be nicely cleaned, and free from grit, and the 
 stalks cut off. Let them simmer gently for about 10 minutes, or until
they are quite tender. Put in the seasoning and ketchup; let it just 
 boil, when serve. 
  
 _Time_.--Rather more than 10 minutes. _Average cost_, 8d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from August to October. 
  
 GROWTH OF THE MUSHROOM AND OTHER FUNGI.--The quick growth of the 
 mushroom and other fungi is no less wonderful than the length of 
 time they live, and the numerous dangers they resist while they 
 continue in the dormant state. To spring up "like a mushroom in 
 a night" is a scriptural mode of expressing celerity; and this 
 completely accords with all the observations which have been 
 made concerning this curious class of plants. Mr. Sowerby 
 remarks--"I have often placed specimens of the _Phallus caninus_ 
 by a window over-night, while in the egg-form, and they have 
 been fully grown by the morning." 
  
 MUSHROOM POWDER (a valuable addition to Sauces and Gravies, when fresh 
 Mushrooms are not obtainable).
 
 477. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 peck of large mushrooms, 2 onions, 12 cloves, 1/4 
 oz. of pounded mace, 2 teaspoonfuls of white pepper. 
  
 _Mode_.--Peel the mushrooms, wipe them perfectly free from grit and 
 dirt, remove the black fur, and reject all those that are at all 
 worm-eaten; put them into a stewpan with the above ingredients, but 
 without water; shake them over a clear fire, till all the liquor is 
 dried up, and be careful not to let them burn; arrange them on tins, and 
 dry them in a slow oven; pound them to a fine powder, which put into 
 small _dry_ bottles; cork well, seal the corks, and keep it in a dry 
 place. In using this powder, add it to the gravy just before serving, 
 when it will merely require one boil-up. The flavour imparted by this 
 means to the gravy, ought to be exceedingly good. 
  
 _Seasonable_.--This should be made in September, or at the beginning of 
 October. 
  
 _Note_.--If the bottles in which it is stored away are not perfectly 
 dry, as, also the mushroom powder, it will keep good but a very short
time.  
  
 PICKLED MUSHROOMS. 
  
 478. INGREDIENTS.--Sufficient vinegar to cover the mushrooms; to each 
 quart of mushrooms, 2 blades of pounded mace, 1 oz. of ground pepper, 
 salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Choose some nice young button mushrooms for pickling, and rub 
 off the skin with a piece of flannel and salt, and cut off the stalks; 
 if very large, take out the red inside, and reject the black ones, as 
 they are too old. Put them in a stewpan, sprinkle salt over them, with 
 pounded mace and pepper in the above proportion; shake them well over a 
 clear fire until the liquor flows, and keep them there until it is all 
 dried up again; then add as much vinegar as will cover them; just let it 
 simmer for 1 minute, and store it away in stone jars for use. When cold, 
 tie down with bladder and keep in a dry place; they will remain good for 
 a length of time, and are generally considered delicious. 
 
_Seasonable_.--Make this the same time as ketchup, from the beginning of 
 September to the middle of October. 
  
 NATURE OF THE MUSHROOM.--Locality has evidently a considerable 
 influence on the nature of the juices of the mushroom; for it 
 has been discovered, after fatal experience, that some species, 
 which are perfectly harmless when raised in open meadows and 
 pasturelands, become virulently poisonous when they happen to 
 grow in contact with stagnant water or putrescent animal and 
 vegetable substances. What the precise nature of the poison in 
 fungi may be, has not been accurately ascertained. 
  
 A VERY RICH AND GOOD MUSHROOM SAUCE, to serve with Fowls or Rabbits. 
  
 479. INGREDIENTS.--1 pint of mushroom-buttons, salt to taste, a little 
 grated nutmeg, 1 blade of pounded mace, 1 pint of cream, 2 oz. of 
 butter, flour to thicken. 
  
 _Mode_.--Rub the buttons with a piece of flannel and salt, to take off 
 the skin; cut off the stalks, and put them in a stewpan with the above
well, and rub the lumps well down with the back of a spoon, as 
 well-mixed mustard should be perfectly free from these. The mustard-pot 
 should not be more than half full, or rather less if it will not be used 
 in a day or two, as it is so much better when freshly mixed. 
  
  
 TARTAR MUSTARD. 
  
 481. INGREDIENTS.--Horseradish vinegar, cayenne, 1/2 a teacupful of 
 mustard. 
  
 _Mode_.--Have ready sufficient horseradish vinegar to mix with the above 
 proportion of mustard; put the mustard in a cup, with a slight seasoning 
 of cayenne; mix it perfectly smooth with the vinegar, adding this a 
 little at a time; rub down with the back of a spoon any lumps that may 
 appear, and do not let it be too thin. Mustard may be flavoured in 
 various ways, with Tarragon, shalot, celery, and many other vinegars, 
 herbs, spices, &c.; but this is more customary in France than in 
 England, as there it is merely considered a "vehicle of flavours," as it 
 has been termed.
NASTURTIUMS.--The elegant nasturtium-plant, called by 
 naturalists _Tropoeolum_, and which sometimes goes by the name 
 of Indian cress, came originally from Peru, but was easily made 
 to grow in these islands. Its young leaves and flowers are of a 
 slightly hot nature, and many consider them a good adjunct to 
 salads, to which they certainly add a pretty appearance. When 
 the beautiful blossoms, which may be employed with great effect 
 in garnishing dishes, are off, then the fruit is used as 
 described in the above recipe. 
  
 FRENCH ONION SAUCE, or SOUBISE. 
  
 483. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 pint of Béchamel, No. 367, 1 bay-leaf, seasoning 
 to taste of pounded mace and cayenne, 6 onions, a small piece of ham. 
  
 _Mode_.--Peel the onions and cut them in halves; put them in a stewpan, 
 with just sufficient water to cover them, and add the bay-leaf, ham, 
 cayenne, and mace; be careful to keep the lid closely shut, and simmer 
 them until tender. Take them out and drain thoroughly; rub them through 
 a tammy or sieve (an old one does for the purpose) with a wooden spoon,
and put them to 1/2 pint of Béchamel; keep stirring over the fire until 
 it boils, when serve. If it should require any more seasoning, add it to 
 taste. 
  
 _Time_.--3/4 hour to boil the onions. 
  
 _Average cost_, 10d. for this quantity. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for a moderate-sized dish. 
  
  
 WHITE ONION SAUCE, for Boiled Rabbits, Roast Shoulder of Mutton, &c. 
  
 484. INGREDIENTS.--9 large onions, or 12 middling-sized ones, 1 pint of 
 melted butter made with milk (No. 380), 1/2 teaspoonful of salt, or 
 rather more. 
  
 _Mode_.--Peel the onions and put them into water to which a little salt 
 has been added, to preserve their whiteness, and let them remain for 1/4 
 hour. Then put them in a stewpan, cover them with water, and let them
boil until tender, and, if the onions should be very strong, change the 
 water after they have been boiling for 1/4 hour. Drain them thoroughly, 
 chop them, and rub them through a tammy or sieve. Make 1 pint of melted 
 butter, by recipe No. 380, and when that boils, put in the onions, with 
 a seasoning of salt; stir it till it simmers, when it will be ready to 
 serve. If these directions are carefully attended to, this onion sauce 
 will be delicious. 
  
 _Time_.--From 3/4 to 1 hour, to boil the onions. 
  
 _Average cost_, 9d. per pint. 
  
 _Sufficient_ to serve with a roast shoulder of mutton, or boiled rabbit. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from August to March. 
  
 _Note_.--To make this sauce very mild and delicate, use Spanish onions, 
 which can be procured from the beginning of September to Christmas. 2 or 
 3 tablespoonfuls of cream added just before serving, will be found to 
 improve its appearance very much. Small onions, when very young, may be
cooked whole, and served in melted butter. A sieve or tammy should be 
 kept expressly for onions: an old one answers the purpose, as it is 
 liable to retain the flavour and smell, which of course would be 
 excessively disagreeable in delicate preparations. 
  
  
 BROWN ONION SAUCE. 
  
 485. INGREDIENTS.--6 large onions, rather more than 1/2 pint of good 
 gravy, 2 oz. of butter, salt and pepper to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Slice and fry the onions of a pale brown in a stewpan, with the 
 above quantity of butter, keeping them well stirred, that they do not 
 get black. When a nice colour, pour over the gravy, and let them simmer 
 gently until tender. Now skim off every particle of fat, add the 
 seasoning, and rub the whole through a tammy or sieve; put it back in 
 the saucepan to warm, and when it boils, serve. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether 1 hour. 
 
juice of a Seville orange or lemon, salt and pepper to taste, 1 glass of 
 port wine. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the onion, cut in slices, into a stewpan with the stock, 
 orange-peel, and basil, and let them simmer very gently for 1/4 hour or 
 rather longer, should the gravy not taste sufficiently of the peel. 
 Strain it off, and add to the gravy the remaining ingredients; let the 
 whole heat through, and, when on the point of boiling, serve very hot in 
 a tureen which should have a cover to it. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether 1/2 hour. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for a small tureen. 
  
  
 OYSTER FORCEMEAT, for Roast or Boiled Turkey. 
  
 489. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 pint of bread crumbs, 1-1/2 oz. of chopped suet 
 or butter, 1 faggot of savoury herbs, 1/4 saltspoonful of grated nutmeg, 
 salt and pepper to taste, 2 eggs, 18 oysters.
 
 _Mode_.--Grate the bread very fine, and be careful that no large lumps 
 remain; put it into a basin with the suet, which must be very finely 
 minced, or, when butter is used, that must be cut up into small pieces. 
 Add the herbs, also chopped as small as possible, and seasoning; mix all 
 these well together, until the ingredients are thoroughly mingled. Open 
 and beard the oysters, chop them, but not too small, and add them to the 
 other ingredients. Beat up the eggs, and, with the hand, work 
 altogether, until it is smoothly mixed. The turkey should not be stuffed 
 too full: if there should be too much forcemeat, roll it into balls, fry 
 them, and use them as a garnish. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 1 turkey. 
  
  
 OYSTER KETCHUP. 
  
 490. INGREDIENTS.--Sufficient oysters to fill a pint measure, 1 pint of 
 sherry, 3 oz. of salt, 1 drachm of cayenne, 2 drachms of pounded mace. 
 
strain, and, when cold, bottle off for use: the corks should be well 
 sealed to exclude the air. 
  
 _Time_.--1/4 hour. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 RAVIGOTTE, a French Salad Sauce. 
  
 _Mons. Ude  '  s Recipe_. 
  
 501. INGREDIENTS.--1 teaspoonful of mushroom ketchup, 1 teaspoonful of 
 cavice, 1 teaspoonful of Chili vinegar, 1 teaspoonful of Reading sauce, 
 a piece of butter the size of an egg, 3 tablespoonfuls of thick 
 Béchamel, No. 367, 1 tablespoonful of minced parsley, 3 tablespoonfuls 
 of cream; salt and pepper to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Scald the parsley, mince the leaves very fine, and add it to 
 all the other ingredients; after mixing the whole together thoroughly,
the sauce will be ready for use. 
  
 _Average cost_, for this quantity, 10d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 READING SAUCE. 
  
 502. INGREDIENTS.--2-1/2 pints of walnut pickle, 1-1/2 oz. of shalots, 1 
 quart of spring water, 3/4 pint of Indian soy, 1/2 oz. of bruised 
 ginger, 1/2 oz. of long pepper, 1 oz. of mustard-seed, 1 anchovy, 1/2 
 oz. of cayenne, 1/4 oz. of dried sweet bay-leaves. 
  
 _Mode_.--Bruise the shalots in a mortar, and put them in a stone jar 
 with the walnut-liquor; place it before the fire, and let it boil until 
 reduced to 2 pints. Then, into another jar, put all the ingredients 
 except the bay-leaves, taking care that they are well bruised, so that 
 the flavour may be thoroughly extracted; put this also before the fire, 
 and let it boil for 1 hour, or rather more. When the contents of both
jars are sufficiently cooked, mix them together, stirring them well as 
 you mix them, and submit them to a slow boiling for 1/2 hour; cover 
 closely, and let them stand 24 hours in a cool place; then open the jar 
 and add the bay-leaves; let it stand a week longer closed down, when 
 strain through a flannel bag, and it will be ready for use. The above 
 quantities will make 1/2 gallon. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether, 3 hours. 
  
 _Seasonable_.--This sauce may be made at any time. 
  
  
 REMOULADE, or FRENCH SALAD-DRESSING. 
  
 503. INGREDIENTS.--4 eggs, 1/2 tablespoonful of made mustard, salt and 
 cayenne to taste, 3 tablespoonfuls of olive-oil, 1 tablespoonful of 
 tarragon or plain vinegar. 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil 3 eggs quite hard for about 1/4 hour, put them into cold 
 water, and let them remain in it for a few minutes; strip off the
shells, put the yolks in a mortar, and pound them very smoothly; add to 
 them, very gradually, the mustard, seasoning, and vinegar, keeping all 
 well stirred and rubbed down with the back of a wooden spoon. Put in the 
 oil drop by drop, and when this is thoroughly mixed with the other 
 ingredients, add the yolk of a raw egg, and stir well, when it will be 
 ready for use. This sauce should not be curdled; and to prevent this, 
 the only way is to mix a little of everything at a time, and not to 
 cease stirring. The quantities of oil and vinegar may be increased or 
 diminished according to taste, as many persons would prefer a smaller 
 proportion of the former ingredient. 
  
 GREEN REMOULADE is made by using tarragon vinegar instead of plain, and 
 colouring with a little parsley-juice, No. 495. Harvey  '  s sauce, or Chili 
 vinegar, may be added at pleasure. 
  
 _Time_.--1/4 hour to boil the eggs. 
  
 _Average cost_, for this quantity, 7d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for a salad made for 4 or 6 persons.
 
 [Illustration: TARRAGON.] 
  
 TARRAGON.--The leaves of this plant, known to naturalists as 
 _Artemisia dracunculus_, are much used in France as a flavouring 
 ingredient for salads. From it also is made the vinegar known as 
 tarragon vinegar, which is employed by the French in mixing 
 their mustard. It originally comes from Tartary, and does not 
 seed in France. 
  
 SAGE-AND-ONION STUFFING, for Geese, Ducks, and Pork. 
  
 504. INGREDIENTS.--4 large onions, 10 sage-leaves, 1/4 lb. of bread 
 crumbs, 1-1/2 oz. of butter, salt and pepper to taste, 1 egg. 
  
 _Mode_.--Peel the onions, put them into boiling water, let them simmer 
 for 5 minutes or rather longer, and, just before they are taken out, put 
 in the sage-leaves for a minute or two to take off their rawness. Chop 
 both these very fine, add the bread, seasoning, and butter, and work the 
 whole together with the yolk of an egg, when the stuffing will be ready
for use. It should be rather highly seasoned, and the sage-leaves should 
 be very finely chopped. Many cooks do not parboil the onions in the 
 manner just stated, but merely use them raw. The stuffing then, however, 
 is not nearly so mild, and, to many tastes, its strong flavour would be 
 very objectionable. When made for goose, a portion of the liver of the 
 bird, simmered for a few minutes and very finely minced, is frequently 
 added to this stuffing; and where economy is studied, the egg may be 
 dispensed with. 
  
 _Time_.--Rather more than 5 minutes to simmer the onions. 
  
 _Average cost_, for this quantity, 4d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 1 goose, or a pair of ducks. 
  
  
 505. SOYER  '  S RECIPE FOR GOOSE STUFFING.--Take 4 apples, peeled and 
 cored, 4 onions, 4 leaves of sage, and 4 leaves of lemon thyme not 
 broken, and boil them in a stewpan with sufficient water to cover them; 
 when done, pulp them through a sieve, removing the sage and thyme; then
add sufficient pulp of mealy potatoes to cause it to be sufficiently dry 
 without sticking to the hand; add pepper and salt, and stuff the bird. 
  
  
 SALAD DRESSING (Excellent). 
  
 I. 
  
 506. INGREDIENTS.--1 teaspoonful of mixed mustard, 1 teaspoonful of 
 pounded sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls of salad oil, 4 tablespoonfuls of milk, 
 2 tablespoonfuls of vinegar, cayenne and salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the mixed mustard into a salad-bowl with the sugar, and add 
 the oil drop by drop, carefully stirring and mixing all these 
 ingredients well together. Proceed in this manner with the milk and 
 vinegar, which must be added very _gradually_, or the sauce will curdle. 
 Put in the seasoning, when the mixture will be ready for use. If this 
 dressing is properly made, it will have a soft creamy appearance, and 
 will be found very delicious with crab, or cold fried fish (the latter 
 cut into dice), as well as with salads. In mixing salad dressings, the
country in Europe. 
  
 [Illustration: THE OLIVE.] 
  
 THE OLIVE AND OLIVE OIL.--This tree assumes a high degree of 
 interest from the historical circumstances with which it is 
 connected. A leaf of it was brought into the ark by the dove, 
 when that vessel was still floating on the waters of the great 
 deep, and gave the first token that the deluge was subsiding. 
 Among the Greeks, the prize of the victor in the Olympic games 
 was a wreath of wild olive; and the "Mount of Olives" is 
 rendered familiar to our ears by its being mentioned in the 
 Scriptures as near to Jerusalem. The tree is indigenous in the 
 north of Africa, Syria, and Greece; and the Romans introduced it 
 to Italy. In Spain and the south of France it is now cultivated; 
 and although it grows in England, its fruit does not ripen in 
 the open air. Both in Greece and Portugal the fruit is eaten in 
 its ripe state; but its taste is not agreeable to many palates. 
 To the Italian shepherd, bread and olives, with a little wine, 
 form a nourishing diet; but in England, olives are usually only
introduced by way of dessert, to destroy the taste of the viands 
 which have been previously eaten, that the flavour of the wine 
 may be the better enjoyed. There are three kinds of olives 
 imported to London,--the French, Spanish, and Italian: the first 
 are from Provence, and are generally accounted excellent; the 
 second are larger, but more bitter; and the last are from Lucca, 
 and are esteemed the best. The oil extracted from olives, called 
 olive oil, or salad oil, is, with the continentals, in continual 
 request, more dishes being prepared with than without it, we 
 should imagine. With us, it is principally used in mixing a 
 salad, and when thus employed, it tends to prevent fermentation, 
 and is an antidote against flatulency. 
  
 II. 
  
 507. INGREDIENTS.--4 eggs, 1 teaspoonful of mixed mustard, 1/4 
 teaspoonful of white pepper, half that quantity of cayenne, salt to 
 taste, 4 tablespoonfuls of cream, vinegar. 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil the eggs until hard, which will be in about 1/4 hour or 20
 
 _Mode_.--Prepare and mix the ingredients by the preceding recipe, and be 
 very particular that the whole is well stirred. 
  
 _Note_.--In making salads, the vegetables, &c., should never be added to 
 the sauce very long before they are wanted for table; the dressing, 
 however, may always be prepared some hours before required. Where salads 
 are much in request, it is a good plan to bottle off sufficient dressing 
 for a few days  '   consumption, as, thereby, much time and trouble are 
 saved. If kept in a cool place, it will remain good for 4 or 5 days. 
  
 POETIC RECIPE FOR SALAD.--The Rev. Sydney Smith, the witty canon 
 of St. Paul  '  s, who thought that an enjoyment of the good things 
 of this earth was compatible with aspirations for things higher, 
 wrote the following excellent recipe for salad, which we should 
 advise our readers not to pass by without a trial, when the hot 
 weather invites to a dish of cold lamb. May they find the 
 flavour equal to the rhyme.-- 
  
 "Two large potatoes, pass  '  d through kitchen sieve,
Smoothness and softness to the salad give: 
 Of mordent mustard add a single spoon, 
 Distrust the condiment that bites too soon; 
 But deem it not, thou man of herbs, a fault. 
 To add a double quantity of salt: 
 Four times the spoon with oil of Lucca crown, 
 And twice with vinegar procured from   '  town; 
 True flavour needs it, and your poet begs, 
 The pounded yellow of two well-boil  '  d eggs. 
 Let onion  '  s atoms lurk within the bowl, 
 And, scarce suspected, animate the whole; 
 And, lastly, in the flavour  '  d compound toss 
 A magic spoonful of anchovy sauce. 
 Oh! great and glorious, and herbaceous treat, 
  '  Twould tempt the dying anchorite to eat. 
 Back to the world he  '  d turn his weary soul, 
 And plunge his fingers in the salad-bowl." 
  
 SAUCE ALLEMANDE, or GERMAN SAUCE. 
 
sauce à la cameline, sold by them, was to be composed or "good 
 cinnamon, good ginger, good cloves, good grains of paradise, 
 good bread, and good vinegar." The sauce Tence, was to be made 
 of "good sound almonds, good ginger, good wine, and good 
 verjuice." May we respectfully express a hope--not that we 
 desire to doubt it in the least--that the English 
 sauce-manufacturers of the 19th century are equally considerate 
 and careful in choosing their ingredients for their various 
 well-known preparations. 
  
 SAUCE A L  '  AURORE, for Trout, Soles, &c. 
  
 511. INGREDIENTS.--The spawn of 1 lobster, 1 oz. of butter, 1/2 pint of 
 Béchamel (No. 367), the juice of 1/2 lemon, a high seasoning of salt and 
 cayenne. 
  
 _Mode_.--Take the spawn and pound it in a mortar with the butter, until 
 quite smooth, and work it through a hair sieve. Put the Béchamel into a 
 stewpan, add the pounded spawn, the lemon-juice, which must be strained, 
 and a plentiful seasoning of cayenne and salt; let it just simmer, but
do not allow it to boil, or the beautiful red colour of the sauce will 
 be spoiled. A small spoonful of anchovy essence may be added at 
 pleasure. 
  
 _Time_.--1 minute to simmer. _Average cost_, for this quantity, 1s. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for a pair of large soles. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 SAUCE A LA MATELOTE, for Fish. 
  
 512. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 pint of Espagnole (No. 411), 3 onions, 2 
 tablespoonfuls of mushroom ketchup, 1/2 glass of port wine, a bunch of 
 sweet herbs, 1/2 bay-leaf, salt and pepper to taste, 1 clove, 2 berries 
 of allspice, a little liquor in which the fish has been boiled, 
 lemon-juice, and anchovy sauce. 
  
 _Mode_.--Slice and fry the onions of a nice brown colour, and put them
into a stewpan with the Espagnole, ketchup, wine, and a little liquor in 
 which the fish has been boiled. Add the seasoning, herbs, and spices, 
 and simmer gently for 10 minutes, stirring well the whole time; strain 
 it through a fine hair sieve, put in the lemon-juice and anchovy sauce, 
 and pour it over the fish. This sauce may be very much enriched by 
 adding a few small quenelles, or forcemeat balls made of fish, and also 
 glazed onions or mushrooms. These, however, should not be added to the 
 matelote till it is dished. 
  
 _Time_.--10 minutes. _Average cost_, 1s. 6d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 _Note_.--This sauce originally took its name as being similar to that 
 which the French sailor (_matelot_) employed as a relish to the fish he 
 caught and ate. In some cases, cider and perry were substituted for the 
 wine. The Norman _matelotes_ were very celebrated. 
  
 [Illustration: THE BAY.] 
 
513. INGREDIENTS.--2 oz. of butter, 1 small carrot, 6 shalots, 1 small 
 bunch of savoury herbs, including parsley, 1/2 a bay-leaf, 2 slices of 
 lean ham, 2 cloves, 6 peppercorns, 1 blade of mace, 3 whole allspice, 4 
 tablespoonfuls of vinegar, 1/2 pint of stock (No. 104 or 105), 1 small 
 lump of sugar, 1/4 saltspoonful of cayenne, salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put into a stewpan the butter, with the carrot and shalots, 
 both of which must be cut into small slices; add the herbs, bay-leaf, 
 spices, and ham (which must be minced rather finely), and let these 
 ingredients simmer over a slow fire, until the bottom of the stewpan is 
 covered with a brown glaze. Keep stirring with a wooden spoon, and put 
 in the remaining ingredients. Simmer very gently for 1/4 hour, skim off 
 every particle of fat, strain the sauce through a sieve, and serve very 
 hot. Care must be taken that this sauce be not made too acid, although 
 it should possess a sharpness indicated by its name. Of course the above 
 quantity of vinegar may be increased or diminished at pleasure, 
 according to taste. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether 1/2 hour. _Average cost_, 10d. 
 
_Sufficient_ for a medium-sized dish of cutlets. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 A GOOD SAUCE FOR VARIOUS BOILED PUDDINGS. 
  
 514. INGREDIENTS.--1/4 lb. of butter, 1/4 lb. of pounded sugar, a 
 wineglassful of brandy or rum. 
  
 _Mode_.--Beat the butter to a cream, until no lumps remain; add the 
 pounded sugar, and brandy or rum; stir once or twice until the whole is 
 thoroughly mixed, and serve. This sauce may either be poured round the 
 pudding or served in a tureen, according to the taste or fancy of the 
 cook or mistress. 
  
 _Average cost_, 8d. for this quantity. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for a pudding. 
 
 
 SAUCE ROBERT, for Steaks, &c. 
  
 515. INGREDIENTS.--2 oz. of butter, 3 onions, 1 teaspoonful of flour, 4 
 tablespoonfuls of gravy, or stock No. 105, salt and pepper to taste, 1 
 teaspoonful of made mustard, 1 teaspoonful of vinegar, the juice of 1/2 
 lemon. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the butter into a stewpan, set it on the fire, and, when 
 browning, throw in the onions, which must be cut into small slices. Fry 
 them brown, but do not burn them; add the flour, shake the onions in it, 
 and give the whole another fry. Put in the gravy and seasoning, and boil 
 it gently for 10 minutes; skim off the fat, add the mustard, vinegar, 
 and lemon-juice; give it one boil, and pour round the steaks, or 
 whatever dish the sauce has been prepared for. 
  
 _Time_.---Altogether 1/2 hour. _Average cost_, for this quantity, 6d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
 
 
 519. INGREDIENTS.--1 glass of port wine, 1 tablespoonful of Leamington 
 sauce (No. 459), 1 tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup, 1 tablespoonful of 
 lemon-juice, 1 slice of lemon-peel, 1 large shalot cut in slices, 1 
 blade of mace, cayenne to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put all the ingredients into a stewpan, set it over the fire, 
 and let it simmer for about 5 minutes; then strain and serve the sauce 
 in a tureen. 
  
 _Time_.--5 minutes. _Average cost_, for this quantity, 8d. 
  
  
 SAUSAGE-MEAT STUFFING, for Turkey. 
  
 520. INGREDIENTS.--6 oz. of lean pork, 6 oz. of fat pork, both weighed 
 after being chopped (beef suet may be substituted for the latter), 2 oz. 
 of bread crumbs, 1 small tablespoonful of minced sage, 1 blade of 
 pounded mace, salt and pepper to taste, 1 egg. 
 
_Mode_.--Chop the meat and fat very finely, mix with them the other 
 ingredients, taking care that the whole is thoroughly incorporated. 
 Moisten with the egg, and the stuffing will be ready for use. Equal 
 quantities of this stuffing and forcemeat, No. 417, will be found to 
 answer very well, as the herbs, lemon-peel, &c. in the latter, impart a 
 very delicious flavour to the sausage-meat. As preparations, however, 
 like stuffings and forcemeats, are matters to be decided by individual 
 tastes, they must be left, to a great extent, to the discrimination of 
 the cook, who should study her employer  '  s taste in this, as in every 
 other respect. 
  
 _Average cost_, 9d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for a small turkey. 
  
  
 SAVOURY JELLY FOR MEAT PIES. 
  
 521. INGREDIENTS.--3 lbs. of shin of beef, 1 calf  '  s-foot, 3 lbs. of 
 knuckle of veal, poultry trimmings (if for game pies, any game
[Illustration: THE WALNUT.] 
  
 THE WALNUT.--This nut is a native of Persia, and was introduced 
 into England from France. As a pickle, it is much used in the 
 green state; and grated walnuts in Spain are much employed, both 
 in tarts and other dishes. On the continent it is occasionally 
 employed as a substitute for olive oil in cooking; but it is 
 apt, under such circumstances, to become rancid. The matter 
 which remains after the oil is extracted is considered highly 
 nutritious for poultry. It is called _mare_, and in Switzerland 
 is eaten under the name of _pain amer_ by the poor. The oil is 
 frequently manufactured into a kind of soap, and the leaves and 
 green husks yield an extract, which, as a brown dye, is used to 
 stain hair, wool, and wood. 
  
 WHITE SAUCE (Good). 
  
 537. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 pint of white stock (No. 107), 1/2 pint of cream, 
 1 dessertspoonful of flour, salt to taste. 
 
_Mode_.--Have ready a delicately-clean saucepan, into which put the 
 stock, which should be well flavoured with vegetables, and rather 
 savoury; mix the flour smoothly with the cream, add it to the stock, 
 season with a little salt, and boil all these ingredients very gently 
 for about 10 minutes, keeping them well stirred the whole time, as this 
 sauce is very liable to burn. 
  
 _Time_.--10 minutes. _Average cost_, 1s. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for a pair of fowls. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 WHITE SAUCE, made without Meat. 
  
 538. INGREDIENTS.--2 oz. of butter, 2 small onions, 1 carrot, 1/2 a 
 small teacupful of flour, 1 pint of new milk, salt and cayenne to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut up the onions and carrot very small, and put them into a
stewpan with the butter; simmer them till the butter is nearly dried up; 
 then stir in the flour, and add the milk; boil the whole gently until it 
 thickens, strain it, season with salt and cayenne, and it will be ready 
 to serve. 
  
 _Time_.--1/4 hour. _Average cost_, 5d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for a pair of fowls. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 WHITE SAUCE (a very Simple and Inexpensive Method). 
  
 539. INGREDIENTS.--1-1/2 pint of milk, 1-1/2 oz. of rice, 1 strip of 
 lemon-peel, 1 small blade of pounded mace, salt and cayenne to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil the milk with the lemon-peel and rice until the latter is 
 perfectly tender, then take out the lemon-peel and pound the milk and 
 rice together; put it back into the stewpan to warm, add the mace and
seasoning, give it one boil, and serve. This sauce should be of the 
 consistency of thick cream. 
  
 _Time_.--About 1-1/2 hour to boil the rice. 
  
 _Average cost_, 4d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for a pair of fowls. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
  
  
 [Illustration: THE LEAMINGTON STOVE, OR KITCHENER.] 
  
 VARIOUS MODES OF COOKING MEAT. 
  
  
 CHAPTER XI.
element, or spontaneous. Many savage nations have been found utterly 
 ignorant of it, and many races had no other way of dressing their food 
 than by exposing it to the rays of the sun. 
  
 543. THE INHABITANTS OF THE MARIAN ISLANDS, which were discovered in 
 1521, had no idea of fire. Never was astonishment greater than theirs 
 when they first saw it, on the descent of Magellan, the navigator, on 
 one of their isles. At first they thought it a kind of animal, that 
 fixed itself to and fed upon wood. Some of them, who approached too 
 near, being burnt, the rest were terrified, and durst only look upon it 
 at a distance. They were afraid, they said, of being bit, or lest that 
 dreadful animal should wound with his violent respiration and dreadful 
 breath; for these were the first notions they formed of the heat and 
 flame. Such, too, probably, were the notions the Greeks originally 
 formed of them. 
  
 544. FIRE HAVING BEEN DISCOVERED, mankind endeavoured to make use of it 
 for drying, and afterwards for cooking their meat; but they were a 
 considerable time before they hit upon proper and commodious methods of 
 employing it in the preparation of their food.
 
 545. MEAT, THEN, PLACED ON BURNING FUEL was found better than when raw: 
 it had more firmness, was eaten with less difficulty, and the ozmazome 
 being condensed by the carbonization, gave it a pleasing perfume and 
 flavour. Still, however, the meat cooked on the coal would become 
 somewhat befouled, certain portions of the fuel adhering to it. This 
 disadvantage was remedied by passing spits through it, and placing it at 
 a suitable height above the burning fuel. Thus grilling was invented; 
 and it is well known that, simple as is this mode of cookery, yet all 
 meat cooked in this way is richly and pleasantly flavoured. In Homer  '  s 
 time, the, art of cookery had not advanced much beyond this; for we read 
 in the "Iliad," how the great Achilles and his friend Patroclus regaled 
 the three Grecian leaders on bread, wine, and broiled meat. It is 
 noticeable, too, that Homer does not speak of boiled meat anywhere in 
 his poems. Later, however, the Jews, coming out of their captivity in 
 Egypt, had made much greater progress. They undoubtedly possessed 
 kettles; and in one of these, Esau  '  s mess of pottage, for which he sold 
 his birthright, must have been prepared. 
  
 546. HAVING THUS BRIEFLY TRACED A HISTORY OF GASTRONOMICAL PROGRESSES,
we will now proceed to describe the various methods of cooking meat, and 
 make a few observations on the chemical changes which occur in each of 
 the operations. 
  
 547. IN THIS COUNTRY, plain boiling, roasting, and baking are the usual 
 methods of cooking animal food. To explain the philosophy of these 
 simple culinary operations, we must advert to the effects that are 
 produced by heat on the principal constituents of flesh. When 
 finely-chopped mutton or beef is steeped for some time in a small 
 quantity of clean water, and then subjected to slight pressure, the 
 juice of the meat is extracted, and there is left a white tasteless 
 residue, consisting chiefly of muscular fibres. When this residue is 
 heated to between 158° and 177° Fahrenheit, the fibres shrink together, 
 and become hard and horny. The influence of an elevated temperature on 
 the soluble extract of flesh is not less remarkable. When the watery 
 infusion, which contains all the savoury constituents of the meat, is 
 gradually heated, it soon becomes turbid; and, when the temperature 
 reaches 133°, flakes of whitish matter separate. These flakes are 
 _albumen_, a substance precisely similar, in all its properties, to the 
 white of egg (see No. 101). When the temperature of the watery extract
is raised to 158°, the colouring matter of the blood coagulates, and the 
 liquid, which was originally tinged red by this substance, is left 
 perfectly clear, and almost colourless. When evaporated, even at a 
 gentle heat, this residual liquid gradually becomes brown, and acquires 
 the flavour of roast meat. 
  
 548. THESE INTERESTING FACTS, discovered in the laboratory, throw a 
 flood of light upon the mysteries of the kitchen. The fibres of meat are 
 surrounded by a liquid which contains albumen in its soluble state, just 
 as it exists in the unboiled egg. During the operation of boiling or 
 roasting, this substance coagulates, and thereby prevents the 
 contraction and hardening of the fibres. The tenderness of well-cooked 
 meat is consequently proportioned to the amount of albumen deposited in 
 its substance. Meat is underdone when it has been heated throughout only 
 to the temperature of coagulating albumen: it is thoroughly done when it 
 has been heated through its whole mass to the temperature at which the 
 colouring matter of the blood coagulates: it is overdone when the heat 
 has been continued long enough to harden the fibres. 
  
 549. THE JUICE OF FLESH IS WATER, holding in solution many substances
besides albumen, which are of the highest possible value as articles of 
 food. In preparing meat for the table, great care should be taken to 
 prevent the escape of this precious juice, as the succulence and 
 sapidity of the meat depend on its retention. The meat to be cooked 
 should be exposed at first to a quick heat, which immediately coagulates 
 the albumen on and near the surface. A kind of shell is thus formed, 
 which effectually retains the whole of the juice within the meat. 
  
 550. DURING THE OPERATIONS OF BOILING, BOASTING, AND BAKING, fresh beef 
 and mutton, when moderately fat, lose, according to Johnston, on an 
 average about-- 
  
 In boiling.  In baking.    In roasting. 
  
 4 lbs. of beef lose    1 lb.     1 lb. 3 oz.   1 lb. 5 oz. 
  
 4 lbs. of mutton lose  14 oz.    1 lb. 4 oz.   1 lb. 6 oz. 
  
  
 BAKING.
 
 [Illustration: BAKING DISH.] 
  
 551. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ROASTING MEAT AND BAKING IT, may be 
 generally described as consisting in the fact, that, in baking it, the 
 fumes caused by the operation are not carried off in the same way as 
 occurs in roasting. Much, however, of this disadvantage is obviated by 
 the improved construction of modern ovens, and of especially those in 
 connection with the Leamington kitchener, of which we give an engraving 
 here, and a full description of which will be seen at paragraph No. 65, 
 with the prices at which they can be purchased of Messrs. R. and J. 
 Slack, of the Strand. With meat baked in the generality of ovens, 
 however, which do not possess ventilators on the principle of this 
 kitchener, there is undoubtedly a peculiar taste, which does not at all 
 equal the flavour developed by roasting meat. The chemistry of baking 
 may be said to be the same as that described in roasting. 
  
 552. SHOULD THE OVEN BE VERY BRISK, it will be found necessary to cover 
 the joint with a piece of white paper, to prevent the meat from being 
 scorched and blackened outside, before the heat can penetrate into the
inside. This paper should be removed half an hour before the time of 
 serving dinner, so that the joint may take a good colour. 
  
 553. BY MEANS OF A JAR, many dishes, which will be enumerated under 
 their special heads, may be economically prepared in the oven. The 
 principal of these are soup, gravies, jugged hare, beef tea; and this 
 mode of cooking may be advantageously adopted with a ham, which has 
 previously been covered with a common crust of flour and water. 
  
 554. ALL DISHES PREPARED FOR BAKING should be more highly seasoned than 
 when intended to be roasted. There are some dishes which, it may be 
 said, are at least equally well cooked in the oven as by the roaster; 
 thus, a shoulder of mutton and baked potatoes, a fillet or breast of 
 veal, a sucking pig, a hare, well basted, will be received by 
 connoisseurs as well, when baked, as if they had been roasted. Indeed, 
 the baker  '  s oven, or the family oven, may often, as has been said, be 
 substituted for the cook and the spit with greater economy and 
 convenience. 
  
 555. A BAKING-DISH, of which we give an engraving, should not be less
d  '  Angleterre_. In order to succeed in a broil, the cook must have a 
 bright, clear fire; so that the surface of the meat may be quickly heated. 
 The result of this is the same as that obtained in roasting; namely, that 
 a crust, so to speak, is formed outside, and thus the juices of the meat 
 are retained. The appetite of an invalid, so difficult to minister to, is 
 often pleased with a broiled dish, as the flavour and sapidity of the meat 
 are so well preserved. 
  
 570. THE UTENSILS USED FOR BROILING need but little description. The 
 common gridiron, for which see engraving at No. 68, is the same as it 
 has been for ages past, although some little variety has been introduced 
 into its manufacture, by the addition of grooves to the bars, by means 
 of which the liquid fat is carried into a small trough. One point it is 
 well to bear in mind, viz., that the gridiron should be kept in a 
 direction slanting towards the cook, so that as little fat as possible 
 may fall into the fire. It has been observed, that broiling is the most 
 difficult manual office the general cook has to perform, and one that 
 requires the most unremitting attention; for she may turn her back upon 
 the stewpan or the spit, but the gridiron can never be left with 
 impunity. The revolving gridiron, shown in the engraving, possesses some
advantages of convenience, which will be at once apparent. 
  
  
 FRYING. 
  
 [Illustration: SAUTÉ PAN.] 
  
 571. THIS VERY FAVOURITE MODE OF COOKING may be accurately described as 
 boiling in fat or oil. Substances dressed in this way are generally well 
 received, for they introduce an agreeable variety, possessing, as they 
 do, a peculiar flavour. By means of frying, cooks can soon satisfy many 
 requisitions made on them, it being a very expeditious mode of preparing 
 dishes for the table, and one which can be employed when the fire is not 
 sufficiently large for the purposes of roasting and boiling. The great 
 point to be borne in mind in frying, is that the liquid must be hot 
 enough to act instantaneously, as all the merit of this culinary 
 operation lies in the invasion of the boiling liquid, which carbonizes 
 or burns, at the very instant of the immersion of the body placed in it. 
 It may be ascertained if the fat is heated to the proper degree, by 
 cutting a piece of bread and dipping it in the frying-pan for five or
six seconds; and if it be firm and of a dark brown when taken out, put 
 in immediately what you wish to prepare; if it be not, let the fat be 
 heated until of the right temperature. This having been effected, 
 moderate the fire, so that the action may not be too hurried, and that 
 by a continuous heat the juices of the substance may be preserved, and 
 its flavour enhanced. 
  
 572. THE PHILOSOPHY OF FRYING consists in this, that liquids subjected 
 to the action of fire do not all receive the same quantity of heat. 
 Being differently constituted in their nature, they possess different 
 "capacities for caloric." Thus, you may, with impunity, dip your finger 
 in boiling spirits of wine; you would take it very quickly from boiling 
 brandy, yet more rapidly from water; whilst the effects of the most 
 rapid immersion in boiling oil need not be told. As a consequence of 
 this, heated fluids act differently on the sapid bodies presented to 
 them. Those put in water, dissolve, and are reduced to a soft mass; the 
 result being _bouillon_, stock, &c. (_see_ No. 103). Those substances, 
 on the contrary, treated with oil, harden, assume a more or less deep 
 colour, and are finally carbonized. The reason of these different 
 results is, that, in the first instance, water dissolves and extracts
the interior juices of the alimentary substances placed in it; whilst, 
 in the second, the juices are preserved; for they are insoluble in oil. 
  
 573. IT IS TO BE ESPECIALLY REMEMBERED, in connection with frying, that 
 all dishes fried in fat should be placed before the fire on a piece of 
 blotting-paper, or sieve reversed, and there left for a few minutes, so 
 that any superfluous greasy moisture may be removed. 
  
 574. THE UTENSILS USED FOR THE PURPOSES OF FRYING are confined to 
 frying-pans, although these are of various sizes; and, for small and 
 delicate dishes, such as collops, fritters, pancakes, &c., the _sauté_ 
 pan, of which we give an engraving, is used. 
  
  
 COOKING BY GAS. 
  
 [Illustration: GAS STOVE.] 
  
 575. GAS-COOKING can scarcely now be considered a novelty,--many 
 establishments, both small and large, have been fitted with apparatus
for cooking by this mode, which undoubtedly exhibits some advantages. 
 Thus the heat may be more regularly supplied to the substance cooking, 
 and the operation is essentially a clean one, because there can be no 
 cinders or other dirt to be provided for. Some labour and attention 
 necessary, too, with a coal fire or close stove, may be saved; and, 
 besides this, it may, perhaps, be said that culinary operations are 
 reduced, by this means, to something like a certainty. 
  
 576. THERE ARE, HOWEVER, WE THINK, MANY OBJECTIONS to this mode of 
 cooking, more especially when applied to small domestic establishments. 
 For instance, the ingenious machinery necessary for carrying it out, 
 requires cooks perfectly conversant with its use; and if the gas, when 
 the cooking operations are finished, be not turned off, there will be a 
 large increase in the cost of cooking, instead of the economy which it 
 has been supposed to bring. For large establishments, such as some of 
 the immense London warehouses, where a large number of young men have to 
 be catered for daily, it may be well adapted, as it is just possible 
 that a slight increase in the supply of gas necessary for a couple of 
 joints, may serve equally to cook a dozen dishes. 
 
 
 ROASTING. 
  
 577. OF THE VARIOUS METHODS OF PREPARING MEAT, ROASTING is that which 
 most effectually preserves its nutritive qualities. Meat is roasted by 
 being exposed to the direct influence of the fire. This is done by 
 placing the meat before an open grate, and keeping it in motion to 
 prevent the scorching on any particular part. When meat is properly 
 roasted, the outer layer of its albumen is coagulated, and thus presents 
 a barrier to the exit of the juice. In roasting meat, the heat must be 
 strongest at first, and it should then be much reduced. To have a good 
 juicy roast, therefore, the fire must be red and vigorous at the very 
 commencement of the operation. In the most careful roasting, some of the 
 juice is squeezed out of the meat: this evaporates on the surface of the 
 meat, and gives it a dark brown colour, a rich lustre, and a strong 
 aromatic taste. Besides these effects on the albumen and the expelled 
 juice, roasting converts the cellular tissue of the meat into gelatine, 
 and melts the fat out of the fat-cells. 
  
 578. IF A SPIT is used to support the meat before the fire, it should be
kept quite bright. Sand and water ought to be used to scour it with, for 
 brickdust and oil may give a disagreeable taste to the meat. When well 
 scoured, it must be wiped quite dry with a clean cloth; and, in spitting 
 the meat, the prime parts should be left untouched, so as to avoid any 
 great escape of its juices. 
  
 579. KITCHENS IN LARGE ESTABLISHMENTS are usually fitted with what are 
 termed "smoke-jacks." By means of these, several spits, if required, may 
 be turned at the same time. This not being, of course, necessary in 
 smaller establishments, a roasting apparatus, more economical in its 
 consumption of coal, is more frequently in use. 
  
 [Illustration: BOTTLE-JACK, WITH WHEEL AND HOOK.] 
  
 580. THE BOTTLE-JACK, of which we here give an illustration, with the 
 wheel and hook, and showing the precise manner of using it, is now 
 commonly used in many kitchens. This consists of a spring inclosed in a 
 brass cylinder, and requires winding up before it is used, and 
 sometimes, also, during the operation of roasting. The joint is fixed to 
 an iron hook, which is suspended by a chain connected with a wheel, and
which, in its turn, is connected with the bottle-jack. Beneath it stands 
 the dripping-pan, which we have also engraved, together with the 
 basting-ladle, the use of which latter should not be spared; as there 
 can be no good roast without good basting. "Spare the rod, and spoil the 
 child," might easily be paraphrased into "Spare the basting, and spoil 
 the meat." If the joint is small and light, and so turns unsteadily, 
 this may be remedied by fixing to the wheel one of the kitchen weights. 
 Sometimes this jack is fixed inside a screen; but there is this 
 objection to this apparatus,--that the meat cooked in it resembles the 
 flavour of baked meat. This is derived from its being so completely 
 surrounded with the tin, that no sufficient current of air gets to it. 
 It will be found preferable to make use of a common meat-screen, such as 
 is shown in the woodcut. This contains shelves for warming plates and 
 dishes; and with this, the reflection not being so powerful, and more 
 air being admitted to the joint, the roast may be very excellently 
 cooked. 
  
 [Illustration: DRIPPING-PAN AND BASTING-LADLE.] 
  
 581. IN STIRRING THE FIRE, or putting fresh coals on it, the
 
 598. INGREDIENTS.--About 2 lbs. of cold roast beef, 2 small onions, 1 
 large carrot or two small ones, 1 turnip, a small bunch of savoury 
 herbs, salt and pepper to taste, 4 tablespoonfuls of gravy, 3 
 tablespoonfuls of ale, crust or mashed potatoes. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the beef in slices, allowing a small amount of fat to each 
 slice; place a layer of this in the bottom of a pie-dish, with a portion 
 of the onions, carrots, and turnips, which must be sliced; mince the 
 herbs, strew them over the meat, and season with pepper and salt. Then 
 put another layer of meat, vegetables, and seasoning; and proceed in 
 this manner until all the ingredients are used. Pour in the gravy and 
 ale (water may be substituted for the former, but it is not so nice), 
 cover with a crust or mashed potatoes, and bake for 1/2 hour, or rather 
 longer. 
  
 _Time_.--Rather more than 1/2 hour. 
  
 _Average cost_, exclusive of the meat, 6d. 
 
_Sufficient_ for 5 or 6 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 _Note_.--It is as well to parboil the carrots and turnips before adding 
 them to the meat, and to use some of the liquor in which they were 
 boiled as a substitute for gravy; that is to say, when there is no gravy 
 at hand. Be particular to cut the onions in very _thin_ slices. 
  
  
 II. 
  
 599. INGREDIENTS.--Slices of cold roast beef, salt and pepper to taste, 
 1 sliced onion, 1 teaspoonful of minced savoury herbs, 5 or 6 
 tablespoonfuls of gravy or sauce of any kind, mashed potatoes. 
  
 _Mode_.--Butter the sides of a deep dish, and spread mashed potatoes 
 over the bottom of it; on this place layers of beef in thin slices (this 
 may be minced if there is not sufficient beef to cut into slices), well 
 seasoned with pepper and salt, and a very little onion end herbs, which
should be previously fried of a nice brown; then put another layer of 
 mashed potatoes, and beef, and other ingredients, as before; pour in the 
 gravy or sauce, cover the whole with another layer of potatoes, and bake 
 for 1/2 hour. This may be served in the dish, or turned out. 
  
 _Time_.--1/2 hour. _Average cost_, exclusive of the cold beef, 6d. 
  
 _Sufficient_.--A large pie-dish full for 5 or 6 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 BEEF.--The quality of beef depends on various circumstances; 
 such as the age, the sex, the breed of the animal, and also on 
 the food upon which it has been raised. Bull beef is, in 
 general, dry and tough, and by no means possessed of an 
 agreeable flavour; whilst the flesh of the ox is not only highly 
 nourishing and digestible, but, if not too old, extremely 
 agreeable. The flesh of the cow is, also, nourishing, but it is 
 not so agreeable as that of the ox, although that of a heifer is 
 held in high estimation. The flesh of the smaller breeds is much
sweeter than that of the larger, which is best when the animal 
 is about seven years old. That of the smaller breeds is best at 
 about five years, and that of the cow can hardly be eaten too 
 young. 
  
 BAKED BEEF-STEAK PUDDING. 
  
 600. INGREDIENTS.--6 oz. of flour, 2 eggs, not quite 1 pint of milk, 
 salt to taste, 1-1/2 lb. of rump-steaks, 1 kidney, pepper and salt. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the steaks into nice square pieces, with a small quantity 
 of fat, and the kidney divide into small pieces. Make a batter of flour, 
 eggs, and milk in the above proportion; lay a little of it at the bottom 
 of a pie-dish; then put in the steaks and kidney, which should be well 
 seasoned with pepper and salt, and pour over the remainder of the 
 batter, and bake for 1-1/2 hour in a brisk but not fierce oven. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour. _Average cost_, 2s. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons.
 
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 BEEF A LA MODE. 
  
 (_Economical_.) 
  
 601. INGREDIENTS.--About 3 lbs. of clod or sticking of beef, 2 oz. of 
 clarified dripping, 1 large onion, flour, 2 quarts of water, 12 berries 
 of allspice, 2 bay-leaves, 1/2 teaspoonful of whole black pepper, salt 
 to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the beef into small pieces, and roll them in flour; put the 
 dripping into a stewpan with the onion, which should be sliced thin. Let 
 it get quite hot; lay in the pieces of beef, and stir them well about. 
 When nicely browned all over, add _by degrees_ boiling water in the 
 above proportion, and, as the water is added, keep the whole well 
 stirred. Put in the spice, bay-leaves, and seasoning, cover the stewpan 
 closely, and set it by the side of the fire to stew very _gently_, till
the meat becomes quite tender, which will be in about 3 hours, when it 
 will be ready to serve. Remove the bay-leaves before it is sent to 
 table. 
  
 _Time_.--3 hours. 
  
 _Average cost_, 1s. 3d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 6 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 BEEF A LA MODE. 
  
 602. INGREDIENTS.--6 or 7 lbs. of the thick flank of beef, a few slices 
 of fat bacon, 1 teacupful of vinegar, black pepper, allspice, 2 cloves 
 well mixed and finely pounded, making altogether 1 heaped teaspoonful; 
 salt to taste, 1 bunch of savoury herbs, including parsley, all finely 
 minced and well mixed; 3 onions, 2 large carrots, 1 turnip, 1 head of
celery, 1-1/2 pint of water, 1 glass of port wine. 
  
 _Mode_.--Slice and fry the onions of a pale brown, and cut up the other 
 vegetables in small pieces, and prepare the beef for stewing in the 
 following manner:--Choose a fine piece of beef, cut the bacon into long 
 slices, about an inch in thickness, dip them into vinegar, and then into 
 a little of the above seasoning of spice, &c., mixed with the same 
 quantity of minced herbs. With a sharp knife make holes deep enough to 
 let in the bacon; then rub the beef over with the remainder of the 
 seasoning and herbs, and bind it up in a nice shape with tape. Have 
 ready a well-tinned stewpan (it should not be much larger than the piece 
 of meat you are cooking), into which put the beef, with the vegetables, 
 vinegar, and water. Let it simmer _very gently_ for 5 hours, or rather 
 longer, should the meat not be extremely tender, and turn it once or 
 twice. When ready to serve, take out the beef, remove the tape, and put 
 it on a hot dish. Skim off every particle of fat from the gravy, add the 
 port wine, just let it boil, pour it over the beef, and it is ready to 
 serve. Great care must be taken that this does not boil fast, or the 
 meat will be tough and tasteless; it should only just bubble. When 
 convenient, all kinds of stews, &c., should be cooked on a hot-plate, as
moderately unctuous, in a medium degree between the 
 last-mentioned properties. 
  
 BEEF-STEAKS AND OYSTER SAUCE. 
  
 603. INGREDIENTS.--3 dozen oysters, ingredients for oyster sauce (see 
 No. 492), 2 lbs. of rump-steak, seasoning to taste of pepper and salt. 
  
 _Mode_.--Make the oyster sauce by recipe No. 492, and when that is 
 ready, put it by the side of the fire, but do not let it keep boiling. 
 Have the steaks cut of an equal thickness, broil them over a very clear 
 fire, turning them often, that the gravy may not escape. In about 8 
 minutes they will be done, then put them on a very hot dish; smother 
 with the oyster sauce, and the remainder send to table in a tureen. 
 Serve quickly. 
  
 _Time_.--About 8 to 10 minutes, according to the thickness of the steak. 
  
 _Average cost_, 1s. per lb. 
 
_Sufficient_ for 4 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from September to April. 
  
  
 BEEF-STEAK PIE. 
  
 604. INGREDIENTS.--3 lbs. of rump-steak, seasoning to taste of salt, 
 cayenne, and black pepper, crust, water, the yolk of an egg. 
  
 _Mode_.--Have the steaks cut from a rump that has hung a few days, that 
 they may be tender, and be particular that every portion is perfectly 
 sweet. Cut the steaks into pieces about 3 inches long and 2 wide, 
 allowing a _small_ piece of fat to each piece of lean, and arrange the 
 meat in layers in a pie-dish. Between each layer sprinkle a seasoning of 
 salt, pepper, and, when liked, a few grains of cayenne. Fill the dish 
 sufficiently with meat to support the crust, and to give it a nice 
 raised appearance when baked, and not to look flat and hollow. Pour in 
 sufficient water to half fill the dish, and border it with paste (see 
 Pastry); brush it over with a little water, and put on the cover;
but always remove the bone from pie-meat, unless it be chicken or game. 
 We have directed that the meat shall be cut smaller than is usually the 
 case; for on trial we have found it much more tender, more easily 
 helped, and with more gravy, than when put into the dish in one or two 
 large steaks. 
  
 [Illustration: SHERRY PUDDING DISH.] 
  
 BEEF-STEAK AND KIDNEY PUDDING. 
  
 605. INGREDIENTS.--2 lbs. of rump-steak, 2 kidneys, seasoning to taste 
 of salt and black pepper, suet crust made with milk (see Pastry), in the 
 proportion of 6 oz. of suet to each 1 lb. of flour. 
  
 _Mode_.--Procure some tender rump steak (that which has been hung a 
 little time), and divide it into pieces about an inch square, and cut 
 each kidney into 8 pieces. Line the dish (of which we have given an 
 engraving) with crust made with suet and flour in the above proportion, 
 leaving a small piece of crust to overlap the edge. Then cover the 
 bottom with a portion of the steak and a few pieces of kidney; season
water will answer the same purpose, but will require to be more 
 frequently changed. 
  
 _Note_.--The BRISKET and RUMP may be boiled by the above recipe; of 
 course allowing more or less time, according to the size of the joint. 
  
  
 BEEF CAKE. 
  
 610. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold roast beef; to each pound of cold 
 meat allow 1/4 lb. of bacon or ham; seasoning to taste of pepper and 
 salt, 1 small bunch of minced savoury herbs, 1 or 2 eggs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Mince the beef very finely (if underdone it will be better), 
 add to it the bacon, which must also be chopped very small, and mix well 
 together. Season, stir in the herbs, and bind with an egg, or 2 should 1 
 not be sufficient. Make it into small square cakes, about 1/2 inch 
 thick, fry them in hot dripping, and serve in a dish with good gravy 
 poured round them. 
 
_Time_.--10 minutes. 
  
 _Average cost_, exclusive of the cold meat, 6d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 BROILED BEEF-STEAKS or RUMP-STEAKS. 
  
 611. INGREDIENTS.--Steaks, a piece of butter the size of a walnut, salt 
 to taste, 1 tablespoonful of good mushroom ketchup or Harvey  '  s sauce. 
  
 _Mode_.--As the success of a good broil so much depends on the state of 
 the fire, see that it is bright and clear, and perfectly free from 
 smoke, and do not add any fresh fuel just before you require to use the 
 gridiron. Sprinkle a little salt over the fire, put on the gridiron for 
 a few minutes, to get thoroughly hot through; rub it with a piece of 
 fresh, suet, to prevent the meat from sticking, and lay on the steaks, 
 which should be cut of an equal thickness, about 3/4 of an inch, or 
 rather thinner, and level them by beating them as _little_ as possible
with a rolling-pin. Turn them frequently with steak-tongs (if these are 
 not at hand, stick a fork in the edge of the fat, that no gravy 
 escapes), and in from 8 to 10 minutes they will be done. Have ready a 
 very hot dish, into which put the ketchup, and, when liked, a little 
 minced shalot; dish up the steaks, rub them over with butter, and season 
 with pepper and salt. The exact time for broiling steaks must be 
 determined by taste, whether they are liked underdone or well done; more 
 than from 8 to 10 minutes for a steak 3/4 inch in thickness, we think, 
 would spoil and dry up the juices of the meat. Great expedition is 
 necessary in sending broiled steaks to table; and, to have them in 
 perfection, they should not be cooked till everything else prepared for 
 dinner has been dished up, as their excellence entirely depends on their 
 being served very hot. Garnish with scraped horseradish, or slices of 
 cucumber. Oyster, tomato, onion, and many other sauces, are frequent 
 accompaniments to rump-steak, but true lovers of this English dish 
 generally reject all additions but pepper and salt. 
  
 _Time_.--8 to 10 minutes. 
  
 _Average cost_, 1s. per lb.
 
 BROILED BEEF AND MUSHROOM SAUCE. 
  
 (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 612. INGREDIENTS.--2 or 3 dozen small button mushrooms, 1 oz. of butter, 
 salt and cayenne to taste, 1 tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup, mashed 
 potatoes, slices of cold roast beef. 
  
 _Mode_.--Wipe the mushrooms free from grit with a piece of flannel, and 
 salt; put them in a stewpan with the butter, seasoning, and ketchup; 
 stir over the fire until the mushrooms are quite done, when pour it in 
 the middle of mashed potatoes, browned. Then place round the potatoes 
 slices of cold roast beef, nicely broiled, over a clear fire. In making 
 the mushroom sauce, the ketchup may be dispensed with, if there is 
 sufficient gravy. 
  
 _Time_.--1/4 hour. _Average cost_, exclusive of the meat, 8d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from August to October.
 
  
 BROILED BEEF AND OYSTER SAUCE (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 613. INGREDIENTS.--2 dozen oysters, 3 cloves, 1 blade of mace, 2 oz. of 
 butter, 1/2 teaspoonful of flour, cayenne and salt to taste, mashed 
 potatoes, a few slices of cold roast beef. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the oysters in a stewpan, with their liquor strained; add 
 the cloves, mace, butter, flour, and seasoning, and let them simmer 
 gently for 5 minutes. Have ready in the centre of a dish round walls of 
 mashed potatoes, browned; into the middle pour the oyster sauce, quite 
 hot, and round the potatoes place, in layers, slices of the beef, which 
 should be previously broiled over a nice clear fire. 
  
 _Time_.--5 minutes. _Average cost_, 1s, 6d., exclusive of the cold meat. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from September to April.
 
  
 BROILED BEEF-BONES. 
  
 614. INGREDIENTS.--The bones of ribs or sirloin; salt, pepper, and 
 cayenne. 
  
 _Mode_.--Separate the bones, taking care that the meat on them is not 
 too thick in any part; sprinkle them well with the above seasoning, and 
 broil over a very clear fire. When nicely browned they are done; but do 
 not allow them to blacken. 
  
  
 TO DRESS A BULLOCK  '  S HEART. 
  
 615. INGREDIENTS.--1 heart, stuffing of veal forcemeat, No. 417. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the heart into warm water to soak for 2 hours; then wipe it 
 well with a cloth, and, after cutting off the lobes, stuff the inside 
 with a highly-seasoned forcemeat (No. 417). Fasten it in, by means of a
 
 616. INGREDIENTS.--A few thin slices of cold boiled beef; butter, 
 cabbage, 1 sliced onion, pepper and salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Fry the slices of beef gently in a little butter, taking care 
 not to dry them up. Lay them on a flat dish, and cover with fried 
 greens. The greens may be prepared from cabbage sprouts or green savoys. 
 They should be boiled till tender, well drained, minced, and placed, 
 till quite hot, in a frying-pan, with butter, a sliced onion, and 
 seasoning of pepper and salt. When the onion is done, it is ready to 
 serve. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether, 1/2 hour. 
  
 _Average cost_, exclusive of the cold beef, 3d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 [Illustration: COLLARED BEEF.] 
 
COLLARED BEEF. 
  
 617. INGREDIENTS.--7 lbs. of the thin end of the flank of beef, 2 oz. of 
 coarse sugar, 6 oz. of salt, 1 oz, of saltpetre, 1 large handful of 
 parsley minced, 1 dessertspoonful of minced sage, a bunch of savoury 
 herbs, 1/2 teaspoonful of pounded allspice; salt and pepper to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Choose fine tender beef, but not too fat; lay it in a dish; rub 
 in the sugar, salt, and saltpetre, and let it remain in the pickle for a 
 week or ten days, turning and rubbing it every day. Then bone it, remove 
 all the gristle and the coarse skin of the inside part, and sprinkle it 
 thickly with parsley, herbs, spice, and seasoning in the above 
 proportion, taking care that the former are finely minced, and the 
 latter well pounded. Roll the meat up in a cloth as tightly as possible, 
 in the same shape as shown in the engraving; bind it firmly with broad 
 tape, and boil it gently for 6 hours. Immediately on taking it out of 
 the pot, put it under a good weight, without undoing it, and let it 
 remain until cold. This dish is a very nice addition to the 
 breakfast-table. 
 
_Time_.--6 hours. _Average cost_, for this quantity, 4s. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 _Note_.--During the time the beef is in pickle, it should be kept cool, 
 and regularly rubbed and turned every day. 
  
  
 BEEF-COLLOPS. 
  
 618. INGREDIENTS.--2 lbs. of rump-steak, 1/4 lb. of butter, 1 pint of 
 gravy (water may be substituted for this), salt and pepper to taste, 1 
 shalot finely minced, 1/2 pickled walnut, 1 teaspoonful of capers. 
  
 _Mode_.--Have the steak cut thin, and divide it in pieces about 3 inches 
 long; beat these with the blade of a knife, and dredge with flour. Put 
 them in a frying-pan with the butter, and let them fry for about 3 
 minutes; then lay them in a small stewpan, and pour over them the gravy. 
 Add a piece of butter, kneaded with a little flour, put in the seasoning 
 and all the other ingredients, and let the whole simmer, but not boil,
for 10 minutes. Serve in a hot covered dish. 
  
 _Time_.--10 minutes. _Average cost_, 1s. per lb. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 MINCED COLLOPS (an Entree). 
  
 619. INGREDIENTS.--1 lb. of rump-steak, salt and pepper to taste, 2 oz. 
 of butter, 1 onion minced, 1/4 pint of water, 1 tablespoonful of 
 Harvey  '  s sauce, or lemon-juice, or mushroom ketchup; 1 small bunch of 
 savoury herbs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Mince the beef and onion very small, and fry the latter in 
 butter until of a pale brown. Put all the ingredients together in a 
 stewpan, and boil gently for about 10 minutes; garnish with sippets of 
 toasted bread, and serve very hot.
 
 ANOTHER WAY. 
  
 622. Put the dripping into a clean saucepan, and let it boil for a few 
 minutes over a slow fire, and be careful to skim it well. Let it stand 
 to cool a little, then strain it through a piece of muslin into jars for 
 use. Beef dripping is preferable to any other for cooking purposes, as, 
 with mutton dripping, there is liable to be a tallowy taste and smell. 
  
  
 ROAST FILLET OF BEEF (Larded). 
  
 623. INGREDIENTS.--About 4 lbs. of the inside fillet of the sirloin, 1 
 onion, a small bunch of parsley, salt and pepper to taste, sufficient 
 vinegar to cover the meat, glaze, Spanish sauce, No. 411. 
  
 _Mode_.--Lard the beef with bacon, and put it into a pan with sufficient 
 vinegar to cover it, with an onion sliced, parsley, and seasoning, and 
 let it remain in this pickle for 12 hours. Roast it before a nice clear 
 fire for about 1-1/4 hour, and, when done, glaze it. Pour some Spanish
sauce round the beef, and the remainder serve in a tureen. It may be 
 garnished with Spanish onions boiled and glazed. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour. Average cost, exclusive of the sauce, 4s. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 6 or 8 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 FRICANDEAU OF BEEF. 
  
 624. INGREDIENTS.--About 3 lbs. of the inside fillet of the sirloin (a 
 piece of the rump may be substituted for this), pepper and salt to 
 taste, 3 cloves, 2 blades of mace, 6 whole allspice, 1 pint of stock No. 
 105, or water, 1 glass of sherry, 1 bunch of savoury herbs, 2 shalots, 
 bacon. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut some bacon into thin strips, and sprinkle over them a 
 seasoning of pepper and salt, mixed with cloves, mace, and allspice,
_Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 FRIED SALT BEEF (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 625. INGREDIENTS.--A few slices of cold salt beef, pepper to taste, 1/4 
 lb. of butter, mashed potatoes. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut any part of cold salt beef into thin slices, fry them 
 gently in butter, and season with a little pepper. Have ready some very 
 hot mashed potatoes, lay the slices of beef on them, and garnish with 3 
 or 4 pickled gherkins. Cold salt beef, warmed in a little liquor from 
 mixed pickle, drained, and served as above, will be found good. 
  
 _Time_.--About 5 minutes. _Average cost_, exclusive of the meat, 4d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 FRIED RUMP-STEAK.
 
 626. INGREDIENTS.--Steaks, butter or clarified dripping. 
  
 _Mode_. Although broiling is a far superior method of cooking steaks to 
 frying them, yet, when the cook is not very expert, the latter mode may 
 be adopted; and, when properly done, the dish may really look very 
 inviting, and the flavour be good. The steaks should be cut rather 
 thinner than for broiling, and with a small quantity of fat to each. Put 
 some butter or clarified dripping into a frying-pan; let it get quite 
 hot, then lay in the steaks. Turn them frequently until done, which will 
 be in about 8 minutes, or rather more, should the steaks be very thick. 
 Serve on a very hot dish, in which put a small piece of butter and a 
 tablespoonful of ketchup, and season with pepper and salt. They should 
 be sent to table quickly, as, when cold, the steaks are entirely 
 spoiled. 
  
 _Time_.--8 minutes for a medium-sized steak, rather longer for a very 
 thick one. 
  
 _Average cost_, 1s. per lb.
 
 _Seasonable all the year, but not good in summer, as the meat cannot 
 hang to get tender._ 
  
 _Note_.--Where much gravy is liked, make it in the following manner:--As 
 soon as the steaks are done, dish them, pour a little boiling water into 
 the frying-pan, add a seasoning of pepper and salt, a small piece of 
 butter, and a tablespoonful of Harvey  '  s sauce or mushroom ketchup. Hold 
 the pan over the fire for a minute or two, just let the gravy simmer, 
 then pour on the steak, and serve. 
  
 A FRENCHMAN  '  S OPINION OF BEEF. The following is translated from 
 a celebrated modern French work, the production of one who in 
 Paris enjoys a great reputation as cook and chemist:--The flesh 
 of the ox, to be in the best condition, should be taken from an 
 animal of from four to six years old, and neither too fat nor 
 too lean. This meat, which possesses in the highest degree the 
 most nutritive qualities, is generally easily digested; stock is 
 made from it, and it is eaten boiled, broiled, roasted, stewed, 
 braised, and in a hundred other different ways. Beef is the
foundation of stock, gravies, braises, &c.; its nutritious and 
 succulent gravy gives body and flavour to numberless ragoûts. It 
 is an exhaustless mine in the hands of a skilful artist, and is 
 truly the king of the kitchen. Without it, no soup, no gravy; 
 and its absence would produce almost a famine in the civilized 
 world! 
  
 BEEF FRITTERS (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 627. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold roast beef, pepper and salt to 
 taste, 3/4 lb. of flour, 1/2 pint of water, 2 oz. of butter, the whites 
 of 2 eggs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Mix very smoothly, and by degrees, the flour with the above 
 proportion of water; stir in 2 oz. of butter, which must be melted, but 
 not oiled, and, just before it is to be used, add the whites of two 
 well-whisked eggs. Should the batter be too thick, more water must be 
 added. Pare down the cold beef into thin shreds, season with pepper and 
 salt, and mix it with the batter. Drop a small quantity at a time into a 
 pan of boiling lard, and fry from 7 to 10 minutes, according to the
size. When done on one side, turn and brown them on the other. Let them 
 dry for a minute or two before the fire, and serve on a folded napkin. A 
 small quantity of finely-minced onions, mixed with the batter, is an 
 improvement. 
  
 _Time_.--From 7 to 10 minutes. 
  
 _Average cost_, exclusive of the meat, 6d. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 HASHED BEEF (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 I. 
  
 628. INGREDIENTS.--Gravy saved from the meat, 1 teaspoonful of tomato 
 sauce, 1 teaspoonful of Harvey  '  s sauce, 1 teaspoonful of good mushroom 
 ketchup, 1/2 glass of port wine or strong ale, pepper and salt to taste, 
 a little flour to thicken, 1 onion finely minced, a few slices of cold 
 roast beef. 
 
_Mode_.--Put all the ingredients but the beef into a stewpan with 
 whatever gravy may have been saved from the meat the day it was roasted; 
 let these simmer gently for 10 minutes, then take the stewpan off the 
 fire; let the gravy cool, and skim off the fat. Cut the beef into thin 
 slices, dredge them with flour, and lay them in the gravy; let the whole 
 simmer gently for 5 minutes, but not boil, or the meat will be tough and 
 hard. Serve very hot, and garnish with sippets of toasted bread. 
  
 _Time_.--20 minutes. _Average cost_, exclusive of the cold meat, 4d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 II. 
  
 629. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of ribs or sirloin of beef, 2 onions, 1 
 carrot, 1 bunch of savoury herbs, pepper and salt to taste, 1/2 blade of 
 pounded mace, thickening of flour, rather more than 1 pint of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Take off all the meat from the bones of ribs or sirloin of
 
 630. This is preserved by salting and drying, either with or without 
 smoke. Hang up the beef 3 or 4 days, till it becomes tender, but take 
 care it does not begin to spoil; then salt it in the usual way, either 
 by dry-salting or by brine, with bay-salt, brown sugar, saltpetre, and a 
 little pepper and allspice; afterwards roll it tight in a cloth, and 
 hang it up in a warm, but not hot place, for a fortnight or more, till 
 it is sufficiently hard. If required to have a little of the smoky 
 flavour, it may be hung for some time in a chimney-corner, or smoked in 
 any other way: it will keep a long time. 
  
  
 HUNTER  '  S BEEF. 
  
 631. INGREDIENTS.--For a round of beef weighing 25 lbs. allow 3 oz. of 
 saltpetre, 3 oz. of coarse sugar, 1 oz. of cloves, 1 grated nutmeg, 1/2 
 oz. of allspice, 1 lb. of salt, 1/2 lb. bay-salt. 
  
 _Mode_.--Let the beef hang for 2 or 3 days, and remove the bone. Pound 
 spices, salt, &c. in the above proportion, and let them be reduced to
the finest powder. Put the beef into a pan, rub all the ingredients well 
 into it, and turn and rub it every day for rather more than a fortnight. 
 When it has been sufficiently long in pickle, wash the meat, bind it up 
 securely with tape, and put it into a pan with 1/2 pint of water at the 
 bottom; mince some suet, cover the top of the meat with it, and over the 
 pan put a common crust of flour and water; bake for 6 hours, and, when 
 cold, remove the paste. Save the gravy that flows from it, as it adds 
 greatly to the flavour of hashes, stews, &c. The beef may be glazed and 
 garnished with meat jelly. 
  
 _Time_.--6 hours. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year. 
  
 _Note_.--In salting or pickling beef or pork for family consumption, it 
 not being generally required to be kept for a great length of time, a 
 less quantity of salt and a larger quantity of other matters more 
 adapted to retain mellowness in meat, may be employed, which could not 
 be adopted by the curer of the immense quantities of meat required to be 
 preserved for victualling the shipping of this maritime country. Sugar,
which is well known to possess the preserving principle in a very great 
 degree, without the pungency and astringency of salt, may be, and is, 
 very generally used in the preserving of meat for family consumption. 
 Although it acts without corrugating or contracting the fibres of meat, 
 as is the case in the action of salt, and, therefore, does not impair 
 its mellowness, yet its use in sufficient quantities for preservative 
 effect, without the addition of other antiseptics, would impart a 
 flavour not agreeable to the taste of many persons. It may be used, 
 however, together with salt, with the greatest advantage in imparting 
 mildness and mellowness to cured meat, in a proportion of about one part 
 by weight to four of the mixture; and, perhaps, now that sugar is so 
 much lower in price than it was in former years, one of the obstructions 
 to its more frequent use is removed. 
  
  
 TO DRESS BEEF KIDNEY. 
  
 I. 
  
 632. INGREDIENTS.--1 kidney, clarified butter, pepper and salt to taste,
a small quantity of highly-seasoned gravy, 1 tablespoonful of 
 lemon-juice, 1/4 teaspoonful of powdered sugar. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the kidneys into neat slices, put them into warm water to 
 soak for 2 hours, and change the water 2 or 3 times; then put them on a 
 clean cloth to dry the water from them, and lay them in a frying-pan 
 with some clarified butter, and fry them of a nice brown; season each 
 side with pepper and salt, put them round the dish, and the gravy in the 
 middle. Before pouring the gravy in the dish, add the lemon-juice and 
 sugar. 
  
 _Time_.--From 5 to 10 minutes. _Average cost_, 9d. each. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 II. 
  
 633. INGREDIENTS.--1 kidney, 1 dessertspoonful of minced parsley, 1 
 teaspoonful of minced shalot, salt and pepper to taste, 1/4 pint of
gravy, No. 438, 3 tablespoonfuls of sherry. 
  
 _Mode_.--Take off a little of the kidney fat, mince it very fine, and 
 put it in a frying-pan; slice the kidney, sprinkle over it parsley and 
 shalots in the above proportion, add a seasoning of pepper and salt, and 
 fry it of a nice brown. When it is done enough, dredge over a little 
 flour, and pour in the gravy and sherry. Let it just simmer, but not 
 boil any more, or the kidney would harden; serve very hot, and garnish 
 with croûtons. Where the flavour of the shalot is disliked, it may be 
 omitted, and a small quantity of savoury herbs substituted for it. 
 _Time_.--From 5 to 10 minutes, according to the thickness of the slices. 
  
 _Average cost_, 9d. each. _Sufficient_ for 3 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 III. 
  
 _A more Simple Method_.
 
 634. Cut the kidney into thin slices, flour them, and fry of a nice 
 brown. When done, make a gravy in the pan by pouring away the fat, 
 putting in a small piece of butter, 1/4 pint of boiling water, pepper 
 and salt, and a tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup. Let the gravy just 
 boil up, pour over the kidney, and serve. 
  
 BOILED MARROW-BONES. 
  
 635. INGREDIENTS.--Bones, a small piece of common paste, a floured 
 cloth. 
  
 _Mode_.--Have the bones neatly sawed into convenient sizes, and cover 
 the ends with a small piece of common crust, made with flour and water. 
 Over this tie a floured cloth, and place them upright in a saucepan of 
 boiling water, taking care there is sufficient to cover the bones. Boil 
 them for 2 hours, remove the cloth and paste, and serve them upright on 
 a napkin with dry toast. Many persons clear the marrow from the bones 
 after they are cooked, spread it over a slice of toast and add a 
 seasoning of pepper; when served in this manner, it must be very
they would be unnecessarily heavy; and if their materials were 
 brought into smaller compass, they would be weaker, because the 
 strength of a bone is in proportion to the distance at which its 
 fibres are from the centre. Some animals, it must, however, be 
 observed, have no cavities in the centre of their bones; such as 
 the whale tribe, skate, and turtles. 
  
 MINCED BEEF (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 636. INGREDIENTS.--1 oz. of butter, 1 small onion, 2 tablespoonfuls of 
 gravy left from the meat, 1 tablespoonful of strong ale, 1/2 a 
 teaspoonful of flour, salt and pepper to taste, a few slices of lean 
 roast beef. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put into a stewpan the butter with an onion chopped fine; add 
 the gravy, ale, and 1/2 a teaspoonful of flour to thicken; season with 
 pepper and salt, and stir these ingredients over the fire until the 
 onion is a rich brown. Cut, but do not chop the meat _very fine_, add it 
 to the gravy, stir till quite hot, and serve. Garnish with sippets of 
 toasted bread. Be careful in not allowing the gravy to boil after the
meat is added, as it would render it hard and tough. 
  
 _Time_.--About 1/2 hour. _Average cost_, exclusive of the meat, 3d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 MIROTON OF BEEF. 
  
 637. INGREDIENTS.--A few slices of cold roast beef, 3 oz. of butter, 
 salt and pepper to taste, 3 onions, 1/2 pint of gravy. 
  
 _Mode_.--Slice the onions and put them into a frying-pan with the cold 
 beef and butter; place it over the fire, and keep turning and stirring 
 the ingredients to prevent them burning. When of a pale brown, add the 
 gravy and seasoning; let it simmer for a few minutes, and serve very 
 hot. This dish is excellent and economical. 
  
 _Time_.--5 minutes. _Average cost_, exclusive of the meat, 6d. 
 
_Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 STEWED OX-CHEEK. 
  
 638. INGREDIENTS.--1 cheek, salt and water, 4 or 5 onions, butter and 
 flour, 6 cloves, 3 turnips, 2 carrots, 1 bay-leaf, 1 head of celery, 1 
 bunch of savoury herbs, cayenne, black pepper and salt to taste, 1 oz. 
 of butter, 2 dessertspoonfuls of flour, 2 tablespoonfuls of Chili 
 vinegar, 2 tablespoonfuls of mushroom ketchup, 2 tablespoonfuls of port 
 wine, 2 tablespoonfuls of Harvey  '  s sauce. 
  
 _Mode_.--Have the cheek boned, and prepare it the day before it is to be 
 eaten, by cleaning and putting it to soak all night in salt and water. 
 The next day, wipe it dry and clean, and put it into a stewpan. Just 
 cover it with water, skim well when it boils, and let it gently simmer 
 till the meat is quite tender. Slice and fry 3 onions in a little butter 
 and flour, and put them into the gravy; add 2 whole onions, each stuck 
 with 3 cloves, 3 turnips quartered, 2 carrots sliced, a bay-leaf, 1 head 
 of celery, a bunch of herbs, and seasoning to taste of cayenne, black
pepper, and salt. Let these stew till perfectly tender; then take out 
 the cheek, divide into pieces fit to help at table, skim and strain the 
 gravy, and thicken 1-1/2 pint of it with butter and flour in the above 
 proportions. Add the vinegar, ketchup, and port wine; put in the pieces 
 of cheek; let the whole boil up, and serve quite hot. Send it to table 
 in a ragout-dish. If the colour of the gravy should not be very good, 
 add a tablespoonful of the browning, No. 108. 
  
 _Time_.--4 hours. _Average cost_, 3d. per lb. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 FRIED OX-FEET, or COW-HEEL. 
  
 639. INGREDIENTS.--Ox-feet, the yolk of 1 egg, bread crumbs, parsley, 
 salt and cayenne to taste, boiling butter. 
 
teaspoonful of salt, a small bunch of savoury herbs, thickening of 
 butter and flour, 1 tablespoonful of lemon-juice, 1 tablespoonful of 
 mushroom ketchup. 
  
 _Mode_.--Divide the tails at the joints, wash, and put them into a 
 stewpan with sufficient water to cover them, and set them on the fire; 
 when the water boils, remove the scum, and add the onion cut into rings, 
 the spice, seasoning, and herbs. Cover the stewpan closely, and let the 
 tails simmer very gently until tender, which will be in about 2-1/2 
 hours. Take them out, make a thickening of butter and flour, add it to 
 the gravy, and let it boil for 1/4 hour. Strain it through a sieve into 
 a saucepan, put back the tails, add the lemon-juice and ketchup; let the 
 whole just boil up, and serve. Garnish with croûtons or sippets of 
 toasted bread. 
  
 _Time_.--2-1/2 hours to stew the tails. 
  
 _Average cost_, 9d. to 1s. 6d., according to the season. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 8 persons.
_Time_.--A moderate-sized tongue should remain in the pickle about a 
 month, and be turned every day. 
  
 [Illustration: POTTING-JAR.] 
  
 POTTED BEEF. 
  
 I. 
  
 642. INGREDIENTS.--2 lbs. of lean beef, 1 tablespoonful of water, 1/4 
 lb. of butter, a seasoning to taste of salt, cayenne, pounded mace, and 
 black pepper. 
  
  
 _Mode_.--Procure a nice piece of lean beef, as free as possible from 
 gristle, skin, &c., and put it into a jar (if at hand, one with a lid) 
 with 1 tablespoonful of water. Cover it _closely_, and put the jar into 
 a saucepan of boiling water, letting the water come within 2 inches of 
 the top of the jar. Boil gently for 3-1/2 hours, then take the beef, 
 chop it very small with a chopping-knife, and pound it thoroughly in a
mortar. Mix with it by degrees all, or a portion, of the gravy that will 
 have run from it, and a little clarified butter; add the seasoning, put 
 it in small pots for use, and cover with a little butter just warmed and 
 poured over. If much gravy is added to it, it will keep but a short 
 time; on the contrary, if a large proportion of butter is used, it may 
 be preserved for some time. 
  
 _Time_.--3-1/2 hours. _Average cost_, for this quantity, 1s. 8d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 POTTED BEEF (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 II. 
  
 643. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold roast or boiled beef, 1/4 lb. of 
 butter, cayenne to taste, 2 blades of pounded mace. 
  
 _Mode_.--As we have stated in recipe No. 608, the outside slices of
boiled beef may, with a little trouble, be converted into a very nice 
 addition to the breakfast-table. Cut up the meat into small pieces and 
 pound it well, with a little butter, in a mortar; add a seasoning of 
 cayenne and mace, and be very particular that the latter ingredient is 
 reduced to the finest powder. When all the ingredients are thoroughly 
 mixed, put it into glass or earthen potting-pots, and pour on the top a 
 coating of clarified butter. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 _Note_.--If cold roast beef is used, remove all pieces of gristle and 
 dry outside pieces, as these do not pound well. 
  
 PRESERVED MEATS.--When an organic substance, like the flesh of 
 animals, is heated to the boiling-point, it loses the property 
 of passing into a state of fermentation and decay. Fresh animal 
 milk, as is well known, coagulates, after having been kept for 
 two or three days, into a gelatinous mass; but it may be 
 preserved for an indefinite period, as a perfectly sweet liquid, 
 if it be heated daily to the boiling-point. The knowledge of
pepper and salt, and put them into a stewpan with the remaining 
 ingredients. Stew gently, until the vegetables are tender, and serve on 
 a flat dish within walls of mashed potatoes. 
  
 _Time_.--3/4 hour. _Average cost_, exclusive of the bones, 2d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 BEEF RISSOLES (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 645. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold roast beef; to each pound of meat 
 allow 3/4 lb. of bread crumbs, salt and pepper to taste, a few chopped 
 savoury herbs, 1/2 a teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel, 1 or 2 eggs, 
 according to the quantity of meat. 
  
 _Mode_.--Mince the beef very fine, which should be rather lean, and mix 
 with this bread crumbs, herbs, seasoning, and lemon-peel, in the above 
 proportion, to each pound of meat. Make all into a thick paste with 1 or 
 2 eggs; divide into balls or cones, and fry a rich brown. Garnish the
forcemeat by recipe No. 417, lay it on the meat, and bind it up 
 securely. Roast it before a nice clear fire, and baste it with 1 glass 
 each of port wine and vinegar, with which mix a teaspoonful of pounded 
 allspice. Serve, with a good gravy in the dish, and send red-currant 
 jelly to table with it. 
  
 _Time_.--A piece of 5 lbs. about 1-1/2 hour before a brisk fire. 
  
 _Average cost_, for this quantity, 5s. 4d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 BEEF ROLLS (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 647. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold roast or boiled beef, seasoning 
 to taste of salt, pepper, and minced herbs; puff paste. 
 
_Mode_.--Mince the beef tolerably fine with a small amount of its own 
 fat; add a seasoning of pepper, salt, and chopped herbs; put the whole 
 into a roll of puff paste, and bake for 1/2 hour, or rather longer, 
 should the roll be very large. Beef patties may be made of cold meat, by 
 mincing and seasoning beef as directed above, and baking in a rich puff 
 paste in patty-tins. 
  
 _Time_,--1/2 hour. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 MINIATURE ROUND OF BEEF. (_An Excellent Dish for a Small Family_.) 
  
 648. INGREDIENTS.--From 5 to 10 lbs. of rib of beef, sufficient brine to 
 cover the meat. 
  
 _Mode_.--Choose a fine rib, have the bone removed, rub some salt over 
 the inside, and skewer the meat up into a nice round form, and bind it 
 with tape. Put it into sufficient brine to cover it (the brine should be
 
 BRISKET OF BEEF, a la Flamande. 
  
 649. INGREDIENTS.--About 6 or 8 lbs. of the brisket of beef, 4 or 5 
 slices of bacon, 2 carrots, 1 onion, a bunch of savoury herbs, salt and 
 pepper to taste, 4 cloves, 4 whole allspice, 2 blades of mace. 
  
 _Mode_.--Choose that portion of the brisket which contains the gristle, 
 trim it, and put it into a stewpan with the slices of bacon, which 
 should be put under and over the meat. Add the vegetables, herbs, 
 spices, and seasoning, and cover with a little weak stock or water; 
 close the stewpan as hermetically as possible, and simmer very gently 
 for 4 hours. Strain the liquor, reserve a portion of it for sauce, and 
 the remainder boil quickly over a sharp fire until reduced to a glaze, 
 with which glaze the meat. Garnish the dish with scooped carrots and 
 turnips, and when liked, a little cabbage; all of which must be cooked 
 separately. Thicken and flavour the liquor that was saved for sauce, 
 pour it round the meat, and serve. The beef may also be garnished with 
 glazed onions, artichoke-bottoms, &c. 
 
his "Physiology of Common Life," has thus revived the story of 
 the beef-eating son of France:--"A Frenchman was one day blandly 
 remonstrating against the supercilious scorn expressed by 
 Englishmen for the beef of France, which he, for his part, did 
 not find so inferior to that of England.   '  I have been two times 
 in England,  '   he remarked, but I nevère find the bif so supérieur 
 to ours. I find it vary conveenient that they bring it you on 
 leetle pieces of stick, for one penny: but I do not find the bif 
 supérieur.  '   On hearing this, the Englishman, red with 
 astonishment, exclaimed,   '  Good heavens, sir! you have been 
 eating cat  '  s meat.  '  " No, M. Curmer, we are ready to acknowledge 
 the superiority of your cookery, but we have long since made up 
 our minds as to the inferiority of your raw material. 
  
 BEEF OLIVES. 
  
 I. 
  
 650. INGREDIENTS.--2 lbs. of rump-steak, 1 egg, 1 tablespoonful of 
 minced savoury herbs, pepper and salt to taste, 1 pint of stock, No.
105, 2 or 3 slices of bacon, 2 tablespoonfuls of any store sauce, a 
 slight thickening of butter and flour. 
  
 _Mode_.--Have the steaks cut rather thin, slightly beat them to make 
 them level, cut them into 6 or 7 pieces, brush over with egg, and 
 sprinkle with herbs, which should be very finely minced; season with 
 pepper and salt, and roll up the pieces tightly, and fasten with a small 
 skewer. Put the stock in a stewpan that will exactly hold them, for by 
 being pressed together, they will keep their shape better; lay in the 
 rolls of meat, cover them with the bacon, cut in thin slices, and over 
 that put a piece of paper. Stew them very _gently_ for full 2 hours; for 
 the slower they are done the better. Take them out, remove the skewers, 
 thicken the gravy with butter and flour, and flavour with any store 
 sauce that may be preferred. Give one boil, pour over the meat, and 
 serve. 
  
 _Time_.--2 hours. _Average cost_, 1s. per pound. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 6 persons. 
 
_Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 II. 
  
 (_Economical_.) 
  
 651. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of underdone cold roast beef, bread 
 crumbs, 1 shalot finely minced, pepper and salt to taste, gravy made 
 from the beef bones, thickening of butter and flour, 1 tablespoonful of 
 mushroom ketchup. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut some slices of underdone roast beef about half an inch 
 thick; sprinkle over them some bread crumbs, minced shalot, and a little 
 of the fat and seasoning; roll them, and fasten with a small skewer. 
 Have ready some gravy made from the beef bones; put in the pieces of 
 meat, and stew them till tender, which will be in about 1-1/4 hour, or 
 rather longer. Arrange the meat in a dish, thicken and flavour the 
 gravy, and pour it over the meat, when it is ready to serve. 
 
_Time_.--1-1/2 hour. _Average cost_, exclusive of the beef, 2d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 BROILED OX-TAIL (an Entree). 
  
 652. INGREDIENTS.--2 tails, 1-1/2 pint of stock, No. 105, salt and 
 cayenne to taste, bread crumbs, 1 egg. 
  
 _Mode_.--Joint and cut up the tails into convenient-sized pieces, and 
 put them into a stewpan, with the stock, cayenne, and salt, and, if 
 liked very savoury, a bunch of sweet herbs. Let them simmer gently for 
 about 2-1/2 hours; then take them out, drain them, and let them cool. 
 Beat an egg upon a plate; dip in each piece of tail, and, afterwards, 
 throw them into a dish of bread crumbs; broil them over a clear fire, 
 until of a brownish colour on both sides, and serve with a good gravy, 
 or any sauce that may be preferred. 
  
 _Time_.--About 2-1/2 hours. _Average cost_, from 9d. to 1s. 6d.,
saltpetre, 1 lb. of common salt. 
  
 _Mode_.--Rub the beef well with the treacle, and let it remain for 3 
 days, turning and rubbing it often; then wipe it, pound the salt and 
 saltpetre very fine, rub these well in, and turn it every day for 10 
 days. Roll it up tightly in a coarse cloth, and press it under a large 
 weight; have it smoked, and turn it upside down every day. Boil it, and, 
 on taking it out of the pot, put a heavy weight on it to press it. 
  
 _Time_.--17 days. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 BEEF SAUSAGES. 
  
 662. INGREDIENTS.--To every lb. of suet allow 2 lbs. of lean beef; 
 seasoning to taste of salt, pepper, and mixed spices. 
  
 _Mode_.--Clear the suet from skin, and chop that and the beef as finely
as possible; season with pepper, salt, and spices, and mix the whole 
 well together. Make it into flat cakes, and fry of a nice brown. Many 
 persons pound the meat in a mortar after it is chopped ( but this is not 
 necessary when the meat is minced finely.) 
  
 _Time_.--10 minutes. _Average cost_, for this quantity, 1s. 6d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 BEEF-STEAK, Rolled, Roasted, and Stuffed. 
  
 663. INGREDIENTS.--2 lbs. of rump-steak, forcemeat No. 417, pepper and 
 salt to taste, clarified butter. 
  
 _Mode_.--Have the steaks cut rather thick from a well-hung rump of beef, 
 and sprinkle over them a seasoning of pepper and salt. Make a forcemeat 
 by recipe No. 417; spread it over _half_ of the steak; roll it up, bind 
 and skewer it firmly, that the forcemeat may not escape, and roast it 
 before a nice clear fire for about 1-1/2 hour, or rather longer, should
the roll be very large and thick. Keep it constantly basted with butter, 
 and serve with brown gravy, some of which must be poured round the 
 steak, and the remainder sent to table in a tureen. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. per lb. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year, but best in winter. 
  
  
 SLICED AND BROILED BEEF--a Pretty Dish (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 664. INGREDIENTS.--A few slices of cold roast beef, 4 or 5 potatoes, a 
 thin batter, pepper and salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pare the potatoes as you would peel an apple; fry the parings 
 in a thin batter seasoned with salt and pepper, until they are of a 
 light brown colour, and place them on a dish over some slices of beef, 
 which should be nicely seasoned and broiled.
time the meat is in the oven it should be turned once or twice. 
  
 _Time_.--4 hours. _Average cost_, 7d. per lb. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 BAKING MEAT.--Baking exerts some unexplained influence on meat, 
 rendering it less savoury and less agreeable than meat which has 
 been roasted. "Those who have travelled in Germany and France," 
 writes Mr. Lewis, one of our most popular scientific authors, 
 "must have repeatedly marvelled at the singular uniformity in 
 the flavour, or want of flavour, of the various   '  roasts  '   served 
 up at the _table-d  '  hôte_." The general explanation is, that the 
 German and French meat is greatly inferior in quality to that of 
 England and Holland, owing to the inferiority of pasturage; and 
 doubtless this is one cause, but it is not the chief cause. The 
 meat is inferior, but the cooking is mainly at fault. The meat 
 is scarcely ever _roasted_, because there is no coal, and 
 firewood is expensive. The meat is therefore _baked;_ and the 
 consequence of this baking is, that no meat is eatable or eaten,
tablespoonful of flour mixed with 2 of cold water. Let it boil up for a 
 minute or two after the thickening is added, and serve. When a 
 vegetable-scoop is at hand, use it to cut the vegetables in fanciful 
 shapes, and tomato, Harvey  '  s sauce, or walnut-liquor may be used to 
 flavour the gravy. It is less rich if stewed the previous day, so that 
 the fat may be taken off when cold; when wanted for table, it will 
 merely require warming through. 
  
 _Time_.--3 hours. Average cost, 1s. per lb. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 STEWED BEEF AND CELERY SAUCE (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 667. INGREDIENTS.--3 roots of celery, 1 pint of gravy, No. 436, 2 onions 
 sliced, 2 lbs. of cold roast or boiled beef. 
 
_Mode_.--Cut the celery into 2-inch pieces, put them in a stew-pan, with 
 the gravy and onions, simmer gently until the celery is tender, when add 
 the beef cut into rather thick pieces; stew gently for 10 minutes, and 
 serve with fried potatoes. 
  
 _Time_.--From 20 to 25 minutes to stew the celery. 
  
 _Average cost_, exclusive of the meat, 6d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from September to January. 
  
  
 STEWED BEEF WITH OYSTERS (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 668. INGREDIENTS.--A few thick steaks of cold ribs or sirloin of beef, 2 
 oz. of butter, 1 onion sliced, pepper and salt to taste, 1/2 glass of 
 port wine, a little flour to thicken, 1 or 2 dozen oysters, rather more 
 than 1/2 pint of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the steaks rather thick, from cold sirloin or ribs of beef;
black pepper, 4 carrots, 12 button onions, 2 turnips, thickening of 
 butter and flour, 3 tablespoonfuls of mushroom ketchup, 2 tablespoonfuls 
 of port wine; pepper and salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Have the bone sawn into 4 or 5 pieces, cover with hot water, 
 bring it to a boil, and remove any scum that may rise to the surface. 
 Put in the celery, onion, herbs, spice, and seasoning, and simmer very 
 gently until the meat is tender. Peel the vegetables, cut them into any 
 shape fancy may dictate, and boil them with the onions until tender; 
 lift out the beef, put it on a dish, which keep hot, and thicken with 
 butter and flour as much of the liquor as will be wanted for gravy; keep 
 stirring till it boils, then strain and skim. Put the gravy back in the 
 stewpan, add the seasoning, port wine, and ketchup, give one boil, and 
 pour it over the beef; garnish with the boiled carrots, turnips, and 
 onions. 
  
 _Time_.--The meat to be stewed about 4 hours. _Average cost_, 4d. per 
 lb. with bone. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 7 or 8 persons.
 
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 TOAD-IN-THE-HOLE (a Homely but Savoury Dish). 
  
 672. INGREDIENTS.--1-1/2 lb. of rump-steak, 1 sheep  '  s kidney, pepper and 
 salt to taste. For the batter, 3 eggs, 1 pint of milk, 4 tablespoonfuls 
 of flour, 1/2 saltspoonful of salt. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut up the steak and kidney into convenient-sized pieces, and 
 put them into a pie-dish, with a good seasoning of salt and pepper; mix 
 the flour with a small quantity of milk at first, to prevent its being 
 lumpy; add the remainder, and the 3 eggs, which should be well beaten; 
 put in the salt, stir the batter for about 5 minutes, and pour it over 
 the steak. Place it in a tolerably brisk oven immediately, and bake for 
 1-1/2 hour. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. 9d. 
 
_Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 _Note_.--The remains of cold beef, rather underdone, may be substituted 
 for the steak, and, when liked, the smallest possible quantity of minced 
 onion or shalot may be added. 
  
  
 BOILED TONGUE. 
  
 673. INGREDIENTS.--1 tongue, a bunch of savoury herbs, water. 
  
 _Mode_.--In choosing a tongue, ascertain how long it has been dried or 
 pickled, and select one with a smooth skin, which denotes its being 
 young and tender. If a dried one, and rather hard, soak it at least for 
 12 hours previous to cooking it; if, however, it is fresh from the 
 pickle, 2 or 3 hours will be sufficient for it to remain in sock. Put 
 the tongue in a stewpan with plenty of cold water and a bunch of savoury 
 herbs; let it gradually come to a boil, skim well and simmer very gently
 
 THE TONGUES OF ANIMALS.--The tongue, whether in the ox or in 
 man, is the seat of the sense of taste. This sense warns the 
 animal against swallowing deleterious substances. Dr. Carpenter 
 says, that, among the lower animals, the instinctive perceptions 
 connected with this sense, are much more remarkable than our 
 own; thus, an omnivorous monkey will seldom touch fruits of a 
 poisonous character, although their taste may be agreeable. 
 However this may be, man  '  s instinct has decided that ox-tongue 
 is better than horse-tongue; nevertheless, the latter is 
 frequently substituted by dishonest dealers for the former. The 
 horse  '  s tongue may be readily distinguished by a spoon-like 
 expansion at its end. 
  
 TO PICKLE AND DRESS A TONGUE TO EAT COLD. 
  
 676. INGREDIENTS.--6 oz. of salt, 2 oz. of bay-salt, 1 oz. of saltpetre, 
 3 oz. of coarse sugar; cloves, mace, and allspice to taste; butter, 
 common crust of flour and water. 
 
further assisted by a flow of saliva, answering the double purpose of 
 increasing the flavour of the aliment and promoting the solvency of the 
 mass. Having completely comminuted and blended this mouthful, it is 
 swallowed a second time; but instead of returning to the paunch or 
 reticulum, it passes through another valve into a side cavity,--the 
 _omasum_, where, after a maceration in more saliva for some hours, it 
 glides by the same contrivance into the fourth pouch,--the _abomasum_, 
 an apartment in all respects analogous to the ordinary stomach of 
 animals, and where the process of digestion, begun and carried on in the 
 previous three, is here consummated, and the nutrient principle, by 
 means of the bile, eliminated from the digested aliment. Such is the 
 process of digestion in sheep and oxen. 
  
 682. NO OTHER ANIMAL, even of the same order, possesses in so remarkable 
 a degree the power of converting pasture into flesh as the 
 Leicestershire sheep; the South Down and Cheviot, the two next breeds in 
 quality, are, in consequence of the greater vivacity of the animal  '  s 
 nature, not equal to it in that respect, though in both the brain and 
 chest are kept subservient to the greater capacity of the organs of 
 digestion. Besides the advantage of increased bulk and finer fleeces,
the breeder seeks to obtain an augmented deposit of tissue in those 
 parts of the carcase most esteemed as food, or, what are called in the 
 trade "prime joints;" and so far has this been effected, that the 
 comparative weight of the hind quarters over the fore has become a test 
 of quality in the breed, the butchers in some markets charging twopence 
 a pound more for that portion of the sheep. Indeed, so superior are the 
 hind quarters of mutton now regarded, that very many of the West-end 
 butchers never deal in any other part of the sheep. 
  
 683. THE DIFFERENCE IN THE QUALITY OF THE FLESH in various breeds is a 
 well-established fact, not alone in flavour, but also in tenderness; and 
 that the nature of the pasture on which the sheep is fed influences the 
 flavour of the meat, is equally certain, and shown in the estimation in 
 which those flocks are held which have grazed on the thymy heath of 
 Bamstead in Sussex. It is also a well-established truth, that the 
 _larger_ the frame of the animal, the _coarser_ is the meat, and that 
 _small bones_ are both guarantees for the fineness of the breed and the 
 delicacy of the flesh. The sex too has much to do in determining the 
 quality of the meat; in the males, the lean is closer in fibre, deeper 
 in colour, harder in texture, less juicy, and freer from fat, than in
8 to 9 lbs.; and it cure is taken not to purchase it too fat, it 
 will be found the most satisfactory and economical mutton that 
 can be bought. 
  
 BRAISED LEG OF MUTTON. 
  
 708. INGREDIENTS.--1 small leg of mutton, 4 carrots, 3 onions, 1 faggot 
 of savoury herbs, a bunch of parsley, seasoning to taste of pepper and 
 salt, a few slices of bacon, a few veal trimmings, 1/2 pint of gravy or 
 water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Line the bottom of a braising-pan with a few slices of bacon, 
 put in the carrots, onions, herbs, parsley, and seasoning, and over 
 these place the mutton. Cover the whole with a few more slices of bacon 
 and the veal trimmings, pour in the gravy or water, and stew very gently 
 for 4 hours. Strain the gravy, reduce it to a glaze over a sharp fire, 
 glaze the mutton with it, and send it to table, placed on a dish of 
 white haricot beans boiled tender, or garnished with glazed onions. 
  
 _Time_.--4 hours. Average cost, 5s.
 
  
 MUTTON PIE (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 733. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of a cold leg, loin, or neck of mutton, 
 pepper and salt to taste, 2 blades of pounded mace, 1 dessertspoonful of 
 chopped parsley, 1 teaspoonful of minced savoury herbs; when liked, a 
 little minced onion or shalot; 3 or 4 potatoes, 1 teacupful of gravy; 
 crust. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cold mutton may be made into very good pies if well seasoned 
 and mixed with a few herbs; if the leg is used, cut it into very thin 
 slices; if the loin or neck, into thin cutlets. Place some at the bottom 
 of the dish; season well with pepper, salt, mace, parsley, and herbs; 
 then put a layer of potatoes sliced, then more mutton, and so on till 
 the dish is full; add the gravy, cover with a crust, and bake for 1 
 hour. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour. 
 
_Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 _Note_.--The remains of an underdone leg of mutton may be converted into 
 a very good family pudding, by cutting the meat into slices, and putting 
 them into a basin lined with a suet crust. It should be seasoned well 
 with pepper, salt, and minced shalot, covered with a crust, and boiled 
 for about 3 hours. 
  
  
 MUTTON PIE. 
  
 734. INGREDIENTS.--2 lbs. of the neck or loin of mutton, weighed after 
 being boned; 2 kidneys, pepper and salt to taste, 2 teacupfuls of gravy 
 or water, 2 tablespoonfuls of minced parsley; when liked, a little 
 minced onion or shalot; puff crust. 
  
 _Mode_.--Bone the mutton, and cut the meat into steaks all of the same 
 thickness, and leave but very little fat. Cut up the kidneys, and 
 arrange these with the meat neatly in a pie-dish; sprinkle over them the 
 minced parsley and a seasoning of pepper and salt; pour in the gravy,
and cover with a tolerably good puff crust. Bake for 1-1/2 hour, or 
 rather longer, should the pie be very large, and let the oven be rather 
 brisk. A well-made suet crust may be used instead of puff crust, and 
 will be found exceedingly good. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour, or rather longer. _Average cost_, 2s. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 6 or 6 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 MUTTON PUDDING. 
  
 735. INGREDIENTS.--About 2 lbs. of the chump end of the loin of mutton, 
 weighed after being boned; pepper and salt to taste, suet crust made 
 with milk (see Pastry), in the proportion of 6 oz. of suet to each pound 
 of flour; a very small quantity of minced onion (this may be omitted 
 when the flavour is not liked). 
 
_Mode_.--Cut the meat into rather thin slices, and season them with 
 pepper and salt; line the pudding-dish with crust; lay in the meat, and 
 nearly, but do not quite, fill it up with water; when the flavour is 
 liked, add a small quantity of minced onion; cover with crust, and 
 proceed in the same manner as directed in recipe No. 605, using the same 
 kind of pudding-dish as there mentioned. 
  
 _Time_.--About 3 hours. _Average cost_, 1s. 9d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 6 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year, but more suitable in winter. 
  
  
 RAGOUT OF COLD NECK OF MUTTON (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 736. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of a cold neck or loin of mutton, 2 oz. 
 of butter, a little flour, 2 onions sliced, 1/4 pint of water, 2 small 
 carrots, 2 turnips, pepper and salt to taste. 
 
 
 791. IN THE COUNTRY, where for ordinary consumption the pork killed for 
 sale is usually both larger and fatter than that supplied to the London 
 consumer, it is customary to remove the skin and fat down to the lean, 
 and, salting that, roast what remains of the joint. Pork goes further, 
 and is consequently a more economical food than other meats, simply 
 because the texture is closer, and there is less waste in the cooking, 
 either in roasting or boiling. 
  
 792. IN FRESH PORK, the leg is the most economical family joint, and the 
 loin the richest. 
  
 793. COMPARATIVELY SPEAKING, very little difference exists between the 
 weight of the live and dead pig, and this, simply because there is 
 neither the head nor the hide to be removed. It has been proved that 
 pork loses in cooking 13-1/2, per cent. of its weight. A salted hand 
 weighing 4 lbs. 5 oz. lost in the cooking 11 oz.; after cooking, the 
 meat weighing only 3 lbs. 1 oz., and the bone 9 oz. The original cost 
 was 7-1/2d. a pound; but by this deduction, the cost rose to 9d. per 
 pound with the bone, and 10-1/4d. without it.
recognized: like the wolf, however, it has been expelled from 
 our island; but, like that animal, it still roams through the 
 vast wooded tracts of Europe and Asia. 
  
 TO DRESS PIG  '  S FRY (a Savoury Dish). 
  
 824. INGREDIENTS.--1-1/2 lb. of pig  '  s fry, 2 onions, a few sage-leaves, 
 3 lbs. of potatoes, pepper and salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the lean fry at the bottom of a pie-dish, sprinkle over it 
 some minced sage and onion, and a seasoning of pepper and salt; slice 
 the potatoes; put a layer of these on the seasoning, then the fat fry, 
 then more seasoning, and a layer of potatoes at the top. Fill the dish 
 with boiling water, and bake for 2 hours, or rather longer. 
  
 _Time_.--Rather more than 2 hours. _Average cost_, 6d. per lb. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 3 or 4 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from October to March.
 
  
 BOILED CALF  '  S FEET AND PARSLEY AND BUTTER. 
  
 860. INGREDIENTS.--2 calf  '  s feet, 2 slices of bacon, 2 oz. of butter, 2 
 tablespoonfuls of lemon-juice, salt and whole pepper to taste, 1 onion, 
 a bunch of savoury herbs, 4 cloves, 1 blade of mace, water, parsley and 
 butter No. 493. 
  
 _Mode_.--Procure 2 white calf  '  s feet; bone them as far as the first 
 joint, and put them into warm water to soak for 2 hours. Then put the 
 bacon, butter, lemon-juice, onion, herbs, spices, and seasoning into a 
 stewpan; lay in the feet, and pour in just sufficient water to cover the 
 whole. Stew gently for about 3 hours; take out the feet, dish them, and 
 cover with parsley and butter, made by recipe No. 493. The liquor they 
 were boiled in should be strained and put by in a clean basin for use: 
 it will be found very good as an addition to gravies, &c. &c. 
  
 _Time_.--Rather more than 3 hours. 
 
_Average cost_, in full season, 9d. each. _Sufficient_ for 4 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from March to October. 
  
 WHEN A CALF SHOULD BE KILLED.--The age at which a calf ought to 
 be killed should not be under four weeks: before that time the 
 flesh is certainly not wholesome, wanting firmness, due 
 development of muscular fibre, and those animal juices on which 
 the flavour and nutritive properties of the flesh depend, 
 whatever the unhealthy palate of epicures may deem to the 
 contrary. In France, a law exists to prevent the slaughtering of 
 calves under _six weeks_ of age. The calf is considered in prime 
 condition at ten weeks, when he will weigh from sixteen to 
 eighteen stone, and sometimes even twenty. 
  
 FRICASSEED CALF  '  S FEET. 
  
 861. INGREDIENTS.--A set of calf  '  s feet; for the batter allow for each 
 egg 1 tablespoonful of flour, 1 tablespoonful of bread crumbs, hot lard 
 or clarified dripping, pepper and salt to taste.
ornamented with pickles, capsicums, and gherkins arranged prettily on 
 the top. 
  
 _Time_.--3/4 hour. _Average cost_, exclusive of the meat, 4d. 
 _Seasonable_ from March to October. 
  
  
 VEAL CUTLETS (an Entree). 
  
 866. INGREDIENTS.--About 3 lbs. of the prime part of the leg of veal, 
 egg and bread crumbs, 3 tablespoonfuls of minced savoury herbs, salt and 
 popper to taste, a small piece of butter. 
  
 [Illustration: VEAL CUTLETS.] 
  
 _Mode_.--Have the veal cut into slices about 3/4 of an inch in 
 thickness, and, if not cut perfectly even, level the meat with a 
 cutlet-bat or rolling-pin. Shape and trim the cutlets, and brush them 
 over with egg. Sprinkle with bread crumbs, with which have been mixed 
 minced herbs and a seasoning of pepper and salt, and press the crumbs
lbs.), lardoons, 2 carrots, 2 large onions, a faggot of savoury herbs, 2 
 blades of pounded mace, 6 whole allspice, 2 bay-leaves, pepper to taste, 
 a few slices of fat bacon, 1 pint of stock No. 107. 
  
 [Illustration: FRICANDEAU OF VEAL.] 
  
 _Mode_.--The veal for a fricandeau should be of the best quality, or it 
 will not be good. It may be known by the meat being white and not 
 thready. Take off the skin, flatten the veal on the table, then at one 
 stroke of the knife, cut off as much as is required, for a fricandeau 
 with an uneven surface never looks well. Trim it, and with a sharp knife 
 make two or three slits in the middle, that it may taste more of the 
 seasoning. Now lard it thickly with fat bacon, as lean gives a red 
 colour to the fricandeau. Slice the vegetables, and put these, with the 
 herbs and spices, in the _middle_ of a stewpan, with a few slices of 
 bacon at the top: these should form a sort of mound in the centre for 
 the veal to rest upon. Lay the fricandeau over the bacon, sprinkle over 
 it a little salt, and pour in just sufficient stock to cover the bacon, 
 &c., without touching the veal. Let it gradually come to a boil; then 
 put it over a slow and equal fire, and let it _simmer very_ gently for
taste, a small piece of butter, flour, 2 tablespoonfuls of lemon-juice, 
 1/4 pint of water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the liver in thin slices, and cut as many slices of bacon 
 as there are of liver; fry the bacon first, and put that on a hot dish 
 before the fire. Fry the liver in the fat which comes from the bacon, 
 after seasoning it with pepper and salt and dredging over it a very 
 little flour. Turn the liver occasionally to prevent its burning, and 
 when done, lay it round the dish with a piece of bacon between each. 
 Pour away the bacon fat, put in a small piece of butter, dredge in a 
 little flour, add the lemon-juice and water, give one boil, and pour it 
 in the _middle_ of the dish. It may be garnished with slices of cut 
 lemon, or forcemeat balls. 
  
 _Time_.--According to the thickness of the slices, from 5 to 10 minutes. 
  
 _Average cost_, 10d. per lb. _Sufficient_ for 6 or 7 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from March to October. 
 
 
 CALF  '  S LIVER LARDED AND ROASTED (an Entree). 
  
 882. INGREDIENTS.--A calf  '  s liver, vinegar, 1 onion, 3 or 4 sprigs of 
 parsley and thyme, salt and pepper to taste, 1 bay-leaf, lardoons, brown 
 gravy. 
  
 _Mode_.--Take a fine white liver, and lard it the same as a fricandeau; 
 put it into vinegar with an onion cut in slices, parsley, thyme, 
 bay-leaf, and seasoning in the above proportion. Let it remain in this 
 pickle for 24 hours, then roast and baste it frequently with the 
 vinegar, &c.; glaze it, serve under it a good brown gravy, or sauce 
 piquante, and send it to table very hot. 
  
 _Time_.--Rather more than 1 hour. _Average cost_, 10d. per lb. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 7 or 8 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from March to October. 
 
 
 (_More Economical_.) 
  
 890. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold roast fillet or loin of veal, 
 rather more than 1 pint of water, 1 onion, 1/2 teaspoonful of minced 
 lemon-peel, salt and white pepper to taste, 1 blade of pounded mace, 2 
 or 3 young carrots, a faggot of sweet herbs, thickening of butter and 
 flour, 1 tablespoonful of lemon-juice, 3 tablespoonfuls of cream or 
 milk. 
  
 _Mode_.--Take about 1 lb. of veal, and should there be any bones, dredge 
 them with flour, and put them into a stewpan with the brown outside, and 
 a few meat trimmings; add rather more than a pint of water, the onion 
 cut in slices, lemon-peel, seasoning, mace, carrots, and herbs; simmer 
 these well for rather more than 1 hour, and strain the liquor. Rub a 
 little flour into some butter; add this to the gravy, set it on the 
 fire, and, when it boils, skim well. Mince the veal finely by _cutting_, 
 and not chopping it; put it in the gravy; let it get warmed through 
 gradually; add the lemon-juice and cream, and, when it is on the point 
 of boiling, serve. Garnish the dish with sippets of toasted bread and
end of summer, a plan more advantageous than that of overfeeding 
 one to a useless degree of corpulency. 
  
 VEAL SAUSAGES. 
  
 904. INGREDIENTS.--Equal quantities of fat bacon and lean veal; to every 
 lb. of meat, allow 1 teaspoonful of minced sage, salt and pepper to 
 taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Chop the meat and bacon finely, and to every lb. allow the 
 above proportion of very finely-minced sage; add a seasoning of pepper 
 and salt, mix the whole well together, make it into flat cakes, and fry 
 a nice brown. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from March to October. 
  
  
 STEWED VEAL, with Peas, young Carrots, and new Potatoes. 
  
 905. INGREDIENTS.--3 or 4 lbs. of the loin or neck of veal, 15 young
carrots, a few green onions, 1 pint of green peas, 12 new potatoes, a 
 bunch of savoury herbs, pepper and salt to taste, 1 tablespoonful of 
 lemon-juice, 2 tablespoonfuls of tomato sauce, 2 tablespoonfuls of 
 mushroom ketchup. 
  
 _Mode_.--Dredge the meat with flour, and roast or bake it for about 3/4 
 hour: it should acquire a nice brown colour. Put the meat into a stewpan 
 with the carrots, onions, potatoes, herbs, pepper, and salt; pour over 
 it sufficient boiling water to cover it, and stew gently for 2 hours. 
 Take out the meat and herbs, put it in a deep dish, skim off all the fat 
 from the gravy, and flavour it with lemon-juice, tomato sauce, and 
 mushroom ketchup in the above proportion. Have ready a pint of green 
 peas boiled; put these with the meat, pour over it the gravy, and 
 serve. The dish may be garnished with a few forcemeat balls. The meat, 
 when preferred, may be cut into chops, and floured and fried instead of 
 being roasted; and any part of veal dressed in this way will be found 
 extremely savoury and good. 
  
 _Time_.--3 hours. _Average cost_, 9d. per lb. 
 
 
  
 TETE DE VEAU EN TORTUE (an Entree). 
  
 911. INGREDIENTS.--Half a calf  '  s head, or the remains of a cold boiled 
 one; rather more than 1 pint of good white stock, No. 107, 1 glass of 
 sherry or Madeira, cayenne and salt to taste, about 12 mushroom-buttons 
 (when obtainable), 6 hard-boiled eggs, 4 gherkins, 8 quenelles or 
 forcemeat balls, No. 422 or 423, 12 crayfish, 12 croûtons. 
  
 _Mode_.--Half a calf  '  s head is sufficient to make a good entrée, and if 
 there are any remains of a cold one left from the preceding day, it will 
 answer very well for this dish. After boiling the head until tender, 
 remove the bones, and cut the meat into neat pieces; put the stock into 
 a stewpan, add the wine, and a seasoning of salt and cayenne; fry the 
 mushrooms in butter for 2 or 3 minutes, and add these to the gravy. Boil 
 this quickly until somewhat reduced; then put in the yolks of the 
 hard-boiled eggs _whole_, the whites cut in small pieces, and the 
 gherkins chopped. Have ready a few veal quenelles, made by recipe No. 
 422 or 423; add these, with the slices of head, to the other
has not eaten calf  '  s head _au naturel_, simply boiled with the 
 skin on, its flavour heightened by sauce just a little sharp? It 
 is a dish as wholesome as it is agreeable, and one that the most 
 inexperienced cook may serve with success. Calf  '  s feet _à la 
 poulette_, _au gratin_, fried, &c.; _les cervelles_, served in 
 the same manner, and under the same names; sweetbreads _en 
 fricandeau_, _piqués en fin_,--all these offer most satisfactory 
 entrées, which the art of the cook, more or less, varies for the 
 gratification of his glory and the well-being of our appetites. 
 We have not spoken, in the above catalogue, either of the liver, 
 or of the _fraise_, or of the ears, which also share the honour 
 of appearing at our tables. Where is the man not acquainted with 
 calf  '  s liver _à la bourgeoise_, the most frequent and convenient 
 dish at unpretentious tables? The _fraise_, cooked in water, and 
 eaten with vinegar, is a wholesome and agreeable dish, and 
 contains a mucilage well adapted for delicate persons. Calf  '  s 
 ears have, in common with the feet and _cervelles_, the 
 advantage of being able to be eaten either fried or _à la 
 poulette_; and besides, can be made into a _farce_, with the 
 addition of peas, onions, cheese, &c. Neither is it confined to
the calf  '  s tongue, or even the eyes, that these shall dispute 
 alone the glory of awakening the taste of man; thus, the 
 _fressure_ (which, as is known, comprises the heart, the _mou_, 
 and the _rate_), although not a very recherché dish, lends 
 itself to all the caprices of an expert artist, and may, under 
 various marvellous disguises, deceive, and please, and even 
 awaken our appetite."--Verily, we might say, after this rhapsody 
 of our neighbour, that his country  '  s weal will not suffer in him 
 as an able and eloquent exponent and admirer. 
  
  
 VEAL CARVING. 
  
  
 BREAST OF VEAL. 
  
 [Illustration: BREAST OF VEAL.] 
  
 912. The carving of a breast of veal is not dissimilar to that of a 
 fore-quarter of lamb, when the shoulder has been taken off. The breast
CHICKEN CUTLETS (an Entree). 
  
 926. INGREDIENTS.--2 chickens; seasoning to taste of salt, white pepper, 
 and cayenne; 2 blades of pounded mace, egg and bread crumbs, clarified 
 butter, 1 strip of lemon-rind, 2 carrots, 1 onion, 2 tablespoonfuls of 
 mushroom ketchup, thickening of butter and flour, 1 egg. 
  
 _Mode_.--Remove the breast and leg bones of the chickens; cut the meat 
 into neat pieces after having skinned it, and season the cutlets with 
 pepper, salt, pounded mace, and cayenne. Put the bones, trimmings, &c., 
 into a stewpan with 1 pint of water, adding carrots, onions, and 
 lemon-peel in the above proportion; stew gently for 1-1/2 hour, and 
 strain the gravy. Thicken it with butter and flour, add the ketchup and 
 1 egg well beaten; stir it over the fire, and bring it to the 
 simmering-point, but do not allow it to boil. In the mean time, egg and 
 bread-crumb the cutlets, and give them a few drops of clarified butter; 
 fry them a delicate brown, occasionally turning them; arrange them 
 pyramidically on the dish, and pour over them the sauce. 
  
 _Time_.--10 minutes to fry the cutlets. _Average cost_, 2s. each.
 
 _Sufficient_ for an entrée. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from April to July. 
  
 FOWLS AS FOOD.--Brillat Savarin, pre-eminent in gastronomic 
 taste, says that he believes the whole gallinaceous family was 
 made to enrich our larders and furnish our tables; for, from the 
 quail to the turkey, he avers their flesh is a light aliment, 
 full of flavour, and fitted equally well for the invalid as for 
 the man of robust health. The fine flavour, however, which 
 Nature has given to all birds coming under the definition of 
 poultry, man has not been satisfied with, and has used many 
 means--such as keeping them in solitude and darkness, and 
 forcing them to eat--to give them an unnatural state of fatness 
 or fat. This fat, thus artificially produced, is doubtless 
 delicious, and the taste and succulence of the boiled and 
 roasted bird draw forth the praise of the guests around the 
 table. Well-fattened and tender, a fowl is to the cook what the 
 canvas is to the painter; for do we not see it served boiled,
 
 929. INGREDIENTS.--2 small fowls or 1 large one, white pepper and salt 
 to taste, 1/2 teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, 1/2 teaspoonful of pounded 
 mace, forcemeat No. 417, a few slices of ham, 3 hard-boiled eggs, 1/2 
 pint of water, puff crust. 
  
 _Mode_.--Skin and cut up the fowls into joints, and put the neck, leg, 
 and backbones in a stewpan, with a little water, an onion, a bunch of 
 savoury herbs, and a blade of mace; let these stew for about an hour, 
 and, when done, strain off the liquor: this is for gravy. Put a layer of 
 fowl at the bottom of a pie-dish, then a layer of ham, then one of 
 forcemeat and hard-boiled eggs cut in rings; between the layers put a 
 seasoning of pounded mace, nutmeg, pepper, and salt. Proceed in this 
 manner until the dish is full, and pour in about 1/2 pint of water; 
 border the edge of the dish with puff crust, put on the cover, ornament 
 the top, and glaze it by brushing over it the yolk of an egg. Bake from 
 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 hour, should the pie be very large, and, when done, pour 
 in, at the top, the gravy made from the bones. If to be eaten cold, and 
 wished particularly nice, the joints of the fowls should be boned, and 
 placed in the dish with alternate layers of forcemeat; sausage-meat may
cold. It is a common practice to cram young chicks with food as 
 soon as they are born. This is quite unnecessary. They will, so 
 long as they are kept warm, come to no harm if they take no food 
 for twenty-four hours following their birth. Should the whole of 
 the brood not be hatched by that time, those that are born may 
 be fed with bread soaked in milk, and the yolk of a hard-boiled 
 egg. 
  
 POTTED CHICKEN OR FOWL (a Luncheon or Breakfast Dish). 
  
 930. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold roast chicken; to every lb. of 
 meat allow 1/4 lb. of fresh butter, salt and cayenne to taste, 1 
 teaspoonful of pounded mace, 1/4 small nutmeg. 
  
 _Mode_.--Strip the meat from the bones of cold roast fowl; when it is 
 freed from gristle and skin, weigh it, and, to every lb. of meat, allow 
 the above proportion of butter, seasoning, and spices. Cut the meat 
 into small pieces, pound it well with the fresh butter, sprinkle in the 
 spices gradually, and keep pounding until reduced to a perfectly smooth 
 paste. Put it into potting-pots for use, and cover it with clarified
the salad with hard-boiled eggs cut in rings, sliced cucumber, and 
 boiled beetroot cut in slices. Instead of cutting the eggs in rings, the 
 yolks may be rubbed through a hair sieve, and the whites chopped very 
 finely, and arranged on the salad in small bunches, yellow and white 
 alternately. This should not be made long before it is wanted for table. 
  
 _Average cost_, exclusive of the cold chicken, 8d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 AGE AND FLAVOUR OF CHICKENS.--It has been the opinion of the 
 medical faculty of all ages and all countries, that the flesh of 
 the young chicken is the must delicate and easy to digest of all 
 animal food. It is less alkalescent than the flesh of any other 
 animal, and its entire freedom from any irritating quality 
 renders it a fit dish for the ailing, or those whose stomachs 
 are naturally weak. In no animal, however, does age work such a 
 change, in regard to the quality of its flesh, as it does in
domestic fowls. In their infancy, cocks and hens are equally 
 tender and toothsome; but as time overtakes them it is the cock 
 whose flesh toughens first. A year-old cock, indeed, is fit for 
 little else than to be converted into soup, while a hen at the 
 same age, although sufficiently substantial, is not callous to 
 the insinuations of a carving-knife. As regards capons, however, 
 the rule respecting age does not hold good. There is scarcely to 
 be found a more delicious animal than a well-fed, well-dressed 
 capon. Age does not dry up his juices; indeed, like wine, he 
 seems but to mellow. At three years old, even, he is as tender 
 as a chick, with the additional advantage of his proper chicken 
 flavour being fully developed. The above remarks, however, 
 concerning the capon, only apply to such as are _naturally_ fed, 
 and not crammed. The latter process may produce a 
 handsome-looking bird, and it may weigh enough to satisfy the 
 whim or avarice of its stuffer; but, when before the fire, it 
 will reveal the cruel treatment to which it has been subjected, 
 and will weep a drippingpan-ful of fat tears. You will never 
 find heart enough to place such a grief-worn guest at the head 
 of your table. It should be borne in mind as a rule, that
small-boned and short-legged poultry are likely to excel the 
 contrary sort in delicacy of colour, flavour, and fineness of 
 flesh. 
  
 HASHED DUCK (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 932. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold roast duck, rather more than 1 
 pint of weak stock or water, 1 onion, 1 oz. of butter, thickening of 
 butter and flour, salt and cayenne to taste, 1/2 teaspoonful of minced 
 lemon-peel, 1 dessertspoonful of lemon-juice, 1/2 glass of port wine. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the duck into nice joints, and put the trimmings into a 
 stewpan; slice and fry the onion in a little butter; add these to the 
 trimmings, pour in the above proportion of weak stock or water, and stew 
 gently for 1 hour. Strain the liquor, thicken it with butter and flour, 
 season with salt and cayenne, and add the remaining ingredients; boil it 
 up and skim well; lay in the pieces of duck, and let them get thoroughly 
 hot through by the side of the fire, but do not allow them to boil: they 
 should soak in the gravy for about 1/2 hour. Garnish with sippets of 
 toasted bread. The hash may be made richer by using a stronger and more
highly-flavoured gravy; a little spice or pounded mace may also be 
 added, when their flavour is liked. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour. _Average cost_, exclusive of the cold duck, 4d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from November to February; ducklings from May to August. 
  
 THE DUCK.--This bird belongs to the order of _Natatores_, or 
 Swimmers; the most familiar tribes of which are ducks, swans, 
 geese, auks, penguins, petrels, pelicans, guillemots, gulls, and 
 terns. They mostly live in the water, feeding on fish, worms, 
 and aquatic plants. They are generally polygamous, and make 
 their nests among reeds, or in moist places. The flesh of many 
 of the species is eatable, but that of some is extremely rank 
 and oily. The duck is a native of Britain, but is found on the 
 margins of most of the European lakes. It is excessively greedy, 
 and by no means a nice feeder. It requires a mixture of 
 vegetable and animal food; but aquatic insects, corn, and 
 vegetables, are its proper food. Its flesh, however, is savoury, 
 being not so gross as that of the goose, and of easier
digestion. In the green-pea season it is usually found on an 
 English table; but, according to Ude, "November is its proper 
 season, when it is plump and fat." 
  
 TO RAGOUT A DUCK WHOLE. 
  
 933. INGREDIENTS.--1 large duck, pepper and salt to taste, good beef 
 gravy, 2 onions sliced, 4 sage-leaves, a few leaves of lemon thyme, 
 thickening of butter and flour. 
  
 _Mode_.--After having emptied and singed the duck, season it inside with 
 pepper and salt, and truss it. Roast it before a clear fire for about 20 
 minutes, and let it acquire a nice brown colour. Put it into a stewpan 
 with sufficient well-seasoned beef gravy to cover it; slice and fry the 
 onions, and add these, with the sage-leaves and lemon thyme, both of 
 which should be finely minced, to the stock. Simmer gently until the 
 duck is tender; strain, skim, and thicken the gravy with a little butter 
 and flour; boil it up, pour over the duck, and serve. When in season, 
 about, 1-1/2 pint of young green peas, boiled separately, and put in the 
 ragoût, very much improve this dish.
different species of ducks; and there is no doubt that the 
 intending keeper of these harmless and profitable birds may 
 easily take his choice from amongst twenty different sorts. 
 There is, however, so little difference in the various members 
 of the family, either as regards hardiness, laying, or hatching, 
 that the most incompetent fancier or breeder may indulge his 
 taste without danger of making a bad bargain. In connection with 
 their value for table, light-coloured ducks are always of milder 
 flavour than those that are dark-coloured, the white Aylesbury  '  s 
 being general favourites. Ducks reared exclusively on vegetable 
 diet will have a whiter and more delicate flesh than those 
 allowed to feed on animal offal; while the flesh of birds 
 fattened on the latter food, will be firmer than that of those 
 which have only partaken of food of a vegetable nature. 
  
 ROAST DUCKS. 
  
 934. INGREDIENTS.--A couple of ducks; sage-and-onion stuffing No. 504; a 
 little flour. 
 
_Choosing and Trussing_.--Choose ducks with plump bellies, and with 
 thick and yellowish feet. They should be trussed with the feet on, which 
 should be scalded, and the skin peeled off, and then turned up close to 
 the legs. Run a skewer through the middle of each leg, after having 
 drawn them as close as possible to the body, to plump up the breast, 
 passing the same quite through the body. Cut off the heads and necks, 
 and the pinions at the first joint; bring these close to the sides, 
 twist the feet round, and truss them at the back of the bird. After the 
 duck is stuffed, both ends should be secured with string, so as to keep 
 in the seasoning. 
  
 [Illustration: ROAST DUCK.] 
  
 _Mode_.--To insure ducks being tender, never dress them the same day 
 they are killed; and if the weather permits, they should hang a day or 
 two. Make a stuffing of sage and onion sufficient for one duck, and 
 leave the other unseasoned, as the flavour is not liked by everybody. 
 Put them down to a brisk clear fire, and keep them well basted the whole 
 of the time they are cooking. A few minutes before serving, dredge them 
 lightly with flour, to make them froth and look plump; and when the
 
 FRICASSEED FOWL OR CHICKEN (an Entree). 
  
 945. INGREDIENTS.--2 small fowls or 1 large one, 3 oz. of butter, a 
 bunch of parsley and green onions, 1 clove, 2 blades of mace, 1 shalot, 
 1 bay-leaf, salt and white pepper to taste, 1/4 pint of cream, the yolks 
 of 3 eggs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Choose a couple of fat plump chickens, and, after drawing, 
 singeing, and washing them, skin, and carve them into joints; blanch 
 these in boiling water for 2 or 3 minutes; take them out, and immerse 
 them in cold water to render them white. Put the trimmings, with the 
 necks and legs, into a stewpan; add the parsley, onions, clove, mace, 
 shalot, bay-leaf, and a seasoning of pepper and salt; pour to these the 
 water that the chickens were blanched in, and simmer gently for rather 
 more than 1 hour. Have ready another stewpan; put in the joints of fowl, 
 with the above proportion of butter; dredge them with flour, let them 
 get hot, but do not brown them much; then moisten the fricassee with the 
 gravy made from the trimmings, &c., and stew very gently for 1/2 hour. 
 Lift the fowl into another stewpan, skim the sauce, reduce it quickly
over the fire, by letting it boil fast, and strain it over them. Add the 
 cream, and a seasoning of pounded mace and cayenne; let it boil up, and 
 when ready to serve, stir to it the well-beaten yolks of 3 eggs: these 
 should not be put in till the last moment, and the sauce should be made 
 _hot_, but must _not boil_, or it will instantly curdle. A few 
 button-mushrooms stewed with the fowl are by many persons considered an 
 improvement. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour to make the gravy, 1/2 hour to simmer the fowl. 
  
 _Average cost_, 5s. the pair. 
  
 _Sufficient_.--1 large fowl for one entrée. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 STOCKING THE FOWL-HOUSE.--Take care that the birds with which 
 you stock your house are _young_. The surest indications of old 
 age are fading of the comb and gills from brilliant red to a 
 dingy brick-colour, general paleness of plumage, brittleness of
the feathers, length and size of the claws, and the scales of 
 the legs and feet assuming a ragged and _corny_ appearance. Your 
 cock and hens should be as near two years old as possible. Hens 
 will lay at a year old, but the eggs are always insignificant in 
 size, and the layers giddy and unsteady sitters. The hen-bird is 
 in her prime for breeding at three years old, and will continue 
 so, under favourable circumstances, for two years longer; after 
 which she will decline. Crowing hens, and those that have large 
 combs, are generally looked on with mistrust; but this is mere 
 silliness and superstition--though it is possible that a spruce 
 young cock would as much object to a spouse with such peculiar 
 addictions, as a young fellow of our own species would to a 
 damsel who whistled and who wore whiskers. Fowls with yellow 
 legs should be avoided; they are generally of a tender 
 constitution, loose-fleshed, and of indifferent flavour. 
  
 FRICASSEED FOWL (Cold Meat Cookery). 
  
 946. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold roast fowl, 1 strip of 
 lemon-peel, 1 blade of pounded mace, 1 bunch of savoury herbs, 1 onion,
popper and salt to taste, 1 pint of water, 1 teaspoonful of flour, 1/4 
 pint of cream, the yolks of 2 eggs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Carve the fowls into nice joints; make gravy of the trimmings 
 and legs, by stewing them with the lemon-peel, mace, herbs, onion, 
 seasoning, and water, until reduced to 1/2 pint; then strain, and put in 
 the fowl. Warm it through, and thicken with a teaspoonful of flour; stir 
 the yolks of the eggs into the cream; add these to the sauce, let it get 
 thoroughly hot, but do not allow it to boil, or it will curdle. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour to make the gravy, 1/4 hour to warm the fowl. 
  
 _Average cost_, exclusive of the cold chicken, 8d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 CHARACTERISTICS OF HEALTH AND POWER.--The chief characteristics 
 of health in a fowl are brightness and dryness of eye and 
 nostrils, the comb and wattles firm and ruddy, the feathers 
 elastic and glossy. The most useful cock is generally the
THE BRENT GOOSE.--This is the smallest and most numerous species 
 of the geese which visit the British islands. It makes its 
 appearance in winter, and ranges over the whole of the coasts 
 and estuaries frequented by other migrant geese. Mr. Selby 
 states that a very large body of these birds annually resort to 
 the extensive sandy and muddy flats which lie between the 
 mainland and Holy Island, on the Northumbrian coast, and which 
 are covered by every flow of the tide. This part of the coast 
 appears to have been a favourite resort of these birds from time 
 immemorial, where they have always received the name of Ware 
 geese, no doubt from their continually feeding on marine 
 vegetables. Their flesh is very agreeable. 
  
 HASHED GOOSE. 
  
 967. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold roast goose, 2 onions, 2 oz. of 
 butter, 1 pint of boiling water, 1 dessertspoonful of flour, pepper and 
 salt to taste, 1 tablespoonful of port wine, 2 tablespoonfuls of 
 mushroom ketchup. 
 
_Mode_.--Cut up the goose into pieces of the size required; the inferior 
 joints, trimmings, &c., put into a stewpan to make the gravy; slice and 
 fry the onions in the butter of a very pale brown; add these to the 
 trimmings, and pour over about a pint of boiling water; stew these 
 gently for 3/4 hour, then skim and strain the liquor. Thicken it with 
 flour, and flavour with port wine and ketchup, in the above proportion; 
 add a seasoning of pepper and salt, and put in the pieces of goose; let 
 these get thoroughly hot through, but do not allow them to boil, and 
 serve with sippets of toasted bread. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether, rather more than 1 hour. 
  
 _Average cost_, exclusive of the cold goose, 4d. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from September to March. 
  
 THE WILD GOOSE.--This bird is sometimes called the "Gray-lag" 
 and is the original of the domestic goose. It is, according to 
 Pennant, the only species which the Britons could take young, 
 and familiarize. "The Gray-lag," says Mr. Gould, "is known to
Persia, and we believe it is generally dispersed over Asia 
 Minor." It is the bird that saved the Capitol by its vigilance, 
 and by the Romans was cherished accordingly. 
  
 ROAST GOOSE. 
  
 968. INGREDIENTS.--Goose, 4 large onions, 10 sage-leaves, 1/4 lb. of 
 bread crumbs, 1-1/2 oz. of butter, salt and pepper to taste, 1 egg. 
  
 _Choosing and Trussing_.--Select a goose with a clean white skin, plump 
 breast, and yellow feet: if these latter are red, the bird is old. 
 Should the weather permit, let it hang for a few days: by so doing, the 
 flavour will be very much improved. Pluck, singe, draw, and carefully 
 wash and wipe the goose; cut off the neck close to the back, leaving the 
 skin long enough to turn over; cut off the feet at the first joint, and 
 separate the pinions at the first joint. Beat the breast-bone flat with 
 a rolling-pin, put a skewer through the under part of each wing, and 
 having drawn up the legs closely, put a skewer into the middle of each, 
 and pass the same quite through the body. Insert another skewer into the 
 small of the leg, bring it close down to the side bone, run it through,
and do the same to the other side. Now cut off the end of the vent, and 
 make a hole in the skin sufficiently large for the passage of the rump, 
 in order to keep in the seasoning. 
  
 [Illustration: ROAST GOOSE.] 
  
 _Mode_.--Make a sage-and-onion stuffing of the above ingredients, by 
 recipe No. 504; put it into the body of the goose, and secure it firmly 
 at both ends, by passing the rump through the hole made in the skin, and 
 the other end by tying the skin of the neck to the back; by this means 
 the seasoning will not escape. Put it down to a brisk fire, keep it well 
 basted, and roast from 1-1/2 to 2 hours, according to the size. Remove 
 the skewers, and serve with a tureen of good gravy, and one of well-made 
 apple-sauce. Should a very highly-flavoured seasoning be preferred, the 
 onions should not be parboiled, but minced raw: of the two methods, the 
 mild seasoning is far superior. A ragoût, or pie, should be made of the 
 giblets, or they may be stewed down to make gravy. Be careful to serve 
 the goose before the breast falls, or its appearance will be spoiled by 
 coming flattened to table. As this is rather a troublesome joint to 
 carve, a _large_ quantity of gravy should not be poured round the goose,
than intrust them with the care of their own eggs. 
  
 ROAST PIGEONS. 
  
 974. INGREDIENTS.--Pigeons, 3 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste. 
  
 _Trussing_.--Pigeons, to be good, should be eaten fresh (if kept a 
 little, the flavour goes off), and they should be drawn as soon as 
 killed. Cut off the heads and necks, truss the wings over the backs, and 
 cut off the toes at the first joint: previous to trussing, they should 
 be carefully cleaned, as no bird requires so much washing. 
  
 [Illustration: ROAST PIGEON.] 
  
 _Mode_.--Wipe the birds very dry, season them inside with pepper and 
 salt, and put about 3/4 oz. of butter into the body of each: this makes 
 them moist. Put them down to a bright fire, and baste them well the 
 whole of the time they are cooking (they will be done enough in from 20 
 to 30 minutes); garnish with fried parsley, and serve with a tureen of 
 parsley and butter. Bread-sauce and gravy, the same as for roast fowl,
HASHED TURKEY. 
  
 989. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold roast turkey, 1 onion, pepper and 
 salt to taste, rather more than 1 pint of water, 1 carrot, 1 turnip, 1 
 blade of mace, a bunch of savoury herbs, 1 tablespoonful of mushroom 
 ketchup, 1 tablespoonful of port wine, thickening of butter and flour. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the turkey into neat joints; the best pieces reserve for 
 the hash, the inferior joints and trimmings put into a stewpan with an 
 onion cut in slices, pepper and salt, a carrot, turnip, mace, herbs, and 
 water in the above proportion; simmer these for an hour, then strain the 
 gravy, thicken it with butter and flour, flavour with ketchup and port 
 wine, and lay in the pieces of turkey to warm through; if there is any 
 stuffing left, put that in also, as it so much improves the flavour of 
 the gravy. When it boils, serve, and garnish the dish with sippets of 
 toasted bread. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour to make the gravy. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from December to February.
 
 _Note_.--Any kind of game may be hashed by the above recipe, and the 
 flavour may be varied by adding flavoured vinegars, curvy powder, &c.; 
 but we cannot recommend these latter ingredients, as a dish of game 
 should really have a gamy taste; and if too many sauces, essences, &c., 
 are added to the gravy, they quite overpower and destroy the flavour the 
 dish should possess. 
  
  
 GROUSE PIE. 
  
 1024. INGREDIENTS.--Grouse; cayenne, salt, and pepper to taste; 1 lb. of 
 rump-steak, 1/2 pint of well-seasoned broth, puff paste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Line the bottom of a pie-dish with the rump-steak cut into neat 
 pieces, and, should the grouse be large, cut them into joints; but, if 
 small, they may be laid in the pie whole; season highly with salt, 
 cayenne, and black pepper; pour in the broth, and cover with a puff 
 paste; brush the crust over with the yolk of an egg, and bake from 3/4 
 to 1 hour. If the grouse is cut into joints, the backbones and trimmings
THE HARE.--This little animal is found generally distributed over 
 Europe, and, indeed, in most parts of the northern world. Its extreme 
 timidity is the endowment which Providence has bestowed upon it as a 
 means of defence; it is therefore attentive to every sound, and is 
 supplied with ears both long and tubular, with which it can hear with 
 great acuteness. Its eyes, also, are so constructed, and placed so 
 prominent in its head, that it can see both before and behind it. It 
 lives entirely upon vegetables, but its flesh is considered dry, 
 notwithstanding that it is deemed, in many respects, superior to that of 
 the rabbit, being more savoury, and of a much higher flavour. Its 
 general time of feeding is the evening; but during the day, if not 
 disturbed, it adheres closely to its _form_. 
  
 [Illustration: THE HARE.] 
  
 POTTED HARE (a Luncheon or Breakfast Dish). 
  
 1028. INGREDIENTS.--1 hare, a few slices of bacon, a large bunch of 
 savoury herbs, 4 cloves, 1/2 teaspoonful of whole allspice, 2 carrots, 2 
 onions, salt and pepper to taste, 1 pint of water, 2 glasses of sherry.[                    ]	0  	 
 _Mode_.--Skin, empty, and wash the hare; cut it down the middle, and put 
 it into a stewpan, with a few slices of bacon under and over it; add the 
 remaining ingredients, and stew very gently until the hare is tender, 
 and the flesh will separate easily from the bones. When done enough, 
 take it up, remove the bones, and pound the meat, _with the bacon_, in a 
 mortar, until reduced to a perfectly smooth paste. Should it not be 
 sufficiently seasoned, add a little cayenne, salt, and pounded mace, but 
 be careful that these are well mixed with the other ingredients. Press 
 the meat into potting-pots, pour over clarified butter, and keep in a 
 dry place. The liquor that the hare was stewed in, should be saved for 
 hashes, soups, &c. &c. 
  
 _Time_.--About 21/2 hours to stew the hare. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from September to the end of February. 
  
  
 BROILED HARE (a Supper or Luncheon Dish). 
 
1029. INGREDIENTS.--The leg and shoulders of a roast hare, cayenne and 
 salt to taste, a little butter. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the legs and shoulders of a roast hare, season them highly 
 with salt and cayenne, and broil them over a very clear fire for 5 
 minutes. Dish them on a hot dish, rub over them a little cold butter, 
 and send to table very quickly. 
  
 _Time_.--5 minutes. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from September to the end of February. 
  
  
 HASHED HARE. 
  
 1030. INGREDIENTS.--The remains of cold roast hare, 1 blade of pounded 
 mace, 2 or 3 allspice, pepper and salt to taste, 1 onion, a bunch of 
 savoury herbs, 3 tablespoonfuls of port wine, thickening of butter and 
 flour, 2 tablespoonfuls of mushroom ketchup. 
 
1031. INGREDIENTS.--1 hare, 1-1/2 lb. of gravy beef, 1/2 lb. of butter, 
 1 onion, 1 lemon, 6 cloves; pepper, cayenne, and salt to taste; 1/2 pint 
 of port wine. 
  
 _Mode_.--Skin, paunch, and wash the hare, cut it into pieces, dredge 
 them with flour, and fry in boiling butter. Have ready 1-1/2 pint of 
 gravy, made from the above proportion of beef, and thickened with a 
 little flour. Put this into a jar; add the pieces of fried hare, an 
 onion stuck with six cloves, a lemon peeled and cut in half, and a good 
 seasoning of pepper, cayenne, and salt; cover the jar down tightly, put 
 it up to the neck into a stewpan of boiling water, and let it stew until 
 the hare is quite tender, taking care to keep the water boiling. When 
 nearly done, pour in the wine, and add a few forcemeat balls, made by 
 recipe No. 417: these must be fried or baked in the oven for a few 
 minutes before they are put to the gravy. Serve with red-currant jelly. 
  
 _Time_,--3-1/2 to 4 hours. If the hare is very old, allow 4-1/2 hours. 
  
 _Average cost_, 7s. 
 
the island of Anglesea. On its first arrival in England, it is 
 so lean as scarcely to weigh above five or six ounces; before 
 its departure, however, it has been known to exceed eight 
 ounces, and is then most delicious eating. 
  
 TO DRESS A LEVERET. 
  
 1034. INGREDIENTS.--2 leverets, butter, flour. 
  
 _Mode_.--Leverets should be trussed in the same manner as a hare, but 
 they do not require stuffing. Roast them before a clear fire, and keep 
 them well basted all the time they are cooking. A few minutes before 
 serving, dredge them lightly with flour, and froth them nicely. Serve 
 with plain gravy in the dish, and send to table red-currant jelly with 
 them. 
  
 _Time_.--1/2 to 3/4 hour. _Average cost_, in full season, 4s. each. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 5 or 6 persons. 
 
_Seasonable_ from May to August, but cheapest in July and August. 
  
  
 BROILED PARTRIDGE (a Luncheon, Breakfast, or Supper Dish). 
  
 1035. INGREDIENTS.--3 partridges, salt and cayenne to taste, a small 
 piece of butter, brown gravy or mushroom sauce. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pluck, draw, and cut the partridges in half, and wipe the 
 inside thoroughly with a damp cloth. Season them with salt and cayenne, 
 broil them over a very clear fire, and dish them on a hot dish; rub a 
 small piece of butter over each half, and send them to table with brown 
 gravy or mushroom sauce. 
  
 _Time_.--About 1/4 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. 6d. to 2s. a brace. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 3 or 4 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from the 1st of September to the beginning of February. 
 
 
 PARTRIDGE PIE. 
  
 1036. INGREDIENTS.--3 partridges, pepper and salt to taste, 1 
 teaspoonful of minced parsley (when obtainable, a few mushrooms), 3/4 
 lb. of veal cutlet, a slice of ham, 1/2 pint of stock, puff paste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Line a pie-dish with a veal cutlet; over that place a slice of 
 ham and a seasoning of pepper and salt. Pluck, draw, and wipe the 
 partridges; cut off the legs at the first joint, and season them inside 
 with pepper, salt, minced parsley, and a small piece of butter; place 
 them in the dish, and pour over the stock; line the edges of the dish 
 with puff paste, cover with the same, brush it over with the yolk of an 
 egg, and bake for 3/4 to 1 hour. 
  
 _Time_.--3/4 to 1 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. 6d. to 2s. a brace. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from the 1st of September to the beginning of February.
 
  
 Note.--Should the partridges be very large, split them in half; they 
 will then lie in the dish more compactly. When at hand, a few mushrooms 
 should always be added. 
  
  
 POTTED PARTRIDGE. 
  
 1037. INGREDIENTS.--Partridges; seasoning to taste of mace, allspice 
 white pepper, and salt; butter, coarse paste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pluck and draw the birds, and wipe them inside with a damp 
 cloth. Pound well some mace, allspice, white pepper, and salt; mix 
 together, and rub every part of the partridges with this. Pack the birds 
 as closely as possible in a baking-pan, with plenty of butter over them, 
 and cover with a coarse flour and water crust. Tie a paper over this, 
 and bake for rather more than 1-1/2 hour; let the birds get cold, then 
 cut them into pieces for keeping, pack them closely into a large 
 potting-pot, and cover with clarified butter. This should be kept in a
ROAST PARTRIDGE. 
  
 1039. INGREDIENTS.--Partridge; butter. 
  
 _Choosing and Trussing_.--Choose young birds, with dark-coloured bills 
 and yellowish legs, and let them hang a few days, or there will be no 
 flavour to the flesh, nor will it be tender. The time they should be 
 kept, entirely depends on the taste of those for whom they are intended, 
 as what some persons would consider delicious, would be to others 
 disgusting and offensive. They may be trussed with or without the head, 
 the latter mode being now considered the most fashionable. Pluck, draw, 
 and wipe the partridge carefully inside and out; cut off the head, 
 leaving sufficient skin on the neck to skewer back; bring the legs close 
 to the breast, between it and the side-bones, and pass a skewer through 
 the pinions and the thick part of the thighs. When the head is left on, 
 it should be brought round and fixed on to the point of the skewer. 
  
 [Illustration: ROAST PARTRIDGE.] 
  
 _Mode_.--When the bird is firmly and plumply trussed, roast it before a
 
 1040. INGREDIENTS.--2 or 3 pheasants, egg and bread crumbs, cayenne and 
 salt to taste, brown gravy. 
  
 _Mode_.--Procure 3 young pheasants that have been hung a few days; 
 pluck, draw, and wipe them inside; cut them into joints; remove the 
 bones from the best of these; and the backbones, trimmings, &c., put 
 into a stewpan, with a little stock, herbs, vegetables, seasoning, &c., 
 to make the gravy. Flatten and trim the cutlets of a good shape, egg and 
 bread crumb them, broil them over a clear fire, pile them high in the 
 dish, and pour under them the gravy made from the bones, which should be 
 strained, flavoured, and thickened. One of the small bones should be 
 stuck on the point of each cutlet. 
  
 _Time_.--10 minutes. _Average cost_, 2s. 6d. to 3s. each. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 2 entrées. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from the 1st of October to the beginning of February. 
 
is its flesh so palatable then as it is in the wild state. Mr. 
 Ude says--"It is not often that pheasants are met with 
 possessing that exquisite taste which is acquired only by long 
 keeping, as the damp of this climate prevents their being kept 
 as long as they are in other countries. The hens, in general, 
 are the most delicate. The cocks show their age by their spurs. 
 They are only fit to be eaten when the blood begins to run from 
 the bill, which is commonly six days or a week after they have 
 been killed. The flesh is white, tender, and has a good flavour, 
 if you keep it long enough; if not, it is not much different 
 from that of a common fowl or hen." 
  
 BRILLAT SAVARIN  '  S RECIPE FOR ROAST PHEASANT, a la Sainte Alliance. 
  
 1042. When the pheasant is in good condition to be cooked (_see_ No. 
 1041), it should be plucked, and not before. The bird should then be 
 stuffed in the following manner:--Take two snipes, and draw them, 
 putting the bodies on one plate, and the livers, &c., on another. Take 
 off the flesh, and mince it finely with a little beef, lard, a few 
 truffles, pepper and salt to taste, and stuff the pheasant carefully
with this. Cut a slice of bread, larger considerably than the bird, and 
 cover it with the liver, &c., and a few truffles: an anchovy and a 
 little fresh butter added to these will do no harm. Put the bread, &c., 
 into the dripping-pan, and, when the bird is roasted, place it on the 
 preparation, and surround it with Florida oranges. 
  
 Do not be uneasy, Savarin adds, about your dinner; for a pheasant served 
 in this way is fit for beings better than men. The pheasant itself is a 
 very good bird; and, imbibing the dressing and the flavour of the 
 truffle and snipe, it becomes thrice better. 
  
  
 BROILED PHEASANT (a Breakfast or Luncheon Dish). 
  
 1043. INGREDIENTS.--1 pheasant, a little lard, egg and bread crumbs, 
 salt and cayenne to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut the legs off at the first joint, and the remainder of the 
 bird into neat pieces; put them into a fryingpan with a little lard, and 
 when browned on both sides, and about half done, take them out and drain
them; brush the pieces over with egg, and sprinkle with bread crumbs 
 with which has been mixed a good seasoning of cayenne and salt. Broil 
 them over a moderate fire for about 10 minutes, or rather longer, and 
 serve with mushroom-sauce, sauce piquante, or brown gravy, in which a 
 few game-bones and trimmings have been stewed. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether 1/2 hour. _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from the 1st of October to the beginning of February. 
  
 THE HEIGHT OF EXCELLENCE IN A PHEASANT.--Things edible have 
 their degrees of excellence under various circumstances: thus, 
 asparagus, capers, peas, and partridges are best when young. 
 Perfection in others is only reached when they attain maturity: 
 let us say, for example, melons and nearly all fruits (we must 
 except, perhaps, the medlar), with the majority of those animals 
 whose flesh we eat. But others, again, are not good until 
 decomposition is about to set in; and here we may mention 
 particularly the snipe and the pheasant. If the latter bird be 
 eaten so soon as three days after it has been killed, it then
has no peculiarity of flavour; a pullet would be more relished, 
 and a quail would surpass it in aroma. Kept, however, a proper 
 length of time,--and this can be ascertained by a slight smell 
 and change of colour,--then it becomes a highly, flavoured dish, 
 occupying, so to speak, the middle distance between chicken and 
 venison. It is difficult to define any exact time to "hang" a 
 pheasant; but any one possessed of the instincts of 
 gastronomical science, can at once detect the right moment when 
 a pheasant should be taken down, in the same way as a good cook 
 knows whether a bird should be removed from the spit, or have a 
 turn or two more. 
  
 TO DRESS PLOVERS. 
  
 1044. INGREDIENTS.--3 plovers, butter, flour, toasted bread. 
  
 _Choosing and Trussing_.--Choose those that feel hard at the vent, as 
 that shows their fatness. There are three sorts,--the grey, green, and 
 bastard plover, or lapwing. They will keep good for some time, but if 
 very stale, the feet will be very dry. Plovers are scarcely fit for
anything but roasting; they are, however, sometimes stewed, or made into 
 a ragoût, but this mode of cooking is not to be recommended. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pluck off the feathers, wipe the outside of the birds with a 
 damp cloth, and do not draw them; truss with the head under the wing, 
 put them down to a clear fire, and lay slices of moistened toast in the 
 dripping-pan, to catch the trail. Keep them _well basted_, dredge them 
 lightly with flour a few minutes before they are done, and let them be 
 nicely frothed. Dish them on the toasts, over which the _trail_ should 
 be equally spread. Pour round the toast a little good gravy, and send 
 some to table in a tureen. 
  
 _Time_.--10 minutes to 1/4 hour. 
  
 _Average cost_, 1s. 6d. the brace, if plentiful. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 2 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_.--In perfection from the beginning of September to the end 
 of January.
 
 THE PLOVER.--There are two species of this bird, the grey and 
 the green, the former being larger than the other, and somewhat 
 less than the woodcock. It has generally been classed with those 
 birds which chiefly live in the water; but it would seem only to 
 seek its food there, for many of the species breed upon the 
 loftiest mountains. Immense flights of these birds are to be 
 seen in the Hebrides, and other parts of Scotland; and, in the 
 winter, large numbers are sent to the London market, which is 
 sometimes so much glutted with them that they are sold very 
 cheap. Previous to dressing, they are kept till they have a game 
 flavour; and although their flesh is a favourite with many, it 
 is not universally relished. The green is preferred to the grey, 
 but both are inferior to the woodcock. Their eggs are esteemed 
 as a great delicacy. Birds of this kind are migratory. They 
 arrive in England in April, live with us all the spring and 
 summer, and at the beginning of autumn prepare to take leave by 
 getting together in flocks. It is supposed that they then retire 
 to Spain, and frequent the sheep-walks with which that country 
 abounds.
_Sufficient_,--4 large carrots for 5 or 6 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_.--Young carrots from April to June, old ones at any time. 
  
 [Illustration: CARROTS.] 
  
 ORIGIN OF THE CARROT.--In its wild state, this vegetable is 
 found plentifully in Britain, both in cultivated lands and by 
 waysides, and is known by the name of birds-nest, from its 
 umbels of fruit becoming incurved from a hollow cup, like a 
 birds-nest. In this state its root is whitish, slender, and 
 hard, with an acrid, disagreeable taste, and a strong aromatic 
 smell, and was formerly used as an aperient. When cultivated, it 
 is reddish, thick, fleshy, with a pleasant odour, and a 
 peculiar, sweet, mucilaginous taste. The carrot is said by 
 naturalists not to contain much nourishing matter, and, 
 generally speaking, is somewhat difficult of digestion. 
  
 TO DRESS CARROTS IN THE GERMAN WAY. 
 
1101. INGREDIENTS.--8 large carrots, 3 oz. of butter, salt to taste, a 
 very little grated nutmeg, 1 tablespoonful of finely-minced parsley, 1 
 dessertspoonful of minced onion, rather more than 1 pint of weak stock 
 or broth, 1 tablespoonful of flour. 
  
 _Mode_.--Wash and scrape the carrots, and cut them into rings of about 
 1/4 inch in thickness. Put the butter into a stewpan; when it is melted, 
 lay in the carrots, with salt, nutmeg, parsley, and onion in the above 
 proportions. Toss the stewpan over the fire for a few minutes, and when 
 the carrots are well saturated with the butter, pour in the stock, and 
 simmer gently until they are nearly tender. Then put into another 
 stewpan a small piece of butter; dredge in about a tablespoonful of 
 flour; stir this over the fire, and when of a nice brown colour, add the 
 liquor that the carrots have been boiling in; let this just boil up, 
 pour it over the carrots in the other stewpan, and let them finish 
 simmering until quite tender. Serve very hot. 
  
 This vegetable, dressed as above, is a favourite accompaniment of roast 
 pork, sausages, &c. &c. 
 
_Time_.--About 3/4 hour. Average cost, 6d. to 8d. per bunch of 18. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 6 or 7 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_.--Young carrots from April to June, old ones at any time. 
  
 CONSTITUENTS OF THE CARROT.--These are crystallizable and 
 uncrystallizable sugar, a little starch, extractive, gluten, 
 albumen, volatile oil, vegetable jelly, or pectin, saline 
 matter, malic acid, and a peculiar crystallizable ruby-red 
 neuter principle, without odour or taste, called carotin. This 
 vegetable jelly, or pectin, so named from its singular property 
 of gelatinizing, is considered by some as another form of gum or 
 mucilage, combined with vegetable acid. It exists more or less 
 in all vegetables, and is especially abundant in those roots and 
 fruits from which jellies are prepared. 
  
 STEWED CARROTS. 
  
 1102. INGREDIENTS.--7 or 8 large carrots, 1 teacupful of broth, pepper
and salt to taste, 1/2 teacupful of cream, thickening of butter and 
 flour. 
  
 _Mode_.--Scrape the carrots nicely; half-boil, and slice them into a 
 stewpan; add the broth, pepper and salt, and cream; simmer till tender, 
 and be careful the carrots are not broken. A few minutes before serving, 
 mix a little flour with about 1 oz. of butter; thicken the gravy with 
 this; let it just boil up, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--About 3/4 hour to parboil the carrots, about 20 minutes to cook 
 them after they are sliced. 
  
 _Average cost_, 6d. to 8d. per bunch of 18. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 5 or 6 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_.--Young carrots from April to June, old ones at any time. 
  
 NUTRITIVE PROPERTIES OF THE CARROT.--Sir H. Davy ascertained the 
 nutritive matter of the carrot to amount to ninety-eight parts
in one thousand; of which ninety-five are sugar and three are 
 starch. It is used in winter and spring in the dairy to give 
 colour and flavour to butter; and it is excellent in stews, 
 haricots, soups, and, when boiled whole, with salt beef. In the 
 distillery, owing to the great proportion of sugar in its 
 composition, it yields more spirit than the potato. The usual 
 quantity is twelve gallons per ton. 
  
 SLICED CARROTS. 
  
 (Entremets, or to be served with the Second Course, as a Side-dish.) 
  
 1103. INGREDIENTS.--5 or 6 large carrots, a large lump of sugar, 1 pint 
 of weak stock, 3 oz. of fresh butter, salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Scrape and wash the carrots, cut them into slices of an equal 
 size, and boil them in salt and water, until half done; drain them well, 
 put them into a stewpan with the sugar and stock, and let them boil over 
 a brisk fire. When reduced to a glaze, add the fresh butter and a 
 seasoning of salt; shake the stewpan about well, and when the butter is
juice, with little taste or smell, and having a cooling and 
 soothing influence on the system. This arises from the large 
 quantities of water and mucilage it contains, and not from any 
 narcotic principle which it is supposed to possess. During the 
 period of flowering, it abounds in a peculiar milky juice, which 
 flows from the stem when wounded, and which has been found to be 
 possessed of decided medicinal properties. 
  
  
 BAKED MUSHROOMS. 
  
 (A Breakfast, Luncheon, or Supper Dish.) 
  
 1124. INGREDIENTS.--16 to 20 mushroom-flaps, butter, pepper to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--For this mode of cooking, the mushroom flaps are better than 
 the buttons, and should not be too large. Cut off a portion of the 
 stalk, peel the top, and wipe the mushrooms carefully with a piece of 
 flannel and a little fine salt. Put them into a tin baking-dish, with a 
 very small piece of butter placed on each mushroom; sprinkle over a
cap. The gills, which occupy its lower surface, consist of 
 parallel plates, bearing naked sporules over their whole 
 surface. Some of the cells, which are visible by the microscope, 
 produce four small cells at their free summit, apparently by 
 germination and constriction. These are the sporules, and this 
 is the development of the Agarics. 
  
 BROILED MUSHROOMS. 
  
 (A Breakfast, Luncheon, or Supper Dish.) 
  
 1125. INGREDIENTS.--Mushroom-flaps, pepper and salt to taste, butter, 
 lemon-juice. 
  
 [Illustration: BROILED MUSHROOMS.] 
  
 _Mode_.--Cleanse the mushrooms by wiping them with a piece of flannel 
 and a little salt; cut off a portion of the stalk, and peel the tops: 
 broil them over a clear fire, turning them once, and arrange them on a 
 very hot dish. Put a small piece of butter on each mushroom, season with
pepper and salt, and squeeze over them a few drops of lemon-juice. Place 
 the dish before the fire, and when the butter is melted, serve very hot 
 and quickly. Moderate-sized flaps are better suited to this mode of 
 cooking than the buttons: the latter are better in stews. 
  
 _Time_.--10 minutes for medium-sized mushrooms. 
  
 _Average cost_, 1d. each for large mushrooms. 
  
 _Sufficient_.--Allow 3 or 4 mushrooms to each person. 
  
 _Seasonable_.--Meadow mushrooms in September and October; cultivated 
 mushrooms may be had at any time. 
  
 [Illustration: MUSHROOMS.] 
  
 VARIETIES OF THE MUSHROOM.--The common mushroom found in our 
 pastures is the _Agaricus campestris_ of science, and another 
 edible British species is _A. Georgii;_ but _A. primulus_ is 
 affirmed to be the most delicious mushroom. The morel is
_Morchella esculenta_, and _Tuber cibarium_ is the common 
 truffle. There is in New Zealand a long fungus, which grows from 
 the head of a caterpillar, and which forms a horn, as it were, 
 and is called _Sphaeria Robertsii_. 
  
 TO PRESERVE MUSHROOMS. 
  
 1126. INGREDIENTS.--To each quart of mushrooms, allow 3 oz. of butter, 
 pepper and salt to taste, the juice of 1 lemon, clarified butter. 
  
 _Mode_.--Peel the mushrooms, put them into cold water, with a little 
 lemon-juice; take them out and _dry_ them very carefully in a cloth. Put 
 the butter into a stewpan capable of holding the mushrooms; when it is 
 melted, add the mushrooms, lemon-juice, and a seasoning of pepper and 
 salt; draw them down over a slow fire, and let them remain until their 
 liquor is boiled away, and they have become quite dry, but be careful in 
 not allowing them to stick to the bottom of the stewpan. When done, put 
 them into pots, and pour over the top clarified butter. If wanted for 
 immediate use, they will keep good a few days without being covered 
 over. To re-warm them, put the mushrooms into a stewpan, strain the
butter from them, and they will be ready for use. 
  
 _Average cost_, 1d. each. 
  
 _Seasonable_.--Meadow mushrooms in September and October; cultivated 
 mushrooms may be had at any time. 
  
 LOCALITIES OF THE MUSHROOM.--Mushrooms are to be met with in 
 pastures, woods, and marshes, but are very capricious and 
 uncertain in their places of growth, multitudes being obtained 
 in one season where few or none were to be found in the 
 preceding. They sometimes grow solitary, but more frequently 
 they are gregarious, and rise in a regular circular form. Many 
 species are employed by man as food; but, generally speaking, 
 they are difficult of digestion, and by no means very 
 nourishing. Many of them are also of suspicious qualities. 
 Little reliance can be placed either on their taste, smell, or 
 colour, as much depends on the situation in which they vegetate; 
 and even the same plant, it is affirmed, may be innocent when 
 young, but become noxious when advanced in age.
 
 STEWED MUSHROOMS. 
  
 1127. INGREDIENTS.--1 pint mushroom-buttons, 3 oz. of fresh butter, 
 white pepper and salt to taste, lemon-juice, 1 teaspoonful of flour, 
 cream or milk, 1 teaspoonful of grated nutmeg. 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut off the ends of the stalks, and pare neatly a pint of 
 mushroom-buttons; put them into a basin of water, with a little 
 lemon-juice, as they are done. When all are prepared, take them from the 
 water with the hands, to avoid the sediment, and put them into a stewpan 
 with the fresh butter, white pepper, salt, and the juice of 1/2 lemon; 
 cover the pan closely, and let the mushrooms stew gently from 20 to 25 
 minutes; then thicken the butter with the above proportion of flour, add 
 gradually sufficient cream, or cream and milk, to make the sauce of a 
 proper consistency, and put in the grated nutmeg. If the mushrooms are 
 not perfectly tender, stew them for 5 minutes longer, remove every 
 particle of butter which may be floating on the top, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--1/2 hour. _Average cost_, from 9d. to 2s. per pint.
wood-pea, or heath-pea, is found in the heaths of Scotland, and 
 the Highlanders of that country are extremely partial to them, 
 and dry and chew them to give a greater relish to their whiskey. 
 They also regard them as good against chest complaints, and say 
 that by the use of them they are enabled to withstand hunger and 
 thirst for a long time. The peas have a sweet taste, somewhat 
 like the root of liquorice, and, when boiled, have an agreeable 
 flavour, and are nutritive. In times of scarcity they have 
 served as an article of food. When well boiled, a fork will pass 
 through them; and, slightly dried, they are roasted, and in 
 Holland and Flanders served up like chestnuts. 
  
 BAKED POTATOES. 
  
 1136. INGREDIENTS.--Potatoes. 
  
 [Illustration: BAKED POTATOES SERVED IN NAPKIN.] 
  
 _Mode_.--Choose large potatoes, as much of a size as possible; wash them 
 in lukewarm water, and scrub them well, for the browned skin of a baked
potato is by many persons considered the better part of it. Put them 
 into a moderate oven, and bake them for about 2 hours, turning them 
 three or four times whilst they are cooking. Serve them in a napkin 
 immediately they are done, as, if kept a long time in the oven, they 
 have a shrivelled appearance. Potatoes may also be roasted before the 
 fire, in an American oven; but when thus cooked, they must be done very 
 slowly. Do not forget to send to table with them a piece of cold butter. 
  
 _Time_.--Large potatoes, in a hot oven 1-1/2 hour to 2 hours; in a cool 
 oven, 2 to 2-1/2 hours. 
  
 _Average cost_, 4s. per bushel. 
  
 _Sufficient_.--Allow 2 to each person. 
  
 _Seasonable_ all the year, but not good just before and whilst new 
 potatoes are in season. 
  
 POTATO-SUGAR.--This sugary substance, found in the tubers of 
 potatoes, is obtained in the form of syrup or treacle, and has
not yet been crystallized. It resembles the sugar of grapes, 
 has a very sweet taste, and may be used for making sweetmeats, 
 and as a substitute for honey. Sixty pounds of potatoes, 
 yielding eight pounds of dry starch, will produce seven and a 
 half pounds of sugar. In Russia it is extensively made, as 
 good, though of less consistency than the treacle obtained from 
 cane-sugar. A spirit is also distilled from the tubers, which 
 resembles brandy, but is milder, and has a flavour as if it were 
 charged with the odour of violets or raspberries. In France 
 this manufacture is carried on pretty extensively, and five 
 hundred pounds of the tubers will produce twelve quarts of 
 spirit, the pulp being given to cattle. 
  
 TO BOIL POTATOES. 
  
 1137. INGREDIENTS.--10 or 12 potatoes; to each 1/2 gallon of water allow 
 1 heaped tablespoonful of salt. 
  
 _Mode_.--Choose potatoes of an equal size, pare them, take out all the 
 eyes and specks, and as they are peeled, throw them into cold water. Put
_Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 [Illustration: SWEET POTATO.] 
  
 VARIETIES OF THE POTATO.--These are very numerous. "They 
 differ," says an authority, "in their leaves and bulk of haulm; 
 in the colour of the skin of the tubers; in the colour of the 
 interior, compared with that of the skin; in the time of 
 ripening; in being farinaceous, glutinous, or watery; in tasting 
 agreeably or disagreeably; in cooking readily or tediously; in 
 the length of the subterraneous _stolones_ to which the tubers 
 are attached; in blossoming or not blossoming; and finally, in 
 the soil which they prefer." The earliest varieties grown in 
 fields are,--the Early Kidney, the Nonsuch, the Early Shaw, and 
 the Early Champion. This last is the most generally cultivated 
 round London: it is both mealy and hardy. The sweet potato is 
 but rarely eaten in Britain; but in America it is often served 
 at table, and is there very highly esteemed. 
  
 POTATO RISSOLES.
 
 1147. INGREDIENTS.--Mashed potatoes, salt and pepper to taste; when 
 liked, a very little minced parsley, egg, and bread crumbs. 
  
 [Illustration: POTATO RISSOLES.] 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil and mash the potatoes by recipe No. 1145; add a seasoning 
 of pepper and salt, and, when liked, a little minced parsley. Roll the 
 potatoes into small balls, cover them with egg and bread crumbs, and fry 
 in hot lard for about 10 minutes; let them drain before the fire, dish 
 them on a napkin, and serve. 
  
 _Time_,--10 minutes to fry the rissoles. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 _Note_.--The flavour of these rissoles may be very much increased by 
 adding finely-minced tongue or ham, or even chopped onions, when these 
 are liked. 
 
QUALITIES OF POTATOES.--In making a choice from the many 
 varieties of potatoes which are everywhere found, the best way 
 is to get a sample and taste them, and then fix upon the kind 
 which best pleases your palate. The Shaw is one of the most 
 esteemed of the early potatoes for field culture; and the Kidney 
 and Bread-fruit are also good sorts. The Lancashire Pink is also 
 a good potato, and is much cultivated in the neighbourhood of 
 Liverpool. As late or long-keeping potatoes, the Tartan or 
 Red-apple stands very high in favour. 
  
 POTATO SNOW. 
  
 1148. INGREDIENTS.--Potatoes, salt, and water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Choose large white potatoes, as free from spots as possible; 
 boil them in their skins in salt and water until perfectly tender; drain 
 and _dry them thoroughly_ by the side of the fire, and peel them. Put a 
 hot dish before the fire, rub the potatoes through a coarse sieve on to 
 this dish; do not touch them afterwards, or the flakes will fall, and 
 serve as hot as possible.
 
 1157. INGREDIENTS.--2 pailfuls of spinach, 2 tablespoonfuls of salt, 2 
 oz. of butter, 1 teaspoonful of flour, 8 tablespoonfuls of good gravy; 
 when liked, a very little grated nutmeg. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pick, wash, and boil the spinach, as in recipe No. 1155, and 
 when quite tender, drain and squeeze it perfectly dry from the water 
 that hangs about it. Chop it very fine, put the butter into a stewpan, 
 and lay the spinach over that; stir it over a gentle fire, and dredge in 
 the flour. Add the gravy, and let it boil _quickly_ for a few minutes, 
 that it may not discolour. When the flavour of nutmeg is liked, grate 
 some to the spinach, and when thoroughly hot, and the gravy has dried 
 away a little, serve. Garnish the dish with sippets of toasted bread. 
  
 _Time_.--10 to 15 minutes to boil the spinach; 10 minutes to simmer in 
 the gravy. 
  
 _Average cost_ for the above quantity, 8d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 5 or 6 persons.
 
 _Seasonable_.--Spring spinach from March to July; winter spinach from 
 October to February. 
  
 _Note_.--For an entremets or second-course dish, spinach, dressed by the 
 above recipe may be pressed into a hot mould; it should then be turned 
 out quickly, and served very hot. 
  
  
 BAKED TOMATOES. 
  
 (_Excellent_.) 
  
 1158. INGREDIENTS.--8 or 10 tomatoes, pepper and salt to taste, 2 oz. of 
 butter, bread crumbs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Take off the stalks from the tomatoes; cut them into thick 
 slices, and put them into a deep baking-dish; add a plentiful seasoning 
 of pepper and salt, and butter in the above proportion; cover the whole 
 with bread crumbs; drop over these a little clarified butter; bake in a
moderate oven from 20 minutes to 1/2 hour, and serve very hot. This 
 vegetable, dressed as above, is an exceedingly nice accompaniment to all 
 kinds of roast meat. The tomatoes, instead of being cut in slices, may 
 be baked whole; but they will take rather longer time to cook. 
  
 _Time_.--20 minutes to 1/2 hour. 
  
 _Average cost_, in full season, 9d. per basket. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 5 or 6 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in August, September, and October; but may be had, forced, 
 much earlier. 
  
 [Illustration: THE TOMATO.] 
  
 TOMATOES.--The Tomato is a native of tropical countries, but is 
 now cultivated considerably both in France and England. Its skin 
 is of a brilliant red, and its flavour, which is somewhat sour, 
 has become of immense importance in the culinary art. It is used
both fresh and preserved. When eaten fresh, it is served as an 
 _entremets_; but its principal use is in sauce and gravy; its 
 flavour stimulates the appetite, and is almost universally 
 approved. The Tomato is a wholesome fruit, and digests easily. 
 From July to September, they gather the tomatoes green in 
 France, not breaking them away from the stalk; they are then 
 hung, head downwards, in a dry and not too cold place; and there 
 they ripen. 
  
 HOT TOMATO SAUCE, or PUREE OF TOMATOES. 
  
 (See No. 529.) 
  
 [Illustration: STEWED TOMATOES.] 
  
 STEWED TOMATOES. 
  
 I. 
  
 1159. INGREDIENTS.--8 tomatoes, pepper and salt to taste, 2 oz. of
restricted. The black has the highest repute, and its 
 consumption is enormous. When the peasantry go to gather 
 truffles, they take a pig with them to scent out the spot where 
 they grow. When that is found, the pig turns up the surface with 
 his snout, and the men then dig until they find the truffles. 
 Good truffles are easily distinguished by their agreeable 
 perfume; they should be light in proportion to their size, and 
 elastic when pressed by the finger. To have them in perfection, 
 they should be quite fresh, as their aroma is considerably 
 diminished by any conserving process. Truffles are stimulating 
 and beating. Weak stomachs digest them with difficulty. Some of 
 the culinary uses to which they are subjected render them more 
 digestible; but they should always be eaten sparingly. Their 
 chief use is in seasoning and garnitures. In short, a professor 
 has said, "Meats with truffles are the most distinguished dishes 
 that opulence can offer to the epicure." The Truffle grows in 
 clusters, some inches below the surface of the soil, and is of 
 an irregular globular form. Those which grow wild in England are 
 about the size of a hen  '  s egg, and have no roots. As there is 
 nothing to indicate the places where they are, dogs have been
trained to discriminate their scent, by which they are 
 discovered. Hogs are very fond of them, and frequently lead to 
 their being found, from their rutting up the ground in search of 
 them. 
  
 ITALIAN MODE OF DRESSING TRUFFLES. 
  
 1163. INGREDIENTS.--10 truffles, 1/4 pint of salad-oil, pepper and salt 
 to taste, 1 tablespoonful of minced parsley, a very little finely-minced 
 garlic, 2 blades of pounded mace, 1 tablespoonful of lemon-juice. 
  
 _Mode_.--After cleansing and brushing the truffles, cut them into thin 
 slices, and put them in a baking-dish, on a seasoning of oil, pepper, 
 salt, parsley, garlic, and mace in the above proportion. Bake them for 
 nearly an hour, and, just before serving, add the lemon-juice, and send 
 them to table very hot. 
  
 _Time_.--Nearly 1 hour. 
  
 _Average cost_.--Not often bought in this country.
 
 _Seasonable_ from November to March. 
  
 WHERE TRUFFLES ARE FOUND.--In this country, the common truffle 
 is found on the downs of Hampshire, Wiltshire, and Kent; and 
 they abound in dry light soils, and more especially in oak and 
 chestnut forests. In France they are plentiful, and many are 
 imported from the south of that country and Italy, where they 
 are much larger and in greater perfection: they lose, however, 
 much of their flavour by drying. Truffles have in England been 
 tried to be propagated artificially, but without success. 
  
 TRUFFLES A L  '  ITALIENNE. 
  
 1164. INGREDIENTS.--10 truffles, 1 tablespoonful of minced parsley, 1 
 minced shalot, salt and pepper to taste, 2 oz. of butter, 2 
 tablespoonfuls of good brown gravy, the juice of 1/2 lemon, cayenne to 
 taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Wash the truffles and cut them into slices about the size of a
1166. INGREDIENTS.--10 or 12 large turnips; to each 1/2 gallon of water 
 allow 1 heaped tablespoonful of salt, 2 oz. of butter, cayenne or white 
 pepper to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Pare the turnips, quarter them, and put them into boiling 
 water, salted in the above proportion; boil them until tender; then 
 drain them in a colander, and squeeze them as dry as possible by 
 pressing them with the back of a large plate. When quite free from 
 water, rub the turnips with a wooden spoon through the colander, and put 
 them into a very clean saucepan; add the butter, white pepper, or 
 cayenne, and, if necessary, a little salt. Keep stirring them over the 
 fire until the butter is well mixed with them, and the turnips are 
 thoroughly hot; dish, and serve. A little cream or milk added after the 
 turnips are pressed through the colander, is an improvement to both the 
 colour and flavour of this vegetable. 
  
 _Time_.--From 1/2 to 3/4 hour to boil the turnips; 10 minutes to warm 
 them through. 
  
 _Average cost_, 4d. per bunch.
 
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_.--May be had all the year; but in spring only good for 
 flavouring gravies. 
  
 VEGETABLES REDUCED TO PURÉE.--Persons in the flower of youth, 
 having healthy stomachs, and leading active lives, may eat all 
 sorts of vegetables, without inconvenience, save, of course, in 
 excess. The digestive functions possess great energy during the 
 period of youth: the body, to develop itself, needs nourishment. 
 Physical exercise gives an appetite, which it is necessary to 
 satisfy, and vegetables cannot resist the vigorous action of the 
 gastric organs. As old proverb says, "At twenty one can digest 
 iron." But for aged persons, the sedentary, or the delicate, it 
 is quite otherwise. Then the gastric power has considerably 
 diminished, the digestive organs have lost their energy, the 
 process of digestion is consequently slower, and the least 
 excess at table is followed by derangement of the stomach for 
 several days. Those who generally digest vegetables with
difficulty, should eat them reduced to a pulp or purée, that is 
 to say, with their skins and tough fibres removed. Subjected to 
 this process, vegetables which, when entire, would create 
 flatulence and wind, are then comparatively harmless. Experience 
 has established the rule, that nourishment is not complete 
 without the alliance of meat with vegetables. We would also add, 
 that the regime most favourable to health is found in variety: 
 variety pleases the senses, monotony is disagreeable. The eye is 
 fatigued by looking always on one object, the ear by listening 
 to one sound, and the palate by tasting one flavour. It is the 
 same with the stomach: consequently, variety of food is one of 
 the essentials for securing good digestion. 
  
 GERMAN MODE OF COOKING TURNIPS. 
  
 1167. INGREDIENTS.--8 large turnips, 3 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to 
 taste, rather more than 1/2 pint of weak stock or broth, 1 tablespoonful 
 of flour. 
  
 _Mode_.--Make the butter hot in a stewpan, lay in the turnips, after
having pared and cut them into dice, and season them with pepper and 
 salt. Toss them over the fire for a few minutes, then add the broth, and 
 simmer the whole gently till the turnips are tender. Brown the above 
 proportion of flour with a little butter; add this to the turnips, let 
 them simmer another 5 minutes, and serve. Boiled mutton is usually sent 
 to table with this vegetable, and may be cooked with the turnips by 
 placing it in the midst of them: the meat would then be very delicious, 
 as, there being so little liquid with the turnips, it would almost be 
 steamed, and consequently very tender. 
  
 _Time_.--20 minutes. _Average cost_, 4d. per bunch. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_.--May be had all the year. 
  
 TURNIPS.--Good turnips are delicate in texture, firm, and sweet. 
 The best sorts contain a sweet juicy mucilage, uniting with the 
 aroma a slightly acid quality, which is completely neutralized 
 in cooking. The turnip is prepared in a variety of ways. Ducks
_Time_.--About 3/4 hour to boil the turnips. 
  
 _Average cost_, 4d. per bunch. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 1 side-dish. _Seasonable_ in winter. 
  
 THE FRENCH NAVET.--This is a variety of the turnip; but, instead 
 of being globular, has more the shape of the carrot. Its flavour 
 being excellent, it is much esteemed on the Continent for soups 
 and made dishes. Two or three of them will impart as much 
 flavour as a dozen of the common turnips will. Accordingly, when 
 stewed in gravy, they are greatly relished. This flavour resides 
 in the rind, which is not cut off, but scraped. This variety was 
 once grown in England, but now it is rarely found in our 
 gardens, though highly deserving of a place there. It is of a 
 yellowish-white colour, and is sometimes imported to the London 
 market. 
  
 BOILED TURNIP GREENS. 
 
 
 _Sufficient_ for 4 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from August to March, but flavourless after the end of 
 January. 
  
 LAMBSWOOL, or LAMASOOL.--This old English beverage is composed 
 of apples mixed with ale, and seasoned with sugar and spice. It 
 takes its name from _Lamaes abhal_, which, in ancient British, 
 signifies the day of apple fruit, from being drunk on the apple 
 feast in autumn. In France, a beverage, called by the Parisians 
 _raisinée_, is made by boiling any given quantity of new wine, 
 skimming it as often as fresh scum rises, and, when it is boiled 
 to half its bulk, straining it. To this apples, pared and cut 
 into quarters, are added; the whole is then allowed to simmer 
 gently, stirring it all the time with a long wooden spoon, till 
 the apples are thoroughly mixed with the liquor, and the whole 
 forms a species of marmalade, which is extremely agreeable to 
 the taste, having a slight flavour of acidity, like lemon mixed 
 with honey.
 
 _Average cost_, 1s. 3d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 5 or 6 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ from August to March. 
  
 _Note_.--A very good economical pudding may be made merely with apples, 
 boiled and sweetened, with the addition of a few strips of lemon-peel. A 
 layer of bread crumbs should be placed above and below the apples, and 
 the pudding baked for 1/2 hour. 
  
 CONSTITUENTS OF THE APPLE.--All apples contain sugar, malic 
 acid, or the acid of apples; mucilage, or gum; woody fibre, and 
 water; together with some aroma, on which their peculiar flavour 
 depends. The hard acid kinds are unwholesome if eaten raw; but 
 by the process of cooking, a great deal of this acid is 
 decomposed and converted into sugar. The sweet and mellow kinds 
 form a valuable addition to the dessert. A great part of the 
 acid juice is converted into sugar as the fruit ripens, and even
in a floured cloth. Boil for 2 hours. 
  
 _Time_.--2 hours. 
  
 _Average cost_, 7d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 5 or 6 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 MANCHESTER PUDDING (to eat Cold). 
  
 1300. INGREDIENTS.--3 oz. of grated bread, 1/2 pint of milk, a strip of 
 lemon-peel, 4 eggs, 2 oz. of butter, sugar to taste, puff-paste, jam, 3 
 tablespoonfuls of brandy. 
  
 _Mode_.--Flavour the milk with lemon-peel, by infusing it in the milk 
 for 1/2 hour; then strain it on to the bread crumbs, and boil it for 2 
 or 3 minutes; add the eggs, leaving out the whites of 2, the butter,
sugar, and brandy; stir all these ingredients well together; cover a 
 pie-dish with puff-paste, and at the bottom put a thick layer of any 
 kind of jam; pour the above mixture, cold, on the jam, and bake the 
 pudding for an hour. Serve cold, with a little sifted sugar sprinkled 
 over. 
  
 _Time_.--1 hour. 
  
 _Average cost_, 1s. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 5 or 6 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 SWEET MACARONI PUDDING. 
  
 1301. INGREDIENTS.--2-1/2 oz. of macaroni, 2 pints of milk, the rind of 
 1/2 lemon, 3 eggs, sugar and grated nutmeg to taste, 2 tablespoonfuls of 
 brandy.
articles, and worked up with water into a paste, to which, by a 
 peculiar process, a tubular or pipe form is given, in order that 
 it may cook more readily in hot water. That of smaller diameter 
 than macaroni (which is about the thickness of a goose-quill) is 
 called _vermicelli_; and when smaller still, _fidelini_. The 
 finest is made from the flour of the hard-grained Black-Sea 
 wheat. Macaroni is the principal article of food in many parts 
 of Italy, particularly Naples, where the best is manufactured, 
 and from whence, also, it is exported in considerable 
 quantities. In this country, macaroni and vermicelli are 
 frequently used in soups. 
  
 [Illustration: MACARONI.] 
  
 MANNA KROUP PUDDING. 
  
 1302. INGREDIENTS.--3 tablespoonfuls of manna kroup, 12 bitter almonds, 
 1 pint of milk, sugar to taste, 3 eggs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Blanch and pound the almonds in a mortar; mix them with the
 
 1303. INGREDIENTS.--The crumb of 2 rolls, 1 pint of milk, sugar to 
 taste, 4 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls of brandy, 6 oz. of chopped suet, 2 
 tablespoonfuls of flour, 1/2 lb. of currants, 1/2 teaspoonful of grated 
 nutmeg, 2 tablespoonfuls of cream. 
  
 _Mode_.--Slice the roll very thin, and pour upon it a pint of boiling 
 milk; let it remain covered close for 1/4 hour, then beat it up with a 
 fork, and sweeten with moist sugar; stir in the chopped suet, flour, 
 currants, and nutmeg. Mix these ingredients well together, moisten with 
 the eggs, brandy, and cream; beat the mixture for 2 or 3 minutes, put it 
 into a buttered dish or mould, and bake in a moderate oven for 1-1/4 
 hour. Turn it out, strew sifted sugar over, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/4 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. 3d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 6 or 7 persons. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 MARLBOROUGH PUDDING.
 
 1304. INGREDIENTS.--1/4 lb. of butter, 1/4 lb. of powdered lump sugar, 4 
 eggs, puff-paste, a layer of any kind of jam. 
  
 _Mode_.--Beat the butter to a cream, stir in the powdered sugar, whisk 
 the eggs, and add these to the other ingredients. When these are well 
 mixed, line a dish with puff-paste, spread over a layer of any kind of 
 jam that may be preferred, pour in the mixture, and bake the pudding for 
 rather more than 1/2 hour. 
  
 _Time_.--Rather more than 1/2 hour. _Average cost_, 1s. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 5 or 6 persons. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 MARMALADE AND VERMICELLI PUDDING. 
  
 1305. INGREDIENTS.--1 breakfastcupful of vermicelli, 2 tablespoonfuls of 
 marmalade, 1/4 lb. of raisins, sugar to taste, 3 eggs, milk. 
 
_Mode_.--Pour some boiling milk on the vermicelli, and let it remain 
 covered for 10 minutes; then mix with it the marmalade, stoned raisins, 
 sugar, and beaten eggs. Stir all well together, put the mixture into a 
 buttered mould, boil for 1-1/2 hour, and serve with custard sauce. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 hour. _Average cost_. 1s. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 5 or 6 persons. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 MARROW DUMPLINGS, to serve with Roast Meat, in Soup, with Salad, &c. 
  
 (_German Recipe_.) 
  
 1306. INGREDIENTS.--1 oz. of beef marrow, 1 oz. of butter, 2 eggs, 2 
 penny rolls, 1 teaspoonful of minced onion, 1 teaspoonful of minced 
 parsley, salt and grated nutmeg to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Beat the marrow and butter together to a cream; well whisk the 
 eggs, and add these to the other ingredients. When they are well 
 stirred, put in the rolls, which should previously be well soaked in
boiling milk, strained, and beaten up with a fork. Add the remaining 
 ingredients, omitting the minced onion where the flavour is very much 
 disliked, and form the mixture into small round dumplings. Drop these 
 into boiling broth, and let them simmer for about 20 minutes or 1/2 
 hour. They may be served in soup, with roast meat, or with salad, as in 
 Germany, where they are more frequently sent to table than in this 
 country. They are very good. 
  
 _Time_.--20 minutes to 1/2 hour. _Average cost_, 6d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 7 or 8 dumplings. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 BAKED OB BOILED MARROW PUDDING. 
  
 1307. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 pint of bread crumbs, 1-1/2 pint of milk, 6 oz. 
 of marrow, 4 eggs, 1/4 lb. of raisins or currants, or 2 oz. of each; 
 sugar and grated nutmeg to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Make the milk boiling, pour it hot on to the bread crumbs, and
 
 _Mode_.--Make a puff-crust by recipe No. 1206; line the edges of a deep 
 pie-dish with it, and wash, wipe, and cut the rhubarb into pieces about 
 1 inch long. Should it be old and tough, string it, that is to say, pare 
 off the outside skin. Pile the fruit high in the dish, as it shrinks 
 very much in the cooking; put in the sugar, cover with crust, ornament 
 the edges, and bake the tart in a well-heated oven from 1/2 to 3/4 hour. 
 If wanted very nice, brush it over with the white of an egg beaten to a 
 stiff froth, then sprinkle on it some sifted sugar, and put it in the 
 oven just to set the glaze: this should be done when the tart is nearly 
 baked. A small quantity of lemon-juice, and a little of the peel minced, 
 are by many persons considered an improvement to the flavour of rhubarb 
 tart. 
  
 _Time_.--1/2 to 3/4 hour. _Average cost_, 9d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. 
  
 _Seasonable_ in spring. 
 
[Illustration: RHUBARB.] 
  
 RHUBARB.--This is one of the most useful of all garden 
 productions that are put into pies and puddings. It was 
 comparatively little known till within the last twenty or thirty 
 years, but it is now cultivated in almost every British garden. 
 The part used is the footstalks of the leaves, which, peeled and 
 cut into small pieces, are put into tarts, either mixed with 
 apples or alone. When quite young, they are much better not 
 peeled. Rhubarb comes in season when apples are going out. The 
 common rhubarb is a native of Asia; the scarlet variety has the 
 finest flavour. Turkey rhubarb, the well-known medicinal drug, 
 is the root of a very elegant plant (_Rheum palmatum_), coming 
 to greatest perfection in Tartary. For culinary purposes, all 
 kinds of rhubarb are the better for being blanched. 
  
 RAISED PIE OF POULTRY OR GAME. 
  
 1340. INGREDIENTS.--To every lb. of flour allow 1/2 lb. of butter, 1/2 
 pint of water, the yolks of 2 eggs, 1/2 teaspoonful of salt (these are
for the crust); 1 large fowl or pheasant, a few slices of veal cutlet, a 
 few slices of dressed ham, forcemeat, seasoning of nutmeg, allspice, 
 pepper and salt, gravy. 
  
 [Illustration: RAISED PIE.] 
  
 _Mode_.--Make a stiff short crust with the above proportion of butter, 
 flour, water, and eggs, and work it up very smoothly; butter a 
 raised-pie mould, as shown in No. 1190, and line it with the paste. 
 Previously to making the crust, bone the fowl, or whatever bird is 
 intended to be used, lay it, breast downwards, upon a cloth, and season 
 the inside well with pounded mace, allspice, pepper, and salt; then 
 spread over it a layer of forcemeat, then a layer of seasoned veal, and 
 then one of ham, and then another layer of forcemeat, and roll the fowl 
 over, making the skin meet at the back. Line the pie with forcemeat, put 
 in the fowl, and fill up the cavities with slices of seasoned veal and 
 ham and forcemeat; wet the edges of the pie, put on the cover, pinch the 
 edges together with the paste-pincers, and decorate it with leaves; 
 brush it over with beaten yolk of egg, and bake in a moderate oven for 4 
 hours. In the mean time, make a good strong gravy from the bones, pour
 
 1341. INGREDIENTS.--3 or 4 lbs. of veal cutlets, a few slices of bacon 
 or ham, seasoning of pepper, salt, nutmeg, and allspice, forcemeat No. 
 415, 2 lbs. of hot-water paste No. 1217, 1/2 pint of good strong gravy. 
  
 _Mode_.--To raise the crust for a pie with the hands is a very difficult 
 task, and can only be accomplished by skilled and experienced cooks. The 
 process should be seen to be satisfactorily learnt, and plenty of 
 practice given to the making of raised pies, as by that means only will 
 success be insured. Make a hot-water paste by recipe No. 1217, and from 
 the mass raise the pie with the hands; if this cannot be accomplished, 
 cut out pieces for the top and bottom, and a long piece for the sides; 
 fasten the bottom and side-piece together by means of egg, and pinch the 
 edges well together; then line the pie with forcemeat made by recipe No. 
 415, put in a layer of veal, and a plentiful seasoning of salt, pepper, 
 nutmeg, and allspice, as, let it be remembered, these pies taste very 
 insipid unless highly seasoned. Over the seasoning place a layer of 
 sliced bacon or cooked ham, and then a layer of forcemeat, veal 
 seasoning, and bacon, and so on until the meat rises to about an inch 
 above the paste; taking care to finish with a layer of forcemeat, to
noyeau and pounded sugar to taste, 1-1/2 pint of cream. 
  
 _Mode_.--Dissolve the isinglass in a little boiling water, add the 
 lemon-juice, and strain this to the cream, putting in sufficient noyeau 
 and sugar to flavour and sweeten the mixture nicely; whisk the cream 
 well, put it into an oiled mould, and set the mould in ice or in a cool 
 place; turn it out, and garnish the dish to taste. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether, 1/2 hour. 
  
 _Average cost_, with cream at 1s. per pint and the best isinglass, 4s. 
  
 _Sufficient_ to fill a quart mould. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 OPEN JELLY WITH WHIPPED CREAM. 
  
 (_A very pretty dish_.) 
  
 1453. INGREDIENTS.--1-1/2 pint of jelly, 1/2 pint of cream, 1 glass of
becomes cheese. This assumes a degree of transparency, and possesses 
 many of the properties of coagulated albumen. If it be well dried, it 
 does not change by exposure to the air; but if it contain moisture, it 
 soon putrefies. It therefore requires some salt to preserve it, and this 
 acts likewise as a kind of seasoning. All our cheese is coloured more or 
 less, except that made from skim milk. The colouring substances employed 
 are arnatto, turmeric, or marigold, all perfectly harmless unless they 
 are adulterated; and it is said that arnatto sometimes contains red 
 lead. 
  
 1621. Cheese varies in quality and richness according to the materials 
 of which it is composed. It is made--1. Of entire milk, as in Cheshire; 
 2. of milk and cream, as at Stilton; 3. of new milk mixed with skimmed 
 milk, as in Gloucestershire; 4. of skimmed milk only, as in Suffolk, 
 Holland, and Italy. 
  
 1622. The principal varieties of cheese used in England are the 
 following:--_Cheshire cheese_, famed all over Europe for its rich 
 quality and fine piquant flavour. It is made of entire new milk, the 
 cream not being taken off. _Gloucester cheese_ is much milder in its
taste than the Cheshire. There are two kinds of Gloucester 
 cheese,--single and double. _Single Gloucester_ is made of skimmed milk, 
 or of the milk deprived of half the cream; _Double Gloucester_ is a 
 cheese that pleases almost every palate: it is made of the whole milk 
 and cream. _Stilton cheese_ is made by adding the cream of one day to 
 the entire milk of the next: it was first made at Stilton, in 
 Leicestershire. _Sage cheese_ is so called from the practice of 
 colouring some curd with bruised sage, marigold-leaves, and parsley, and 
 mixing this with some uncoloured curd. With the Romans, and during the 
 middle ages, this practice was extensively adopted. _Cheddar cheese_ 
 much resembles Parmesan. It has a very agreeable taste and flavour, and 
 has a spongy appearance. _Brickbat cheese_ has nothing remarkable except 
 its form. It is made by turning with rennet a mixture of cream and new 
 milk. The curd is put into a wooden vessel the shape of a brick, and is 
 then pressed and dried in the usual way. _Dunlop cheese_ has a 
 peculiarly mild and rich taste: the best is made entirely from new milk. 
 _New cheese_ (as it is called in London) is made chiefly in 
 Lincolnshire, and is either made of all cream, or, like Stilton. by 
 adding the cream of one day  '  s milking to the milk that comes immediately 
 from the cow: they are extremely thin, and are compressed gently two or
three times, turned for a few days, and then eaten new with radishes, 
 salad, &c. _Skimmed Milk cheese_ is made for sea voyages principally. 
 _Parmesan cheese_ is made in Parma and Piacenza. It is the most 
 celebrated of all cheese: it is made entirely of skimmed cow  '  s milk. The 
 high flavour which it has, is supposed to be owing to the rich herbage 
 of the meadows of the Po, where the cows are pastured. The best Parmesan 
 is kept for three or four years, and none is carried to market till it 
 is at least six months old. _Dutch cheese_ derives its peculiar pungent 
 taste from the practice adopted in Holland of coagulating the milk with 
 muriatic acid instead of rennet. _Swiss cheeses_ in their several 
 varieties are all remarkable for their fine flavour. That from 
 _Gruyère_, a bailiwick in the canton of Fribourg, is best known in 
 England. It is flavoured by the dried herb of _Melilotos officinalis_ in 
 powder. Cheese from milk and potatoes is manufactured in Thuringia and 
 Saxony. _Cream cheese_, although so called, is not properly cheese, but 
 is nothing more than cream dried sufficiently to be cut with a knife. 
  
  
 EGGS. 
 
creams, flip, &c. It is particularly necessary that they should be quite 
 fresh, as nothing is worse than stale eggs. Cobbett justly says, stale, 
 or even preserved eggs, are things to be run from, not after. 
  
 1625. The Metropolis is supplied with eggs from all parts of the 
 kingdom, and they are likewise largely imported from various places on 
 the continent; as France, Holland, Belgium, Guernsey, and Jersey. It 
 appears from official statements mentioned in McCulloch  '  s "Commercial 
 Dictionary," that the number imported from France alone amounts to about 
 60,000,000 a year; and supposing them on an average to cost fourpence a 
 dozen, it follows that we pay our continental neighbours above £83,000 a 
 year for eggs. 
  
 1626. The eggs of different birds vary much in size and colour. Those of 
 the ostrich are the largest: one laid in the menagerie in Paris weighed 
 2 lbs. 14 oz., held a pint, and was six inches deep: this is about the 
 usual size of those brought from Africa. Travellers describe _ostrich 
 eggs_ as of an agreeable taste: they keep longer than hen  '  s eggs. 
 Drinking-cups are often made of the shell, which is very strong. The 
 eggs of the _turkey_ are almost as mild as those of the hen; the egg of
the _goose_ is large, but well-tasted. _Duck  '  s eggs_ have a rich 
 flavour; the albumen is slightly transparent, or bluish, when set or 
 coagulated by boiling, which requires less time than hen  '  s eggs. 
 _Guinea-fowl eggs_ are smaller and more delicate than those of the hen. 
 Eggs of _wild fowl_ are generally coloured, often spotted; and the taste 
 generally partakes somewhat of the flavour of the bird they belong to. 
 Those of land birds that are eaten, as the _plover, lapwing, ruff_, &c., 
 are in general much esteemed; but those of _sea-fowl_ have, more or 
 less, a strong fishy taste. The eggs of the _turtle_ are very numerous: 
 they consist of yolk only, without shell, and are delicious. 
  
  
  
  
 RECIPES. 
  
  
 CHAPTER XXXIII. 
  
 
MACARONI, as usually served with the CHEESE COURSE. 
  
 I. 
  
 1645. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 lb. of pipe macaroni, 1/4 lb. of butter, 6 oz. 
 of Parmesan or Cheshire cheese, pepper and salt to taste, 1 pint of 
 milk, 2 pints of water, bread crumbs. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the milk and water into a saucepan with sufficient salt to 
 flavour it; place it on the fire, and, when it boils quickly, drop in 
 the macaroni. Keep the water boiling until it is quite tender; drain the 
 macaroni, and put it into a deep dish. Have ready the grated cheese, 
 either Parmesan or Cheshire; sprinkle it amongst the macaroni and some 
 of the butter cut into small pieces, reserving some of the cheese for 
 the top layer. Season with a little pepper, and cover the top layer of 
 cheese with some very fine bread crumbs. Warm, without oiling, the 
 remainder of the butter, and pour it gently over the bread crumbs. Place 
 the dish before a bright fire to brown the crumbs; turn it once or 
 twice, that it may be equally coloured, and serve very hot. The top of 
 the macaroni may be browned with a salamander, which is even better than
placing it before the fire, as the process is more expeditious; but it 
 should never be browned in the oven, as the butter would oil, and so 
 impart a very disagreeable flavour to the dish. In boiling the macaroni, 
 let it be perfectly tender but firm, no part beginning to melt, and the 
 form entirely preserved. It may be boiled in plain water, with a little 
 salt instead of using milk, but should then have a small piece of butter 
 mixed with it. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 to 1-3/4 hour to boil the macaroni, 5 minutes to brown it 
 before the fire. 
  
 _Average cost_, 1s. 6d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 6 or 7 persons. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 _Note_.--Riband macaroni may be dressed in the same manner, but does not 
 require boiling so long a time. 
  
  
 II.
_Sufficient_ for 3 or 4 persons. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 III. 
  
 1647. INGREDIENTS.--1/4 lb. of pipe macaroni, 1/2 pint of brown gravy 
 No. 436, 6 oz. of grated Parmesan cheese. 
  
 _Mode_.--Wash the macaroni, and boil it in salt and water until quite 
 tender; drain it, and put it into rather a deep dish. Have ready a pint 
 of good brown gravy, pour it hot over the macaroni, and send it to table 
 with grated Parmesan served on a separate dish. When the flavour is 
 liked, a little pounded mace may be added to the water in which the 
 macaroni is boiled; but this must always be sparingly added, as it will 
 impart a very strong flavour. 
  
 _Time_.--1-1/2 to 1-3/4 hour to boil the macaroni. 
  
 _Average cost_, with the gravy and cheese, 1s. 3d. 
 
_Sufficient_ for 3 or 4 persons. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 POUNDED CHEESE. 
  
 1648. INGREDIENTS.--To every lb. of cheese allow 3 oz. of fresh butter. 
  
 _Mode_.--To pound cheese is an economical way of using it, if it has 
 become dry; it is exceedingly good spread on bread, and is the best way 
 of eating it for those whose digestion is weak. Cut up the cheese into 
 small pieces, and pound it smoothly in a mortar, adding butter in the 
 above proportion. Press it down into a jar, cover with clarified butter, 
 and it will keep for several days. The flavour may be very much 
 increased by adding mixed mustard (about a teaspoonful to every lb.), or 
 cayenne, or pounded mace. Curry-powder is also not unfrequently mixed 
 with it. 
  
  
 RAMAKINS, to serve with the CHEESE COURSE. 
 
1649. INGREDIENTS.--1/4 lb. of Cheshire cheese, 1/4 lb. of Parmesan 
 cheese, 1/4 lb. of fresh butter, 4 eggs, the crumb of a small roll; 
 pepper, salt, and pounded mace to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Boil the crumb of the roll in milk for 5 minutes; strain, and 
 put it into a mortar; add the cheese, which should be finely scraped, 
 the butter, the yolks of the eggs, and seasoning, and pound these 
 ingredients well together. Whisk the whites of the eggs, mix them with 
 the paste, and put it into small pans or saucers, which should not be 
 more than half filled. Bake them from 10 to 12 minutes, and serve them 
 very hot and very quickly. This batter answers equally well for macaroni 
 after it is boiled tender. 
  
 _Time_--10 to 12 minutes. _Average cost_, 1s. 4d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 7 or 8 persons. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 PASTRY RAMAKINS, to serve with the CHEESE COURSE. 
 
1650. INGREDIENTS.--Any pieces of very good light puff-paste Cheshire, 
 Parmesan, or Stilton cheese. 
  
 _Mode_.--The remains or odd pieces of paste left from large tarts, &c. 
 answer for making these little dishes. Gather up the pieces of paste, 
 roll it out evenly, and sprinkle it with grated cheese of a nice 
 flavour. Fold the paste in three, roll it out again, and sprinkle more 
 cheese over; fold the paste, roll it out, and with a paste-cutter shape 
 it in any way that may be desired. Bake the ramakins in a brisk oven 
 from 10 to 15 minutes, dish them on a hot napkin, and serve quickly. The 
 appearance of this dish may be very much improved by brushing the 
 ramakins over with yolk of egg before they are placed in the oven. Where 
 expense is not objected to, Parmesan is the best kind of cheese to use 
 for making this dish. 
  
 _Time_.--10 to 15 minutes. _Average cost_, with 1/2 lb. of paste, 10d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 6 or 7 persons. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
 
TOASTED CHEESE, or SCOTCH RARE-BIT. 
  
 1651. INGREDIENTS.--A few slices of rich cheese, toast, mustard, and 
 pepper. 
  
 [Illustration: HOT-WATER CHEESE-DISH.] 
  
 _Mode_.--Cut some nice rich sound cheese into rather thin slices; melt 
 it in a cheese-toaster on a hot plate, or over steam, and, when melted, 
 add a small quantity of mixed mustard and a seasoning of pepper; stir 
 the cheese until it is completely dissolved, then brown it before the 
 fire, or with a salamander. Fill the bottom of the cheese-toaster with 
 hot water, and serve with dry or buttered toasts, whichever may be 
 preferred. Our engraving illustrates a cheese-toaster with hot-water 
 reservoir: the cheese is melted in the upper tin, which is placed in 
 another vessel of boiling water, so keeping the preparation beautifully 
 hot. A small quantity of porter, or port wine, is sometimes mixed with 
 the cheese; and, if it be not very rich, a few pieces of butter may be 
 mixed with it to great advantage. Sometimes the melted cheese is spread 
 on the toasts, and then laid in the cheese-dish at the top of the hot
be boiling; add a seasoning of pepper and salt, and simmer the whole for 
 5 minutes. Put the remainder of the butter into the sauce, and add the 
 minced parsley; then boil the eggs hard, strip off the shells, cut the 
 eggs into quarters, and put them on a dish. Bring the sauce to the 
 boiling-point, add the lemon-juice, pour over the eggs, and serve. 
  
 _Time_.--5 minutes to boil the sauce; the eggs, 10 to 15 minutes. 
  
 _Average cost_, 1s. 
  
 _Sufficient_ for 4 or 5 persons. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 OEUFS AU PLAT, or AU MIROIR, served on the Dish in which they are 
 Cooked. 
  
 1661. INGREDIENTS.--4 eggs, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Butter a dish rather thickly with good fresh butter; melt it, 
 break the eggs into it the same as for poaching, sprinkle them with
_Time_.--2-1/2 to 3-1/2 minutes, according to the size of the egg. 
  
 _Sufficient_.--Allow 2 eggs to each person. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time, but less plentiful in winter. 
  
  
 POACHED EGGS, WITH CREAM. 
  
 1664. INGREDIENTS.--1 pint of water, 1 teaspoonful of salt, 4 
 teaspoonfuls of vinegar, 4 fresh eggs, 1/2 gill of cream, salt, pepper, 
 and pounded sugar to taste, 1 oz. of butter. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the water, vinegar, and salt into a frying-pan, and break 
 each egg into a separate cup; bring the water, &c. to boil, and slip the 
 eggs gently into it without breaking the yolks. Simmer them from 3 to 4 
 minutes, but not longer, and, with a slice, lift them out on to a hot 
 dish, and trim the edges. Empty the pan of its contents, put in the 
 cream, add a seasoning to taste of pepper, salt, and pounded sugar; 
 bring the whole to the boiling-point; then add the butter, broken into
British isles is daily increasing, the more especially since so much 
 attention has been given to mechanical contrivances for roasting and 
 grinding the berry and preparing the beverage. 
  
 1802. Of the various kinds of coffee the Arabian is considered the best. 
 It is grown chiefly in the districts of Aden and Mocha; whence the name 
 of our Mocha coffee. Mocha coffee has a smaller and rounder bean than 
 any other, and likewise a more agreeable smell and taste. The next in 
 reputation and quality is the Java and Ceylon coffee, and then the 
 coffees of Bourbon and Martinique, and that of Berbice, a district of 
 the colony of British Guiana. The Jamaica and St. Domingo coffees are 
 less esteemed. 
  
 1803. A considerable change takes place in the arrangement of the 
 constituents of coffee by the application of heat in roasting it. 
 Independently of one of the objects of roasting, namely, that of 
 destroying its toughness and rendering it easily ground, its tannin and 
 other principles are rendered partly soluble in water; and it is to the 
 tannin that the brown colour of the decoction of coffee is owing. An 
 aromatic flavour is likewise developed during torrefaction, which is not
perceived in the raw berry, and which is not produced in the greatest 
 perfection until the heat has arrived at a certain degree of 
 temperature; but, if the heat be increased beyond this, the flavour is 
 again dissipated, and little remains but a bitter and astringent matter 
 with carbon. 
  
 1804. The roasting of coffee in the best manner requires great nicety, 
 and much of the qualities of the beverage depends upon the operation. 
 The roasting of coffee for the dealers in London and Paris has now 
 become a separate branch of business, and some of the roasters perform 
 the operation on a great scale, with considerable skill. Roasted coffee 
 loses from 20 to 30 per cent, by sufficient roasting, and the powder 
 suffers much by exposure to the air; but, while raw, it not only does 
 not lose its flavour for a year or two, but improves by keeping. If a 
 cup of the best coffee be placed upon a table boiling hot, it will fill 
 the room with its fragrance; but the coffee, when warmed again after 
 being cold, will be found to have lost most of its flavour. 
  
 1805. To have coffee in perfection, it should be roasted and ground just 
 before it is used, and more should not be ground at a time than is
wanted for immediate use, or, if it be necessary to grind more, it 
 should be kept closed from the air. Coffee readily imbibes exhalations 
 from other substances, and thus often acquires a bad flavour: brown 
 sugar placed near it will communicate a disagreeable flavour. It is 
 stated that the coffee in the West Indies has often been injured by 
 being laid in rooms near the sugar-works, or where rum is distilled; and 
 the same effect has been produced by bringing over coffee in the same 
 ships with rum and sugar. Dr. Moseley mentions that a few bags of 
 pepper, on board a ship from India, spoiled a whole cargo of coffee. 
  
 1806. With respect to the quantity of coffee used in making the 
 decoction, much depends upon the taste of the consumer. The greatest and 
 most common fault in English coffee is the too small quantity of the 
 ingredient. Count Rumford says that to make good coffee for drinking 
 after dinner, a pound of good Mocha coffee, which, when roasted and 
 ground, weighs only thirteen ounces, serves to make fifty-six full cups, 
 or a little less than a quarter of an ounce to a coffee-cup of moderate 
 size. 
  
 
 
 _Sufficient  '  _-Allow 2 tablespoonfuls for a breakfast-cupful of hot milk. 
  
  
 TO ROAST COFFEE. 
  
 (_A French Recipe_.) 
  
 1809. It being an acknowledged fact that French coffee is decidedly 
 superior to that made in England, and as the roasting of the berry is of 
 great importance to the flavour of the preparation, it will be useful 
 and interesting to know how they manage these things in France. In 
 Paris, there are two houses justly celebrated for the flavour of their 
 coffee,--_La Maison Corcellet_ and _La Maison Royer de Chartres_; and to 
 obtain this flavour, before roasting they add to every 3 lbs. of coffee 
 a piece of butter the size of a nut, and a dessert-spoonful of powdered 
 sugar: it is then roasted in the usual manner. The addition of the 
 butter and sugar develops the flavour and aroma of the berry; but it 
 must be borne in mind, that the quality of the butter must be of the 
 very best description.
 
 1837. INGREDIENTS.--The juice of 1 lemon, a tumbler-ful of cold water, 
 pounded sugar to taste, 4 small teaspoonful of carbonate of soda. 
  
 _Mode_.--Squeeze the juice from the lemon; strain, and add it to the 
 water, with sufficient pounded sugar to sweeten the whole nicely. When 
 well mixed, put in the soda, stir well, and drink while the mixture is 
 in an effervescing state. 
  
  
 TO MULL WINE. 
  
 1838. INGREDIENTS.--To every pint of wine allow 1 large cupful of water, 
 sugar and spice to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--In making preparations like the above, it is very difficult to 
 give the exact proportions of ingredients like sugar and spice, as what 
 quantity might suit one person would be to another quite distasteful. 
 Boil the spice in the water until the flavour is extracted, then add the 
 wine and sugar, and bring the whole to the boiling-point, when serve
with strips of crisp dry toast, or with biscuits. The spices usually 
 used for mulled wine are cloves, grated nutmeg, and cinnamon or mace. 
 Any kind of wine may be mulled, but port and claret are those usually 
 selected for the purpose; and the latter requires a very large 
 proportion of sugar. The vessel that the wine is boiled in must be 
 delicately clean, and should be kept exclusively for the purpose. Small 
 tin warmers may be purchased for a trifle, which are more suitable than 
 saucepans, as, if the latter are not scrupulously clean, they will spoil 
 the wine, by imparting to it a very disagreeable flavour. These warmers 
 should be used for no other purposes. 
  
  
 TO MAKE HOT PUNCH. 
  
 1839. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 pint of rum, 1/2 pint of brandy, 1/4 lb. of 
 sugar, 1 large lemon, 1/2 teaspoonful of nutmeg, 1 pint of boiling 
 water. 
  
 [Illustration: PUNCH-BOWL AND LADLE.] 
 
_Mode_.--Rub the sugar over the lemon until it has absorbed all the 
 yellow part of the skin, then put the sugar into a punchbowl; add the 
 lemon-juice (free from pips), and mix these two ingredients well 
 together. Pour over them the boiling water, stir well together, add the 
 rum, brandy, and nutmeg; mix thoroughly, and the punch will be ready to 
 serve. It is very important in making good punch that all the 
 ingredients are thoroughly incorporated; and, to insure success, the 
 processes of mixing must be diligently attended to. 
  
 _Sufficient_.--Allow a quart for 4 persons; but this information must be 
 taken _cum grano salis_; for the capacities of persons for this kind of 
 beverage are generally supposed to vary considerably. 
  
 PUNCH is a beverage made of various spirituous liquors or wine, 
 hot water, the acid juice of fruits, and sugar. It is considered 
 to be very intoxicating; but this is probably because the 
 spirit, being partly sheathed by the mucilaginous juice and the 
 sugar, its strength does not appear to the taste so great as it 
 really is. Punch, which was almost universally drunk among the 
 middle classes about fifty or sixty years ago, has almost
_Time_.--To stand 24 hours before being strained; 12 hours after the 
 sugar is added. 
  
 _Seasonable_.--Make this in July. 
  
 [Illustration] 
  
  
  
  
 INVALID COOKERY. 
  
  
 CHAPTER XXXVIII. 
  
  
 A FEW RULES TO BE OBSERVED IN COOKING FOR INVALIDS. 
  
 1841. LET all the kitchen utensils used in the preparation of invalids  '  
 cookery be delicately and   '  scrupulously clean;  '   if this is not the case,
a disagreeable flavour may be imparted to the preparation, which flavour 
 may disgust, and prevent the patient from partaking of the refreshment 
 when brought to him or her. 
  
 1842. For invalids, never make a large quantity of one thing, as they 
 seldom require much at a time; and it is desirable that variety be 
 provided for them. 
  
 1843. Always have something in readiness; a little beef tea, nicely made 
 and nicely skimmed, a few spoonfuls of jelly, &c. &c., that it may be 
 administered as soon almost as the invalid wishes for it. If obliged to 
 wait a long time, the patient loses the desire to eat, and often turns 
 against the food when brought to him or her. 
  
 1844. In sending dishes or preparations up to invalids, let everything 
 look as tempting as possible. Have a clean tray-cloth laid smoothly over 
 the tray; let the spoons, tumblers, cups and saucers, &c., be very clean 
 and bright. Gruel served in a tumbler is more appetizing than when 
 served in a basin or cup and saucer. 
 
tablespoonfuls of cold water, 1 pint of boiling water. 
  
 _Mode_.--Mix the prepared groats smoothly with the cold water in a 
 basin; pour over them the boiling water, stirring it all the time. Put 
 it into a very clean saucepan; boil the gruel for 10 minutes, keeping it 
 well stirred; sweeten to taste, and serve. It may be flavoured with a 
 small piece of lemon-peel, by boiling it in the gruel, or a little 
 grated nutmeg may be put in; but in these matters the taste of the 
 patient should be consulted. Pour the gruel in a tumbler and serve. When 
 wine is allowed to the invalid, 2 tablespoonfuls of sherry or port make 
 this preparation very nice. In cases of colds, the same quantity of 
 spirits is sometimes added instead of wine. 
  
 _Time_.--10 minutes. 
  
 _Sufficient_ to make a pint of gruel. 
  
  
 INVALID  '  S JELLY. 
 
1869. INGREDIENTS.--12 shanks of mutton, 3 quarts of water, a bunch of 
 sweet herbs, pepper and salt to taste, 3 blades of mace, 1 onion, 1 lb. 
 of lean beef, a crust of bread toasted brown. 
  
 _Mode_.--Soak the shanks in plenty of water for some hours, and scrub 
 them well; put them, with the beef and other ingredients, into a 
 saucepan with the water, and let them simmer very gently for 5 hours. 
 Strain the broth, and, when cold, take off all the fat. It may be eaten 
 either warmed up or cold as a jelly. 
  
 _Time_.--5 hours. _Average cost_, 1s. 
  
 _Sufficient_ to make from 1-1/2 to 2 pints of jelly. 
  
 _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 LEMONADE FOR INVALIDS. 
  
 1870. INGREDIENTS.--1/2 lemon, lump sugar to taste, 1 pint of boiling
sugar, and pour over the boiling water. Let it cool, then strain it; add 
 the wine, lemon-juice, and eggs, previously well beaten, and also 
 strained, and the beverage will be ready for use. If thought desirable, 
 the quantity of sherry and water could be lessened, and milk substituted 
 for them. To obtain the flavour of the lemon-rind properly, a few lumps 
 of the sugar should be rubbed over it, until some of the yellow is 
 absorbed. 
  
 _Time_.--Altogether 1 hour to make it. _Average cost_, 1s. 8d. 
  
 _Sufficient_ to make 2-1/2 pints of lemonade. _Seasonable_ at any time. 
  
  
 TO MAKE MUTTON BROTH. 
  
 1872. INGREDIENTS.--1 lb. of the scrag end of the neck of mutton, 1 
 onion, a bunch of sweet herbs, 4 turnip, 1/2 pints of water, pepper and 
 salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Put the mutton into a stewpan; pour over the water cold and add
method. 
  
  
 TOAST SANDWICHES. 
  
 1877. INGREDIENTS.--Thin cold toast, thin slices of bread-and-butter, 
 pepper and salt to taste. 
  
 _Mode_.--Place a very thin piece of cold toast between 2 slices of thin 
 bread-and-butter in the form of a sandwich, adding a seasoning of pepper 
 and salt. This sandwich may be varied by adding a little pulled meat, or 
 very fine slices of cold meat, to the toast, and in any of these forms 
 will be found very tempting to the appetite of an invalid. 
  
  
 1878. Besides the recipes contained in this chapter, there are, in the 
 previous chapters on cookery, many others suitable for invalids, which 
 it would be useless to repeat here. Recipes for fish simply dressed, 
 light soups, plain roast meat, well-dressed vegetables, poultry, simple 
 puddings, jelly, stewed fruits, &c. &c., all of which dishes may be
partaken of by invalids and convalescents, will be found in preceding 
 chapters. 
  
  
  
  
 DINNERS AND DINING. 
  
  
 CHAPTER XL. 
  
  
 1879. Man, it has been said, is a dining animal. Creatures of the 
 inferior races eat and drink; man only dines. It has also been said that 
 he is a cooking animal; but some races eat food without cooking it. A 
 Croat captain said to M. Brillat Savarin, "When, in campaign, we feel 
 hungry, we knock over the first animal we find, cut off a steak, powder 
 it with salt, put it under the saddle, gallop over it for half a mile, 
 and then eat it." Huntsmen in Dauphiny, when out shooting, have been 
 known to kill a bird, pluck it, salt and pepper it, and cook it by
And we may well say, Who, indeed, would suppose it? The gulf between the 
 Croat, with a steak under his saddle, and Alexis Soyer getting up a 
 great dinner at the Reform-Club, or even Thackeray  '  s Mrs. Raymond Gray 
 giving "a little dinner" to Mr. Snob (with one of those famous 
 "roly-poly puddings" of hers),--what a gulf it is! 
  
 1881. That Adam  '  s "ration," however, was "simple," is a matter on which 
 we have contrary judgments given by the poets. When Raphael paid that 
 memorable visit to Paradise,--which we are expressly told by Milton he 
 did exactly at dinner-time,--Eve seems to have prepared "a little 
 dinner" not wholly destitute of complexity, and to have added ice-creams 
 and perfumes. Nothing can be clearer than the testimony of the poet on 
 these points:-- 
  
 "And Eve within, due at her home prepared 
 For dinner savoury fruits, of taste to please 
 True appetite, and not disrelish thirst 
 Of nectarous draughts between.... 
 .... With dispatchful looks in haste 
 She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent,
What choice to choose for delicacy best, 
 What order so contrived as not to mix 
 Tastes not well join  '  d, inelegant, but bring 
 Taste after taste, upheld with kindliest change-- 
 *       *       *       *       * 
 "She _tempers dulcet creams_.... 
 .... _then strews the ground 
 With rose and odours._" 
  
 It may be observed, in passing, that the poets, though they have more to 
 say about wine than solid food, because the former more directly 
 stimulates the intellect and the feelings, do not flinch from the 
 subject of eating and drinking. There is infinite zest in the above 
 passage from Milton, and even more in the famous description of a dainty 
 supper, given by Keats in his "Eve of Saint Agnes." Could Queen Mab 
 herself desire to sit down to anything nicer, both as to its 
 appointments and serving, and as to its quality, than the collation 
 served by Porphyro in the lady  '  s bedroom while she slept?-- 
  
 "There by the bedside, where the faded moon
other than a very large establishment. Where, however, a service à la 
 Russe is practicable, there it, perhaps, no mode of serving a dinner so 
 enjoyable as this. 
  
  
 SUPPERS. 
  
 2139. Much may be done in the arrangement of a supper-table, at a very 
 small expense, provided _taste_ and _ingenuity_ are exercised. The 
 colours and flavours of the various dishes should contrast nicely; there 
 should be plenty of fruit and flowers on the table, and the room should 
 be well lighted. We have endeavoured to show how the various dishes may 
 be placed; but of course these little matters entirely depend on the 
 length and width of the table used, on individual taste, whether the 
 tables are arranged round the room, whether down the centre, with a 
 cross one at the top, or whether the supper is laid in two separate 
 rooms, &c. &c. The garnishing of the dishes has also much to do with the 
 appearance of a supper-table. Hams and tongues should be ornamented with 
 cut vegetable flowers, raised pies with aspic jelly cut in dice, and all 
 the dishes garnished sufficiently to be in good taste without looking
relaxed; in which case, the milk is sure to be imperfect in its 
 organization, and, consequently, deficient in its nutrient qualities. 
 Appetite is another indication of health in the suckling nurse or 
 mother; for it is impossible a woman can feed her child without having a 
 corresponding appetite; and though inordinate craving for food is 
 neither desirable nor necessary, a natural vigour should be experienced 
 at meal-times, and the food taken should be anticipated and enjoyed. 
  
 2440. Besides her health, the moral state of the nurse is to be taken 
 into account, or that mental discipline or principle of conduct which 
 would deter the nurse from at any time gratifying her own pleasures and 
 appetites at the cost or suffering of her infant charge. 
  
 2441. The conscientiousness and good faith that would prevent a nurse so 
 acting are, unfortunately, very rare; and many nurses, rather than 
 forego the enjoyment of a favourite dish, though morally certain of the 
 effect it will have on the child, will, on the first opportunity, feed 
 with avidity on fried meats, cabbage, cucumbers, pickles, or other crude 
 and injurious aliments, in defiance of all orders given, or confidence 
 reposed in their word, good sense, and humanity. And when the infant is
poison. The _symptoms_ and _treatment_ are much the same as those of 
 _nitric acid_. 
  
 N.B.--_In no case of poisoning by these three acids should emetics ever 
 be given_. 
  
 2652. _Oxalic Acid_, commonly called _Salt of Lemons_.--This poison may 
 be taken by mistake for Epsom salts, which it is a good deal like. It 
 may be distinguished from them by its very acid taste and its shape, 
 which is that of needle-formed crystals, each of which, if put into a 
 drop of ink, will turn it to a reddish brown, whereas Epsom salts will 
 not change its colour at all. When a large dose of this poison has been 
 taken, death takes place very quickly indeed.--_Symptoms produced in 
 those who have swallowed it_. A hot, burning, acid taste is felt in the 
 act of swallowing, and vomiting of a _greenish-brown_ fluid is produced, 
 sooner or later, according to the quantity and strength of the poison 
 taken. There is great tenderness felt over the stomach, followed by 
 clammy perspirations and convulsions; the legs are often drawn up, and 
 there is generally stupor, from which the patient, however, can easily 
 be roused, and always great prostration of strength. The pulse is small
quite dead-is to dash quantities of cold water on the back, from the top 
 of the neck downwards. Placing the patient under a pump, and pumping on 
 him, is the best way of doing this. Smelling-salts are also to be applied 
 to the nose, and the chest well rubbed with a camphor liniment. 
  
 2654. ALKALIS: _Potash, Soda_, and _Ammonia_, or common 
 _Smelling-Salts_, with their principal preparations--_Pearlash, Soap 
 Lees, Liquor Potassae, Nitre, Sal Prunella, Hartshorn_, and 
 _Sal--Volatile._--Alkalis are seldom taken or given with the view of 
 destroying life. They may, however, be swallowed by mistake.--_Symptoms 
 produced in those who have swallowed them_. There is at first a burning, 
 acrid taste in, and a sensation of tightness round, the throat, like 
 that of strangling; the skin touched is destroyed; retching mostly 
 followed by actual vomiting, then sets in; the vomited matters often 
 containing blood of a dark brown colour, with little shreds of flesh 
 here and there, and always changing vegetable blue colours green. There 
 is now great tenderness over the whole of the belly. After a little 
 while, great weakness, with cold, clammy sweats, a quick weak pulse, and 
 purging of bloody matters, takes place. The brain, too, mostly becomes 
 affected.--_Treatment_. Give two tablespoonfuls of vinegar or
depression, and sickness, with an intense burning pain in the region of 
 the stomach, which gets worse and worse, and is increased by pressure. 
 There is also vomiting of dark brown matter, sometimes mixed with blood; 
 and mostly great thirst, with a feeling of tightness round, and of 
 burning in, the throat. Purging also takes place, the matters brought 
 away being mixed with blood. The pulse is small and irregular, and the 
 skin sometimes cold and clammy, and at others hot. The breathing is 
 painful. Convulsions and spasms often occur.--_Treatment_. Give a couple 
 of teaspoonfuls of mustard in a glass of water, to bring on or assist 
 vomiting, and also use the other means elsewhere recommended for the 
 purpose. A solution, half of lime-water and half of linseed-oil, well 
 mixed, may be given, as well as plenty of arrowroot, gruel, or 
 linseed-tea. Simple milk is also useful. A little castor-oil should be 
 given, to cleanse the intestines of all the poison, and the 
 after-symptoms treated on general principles. 
  
 2657. _Corrosive Sublimate_.--Mostly seen in the form of little heavy 
 crystalline masses, which melt in water, and have a metallic taste. It 
 is sometimes seen in powder. This is a most powerful poison.--_Symptoms_. 
 These mostly come on immediately after the poison has been taken. There
is a coppery taste experienced in the act of swallowing, with a burning 
 heat, extending from the top of the throat down to the stomach; and also 
 a feeling of great tightness round the throat. In a few minutes great 
 pain is felt over the region of the stomach, and frequent vomiting of 
 long, stringy white masses, mixed with blood, takes place. There is 
 also mostly great purging. The countenance is generally pale and 
 anxious; the pulse always small and frequent; the skin cold and clammy, 
 and the breathing difficult. Convulsions and insensibility often occur, 
 and are very bad symptoms indeed. The inside of the mouth is more or 
 less swollen.--_Treatment_. Mix the whites of a dozen eggs in two pints 
 of cold water, and give a glassful of the mixture every three or four 
 minutes, until the stomach can contain no more. If vomiting does not now 
 come on naturally, and supposing the mouth is not very sore or much 
 swollen, an emetic draught, No. 1, may be given, and vomiting induced. 
 (The No. 1 draught, we remind our readers, is thus made:--Twenty grains 
 of sulphate of zinc in an ounce and a half of water; the draught to be 
 repeated if vomiting does not take place in a quarter of an hour.) After 
 the stomach has been well cleaned out, milk, flour-and-water, linseed-tea, 
 or barley-water, should be taken in large quantities. If eggs cannot be 
 obtained, milk, or flour-and-water, should be given as a substitute for
them at once. When the depression of strength is very great indeed, a 
 little warm brandy-and-water must be given. In the course of an hour or 
 two the patient should take two tablespoonfuls of castor-oil, and if 
 inflammation comes on, it is to be treated as directed in the article on 
 acids and alkalis. The diet should also be the same. If the patient 
 recovers, great soreness of the gums is almost certain to take place. The 
 simplest, and at the same time one of the best modes of treatment, is to 
 wash them well three or four times a day with brandy-and-water. 
  
 2658. _Calomel_.--A heavy white powder, without taste, and insoluble in 
 water. It has been occasionally known to destroy life.--_Symptoms_. Much 
 the same as in the case of corrosive sublimate.--_Treatment_. The same 
 as for corrosive sublimate. If the gums are sore, wash them, as 
 recommended in the case of corrosive sublimate, with brandy-and-water 
 three or four times a day, and keep the patient on _fluids_, such as 
 arrowroot, gruel, broth, or beef-tea, according to the other symptoms. 
 Eating hard substances would make the gums more sore and tender. 
  
 2659. _Copper_.--The preparations of this metal which are most likely to 
 be the ones producing poisonous symptoms, are _blue-stone_ and
_verdigris_. People are often taken ill after eating food that has been 
 cooked in copper saucepans. When anything has been cooked in one of 
 these vessels, _it should never be allowed to cool in it_.--_Symptoms_. 
 Headache, pain in the stomach, and purging; vomiting of green or blue 
 matters, convulsions, and spasms.--_Treatment_. Give whites of eggs, 
 sugar-and-water, castor-oil, and drinks, such as arrowroot and gruel. 
  
 2660. _Emetic Tartar_.--Seen in the form of a white powder, or crystals, 
 with a slightly metallic taste. It has not often been known to destroy 
 life.--_Symptoms_. A strong metallic taste in the act of swallowing, 
 followed by a burning pain in the region of the stomach, vomiting, and 
 great purging. The pulse is small and rapid, the skin cold and clammy, 
 the breathing difficult and painful, and the limbs often much cramped. 
 There is also great prostration of strength.--_Treatment_. Promote the 
 vomiting by giving plenty of warm water, or warm arrowroot and water. 
 Strong tea, in large quantities, should be drunk; or, if it can be 
 obtained, a decoction of oak bark. The after-treatment is the same as 
 that for acids and alkalis; the principal object in all these cases 
 being to keep down the inflammation of the parts touched by the poison 
 by means of leeches, warm poppy fomentations, fever-mixtures, and very
