after it is ridged, if perchance any large clods have been left in the 
 seed bed. The hollow channel left by the share of the plough is called 
 the furrow, the raised land between two furrows is called the ridge 
 (_porca_,) because there the seed is as it were laid upon an altar 
 (_porricere_) to secure a crop, for when the entrails are offered to 
 the gods this word _porricere_ is used to describe the oblation. 
  
  
  
  
 2° _March 24-May 7_ 
  
  
 XXX. These are the things to be done during the second season between 
 the vernal equinox and the rising of the Pleiades. Weed the corn land, 
 break up old sod, cut the willows, close the pastures (to the stock) 
 and complete any thing left undone in the preceding season. Plant 
 trees before the buds shoot and they begin to blossom, for deciduous 
 trees are not fit to transplant after they put forth leaves. Plant and 
 prune your olives.
 
  
  
  
 3° _May 7-June 24_ 
  
  
 XXXI. These are the things to be done during the third season between 
 the rising of the Pleiades and the summer solstice. Dig the young 
 vines or plough them, and afterwards put the land in good order; that 
 is to say, fine the soil so that no clods shall remain. This is called 
 fining the soil (_occare_) because it breaks down (_occidare_) the 
 clods. Thin out the vines, but let it be done by one who knows 
 how, for this operation which is considered of great importance is 
 performed only on vines and not on the orchard. To thin a vine is to 
 select and reserve the one, two and some times even three best new 
 tendrils sprung from the stem of the vine, cutting off all the others, 
 lest the stem may be unable to furnish nourishment for those which 
 have been reserved. So in a nursery it is the custom to cut it back 
 at first so that the vine may grow with a stronger stem and may have
greater strength to produce fruitful tendrils: for a stem which grows 
 slender like a rush is sterile through weakness and cannot throw out 
 tendrils. Thus it is the custom to call a weak stem a flag, and 
 a strong stem, which bears grapes, a palm. The name _flagellum_, 
 indicating something as unstable as a breeze, is derived from 
 _flatus_, by the change of a letter, just as in the case of the word 
 _flabellum_, which means fly fan. The name _palma_, which is given 
 to those vine shoots which are fruitful in grapes, was it seems, at 
 first, parilema, derived from _parire_ (to produce), whence by a 
 change of letters, such as we find in many instances, it came to be 
 called _palma_. 
  
 From another part of the vine springs the _capreolus_, which is a 
 little spiral tendril, like a curled hair, by means of which the vine 
 holds on while it creeps towards the place of which it would take 
 possession, from which quality of taking hold of things (_capere_) it 
 is called _capreolus_. 
  
 All forage crops should be saved at this season; first, basil, then 
 mixed fodder (_farrago_)[87] and vetch, and last of all the hay. Our
name for basil is _ocinum_, which is derived from the Greek word 
 [Greek: ocheos] and signifies that it comes quickly, like the pot herb 
 of the same name. It has this name also because it quickens the action 
 of the bowels of cattle and so is fed to them as a purgative. It is 
 cut green from a bean field before the pods are formed. On the other 
 hand that forage which is cut with a sickle from a field in which 
 barley and vetch and other legumes have been sown in mixture for 
 forage, is called _farrago_ from the instrument (_ferro_) with which 
 it is cut, or perhaps because it was first sown in the stubble of a 
 field of corn (_far_). It is fed to horses and other cattle in the 
 spring to purge and to fatten them. 
  
 Vetch (_vicia_) is so called from its quality of conquering 
 (_vincire_) because this plant, like the vine, has tendrils by means 
 of which it creeps twisting upward on the stalks of lupines or other 
 plants where it clings until it over-tops its host. 
  
 If you have irrigated meadows, proceed to water them at this season, 
 as soon as you have saved the hay. 
 
During droughts water your grafted fruit trees every evening. They 
 probably derive their name, (_poma_), from their appetite for drink 
 (_potus_). 
  
  
  
  
 4° _June 24-July 21_ 
  
  
 XXXII. During the fourth season between the summer solstice and the 
 rising of the Dog Star most farmers make their harvest, because it is 
 claimed that to mature properly corn should be allowed fifteen days to 
 germinate and shoot, fifteen days to bloom and fifteen days to ripen. 
  
 Finish your ploughing: it will be more profitable in proportion as the 
 earth is ploughed warm, when the land is broken up, fine it, that is, 
 work it again in order that all the clods may be reduced, for at the 
 first ploughing large clods are always turned up. This is the time 
 also to sow vetch, lentils, the small variety of chick peas, pulse
(_ervilia_) and the other things which we call legumes, but which 
 others, as for example the Gauls, call _legarica_, both of which names 
 come from the practice of picking their fruit (_legere_) because they 
 are not cut but gathered. 
  
 Work the old vines a second time and the young ones thrice, especially 
 if there are any clods left. 
  
  
  
  
 5° _July 21-September 26_ 
  
  
 XXXIII. During the fifth season between the rising of the Dog Star 
 and the autumn equinox thresh your straw and rick it, continue the 
 harrowing of your fallow land, prune your fruit trees, and mow your 
 irrigated meadow the second time. 
  
 
 
  
 6° _September 26-October 28_ 
  
  
 XXXIV. The authorities advise you to begin to sow at the commencement 
 of the sixth season immediately after the autumn equinox and to keep 
 it up for the following 91 days, but not to attempt to sow any thing 
 after the winter solstice, unless it is absolutely necessary, because 
 seed sown before the winter solstice germinates in seven days, while 
 that sown later hardly ever sprouts for 40 days. 
  
 In like manner the authorities say that you should not begin your 
 sowing before the equinox, lest continued rains cause the seed to rot 
 in the ground. The best time to plant beans is at the setting of the 
 Pleiades, but gather the grapes and make the vintage between the 
 equinox and the setting of the Pleiades. Immediately afterward begin 
 to prune the vines, to propagate them and plant fruit trees, but in 
 those regions where the frost comes early it is better to postpone 
 these operations until the following spring.
 
  
  
  
 7° _October 28-December 24._ 
  
  
 XXXV. These are the things to do during the seventh season between 
 the setting of the Pleiades and the winter solstice. Plant lilies and 
 crocuses and propagate roses, which may be done by making cuttings 
 about three inches in length from a stem already rooted, set these out 
 and later, after they have formed their own roots, transplant them. 
 The cultivation of violets has no place on a farm because they require 
 elevated beds for which the soil is scraped up and these are damaged 
 or even washed away by heavy rains, thus wasting the fertility of the 
 land. At any time of the year between the rising of the west wind and 
 the rising of Arcturus (February-September) it is proper to transplant 
 from the seed beds thyme, an herb, which owes its name, _serpyllum_, 
 to its creeping habit (_quod serpit_). This is the season also to 
 dig new ditches, clean the old ones, and to prune the trees in the
arbustum and the vines which are married to them, but be careful that 
 you suspend most of your work during the fifteen days before and after 
 the winter solstice: it is fitting, however, to set out some trees 
 during this period, as, for example, elms. 
  
  
  
  
 8° _December 24-February 7_ 
  
  
 XXXVI. These are the things to do during the eighth season between the 
 winter solstice and the rising of the west wind. Drain the fields, if 
 any water is standing on them, but if they are dry and the land is 
 friable, harrow them. Prune the vines and the orchard. When it is not 
 fitting to work in the fields then those things should be done which 
 can be done under cover during the winter twilight. 
  
 All these rules should be written out and posted in the farmstead and 
 the overseer especially should have them at the tip of his tongue.
_Of the four methods of propagating plants_ 
  
 XXXIX. The second operation, namely that of propagating, must be 
 considered in relation to the proper time for sowing each kind of 
 seed, for this concerns the aspect of the field you are to sow and the 
 season fitting for what you are to plant. Do we not see some things 
 grow best in the spring, others in summer, some in autumn, and others 
 again in winter? For each plant is sowed or propagated or harvested in 
 season according to its nature: so while most trees are grafted most 
 successfully in spring, rather than the autumn, yet figs may be 
 grafted at the summer solstice, and cherries even in winter. 
  
 And since there are four methods of propagation of plants, by nature 
 and by the several processes of art, namely: transplanting from one 
 place to another, as is done in layering vines, what is called cuttage 
 or propagating quick sets cut from trees, and graftage, which consists 
 in transferring scions from one tree to another, let us consider at 
 what season and in what locality you should do each of these things. 
  
 
_Of racking wine_ 
  
 LXV. When the must is stored in the vat to make wine, it should not be 
 racked off while it is fermenting nor until this process has advanced 
 so far that the wine may be considered to be made. If you wish to 
 drink old wine, it is not made until a year is completed; when it is a 
 year old, then draw it out. But if your vineyard contains that kind 
 of grape which turns sour early, you should eat the fruit, or sell it 
 before the succeeding vintage. There are kinds of wine, like that of 
 Falernum, which improve the longer you keep them. 
  
  
 _Of preserved olives_ 
  
 LXVI. If you attempt to eat white olives immediately after you have 
 put them up and before they are cured your palate will reject them on 
 account of their bitterness (and the same is true of the black olive) 
 unless you dip them in salt to make them palatable. 
  
 
_Of nuts, dates and figs_ 
  
 LXVII. The sooner you use nuts, dates and figs after they have been 
 stored, the more palatable they will be, for by keeping figs lose 
 their flavour, dates rot and nuts dry up. 
  
  
 _Of stored fruits_ 
  
 LXVIII. Fruits which are strung, such as grapes, apples and sorbs show 
 by their appearance when they may be taken down for use, for by their 
 change of colour and shrinking they reveal themselves as destined to 
 the garbage pile unless they are eaten in time. Sorbs which have been 
 laid by when they are already dead-ripe should be used promptly, but 
 those which were picked green are slower to decay: for green fruit in 
 the store house must there go through the process of ripening which 
 was denied it on the tree. 
  
  
 _Of marketing grain_
feed of the cows is cut down at that time because it is deemed that 
 they breed most successfully when they are thin. 
  
 "The next consideration is concerning breeding, which I call the period 
 between conception and birth, for these are the beginning and the end 
 of pregnancy. First of all then we should consider the stinting and 
 the season at which this should be accomplished, for as the 
 season from the rising of the west wind to the vernal equinox 
 (February-March) is considered best for swine, so that from the 
 setting of Arcturus to the setting of Aquila (May-July) is best for 
 sheep. Furthermore, a rule should be made that the male animals are 
 kept apart from the females for some time before they are bred, a 
 period which neatherds and shepherds usually fix at two months. The 
 next consideration is of the rules to be observed while the animal 
 is pregnant, because the periods of gestation differ in the several 
 domestic animals: thus the mare goes twelve months, the cow ten, the 
 ewe and the goat five and the sow four. 
  
 "In Spain is reported a phenomenon of breeding which seems incredible, 
 but is nevertheless true, namely: that on Mount Tagnus on that part of
the coast of Lusitania near the town of Olisippo, mares are some 
 times impregnated by the wind,[113] some thing which often happens with 
 respect to chickens, whence their eggs are called [Greek: hypaenemios] 
 (conceived by the wind),[114] but the foals born of such mares never 
 live more than three years. 
  
 "When lambs are born in due season, or what we call _chordi_ (that is 
 to say those lambs which are born late and have remained beyond their 
 season in the belly of the dam, the name _chordi_, being derived from 
 [Greek: chorion] the Greek name for the membrane which is called the 
 after birth), care must be taken to clean them and set them gently on 
 their feet and to prevent the dam from crushing them. 
  
 "On the third consideration with respect to raising young animals, you 
 must consider for how long they should be permitted to suck the dam 
 and when and where, and if the mother has an insufficient supply of 
 milk, how you may put the young one to nurse at the udder of another: 
 in which case they are called _subrumi_, that is to say, under the 
 udder, for I think that rumis is an old word for udder. 
 
from wasting away in their longing for the dam: they should be tempted 
 to eat by giving them appetizing food, and care should be taken that 
 they do not suffer from cold or heat. When at last they have forgotten 
 the taste of milk and no longer yearn for the dam, they may be driven 
 out with the flock. 
  
 "A ram lamb should not be altered until he is five months old, nor yet 
 in very hot or very cold weather. Those which you wish to keep for 
 rams should be chosen as far as possible from dams who are in the 
 habit of having twin lambs. 
  
 "Most of these recommendations apply equally to those fine wool sheep 
 which are called _pellitae_, because they are jacketed with skins, as 
 is done at Tarentum and in Attica, to protect their wool from fouling, 
 for by this precaution the fleece is kept in better plight for dyeing, 
 washing or cleaning. Greater diligence is required to keep clean the 
 folds and stables of such sheep than is necessary for the ordinary 
 breeds: so they are paved with stone to the end that no urine may 
 stand anywhere in the stable. 
 
"Sheep eat whatever is put before them--fig leaves, marc, even straw. 
 Bran should be fed to them in moderation, lest they eat either too 
 much or too little of it, in either of which cases it is bad for the 
 digestion, but clover and alfalfa agree with them best and make both 
 fat and milk with the utmost facility. 
  
 "So far as concerns the health of the flock, there are many things 
 I might add, but, as Scrofa has said, the flock master keeps his 
 prescriptions written down in a book and carries with him what he 
 needs in the way of physic. 
  
 "It remains to speak of the number of sheep in a flock. Some make this 
 more, some less, for there is no natural limit. In Epirus almost all 
 of us have a rule not to allow more than one hundred short wool sheep 
 or fifty fine wool jacketed sheep to a shepherd." 
  
  
 _Of goats_ 
  
 III. As Atticus stopped, Cossinius took him up. "Come, my dear
to pasture in summer in the hills where shrubbery abounds. 
  
 "These are my breeding rules: 
  
 "For a month before breeding I cut down the food and drink of the cows 
 because it is deemed that they breed more certainly when they are 
 thin. On the other hand, I fatten the bulls up on grass and straw and 
 hay for two months before the breeding season, and during that time I 
 keep them apart from the cows. Like Atticus, I have two for seventy 
 cows, one a yearling, the other two years old. When that constellation 
 has risen which the Greeks call Lyra, and we Romans, Fides, I turn 
 the bull into the herd again. The bull indicates whether a male or a 
 female calf has been conceived by the side on which he leaves the cow: 
 if male, on the right; if female, on the left. "Why this is so," said 
 Vaccius, turning to me, "I leave to you who read Aristotle." 
  
 "A cow should not be served under two years, so that she may have her 
 first calf in the third year: it would be better in the fourth. Most 
 cows bear for ten years, some even more. The most suitable time for 
 stinting cows is during the forty days following the rising of the
Dolphin, or even a little later, for thus they will drop their calves 
 at the most temperate season of the year, for a cow goes ten months 
 pregnant. On this subject I have come upon an extraordinary statement 
 in a book that a bull which has just been altered can get a cow with 
 calf. 
  
 "Breeding cows should be pastured where there is abundant grass and 
 plenty of water, and care should be taken to protect them from 
 crowding too close together, and from being struck, or from fighting 
 with one another: moreover, to protect them against being worried in 
 summer by cattle flies and those minute insects which get under their 
 tails, some farmers shut them up during the heat of the day in pens, 
 which should be strewn with leaves or some other bedding on which they 
 can rest comfortably. In summer they are driven to water twice a day, 
 in winter once. Against the time when they are due to drop their 
 calves you should arrange to give them access to fresh forage near the 
 stable which they can eat with appetite as they go out, for at that 
 time they are very dainty about their food. A watch out must be kept 
 to prevent their frequenting chilly places, for cold depresses the 
 vitality as much as hunger.
 
 "These are the rules for raising neat cattle: the suckling calves 
 should not be suffered to sleep with their dams, for they might crush 
 them, but should be given access to them in the morning and when they 
 return from pasture. When the calves are weaned the dams should be 
 comforted by having green stuff thrown into their stalls for them to 
 eat. The floor of a calf stable, like most others, should be paved 
 with stone to keep their hoofs from rotting. The calves may be 
 pastured with their dams after the autumn equinox. Bull calves should 
 not be altered before they are two years old, as they recover with 
 difficulty if the operation is performed sooner, while if it is done 
 later they are apt to be stubborn and useless. 
  
 "As in the case of other cattle, the herd should be gone over every 
 year and the culls thrown out because they occupy the room of those 
 which might be profitable. If a cow loses her calf she should be given 
 another to nurse, taken from a cow which has not a sufficient supply 
 of milk. Calves six months old are fed wheat bran and barley meal and 
 young grass, and care should be taken that they are watered morning 
 and evening.
"I propose to tell about asses as well I may, because I am from Reate 
 where the best and the largest are found; indeed, I have sold to the 
 Arcadians themselves asses of this race and of my own breeding. He who 
 wishes to establish a good herd of asses should see in the first place 
 that he procures jacks and jennies of prime age so that they may breed 
 as long as possible, strong, well made in all parts, of full body and 
 of a good breed, that is to say derived from those localities whence 
 the best specimens come; thus the Peloponnesians, so far as possible, 
 buy asses bred in Arcadia and we in Italy those from the valley of 
 Reate. For if the best of those delicious fish we call _muraenae 
 flutae_ are taken on the coast of Sicily and the best sturgeons at 
 Rhodes, it does not follow that they are of equal delicacy in all 
 seas. 
  
 "There are two kinds of asses, one wild, which is called the onager, 
 of which there, are many herds in Phrygia and Lycaonia; the other 
 domestic, as they are all over Italy. The onager is fit for use for 
 breeding because he is easily tamed and once domesticated never 
 reverts to a wild life.[138] 
 
"Because their young take after their parents, it is important to 
 choose both jack and jenny of good conformation. The conditions of 
 buying and selling asses are much the same as for other kinds of 
 cattle and include stipulations as to their health and against tort. 
 They are best fed on corn and barley bran. The jennies are bred before 
 the solstice so that they may have their foals at the same season in 
 the following year, for their period of gestation is twelve months. 
 The jennies should be relieved from work while in foal for fatigue at 
 that time injures the offspring: but the jacks, on the contrary, are 
 worked all the time, because it is lack of exercise which is bad for 
 them. 
  
 "In the matter of rearing, practically the same rules apply to asses as 
 to horses. The foals are not separated from their dams for the first 
 year after they are born: during the second year they are permitted 
 to stay with their dams at night, but they should then be tied with a 
 loose halter or some other such restraint. In the third year you begin 
 to break them for whatever service they are intended. 
  
 "As to the number: they are not usually kept in herds unless it may be
Care must be taken that they are fed regularly, for, if food is not 
 provided, hunger will lead them in search of it away from the 
 flock, unless, indeed, they shall find it in one another, thereby 
 contradicting the old proverb,[146] or perchance they may realize the 
 fable of Actaeon and turn their teeth against their master himself. 
 You would do well to feed them on barley bread soaked in milk, because 
 when they have become accustomed to that diet they will not readily 
 desert the flock. They should never be suffered to taste the flesh of 
 a carrion sheep lest the relish should tempt them to indulge in such 
 food again. They may be fed also broth made out of bones, or bones 
 themselves when broken up, for that makes their teeth stronger and the 
 mouth wider: and thereby the jaws are stretched, while the zest of the 
 marrow makes the dog fiercer. They should be accustomed to take their 
 food in the day time where the flock is feeding and at night where the 
 flock is folded. 
  
 "In the matter of breeding it is the practice to line the bitch at the 
 beginning of spring, for then she is said to be in heat, that is to 
 say, to show a readiness for breeding. When they are lined at this 
 season they pup about the solstice, for they go three months. While
it has been ploughed at that season, it should be worked again, after 
 an interval of twenty days, about the time of the solstice, which is 
 the eighth or ninth day before the Kalends of July, and again the 
 third time about the Kalends of September, for it is not the practice 
 of experienced farmers to till the land in the interval after the 
 summer solstice, unless the ground shall have been soaked with a heavy 
 down-pour of sudden rain, like those of winter, as does some times 
 happen at this season. In that event there is no reason why the fallow 
 should not be cultivated during the month of July. But when you do 
 till at this season beware lest the land be worked while it is muddy: 
 or when, having been sprinkled by a shower, it is in the condition 
 which the country people call _varia_ and _cariosa_, that is to say, 
 when, after a long drought, a light rain has moistened the surface of 
 the upturned sod but has not soaked to the bottom of the furrow. 
  
 "Those plough lands which are cultivated when they are miry are 
 rendered useless for an entire year--they can be neither seeded nor 
 harrowed nor hoed--but those which are worked when they are in the 
 state which has been described as varia, remain sterile for three 
 years on end. We should, therefore, follow a medium course and plough
Church. The lady ' s chief virtue appears to have been, in the memory 
 of her husband, that she was "the great-grand-daughter of John 
 Allen, esq. of Lyng House in the County of Norfolk, the first person 
 according to the Comte de Boulainvilliers, who there used marl." 
  
 The Romans did not have the fight against sour land which is the 
 heritage of the modern farmer after years of continuous application 
 to his land of phosphoric and sulphuric acid in the form of mineral 
 fertilizers. What sour land the Romans had they corrected with humus 
 making barnyard manure, or the rich compost which Cato and Columella 
 recommend. They had, however, a test for sourness of land which is 
 still practised even where the convenient litmus paper is available. 
 Virgil (_Georgic_ II, 241) gives the formula: "Fill a basket with 
 soil, and strain fresh water through it. The taste of water strained 
 through sour soil will twist awry the taster ' s face."] 
  
 [Footnote 63: This sounds like the boast of the modern proprietor of an 
 old blue grass sod in Northern Virginia or Kentucky. On the general 
 question of pasture vs. arable land, cf. Hartlib ' s _Legacie_: "It is a 
 misfortune that pasture lands are not more improved. England abounds
[Footnote 64: This is the explanation of why Aesop ' s fox found the 
 grapes to be sour which grew on a trellis, for he had expected to find 
 them of easy access on the ground. Aesop was a Phrygian, and, while 
 Bentley has proved that Aesop never wrote the existing fables which go 
 by that name, yet it is recognized that they are of Oriental origin 
 and it is evident that that of the Fox and the Grapes came out of 
 Asia, where, as Varro says, the grapes were usually allowed to grow on 
 the ground.] 
  
 [Footnote 65: One is tempted to include here Pliny ' s observations upon 
 the tests of good soil if only for the sake of his description of one 
 of the sweetest sensations of the farmer every where, the aroma of new 
 ploughed fertile land:-- 
  
 "Those unguents which have a taste of earth are better," says Cicero, 
 "than those which smack of saffron," it seeming to him more to the 
 purpose to express himself by the word taste than smell. And such is 
 the fact no doubt, that soil is the best which has the savour of a 
 perfume. If the question should be put to us, what is this odour of 
 the earth that is held in such estimation; our answer is that it
is the same that is often to be recognized at the moment of sunset 
 without the necessity even of turning up the ground, at the spots 
 where the extremities of the rainbow have been observed to meet the 
 earth: as also, when after long continued drought, the rain has soaked 
 the ground. Then it is that the earth exhales the divine odour that is 
 so peculiarly its own, and to which, imparted to it by the sun, there 
 is no perfume however sweet that can possibly be compared. It is this 
 odour which the earth, when turned up, ought to emit, and which, when 
 once found, can never deceive any person: and this will be found the 
 best criterion for judging of the quality of the soil. Such, too, is 
 the odour that is usually perceived in land newly cleared when an 
 ancient forest has been just cut down; its excellence is a thing that 
 is universally admitted.] 
  
 [Footnote 66: The _actus_ was the head land or as much land as a yoke 
 of oxen could plough at a single spell without stopping, and measured 
 120 feet in length and four feet in width. Cf. Pliny, H.N. XVIII, 3. 
 Hence the square of the head land became the basis of the Roman land 
 measure. With the derivation of the _actus_ may be compared that of 
 the English furlong (furrow-long) and the French _arpent_ (literally,
