 The cathedral at Amiens made ample amends for the country we passed 
 through to see it; the _Nef d  '  Amiens_ deserves the fame of a first-rate 
 structure: and the ornaments of its high altar seem particularly well 
 chosen, of an excellent taste, and very capital execution. The vineyards 
 from thence hither shew, that either the climate, or season, or both, 
 improve upon one: the grapes climbing up some not very tall 
 golden-pippin trees, and mingling their fruits at the top, have a mighty 
 pleasing effect; and I observe the rage for Lombardy poplars is in equal 
 force here as about London: no tolerable house have I passed without 
 seeing long rows of them; all young plantations, as one may perceive by 
 their size. Refined countries always are panting for speedy enjoyment: 
 the maxim of _carpe diem_[Footnote: Seize the present moment.] came into 
 Rome when luxury triumphed there; and poets and philosophers lent their 
 assistance to decorate and dignify her gaudy car. Till then we read of 
 no such haste to be happy; and on the same principle, while Americans 
 contentedly wait the slow growth of their columnal chesnut, our hot-bed 
 inhabitants measure the slender poplar with canes, anxiously admiring 
 its quick growth and early elegance; yet are often cut down themselves,
which, when once tasted, will not seldom be preferred to the attentive 
 watchfulness of more confined society. 
  
 The famous Venetian too, who has written so many successful comedies, 
 and is now employed upon his own Memoirs, at the age of eighty-four, 
 was a delightful addition to our Coterie, _Goldoni_. He is garrulous, 
 good-humoured, and gay; resembling the late James Harris of Salisbury in 
 person not manner, and seems justly esteemed, and highly, by his 
 countrymen. 
  
 The conversation of the Marquis Trotti and the Abate Bucchetti is 
 likewise particularly pleasing; especially to me, who am naturally 
 desirous to live as much as possible among Italians of general 
 knowledge, good taste, and polished manners, before I enter their 
 country, where the language will be so very indispensable. Mean time I 
 have stolen a day to visit my old acquaintance the English Austin Nuns 
 at the Fossée, and found the whole community alive and cheerful; they 
 are many of them agreeable women, and having seen Dr. Johnson with me 
 when I was last abroad, enquired much for him: Mrs. Fermor, the 
 Prioress, niece to Belinda in the Rape of the Lock, taking occasion to
tell me, comically enough, "That she believed there was but little 
 comfort to be found in a house that harboured _poets_; for that she 
 remembered Mr. Pope  '  s praise made her aunt very troublesome and 
 conceited, while his numberless caprices would have employed ten 
 servants to wait on him; and he gave one" (said she) "no amends by his 
 talk neither, for he only sate dozing all day, when the sweet wine was 
 out, and made his verses chiefly in the night; during which season he 
 kept himself awake by drinking coffee, which it was one of the maids 
 business to make for him, and they took it by turns." 
  
 These ladies really live here as comfortably for aught I see as peace, 
 quietness, and the certainty of a good dinner every day can make them. 
 Just so much happier than as many old maids who inhabit Milman Street 
 and Chapel Row, as they are sure not to be robbed by a treacherous, or 
 insulted by a favoured, servant in the decline of life, when protection 
 is grown hopeless and resistance vain; and as they enjoy at least a 
 moral certainty of never living worse than they do to-day: while the 
 little knot of unmarried females turned fifty round Red Lion Square 
 _may_ always be ruined by a runaway agent, a bankrupted banker, or a 
 roguish steward; and even the petty pleasures of six-penny quadrille may
and I now find that he was deliciously cool and sharp, like the ordinary 
 wine of the country we are passing through, which having _no body_, can 
 neither keep its little power long, nor even use it while fresh to any 
 sensible effect. 
  
 The country is really beautiful; but descriptions are _so_ fallacious, 
 one half despairs of communicating one  '  s ideas as they are: for either 
 well-chosen words do not present themselves, or being well-chosen they 
 detain the reader, and fix his mind on _them_, instead of the things 
 described. Certain it is that I had formed no adequate notion of the 
 fine river called the Yonne, with cattle grazing on its fertile banks: 
 those banks not clothed indeed with our soft verdure, but with royal 
 purple, proceeding from an autumnal daisy of that colour that enamels 
 every meadow at this season. Here small enclosures seem unknown to the 
 inhabitants, who are strewed up and down expansive views of a most 
 productive country; where vineyards swell upon the rising grounds, and 
 young wheat ornaments the valleys below: while clusters of aspiring 
 poplars, or a single walnut-tree of greater size and dignity unite in 
 attracting attention, and inspiring poetical ideas. Here is no tedious 
 uniformity to fatigue the eye, nor rugged asperities to disgust it; but
enquiries. L  '  Hotel de la Croix de Malthe affords excellent 
 accommodations within, and a delightful prospect without. The Baths too 
 have attracted my notice much, and will, I hope, repair my strength, so 
 as to make me no troublesome fellow-traveller. How little do those 
 ladies consult their own interest, who make impatience of petty 
 inconveniences their best supplement for conversation!--fancy themselves 
 more important as less contented; and imagine all delicacy to consist in 
 the difficulty of being pleased! Surely a dip in this delightful river 
 will restore my health, and enable me to pass the mountains, of which 
 our present companions give me a very formidable account. 
  
 The manufacturers here, at Lyons, deserve a volume, and I shall 
 scarcely give them a page; though nothing I ever saw at London or Paris 
 can compare with the beauty of these velvets, or with the art necessary 
 to produce such an effect, while the wrong side is smooth, not struck 
 through. The hangings for the Empress of Russia  '  s bed-chamber are 
 wonderfully executed; the design elegant, the colouring brilliant: A 
 screen too for the Grand Signor is finely finished here; he would, I 
 trust, have been contented with magnificence in the choice of his 
 furniture, but Mr. Pernon has added taste to it, and contrived in
appearance to sink an urn or vase of crimson velvet in a back ground of 
 gold tissue with surprising ingenuity. 
  
 It is observable, that the further people advance in elegance, the less 
 they value splendour; distinction being at last the positive thing which 
 mortals elevated above competency naturally pant after. Necessity must 
 first be supplied we know, convenience then requires to be contented; 
 but as soon as men can find means after that period to make themselves 
 eminent for taste, they learn to despise those paltry distinctions 
 which riches alone can bestow. 
  
 Talking of Taste leads one to speak of gardening; and having passed 
 yesterday between two villas belonging to some of the most opulent 
 merchants of Lyons, I gained an opportunity of observing the disposal of 
 those grounds that are appropriated to pleasure; where the shade of 
 straight long-drawn alleys, formed by a close junction of ancient elm 
 trees, kept a dazzling sun from incommoding our sight, and rendering the 
 turf so mossy and comfortable to one  '  s tread, that my heart never felt 
 one longing wish for the beauties of a lawn and shrubbery--though I 
 should certainly think such a manner of laying out a Lancashire
have been over praised; their pale colour allured me but little in the 
 first place, nor is their flavour equal to that of trout found in 
 running water. Going down the Italian side of the Alps is, after all, an 
 astonishing journey; and affords the most magnificent scenery in nature, 
 which varying at every step, gives new impression to the mind each 
 moment of one  '  s passage; while the portion of terror excited either by 
 real or fancied dangers on the way, is just sufficient to mingle with 
 the pleasure, and make one feel the full effect of sublimity. To the 
 chairmen who carry one though, nothing can be new; it is observable that 
 the glories of these objects have never faded--I heard them speak to 
 each other of their beauties, and the change of light since they had 
 passed by last time, while a fellow who spoke English as well as a 
 native told us, that having lived in a gentleman  '  s service twenty years 
 between London and Dublin, he at length begged his discharge, chusing to 
 retire and finish his days a peasant upon these mountains, where he 
 first opened his eyes upon scenes that made all other views of nature 
 insipid to his taste. 
  
 If impressions of beauty remain, however, those of danger die away by 
 frequent reiteration; the men who carried me seemed amazed that I should
stream is directed, that _ought_ to carry off all nuisances, which here 
 have no apology from want of any convenience purchasable by money; and 
 which must for that reason be the choice of inhabitants, who would 
 perhaps be too happy, had they a natural taste for that neatness which 
 might here be enjoyed in its purity. The arches formed to defend 
 passengers from the rain and sun, which here might have even serious 
 effects from their violence, deserve much praise; while their 
 architecture, uniting our ideas of comfort and beauty together, form a 
 traveller  '  s taste, and teach him to admire that perfection, of which a 
 miniature may certainly be found at Turin, when once a police shall be 
 established there to prevent such places being used for the very 
 grossest purposes, and polluted with smells that poison all one  '  s 
 pleasure. 
  
 It is said, that few European palaces exceed in splendour that of 
 Sardinia  '  s king; I found it very fine indeed, and the pictures 
 dazzling. The death of a dropsical woman well known among all our 
 connoisseurs detained my attention longest: the value set on it here is 
 ten thousand pounds. The horse cut out of a block of marble at the 
 stairs-foot attracted me not a little; but we are told that the
Miscellanies; who, among other luxuries, resolves to eat Lodi cheese, I 
 remember. 
  
 The town, however, bringing no other ideas either new or old to our 
 minds, we went to the opera, and heard Morichelli sing: after which they 
 gave us a new dramatic dance, made upon the story of Don John, or the 
 Libertine; a tale which, whether true or false, fact or fable, has 
 furnished every Christian country in the world, I believe, with some 
 subject of representation. It makes me no sport, however; the idea of an 
 impenitent sinner going to hell is too seriously terrifying to make 
 amusement out of. Let mythology, which is now grown good for little 
 else, be danced upon the stage; where Mr. Vestris may bounce and 
 struggle in the character of Alcides on his funeral pile, with no very 
 glaring impropriety; and such baubles serve beside to keep old classical 
 stories in the heads of our young people; who, if they _must_ have 
 torches to blaze in their eyes, may divert themselves with Pluto 
 catching up Ceres  '  s daughter, and driving her away to Tartarus; but let 
 Don John alone. I have at least _half a notion_ that the horrible 
 history is _half true_; if so, it is surely very gross to represent it 
 by dancing. Should such false foolish taste prevail in England (but I
But it is almost time to talk of the Rialto, said to be the finest 
 single arch in Europe, and I suppose it is so; very beautiful too when 
 looked on from the water, but so dirtily kept, and deformed with mean 
 shops, that passing over it, disgust gets the better of every other 
 sensation. The truth is, our dear Venetians are nothing less than 
 cleanly; St. Mark  '  s Place is all covered over in a morning with 
 chicken-coops, which stink one to death; as nobody I believe thinks of 
 changing their baskets: and all about the Ducal palace is made so very 
 offensive by the resort of human creatures for every purpose most 
 unworthy of so charming a place, that all enjoyment of its beauties is 
 rendered difficult to a person of any delicacy; and poisoned so 
 provokingly, that I do never cease to wonder that so little police and 
 proper regulation are established in a city so particularly lovely, to 
 render her sweet and wholesome. It was at the Rialto that the first 
 stone of this fair town was laid, upon the twenty-fifth of March, as I 
 am told here, with ideal reference to the vernal equinox, the moment 
 when philosophers have supposed that the sun first shone upon our earth, 
 and when Christians believe that the redemption of it was first 
 announced to _her_ within whose womb it was conceived. 
 
or something to murmur about, while their only great nuisances pass 
 unnoticed, the heaps of dirt, and crowds of beggars, who infest the 
 streets, and poison the pleasures of society. While ladies are eating 
 ice at a coffee-house door, while decent people are hearing mass at the 
 altar, while strangers are surveying the beauties of the place--no 
 peace, no enjoyment can one obtain for the beggars; numerous beyond 
 credibility, fancy and airy, and odd in their manners; and exhibiting 
 such various lamenesses and horrible deformities in their figure, that I 
 can sometimes hardly believe my eyes--but am willing to be told, what is 
 not very improbable, that many of them come from a great distance to 
 pass the season of ascension here at Venice. I never indeed saw any 
 thing so gently endured, which it appeared so little difficult to 
 remedy; but though I hope it would be hard to find a place where more 
 alms are asked, or less are given, than in Venice; yet I never saw 
 refusals so pleasingly softened, as by the manners of the high Italians 
 towards the low. Ladies in particular are so soft-mouthed, so tender in 
 replying to those who have their lot cast far below them, that one feels 
 one  '  s own harsher disposition corrected by their sweetness; and when 
 they called my maid _sister_, in good time--pressing her hand with 
 affectionate kindness, it melted me; though I feared from time to time
of tormenting those who came to take musical instructions. With regard 
 to other actions of life, I saw nothing particular in the pigeon, but 
 his tameness, and strong attachment to his master: for though never 
 winged, and only clipped a very little, he never seeks to range away 
 from the house or quit his master  '  s service, any more than the dove of 
 Anacreon: 
  
 While his better lot bestows 
 Sweet repast and soft repose; 
 And when feast and frolic tire, 
 Drops asleep upon his lyre. 
  
 All the difficulty will be indeed for us _other_ two-legged creatures to 
 leave the sweet societies of charming Venice; but they begin to grow 
 fatiguing now, as the weather increases in warmth. 
  
 I do think the Turkish sailor gave an admirable account of a carnival, 
 when he told his Mahometan friends at his return, That those poor 
 Christians were all disordered in their senses, and nearly in a state of 
 actual madness, while he remained among them, till one day, on a sudden,
ratiocination, is apt to cry out, "_Cosa serve sosistieare cosi? ci farà 
 andare tutti matti_[V]." They have indeed so many external amusements in 
 the mere face of the country, that one is better inclined to pardon 
 _them_, than one would be to forgive inhabitants of less happy climates, 
 should they suffer _their_ intellectual powers to pine for want of 
 exercise, not food: for here is enough to think upon, God knows, were 
 they disposed so to employ their time; where one may justly affirm that, 
  
 [Footnote V: What signifies all this minuteness of inquiry?--it will 
 drive us mad.] 
  
 On every thorn delightful wisdom grows, 
 And in each rill, some sweet instruction flows; 
 But some untaught o  '  erhear the murmuring rill, 
 In spite of sacred leisure--blockheads still. 
  
 The road from Padua hither is not a good one; but so adorned, one cares 
 not much whether it is good or no: so sweetly are the mulberry-trees 
 planted on each side, with vines richly festooning up and down them, as 
 if for the decoration of a dance at the opera. One really expects the
that we call bleeding-hearts, hard to the bite, and parting easily from 
 the stone, which is proportionately small. Figs too are here in such 
 perfection, that it is not easy for an English gardener to guess at 
 their excellence; for it is not by superior size, but taste and colour, 
 that _they_ are distinguished; small, and green on the outside, a bright 
 full crimson within, and we eat them with raw ham, and truly delicious 
 is the dainty. By raw ham, I mean ham cured, not boiled or roasted. It 
 is no wonder though that fruits should mature in such a sun as this is; 
 which, to give a just notion of its penetrating fire, I will take leave 
 to tell my countrywomen is so violent, that I use no other method of 
 heating the pinching-irons to curl my hair, than that of poking them out 
 at a south window, with the handles shut in, and the glasses darkened to 
 keep us from being actually fired in his beams. Before I leave off 
 speaking about the fruit, I must add, that both fig and cherry are 
 produced by standards; that the strawberries here are small and 
 high-flavoured, like our _woods_, and that there are no other. England 
 affords greater variety in _that_ kind of fruit than any nation; and as 
 to peaches, nectarines, or green-gage plums, I have seen none yet. Lady 
 Cowper has made us a present of a small pine-apple, but the Italians 
 have no taste to it. Here is sun enough to ripen them without hot-houses
Italian than almost any Englishman, and studies it more closely, refuse 
 to decide in critical disputations among his literary friends here, 
 though the sonnets he writes in the Tuscan language are praised by the 
 natives, who best understand it, and have been by some of them preferred 
 to those written by Milton himself. Mean time this is acknowledged to 
 be the prime city for purity of phrase and delicacy of expression, 
 which, at last, is so disguised to me by the guttural manner in which 
 many sounds are pronounced, that I feel half weary of running about from 
 town to town so, and never arriving at any, where I can understand the 
 conversation without putting all the attention possible to their 
 discourse. I am now told that less efforts will be necessary at Rome. 
  
 Nothing can be prettier, however, than the slow and tranquil manners of 
 a Florentine; nothing more polished than his general address and 
 behaviour: ever in the third person, though to a blackguard in the 
 street, if he has not the honour of his particular acquaintance, while 
 intimacy produces _voi_ in those of the highest rank, who call one 
 another Carlo and Angelo very sweetly; the ladies taking up the same 
 notion, and saying Louisa, or Maddalena, without any addition at all. 
 
plant: straggling and dusky, one is forced to think of its produce, 
 before one can be pleased with its merits, as in a deformed and ugly 
 friend or companion. 
  
 The fogs now begin to fall pretty heavily in a morning, and rising about 
 the middle of the day, leave the sun at liberty to exert his violence 
 very powerfully. At night come forth the inhabitants, like dor-beetles 
 at sunset on the coast of Sussex; then is their season to walk and chat, 
 and sing and make love, and run about the street with a girl and a 
 guittar; to eat ice and drink lemonade; but never to be seen drunk or 
 quarrelsome, or riotous. Though night is the true season of Italian 
 felicity, they place not their happiness in brutal frolics, any more 
 than in malicious titterings; they are idle and they are merry: it is, I 
 think, the worst we can say of them; they are idle because there is 
 little for them to do, and merry because they have little given them to 
 think about. To the busy Englishman they might well apply these verses 
 of his own Milton in the Masque of Comus: 
  
 What have we with day to do? 
 Sons of Care!   '  twas made for you.
door; and felt sensations so unaffectedly pastoral, that nothing in 
 romance ever exceeded my felicity. 
  
 The cold bath here is the most delicate imaginable; of a moderate degree 
 of coldness though, not three degrees below Matlock surely; but 
 omitting, simply enough, to carry a thermometer, one can measure the 
 heat of nothing. Our hot water here seems about the temperature of the 
 Queen  '  s bath in Somersetshire; it is purgative, not corroborant, they 
 tell me; and its taste resembles Cheltenham water exactly. 
  
 These springs are much frequented by the court I find, and here are 
 very tolerable accommodations; but it is not the season now, and our 
 solitude is perfect in a place which beggars all description, where the 
 mountains are mountains of marble, and the bushes on them bushes of 
 myrtle; large as our hawthorns, and white with blossoms, as _they_ are 
 at the same time of year in Devonshire; where the waters are salubrious, 
 the herbage odoriferous, every trodden step breathing immediate 
 fragrance from the crushed sweets of thyme, and marjoram, and winter 
 savoury: while the birds and the butterflies frolick around, and flutter 
 among the loaded lemon, and orange, and olive trees, till imagination is
to display the glories of colouring which his beams alone can bestow. 
  
 The pleasing tales told of this pretty animal  '  s amical disposition 
 towards man are strictly true, I hear; and it is no longer ago than 
 yesterday I was told an odd anecdote of a young farmer, who, carrying a 
 basket of figs to his mistress, lay down in the field as he crossed it, 
 quite overcome with the weather, and fell fast asleep. A serpent, 
 attracted by the scent, twined round the basket, and would have bit the 
 fellow as well as robbed him, had not a friendly lizard waked, and given 
 him warning of the danger. 
  
 Swift says, that in the course of life he meets many asses, but they 
 have not _lucky names_. I have met many _vipers, and so few lizards_, it 
 is surprising! but they will not live in London. 
  
 All the stories one has ever heard of sweetness in language and delicacy 
 in pronunciation, fall short of Siennese converse. The girls who wait 
 on us at the inn here, would be treasures in England, could one get them 
 thither; and they need move nothing but their tongues to make their 
 fortunes. I told Rosetta so, and said I would steal from them a poor
This town is neat and cleanly, and comfortable and airy. The prospect 
 from the public walks wants no beauty but water; and here is a 
 suppressed convent on the neighbouring hill, where we half-longed to 
 build a pretty cottage, as the ground is now to be disposed of vastly 
 cheap; and half one  '  s work is already done in the apartments once 
 occupied by friars. With half a word  '  s persuasion I should fix for life 
 here. The air is so pure, the language so pleasing, the place so 
 inviting;--_but we drive on_. 
  
 There is, mean time, resident in the neighbourhood an English gentleman, 
 his name Greenfield, who has formed to himself a mighty sweet habitation 
 in the English taste, but not extensive, as his property don  '  t reach 
 far: he is however a sort of little oracle in the country I am told; 
 gives money, and dispenses James  '  s powders to the poor, is happy in the 
 esteem of numberless people of fashion, and the comfort of his country 
 people  '  s lives beside; who, travelling to Sienna, as many do for the 
 advantage of studying Italian to perfection, find a friend and 
 companion where perhaps it is least expected. 
  
 The cathedral here at Sienna deserves a volume, and I shall scarcely
