But there were half a dozen loggers meeting the weekly steamer. 
They were loquacious men, without formality in the way of acquaintance. Hollister had more than trail 
 knowledge imparted to him. The name of the man who lived with his wife 
 at the top of the Big Bend was Mr. J. Harrington Bland; the logger 
 said that with a twinkle in his eye, a chuckle as of inner amusement. 
 Hollister understood. The man was a round peg in this region of square 
 holes; otherwise he would have been Jack Bland, or whatever the 
 misplaced initial stood for. They spoke of him further as "the 
 Englishman." There was a lot of other local knowledge bestowed upon 
 Hollister, but "the Englishman" and his wife--who was a "pippin" for 
 looks--were still in the forefront of his mind when the trail led him 
 out on the river bank a few hundred yards from their house. He passed 
 within forty feet of the door. Bland was chopping wood; Myra sat on a 
 log, her tawny hair gleaming in the sun. Bland bestowed upon Hollister 
 only a casual glance, as he strode past, and went on swinging his axe; 
 and Hollister looking impersonally at the woman, observed that she 
 stared with frank curiosity. He remembered that trait of hers. He had 
 often teased her about it in those days when it had been an impossible
on familiar ground." 
  
 Hollister knew this to be so, in a certain measure, on a small scale. 
 In a room she knew Doris moved as surely and rapidly as he did 
 himself. He had dreaded a little lest she should find herself feeling 
 lost and helpless in this immensity of forest and hills which 
 sometimes made even him feel a peculiar sense of insignificance. It 
 was a relief to know that she turned to this wilderness which must be 
 their home with the eagerness of a child throwing itself into its 
 mother  '  s arms. He perceived that she had indeed a clear image of the 
 Toba in her mind. She was to give further proof of this before long. 
  
 They turned the top of the Big Bend. Here the river doubled on itself 
 for nearly a mile and crossed from the north wall of the valley to the 
 south. Where the channel straightened away from this loop Hollister 
 had built his house on a little flat running back from the right-hand 
 bank. A little less than half a mile below, Bland  '  s cabin faced the 
 river just where the curve of the S began. They came abreast of that 
 now. What air currents moved along the valley floor shifted in from 
 the sea. It wafted the smoke from Bland  '  s stovepipe gently down on the
was rolling pie crust on a board. 
  
 "We  '  re off," he said, putting an arm around her. "If we can keep this 
 up all summer, I  '  ll build a new wing on the house and bring you in a 
 piano to play with this winter." 
  
 Hollister himself now took a hand at cutting cedar. Each morning he 
 climbed that steep slope to the works, and each night he came trudging 
 down; and morning and night he would pause at a point where the trail 
 led along the rim of a sheer cliff, to look down on the valley below, 
 to look down on the roof of his own house and upon Bland  '  s house 
 farther on. Sometimes smoke streamed blue from Bland  '  s stovepipe. 
 Sometimes it stood dead, a black cylinder above the shake roof. 
 Sometimes one figure and sometimes two moved about the place; more 
 often no one stirred. But that was as near as the Blands had come in 
 eight weeks. Hollister had an unspoken hope that they would remain 
 distant, no matter that Doris occasionally wondered about this woman 
 who lived around the river  '  s curve, what she was like and when she 
 would meet her. Hollister knew nothing of Bland, nothing of Myra. He 
 did not wish to know. It did not matter in the least, he assured
 
 "I was told of an Englishman named Bland who is quite a hunter. I 
 stopped in here, thinking this was his place and that I might get him 
 to go on with me," he said to Hollister. 
  
 "That  '  s Bland  '  s place down there," Hollister explained. 
  
 "So Mrs. Hollister was just telling me. There didn  '  t seem to be 
 anybody about when I passed. It doesn  '  t matter much, anyway," he 
 laughed. "The farther I get into this country, the less keen I am to 
 hunt. It  '  s good enough just to loaf around and look at." 
  
 Lawanne had supper with them. Hollister asked him, not only as a 
 matter of courtesy but with a genuine feeling that he wanted this man 
 to break bread with them. He could not quite understand that sudden 
 warmth of feeling for a stranger. He had never in his life been given 
 to impulsive friendliness. The last five years had not strengthened 
 his belief in friendships. He had seen too many fail under stress. 
 But he liked this man. They sat outside after supper and Doris joined 
 them there. Lawanne was not talkative. He was given to long silences
"I have been working there," the man replied. "Working on the boom." 
  
 He was frank enough about it. He wanted money,--a stake. He believed 
 he could make more cutting shingle bolts by the cord. This was true. 
 Hollister  '  s men were making top wages. The cedar stood on good ground. 
 It was big, clean timber, easy to work. 
  
 "I  '  ll be on the job to-morrow," he said, after they had talked it 
 over. "Take me this afternoon to get my outfit packed up here." 
  
 Hollister was haunted by the man  '  s face at odd times during the day. 
 Not until he was half-way home, until he came out on that ledge from 
 whence he could look--and always did look with a slight sense of 
 irritation--down on Bland  '  s cabin as well as his own, did he recall 
 clearly where and when he had seen Charlie Mills. 
  
 Mills was the man who sat looking at Myra across the table that winter 
 morning when Hollister was suffering from the brief madness which 
 brought him to Bland  '  s cabin with a desperate project in his 
 disordered mind.
 
 Well, what of it, Hollister asked himself? It was nothing to him. He 
 was a disinterested bystander now. But looking down on Bland  '  s cabin, 
 he reflected that his irritation was rooted in the fact that he did 
 not want to be a bystander. He desired to eliminate Myra Bland and all 
 that pertained to her from even casual contact with him. It seemed 
 absurd that he should feel himself to be in danger. But he had a dim 
 sense of danger. And instead of the aloofness which he desired, he 
 seemed to see vague threads drawing himself and Doris and Myra Bland 
 and this man Mills closer and closer together, to what end or purpose 
 he could not tell. 
  
 For a minute Hollister was tempted to turn the man away when he went 
 back up there in the morning. But that, he concluded with a shrug of 
 his shoulders, was carrying a mere fancy too far. 
  
 It did not therefore turn his thoughts into a more placid channel to 
 find, when he reached the house, Myra sitting in the kitchen talking 
 to Doris. Yet it was no great surprise. He had expected this, looked 
 forward to it with an uneasy sense of its inevitability.
habits. But their real selves, the essence of their being, the shadowy 
 inner self where motives and passions took form and gathered force 
 until they were translated for good or evil into forthright 
 action,--these they had not known at all. 
  
 At any rate he perceived that Myra could calmly enough face the 
 prospect of being alone. Hollister cast his eye up to where the cedars 
 towered, a green mass on the slope above the cliff. He thought of 
 Charlie Mills and wondered if after all she would be alone. 
  
 He felt ashamed of that thought as soon as it formed in his mind. And 
 being ashamed, he saw and understood that he still harbored a little 
 bitterness against Myra. He did not wish to bestow bitterness or any 
 other emotion upon her. He wanted her to remain completely outside the 
 scope of his feelings. He would have to try, he perceived, to 
 cultivate a complete indifference to her, to what she did, to where 
 she went, to insulate himself completely against her. Because he was 
 committed to other enterprises, and chiefly because, as he said to 
 himself, he would not exchange a single brown strand of Doris 
 Cleveland  '  s hair for all of Myra  '  s body, even if he had that choice.
dollars a month. When he was thirty he would come into certain 
 property and an income of so many thousand pounds a year. He and his 
 wife could not subsist in any town on the quarterly dole he received. 
 That was why they had come to live in that cabin on the Toba River. 
 Bland hunted. He fished. To him the Toba valley served well enough as 
 a place to rusticate. Any place where game animals and sporting fish 
 abounded satisfied him temperamentally. 
  
 He had done his "bit" in the war. When he came into his money, they 
 would go "home." He was placidly sure of himself, of his place in the 
 general scheme of things. He was suffering from temporary 
 embarrassment, that was all. It was a bit rough on Myra, but it would 
 be all right by and by. 
  
 So much filtered into Hollister  '  s ears and understanding before long. 
 Archie Lawanne came back downstream with two grizzly pelts, and 
 Hollister met Bland for the first time. He appraised Bland with some 
 care,--this tall, ruddy Englishman who had supplanted him in a woman  '  s 
 affections, and who, unless Hollister  '  s observation had tricked him, 
 was in a fair way to be himself supplanted.
the outward seeming. He was not slow to discover that Mills was 
 something more than so much bone and sinew which could be applied 
 vigorously to an axe or a saw. 
  
 Hollister  '  s speculations took a new turn when Archie Lawanne and 
 Bland came back from the bear hunt. For Lawanne did not go out. He 
 pitched a tent on the flat below Hollister  '  s and kept one Siwash to 
 cook for him. He made that halt to rest up, to stretch and dry his 
 bear-skins. But long after these trophies were cured, he still 
 remained. He was given to roaming up and down the valley. He extended 
 his acquaintance to the settlement farther down, taking observation of 
 an earnest attempt at coöperative industry. He made himself at home 
 equally with the Blands and the Hollisters. 
  
 And when July was on them, with hot, hazy sunshine in which berries 
 ripened and bird and insect life filled the Toba with a twitter and a 
 drone, when the smoke of distant forest fires drifted like pungent fog 
 across the hills, Hollister began to wonder if the net Myra seemed 
 unconsciously to spread for men  '  s feet had snared another victim. 
 
 
 "I  '  ll be glad to see you," Hollister replied, "but it  '  s a lonely 
 valley in the winter." 
  
 Lawanne smiled. 
  
 "I can stand isolation for a change," he said. "I want to write a 
 book. And while I am outside I  '  ll send you in a couple that I have 
 already written. You will see me in October. Try to get the 
 shingle-bolt rush over so we can go out after deer together now and 
 then." 
  
 So for a time the Toba saw no more of Lawanne. Hollister missed him. 
 So did Doris. But she had Myra Bland to keep her company while 
 Hollister was away at work in the timber. Sometimes Bland himself 
 dropped in. But Hollister could never find himself on any common 
 ground of mutual interest with this sporting Englishman. He was a 
 bluff, hearty, healthy man, apparently without either intellect or 
 affectation. 
 
"What do you think of Bland?" he asked Doris once. 
  
 "I can  '  t think of him, because I can  '  t see him," she answered. "He is 
 either very clever at concealing any sort of personality, or he is 
 simply a big, strong, stupid man." 
  
 Which was precisely what Hollister himself thought. 
  
 "Isn  '  t it queer," Doris went on, "how vivid a thing personality is? 
 Now Myra and Mr. Lawanne are definite, colorable entities to me. So is 
 Charlie Mills, quiet as he is. And yet I can  '  t make Bland seem 
 anything more than simply a voice with a slightly English accent." 
  
 "Well, there must be something to him, or she wouldn  '  t have married 
 him," Hollister remarked. 
  
 "Perhaps. But I shouldn  '  t wonder if she married him for something that 
 existed mostly in her own mind," Doris reflected. "Women often do 
 that--men too, I suppose. I very nearly did myself once. Then I 
 discovered that this ideal man was something I had created in my own
Blands. For weeks at a time he did not leave the bolt camp except to 
 come down to Hollister  '  s house. 
  
 Lawanne seemed to be a favored guest now, at Bland  '  s. Lawanne worked 
 upon his book, but by fits and starts, working when he did work with a 
 feverish concentration. He had a Chinese boy for house-servant. He 
 might be found at noon or at midnight sprawled in a chair beside a 
 pot-bellied stove, scrawling in an ungainly hand across sheets of 
 yellow paper. He had no set hours for work. When he did work, when he 
 had the vision and the fit was on and words came easily, chance 
 callers met with scant courtesy. But he had great stores of time to 
 spare, for all that. Some of it he spent at Bland  '  s, waging an 
 interminable contest at cribbage with Bland, coming up now and then 
 with the Blands to spend an evening at Hollister  '  s. 
  
 "It  '  s about a man who wrecked his life by systematically undermining 
 his own illusions about life," he answered one day Hollister  '  s curious 
 inquiry as to what the new book was about, "and of how finally a very 
 assiduously cultivated illusion made him quite happy at last. Sound 
 interesting?"
"But it _is_ sordid," Lawanne persisted. "Were you ever in their 
 house?" 
  
 Hollister shook his head. 
  
 "It isn  '  t as comfortable as your men  '  s bunk house. They have boxes for 
 chairs, a rickety table, a stove about ready to fall to pieces. There 
 are cracks in the walls and a roof that a rat could crawl through--or 
 there would be if Mrs. Bland didn  '  t go about stuffing them up with 
 moss and old newspapers. Why can  '  t a gentleman, an athlete and a 
 sportsman make his quarters something a little better than a Siwash 
 would be contented with? Especially if he has prevailed on a woman to 
 share his joys and sorrows. Some of these days Mr. Bland will wake up 
 and find his wife has gone off with some enterprising chap who is 
 less cocksure and more ambitious." 
  
 "Would you blame her?" Doris asked casually. 
  
 "Bless your soul, no," Lawanne laughed. "If I were a little more 
 romantic, I might run away with her myself. What a tremendous jar that
would give Bland  '  s exasperating complacency. I believe he  '  s a 
 hang-over from that prehistoric time when men didn  '  t believe that any 
 woman had a soul--that a woman was something in which a man acquired a 
 definite property right merely by marrying her." 
  
 Doris chuckled. 
  
 "I can imagine how Mr. Bland would look if he heard you," she said. 
  
 "He  '  d only smile in a superior manner," Lawanne declared. "You 
 couldn  '  t get Bland fussed up by any mere assertion. The only thing 
 that would stir him deeply would be a direct assault on that vague 
 abstraction which he calls his honor--or on his property. Then he 
 would very likely smite the wrongdoer with all the efficiency of 
 outraged virtue." 
  
 Hollister continued to muse on this after Lawanne went away. He 
 thought Lawanne  '  s summing up a trifle severe. Nevertheless it was a 
 pretty clear statement of fact. Bland certainly seemed above working 
 either for money or to secure a reasonable degree of comfort for
himself and his wife. He sat waiting for a windfall to restore his 
 past splendor of existence, which he sometimes indirectly admitted 
 meant cricket, a country home, horses and dogs, a whirl among the 
 right sort of people in London now and then. That sort of thing and 
 that sort of man was what Myra had fallen in love with. Hollister felt 
 a mild touch of contempt for them both. 
  
 His wife had also let her thoughts focus on the Blands. 
  
 "I wonder," she said, "if they are so very poor? Why don  '  t you offer 
 Bland a job? Maybe he is too proud to ask." 
  
 Bland was not too proud to ask for certain things, it seemed. About a 
 week later he came to Hollister and in a most casual manner said, "I 
 say, old man, can you let me have a hundred dollars? My quarterly 
 funds are delayed a bit." 
  
 Hollister gave him the money without question. As he watched Bland 
 stride away through the light blanket of snow, and a little later 
 noticed him disappear among the thickets and stumps going towards the
possibilities in her presence, all that uneasy dread of her nearness, 
 that consciousness of her as an impending threat, had finally come to 
 seem nothing more than mere figments of his imagination. Especially 
 since their son was born. That seemed to establish the final bond 
 between himself and Doris. Myra, the past which so poignantly included 
 Myra, held less and less significance. He could look at Myra and 
 wonder if this _was_ the same woman he had held in his arms, whose 
 kisses had been freely and gladly bestowed upon him; if all the 
 passion and pain of their life together, of their tearing apart, had 
 ever really been. He had got so far beyond that it seemed unreal. And 
 lately there had settled upon him a surety that to Myra it must all be 
 just as unreal--that she could not possibly harbor any suspicion that 
 he was her legal husband, hiding behind a mask of scars--and that 
 even if she did suspect, that suspicion could never be translated into 
 action which could deflect ever so slightly the current of his present 
 existence. 
  
 He was working at the chute mouth when Bland came to ask for that 
 loan. He continued to work there. Not long after he noticed Bland 
 leave his own house and go down the flat, he saw Myra coming along the
myriad fragile green tufts that would presently burst into flowers. 
 The Toba rose day by day, pouring down a swollen flood of snow-water 
 to the sea. 
  
 And life went on as it always did. Hollister  '  s crew, working on a 
 bonus for work performed, kept the bolts of cedar gliding down the 
 chute. The mill on the river below swallowed up the blocks and spewed 
 them out in bound bundles of roof covering. Lawanne kept close to his 
 cabin, deep in the throes of creation, manifesting strange vagaries of 
 moroseness or exhilaration which in his normal state he cynically 
 ascribed to the artistic temperament. Bland haunted the creeks where 
 the trout lurked, tramped the woods gun in hand, a dog at his heels, 
 oblivious to everything but his own primitive, purposeless pleasures. 
  
 "I shouldn  '  t care to settle here for good," he once said to Hollister. 
 "But really, you know, it  '  s not half bad. If money wasn  '  t so dashed 
 scarce. It  '  s positively cruel for an estate to be so tied up that a 
 man can  '  t get enough to live decently on." 
  
 Bland irritated Hollister sometimes, but often amused him by his calm
assurance that everything was always well in the world of J. 
 Carrington Bland. Hollister could imagine him in Norfolk and gaiters 
 striding down an English lane, concerned only with his stable, his 
 kennels, the land whose rentals made up his income. There were no 
 problems on Bland  '  s horizon. He would sit on Hollister  '  s porch with a 
 pipe sagging one corner of his mouth and gaze placidly at the river, 
 the hills, the far stretch of the forest,--and Hollister knew that to 
 Bland it was so much water, so much up-piled rock and earth, so much 
 growing wood. He would say to Myra: "My dear, it  '  s time we were going 
 home", or "I think I shall have a go at that big pool in Graveyard 
 Creek to-morrow", or "I say, Hollister, if this warm weather keeps on, 
 the bears will be coming out soon, eh?", and between whiles he would 
 sit silently puffing at his pipe, a big, heavy, handsome man, wearing 
 soiled overalls and a shabby coat with a curious dignity. He spoke of 
 "family" and "breeding" as if these were sacred possessions which 
 conferred upon those who had them complete immunity from the sort of 
 effort that common men must make. 
  
 "He really believes that," Myra said to Hollister once. "No Bland ever 
 had to work. They have always had property--they have always been
the crackle and snap of burning wood. 
  
 "A forest fire is quite literally hell, isn  '  t it?" Lawanne asked. 
  
 Hollister nodded. His eyes were on Bland. The man sat on the ground. 
 He had a cup of coffee in one hand, a sandwich in the other. He was 
 blackened almost beyond recognition, and he was viewing with patent 
 disgust the state of his clothes and particularly of his hands. He 
 set down his food and rubbed at his fingers with a soiled 
 handkerchief. Then he resumed eating and drinking. It appeared to him 
 a matter of necessity rather than a thing from which he derived any 
 satisfaction. Near him Charlie Mills lay stretched on the moss, his 
 head pillowed on his folded arms, too weary to eat or drink, even at 
 Hollister  '  s insistence. 
  
 "Dirty job this, eh?" Bland remarked. "I  '  ll appreciate a bath. Phew. I 
 shall sleep for a week when I get home." 
  
 By mid-afternoon of the next day, Sam Carr decided they had the fire 
 well in hand and so split his forces, leaving half on guard and
subtle play of her imagination. 
  
 And following Myra with that mechanical noting of her progress, his 
 eyes, which were very keen, caught some movement in a fringe of 
 willows that lined the opposite shore of the river some three hundred 
 yards below. He looked more sharply. He had developed a hunter  '  s 
 faculty for interpreting movement in the forest, and although he had 
 nothing more positive than instinct and a brief flash upon which to 
 base conclusions, he did not think that movement of the leaves was 
 occasioned by any creature native to the woods. 
  
 On impulse he rose, went inside, and taking his binoculars from their 
 case, focused the eight-power lenses on the screen of brush, keeping 
 himself well within the doorway where he could see without being seen. 
  
 It took a minute or so of covering the willows before he located the 
 cause of that movement of shrubbery. But presently he made out the 
 head and shoulders of a man. And the man was Bland, doing precisely 
 what Hollister was doing, looking through a pair of field glasses. 
 Hollister stood well back in the room. He was certain Bland could not
see that he himself was being watched. In any case, Bland was not 
 looking at Hollister  '  s house. It was altogether likely that he had 
 been doing so, that he had seen Myra sitting beside Hollister with her 
 hand on his shoulder, bending forward to peer into Hollister  '  s face. 
 And Hollister could easily imagine what Bland might feel and think. 
 But he was steadily watching Myra. Once he turned the glasses for a 
 few seconds on Hollister  '  s house. Then he swung them back to Myra, 
 followed her persistently as she walked along the bank, on past 
 Lawanne  '  s, on towards their own rude shack. And at last Bland shifted. 
 One step backward, and the woods swallowed him. One moment his 
 shoulders and his head stood plain in every detail, even to the 
 brickish redness of his skin and the curve of his fingers about the 
 glasses; the next he was gone. 
  
 Hollister sat thinking. He did not like the implications of that 
 furtive observance. A suspicious, watchful man is a jealous man. And a 
 jealous man who has nothing to do but watch and suspect and nurse that 
 mean passion was a dangerous adjunct to an unhappy woman. 
  
 Hollister resolved to warn Myra, to emphasize that warning. No one
could tell of what a dull egotist like Bland might be capable. The 
 very fact of that furtive spying argued an ignoble streak in any man. 
 Bland was stiff-necked, vain, the sort to be brutal in retaliation for 
 any fancied invasion of his rights. And his conception of a husband  '  s 
 rights were primitive in the extreme. A wife was property, something 
 that was his. Hollister could imagine him roused to blind, blundering 
 fury by the least suspicious action on Myra  '  s part. Bland was the type 
 that, once aroused, acts like an angry bull,--with about as much 
 regard or understanding of consequences. Hollister had been measuring 
 Bland for a year, and the last two or three weeks had given him the 
 greatest opportunity to do so. He had appraised the man as a dullard 
 under his stupid, inflexible crust of egotism, despite his veneer of 
 manners. But even a clod may be dangerous. A bomb is a harmless thing, 
 so much inert metal and chemicals, until it is touched off; yet it 
 needs only a touch to let loose its insensate, rending force. 
  
 Hollister rose to start down the path after Myra with the idea that he 
 must somehow convey to her a more explicit warning. As he stepped out 
 on the porch, he looked downstream at Bland  '  s house and saw a man 
 approach the place from one direction as Myra reached it from the
other. He caught up his glasses and brought them to bear. The man was 
 Mills,--whom he had thought once more far from the Toba with the rest 
 of his scattered crew. Nevertheless this was Mills drawing near 
 Bland  '  s house with quick strides. 
  
 Hollister  '  s uneasiness doubled. There was a power for mischief in that 
 situation when he thought of Jim Bland scowling from his hiding place 
 in the willows. He set out along the path. 
  
 But by the time he came abreast of Lawanne  '  s cabin he had begun to 
 feel himself acting under a mistaken impulse, an exaggerated 
 conclusion. He began to doubt the validity of that intuition which 
 pointed a warning finger at Bland and Bland  '  s suspicions. In 
 attempting to forestall what might come of Bland  '  s stewing in the 
 juice of a groundless jealousy, he could easily precipitate something 
 that would perhaps be best avoided by ignoring it. He stood, when he 
 thought of it, in rather a delicate position himself. 
  
 So he turned into Lawanne  '  s. He found Archie sitting on the shady side 
 of his cabin, and they fell into talk.
his shoulders, "I break loose properly. This country has that sort of 
 effect on a man. It makes him want to break loose from everything that 
 seems to hamper and restrain him. It doesn  '  t take a man long to shed 
 his skin in surroundings like these. Oh, well, whether I come back or 
 not, I  '  ll be all the same a hundred years from now." 
  
 A rifle shot cut sharp into the silence that followed Lawanne  '  s last 
 words. That was nothing uncommon in the valley, where the crack of a 
 gun meant only that some one was hunting. But upon this report there 
 followed, clear and shrill, a scream, the high-pitched cry that only a 
 frightened woman can utter. This was broken into and cut short by a 
 second whip-like report. And both shots and scream came from the 
 direction of Bland  '  s house. 
  
 Hollister rose. He looked at Lawanne and Lawanne looked at him. Across 
 Hollister  '  s brain flashed a thought that would scarcely have been born 
 if he had not seen Bland spying from the willows, if he had not seen 
 Charlie Mills approaching that house, if he had not been aware of all 
 the wheels within wheels, the complicated coil of longings and desires 
 and smoldering passions in which these people were involved. He looked
expression from her features. There were no visible marks on her,--but 
 a red stain was creeping slowly from under her body, spreading across 
 the rough floor. 
  
 Mills sat on the floor, his back against the wall, his hands braced on 
 his knees to keep his body erect. And upon him there was to be seen no 
 visible mark of the murderer  '  s bullet. But his dark-skinned face had 
 turned waxy white. His lips were colorless. Every breath he drew was a 
 laborious effort. A ghastly smile spread slowly over his face as he 
 looked up at Hollister and Lawanne. 
  
 "You fool. You damned, murdering fool!" Lawanne turned on Bland. "You 
 did this?" 
  
 Bland did not answer. He put his hand to his face and wiped away the 
 sweat that had gathered in a shiny film on his skin, from which all 
 the ruddiness had fled. Myra  '  s pale, dead face seemed to hold him in 
 some horrible fascination. 
  
 Hollister shook him.
