vegetables, except beans and oatmeal. Vegetable foods are rich in 
 carbohydrates while meats contain none. The fatter the meat the less the 
 amount of water. Thus very lean meat may be almost four-fifths water, and 
 fat pork almost one-tenth water. 
  
 [Illustration: Fig. 45.--Graphic Chart of the Composition of Food 
 Materials. Composition of Food Materials. Nutritive ingredients, refuse, 
 and fuel value. ] 
  
 114. Non-proteid Animal Foods. Butter is one of the most digestible 
 of animal fats, agreeable and delicate in flavor, and is on this account 
 much used as a wholesome food. Various substitutes have recently come into 
 use. These are all made from animal fat, chiefly that of beef, and are 
 known as butterine, oleomargarine, and by other trade names. These 
 preparations, if properly made, are wholesome, and may be useful 
 substitutes for butter, from which they differ but little in composition. 
  
 115. Garden Vegetables. Various green, fresh, and succulent 
 vegetables form an essential part of our diet. They are of importance 
 not so much on account of their nutritious elements, which are usually
small, as for the salts they supply, especially the salts of potash. It is 
 a well-known fact that the continued use of a diet from which fresh 
 vegetables are excluded leads to a disease known as scurvy. They are also 
 used for the agreeable flavor possessed by many, and the pleasant variety 
 and relish they give to the food. The undigested residue left by all green 
 vegetables affords a useful stimulus to intestinal contraction, and tends 
 to promote the regular action of the bowels. 
  
 116. Fruits. A great variety of fruits, both fresh and dry, is 
 used as food, or as luxuries. They are of little nutritive value, 
 containing, as they do, much water and only a small amount of proteid, but 
 are of use chiefly for the sugar, vegetable acids, and salts they contain. 
  
 In moderate quantity, fruits are a useful addition to our regular diet. 
 They are cooling and refreshing, of agreeable flavor, and tend to prevent 
 constipation. Their flavor and juiciness serve to stimulate a weak 
 appetite and to give variety to an otherwise heavy diet. If eaten in 
 excess, especially in an unripe or an overripe state, fruits may occasion 
 a disturbance of the stomach and bowels, often of a severe form. 
 
117. Condiments. The refinements of cookery as well as the craving 
 of the appetite, demand many articles which cannot be classed strictly as 
 foods. They are called condiments, and as such may be used in 
 moderation. They give flavor and relish to food, excite appetite and 
 promote digestion. Condiments increase the pleasure of eating, and by 
 their stimulating properties promote secretions of the digestive fluids 
 and excite the muscular contractions of the alimentary canal. 
  
 The well-known condiments are salt, vinegar, pepper, ginger, nutmeg, 
 cloves, and various substances containing ethereal oils and aromatics. 
 Their excessive use is calculated to excite irritation and disorder of the 
 digestive organs. 
  
 118. Salt The most important and extensively used of the condiments 
 is common salt. It exists in all ordinary articles of diet, but in 
 quantities not sufficient to meet the wants of the bodily tissues. Hence 
 it is added to many articles of food. It improves their flavor, promotes 
 certain digestive secretions, and meets the nutritive demands of the body. 
 The use of salt seems based upon an instinctive demand of the system for 
 something necessary for the full performance of its functions. Food
impure water. So with cholera, the evidence is overwhelming that filthy 
 water is an all-powerful agent in the spread of this terrible disease. 
  
 120. Tea, Coffee, and Cocoa. The active principle of tea is called 
 theine; that of coffee, caffeine, and of cocoa, theobromine. They also 
 contain an aromatic, volatile oil, to which they owe their distinctive 
 flavor. Tea and coffee also contain an astringent called tannin, which 
 gives the peculiar bitter taste to the infusions when steeped too long. In 
 cocoa, the fat known as cocoa butter amounts to fifty per cent. 
  
 121. Tea. It has been estimated that one-half of the human race now 
 use tea, either habitually or occasionally. Its use is a prolific source 
 of indigestion, palpitation of the heart, persistent wakefulness, and of 
 other disorders. When used at all it should be only in moderation. Persons 
 who cannot use it without feeling its hurtful effects, should leave it 
 alone. It should not be taken on an empty stomach, nor sipped after every 
 mouthful of food. 
  
 122. Coffee. Coffee often disturbs the rhythm of the heart and causes 
 palpitation. Taken at night, coffee often causes wakefulness. This effect
apple-skin, very little was known of the changes produced in cider during 
 the mysterious process of "working." Now, when we see the bubbles of gas 
 in the glass of cider we know what has produced them, and we know too that 
 a poison which we do not see is there also in corresponding amounts. We 
 have learned, too, to trace the wrecked hopes of many a farmer  '  s family to 
 the alcohol in the cider which he provided so freely, supposing it 
 harmless. 
  
 Beer and other malt liquors are made from grain. By sprouting the grain, 
 which changes its starch to sugar, and then dissolving out the sugar with 
 water, a sweet liquid is obtained which is fermented with yeast, one kind 
 of alcoholic ferment. Some kinds of beer contain only a small percentage 
 of alcohol, but these are usually drunk in proportionately large amounts. 
 The life insurance company finds the beer drinker a precarious risk; the 
 surgeon finds him an unpromising subject; the criminal court finds him 
 conspicuous in its proceedings. The united testimony from all these 
 sources is that beer is demoralizing, mentally, morally, and physically. 
  
 127. Cooking. The process through which nearly all food used by 
 civilized man has to pass before it is eaten is known as cooking.
Very few articles indeed are consumed in their natural state, the 
 exceptions being eggs, milk, oysters, fruit and a few vegetables. Man is 
 the only animal that cooks his food. Although there are savage races that 
 have no knowledge of cooking, civilized man invariably cooks most of his 
 food. It seems to be true that as nations advance in civilization they 
 make a proportionate advance in the art of cooking. 
  
 Cooking answers most important purposes in connection with our food, 
 especially from its influence upon health. It enables food to be more 
 readily chewed, and more easily digested. Thus, a piece of meat when raw 
 is tough and tenacious, but if cooked the fibers lose much of their 
 toughness, while the connective tissues are changed into a soft and 
 jelly-like mass. Besides, the meat is much more readily masticated and 
 acted upon by the digestive fluids. So cooking makes vegetables and grains 
 softer, loosens their structure, and enables the digestive juices readily 
 to penetrate their substance. 
  
 Cooking also improves or develops flavors in food, especially in animal 
 foods, and thus makes them attractive and pleasant to the palate. The 
 appearance of uncooked meat, for example, is repulsive to our taste, but
by the process of cooking, agreeable flavors are developed which stimulate 
 the appetite and the flow of digestive fluids. 
  
 Another important use of cooking is that it kills any minute parasites or 
 germs in the raw food. The safeguard of cooking thus effectually removes 
 some important causes of disease. The warmth that cooking imparts to food 
 is a matter of no slight importance; for warm food is more readily 
 digested, and therefore nourishes the body more quickly. 
  
 The art of cooking plays a very important part in the matter of health, 
 and thus of comfort and happiness. Badly cooked and ill-assorted foods are 
 often the cause of serious disorders. Mere cooking is not enough, but good 
 cooking is essential. 
  
  
  
 Experiments. 
  
  
 Experiments with the Proteids.
craving for strong animal diet, especially fatty foods.[24] 
  
 [Illustration: Fig. 63.--Lymphatics and Lymphatic Glands of the Axilla.] 
  
 The intense cold makes such a drain upon the heat-producing power of the 
 body that only food containing the largest proportion of carbon is capable 
 of making up for the loss. In tropical countries, on the other hand, the 
 natives crave and subsist mainly upon fruits and vegetables. 
  
 165. The Kinds of Food Required. An appetite for plain, well-cooked 
 food is a safe guide to follow. Every person in good health, taking a 
 moderate amount of daily exercise, should have a keen appetite for three 
 meals a day and enjoy them. Food should be both nutritious and digestible. 
 It is nutritious in proportion to the amount of material it furnishes for 
 the nourishment of the tissues. It is digestible in a greater or less 
 degree in respect to the readiness with which it yields to the action of 
 the digestive fluids, and is prepared to be taken up by the blood. This 
 digestibility depends partly upon the nature of the food in its raw state, 
 partly upon the effect produced upon it by cooking, and to some extent 
 upon its admixture with other foods. Certain foods, as the vegetable
craving for special articles of food. Thus on long voyages, and during 
 long campaigns in war, there is an almost universal craving for onions, 
 raw potatoes, and other vegetables. 
  
 166. Hints about Meals. On an average, three meals each day, from 
 five to six hours apart, is the proper number for adults. Five hours is by 
 no means too long a time to intervene between consecutive meals, for it is 
 not desirable to introduce new food into the stomach, until the gastric 
 digestion of the preceding meal has been completed, and until the stomach 
 has had time to rest, and is in condition to receive fresh material. The 
 stomach, like other organs, does its work best at regular periods.[25] 
  
 Eating out of mealtimes should be strictly avoided, for it robs the 
 stomach of its needed rest. Food eaten when the body and mind are wearied 
 is not well digested. Rest, even for a few minutes, should be taken before 
 eating a full meal. It is well to lie down, or sit quietly and read, 
 fifteen minutes before eating, and directly afterwards, if possible. 
  
 Severe exercise and hard study just after a full meal, are very apt to 
 delay or actually arrest digestion, for after eating heartily, the vital
forces of the body are called upon to help the stomach digest its food. If 
 our bodily energies are compelled, in addition to this, to help the 
 muscles or brain, digestion is retarded, and a feeling of dullness and 
 heaviness follows. Fermentative changes, instead of the normal digestive 
 changes, are apt to take place in the food. 
  
 167. Practical Points about Eating. We should not eat for at least 
 two or three hours before going to bed. When we are asleep, the vital 
 forces are at a low ebb, the process of digestion is for the time nearly 
 suspended, and the retention of incompletely digested food in the stomach 
 may cause bad dreams and troubled sleep. But in many cases of 
 sleeplessness, a trifle of some simple food, especially if the stomach 
 seems to feel exhausted, often appears to promote sleep and rest. 
  
 [NOTE. The table on the next page shows the results of many 
 experiments to illustrate the time taken for the gastric digestion of 
 a number of the more common solid foods. There are a good many factors 
 of which the table takes no account, such as the interval since the 
 last meal, state of the appetite, amount of work and exercise, method 
 of cooking, and especially the quantity of food.]
Alcoholic drinks forced upon the stomach are a foreign substance; the 
 stomach treats them as such, and refuses to go on with the process of 
 digestion till it first gets rid of the poison. This irritating presence 
 and delay weaken the stomach, so that when proper food follows, the 
 enfeebled organ is ill prepared for its work. After intoxication, there 
 occurs an obvious reaction of the stomach, and digestive organs, against 
 the violent and unnatural disturbance. The appetite is extinguished or 
 depraved, and intense headache racks the frame, the whole system is 
 prostrated, as from a partial paralysis (all these results being the voice 
 of Nature  '  s sharp warning of this great wrong), and a rest of some days 
 is needed before the system fully recovers from the injury inflicted. 
  
 It is altogether an error to suppose the use of intoxicants is necessary 
 or even desirable to promote appetite or digestion. In health, good food 
 and a stomach undisturbed by artificial interference furnish all the 
 conditions required. More than these is harmful. If it may sometimes seem 
 as if alcoholic drinks arouse the appetite and invigorate digestion, we 
 must not shut our eyes to the fact that this is only a seeming, and that 
 their continued use will inevitably ruin both. In brief, there is no more 
 sure foe to good appetite and normal digestion than the habitual use of
317. The Organ of Taste. The sense of taste is located chiefly 
 in the tongue, but may also be referred even to the regions of the fauces. 
 Taste, like touch, consists in a particular mode of nerve termination. 
  
 The tongue is a muscular organ covered with mucous membrane, and is 
 richly supplied with blood-vessels and nerves. By its complicated 
 movements it is an important factor in chewing, in swallowing, and in 
 articulate speech. The surface of the tongue is covered with irregular 
 projections, called papillæ,--fine hair-like processes, about 1/12 of 
 an inch high. Interspersed with these are the fungiform papillæ. 
 These are shaped something like a mushroom, and may often be detected by 
 their bright red points when the rest of the tongue is coated. 
  
 Towards the root of the tongue is another kind of papillæ, the 
 circumvallate, eight to fifteen in number, arranged in the form of 
 the letter V, with the apex directed backwards. These are so called 
 because they consist of a fungiform papilla surrounded by a fold of mucous 
 membrane, presenting the appearance of being walled around. 
  
 In many of the fungiform and most of the circumvallate papillæ are
peculiar structures called taste buds or taste goblets. These 
 exist in great numbers, and are believed to be connected with nerve 
 fibers. These taste buds are readily excited by savory substances, and 
 transmit the impression along the connected nerve. 
  
 The tongue is supplied with sensory fibers by branches from the fifth and 
 eighth pairs of cranial nerves. The former confers taste on the front part 
 of the tongue, and the latter on the back part. Branches of the latter 
 also pass to the soft palate and neighboring parts and confer taste on 
 them. The motor nerve of the tongue is the ninth pair, the hypoglossal. 
  
 [Illustration: Fig. 125.--The Tongue. 
  
 A, epiglottis; 
 B, glands at the base of tongue; 
 C, tonsil; 
 D, median circumvallate papilla, 
 E, circumvallate papillæ; 
 F, filiform papillæ; 
 H, furrows on border of the tongue;
K, fungiform papillæ. 
 ] 
  
 318. The Sense of Taste. The sense of taste is excited by stimulation 
 of the mucous membrane of the tongue and of the palate, affecting the ends 
 of the nerve fibers. Taste is most acute in or near the circumvallate 
 papillæ. The middle of the tongue is scarcely sensitive to taste, while 
 the edges and the tip are, as a rule, highly sensitive. 
  
 Certain conditions are necessary that the sense of taste may be 
 exercised. First, the substance to be tasted must be in _solution_, or be 
 soluble in the fluids of the mouth. Insoluble substances are tasteless. If 
 we touch our tongue to a piece of rock crystal, there is a sensation of 
 contact or cold, but no sense of taste. On the other hand, when we bring 
 the tongue in contact with a piece of rock salt, we experience the 
 sensations of contact, coolness, and saline taste. 
  
 Again, the mucous membrane of the mouth must be _moist_. When the mouth is 
 dry, and receives substances not already in solution, there is no saliva 
 ready to dissolve them; hence, they are tasteless. This absence of taste
is common with the parched mouth during a fever. 
  
 The tongue assists in bringing the food in contact with the nerves, by 
 pressing it against the roof of the mouth and the soft palate, and thus is 
 produced the fullest sense of taste. 
  
 319. Physiological Conditions of Taste. The tongue is the seat of 
 sensations which are quite unlike each other. Thus, besides the sense of 
 taste, there is the sensation of touch, pressure, heat and cold, burning 
 or acrid feelings, and those produced by the application of the tongue to 
 an interrupted electric current. These are distinct sensations, due to 
 some chemical action excited probably in the touch cells, although the 
 true tastes may be excited by causes not strictly chemical. Thus a smart 
 tap on the tongue may excite the sensation of taste. 
  
 In the majority of persons the back of the tongue is most sensitive to 
 bitters, and the tip to sweets. Saline matters are perceived most 
 distinctly at the tip, and acid substances at the sides. The nerves of 
 taste are sensitive in an extraordinary degree to some articles of food 
 and certain drugs. For example, the taste of the various preparations of
quinine, peppermint, and wild cherry is got rid of with difficulty. 
  
 Like the other special senses, that of taste may become fatigued. The 
 repeated tasting of one substance rapidly deadens the sensibility, 
 probably by over-stimulation. Some savors so impress the nerves of taste 
 that others fail to make any impression. This principle is used to make 
 disagreeable medicine somewhat tasteless. Thus a few cloves, or grains of 
 coffee, or a bit of pepper, eaten before a dose of castor oil, renders it 
 less nauseous. 
  
 Flavor is something more than taste. It is in reality a mixed 
 sensation, in which smell and taste are both concerned, as is shown by the 
 common observation that one suffering from a cold in the head, which 
 blunts his sense of smell, loses the proper flavor of his food. So if a 
 person be blindfolded, and the nose pinched, he will be unable to 
 distinguish between an apple and an onion, if one be rubbed on the tongue 
 after the other. As soon as the nostrils are opened the difference is at 
 once perceived. 
  
 Experiment 142. Put a drop of vinegar on a friend  '  s tongue, or on
your own. Notice how the papillæ of the tongue start up. 
  
 Experiment 143. Rub different parts of the tongue with the pointed 
 end of a piece of salt or gum-aloes, to show that the _back_ of the 
 tongue is most sensitive to salt and bitter substances. 
  
 Experiment 144. Repeat the same with some sweet or sour substances, 
 to show that the _edges_ of the tongue are the most sensitive to these 
 substances. 
  
 Experiment 145. We often fail to distinguish between the sense of 
 taste and that of smell. Chew some pure, roasted coffee, and it seems to 
 have a distinct taste. Pinch the nose hard, and there is little taste. 
 Coffee has a powerful odor, but only a feeble taste. The same is true of 
 garlic, onions, and various spices. 
  
 Experiment 146. Light helps the sense of taste. Shut the eyes, and 
 palatable foods taste insipid. Pinch the nose, close the eyes, and see 
 how palatable one half of a teaspoonful of cod-liver oil becomes. 
 
Experiment 147. Close the nostrils, shut the eyes, and attempt to 
 distinguish by taste alone between a slice of an apple and one of a 
 potato. 
  
 320. Modifications of the Sense of Taste. Taste is modified to a 
 great extent by habit, education, and other circumstances. Articles of 
 food that are unpleasant in early life often become agreeable in later 
 years. There is occasionally a craving, especially with people of a 
 peculiar nervous organization, for certain unnatural articles (as chalk 
 and laundry starch) which are eaten without the least repugnance. Again, 
 the most savory dishes may excite disgust, while the simplest articles may 
 have a delicious flavor to one long deprived of them. The taste for 
 certain articles is certainly acquired. This is often true of raw 
 tomatoes, olives, and especially of tobacco. 
  
 The organs of taste and smell may be regarded as necessary accessories of 
 the general apparatus of nutrition, and are, therefore, more or less 
 essential to the maintenance of animal life. While taste and smell are 
 generally maintained until the close of life, sight and hearing are often 
 impaired by time, and may be altogether destroyed, the other vital
functions remaining unimpaired. 
  
 321. Effect of Tobacco and Alcohol upon Taste. It would be remarkable 
 if tobacco should fail to injure the sense of taste. The effect produced 
 upon the tender papillæ of the tongue by the nicotine-loaded juices and 
 the acrid smoke tends to impair the delicate sensibility of the entire 
 surface. The keen appreciation of fine flavors is destroyed. The once 
 clear and enjoyable tastes of simple objects become dull and vapid; thus 
 highly spiced and seasoned articles of food are in demand, and then 
 follows continued indigestion, with all its suffering. 
  
 Again, the burning, almost caustic effect of the stronger alcoholic 
 drinks, and the acrid pungency of tobacco smoke, are disastrous to the 
 finer perceptions of both taste and odors. 
  
  
 322. Smell. The sense of smell is lodged in the delicate 
 membrane which lines the nasal cavities. The floor, sides, and roof of 
 these cavities are formed by certain bones of the cranium and the face. 
 Man, in common with all air-breathing animals, has two nasal cavities.
which little or no light can penetrate. Deer, wild horses, and antelopes 
 probably surpass all other animals in having a vivid sense of smell. 
  
 Smell has been defined as "taste at a distance," and it is obvious that 
 these two senses not only form a natural group, but are clearly 
 associated in their physical action, especially in connection with the 
 perception of the flavor of food. The sense of odor gives us information 
 as to the quality of food and drink, and more especially as to the quality 
 of the air we breathe. Taste is at the gateway of the alimentary canal, 
 while smell acts as the sentinel of the respiratory tract. Just as taste 
 and flavor influence nutrition by affecting the digestive process, so the 
 agreeable odors about us, even those of the perfumes, play an important 
 part in the economy of life. 
  
  
 324. The Sense of Sight. The sight is well regarded as the 
 highest and the most perfect of all our senses. It plays so common and so 
 beneficent a part in the animal economy that we scarcely appreciate this 
 marvelous gift. Sight is essential not only to the simplest matters of 
 daily comfort and necessity, but is also of prime importance in the
culture of the mind and in the higher forms of pleasure. It opens to us 
 the widest and the most varied range of observation and enjoyment. The 
 pleasures and advantages it affords, directly and indirectly, have neither 
 cessation nor bounds. 
  
 Apart from its uses, the eye itself is an interesting and instructive 
 object of study. It presents beyond comparison the most beautiful example 
 of design and artistic workmanship to be found in the bodily structure. It 
 is the watchful sentinel and investigator of the external world. Unlike 
 the senses of taste and smell we seem, by the sense of vision, to become 
 aware of the existence of objects which are entirely apart from us, and 
 which have no direct or material link connecting them with our bodies. And 
 yet we are told that in vision the eye is affected by something which is 
 as material as any substance we taste or smell. 
  
 [NOTE. "The higher intelligence of man is intimately associated with 
 the perfection of the eye. Crystalline in its transparency, sensitive 
 in receptivity, delicate in its adjustments, quick in its motions, the 
 eye is a fitting servant for the eager soul, and, at times, the truest 
 interpreter between man and man of the spirit  '  s inmost workings. The
