To the acrid and pungent qualities of the 
 capsicum is to be ascribed the heightened 
 flavour of brandy and rum, when coloured 
 with the above-mentioned matter. 
  
 In other cases the ale-brewer has been 
 supplied with ground coriander-seeds, pre- 
 viously mixed with a portion of ground nux 
 vomica, under the delusive name of Faba 
 amara, to give a narcotic property to the 
 beverage. 
  
 It is a painful reflection, that the division 
 of labour which has been so instrumental in 
 bringing the manufactures of this country 
 to their present flourishing state, should 
  
  
  
 10 PRELIMINARY REMARKS.
 
 white sort, which has no wrinkles, and no perceptible 
 bitterness in taste, and which, though taken in a large 
 dose, has scarcely any effect at all, after being pul- 
 verised by fraudulent druggists, and mixed with a 
 portion of emetic tartar, is sold at a low price, for the 
 powder of genuine ipecacuanha root. There is no 
 ready method known to detect the fraud. 
  
  
  
 DRUGS AND MEDICINES. 19 
  
 magnesia, calcined magnesia, calomel, or 
 any other chemical preparation in general 
 demand. 
  
 ADULTERATION OF SPIRIT OF 
 HARTSHORN, 
 
verty may, indeed, oblige people to eat 
 such meat; but it would be better for them 
 to eat a smaller quantity of what is sound 
 and wholesome ; at least it would afford a 
 better nourishment, with less danger. 
  
 The injunction given to the Jews not to 
 eat of any creature which had died in conse- 
 quence of a disease, seems to have a strict 
 regard to health, and ought to be observed, 
 as a wholesome lesson, by Christians as 
 well as Jews. 
  
  
  
 40 DISGUSTING PRACTICE OF RENDERING 
  
 The Editor of The Literary Miscellany, 
 states, that it is a practice among many but- 
 chers to suspend calves by the hind legs, with
degree of muddiness much better than if 
 the water be viewed through the glass 
 placed between the eye and the light. It 
 should be perfectly colourless, devoid of 
 odour, and its taste soft and agreeable. It 
 should send out air-bubbles when poured 
 from one vessel into another ; it should boil 
 pulse soft, and form with soap am uniform 
 opaline fluid, which does not separate after 
 standing for several hours. 
  
 It is to the presence of common air and 
 carbonic acid gas that common water owes 
 ils taste, and many of the good effects 
 which it produces on animals and vege- 
 tables. Spring water, which contains more 
  
  
  
 CHARACTERS OF GOOD WATER. 51
 
 air, has a more lively taste than river 
 water. 
  
 Hence the insipid and vapid taste of newly 
 boiled water, from which these gases are 
 expelled: fish cannot live in water deprived 
 of those elastic fluids. 
  
 100 cubic inches of the New River water, 
 with which part of this metropolis is sup* 
 plied, contains 2,25 of carbonic acid, and 
 1,25 of common air. It contains, beside a 
 minute portion of muriate of lime, carbonate 
 of lime, and muriate of soda. The water 
 of the river Thames contains rather a larger 
 quantity of common air, and a smaller por- 
 tion of carbonic acid. 
  
 Water is freed from foreign matter by
As wells take their origin at some depth 
 from the surface, and below the influence 
 of the external atmosphere,, their tempera- 
 ture is in general pretty uniform during 
 every vicissitude of season, and always se- 
 veral degrees lower than the atmosphere.. 
 They differ from one another according to 
 the nature of the strata through which they 
 issue; for though the ingredients usually 
 existing in them are in such minute quan- 
 tities as to impart to the water no striking 
 properties, and do not render it unfit for 
 common purposes, yet they modify its na- 
 ture very considerably. Hence the water 
 of some springs is said to be hard, of others 
 soft, some sweet, others brackish, accord-, 
 ing to the nature and degree of the impreg- 
 nating ingredients. 
  
 Common springs are insensibly changed
* Dried bilberries are imported from Germany, under 
 the fallacious name of berry  ' dye. 
  
  
  
 ADULTERATION OF WINE. 93 
  
 parted to immature red wines by means of 
 oak-wood sawdust*, and the busks of fil- 
 berts; and that a mixture of spoiled foreign 
 and home-made wines is converted into the 
 wretched compound frequently sold in this 
 town by the name of* genuine old Port. '  
  
 Various expedients are resorted to for the 
 purpose of communicating particular fla- 
 vours to insipid wines. Thus a nutty flavour 
 is produced by bitter almonds ; factitious 
 Port wine is flavoured with a tincture drawn 
 from the seeds of raisins ; and the ingre-
by the Highflyer coach, from the north, 
 dined, as usual, at Newark. A bottle of 
 Port wine was ordered ; on tasting which, 
 one of the passengers observed that it had 
 an unpleasant flavour, and begged that it 
 might be changed. The waiter took away 
 the bottle, poured into a fresh decanter 
 half the wine which had been objected to, 
 and filled it up from another bottle. This 
 he took into the room, and the greater 
 part was drank by the passengers, who, 
  
  
  
 ADULTERATION OF WINE. 101 
  
 after the coach had set out towards Grarv- 
 tham, were seized with extreme sickness ; 
 one gentleman in particular, who had taken 
 more of the wine than the others, it was
thought would have died, but has since re- 
 covered. The half of the bottle of wine sent 
 out of the passengers '  room, was put aside 
 for the purpose of mixing negus. In the 
 evening, Mr. Bland, of Newark, went into 
 the hotel, and drank a glass or two of wine 
 $nd water. He returned home at his usual 
 hour, and went to bed; in the middle of the 
 night he was taken so ill, as to induce Mrs. 
 Bland to send for his brother, an apothecary 
 in the town ; but before that gentleman ar- 
 rived, he was dead. An inquest was held, 
 and the jury, after the fullest inquiry, and 
 the examination of the surgeons by whom 
 r3 
  
  
  
 102 ADULTERATION OF WINE. 
 
in warm climates. Its effect is of an inebri- 
 ating nature. 
  
 " Calamus Ar omaticus is used in the brew- 
 ery as a succedaneum for hops and strength, 
 by slicing it thin, and boiling it a short time 
 with the hops ; one pound of which is equal 
 to six pounds of hops. 
  
 " Quassia leaves so severe a bitter on the 
 palate, long after the liquor is drank, that 
 it requires much judgment in using it. 
  
 " Coriander is much used by brewers, to 
 give a flavour to ales. 
  
 " Capsicum, or guinea pepper, is used in 
 ales and amber. 
  
 " Caraway Seed is put into ales, for the
flavour ; and is used in the tun. 
  
 " Grams of Paradise are of a warm na- 
 ttire also, and are used in ales. 
  
  
  
 ADULTERATION OF BEER, 153 
  
 ** Ginger. This article, when used in the 
 brewery, is always ground fine ; and made 
 use of in the tun at the time of cleansing, 
  
 " Beans tend to mellow malt liquor ; and, 
 from their properties, add much to its inebri- 
 ating qualities ; but they must not be used 
 in too large a quantity. 
  
 " Oyster Shells are very good to recover 
 sour beer : but when used, you must leave
This produced beer of a paler colour, and 
 of a less bitter flavour. To remedy these 
 disadvantages, they invented an artificial 
 colouring substance, prepared by boiling- 
 brown sugar till it acquired a very dark 
  
  
  
 ADULTERATION OF BEER. 163 
  
 brown colour ; a solution of which was em- 
 ployed to darken the colour of the beer. 
 Some brewers made use of the infusion of 
 malt instead of sugar colouring*. To impart 
 to the beer a bitter taste, the fraudulent 
 brewer employed quassia wood and worm- 
 wood as a substitute for hops. 
  
 But as the colouring of beer by means of 
 sugar became in many instances a pretext
thing is allowed by law to enter into the 
 composition of beer, but malt and hops. 
  
 The substances used by fraudulent brew- 
 ers for adulterating beer, are chiefly the fol- 
 lowing : 
  
 Quassia, which gives to beer a bitter taste, 
 is substituted for hops ; but hops possess a 
 i 3 
  
  
  
 174 ADULTERATION OF BEER. 
  
 more agreeable aromatic flavour, and there 
 is also reason to believe that they render 
 beer less liable to spoil by keeping ; a pro- 
 perty which does not belong to quassia. It 
 requires but little discrimination to distin-
aromatic flavour which the hop contains, 
 partly to cover the sweetness of undecom- 
 posed saccharine matter, and also to separate, 
 i 4 
  
  
  
 176 ADULTERATION OF BEER. 
  
 by virtue of the gallic acid and tannin it 
 contains, a portion of peculiar vegetable mu- 
 cilage somewhat resembling gluten, which 
 is still diffused through the beer. The com- 
 pound thus produced, separates in small flakes 
 like those of curdled soap ; and by these 
 means the beer is rendered less liable to spoiK 
 For nothing contributes more to the conver- 
 sion of beer, or any other vinous fluid, into 
 vinegar, than mucilage. Hence, also, all 
 full-bodied and clammy ales, abounding in
But, as the duties of a brewhouse sufficiently 
 employ every person engaged in it, I recom- 
 mend it to be purchased of those who make 
 it their business to have it ready prepared. 
  
 " Observe, that porter should not be sent 
 out without it, as it causes the head so 
 much admired in that liquor, and is agree- 
 able to its flavour." 
  
 Capsicum and grains of paradise, two 
 i 6 
  
  
  
 180 ADULTERATION OP BEER. 
  
 highly acrid substances, are employed to 
 give a pungent taste to weak insipid beer. 
 Of late, a concentrated tincture of these ar-
two-penny ; he did so, and succeeded, call- 
 ing it entire, OY entire butt, meaning that it 
 was drawn entirely from one cask or butt ; 
 and as it was a very hearty and nourishing* 
 liquor, and supposed to be very suitable for 
 porters and other working people, it obtained 
 the name of porter*" The system is now 
 altered, and porter is very generally com- 
 pounded of two kinds, or rather the same 
  
  
  
 ADVLTERATIOH OF BEER. 193 
  
 liquor in two different states, the due ad- 
 mixture of which is palatable, though nei- 
 ther is good alone. One is mild porter, and 
 the other stale porter ; the former is that 
 which has a slightly bitter flavour; the latter 
 has been kept longer. This mixture the
 
  
  
 198 ADULTERATION OF BEER. 
  
 of beer always affords a less proportion of 
 alcohol than is produced from mild beer. 
 The practice of bringing beer forward, it 
 is to be understood, is resorted to only by 
 fraudulent brewers*. 
  
 If, on the contrary, the brewer has too 
 large a stock of old beer on his hands, 
 recourse is had to an opposite practice 
 of converting stale, half-spoiled, or sour 
 beer, into mild beer, by the simple ad>- 
 mixture of an alkali, or an alkaline earth. 
 Oyster-shell powder and subcarbonate of 
 potash, or soda, are usually employed for 
 that purpose. These substances neutralise
the excess of acid, and render sour beer 
 somewhat palatable. By this process the 
 beer becomes very liable to spoil. 
  
 * Mr. Child, in Ms Treatise on Brewing, p. 23, 
 directs, to make neiv faer older, use oil of vitriol. 
  
  
  
 ADULTERATION OF BEER, 199 
  
 It is the worst expedient that the brewer 
 can practise : the beer thus rendered mild, 
 soon loses its vinous taste; it becomes va- 
 pid; and speedily assumes a muddy grey 
 colour, and an exceedingly disagreeable 
 taste. 
  
 These sophistications may be considered, 
 at first, as minor crimes practised by fraudu-
drinkers are very liable to apoplexy and 
 palsy, without taking this narcotic poison. 
  
 * The deleterious effect of Cocculus Indicus (the 
 fruit of the memispermum cocculus} is owing to a pe- 
 culiar bitter principle contained in it; which, when, 
 swallowed in minute quantities, intoxicates and acts as 
 poison. It may be obtained from cocculus indicus ber- 
 ries in a detached state : chemists call it picrotoxin^ 
 from 7r*x/?ofc bitter ; and TO&KOV, poison. 
  
  
  
 ADULTERATION OF BEER. 205 
  
 If we judge from the preceding lists of 
 prosecutions and convictions furnished by 
 the Solicitor of the Excise*, it will be evident 
 that many wholesale brewers, as well as 
 retail dealers, stand very conspicuous among
Such is the advice given by Mr. Shannon. 
  
  
  
 SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS. 259 
  
 The mode of judging by the taste of spi- 
 rituous liquors is deceitful. A false strength 
 is given to a weak liquor, by infusing in it 
 acrid vegetable substances, or by adding 
 to it a tincture of grains of paradise and 
 Guinea pepper. These substances impart 
 to weak brandy or rum, an extremely hot 
 and pungent taste. 
  
 Brandy and rum is also frequently so- 
 phisticated with British molasses, or sugar- 
 spirit, coloured with burnt sugar. 
  
 The flavour which characterises French
brandy, and which is owing to a small 
 portion of a peculiar essential oil contained 
 in k, is imitated by distilling- British mo- 
 lasses spirit over wine lees ; but the spirit, 
 prior to being distilled over wine lees, is 
 previously deprived, in part, of its peculiar 
 disagi-eeable flavour, by rectification over 
  
  
  
 260 ADULTERATION OF 
  
 fresh-burnt charcoal and quicklime. Other 
 brandy-merchants employ a spirit obtained 
 from raisin wine, which is suffered to pass 
 into an incipient acescency. The spirit 
 thus procured partakes strongly of the 
 flavour which is characteristic of foreign 
 brandy. 
 
Oak saw-dust, and a spirituous tincture 
 of raisin stones, are likewise used to impart 
 to new brandy and rum a ripe taste, resem- 
 bling brandy or rum long kept in oaken 
 casks, and a somewhat oily consistence, 
 so as to form a double froth at its surface, 
 when strongly agitated in a vial. The co- 
 louring substances are burnt sugar, or mo- 
 lasses; the latter gives to imitative brandy 
 a luscious taste, and fulness in the mouth. 
 These properties are said to render it parti- 
 cularly fit for the retail London customers. 
  
  
  
 SPIRITUOUS LIQUOflS. 261 
  
 The following- is the method of com- 
 pounding or making up 9 as it is technically 
 called, brandy* for retail:
MALT SPIRIT. 
  
 THE false strength of brandy or rum is 
 rendered obvious by diluting the suspected 
  
 * Observations on Malted and Unmalted Corn, con- 
 nected with Brewing and Distilling-, p, 167. 
  
  
  
 262 ADULTERATION OF 
  
 liquor with water ; the acrimony of the cap- 
 sicum, and grains of paradise, or pepper, 
 may then be readily discovered by the 
 taste. 
  
 The adulteration of brandy with British 
 molasses, or sugar-spirit, becomes evident 
 by rubbing a portion of the suspectetl
brandy between the palm of the hands; the 
 spirit, as it evaporates, leaves the disagree- 
 able flavour which is peculiar to all British 
 spirits. Or the liqour may be deprived of 
 its alcohol, by heating a portion in a spoon 
 over a candle, till the vapour ceases to catch 
 fire on the approach of a lighted taper. The 
 residue thus obtained, of genuine French 
 brandy, possesses a vinous odour, still 
 resembling* the original flavour of the 
 brandy, whilst the residue, produced from 
 sophisticated brandy, has a peculiar disa- 
  
  
  
 SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS, 263 
  
 greeable smell, resembling gin, or the breath 
 of habitual drunkards. 
 
Arrack is coarsely imitated by adding to 
 rum a small quantity of  ' pyroligneous acid 
 and some flowers (acid) of benzoe. The 
 compound thus produced, however, must 
 be pronounced a bad one. The author of a 
 very popular Cookery Book, (the Cook ' s 
 Oracle, 2d edition, p. 480,) directs two scru- 
 ples of benzoic acid to be dissolved in one 
 quart of rum, to make " mock arrack." 
  
  
  
 MALT SPIRIT. 
  
 MALT spirit, or gin, the favourite liquor 
 of the lower order of people, which is cha- 
 racterized by the peculiar flavour of juniper 
 berries, over which the raw spirit is distilled, 
  
 
 
 204 ADULTERATION OF 
  
 is usually obtained from a mixture of malt 
 and barley : sometimes both molasses and 
 corn are employed, particularly if there be 
 a scarcity of grain. But the flavour of whis- 
 key, which is made from barley and oats, is 
 owing to the malted grain being dried with 
 peat, the smoke of which gives it the charac- 
 teristic taste. 
  
 The malt distiller is not allowed to fur- 
 nish, under a heavy penalty, any crude or 
 raw spirit to the rectiiier or manufacturer 
 of gin, of a greater strength than seven per 
 cent over proof. The rectifier who receives 
 the spirit from the inalt distiller is not al- 
 lowed, under a certain penalty, to send out 
 the spirit to his customers greater than of a
 
  
 COUNTERFEIT PEPPER 291 
  
 steeped in sea water and urine, and ex- 
 posed to the heat of the sun for several 
 days, till the rind or outer bark loosens ; it 
 is then taken out of the steep, and, when 
 dry, it is rubbed with the hand till the rind 
 falls off. The white fruit is then dried, and 
 the remains of the rind blown away like 
 chaff. A great deal of the peculiar flavour 
 and pungent hot taste of the pepper is taken 
 off by this process. White pepper is al- 
 ways inferior in flavour and quality to 
 black pepper. 
  
 However, there is a sort of native white 
 pepper, produced on a species of the pepper 
 plant, which is much better than the facti-
poppy oil. 
  
 Good olive oil should have a pale yellow 
 colour, somewhat inclining to green ; a 
 bland taste, without smell ; and should con- 
 geal at 38 Fahrenheit. In this country, it 
 is frequently met with rancid. 
  
 The presence of lead is detected by shak- 
 ing, in a stopped vial, one part of the sus- 
 pected oil, with two or three parts of water, 
 impregnated with sulphuretted hydrogen. 
 This agent will render the oil of a dark 
 brown or black colour, if any metal, delete- 
 rious to health, be present. The practice of 
 keeping this oil in pewter or leaden cisterns, 
  
  
  
 320 POISONOUS OLIVE OIL.
 
  
 of 
  
  
  
 ISINGLASS may be considered as an ali- 
 mentary substance employed in dometie 
 economy. By boiling isinglass in water, it 
 becomes dissolved, and furnishes a mild 
 tremulous jelly, which, when seasoned with 
 cream, bitter almonds, and sugar, is called 
 blanc-mange; and when seasoned with 
 lemon juice, sugar, and aromatics, forms 
 the basis of many delicacies for the table. 
 It is also employed in domestic use in the 
 clarification of various liquors ; and if small 
 shreds are thrown into boiling coffee, it 
 renders it clear in a few minutes. 
 
 
  
  
 <tnttamom 
  
  
  
 CINNAMON is often adulterated with cassia 
 bark, or by mixing 1 with the genuine cinna- 
 mon, a portion of cinnamon bark which 
 has been deprived of its essential oil by 
 distillation. 
  
 The best cinnamon is rather pliable, and 
 ought not much to exceed stout writing 
 paper in thickness. It is of a light yellow- 
 ish colour; it possesses a sweet taste, not 
 so hot as to occasion pain, and not suc- 
 ceeded by any aftertaste. The inferior 
 kind is distinguished by being thicker, of
a darker and brownish colour, hot and pun- 
  
  
  
 ADULTERATION OF CINNAMON. 345 
  
 gent when chewed, and succeeded by a 
 disagreeable bitter after-taste. The cassia 
 bark, which greatly resembles the true cin- 
 namon, is thicker, and of a coarser texture, 
 and breaks short and smooth, whilst true 
 cinnamon breaks fibrous and splintery. 
 Cassia has a slimy mucilagenous taste, and 
 without any of the roughness of the true 
 cinnamon bark. 
  
  
  
 Q5 
 
