 As to the Kinds and Differences of Feeling, both are taken, either from the Objects, or from the various affection of the Sensory: the ways or means of the former, are so The Kinds and Differences of Feeling, are ei∣ther, In respect of the Object; manifold, that they cannot easily be recounted; for hither ought to be referred (as we said but now) the universal Tangible Qualities; By Tangible Qualities we understand here, the various habitudes of Natural Bodies, which arise from the Crasis and Dispo∣sition of the Elements, of which they are made; as also from their Intestine Motion, or Effluvia ' s variously appearing in themselves; which kind of Modifications of Bodies, the Sense of Feeling chiefly finds out, and makes their knowledge or marks so certain, that when we do not believe the Scrutiny of the other Senses, we are wont to rest satisfied with the Examination of this. 
 Concerning the Species of Feeling, Constituted in respect of the Sensory, we shewed even now, that the sensible Impression was immediately derived from the External Or∣gan, In respect of the Sensory. either to the streaked Bodies, or to the Cerebel: Therefore, for that Reason, Sen∣sion is either manifest, and knows plainly every thing; or private of which the Animal And so it is ei∣ther manifest or private. is scarce knowing: but the Consequence declares this Kind of Sension to have been stir∣red up: for a Motion being made in any inward unseen, argues a previous sense of it to have been; as from the change of the Pulse, or a failure of Spirits, shews a certain Malig∣nity to have affected the Praecordia, or the Cerebel. 
 In either of the aforesaid Kinds of Sension, to wit, whether the same be manifest or Pleasant or Sad. private, the Tangible Impression, either coming pleasantly to the Fibres, gathers toge∣ther the Spirits implanted in them, and more nearly delights them, and strokes them with a soft and gentle rubbing, whence pleasure arises; or the Impulse of the same, pulling and wrinkling the Fibres, distracts and dissipates the Spirits one from another, and so Grief, Pain, or Trouble Succeeds: But concerning these Affections, viz. Grief and Pleasure, we shall have hereafter a more fit place to speak of them; so that it next remains, for us to proceed, from the Sense of Feeling, to its nearest Neighbor and Re∣lation the Taste. 
 CHAP. XII. Of the Taste. THe Taste is so like to the Sense of Feeling, that it seems to be a certain Species of The Taste a Kin to Feeling. it; and certainly the Object, in either Organ, ought to be brought near, and laid upon it; yea in tasting, to be admitted more deeply within the Pores and its passa∣ges. Upon this Sense, depends chiefly both the Life and Vegetation of Animals; for The Sensory of the Tast discerns its Objects, and is delighted with those things that are Convenient. this chooses and takes in Juice for nourishment convenient, and that by this Office it might be constantly and rightly performed, it is furnished with a faculty, or a certain implanted Judgment, whereby some wholesome and agreeable Aliments, fit for every Individual, are discerned from those that are disagreeable and hurtful; also further, as it were in reward of its work, it is delighted after a notable manner, with the Exercise of its Function; For unless convenient agreeable things, fit to be Eaten, move Spittle, and as it were prickle them with a most grateful pleasantness of Taste, the appetite of desiring or taking of Food is quickly extinguished, with oblivion or tediousness; so Venus or Plea∣sure is necessary for the preserv∣ing of the Indi∣vidual. for the preserving the Individual, no less than the Species, Desire and Pleasure ought to be had. 
 The Sensory of the Taste is not so diffusive, and almost Co-extended with the whole Body, as that of Feeling, but is limitted to one part only: yea, and its Sensible is of one Kind only, to wit, a Savoury thing, nor does it include, as the Tangible Quality, the Subjects of many Catagorical things. Indeed the chief and almost only Organ of the Taste is the Tongue; to which, after a manner, but obscurely, do confent the Pa∣late and the Upper part of the Throat; But in all of them, the Nervous Fibres are the immediate Instruments of Sension; wherefore  ' tis observed, that the Tongue is notedly The Organ of the Taste, is the Tongue, with the Palate, and Throat. more Fibrous than any other part, also consists of a very porous Contexture; for this end, that the savory Particles of the thing, might be more plentifully, and more deep∣ly admitted, into the passages of the Sensory, and so meeting at once with many Fi∣bres, might excite a more acute Sension: yea, it may be suspected, that whil ' st the subtil Particles of the savory Humor are imbibed so deeply by the Tongue, the Eating is a cer∣tain Solution; Animal Spirits do in some measure snatch the same, for their nourishment, and convey them inwardly, by the passages of the Nerves, towards the Brain; for it plainly appears, that in great Fastings or want of Food, and swouning or failure of Spirits, that a refreshment of them immediately follows, upon the first tasting of any noble Liquor. 
 Eating is a certain Kind of Solution, whereby the savory Particles may be the better taken in, from the Food by the Sensory: Because, whil ' st solid eatable things are redu∣ced Wherefore one savour, often∣times excludes another. into bits, by Chawing, the Tongue, and other parts of the Mouth, and Throat, pour forth as it were a certain Menstruum, which washing and as it were Elixivating the savory little Bodies, carries them into the Sensory, and insinuates them into the Pores of the Tongue: Further, The savory Particles, because so impacted in the Sen∣sory, do employ its passages, hence it comes to pass, that one savour not rarely ex∣cludes another; so sweet things being tasted, because they are clammy, and very ob∣structing, hinder or pervert the more exact taste of Wine; wherefore, that the hindred Faculty might be again restored, salt or sharp things are eaten, which may open the Pores of the Tongue, and clear away the sticking Viscousness. 
 As to the Nerves, which serve to the Fibres of the Tongue, thickly interwoven with The Nerves, sent to the Organs of the Taste, proceed partly from the Fifth pair. it, and which carry the Impressions of Savours, to the chief Sensory, it seems, that they are of a double Kind: for as Nerves are inserted in the Tongue from both the Fifth, and the Ninth pair, and are every where distributed thorow its whole frame, with a most thick Series of shoots, it is very likely, that they are both Sensitive. Concerning the Nerves sent hither from the Fifth pair, the thing is out of doubt; and as from the same pair, other shoots are sent into the Nostrils, hence we may say, the reason is, of that Consent, which is between both these Sensories; but indeed, as to the Nerves bestowed also on the Tongue, from the Ninth pair, it may be something doubted, because it is commonly believed, that the Office of these serve to the Motion of the Tongue, and to Speech; wherefore, from the same pair are sent certain branches into the Muscles of Partly from the Ninth also, which serve for the Motions of the Tongue. the Tongue, and of the Bone called Hyoides, which without doubt are destinated for their Motion: Nevertheless, thô it be granted, that the Nerves of the Tongue and its Appendix, inserted from the Ninth pair, do bestow on them the moving Power (which indeed is necessary to this Part, as well for Tasting as for speaking; to wit, as the Tongue is very versatile, it takes in with delight the Savours from every corner or recess of the Mouth) yet what hinders, that however the same Nerves should not serve for both, It is in like manner observ∣ed of the Touch, that the same Nerves serve both for Sense, and Motion. to wit, Motion and Sense? For it appears, that many Nerves which serve for the Sense of Feeling, do in like manner serve for the performing of the Motions of those Parts to which they belong. Wherefore, as Tasting is a certain Species of Feeling, it is pro∣bable, that it enters in some measure through the moving Nerves of the Tongue it self; neither does it appear otherwayes, for what end Branches of the Nerves, derived from the Ninth pair into the Tongue, disperse such thick-set shoots into its whole frame, un∣less they should serve for the receiving of the Particles of Savours, coming from every Part. But for as much as after this manner, two Nerves of a distinct Original belong to the Tongue, and one of them arises from the Parts of the Brain, and the other from the Wherefore from the Taste of a pleasant thing, the Imagination and the Prae∣cordia, are wont to be affected. Cerebel: Hence a Sension being carried inwards by the same, it is stay ' d from either at the Common Sensory, and so according to the diverse Nature of the Object, a pleasant and delectable fruition, or an ingrateful and sad Aversion, at once in either Govern∣ment the Imagination and the Praecordia are affected. 
 There is a sufficient indulgement to the Taste, for a reward of its necessary work, to wit, Eating; therefore its Objects are sought far and near, through the Regions of the whole World, yea and all the Elements are imployed. Further, as to its Ministry, all the rest of the Senses serve to this, for nothing pleases the Palate unless the Sight, and The rest of the Senses, wait up∣on the Taste. Hearing, Smell, and Touch approve it.  ' Tis fit it should be so, for this Sensory, by which Food is conveyed for Humane Life, and that it might enjoy great variety, for the shunning of nauseous things; and use a guard upon the rest, for Discrimination; lest instead of Food, it might unawares take Poison. 
 The Speculation of Savours, (which are the next Object of Taste) contains in it self Savours the O ∣ject of Tasting. Simple or Com∣pound: A ThreefoldCon∣sideration of them, to wit, which are, 1. Whose Origi∣nal are natural. 2. Artificial. 3. The Altera∣tion or Abolition of either. very many Pleasant, and no less Profitable things; wherefore I think it will not be from the Matter, to turn aside here a little into this Theory; and as we shall divide all Sa∣vours into Simple and Compound: First, we shall rehearse what Nature suggests of that Kind particularly, according to their several differences, both of themselves, and of the Subjects in which they are; Then Secondly, we shall add the Parallels, by what means, and by what service of Art, the same Savours in Subjects are produced anew, in which they are not by Nature; Thirdly, After what manner Savours both Natural and Artificial, are any way altered and changed in their Subjects, or wholly perish. It will be worth our while to discourse briefly concerning these, and lastly, somewhat of Compounded Savours. 
 Savours called Simple, are commonly counted to be Nine, viz. Sharp, Bitter, Salt, Nine Simple Savours. Acid or Tart, Astringent or Biting, Sowre, Sweet, Oyly, insipid or without Taste. 
 The first is sharp or biting Savour, such as is felt in Pepper or Pellitory, being chewed; Sharp Savour. which probably arises, as often as the Particles of any Body are smooth, and sharpned, and after that manner figured, like the stings of Nettles, that they may prick and very much dig into the Sensory. In Subjects indued with a sharp biting Savour, a volatile Salt, or an Alchalisat, or suffering a Flux from Fire, very much exceeds other Elements. 
 Secondly, Sharp biting Bodies produced by the help of Art, are Mercury Sublimate, 2. Which are so produced by Art. Butter of Antimony, Strong-Waters, and Causticks, the fixed Salts of Herbs, made by burning to Ashes, Calcined Vitriol, the Rust of Brass, &amp;c. The oftner things suffer Calcination, and Fusion in the Fire, the more biting sharp they are made; because, by this means, the Pricks and Spears of the Particles are sharpned. An Example is in the fixed Salts of Herbs, calcined Vitriol, the Infernal Stone, &amp;c. Bodies which are biting sharp, and Corrosives mixt together, and committed to the Fire, acquire a most sharp force of burning. An example is in Mercury Sublimate, and Stygian Waters, the rea∣son of which is, because Salts of a like Kind, being mixed together, joyn their forces or edges, and are at the same time very much sharp ' ned by the fire. It happens otherwise to Salts of a divers Kind, as are Spirits of Vitriol, and Salt of Tartar, mixed together; Sugar and Honey subjected to distillation, exhale a Caustick Water; also the Spirit of Wine highly rectified becomes biting sharp, and burning; because the Saline or Spiri∣tuous Particles, in both Substances being deprived of the sweetness of the others, put forth their Spears and Pricks. 
 Thirdly, Which was the Third Proposition, the biting sharpness in Bodies, both 3 By what means the biting sharpness is wont to be ta∣ken away, or al∣tered. Natural and Artificial is put away or altered after various wayes. Mercury Sublimate highly Corrosive, if another quantity of live Mercury be added and sublimed, it takes away all acritude or biting sharpness, and it becomes insipid or without taste. The reason of which is, that when the Particles of the added Mercury, do grow to the little Spears of the Salts, they do thereby become more thick and obtuse. The Spirit of Vitriol and Salt of Tartar, being melted (which two are biting sharp and corrosive of them∣selves apart) if they be put together, lose all acritude; to wit, these Salts being of a divers Kind, viz. Fluid and Alchalisat; being put together, work mutually one upon another, by which means, the little Spears and Pricks of both are broken; even as if the edge of one Knife, should be rubbed against the edge of another. Plants and Herbs, which are naturally biting sharp, if they be macerated in White-wine, (or perhaps in any other Liquor) put away all their sharpness; and yet the Liquor becomes not at all sharp. In these sort of Concretes, all the acritude depends upon the volatile Salt, which being loosned, by the mixture, presently flyes away. For the same Reason, these sort of Herbs, being subjected to distillation, exhale almost an insipid water, and the dreggs of the Herbs remaining after distillation, is also insipid: Hence also some Herbs, which being green, abound with a sharp biting juice, being dryed, lose very much of their acritude; as Scurvy-grass, Water-cresses, and Brooklime, &amp;c. 
 Secondly, The bitter Savour or Taste, such as is principally in Gall and Wormwood, seems to be made, for as much as the Particles of its Body are planted with forked Pricks, 2. Bitter Sa∣vour. which digging into the Sensory, not deeply, but only on the Superficies, cause a sad or sorrowful Sense; just as if the sharp-pointed fruit of the Teas , should be sharply hand∣led with ones hands. In Subjects indued with a bitter Savour, Salt, associated with Sul∣phur, and suffering an Adustion with it, Predominates. 
 First, Subjects which exhibit this kind of Savour naturally, among Vegetables, are 3. Which are bitter of their own Nature. Wormwood, Southernwood, Centaury, Colocynthida, Agaric, Fumitary, and almost all Herbs which grow in dry and mountany places; then Gumms, and Concrete juices, as Myrrh, Aloes, Opium, Ammoniac, &amp;c. Among Minerals they are not easily met with. The Excrements of living Creatures, as the Gall, and Dung, the Liquor contained in the Bladder of the Gall; and so the Skins of some Birds are bitter.
Secondly, As to the second, Things which draw bitterness anew, they are Compound∣ed Liquors; if in Cooking they are burnt, or are made too thick by Evaporation; hence 2. After what manner, the bit∣terness may be produced anew. Soot is bitter, and whatever things suffer adustion or burning. Sugared Aliments and sweet things are most easily Corrupted in the Stomach, and degenerate into a most high∣ly bitter Humor. 
 Thirdly, As to the Third, a bitter Savour is most difficultly taken away, without the 3 By what means it is wont to be taken a∣way, or altered. Destruction of the Subject, in which it is; as appears in Aloes, and Colocynthida, and Medicines prepared out of them. Yet New Beer, being something bitterish, by the boyling of Hops in it, grows sweet by clearing and a long fermentation: the reason of this we have shewed elsewhere. Further, Liquors, which grow bitter by reason of their Contracting an Empyreuma or burning to, if they be exposed for a long while in a moist Air, or distilled over again, mixed with Calcined Salt, they will partly lose their Empyreu∣ma, or smatch of Fire, and bitterness. 
 Thirdly, As to the Third, all natural Salts, if they be distilled often over again, 3. By what means saltness is wont to be taken away or altered. pass into acetous or tart Liquors: The reason of which is, because these kind of Con∣cretes suffer a divorce of the other Principles, by the fire, and so come more near to the Simple and Elementary Nature of Salt. Volatile Salts, at first white, if exposed to the Moisture of the Air, do melt into a reddish Liquor, not very Salt, and besides smelling like the stink of smoak or soot; because the mixture being loosned by the moist Air, the Saline Particles, for that they are volatile, many of them fly away, but in the mean time, the Sulphureous Particles, before subjugated, get the Do∣minion. 
 Fourthly, The Acid, or sour, or tart Savour or Taste, seems to be made, when the 4. The Acid or tart savou . Particles of any Body are four pointed or corner ' d (to wit, which appear with a smooth and acute point, and with a sharp Body, like a wedge made into a bigger bulk) so that which way soever applyed to the Sensory, they prick it, and by pressing it, something bind it up; and therefore they leave in it larger Incisions than any other Savour. This Kind of Savour, for the most part depends upon a fixed Salt, car ied forth into a Flux. 
 First, Bodies naturally acid or sower, are among Vegetables, Pomecitrons, Oringes, 1. Natural A∣cids. Lemons, Berberries, Sorrel, Tamarinds, &amp;c. Among Minerals scarce any to be met with, as I remember, nor is it easily to be found among Animals, unless perhaps the Melancholly Juice, the ferments of the Stomach, and Spleen, the Pancratic Juice, and also the fasting spittle of a Man, may be said to be something Acid. 
 Secondly, Made Acids, are Vinegar, and the Spirit of it, or the Liquor distilled: 2. Made Acids. The Melanchollic Humor preternaturally begotten in the Body, which often like the Spirit of Vitriol, becomes Acid, and almost Corrosive. Vitriol, Salt, and Sulphur, be∣ing whole, and tasted in their solid substance, shew no kind of acidity, if they be made subject to Chymical Operation, send forth a Liquor highly acid; the reason of which was shewed but now. 
 Thirdly, As to the Third, Chymists say, that acetous Spirits, to wit, of Sulphur, 3. By what means an Acid savour is wont to be taken a∣way, or altered. Salt, Vitriol, &amp;c. by a long Digestion and Circulation, do grow sweet. All acetous Mineral Spirits, also distilled Vinegar, and the juice of Vegetables; if they dissolve any Body, by knawing or corroding it, as Corals, Pearls, or any Precious Stones, put away their acidness; because the Particles of the fluid Salt, in the acid Stagma or Menstruum, are fixed to the Alchali Salt in the mixture. Moreover, these Kinds of Spirits, and ace∣tous Liquors, if they are mixed, either with Oil of Tartar, or with the fixed Salts of Herbs, loosed by Deliquium, loose their acidity. The Spirit of Vinegar being poured upon Salt of Tartar, and drawn off by distillation, becomes insipid. Spirit of Vitriol po red upon Quick-silver, and drawn off by distillation, putting away its acidity, acquires a taste like Allum; and if we may believe Helmont, passes by Coagulation into true Alum. Distilled Vinegar impregnated with the solution of Minium, or red Lead, grows wonderfully sweet. 
 5. The Sower, austere, or binding or astringent Savour, arises in Bodies, whose 5. Austere or sower Taste. Particles are stuffed with very many little Spears and Hooks, which in chewing, being rolled upon the Sensory, are fixed to it, and greatly draw together, and pull its Fibres; not much unlike, as if a Comb, which Cards Wool, should be drawn up and down upon the hands. In substances indned with an austere savour, a fixed Salt, enwrapped with the Particles of the earthy Element, predominates. 
 First, Bodies naturally austere, among Vegetables, are the Fruit of the Medlar-Tree, 1. Naturally austere things. of the Dog-Bryer, of the Cypress-Tree, Flowers of Pomeg anat, Galls, Slows, Sumach, &amp;c. Among Minerals Alum, Iron, Vitriol. Among living Creatures, or among their Parts, there is not as I remember, any austere savour to be met with. 
 Secondly, odies Artificially produced, which have an austere, sower or rough sa∣vour, 2. Made au∣stere savours. are all made Vitriols, to wit, the Vitriol of Silver, of Steel, of Tin, of Cop∣per, &amp;c. The reason of which is, because in these Minerals, the Saline Particles, are very uch intangled with Terrene, and they continue in the same state, when they are drawn forth from their Substances, by the soluted Mixtion. Spirit of Vitriol being drawn from Mercury, by frequent Cohobations, acquires a Pontick or Aluminous Savour. 
 Thirdly, As to the Instances, by which an austere, sower, or rough taste, may be taken away out of all Substances, it is to be observed, that Vitriol of every Kind, by 3. By what means an au∣stere or rough Taste, is wont to be taken away, or altered. long distillation and circulation with the Spirit made of Wine, grows sweet, and loses its astringent force. If waters impregnated with Vitriol, be poured into Oil of Tar∣tar, there will be precipitated a certain thickish Matter wonderfully sweet. Steel, Tin, or Lead, being dissolved in Vinegar, and Coagulated by Evaporation, go into sweet Salts. Further, it is a common Experiment: If having before tasted Vitriol, you take the fume of Tobacco at your Mouth, the austere taste at first impressed on the Sense, is changed into a plainly honied sweetness; the reason of which is, because the Sea-salt Particles, such as are in Vitriol, being mingled with the Sulphureous, out of the burnt Tobacco, create a sweet Savour: from whence also we may Collect, that Sugar and Honey, are of a Sulphureous-saline Nature; which also clearly appears, by their distillation, for as much as they, like Salt Minerals, yield an Acid and very Corrosive Stagma. 
 6. Of Kin to the austere, is the acerb or sower taste, the Particles of whose subject, are indued with little Tenters or Hooks, or Claws, but which are more dull and blunt, VI. A sower Taste. and with which they strike the Sensory, and stop up its little Pores, and being once fixed, they are not easily removed; whence a stupor or numness in the Teeth and Palat is caused; not unlike Burdocks, which being fixed to the Skin, become troublesome, and are not easily shaken off. In acerb or sower biting Bodies, a fluid Salt, implicated with an earthy Matter, excells. 
 First, Bodies naturally sower among Vegetables, are unripe Fruits; as Grapes, Pears, and Apples, and most of all Wildings, Crabs, or wild Apples, thô kept till they are 1. Bodies na∣turally acerb or sower. mellow: also sower Herbs: Among Minerals, or Animals, there is nothing easily to be met with, that has a sower Taste. 
 Secondly, Bodies that are made sower anew, are chiefly Wine and Beer, degenerating into a deadness, through Age or Thunder; also Leaven, or Bread too much leavened. 2. Made sower things. Broths and Milk-meats, if they Contract a settlement and hoariness, become sower: because in all those Concretes disposed to Corruption, the Saline Particles being ex∣alted, and tending towards a Flux, carry forth also earthy Particles involved with themselves. 
 Thirdly, As to the taking away of this Taste, we have observed, That sower Fruits do grow sweet, either by the goodness of the Air, and Sun; in sower Fruits brought to 3. By what means the sower Taste, is wont to be taken a∣way, or altered. maturity: or by the goodness of the Ground or Soil, as when wild Apples translated to a good Soil grow sweet; the reason of either is, because the Spirituous and Sulphu∣reous Particles before subjugated, at length Predominate over the Saline. If Wine de∣generated into deadness, is impregnated with new Lees of Tartar, it shall recover its Vigor: The like happens, if a Can of good Wine be poured into a Vessel of sower Beer or Ale. Wine growing dead, if it be distilled, often yields a sweet Spirit, and in no less quantity, than if the Wine had been in its full strength: because the Spirits be∣fore subjugated in that Mixture, recover their Dominion by distillation. 
 Seventhly, The sweet favour seems to be made, for as much as the Particles of any Body are so figured, into soft prickles, that they tickle the Sensory, with a soft rub∣bing, VII. The sweet favour. and from thence stir up a delightful Sense of Pleasure; like as if feathers were applyed to the Sides, or the Soles of the Feet. In these the Saline Principle seems to be associated, with Sulphureous and Spirituous, and when they are, in like manner are carried forth. 
 First, Those which are naturally sweet, are among Vegetables, first Sugar, and Man∣na; then Cassia, ripe Fruits, Grapes, Raisons, some Roots, as Par nips, &amp;c. Among 1. What are na∣turally sweet. Animals, some ascribe Honey, but others more rightly, say that is swet out of Plants, and gathered by Bees. Among Minerals nothing (that I know) hath naturally a sweet Savour.
Secondly, The things which have a sweet Taste, and are made by Art, are the Sugar of Lead, Salt of Steel, Lythargires, yea, and out of many other Bodies, Vinegar extracts 2. Sweets pre∣pared by Art. a sweet Salt. Tasting Vitriol before-hand (as was said) and then taking a Pipe of To∣bacco, the smoke grows sweet like Honey. In this, and in the former instances, whil ' st the Saline little darts grow to the Sulphureous Particles, or Saline of another Kind, both of them become more blunt. An Alchalisat Spirit, and the fixed Sal of any Body, being mixed, and circulated by a long digestion, acquire a sweetness. Barley soaked in Water, when it begins to sprout, and dried with a gentle fire, grows exceeding sweet: And Wheat in like manner also, if being wet, it sprouts yields a wonderfully sweet Meal; the reason of which is, because by that Artifice, the Sulphureous and Spi∣rituous Particles, overthrown by the Earthy, get their Liberty. 
 Thirdly, There are many Instances, by which sweetness is abolished; for all sweet 3. By what means sweetness is taken away, or altered. things too much boiled, grow bitter. Sugar on Honey, by distillation, yield at first an insipid Phlegm, then sharp and burning Spirits; In the dead Head remaining after di∣stillation, is a burning Salt, and an insipid Earth, and whatever is sweet perishes. Fur∣ther, Sugar or Honey being mixed with a great quantity of Common Water, and di∣stilled through a Bladder, yield a burning Water, like the Lees of Wine distilled after the same fashion. In both these, and in the following Instance, the additional sweet∣nesses are bruised, by the saline little darts, Sugar of Lead b ing fused by the fire, melts into meer Lead; if it be distilled in a Retort, if we may believe Beguinus, it will produce a burning and sweet smelling Spirit. 
 8. The unctuous or oyly savour, seems to be produced, when the Particles of any Bo∣dy VIII. An Oyly Taste. are very Spherical and round, which neither hawl, prick, nor tickle the Sensory, but only stroke it with a gentle and soft coming to it. In these, the Sulphureous Principle predominates. 
 First, Bodies naturally Unctuous or oyly, among Vegetables, are ripe Olives, the 1. In which it is by Nature. Turpentine-Tree. The Larix, and some sweet smelling Gums naturally sweating forth. Among Minerals, Asphaltum, Bitumen, Amber, Sperma Ceti, and some fat Earths, and Ochers: Of Animals, and their Parts, the Sewet, Marrow, and Fat. 
 Secondly, Unctuous things prepared by Art, are Butter, Cream, Oyls, press ' d out of 2. In what things it is wont to be produced by Art. Fruits and Seeds, as Oyl of Nuts, of sweet Almonds, also Oyls drawn out of Seeds, Woods, Gums, and Resines by distillation. 
 Thirdly, Althô unctuosity is most difficultly taken away from the Subjects, yet it is wont to be lessen ' d: for so Unctuous Bodies, if they grow stale, or are too much boiled, 3. How it is ta∣ken away or al∣ter ' d. or otherways grow hot by shaking, losing their smoothness, become rank, and prick and dig the Sensory, Further, Sewet and Fat, if they be long exposed to a moist Air, contract a settlement, and become hoary, and then are resolved into Water, or a cor∣rupt Earth. In this, and in the former instance, whil ' st the mixture of the Body is re∣solved, some Sulphureous Particles fly away, in the mean time the remaining lose their Dominion. 
 9. An insipid Savour or Taste, seems to be made, when the Particles of any Body, IX. An insipid Savour. are indued with superficial little Darts, not at all sharp, but smooth and discharged; which enter not into the Pores of the Sensory, and no ways dig or hawl it. In these, the Principle either of Water, or Earth, predominate over the rest. 
 First, Bodies naturally insipid or tastless, are Common Water, especially Rain Wa∣ter, 1. In what things it is by Nature. some cold Herbs, the raw white of an Egg, &amp;c. Althô in the whole there is nothing insipid simply, yet Speech is wont to apply it to them things, in which some one of those Savours, are not eminently, which we have before recounted. 
 Secondly, That Savory things may become Unsavory, the more acute Particles ought wholly to fly away, or be very much broken. Herbs long kept, also many more 2. How it is wont to be pro∣duced. things, if they be distilled by a moderate heat, yield almost an insipid Liquor. 
 Thirdly, Insipidness it self, sometimes is taken away; for insipid Water, if it stand 3. By what means it is ta∣ken away. long, that it putrifie, acquires a stink and mouldy Savour: The white of an Egg boiled hard, has something a sharp taste. In these kind of Instances, fome active Elements, be∣ing before subjugated, get strength. 
 Besides these Kinds of simple Savours, which are as it were the Elements of the rest, there remain yet many Complications of these simple ones, as the Savours rehearsed are Compounded Savours. conjoyned one among another: And for as much as by the Wisdom of Nature, to satis∣fie all Palates, and by the Luxury of Art, that she might please the Throats of some, ma∣nifold mixtures of Savours have been produced, that almost nothing to be eaten, is found simple and without Sawce or Condiment. The several Compositions of these, is a thing almost impossible to enumerate; it shall suffice for the present, that we note some of the more noted Conjugations, and their Affections, as they are grateful or ingrateful to the Palate. 
 The first Conjugation, and that most grateful to the Palate, is of acid and sweet, of Compositions of Savours, which are more or less grateful. which sort are generous Wine, Confections prepared out of Citron, Wood-Sorrel, Berberries, &amp;c. Sugar ' d things, and sharp things pickl ' d, with Sugar. Secondly, Sweet and Astringent, as also sweet and sower, are well Consociated: as in Marmalade of Quinces, Candied Bulloes, Cyder drunk with Sugar, &amp;c. Thirdly, Sweet and oyly yield a grateful Savour to the Palate, but that brings a nauseousness to the Stomach, as in Milk-meats, Sugar ' d-meats, and Pasty-crust, &amp;c. Fourthly, Sweet agrees not with biting, bitter, or salt Savour. Fifthly, nor doth a bitter Savour of it self, agree with any other: it is grateful to the Palate, well-tempered with the sweet. Sixthly, Salt∣savour best agrees with the biting sharp, as in flesh seasoned with Salt and Pepper, it is an ingrateful Sawce with the oyly. Seventhly, The Acid, Astringent and Sower, are well afsociated with the sweet, not with the rest. 
 There are more Kinds of some other Compounded Savours, which we have no time now to recount. But there are in respect of the Taste, as the Compounded Tunes of Harmony in respect of Hearing, in both sensible not simple Species of one Kind, but are carried manifold, and variously Complicated to the Sensory. It now remains for us to pass from the Taste, the Object of which we have largely handled, to the other Species of the Senses. 
