 
 THE CATCHING OF UNSHELLED FISH 
  
 "First catch your hare," the old cookery books used to say, and 
 hence it is proper, in a treatise devoted entirely to the cooking 
 of Unshelled Fish, to pay passing attention to the Catching, or 
 what the Head of the House terms the Masculine Division of the 
 Subject. As it is evident that the catching must, in every case 
 precede the cooking--but not too far--the preface is the place 
 to begin. 
  
 Shell-fish are, comparatively, slow of movement, without guile, 
 pitifully trusting, and very easily caught. Observe the difference 
 between the chunk of mutton and four feet of string with which one 
 goes crabbing, and the complicated hooks, rods, flies, and reels 
 devoted to the capture of unshelled fish. 
  
 An unshelled fish is lively and elusive past the power of words to 
 portray, and in this, undoubtedly, lies its desirability. People 
 will travel for two nights and a day to some spot
beyond. 
  
 It may be cold up North, but down in the Gulf they are fishing--scudding 
 among the Florida Keys in a little white sailboat, landing for lunch 
 on a strand as snowy as the northern streets, where the shimmering 
 distances of white sand are paved with shell and pearl, and the tide 
 thrums out its old song under the palms. And fish? Two-hundred 
 and fifty pounds is the average day  '  s catch for a small sailboat 
 cruising among the Florida Keys. 
  
 Yet, when all is said and done, the catching of fish is a matter 
 of luck--a gambler  '  s chance, 
 [Page 5] 
 if you will have it so. The cooking, in unskilled hands, is also 
 a lottery, but, by following the appended recipes, becomes an art 
 to which scientific principles have been faithfully applied. 
  
 Having caught your fish, you may cook him in a thousand ways, but 
 it is doubtful whether, even with the finest sauce, a pompano will 
 taste half as good as the infantile muskellunge, several pounds under
Put into the bottom of the fish-kettle a thick layer of sliced 
 carrots and onion, and a sliced lemon. Season with parsley, thyme, 
 a bay-leaf, half a dozen whole peppers, and three or four whole 
 cloves. Lay the fish on top of this and cover with equal parts of 
 cold water and white wine, or with water and a little lemon-juice 
 or vinegar. Put the kettle over the fire and let it heat slowly. 
 The fish must always be put into it while cold and after boiling 
 allowed to cool in the water. 
  
 II 
  
 Cut fine a stalk of celery, a carrot, an onion, and a small sweet 
 pepper. Fry in butter, and add eight cupfuls of water, one cupful 
 of vinegar, and the trimmings of fish. Season with salt and pepper, 
 add half a bay-leaf, four cloves, and two sprigs of parsley. Boil 
 for ten minutes and let cool thoroughly before cooking the fish 
 in it. 
  
 [Page 9] 
 III
 
 One pint of water, one quart of white wine, one tablespoonful of 
 butter, a bunch of parsley, four young onions, a clove of garlic, 
 a bunch of thyme, a bay-leaf, a carrot, and a blade of mace. Bring 
 to the boil and let cool thoroughly before cooking the fish in 
 it. 
  
 IV 
  
 Fry a large onion in two tablespoonfuls of butter. Add half a can 
 of tomatoes, salt, pepper, allspice, and minced parsley to season, 
 and half a cupful of tomato catsup. Add also one cupful of sliced 
 carrot and sufficient water to cover the fish. 
  
 V 
  
 One onion, two bay-leaves, four whole cloves, a stalk of celery, two 
 sprigs of parsley and three quarts of cold water. Add any trimmings 
 of fish at hand, simmer for two hours, season with salt and pepper, 
 and strain. Cool before using.
 
 VI 
  
 Chop fine one onion, one stalk of celery, and two or three sprigs 
 of parsley. Fry in butter, add two tablespoonfuls of salt, six 
 pepper-corns, a bay-leaf, three cloves, two quarts of 
 [Page 10] 
 boiling water, and two cupfuls of vinegar or sour wine. Boil for 
 fifteen minutes, strain, and cool. Rub the fish with salt and 
 lemon-juice before cooking. 
  
 VII 
  
 Chop fine a large onion and a carrot. Add three bay-leaves, a few 
 sprigs of parsley, a pinch of powdered thyme, and three tablespoonfuls 
 of tarragon vinegar. Add enough water to cover the fish. The vinegar 
 may be omitted and equal parts of water and white wine used for 
 liquid. 
  
 VIII
 
 Prepare according to directions given for Brown Italian Sauce, 
 using butter instead of oil and half a cupful of minced parsley 
 instead of the thyme and bay-leaf. Season with grated nutmeg and 
 add to either Spanish or Veloute Sauce. 
  
 FLEMISH SAUCE 
  
 Prepare a cupful of Drawn-Butter Sauce, take from the fire, add 
 the yolks of two eggs well-beaten, and pepper, grated nutmeg, made 
 mustard, vinegar, and minced parsley to season. 
 [Page 24] 
 Add gradually half a cupful of melted butter and serve. 
  
 GARLIC SAUCE 
  
 Peel the garlic and boil for an hour, changing the water four times. 
 Drain, chop, and mix to a smooth paste with melted butter. The 
 flavour is mild and resembles almond. 
 
SAUCE À LA GASCONNE 
  
 Chop together a tablespoonful of capers and a bean of garlic. Fry 
 in olive-oil, seasoning with pepper and grated nutmeg. Add a 
 wineglassful of white wine, a cupful of Veloute Sauce, a bay-leaf, 
 and a sprig of thyme. Boil for fifteen minutes, skim, add another 
 wineglassful of white wine, strain, and add the yolks of three eggs 
 well beaten. Season with lemon-juice, butter, anchovy essence, 
 and minced parsley. 
  
 GENEVA SAUCE 
  
 Brown one tablespoonful of flour in butter, add two cupfuls of thick 
 stock and one cupful of red wine, and cook until thick, stirring 
 constantly. Add two small onions chopped, a bunch of sweet herbs, 
 two tablespoonfuls of chopped mushrooms, and salt and pepper to 
 [Page 25] 
 season. Simmer for half an hour, add a wineglassful of Madeira, 
 strain, and serve. 
 
boiling water and a tablespoonful of butter into the baking-pan, 
 and baste frequently while cooking. 
  
 BAKED BASS--III 
  
 Rub the inside of the fish with salt, sprinkle 
 [Page 46] 
 the outside with pepper and salt, cover with sliced onion and salt 
 pork. Dredge with flour and put into the baking-pan with sufficient 
 boiling water to keep from burning. Baste frequently while cooking, 
 remove the pork and onion, thicken the sauce with a tablespoonful 
 each of butter and flour blended and mixed with a little tomato 
 catsup. Pour the hot sauce over the fish and serve. 
  
 BAKED BASS--IV 
  
 Make a stuffing of one cupful of bread-crumbs, one teaspoonful 
 each of melted butter, Worcestershire sauce, tomato catsup, minced 
 parsley, minced onion, minced olives or pickles, lemon-juice, salt, 
 black pepper, and paprika to taste, and sufficient cold water to
seasoning with parsley and onion, three cloves, salt, and half 
 a dozen pepper-corns. Boil for half an hour, strain the sauce, 
 and thicken with two tablespoonfuls of flour browned in butter. 
 Cook until thick, add two tablespoonfuls of butter and the juice 
 of half a lemon. Strain over the fish and surround with a border 
 of baked tomatoes. 
  
 BAKED BLACKFISH--I 
  
 Put two cleaned blackfish into a buttered baking-pan with one cupful 
 of Port wine and two cupfuls of water. Add salt, white and red 
 pepper, grated nutmeg, minced parsley, and sweet herbs to season. 
 Dot the fish with butter, cover with buttered paper, and bake for 
 forty-five minutes, basting as required. Take out the fish, strain 
 the sauce, and put it into a saucepan with two cupfuls of stock. 
 Thicken with two tablespoonfuls of butter 
 [Page 68] 
 blended with an equal quantity of flour, and boil for ten minutes. 
 Skim, add two tablespoonfuls each of butter and anchovy paste, 
 and lemon-juice to taste. Reheat, pour over the fish, and serve.
Parboil part of a codfish in salted water. Remove the bones and 
 put the pieces into a baking-dish in layers with Cream Sauce and 
 seasoning between. Cover with crumbs, dot with butter, sprinkle 
 with grated nutmeg, and bake. 
  
 BOILED SALT CODFISH--I 
  
 Soak two pounds of salted cod over night, put into fresh water, 
 bring to the boil and serve with melted butter. 
  
 BOILED SALT CODFISH--II 
  
 Soak the fish over night, change the water, and simmer until done. 
 Serve with a Drawn-Butter Sauce. 
  
 BOILED SALTED CODFISH WITH EGG SAUCE 
  
 Prepare the fish according to directions given in the preceding 
 recipe. Cook one teaspoonful 
 [Page 96]
of corn-meal until thick in one cupful of milk, add one cupful 
 of mashed potatoes, the codfish chopped, two tablespoonfuls of 
 butter, two well-beaten eggs, and pepper to taste. Prepare an Egg 
 Sauce, pour over the fish, and serve. 
  
 BOILED CODFISH WITH OYSTER SAUCE 
  
 Boil the fish in salted water, seasoned with pepper, cloves, and 
 lemon peel. Prepare a Cream Sauce, and cook oysters in it until 
 the edges curl, pour over the fish, and serve. 
  
 BOILED CODFISH WITH CREAM SAUCE 
  
 Boil the codfish slowly in salted water. Melt two tablespoonfuls 
 of butter, add two tablespoonfuls of flour, and cook thoroughly. 
 Add two cupfuls of cream and cook until thick, stirring constantly. 
 Add salt, pepper, and anchovy paste to season, pour over the fish. 
 sprinkle with minced parsley, and serve. 
  
 BOILED CODFISH À LA HOLLANDAISE
 
 FRIED CODFISH STEAKS 
  
 Clean the steaks, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and dip into flour. 
 Sauté in salt pork fat. 
  
 CODFISH STEAKS À LA NARRAGANSETT 
  
 Fry the steaks with a chopped onion in butter, seasoning with salt 
 and pepper. Take out and put a tablespoonful of flour into the 
 frying-pan. Cook thoroughly, add two cupfuls of water and half 
 a cupful of wine, and cook until thick, stirring constantly. Add 
 two tablespoonfuls of butter, season with minced parsley and 
 lemon-juice, pour over the fish, and serve. 
  
 [Page 109] 
 CODFISH HASH 
  
 Flake cold cooked cod, mix with an equal quantity of mashed potatoes, 
 and season to taste. Cook until light brown in butter.
 
 BROILED CODFISH 
  
 Split the tail end of the fish and broil. Serve with melted butter, 
 lemon-juice, and minced parsley. 
  
 CODFISH PIE 
  
 Prepare Creamed Codfish according to directions previously given, 
 seasoning with grated onion. Fill a buttered baking-dish and cover 
 [Page 111] 
 with mashed potato, beaten very light with an egg and a little 
 cream. Rub with melted butter, sprinkle with grated cheese, and 
 bake in a quick oven. 
  
 ESCALLOPED CODFISH 
  
 Prepare the fish according to directions previously given. Flake 
 and prepare according to directions given for Creamed Codfish. Put 
 into a buttered baking-pan with layers of seasoned crumbs between,
add milk to moisten, cover with crumbs, dot with butter, and brown 
 in the oven. 
  
  
  
  
 [Page 113] 
 FORTY-FIVE WAYS TO COOK EELS 
  
 BRAISED EEL 
  
 Skin and clean an eel, cut it into two-inch pieces, sprinkle with 
 salt, and let stand for an hour. Soak in cold water for ten minutes, 
 drain, and dry. Put into a buttered saucepan, seasoning with grated 
 nutmeg, salt, and pepper. Cover with sliced lemon, chopped shallot, 
 minced parsley, and a few pepper-corns. Cover the pan and bake in 
 the oven until the fish is brown. Take out the eel and put into 
 a deep dish. Add to the sauce one cupful of stock, bring to the 
 boil, and thicken with a tablespoonful each of butter and flour 
 cooked together. Boil until thick, take from the fire, add the
 
 Prepare the eel according to directions previously given, cook in 
 equal parts of white wine and water, seasoning with mace, pepper, 
 nutmeg, cloves, sweet herbs, allspice, and salt. 
 [Page 120] 
 Boil until the eels are tender, then skim out. Add a little anchovy 
 paste to the sauce, with a tablespoonful of butter, bring to the 
 boil, take from the fire, add the yolks of two eggs well beaten, 
 pour over the fish, and serve. 
  
 FRICASSÉED EELS 
  
 Skin, clean, and cut up. Cover with cold water, add salt, and minced 
 parsley to season, cover, and cook slowly for an hour. Thicken 
 with a tablespoonful each of butter and flour blended together 
 and made smooth with cold water. Season highly with pepper, and 
 serve. 
  
 STEWED EELS WITH CUCUMBERS 
 
Clean and skin two eels, cut into pieces and soak in cold water 
 for an hour. Drain, cover with wine and water, seasoning with salt, 
 pepper, onion, and parsley, and simmer for fifteen minutes. Take 
 out the fish and add three sliced and parboiled cucumbers. Strain 
 the sauce, thicken with flour cooked in butter, and boil for ten 
 minutes. Skim, add the yolks of four eggs well beaten and take 
 from the fire. Season with red pepper and lemon-juice, strain over 
 the fish, and serve. 
  
 STEWED EELS--I 
  
 Put into a saucepan three fourths of a cupful 
 [Page 121] 
 of butter and fry in it four small chopped onions. Add a tablespoonful 
 of flour, cook through, and add two cupfuls of boiling water or stock. 
 Cook until thick, stirring constantly, then put in one large cleaned 
 eel cut into inch pieces; cover and cook for fifteen minutes. 
  
 STEWED EELS--II 
 
STEWED EELS--IV 
  
 Prepare according to directions given above, using veal or fish 
 stock, instead of water, and adding a bay-leaf to the seasoning. 
  
 STEWED EELS À L  '  ANGLAISE 
  
 Cook prepared eels in half a bottle of Port wine, seasoned with 
 carrot, onion, parsley, bay-leaf, thyme, salt, pepper-corns, cloves, 
 mace, and chopped mushrooms. Cover with buttered paper, simmer 
 for half an hour and drain. Melt two tablespoonfuls of butter and 
 cook in it two tablespoonfuls of flour. Add a chopped shallot and 
 enough of the eel liquor to make the required quantity of sauce. 
 Cook until thick, stirring constantly. Add half a cupful of stock, 
 and two wineglassfuls of Port wine. Bring to the boil, strain, add 
 a few chopped mushrooms, a tablespoonful of butter, and minced 
 parsley, lemon-juice, and anchovy paste to season. Pour the sauce 
 over the eels, and serve. 
  
 STEWED EELS À L  '  AMERICAINE
 
 Use three pounds of cleaned and skinned eel with all the fat removed. 
 Cut in two-inch pieces, season with pepper and salt and chopped 
 [Page 123] 
 onion, and put in a double-boiler with half a cupful of butter. 
 Sprinkle with parsley, cover tightly, and cook for about an hour 
 and a half. Serve in a deep dish. 
  
 STEWED EELS À LA POULETTE 
  
 Cut cleaned eels into two-inch pieces and cook until tender in 
 stock. Thicken with butter and flour cooked together, add half 
 a dozen chopped mushrooms, and salt, pepper, grated onion, and 
 minced parsley to season. Boil for twenty minutes, add the juice 
 of a lemon, and serve. 
  
 STEWED EELS À LA CANOTIERE 
  
 Fry a chopped onion in butter, add a pound of rice and cook brown. 
 Add four cupfuls of fish stock, seasoning with red and white pepper,
 
 Brush the fish with butter and sprinkle it with pepper. Broil until 
 cooked through, and serve with toast. 
  
 FINNAN-HADDIE À LA DELMONICO 
  
 Flake half a pound of freshened finnan-haddie, and fry in a little 
 butter. Add one cupful of cream beaten with the yolk of a raw egg. 
 Thicken with a tablespoonful of flour rubbed smooth with a little 
 of the cream. Add a hard-boiled egg chopped fine, and a teaspoonful 
 of grated cheese. Serve on toast. 
  
 [Page 134] 
 SAVORY FINNAN-HADDIE 
  
 Dip the fish in boiling water, take out all the bones and skin. Mash 
 the meat with a tablespoonful each of butter and cream, seasoning 
 with salt, pepper, and lemon-juice. Cook until thick and pour over 
 slices of buttered toast. 
 
FINNAN-HADDIE HASH 
  
 Prepare the fish according to directions given for Boiled Finnan-Haddie. 
 Mix with an equal quantity of hot mashed potatoes, moisten with 
 cream, and season with chopped green peppers fried in oil. 
  
 FINNAN-HADDIE WITH TOMATOES 
  
 Lay a haddie in a deep dish, cover with boiling water, and let 
 stand for ten minutes. Drain and remove skin and break in good-sized 
 flakes. Cook two level tablespoonfuls of butter and a tablespoonful 
 of finely minced onion in a saucepan until golden brown. Add one 
 cupful of the solid part of canned tomatoes. When it begins to 
 simmer, add salt and pepper to taste. Then add the prepared fish 
 and simmer for five minutes. Add one tablespoonful of finely minced 
 parsley and serve. 
  
 [Page 135] 
 CREAMED FINNAN-HADDIE 
 
a tablespoonful of flour and cook thoroughly. Add one cupful of 
 chicken stock and half a cupful of cream. Cook until thick, stirring 
 constantly, and seasoning with salt, pepper, and grated nutmeg. 
 Add the gravy from the baking-pan, strain, reheat, pour over the 
 fish, and serve. 
  
 BAKED FILLETS OF FLOUNDER 
  
 Remove the back-bone and cut the fish into four pieces. Roll up 
 each piece and pin with a toothpick. Soak for an hour in oil and 
 lemon-juice. Roll in seasoned crumbs, then in beaten egg, then 
 in crumbs. Put into a baking-pan, upon thin slices of salt pork, 
 sprinkle with chopped onion and olives, cover, and bake. Garnish 
 with sliced lemons. 
  
 FLOUNDER WITH FINE HERBS 
  
 Put the prepared fish into a pan with two tablespoonfuls of butter, 
 the juice of a lemon, and salt and pepper to season. Add one cupful 
 each of water and white wine, cover and
of Sherry and oyster liquor. Bake until done, basting as required. 
 Take up the fish, add a cupful of stock to the sauce, and thicken 
 with browned flour. Add two tablespoonfuls of butter and a little 
 lemon-juice. Strain over the fish and garnish with parboiled oysters. 
  
 [Page 142] 
 FLOUNDER À LA PROVENÇALE 
  
 Clean two flounders and let stand for four hours in a marinade 
 of olive-oil and lemon-juice, seasoned with salt, pepper, onion, 
 parsley, thyme, bay-leaves, and bruised garlic. Put into a baking-dish 
 with the seasoning, a teaspoonful of butter and one cupful each of 
 stock and white wine. Bake for half an hour, basting as needed. 
 Drain, strain, and skim the sauce, thicken with butter and flour, 
 take from the fire, add the yolks of four eggs well beaten and 
 lemon-juice to taste. Season with red pepper and minced parsley, 
 pour over the fish, and serve. 
  
 BREADED TURBANS OF FLOUNDER 
 
 
 BROILED FILLETS OF FLOUNDER À LA BRIGHTON 
  
 Season the fillets with salt, pepper, and oil. Broil carefully and 
 put on slices of buttered toast. Surround with parboiled oysters 
 and pour over a sauce made of water and the oyster liquor, thickened 
 with butter and flour cooked together, and seasoned with anchovy 
 paste. 
  
 FILLETS OF FLOUNDER À LA DIEP-POISE 
  
 Prepare the fillets as directed, seasoning with salt and pepper, 
 brown in melted butter, and cool. Sprinkle with crumbs, dip in 
 eggs beaten with an equal quantity of melted butter, roll in fresh 
 crumbs and broil, basting with oil. Serve with melted butter, minced 
 parsley, and lemon-juice. 
  
 [Page 149] 
 FLOUNDER PIE À LA NORMANDY 
 
Chop fine two carrots and two onions, two sprigs of parsley, a 
 stalk of celery and a bit of bay-leaf. Fry in butter, seasoning 
 with salt and pepper, and powdered mace. Add two cupfuls of boiled 
 milk and cook slowly for twenty-five minutes. Press through a sieve, 
 add two cupfuls of cream, and reheat. Add the fillets of a two-pound 
 flounder, the mussels taken from a quart of mussel shells, a quart 
 of oysters, parboiled in their liquor, and drained, and half a 
 pound of cleaned fresh mushrooms. Cook for two minutes. Thicken 
 with the yolks of two eggs beaten with one tablespoonful of butter 
 and two of cream. Fill a baking-dish lined with pastry, cover with 
 crust, and bake. 
  
 BROILED FLOUNDER À LA CHIVRY 
  
 Cut the flounder into fillets as previously directed. Soak for 
 an hour in a marinade of oil and lemon-juice, seasoned with salt, 
 pepper, onion, and parsley. Dip in crumbs and broil, basting with 
 oil. Serve with quartered lemon. 
  
 FLOUNDER WITH WHITE WINE SAUCE
to suit the taste. Serve very cold with a garnish of hard-boiled 
 eggs. 
  
 HERRING SALAD À LA BRENOISE 
  
 Peel and cut into dice a quart of cold boiled potatoes, four peeled 
 and cored sour apples, the fillets of four salt herrings, a cucumber 
 pickle and two boiled beets. Add salt, pepper, chopped onion, vinegar, 
 mustard and Mayonnaise dressing. Sprinkle with minced parsley before 
 serving. 
  
 SWEDISH HERRING SALAD 
  
 Soak two salted Holland herrings for twenty-four hours. Remove 
 the bones and cut into dice. Add an equal amount of cooked meat 
 cut into dice and half the quantity each of boiled potatoes, sour 
 apples, and beets chopped fine. Chop one tablespoonful of capers and 
 four hard-boiled eggs. Add to the salad with three tablespoonfuls 
 of cream, two of olive-oil, two of vinegar, and pepper, sugar, and 
 mustard to taste. Press in a mould, and serve on platter with a
HERRING BALLS 
  
 Parboil three red herrings, skin, and remove the bones. Add an 
 equal quantity of baked potatoes, skinned and mashed. Make to a 
 paste with cream and melted butter, season to 
 [Page 203] 
 taste, and shape into balls. Dip in egg and crumbs and fry in deep 
 fat. 
  
 BAKED SMOKED HERRING 
  
 Wash thoroughly, wipe dry, wrap in clean wet manilla paper, and put 
 into a quick oven for fifteen minutes. Served with sliced lemon. 
  
 BAKED FRESH HERRING 
  
 Clean a dozen fresh herrings, removing the head and tail. Butter 
 a deep earthen dish, put in a layer of fish, two slices of lemon, 
 and three or four slices of onion. Season with pepper and salt and 
 repeat until the dish is full, cover with vinegar, tie a sheet
of buttered brown paper over the dish, and bake in a slow oven 
 for six hours. The bones will be dissolved. 
  
 MARINADE OF HERRING 
  
 Soak white salted herrings for two hours in milk to cover. Split, 
 remove the bones, and cut each half into three pieces. Pack in 
 layers in a deep jar, seasoning between the layers with minced 
 shallot, pounded clove and white pepper. Add here and there a bit 
 of bay-leaf and a slice of fresh lemon with half the rind taken 
 off. Use the roe with the herring. Season the top layer, cover with 
 [Page 204] 
 vinegar, add three tablespoonfuls of olive-oil, and let stand for 
 two days before using. 
  
 ESCALLOPED HERRING 
  
 Soak four or five Norway herrings over night. Divide the fish down 
 the back, remove the skin and bones, and cut into eight squares. 
 Arrange in a baking-pan with alternate layers of cold boiled potatoes,
seasoning each layer with butter and red pepper. Have potatoes 
 on top. Pour over three eggs beaten with three cupfuls of milk. 
 Cover with crumbs, dot with butter, and bake for forty minutes. 
  
 GRILLED SMOKED HERRING 
  
 Soak over night and in the morning cover with hot water and let 
 stand for half an hour. Put into cold water for ten minutes, then 
 wipe dry and broil. Serve with hot corn bread. 
  
 GRILLED FRESH HERRING 
  
 Dip in seasoned melted butter, then in crumbs, and broil carefully, 
 basting with melted butter if required. Serve with Maître d  '  Hôtel 
 Sauce. 
  
  
  
  
 [Page 205]
 
 Marinate the prepared fish for an hour in olive-oil, seasoned with 
 salt, pepper, minced onion, and parsley. Drain and broil, basting 
 with the oil as required. Serve with Maître d  '  Hôtel Sauce. The 
 onion and parsley may be omitted from the seasoning. 
  
 BROILED SHAD--III 
  
 Clean the shad, split, remove the backbone and marinate for an 
 hour in oil and lemon-juice, seasoning with salt and pepper. Drain, 
 sprinkle with crumbs, and broil carefully. Serve with Fine Herbs 
 Sauce. 
  
 [Page 322] 
 BROILED SHAD--IV 
  
 Prepare, clean, and split the fish. Put on a platter skin side down 
 and sprinkle with sugar, pepper, and salt. Let stand over night, 
 broil, and serve with melted butter. 
 
BOILED SHAD À LA VIRGINIA 
  
 Chop together an onion, a carrot, and a stalk of celery. Fry in 
 butter. Cover a prepared shad with boiling salted and acidulated 
 water, and add the cooked vegetables to it. Add also two tablespoonfuls 
 of white wine, a blade of mace, half a dozen peppercorns, two cloves, 
 and a bay-leaf. Simmer slowly until the fish is done, drain, and 
 serve with a Drawn-Butter Sauce, using the strained cooking liquor 
 for liquid. 
  
 BOILED SALT SHAD 
  
 Soak the fish all day in warm water, changing the water frequently, 
 wipe off the salt, and plunge into ice-water for an hour. Put into 
 a fish-kettle with boiling water to cover, and simmer until done. 
 Season with pepper and serve with plenty of melted butter. 
  
 BAKED SHAD--I 
  
 Bake a shad in a buttered baking-pan, adding enough boiling water
to keep from burning. Baste while baking with melted butter and 
 lemon-juice, seasoning with pepper and salt. Cook together a 
 tablespoonful each of butter and flour until brown. Add slowly a 
 cupful of stock and cook until thick, stirring constantly. Take 
 [Page 326] 
 from the fire and add the yolks of two eggs beaten with the juice 
 of half a lemon. Pour over the fish and serve. 
  
 BAKED SHAD--II 
  
 Clean a large fish and stuff with seasoned crumbs mixed with minced 
 parsley, adding enough melted butter to make a smooth paste. Score 
 one side of the fish deeply and lay a small strip of salt pork in 
 each gash. Put the fish in a buttered baking-dish, sprinkle with 
 salt, pepper, and flour, and add enough boiling water to keep from 
 burning. Baste as required with the drippings, adding more boiling 
 water if necessary. Serve with Hollandaise Sauce or Drawn-Butter 
 Sauce to which the mashed roe has been added. 
  
 BAKED SHAD--III
 
 Stuff a fish with seasoned crumbs made smooth with melted butter. 
 Season the fish with salt and pepper and cover with thin slices of 
 breakfast bacon. Bake until well done, basting with melted butter 
 and hot water. Add a teaspoonful each of lemon-juice and anchovy 
 essence to the gravy remaining in the pan and thicken with flour 
 browned in butter. Serve the sauce separately. 
  
 [Page 327] 
 BAKED SHAD--IV 
  
 Stuff a large fish with seasoned crumbs, adding chopped onion and 
 melted butter to taste. Sew up the fish and put into a buttered 
 baking-pan with a cupful of salted boiling water and two tablespoonfuls 
 of butter. Dredge with flour, and bake, basting with the drippings. Take 
 up the fish carefully and thicken the gravy with two tablespoonfuls of 
 flour browned in butter and made smooth with a little cold water. Add 
 a cupful of stock or water, the juice of a lemon, and Worcestershire 
 Sauce and kitchen bouquet to season. Strain through a sieve and 
 serve with the fish.
Clean and dry the fish, dip into cream, then into flour, and fry 
 in deep fat. 
  
 SMELTS À LA DAVIS 
  
 Prepare and clean the fish, remove the bone, 
 [Page 376] 
 dip in milk, season with salt and pepper, dip in flour, and brown 
 in butter. Melt two tablespoonfuls of peanut butter, add to it the 
 juice of a lemon, pour over the fish and serve, garnishing with 
 lemon and parsley. 
  
 SMELTS À LA TOULOUSE 
  
 Clean and bone a dozen large smelts. Cook in a saucepan with white 
 wine and mushroom liquor or stock, seasoning with salt and pepper. 
 Drain, and add the remaining liquid to a cupful of Allemande Sauce. 
 Add a few button mushrooms and a tablespoonful of butter to the 
 sauce. Pour over the smelts and serve. 
 
STEWED SMELTS 
  
 Clean the fish and remove the heads. Put into a buttered china 
 baking-dish. Add enough fish or veal stock to cover, and chopped 
 onions, capers, parsley, thyme, pepper and salt, and white wine 
 to season. Bring to the boil, pour over the fish and bake for ten 
 or fifteen minutes. Serve in the same dish. 
  
 SMELTS WITH FINE HERBS 
  
 Chop together chives and parsley, and sprinkle a buttered baking-dish. 
 Season with salt and pepper, lay prepared smelts upon it, sprinkle 
 with chopped onions and seasoning, add half a cupful of white wine, 
 cover with buttered paper and bake for ten minutes. Take up carefully, 
 thicken the liquid with butter and flour cooked together, and serve 
 with the fish. 
  
 [Page 378] 
 SMELT CROQUETTES 
 
Clean and split smelts and remove the backbone. Pound fine a pound 
 of cooked halibut, seasoning with salt, white pepper, and Sherry. 
 Add enough very thick Cream Sauce to make a stiff paste, and cool. 
 Shape into croquettes and roll a smelt around each one, fastening 
 it by sticking the tail through the head. Dip in egg and crumbs 
 and fry in hot lard to cover. Serve with Tartar Sauce. 
  
 SMELTS IN MATELOTE 
  
 Chop together an onion, a sprig of parsley, three mushrooms, and 
 a bean of garlic. Fry in oil and season with salt and pepper. Put 
 the cleaned smelts into the pan, add enough white wine to cover, 
 and simmer until done. Strain the liquid, thicken it with butter 
 and flour cooked together, pour over the fish, and serve with a 
 garnish of lemon and parsley. 
  
  
  
  
 [Page 379]
with chopped onion, parsley, and mushrooms, and seasoning with 
 salt and pepper. Add a tablespoonful of butter and enough white 
 wine and white stock in equal parts to keep from burning. Bake, 
 basting frequently. Cook together one tablespoonful each of butter 
 and flour, add a cupful of brown stock and cook until thick, stirring 
 constantly. Take up the fish, drain the liquor from the pan into the 
 [Page 381] 
 sauce, and reheat. Spread the sauce over the fish, sprinkle with 
 crumbs, dot with butter, and brown in the oven. 
  
 FILLETS OF SOLE BAKED IN WHITE WINE 
  
 Butter a baking-dish and put into it six fillets of sole. Add half 
 a cupful of hot water and a tablespoonful of lemon-juice. Cook 
 together one tablespoonful each of butter and flour, seasoning 
 with minced parsley, grated onion, salt, cayenne, and powdered 
 mace. Add one cupful of white wine and cook until thick, stirring 
 constantly. Drain the fish, pour the sauce over, and serve. 
  
 BAKED SOLE WITH WINE SAUCE
 
 Cook some fillets of sole in butter, seasoning with salt, pepper, 
 and minced onion. Take up the fish, add two tablespoonfuls of butter, 
 a teaspoonful of minced parsley, and the juice of a lemon. Pour 
 over the fish and serve. 
  
 FILLETS OF SOLE À LA BORDEAUX 
  
 Season the prepared fillets with salt and pepper, dip in melted 
 butter, then into flour, then into beaten eggs, then into bread-crumbs. 
 Fry brown in deep fat, garnish with lemon and parsley, and serve 
 with Tomato Sauce. 
  
 [Page 385] 
 SOLES À LA COLBERT 
  
 Skin and trim the soles and boil in salted water until done. Chop 
 fine a head of endive and fry it in butter. Add two cupfuls of 
 stock, bring to the boil, take from the fire, and add the yolk 
 of an egg beaten smooth with a little cream. Place the soles on
a hot dish, pour over the sauce, and serve. 
  
 FILLETS OF SOLE À LA CRÈME 
  
 Simmer the prepared fillets in salted and acidulated water to cover, 
 seasoning with salt and pepper, sliced onion, cloves, and parsley. 
 Cook together a tablespoonful each of butter and flour and add 
 one cupful of cream and half a cupful of stock. Cook until thick, 
 stirring constantly. Take from the fire, season with salt and pepper, 
 and add the yolks of two eggs beaten smooth with a teaspoonful of 
 lemon-juice and a tablespoonful of melted butter. Pour the sauce 
 over the fillets and serve. 
  
 SOLE À LA DIEPPOISE 
  
 Butter a baking-dish, sprinkle with chopped shallot, and lay upon 
 it the fillets of three soles. Add half a wineglassful of white 
 wine and three tablespoonfuls of mushroom liquor. Cook for six 
 [Page 386] 
 minutes, take up, and reduce the liquid half by rapid boiling. Add
FRIED TROUT WITH MUSHROOM SAUCE 
  
 Dip slices of sea-trout in beaten egg, then 
 [Page 415] 
 in seasoned crumbs, and fry in deep fat. Serve with the sauce given 
 in the recipe for Baked Trout with Mushroom Sauce. 
  
 TROUT WITH REMOULADE SAUCE 
  
 Sauté a small trout in butter, drain on brown paper, and serve with 
 Remoulade Sauce. 
  
 FILLETS OF TROUT À L  '  AURORE 
  
 Sauté the fillets of a cleaned trout in butter, seasoning with salt 
 and pepper. Drain and serve with Aurora Sauce. 
  
 BAKED TROUT--I 
  
 Scrape and clean the trout, stuff with seasoned crumbs, and put
into a buttered baking-dish. Lay a thin slice of salt pork on each 
 fish, sprinkle with three or four tablespoonfuls of chopped onions, 
 add a can of mushrooms drained from the liquor, a tablespoonful 
 of minced parsley, three tablespoonfuls of butter, and one cupful 
 of stock. Bake, basting frequently. Thicken the liquid with butter 
 and flour cooked together, pour over the fish, and serve. 
  
 BAKED TROUT--II 
  
 Clean a large sea or lake trout. Prepare a 
 [Page 416] 
 stuffing of bread-crumbs, seasoning with chopped onions, celery, 
 salt, pepper, and melted butter. Cook the stuffing for ten minutes, 
 using as little water as possible. Stuff the fish, put into a buttered 
 baking-pan with enough hot water to keep from burning. Cover the 
 fish with thin slices of salt pork and bake until done, adding 
 more hot water if required. Brown two tablespoonfuls of flour in 
 butter, add half a cupful of cream, and enough boiling water to 
 make a smooth thick sauce. Season with salt and pepper, add a few 
 capers, pour around the fish, and serve.
 
 BAKED TROUT--III 
  
 Stuff a large sea or lake trout with mashed potatoes, seasoning 
 with butter, pepper, salt, and grated onion. Butter a baking-pan 
 and cover the bottom with thin slices of tomatoes. Lay the fish 
 upon it, sprinkle with salt and pepper, add two tablespoonfuls 
 of butter and enough water to keep from burning. Bake until done 
 and serve with the tomatoes and sliced hard-boiled eggs. 
  
 BAKED BROOK-TROUT--I 
  
 Clean and score small trout, dip in seasoned melted butter, and 
 put in a buttered baking-pan. Cover with buttered paper and bake, 
 [Page 417] 
 basting with their own liquid until done. Serve with any preferred 
 sauce. 
  
 BAKED BROOK-TROUT--II 
 
Stuff a large whitefish with seasoned crumbs, put into a buttered 
 baking-pan, rub with butter, dredge with seasoned flour, add one 
 cupful of Claret, and bake. Take up the fish, strain the liquid, 
 add a little more Claret, thicken with flour, brown in butter, 
 season with red pepper, and serve separately. 
  
 STUFFED WHITEFISH 
  
 Make a stuffing of bread-crumbs, seasoning with salt, pepper, sweet 
 herbs, and melted butter. Add a beaten egg to bind, stuff the fish, 
 and sew up. Bake slowly, basting with melted butter and water, 
 and serve with Tartar Sauce. 
  
 STUFFED WHITEFISH WITH OYSTER SAUCE 
  
 Make a stuffing of two cupfuls of bread-crumbs, half a cupful of 
 chopped salt pork fried crisp, a chopped hard-boiled egg, half a 
 cupful of vinegar, and salt, pepper, butter, sage, and mustard 
 to season. Stuff the fish, tie in mosquito netting, and steam until 
 [Page 445]
done. Pour over a Cream Sauce to which cooked oysters and a little 
 lemon-juice and minced parsley have been added. 
  
 WHITEFISH À LA CRÈME--I 
  
 Cook the fish until done in boiling salted water, drain, and remove 
 the large bones. Cook together two tablespoonfuls each of butter 
 and flour, add two cupfuls of milk, and cook until thick, stirring 
 constantly. Season with salt, pepper, grated onion, minced parsley, 
 and grated nutmeg, take from the fire and add half a cupful of 
 butter. Add also the white of an egg well-beaten. Put the fish on 
 a serving-dish, spread the sauce over it and brown in the oven. 
  
 WHITEFISH À LA CRÈME--II 
  
 Clean a whitefish and simmer until done in salted, boiling water. 
 Drain, remove the large bones. Put into a buttered baking-pan, 
 sprinkle with chopped onion and minced parsley, seasoning with 
 grated nutmeg, salt, and pepper. Cover with Cream Sauce to which 
 three tablespoonfuls of butter have been added, and put into a
hot oven for ten or fifteen minutes. 
  
 [Page 446] 
 WHITEFISH AU GRATIN--I 
  
 Boil a whitefish in salted water and flake fine with a fork. Bring 
 to the boil two cupfuls of milk and thicken it with a tablespoonful 
 of corn-starch rubbed smooth in a little cold water. Take from 
 the fire, add salt and pepper to season, two tablespoonfuls of 
 butter, and two eggs well-beaten. Butter a baking-dish, put in a 
 layer of fish, cover with sauce, season with grated nutmeg, and 
 repeat until the dish is full. Cover with crumbs, dot with butter, 
 and brown in the oven. 
  
 WHITEFISH AU GRATIN--II 
  
 Skin and bone the fish, cut into small squares, and season with salt 
 and pepper. Brown two tablespoonfuls of flour in butter, and add 
 gradually two cupfuls of stock or milk. Cook until thick, stirring 
 constantly, seasoning with salt, pepper, lemon-juice, minced parsley,
 
 ESCALLOPED FISH IN SHELLS 
  
 Allow one cupful of Cream Sauce to each cupful of cold cooked flaked 
 fish, seasoning with salt, pepper, grated onion, and lemon-juice. 
 Add chopped hard-boiled eggs if desired, or the yolk of one egg 
 beaten smooth with a little hot cream. Fill buttered shells with 
 the mixture, cover with crumbs, dot with butter, and brown in the 
 oven. Sprinkle also with minced parsley or grated Parmesan cheese, 
 or sweet green pepper. 
  
 FILLED FISH 
  
 Clean a fish thoroughly and take the flesh 
 [Page 467] 
 carefully from the skin. Do not injure the skin. Take out the bones, 
 chop the meat fine, and mix with an equal quantity of bread-crumbs. 
 Season with grated onion, salt, pepper, grated nutmeg, and minced 
 parsley. Add half a cupful of butter, half a cupful of blanched 
 and pounded almonds, three whole eggs, and the yolks of two more.
Fill the skin, preserving the natural shape of the fish, and sew 
 up. Simmer in court bouillon until done, drain, and stick the body 
 of the fish full of blanched almonds shredded. Strain the liquid 
 in which the fish was cooked, thicken with butter and flour cooked 
 together, season with lemon-juice, pour around the fish, and serve. 
  
 FISH FRITTERS 
  
 Mix any cold cooked flaked fish with an equal quantity of mashed 
 potatoes, seasoning with grated onion. Make into a paste with beaten 
 egg, shape into balls, dredge with flour, and fry in deep fat. 
 Dip in egg and crumbs before frying if desired. 
  
 FISH IN GREEN PEPPERS 
  
 Prepare Creamed Fish according to directions previously given. 
 Cut a slice from the pointed ends of green peppers, and remove the 
 seeds carefully. Stuff with the fish mixture, sprinkle with crumbs, 
 [Page 468] 
 and lay a bit of butter on top of each one. Put into a baking-pan
with a little hot water and bake carefully, basting as required. 
  
 FISH HASH 
  
 Cut salt pork into dice, fry crisp, and skim out the pork. Mix 
 together equal parts of cold cooked flaked fish and cooked potatoes, 
 cut small. Season to taste and cook slowly in the pork fat until 
 brown. Arrange the dice around the platter as a garnish. 
  
 JELLIED FISH SALAD 
  
 Mix cold flaked fish, which has been cooked in court bouillon, 
 with Mayonnaise. Add sufficient soaked and dissolved gelatine to 
 make the mixture very hard. One package of gelatine will solidify 
 one quart of the mixture. Pour into a mould wet in cold water and 
 put on the ice to harden. Turn out and serve with a garnish of 
 hard-boiled eggs and lettuce. 
  
 KEDJEREE--I 
 
Prepare a Cream Sauce, take from the fire, season to taste, and 
 add two eggs well-beaten. Add cold cooked flaked fish and boiled 
 rice in equal parts, seasoning the rice with salt, pepper, cayenne, 
 [Page 469] 
 mace, and melted butter. Reheat and serve. 
  
 KEDJEREE--II 
  
 Moisten cold flaked fish with one egg beaten with two tablespoonfuls 
 of milk and a tablespoonful of melted butter. Heat thoroughly in 
 a double-boiler, season to taste, and serve with rice which has 
 been cooked for ten minutes in stock. 
  
 CRÉOLE KEDJEREE--I 
  
 Cook together for five minutes one cupful of cold cooked flaked 
 fish, one cupful of cold boiled rice, one hard-boiled egg chopped 
 fine, a tablespoonful of butter, and salt, red pepper, and curry 
 powder to season. Serve on buttered toast. 
 
CRÉOLE KEDJEREE--II 
  
 Prepare according to directions given above, adding chopped onion 
 and garlic, and a little lemon-juice to the seasoning. 
  
 FISH LOAF 
  
 Line a buttered baking-dish with mashed potato that has been well 
 seasoned with pepper and salt, and made light with well-beaten 
 eggs. Fill the centre with Creamed Fish, seasoned to taste, cover 
 [Page 470] 
 with more mashed potato, rub with butter, and bake until the top 
 is nicely browned. Serve in the same dish. 
  
 FISH WITH LEMON SAUCE 
  
 Put to boil in a wide porcelain-lined kettle sufficient water to 
 cook the fish. Add one-half cupful of vinegar, and one-half cupful 
 of wine. Add a heaping tablespoonful of butter, and when melted, 
 put in the slices of fish, which have already been seasoned. Boil
 
 Boil the sliced fish until tender, in enough water to cover, to 
 which a lump of butter, half a cupful of vinegar, and salt and pepper 
 have been added. Beat the yolks of two eggs and two teaspoonfuls 
 of sugar, and add the juice of one lemon. Take the fish out of 
 the water, and put on the platter in which it is to be served. 
 Thicken the gravy with flour that has first been dissolved in a 
 little water. When thick, pour two cupfuls of the gravy over the 
 eggs and lemon, stirring all the time. When cold, add one-half 
 cupful of cream whipped stiff, and pour over the fish. 
  
 MASKED FISH 
  
 Cover the bottom of an earthen baking-dish with sliced onion, add 
 a thick layer of sliced raw potatoes, seasoning with salt and red 
 pepper. Cover with a layer of fish, add a layer of sliced tomatoes, 
 cover with raw potato, and fill the bowl with stock or water in 
 which one-half cupful of butter has been melted. Bake for two hours 
 in a slow oven. 
 
[Page 472] 
 STEWED FISH À LA MARSEILLES 
  
 Cook three pounds of fish with a crab in equal parts of hot water 
 and cider, seasoning with minced garlic, parsley, and thyme, a 
 bay-leaf, and a clove. Cook for half an hour and thicken with a 
 tablespoonful each of butter and flour cooked together. Add the 
 yolks of two eggs beaten with a little cold water, and salt, pepper, 
 and lemon-juice to season. Add a green pepper chopped fine, and 
 two pods of okra. Simmer for fifteen minutes and serve in the dish 
 in which it is cooked. 
  
 FISH EN MATELOTE--I 
  
 Cut any firm-fleshed fish into strips and season with salt and 
 pepper. Parboil two sliced onions, drain, season, add a cupful 
 of hot water and half a cupful of Sherry. Add the fish and simmer 
 until done. Thicken with butter cooked in flour, and serve. 
  
 FISH EN MATELOTE--II
 
 Cut three or four kinds of fish into convenient pieces for serving, 
 and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cover with water and Claret in 
 equal parts, and add parsley, thyme, and bay-leaves to season. 
 Simmer until done. Take the fish up carefully and strain the 
 [Page 473] 
 cooking liquor. Fry a dozen or more small white onions brown in 
 butter. Add two tablespoonfuls of flour and the liquid drained from 
 the fish. Cook until thick, stirring constantly, and add boiling 
 water or stock, if too thick. When the onions are done, take from 
 the fire, season with lemon-juice, add a few cooked mushrooms, 
 pour over the fish, and serve. 
  
 MATELOTE OF FISH À LA NORMANDY 
  
 Fry brown in butter with sliced onions two pounds of fresh sliced 
 fish, using several kinds. Add two tablespoonfuls of flour, half 
 a dozen sliced mushrooms, salt, pepper, and lemon-juice to season, 
 a pinch of sweet herbs, and Claret and stock in equal parts to 
 cover. Simmer for half an hour and serve in a casserole.
