The  alcoholic  tincture  is rendered  milky  by  water.  The  ethereal  tincture  has  a yellowish- 
 green  hue,  and,  when  evaporated  on  the  surface  of  water,  it  leaves 
 neither  resin  nor  extractive ; and  only  a considerable  portion  of 
 essential  oil,  which  has  the  flavour  and  taste  of  the  seeds  in  perfec- 
 tion. Cardamoms  owe  any  medicinal  virtue  they  possess  to  the 
 volatile  oil  which  they  contain.  Dr.  Pereira  states,  from  private 
 information,  that  about  six  and  a half  drachms  of  this  oil  were  ob- 
 tained from  good  Malabar  cardamoms,  which  is  colourless  at  first, 
 but  becomes  yellow ; sp.  gr.  0*943,  hot  taste  and  has  a composition 
 analogous  to  that  from  lemons  or  turpentine  (Ci0  H8). 
  
 Medical  properties  and  uses . — Cardamom  seeds  are  carminative 
 The  two  varieties  of  the  amygdalus  communis  are  not  distin- 
 guished from  each  other  but  by  the  taste  of  the  kernel  of  their 
 fruit.  Nees  von  Esenbeck  informs  us  that  in  the  Palatinate  bitter 
 and  sweet  almonds  are  sometimes  found  on  the  same  tree. 
  
 There  are  several  varieties  of  sweet  almonds . The  Valentia  al-
mond is  a sweet,  large,  flat  almond,  round  at  one  extremity,  pointed 
 at  the  other,  and  compressed  in  the  middle,  as  if  with  the  thumb. 
 The  Italian  almond  resembles  the  Valentia,  but  it  is  not  so  sweet, 
 is  smaller,  and  less  depressed  in  the  middle.  The  Jordan  almond, 
 which  comes  from  Malaga,  and  is  the  best  sweet  almond  brought 
 to  England,  is  said  to  be  the  produce  of  a distinct  species  of  amyg- 
 dalus. They  are  longer,  flatter,  less  pointed  at  one  end,  and  less 
 round  at  the  other,  and  have  a paler  cuticle  than  those  which  we 
 have  described. 
  
 Sweet  almonds  in  the  shell,  both  hard  and  soft,  are  imported  in 
 baskets  from  Spain,  and  also  in  mats,  casks,  serons,  and  cases. 
 The  bitter  almonds,  which  come  chiefly  from  Mogadore,  arrive  in 
 boxes.  They  are  smaller  than  the  sweet  almond,  and  much  thicker; 
 they  taste  bitter,  and  when  rubbed  in  water  give  out  the  odour  of 
 peach-blossoms. 
  
 When  the  almond  is  not  well  preserved,  it  is  preyed  on  by  an 
 insect  that  eats  out  the  internal  part : or,  if  this  does  not  happen, 
 the  oil  it  contains  is  apt  to  become  rancid.
of  acetic  acid , and  4 parts  of  icoody  fibre  and  water , with  5 of  testa 
 = 100*00.  When  eaten  as  food  it  is  not  very  digestible,  unless  it 
 be  well  masticated.  The  bitter  almond  is  also  inodorous  when 
 entire,  but  when  triturated  with  water  it  has  the  odour  of  the 
 peach-blossom ; and  the  taste  is  the  pleasant  bitter  of  the  peach 
 kernel.  It  contains  only  28  parts  of  fixed  oil , but  the  oil  is  as 
 bland  as  that  of  the  sweet  almond,  and  keeps  better ; 30  parts  of 
 emulsin , and,  besides  the  other  components  of  the  sweet  almond,  a 
 principle  which  has  been  named  Amygdalin ; which,  when  in 
 contact  with  water  and  the  emulsin,  forms  a volatile  oil  and  hydro- 
 cyanic acid.  The  volatile  oil  of  bitter  almonds,  which  contains 
 hydrocyanic  acid,  is  prepared  from  the  cake  remaining  after  the 
 expression  of  the  fixed  oil,  by  submitting  it  to  distillation  with 
 water.  One  hundred  weight  of  the  cake  generally  yields  from  two 
 either  universal  or  partial  involucrum ; the  corolla  consists  of  five 
 ovate,  obtuse,  concave,  yellow  petals,  with  the  apexes  inflected ; 
 the  filaments  are  yellow,  and  longer  than  the  corolla ; with  an 
 inferior  germen,  covered  by  the  nectary,  and  supporting  two  short 
 styles,  terminated  by  obtuse  stigmas. 
 
Y accinium  Vitis  Idcea , red  whortleberry ; which,  however,  are 
 easily  detected  by  their  wanting  the  reticulated  surface  of  the  Uva 
 Ursi  leaves,  by  their  edges  being  revolute,  sparsely  and  finely 
 serrated,  and  dotted  beneath ; and  by  their  infusion  not  displaying 
 the  presence  of  tannic  acid  on  either  the  addition  of  a solution  of 
 isinglass,  or  of  sulphate  of  iron. 
  
 Qualities.  — The  fresh  leaves  are  inodorous,  and  have  a slightly 
 bitter,  astringent  taste,  leaving  a sweet  sensation  in  the  mouth. 
 When  properly  dried  and  powdered,  they  acquire  an  odour  similar 
 to  that  of  Hyson  tea ; but  the  taste  remains  the  same,  the  degree 
 of  bitterness  only  being  increased.  The  colour  of  the  powder  is  a 
 light  brown,  with  a shade  of  greenish  yellow.  Both  water  and 
 alcohol  extract  its  virtues,  and  the  watery  infusion  strikes  a deep 
  
 part  ii.  Materia  Medica . — Atropa  Belladonna. 
  
  
 173 
 
 
 ternally  brownish-grey,  internally  white  : it  has  a faint  odour  and 
 a sweetish-bitter  taste.  It  should  be  taken  up  either  in  autumn 
 or  in  early  spring,  before  the  stems  begin  to  appear.  The  leaves  of 
 belladonna  are  inodorous : the  taste  is  slightly  nauseous,  sweetish- 
 bitter,  and  subacrid  ; they  do  not  lose  their  active  properties  by 
 drying,  unless  much  heat  be  used>  Vauquelin  found  that  the  ex- 
 pressed juice  contains  albumen,  salts  with  a base  of  potassa,  and  a 
 bitter  principle,  soluble  in  alcohol1  2 ; this  was  afterwards  found  by 
 M.  Brandes  to  be  an  alkaloid,  which  he  named  Atropia^  and  on 
 which  the  narcotic  quality  of  the  plant  depends ; an  opinion  which 
 was  confirmed  by  M.  Bunge,  Geiger,  Hesse,  and  Mein,  and  is  now 
 fully  established.  The  root  yields  the  largest  proportion  of  this 
 principle,  but  it  is  also  obtained  from  the  seeds,  and  exists  in  the 
 leaves.  Atropia , when  pure,  occurs  in  the  form  of  white  trans- 
 parent needles,  which  generally  arrange  themselves  in  stellate  groups 
 on  crystallizing:  it  is  without  odour  and  has  a strong  acrid  taste.  At 
 194°  F.  it  fuses  into  a transparent  oily  looking  substance,  and 
 crystallizes  again  on  cooling  ; it  is  partially  volatile,  without  change, 
 at  284°  F. ; at  a higher  temperature  it  burns  with  a white  flame.
decoction  in  water,  and  separated  by  distillation  ; they  are  com- 
 pletely imparted  to  alcohol,  but  only  imperfectly  to  boiling  water 
 by  infusion.  The  fruit  contains  also  a fixed  inodorous,  insipid  oil. 
 The  oil  of  fennel  usually  employed  is  obtained  from  the  fruit  of  F. 
 dnlce:  it  is  more  agreeable  both  in  odour  and  taste  than  that  of  F. 
 vidgare.  Nineteen  cwts.  of  the  fruit  yield  78  lbs.  of  the  oil. 
  
 Medical  properties  and  uses.  — Fennel  was  formerly  esteemed  as 
 a remedy:  and  supposed  to  be  resolvent,  diuretic,  carminative,  and 
 stomachic ; but  even  as  a carminative  it  is  not  superior  to  anise- 
 seed  and  caraway ; and  it  is  therefore  now  seldom  employed.  The 
 dose  of  the  bruised  fruit  may  be  from  9 j.  to  £j. 
  
 Officinal  preparations.  — Aqua  Fceniculi , E.  D.  Oleum  Seminum 
 termed  the  offal,  are  dried  and  ground  to  powder ; the  latter  are 
 packed  up  and  sold  to  the  druggists.”2 
  
 Qualities.  — This  root  is  inodorous,  and  the  taste  sweet  and 
 mucilaginous,  leaving,  when  it  is  chewed  without  being  peeled,  a 
 slight  degree  of  bitterness  in  the  mouth.  The  powder,  if  good,
 
 Good  cinnamon  is  sometimes  intermixed  with  cinnamon  from 
 which  the  oil  has  been  drawn,  and  with  cassia.  The  former  is  de- 
 tected by  the  weakness  of  its  odour  and  taste ; and  the  latter  by 
 its  thickness,  smooth  fracture,  and  remarkably  slimy  taste. 
  
 Cinnamon  from  China  is  imported  under  the  name  of  cassia.  It 
 is  usually  in  single  quills,  which  are  thicker,  rougher,  denser,  and 
 break  with  a shorter  fracture  than  the  fine  Ceylon  cinnamon.  It 
 is  thus  readily  distinguished,  but  the  distinction  is  rendered  more 
 evident  when  it  is  made  into  infusion.  The  infusion  of  real  good 
 cinnamon  affords  no  blue  tint  on  the  addition  of  tincture  of  iodine; 
 that  of  cassia  becomes  blue,  owing  to  the  cellular  part,  which  con- 
 tains fecula,  being  left  on  the  bark. 
  
 Qualities.  — Cinnamon  has  a very  pleasant  fragrant  odour,  and 
 a pungent,  aromatic,  sweetish  taste ; and  the  pieces,  when  chewed, 
 soften  in  the  mouth.  When  it  is  very  hot,  without  sweetness,  and 
 leaves  a mawkish  taste  in  the  mouth,  it  is  of  an  inferior  quality. 
 The  best  is  rather  pliable,  but  breaks  in  splinters;  is  as  thin  as
cious, translucent,  combine  readily  with  fixed  oils  and  are  inflam- 
 mable, burning  with  a white  flame  and  much  smoke.  Alcohol  and 
 ether  dissolve  them  entirely,  leaving  the  impurities  '  ,  but  water 
 takes  up  only  their  flavour.  When  distilled  with  water  a volatile 
 oil  comes  over,  and  towards  the  end  of  the  operation  succinic  acid 
 rises 1 ; resin  remains  in  the  retort ; the  turpentines  therefore  are 
 compounds  of  these  three  substances.  They  are  partially  saponi- 
 fied by  solution  of  pure  potassa : but  a part  of  the  resin  and  the 
 greater  part  of  the  volatile  oil  remain  unchanged.  Each  sort  of 
 turpentine  has  characteristic  qualities  which  require  to  be  noticed. 
 1.  Common  Turpentine  has  a strong,  somewhat  fragrant  odour, 
 and  a bitter,  disagreeable  taste  ; its  consistence  is  greater  than 
 that  of  honey  ; its  colour  is  dirty  yellow,  and  it  is  more  opaque 
 than  the  other  sorts.  Strasburg  turpentine,  according  to  Caillet, 
 consists  of  53*5  of  volatile  oil,  6*2  resin , 10*8  abietin,  46*4  abietic 
 acid , and  0  '  9  of  succinic  acid.  2.  Venice  Turpentine  is  more  fluid. 
  
  
 1 Annales  de  Chim.  xxi.  328. 
 
 
 part  ii.  Materia  Medic  A.  — Pinus  ( Terebinthinae).  541 
  
 having  the  consistence  of  new  honey,  a yellowish  colour,  and  is 
 less  unpleasant  to  the  smell  and  taste  than  the  common.  3.  Ca- 
 nadian Balsam  (or  more  correctly  Turpentine)  has  a strong,  not 
 disagreeable,  odour,  and  a bitterish  taste  ; is  transparent,  whitish, 
 and  has  the  consistence  of  copaiva.  4.  Chian  or  Cyprus  Turpentine 
 (see  Pistacia)  is  very  fragrant,  but  almost  insipid,  nearly  transpa- 
 rent, thick,  tenacious,  and  of  a whitish  colour. 
  
 Oil  of  turpentine  has  a strong,  penetrating,  peculiar,  odour,  and 
 a hot,  pungent,  bitterish  taste.  It  is  perfectly  limpid  and  colour- 
 less: extremely  light,  volatile,  and  inflammable  ; it  congeals  at 
 + 14°  Fahr.,  its  boiling  point  is  312°  Fahr. : it  dissolves  com- 
 pletely in  six  parts  of  sulphuric  ether ; but  although  hot  alcohol 
 readily  dissolves  it,  yet  it  again  separates  in  drops  as  the  spirit 
 cools,  and  is  very  sparingly  soluble  in  the  cold  in  the  strongest 
 alcohol : one  hundred  parts  in  volume,  however,  unite  with  twenty 
 of  alcohol,  and  form  a homogeneous  solution,  which  does  not
by  their  different  solubilities  in  alcohol ; the  one  soluble  in  cold 
 alcohol  is  called  Pinic  acid ; the  other  Sylvie  acid.  Their  formula 
 is  C40  H30  04.  Another  acid  occurring  in  resin  and  produced 
 by  the  action  of  heat  on  the  above  acids,  is  called  Colophonic 
 acid,  to  which  the  brown  colour  of  common  resin  or  rosin  is  due.  It 
 is  very  sparingly  soluble  in  alcohol.  The  resin  of  the  Norway 
 Spruce  possesses  nearly  the  same  properties.  It  is  in  the  form  of 
 solid  brittle  tears,  of  a brownish-yellow  colour  on  the  outside, 
 and  internally  white  : and  emits  a very  agreeable  odour  when 
 burning. 
  
 Burgundy  pitch  has  a terebinthinate  odour  and  taste,  is  brittle, 
 opaque,  and  of  a light  yellow  or  reddish-brown  colour.  It  softens 
 moderately  in  the  heat  of  the  hand,  appears  unctuous,  and  has  a 
 a lengthened  period. 
  
 Sugar  was  originally  brought  from  Asia,  about  the  period 
 of  the  Crusades,  but  was  for  a long  time  only  employed  as  a 
 medicine. 
 
Qualities . — Raw  or  muscovado  sugar  is  odorous,  and  sweet  to 
 the  taste.  It  is  in  concreted  masses,  consisting  of  small,  dry, 
 sparkling,  irregular  crystals  of  a yellowish-brown  colour.  It  has 
 the  odour  of  honey  ; and,  beside  pure  cane  sugar , contains  colouring 
 matter , lime , and  malic  acid . Refined  sugar  is  inodorous,  and  sweet 
 to  the  taste.  Its  colour  is  pure  white ; and  the  mass  or  loaf,  in 
 which  it  is  concreted  in  small  cohering  crystals,  should  be  hard, 
 extremely  brittle,  pulverulent,  and  persistent  in  the  air:  the 
 crystals  are  modified,  oblique,  rhombic  prisms.  Cane  sugar  re- 
 quires only  one  third  of  its  own  weight  of  water  at  60°  for  its 
 solution : when  united  at  a higher  temperature  with  a smaller 
 quantity  of  water,  it  remains  dissolved,  forming  syrup . Sugar  is 
 sparingly  soluble  in  cold  alcohol : it  requires  four  parts  of  boiling 
 spirit  of  wine,  of  sp.  gr.  0*880,  for  its  solution  ; and  by  rest  a 
 moiety  of  the  sugar  again  separates  in  crystals.  Volatile  oils  also 
 readily  combine  with  it,  and  form  oleo-sacchara , which  are  miscible 
 with  water.  Lime  and  the  fixed  alkalies  unite  with  sugar,  and 
 form  compounds  without  any  sweetness  of  taste.  The  concen- 
 trated strong  acids  act  differently  upon  sugar.  The  sulphuric  acts 
 violently  upon  it,  sulphurous  acid  being  disengaged,  and  the  sugar
and  set  aside.  The  milk-sugar  slowly  crystallizes  out,  and  may 
 be  purified  by  animal  charcoal  and  re-crystallization. 
  
 Qualities.  — When  pure  it  occurs  in  the  form  of  four-sided 
 prisms,  which  are  white,  translucent,  and  very  hard.  It  is  fre- 
 quently found  in  cylindrical  masses,  the  crystals  having  been 
 deposited  on  cords  or  sticks.  It  is  sweetish  tc  the  taste,  but  much 
 less  so  than  either  cane  or  grape  sugar.  It  is  soluble  in  about  six 
  
  
 1 Rollo  on  Diabetes , 452.  Thomson  '  s  Chemistry , 4th  edit.  vol.  iv.  660. 
  
 2 A sugar  in  every  respect  resembling  common  sugar  is  obtained  from  the  maple,  the 
 roots  of  the  beet,  carrots,  the  roots  of  marshmallows,  and  many  other  plants. 
 the  mode  of  conducting  the  fermentation,  modify  the  flavour  and 
 taste  of  wine.  The  odour  and  flavour  in  the  more  fully-fermented 
 wines,  seems  to  depend  on  the  vinous  process,  as  it  bears  little  re- 
 semblance to  the  natural  flavour  of  the  fruit ; from  which,  how- 
 ever, in  the  sweet  and  half- fermented  wines,  it  is  immediately 
 derived ; but  flavouring  ingredients,  as  bitter  almonds  and  orris
root,  are  also  used  in  the  manufacturing  of  wines.  Malaga,  Fron- 
 tignac,  Tokay,  Vino  tinto,  Montefiuscone,  Schiras,  and  the  Malmsey 
 wines  of  the  Greek  islands,  are  sweet  to  the  taste,  and  consequently 
 the  result  of  imperfect  fermentation  ; Champagne,  Gooseberry, 
 and  all  sparkling  wines,  owe  their  briskness  to  carbonic  acid  gas : 
 Hock,  Khenish,  Mayne,  Barsac,  Burgundy,  Claret2,  and  Her- 
 mitage contain  a certain  quantity  of  uncombined  acid,  and  are 
 termed  light  and  dry  ; while  Marsala,  Madeira,  Sherry3,  and  Port, 
 are  dry  and  strong.  The  odour  of  sherry  is  pleasant  and  aromatic ; 
 the  taste  warm,  with  some  degree  of  the  agreeable  bitterness  of 
 the  peach  kernel ; the  taste  of  port  is  austere  and  bitterish : claret 
 is  less  rough,  thinner,  slightly  acidulous,  and  higher  flavoured ; 
 and  hock,  although  frequently  acidulous,  yet,  when  good,  is  free 
 from  acid.  Of  the  common  white  wines,  marsala  is  undoubtedly 
 the  sulphate  is  dissolved,  but  the  mannite,  which  is  soluble  in 
 water,  is  left  and  has  a sweet  taste.  The  sugar  is  readily  detected 
 by  dissolving  the  suspected  salt  in  water,  and  precipitating  the 
 quina  by  liquor  potassae : as  this  destroys  the  bitterness  of  the  so- 
 lution, the  presence  of  the  sugar  becomes  obvious  by  its  taste. 
 Gum  is  detected  by  digesting  the  salt  in  strong  alcohol : the  sul-
