it. Instead, the project of persuading her to do something he felt she 
 oughtn  '  t to do flooded him with a tingling pleasure. 
  
 He said, "But it  '  s so pretty!" He could not imagine why he should have 
 said that, and yet he knew when he had said it that he had hit on an 
 argument that would weigh with her. 
  
 She sighed as who makes a concession. "Oh yes, it  '  s pretty!" And then, 
 to his perplexity, her face fell into complete repose. She was absorbed 
 in the red beauty in his glass. 
  
 It angered him, yet he still felt bland and coaxing. "You  '  ll have a 
 glass?" 
  
 "No, thank you." 
  
 "You  '  ll surely have a taste?" 
  
 "Ah, no--" 
 
terror of this man, but the anger of a feminist against all men, and 
 stared fiercely at the platform, crying out silently: "What have I to do 
 with this man? I will have nothing to do with any man until I am great. 
 Then I suppose I will have to use them as pawns in my political and 
 financial intrigues." 
  
 Through this gaping at the client from Rio she had missed the chairman  '  s 
 speech. Dr. Munro had just sat down. Her sensible square face looked red 
 and stern, as though she had just been obliged to smack someone, and 
 from the tart brevity of the applause it was evident that that was what 
 she had been doing. This rupture of the bright occasion struck Ellen, 
 who found herself suddenly given over to irritations, as characteristic 
 of the harshness of Edinburgh life. Here was a cause so beautiful in its 
 affirmation of freedom that it should have been served only by the 
 bravery of dignified women and speeches lucent with reason and 
 untremulously spoken, by things that would require no change of quality 
 but only rearrangements to be instantly commemorable by art; and yet 
 this Scotch woman, moving with that stiffness of the mental joints which 
 nations which suffer from it call conscientiousness, had managed to turn 
 a sacramental gathering of the faithful into a steamy short-tempered
music. Her hoarse, sweet North-country voice rushed forth like a wind 
 bearing the sounds of a battlefield, the clash of arms, the curses 
 hurled at an implacable and brutish enemy, the sights of the dying--for 
 already some had died; and with a passion that preserved her words from 
 the common swift mortality of spoken things she told stories of her 
 followers  '   brave deeds which seemed to remain in the air and deck the 
 hall like war-tattered standards. She spoke of the women who were 
 imprisoned at Birmingham for interrupting Mr. Asquith  '  s meeting, and 
 how they lay now day and night in the black subterranean prison cells, 
 huddled on the tree-stumps that were the only seats, clad in nothing but 
 coarse vests because they would not wear the convict clothes, breathing 
 the foul sewage-tainted air for all but that hour when they were carried 
 up to the cell where the doctor and the wardresses waited to bind and 
 gag them and ram the long feeding-tube down into their bodies. This they 
 had endured for six weeks, and would for six weeks more. She spoke with 
 a proud reticence as to her sufferings, about her recent sojourn in 
 Holloway, from which she had gained release by hunger-striking a 
 fortnight before. 
  
 "Ah, I could die for her!" cried Ellen to herself, wet-eyed with
loyalty. "If only it weren  '  t for mother I  '  d go to prison to-morrow." Her 
 love could hardly bear it when Mrs. Ormiston went on, restrained rage 
 freezing her words, to indict the conspiracy of men that had driven her 
 and her followers to revolt: the refusal to women of a generous 
 education, of a living wage, of opportunities for professional 
 distinction; the social habit of amused contempt at women  '  s doings; the 
 meanness that used a woman  '  s capacity for mating and motherhood to bind 
 her a slave either of the kitchen or of the streets. All these things 
 Ellen knew to be true, because she was poor and had had to drink life 
 with the chill on, but it did not sadden her to have her reluctant views 
 confirmed by the woman she thought the wisest in the world, for she felt 
 an exaltation that she was afraid must make her eyes look wild. It had 
 always appeared to her that certain things which in the main were 
 sombre, such as deep symphonies of an orchestra, the black range and 
 white scaurs of the Pentland Hills against the south horizon, the idea 
 that at death one dies utterly and is buried in the earth, were patterns 
 cut from the stuff of reality. They were relevant to fate, typical of 
 life, in a way that gayer things, like the song of girls or the 
 field-checked pleasantness of plains or the dream of a soul  '  s holiday in 
 eternity, were not; And in the bitter eloquence of this pale woman she
him and said, "Oh, it  '  s you!" as if it was the first time she had set 
 eyes upon him that evening; but he knew that that was just because she 
 was shy, and he shook hands rather slowly and looked her full in the 
 face as he said he had liked the speeches so that she might see she 
 couldn  '  t come it over _him_. And he asked if he might see her home. 
  
 She swallowed, and pushed up her chin, as if trying to rise to some 
 tremendous occasion, and then pulled herself together, and with an air 
 of having found a loophole of escape, enquired, "But where are you 
 stopping?" and when he made answer that he was staying at the Caledonian 
 Hotel, she exclaimed in a tone of relief, "Ah, but I live at Hume Park 
 Square out by the Meadows!" 
  
 "I want to see you home," he said inflexibly. 
  
 "Oh, if you want the walk!" she answered resignedly. "Though you  '  ve a 
 queer taste in walks, for the streets are terrible underfoot. But I 
 suppose you  '  re shut up all day at your work. You  '  ll just have to sit 
 down and wait till I  '  ve checked the literature and handed in the 
 takings. I doubt yon stout body in plum-coloured velveteen who bought
R.J. Campbell on the Social Evil with such an air of condescension has 
 paid me with a bad threepenny-bit. Aren  '  t folks the limit?" She was so 
 full of bitterness against the fraudulent body in plum-coloured 
 velveteen that she forgot her shyness and looked into his eyes to appeal 
 for sympathy. "Ah, well!" she said, stiffening again, "I  '  ll be back in a 
 minute." 
  
 He leaned against a pillar and waited. The hall became empty, became 
 melancholy; mysteriously and insultingly its emptiness seemed to 
 summarise the proceedings that had just ended. It was as if the place 
 were waiting till he and the few darkly dressed women who still stood 
 about chewing the speeches were gone, and would then enact a satire on 
 the evening; the rows of seats which turned their polished brown 
 surfaces towards the platform with an effect of mock attentiveness would 
 jeeringly imitate the audience, the chairs that had been left 
 higgledy-piggledy on the platform would parody the speakers. And 
 doubtless, if there is a beneficent Providence that really picks the 
 world over for opportunities of kindliness, halls which are habitually 
 let out for political meetings are allowed means of relieving their 
 feelings which are forbidden to other collections of bricks and mortar.
But he mustn  '  t say that to Ellen. To her political meetings were plainly 
 sacred rituals, and in any case he was not sure whether she laughed at 
 things. 
  
 She called to him from the doorway, "I  '  m through, Mr. Yaverland!" She 
 was wearing a tam-o  '  -shanter and a mackintosh, which she buttoned right 
 up to her chin, and she looked just a brown pipe with a black knob at 
 the top, a mere piece of plumbing. He thought it very probable that 
 never before in the history of the human race had a beautiful girl 
 dressed herself so unbecomingly. But that she had done so seemed so 
 peculiarly and deliciously amusing that as he walked by her side he 
 could hardly keep from looking at her smilingly in a way that would have 
 puzzled and annoyed her. And outside the hall, when they found that the 
 mist, like a sour man who will not give way to his temper but keeps on 
 dropping disagreeable remarks, was letting down just enough of itself to 
 soak Edinburgh without giving it the slightest hope that it would rain 
 itself out by the morning, he caught again this queer flavour of her 
 that in its sharpness and its freshness reminded him of the taste of 
 fresh celery. He asked her if she hadn  '  t an umbrella, and she replied, 
 "I  '  ve no use for umbrellas; I like the feel of the rain on my face, and
 
 She went to a desk in the corner of the room and dashed it open, and 
 fell to rummaging in a pile of papers with such noisy haste that he knew 
 she was afraid she ought not to have asked him in and was trying to 
 carry it off under a pretence of urgency; and he found himself facing a 
 little woman who wore a shawl in the low-spirited Scotch way, as if it 
 were a badge of despondency, and who was saying, "Good evening, Mr. 
 Yaverland. Will you not sit down? I  '  m ashamed the hall gas wasn  '  t lit." 
 A very poor little woman, this mother of Ellen  '  s. The hand that shook 
 his was so very rough, and at the neck of her stuff gown she wore a 
 large round onyx brooch, a piece of such ugly jewellery as is treasured 
 by the poor, and the sum of her tentative expressions was surely that 
 someone had rudely taken something from her and she was too 
 gentle-spirited to make complaint. She was like some brown bird that had 
 not migrated at the right season of the year, and had been surprised as 
 well as draggled by the winter, chirping sweetly and sadly on a bare 
 bough that she could not have believed such things of the weather. Yet 
 once she must have been like Ellen; her hair was the ashes of such a 
 fire as burned over Ellen  '  s brows, and she had Ellen  '  s short upper lip, 
 though of course she had never been fierce nor a swift runner, and no
meanly to this woman. When she was young and sweet her sweetness had 
 been violated and crushed by something harsh and reckless; and now she 
 was not sweet any longer, but just a wisp of an old woman, and nobody 
 would ever bother about her again; and life gives one no second chances. 
 Yaverland lamented, as Ellen had done, the fate of those exceptional 
 people who are old or not perfectly happy. 
  
 "You  '  re not Irish, are you?" she enquired seriously; and immediately he 
 knew that her husband had been Irish, and that she held a naïve and 
 touching belief that no one but a man of his race would have behaved as 
 he had done, that all other men would have been kind. Particularly now 
 that Ellen was growing such a big girl she didn  '  t want any Irish coming 
 into this little home, where at least there was peace and quiet. 
  
 "No," he said reassuringly, "I  '  m not Irish. My people have been in Essex 
 for hundreds of years. I  '  m afraid," he added, for so evident was it that 
 most of her fellow-creatures had dealt cheatingly with her that decent 
 people felt a special obligation to treat her honestly, "my grandmother 
 was an O  '  Connor, but she was half French. Lord, what  '  s that?" 
 
 
 Two or three whaups rose from the moss-hags and then sailed pee-weeting 
 towards the hills, as if despatched by the moor to warn them of the 
 coming of these strangers; and it was as if the range answered shortly, 
 "Ay, I ken that, I ken that." The broad view was as solemn as eternity, 
 and at the same time there was a dancing exhilaration in the air, which, 
 when it was still, was sweet-flavoured with the sweetness of the firs 
 and the bog-myrtle, and when it was disturbed by the diamond-hard wind 
 was ice-cold and seemed to intoxicate the skin. There was a sound of 
 wheels behind them, and they stepped aside to let a carriage pass down a 
 track that turned aside from the road at this point and ran timorously 
 between the moor and the white wall of the neat estate. In it sat an old 
 lady, so very old that the flesh on the hand that was raised to her 
 bonnet was a mere ivory web between the metacarpal bones, and her eyes 
 had gone back to that indeterminate hue which is seen in the eyes of a 
 new-born baby; but she sat up straight in the open carriage and directed 
 on the two strangers a keen belittling gaze that without doubt extracted 
 everything essential in their appearance. He liked this harsh country, 
 these harsh, infrangible people that it bred. 
 
corner of the carriage, screwing up his dark face with mocking laughter. 
 "Mr. Philip is driving me mad," she thought to herself. "Some day soon 
 I  '  ll find myself in Morningside Asylum, sticking flowers in my hair and 
 flattering myself I  '  m Queen Victoria. But I will not go mad. I am going 
 to get on. I am going to be great. But am I? I think I am not." Her face 
 made a wet contorted mask against her sleeve, and a swallowed sob was as 
 sharp in her throat as a fishbone; and there struck through her like an 
 impaling sword a certainty which she could not understand, but which was 
 surely a certificate that there was to be no more happiness, that even 
 if Mr. Philip ceased to persecute her she would still be hungry and 
 tormented. 
  
 Perhaps if she could go to some new country she would escape from this 
 misery. She saw a sky like stretched blue silk, stamped with the black 
 monograms of palms; a purple bay shaped like a shell and edged with a 
 white embroidery of surf. Surely such fair weather killed with sweetness 
 such coarse plants as her stupid gloom, as the foul weather here killed 
 with its coarseness all sweet-flowering southern plants. She turned to 
 Yaverland to ask him if he could help her to find work abroad, but she 
 became aware that she was in the grip of an unreasonable emotion that
When he reached Rio he would not stand by the quiet bay as she would 
 have stood, enraptured by the several noble darknesses of the sky, the 
 mountains, and the ship-starred sea, but would go quickly to his house 
 on the hill, not hurrying, but showing by a lightness in his walk, by a 
 furtive vivacity of his body, that he was involved in some private 
 system of exciting memories. He would open the wrought-iron gates with a 
 key which she had not known he possessed, which had lain close to him in 
 one of those innumerable pockets that men have in their clothes. With 
 perfect knowledge of the path, he would step silently through the 
 garden, where flowers run wild had lost their delicacy and grew as 
 monstrous candelabra of coarsened blooms in soil greenly feculent with 
 weeds; she rejoiced in its devastation. He would enter the hall and pick 
 his steps between the pools of wine that lay black on the marble floor; 
 he would tread on the rosettes of corruption that had once been garlands 
 of roses hung about the bronze whale  '  s neck; he would look down on the 
 white limbs of the shattered Venus, and look up and listen to the 
 creaking flight of the birds of prey that were nesting under the broken 
 roof; and he would smile as if he shared a secret with the ruin and 
 dissipation. His smile was the sun, but in it there was always a dark 
 ray of secrecy. All his experience was a mockery of her inexperience.
Her clenched fist beat her brow, which had become hot.... 
  
 All that day her mind had painfully enacted such fantasies of hatred or 
 had waited blankly for this moment which the old man  '  s shuffling step 
 was now bringing towards her. She braced herself, though she did not 
 look up from the table. 
  
 "Nelly, I  '  ve brought you a bit rock from Ferguson  '  s." 
  
 She gazed cannily at the white paper parcel. It was the largest box he 
 had ever given her; he always gave her sweeties when Mr. Philip had been 
 talking against her. Ought she therefore to deduce from the unusual size 
 that he had been saying something unusually cruel? But, on the other 
 hand, surely no one could ever give sweeties to a girl if they thought 
 she had let herself be kissed. "You  '  re just too kind, Mr. James," she 
 said mournfully. 
  
 "Take out a stick and give me one. What for did I have false teeth put 
 in at great expense if it was not that I might eat rock with my Nelly? 
 I  '  ll take a bit of the peppermint. My wife is a leddy and will not let
me eat peppermint in my ain hoose." He always spoke to Ellen, he did not 
 know why, in the same rough, soft, broad Scots tongue that he had talked 
 with his mother and father when he was a wee boy in the carter  '  s cottage 
 on the Lang Whang of the Old Lanark Road, that he still talked to his 
 cat in his little study at the back of his square, decent residence. 
 "Ay, that  '  s right. But lassie, what ails ye? You  '  re looking at the box 
 as though you  '  d taken a turn at the genteel and become an Episcopalian 
 and it was Lent. If you  '  ve lost that fine sweet tooth of yours ye must 
 be sickening for something." 
  
 "Och, me. I  '  m all right," said Ellen drearily, and picked a ginger 
 stick, and bit it joylessly; and laid it down again, and pressed her 
 hand to her heart. She hearkened to the racing beat of her agony with 
 eyes grown remote and lips drawn down at the corner with disgust, like a 
 woman feeling the movements of an unwanted child. And Mr. Mactavish 
 James, was so wrung with pity for the wee thing, and the mature dignity 
 with which she wore her misery, and the next moment so glowing with 
 pleasure at himself for this generous emotion, that he beamed on her and 
 purred silently, "Ech, the poor bairn! I will go straight to the point 
 and make her mind easy." He wriggled into an easier position in his
called, "Mother! Mother!" She more than half remembered as she called 
 that her mother had that morning said something about spending the 
 afternoon with an old friend at Trinity. But she cried out again, 
 "Mother! Mother!" and lest the cry should sound piteous sent it out 
 angrily. There was no answer but the complaining rattle of a window at 
 the top of the house, which, like all dwellings of the very poor, was 
 perpetually ailing in its fitments; and, letting her wet things fall to 
 her feet, she moved desolately into the kitchen. The gleam of the 
 caddies along the mantelpiece, the handles that protruded like stiff 
 tails over the saucepan-shelf above the sink, struck her as looking 
 queer and amusing in this twilight, and then made her remember that she 
 had had no lunch and was now very hungry, so she briskly set a light to 
 the gas-ring and put on the kettle. She had the luck to find in the 
 breadpan a loaf far newer than it was their thrifty habit to eat, and 
 carried it back to the table, finding just such delicious pleasure in 
 digging her fingers into its sides as she found in standing on her 
 heels on new asphalt; but turned her head sharply on an invisible 
 derider. 
  
 "I do mean to commit suicide, though I am getting my tea!" she snapped.
"Indeed, I never meant to come home at all; I found myself running up 
 the Mound from sheer force of habit. Did you never hear that human 
 beings are creatures of habit? And now I  '  m here I might as well get 
 myself something to eat. Besides, I  '  m not going shauchling down to the 
 Dean Bridge in wet shoes either." She kicked them off and moved for a 
 time with a certain conscious pomp, setting out the butter and the milk 
 and the sugar with something of a sacramental air, and sometimes sobbing 
 at the thought of how far the journey through the air would be after she 
 had let go the Dean Bridge balustrade. But as she put her head into the 
 larder to see if there was anything left in the pot of strawberry jam 
 her hand happened on a bowl full of eggs. There was nothing, she had 
 always thought, nicer to touch than an egg. It was cool without being 
 chill, and took the warmth of one  '  s hand flatteringly soon, as if it 
 liked to do so, yet kept its freshness; it was smooth without being 
 glossy, mat as a pearl, and as delightful to roll in the hand; and of an 
 exquisite, alarming frangibility that gave it, in its small way, that 
 flavour which belongs to pleasures that are dogged by the danger of a 
 violent end. As elaborately as this she had felt about it; for she was 
 silly, as poets are, and believed it possible that things can be common 
 and precious too.
 
 She held an egg against the vibrating place in her throat, and, shaken 
 with silent weeping, thought how full of delights for the sight and the 
 touch was this world she was going to leave. It also seemed to her that 
 she could do very well with it as an addition to her tea. "Mother  '  ll not 
 grudge it me for my last meal on earth," she muttered mournfully, 
 putting it in the kettle to save time. "And I ought to keep up my 
 strength, for I must write a good-bye letter that will show people what 
 they  '  ve lost...." 
  
 The egg was good; and as she would never eat another she cut her 
 buttered bread into fingers and dipped them into the yolk, though she 
 knew grown-up people never did it. The bread was good too. It was only 
 because of all the things there are to eat this was a dreadful world to 
 leave. She thought reluctantly of food; the different delicate textures 
 of the nuts of meat that, lying in such snug unity within the crisp 
 brown skin, make up a saddle of mutton; yellow country cream, whipped no 
 more than makes it bland as forgiveness; little strawberries, red and 
 moist as a pretty mouth; Scotch bun, dark and rich and romantic like the 
 plays of Victor Hugo; all sorts of things nice to eat, and points of
departure for the fancy. Even a potato roasted in its skin, if it was 
 the right floury sort, had an entrancing, ethereal substance; one could 
 imagine that thus a cirrus cloud might taste in the mouth. If the name 
 were changed, angels might eat it. Potato plants were lovely, too. 
  
 Very vividly, for her mind  '  s eye was staring wildly on the past rather 
 than look on this present, which, with all the honesty of youth, she 
 meant should have no future, there sprung up before her on the bare 
 plastered wall a potato-field she and her mother had seen one day when 
 they went to Cramond. Thousands and thousands of white flowers running 
 up to a skyline in ruler-drawn lines. They had walked by the River 
 Almond afterwards, linking arms, exclaiming together over the dark 
 glassy water, which slid over small frequent weirs, the tents of green 
 fire which the sun made of the overarching branches, the patches of moss 
 that grew so symmetrically between the tree-trunks on the steep 
 river-banks above the path that they might have been the dedicatory 
 tablets of rustic altars. When the cool of the evening came they had sat 
 and watched a wedding-party dance quadrilles on a lawn by the river, 
 overhung by chestnut trees and severed by a clear and rapid channel, 
 weedless as the air, from an island crowded by the weather-bleached
her three times. 
  
 _"I  '  m missing another day of you, Ellen. And I  '  m greedy for every minute 
 of you. There you are, away from me, and moving about and doing all the 
 sweet things you do, and saying all the things you do say, and your red 
 hair catching the light and your voice full of exquisite sweet sounds, 
 and I just have to get along seeing and hearing nothing of it. I am the 
 most insatiable of lovers. Life is thirst without you. I grudge every 
 moment we have been alive on the same world and not together. What a 
 waste! What a waste! I  '  ve never wanted an immortal soul before, but now 
 I do--that I may go on with you and go on with you, you darlingissima, 
 you endlessly lovely human thing. I  '  d go through all the ages with you; 
 we  '  d be like two children reading a wonderful book together, and you  '  d 
 light even the darkest passage of time for me with your wit and your 
 beauty. Tell me everything you are doing, tell me every little thing, my 
 lovely red-haired Ellen...."_ 
  
 And she had written to him twice.... 
  
 _"And in the evening I went out shopping. I wish you would tell me what
The girl was hurt. Marion bit her lip while she watched her crossly pick 
 up her spoon and eat her ice pudding as if it was a duty. "This is like 
 old times," she essayed feebly. "I  '  ve so often watched Richard eat it. 
 He went through various stages with this pudding. When he was quite 
 small he used to leave the crystallised cherries to the very last, 
 because they were nicest, arranged in a row along the rim of his plate, 
 openly and shamelessly. When he went to school he began to be afraid 
 that people would think that babyish if they noticed it, and he used to 
 leave them among the ice, though somehow they always did get left to 
 the last. Then later on he began to side with public opinion himself, 
 and think that perhaps there was something soft and unmanly about caring 
 so much for anything to eat, so he used to gobble them first of all, 
 trying not to taste them very much. Then there came an awful holiday 
 when he wouldn  '  t have any at all. That was just before he insisted on 
 going to sea. But then he came back--and ever since he  '  s had it every 
 time we come here, and now he always leaves the cherries to the last." 
 She was now immersed in the story she told; she was seeing again the 
 slow magical increase of the small thing she had brought into the world, 
 and the variations through which it passed in the different seasons of 
 its youth, changing from brown candid gracefulness to a time of sulky
billets that had been cut from the spinneys on the land they retained, 
 bound neatly with the black branches fluting together and a fuzz of 
 purple twigs at each end. 
  
 But she could remember another day, more than thirty years before, when 
 it was brown and oozy underfoot and there was nothing neat about it at 
 all, and the mellow cry of well-fed cattle came from the dark doors of 
 tumble-down sheds, and she was standing in the sunshine with two of the 
 Berkshire piglets in her arms. She had brought them out of the stye to 
 have a better sight of their pretty twitching noses and their silken 
 bristles and their playfulness, which was unclouded, as it is in the 
 puppy by a genuine fear of life, or in the kitten by a minxish 
 affectation of the same; and Goodtart, the cattleman, had drawn near 
 with a "Wunnerful, ain  '  t they, Miss Marion?--and them not born at four 
 o  '  clock this morning," when she heard the clear voice that was sweet and 
 yet hard, like silver ringing on steel, calling to the dogs out in the 
 roadway, "Lesbia! Catullus! Come out of it!" The greyhounds had, as 
 usual, got in among the sheep on the glebe land opposite. She ran 
 forward into the darkness of the stye and put down the two piglets among 
 the sucking tide of life that washed the flanks of the great old sow,
out of her wide window into the mature and undoubtful sunshine of a fine 
 afternoon. She had felt wonderfully well and terribly hungry, and had 
 hastened at her washing and dressing so that she could run downstairs 
 and get something to eat. When she went into the kitchen she saw that 
 dinner was over, for the plates were drying in the rack and Peggy, the 
 maid, was not there. It was incredible that she had not known why Peggy 
 had gone out, that she should fatuously have told herself that the girl 
 was probably working in the dairy; but in those days her mind was often 
 half asleep with love for the unborn. 
  
 She rejoiced that she had missed the family meal, for it was not easy to 
 sit at the table with Grandmother and Cousin Tom and Aunt Alphonsine, 
 unspoken comments on her position hanging from each face like 
 stalactites. In the larder she found the cold roast beef, magnificently 
 marbled with veins of fat, and the cherry pie, with its globes of 
 imperial purple and its dark juice streaked on the surface with richness 
 exuded from the broken vault-of the pastry, and she ate largely, with 
 the solemn greed of pregnancy. Afterwards she washed the dishes, in that 
 state of bland, featureless contentment that comes to one whose being 
 knows that it is perfectly fulfilling its function and that it is
little, sweet, and moderate. 
  
 Marion brought her an éclair on a plate. She took it and stood up, 
 asking meekly: "Shall I take it and eat it somewhere else? You and 
 Richard  '  ll be wanting to talk things over." 
  
 "Ah, no!" Marion was startled; and Ellen, to her own distress, found 
 herself exulting because this mature woman, who had dived so deeply into 
 the tides of adult experience in which she herself had hardly been 
 laved, was facing the situation so inadequately. She scorned her for the 
 stiffness of the conciliatory gesture she attempted, for the queer notes 
 which her voice made when she tried to alter it from her customary tone 
 of indifference in saying: "But, Ellen dear, you  '  re one of us now. We  '  ve 
 no affairs that aren  '  t yours too. We only wish they were a little 
 gayer...." She admired the facility of her own response for not more 
 than a minute, for, giving her a kind, blindish smile, Marion walked 
 draggingly across the hearthrug and took up her position at the 
 disengaged side of the fireplace and rested her elbow on the 
 mantelpiece, even as Richard was doing at its other end. They stood side 
 by side, without speaking, their firelit faces glowing darkly like
It struck Ellen that his refusal of any recognition of the girl  '  s 
 sweetness was unnatural; that it would have been more sane and 
 wholesome, though it would have pricked her jealousy, if he had shown 
 some flush of pleasure at this gentle, bucolic, nut-brown beauty. 
  
 "Please, sir," gabbled the girl with her wet, foolish, pretty lips, "I  '  m 
 Annie Brickett, and your cook  '  s my auntie, and I come over to say my 
 married sister  '  s had a little baby, and it  '  s before her time, so would 
 auntie give us the clothes she was making?" 
  
 The door opened, and aproned figures looked out of the kitchen 
 brightness at them. 
  
 "Where is your mistress?" Richard asked them, cutting into the girl  '  s 
 sweet, silly speech. "Has she come back?" 
  
 The servants all started making twittering, consequential noises. "No, 
 sir, she isn  '  t." "We didn  '  t know, any of us, you was out till the lady 
 and gentleman come." 
 
extravagant bitterness: "Well, that  '  s that. He knows as well as I do 
 that the Army expects us officers to be in by eleven." 
  
 "No doubt Mr. Yaverland  '  ll go round in the morning and explain the 
 exceptional circumstances," murmured Ellen. 
  
 "I  '  m sure I don  '  t care. I  '  m fed to the teeth with the Army, fed to the 
 teeth...." She stared into the fire as if she saw a picture there, and 
 drew a little tin box from her pocket and offered it to Ellen, saying: 
 "Take one. They  '  re violet cachous." Sucking one, she sat forward with 
 her feet in the fender and her head near her knees until, as if the 
 flavour of the sweet in her mouth was reminding her of a time when life 
 was less flavourless than now, she started up and began to walk 
 restlessly about the room. She halted at the window and asked thickly: 
 "That place over the other side of the river. Where there  '  s a glow in 
 the sky. Is that Chatham?" 
  
 With awe, with the lifting of the hair, the chilling of the skin that 
 those suffer who see the fulfilment of a prophecy, Ellen remembered 
 what Marion had said that afternoon about the handsome young sailor in
