Miss Corson  '  s "Cooking-School Text-Book" commended itself for its 
 admirable plainness and fullness of detail, but was almost at once found 
 impracticable as a system for my purposes; her dishes usually requiring 
 the choicest that the best city market could afford, and taking for 
 granted also a taste for French flavorings not yet common outside of our 
 large cities, and to no great extent within them. To utilize to the best 
 advantage the food-resources of whatever spot one might be in, to give 
 information on a hundred points suggested by each lesson, yet having no 
 place in the ordinary cook-book, in short, _to teach household science as 
 well as cooking_, became my year  '  s work; and it is that year  '  s work which 
 is incorporated in these pages. Beginning with Raleigh, N.C., and lessons 
 given in a large school there, it included also a seven-months  '   course at 
 the Deaf and Dumb Institute, and regular classes for ladies. Straight 
 through, in those classes, it became my business to say, "This is no 
 infallible system, warranted to give the whole art of cooking in twelve 
 lessons. All I can do for you is to lay down clearly certain fixed 
 principles; to show you how to economize thoroughly, yet get a better 
 result than by the expenditure of perhaps much more material. Before our 
 course ends, you will have had performed before you every essential 
 operation in cooking, and will know, so far as I can make you know,
it; and the aim has been to cover the ground concisely yet clearly and 
 attractively. As to Part II., it does not profess to be the whole art of 
 cooking, but merely the line of receipts most needed in the average 
 family, North or South. Each receipt has been tested personally by the 
 writer, often many times; and each one is given so minutely that failure 
 is well-nigh impossible, if the directions are intelligently followed. A 
 few distinctively Southern dishes are included, but the ground covered has 
 drawn from all sources; the series of excellent and elaborate manuals by 
 well-known authors having contributed here and there, but the majority of 
 rules being, as before said, the result of years of personal experiment, 
 or drawn from old family receipt-books. 
  
 To facilitate the work of the teacher, however, a scheme of lessons is 
 given at the end, covering all that can well be taught in the ordinary 
 school year: each lesson is given with page references to the receipts 
 employed, while a shorter and more compact course is outlined for the use 
 of classes for ladies. A list of topics is also given for school use; it 
 having been found to add greatly to the interest of the course to write 
 each week the story of some ingredient in the lesson for the day, while a 
 set of questions, to be used at periodical intervals, fixes details, and
insures a certain knowledge of what progress has been made. The course 
 covers the chemistry and physiology of food, as well as an outline of 
 household science in general, and may serve as a text-book wherever such 
 study is introduced. It is hoped that this presentation of the subject 
 will lessen the labor necessary in this new field, though no text-book can 
 fully take the place of personal enthusiastic work. 
  
 That training is imperatively demanded for rich and poor alike, is now 
 unquestioned; but the mere taking a course of cooking-lessons alone does 
 not meet the need in full. The present book aims to fill a place hitherto 
 unoccupied; and precisely the line of work indicated there has been found 
 the only practical method in a year  '  s successful organization of schools 
 at various points. Whether used at home with growing girls, in 
 cooking-clubs, in schools, or in private classes, it is hoped that the 
 system outlined and the authorities referred to will stimulate interest, 
 and open up a new field of work to many who have doubted if the food 
 question had any interest beyond the day  '  s need, and who have failed to 
 see that nothing ministering to the best life and thought of this 
 wonderful human body could ever by any chance be rightfully called "common 
 or unclean." We are but on the threshold of the new science. If these
By this time I do not doubt our baby has your heartiest pity, and you are 
 saying, "What! no snacks? no cooky nor cake nor candy? no running to aunt 
 or grandmother or tender-hearted cook for goodies? If that must be so, 
 half the pleasure of childhood is lost." 
  
 Perhaps; but suppose that with that pleasure some other things are also 
 lost. Suppose our baby to have begun life with a nervous, irritable, 
 sensitive organization, keenly alive to pain, and this hard regimen to 
 have covered these nerves with firm flesh, and filled the veins with 
 clean, healthy blood. Suppose headache is unknown, and loss of appetite, 
 and a bad taste in the mouth, and all the evils we know so well; and that 
 work and play are easy, and food of the simplest eaten with solid 
 satisfaction. The child would choose the pleasant taste, and let health 
 go, naturally; for a child has small reason, and life must be ordered for 
 it. But if the mother or father has no sense or understanding of the laws 
 of food, it is useless to hope for the wholesome results that under the 
 diet of our baby are sure to follow. 
  
 By seven some going to school has begun; and from this time on the diet, 
 while of the same general character, may vary more from day to day. Habits
Meats will be regarded as essential by the majority, and naturally they 
 come first in considering food; and beef is taken as the standard, being 
 identical in composition with the structures of the human body. 
  
 BEEF, if properly fed, is in perfection at seven years old. It should then 
 be a light red on the cut surface, a darker red near the bone, and 
 slightly marbled with fat. Beef contains, in a hundred parts, nearly 
 twenty of nitrogen, seventy-two of water, four of fat, and the remainder 
 in salts of various descriptions. The poorer the quality of the beef, the 
 more it will waste in cooking; and its appearance before cooking is also 
 very different from that of the first quality, which, though looking 
 moist, leaves no stain upon the hand. In poor beef, the watery part seems 
 to separate from the rest, which lies in a pool of serous bloody fluid. 
 The gravy from such beef is pale and poor in flavor; while the fat, which 
 in healthy beef is firm and of a delicate yellow, in the inferior quality 
 is dark yellow and of rank smell and taste. Beef is firmer in texture and 
 more satisfying to the stomach than any other form of meat, and is usually 
 considered more strengthening. 
  
 MUTTON is a trifle more digestible, however. A healthy person would not[||||||||||||        ]	3  	CONDIMENTS AND BEVERAGES. 
  
  
 Condiments are simply seasoning or flavoring agents, and, though hardly 
 coming under the head of food, yet have an important part to play. As food 
 by their use is rendered more tempting, a larger amount is consumed, and 
 thus a delicate or uncertain appetite is often aided. In some cases they 
 have the power of correcting the injurious character of some foods. 
  
 Salt stands foremost. Vinegar, lemon-juice, and pickles owe their value to 
 acidity; while mustard, pepper black and red, ginger, curry-powder, and 
 horse-radish all depend chiefly upon pungency. Under the head of aromatic 
 condiments are ranged cinnamon, nutmegs, cloves, allspice, mint, thyme, 
 fennel, sage, parsley, vanilla, leeks, onions, shallots, garlic, and 
 others, all of them entering into the composition of various sauces in 
 general use. 
  
 Salt is the one thing indispensable. The old Dutch law condemned criminals 
 to a diet of unsalted food, the effects being said to be those of the 
 severest physical torture. Years ago an experiment tried near Paris
demonstrated the necessity of its use. A number of cattle were fed without 
 the ration of salt; an equal number received it regularly. At the end of a 
 specified time, the unsalted animals were found rough of coat, the hair 
 falling off in spots, the eyes wild, and the flesh hardly half the amount 
 of those naturally fed. 
  
 A class of extreme Grahamites in this country decry the use of salt, as 
 well as of any form of animal food; and I may add that the expression of 
 their thought in both written and spoken speech is as savorless as their 
 diet. 
  
 Salt exists, as we have already found, in the blood: the craving for it is 
 a universal instinct, even buffaloes making long journeys across the 
 plains to the salt-licks; and its use not only gives character to insipid 
 food, but increases the flow of the gastric juice. 
  
 Black pepper, if used profusely as is often done in American cooking, 
 becomes an irritant, and produces indigestion. Red pepper, or cayenne, on 
 the contrary, is a useful stimulant at times; but, as with mustard, any 
 over-use irritates the lining of the stomach.
 
 So with spices and sweet herbs. There should be only such use of them as 
 will flavor well, delicately, and almost imperceptibly. No one flavor 
 should predominate, and only a sense of general savoriness rule. Extracts, 
 as of vanilla, lemon, bitter almond, &c., should be used with the greatest 
 care, and if possible always be added to an article after it cools, as the 
 heat wastes the strength. 
  
  
 BEVERAGES. 
  
 Tea and coffee are the most universal drinks, after water. The flavor of 
 both is due to a principle, _theine_ in tea, _caffeine_ in coffee, in 
 which both the good and the ill effects of these drinks are bound up. It 
 is hardly necessary the principles should have different names, as they 
 have been found by chemists to be identical; the essential spirit of cocoa 
 and chocolate,--_theobromine_,--though not identical, having many of the 
 same properties. 
  
 _Tea_ is valuable chiefly for its warming and comforting qualities. Taken
strongest in the best. If the water is soft, it should be used as soon as 
 boiled, boiling causing all the gases which give flavor to water to 
 escape. In hard water, boiling softens it. In all cases the water must be 
 fresh, and poured boiling upon the proper portion of tea,--the teapot 
 having first been well scalded with boiling water. Never boil any tea but 
 English-breakfast tea; for all others, simple steeping gives the drink in 
 perfection. 
  
 A disregard of these rules gives one the rank, black, unpleasant infusion 
 too often offered as tea; while, if boiled in tin, it becomes a species of 
 slow poison,--the tannic acid in the tea acting upon the metal, and 
 producing a chemical compound whose character it is hard to determine. 
 Various other plants possess the essential principle of tea, and are used 
 as such; as in Paraguay, where the Brazilian holly is dried, and makes a 
 tea very exhilarating in quality, but much more astringent. 
  
 The use of _Coffee_ dates back even farther than that of tea. Of the many 
 varieties, Mocha and Java are finest in flavor, and a mixture of one-third 
 Mocha with two-thirds Java gives the drink at its best. As in tea, there 
 are three chief constituents: (1) A volatile oil, giving the aroma it
The secret of a savory soup lies in many flavors, none of which are 
 allowed to predominate; and, minutely as rules for such flavoring may be 
 given, only careful and frequent _tasting_ will insure success. Every 
 vegetable, spice, and sweet herb, curry-powders, catchups, sauces, dried 
 or fresh lemon-peel, can be used; and the simple stock, by the addition of 
 these various ingredients, becomes the myriad number of soups to be found 
 in the pages of great cooking manuals like Gouffée  '  s or Francatelli  '  s. 
  
 _Brown soups_ are made by frying the meat or game used in them till 
 thoroughly brown on all sides, and using dark spices or sauces in their 
 seasoning. 
  
 _White soups_ are made with light meats, and often with the addition of 
 milk or cream. 
  
 _Purées_ are merely thick soups strained carefully before serving, and 
 made usually of some vegetable which thickens in boiling, as beans, pease, 
 &c, though there are several forms of fish _purées_ in which the 
 foundation is thickened milk, to which the fish is added, and the whole 
 then rubbed through a common sieve, if a regular purée-sieve is not to be
had. 
  
 Browned flour is often used for coloring, but does not thicken a soup, as, 
 in browning it, the starchy portion has been destroyed; and it will not 
 therefore mix, but settles at the bottom. Burned sugar or caramel makes a 
 better coloring, and also adds flavor. With clear soups grated cheese is 
 often served, either Parmesan or any rich cheese being used. Onions give a 
 better flavor if they are fried in a little butter or dripping before 
 using, and many professional cooks fry all soup vegetables lightly. 
 Cabbage and potatoes should be parboiled in a separate water before 
 adding to a soup. In using wine or catchup, add only at the last moment, 
 as boiling dissipates the flavor. Unless a thick vegetable soup is 
 desired, always strain into the tureen. Rice, sago, macaroni, or any 
 cereal may be used as thickening; the amounts required being found under 
 the different headings. Careful skimming, long boiling, and as careful 
 removing of fat, will secure a broth especially desirable as a food for 
 children and the old, but almost equally so for any age; while many 
 fragments, otherwise entirely useless, discover themselves as savory and 
 nutritious parts of the day  '  s supply of food. 
 
*       *       *       *       * 
  
 FISH. 
  
  
 The most essential point in choosing fish is their _freshness_, and this 
 is determined as follows: if the gills are red, the eyes prominent and 
 full, and the whole fish stiff, they are good; but if the eyes are sunken, 
 the gills pale, and the fish flabby, they are stale and unwholesome, and, 
 though often eaten in this condition, lack all the fine flavor of a 
 freshly-caught fish. 
  
 The fish being chosen, the greatest care is necessary in cleaning. If this 
 is properly done, one washing will be sufficient: the custom of allowing 
 fresh fish to lie in water after cleaning, destroys much of their flavor. 
  
 Fresh-water fish, especially the cat-fish, have often a muddy taste and 
 smell. To get rid of this, soak in water strongly salted; say, a cupful of 
 salt to a gallon of water, letting it heat gradually in this, and boiling 
 it for one minute; then drying it thoroughly before cooking.
of salt pork. 
  
 Baking and broiling preserve the flavor most thoroughly. 
  
 Cold boiled fish can always be used, either by spicing as in the rule to 
 be given, or by warming again in a little butter and water. Cold fried or 
 broiled fish, can be put in a pan, and set in the oven till hot, this 
 requiring not over ten minutes; a longer time giving a strong, oily taste, 
 which spoils it. Plain boiled or mashed potatoes are always served with 
 fish where used as a dinner-course. If fish is boiled whole, do not cut 
 off either tail or head. The tail can be skewered in the mouth if liked; 
 or a large fish may be boiled in the shape of the letter S by threading a 
 trussing-needle, fastening a string around the head, then passing the 
 needle through the middle of the body, drawing the string tight and 
 fastening it around the tail. 
  
  
 BAKED FISH. 
  
 Bass, fresh shad, blue-fish, pickerel, &c., can be cooked in this way:--
 
 See that the fish has been properly cleaned. Wash in salted water, and 
 wipe dry. For stuffing for a fish weighing from four to six pounds, take 
 four large crackers, or four ounces of bread-crumbs; quarter of a pound of 
 salt pork; one teaspoonful of salt, and half a teaspoonful of pepper; a 
 tablespoonful of chopped parsley, or a teaspoonful of thyme. Chop half the 
 pork fine, and mix with the crumbs and seasoning, using half a cup of hot 
 water to mix them, or, if preferred, a beaten egg. Put this dressing into 
 the body of the fish, which is then to be fastened together with a skewer. 
 Cut the remainder of the pork in narrow strips, and lay it in gashes cut 
 across the back of the fish about two inches apart. Dredge thickly with 
 flour, using about two tablespoonfuls. Put a tin baking-sheet in the 
 bottom of a pan, as without it the fish can not be easily taken up. Lay 
 the fish on this; pour a cup of boiling water into the pan, and bake in a 
 hot oven for one hour, basting it very often that the skin may not crack; 
 and, at the end of half an hour, dredging again with flour, repeating this 
 every ten minutes till the fish is done. If the water dries away, add 
 enough to preserve the original quantity. When the fish is done, slide it 
 carefully from the tin sheet on to a hot platter. Set the baking-pan on 
 top of the stove. Mix a teaspoonful of flour with quarter of a cup of cold
of cotton cloth, sewing or tying it firmly. Put a trivet or small iron 
 stand into a soup-pot, and lay the beef upon it. Half cover it with cold 
 water; put in two onions stuck with three cloves each, a large 
 tablespoonful of salt, and a half teaspoonful of pepper; and stew very 
 slowly, allowing half an hour to the pound, and turning the meat twice 
 while cooking. At the end of this time take off the cloth, and put the 
 meat, which must remain on the trivet, in a roasting-pan. Dredge it 
 quickly with flour, set into a hot oven, and brown thoroughly. Baste once 
 with the gravy, and dredge again, the whole operation requiring about half 
 an hour. The water in the pot should have been reduced to about a pint. 
 Pour this into the roasting-pan after the meat is taken up, skimming off 
 every particle of fat. Thicken with a heaping tablespoonful of browned 
 flour, stirred smooth in a little cold water, and add a tablespoonful of 
 catchup and two of wine, if desired, though neither is necessary. Taste, 
 as a little more salt may be required. 
  
 The thick part of a leg of veal may be treated in the same manner, both 
 being good either hot or cold; and a round of beef may be also used 
 without spicing or stuffing, and browned in the same way, the remains 
 being either warmed in the gravy or used for hashes or croquettes.
 
  
 BEEF À LA MODE (_Virginia fashion_). 
  
 Use the round, as in the foregoing receipt, and remove the bone; and for 
 eight pounds allow half a pint of good vinegar; one large onion minced 
 fine; half a teaspoonful each of mustard, black pepper, clove, and 
 allspice; and two tablespoonfuls of brown sugar. Cut half a pound of fat 
 salt pork into lardoons, or strips, two or three inches long and about 
 half an inch square. Boil the vinegar with the onion and seasoning, and 
 pour over the strips of pork, and let them stand till cold. Then pour off 
 the liquor, and thicken it with bread or cracker crumbs. Make incisions in 
 the beef at regular intervals,--a carving-steel being very good for this 
 purpose,--and push in the strips of pork. Fill the hole from which the 
 bone was taken with the rest of the pork and the dressing, and tie the 
 beef firmly into shape. Put two tablespoonfuls of dripping or lard in a 
 frying-pan, and brown the meat on all sides. This will take about half an 
 hour. Now put the meat on a trivet in the kettle; half cover with boiling 
 water; and add a tablespoonful of salt, a teaspoonful of pepper, an onion 
 and a small carrot cut fine, and two or three sprigs of parsley. Cook very
slowly, allowing half an hour to a pound, and make gravy by the directions 
 given for it in the preceding receipt. 
  
 _Braised beef_ is prepared by either method given here for _à la mode_ 
 beef, but cooked in a covered iron pan, which comes for the purpose, and 
 which is good also for beef _à la mode_, or for any tough meat which 
 requires long cooking, and is made tenderer by keeping in all the steam. 
  
  
 BOILED MUTTON. 
  
 A _shoulder_, or _fore-quarter_, of mutton, weighing five or six pounds, 
 will boil in an hour, as it is so thin. The _leg_, or _hind-quarter_, 
 requires twenty minutes to the pound; though, if very young and tender, it 
 will do in less. It can be tried with a knitting-needle to see if it is 
 tender. It is made whiter and more delicate by boiling in a cloth, but 
 should be served without it. Boil in well-salted water according to the 
 rule already given. Boiled or mashed turnips are usually served with it, 
 and either drawn butter or caper sauce as on p. 169. 
 
and pour over it the thickened gravy. Two beaten eggs are sometimes added, 
 and it is then called a _blanquette_ of veal. 
  
  
 BROWN STEW OR FRICASSEE. 
  
 To make these stews the meat is cut in small pieces, and browned on each 
 side in a little hot dripping; or, if preferred, quarter of a pound of 
 pork is cut in thin slices and fried crisp, the fat from it being used for 
 browning. Cover the meat with warm water when done. If a stew, any 
 vegetables liked can be added; a fricassee never containing them, having 
 only meat and a gravy, thickened with browned flour and seasoned in the 
 proportions already given. Part of a can of mushrooms may be used with a 
 beef stew, and a glass of wine added; this making a _ragoût with 
 mushrooms_. The countless receipts one sees in large cook-books for 
 ragoûts and fricassees are merely variations in the flavoring of simple 
 stews; and, after a little experimenting, any one can improvise her own, 
 remembering that the strongly-flavored vegetables (as carrots) belong 
 especially to dark meats, and the more delicate ones to light. Fresh pork 
 is sometimes used in a white fricassee, in which case a little powdered
sage is better than mace as a seasoning. 
  
 _Curries_ can be made by adding a heaping teaspoonful of curry-powder to a 
 brown fricassee, and serving with boiled rice; put the rice around the 
 edge of the platter, and pour the curry in the middle. Chicken makes the 
 best curry; but veal is very good. In a genuine East-Indian curry, 
 lemon-juice and grated cocoa-nut are added; but it is an unwholesome 
 combination. 
  
  
 BEEF ROLLS. 
  
 Two pounds of steak from the round, cut in very thin slices. Trim off all 
 fat and gristle, and cut into pieces about four inches square. Now cut 
 _very thin_ as many slices of salt pork as you have slices of steak, 
 making them a little smaller. Mix together one teaspoonful of salt and one 
 of thyme or summer savory, and one saltspoonful of pepper. Lay the pork on 
 a square of steak; sprinkle with the seasoning; roll up tightly, and tie. 
 When all are tied, put the bits of fat and trimmings into a hot 
 frying-pan, and add a tablespoonful of drippings. Lay in the rolls, and
Cut the pork in slices, and fry brown; cut the squirrels or chickens in 
 pieces, and brown a little, adding the onion cut fine. Now put all the 
 materials in a soup-pot; cover with two quarts of boiling water, and 
 season with one tablespoonful of salt, one of sugar, and half a 
 teaspoonful of cayenne pepper. Stew slowly for four hours. Just before 
 serving, cream a large spoonful of butter with a heaping tablespoonful of 
 flour; thin with the broth, and pour in, letting all cook five minutes 
 longer. To be eaten in soup-plates. 
  
  
 ROASTED MEATS. 
  
 Our roasted meats are really _baked_ meats; but ovens are now so well made 
 and ventilated, that there is little difference of flavor in the two 
 processes. 
  
 Allow ten minutes to the pound if the meat is liked rare, and from twelve 
 to fifteen, if well done. It is always better to place the meat on a 
 trivet or stand made to fit easily in the roasting-pan, so that it may not 
 become sodden in the water used for gravy. Put into a hot oven, that the
surface may soon sear over and hold in the juices, enough of which will 
 escape for the gravy. All rough bits should have been trimmed off, and a 
 joint of eight or ten pounds rubbed with a tablespoonful of salt. Dredge 
 thickly with flour, and let it brown on the meat before basting it, which 
 must be done as often as once in fifteen minutes. Pepper lightly. If the 
 water in the pan dries away, add enough to have a pint for gravy in the 
 end. Dredge with flour at least twice, as this makes a crisp and 
 relishable outer crust. Take up the meat, when done, on a hot platter. 
 Make the gravy in the roasting-pan, by setting it on top of the stove, and 
 first scraping up all the browning from the corners and bottom. If there 
 is much fat, pour it carefully off. If the dredging has been well managed 
 while roasting, the gravy will be thick enough. If not, stir a teaspoonful 
 of browned flour smooth in cold water, and add. Should the gravy be too 
 light, color with a teaspoonful of caramel, and taste to see that the 
 seasoning is right. 
  
 _Mutton_ requires fifteen minutes to the pound, unless preferred rare, in 
 which case ten will be sufficient. If a tin kitchen is used, fifteen 
 minutes for beef, and twenty for mutton, will be needed. 
 
 
 STUFFED LEG OF MUTTON. 
  
 Have the butcher take out the first joint in a leg of mutton; or it can be 
 done at home by using a very sharp, narrow-bladed knife, and holding it 
 close to the bone. Rub in a tablespoonful of salt, and then fill with a 
 dressing made as follows: One pint of fine bread or cracker crumbs, in 
 which have been mixed dry one even tablespoonful of salt and one of summer 
 savory or thyme, and one teaspoonful of pepper. Chop one onion very fine, 
 and add to it, with one egg well beaten. Melt a piece of butter the size 
 of an egg in a cup of hot water, and pour on the crumbs. If not enough to 
 thoroughly moisten them, add a little more. Either fasten with a skewer, 
 or sew up, and roast as in previous directions. Skim all the fat from the 
 gravy, as the flavor of mutton-fat is never pleasant. A tablespoonful of 
 currant jelly may be put into the gravy-tureen, and the gravy strained 
 upon it. The meat must be basted, and dredged with flour, as carefully as 
 beef. Both the shoulder and saddle are roasted in the same way, but 
 without stuffing; and the leg may be also, though used to more advantage 
 with one. 
 
as soon as it boils, that the gases which give it character and sparkle 
 may not have had time to escape. Tea and coffee both should be kept from 
 the air, but the former even more carefully than the latter, as the 
 delicate flavor evaporates more quickly. 
  
  
 TEA. 
  
 To begin with, never use a tin teapot if an earthen one is obtainable. An 
 even teaspoonful of dry tea is the usual allowance for a person. Scald the 
 teapot with a little _boiling water_, and pour it off. Put in the tea, and 
 pour on not over a cup of boiling water, letting it stand a minute or two 
 for the leaves to swell. Then fill with the needed amount of _water still 
 boiling_, this being about a small cupful to a person. Cover closely, and 
 let it stand five minutes. Ten will be required for English breakfast tea, 
 but _never boil_ either, above all in a tin pot. Boiling liberates the 
 tannic acid of the tea, which acts upon the tin, making a compound bitter 
 and metallic in taste, and unfit for human stomachs. 
  
 
COFFEE. 
  
 The best coffee is made from a mixture of two-thirds Java and one-third 
 Mocha; the Java giving strength, and the Mocha flavor and aroma. The 
 roasting must be very perfectly done. If done at home, constant stirring 
 is necessary to prevent burning; but all good grocers use now rotary 
 roasters, which brown each grain perfectly. Buy in small quantities 
 _unground_; keep closely covered; and if the highest flavor is wanted, 
 heat hot before grinding. 
  
 A noted German chemist claims to have discovered an effectual antidote to 
 the harmful effects of coffee,--an antidote for which he had searched for 
 years. In his experiments he discovered that the fibre of cotton, in its 
 natural state before bleaching, neutralizes the harmful principle of the 
 caffein. To make absolutely harmless coffee which yet has no loss of 
 flavor, it is to be boiled in a bag of unbleached cheese-cloth or 
 something equally porous. In the coffee-pot of his invention, the rounds 
 of cotton are slipped between two cylinders of tin, and the boiling water 
 is poured through once or twice, on the same principle as French filtered 
 coffee. The cloths must be rinsed in hot and then cold water daily and
carefully dried; and none are to be used longer than one week, as at the 
 end of that time, even with careful washing, the fibre is saturated with 
 the harmful principle. The same proportions of coffee as those given below 
 are used, and the pot must stand in a hot place while the water filters 
 through. 
  
 For a quart of coffee allow four heaping tablespoonfuls of coffee when 
 ground. Scald the coffee-pot; mix the ground coffee with a little cold 
 water and two or three egg-shells, which can be dried and kept for this 
 purpose. Part of a fresh egg with the shell is still better. Put into the 
 hot coffee-pot, and pour on one quart of _boiling water_. Cover tightly, 
 and boil five minutes; then pour out a cupful to free the spout from 
 grounds, and return this to the pot. Let it stand a few minutes to settle, 
 and serve with boiled milk, and cream if it is to be had. Never for 
 appearance  '  s sake decant coffee. Much of the flavor is lost by turning 
 from one pot into another, and the shapes are now sufficiently pretty to 
 make the block tin ones not at all unpresentable at table. 
  
 Where coffee is required for a large company, allow a pound and a half to 
 a gallon of water.
 
 Coffee made in a French filter or biggin is considered better by many; but 
 I have preferred to give a rule that may be used with certainty where 
 French cooking utensils are unknown. 
  
  
 COCOA, BROMA, AND SHELLS. 
  
 The directions found on packages of these articles are always reliable. 
 The _cocoa_ or _broma_ should be mixed smoothly with a little boiling 
 water, and added to that in the saucepan; one quart of either requiring a 
 pint each of milk and water, about three tablespoonfuls of cocoa, and a 
 small cup of sugar. A pinch of salt is always a great improvement. Boil 
 for half an hour. 
  
 SHELLS are merely the husk of the cocoa-nut; and a cupful to a quart of 
 boiling water is the amount needed. Boil steadily an hour, and use with 
 milk and sugar. 
  
 
CHOCOLATE. 
  
 This rule, though unlike that given in cook-books generally, makes a drink 
 in consistency and flavor like that offered at Maillard  '  s or Mendee  '  s, the 
 largest chocolate manufacturers in the country. 
  
 Scrape or grate fine two squares (two ounces) of Baker  '  s or any 
 unsweetened chocolate. Add to this one small cup of sugar and a pinch of 
 salt, and put into a saucepan with a tablespoonful of water. Stir for a 
 few minutes till smooth and glossy, and then pour in gradually one pint of 
 milk and one of boiling water. Let all boil a minute. Dissolve one heaping 
 teaspoonful of corn-starch or arrow-root in a little cold water, and add 
 to the chocolate. Boil one minute, and serve. If cream can be had, whip to 
 a stiff froth, allowing two tablespoonfuls of sugar and a few drops of 
 vanilla essence to a cup of cream. Serve a spoonful laid on the top of the 
 chocolate in each cup. The corn-starch may be omitted, but is necessary 
 to the perfection of this rule, the following of which renders the 
 chocolate not only smooth, but entirely free from any oily particles. 
 Flavor is lost by any longer boiling, though usually half an hour has been 
 considered necessary.
marked-out top can easily be removed. Take out the soft inside, and fill 
 with sweetmeats for dessert, or with minced chicken or oysters prepared as 
 on p. 140. 
  
  
 GRANDMOTHER  '  S APPLE PIE. 
  
 Line a deep pie-plate with plain paste. Pare sour apples,--greenings are 
 best; quarter, and cut in thin slices. Allow one cup of sugar, and quarter 
 of a grated nutmeg mixed with it. Fill the pie-plate heaping full of the 
 sliced apple, sprinkling the sugar between the layers. It will require not 
 less than six good-sized apples. Wet the edges of the pie with cold water; 
 lay on the cover, and press down securely, that no juice may escape. Bake 
 three-quarters of an hour, or a little less if the apples are very tender. 
 No pie in which the apples are stewed beforehand can compare with this in 
 flavor. If they are used, stew till tender, and strain. Sweeten and flavor 
 to taste. Fill the pies, and bake half an hour. 
  
  
 DRIED-APPLE PIES.
20. Rule for puff paste? 
  
 21. How should you furnish a kitchen? 
  
 22. What are the best kinds of cooking utensils? 
  
  
 END. 
  
  
  
  
 BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
  
  
 THE CHEMISTRY OF COOKERY. By W. Mattieu Williams. 
  
 THE PERFECT WAY IN DIET. By Dr. Anna Kingsford. 
  
 FOODS. By Edward Smith.
 
 FRUITS, AND HOW TO USE THEM. By Hester M. Poole. 
  
 EATING FOR STRENGTH. Dr. M.L. Holbrook. 
  
 FRUIT AND BREAD. By Gustav Schlickeyesen. Translated by Dr. M.L. Holbrook. 
  
 FOOD AND FEEDING. By Sir Henry Thompson. 
  
 MRS. LINCOLN  '  S BOSTON COOK BOOK. What to Do and What not to Do in Cooking. 
  
 JUST HOW. By Mrs. A.D.T. Whitney. 
  
 MRS. RORER  '  S PHILADELPHIA COOK BOOK. 
  
 PRACTICAL COOKING AND DINNER-GIVING. Mrs. Henderson. 
  
 IN THE KITCHEN. By Mrs. E.S. Miller. 
  
 GOOD LIVING. A Practical Cook Book for Town and Country. By Sara Van Buren
