 By the end of some October, when its leaves have fallen, I frequently 
 see such a central sprig, whose progress I have watched, when I 
 thought it had forgotten its destiny, as I had, bearing its first crop 
 of small green or yellow or rosy fruit, which the cows cannot get at 
 over the bushy and thorny hedge which surrounds it, and I make haste 
 to taste the new and undescribed variety. We have all heard of the 
 numerous varieties of fruit invented by Van Mons and Knight. This is 
 the system of Van Cow, and she has invented far more and more 
 memorable varieties than both of them. 
  
 Through what hardships it may attain to bear a sweet fruit! Though 
 somewhat small, it may prove equal, if not superior, in flavor to that 
 which has grown in a garden,--will perchance be all the sweeter and 
 more palatable for the very difficulties it has had to contend with. 
 Who knows but this chance wild fruit, planted by a cow or a bird on 
 some remote and rocky hillside, where it is as yet unobserved by man.
 
THE FRUIT, AND ITS FLAVOR 
  
 The time for wild apples is the last of October and the first of 
 November. They then get to be palatable, for they ripen late, and they 
 are still perhaps as beautiful as ever. I make a great account of 
 these fruits, which the farmers do not think it worth the while to 
 gather,--wild flavors of the Muse, vivacious and inspiriting. The 
 farmer thinks that he has better in his barrels, but he is mistaken, 
 unless he has a walker  '  s appetite and imagination, neither of which 
 can he have. 
  
 Such as grow quite wild, and are left out till the first of November, 
 I presume that the owner does not mean to gather. They belong to 
 children as wild as themselves,--to certain active boys that I 
 know,--to the wild-eyed woman of the fields, to whom nothing comes 
 amiss, who gleans after all the world, and, moreover, to us walkers. 
 We have met with them, and they are ours. These rights, long enough 
 insisted upon, have come to be an institution in some old countries, 
 where they have learned how to live. I hear that "the custom of 
 grippling, which may be called apple-gleaning, is, or was formerly,
America," though they are more memorable to my taste than the grafted 
 kinds; more racy and wild American flavors do they possess when 
 October and November, when December and January, and perhaps February 
 and March even, have assuaged them somewhat. An old farmer in my 
 neighborhood, who always selects the right word, says that "they have 
 a kind of bow-arrow tang." 
  
 Apples for grafting appear to have been selected commonly, not so much 
 for their spirited flavor, as for their mildness, their size, and 
 bearing qualities,--not so much for their beauty, as for their 
 fairness and soundness. Indeed, I have no faith in the selected lists 
 of pomological gentlemen. Their "Favorites" and "None-suches" and 
 "Seek-no-farthers," when I have fruited them, commonly turn out very 
 tame and forgettable. They are eaten with comparatively little zest, 
 and have no real _tang_ nor _smack_ to them. 
  
 What if some of these wildings are acrid and puckery, genuine 
 _verjuice_, do they not still belong to the _Pomaceæ_, which are 
 uniformly innocent and kind to our race? I still begrudge them to the 
 cider-mill. Perhaps they are not fairly ripe yet.
 
 No wonder that these small and high-colored apples are thought to make 
 the best cider. Loudon quotes from the "Herefordshire Report," that 
 "apples of a small size are always, if equal in quality, to be 
 preferred to those of a larger size, in order that the rind and kernel 
 may bear the greatest proportion to the pulp, which affords the 
 weakest and most watery juice." And he says that, "to prove this, Dr. 
 Symonds, of Hereford, about the year 1800, made one hogshead of cider 
 entirely from the rinds and cores of apples, and another from the pulp 
 only, when the first was found of extraordinary strength and flavor, 
 while the latter was sweet and insipid." 
  
 Evelyn says that the "Red-strake" was the favorite cider-apple in his 
 day; and he quotes one Dr. Newburg as saying, "In Jersey   '  tis a 
 general observation, as I hear, that the more of red any apple has in 
 its rind, the more proper it is for this use. Pale-faced apples they 
 exclude as much as may be from their cider-vat." This opinion still 
 prevails. 
  
 All apples are good in November. Those which the farmer leaves out as
unsalable and unpalatable to those who frequent the markets are 
 choicest fruit to the walker. But it is remarkable that the wild apple, 
 which I praise as so spirited and racy when eaten in the fields or 
 woods, being brought into the house has frequently a harsh and crabbed 
 taste. The Saunterer  '  s Apple not even the saunterer can eat in the 
 house. The palate rejects it there, as it does haws and acorns, and 
 demands a tamed one; for there you miss the November air, which is the 
 sauce it is to be eaten with. Accordingly, when Tityrus, seeing the 
 lengthening shadows, invites Meliboeus to go home and pass the night 
 with him, he promises him _mild_ apples and soft chestnuts,--_mitia 
 poma_, _castaneæ molles_. I frequently pluck wild apples of so rich 
 and spicy a flavor that I wonder all orchardists do not get a scion 
 from that tree, and I fail not to bring home my pockets full. But 
 perchance, when I take one out of my desk and taste it in my chamber, 
 I find it unexpectedly crude,--sour enough to set a squirrel  '  s teeth 
 on edge and make a jay scream. 
  
 These apples have hung in the wind and frost and rain till they have 
 absorbed the qualities of the weather or season, and thus are highly 
 _seasoned_, and they _pierce_ and _sting_ and _permeate_ us with their
spirit. They must be eaten in _season_, accordingly,--that is, 
 out-of-doors. 
  
 To appreciate the wild and sharp flavors of these October fruits, it 
 is necessary that you be breathing the sharp October or November air. 
 The outdoor air and exercise which the walker gets give a different 
 tone to his palate, and he craves a fruit which the sedentary would 
 call harsh and crabbed. They must be eaten in the fields, when your 
 system is all aglow with exercise, when the frosty weather nips your 
 fingers, the wind rattles the bare boughs or rustles the few remaining 
 leaves, and the jay is heard screaming around. What is sour in the 
 house a bracing walk makes sweet. Some of these apples might be 
 labeled, "To be eaten in the wind." 
  
 Of course no flavors are thrown away; they are intended for the taste 
 that is up to them. Some apples have two distinct flavors, and perhaps 
 one half of them must be eaten in the house, the other outdoors. One 
 Peter Whitney wrote from Northborough in 1782, for the Proceedings of 
 the Boston Academy, describing an apple tree in that town "producing 
 fruit of opposite qualities, part of the same apple being frequently
sour and the other sweet;" also some all sour, and others all sweet, 
 and this diversity on all parts of the tree. 
  
 There is a wild apple on Nawshawtuct Hill in my town which has to me a 
 peculiarly pleasant bitter tang, not perceived till it is 
 three-quarters tasted. It remains on the tongue. As you eat it, it 
 smells exactly like a squash-bug. It is a sort of triumph to eat and 
 relish it. 
  
 I hear that the fruit of a kind of plum tree in Provence is "called 
 _Prunes sibarelles_, because it is impossible to whistle after having 
 eaten them, from their sourness." But perhaps they were only eaten in 
 the house and in summer, and if tried out-of-doors in a stinging 
 atmosphere, who knows but you could whistle an octave higher and 
 clearer? 
  
 In the fields only are the sours and bitters of Nature appreciated; 
 just as the woodchopper eats his meal in a sunny glade, in the middle 
 of a winter day, with content, basks in a sunny ray there, and dreams 
 of summer in a degree of cold which, experienced in a chamber, would
make a student miserable. They who are at work abroad are not cold, 
 but rather it is they who sit shivering in houses. As with 
 temperatures, so with flavors; as with cold and heat, so with sour and 
 sweet. This natural raciness, the sours and bitters which the diseased 
 palate refuses, are the true condiments. 
  
 Let your condiments be in the condition of your senses. To appreciate 
 the flavor of these wild apples requires vigorous and healthy senses, 
 _papillæ_ firm and erect on the tongue and palate, not easily 
 flattened and tamed. 
  
 From my experience with wild apples, I can understand that there may 
 be reason for a savage  '  s preferring many kinds of food which the 
 civilized man rejects. The former has the palate of an outdoor man. It 
 takes a savage or wild taste to appreciate a wild fruit. 
  
 What a healthy out-of-door appetite it takes to relish the apple of 
 life, the apple of the world, then! 
  
 "Nor is it every apple I desire,
beginning of the winter they freeze hard, and soon, though undecayed, 
 acquire the color of a baked apple. 
  
 Before the end of December, generally, they experience their first 
 thawing. Those which a month ago were sour, crabbed, and quite 
 unpalatable to the civilized taste, such at least as were frozen while 
 sound, let a warmer sun come to thaw them,--for they are extremely 
 sensitive to its rays,--are found to be filled with a rich, sweet 
 cider, better than any bottled cider that I know of, and with which I 
 am better acquainted than with wine. All apples are good in this 
 state, and your jaws are the cider-press. Others, which have more 
 substance, are a sweet and luscious food,--in my opinion of more worth 
 than the pineapples which are imported from the West Indies. Those 
 which lately even I tasted only to repent of it,--for I am 
 semicivilized,--which the farmer willingly left on the tree, I am now 
 glad to find have the property of hanging on like the leaves of the 
 young oaks. It is a way to keep cider sweet without boiling. Let the 
 frost come to freeze them first, solid as stones, and then the rain or 
 a warm winter day to thaw them, and they will seem to have borrowed a 
 flavor from heaven through the medium of the air in which they hang.
