Honey-Sweet, by Edna Turpin, Illustrated by 
 Alice Beard 
  
  
 Title: Honey-Sweet 
  
  
 Author: Edna Turpin 
  
 
"Call her Emily Patterson," suggested the doll  '  s namesake. 
  
 But Anne shook her head. "That wouldn  '  t sound   '  spectful," she objected; 
 "and Patterson is your   '  Mrs.  '   name." Then her face brightened. "Oh! Her 
 name can be Mrs. Emily Patterson, and I  '  ll call her a pet name. I don  '  t 
 like nicknames, but pet names are dear. She shall be what Aunt Charity 
 used to call me--  '  Honey-Sweet.  '   I can sing it like she did:-- 
  
 "  '  Honey, honey! Sweet, sweet, sweet! 
 Honey, honey! Honey-Sweet!  '  " 
  
 As Anne crooned the words over and over, her voice sank drowsily. When 
 Miss Drayton went a few minutes later to turn out the light, Anne was 
 fast asleep, smiling in her dreams at Honey-Sweet who lay smiling on the 
 pillow beside her. 
  
  
  
  
 CHAPTER V
would sit beside them, sometimes chattering and   '  making believe  '   with 
 Honey-Sweet, sometimes prattling to her grown-up friends about her old 
 home in Virginia or her life in New York. 
  
 Mrs. Patterson petted her and made dainty frocks for Honey-Sweet. Brisk, 
 practical Miss Drayton gave Anne spelling lessons and set her problems 
 in number work, protesting that she was too large a girl to spend all 
 her time playing and looking at fairy-tale books, blue, red, and green. 
 Why, she did not even read them except by bits and snatches, but made up 
 tales to fit the pictures, and told over and over the stories that were 
 read to her. 
  
 She was always ready to drop a book for a romp with Pat Patterson. 
 Bounding about the deck together, they looked like a greyhound and a St. 
 Bernard--she slim and alert, he with his rough hair tumbling over his 
 merry, freckled face. Often their games ended by her stalking away with 
 Honey-Sweet, in offended dignity. Pat was such a tease! 
  
 "Isn  '  t that a pretty doll?" he said one day, with suspicious 
 earnestness. "I say, lend her to me awhile, Anne."
absorbed in trying to spell her name backwards that she forgot about the 
 stockings. Louise caught her by the shoulder. 
  
 "You will dress instant, Mees Anne," she threatened, "or I report you to 
 Mademoiselle." 
  
 Anne had heard that threat too often to be disturbed by it. She went to 
 get a fresh apron, then, seeing that Honey-Sweet  '  s frock was soiled, she 
 selected a fresh frock for her doll whom she reproved severely for being 
 so untidy and so slow about dressing. Louise, who was wrestling with 
 Annette  '  s curls, turned and saw Anne devoting herself to her doll  '  s 
 toilette when she ought to have been finishing her own. The much-tried 
 maid snatched away Honey-Sweet and shook her heartily. 
  
 "Don  '  t, don  '  t, Louise!" cried Anne. "Don  '  t you hurt Honey-Sweet. I  '  ll 
 dress. I  '  ll hurry. I  '  ll be quick." 
  
 Louise looked keenly at Anne  '  s flushed, earnest face. Then she gave poor 
 Honey-Sweet a smart little smack. "The wicked _bébé_!" she exclaimed. 
 "She does not permit that you make the toilette. If you are not dressed
in six minutes exact, I give the spank once more to the bad _bébé_!" 
  
 Anne  '  s fingers hurried as she had not known they could hurry and in 
 exactly four minutes she presented herself for Louise to tie her 
 hair-ribbons, while she cuddled and pitied her rescued baby. 
  
 "Oh, ho! Mees Anne," said Louise, her eyes sparkling with satisfaction 
 at having found a way to enforce promptness. "Each morning that is 
 tardy, I give the spank to the wicked _bébé_ that makes you to delay." 
  
 To save Honey-Sweet from punishment, Anne sprang up the next morning at 
 Louise  '  s first call and dressed at once. To her surprise, she found that 
 it was really pleasanter than dawdling over her toilette, and Louise 
 good-naturedly gave her permission to take Honey-Sweet for a 
 before-breakfast stroll to the arbor in the playground. 
  
 From the first, Anne got on well in her classes. She did not like to 
 study lessons in books--she was always getting tangled up in long 
 sentences or stumbling over big words--but where she once, in spite of 
 the printed page, understood a subject, she made it her own. The scenes
"I  '  m like you, Anne," she said; "I had forgotten what good times there 
 are in the world. Before we go to luncheon, I want to know if 
 Honey-Sweet  '  s mother approves of her. I told you that her hair would 
 grow, you know. See!" She untied the strings and took off Honey-Sweet  '  s 
 cap. Instead of a bald head with a few painted ringlets, there were wavy 
 golden locks of real hair. It is no use to try to express Anne  '  s 
 delight. She couldn  '  t do it herself. She laughed and cried and hugged 
 first Honey-Sweet, then Mrs. Patterson, then both together. 
  
 A soft wet snow was falling, and amid its whiteness and the glittering 
 lights and the merry bustle of the holiday crowds, the carriage turned 
 homeward. After such a happy day, nothing could ever be so bad again, it 
 seemed to Anne, as she kissed her friends good-by and ran 
 light-heartedly up the steps. 
  
 The gift-giving and gift-receiving and merry-making of the Christmas 
 holidays brought Anne back into the circle of her schoolmates. But her 
 troubles were not over. One afternoon early in the new year, Mrs. 
 Patterson and Miss Drayton came for the promised interview with 
 Mademoiselle Duroc. She showed them the purse and jewels discovered in
 
  
 The weeks went by, one as like another as the blue-clad children. A 
 September Saturday afternoon found Anne, with Honey-Sweet clasped in her 
 arms, in a secluded corner near the boundary hedge. She had told 
 Honey-Sweet all the happenings of the week--that she was head in 
 reading, that she would have cut Lucy down in spelling-class if the girl 
 next above her had not spelt   '  scissors  '   on her fingers--that Miss   '  Liza 
 had not found a wrinkle in her bed-clothes all the week. She cuddled and 
 kissed Honey-Sweet to her heart  '  s content, crooning over and over her 
 old lullaby:-- 
  
 "Honey, honey! Sweet, sweet, sweet! 
 Honey, honey! Honey-Sweet!" 
  
 Then she wandered into her world of   '  make believe.  '   Once upon a time, 
 there was a fair, forlorn princess on a milk-white steed. She was lost 
 in a forest. It was, though the princess did not know it, an enchanted 
 forest. And there was a cruel giant who had seized twenty-seven fair, 
 forlorn princesses whom he had made his serving-maids. They could be
before Miss Farlow, with "Here! for the old orphans." 
  
 Miss Farlow opened her mouth but before words could come Anne was gone. 
 She crouched down with Honey-Sweet between her bed and the wall and 
 sobbed as if her heart would break. 
  
 "I wouldn  '  t mind so much," she explained to Honey-Sweet, "I wouldn  '  t 
 mind so much if I could have taken out one teeny piece of chocolate 
 with the darling little silver tongs. I haven  '  t had a box of candy for 
 months and months. And, oh! Honey-Sweet, I read just three chapters in 
 that beautiful book, and now I  '  ll never, never know what became of that 
 dear little boy." 
  
 At teatime Anne, red-eyed and unsmiling, met Miss Farlow on the stairs. 
  
 "Ah! Anne Lewis," said the lady, looking over her spectacles. "You are a 
 generous child. I only asked and expected some old toys. It was generous 
 of you to bring your pretty new gifts. But I hardly feel that you ought 
 to give away the Christmas presents your friends selected for you to 
 enjoy. I think you  '  d better take them back." Anne  '  s face shone like the
sun coming from behind a cloud. "Instead, you can give--oh! some old 
 thing--give that rag doll to put in the box for the little orphans." The 
 sun went under a dark cloud. 
  
 "Oh!" Anne faltered. Then she hurried on: "Can  '  t no old orphans have 
 Honey-Sweet. You keep the dominoes and the book and the handkerchief and 
 the candy. And they may have my gold beads, too. But not Honey-Sweet. 
 I  '  d rather have her than Christmas. There--there  '  s a lonesome spot she 
 just fits in." 
  
 "You  '  d rather give away your pretty new things than that old rag doll?" 
 Miss Farlow was amazed. 
  
 "A million times!" cried Anne, hugging her baby fondly. 
  
 "What a queer child you are, Anne Lewis!" said Miss Farlow. "Well, well! 
 keep your doll, of course, if you wish." 
  
 Anne gave her an impulsive kiss. "Thank you, Miss Farlow! You are so 
 good," she said.
 
 Without a word, Anne gathered up Honey-Sweet and marched off, with her 
 chin in the air. For a whole long week she did not come to   '  Roseland.  '  
 Worst of all, on Saturday she played all afternoon with the other girls 
 on the   '  Home  '   grounds, without once looking over the hedge. 
  
 Arthur threw himself into Martha  '  s arms. "I want my Anne," he sobbed, "I 
 want her to come back.   '  Lop  '  s a bad, bad boy to make my Anne go   '  way." 
  
 Shortly before teatime, Anne left the other girls and without seeming to 
 see any one beyond the hedge, sat down just out of earshot and began to 
 tell Honey-Sweet a story. This was more than could be borne. Arthur 
 wailed aloud. 
  
 Suddenly Dunlop broke his way through the hedge, stopped just in front 
 of Anne, and screamed: "It  '  s your old house. You come on." 
  
 Anne looked at him but did not move. 
  
 He stamped his foot. "Please!" he shouted fiercely.
with Mrs. Marshall and I knew the place when we came to the water-tank. 
 And I wanted to be here. So we came, Honey-Sweet and I. I thought the 
 dog was going to bite me." 
  
 "You hear that, Peter Collins?" exclaimed Mrs. Collins. "Now wasn  '  t that 
 smart of her? She knowed the place and got off the train by herself and 
 come right up to the house. And Red Coat might   '  a  '   bit the po  '   child 
 traipsin  '     '  long in the dark. You got to shut that dog up nights," she 
 said, as if every evening was to bring a little lost Anne wandering into 
 danger. "To think of puttin  '   a po  '   little motherless, fatherless thing 
 in a   '  sylum," she continued. "Many homes as thar is in this world!--Le  '  
 me fry you another plateful of nice brown cakes, honey, and get you some 
 damson preserves--maybe you like them better  '  n sweetmeats. Or would you 
 choose raspberry jam?" She had thrown open the diamond-paned doors of 
 the bookcase, now used as a pantry, and was looking over the rows of 
 jars. 
  
 "I couldn  '  t eat another mouthful of anything; indeed, I couldn  '  t," 
 insisted Anne. 
 
the other children  '  s good times and be out of them all." 
  
 She consoled herself as best she could with Honey-Sweet, disagreeing 
 stoutly with Miss Dorcas who thought that she was too large a girl to 
 play with dolls. 
  
 "Honey-Sweet isn  '  t just a doll--not like those in shops," Anne 
 explained. "Dear Mrs. Patterson made her. And she  '  s been everywhere with 
 me. And, Cousin Dorcas, she really is useful. I study all my lessons 
 with her. That  '  s how I learn them so good--making believe I  '  m teaching 
 them to Honey-Sweet. And she helps me keep still. You know you do like 
 me to be quiet, Cousin Dorcas." 
  
 "Yes. I don  '  t want to seem severe, but I cannot bear a noise. I am so 
 worn out when I come from the office. It seems each day my head aches 
 worse than it did the day before." Miss Dorcas sighed. "And if it isn  '  t 
 a downright ache when I come home, it begins to pound as soon as I look 
 at this book--" she eyed the account-book open before her--"I hoped you 
 could have some new shoes this month. Those are downright shabby. But 
 there isn  '  t any money for them. I don  '  t see how I am going to pay the
 
 "Is this the truth?" asked Miss Margery. 
  
 "It  '  s the gospel truth, ma  '  am," declared Mrs. Callahan. "You ask Mrs. 
 Mooney, ma  '  am." 
  
 As the two women promised faithfully to repay it on Monday, Miss Margery 
 lent the lacking rent-money and then rose to go. 
  
 Meanwhile, Anne and Honey-Sweet were the centre of an admiring group. 
 Anne allowed the little Callahans one by one to touch Honey-Sweet and 
 the older ones were even permitted to hold her for a minute. 
  
 As Honey-Sweet made the rounds of the group, she was followed admiringly 
 by the beadlike, black eyes of Lois, the second from the baby. She put 
 out her chubby hand and solemnly touched the doll  '  s dress with her 
 fingertip, saying over and over, "Pretty sweet Honey! pretty sweet 
 Honey!" When Miss Margery said they must go, Lois caught Anne  '  s frock in 
 her little fat hands and lisped, "Don  '  t go away, sweet Honey. Stay here 
 two, five minutes."
floor." 
  
 There the child was lying, tossing restlessly about, while Mrs. 
 Callahan  '  s machine rattled away as usual. 
  
 Lois gave a cry of delight when Anne came in with Honey-Sweet. "Pretty 
 sweet Honey!" she exclaimed. "Le  '   me kiss her one time." 
  
 "You wait," said Mrs. Callahan. "That dolly ain  '  t coming nigh you till 
 you take your dost of medicine. Then I  '  ll ask the lady to let her lay on 
 the pillow." 
  
 Lois looked inquiringly at Anne. 
  
 "Take your medicine like a good girl," said Honey-Sweet  '  s little mother, 
 "and I  '  ll let you hold my baby doll in your own hands." 
  
 Lois opened her mouth to receive the bitter draught and then stretched 
 out her arms for Honey-Sweet. She touched shoes and dress and hair with 
 light, admiring fingers.
don  '  t." 
  
 Miss Dorcas exclaimed in dismay. "Aren  '  t you afraid the child will die 
 if she doesn  '  t take the medicine?" 
  
 "Yessum, I am. But what can I do?" said Mrs. Callahan. "I try to get her 
 to take it every time she ought to have a dost. And what  '  s the use of 
 worritin  '   the doctor if she won  '  t? It makes him so mad." 
  
 Lois, meanwhile, was having a happy time with Honey-Sweet. Anne showed 
 how her shoes came off and on and untied her cap to display her curls. 
 "Here  '  s how she goes to sleep at night," she said. "I put her to bed by 
 me and I sing to her:-- 
  
  '  Honey, honey! Sweet, sweet, sweet! 
 Honey, honey! Honey-Sweet!  '  " 
  
 As she crooned the lullaby, Lois lisped it after her. 
  
 It grew late and Miss Dorcas rose to go.
 
 "If you  '  ll take your medicine to-night, like a little lady," said Anne, 
 "we will come back to see you to-morrow--Honey-Sweet and I. Mayn  '  t we, 
 Cousin Dorcas?--Oh, oh! if you cry, we can  '  t come! Will you promise to 
 take your medicine?" 
  
 "I take it now if pretty Honey stay," said Lois. 
  
 "No, no! it isn  '  t time now. But if you take it at the right time, we  '  ll 
 come back, and Honey-Sweet may lie on the pillow beside you." 
  
 The next afternoon, Anne brought Honey-Sweet, dressed in a blue muslin 
 frock and a new hat that Miss Margery had made of lace and rosebuds and 
 blue ribbon. 
  
 Lois  '  s face beamed when she saw this finery. "Can I kiss her dwess?" she 
 asked, gulping down the bitter draught. "Bad medicine gone now. Oh, the 
 pretty flowers!" and she counted on her fingers the rosebuds on 
 Honey-Sweet  '  s hat: "One, two, free, five, seben, leben, hundred beauty 
 flowers."
 
 When it was time for Anne to go, Lois wailed aloud. "I don  '  t want sweet 
 Honey to go! I don  '  t want sweet Honey to go!" 
  
 "If you  '  ll take your medicine, she  '  ll come back to see you," promised 
 Anne. 
  
 "Don  '  t want her to come back--want her to stay," sobbed Lois. 
  
 Anne tried to soothe her with promises that she would bring Honey-Sweet 
 back soon, dressed in a pink hat and a pink-flowered muslin. But Lois 
 would not be consoled and Anne left her at last in tears. 
  
 Monday morning before school time, Peggy and John Edward and Elmore came 
 to Miss Dorcas  '  s door and asked for Anne. Would she please lend them 
 Honey-Sweet that day? They  '  d be ever and ever so careful. 
  
 "Lend Honey-Sweet!" exclaimed Anne. 
  
 They hated to ask it but Lois would not take her medicine. She had
pushed aside and spilled dose after dose. "She says she won  '  t take that 
 nasty old bitter old stuff. And her cheeks are so red and she breathes 
 so rattly. Mommer  '  s scairt. And the doctor man  '  ll be so mad. Mommer 
 asked her if she  '  d take her medicine for Honey-Sweet and she said 
  '  Yes.  '   So mommer say for us to run and beg you do please lend us your 
 baby-doll to-day." 
  
 "If Lois is so sick,--oh, I suppose I must," said Anne; "but--Peggy, 
 will you be careful of her every minute of the time and bring her back 
 this afternoon--sure and certain?" 
  
 Peggy promised, and Peggy did. "Lois took her medicine fine," she said, 
 smiling and dimpling. "Mommer give her a dost a hour before time so  '  s I 
 could bring your baby-doll and get home before dark. Here she is. See! I 
 ain  '  t even mussed her curls." 
  
 The next day, Lois was worse again. Her mother confessed that they had 
 "worrited half the night with her and not got a dost down her," but 
 Honey-Sweet brought her to terms. 
 
When Miss Margery rose to go, Anne hesitated a minute, then said, "Mrs. 
 Callahan, if I let Honey-Sweet stay here to-night with Lois, can you 
 take good, good care of her?" 
  
 Mrs. Callahan  '  s face beamed. "That I can, and that I will. I been 
 wantin  '   to ask you to let her stay and hatin  '   to do it, seein  '   how much 
 you set store by her. I  '  ll take care of her good as if she was my own 
 baby." 
  
 The next afternoon, Anne found Honey-Sweet sitting in state on the 
 mantel-piece beside the medicine bottle. 
  
 "She comes down with it and she goes back with it," said Mrs. Callahan. 
 "The doctor was here this noon and he says she  '  s better and if she takes 
 her medicine reg  '  lar and keeps on the mend till Sadday he thinks she  '  ll 
 be all right. I hope she  '  ll take it. She does every time for that doll." 
 And the worried mother looked anxiously at Anne. 
  
 "I reckon I  '  ll have to spare Honey-Sweet till Saturday," said Anne, with 
 an effort. She missed her pet and the Callahan family was so big and so
for Honey-Sweet. She  '  s never been away from me before. You can hand her 
 out the window and let me visit her, if I can  '  t see Lois." 
  
 It was a raw December day and none of the Callahan children were 
 playing, as usual, in front of the little brown house. The 
 sewing-machine was rattling away at such furious speed that Miss 
 Margery  '  s knock at the door was unheard. The Charity lady hesitated a 
 moment. "If Lois can stand that rattle-ty-banging, she can stand sight 
 and sound of us. Let  '  s go in," she said and she opened the door. 
  
 Anne  '  s eyes went straight to the mantel-piece. Honey-Sweet was not 
 there. Anne looked down at the pallet, where Lois lay asleep. No 
 Honey-Sweet there. The child  '  s questioning, appealing eyes turned to 
 Lois  '  s mother. 
  
 Mrs. Callahan dropped her face in her apron. "I wouldn  '  t   '  a  '   had it 
 happen for the world!" she sobbed. "Not for all the world." 
  
 "What is the matter, Mrs. Callahan?" inquired Miss Margery. 
 
"Where  '  s Honey-Sweet?" asked Anne. 
  
 "I wouldn  '  t   '  a  '   had that doll ruint for nothin  '  ," wailed Mrs. Callahan. 
  
 "Honey-Sweet? ruined?" stammered Anne. 
  
 "What has happened to Anne  '  s doll, Mrs. Callahan? Will you please 
 explain at once?" Miss Margery was at her sternest. 
  
 "Peggy done it--and she  '  s cried herself   '  most sick.   '  Twas yestiddy. I  '  d 
 gone to take home some sewin  '  . Peg she  '  s been possessed to show that 
 doll to the Flannagan children. Bein  '   as I was gone and Lois   '  sleep, she 
 slipped out. And while they were all mirationin  '   over the doll  '  s shoes 
 and stockin  '  s, that low-down Flannagan dog grabbed the doll and made off 
 with it. And they couldn  '  t get it away from him--he tore it to pieces, 
 worritin  '   it like   '  twas a cat. He ought to be skinned alive, I say. It  '  s 
 low-down to keep such a dog." 
  
 "If Peggy had obeyed--" began Miss Margery. 
 
box that was to have waited till Christmas. Then she sang Anne  '  s 
 favorite songs. But the shadow did not lift. Anne kissed her friend 
 good-night and crept away to bed before nine o  '  clock. An hour later, 
 Miss Dorcas and Miss Margery tiptoed into her room. There she lay, her 
 face swollen with weeping and her breath coming in sobbing gasps. She 
 stirred and crumpled a pillow in her arms, and crooned in her sleep the 
 old lullaby:-- 
  
 "  '  Honey, honey! Sweet, sweet, sweet! 
 Honey, honey! Honey-Sweet!  '  " 
  
  
  
  
 CHAPTER XXVIII 
  
  
 All this time--so little is our big world--Miss Drayton was hardly a 
 stone  '  s throw from Anne. She was keeping house for her brother-in-law 
 who was busy with office work in Washington. Pat was at home, having
doll to get Lois to take her medicine. And the doll got ruint. Miss 
 Margery--that  '  s the Charity lady--she  '  s awful cross sometimes--said we 
 shouldn  '  t buy a doll with the wages. But she couldn  '  t fault a present. I 
 never see a child love a doll like she did that Honey-Sweet." 
  
 "Honey-Sweet!" exclaimed Miss Drayton. 
  
 "Yessum, lady. Wasn  '  t that a funny name for a doll? It was the purtiest 
 rag baby I ever see." 
  
 "A rag baby, named Honey-Sweet!" repeated Miss Drayton. "Was the little 
 girl--what was her name?" 
  
 "Anne. Anne Hartman. She  '  s niece to Miss Hartman, the head lady of the 
 Charity." 
  
 "Oh!" Could this be her little Anne? Or was there another child named 
 Anne with another rag doll named Honey-Sweet? Anne Hartman? And her 
 Anne had no aunt Miss Hartman. It was queer, very queer, and puzzling. 
 "What kind of looking child is Anne Hartman?" Miss Drayton asked.
and I got   '  em filled up good. Run around the table again now, you John 
 Edward and Elmore, so  '  s to jostle your victuals down and make room for 
 the cake and ice-cream." 
  
 Miss Drayton presently heard a great smacking of lips from the corner 
 where the twins sat. They had put their ice-cream together on one plate 
 and were feeding each other. Elmore put a generous spoonful in John 
 Edward  '  s mouth. 
  
 "Smack your lips--loud--so I can taste it," he said. "Now it  '  s your turn 
 to give me a spoonful." 
  
 "M-m-m! ain  '  t it good?" exclaimed John Edward. "I smacked my lips 
 loudest--didn  '  t I, Peggy?" 
  
 But Peggy, talking aside with Anne, did not heed him. 
  
 "It was very, very, very good of you all to send me the doll," said 
 Anne; "but truly, I  '  d rather you  '  d keep it for Susie and Lois. I  '  m 
 getting too big to play dolls, anyway."
 
  
 Whyte--The Story Book Girls. By Christina G. Whyte. 
  
 "A book that all girls will read with delight--a sweet, wholesome story 
 of girl life." 
  
  
 Wright--Dream Fox Story Book. By Mabel Osgood Wright. 
  
 "The whole book is delicious with its wise and kindly humor, its just 
 perspective of the true value of things." 
  
  
 Wright--Aunt Jimmy  '  s Will. By Mabel Osgood Wright. 
  
 "Barbara has written no more delightful book than this." 
  
  
 
