Tesee. The old man viewed his visitor with great earnestness, having 
 never beheld but one white man before, whom Mr. Park discovered to be 
 Major Houghton. He appeared to disbelieve what Mr. Park asserted, in 
 answer to his inquiries concerning the motives that induced him to 
 explore the country, and told him that he must go to Kooniakary to 
 pay his respects to the king, but desired to see him again before he 
 left Tesee. 
  
 Tesee is a large unwalled town, fortified only by a sort of citadel, 
 in which Tiggity Sego and his family reside. The present inhabitants, 
 though possessing abundance of cattle and corn, eat without scruple 
 rats, moles, squirrels, snakes, locusts, &c. The attendants of Mr. 
 Park were one evening invited to a feast, where making a hearty meal 
 of what they thought to be fish and kouskous, one of them found a 
 piece of hard skin in the dish, which he brought away with him, to 
 show Mr. Park what sort of fish they had been eating. On examining 
 the skin, it was discovered they had been feasting on a large snake. 
 Another custom, which is rigidly adhered to, is, that no woman is 
 allowed to eat an egg, and nothing will more affront a woman of Tesee 
 than to offer her an egg. The men, however, eat eggs without scruple.
interfered, and told them that he would not see the king  '  s stranger 
 ill treated while under his protection, but that in the morning he 
 should be sent about his business. This somewhat appeased their 
 clamour, but they compelled Mr. Park to ascend a high seat by the 
 door of the mosque, that every one might see him, where he remained 
 till sunset, when he was conducted to a neat little hut, with a small 
 court before it; but the Moors climbed in crowds over the mud walls, 
 to see the white man perform his evening devotions, and eat eggs. The 
 first demand was positively declined, but he professed his utmost 
 readiness to comply with the second; the dooty immediately brought 
 seven hens  '   eggs, but was much surprised that Mr. Park would not eat 
 them raw, as it is a prevalent opinion in the interior of Africa, 
 that Europeans subsist chiefly on this diet. His reluctance to 
 partake of this fare exalted him in the eyes of his sage visitants; 
 his host accordingly killed a sheep, and gave him a plentiful supper. 
  
 Mr. Park  '  s route now lay through woods, much infested with all kinds 
 of wild animals. On one occasion, his guide suddenly wheeled his 
 horse round, calling out (_Warra billi billi_, a very largo lion.) 
 Mr. Park  '  s steed was ill fitted to convey him from the scene of
similar to rice. As the provisions of the coffle were not exhausted, 
 kouskous was dressed for supper, and several villagers were invited 
 to partake; meanwhile one of the schoolmaster  '  s boys, who had fallen 
 asleep under the bentang, was carried off during the night; but the 
 thief, finding that his master  '  s residence was only three days  '  
 journey distant, thinking he could not be retained with security, 
 after stripping him, suffered him to return. 
  
 They now crossed the Black River by a bridge of a curious 
 construction. Several tall trees are fastened together by the tops, 
 which float on the water, while the roots rest on the rocks on each 
 side of the river; these are covered with dry bamboos, and the whole 
 forms a passage, sloping from each end towards the middle, so as to 
 resemble an inverted arch. In the rainy season the bridge is carried 
 away, but the natives constantly rebuilt it, and on that account 
 exact a small tribute from every passenger. 
  
 Being informed that, two hundred Jalonkas had assembled to intercept 
 and plunder the coffle, they altered their course, and about midnight 
 arrived at a town called Koba. They now discovered that a free man
by whom they were ransomed; and he understood from the Moors 
 themselves, that they were not allowed to go in large bodies to 
 Timbuctoo. This statement bears on the face of it a certain degree of 
 improbability; but it loses that character when it is considered that 
 Timbuctoo, although it is become, in consequence of its frontier 
 situation, the port, as it were, of the caravans from the north, 
 which could not return across the desert the same season, if they 
 were to penetrate deeper into Soudan, is yet, with respect to the 
 trade itself, probably only the point whence it diverges to Houssa, 
 Tuarick, &c. on the east, and to Walet, Jinnie, and Sego, on the west 
 and south, and not the mart where the merchandise of the caravans is 
 sold in detail. Such Moors, therefore, as did not return to Barbary 
 with the returning caravan, but remained in Soudan until the 
 following season, might be expected to follow their trade to the 
 larger marts of the interior, and to return to Timbuctoo only to meet 
 the next winter  '  s caravans. Adams arriving at Timbuctoo in February, 
 and departing in June, might therefore miss both the caravans 
 themselves and the traders, who remained behind in Soudan; and, on 
 the same principle, Park might find Moors carrying on an active trade 
 in the summer at Sansanding, and yet there might not be one at
season could not be far distant, a period, in which travelling is 
 very difficult and trying to European constitutions. It is clear, 
 therefore, that it would have been prudent to remain at Goree or 
 Pisania, till that season had passed; but in Mr. Park  '  s enthusiastic 
 state of mind, it would have been extremely painful to linger so long 
 on the eve of his grand and favorite undertaking. He hoped, and it 
 seemed possible, that before the middle of June, when the rains 
 usually began, he might reach the Niger, which could then be 
 navigated without any serious toil or exposure. He departed, 
 therefore, with his little band from Pisania, on the 4th May, and 
 proceeded through Medina, along the banks of the Gambia. With so 
 strong a party, he was no longer dependent on the protection of the 
 petty kings and mansas, but the Africans seeing him so well provided, 
 thought he had now no claim on their hospitality; on the contrary, 
 they seized every opportunity to obtain some of the valuable articles 
 which they saw in his possession. Thefts were practised in the most 
 audacious manner; the kings drove a hard bargain for presents; at one 
 place, the women, with immense labour had emptied all the wells, that 
 they might derive an advantage from selling the water. Submitting 
 quietly to these little annoyances, Mr. Park proceeded along the
The first day of spring is at Sockna a day of general rejoicing. It 
 is then the custom, to dress out little tents or bowers on the tops 
 of the houses, decorating them with carpets, _jereeds_, shawls, and 
 sashes. A gaudy handkerchief on a pole, as a standard, completes the 
 work, which is loudly cheered by the little children, who eat, drink, 
 and play during the day in these covered places, welcoming the 
 spring by songs, and crying continually, "O welcome spring, with 
 pleasure bring us plenty." The women give entertainment in their 
 houses, and the day is quite a holiday. From the top of the houses in 
 which Captain Lyon lodged, these little bowers had a very pretty 
 effect, every roof in the town being ornamented with one. Four ears 
 of corn were this day seen perfectly ripe, which was very early for 
 the season. The gardens here are excellent, compared with the others 
 in Fezzan. 
  
 Ten miles east by south from Sockna is the town of Hoon. It is 
 smaller than Sockna, but is built and walled in the same manner. It 
 has three gates, three mosques, and a large building, which is 
 dignified with the name of a castle, but it does not appear to have 
 even a loop-hole for musketry. The palm groves and gardens come up
a rough nest, in which she covers from fourteen to eighteen eggs, and 
 regularly sits on them, in the same manner as the common fowl does on 
 her chickens, the male occasionally relieving the female.[Footnote] 
 It is during the breeding season that the greatest numbers are 
 procured, the Arabs shooting the old ones on their nests. 
  
 [Footnote: There is one peculiarity attending the ostrich, which is, 
 that although the female lays from about twenty-five to thirty eggs, 
 yet she only sits upon about fifteen, throwing the remainder outside 
 the nest, where they remain until the young ones are hatched, and 
 these eggs form the first food of the young birds.--EDITOR.] 
  
 On the 22d April, Captain Lyon and his companions left Sockna, in 
 company with Sultan Mukni, for Mourzouk, which they entered upon the 
 4th May. The whole way is an almost uninterrupted succession of stony 
 plains and gloomy wadys, with no water but that of wells, generally 
 muddy, brackish, or bitter, and at fearful intervals. On the first 
 evening, the place of encampment was a small plain, with no other 
 vegetation than a few prickly _talk_ bushes, encircled by high 
 mountains of basalt, which gave it the appearance of a volcanic
on the next morning, and leaving an Arab castle to the south-east, 
 and some table-top hills, they arrived at Kasrowa by three in the 
 afternoon. 
  
 On the 9th December, they were to arrive at Tegerhy. The Arabs 
 commenced skirmishing as soon as they came within sight of it, and 
 kept it up in front of the town for half an hour after their arrival. 
 They were to halt here for a day or two, for the purpose of taking in 
 the remainder of their dates and provisions, and never was halt more 
 acceptable. Almost the whole of the party were afflicted with 
 illness; the servants were all so ill, that one of the negro women 
 made them a mess of kouscasou, with some preserved fat, which had 
 been prepared in Mourzouk, it was a sorry meal, for the fat was 
 rancid, and although tired and not very strong, Major Denham could 
 not refuse an invitation about nine at night, after he had laid down 
 to sleep, to eat camels  '   heart with Boo Khaloom; it was woefully hard 
 and tough, and the major suffered the next morning from indulging too 
 much at the feast. 
  
 The Tibboos and Arabs kept them awake half the night with their
country, so soon as debility or sickness comes upon him. 
  
 Towards the evening, when the wind became hushed, and the sky 
 re-assumed its bright and truly celestial blue, the Tibboo sheik, and 
 about thirty of his people, male and female, returned; but their 
 supplies were very scanty for a kafila of nearly three hundred 
 persons. The sweet milk turned out to be nothing but sour camel  '  s 
 milk, full of dirt and sand; and the fat was in small quantities, and 
 very rancid. They, however, purchased a lean sheep for two dollars, 
 which was indeed a treat. 
  
 Some of the girls who brought the milk were really pretty, as 
 contrasted with the extreme ugliness of the men. They were different 
 from those of Bilma, were more of a copper colour, with high 
 foreheads, and a sinking between the eyes. They have fine teeth, and 
 are smaller and more delicately formed than the Tibboos who inhabit 
 the towns. 
  
 It is quite surprising with what terror these children of the desert 
 view the Arabs, and the idea they have of their invincibility, while
although only three in number, the natives flew in all directions. 
 On their approaching the town, they beckoned to them, and got off 
 their horses, for the purpose of giving them confidence, and sat down 
 under the shade of a large tamarind tree. An old negro, who spoke a 
 little Arabic, was the first who ventured to approach; seeing that he 
 was not ill-treated, the others soon followed his example. Major 
 Denham begged a little sour milk, a most refreshing beverage after a 
 hot ride, but none was to be found, until they were assured that it 
 should be paid for, and at the sight of the dollar they all jumped 
 and skipped like so many monkeys. Major Denham now began to eat some 
 biscuit which he had in his saddle cloth, which created much 
 astonishment, and the first to whom he offered some, refused to eat 
 it. One, rather bolder than the rest, put a small piece in his mouth, 
 and pronounced it good, with such extravagant gestures, that the 
 visitors all became clamorous. The major refused for a long time the 
 man, who had been suspicious at first, to the great amusement of the 
 rest, who seemed to relish the joke amazingly. 
  
 The little nest of thatched huts in which they lived, was most 
 beautifully situated on a rising spot, in the midst of a rich and
and remounted, to receive the sheik  '  s orders, and they were not to 
 proceed beyond Woodie until his pleasure was known. So jealous and 
 suspicious are these negro princes of the encroachments of the Arabs, 
 that divers were the speculations as to whether the sheik would or 
 would not allow the Arabs to proceed with the party nearer his 
 capital. 
  
 A weekly fsug, or market, was held about a mile from the town, and 
 the women, flocking from the neighbouring negro villages, mounted on 
 bullocks, who have a thong of hide passed through the cartilage of 
 the nose when young, and are managed with great ease, had a curious 
 appearance. A skin is spread on the animal  '  s back, upon which, after 
 hanging the different articles they take for sale, they mount 
 themselves. Milk, sour and sweet, a little honey, lowls, gussub, and 
 gafooly, are amongst their wares; fat and _meloheea_ (ochra), a green 
 herb, which, with the bazeen, all negroes eat voraciously, and indeed 
 Christians too, as was afterwards experienced. The men brought oxen, 
 sheep, goats, and slaves; the latter were few in number, and in 
 miserable condition. 
 
When quite fatigued, Major Denham determined on making for some huts, 
 and begged a little milk, sweet or sour. No knowing landlady of a 
 country ever scanned the character of her customer more than did this 
 untaught, though cunning negro, who was found there. He first denied 
 that he had any, notwithstanding the bowls were scarcely ten paces 
 behind him, and then asked, what they had got to pay for it? Major 
 Denham had in reality nothing with him; and after offering his pocket 
 handkerchief, which was returned to him, as not worth any thing, he 
 was about to depart, though ten long miles from the tents, thirsty as 
 he was, when the Arab pointed to a needle, which was sticking in the 
 major  '  s jacket; for this and a white bead, which the Arab produced, 
 they had a bowl of fine milk and a basket of nuts, which refreshed 
 them much. On their way to the tents, they saw a flock of at least 
 five hundred pelicans, but could not get near enough to fire at them. 
  
 On the 11th, two of the sheik  '  s officers arrived, with letters and a 
 present of goroo nuts of Soudan; they have a pleasant bitter taste, 
 and are much esteemed by all the Tripoli people. These letters 
 pressed Boo Khaloom to continue his march towards Kouka, with all his 
 people, a very great proof of his confidence in the peaceable
moment, but the beast, after looking carelessly at him, brushed past 
 his legs, broke the ring, overturning several who stood before him, 
 and bounded off to another part, where there were fewer people. 
  
 It remained that Major Denham should be introduced to the sultan, in 
 his royal residence at Birnie, where all the real state and pomp of 
 the kingdom, with none of its real power were concentrated. On the 
 2nd March, the English accompanied Boo Khaloom to that city, and on 
 their arrival, the following day was fixed for the interview. Fashion 
 even in the most refined European courts, does not always follow the 
 absolute guidance of taste or reason, and her magic power is often 
 displayed in converting deformities into beauties, but there is 
 certainly no court, of which the taste is so absurd, grotesque, and 
 monstrous, as that to which Major Denham was now introduced. An 
 enormous protruding belly, and a huge misshapen head, are the two 
 features, without which it is vain to aspire to the rank of a 
 courtier, or fine gentleman. The form, valued perhaps as the type of 
 abundance and luxury, is esteemed so essential, that where nature has 
 not bestowed, and the most excessive feeding and cramming cannot 
 supply it, wadding is employed, and a false belly produced, which in
on his first entry, and for a quarter of a mile scarcely appeared a 
 city at all. Even in its more crowded quarters, the houses rose 
 generally in clusters, separated by stagnant pools. The inhabited 
 part on the whole, did not comprise more than a fourth of the space 
 enclosed by the walls, the rest consisted of fields, gardens, and 
 swamps; however, as the whole circuit is fifteen miles, there is 
 space for a population moderately estimated, to be between thirty or 
 forty thousand. The market is held on a neck of land, between two 
 swamps, by which, during the rains, it is entirely overflowed, but in 
 the dry season it is covered with sheds of bamboo, arranged into 
 regular streets. Different quarters are allowed for the several kinds 
 of goods; some for cattle, others for vegetables, while fruits of 
 various descriptions, so much neglected in Bornou, are here displayed 
 in profusion. The fine cotton fabrics of the country are sold either 
 in webs, or in what are called tobes and Turkadees, with rich silken 
 strips or borders ready to be added. Amongst the favourite articles 
 are goora or kolla nuts, which are called African coffee, being 
 supposed to give a peculiar relish to the water drunk after them; and 
 crude antimony, with the black tint of which every eyebrow in Houssa 
 must be dyed. The Arabs also dispose here of sundry commodities that
in the mouth so much of that impression, that a glass of vinegar 
 tastes like sweet wine, and the sourest lemon like a sweet orange; 
 sugar is quite an unnecessary article in tea or coffee; in fact, the 
 most nauseous drug seems sweet to whomever chews this fruit, and its 
 effect is not worn away until after several meals. It is generally 
 called the miraculous berry, and whoever eats of it in the morning, 
 must be content at least for that day to forego the flavour of every 
 kind of food, whether animal or vegetable, for all will be alike 
 saccharine to the palate, and the most ridiculous effect is often 
 produced by playing tricks upon those, who are not aware of its 
 peculiar property. Lander himself was one of the dupes, and he 
 relates, that the first time he partook of one of these berries, he 
 thought himself under the influence of witchcraft--the fowl of which 
 he partook at dinner seemed to him as if it had been soaked in a 
 solution of sugar--the lime juice appeared to him as if it were mixed 
 with some saccharine matter--his biscuit tasted like a bun--and 
 although he was convinced that he had not put any sugar into his 
 grog, it seemed to him as if it had been sweetened by the first maker 
 of punch in his native country. 
 
often freed, and the females given in marriage to free men, or to 
 other domestic slaves. The food of the slave and the free is nearly 
 the same. The greatest man or woman in the country is not ashamed, at 
 times, to let the slaves eat of the same dish; but a woman is never 
 allowed to eat with a man. With a people, who have neither 
 established law nor government, it is surprising that they are so 
 good and moral as they are; it is true, they will cheat if they can, 
 but amongst the civilized nations, who have both laws and government, 
 cheating is by no means a rare occurrence, and by those too, who are 
 the loudest in the professions of their honesty and integrity. 
  
 The country round Koolfu is a level plain, well cultivated, and 
 studded with little walled towns and villages along the banks of the 
 May Yarrow, and of a little river running into it from the north. 
 Between the walled towns of Bullabulla and Rajadawa, the route passed 
 through plantations of grain, indigo, and cotton; the soil clay mixed 
 with sand, with here and there large blocks of sandstone, containing 
 nodules of iron and veins of iron-stone. 
  
 At five days from Koolfu, the route entered at the town of Wazo, or
the said precious head and legs, and to him they were finally 
 committed by the disappointed eunuch, who could hardly forbear 
 weeping on the occasion; these relics are considered extremely 
 valuable as a charm. 
  
 The chief sent them a goat, a quantity of bananas, a dish of pounded 
 or rather mashed yam with gravy, and a large basket of _caffas_. 
 These are a kind of pudding, made into little round balls from 
 bruised Indian corn, which is first boiled to the consistence of 
 thick paste. From being made entirely of coarse flour and water, they 
 have an insipid taste when new, but when kept for a day or two, they 
 become sour, and in this state are eaten by the natives. There are 
 several deep wells in the town, but most of them are dried up, so 
 that water is exceedingly scarce, and it is sold in the market-place 
 to the inhabitants. They were daily accosted on the road with such 
 salutations as these, "I hope you go on well on the path," "success 
 to the king  '  s work," "God bless you white men," "a blessing on your 
 return, &c." 
  
 They remained the whole of the 28th at Chaadoo, in order to give the
dismounted, and after a laborious ascent, which occupied them three 
 quarters of an hour, at length reached the top. Stones and blocks of 
 granite interrupted their path, so that it became a very difficult 
 matter to force the horses along before them; they fell repeatedly, 
 but without materially injuring themselves. 
  
 The name of the town was Chekki; their arrival was rather unexpected, 
 and therefore the governor was not prepared to receive them, and they 
 sat down under a tree, until they were tired of waiting. At length, a 
 man came to conduct them to his residence, which was but a little way 
 from the tree, under which they were reposing, when a tumultuous rush 
 was made by the inhabitants to precede them into the yard, and 
 notwithstanding the presence of their chief, they so surrounded the 
 travelling party as to prevent a particle of fresh air from reaching 
 them. The governor received them with bluntness, but not unkindly, 
 though without much demonstration of good-will. While in his yard, he 
 regaled them with water, and afterwards sent them a large calabash of 
 _foorah_ sweetened with honey to their lodgings, which did not taste 
 unlike thick gruel or _burgoo_, as it is termed in Scotland. It is 
 made of a corn called goorah, is very palatable, and is in general
intersects the latter city. Bòhoo was formerly the metropolis of 
 Youriba, but about half a century ago, the reigning prince preferring 
 the plain at Katunga, the seat of government was transferred there, 
 since which Bòhoo has materially declined in wealth, population, and 
 consequence, although it is still considered a place of great 
 importance, and the second town in the kingdom. It is bounded on all 
 sides by hills of gradual ascent, which are prettily wooded, and 
 commands an extensive horizon. The land in the vicinity of the town 
 presents a most inviting appearance, by no means inferior to any part 
 of England in the most favourable season of the year. It appears to 
 be duly appreciated by the Fellatas, so great a number of whom reside 
 with their flocks in different parts, that the minister candidly 
 declared he could not give any information of their amount. These 
 foreigners sell their milk, butter, and cheese in the market at a 
 reasonable rate. The latter is made into little cakes about an inch 
 square, and when fried in butter is very palatable. It is of the 
 consistence and appearance of the white of an egg, boiled hard. 
  
 Agreeably to the promise which Richard Lander made to the chief, he 
 left his brother to the care of old Pascoe and his wife, and hastened
Wowow. 
  
 Unwilling as the Landers always were to infringe upon the observance 
 of the Sabbath, they were nevertheless compelled on Sunday, May 30th, 
 to submit to the mortification of cleaning and polishing a sword and 
 pistol, which were sent them for that purpose by the king, against 
 the approaching mahommedan festival. Yarro shortly afterwards sent 
 them a turkey, and one of his women presented them with a roasted 
 badger, a quantity of yams, &c. for the use of one of their people. 
 On this evening, the wives of the king unanimously bestowed a severe 
 reprimand on their royal husband for neglecting to offer them a 
 portion of a bottle of rum, which was given to him on the preceding 
 day. The ladies scolded so lustily, that the noise was heard outside 
 the wall surrounding their huts, which led them to make the 
 discovery. To appease the indignation of the irascible ladies, and to 
 reconcile them to the loss of so great a dainty as a glass of rum, 
 they were presented with a few beads, and some other trifles, but 
 still it was evident that these fancy articles bore no comparison in 
 the eyes of the ladies with the exquisite relish of the spirituous 
 liquid.
ignorance of the poor creatures, but such is their firm belief. 
  
 They had pursued their course in this manner, which had been 
 principally to the west, till about three in the afternoon, when they 
 came to a branch of the river about two hundred yards wide, and 
 seeing a small village at a short distance before them, they stopped 
 there for the purpose of obtaining some dried fish. Having supplied 
 their wants and proceeded on, about an hour afterwards they again 
 stopped, that their people might take some refreshment. Boy very 
 kindly presented Lander with a large piece of yam, reserving to 
 himself all the fish they had got at the village, and after making a 
 hearty meal off them, he fell asleep. While he was snoring by 
 Lander  '  s side, the remainder of the fish attracted his notice, and 
 not feeling half satisfied with the yam which had been given him, he 
 felt an irresistible inclination to taste them. Conscience acquitted 
 him on the score of hunger, and hinted that such an opportunity 
 should not be lost, and accordingly, he very quickly demolished two 
 small ones. Although entirely raw, they were delicious, and he never 
 remembered having enjoyed anything with a better relish in all his 
 life.
Wednesday, November 17th. "This morning, my brother, attended by one 
 of our men, quitted this town with King Boy and suite, leaving the 
 remainder of the party and myself behind, as hostages for the 
 fulfilment of the conditions, which we entered into with him in the 
 Eboe country. For myself, though greatly chagrined at this unforeseen 
 arrangement, I could not from my heart, altogether condemn the framer 
 of it; for it is quite natural to suppose that a savage should 
 distrust the promises of Europeans, when he himself is at all times 
 guilty of breach of faith and trust, not only in his trading 
 transactions with foreigners, but likewise in familiar intercourse 
 with his own people. Forday is the cause of it, and he displays all 
 the artifice, chicanery, and low cunning of a crafty and corrupt 
 mind. Therefore, after a moment  '  s reflection, I was not much 
 surprised at the step which King Boy has taken, nor can I be very 
 angry with him, and I am resolved to await with composure his return, 
 and consequently my release from this miserable place, though I have 
 begun to consider with seriousness, what will become of us, in the 
 event of Lake  '  s refusal to honour the bill which we have sent him. 
 Besides, I am rather uneasy on our people  '  s account, for during these 
 two or three days past, they have had scarcely any thing to eat, and
we are now left entirely destitute, nor do I know where to obtain 
 relief. The Damaggoo people are with us likewise, and they are 
 interested in my brother  '  s return, equally as much as myself. Instead 
 of being our guides and protectors, these poor creatures have shared 
 in our calamity; their little all has either been lost or stolen, or 
 else expended in provisions, and like us, they are reduced to great 
 distress and wretchedness. They will remain here, in order to receive 
 the few things which we have promised them and their chief, but 
 should Lake object to part with his goods, we shall give them a note 
 to the master of any English vessel at Bonny, whither they are 
 destined to go, requesting him to pay the poor strangers their 
 demands. 
  
 "After a good deal of solicitation and importunity, we received this 
 morning four small yams from the wives of King Boy, who informed us 
 that the same number of yams will be given us daily. Our people 
 having nothing else to eat, made a kind of broth with this vegetable; 
 at first it was, of course, a most insipid mess, but with the 
 addition of a little salt, it is rendered more palatable. We sent to 
 King Forday in the afternoon, for a few plantains, or any thing that
therefore, not to be depended upon. The island is entirely 
 mountainous, and contains a fine rich soil, capable of producing any 
 thing required of it. Several small mountain streams fall into the 
 sea, the largest of which are the two, named Hay and Horton Brooks, 
 before mentioned. The principal vegetable cultivated by the natives 
 is the yam, with which they are particularly successful. The best 
 yams of the island are said to be those of George  '  s Bay, which are 
 very large, and of an uncommonly fine flavour. The supply of these at 
 Clarence is now very limited, and not to be depended on always, which 
 may be probably to a difference in the season for growing them. This 
 deficiency has been in some measure remedied by the construction of a 
 government garden, from which some men of war have received supplies, 
 but these are not sufficient to supply the wants of the colony, and 
 recourse is had for them to the Calebar River. 
  
 Palm wine at the colony, as well as on the coast, is the common and 
 favourite drink of the natives. It is easily procured in any 
 quantity, and is used in either an unfermented state, when just fresh 
 from the tree, or after it has been kept some days. It seems 
 peculiarly intended by a bountiful providence for the untutored and
destitute Indian, who is unable to supply himself with those 
 beverages which are the result of art. The palm tree affords him a 
 pleasant drink, a valuable oil, a fruit from the nut, and besides 
 food, it furnishes him with a material to construct his hut, and is 
 always ready for any immediate purpose. The juice, which is called 
 "wine," is obtained by making a hole in the trunk of the tree, and 
 inserting a piece of the leaf into it, so as to form a spout; the 
 liquid flows through this, and is received in a calabash placed 
 beneath it, which probably holds two or three gallons, and will be 
 thus filled in the course of a day. It shortly assumes a milky 
 appearance, and is either used in this state, or preserved till it 
 acquires rather a bitter flavour. The produce of the palm tree, fish, 
 and yams, form the principal food of the natives; they devour monkeys 
 when they can get them. 
  
 This method of obtaining the juice of the palm tree is exactly 
 similar to that which is adopted by the Indians of North America, 
 with respect to the maple tree. A hole is made in the same manner in 
 the trunk of the tree, and a piece of birch bark inserted into it as 
 a spout, which, from its peculiar nature, answers the purpose
from a want of moisture. The effect of the harmattan after the rainy 
 season is said to be most beneficial in drying up the vapours with 
 which the atmosphere is loaded, and it has been observed, that on the 
 return of this wind at the end of the rainy season, the recovery of 
 invalids commences. The harmattan has also the effect of drying up 
 the skin of the natives in a very extraordinary manner. After an 
 exposure to it, the skin peals off in white scales from their whole 
 body, which assumes an appearance as if it were covered over with 
 white dust. 
  
 The islands in the gulf of Guinea, with the exception of Fernando Po, 
 have each a capital town of some consequence, and although they 
 produce sufficient supplies for ships that visit them, and carry on a 
 small trade, it is much to be doubted, whether they are not more 
 indebted for their importance to the slave trade than any other 
 source. With respect to Prince  '  s Island and St. Thomas, they are 
 known to be the receptacles for slaves from the coast, from whence 
 they are re-embarked and conveyed away as opportunities offer; and 
 the natives of the small island of Anna Bon, appear to be living in 
 constant fear of the same, from the effects of their former treatment
