Certain authorities however, (who reject the two aforesaid theories), hold the potency (Viryam) of a drug to be the most important factor in medicine inasmuch as its therapeutic action, whether purgative, emetic, or both, or cathartic, or pacifying, or astringent, appetising, pressing (drawing to a definite head) or liquefacient, or constructive, tonic (vitalising) or aphrodisiac, or inflammatory, absorbing, caustic, or bursting, or intoxicating, soporific, killing or antitoxic, depends upon its potency. The potency of a drug is either cooling or heat-making owing to the twofold (hot and cool) nature of the temperament of the world. According to several authorities the potency of a medicinal drug may be classed as either hot or cool, emollient or dry, expansive or slimy, mild or keen, so as to embrace the eight different attributes in all. 

These potencies of medicinal drugs serve their respective functions by overpowering their (drugs') tastes with their specific strength (intensity) and virtues. As for example the decoction of the roots belonging to the group of the Maha-Panchamulam, though possessed of an astringent taste which is subsequently transformed into a bitter one, acquires the virtue of pacifying the deranged Vayu out of its heat-making potency. 

Similarly, the pulse known as Kulattha though possessed of an astringent taste, and onion though endued with a , pungent one, respectively soothe the same deranged humour of the body through the oleaginous character of their potencies. On the other hand, the expressed juice of sugar-cane, though possessed of a sweet taste, tends to augment or aggravate the deranged Vayu owing to its cooling potency. The drug Pippali, though a pungent substance in itself, proves soothing to the deranged Pittam, owing to its mild and cooling potency. Similarly, an Amalakam fruit, though acid in taste, and Saindhava, though saline, respectively tend to pacify the deranged Pittam. The drug Kakamachi, though of a bitter taste, and fish, though sweet, respectively aggravate the Pittam, owing to their thermogenetic potency. Similarly, Mulakam (Radish), though pungent, increases the Kapham of the body, on account of its emollient potency; and Kapittham, though acid, soothes; and honey, though sweet, tends to pacify the deranged Kapham owing to the dry character of its potency. 

The Vayu is a self-origined principle in the human organism. The Pittam owes its origin to the bodily heat (Agneya), while the origin of Kapham is ascribed to the presence of watery (Saumya) principle in the body. 

 Tastes such as sweet, etc. are augmented by elements, admits of being divided into six different kinds, such as sweet, acid, saline, pungent, bitter and astringent. These, in their turn, being combined with one another, give rise to sixty- three different kinds. A sweet taste is largely endued with attributes which specifically appertain to the material principles of earth and water. An acid taste is pre-eminently possessed of attributes, which belong to the elementary principles of earth and fire. A saline taste is mostly endued with attributes which characterise the elements of water and fire. A pungent taste is largely possessed of attributes, which mark the elementary principles of air and fire. The specific attributes of air and sky predominate in a bitter taste. The specific properties of earth and air should be regarded as dominant in an astringent taste. 

 Tastes such as sweet, acid and saline are endued with the virtues of subduing Vayu. Tastes such as sweet, bitter and astringent are possessed of the virtue of subduing the deranged Pittam. Tastes such as pungent, bitter and astringent tend to subdue the deranged Kapham. 
 The Vayu is a self-origined principle in the human organism. The Pittam owes its origin to the bodily heat (Agneya), while the origin of Kapham is ascribed to the presence of watery (Saumya) principle in the body. Tastes such as sweet, etc. are augmented by causes in which they have their origin, and prove soothing or pacifying in respect of causes other than those which produce them.
 
 According to certain authorities, there are only two kinds of tastes, owing to the two- fold (hot and cold) nature of the temperament of the world. Of these the tastes such as sweet, bitter and astringent are cold in their properties, while the pungent, acid and saline ones exercise fiery or heat making virtues. The tastes such as sweet, acid and saline are heavy and emollient in their character, while the pungent, astringent and bitter ones are dry and light. The watery (Saumya) tastes are cold. The fiery (Agneya) ones are hot. 
 Coldness, dryness, lightness, non-sliminess, suppression (of the urine or ordure) form the characterstic properties of the Vayu. An astringent taste should be considered as possessed of the same properties as the Vayu, and hence it (astringent taste) increases the coldness, dryness, lightness, non-sliminess and arrestiveness of the latter with its specific coolness, dryness, lightness, non-sliminess and arrestiveness. 
 Heat, pungency, dryness, lightness, and non-sliminess form the specific properties of the Pittam. A pungent taste, which is possessed of the same properties as the Pittam, respectively increases the heat, pungency, causes in which they have their origin, and prove soothing or pacifying in respect of causes other than those which produce them. 


 Sweetness, oiliness, heaviness, coldness and sliminess form the specific properties of Kapham. A sweet taste, which is possessed of the same properties as the Kapham, respectively increases the sweetness, oiliness, heaviness, coldness and sliminess of the latter with the help of similar properties of its own. A pungent taste is endued with properties which are contrary to those of the Kapham, hence the sweetness, oiliness, heaviness, coldness and sliminess of the latter, are respectively destroyed by the pungency, dryness, lightness, heat and non-sliminess of the former. 

 Characteristics of Tastes:—Now we shall describe the characteristics of tastes. A taste, which is pleasant, proves comfortable to, and contributes to the life-preservation of a man, keeps his mouth moist, and increases the quantity of bodily Kapham, is called Sweet (Madhura). A taste, which produces tooth-edge and increased salivation, and increases the relish for food, is called acid (Amla). A taste, which imparts a greater relish to food, produces salivation and softness of a part, is called saline (Lavana). A taste, which produces a burning sensation at the tip of the tongue attended with a tingling of the part and headache, and is instantaneously followed dryness, lightness and non-sliminess of the latter with the help of similar properties of its own. 

 
 Acid taste: An acid taste should be regarded as a digestant of assimilated food, and is endued with resolving, appetising and carminative properties. It sets in the natural emission of flatus and urine, restores the natural movements of the bowels, lessens the 
 tendency to spasms, and gives rise to an acid (digestive) reaction in the stomach, and to a sensation of external shivering. It originates a slimy or mucous secretion and is extremely pleasant or relishing. An acid taste, though possessed of the aforesaid virtues, brings on tooth-edge, with sudden closing of the eyes, appearance 
 of goose flesh on the skin, absorption of Kapham and looseness of the body in the event of its being largely partaken of to the exclusion of all other tastes. Owing to its fiery character, the taste under discussion sets in a process of suppuration in cuts or burns, or in incised, lacerated or punctured wounds, as well as in those, which result from external blows, or are due to fractures, swellings, or falls, or are brought about as the after effects of any idiopathic distemper. 


Saline taste: A saline taste is possessed of corrective (purgative and emetic) virtues, favours the processes of suppuration and spontaneous bursting of swellings, brings about the looseness or resolution of any affected part (ulcer), is heat- engendering in its property and proves incompatible with all other tastes. It cleanses the internal passages or channels of the organism and produces softness of the limbs and members of the body. A saline taste, though possessed of the aforesaid properties, may bring on scabies 
 urticaria, oedematous swellings, loss or discoloration of the natural complexion of the body, loss of virile potency, distressing symptoms affecting the sense-organs, inflammation of the mouth and the eyes, haemoptysis, Vata-rakta (a kind of leprosy) and acid eructations etc., in the event of its being largely partaken of to the exclusion of all other tastes. 

 Pungent taste: A pungent taste is endued with appetising, resolving (Pachana) and purifying properties in respect of ulcers etc.), and destroys obesity, languor, deranged Kapham and intestinal parasites. It is antitoxic in its character, proves curative in cases of Kushta (skin diseases) and itches, and removes the stiffness of the ligaments. It acts as a sedative and reduces the quantity of semen, milk and fat. A pungent taste, though possessed of the aforesaid virtues, may bring on vertigo, loss of consciousness, dryness of the throat, palate and lips, burning sensation and a high temperature of the body, loss of strength, tremor, a sort of aching or breaking pain, and a neuralgic pain (Vata Shula) in the back, sides and the extremities, etc. in the event of its being largely partaken of in exclusion of all other tastes. 

 Bitter taste: A bitter taste serves to restore the natural relish of a person for food and brings on a sense of general languor. It is a good appetiser, and acts as a good purifying agent (in respect of ulcers, etc.), and proves curative in itches and urticaria. It removes thirst, swoon and fever, purifies mother's 
 milk, and is possessed of the virtue of drying up urine, ordure, mucous, fat and pus, etc. A bitter taste, though possessed of the aforesaid properties, may bring on numbness of the limbs, wry-neck, convulsions, facial paralysis, violent headache, giddiness, and an aching, cutting and breaking pain, as well as a bad taste in the 
 mouth in the event of its being largely partaken of in exclusion of all other tastes. 
 
 Astringent taste: An astringent taste is possessed of astringent, healing, styptic. The milk of a woman is cold and sweet, leaving an astringent after-taste. It proves beneficial as an errhine and acts as a good wash in eye diseases. It is whole-some, vitalising, light and appetising. The milk of a she- elephant is sweet though it leaves an astringent after-taste. It is spermatopoietic, heavy, demulcent, cooling and tonic. It invigorates the eyesight. 

 The milk of a she-animal, milched in the morning, is heavy, cold and takes a long time to be digested owing to her entire repose (literally want of physical exercise or locomotion) during the night, when cooling attributes preponderate. Similarly, the milk milched in the evening is found to be possessed of refrigerant and eye-invigorating properties. Moreover, it restores the bodily Vayu to its normal condition owing to the physical labour undergone by the animal in the day time, exposed to the rays of the sun and the currents of free air. Cold or unboiled milk is extremely heavy, and serves to increase the slimy secretions of the organs, whereas by boiling it is freed from those injurious traits. But this rule does not hold good in the case of woman's milk, which is wholesome in its natural or unboiled state. Freshly milched warm milk should be regarded as extremely wholesome, which, being cooled down, loses its efficacious virtues and becomes unwholesome. On the contrary, over-cooked milk is heavy and fat-making. The milk, which emits a fetid smell, or has become discoloured and insipid, or has acquired an acid taste and looks shreddy and curdled, or tastes saline, should be regarded as Unwholesome and injurious. 

 The Curd-group:—There are three kinds of curd such as, the sweet, the acid, and the extremely acid curd. Milk curd generally leaves an astringent after-taste. It is demulcent and heat-making in its potency, as well as spermatopoietic, vitalising and auspicious. It proves curative in Pinasa (nasal catarrh), intermittent fever (Vishama Jvara, dysentery, non-relish for food, difficult urination, and general cachexia. 
 Metrical Text:—Sweet curd greatly increases the slimy secretions of the organs and the quantity of fat and Kapham in the body. Acid curd deranges the Pittam and the Kapham, while the extremely acid curd vitiates the blood. Curd, which has been not perfectly curdled (Mandajatam) is acid in its (digestive) chemical reaction, acts as an inordinately strong purgative and diuretic agent, and deranges the three fundamental humours of the body. 
 Curdled cow's milk is demulcent, sweet in digestion, appetising, srength- increasing and acrid. It subdues the bodily Vayu and imparts a relish to one's food. Curd prepared with the milk of a she-goat is light, and subdues the deranged Pittam and Kapham. It proves curative in Vata and wasting diseases, and is a good appetiser. Its beneficial effect is witnessed in cases of piles, dyspnoea and cough. Curd, prepared with the milk of a she-buffalo, is sweet in digestion, and spermtopoietic. It pacifies the deranged Vayu and Pittam, and serves to augment the normal quantity of bodily Kapham. It is specifically a demulcent substance. Curd prepared with the milk of a she-camel is pungent in digestion. It is found to be charged with alkali, and is heavy and a purgative. A continued use of curdled camel's milk proves curative in Vata, piles, cutaneous affections (Kushtha), worms in the intestines, and abdomimal dropsy. Curd prepared with the milk of a ewe proves aggravating in derangements of the Vayu and Kapham, as well as in cases of piles. It is sweet in taste and its chemical reaction increases the slimy secretions of the organs, and tends to derange the bodily humours. Curd, prepared with the milk of a mare, is appetising. 

 It proves injurious to the eyes, and tends to augment the bodily Vayu. It is parchifying and hot in its potency and is astringent in taste. It diminishes the secretions of stool and urine. Curd prepared with the milk of a woman is demulcent, sweet in digestion, tonic, pleasant, heavy, and specially beneficial to the eyes. It subdues the deranged humours and is specially efficacious in its virtues, and is the best spring, (Grishma) summer, and (Sharat) autumn, whereas it is recommended during the rains (Varsha) and in the forepart of winter (Hemanta), and in the cold season proper (Shishira). The residuary sediment of curd (Mastu) is frigorific and refrigerant, light and purifying to the internal channels of the body. It has a sweet and astringent taste and is anti-aphrodisiac. It destroys the deranged Vayu and Kapham, and is pleasant and palatable. It acts as a speedy purgative, and imparts strength to the system and relish to the food. In this group have been described the virtues of the seven kinds of curd such as, the sweet, the acid, the extremely acid, the curd of incomplete curdling, the curd of boiled milk, curd cream, and the creamless curd, as well as the residuary sediment (Mastu). 


 The Takra Group:—The Takra (whey) is sweet and acid in taste, and leaves an astringent after-taste. It is light, appetising and heat-making in its potency, and has a parchifying effect upon the organism. Its curative efficacy is witnessed in cases of chemical or 
 combinative poisoning, oedema, dysentery, diarrhoea, jaundice, piles, enlarged spleen, abdominal glands, non-relish for food, intermittent fever, thirst, vomiting, water-brash, colic and obesity. It subdues the deranged Vayu and Kapham, and is non-aphrodisiac. It is sweet in Kapham, and intestinal worms. The Oils obtained from the seeds of Tumvi, Koshamra, Danti, Dravanti, Shyama, Saptala, Nilika, Kampillaka, and Shankhini, are bitter, pungent and astringent in their tastes. They serve to cleanse the system from all impurities and baneful principles through their purgative properties. They act as purifying agents in respect of malignant ulcers, and prove curative in diseases due to the deranged Vayu and Kapham, as well as in skin-diseases (Kushtha), and parasitic complaints. Yavatikata-oil tends to subdue all the deranged humours, is slightly bitter, and acts as a good elixir. It is appetising, acid, and liquefacient. It is holy and wholesome (Pathyam), and serves to improve the memory of its user. The 



 The Oils of the Madhuka (Maula), Kashmarya, and Palasha seeds are sweet and astringent. They pacify the deranged Kapham and Pittam. The oils of the Tuvaraka and Bhallataka are heat-making, sweet and astringent, and leave a bitter after-taste. They prove curative in diseases due to the action of deranged Vayu and Kapham, as well as in obesity, Meha, cutaneous affections, and intestinal worms, and cleanse the system 
 both by their emetic and purgative actions. The Oils obtained from the piths (Sara of such trees as, Sarala, Devadaru, Gandira, Shinshapa and Aguru, are bitter, pungent and astringent in their tastes, and act as purifying agents in respect of bad ulcers. They prove curative in skin diseases and destroy the deranged Vayu, 
 Kapham, and intestinal worms. The Oils obtained from the seeds of Tumvi, Koshamra, Danti, Dravanti, Shyama, Saptala, Nilika, Kampillaka, and Shankhini, are bitter, pungent and astringent in their tastes. They serve to cleanse the system from all impurities and baneful principles through their purgative properties. They act as purifying agents in respect of malignant 
 ulcers, and prove curative in diseases due to the deranged Vayu and Kapham, as well as in skin-diseases (Kushtha), and parasitic complaints. Yavatikata-oil tends to subdue all the deranged humours, is slightly bitter, and acts as a good elixir. It is appetising, acid, and liquefacient. It is holy and wholesome (Pathyam), and serves to improve the memory of its user. The Oil From Ekaishika seeds is sweet, and extremely cooling. It subdues the Pittam, increases the Kapham and aggravates the Vayu. The Oil of the seeds of mango stones is slightly bitter in taste, and extremely aromatic. It subdues the Vayu and Kapham. It is Sugar prepared from concentrated honey (Madhu Sharkara) is parchifying and liquefacient. It proves beneficial in cases of vomiting and dysentery, is pleasant, has a sweet and astringent taste, and is sweet in digestion. Sugar prepared from a decoction of 
 Yavasa Sharkara (Duralabha) has a sweet and astringent taste, leaves a bitter after-taste, and is possessed of laxative properties, and subdues the deranged Kapham. All kinds of sugar tend to assuage burning sensations in the body, and prove curative in hoemoptysis, vomiting, epileptic fits, and thirst. The sweet and concentrated extract (Phanitam) of Modhuka flowers should be regarded as parchifying. It produces Vayu and Pittam, and subdues Kapham. It is sweet, astringent in its digestive transformation, and deranges the blood. 



 Madya Varga ( Wines and spirits):— All species of wine are acid in taste, and appetising. They generate Pittam, and impart a greater relish to one's food. They act as mild purgatives, subdue the deranged Vayu and Kapham, and are pleasing, exhilarating and diuretic. 


 Vayu and Kapham, or the deranged Vayu alone, and is palatable, and possessed of a more durable intoxicating power. The wine known as the Madhvasava wine is light, tends to disintegrate the knotty accumnlations or collections of phlegm (Chhedi), and proves curative in Meha (unhealthy discharges from the urethra), cutaneous affections, and poisoning (antitoxic). It has a taste blended of the sweet and the astringent, is keen and anti-epispastic, and does not generate an abnormal quantity of Vayu in the system. The wine known as the Maireya (prepared from the Paishtisura, treacle- made spirit and honey) is keen, and has a sweet and astringent taste. It is intoxicating, and proves curative in piles, Kapham and Gulma (abdominal glands . It is antifat and a vermifuge, and is heavy in digestion, and subdues the deranged Vayu. Wines prepared from the juice of grapes or sugar-cane (Ikshu or Dhrakshasava) are tonic and choleric. They subdue the deranged Pittam, and serve to improve the complexion. Sidhu (wine) prepared from the 
 Madhuka flowers is parchifying, takes a long time to be digested, and is followed by an acid re-action. It improves the strength and digestive capacity, and has an astringent taste. It subdues the deranged Kapham, and serves to aggravate the Vayu and Pittam. Wines prepared from the distilled juice of bulbs or roots should be deemed as possessed of properties pertaining to them individually. 



 Flesh and a relish for food, is palatable to the taste, and tends to constipate the bowels by (imparting a greater consistency to the fecal matter). Dadimas may be classified into two distinct species according as they are sweet or acid to the taste. The sweet species subdues the three deranged bodily humours, while the acid one subdues the Vayu and Kapham. The fruit known as the Amalaka has a taste blended of the sweet, pungent and astringent ones with a shade of the bitter. It is laxative, spermatopoietic and beneficial to the eye-sight, and is capable of subduing all the three deranged humours The Vataghna virtue of this fruit should be ascribed to its acid taste; its power of subduing the Pittam, to its sweetness and coolness; and its efficacy in subduing the Kapham, to its affecting the tongue as a dry astringent substance. This fruit is by far the best known fruit as possessing high therapeutic properties. The Karkandhu, like the Kola or the Vadara, generates the Kapham and Pittam in its unripe or immature stage, while in its ripe or matured stage it is sweet, demulcent, purgative and subdues the Vayu and Pittam. The fruit known as the Sauvira is possessed of properties similar to those of the Vadara; moreover it is sweet, demulcent, and subdues the vayu and Pittam. The Shimvitika-fruit is cooling, astringent and palatable and has an astringent taste. The Kapittham in its unripe stage produces hoarseness. 


 The fruit (of such trees as the Ashvatha, the Plaksha, the Audumvura, etc., which pass by the general name) of Kshira-Vrikshas as well as those which are known as the Jamva, Rajadana, Todana, Tinduka, Vakula, Dhanvana, Ashmantaka, Ashvakarna, Phalgu, Parushaka, Gangeruka, Pushkara, Varti, Villa and Vimvi, etc. are cooling, and astringent in their effect. They subdue the Pittam and Kapham, tend to produce a condition of parchedness in the system, and have a sweet and astringent taste. 
 Of these the fruit of trees which belong to the genus Kshiri-Vrikshas is heavy and cooling, and is long retained in the stomach in an undigested state. It has a sweet, acid and astringent taste and does not inordinately derange the Vayu. The fruit known as the Jamvava generates the Vayu. It is astringent, and subdues the Pittam and Kapham, while the Rajadana is demulcent, sweet, astringent and heavy. The Todana is acid, astringent, and sweet in its taste and is parchifying and subdues the Pittam and Vayu. It is (heat- making) in its potency, easily digestible (light of digestion), astringent, demulcent and appetising and further generates the Pittam. Unripe Tinduka fruit is astringent, and heavy in digestion and produces Vayu in the organism, while in its ripe or fully matured stage it is sweet, and subdues the Kapham and Pittam. 

 The Vakula fruit has a sweet and astringent taste, is demulcent and astringent in its properties, imparts a greater firmness to the teeth, and removes the viscid condition of the membranes. The fruit of the Dhanvana has an astringent taste, and is cooling and palatable and subdues the Vayu and Kapham. The fruit of the Gangeruka and Ashmantaka is possessed of similar properties as the preceding ones. The Phalgu fruit is long retained in the stomach in an undigested state, has a sweet taste, and is heavy of digestion, refreshing, and demulcent in its effect. Raw or unripe Parushaka fruit is extremly acid in taste with a shade of the sweet, leases an astringent after-taste, is light of digestion, generates the Pittam, and subdues the Kapham; while in its ripe state it is sweet in taste, subdues the Vayu and Pittam, is sweet in digestion and cooling in its known as the Jamvava generates the Vayu. It is astringent, and subdues the Pittam and Kapham, while the Rajadana is demulcent, sweet, astringent and heavy. The Todana is acid, astringent, and sweet in its taste and is parchifying and subdues the Pittam and Vayu. It is (heat- making) in its potency, easily digestible (light of digestion), astringent, demulcent and appetising and further generates the Pittam. Unripe Tinduka fruit is astringent, and heavy in digestion and produces Vayu in the organism, while in its ripe or fully matured stage it is sweet, and subdues the Kapham and Pittam. 
 

 The fruits such as the Drakshas, Kashmaryas, Madhukas, Kharjuras, etc., have a sweet taste, are heavy of digestion and prove curative in cases of haemoptysis. Of these grapes are laxative, beneficial to the voice, sweet, demulcent, and cooling in their potency. They prove beneficial in cases of haemoptysis, fever, asthma, thirst, burning sensation of the skin, and consumption. The fruit known as the Kashmarya Phala is pleasant and diuretic. It purifies the blood, improves the intellect and growth of hair, and is rejuvenescent and subdues the Vayu and Pittam. Kharjuras are possessed of the virtue of arresting all bodily wastes. They prove beneficial in Urakshata, are pleasant, cooling in their potency, refreshing, heavy of digestion, sweet in taste, and prove curative in cases of haemoptysis. The flowers of Madhuka trees are tissue-building, unpleasant and heavy of digestion, while their fruit subdues the Vayu and Pittam. 


 The fruit known as the Lavali is astringent and slightly bitter in taste, improves a relish for food, and is pleasant, aromatic and refreshing to the whole system. It subdues the Kapham and Pittam. The fruits such as the Vasiram, and the Shitapakyam, as well as the stems of Bhallataka trees, are hard to digest and are long retained in the stomach in an undigested condition. They tend to produce a state of dryness in the organism, derange the Vayu, are cooling in their potency, sweet of digestion, and prove curative in cases of heemoptysis. 

 The fruits known as the Airavata and the Dantashatha have an extremely acid taste and tend to bring on an attack of haemoptysis. The fruit known as the Tanka is coohng in its potency, has a sweet and astringent taste, is heavy and generates the Vayu. 
 The fruit known as the Aingudam is demulcent, and heat-making in its potency, has a sweet and bitter taste, and subdues the Vayu and Kapham. The Shami fruit is heavy, sweet and heat-making, produces a state of parchedness in the organism, and helps the falling off of hair. The Shleshmataka fruit is 


Fruits such the Karira, Akshaka Pilu and Trinashunya have a sweet, bitter and pungent taste, and are heat-making in their potency. They subdue the Vayu and Kapham. Of these the Pilu has a bitter and astringent taste. It generates the Pittam, acts as purgative, is pungent in digestion, keen, heat-making and oily. It subdues the Vayu and Kapham. The Arushkara and Tauvaraka fruits have an astringent taste, are pungent in digestion, heat-making in their potency and prove curative in cases of worms in the intestines, fever, constipation of the bowels (Anaha) and Meha. Fruits such as, the Karanja, Kinshuka, and Arishtaphalam (Nimva) are vermifugenous and pungent in digestion, and prove curative in , cases of Leprosy, Gulma (internal tumour). Ascites, Piles and Prameha. The Vidanga fruit produces a state of dryness in the body, is heat-making in its potency, light, and pungent in digestion, subdues the Vayu and Kapham and is slightly bitter and anti-toxic. 




 

 


