The refuse of packing-houses is  sold to the poor at a low rate, under the name of tea endings and  tea bones; and if a few of the rarest sorts do not go abroad,  neither do the poorest. It is a necessary of life to all classes of  Chinese, and that its use is not injurious is abundantly evident  from its general acceptance and extending adoption; and the  prejudice against it among some out of China may be attributed  chiefly to the use of strong green tea, which is no doubt  prejudicial. If those who have given it up on this account will  adopt a weaker infusion of black tea, general experience is proof  that it will do them no great harm, and they may be sure that they  will not be deceived by a colored article; Neither the Chinese nor  Japanese use milk or sugar in their tea, and the peculiar taste and  aroma of the infusion is much better perceived without those  additions; nor can it be drunk so strong without tasting an  unpleasant bitterness, which the milk partly hides. The Japanese  sometimes reduce the leaves to a powder, and pour boiling water  through them in a cullender, in the same way that coffee is often  made."

   _Method and season for plucking and gathering leaves_.--The season  for picking leaves commences in April and continues until October.  The number of gatherings varies, depending on the moisture[12] or  dryness of the season. If the season be good, as many as seven  gatherings may be obtained. If, however, the rains are partial, only  four or five. These, however, may be reduced to their general  periods for gathering--that is, from April to June, from July to  15th August, and from September to the end of October. But few  leaves are collected after the 15th of the latter month. As soon as  the new and young leaves have appeared in April, the plucking takes  place, this being done by the Chinese, assisted by the Mallees. The  following is the method adopted:--A certain division of the  plantation is marked off, and to each man a small basket is given,  with instructions to proceed to a certain point, so that no plant  may be passed over. On the small basket being filled, the leaves are
_3rd. 

On the vegetation of China and the Himalayas_. One of the  use, and the present backward state of sugar manufacture is  attributable: I unhesitatingly assert that, if there be an acid  present in the cane-juice, the addition of lime to it will be  injurious instead of beneficial. There are only four acids that we  could expect to find in cane juice--mucous, saccholactic or saclactic,  oxalic, and acetic acids. The three first named of these, however,  have never been traced, even in the most minute quantities; and if the  latter be present, which, unfortunately, is but too often the case,  the addition of lime would only result in the formation of acetate of  lime, which is, as I have already observed, an exceedingly difficult  crystallisable, very soluble, and deliquescent salt. It has a bitter,  saline taste; 100 parts consist of 64.5 acid, 35.5 lime, and it is  easily recognisable by its taste in the molasses made from sour  cane-juice: so that, supposing the cane-juice sour, every pint of acid  present would require nearly half a pound of lime for its  neutralisation, independent of the quantity required for the tempering  or precipitation of the feculencies contained in it, and would result  in the formation of one-and-a-half pound of the above mentioned highly  deleterious salt.
  
  Suppose we boil the cane-juice prior to tempering it, we then drive  off a great portion of acetic acid, much less lime will be required,  and if we could, by filtration or subsidence, get rid of the  precipitated feculencies, we should make a tolerably good sugar; but  as, under the present plan, we have no means of so doing, the acetic  acid, which is forming during the whole process of evaporation (as  fermentation still goes on), unites with the lime before it can be  dissipated by the heat, and thus not only forms acetate of lime, but  causes the re-solution of the precipitated feculencies, thus rendering  it necessary to add a fresh portion of lime in the tache, a proceeding  always to be avoided, if possible, but generally necessary in boiling  down sour liquor. Take a small portion of cane-juice (hot or cold) in  a tumbler, and temper it with lime until the feculencies are  precipitated and the flakes perfectly visible, then add vinegar by  drops, and it will be found that the flakes will speedily disappear  and be re-dissolved, showing that lime has a greater affinity for  acetic acid than starch, and that, although when added to sour  cane-juice, it neutralises the acidity, still that result is a  consequence, not the cause, of the application, and is highly of an agreeable flavor, for the essential oil which it contains is  made, instead of the beautiful and delicious sweet which the maple,  properly treated, is sure to yield.    The quantity of sugar produced in a year varies considerably from the  same trees. The cause of this difference is to be found in the depth  of snow, continued cold, or a sudden transition from cold to warm,  thus abridging the period of sugar-making. A sharp frost at night,  with clear warm days, is the most favorable to the sugar-maker.  Perhaps four pounds of sugar from a tree may be a pretty fair average  of seasons generally, although we have known the growth to exceed six  pounds, and sink as low as three. A man will take care of one hundred  trees easily, during the season of sugar, which usually lasts from  about the middle of March into April, perhaps employing him twenty  days in the whole. Dr. Jackson, in his Report of the Maine Geological  Survey, gives the following instances of the production of sugar in  that State:--    Lbs. of Sugar.  At the Forks of the Kennebec, twelve persons made    3,605

Another lot of the sap, reduced to sugar  without lime-water, granulated, but not so well, was sour to the  taste, deliquesced by exposure, and gave a considerable quantity of  molasses.    Having studied the nature of the peculiar acid of the maple, I found  that its combinations with lime were excessively soluble in alcohol,  so that the yellow sugar first described could be rendered white in  a few minutes, by placing it in an inverted cone open at the bottom,  and pouring a fresh quantity of alcohol upon it, and allowing it to  filtrate through the sugar. The whitened sugar was then taken and  re-dissolved in boiling water and crystallised, by which all the  alcoholic flavour was entirely removed, and a perfectly fine  crystallised and pure sugar resulted. Now, in the large way, I  advise the following method of manufacturing maple sugar. Obtain  several large copper or brass kettles, and set them up in a row,  either by tripods with iron rings, or by hanging them on a  cross-bar; clean them well, then collect the sap in buckets, if  possible, so that but little rain-water will be mixed with the sap, in the hills is fermented into a kind of beer or sweet wort, drank  warm.    _Holcus spicatus_, the _Panicum spicatum_ of Roxburgh, is cultivated  in Mysore, Behar, and the provinces more to the north. 

From one to  four seers are sown on a biggah of land, and the yield is about four  maunds per acre. It is sown after the heavy rains commence, and the  plough serves to cover the seed. The crop is ripe in three months, and  the ears only are taken off at first. Afterwards the straw is cut down  close to the surface of the soil, to be used for thatching, for it is  not much in request as fodder. Being a grain of small price, it is a  common food of the poorer class of natives, and really yields a sweet  palatable flour. It is also excellent as a fattening grain for  poultry.    The _Poa Abyssinica_is one of the bread-corns of Abyssinia. The bread  made from it is called _teff_, and is the ordinary food of the  country, that made from wheat being only used by the higher classes.  The way of manufacturing it is by allowing the dough to become sour,  when, generating carbonic acid gas, it serves instead of yeast. It is Commercial, of English manufacture    

That the extremes in this table should occur in the case of the  starches of commerce, was, perhaps, to be expected; nevertheless the  difference between the starch of the sweet potato and that of the  bitter cassava is nearly as great, and both these specimens were  prepared in the laboratory, by the same process, and subject to the  same temperature and exposure.  

From the foregoing list it appears that the sweet and bitter cassava  merit attention as starch-producing plants. They are occasionally  grown for this purpose in the colonies, and yield a large per centage  of starch; but there exists an opinion, whether well or ill founded,  that it is liable to rot linen, and the preference is given here to  the starch of arrowroot. It remains to be seen, however, what estimate  will be formed of this starch in England, for if it should prove an  esteemed variety, there can be no doubt of its proving a highly  profitable cultivation. Cassava grows readily in almost any soil, and  when the drainage is tolerable, two crops of the sweet variety can, it  is stated be grown in a year. I have seen it growing luxuriantly in  the light soils of the interior, as well as in the stiff clay soils of  the coasts. It is considered an excellent preparatory crop in new and  stiff land, on account of its tendency to loosen the soil. Were the  bitter variety fixed on, the preparation of _Casareep_ might be  combined with the preparation of starch; and as that substance is one  of the most esteemed bases for the preparation of various sauces, it  is probable that this might turn out the most profitable part of the  produce. At all events, bitter cassava would have this advantage over  all other starch-producing roots, that the juice of the roots could be turned, to account as well as the starch nor is it possessed of any unpalatable flavor, the pecularity being  between that of rice and the potato. Dressed in milk, or mashed, they  are absolutely a delicacy; and from the abundance in which they are  cultivated in the West Indies and other parts, they promise to become  a most economical and nutritious substitute for the potato.    The yam frequently grows to the enormous size of forty or fifty pounds  weight, but in this large state it is coarse-flavored and fibrous.    An acre of land is capable of producing 4½ tons of yams, and the same  quantity of sweet potatoes, within the twelve months, or nine tons per  acre for both, being nearly as much as the return obtained at home in  the cultivation of potatoes; and I have the authority of all  analytical chemists for saying that in point of value, as an article  of food, the superiority is as two to one in favor of the tropical  roots.    The kidney-rooted yam (_D. pentaphylla_), is indigenous to the  Polynesian islands, and is sometimes cultivated for its roots. It is
called _kawaii_ in the Feejee islands. _D. bulbifera_, a native of the  The amount of sweet potatoes exported from South Carolina in 1747-48,  was 700 bushels; that of the common potato exported from the United  States, 1820-21, 90,889,000 bushels; in 1830-31, 112,875,000 bushels;  in 1840-41, 136,095,000 bushels; in 1850-51, 106,342,000 bushels.    The sweet potato is cultivated generally in all the intertropical  regions, for the sake of its roots, and as a legume in temperate  countries. In the Southern States of North America, the culture ceases  in Carolina under latitude 36 degs.; in Portugal and Spain it reaches  to latitude 40 and 42 deg.; and as a legume its cultivation is  attempted to the vicinity of Paris. In India it is a very common crop;  its tubers are very similar to the potato, but have a sweeter taste,  whence the common name; but it must not be confounded with the  topinambur (_Helianthus tuberosus_), a native of Brazil, which is less  cultivated. The root contains much saccharine and amylaceous matter.    Several marked varieties of the sweet potato are raised in the  Polynesian groups. In some islands it forms the principal object of  cultivation.
other crops, are found to yield a good return when planted with sweet  potatoes. The best time to plant slips to get stock from, is the  latter end of August or early in September, as the season may suit.    The sweet potato of Java, says Mr. Crawfurd, is the finest I ever met  with. Some are frequently of several pounds weight, and now and then  have been found of the enormous weight of 50 lbs. The sweetness is not  disagreeable to the palate, though considerable, and they contain a  large portion of farinaceous matter, being as mealy as the best of our  own potatoes. In Java it is cultivated in ordinary upland arable, or  in the dry season as a green crop in succession to rice.    A tuberous root (_Ocymum tuberosum_), an inhabitant of the hot plains,  is frequently cultivated in Java. It is small, round, and much  resembling in appearance the American potato, but has no great flavor.  Its local name is _kantang_.      CASSAVA OR MANIOC.  
Of this plant, which is a shrub about six feet high, extensively grown  for its farinaceous root, there are several species, nearly all  natives of America, principally of Brazil, whence it derives one of  its common names of Manihot or Mandioc. Two species of Manihot have  been found indigenous in South Australia. The varieties commonly  cultivated for their roots, are the sweet and the bitter.    1. Sweet cassava (_Janiphi_ (or _Jatropha_,) _Loeflingii_, Kunth;  _Manihot Aipi_, of Pohl).--This species has a spindle-shaped root  brown externally, about six or seven ounces or more in weight, which  contains amylaceous matter, without any bitterness, and is used as  food, after being rasped and washed, so as to cleanse it from the  fibrous matter, in the same manner as arrowroot is prepared. It is  distinguished from the bitter cassava by a tough ligneous fibre, which  runs through the heart of the tuber. Manihot starch is sometimes  imported into Europe under the name of Brazilian arrowroot. The  cassava is known in Peru as _yucca_.    A dry mixed soil is best suited to its culture. So exhausting is this  crop, that it cannot be raised more than two or three times
when boiled is quite wholesome.  done, its success is certain.    The North American Indians have several wild roots which they dig up  for sustenance when other food is exhausted. Among these are--1st, the  mendo, or wild sweet potato; 2nd, the tip-sin-ah, or wild prairie  turnip; 3rd, the omen-e-chah, or wild bean. The first is found  throughout the valleys of the Mississippi and St. Peter   '   s, about the  basis of bluffs, in rather moist but soft and rich ground. The plant  resembles the sweet potato, and the root is similar in taste and  growth. It does not grow so large or long as the cultivated sweet  potato, but I should have thought it the same, were it not that the  wild potato is not affected by the frost. A woman will dig from a peck  to half a bushel a day.    The Indians eat them, simply boiled in water, but prefer them cooked  with fat meat.    The wild potato, of the north-west of America, is a general article of  food; it is called by them wabessepin; it resembles the common potato,
feet deep. The Indian women dive for them, and frequently obtain as  many as they are able to carry. The root is from one to two feet in  height, very porous; there are as many as six or eight cells running  the whole length of the root. It is very difficult to describe the  flavor. It is slightly sweet and glutinous, and is generally boiled  with wild fowl, but is occasionally roasted.    In his exploring expedition into the interior of Guiana, in the region  of the Upper Essequibo, Sir E. Schomburgk notices the discovery of a  variety of Leguminosæ, whose tubers grow to an enormous size, fully  equal to the largest yam. These roots were not, at the time he was  there, in full perfection, but their taste was somewhat between the  yam and the sweet potato. The Taruma Indians called them Cuyupa. The  roots are considered fit for use when the herb above ground dies. Sir  Robert brought a few of the seeds of the plant with him on his return  to Demerara.    Two interesting productions have been recently introduced into the  Jardin des Plantes, at Paris, from the Ecuador, by M. Bourcier,  formerly Consul-General of France in that country. One is the red and
been favorable, a great part of their diet.    The seeds of the cones of the nut pine (_Pinus monophyllus_), a new  species described by Dr. Torrey, and alluded to by Col. Fremont in his  exploring expedition to the Rocky Mountains, are largely used by the  North American Indians. The nut is oily, of a most agreeable flavor,  and must be very nutritious as it constitutes the principal  subsistence of many of the native tribes.    The cone of another magnificent pine (_Auracaria Bidwillii_),  indigenous to the Eastern coast of Australia, about the Moreton Bay  district, is frequently met with twelve inches in diameter, and  containing 150 edible seeds as large as a walnut. The aborigines  roast these seeds, crack the husk between two stones, and eat them  hot. They taste something like a yam or hard dry potato. The trees  bear cones only once in four years, during a period of six months.  This season is held as a great festival by the aborigines of that  locality, called by them Bunga Bunga, and they congregate in greater  numbers than is known in any other part of Australia, frequently  coming from a distance of 300 miles. They grow sleek and fat upon this
nicasol (_Vitex Negundo_). The bark of this tree has neither taste or  rather pliable; it ought to be about the substance of royal paper, or  somewhat thicker. It admits of a considerable degree of pressure, and  bends before it breaks; the fracture is then splintering. It is of a  light color, approaching to yellow, bordering but little upon the  brown; it possesses a sweetish taste, at the same time it is not  stronger than can be borne without pain, and is not succeeded by any  after-taste. The more cinnamon departs from these characteristics, the  coarser and less serviceable it is esteemed; and it should be rejected  if it be hard, and thick as a half-crown piece; if it be very dark  colored or brown; if it be very pungent and hot on the tongue, with a  taste bordering upon that of cloves, so that it cannot be suffered  without pain. Particular care should be taken that it is not  false-packed, or mixed with cinnamon of a common sort.    The following remarks, by Mr. Dunewille, of Malacca, as to the  suitability of the Straits   '    Settlements for cinnamon culture, are  interesting, although in some instances a repetition of previous  observations:--  
millions of poor in that country can obtain to eat with their insipid  sowings are usually the most productive, and the dye obtained from  them the finest. The object for thus delaying the sowing is, that  the young plants may have a more genial season for vegetation. Those  who prefer sowing earlier, and yet are aware of the importance of  saving the young plants as much as possible from the comparative low  temperature of the season, sow some other crop with their indigo.  Til, the country linseed, is good for this purpose in high lying  soils. But I never knew an intermixture of crops that was not  attended by inconveniences and injuries more than was compensated by  the advantages gained.    The success of sowings during March and April is very doubtful. It  depends entirely upon the occurrence of rain, which in those months  is proverbially uncertain. If the season should be sufficiently wet,  the sowing may be performed in May; but a June sowing is very rarely  remunerating. The rains setting in during the latter part of this  month so promote the growth of weeds, that the young plants are  choked and generally destroyed. The exceptions only occur in high  lands, in unusually propitious seasons, and ought never to be relied weight of flowers to three weights of oil in a bottle, which being  of a dollar per hundred in their natural state, to captains of ships,  who freely purchase them, or manufactured into oil, they are a very  remunerative product. Each tree in the West Indies is calculated to  produce nuts to the value of one dollar yearly. There is one thing to  which we would draw the attention of chemists and other scientific  men.    For twenty-four or even forty-eight hours after its manufacture this  oil is as free from any unpleasant taste as olive oil, and can be used  in lieu of it for all culinary purposes, but after that time it  acquires such a rancid taste as to be wholly unpalateable. If any  means could be discovered of preventing this deterioration in quality,  and preserving it fresh and sweet, it could compete with olive oil,  and the price and consumption would be largely raised.    COCO-NUT OIL IMPORTED INTO THE UNITED KINGDOM.    Imports.   Retained for home consumption.  cwts.

The leaves are almost insipid,  but when a small quantity of lime is mixed with them, they have a very  agreeable sweet taste. The natives generally carry with them a leather  pouch containing coca, and a small calabash holding lime or the ashes  of the molle to mix with them.    

_Cocculus indicus_, or Indian berries.--This is the commercial name  for the berries or fruit of the _Menispermum Cocculus_ of Linnæus, _M.  heteroclitum_ of Roxburgh, _Animerta paniculata_ of Colebrooke, _A.  Cocculus_ of Wright and Arnot, and _Cocculus suberosus_ of Decandolle.  It is a strong climbing shrub or tree, native of Malabar, Ceylon, and  the Eastern Islands. The seeds or drupes contain a bitter poisonous  acid, and are used for the purpose of stupefying fish, and, in the  form of a black extract, for fraudulently increasing the intoxicating power of malt liquors; one pound of the berries, it is said, will go  The seeds or nuts form a chief ingredient in the celebrated eastern  masticatory called Pan and which seems to owe its stimulating  properties to the leaves of the _Piper Betel_. When prepared for use,  the nut is cut into slices and wrapped in the fresh leaves of the  betel pepper vine, together with a quantity of quicklime (_Chunam_) to  give it a flavor. The flavor is peculiar, between an herbaceous and an  aromatic taste.    All classes, male and female, chew it; they say it sweetens the  breath, strengthens the stomach, and preserves the teeth, to which it  gives a reddish hue; there is probably less objection to its use than  tobacco or opium, and its taste is more pleasant; but, if taken to  excess, it will produce stupor like other narcotics, and even  intoxication. The nuts grow in large bunches at the top, and when ripe  are red and have a beautiful appearance; they resemble the nutmeg in  shape and color, but are larger and harder. When gathered they are  laid in heaps until the shell be somewhat rotted, and then dried in  the sun, after which the process of shelling commences. The trees vary  in their yield from 300 to 1,000 nuts, averaging about 14 lbs.; which
