to a science. 
  
  
 SMELL. 
  
  
 [Illustration: Fig. 65. 
 1. Frontal sinus. 2. Nasal bone. 3. Olfactory 
 ganglion and nerves. 4. Nasal branch 
 of the fifth pair. 5. Spheno-palatine ganglion. 
 6. Soft palate. 7. Hard palate, _a_. 
 Cerebrum, _b_. Anterior lobes, _c_. Corpus 
 callosum. _d_. Septum lucidum. _f_. Fornix. 
 _g_. Thalami optici. _h_. Corpora striata.] 
  
 Next in order of delicacy, and more closely allied with the physical 
 functions, is the sense of smell. Delicate perfumes, or the fragrance of 
 a flower, impart an exhilarating sensation of delight, while numerous 
 odors excite a feeling of disgust. The organ of smell is far less 
 complicated in its structure than the eye or the ear. It consists of two
cavities having cartilaginous walls, and lined with a thick mucous coat, 
 termed the _pituitary membrane_, over which are reflected the olfactory 
 nerves. Particles of matter, too minute to be visible even through the 
 microscope, are detached from the odorous body and come in contact with 
 the nerves of smell, which transmit the impressions or impulses thus 
 received to the brain. Fig. 65 shows the distribution of the olfactory 
 nerves in the nasal passages. The nose is supplied with two kinds of 
 filaments which are termed respectively nerves of _special_ and nerves 
 of _general sensation_. Compared with the lower animals, especially with 
 those belonging to the carnivorous species, the sense of smell in man is 
 feeble. The sensation of smell is especially connected with the 
 pleasures and necessities of animal life. 
  
  
 TASTE. 
  
  
 The sense of taste is directly connected with the preservation and 
 nutrition of the body. A delicious flavor produces a desire to eat a 
 savory substance. Some writers on hygiene have given this sense an
instinctive character, by assuming that all articles having an agreeable 
 taste are suitable for diet. The nerves of taste are distributed over 
 the surface of the tongue and palate, and their minute extremities 
 terminate in well developed _papillae_. These _papillae_ are divided 
 into three classes, termed, from their microscopic appearance, 
 _filiform_, _fungiform_ and _circumvallate_. The organ of taste is the 
 mucous membrane which covers the back part of the tongue and the palate. 
 The papillae of the tongue are large and distinct, and covered with 
 separate coats of epithelium. The filiform papillae are generally long 
 and pointed and are found over the entire surface of the tongue. The 
 fungiform are longer, small at the base and broad at the end. The 
 circumvallate are shaped like an inverted V and are found only near the 
 root of the tongue; the largest of this class of papillae have other 
 very small papillae upon their surfaces. It is now pretty satisfactorily 
 established that the circumvallate, or fungiform papillae are the only 
 ones concerned in the special sense of taste. 
  
 The conditions necessary to taste are, that the substance be in solution 
 either by artificial means, or by the action of the saliva; and that it 
 be brought in contact with the sensitive filaments imbedded in the
mucous membrane. The nerves of taste are both _general_ and _special_ in 
 their functions. If the general sensibility of the nerves of taste is 
 unduly excited, the function of sensibility is lost for some time. If a 
 peppermint lozenge is taken into the mouth, it strongly excites the 
 general sensibilities of taste, and the power of distinguishing between 
 special flavors is lost for a few moments. A nauseous drug may then be 
 swallowed without experiencing any disagreeable taste. 
  
 Paralysis of the facial nerve often produces a marked effect in the 
 sensibility of the tongue. Where this influence lies has not been fully 
 explained; probably it is indirect, being produced by some alteration in 
 the vascularity of the parts or a diminution of the salivary secretions. 
  
  
 TOUCH. 
  
  
 By the sense of touch, we mean the _general sensibility of the skin_. 
 Sensations of heat and cold are familiar illustrations of this faculty. 
 By the sense of touch, we obtain a knowledge of certain qualities of a
the mouth with secretions, and a story with unsavory associations may 
 completely turn the stomach. 
  
 The relationship of mental and physical functions may be illustrated by 
 entirely removing the spleen of an animal, as that of a dog. An 
 invariable result of its extirpation is an unusual increase of the 
 appetite, for at times the animal will eat voraciously any kind of food. 
 The dog will devour, with avidity, the warm entrails of recently killed 
 animals, and thrive in consequence of such an appetite. Another symptom, 
 which usually follows the removal of the spleen, is an unnatural 
 ferocity of disposition. Without any apparent provocation, the animal 
 will attack others of its own, or of a different species. In some 
 instances, these outbursts of irritability and violence are only 
 occasional, but the experiments show quite conclusively that the spleen 
 moderates combativeness, restrains the appetite, and co-operates with 
 the will and judgment in controlling them. 
  
 We shall briefly consider the practical question whether the elements of 
 mind can be ideally arranged and presented, so as to more completely 
 reveal their relations to, and disclose their effects upon the bodily
source of recklessness, quarrels, frauds, falsehoods, robberies, and 
 homicides. They are unlike instinct, inasmuch as they are not 
 self-limiting. The intimate relation which they sustain to the stomach 
 and nutritive functions is strikingly displayed in the habit of 
 alcoholic intoxication. Spirituous drinks deprave the appetite, derange 
 and destroy the stomach, poison the blood, and pervert all the functions 
 of mind and body; and their injurious influence upon the nerves and 
 basilar faculties is equally remarkable. They excite combativeness, 
 selfishness, irritability, and exaggerate the influence of the animal 
 organs. Intemperance results in disputes, fights, brawls, and 
 murders--the legitimate consequences of which are misunderstandings, 
 suits at law, criminal proceedings, imprisonment, and the gallows. It 
 is, therefore, evident that the ultimate tendencies of these faculties 
 are tyrannical, cruel, violent, and atrocious. They are opposed to the 
 noble, moral faculties--Faith, Love, and Devotion--and, whenever 
 temptation inordinately allures, the course of life is likely to be 
 characterized by dishonorable, deceptive, and treacherous conduct. 
  
 The pangs of hunger cause soldiers to act more like ravenous beasts, 
 than rational beings. It is animal instinct which impels the soldier to
seek first for the gratification of his appetite. Some persons, 
 instigated by carnivorous desires, yearn for raw meat, and will not be 
 satisfied unless their food is flavored with the flesh of animals. Their 
 bodies increase and thrive, even to repletion. Contrast these 
 individuals with pale, lean, anæmic people, who crave innutritious 
 articles of diet, and eat soft stones, slate, chalk, blue clay, and soft 
 coal. Such perversions of the appetite are manifested only when there is 
 either a diminution in the volume of blood, deficient alimentation, 
 defective assimilation, or a general depravity of the nutritive 
 functions. Morbid conditions generate vitiating tendencies and destroy 
 the natural appetite. 
  
 While alcoholic stimulants affect the medulla oblongata principally, 
 opium acts chiefly on the cerebrum, and excites reverie, dreamy 
 ideality, optical delusions, and the creative powers of the imagination; 
 some of these hallucinations are said to be grotesquely beautiful and 
 enjoyable. The effects of this agent differ from those of alcoholic 
 intoxication by not deadening the moral sensibilities, or arousing the 
 animal propensities. Opium smokers are dreamy and abstracted, not 
 quarrelsome or violent. Those who use ardent spirits lose their moral
delicacy, their intellect becomes dull, the reason cloudy, and the 
 judgment is overruled by appetite. It is conceded that the _trophic 
 center_ is principally in the medulla oblongata; the cerebellum and 
 lower cerebral ganglia, however, favorably influence the nutritive 
 functions, and, when these organs are large and active, a plethoric 
 condition is the natural consequence. Redundancy of blood in the body 
 indicates preponderance of the basilar organs. These faculties being 
 vehement in character, an excess of animal characteristics produces 
 those conditions which result in acute and inflammatory diseases. We may 
 express these conditions of the system as follows: 
  
 The _Animal Faculties_ correspond to the lower instinctive 
 manifestations. 
  
 / ACQUISITIVENESS, 
 The elements of character are { SELFISHNESS, 
 \ COMBATIVENESS 
  
 They tend to                  / TURBULENCE, 
 \ CRIME.
SOUPS. The nutritious properties, tone, and sweetness of soup depend in 
 the first place upon the freshness and quality of the meat; secondly on 
 the manner in which it is boiled. Soups should be nicely and delicately 
 seasoned, according to the taste of the consumer, by using parsley, 
 sage, savory, thyme, sweet marjoram, sweet basil, or any of the 
 vegetable condiments. These may be raised in the garden, or obtained at 
 the drug stores, sifted and prepared for use. In extracting the juices 
 of meats, in order that soups may be most nutritious, it is important 
 that the meat be put into _cold_ water, or that which is not so hot as 
 to coagulate the albumen (which would prevent it from being extracted), 
 and then, by slow heat and a simmering process, the most nutritious 
 properties will be brought out. 
  
 BEEF SOUP may be made of any bone of the beef, by putting it into cold 
 water, adding a little salt, and skimming it well just before it boils. 
 If a vegetable flavor be desired, celery, carrots, onions, turnips, 
 cabbage, or potatoes, may be added, in sufficient quantities to suit the 
 taste. 
  
 MUTTON SOUP may be made from the fore-quarter, in the same manner as
described above, thickened with pearl-barley or rice, and flavored to 
 suit the taste. 
  
 BOILED FISH. Clean the fish nicely, then sprinkle flour on a cloth and 
 wrap it around them; salt the water, and, when it boils, put in the 
 fish; let them boil half an hour, then carefully remove them to a 
 platter, adding egg sauce and parsley. To _bake fish_, prepare by 
 cleaning, scaling, etc., and let them remain in salt water for a short 
 time. Make a stuffing of the crumbs of light bread, and add to it a 
 little salt, pepper, butter, and sweet herbs, and stir with a spoon. 
 Then fill the fish with the stuffing and sew it up. Put on butter, salt, 
 pepper, and flour, having enough water in the dish to keep it from 
 burning, and baste often. A four pound fish will bake in fifty or sixty 
 minutes. 
  
 BROILED STEAK. Sirloin and porter-house steaks should be broiled 
 quickly. Preserve them on ice for a day or two and their tenderness is 
 much increased. Never broil them until the meal is ready to be served. 
  
 BOILED HEAT. When meat is to be boiled for _eating,_ put it into boiling
water, by which its juices are coagulated and its richness preserved. 
 The slower it boils, the more tender, plump, and white it will be. Meat 
 should be removed as soon as done, or it will lose its flavor and become 
 soggy. 
  
 PORK STEAKS. The best steaks are cut off the shoulder--ham steaks being 
 rather too dry. They should be well fried, in order to destroy the 
 little living parasites, called Trichinae which sometimes infest this 
 kind of meat. They are introduced into the stomach by eating ham, pork, 
 or sausages made from the flesh of hogs infested by them. Thorough 
 cooking destroys them, and those who will persist in the use of swine  '  s 
 flesh can afford to have it "_done brown._" 
  
 BAKED MUTTON. To bake mutton well, a person should have a brisk, sharp 
 fire, and keep the meat well basted. It requires two hours to bake a leg 
 of mutton, weighing eight pounds. 
  
 BREAD. The health and happiness of a family depend, to a certain extent, 
 on good, well-baked bread. At all events, our enjoyment would be greater 
 if it were only better prepared. We make the following extract from an
adulterated. In their pure state the objection to their use for this 
 purpose lies in the fact that they contain alcohol. This, as we have 
 seen, is a poisonous substance, which the human system in a state of 
 health does not need. Its use, when the body is in a normal condition, 
 is uncalled for, and can only be deleterious. Beverages containing this 
 poison are more or less deleterious to healthy persons, according to the 
 amount of it which they contain. 
  
 These liquors are frequently adulterated, and this increases their 
 injurious effects. The ingenuity of man has been taxed to increase their 
 intoxicating properties; to heighten the color and flavor, to create 
 pungency and thirst; and to revive old beer. To increase the 
 intoxicating power, tobacco or the seeds of the Cocculus indicus are 
 added; to heighten the color and flavor, burnt sugar, liquorice, or 
 treacle, quassia, or strychnine, coriander, and caraway seeds are 
 employed; to increase the pungency, cayenne pepper or common salt is 
 added; to revive old beer, or ale, it is shaken up with green vitriol or 
 sulphate of iron, or with alum and common salt. 
  
 FERMENTED LIQUORS. These are cider and wine. Cider contains alcohol to
poisonous to it when in a normal condition. 
  
 DISTILLED LIQUORS. These are whiskey, brandy, and the kindred 
 productions of the still. Whiskey is a solution of alcohol in water, 
 mixed with various other principles which impart to it peculiar physical 
 properties. The amount of alcohol which it contains varies from 
 forty-eight to fifty-six per cent. Old whiskey is more highly prized 
 than the more recent product of the still, from the fact that when kept 
 for some years certain volatile oils are generated which, impart to it a 
 mellowness of flavor. 
  
 Brandy is a solution of alcohol in water, together with various other 
 substances. It contains from fifty to fifty-six per cent. of alcohol. 
 Pure brandy is distilled from wine, 1,000 gallons of wine yielding from 
 100 to 150 gallons of brandy, but a very large proportion of the brandy 
 is made with little or no wine. It is made artificially from high wines 
 by the addition of oil of Cognac, to give it flavor, burnt sugar to give 
 it color, and logwood or catechu, to impart astringency and roughness of 
 taste. The best brandy is obtained by distillation from the best quality 
 of white wines, from the districts of Cognac and Armagnac in France.
the stomach, attended by impatience, irritability, sluggishness, 
 anxiety, and melancholy; there is impairment of the appetite and taste, 
 also sourness, flatulency, and, perhaps, frequent attacks of colic, loss 
 of hope, courage, and energy; apathy, drowsiness, and frightful dreams 
 are also symptoms common in the different stages of this disease. There 
 are, furthermore, the accompanying symptoms of a coated tongue, bitter 
 taste in the mouth, unpleasant eructations, scalding of the throat from 
 regurgitation, offensive breath, sick headache, giddiness, disturbed 
 sleep, sallow countenance, heart-burn, morbid craving after food, 
 constant anxiety and apprehension, fancied impotency, and fickleness. 
 The subjects of dyspepsia frequently imagine that they require medicines 
 to act upon the liver, desire active treatment, are endlessly 
 experimenting in diet, daily rehearse their symptoms, and are morbidly 
 sensitive. 
  
 CAUSES. Overtasking the body or mind, overloading the stomach, the use 
 of improper food, such as stale vegetables and meat, unripe fruits, 
 indigestible articles, improperly prepared food, irregular meals, 
 disorderly habits, the use of alcoholic stimulants, loss of sleep, 
 masturbation irritability of temper, anxiety, or grief may all give rise
book. I have told dozens if they were sick to call on you. With my best 
 wishes, and hoping that all of your patients will receive as much 
 benefit as I did, I remain, 
  
 Very truly yours, 
 GEORGE R. KENYON 
 Batavia, Ill. 
  
  
 DYSPEPSIA. 
  
 WORLD  '  S DISPENSARY MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, Buffalo, N.Y.: 
  
 [Illustration: J.P. McAdams, Esq. ] 
  
 _Gentlemen_--"A few of my symptoms were: Heartburn and fullness after 
 eating, sometimes pain in my bowels, headache, poor appetite and bad 
 taste in my mouth. At night I was feverish, with hot flushes over skin. 
 After taking Dr. Pierce  '  s Golden Medical Discovery I was relieved of all 
 these symptoms, and I feel perfectly well to-day."
 
 DYSPEPSIA, TORPID LIVER--TERRIBLE SUFFERING. 
  
 [Illustration: MRS. O  '  BANNON] 
  
 DR. R.V. PIERCE: _Dear Sir_--When I commenced your medicines, had 
 headache all the time, indigestion, pain in my back and loins, soreness 
 and stiffness in my joints, my limbs ached so I could not sleep at 
 night: I could not lie in bed more than two or three hours any night; 
 when I would lie my head on the pillow I would have to rise immediately 
 to get breath, sit up and walk the floor very near all night. I could 
 not eat anything that would digest; I would do the cooking for the 
 family, but I was in so much pain the tears were in my eyes all the time 
 I would get a meal ready. I would take one mouthful of bread and then go 
 off and sit down and cry with hunger, but dare not eat any more, and 
 then would have to vomit from that one mouthful of bread--I would have 
 such weak spells I could not stand on my feet. 
  
 I had tried five doctors, they had done me no good; I had given 
 up--never to take anything more, only to lull the pain. I had given up
violent shaking, over which I had no control; circulation so feeble that 
 the extremities were scarcely supplied with blood, they were constantly 
 cold and clammy. My sleep broken and disturbed, life was fast becoming a 
 burden to me, For months, however, I endured this torture; I had 
 abandoned work altogether; I could be up but a few moments at a time and 
 could not walk across the floor without excruciating pain. There was no 
 sleep, no rest, and after a week and even more, would pass during which 
 I would never close my eyes in sleep, even when morphine, opium and 
 chloral, were administered. My body seemed a dead weight, while my mind 
 was alive to all my sufferings. There seemed to be a burning pressure 
 about my head all the while. 
  
 I would have shaking spells frequently, leaving me perfectly exhausted, 
 my heart the while beating so rapidly, I could not count the pulsations; 
 it seemed to cease altogether after that, with a sinking, fainting 
 feeling over me, making it difficult to breathe at all. During my 
 menstrual periods I suffered a "thousand deaths." My appetite was gone, 
 mind and sight impaired, strength and flesh all gone. I was a pitiable 
 object to look at, divested of all that made life endurable for me. I 
 had baffled the skill of two physicians, and was left, after three years
of agony, to die, a "hopeless wreck," worse than death. 
  
 Such was my condition when I applied to you for treatment. After using 
 medicines only six days I began to improve; my nerves were steadier; 
 circulation better, hands and feet warm. Nine days after taking your 
 medicines they restored the function again. I will confess I expected to 
 suffer death again--I did not think the medicines had had time to effect 
 a change within so short a time. Imagine my joy and surprise upon waking 
 next morning to find it had "stolen like a thief upon me in the night," 
 I knew not when. I spent the day in grateful tears--how could I help it? 
 It passed off as quietly as it came, leaving my head clear of that 
 _dreadful, burning pressure_! My nerves were steady; indeed, my 
 improvement was so remarkable, that it seemed almost a delusion. My 
 appetite had returned, and I was hungry for the first time in over a 
 year. I slept well--awoke refreshed and feeling stronger. After two 
 weeks, I was able to walk around the house and yard without support; a 
 day or two after that I walked a hundred yards, visiting and spent the 
 day. In three weeks time I went home (I had gone to my mother  '  s before 
 treatment, as I and many others thought, to die). 
 
At the end of one month there was no symptom, nor sign, of the old 
 disease. I was able to be up all day, resting a short time at noon. To 
 be sure of permanent results I continued treatment for one month longer, 
 and have never had a return of the disease nor any symptom of it since. 
 Before the end of the second month, I was able to be about the house, 
 helping the children with the cooking, and milking. My weight increased 
 fourteen pounds in five months after treatment. I have taken no medicine 
 since except one bottle of Dr. Pierce  '  s Favorite Prescription, four 
 years ago. At this time (nine years after treatment), I find my health 
 still good, having no aches nor pains, a splendid appetite, sleep well, 
 no headache, no backache and no womb trouble. I am able to do my house 
 work and everything; can do a day  '  s work with less fatigue than I have 
 for years before treatment. I feel sure that I would have been in the 
 grave years ago if it had not been for your medicines. I advise all 
 other ladies who are troubled with the same disease to apply to you for 
 treatment. 
  
 Be assured, that whenever I have it in my power I shall recommend your 
 invaluable remedies. I thank you a thousand times for what you have done 
 for me, and for the kindness which you have extended to me throughout.
