 Carrots, Parsnips, and Beetroot are distinguished among 
 vegetables for their richness in sugar. Bread has heen made 
 from all of them. When in great abundance they are 
 sometimes used in distilleries for making spirits. 
  
 Carrots should be light red or yellow, of a regular conical 
 shape, sweet and crisp. Young carrots are more tender and 
 are preferred for the table. They are in season from April 
 till June. 
  
 Parsnips should be buff in colour, unforked in the roots, 
 sweet and crisp. They are in season winter and spring.
They should be stored in dry sand. 
  
 Beetroot should be deep red, or purple, of a long oval or 
 globular shape, fine-grained, sweet and delicate in flavour. 
 It keeps well in dry sand, and is always seasonable. 
  
 The larvce of the carrot-fly burrow into and spoil carrots 
 and parsnips, often causing them to shrivel. A mildew also 
 attacks parsnip roots. Beetroot is liable to be damaged by 
 a nematode — the male of which is like a worm, the female 
 lemon-shaped. 
  
 Celery should be nearly white in colour, large, crisp, 
 solid, and nutty in flavour. It is in season in winter and 
 spring. It is fit for use for some time after being gathered. 
 There is a variety of celery in which the root is large and 
 turnip-shaped. This has been called celeriac. It is depicted 
 in Fig. 38. All varieties are eaten raw or cooked. 
  
 Much damage is done to the plant by the larva of the
" celery-stem fly," by a fungus known as "red rust," and by 
 " black mildew." 
  
 Cucumber should be regular in shape, smooth in the skin, 
 dark green in colour (some varieties light green), white- 
  
  
  
 x +/ 
  
  
  
 fleshed, and delicate in flavour. It is in season spring, 
 summer, and autumn. 
  
 Endive is a sort of winter lettuce, and should be crisp and 
 succulent. When carefully tied up it blanches well. It is 
  
  
 
 
 Fig. 38 
  
 ordinarily used as a salad and garnish. It requires much 
  
 cleansing, as insects find their way right into the heart. 
  
 Lettuce is ordinarily in season from March to September, 
  
 but some varieties of both cos and cabbage are seasonable 
  
 in winter. The head should be close and compact, and 
  
 l 2 
  
  
  
 148 
  
 the leaves should be crisp and sweet. When the lettuce is
too young, or running to seed, the flavour is bitter. 
  
  
  
  
 Fig. 39. 
  
 Mildew often attacks the leaves. Its presence is indicated 
 by pale patches, and it soon causes putrefaction. 
  
  
  
 149 
  
 Horseradish. — This garden root is usually scraped raw, and 
 used as a condiment and garnish. It is in season from 
 October to June. There seems to be some risk of aconite 
 root (a poison) being mistaken for horse-radish. Horse- 
 radish (vide Fig. 39) is usually from 7 to 10 inches long, and 
 as thick as a man ' s thumb some distance down. It is
yellowy-white outside. x\conite root is usually not half as 
 long, not thicker than the finger at the crown, and tapering. 
 It is wrinkled, and blackish brown in colour outside. A 
 minute portion, cautiously chewed, causes prolonged tingling 
 and numbness. 
  
 Mushrooms may be gathered in the fields in September 
 and October, and forced mushrooms can be obtained all the 
 year round. There are many edible British species. They 
 will grow in any cool, shady place (in an outhouse in the 
 winter), but the temperature should be fairly uniform, and 
 not below 45 deg. Fah. The cap should peel easily, the gills 
 vary in colour from salmon-pink to brown, or nearly black. 
 The stalk should be thick and frilled. No part of the 
 mushroom is bright in colour, or has a hot or acrid taste. 
 The little immature button mushrooms are commonly used 
 for garnish and pickling. 
  
 Onions are in season all the year, the imported Spanish 
 onion from October to January only. Onions are grown in
derives its name from growing on certain sea-shores. It is 
 easily cultivated from seed or roots. It is in season from 
 February to June. 
  
 Spinach. — There are many varieties of this, the best 
 known, perhaps, being the " round-leaved," the " straw- 
 berry," and the rapid-growing " New Zealand." It is 
 ordinarily in season from March to July. The " prickly, '  '  
 or winter spinach, is in season from October to February. 
 Spinach should be bright in colour, should last well, and not 
 run to seed early. The leaves should be soft and succulent, 
 and not stringy. 
  
 Tomatoes are cultivated in hot-houses and out of doors in 
  
  
  
 1^1 
  
 
 
 this country ; but large quantities are imported. They vary 
 in colour from deep crimson to scarlet or yellow ; in size, 
 from that of a large apple to that of a cherry. Indeed, 
 there is a currant tomato, producing bunches of fruit looking 
 like fine red currants. They are in season from August to 
 October, and those grown under glass much earlier. The 
 plant has an unpleasant odour. 
  
 Truffles are tubers, possessing an animal rather than a 
 vegetable flavour, in this as in other aspects they somewhat 
  
  
  
  
 Fig. 40. 
  
 resemble mushrooms. They are not subjected to regular 
 culture, but grow some inches below the surface of the earth 
 in damp calcareous soils, especially in oak and chestnut
 
  
  
 Fig. 41. 
  
 is lost. The best way of preserving them is to partially boil 
 them in a tin, and then seal them up in in their own diluted 
 juice. 
  
 Turnips may be obtained all the year round, but young 
 turnips (best suited for the table) are in season from April 
 to June, and turnip tops from March to May. The turnip 
 should be regular in shape, firm-fleshed, white or yellow, 
 and sweet. Turnip-tops should be bright green in colour, 
 fresh and tender. The swede, a large variety of turnip, is 
  
  
  
 00 
 
varieties, under glass and in the open garden. They should 
 be young, quite firm, bright coloured, smooth on the 
 surface, and of good flavour. They are in season July, 
 August, and September. 
  
 Vegetables, like fruit, are subject to disease, or may be 
 in a state of decay. The chief indications are softening, 
 change of colour, and external mould. The insects and 
 parasites attacking them have been already referred to. 
  
  
  
 3D 
  
  
  
 Tinned goods. — There is good reason for believing that 
 nearly all tinned fruit and vegetables are more or less con- 
 taminated with tin, the amount present being from one-tenth 
 of a grain to over one grain per pound. Fortunately, this
of corn : Bunt, Smut, and Ergot — Flour — Wheat flour — 
 Varieties of wheat — Yield of a quarter of wheat— Good 
 flour — Diseased, mouldy, damp, fermented, and decomposing 
 flour— Adulteration with other flours or starch — Mineral 
 adulterants — Readily applied test for presence of alum — 
 Bread defined — Wholemeal bread — Good bread described 
 — Sodden, sour, bitter, or mouldy bread— Adulteration of 
 bread. 
  
 Corn is generally understood to include wheat, barley^ 
 oats, and rye. Maize and rice also come under the term 
 " corn. '  '  It is by far the most important food substance in 
 use in this country, and if stored in a dry place keeps well. 
 Barley will grow even in the Arctic circle, and oats in quite 
 a cold climate. Rye requires more warmth, wheat yet 
 more, and maize more again, while rice is the corn of 
 tropical countries. 
  
 In all kinds of corn the bulk consists chiefly of starch 
 contained in a husk. It is easy to tell one kind of corn
the presence of the spores of some fungus will probably be 
 detected on examining it under the microscope. Flour 
 may also be mouldy, a condition which is at once known 
 by the characteristic smell. It may be exposed to damp, to 
 make it weigh heavier, when it is more liable to mould. It 
 may have undergone a kind of acid fermentation. This 
 gives it a peculiar smell, an acid taste, and makes it some- 
 what gritty to the touch. Flour may be in a state of active 
 decomposition, when it will be moist, discoloured, and of 
 an offensive smell. Flour is also subject to two forms of 
 adulteration — it may be mixed with a cheaper flour, with 
 meal, or starch, or with some mineral substance to increase 
 its weight or improve its colour. Wheat flour is thus liable 
 to be adulterated with the flour of barley, oats, maize, rice ? 
 and, less frequently, rye, or buckwheat, beans, peas, and 
 linseed. Potato starch is also sometimes used for this 
 purpose. Most of these adulterants can be certainly 
 detected by examining the flour under the microscope. 
 Some will appreciably alter the colour and taste of the 
 
may be freed from the husk or may contain part or the 
 whole of it. The so-called " wholemeal bread " is made 
 from the flour of wheat from which only the bran has been 
 removed. The bread may be unleavened or it may be 
 aerated with leaven or yeast, by kneading the flour with 
 water charged with carbonic acid, or by means of a baking 
 powder or a chemical compound. Thus, bread includes 
 oat cakes, passover cakes, water biscuits, black or rye bread, 
 &c. The word is, however, in this country usually restricted 
 to wheaten bread leavened, fermented, or aerated. 
  
 Good wheaten bread should be well baked (not burnt), 
 light and spongy, the crumb being well permeated with little 
 cavities. It should be thoroughly kneaded, of good colour 
 (white or brown), not acid to the taste, not bitter, not too 
 moist. When set aside, the lower part should not become 
 sodden. A 4-lb. loaf loses about ij oz. in twenty-four 
 hours, about 5 oz. in forty-eight hours, and about 7 oz. in 
 sixty hours. This loss will vary with the temperature, 
 draughts of air, &c.
 
 M 
  
  
  
 162 
  
 Bread may have many defects. It may be sodden and 
 heavy owing to bad flour or yeast, the sponge never having 
 risen properly, or owing to imperfect baking. It may be 
 sour owing to bad flour, or to fermentation having been 
 allowed to proceed too far. A slight degree of sourness in 
 leavened bread is not objected to. It may be bitter owing 
 to bitter yeast. Finally, it may be mouldy, which is due 
 to the bread having been too moist originally, having been 
 kept in a damp place, or kept too long, or to bad flour 
 having been used. 
  
 Wheaten bread may be adulterated with barley, maize, 
 pea or bean flour, and with boiled rice or potatoes. For
used in a raw state, it is important it should not be infected 
 with disease, and as it often forms the sole food of young 
 children, it is important that it should be delivered without 
 addition to it or abstraction from it. The milk ordinarily 
 exposed for sale in this country is obtained from cows. 
 There is also some sale for asses '  and goats '  milk, but it is 
 inconsiderable. The same constituents are present in all, 
 the proportions, however, differing appreciably. 
  
 Good milk is a yellowish-white opaque liquid, having a 
 specific gravity of from 1026 deg. to 1036 deg. It has a 
 fresh smell and a bland sweet taste. After the milk is 
 allowed to stand from four to eight hours the cream rises, 
 and the remainder of the milk is less opaque, and nearly or 
 quite white. The amount of milk a cow gives varies much. 
 About twelve quarts is the average daily yield ; just after 
  
 m 2 
  
 
and may be used again on the same round. This practice 
 should be checked. 
  
 Sour Milk. — Under the influence of an organism  ' called 
 the bacillus of lactic acid) introduced from without, the 
 sugar of milk is converted into lactic acid, and it is this 
 which causes milk to turn sour. Milk only slightly soured, 
 exposed or offered for sale as "milk," may be seized as 
 unsound, and an application for an order to destroy it 
 applied for. However, butter-milk is ordinarily sold some- 
 what "turned;" sour butter-milk may therefore be held to 
 be the normal condition of butter-milk. When milk sours, 
 the part that forms the cheese, the casein, coagulates. In 
 fresh milk the casein is combined with phosphate of lime, 
 which keeps it fluid. The acid converts the neutral alkaline 
 phosphate into an acid phosphate, and the casein coagulates. 
 Warmth, as is well known, assists the change — thus milk in 
 which only a very little lactic acid has been formed may 
 appear perfectly fresh when cool and yet curdle on boiling. 
 
 
  
  
  ' 75 
  
 Unsweetened condensed milk, imported from abroad, is 
 occasionally mixed with four times its weight of water and 
 sold as pure new milk. The boiled flavour of such a 
 mixture would ordinarily serve to distinguish it from new 
 milk. 
  
 Butter=milk is the milk left after the manufacture of 
 butter. It is thicker than new milk, slightly sour, and the 
 casein, though coagulated, is in a finely-divided state. The 
 proportion of fat is usually less than i per cent. 
  
 Koumiss is an alcoholic drink made by the fermentation 
 of milk. It is prepared in Asia from mares '  milk and 
 camel ' s milk, and in this country from cows '  milk. Koumiss 
 is made by the Tartars as follows : — One part of sour milk
milk) rise to the top, forming a layer of cream. The cream, 
 which contains casein and milk-liquid as well as fat, is 
 ordinarily removed by skimming, and violently shaken or 
 beaten up in a churn or other suitable vessel, till the fat 
 globules unite and form a mass. This mass, carefully 
 washed and squeezed, with or without the addition of salt, 
 is the butter of commerce. 
  
 Butter varies much in colour, flavour, and quality. The 
 colour ranges, according to the season and the food and 
 breed of the cow, from deep yellow to almost white. The 
 flavour is influenced by the food of the cow and the quality 
 by the state of the cream, the method of churning and 
 making up the butter, &c. 
  
 Carefully prepared butter has a pleasant odour and 
 agreeable taste, and is of the same consistency and colour 
 throughout. It is easily cut and moulded into shapes, and 
 melts to a light coloured oil. It always contains water and 
 
 
  
 i8 4 
  
 curd and a trace of mineral matter, and nearly always a 
 minute portion of sugar of milk. The curd is especially 
 liable to decompose, and the change in the curd is soon 
 followed by decomposition of the fat ; hence the addition 
 of salt as a preservative. Butter fat, freed from curd and 
 water, and fairly excluded from the air, will keep a long 
 time without change. 
  
 It seems superfluous to say that butter of fine flavour 
 cannot be made from sour cream. Yet much butter is 
 made from sour cream, particularly in small farms and 
 dairies. The best method of collecting cream for churning 
 and securing its sweetness is by setting the milk to cream in 
 iced coolers. Where there is a large quantity of milk to be 
 dealt w T ith, it is convenient to use the cream separator, an 
 apparatus already described. The temperature of the milk
When annatto or other colouring matter is used it is usually 
 stirred in with the rennet. The coagulation should be com- 
 pleted in an hour, and then the curd may be cut up or 
 gently broken down and stirred and left to settle. As it is 
 needful that the curd should develop a little acidity, this is 
 effected in various ways. Thus the curds and whey are 
 heated to a temperature of 98 deg. Fah., and allowed to 
 stand, or a little sour whey is added with the rennet, or the 
 souring of the curd is not encouraged till the whey is 
 drained off or removed with a syphon. Sweet curd gathered 
 in a heap, covered with a cloth, and allowed to stand for an 
 hour or so, becomes slightly acid. Again, the curd may be 
 put into the press vats quite sweet, and the necessary acidity 
 will be produced in a few hours. In cheese factories the 
 breaking up of the curd is effected in curd-mills. If the 
 curd is rich in fat, only a little salt is needed to prevent 
 excessive fermentation in the cheese ; if the curd is poor 
 more salt is needed. Excess of salt spoils a cheese, pre- 
  
 
 
 i88 
  
 venting its ripening. The curd is pressed in cloths in the 
 press-vat for two or three days, during which time the cheese 
 is turned from time to time and the wet cloths changed for 
 dry ones. From the press the cheese is taken to the curing- 
 room (which is kept at a uniform temperature) to mellow 
 and acquire flavour. The ripening is due to slow fermen- 
 tative changes. When it is complete the constituents of 
 the cheese are similar to those of milk, except that part of 
 the butter has been drained off with the whey, and that the 
 milk sugar is in part changed into lactic acid, and in part 
 into alcohol and carbonic acid. There is also present 
 some common salt, and usually a little colouring matter. 
  
 Cheese may be made on what is termed the early ripen- 
 ing principle, so that it may be quickly brought into the 
 market; but such cheese will not keep long without deteri- 
 orating, so that it must be sold within a very limited time.
of the bark and the pulpy matter are scraped off. The 
 smaller quills are introduced into the larger ones, and the 
 bark is dried in the sun. Cinnamon has a sweet taste and 
 an aromatic flavour. It is light brown in colour, well 
 curled, and scarcely thicker than drawing paper. It 
 breaks with an uneven fibrous margin. It contains a 
 volatile oil, tannin, mucilage, colouring matter, resin, an 
 acrid principle, woody fibre, starch, and a little moisture. 
  
 Cassia, the bark of another tree belonging to the laurel 
 family, is sometimes substituted for cinnamon. Cassia bark 
  
  
  
 215 
  
 is brown, much stouter than cinnamon, and breaks short off, 
 without splintering. Cassia is also redder in colour and 
 stronger in taste, but less sweet. 
 
It contains two brown-coloured hemispherical seeds, having 
 an aromatic taste and odour. The seed-vessels, or pods, of 
 cardamom are of triangular form, each containing several 
 hard, reddish-brown seeds, having a pungent taste, and 
 popularly known as "grains of paradise." Cumin and fenu- 
 greek seeds are aromatic seeds having a peculiar medicinal 
 taste and odour. The characteristic flavour of curry is due 
 largely to the cumin it contains. Curry has been found to 
 be adulterated with ground rice, potato starch, common salt, 
 red lead, and ferruginous earths. 
  
 Olive Oil is expressed from olives, the fruit of a well-known 
 tree cultivated in many European countries. Olives should 
 furnish from 20 to 25 per cent, of their weight of oil, but 
 the whole yield is not usually of the same quality. The 
 pure oil is pale yellow, transparent, of agreeable odour and 
 bland taste. It keeps well, being little liable to become 
 rancid. 
  
 
citric acid per ounce, a little malic acid, sugar, vegetable 
 albumen, and mucus. It is largely prepared in Sicily and 
 the West Indies. As found in commerce, it is frequently 
 mixed with varying proportions of spirit to make it keep 
 better, but it may be obtained pure. Sometimes olive oil is 
 poured on the top to exclude the air. Good lime juice or 
 lemon juice is free from turbidity or stringiness, keeps well, 
 has a pleasant acid taste, but is not bitter. It should not 
 contain more than 5 per cent, of alcohol. 
  
 It is adulterated with water, tartaric acid, sulphuric 
 acid, or other acid. Artificial lemon-juice, made from citric 
 acid, water, and essence of lemons, may be substituted 
 for the genuine article. It is, however, deficient in flavour, 
 and the fraud can be detected by evaporation. 
  
 Foods sold Cooked. — Many of the articles of food already 
 referred to come under this description, as bread, tinned 
 milk, preserved fruit, &c. ; yet it appears desirable to draw 
 the food inspector ' s special attention to some of the victuals
for sale in poor neighbourhoods. 
  
 Biscuits, Cakes, Pastry, &c. — At the cheap pastrycooks 
 and at little shops frequented by children, are sold biscuits 
 damaged with damp and attacked with mould, cakes and 
 pastry originally made with butter beginning to be rancid, 
 and stale beyond all possibility of wholesomeness. Then 
 what are the contents of the penny meat pies in such 
 shops ? They are usually so highly seasoned with pepper 
 that it is impossible to judge by the taste. A few purchases 
  
  
  
 222 
  
  
  
 by intelligent inspectors might be the means of improving 
 the quality, and wholesomeness of what may be called the 
 dainties of the poor.
