Is of the same Species with the Cicotrina: but instead of being of a dark green, and almost transparent when shivered into thin Pieces, is of the Colour of the Liver of an Animal; and it frequently happens that there is a Mixture of Cicotrina in the Epatic, as well as a Mixture of Epatic in the Cicotrina, which ought to be separated in the Country. Stones, Dirt, &c. should be equally guarded against in this Article as in the Cicotrina, and the Buyer should guard against its being wet; very good Epatic Alloes having been brought home from India almost Liquid, which the Buyers were obliged to keep till it became dry and fit to be broke into small Pieces, and capable of being reduced to Powder 
  
 Page  4 
 GUM AMMONIACUM: 
 Is a concrete gummy substance in small Drops or Tears; it is of a nauseous bitter Taste, but when dissolved in any liquid but Spirits, or rubbed in a Mortar with Water, resembles Milk; it must be free from Dross, Stones, &c. and if brown will not (though it may be as good as when it is almost white) fetch half the Price. 
  
 Page  5 
 GUM ASSAFAETIDA. 
 Is a concrete gummy substance, of a strong faetid smell → , resembling Onions, or rather Shal∣lots, in small Drops or Tears; but when packt forms a massy lump. Observe, that when first broke it appears quite white within, and changes soon after to a red or purple Colour; the brown, dingy, or dirty is of little Value: it is often mixed with Stones; some sorts are moist, with Tears, which if clean is very good. 
  
 Page  6 
 GUM BENJAMIN, or BENZOIN. 
 Is a concrete rosinous Gum, of a sweet aro∣matic Taste; it is generally brought here in large Masses, according to the shape of the package, therefore before you buy break well into it, and see that it is full of white marble Drops. If that Sort is not to be had, the next best is the light brown sort, which breaks smooth, and is free from dross, and almost transparent; the drossy Sort is of little Value, and the King ' s Duty is as high upon that as the very finest. 
  
 Page  7 
 BEZOAR. 
 The true East-India sort are smooth black-shining stones, about the size of small Hazel-Nuts, found in the Stomach of certain Animals in the East-Indies, said to be something resembling the Goat Kind; when it is broke appears of a shining, dark, green or olive Colour, and com∣posed of Coats or Shells one above another, so closely connected as to form a solid stone; some prefer the Sort that goes by the Name of Por∣cupine Bezoar, but as it has been found of little or no efficacy in Medicine is but seldom used, the Lapis Contrayerva being used in its stead. 
  
 Page  8 
 BORAX.
The way to discover the true Cinnamon Sort is to chew it, when, if it is musilaginous or slimy in the mouth, it is not near so valuable, though it is often stronger than real Cinnamon, but will foul the Cinnamon Water made from it. There is also Cassia Lignea that is of a very bright Colour and good Shape, which has little or no ← smell → or Taste; the breaking a handful of Sticks will ascertain the Quality almost as well as tast∣ing, for where there is a fine ← Smell → , there is always a strong Taste. 
  
 Page  13 
 The third Sort got at the Coast and Bengal, having very little Taste and Shape, like unto Cinnamon, but is slat, woody and shaffy, will scarce fell for the Duty and Charges; the King ' s Duty is £2 6s. 8d, per Cwt. equally on the worst as the best, and the Company ' s and Dis∣count 13 and half per Cent. on the Price it sells for. 
  
 Page  14 
 CASSIA BUDS. 
 Appears to be the Fruit or Berries of the Cassia Tree, and resembles in some Degree a Clove, but is smaller, of a fine rich Cinnamon Flavour when fresh; they have been but very lately introduced into Europe, and chiefly brought from China: chuse them fresh and found, free from Stalks and Dirt. 
  
 Page  15 
 CARDAMON SEEDS. 
 Those produced on the Coast of Malabar are the best, which are contained in a three-square Pod, or Husk, rather larger than a large Pea; very little Judgment is required in chusing them, provided they are fresh, sound, well filled Husks and of a palish Colour, and of a very grateful ← Smell → , resembling Camphor. Care should be taken to pack them in strong sound Chests, for the least damp will turn the Husk, not only mouldy but musty, and greatly reduce its Value. 
  
 Page  16 
 COCULUS INDIA. 
 A round blackisk Berry, generally brought from Bombay. Observe they are sound, dry and clean; they are extremely light, being quite hollow. 
  
 CUBEBS. 
 Is a kind of Pepper, with this Difference, that it has a Tail or Stalk to each Berry, and is much more aromatic than Pepper, resembling Jamaica Pepper, called by the common People All-spice; it is generally bought on the Malabar Coast, and should be dry, sound and clean. 
 
Page  17 
 DRAGONS BLOOD. 
 A red rosinous Gum, sometimes brought in oval lumps, about the Size of a Chesnut or a Pullet ' s Egg, and sometimes in a large Mass, composed of small Grains or Tears, and if good, appears of a deep shining red colour, and when reduced to Powder changes into elegant bright Crimson: if you meet with any different from the above Account, as mixed with Dross, Dirt, or worse colour, must not give much for it, there being Dragons Blood from less than £.10 to £40 per Cwt. that in Tears is the safest to buy, if it breaks as clear as Glass, and is when powdered of a fine Crimson red, which is the only Excellence, it being used much more in Japaniary than in physic. 
  
 Page  18 
 GALBANUM. 
 Is a soft tenacious yellowish Gum, of a warm bitterish Taste; the best Sort is in Masses, and when broke or cut appears composed of white small dry Tears or Drops. Chuse as above, for if you meet with it mixed with Dirt, Sticks, Bits of Cane, or other Rubbish, it will reduce the Value; the more Aromatic it ← smells → the better: that which is fine, has Tears in it, like other East India Gums. 
  
 Page  19 
 GUM ARABIC. 
 Prefer the large red lumps, for the pale yel∣low does not sell well. Observe that it be clean and kept from Wet or Dampness; the best Packages is strong iron-bound Casks: there is sometimes a fine transparent Sort, almost white, which will sell very well. 
  
 Page  20 
 LAC, called SHELLACK. 
 Is thought to be a Preparation from Sticklack, and formed into thin Flakes or Shells, appears of a clear transparent deep yellow or red colour; if specky, drossy, black, or of a Liver colour, or any ways dull and cloudy, and not transpa∣rent, it will be of little Value at this Market. 
  
 Page  21 
 LACK, called STICKLACK. 
 Is supposed to be a kind of rosinous Wax collected by Insects, and deposited by them on round small Sticks, in such form as is commonly imported; the best for Sale here is composed of a very deep red Gum, intermixed with Cells, (formed by the Insects) in which the colour is contained, and when put into Water gives a red Tincture, which is the Sort most in Esteem for dying red Morocco Leather.—Chuse the deep Red, which is here called Black, and the fewer Sticks the better; if when chewed it does not make your Spittle of a fine red or crimson colour it is not the right Sort, and not half so valuable. 
 
Appears to be a Substance like greasy clotted Blood, contained in a hairy small Bag or Pod, resembling the Cod of an Animal, weighing about an Ounce, and supposed to be found on a certain Animal in China. Chuse thin-skinned Pods that have not been cut open, for the ← Smell → of the Musk is so powerful, that Pieces of Liver or any thing else may be mixed with it, and sometimes Lead Shot to make it heavy. It can∣not be too dry, and if the Cods have been cut open, the Palp or Grain ought to be of a dark reddish brown Colour. 
  
 Page  27 
 MYRRH. 
 Is a concrete gummy rosinous Juice, of vari∣ous Colours and Sizes, the Produce of Persia, of a fine aromatic ← Smell → , and bitter aromatic Taste; the best that has been brought home for ten Years past was in solid lumps, from the Size of a Nutmeg to that of a Pigeon ' s Egg, of a palish yellow Colour, and when broke appeared in the Inside of a whitish mealy Substance; though where it breaks of a deep Orange-colour, and of a firmer Texture, and shining, it is much more preferable. 
  
 There is also a brown sort, which appears of the same mealy Substance, and sells near as well 
  
 The second Sort has the same Colour, Taste, and ← Smell → ; but the Inside appears more glassy and solid, and generally in less Lumps. 
  
 The third Sort is in brown, red, dirty, small, and frequently mixed with ordinary inferior Gum, which, by being mixed with it, will contract the ← Smell → and Flavour of the true Gum. The very best is sometimes mixed with Pieces that are very drossy and light, and often with very small Gum and Dust; which, though ever so genuine, will not sell for near the Price that the large will. 
  
 Page  28 
 OLIBANUM. 
 Is a rosinous Gum, mostly brought from Turkey, and sometimes from the East Indies, in small round Drops or Tears, of a pale yellowish Colour, and very rarely transparent, being in general hardly pellucid, as it is a Species of Frankincense; it has an aromatic ← Smell → , but rather a disagreeable acrid astringent Taste, and when chewed will be of a milky Colour. If it is run into a Mass with but few Tears in it, and mixed with Dirt or Rubbish, it will not do for this Market. 
  
 Page  29 
 OPOPONAX. 
 A concrete gummy rosinous Juice, the Pro∣duce of Persia; the best brought home, by the way of the East Indies, is in reddish or Orange-coloured Drops or Tears, and when broke the Inside appears of a pale yellow, intermixed with white Specks; it has a very fragrant ← Smell → , something like Sellery Roots, and a pleasant bit∣ter acrid Taste. It is sometimes very light and kecksey, mixed with small Bits of Canes and Sticks, but that always sells low, in Proportion to the Quantity of Gum. 
 
Page  30 
 RHUBARB. 
 The Root of a Plant growing in China, of our English Dock kind, but considerably larger. The Natives cut the Root into round Pieces, about three or four Inches long, and dry it for Sale, which is well known in Europe by the Name of round Rhubarb; and sometimes they cut it down the middle of the Root, and after∣wards into four or five Inch long Pieces, which drys the better, and when fit for Sale appears flat. For these four or five Years past the flat Kind has sold £25 per Cent. better than the round of the same goodness. 
  
 Observe what you buy has the rough dis∣coloured outside Coat pared off, which it at∣tracts in drying, and that it is quite dry and not the least Dampness or Greeness left in it; the Outside to be of a pale yellow, and the Inside of a pale red Nutmeg Colour: and it can∣not ← smell → too fresh, and must be free from Worm Holes. To avoid being cheated, break several Pieces through the Middle, it being frequently of a very good Colour on the Outside, but quite green, and often black, and almost rotten in the middle. 
  
 Page  31 
 SAGO. 
 Is generally thought to be the Pith of a Tree and manufactured into small round Grains, and brought from China or other Parts of India, though the Mallaca is the principal Market, and the best Sago; what is most preferable here is of a red Bloom Colour, and dissolves very easily in warm or hot Water, and makes a very fine Jelly; that which boils red is always pre∣ferred: that which is brown is not near so good, and it ought also to be free from Dust. Care should be taken of the Package, which is best in Oak Casks; the least damp will render it Musty, and good for nothing. 
  
 Page  32 
 SAL ARMONIAC. 
 Is a manufactured Salt, said to be prepared from Camel ' s or other Animal ' s Urine, or Dung, in the hot Climates, about Persia and Arabia. The Sort generally brought here is in large round convex Cakes, or conical Loaves, in some Degree resembling a Sugar Loaf, about six or eight Pounds Weight each. Very little Judgment is required in chusing it: the Taste ought to be sharp and penetrating, its Colour white and clear; sometimes Soot or Sticks is in it, but the less the better. 
  
 Page  33 
 TINCAL, or unrefined BORAX. 
 In the Manner we have it brought home appears to be a natural Salt, produced in the Province of Bengal, being mixed with Sand and Earth; the best is in large Pieces, of the Size of a Hasel-Nut, and sometimes, though very seldom, larger, and of a clear and almost transparent Colour, when broke resembling Allum, though seldom so clear, but generally mixed with Dirt, Sand, &c. 
  
 Another Sort has been imported, about the Size of a Grain of Wheat, of a yellowish Co∣lour, resembling brown Sugar Candy, when broke into small Pieces, which was very good; but the worst is what is mixed with Sand, Dirt, and other Rubbish. They have a wrong Notion in Madrass and Bengal to mix it with Oil and Butter-Milk, when tight Casks would bring it home better, and save the Expence of paying Duty on Water, &c. which in the refining must be all evaporated, as refined Borax must be dry enough to be reduced to a fine Powder. 
 
Page  34 
 TURMERICK. 
 A Root growing in China and Bengal, brought home in Pieces, about an Inch long, of a warm aromatick Taste, much resembling Ginger. The China Sort sells the best, being about the Thick∣ness of a Man ' s little Finger; smooth yellow Surface, and fine pale red, or rather Orange-colour, and the more rosinous the better, when broke. The Bengal Sort is not yellow on the Outside as the China Sort is, but when broke is almost of as good a colour, but very often breaks black, which renders it of less Value: Turme∣rick is also very subject to be Worm-eaten, which will greatly reduce its Value; and the least wet or damp will spoil it for Use, on which account tight Casks is far preferable to Bags, in which it is too often imported. 
  
 Page  35 
 Drugs not much in Demand, or the Produce of other Parts, as well as India. 
 AMBERGREASE. 
 Is a bituminous Substance, almost as solid as Fullers-earth, chiefly found floating on the Sea, or on Shores; it is a fine Perfume, of a greyish or Ash-colour, which is the best, and of great Value; the black or dirty is ordinary, and if it is adulterated with Rosin, &c. a red hot Knitting Needle or Wire will discover it, as true Amber∣grease will not melt by Heat: it chiefly comes from North-America. 
  
 BALM, or BALSAM of GILEAD. 
 Is generally supposed to be the Produce of Arabia, and sometimes has been imported from the East Indies. The true has a surprising odo∣riferous fragrant ← Smell → , a pungent but very agreeable bitter astringent Taste, and of a turbid thickish Consistence, of a yellowish colour; but so little has come these many Years, that a stranger must be very cautious how he buys it, as every Species of Turpentine will mix with it. 
  
 Page  36 
 CANTHARIDES. 
 Are Flies as large as Bees, of a very fine green and gold Colour, and are chiefly imported from Spain and Italy; though there are some in India, but the length of the Voyage prevents their be∣ing brought to Advantage; though if packed in Chests, lined with Tutenague as Tea is, and very fresh when brought, might answer. 
  
 CASSIA MUNIAR. 
 Is a bulbous Root of the Zedoary kind, but more resembling in shape Turmerick; it breaks of a fine Orange-colour, of a fragrant ← Smell → , and aromatic Taste. 
  
 Page  37
Page  40 
 DIAGREDIUM, or SCAMONY. 
 Is the inspissated Juice of a Plant reduced to a Consistence not unlike Spanish Juice, of a brown∣ish Colour, and of a purgative Quality, and chiefly comes from Turkey; but so much adul∣teratep, that the oldest Druggists can scarcely ascertain its real Qualities. 
  
 FOLIUM INDIA, or MALABATHRUM. 
 Is the Leaf of a Plant or Tree, resembling the Leaf of a Bay Tree, but much larger, and differs from that and most other Leaves, by having three Stems, or strong Fibres, running from the Stalk to the Top of the Leaf. 
  
 Page  41 
 COSTUS DULCIS 
 Is an aromatic firm Root, resembling Spike∣nard in ← Smell → , but of little use. 
  
 JUNEUS ODORATUS, or SWEET CANE. 
 Is a small aromatic Reed, of a Straw Co∣lour, but little in use. 
  
 GALLINGALS. 
 Are generally brought home in short knotty Pieces, about an inch and half long, about the Size of Turmerick, of a pale red Colour, bitter Taste, and aromatic ← Smell → . 
  
 Page  42 
 GREEN, or PRESERVED GINGER. 
 The Root boiled when just taken out of the Ground with Water and Sugar, to such a Con∣sistence and Time that the Syrup enters into the Pores of the Ginger, and will preserve the Fla∣vour for several Years. The best comes in small lumps of a pale yellow, and almost transparent; the ordinary appears dark and brown, and when broke has small Strings or Fibres.
 
 The Barbadoes Sort sells for more than double the Price that India does, which is owing to the Root being taken out of the Ground before it is full grown, and has contracted the stringy Quality (West-India Ginger, when dry, being full of Strings and Fibres) and the Syrup made with white Sugar, and often Sells at 3s. 6d. to 5s. per Pound, when India seldom sells higher than 2s. and often much lower. 
  
 GOA STONES. 
 A factitious Preparation of mineral Substances, mixed with Perfume, in a round or oval Shape, and gilt; it is, (where the Gilding is rubbed off) brownish, but the Inside is of a Straw Colour: it is of very little Demand. 
  
 Page  43 
 GUM ANIMI, or COPAL GUM ELIMI; come very cheap from America. 
 But if any fine Gum Animi can be procured in India, it will sell for a great Price; it should be of a fine pale yellow, and as transparent as Glass, and must dissolve in Spirits of Wine, and is not much harder than Rosin, and resembles transparent Amber so much, that Cane Heads have been made of it, and sold for Amber. 
  
 GUM SAGAPENUM, GUM SARCOCOLLA, GUM TRAGACANTH; come cheap from Turkey. 
 But if any Sagapenum can be procured in India, it will fetch a good Price; it in some Measure resembles Assafaetida, but is in less Tears, and ← smells → like Garlick instead of Onions which Assasaetida does. 
  
 Page  44 
 LAPIS TUTIAE: 
 The sublimate Part collected by Means of Sticks, on the uppermost Part of Furnaces when a certain Metal in the East Indies is fluxed, by which Means it receives a tubelated Form, and generally appears of a Mouse Colour; it is of little Use, and made in England the Copper Works, and therefore not worth importing. 
  
 LIGNUM ALOES, or ALOES WOOD. 
 What is brought to Europe is in little hard ponderous Pieces, or Chips; when burnt, or re∣duced to Powder, has a bitterish aromatic Taste, and fragrant ← Smell → , but little in Use; but a small Quantity of the true would fetch a high Price; a Ton would over-do the Market. 
 
 
 Page  48 
 SENNA LEAVES. 
 Come cheap from Turkey, and much brighter and cleaner than any that have been brought from India, which generally are foul and full of Stalks, and of a darker colour, and not near so fresh. 
  
 SPIKENARD. 
 Is a small Root, from which issue several very small Fibres, resembling a Bunch or Brush, about an Inch long, and very light in weight, of a darkish brown Colour; it has an aromatic but rather disagreeable ← Smell → : be careful that it is free from Dust or Earth. 
  
 Page  49 
 STORAX CALAMITA, or STORAX in TEARS. 
 Is a fine odoriferous Gum, sometimes in small Drops or Tears, and often brought home in Masses, with Saw-dust, Sand, &c. It generally comes from Turkey or Italy; the fine greatly re∣sembles fine Gum Benjamin, but is generally moisiter. 
  
 TAMARINDS. 
 The long Pod or Fruit of the Tamarind Tree, which grows in Pods as large as ripe Beans; it is taken out of the Shell, and preserved in Sugar, the less of which the better, provided there is enough to keep the Pulp moist: the West India is red; there is red, brown and black, brought from ihe East Indies, but the black is the most valuable, and the more Pulp and sewer Stones the better; they are of a very fine acid, more pleasant than the Juice of Lemons, and make much wholesomer Punch. 
  
 Page  50 
 JAPAN EARTH. 
 Improperly so called, as by Experiments it appears to be the Juice of some vegetable Fruit boiled to a hard consistence, like Spanish Juice, in hard Lumps, which ought to break of a brown shining Colour, and of an astringent Taste; it was formerly, when Bohea Tea was more esteem∣ed than green, used in dying green Tea, and other Leaves of a Bohea Colour. Two or three Tons would sell very well, but more would ren∣der it of little Value, the Consumption being small. 
  
 WORMSEED.
Is a small chaffy Seed, of a light yellow Co∣lour, of a fragrant ← Smell → , and a sine bitter Taste, and in all Probability the Seed of Wormwood. What we have had from India was so small, dusty, chaffy, and full of Stalks, that it did not sell for a third of the Price of that imported from Turkey. 
  
 Page  51 
 YELEOW SAUNDERS. 
 A pale yellowish Wood, of a pleasant ← Smell → , bitterish aromatic Taste, which leaves an agree∣able kind of Pungency; it is generally brought in large thick Logs, and Care should be taken that it is quite sound and solid. There is a Sort of white Saunders, which perhaps is nothing more than the yellow with the Sap on it, and should be avoided, as Rosewood, notwithstanding its be∣ing of a dark Colour, is in some Measure white on the Outside, but that Part will produce no Oli. 
  
 OIL of RHODIUM, or ROSEWOOD. 
 Though never imported from India, might be extracted from the Chips of large Pieces, which are made into Tea Chests, &c. and the small Branches of the Tree, in the same Manner as the Oil of Cinnamon, &c. are; the Wood would not answer importing, but the Oil may, as the Chymists and Perfumers sell it at 14s. an Ounce. 
  
 Page  52 
 ZEDOARY ROOT. 
 There are two Sorts brought from India, the yellow and the white, both of them generally cut into small Pieces of different Shapes, though it appears by the Shape of them, that the Root is originally round or oval, and only cut for the Conveniency of drying them better; the yel∣low has the Appearance of large Turmerick, but a more agreeable aromatic Taste; the white is more rosinous on the Inside, and of a pale dusky white Colour, and more valuable. Ob∣serve that it is sound, and free from Worms, or Rottenness, and the larger and heavier, if dry, the better. 
  
 Various Articles. 
 ARRACK. 
 Is a fine Cane Spirit, supposed to be distilled from Rice, formerly of great Esteem in Eng∣land, but the high Duties has lessened the De∣mand so, that fifty or sixty Leagers are suffici∣ent for a Year ' s Consumption. What you intend for Sale must be full Proof, clean, and have no bad ← Smell. 
  
 Page  53 
 ARRANGOES, 
 Are made from the rough Cornelian Stone, or something of that kind, and formed into dif∣ferent Shapes, and bored through the Middle in India: the chief Demand for them here are to send to Africa, where they are much used on Strings as Ornaments.
