Wash the Roots well, take out the pith and scrape their outsides, and having bruis ' d and slic ' d them, let them boyl half an hour in the Water. Then take the Hopps, the Endive, Succorie, Agrimonie, Dandelyon, Pimpernel and Chervil shred, and let them boyl about a quarter of an hour with the Roots. Then add the Seeds of Parsley and Gromel stamp ' d, and having let them boyl never so little, put in the Liquorice slic ' d and bruis ' d, and presently after the cold Seeds bruis ' d and the Flowers; put them down into the Decoction, and at the same time take it off, and strain it when it is half cold. 
 A Cephalic Decoction. ℞. Radicum Valerianae majoris,   ℞. Roots of the bigger Valerian,   Icreos Florentinae,   Florence Orrice,   Paeoniae maris,   Male-Peonie,   Acori veri,   The true Aromatical Reed,   Visci Quercini, an ℥ ss. Misleto of the Oak, an. ℥ ss. Foliorum Betonicae,   Flowers of Betony,   Salviae,   Sage,   Majoranae,   Marjoram,   Calaminthae Montanae,   Mountain-Calamint,   Chamadryos, an. M. j. Germander, an. M. j. Seminum Rutae,   Seeds of Rue,   Paeoniae maris,   Male-Peonie,   Baccarum Juniperi, an. ʒ ij. Juniper-Berries, an. ʒ ij. Florum Rorismarini,   Flowers of Rosemary,   Stoechados,   Cassidonie,   Lavendulae,   Lavender,   Calendulae,   Marigolds,   Lillii Convallium, an. P. j. Lillies of the Vallies, an. P. j. Tartari crudi, ℥ j. Raw-Tartar, ℥ j. 
 Make a Decoction according to Art in lb vj. of Fountain-water to the consumption of the fourth part. 
 The Raw-Tartar is prescrib ' d in this Decoction, as well to communicate to the Wa∣ter the vertue of the Medicaments therein prescrib ' d, as to retain in some sort their volatile parts; and to prevent dissipation during the Decoction. And though I do not contradict the opinion of those that would avoid boyling the parts of Aromatic Plants, especially in uncover ' d Vessels; nevertheless I believe we may yet allow something to the ancient Customs, provided there be requisite care tak ' n. The Roots of Peonie, Valerian, Orrice and Acorus are to be well bruis ' d, as also the Misletoe of the Oak, and the raw Tartar, and then put into an Earthen glaz ' d pot, with the quantity of water prescrib ' d: and having cover ' d the pot, boyl the Decoction over a gentle fire, during a small quarter of an hour; then put in the cut Herbs, and covering the pot, let them boil a quarter of an hour longer: then put in the berries and seeds, and cover the pot again, and after having given them four or five wambles more, put down the flow∣ers into the Decoction, cover the pot, and take it off from the fire; and when it is half cold, strain it gently from the sediment. 
 CHAP. III. Of Juleps, and Apozems. I Shall not go about here to set down the Juleps of Roses, and Violets of the Ancients, nor any other of the same Nature, as being now out of use; their consistency and name being now chang ' d into those of Syrups. I shall only say that the name of Ju∣lep has been formerly given to certain liquid compositions, made with distill ' d Wa∣ters, or slight Decoctions, which are boil ' d with Sugar, to a consistency much thinner then that of Syrups: For they had no design to keep them, but prepar ' d them as they had occasion. The name of Julep is still now-a-days giv ' n to certain Remedies, which have some agreement with the Juleps of the Ancients; but they are less sweetn ' d with Sugar, and less fit to keep: For usually they never put above an ounce of Sugar, or an ounce and a half of some Syrups, to six or eight ounces of some distill ' d Waters, of some decoction, or some other Liquor. We never boil these Liquors with the Sugar or Syrups, but only mingle them together when they are to be given to the patient, who may drink them as their ordinary drink, abating some thing of the quantity of Su∣gar and Syrups mix ' d therewith. All these Juleps may be made tart with Spirits or A∣cid Juices. But they will not keep above twenty-four hours in the Summer in a cool place, and not above two or three days in the Winter. 
 Apozems are Medicines very near the Nature of Juleps: But they admit of a great∣er Number of Medicaments, which render them less pleasing. They are seldom com∣pos ' d of any thing but the Decoctions of the various parts of plants. And hence it is, that they have deriv ' d their Name. For the Greek word , signifies to boil, from whence , Decoctum, or, a thing boil ' d. I could insert here several Examples, but I refer the Reader to the Decoctions of the preceding Chapter, which may be call ' d Apozems. We may add purgative Medicines to these Decoctions, and dissolve therein several Syrups, as they are intended for this or t ' other Disease. 
 CHAP. IV. Of Emulsions and Almond-Milks. EMulsions are liquid Medicines very pleasing to the taste, whose colour and consisten∣cy is very like to that of Milk. They are usually compos ' d of Seeds, or Oily Fruits, beat ' n in a Marble-Mortar, with a Woodd ' n-pestle, and then dissolv ' d in di∣still ' d Waters, or in slight Decoctions, which you must strain and press out, and sweeten with Sugar or Syrups. 
 Emulsions are prepar ' d for several purposes, especially to temper the excessive heat of the Lungs, and of all the Brest; to take off the sharpness and acrimony of the humours, and to asswage the boiling of the Blood, the heat of the Urine, and the Reins. For which reason they are us ' d not only in stoppages of the Urine, and in Gonorrhea ' s, but also in Inflammations of the Natural parts of those that are troubl ' d with Venereal Distempers. They are also successfully us ' d to temper the excessive heat of the Entrails, and to pro∣voke sleep and rest. Emulsions are also very proper to sweet ' n the Acrimony of the Humours in Dysenteries, to asswage pains, and heal Excoriations. Of all which things it will be convenient to give some examples; and first, for the Distempers of the Lungs, and Brest. 
 ℞ Amygdal. dulcium mund. ℥ j. ℞ Sweet Almonds cleans ' d, ℥ j. Seminum 4. frig. maj. Mundat. Bombacis, an. ʒ ij. The four greater cold Seeds cleans ' d▪ Bombax, an. ʒ ij. Contundantur in Mortareo Marmoreo Pestillo Ligneo, sensim affundendo, aqua Tussi∣laginis, Scabiosae, Papaveris, Rhoeados, vel decocti hordei, Passularum Mundat. &amp; Liquoritiae, lb j ss. Colentur &amp; Exprimantur. Expressioni adde Syr. Violar. et Capill. Vene∣ris, an. ℥ j ss. fiat emulsio pro tribus dosibus, longe a pastu sumend.   Bruise these in a Marble-Mortar, with a Woodd ' n Pestle, pouring by little and lit∣tle upon them, Colts-foot, Scabious, wild Poppy-water, or decoction of Barley, Ston ' d-Raisins, and Liquorice, lb j. ss, strain and press them out. To the liquor prest forth, add Syrup of Violets and Ve∣nus-hair, an. ℥ j. ss. Make an emulsion for three doses to be taken a good distance be∣fore or after Meals. 
 If Acrimony of humours, boiling of the blood, want of rest and sleep, accompany Diseases of the Lungs and brest, you may add to the Emulsions two drams of white Poppy-seed, and as much Lettice-seed, and change the Syrup of Violets, and Venus-hair into those of White-poppy and Water-Lillies. 
 And if you would prepare Emulsions against the heat and difficulties of Urine, whe∣ther caus ' d by strange substances contain ' d in the Reins, or in the Ureters, or in the blad∣der, or through any ill temper of the parts, or through any Venereal Malignity: then observe what follows. 
 ℞. Seminum 4. frig. maj. mundat,   ℞. Of the four greater cold seeds cleans ' d,   Milii solis   Gromel and   Papav. Alb. an. ʒ iij White-Poppy-seed, an. ʒ iij. Contundantur in Marmoreo Mortareo, sen∣sim affundendo, Decocti Radicum Althea et Nymphaeae, lb j. ss. Colentur &amp; Exprimantur: Expressioni adde Syrupi de Althea &amp; Nym∣phaea, an. ℥ j. ss. Salis Prunel. ʒ iij. fiant tres doses longe a pastu exhibend.   Bruise them in a Marble-Mortar with a woodd ' n-pestle, pouring by little and little upon them, a pint and a half of the deco∣ction of the Roots of Marsh-mallows and Water-Lillies: strain and press them, add to the straining Syrup of Mallows, and Water-Lillies, an. ℥ j. ss. Sal-prunella, ʒ iij. Make three doses, to be given a good while before or after Meals. 
 Emulsions against the Dysenterie may be thus prepar ' d. 
 ℞. Amygdal. dulc. excorticatarum, ℥ j. ℞. Sweet Almonds blanch ' d, ℥ j. Seminum Sumach,   Seeds of Sumach,   Lactucae,   Lettice,   Papaveris Alb.   White-Poppy,   Cydoniorum, an ʒ ij. Quinces, an. ʒ ij. Contundantur in Mortareo Marmoreo, sen∣sun affundendo, decoct. hordei mundat. Portulacae &amp; Veronicae, vel q . Plantaginis, Rosarum, &amp; Veronicae, lb j. ss Colentur &amp; Expriman∣tur: Expressioni adde Syrup. Cydoniorum &amp; Papaveris Albi, an. ℥ j. ss fiant tres doses ho∣ris commodis ogg rend .   Bruise all these in a Marble-Mortar, pouring upon them by degrees one pint ss of the Decoction of cleans ' d Barley, Pur∣slain, and Speed-well, or of the waters of Plantain, Roses, and Speed-well. Strain and press them: To the straining add Syrup of Quinces and white-Poppy, ℥ j. ss make three doses to be tak ' n at convenient hours. 
 The Following Emulsions are proper to kill Worms. 
 ℞. Nucleorum Persicorum Excorticatorum, ℥ ss ℞. Of the Kernels of Peaches, the Husks tak ' n off, ℥ ss Seminum Citri,   Seeds of Citron,   Portulacae,   Purslain,   Contra vermes, an. ʒ ij. Wormseed, an. ʒ ij. Contundantur in Mortareo Marmoreo, sen∣sim affundendo aquarum stillatitiarum Naphae &amp; Portulacae, an. ℥ vj. vel decocti Radicis Graminis, &amp; Rasurae Cornu-cervi, lb j. Co∣lentur &amp; Exprimantur, Expressioni adde Sy∣rupi de Limonibus, ℥ ij. fiant duae vel tres, vel quatuor Emulsionis doses, longe a pastu sumend. Melius succedent, si Lunae decursu exhibe∣antur.   Bruise them in a Marble-Mortar, pour∣ing upon them by degrees, of the distill ' d waters of Orange-flowers, and Purslain, an. ℥ vj. or of the Decoction of the Roots of Grass, and shavings of Harts horn, lb j. strain and press them out. To the strain∣ing add Syrup of Lemons, ℥ ij. make two or three, or four Doses of Emulsion, to be tak ' n at a good distance from Meals. They will do better being taken in the Wane of the Moon. 
 Almond-Milks, Butters are easie to make; known to, and made use of by several Ladies, that regard their health, and to keep themselves plump. 
 The usual way is to prepare them of two ounces of blanch ' d-Almonds, which must be stamp ' d exactly in a Marble-Mortar with a Woodd ' n-Pestle, afterwards dissolv ' d in eight or ten ounces of the decoction of barley cleans ' d, or in the Water where Veal or Pullets have been boyl ' d. Then strain and press the whole, and add to the straining an ounce of fine Sugar, and never so little Rose-water, or if you please, Orange-flower∣water. You may add an ounce of Syrup of Violets, Water-Lillies, or White-poppy instead of Sugar if there be occasion. 
 CHAP. V. Of Potions, Mixtures, and Bolus ' s. POtions are so call ' d, because they are to be drank. The Materials of them are very various, by reason of the different Indications, Judgements, and insight of them that prescribe them; for that may be call ' d a Potion which is as ill prepar ' d, as that which is well prescrib ' d, and as well prepar ' d. Besides Purgative-Potions are as well to be accompted potions, as those which are accompted Astringent or Cordial, Sudo∣rific, or Diuretic, &amp;c. As Potions are not made without liquors; those which are made use of are sometimes simple, as fair Water, Wine, Milk, Whey, &amp;c. and sometimes waters distill ' d, Infusions, Tinctures, Decoctions, Juices, &amp;c. Sometimes several liquors are mingled, one among another. Sometimes also to these liquors are added Powders, Salts, Opiates, Confections, Magisteries, Elyxirs, Oyls, Essences, &amp;c. Juleps, Apozems, Emulsions, Almond-Milks, and Diets, may be call ' d Potions as well as Medicines. We also prepare Potions Emetick, Diaphoretic, Pectoral, Cephalic, Somniferous, Anodynes, Aperitives, Diuretics, Cordials, Stomachical, Hepatical, Splenetic, Hysteric, Vulnerary, Arthritick, Carminative, Dysenteric, and for several o∣ther purposes: So that Potions may be made after a thousand fashions for every Di∣sease, since we may make use of various Remedies and different Doses according to the intention of the Physician. 
 That which many modern Physicians call Mixture, may be reckon ' d in the same rank with Potions. But Mixtures differ in this from Potions, that their use is more frequent and longer, and because there is not so much drank of them at a time; for being com∣pos ' d of powerful Medicines, they operate in less quantity, and work those effects by repetition, which could hardly be done at once taking. These Mixtures are usually a mixture of distill ' d Waters, more or less, compounded of Elixirs, distill ' d-Oyls, vola∣tile, fix ' d, or Essential Salts, Spirits, Tinctures, Essences, Extracts, pretious Stones, Syrups, and many other Remedies, well-chosen, and well-proportion ' d in their Doses, which are to be taken from time to time in a little Spoon, in the Intervals between the Patients meals.
The difference of Mixtures may be very great, according to the diversity and com∣plication of Diseases, and the Judgement of the Physicians, that prescribe them. Mixtures are also sometimes made of a more thick consistency, not much unlike that of ordinary Opiates, which is for the accommodation of such Patients, as cannot take Remedies in Drink. These Medicines may be compos ' d of the same Medicaments made use of in the preceding mixtures, excepting the Liquors, instead whereof we put Conserves or Confections: They are given upon the point of a Knife, or wrapt up in Wafers, or otherwise. 
 Bolus ' s are internal Remedies, usually a little more solid then Opiates; invented meerly for the benefit of such Patients as cannot indure to swallow liquid drinks, or cannot away with their scent or taste. They are also profitable to make the best advan∣tage for the swallowing of certain Medicines, whose weight would keep them always at the bottom of the Glass, were they mingl ' d in liquor, as in several preparations of Mercury and Antimony: There may be as much diversity in Bolus ' s, as in Potions. They make them of Electuaries, Confections, Conserves, Pulps, Powders, Salts, Oyls, Essences, Extracts, Syrups, and an infinite sort of Medicines, of which there must be some that are solid and dry enough to thicken those that are too liquid, or too soft. Bolus ' s are taken usually a good while before meals, sometimes upon the point of a Knife, but generally wrapt up in Wafers, powder ' d Sugar, or powder of Liquorice, Fruits roasted or raw, or some confection, or other substance that prevents the Bolus from being either smelt or tasted. 
 CHAP. VI. Of Gargarismes, Masticatories, and Errbines, or Tents to put up into the Nostrils. GArgarisms, are liquid Medicines, design ' d for Diseases of the Throat, Mouth, Pa∣late, and Gums, as also to free the Head from excessive moisture. They are u∣sually compos ' d of distill ' d waters or decoctions, wherein they mix sometimes Salts, sometimes Spirits, Syrups, Honeys, Vinegar, and sometimes several Juices. Gargarisms are never swallow ' d, but only gargl ' d and held for some time in the mouth, then spit out again, continuing the use thereof as long and as often as necessity requires. These Gargarisms are as well known, and as usual as any other sort of Medicine, and there are enough to be found in several Authours, to spare the swelling of these Sheets. 
 Masticatories, are also call ' d Apophlegmatismes, because their chief work is to bring down flegm from the Brain. For which purpose we make use of several simple Drugs, and particularly of divers parts of Plants, as roots of Orrice, Pellitory of Spain, Cyperus, or English Galenga, true Acorus, or Aromatic-reed, Grains of Staves-acre, Cubebs, Cardamom, all the Peppers, Mustard, Rocket, Sage, Rosemary, Mastick, Time, Savory, Tobacco, &amp;c. which Medicines being chaw ' d, by their heat and acrimony have a peculiar qualitie to draw down flegm from the Brain, and to void it by the mouth. Tro∣chisques may be also made thereof by pulverizing them, and incorporating them with Oxymel, or Syrup of Cassidony, to hold in the mouth, and to masticate when they are dry: or else to make thereof a kind of paste, to tye up in a Linnen-Cloth like a knot and so to champ them between the teeth. 
 Errhines are so call ' d, as being Medicines design ' d to be put up into the Nostrils. They were invented for the same use as Apophlegmatismes. But they operate with more force, because they carry their vertue directly to the Brain, through the Conduits of the Nostrils, and powerfully stir up and move the Expulsive faculty. Errhines are sometimes liquid, and proper to be snufft up through the Nostrils; sometimes in Pow∣der, to be either snufft up, or blown into the Nostrils; sometimes like a thin Oynt∣ment, and sometimes like a Tent small at one end. Liquid Errhines are usually made of the Juices of Marjoram, Betony, Sage, Roots of Beets, Sow-bread, Orrice, &amp;c. Or of the Decoctions of the same Plants, or of Lettice, or Lillies of the Valleys. The Pow∣ders are made of Marjoram, Betony, Orrice, Nicotian, Oleander, Colts-foot, white-Ellebore, and Euphorbium, upon some extraordinary accompts: Those that are made up in Liniments will admit the same things into their compositions; and must be incor∣porated with Oyl of Roses or Orrice, and a little wax, or with Oyl of Laurel. The more solid Errhines are chiefly to stop bleeding at the Nose: They are usually compos ' d of Balausts, or the Flowers of the wild-Pomgranate-tree, of Bole of the East, Ter∣ra sigillata, Mastick, and Man ' s-blood or Swines-blood dry ' d; or of some such kind of astringent Medicaments pulveriz ' d, and incorporated with the white of an Egg or Down of a Hare, to make Tents thereof to be put up and held in the Nose. Some there are that make an addition of white-Vitriol. 
 CHAP. VII. Of Injections, and Pessaries. INjections are liquid Medicines sometimes injected into the private parts of Nature, and sometimes into wounds: Clysters may be also call ' d Injections. The ingredi∣ents are different, according to the difference of the Distemper. Wine, Distill ' d∣waters, Lime-waters, Sea-waters, Spirit of Wine, Milk, Whey, Oyls, Balsoms, and several other Liquors; as also several Juices, and divers Decoctions and Infusions of several parts of Plants, and several Minerals. Usually Syringes are made use of for the application of these Injections, and they must be always warm ' d before they be us ' d. Sometimes several Ingredients and Preparations are dissolv ' d in these Liquors, as Salts, Powders, Extracts, Syrups, Honeys, Trochisques, Gums, Elixirs, and several other things, according as necessity requires. Sometimes also we dip Tents, Feathers and Bolsters into Injections for the cure of Wounds. 
 Under the name of Pessaries, are comprehended all Medicines not liquid, which are put up into the Secret-parts of Women. But by the word Pessary, strictly tak ' n, is to be understood a sort of solid Medicine, about a fingers length, sometimes somewhat bigger, which is put up into the Secret-parts with a Riband fasten ' d to one end. These Pessaries are made pyramidical, round, close and smooth, for fear of hurting the parts. These Remedies are prepar ' d for several purposes; the chief of which are to pro∣voke the menstruum ' s, or to stop them: to hinder the falling down of the Matrix, to cure Fluxes against Nature, or to heal Ulcers, or other mischiefs that may happ ' n to those parts. The Body of the Pessary is made of some slight polish ' d-wood, or some piece of Linnen made up close and hard; cover ' d with a kind of Sheath of Velvet, or some other Silk-stuff, the seams whereof cannot hurt. Then fill the Velvet with Cotton or Wool, that it may be as hard as if it were of Wood or Cork; and daub all the outside of the Pessary with some Liniment, or some other mixture proper for your pur∣pose. Pessaries may be also made of Lead, hollow like a little Cane, and cover ' d with Velvet, like the former. In all which there must be a difference observ ' d between Maids and Women; as well in reference to the hardness, as the bigness of Pessaries, appro∣priating the lesser and softer to the first. 
 Aromaticks that are sweet and free from acrimonie are very proper to render Pessa∣ries effectual: whether it be to consume the vapours of the Matrix, or to op ' n the passa∣ges, and to provoke the menstruums: For we observe that good Smells seem to comfort that part. For which reason such Liniments where Musk, Ambergrise, Civet, and other good Smells are mix ' d, are successfully us ' d upon those occasions. Though you must be very careful not to let them come near the Noses of some Persons, upon whom those Sweet-smells would work a contrary effect. The Bodies of Pessaries prepar ' d to stop the menstruum ' s, are made up with astringent powders, very finely pulveriz ' d, in∣corporated with Wax and Oyl of Mastick melted together, fill ' d into some piece of thin Taffaty, and anointed without-side with the same Oyl. These Pessary ' s are very good to stop extraordinary losses of Blood, and the falling of the Matrix. If the Pessaries are design ' d for the cure of any Ulcer, or any other disease in the neck of the Matrix, the Pessary must be anointed with some Linement or convenient Medicine in that part which is most able to reach it. 
 CHAP. VIII. Of Clysters, and Suppositories. CLysters, call ' d by the Greeks Enemata, are also Injections, and liquid Medicines, injected through the Fundament into the Intestines, for the cure or ease of several Maladies. They are call ' d Clysters or Washings, because their use is to wash the Intestines. 
 Clysters are prepar ' d for several purposes, sometimes to cool the Intestines, some∣times to moist ' n them; sometimes to soft ' n and soak the harden ' d excrements, or to stir up the expulsive Faculty, to dispel the wind, to asswage pains, to facilitate the Ex∣pulsion of the Urine, to draw forth or kill the Worms, to ease Women in Labour; to provoke their menstruum ' s, and to appease Hysteric-passions, to asswage tormenting Gripes, and to make a diversion of Humours or Vapours, which flie to the Head, Sto∣mach, Brest, Reins, or any other parts of the Body. 
 Clysters are usually compos ' d of the Decoctions of Roots, Herbs, Seeds and Flowers, of different vertue, according to the intention of the Physician. The Decoctions are for the most part made in fair Water, but many times in Milk, Whey, Meat∣broths, ordinary Spanish -wine, Urine, Oxycrat, Hydromel, and several other Li∣quors. And besides the ordinary Roots and Flowers, which are boyl ' d for Clysters, many times there is an occasion to mixe Laxatives, such as are Senna, Coloquintida, Rhubarb, and many others, and to dissolve therein the Strain ' d-decoctions of Opiats, Honeys, Syrups, Sugar, Salts, Yolks of Eggs, Turpentine, Oyls, Extracts, and many other things, which it would be too tedious to repeat. The forms of Clysters are so familiar, that it is to no purpose to insert them. 
 Suppositories are solid Medicines about the length and bigness of the little Finger, round and pyramidical. They were invented for the convenience of those who have an aversion to Clysters, or of such whose Sickness and constitution will not admit of them. The ordinary ingredient of Suppositories is Common-honey, Bay-salt, Salt-gemme, or Aloes, or Coloquintida in powder, or some Hiera, or Laxative Electuary. Some∣times Suppositories of Sope cut round and small at the end will suffice. Some there are that make use of Muscardins, or bits of Paste made of Gum-Tragacanth, Rose-water and Musk. So that in these things every one is at liberty to make choice of what he likes best. 
 CHAP. IX. Of Wines. ALL the World knows that the Grape is the Fruit of the Vine; and that Wine is the Juice of the Grape; but this Juice would not be true Wine, did it not undergo a Fermentation; and if the subtle parts had not by that means been separated from the grosser, and by that means were not become capable of operating as they do: Not that their Fermentation gives to the subtle parts of the Wine their utmost purity. For that requires other means, as you shall hear in the third part of this Work; and there∣fore I shall here at present only describe the preparation of two sorts of Wine most in use, the first of which may serve as an Example how to prepare any other. 
 Vinum Absinthii. Wormwood Wine. ℞. Summitat. floridarum siccarum Absin∣thii majoris vel minoris Fasc. j. Incide &amp; im∣mitte in doliolum, quod pintas Parisienses quin∣quaginta aut circiter contineat. Impleatur do∣lium succo Racemorum recenter expresso, &amp; re∣ponatur in Cella vinaria ad fermentationem, qua per acta, quod per fermentationem deperditum est Vino suppleatur, &amp; diligenter dolio obtu∣rato, servetur Vinum. ℞. Of the Flowrie drie-tops of the big∣ger or lesser Wormwood, Fasc. j. Shred them and put them into a little Vessel contain∣ing fifty pints of Paris, or thereabouts. Fill the Vessel with the Juice or Vine-clusters newly press ' d forth, and set the Vessel into a Wine-Cellar to ferment. The Fermentati∣on being over, supply the waste of the Fer∣mentation with Wine: then carefully stop∣ping up the Vessel, keep the Wine. 
 They that can endure the bitterness of Great-Wormwood, may make choice of it for the preservation of this Wine: But the nicer sort choose the little, whose vertues are no less then those of greater. Take the Flowerie-tops, and having weigh ' d out the quan∣tity prescrib ' d, shred them and put them into a little Bag, which is to be so fasten ' d to the bung-hole, as to hang in the midst of the Liquor. Place the Vessel in the Cellar, fill it with the Juice of clusters newly squeez ' d, and let it stand for two months, during which time the Wine will ferment and be fully charg ' d with the smell, taste and vertues of the Wormwood. When the Ebullition of the Wine is over, fill up with white∣wine, burnt-wine, or Spanish -wine the waste of the Fermentation: Then stop up the Tub, and keep the Wine for your use. 
 The Juice of the New-gather ' d-grapes is to be preferr ' d before all sorts of Wine, for the preparation of Wormwood-wine, and of all compound Wines; because that Juice being newly squeez ' d forth, by subtilizing and disengaging it self from its terre∣strial parts by Fermentation, penetrates more inwardly the ingredients which are put into it; and operates more effectually then a wine could do already fermented, whose subtle parts are subject to dissipation. For this Juice loses nothing to speak of in its Fermentation with the Wormwood; but the same flegm which the ordinary wine loses in its own. And in the mean time by means of the heat which the Fermentative∣spirits excite in it, it is better able to penetrate the body of the wormwood, and to charge it self with its vertue, then otherwise it would be. By this means also it may be kept a long while, provided the Vessel were full and close stopt. 
 Wormwood-wine is very much commended against the Diseases of the Stomach and Liver, especially proceeding from a cold cause. It dissipates wind and crudities, it helps and increases the appetite, kills worms, resists putrefaction; helps conco∣ction and distribution of the nourishment, and consumes bad humours. It brings down the vapours that rise from the Matrix▪ and op ' ns its obstructions, and is very proper for the Green-sickness, and to provoke the menstruums. Take three or four ounces in a morning fasting, for several days, as you find it requisite. 
 Vinum Stibiatum, vulgò Emeticum. Stibiated Wine, vulgarly Emetic; or apt to provoke vomiting. ℞. Vitri aut Reguli Antimonii, vel si lubet, Croci Metallorum, aut Magnesiae Opalina subtilissime pulveratorum, ℥ iij. Vini Hispa∣nici. aut Vini albi generosi pintas duas Parisi∣enses. In Lagena Vitrea simul collocentur, probéque obturato vase in loco temperato per ctiduum macerentur, &amp; saepius agitentur, si∣mulque tandem serventur, ut usus tempore Vi∣num Clarum Antimonium supernatans, per in∣clinationem effundi &amp; sumi possit. ℞. Of Glass, Regulus of Antimony, or if you had rather, Crocus Metallorum, or Magnesia Opalina, finely powder ' d ℥ iij. Spanish -wine or strong French -white-wine two Paris -pints: Put them together in a Glass-bottle, and the Bottle being carefully stopp ' d, let them macerate eight days in a temperate place, and let them be oft ' n stirr ' d; and at length let them be all kept together, that when it is to be us ' d, the clear wine that swims above the Antimony, may be pour ' d forth by inclination, and so tak ' n. 
 Having Glass or Regulus of Antimony, or Magnesia Opalina, well prepar ' d and finely beat ' n upon a mortar, it is an easie thing to prepare Emetic -wine. For it is sufficient to get a good Glass-bottle, and to put the prepar ' d Antimony into it, and to pour the prescrib ' d quantity of wine into it, then to stop up the Bottle, to set it in a temperate place, to shake it from time to time for seven or eight days together, and to keep the wine and the Antimony together in a Bottle well-stopp ' d, to make use of as occasion serves, pouring out by inclination, and taking the clear wine that swims above the Antimony, to such a quantity as is requisite; taking care not to raise the bottom, for fear some part of the Antimony should mixe with the wine. Upon which this observation is to be made, That the prescrib ' d dose of wine and Antimony need not be too religiously observ ' d. For though there should be a little more or a little less of the one or of the other, it would not signifie much, since oft ' n Experience teaches us that the wine takes to it self no more of the vertue of the Antimony, then it is able to receive; and that the lying with the Antimony one, two or more months, as the wine might do, renders it nothing more strong then that which has lain but eight days, if it be oft ' n shak ' n. 
 You shall observe also that the same powder of Antimony, upon which the wine has staid a long time, and which has imparted its Emetic and Purgative Quality to it, is still able to impart as much vertue to more new wine, if macerated with it, and that after that wine is sufficiently strong of the Antimony, and spent, the same Powder will serve again several times for the same use. And that if you be but careful always to pour out the wine gently, and to take always only the clear, you shall find very near the same weight of the powder as at the first maceration; which is more confirm ' d by the trial which we make of Cups of Regulus of Antimony, which will give a Purgative and Emetic Quality to the wine, which shall be fill ' d and kept in them but for some few hours: and then again bequeath the same vertues to new wine in the same space of time, and will still afford the same qualities to other wine, as long as the life of one, or several men continues to make tryal of it, without perceiving in the Cup any diminution of its weight or vertue.
Emetic Wine purges upwards and downwards ill humours, especially those that are bred in the Stomach. It operates with more or less violence according to the consti∣tution of those that take it, or according to the superfluity or small quantity of matter which it meets with. And therefore it is much more proper for persons that are full of humours, then for those that are not so much troubled with them, and it is better at the beginning then at the end of a sickness, when the Patient is weak. It may be given alone from one, to two, three, or four ounces, a good distance before Meals, ac∣cording to the Age, Strength, and Nature of the Disease. It may be mingled also a∣mong Purgatives. Where note, that if the Purgatives are too strong and exceed in quantity the Emetick-wine, then it acts as they act, and works only downwards. But if it surmount the Purgatives in quantity and strength, it constrains them to work as that does, upwards and downwards. 
 Emetic-wine is never giv ' n to those that are narrow-Chested, nor to those that are hard to vomit, or if there be any fear of any Inflammation of the Bowels. 
 CHAP. X. Of Vinegars. VVE may say of Vinegar, that the first Original of it is the Juice of Grapes, as well as of Wine. But the Juice of the Grape must be made Wine by Fer∣mentation before it can be turn ' d into Vinegar. And though Vinegar may be made of Beer or Cider, as also of water; I hold, that good and true Vinegar is only to be made of Wine. Some attribute the only cause of the acidity of Vinegar to the dissipation of the volatile Spirits of the Wine. But it seems that they have not sufficiently examin ' d this business. For they that know the Nature and Original of acids, and the effects which they are able to act upon Salts and Spirits, especially upon volatiles, will as much attribute to them the turning of Wine into Vinegar, as to the absence of the volatile Spirit of Wine. For although before this alteration, some part of the Spirit of Wine may chance to be dissipated, yet we are to believe, that the corruption which happens to wine, happens through the disproportion of its parts, and that the excess of the acid is the chief cause of turning wine into Vinegar. For so long as the flegm, the volatile and tartarous parts which contain the acid, keep nigh a just proportion together, the Wine continues good. But when any one of those parts predominates, there must of necessity happen some corruption, which proves to be more or less according to the Quantity and Nature of the part which predominates, which causes very great diffe∣rences in the decay of the Wine. For when the Wine decays through excess of flegm, it grows greasie, and turns. But though the flegm be able to enervate the force of the volatile part of the Wine by its own corruption, and by its excess, it can∣not nevertheless destroy it, as it destroys almost entirely the tartarous acid part. Whence it comes to pass, that though no good Vinegar can be made of Wines grown greasie, and turn ' d; Yet in Distillation you may draw from hence as much vola∣tile Spirit, as from Wines neither greasie nor sowr. And you might draw from hence altogether quite as much, but that the abundance of flegm, which caus ' d the corruption of the Wine, in part takes up the place of the volatile Spirit. The excess of the volatile Spirit happ ' ns very rarely to Wine, and though it should exceed the other parts in quantity, as it is very able to preserve it self without them, it would never corrupt them, but would make the Wine violent and reaking, so that it would be less serviceable for common use, and would intoxicate sooner: But when the Tartarous part sur∣mounts, it draws to it the nitrous part of the Air, which is in some sort Homogeneous to it, and multiplying it self by a little and a little, instead of chasing away the volatile Spirit, which it has surmounted in quantity, it unites it self strictly to it, to make it in some measure conformable to its own Nature, while the flegm is no longer able to tem∣per the acid which has got the upper hand of it. Vinegars by their acidity slack ' n the activity of the Salts, and volatile Spirits; joyning themselves to them, and altering their action; and are successfully made use of in Distempers caus ' d by the Salts, and vola∣tile Spirits, or by humours that participate of their Nature, chiefly Choleric humours, to which purpose acid Fruits and Juices are usually administred with good success. 
 Acetum Rosatum. Vinegar of Roses. ℞. Rosarum Rubrarum exungulatarum Sic∣carum, lb j. Aceti acerrimi, lb viij. Vase Vi∣treo bene obturato excipiantur per quindecim aut viginti dies insolentur; deinde colentur &amp; exprimantur. Colatura cum pari Rosarum Pon∣dere in eodem vase iterum per idem tempus in∣soletur, coletur &amp; exprimatur, &amp; servetur a∣cetum. ℞. Of dry red Roses, the white being nipt off, one pound; of very tart Vine∣gar, lb viij. Put them into a Glass-Vessel well stopp ' d; set them in the Sun for fif∣teen or twenty days, then strain and press them out. Let the straining be again set in the Sun during the same time, with the like weight of Roses. Let it be strain ' d and press ' d out, and let the Vine∣gar be kept. 
 Take the great buds of Provence -Roses, and cut away the white part at the bottom. Dry the red part in the hot Sun, if it may be done, at least in the Air, as soon as possi∣ble may be. Take a pound of Roses thus dry ' d, and put them into a strong glass-bot∣tle; upon which you must pour eight pints of good Vinegar, and having stopt the bot∣tle, expose it to the Sun for fifteen days or three weeks; then strain and press out the whole, and return the straining to the same Vessel, over a pound of fresh Roses; then stop up the bottle, and expose it to the Sun as long as before: then strain the Vinegar and squeeze the Roses, and keep the Vinegar for your use. You may, if you please, leave the Roses in the Vinegar, and strain it only when you have occasion for it. 
 Vinegar of Roses is as much us ' d in Dyet, as in Physick. It cuts, cleanses, tempers, it gives an appetite, it provokes sleep being apply ' d to the Fore-head, it removes the Acrimony of the fix ' d Salts, it moderates the activity of the volatile, it kills the Worms, stays Vomiting, stays the Operation of Purgatives, cools Inflammations, assists Expecto∣rations, and loosens Flegm, stops the Piles being taken inwardly, and applied outwardly; resists Putrefaction, and is good to smell to in noisome and Pestilential seasons. It is mix ' d among several Liquors, as also in Liniments, Unguents and Emplaisters. 
 Vinegar of Roses may serve as an example for the making of several Vinegars, made of Flowers, as of Elder, Gilli-flowers, Rosemary, Sage, Marigolds, &amp;c. But because these flowers do not abound so much in moisture as the Rose, you may take the pains to dry them, or at least to half-dry them, not to dissipate their good parts. 
 Acetum Scilliticum. Vinegar of Squills. ℞. Scillas duas molis mediocris, quarum cor∣ticem externum, &amp; cor medium cultro Arundi∣naceo eximes, Laminas inter cor &amp; Corticem existentes in partes divides, &amp; soli per multos dies ad humidi superflui consumptionem expo∣nes. Harum lb j. in lagenam capacem immit∣tes, illique superfundes Aceti Albi Acerrimi, vel potius Spiritus Aceti, lb viij. Lagenam obturabis, &amp; per quadraginta dies radiis Sola∣ribus expones. Colatis deinde, &amp; expressis Laminis, Acetum servabis ad usum. ℞. Two Sea-Onions of an indifferent bigness, peel off the outward Rind, and take out the heart with a knife made of a Reed; the thin slices between the out∣most skin and the heart divide into parts, and expose them for many days to the Sun, till the superfluous moisture be consum ' d. Of those put a pound into a large stone-Jug, and pour upon them eight pints of very sharp White Vinegar▪ or rather Spirit of Vinegar. Stop the Jug, and set it in the Sun for forty days. Then having strain ' d and squeez ' d the thin slices, keep the Vinegar for your use. 
 They that have travelled into Spain and Portugal, have there met with two sorts of true Sea-Onions, one of which being white, is call ' d the Male; the other being red is call ' d the Female. The white is usually somewhat the lesser: it is in taste like the red one, but a little thought more tart: However the vertues of both are the same. These Squills are Onions that grow by the Sea-shore, the Root whereof is large, short, close, and bended. In the Months of August and September, they put forth a round, sleek, shi∣ning stalk altogether bare, of a whitish colour enclining to Grideline, as big as a Man ' s finger, about two Cubits high, surrounded at the top with several little white-flowers en∣clining to purple, growing like an Ear; after which follows a black-seed like that of or∣dinary Onions which is ripe in October and November. The leaves of both Squills are like those of a Flower-de-luce, but bigger; they begin to sprout forth in November and December, and grow dry and die in May or June. The white is accounted better then the red because of the colour. 
 The drying of the slices was only intended to correct any ill quality which may be in them; for as much as all that is dissipated by the Sun, is only a superfluous moisture, void of any considerable vertue; and therefore care is tak ' n to prevent that superfluous moi∣sture from taking away the strength of the Vinegar, and causing it to putrifie, in regard there is flegm enough in the Vinegar without having any need to multiply it. 
 Dioscorides and Matthiolus most highly applaud the vertues of Vinegar of Squills, and affirm that by taking three ounces every Morning, two hours before any eating, and ta∣king a little walk after it, it will preserve a Man many years in perfect health. That he shall never have any Disease in Mouth, Throat or Stomach. That he shall have a voice always clear and clean, respiration free, quick sight, hearing good, an excellent complexion. That he shall be free from Windiness: That all the parts of the body shall do their Offices: That he shall be always fit for business, never have an ill breath; shall digest whatever he eats, and turn it into good nourishment, and have a kindly eva∣cuation of the Excrements. That it will recover the Pthysical, though far gone; very much help the Epileptic, abating the effects of the Disease, and quite taking them at length a∣way, if the Disease be new. That it will give ease in the Gout, and diseases of the Joynts; open obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, and other parts: and in short will procure soundness of health, and a prolongation of Life. But because our Physicians seldom prescribe this Vinegar, I have not made Tryals enough to confirm what those great Men have writt ' n. 
 Acetum Theriacale.   Treacl ' d Vinegar.   ℞. Radicum Angeliae,   ℞. Of the Roots of Angelica,   Valerianae Majoris,   the bigger Valerian,   Meu Athamantici,   Athamantic Spignel,   Imperatoriae,   Master-wort,   Gentianae,   Gentian,   Vince-toxici,   Swallow-wort,   Carlinae,   Carline-Thistle,   Zedoariae,   Setwall,   Tormentillae,   Tormentill,   Bistortae, an. ℥ j. ss. Snake-weed, an. ℥ j. ss. Cortices Citri sicci,   Rind of dry Citron,   Seminis ejusdem,   Seed of the same,   Baccarum Juniperi,   Juniper-berries,   Cardamomi minoris,   Lesser Cardamoms,   Cubebarum, an. ℥ j. Cubebs, an. ℥ j. Foliorum Rutae,   Leaves of Rue,   Scordij,   Water-Germander,   Dictamni Cretici,   Cretan Dittany,   Cardui Benedicti,   Carduus,   Centaurii minoris,   Lesser Centaury,   Florum Aurantiorum,   Orange-Flowers,   Rosarum rubrarum, an. M. j. Red-Roses, an. M. j. Radices &amp; Semina Contusa cum foliis inci∣sis excipiantur Lagena Vitrea satis ampla, illisque superfundantur Aceti Acerrimi vel potius spiritus Aceti lb xij. Obturetur Lagena, &amp; per dies duodecim radiis Solaribus expona∣tur, sapius agitando; postea colentur &amp; expri∣mantur omnia, serveturque Acetum ad usum. The Roots and Seeds being cut, put them into a Glass-bottle, large enough and pour upon them twelve pints of the most sharpVinegar, or rather Spirit of Vinegar, and expose them to the Sun twelve days, oft ' n stirring them▪ then strain and squeeze out the ingredients, and keep the Vinegar for use 
 The Composition of this Treacled-Vinegar is a mixture of the vertues of several choice Medicines, really Theriacal, and able to furnish the Vinegar with all the good qualities expected from it. And to facilitate the preparation, I have thought fit to give a brief Description of the Medicaments, in the choice whereof there may be some doubt. 
 Authors describe several sorts of Angelica, of which the two principal are, the Bo∣hemian, and that which grows upon the high Mountains of France, Spain or Italy. Some prefer the Bohemian; but that may be more for the rarity of it then for any vertue ex∣traordinary above that of our Mountains; the stalk whereof is above a Cubit in height, knotted in several parts, hollow and having many Branches; the Leaves long and dent∣ed, the colour dark-green, with ombels of white Flowers: The root is large▪ round, about a foot in length, divided into parts like a beard; white within, and somewhat dark without. The Seed is large and flat: It is of a thin substance; of a smell and taste very Aromatic. The Great Valerian grows in the Mountains of Pontus, as also upon some Mountains of France. It has a soft, broad, smooth Leaf, very jag∣ged. The Stalk is smooth, soft, hollow, inclining to red, somewhat knotted, about two Cubits high. The Flowers are small and white▪ inclining to purple, and grow∣ing in Tufts. The Root is half creeping, as big as a man ' s finger, having of each side and all a-long the lower part several little white Roots that run into the Earth. The taste is very Aromatical, and the scent piercing, and much like that of Nard. 
 Meum or Spignel, call ' d Athamantic, from the Mountain Athamas in Thessalie, where it grows very plentifully, abounds also upon several Mountains of France. The Leaves are small and long like those of Anise. The Stalk is about a Cubit high, or some∣times more, with ombels of flowers at the top. It hath several Roots pack ' d to∣gether, black without and white within, as big as a Man ' s little-finger, cover ' d to∣wards the bottom with a kind of hairy excrescence like the stalk of Sea-holly. It is of a thin substance, but of a smell and taste very Aromatic. 
 Imperatoria grows upon the high Mountains of France, Italy and other parts. The Leaves are broad, somewhat pointed, indented and jagged, growing from the Root by three and by three, at the end of a long tayl: They are strong and rough to handle, as is also the stalk, that inclines somewhat to red, being about two Cubits high. The Flowers are white and in ombels. The Seed in shape, taste and smell is very like to the Seseli, or Hartwort of Marseilles. It has several roots, which are neither very long nor big, lying on the ground, knotted, dark-colour ' d and rugged without, somewhat green within, of a sharp taste, thin substance and very Aromatical smell. 
 Gentian grows upon high Mountains in moist places. The Leaves are large, broad▪ and inclining to red, somewhat resembling the leaves of Plantain; but much more like to white Ellebore. The Stalk about the bigness of a man ' s finger, is very smooth▪ five or six foot high, and parted by knots; whence spring forth leaves by two and two, less then those which are next the root. The Flower is yellow, the Seed flat and smooth; the Root very much like that of Marsh-mallows; but much bigger and thicker. It is also very yellow and very bitter. 
 Swallow-wort grows usually in Mountainy-places; the stalks are about a cubit high, smooth, round, limber, and difficult to break. The leaves are dark-green▪ long▪ pointed at the end, somewhat like those of Ivy. The Flowers are white, shall, and stinking. After which succeed round, long knobs full of red-seed, somewhat broad and downie, in shape like a Swallow. The Roots are small and odoriferous, and very much commended against Poysons. 
 The Carline-Thistle grows upon high Mountains. The Leaves are large, broad▪ rough, prickly, pointed, display ' d, and extended like branches. It has no stalk▪ but lies upon the ground, producing a little above the Root a round, hoary, prickly head that spreads into a large Flower of a yellow colour. The Root is about tyhe bigness of a Man ' s fist, and somewhat more: it is about a foot long▪ and runs directly into the ground. It is somewhat dark colour ' d without, and white within, of an indifferent sub∣stance. The taste is not displeasing, insomuch that the Countrey-People feed upon it. The smell is very Aromatic. 
 The Plant of Zedoary is not describ ' d by Authors, yet the Root is very much in use. It is somewhat inclining to red, a little flat, as long and as thick as a Man ' s little finger, having a kind of resemblance to ginger, but less knotty. The taste is a little bitter, but Aromatical. It is commended for a great Cordial, and good against Poyson.
Tormentil call ' d Heptaphyllon, because that the Leaves grow sev ' n and sev ' n toge∣ther, has several creeping-stalks, round and smooth. The Leaves like those of Cinqfoyle. The Flowers yellow, but very small. The Root short, as big as the little finger, black without, red within, environ ' d with strings; the taste is astringent, and the smell some∣what Aromatie. 
 Snake-weed grows generally in the Mountains; the Leaves are long, fibrous, and like those of the lesser Dock. The upper-part is dark colour ' d and spotted: the Stalk is not very big, thrusting forth some kind of Leaves at the top, which is beset with little Purple-flowers in the form of a Spike, being about a cubit in length. The Root is red within, dark-colour ' d without, beset with little threads; of a very compact substance▪ in taste and smell like that of Tormentil. 
 The Lesser-Cardamom is esteem ' d the best. We have no Description of the Plant that produces it, no more then of the other Cardamoms. The form of the Cod of the Lesser is triangular, resembling that of the Fruit of Ben. The Seeds▪ are set in order and well-crowded into the Cod, within a little as big as those of Amomum, of a pur∣plish colour, separated by little membrains, and filling all the Cod. Their taste is biting and very Aromatic. 
 The Plant of Cubebs is not well known yet: we believe it to resemble black-Pepper, and that it creeps up and supports it self upon Trees that grow next to it. They grow in Java. The Seeds of Cubebs are cluster ' d together like those of Ivy, but they have a little tail which black-Pepper has not. Their taste is biting and Aromatic. You must cut off the tail with a pair of Scissers, and throw it away. 
 The true Dittany is no where to be met with but in Candy, upon the Mountain Ida. It has many stalks very smooth and woollie, as also are the Leaves, by reason of the cotton that covers them; they are of a round figure, about the bigness of the Nail; the Flowers are purplish, and like our ordinary Violets. They are intermix ' d with the Leaves, especially at the top of the stalks like those of Scordium. Which I affirm to be true, as having oft ' n had the real Dittany in flower, contrary to the opinion of several Writers, who affirm that Dittany never flowers: For which they may be excus ' d, as having never seen any Dittany, but what was gather ' d before the Dittany came to be in flower, and consequently took it to be always the same. And I believe it is for the same reason that you shall never find the Flowers but only the Leaves of Dittany pre∣scrib ' d by Physicians, which in my opinion are not to be rejected; nor are they to be separated from the Leaves, no more then those of Scordium, Calamint, Germander, Ground-Ivy and other Aromatical Herbs. The Roots of Dittany are very numerous, small-cluster ' d together, dark-colour ' d without. They are accounted good for no∣thing: the Leaves and Flowers are very Aromatical in taste and smell. 
 All the Simples in this composition of Vinegar must be put in drie. You must bruise the Roses, Citron-rinds, and all the Seeds or Berries; you cut must the Herbs, and put them all into a large strong Glass-bottle, and pour out upon them twelve pints of excel∣lent Vinegar, stirring the Ingredients, so that they may be equally steep ' d in the Vinegar. Then stop up the Bottle, and expose it to the Sun for forty days; at the end whereof strain and press out the Ingredients, and put up the Vinegar in a Bottle close-stopp ' d. 
 The vertues of this Vinegar are extraordinary, especially against the Pestilence and in all contagious and Epidemic Distempers. It is very good to resist Poyson and con∣tagious Air, and to cure the bitings of venemous Beasts. It resists putrefaction and kills the Worms. It cuts and attenuates thick matters, and helps digestion. It is ad∣minister ' d both inwardly and outwardly. The dose of it is one or two full Silver-spoons full in Wine, Broth or any other convenient liquor. It is mingl ' d in Potions, and also in liquid Epithems. It is put up into the Nostrils, apply ' d to the Temples, to the Sto∣mach and Wrists. It may be dipt in a spunge, and carry ' d in a little Box with holes in it to smell to in sickness-time, or against any ill scents. 
 Acetum Febrifugum, sive Aqua Pro∣phylactica Sylvii de le Boe.   The Fever-vanquishing Vinegar, or Water for prevention of Sylvius de le Boe.   ℞. Radicum Petasitidis, ℥ ij. ℞. Of the Root of Butter-Bur, ℥ ij. Angelicae,   Angelica,   Zedoariae, an. ℥ j. Zeodoarie, an. ℥ j. Foliorum Rutae Hortensis, ℥ iiij. Leaves of Gard ' n-Rue, ℥ iiij. Melissae,   Baume   Scabiosa,   Scabious,   Calendulae, an ℥ ij. Marigolds, an. ℥ ij. Nucum jugland. immaturar. incisorum, lb ij. Green-Wall-nuts cut, lb ij. Pomorum Citriorum recentium incis. lb j. New Pome-Citrons slic ' d, lb j. Contundantur prius Radices, deinde cum reli∣quis omnibus in Aceti distillati lb xij. per noctem macerentur, postea lento igne cinerum fere ad Pharmacorum siccitatem distillentur, prolectúmqu tum in Lagenis Vitreis as∣servetur.   Bruise the Roots first, then with the rest of the ingredients, let them macerate all night in xij. pints of distill ' d Vinegar. Then let them be distill ' d with a gentle fire of embers till the ingredients be al∣most drie; keep the Vinegar so gotten, close stopp ' d up in Bottles. 
 The Butter-Bur grows in moist places in Mountains: in the Spring-time it puts forth a tender stalk, hollow and pithie, about a Palm and half high; having at the top se∣veral flowers, small and cluster ' d like those of Olives, somewhat pyramidical and fair to the sight: the Leaves come forth after the stalk is fall ' n. They are fasten ' d in the middle to a long tail about a cubit long, thick and full of pith. They hang like a hat turn ' d the wrong way: they are large and round, and somewhat whitish underneath; upon one side cleft to the very middle; which cleft coming to close, makes the Leaf resemble a Champinion upon its stalk. The Root is large, dark-colour ' d without and white within, of a bitter and unpleasing taste, and a strong and unsavoury smell. 
 The Roots being well-scrap ' d must be well-bruis ' d in a Marble-mortar with a wood ' n∣pestle among the green Wall-nuts, Citrons and chopt Herbs; then put them into a Glass-cucurbit of a sufficient bigness, and pour upon them xij. pints of good Spirit of Vinegar that did not yield above three pints at a distillation: then fit and lute on a head upon the Cucurbit and leave the ingredients in digestion all night, and the next day distil them with a moderate fire of embers, till the Ingredients are drie; taking care that they do not burn at last; and you shall have a Distill ' d-vinegar as clear Water. 
 Sylvius the Dutchman extols this Vinegar for the cure of all sorts of Agues, as well intermitting as continual. He would have the patient mix it in his ordinary drink, in Distill ' d-Waters, in Apozemes, in Mixtures, Potions, Broth, &amp;c. It provokes very gentle Sweats, it qualifies and takes off the acrimonie of the Choler, it quenches thirst, corrects the bitterness of the month, and stays vomiting. It is very much commend∣ed against the Pestilence, and in all Epidemic-diseases. It may be also put up the No∣strils, apply ' d to the Temples and Wrists; or be dipt in spunges to be smelt to for the comfort of the Noble-parts. 
 This Vinegar must not be us ' d in Diseases occasion ' d by Acids; for there you must have recourse to the fix ' d or volatile Salts. 
 CHAP. XI. Of Robs. THE Arabick word Rob, which the Modern still retain was giv ' n to the Juices of Fruits depurated, and boyl ' d to the consumption of two Thirds; or rather to the consumption of three Fourths of their moistures. The Name of Sapa is given par∣ticularly to the Juice of Grapes depurated and boyl ' d after the same manner. And there∣fore there was no ground for them that would make the Name of Sapa common to all Robs. For though the Sapa be in effect a Rob, yet we acknowledg for a Sapa no other Rob then that of the Juice of Grapes. Defrutum, is a diminutive of Sapa; being only de∣purated and boyl ' d to the consumption of the third part. And is properly that which we call Burnt-wine. It might be an easie thing to prepare Robs of the Juices of se∣veral Fruits depurated; but considering that it is not for Apothecaries to trouble their Shops with Remedies little in use, it shall suffice to set down the most necessary. 
 A Rob, or Simple Sapa. ℞. Succi recentis Ʋvarum albarum perfe∣ctè maturarum lb xxx. Coque igne lento in vase fictili vitreato, vel in Aheneo, stanno in∣tus. obducto, donec tertia tantum pars succi supersit. Si vero Defrutum optaveris, ad tertiae tantum partis consumptionem coque. ℞. Of the new Juice of white Grapes perfectly ripe lb xxx. Boyl it over a gentle fire in an Earth ' n-glaz ' d-vessel, or a Cop∣per-vessel tinn ' d within, till the third part of the Juice only remains. But if you de∣sire a Defrutum, boyl it only to the con∣sumption of the third part. 
 You must not expose the Juice of the Grapes to the Sun, nor use artifice to pu∣rifie it before you set it upon the fire, to make a Rob or Defrutum. on the con∣trary you must avoid it, because that Depuration would never come to pass without the Fermentation of the Juice, whereby it would change its nature and become Wine, and would lose all its volatile Spirits in boyling. Whereas by avoiding Fermentation, those Spirits are no-where settl ' d or concenter ' d; so that while they are upon the fire there exhales nothing but a gross and unuseful flegm. Which may serve for an Item to those, who preparing the Defrutum or Sapa, may be ignorant of the reasons why we take the Juice of Grapes newly press ' d out, and not the good Wine, which because it is more pure, they might probably think proper to be preferr ' d before the new Juice. 
 The Juice of Grapes is differently boyl ' d in Languedoc, Provence, and other places, for sometimes they only boil it to a Defrutum, and call it burnt-wine. Sometimes they con∣tinue and boyl it to the consistency of a Sapa, which comes near the ordinary Syrups: sometimes till it be as thick as soft Electuaries, and this they call Raisiné, or the Grape-Confection, and use in the conditing several Fruits. In all which things they thus proceed. 
 They take a good quantity of white Grapes perfectly ripe, take out the stones, squeeze and press out the Juice in a clean cloth. Then for example they take about thir∣ty pints of this Juice, putting it at the same time into a great Earthen Vessel well-glaz ' d, or in a Cauldron, or Copper-Bason tinn ' d within side; and setting the Vessel upon a moderate fire, they cause the Juice to boil softly till the third part be consum ' d, which is the boyling allow ' d to burnt-wine. Then they take the Vessel off from the fire, and stir the burnt-wine continually with a stick till it be quite cold; which they do to evaporate some superfluous humidity, which might remain in the burnt-wine. Then they cover thē Vessel, and letting it stand till the next day, they pour forth by inclination the clear li∣quor into a proportionable Vessel, leaving the settlement at the bottom. Then they set the Vessel in the Cellar for six or seven weeks, to ferment like the new Wine. After which, to make up that little burnt-wine which the fermentation had dissipated, they fill up the Wine with other burnt-wine reserv ' d on purpose, or else they put in Spanish-Wine, or good White-wine, and stopping up the Vessel, keep it in a cool place for use. 
 But if instead of burnt-wine, you desire a Sapa, you must boil the juice of red Grapes, till there be but a third part left; Then stir it with a stick till it be quite cold, and let it rest all night in the Vessel, the better to purifie it self from its Lees. But then instead of putting this depurated Wine into a Cask, you must let it boil again over a lit∣tle fire, in the same Vessel very clean, till the half be consum ' d; then take it off the fire, let it cool, and stay two or three days; then pour out the clear liquor by inclination, and leave the feces at the bottom of the Vessel as before. By this second boiling, the Juice will be reduc ' d to two thirds, and will be of a consistency not unlike that of or∣dinary Syrups. 
 You may also return the same Sapa upon the Fire again, and consume about a fourth part, over a very gentle fire, if you desire it should be boil ' d to the consistency of Electua∣ries; or for the preserving of Conditements. You may Aromatize these Juices thus diffe∣rently boyl ' d by mixing with them, when they are cold, some drops of Oyl of Cinamon or Cloves, incorporated with fine-powder ' d Sugar. 
 That which they call burnt-wine in Languedoc and Province, is a preparation very like that of Spanish-wine. This Wine is to be lookt upon as an Alimental nourishment, as well as the Sapa or the Raisiné. It breeds good and quick nourishment, and is proper to restore lost strength, to fortifie the Heart, Stomach, and all the other noble parts, to create an Appetite and help Digestion. The Dose of the burnt-wine is from one ounce to four, that of the Sapa, from one ounce to two. That of the Raisiné much the same. The burnt-wine is also made use of in Clysters instead of Decoctions, chiefly in Colicks proceeding from Wind and Acids.
Rob Cydoniorum. A Rob of Quinces. ℞. Succi Cydoniorum ad maturitatem ver∣gentium, lb xviij. Coque igne lento in vase fictili vitreato, donec Tertia tantum pars super∣fit. Refrigeratum Rob, quiete &amp; decantatione fecibus liberatum, Oleorum Cinnamomi &amp; Cary∣ophillorum ana guttis tribus, Saccharo pul∣v izato exceptis, Aromatizetur &amp; servetur. ℞. Of the Juice of Quinces enclining to be ripe lb xviij. Boyl them over a soft fire in an Earth ' n glaz ' d-Pot, till only the third part remain. When the Rob is cold, and freed from its feces by settlement and inclinati∣on, take of Oyl of Cinamon and Cloves, an. three drops, mix ' d with powder ' d Su∣gar, and Aromatize it, and then keep it for use. 
 Take a good quantity of Quinces half ripe, rasp them one after another into Earthen Pipkins, all but the inward hard Core. Let them settle two or three days, then squeeze them through a new strong Cloth, gently at first, afterwards very strongly. By that means you will have a Juice of Quinces very clear. Of which take eighteen pints, and put them into an Earth ' n glaz ' d Pipkin, or into a skillet of Copper Tinn ' d, and let them boyl over a gentle fire, till two thirds are consum ' d. Then let them cool, and set the Rob aside in the skillet for two or three days; then pour the clear Liquor into another very clean Vessel, and add to it the Oyls of Cloves and Cinamon, incorpora∣ted with an ounce of fine-powder ' d Sugar, to mix them the better together, and when they are well mingl ' d, put them up into a bottle well-stopp ' d, and keep them for use. 
 The Rob of Quinces is indu ' d with all the principal vertues that are attributed to the pulp of the Quinces. It is recommended to fortifie the Stomach, to help the weakness of retention in the Stomach, and Intestines. To create an Appetite, and help Digestion. It is giv ' n with success in Diarrhea ' s, Dysenteries, Lienteries, the Choleric Disease, and Internal Fluxes of Blood. 
 Rob Mororum seu Diamorum. Rob of Mulberries, or Diamorum. ℞. Succi Mororum Rubi Humilis ar∣v sis, ℞. Of the Juice of Mulberries, of the low-field Bramble. Succi Mororum mori arboris nigrae semi-ma∣turorum, Of the Juice of Mulberries of the black Tree, half-ripe. Mellis Narbonensis despumati, an. lb iij. Of clarify ' d Honey of Narbonne, an. lb iij. Coquantur igne lento in vase fictili vitreato ad debitam consistentiam, illisque permisce∣antur Spiritus Vitrioli vel Sulphuris, gut∣ta, xx. Boyl them over a gentle fire in a Glaz ' d Earth ' n Vessel, to a due consistence, and mix with them twenty drops of Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur. 
 This Rob may be made with these two Juices, or with either of the two separately without any addition of Honey; but besides that the Honey increases their detersive and cleansing quality, it makes the Rob more delightful, and fitter to be preserv ' d for a longer time. The two sorts of Mulberries must be gather ' d before they come to their maturity; that the Rob may be more detersive. 
 You must squeeze out the Juice through a strong Cloth, let it settle two or three days; then pour the clear Liquor by inclination into another vessel, weigh the quantity pre∣scrib ' d and boil it over a small fire in a glaz ' d Earth ' n-pot, with the Honey clarify ' d be∣fore, to a consistence like that of Syrups. Then let the Rob cool, scum it well, and add to it the Spirits of Vitriol or Sulphur, and so put up it in a glass-bottle, or a gally-pot well-stopp ' d for your use. 
 This Rob is chiefly for the cure of Ulcers and Inflammations in the Mouth, Tongue, and Throat. For it is very proper to qualifie the Acrimony of the humours, to cleanse, stop up, and consolidate; sometimes this Rob is taken alone by the spoonful. But it is most frequently mix ' d in cooling and detersive decoctions. 
 Rob Baccarum Sambuci. Rob of Elder-Berrier. ℞. Succi Baccarum Sambuci, tribus die∣bus per residentiam depurati, lb vj. Aut quan∣tum libuerit. Coque igne lento in vase fictili vitreato, ad duarum▪ partium Consumptionem. Adde si volueris Sacchari vel Mellis despumati portionem aliquam. ℞. Of the Juice of Elder-berries cla∣rify ' d by three days settlement, six pints; or as much as you please. Boil them in a glaz ' d Earth ' n-Pipkin over a soft fire to the consumption of two parts. Add if you please some little quantity of Sugar or cla∣rify ' d Honey. 
 You must take the Elder-berries when they are fully ripe, take from them all their little stalks, squeeze them through a strong Cloth, and draw out their Juice; let them settle for three days, separate them from their feces, and boil them over a soft fire in an Earthen-Vessel well-glaz ' d, to the consumption of two thirds, or to the consistence of a Rob. Let it cool, and take off the scum if there be any. To make the Rob more plea∣sant and fit to keep▪ longer, you may add a third or a fourth of its weight of fine Sugar, or clarify ' d Honey. 
 This Rob is very much commended for the cure of Diseases of the Brain, particu∣larly of the Epilepsie and Palsie. It is accounted a Specifick against Hysteric Passions, and for Dysenteries. It may be tak ' n alone in a spoon fasting, or mix ' d in Potions. The dose is not certain: but you may take from half an Ounce to an Ounce at a time. 
 The other Robs which are prepar ' d of the Juices of several Fruits merit no farther mention here, because they are converted into Syrups, which the sweetness of the Sugar renders more pleasing then all the Robs that can be prepar ' d. 
 CHAP. XII. Of Sweet-Meats. THE difficulty of accommodating Medicines to the taste of Patients, and the de∣sire of pleasing them, and to have at all times ready some parts of Plants of which they may stand in need, have been the principal occasions of inventing Sweet-meats. It happ ' ns also that the liking which Patients take to them when sick, gives them a desire to continue the use of them when they are well. 
 And the healthy themselves have so far tak ' n their part, and made Sweet-meats so common, that there is no good City, where there are not some who make it their Trade and Calling to make all sorts of Sweet-meats. But though it be not the Apothecaries bu∣siness to make for the healthy, yet they are oblig ' d for the benefit of the sick to condite several sorts of Plants which are not within the knowledge or practice of the ordi∣nary Comfit-makers. 
 If all the parts of Plants were to be had at all times, or if they were all of an equal perfection, there would be no great trouble to make provision of any Sweet-meats, nor need we make any conditement but upon occasion. But as they must have time to grow, increase, come to perfection, and then decline again, we must choose the best time for the vertues or qualities of the Plant which we intend to candie. Herbes, Fruits, Stalks, Flowers and Seeds cannot be fit but in their Season. Roots that may be had at all Seasons of the Year, yet are not fit to be condited till the Spring of the Year, when they begin to put forth their Leaves: for then they possess to themselves all that the Plant has of vertue; besides that they are then more tender and more juicie then at any other Season. Sometimes the Flowers are condited before they are blown; Seeds and Fruits half ripe: And sometimes we stay till every one of these comes to their perfect maturity. Sometimes the Roots, Flowers, Fruits, and other parts of Plants are condited whole, sometimes cut in pieces, either for convenience, or to se∣parate what is to be thrown away. Sometimes they are to be reduc ' d into a paste, and boyl ' d with Sugar or Honey. But Sweet-meats are so common that I think I need not give many Examples thereof. 
 Radices Eringii conditae. Eringo-Roots condited. ℞. Radicum Eringii mundatarum &amp; in partes dissectarum quantum volueris: coque ad mollitiem in aquae communis sufficiente quanti∣tate; in decocto dissolve Sacchari albissimi pon∣dus Radicibus aequale: Coque ad Syrupi crassio∣ris consistentiam; despuma, calidúmque Syrupum Radicibus in vase fictili vitreato positis super∣funde. Post dies aliquot decantatum Syrupum ad priorem consistentiam recoque, calidúmque radicibus superfunde. Idque ter, quatérve re∣pete, &amp; tandem ita Syrupum coque, ut in de∣bita consistentia possit in posterum cum Radici∣bus asservari. ℞. Of these Roots as many as you please; wash them well, then take out the pith and the outside, then boyl them in fair Water till they are sufficiently tender. Then take them out of the Water, lay them upon a white Linnen-cloth, and drie up the moisture as much as may be. Then weigh them, and take the same weight of fine Sugar, and boyl it with the Decoction of the Roots, scumming it from time to time, till the Sugar have acquir ' d a consistency a little thicker then that of ordinary Syrups. Then put the Roots into a Pot of glaz ' d∣earth, and pour the Syrup upon them fiery hot; some few days after pour this Syrup by inclination into a Bason, and re∣boyl it over a soft fire, till it have acquir ' d its first consistency; then pour it hot a se∣cond time upon the Roots. A while after boyl the Liquor a third time, and pour it upon the Roots again. Repeat this again if need be; and at length so boyl the Sy∣rup that it may be kept for the future with the Roots. 
 Eringium or Sea-Holly is a Plant well-known: the Roots whereof must be gather ' d in the Spring-time, when the Herb begins to appear. 
 Eringo-roots are opening and diuretic. They are also great friends to the Stomach, Liver and Spleen. They are sometimes mix ' d in Opiates and other Medicines. 
 The Example of this Root may serve for the conditing of Succorie, Burrage, Bugloss, Comfrey, Elecampane, Satyrion, Scorzonera or Vipers-grass, and several others; from all which you must take off the small rinds and superfluities. They may be condited whole that have no pith, or are not very big; and cut into slices those that are over∣large. 
 Cortices Malorum conditi. Citron-Peels condited. ℞. Corticum Malorum Citreorum in frusta blonga incisorum quantum libuerit, per dies quindecim Aquae marinae committantur; edu∣cantur, postea ex illa aqua, &amp; in Fontanam ejiciantur, in eáque saepius renovata relinquan∣tur, donec salsedinem deposuerint. Bulliant tandem leviter in nova aqua, ut siquid supersit salsedinis auferatur. Tunc in recenti aqua ad sufficientem teneritatem coquantur, deinde lin∣teo mundo quantum fieri potest exsiccati in vase novo fictili vitreato ordine collocentur. Illis saccharum in proprio Corticum decocto ad de∣bitam consistentiam coctum calide superfunda∣tur, illius{que} coctio &amp; superfusio repetatur, ut in superiori Radicum Eringii conditurâ di∣ximus. ℞. Of the Peels of Citrons as many as you please; cut them into long slices about an inch or an inch and a half broad: range them one by one in a clean Barrel, cover them with Salt-water, and leave them in that Water for fifteen days, or longer if you please; then take them out, and steep them in Fountain-water for several days, shifting and re-shifting the Water, till you can perceive nothing of saltness in them. Then boyl them gently in Fresh-water, to take away any thing of Salt that might remain. Then throwing away that water, boyl them in fresh-water, till they are suffici∣ently tender. Then take out the Peels out of the water, and with a Linnen-cloth dry them as well as you can. Then weigh ' em, and take twice the weight of fine Sugar, and boyl it in the last Decoction of the Peels to the thick∣ness of Honey. Then having laid the Citron∣peels one by another in an Earth ' n-glaz ' d∣pan, pour the Sugar upon them scalding∣hot, so that they may be altogether well∣cover ' d▪ leave them so for some days, and then pour out the Syrup by inclination in∣to a Bason, and repeat Coction and Super∣fusion as is directed in the Conditing of Eringo  ' s. 
 The difficulty of conditing Citron-peels without causing them to lose their shape, or so as to keep them from falling to pieces or into paste, is the reason that we are forc ' d to make use of Salt-water, which preserves their Rinds entire, fair and transparent.
If you would preserve these Peels dry, take them out of the Syrup, let them drain; then boyl fine Sugar in the Water to the consistency of a solid Electuary; put in the Peels, and let them boyl till the Sugar be again gently boyl ' d to the consistence of a so∣lid Electuary. Then take out the Peels, letting the Sugar drain off, and lay the Peels upon twigs in a Stove, to be there entirely dry ' d. 
 You may make good use of the first Syrup which serv ' d to condite the Citron-peels, being very much esteem ' d under the Name of The Syrup for preserving the Citron∣peel, the vertues whereof are very near as good as those of the Peel, to strength ' n the Heart, Stomach, and all the Noble-Parts. 
 You may also boyl in the Water new Citron-peel, till it be almost reduc ' d into paste; beat it afterwards in a Marble-mortar, and pass it through a Hair-Sieve, adding thereto the weight of it in powder-Sugar; then boyling it over a gentle-fire in a Glaz ' d-earth ' n∣pipkin, and at the end putting a little Juice of Citron, to give it a pleasing acidity. 
 n the same manner Quinces, Pears, Apples, Abricots, Peaches, Plumbs and many other Fruits may be reduc ' d into Pastes of the like nature. In the same manner may the Stalks of Lettice separated from their Rind, the pulpie-part of Melons, long-Gourds, Cucumbers, Hartichoak-bottoms, and many other pithie parts of Plants be condited. You may also put them into Salt-water and condite them whole, as I have directed for Citron-peel. 
 You may also make use of a clear Lye instead of Salt-water to condite green Almonds. And though they become extraordinary pale, yet by boyling them afterwards in fair Water, they recover a colour more green then that which they had before, and you may then preserve them drie or liquid, without fear of altering their colour. Condi∣tements in Honey are not so much us ' d as those in Sugar, as being more acceptable in all Sweet-meats: besides that Honey is not so proper for dry Sweet-meats. And though in Languedoc and Provence during the cold weather they preserve Almonds dry with Honey, and to make a Sweet-meat sometimes red, sometimes white, which they call Nogat, or Tourron; yet it is not a Sweet-meat that can be kept long: for the Honey will give and at length dissolve altogether, when the moist air has had time to pe∣netrate it. 
 The preserving of Olives is very different from all others; especially because it is done without either Sugar or Honey. Their Preparation consists chiefly in taking a∣way their natural bitterness, to render them pleasant to the taste, and in preserving them long in their beauty and goodness. They that regard not their beauty, only slit the green Olives in two with a Knife, and bruise them gently, and soak them in fair Water, which they shift oft ' n till their bitterness be almost all tak ' n away. Then they put them into Pots of Glass or Earth-glaz ' d with some small bunches of Fennel, or some pieces of dry Citron or Orange-peel, and cover them with a Water indifferently salt, wherein they keep them to eat, as they have occasion. But they that desire to preserve the colour of their Olives, and to keep them entire, make use of a Lye made of the ashes of Oak-wood, Vine-branches or the like: or else of Quick-lime, steeping their Olives therein four and twenty hours, or till they have quite lost their bitterness. Then they put their Olives into an indifferent Salt-water, adding to them sweet Fennel, Citron or Orange-peel cut into little slices, or some such other Aromatic, as they shall like best. They also pour in as much good Oyl upon the Water as may swim about a fingers-breadth above it, the better to preserve the whole. 
 CHAP. XIII. Of Gellies. WE give that now-a-days the Name of Gelly, which the Latins call ' d Gelatina. Gelly is usually made of Juices extracted by pressing, or by decoction of several Fruits. They are also made by the long boyling of different Animals, or of their parts. These Juices must be clarify ' d by Despumation or otherwise, and be sweeten ' d with Sugar, to make them pleasing to the Palate. They must be also boyl ' d to the consi∣stency that a Gelly ought to have, which is not to be too fluid when it is cold, and not to stick to the Trencher or Plate when you drop a few drops to try the consistency. Gelly is so nam ' d, because it is transparent like Ice, and because it congeals in the cold, and melts in the heat. However it differs from Ice, because it never becomes hard like that, but remains always soft, unless it freeze in extremity of weather. 
 Gellies are so common among the Ladies, that I shall only give you the Examples of two or three made by Decoction. 
 Gelatina Cydoniorum. Gelly of Quinces. ℞. Cydoniorum ad maturitatem acceden∣tium, lb viij. in frusta incide cum Cortice &amp; Seminibus, &amp; in aquae communis lb xx deco∣que ad dimidiae circiter partis consumptionem: decoctum cola &amp; Cydonia exprime. Colaturam Ovi albumine cum Sacchari lb vj. clarifica; &amp; clarum liquorem ad Mivae consistentiam co∣que, Pixidibúsque ligneis vel Vasis vitreis, aut fictilibus vitreatis reconde. ℞. Whole Quinces not fully ripe, and cut them into five or six slices, and weigh out eight pound, and boyl them in twenty pints of Water, to the consumption of half. Strain the Decoction, and squeeze the Sediment well; and when it is almost cold, clarifie it with the white of an Egg, with six pound of fine Sugar, after the ordinary manner. Then boyl the clear liquor over a gentle-fire, to the consistency of a Gelly. Then take the Skillet from the fire, and when the Gelly is half-cold, Aromatize it with four drops of Distill ' d-oyl of Cloves, and two drops of Oyl of Cinamon, incor∣porated first with fine powder ' d-Sugar. The whole being well mix ' d, and the Gelly well scumm ' d, pour it out into Glasses, or Glaz ' d-pots, or else into Woodd ' n-Boxes or Moulds, moisten ' d before-hand. The Latins call the Gelly of Quinces Mivam Cy∣doniorum. 
 This Aromatization is to be preferr ' d before that of the Ancients, who direct you to put Cinamon, Cloves, Cardamoms, Saffron, Trochisques of Gallia Moscata, Gin∣ger, Mastich, lignum Aloes, and Musk in powder ty ' d up in a knot, and to steep them in the Gelly while it boyles; not considering that besides the harsh and unpleasing taste which the grosser part of all this Mixture of Drugs would give the Gelly, their Aro∣matick and volatile part would dissipate, and leave nothing behind but the ill-qualities of the Terrestrial. You may also, besides the Oyls of Cloves and Cinamon pre∣scrib ' d for Aromatization, add some drops of the Essence of Musk and Ambergrise, for those that love sweet Scents. There are some that take out the Seeds from the Quinces when they make the Decoction for the Gelly. Others on the contrary make use of the Seeds, Cores and Rind, reserving the pulp of the Quinces to condite, or to make Mar∣malate. 
 You may also make a Gelly of Rennettings or other good Apples, cutting them into quarters, boyling them in Water almost to a mash, and straining the Decoction through hair-sieve without pressing the Apples. For this Decoction thus strain ' d through the Sieve reverst, and re-passt through a Bag, mix ' d with the weight in Apples of very fine Sugar, and boyl ' d over a gentle fire to a due consistency, makes a Gelly as pleasant as sightly, to which you may add at the end of the Decoction some drops of the Juice of Citrons well∣clarify ' d to give them a sharp taste. You may also cut the rind of candy ' d Pome-Ci∣tron into small pieces, and lay at the bottom of the Glasses or Boxes where you put your Gellies, which being pour ' d hot upon these pieces, will become by that Mixture much more acceptable then without it. 
 Gelatina Cornu Cervini. Gelly of Harts-Horn. ℞. Rasurae Cornu Cervini lb ss, Aque com∣munis lb vj. Coque lento igne, in va ▪ fictili vitreato, ad duarum partium consumptionem. Cola &amp; exprime, Colaturam clarifica Ovi al∣bumine cum Sacchari optimi ℥ vj. Vini albi ℥ iiij. Succi Citri ℥ j. Et coque igne lento ad Gelatina melior is consistentiam. ℞. Half a pound of the havings of Harts∣horn, and boyl it over a gentle fire in six pints of Fountain-water in a glaz ' d-earth ' n Pipkin to the consumption of two thirds of the Water. Strain out the Decoction, squeezing the Harts-horn well; then clarifie the straining with the white of an Egg, ad∣ding six ounces of fine Sugar, four ounces of white Wine, and one ounce of Juice of Citrons. After which boyl the clarify ' d Li∣quor over a gentle fire, to the consistency of a Gelly, rather too soft then too strong, which you must empty hot into Glasses or Pots, and there let it cool. 
 You may Aromatize this Gelly with some half a drop of the Essence of Citron, Cloves or Cinamon, incorporated with fine powder ' d Sugar. 
 This Gelly of Harts-horn is never prepar ' d but upon occasion. For it cannot be kept above four or five dayes in Winter, and two in Summer; and then you must keep it in a Cellar. Some nice Persons may disapprove the boyling of the Wine and the Gelly, believing that the Spiritous part dissipates in boyling. But in regard the Gelly cannot be clarify ' d without the Wine, there is no care to be tak ' n for the dissipation of the Spirit, so much the rather because that the Gelly being most frequently prepar ' d for those that are in Fevers, we may be glad of the dissipation of those Spirits. 
 Gelly of Harts-horn may be call ' d a Medicinal-nourishment: For it breeds good nou∣rishment, and strength ' ns the Heart and Stomach. It is us ' d in all sorts of Fevers, especially the putrid, and in all Epidemic-diseases; and is highly approv ' d in all weaknesses, and want of retention in the Stomach and Bowels. 
 In the same manner may be prepar ' d Gelly of Vipers, and of the parts of other sorts of Animals. 
 CHAP. XIV. Of Conserves. ROOTS, Herbs, or Flowers are usually the foundation of all Conserves. Their preparation therefore not being very difficult, and requiring no tedious Dis∣courses, I will only give you two or three Examples, by which you may prepare all sorts of Conserves. 
 Conserva Radicum Helenii. Conserve of Roots of Elecampane. ℞. Radicum Helenii recentium mundatarum quantum libuerit; coquantur ad mollitiem in sufficiente quantitate Aqua Fontanae; deinde pinsentur, &amp; per Cribrum inversum trajician∣tur. Decoctum coquatur lento igne cum Sac∣chari duplo Radicum pondere, ad Electuarii solidi consistentiam. Illique tantisper refrige∣rato, trajecta pulpa permisceatur; refigera∣táque conserva vase idoneo recondatur. ℞. What quantity you please of the new Roots of Elecampane, wash them well, and cleanse them from their little rind, and from all superfluities; cut them into great pieces▪ boyl them in six times their weight in Wa∣ter over a moderate fire, till they are suffici∣ently tender. Then bruise them in a Marble∣mortar with a woodd ' npestle, and strain the pulp through a Hair-sieve revers ' d. In the mean while boyl twice the weight of fine Su∣gar in the Decoction of the Roots, to the consistence of a solid Electuary; and when it is half cold, incorporate the pulp therein, and put up the cold Conserve in fit vessel. 
 Some let the Decoction be quite cold before they incorporate the pulp. Others put it hot into the pot, to the end there may be a crust proper to preserve the Conserve. However you must not cover the pot till the Conserve be quite cold, for fear the super∣fluous moisture which rises with the Conserve, not finding vent, should fall upon the Conserve and putrifie it. 
 This Conserve, as also that of many other Roots may be done without boiling the Roots, as also without boyling the Sugar. For you may stamp the raw Roots in a Marble-Mortar, press the pulp through a hair-sieve revers ' d, and incorporate it with twice as much the weight of fine-Sugar in powder, and the Conserve shall be made. But besides that the raw Roots are more difficult to stamp and strain, and more fibrous then those which are boyl ' d, the Conserve is also more displeasing and coarse. In the same manner may be prepar ' d the Conserves of all pithy Roots.
Conserve of Elecampane, cuts, and powerfully loosens Flegm from the Lungs, the Reins and Stomach, it serves for expectoration, helps Digestion, and creates an Appe∣tite. You may take it alone, or mix ' d in Opiates, Loches, or Tablets: you may take from half an ounce to an ounce. 
 Conserva Rosarum mollis. Soft Conserve of Roses. ℞. Rosarum Rubrarum recentium exungula∣tarum, lb j. Sacchari Albissimi, lb ij. Fiat ex arte Conserva. Take one pound of red Rose-buds, cut off the white part at the bottom with a pair of Scissors. Stamp them exactly in a Marble-Mortar, mixing with them by degrees, two pound of fine powder ' d Sugar. 
 This mixture will make a body not unlike that of a soft Electuary, of a dark red co∣lour and pleasing to the taste. You may at the latter end add some drops of Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur, which will heighten the colour of the Conserve, and make it look more red. After this you may put it up in a bottle well-stopp ' d, and expose it to the Sun for several days, stirring the Conserve from time to time with a woodd ' n Spatula, the better to unite the Roses with the Sugar, and to consume the superfluous moisture. 
 But if you desire a Conserve of Roses more pleasant, and more sightly, this is the way. Give a gentle wamble to about a pint of Rose-Water, and having tak ' n it off the fire, cast into it a pound of large red Rose-buds, clean ' d as before, and having well-steep ' d them, strain the Liquor through a clean Linnen-Cloth, squeeze the Roses with your hands, and beat them well in a Marble-Mortar. In the mean while boil two pound of fine Sugar in the Water where the Roses were steep ' d, to the consistence of a solid E∣lectuary, and when it is well boil ' d, mix the Roses therein perfectly well-stamp ' d; stir them for some time the better to make the mixture, and to evaporate the superfluous molsture. Then put them up in a pot, and cover them well, when they are quite cold. This way makes the Roses very tender, and makes them fit to be the better and more easily stamp ' d. The Rose-Water increases the good Scent and vertue of the Conserve: and the mixture of the Roses with the Sugar becomes more exact. The Conserve is more sightly, and retains its vertue and its beauty longer, then by the ordinary preparations. 
 There is also another preparation of Conserve of Roses not inferiour to this, which is done by putting the Rose-buds cut into a glass- Cucurbit, in Maceration in Balneo Ma∣riae, between luke-warm and boiling hot; keeping them there till they are sufficiently tender, boyling the Sugar with the Rose-Water, and observing the same Method, as for the former Conserve. 
 The principal use of Conserve of Roses, is to stop defluxions from the Brain falling upon the Lungs. It is also good to stay coughing and spitting of Blood: to streng∣then the Stomach, Heart, and Brain, to stay vomiting and loosness of the Belly; to keep the Breath sweet, to provoke sleep; to which purpose it is usually apply ' d in a frontal to the Forehead. This Conserve is to be tak ' n fasting from one dram to two, often mix ' d with Confections, Powders, Essences, and other Conserves. Sometimes it is outwardly apply ' d upon the Heart and Stomach in a solid Epitheme, alone, or mix ' d with other Medicines. 
 Conserva Rosarum solida. Solid Conserve of Roses. ℞. Rosarum Rubrarum mundatarum, &amp; ad Solis Radios celeriter siccatarum, ℥ j. in Pul∣verem subtilem redigantur, postea irrorentur dragma Semis Spiritus Sulphuris. Tunc ℞. Sacchari Albissimi, lb j. Aquae Rosarum, ℥ iiij. Coquantur simul ad Electuarii solidi consisten∣tiam. Deinde pulvis Rosarum immisceatur, &amp; ubi fere refrixerint, formentur Tabellae vel Rotulae ad usum. Take an ounce of red-Roses cleans ' d, and hastily dry ' d in the Sun, powder them very fine, and sprinkle them with half a drachm of Spirit of Sulphur in some glass-Vessel, mixing them well with a woodd ' n Spatula. Then boyl a pound of fine Sugar in four ounces of Rose-Water to the con∣sistency of a solid Electuary, and incorpo∣rate the Roses therein, being tak ' n off the fire, stirring them well with a woodd ' n-Pe∣stle. And when you observe a film upon the Conserve, pour it out upon a sheet of Paper, or a Pewter-platter to make Tablets thereof. 
 This is call ' d hard Conserve of Roses, which will be of a good colour, and grateful to the taste; the vertues whereof are much the same with those of the liquid Conserve. It is also very convenient to carry in the Pocket. 
 They are deceiv ' d who think that the Roses ought to be dry ' d in the shade to make them look the fairer. For experience and reason have taught me, that red Roses so dry ' d are never sightly in colour, but become very brown. And therefore it is not without cause, that you are here directed to dry them hastily in the Sun. For being suddenly dry ' d they look fair and are full of vertue, because the red-Roses abound in superfluous and viscous moisture, which is not easily separated, unless it meet with some powerful Agent to constrain it; such as is the Sun by means of his heat. Where∣as if you dry them in shade only, the action of the Sun being too weak, and slow, the Roses in that space of time, wither and turn black. However, you must be careful to take them out of the Sun, when they are sufficiently dry; for after that, the Sun does but burn them, and make them change colour. 
 You must be careful also to put the Roses in a Glass-bottle well-stopp ' d to preserve them in their vertue and beauty, which you may do for a year or two together. 
 Conserva Violarummollis. Conserve of Violets liquid. ℞. Violarum recentium mundatarum lb ss. Sacchari Albissimi, lb j. ss. Fiat ex arte Conserva. ℞. Half a pound of new Violets very clean, and beat them exactly in a Marble-Mortar; and when they are well-beaten, boil over a soft fire in six ounces of di∣still ' d Water of Violets, a pound and a half of fine Sugar, to the consistency of an Electuary. Then take the Sugar off the fire, and when it is half-cold, mix the stamp ' d Violets therewith. 
 At the same time pour this Conserve into a pot, that the film or crust may grow o∣ver it, which will very much preserve it. And when it is cold cover the pot very close, and keep it for your use. 
 This Conserve may serve as an example for those of Burrage, Bugloss, Water-Lillies, and such-like flowers as abound in moisture. 
 The moisture of the Violets is the reason of putting more Sugar into Conserve of Violets, then into Conserves of Flowers less moist. And the method of boiling the Su∣gar is much better, then to mingle the Violets in powder with the Sugar: in regard the Flowers seem better mix ' d in the boil ' d Sugar, and for that by putting the Conserve hot into the Pot, the crust that grows over it resists the penetration of the Air, and makes the Conserve keep much longer. 
 Conserve of Violets is very cordial; It is very much esteem ' d in Diseases of the Liver and Spleen. It qualifies the Acrimony of the humours, and makes them slippery. It is admirable in Diseases of the Breast, and to cool the boyling of the Blood. 
 CHAP. XV. Of Syrups. JUleps were the fore-runners and the occasion of the invention of Syrups. For the Ancients finding, that the superfluous moisture of Juleps hastn ' d their putrefaction, bethought themselves of consuming it by boiling, and to reduce them to a thicker con∣sistency, giving them the name of Syrups. The word Syrup is deriv ' d from , to draw, and , which signifies Juice. 
 All Syrups are pleasant Compositions, made of Waters, Juices, Tinctures, or Decocti∣ons boyl ' d with Sugar or Honey, to a consistency somewhat thick, and fit to keep. The Juices that compound Syrups, are usually drawn from several parts of Plants, sometimes by expression, sometimes by the impression of their succulent substance into any Liquor. They may be also drawn from the parts of Animals, as Syrup of Tortoises. Tin∣ctures, Infusions, or Decoctions, made use of in the composition of Syrups, are as so many means, to impart the virtues of different Medicines to the same Syrups. 
 Besides the design of long-keeping, our Artists had a desire to have the vertue of one or more Medicaments clos ' d together in a small Room. But the number of Syrups is so great, that should we prepare them all, the shops would not be big enough to hold them. For which reason I shall not fill this Volumn with Syrups that may be let alone, as being out of use, or such as may be prepar ' d when prescrib ' d. I shall only there∣fore here set down such Syrups, the use whereof is confirm ' d by the practice and pre∣scriptions of the Physicians, and which deserve to be prepar ' d for their vertues, and ad∣vantages which the sick receive thereby. 
 Syrupus e Succo Citri. Syrup of the Juice of Citron. ℞. Succi acidi recentis defaecatissimi Malo∣rum Citreorum, lb iij. Sacehari Albissimi, lb vj. Fiat ex arte Syrupus. Take three pints of the Juice of Citron extreamly well purify ' d, and put it into a Glass, or glaz ' d Earth ' n▪ Vessel, then dis∣solve therein six pound of fine Powder Su∣gar; stirring it all the while till the Sugar be wholly incorporated with the Juice. 
 Continue stirring as well when it is off, as when it is upon the fire.
Make use of no Vessels for the Preparation of this or any other Syrup compos ' d of Acid Juices, but such as are made of glass, or glaz ' d Earth. 
 There is another way of making this Syrup, by taking six pound of white and dry fine Powder Sugar, clarifying it with the white of an Egg, and six pints of Fountain∣water, and then boyling it over a fire, to the consistency of a solid Electuary; and after that, when it is off from the fire, pouring into it three pints of Juice of Lemons, well∣clarify ' d, and stirring the Syrup with a Woodd ' n Pestle, till it be almost cold. 
 The Ancients believ ' d that the quantity of the acid Juices of Fruits in Syrups, ought to be greater then that of the Sugar, and that the same Juices requir ' d a longer boiling, as well to consume one part of their moisture, which they thought superfluous, as also to make a consistence necessary for the Syrups which were compos ' d of them. For this reason they boil ' d their Juices a long time. I confess that the acid Juices evaporated in a glass-Vessel in Balneo Mariae, do lose of their aquosity, and that the Juice which remains in the Vessel, is more acid, then the Juice before the watry part was eva∣porated. 
 But besides that, there is no need of so much Acidity, they lose of their beauty, and become less cooling by being boyl ' d. Moreover the watry part is not unprofitable in the composition of these Juices, in regard it is very refreshing, and for that by the means thereof, the acids are more conveniently convey ' d to the remote parts, without any offence to the parts, by reason of their Acrimony. 
 And for as much as the Syrups, which are only compos ' d of acid Juices and Sugar, re∣quire not a consistency altogether so thick as that of other Syrups, they must not be kept so long upon the fire, for fear of changing their quality. This Syrup may serve for an example for all Syrups compos ' d of the acid Juices of Fruits, and Sugar. 
 Syrup of Citrons cools and moistens very much, it quenches thirst, and sensibly cools the heat of choleric-Fevers. It strengthens the Stomach and Bowels, weak ' nd by the hot intemperature of humours, it resists putrefaction and contagious Air. It is good against Worms, Poyson, and Pestilent and Epidemic Diseases. The Dose is usually from half an ounce to an ounce, in a glass of Ptisan, or some other Liquor. It serves as a foundation for some compositions, and is mix ' d in Potions and other Medicines. 
 The Syrups of Granates, red-Currans, Barberries, Verjuice, and the like are pre∣par ' d after the same manner. 
 Syrupus e Succo Oxytriphylli. Syrup of the Juice of Wood-Sorrel. ℞. lb iiij. Succi Oxytriphylli depurati, Sacchari Albissimi, ana. Fiat ex arte Syrupus. Take four pints of the Juice of Wood-Sorrel well-purify ' d; pour them into a glass- Cucurbit, cover it with its Alembic slightly luted, place it in Balneo Mariae, and distil with a moderate fire about half the moisture. Then take away the Cucur∣bit, and let it cool. That done, pour out the acid Juice, which remains by Inclina∣tion, and pass it through a brown-Paper, to separate the Terrestreities gather ' d in Distillation. Then weigh out two pints of this clarify ' d Juice, and dissolve there∣in four pound of fine powder ' d Sugar, and give the whole a little wamble over the fire. Take it off, scum it, and put up the Syrup, when it is cold. 
 You may also clarifie the fine powder ' d Sugar with the white of an Egg and fair Wa∣ter, boil it to the strong consistency of a solid Electuary, and afterwards incorporate the Juice of Wood-Sorrel prepar ' d as I have said, and make a Syrup as you do of the Juice of Lemons. 
 Wood-sorrel, otherwise call ' d Oxytriphyllum, and Allelujah, is a Plant well-known. If the Juice were as acid as that of Citrons, two pints of Juice would be enough for the four pound of Sugar prescrib ' d. But because it is much less acid, and much more wa∣try, there is a necessity of separating by distillation one part of its aquosity, to make its acidity somewhat like that of the Juice of Citrons. 
 The Syrup of Allelujah cools very much. It is very useful to quench thirst, to cool the heats of the Stomach and Liver. It is very much commended in Burning Fevers, Malignant and Epidemic Distempers. It comforts and strengthens the Heart, and cures the Inflammations of the Mouth, Tongue, Palat, and Throat. The distill ' d-Water of the Juice may be very properly mix ' d with the Syrup, or you may drink the Water a∣lone. The Dose is the same with that of the Syrup of Citrons. 
 Syrupus Cinamomi Regius. Royal Syrup of Cinamon. ℞. Aquae Cinnamomi stillatitiae supra no∣vum Cinnamomum electum cohobatae &amp; ite∣rum distillatae, lb j. Sacchari Albissimi in aqua Melissae soluti &amp; in Electuarium solidum cocti, lb ij. Fiat ex arte Syrupus. Take two pound of very fine Sugar, and boil them in eight ounces of Balm-water, to the consistence of a solid Electuary, and when it is almost cold, mix it with the Ci∣namon-water, and put up the Syrup in a bottle well-stopp ' d. 
 The Preparation of the Cinamon-water, which is the foundation of this Syrup, is to be seen in the Third Part of this Pharmacopoea, whither I refer the Reader. 
 Cinamon is the Rind of a tree, as big as an Orange-tree, which grows in the Island of Ceylon in the East-Indies. The branches spred out of the body very streight, thick, in good order, and without knots. They cut those branches from the Trunk, when the Tree is in sap, and take off the Rind, which is the true Cinamon, which at first is flat, without colour, and having little taste or smell: but as it dries it rolls up like a Parch∣ment, and losing its superfluous moisture, which stifled the best part of its good qua∣lities, recovers its pleasing and penetrating smell, and its no less agreeable and biting taste. The best is of a pale purple brisk colour, smooth within and without, and of a substance indifferently compact. It is not subject to rott ' nness, for it will keep a long time, provided it be well put up. The Wood is without any considerable vertue, no more then the Flowers which are white and sweet-scented, and follow ' d by a Fruit in shape and bigness much like an Olive, which are full of a green, sharp, bitter-oylie Li¦quor, but little regarded. 
 The Syrup of Cinamon is a Cordial that operates quickly. It is administred suc∣cessfully in weaknesses and sounding fits, to recall the dissipated Spirits. It very much strengthens the Stomach, and the Brain, and all the Noble-parts. It stirs up the Ap∣petite, helps Digestion, expels Wind, sweetens the Breath, facilitates the Travels of Women, provokes the Menstruums, and remedies Obstructions of the Matrix. You may take from two drams to an ounce, either in a Spoon, or mix ' d with Opiates, or other Medicines. 
 Syrupus Coralliorum. Syrup of Coral. ℞. Coralliorum rubrorum in subtilissimum pollinem supra Porphyritem redactorum, ℥ iiij. Succi Berberini defacatissimi, lb iij. In Cucurbit vitream immissae in Balneo Cinerum horis quadraginta stent, per vices Spatulâ ligneâ agitando; Deinde filtretur Liquor, &amp; cum Sacchari Candi subtiliter pul∣verati duplo pondere fiat in Balneo Mariae mo∣deratè calido ex arte Syrupus. Take four ounces of red-Coral well-cho∣sen, break it upon a Porphyrie-stone till it be reduc ' d to perfect dust, moistning it now and then with Rose-water. When it is dry, put it into a glass- Cucurbit, and pour upon it three pints of Juice of Bar∣berries well-clarify ' d; put the Cucurbit in a Bath of Ashes moderately hot, for forty hours, stirring the Ingredients from time to time with a Woodd ' n-Spatula. Then filter the Liquor through a brown-Paper; weigh it, and having return ' d it into a glass- Cucurbit very clean, and set the Cucurbit upon a luke-warm Balneo Mariae, dis∣solve in this Liquor double the weight of fine Sugar-candy finely powder ' d. When the Syrup is cold put it carefully up in a glass-bottle. 
 Coral, call ' d also Lith dendron, or the Petrify ' d Tree, is tak ' n by some for a Mineral, by reason of the hardness of its substance resembling that of stone; but it may pass for a Plant among those that consider how it grows like a Plant in the bottom of the Sea. Nevertheless, we are not to credit those who have affirm ' d that Coral fructifies, and brings forth Berries, for which they took the Grains of Coral rounded about. No more then to those that believ ' d that Coral was soft in the place where it grows, and that it grows red and hard, when it is tak ' n out of the Sea, and expos ' d to the Air. For they that fish for it have assur ' d me, that it neither bears Berries, nor Seed, and that it is of the same colour, and as hard at the bottom of the Sea in every part of the Plant, as when it is drawn up. I confess there are three sorts of it, red, black, and white; but without question, the red surpasses all the rest in vertue. It must be of a lively colour, pure and clean, solid, weighty, smooth, and easie to break. 
 The Syrup of Coral is commended against all weaknesses of the Stomach, Liver, and Bowels, and for the cure of Diseases that proceed from thence, particularly to stay Vomitings, Diarrheas, Dysenteries, Lienteries, Hepatic Fluxes, to stop the loss of Blood in Men and Women, at Mouth, Nose, or any other part. The Dose is from half an ounce to an ounce, to be tak ' n alone in a spoon, or with other convenient Liquors. 
 Syrupus Cydoniorum. Syrup of Quinces. ℞. Succi Cydoniorum purissimi, Succhari Albissimi, ana. ℞ iiij. In vase fictili vitreato, lento igne, ad Sy∣rupi Consistentiam coquantur. Remotus ab igne &amp; semi-refrigeratus Syrupus si libuerit aro∣matizetur Oleorum Cinnamomi &amp; Caryophillo∣rum an. guttii, Saccharo pulverato prius ex∣ceptis. Take equal parts, viz. four pints of Juice of Quinces well-clarify ' d, and four pound of Sugar, and put them together into a pot of glaz ' d Earth, and boil them over a soft fire to a good consistence of a Syrup. Then take the Syrup off the fire, and aro∣matize with Oyl of Cinamon and Cloves, ana two drops, incorporated with an ounce of fine powder ' d Sugar. 
 If you would prepare a Syrup with less Juice of Quinces, and by consequence less astringent. You may prepare this Syrup in the same manner as that of Lemons, and put but one pint of Juice of Quinces to two pound of Sugar. But because astriction is chiefly expected from the fore-going Syrup, the quantity of the Juice must be equal to that of the Sugar, according to the prescription. For thereby the Juice finding it self concenter ' d and despoil ' d of the greatest part of its superfluous moisture in the boil∣ing, which was necessary to bring it to the consistency of a Syrup, renders it more astrin∣gent, and fit for the use to which it is design ' d.
The vertues of it being to restore the weakned force of the Stomach, to stay vomi∣ting, to help Digestion, to create an Appetite, to digest bad humours, and to fit them for expulsion. It strengthens the Bowels, and is us ' d with success in Lienteries, Diar∣rhoea ' s, and all sorts of Fluxes of the Belly, caus ' d by acrimonious humours, or weak∣ness of the Parts. The usual Dose is an ounce. It may be tak ' n alone, or mixt in Poti∣ons, or in a Ptisan to drink at any time. 
 Syrupus Antepilepticus, D. D. D ' Aquin.   Syrup against Epilepsie, D. D. D ' Aquin.   ℞. Visci Querci   ℞. Misletoe of the Oak,   Radicis Paeoniae majoris,   Roots of bigger Piony,   Seminis ejusdem, ana. ℥ ij. Seed of the same, an. ℥ ij. Radicis Valerianae majoris,   Roots of the bigger Valerian,   Angelicae,   Angelica,   Imperatoriae,   Masterwort,   Iridis Illyricae,   Illyrian Orrice,   Dictamni Alb. ana. ℥ j. White Dittany, an. ℥ j. Foliorum Betonicae,   Leaves of Betony,   Ruta,   Rue,   Florum Lillii convallium,   Flowers of the Lilly Convally,   Tilia, &amp;   Linden-tree, and   Lavendula, an. M. j. Lavender, an. M. j. Tartari Alb. Monspeliensis pulversati, ℥ jss. White Tartar of Montpelire pulve∣riz ' d. ℥ j ss. 
 Bruise the Misletoe, as also the Roots and seeds of Piony, beat the Tartar in a Mor∣tar, shred the Leaves of Betony and Rue, and put them together with the Flowers into a Matrass of a sufficient bigness. Then pour upon them three pints of the distill ' d Wa∣ter of black-Cheries, and as much of the Water of the Flowers of the Linden-Tree, and stopping up the Matrass keep it twenty-four hours in a luke-warm Balneum Mariae; then let the Bathe boyl two or three hours. After which having drain ' d and squeez ' d the whole, clarifie the Liquor with the white of an Egg, mixt with four pound of Sugar, and boyl it to the consistency of a Syrup, which done, aromatize it with Oyls of Cinamon and Lavender, an. three drops, and keep the Syrup in a Glass-bottle. 
 This Syrup is not only proper for the Epilepsie for which it is design ' d, but for all Diseases of the Brain. The usual dose is one ounce alone, or in some Cephalic-liquor. It may be mingl ' d also in Potions, Opiates, and many other Liquors. 
 Syrupus Hydragogus, D. D. D ' AQUIN.   A Syrup to draw forth watry humours, by Monsieur D ' AQUIN.   ℞. Radicum Mechoachan,   ℞. Roots of Mechoacan,   Ireos Nostratis,   French -Orrice,   Ebuli Recentis,   Vulgar Dwarf-Elder,   Medullae Seminis Carthami,   The Pulp of the Seed of Carthamum,   Folliculorum Sennae Orientalis,   Seed-Bag of Eastern Senna,   Foliorum Soldanellae siccorum, an. ℥ j ss. Dry-leaves of Sea-Bindweed, ana. ℥ j ss. Turbith Gummosi,   Gummie-Turbith,   Hermodactylorum,   Hermodactyles,   Jalapae,   Jalap,   Rhei Electi, an. ʒ vj. Pick ' d Rhubarb, an. ʒ vj. Radicum Valerianae major.   Roots of the Bigger Valerian,   Eringii,   Eringo ' s,   Enulae Campanae,   Elecampane,   Assari,   Asarabacca,   Corticis Rad. Capparis,   The Bark of the Root of Capers,   Tamarisci,   Tamarisk,   Santali Citrini,   Yellow-Saunders,   Seminis Ebuli,   Seed of Dwarf-Elder,   Baccarum Juniperi, an. ℥ ss. Juniper-Berries, an. ℥ ss. Foliorum Ceterach,   Leaves of Ceterach,   Agrimoniae,   Agrimonie,   Chamaedryos,   Germander,   Florum Genistae, an. M. j. Flowers of Broom, an. M. j. Limaturae Chalybisnodulo inclusae,   Filings of Steel ty ' d in a Bag,   Tartari alb. Monspel. contusi, an. ℥ ij. White Montpelier -Tartar, an. ℥ ij. 
 Break the Yellow-Saunders, bruise the Roots, Barks, Berries and Seeds, beat the Tar∣tar in a Mortar, shred the Senna-bags, put the Filings of Steel in a little Linnen-cloth slightly ty ' d, and having put them all into a Cucurbit of Earth well-glaz ' d within, mingle the Flowers with the rest. Then pour upon them two pints of Succorie-water, and of the Juices of the Roots of Elder, and Leaves of Chervil well-clarify ' d, of each three pints, so that the Ingredients may steep in the Liquors; cover the Cucurbit, and set it over hot embers for four and twenty hours; at the end whereof boil the whole for an hour and a half. Then drain and squeeze them strongly out, and having clarify ' d the Liquor with the white of an Egg with 4 pound of fine Sugar, boil it again over a soft fire to the consistency of a Syrup, adding at the end of Tartar-vitrioliz ' d and Sal-Po∣lychrestes, ana ℥ ij. When it is cold, aromatize it with three drops of Distill ' d-oyl of Cinnamon incorporated with an ounce of fine-powder ' d Sugar. 
 Eastern-Senna is accounted the best; the Leaves are like those of bastard-Senna, but more pointed and longer. The least bruis ' d, the freeest from sprigs and dead leaves is always the best: it ought be of a pale-green colour, soft to feel, of a strong scent, but not displeasing. The Flowers are small and yellow, like those of Bastard-Senna. The Seed-bags are the Cods, which the Plant produces, flat, light, like a half-Moon, broad and long, about half a finger ' s breadth, of a pale-green colour inclining to red. They contain the Seed, pale-green, long and flat, resembling a Heart. But the Bags are more purgative then the Leaves, and more proper to purge Waters. 
 Turbith is the Bark of a Milkie-root, which is chos ' n by its weight, dark-colour ' d without, white within, and clean from its pith, which is hard and fibrous. The mark of Gum is but fictitious and added to it; for that little Gum that is in it cannot be perceiv ' d till the Turbith in powder has been macerated in Spirit of Wine, and so dis∣solv ' d and separated from its grosser parts. 
 Mechoachan is a great and almost insipid Root, of an ash-colour without, whitish within, brought in slices from New-Spain, where it grows in the Island of Mechoacan. The newest is to be chos ' n. 
 A Hermodactyle is a little Root made like a Heart, reddish without and very white within; of a heavy and close Substance, but easily powder ' d, about the bigness and somewhat resembling Anacardium, or the Roots of Satyrion: The whitest, fullest grown, and without Worm-holes is to be chos ' n. 
 Jalap grows in New-Spain. A Root about the bigness of Mechoachan. It is brought to us in little round pieces, of which the newest, most weighty, and gummy are the best. 
 The best Rhubarb is of a firm-wheighty Substance, spotted with red when it is brok ' n, of a bitter-astringent taste, and a good scent. 
 They that will be so curious as to examine the qualities and quantities of all the Sim∣ples prescrib ' d by the Chief Physician to his Majesty of France, for the Composition of this Syrup, will have no reason to question the vertue thereof in purging serous humours from all parts of the Body, particularly Hydropical, for the cure whereof it was chiefly study ' d. 
 It may be giv ' n alone from one ounce to two in proper Liquor. 
 Syrupus Anti-Nephriticus, D. D. D ' AQUIN.   A Syrup against Gravel, and pains in the Kidneys, by D. D ' AQUIN.   ℞. Radicum Altheae,   ℞. Roots of Althea,   Ononidis,   Rest-Harrow,   Fragariae,   Straw-berries,   Bardanae,   Burdock,   Nymphaeae,   Water-Lilly,   Quinque Aperientium, an. ℥ j ss. Five Openers, an. ℥ j ss. Fructuum Alkekengi,   Fruit of Alkekengi,   Cynosbati, an. ℥ iij. Sweet-Bryer, an. ℥ iij. Seminum Bardanae,   Seeds of Burdock,   Milii Solis,   Grommel,   Sileris montani,   Lovage,   Quatuor Frig. major mundat.   Four Greater Cold-seeds cleans ' d,   Nucleorum Mespillorum &amp; Persicorum, an. ℥ j. Kernels of Medlars and Peaches, an. ℥ j. Foliorum Saxifragae,   Leave of Saxifrage,   Pimpinellae,   Pimpernel,   Cerefolii,   Chervile,   Virgae Aureae,   Gold ' n-Rod,   Hyperici,   St. John  ' s-wort,   Capilli Veneris, an. M. j. Maidenhair, M. j. Tart. albi pulverati, ℥ ij. White Tartar pulveriz ' d, ℥ ij. 
 After you well wash ' d and cleans ' d all the Roots from their external and internal su∣perfluities, and bruis ' d and slic ' d them well, put them into an Earth ' n-pot glaz ' d within∣side, with two ounces of Montpelier -Tartar pulveriz ' d; and having pour ' d upon them ten pints of the Distill ' d-water of Pellitory of the Wall, let them boil over a soft fire for the space of a good hour: After which add to the Decoction the Fruits of Sweet-Bryar and Alkekengi well-cut, and boil them a quarter an hour among the Roots; then add to them the Seeds of Burdock, Grommel and Lovage, slightly pounded, and the Leaves of Chervile and St. John  ' s-wort cut. Boil the whole about a quarter of an hour, after which put in the Maidenhair; and having put them down into the Decocti∣on, cover. the Pot, take it off the fire, and when the Decoction is half-cold, drain and squeeze it out. Then clarifie the Liquor with the white of an Egg with four pound of fine Sugar, and boil them over a soft fire to the consistence of a Syrup. When it is cold, aromatize it with six drops of Distill ' d-oyl of Anise, incorporated with an ounce of fine-powder ' d Sugar, and put up the Syrup in a Bottle well-stopp ' d. 
 The Diuretic vertues particularly known to belong to every one of the Simples made choice of for the Composition of this Syrup, demonstrate the good effects which may be expected from their union. Nor can we otherwise believe but that this Syrup will give considerable ease to those that are troubl ' d with Gravel in their Reins, Ureters or Bladder, or any thick or viscous flegm, which stopping the Urinary-pipes, stops the ordinary course of the Water; or to those that are subject to relapse into these Distem∣pers. For prevention whereof, let them continue the use of this Syrup for several days, taking every morning an ounce in three or four ounces of white-wine. In the pains take from an ounce to two ounces in Emulsions or any other Liquors. 
 Syrupus de Absinthio. Syrup of Wormwood. ℞. Summitatum Absinthii majoris Scca∣rum, lb ss. Rosarum rubrarum exungulatarum, Tartari albi Monspeliensis, an. ℥ ij. N dis Indicae, ʒ iij. Succi Cydoniorum nondum perfectè matu∣rorum, Vini albi austeri, an. lb iij ss. ℞. The tops of Wormwood gather ' d when it is in flower, and dry them, half a pound; red-Roses cleans ' d from their white bottoms, two ounces; Indian -Nard three Drachms: put them all into a Vessel of Earth glaz ' d within-side, having a narrow mouth, and then adding two ounces of Montpelier -Tartar, pour upon them of the Juices of Quinces not perfectly ripe, and austere white-wine, of each three pints and a half. Then with a woodd ' n-Spatula thrust down the Wormwood, Roses and Spikenard into the Liquors, and having cover ' d the Vessel, set it upon hot embers for 24 hours. Then boil the Ingredients gently till the Liquors be a third part consum ' d. Drain and press out the Decoction, and clarifie it with the white of an Egg and four pound of Sugar, and boil them over a gentle fire to the con∣sistence of a Syrup a little thicker then or∣dinary. Let the Syrup cool, and then mix with it half a Drachm of Oyl of Worm∣wood, incorporated with two ounces of powder ' d Sugar; or else with two ounces of the tincture of the tops of Wormwood drawn with the Spirit of Wine. Then keep the Syrup in a Bottle well-stopp ' d. 
 Here give me leave to answer the objections some have made against the preparations of this Syrup. For they say, That in the Decoction of the Wormwood, Roses and Spikenard, their volatile parts dissipate with the spiritous part of the Win ; and that to preserve them, the Infusion and Decoction of this Syrup must be made in a Cucurbit of glass, cover ' d with its Head in a Sand-bath, and that the ten first ounces of the Di∣still ' d-waters must be kept a-part, as also the two next pints that follow, continuing the Distillation till there remains but one pint of moisture in the Cucurbit. Then, say they, that which remains in the Cucurbit must be prest out, and the Liquor clarify ' d and evaporated till it be reduc ' d to four ounces; that those 4 ounces must be dissolv ' d with 2 pound of Sugar, and the ten ounces of the first Water reserv ' d a-part, and that after they have boyl ' d a very little while, the Syrup is made: Only the two last pints of the se∣cond Water must be reserv ' d to mingle with the Syrup, when occasion requires. 
 The dissipation of the volatile parts of the Wormwood, Roses, and Spike∣nard with the Wine, seems at first a specious Argument. But upon examina∣tion, we shall sind that the Remedy propos ' d is worse then the mischief sought to be prevented, besides the trouble of the Preparation. For, besides that the volatile parts, the loss whereof is so much fear ' d, are not such as the design of the Syrup requires, which is principally to strength ' n the Stomach, Liver and Bowels, which is the office of the material and grosser parts of Medicaments, and chiefly of their fix ' d salt, you shall find a greater dissipation of the good parts in the preparation of these Au∣thors, then in that of the Ancients. For though they keep the first ten ounces of the Distill ' d-water; they take away two pints of that which follows next, the vertue whereof is no more to be found in the Syrup. Then again, they dissipate many of the conside∣rable parts by clarifying the rest of the Decoction, and causing it to evaporate to four ounces, whereby it is impossible to concenter the vertues of so many ingredients, espe∣cially for one Syrup. Then the boyling, how soft soever, which afterwards they allow the Syrup to unite the four ounces of the first Water; carries off the most subtle parts of the Spiritous-water, which they took so much care to preserve. Whereby the defi∣ciency of their Preparation easily appears.
Yet I must confess the Ancients might have done better with less trouble, had they gone according to the prescription here set down. For though we cannot boast by this means to preserve all the Spiritous parts of the Wormwood, Roses and Spike∣nard, no more then those of the Wine; nevertheless a good part are retain ' d, and the addition of the Distill ' d-oyl of Wormwood sufficiently supplyes the defects of those Spirits which the Wormwood lost in Distillation. Besides all this, the green-sowre∣wine, which we use instead of the ripe-wine prescrib ' d by the Ancients, the unripe Quinces, and the Tartar being order ' d as we have done, the Acid part which abounds in all these, uniting with the fixt Salt of the Tartar it self, will stop the motion of the greatest part of the volatile Spirits which were subject to dissipation, and enable them to resist the heat of the Infusion and Decoction. And these volatiles thus retain ' d, find∣ing themselves joyn ' d to the terrestrial and fix ' d parts of the other Medicaments, will be able to second and assist their operation: which they will do more powerfully, when they meet with the sulphurie parts of the Distill ' d-oyl of Wormwood. 
 But to satisfie those who believe that all the spiritous part of Wine is absolutely necessary in this Syrup, and fear that the Coction may have dissipated some parts; That dissipation may be supply ' d by adding to the Syrup, boyl ' d a little more then or∣dinary and cold again, two ounces of the Tincture of the tops of Wormwood, drawn with the Spirit of Wine. Which re-inforc ' d by the Oyl, will render the Syrup much more effectual. 
 If the Greater Wormwood be too bitter, you may may make use of the Lesser for Persons that are more nice, observing still the same Preparation. 
 Spikenard is brought from the East-Indies. It is a Root that shooteth up many hairy∣spikes set together of a brownish-colour. There is nothing appears above the ground but the stalk, for the spikes grow even with the Earth, about an inch and a half long, of a strong scent, like that of Galingale, the taste whereof is bitter and biting. 
 Syrup of Wormwood strength ' ns the Stomach and Liver, creates an Appetite, helps digestion, kills Worms, corrects the acidities of the Stomach, expels winds, fortifies the Bowels, stops Looseness, and is profitable in Hysteric-distempers. The dose is one or two spoonfuls in a morning fasting, either unmix ' d, or in Wine, or any other pro∣per Liquor. It is also us ' d in Potions, Opiates, Pills, and several other Medicaments. 
 Syrupus de Althaea.   Syrup of Marsh-mallows.   ℞. Radicum Althaeae, ℥ ij. ℞. Roots of Marsh-mallows, ℥ ij. Graminis,   Meadow-grass,   Asparagi,   Asparagus,   Glycyrrhizae,   Liquorice,   Ʋvarum passarum,   Raisins of the Sun,   Cicerum rubrorum, an. ℥ j. Red Cich-pease, an. ℥ j. Summitatum Althaeae,   Tops of Althea,   Malvae,   French -Mallows,   Parietariae,   Pellitorie of the wall,   Pimpinellae,   Pimpernel,   Adianti vulgaris,   Common Maidenhair,   Capilli Veneris Monspeliensis, an. M. j. Monpelier -Maidenhair, an. M. j. Quatuor Semin frigid. Minorum, &amp;   Four Lesser Cold-seeds   Majorum, an. ℥ ij. Greater, an. ℥ ij. 
 Wash and cleanse the Roots of Althea, Asparagus and Meadow-grass, from their dirt, pith and strings, slice them well; and having boil ' d the Grass-roots a good quar∣ter of an hour first in 8 pints of Water, put into the Decoction the slic ' d-roots of Al∣thea and Asparagus, and let them boil soundly for half an hour; then add the dry Raisins cut, and the▪ Cich-pease whole; when they have boil ' d a little while, put in the tops of the Mallows, Althea, Pellitorie and Pimpernel slightly shred, and boil them about a quarter of an hour among the rest: after that add the Liquorice slic ' d, and the Maidenhairs cut, and when they begin to boil, put in the Cold-seeds: thrust them down into the Decoction, and take the whole off the fire, and let them drain a quarter of an hour afterwards. Then clarifie the Liquor with the white of an Egg and four pounds of Sugar, and let them boil over a moderate fire to the consistence of a Syrup, a little more then ordinary. Stir the Syrup softly from time to time, the better to evaporate the superfluous moisture, and put up the Syrup when it is quite cold. 
 This Preparation differs from that of Fernelius and some other Writers; the quan∣tity of the Roots and Raisins being here chang ' d from half an ounce to an ounce; the Plantain is left out, and eight pints of Water prescrib ' d instead of six. All which quantities are too small for four pound of Sugar. And Plantain known to be an astrin∣gent herb, is not to be admitted among opening, slippery-making Roots. And ten pints of Water are but little enough to extract the vertues of so many Medicaments, and yet retain the just consistence of a Syrup. 
 Some think this Preparation impossible, by reason of the viscosity of most of the par∣ticular Ingredients; but they that observe my method, will find not only the possibility, but the success which they suspect. 
 The Cich-pease are prescrib ' d whole, because their opening quality abounds enough without-side without being brok ' n: which if they should be, their terrestrial part be∣ing op ' n, might prevail above their aperitive Faculty. 
 Some would have the Roots, Herbs, and other Ingredients put into a little Bag, and so boil ' d, believing their Mucilaginous part would remain in the Bag; by which means the Syrup would be less viscous, and more easily prepar ' d. But the difference of the Substances requires different degrees of boiling; and therefore it would be ill-done to boil them one among another equally, whereby the vertue of the one might be dissi∣pated before the vertues of the other were fully imparted to the Liquor: besides that there be others whose terrestial parts would remain in the Syrup, especially the Cich∣pease. And then again, though all the Ingredients were of the same nature, it would be a difficult thing for them, being so stopp ' d up, to communicate their vertue equally; which in regard it could not be done otherwise then by squeezing the Ingredients, would render the Syrup more mucilaginous. 
 Syrup of Althea is very much esteem ' d for discharging the Reins and Ureters of gra∣velly-flegmatic and tenacious Substances. For it moderately op ' ns and makes all the passages slippery; tempers the shapness of them, as well as of the Urine it self: and cools the heat that burns in the passages. It is no less commended in Diseases of the Brest, and Gonorrhea  ' s. It is to be tak ' n fasting, alone, or in Decoctions, Emulsions, Whey, White-wine, &amp;c. The usual dose is an ounce, though you may take two up∣on occasion. 
 Syrupus Aperiens Cachecticus, D. D. D ' Aquin.   A Opening Syrup against ill-habit of Body, by Monsieur D ' Aquin.   ℞. Radicum Apii,   ℞. Roots of Parsly,   Foeniculi,   Fennel,   Petroselini,   Stone-Parsly,   Rubiae Tinctorum,   Dyers-Madder,   Aristolochiae tenuis, an. ℥ ij. Thin-Birthwort, an. ℥ ij. 
 Wash and cleanse the Roots of Parsly, Fennel, Stone-Parsly, Madder and Birth∣wort, and having bruis ' d them and put them into an Earth ' n-vessel glaz ' d within, with a streight mouth, moist ' n them with Vinegar of Squills, and having cover ' d the Pot, keep them in maceration 24 hours in some hot place, as over a Baker ' s Oven; then let them boyl over a gentle fire in eight pints of water, where Steel has been quench ' d, to the consumption of the fourth part. Then 
 ℞. Foliorum Arthemisiae,   ℞. The Leaves of Mugwort,   Absinthii,   Wormwood,   Agrimoniae,   Agrimonie,   Pulegii,   Penny-royal,   Chamaedryos, an. M. j. Germander, an. M. j. Rutae, M ss. Rue, M ss. 
 Shred them and put them in, and when they have boyl ' d about a quarter of an hour among the Roots, add thereto 
 Injice, Epithymi,   Dodder of time, Florum Matricariae,   Flowers of Featherfew, Chaemomillae,   Camomile, Hyperici, an. P. ij. St. John  ' s-wort, an. Little Hand∣fulls, ij. 
 After some few bubblings, take it off the fire, strain and squeeze out the whole; clarifie the straining with five pound of Sugar, and boyl them over a gentle fire to the consistence of a Syrup. 
 Si purgante cupias,   If you desire it purgative, boyl it still to the consistence of a soft Electuary. Then   ℞. Rhabarbari electi minutim incisi,   ℞. Choice Rhubarb small cut,   Foliorum Orientalium, an. ℥ ij. Indian -Leaves, an. ℥ ij. Radicum Jalapa,   Roots of Jalap,   Mechoachana,   Mechoachan,   Hermodactilorum, &amp;   Hermodactyles, and   Brioniae albae contusarum, an. ℥ j. White Bryony bruis ' d, an. ℥ ij. Tartari Vitriolati, ʒ vj. Tartar-vitrioliz ' d, ʒ vj. 
 Infuse all these in a Glaz ' d-earthen-vessel for four and twenty hours over hot embers in three pints of Balm-water, and let them boyl about a quarter of an hour. Strain and press out the Infusion, and clarifie the Liquor. Then mixe it with the Syrup boyl ' d to the consistence of a soft Electuary, and boyl it again to the consistence of a Syrup. When it is cool, aromatize. it with four drops of Oyl of Cinamon incorporated with half an ounce of fine Sugar, or with as much of the Tincture of Saffron; then put it up and stop it well.
This Syrup is a collection of choice Medicaments, which has had good success in opening obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesenterie and Matrix. It purges gently viscous and tenacious humours, which are the original of Cachexies, Dropsies and quo∣tidian Agues. It is very proper to cure pale Complexions, and against suppression or irregularity of the Menstruum ' s. And though the Chalybeat-water does but a very little matter augment the vertue of the Syrup, yet you may re-inforce it with Tin∣cture, Salt or Vitriol of Mars, if th be occasion. 
 Either of these Syrups the first or e Purgative, may be tak ' n alone, or mix ' d with Distill ' d waters or White-wine, or any proper Decoction, from one ounce to two. 
 Syrups de Arthemisia.   Syrup of Mugwort.   ℞. Radicum Apii,   ℞. Of the Roots of Parsly,   Foeniculi,   Fennel,   Petroselini,   Stone-Parsly,   Enulae Campanae,   Elecampane,   Ireos Nostratis,   French -Orrice,   Paonia, &amp;   Peonie, and   Rubia major, an. ℥ j. The Bigger Madder, an. ℥ j. Foliorum Arthemisia,   Leaves of Mugwort,   Pulegis,   Peny-royal,   Calamintha,   Calaminte,   Origani,   Organy,   Melissa,   Balm,   Dictamni Cretici,   Cretan -Dittany,   Sabina,   Savine,   Persicaria,   Arsmart,   Majorana,   Marjoram,   Chamadryos,   Germander,   Chamapityos,   Ground-Ivy,   Hyssopi,   Hyssop,   Hyperici,   St. John  ' s-wort,   Ruta,   Rue, 
 Matricaria florida,   Double Featherfew,   Centaurii minoris,   Lesser Centaurie,   Betonicae,   Betonie,   Prassii albi, an. M. j. White-Horehound, an. M. j. Seininum Anisi,   Seed of Annise,   Foeniculi,   Fennel,   Dauci,   Wild-Carrot,   Petroselini,   Stone-Parsley,   Ocymi,   Basil,   Ruta, an. ʒ iij. Rue, an. ʒ iij. Tartari albi Monspeliensis, ℥ ij. Tartar white of Montpelier, ℥ ij. 
 Wash, cleanse and bruise all the Roots, and infuse them with the Tartar pulveriz ' d four and twenty hours over hot embers in an Earth ' n-glaz ' d-vessel well-cover ' d, in three pints of clear Hydromel newly made. Cut the Herbs and bruise the Seeds, and put them in another Earth ' n-glaz ' d-pot by themselves in ten pints of the same Hydromel, covering the Pot and setting it upon hot embers for twelve hours. Then boyl the In∣fusion of the Roots over a gentle fire for half an hour. Having so done, mixe the In∣fusion of the Herbs with it, and boyl both together for a good quarter of an hour. Af∣ter that take the Decoction from the fire, and when it is half-cold, strain and squeeze it well, and having clarify ' d the Liquor with the white of an Egg in five pounds of Sugar, boyl them over a moderate fire to the consistence of a Syrup, and aromatize it with six drops of Distill ' d-oyl of Cinamon, incorporated with an ounce of fine powder ' d Sugar. But this mixture must not be made till the Syrup be quite cold. 
 Hydromel is preferr ' d before Water and the powder ' d Tartar added, as well the better to penetrate the Ingredients, as to bind their volatile parts, and to hinder dis∣sipation during the Decoction. The Aromatization of the Syrup with Oyl of Cinamon is beyond the method of the Ancients, who were wont to boyl the Cinamon in their Decoctions, not considering that the sulphurie and volatile parts of the Cinamon dissi∣pate in boyling, and leave in the Decoction only some terrestrial parts of the Ci∣namon, inferior to the smell and sharp and penetrating taste of the Oyl of Cinamon. 
 The Preparation of this Syrup is different from those which may be met with in se∣veral Pharmacopoeas: But you will find that the change is much for the better, and that I have observ ' d the best rules of Pharmacy. 
 This Syrup is chiefly made use of in the Diseases of Women: to op ' n obstructions of the Matrix, to dispel Wind, to repress vapours and to quiet suffocations, as also to provoke and regulate the menstruum ' s, and evacuate the impurities of the Matrix. It is good against obstructions of the Spleen, Liver and Bowels, as well for Men as Women. The dose is from one ounce to two, alone, or in White-wine, in Open∣ing-waters or Decoctions. It is also sometimes mixt i Pills, Opiates and other Me∣dicines. 
 Syrupus de Cichorio compositus cum Rhabarbaro.   Syrup of Cichorio compounded with Rhubarb.   ℞. Hordei integri,   ℞. Whole Barley,   Radicum Apii,   Roots of Parsly,   Foeniculi,   Fennel,   Asparagi,   Asparagus,   Tartari albi crudi, an. ℥ ij. Raw white Tartar, an. ℥ ij. Foliorum Cichorii,   Leaves of Cichorie,   Taraxaci,   Dandelion,   Endivia,   Endive,   Sonchi Levis,   Smooth Sow-thistle,   Lactuca Sativa; &amp;   Gard ' n-Lettice, and   Sylvestris Spinas in dorso ferentis,   Wild-Lettice with prickles,   Hepaticae,   Liverwort,   Fumariae,   Fumitorie,   Lupuli, an. M. j. Hopps, an. M. j. Capill. Ven. Monspeliensis,   Venus -Hair of Montpelier,   Polytrici,   Gold ' n-Maidenhair, 
 Adianti vulgaris,   Common-Maidenhair,   Ceterach,   Spleenwort,   Glycyrrhiza,   Liquorice,   Baccarum Alkekengi,   Alkekengi-Berries,   Seminis Cuscutae, an. ʒ vj. Dodder-seed, an. ʒ vj. 
 First boil the Barley whole with the Tartar beat ' n to powder in ten pints of Water for half an hour, then adding the Roots of Parsly, Fennel and Asparagus, well-cleans ' d from dust and pith, and slic ' d or bruis ' d, let them boil another half hour; next put in the Alkekengi-Berries bruis ' d, and the Herbs cut, and boil them a quarter of an hour among all the rest: After that put in the Liquorice cleans ' d and slic ' d, the Dodder-seed, and the Maidenhairs, and having let them boil a little while, take the the Decoction from the fire, and when it is half-cold, strain and press it forth. Cla∣rifie it with the white of an Egg with six pound of Sugar, and boil it over a moderate fire to the consistence of a Syrup between soft and solid. 
 Interim,   In the mean time,   ℞. Rhubarbari electi incisi, ℥ vj. ℞. Of choice Rhubarb cut, ℥ vj. Tartari albi Monspel. ℥ j. White Tartar of Montpelier, ℥ j. Spica Narda, ʒ vj. Spikenard, ʒ vj. 
 Infuse them in three pints of the Distill ' d-water of Succorie in an Earth ' n-glaz ' d-pot, narrow-mouth ' d and well cover ' d over hot coals for 24 hours; then let them boyl a few bublings, and having strain ' d and press ' d the whole, and clarify ' d the Liquor with the white of an Egg and four ounces of white Sugar, put this to the Syrup, while it is hot; and if it be not then thick enough boyl it on to a good consistence, and put it up when it is quite cold. 
 Some there are that reserve a part of their Decoction to infuse the Rhubarb and Spikenard into it. But considering that a Liquor charg ' d with the vertue of so many Ingredients is not in a condition to receive a new that of the Rhubarb and Spikenard, and that of necessity it must leave a good part in the Sediment, certainly the Succorie∣water here prescrib ' d, is much more proper at this time, not being pester ' d with any other qualities than what is natural to it. 
 There is no Syrup more in use in all places then this of Succorie-compos ' d: Though by what miscarriage I know not, none of the Pharmacopoea ' s have yet agreed in the Composition. But this you may be certain is right: and by the way take notice, That the Tartar is added here also for the better penetration of the simples, to impart their vertue to the Water more effectually, and to stop the dissipation of their volatile parts. 
 The remarquable vertues of this Syrup, have caus ' d some to give it the Name of The Balsom of the Liver and Spleen, the obstructions whereof it powerfully op ' ns, as also of the Pancreas and Mesenterie. It is recommended against the Jaundice and Cachexies; as also to soft ' n and discuss the hardness and swelling of the Belly which happ ' ns to little Children through obstructions caus ' d by the Worms. It is successfully us ' d in Apo∣zems appointed to prepare bad humours for digestion, especially choleric ones, and to open the passages necessary for their evacuation. It is purgative, compounded with Rhubarb, for which reason it is giv ' n sometimes alone to little Children, some∣times mix ' d with Purgative infusions, especially in Diarrhea ' s, Lienteries, Dysenteries, and other choleric Distempers that harrass the Intestines. And it has this good qua∣lity, that as it purges the ill humours, it strength ' ns all the lower parts of the Belly. The dose is from one ounce to two. 
 They that desire a simple Syrup of Succorie may prepare it with equal parts of fine Sugar and Juice of Succorie depurated by settlement, clarify ' d together with the white of an Egg, and boyl ' d to the consistence of a Syrup. 
 Syrupus Roborans.   A Strength ' ning Syrup.   ℞. Rhabarbari elect. incisi, ℥ iiij. ℞. Choice Rhubarb cut, ℥ iiij. Baccarum Myrti contusarum,   Mirtle-berries bruis ' d,   Rosarum Rubrarum exungulatarum, an. ℥ iij. Red-Roses cleans ' d, an. ℥ iij. Tartari Alb. contusi, ℥ j. White-Tartar bruis ' d, ℥ j. 
 Slice the Rhubarb, bruise the Berries, beat the Tartar in a Mortar, and put them with the Roses cleans ' d from their whites, into a Glaz ' d-earth ' n-pot with a narrow mouth, in six pints of Water wherein Steel has been quench ' d. Cover the Pot, and set it over hot embers for 24 hours; then let them boil a little; which done, strain and press the Sediment strongly. Clarifie the Liquor with the white of an Egg and four pound of Sugar, and boil them up over a soft fire to the consistency of a Syrup. 
 Though the Purgative-vertue of Rhubarb may not seem necessary for the purposes of this Syrup, yet it had been ill-left out; in regard it may, as it were, insensibly evacuate some ill-humours, while it ' s more terrrestial parts assisted by other Medicaments, for∣tifie the parts that were weaken ' d and relax ' d. The purpose of the Tartar is the same as before.
This Syrup is highly esteem ' d for the strength ' ning and restoring the Stomach and Liver debilitated. It is very much us ' d in the cure of Diarrheas, Lienteries, Dysen∣teries, and Hepatic-fluxes; it creates an Appetite, and helps Digestion. It is good to help the retentive Faculty of the Stomach, and in losses of Blood. You may take it fasting, alone, or mix ' d with proper Liquors. The usual dose is an ounce, which you may enlarge to two. 
 Syrupus Myrtinus.   Syrup of Myrtle.   ℞. Baccarum Myrti,   ℞. Myrtle-Berries,   Mespillorum ad maturitatem vergentium, &amp;   Medlars near ripe, and   Radicis Symphiti majoris, an. ℥ iiij. Root of Greater Cumfrey, an. ℥ iiij. Suntali Citrini,   Yellow-Saunders,   Fructuum Oxyacanthae recentium,   Fresh-Barberies,   Granorum Sumach,   Seeds of Sumach,   Balaustiorum, &amp;   Double Flowers of wild-Pome-granates, And   Rosarum rubrarum mundatar. an. ℥ ij. Red-Roses clean pick ' d, an. ℥ ij. 
 Take the Myrtle-Berries dry, the Medlars when they are almost ripe, bruise them well, as also the Sumach-seeds, the Barberries, the Pome-granate flowers, the Yellow-Saunders, and the Roots of great Confrey, and putting them all together with the Roses clean-pickt into an Earth ' n-glaz ' d-pot; pour upon them three pints of fair Wa∣ter, and of the Juice of Quinces and wild-Pears, of each two pints. Thrust down the Ingredients into the Liquors, cover the Pot and set it four and twenty hours upon hot embers, at the end whereof boyl the Infusion a good quarter of an hour, and when it is half-cold, strain and squeeze it strongly out; and having clarify ' d the Liquor with the white of an Egg with five pound of the finest Sugar, boyl them over a moderate fire to the consistence of a Syrup. 
 Syrup of Myrtles cools, dries and binds, for which reason it is successfully made use of to stay thin Defluxions upon the Lungs, and to stop the coughing which pro∣ceeds from thence. It is also very proper to stay Loosenesses, Spitting and vomiting of Blood, and all other internal Haimorraghia ' s. It stops the excessive flowings of the menstruum ' s, and all want of retention in the Stomach and Bowels. It is highly esteem ' d for the cooling of Inflammations, and healing Ulcers of the Mouth, Tongue or Throat. It is tak ' n alone from one ounce to two, or else in Distill ' d-waters or pro∣per Decoctions. 
 Syrupus Jujubinus.   Syrup of Jujubs.   ℞. Jujubas, N o . lx. ℞. Jujubs, N o . lx. Hordei mundati,   Barley pickt,   Glycyrrhizae,   Liquorice,   Capilli Veneris Monspel. an. ℥ j. Venus -Hair of Montpelier, an. ℥ j. Violarum recentium, M. j. Fresh-Violets, M. j. Seminum Malvae,   Seeds of Mallows,   Cydoniorum,   Quinces,   Papaveris albi,   White-Poppie,   Melonis,   Of Melon,   Lactuca, an. ʒ iij. Of Lettice, an. ʒ iij. 
 Put the pickt Barley with six pints of Water into an Earth ' n-glaz ' d-pot, and let it boyl over a gentle fire for a good half hour; then put in the Jububs slic ' d, and let them boyl a good quarter of an hour; then add the Liquorice scrap ' d and bruis ' d, the Venus -Hair cut, and the Seeds bruis ' d, and let them bubble a while. Then add the fresh-Violets, thrusting them down into the Decoction, at the same time taking off the Pot from the fire; and when the Decoction is somewhat cool, strain it, and having clari∣fy ' d the Liquor with the white of an Egg with three pound of fine Sugar, boyl it over a gentle-fire to the consistence of a Syrup. 
 Should the Decoction of the Ingredients prescrib ' d for the making of this Syrup be made without regard had to the viscosity of the Seeds, and without following exactly the order to be observ ' d in the boyling, it would be so clammy that the Syrup could never keep long. Much less would it keep, and much more irregular would the con∣sistence be, if as the Ancients did, you should add Gum-Tragacanth. For two drams of that Gum were enough to make it as thick as a Loohc, and keep it from being trans∣parent. But observing my method, the vertue which is requir ' d in the Ingredients, will not fail to remain in the Syrup, and the consistence will be proper. 
 Syrup of Jujubs is chiefly made use of for Persons that are troubl ' d with a dry cough, and are troubl ' d with hot and thin Defluxions upon the Aspera Arteria or Rough Ar∣terie, or upon the Lungs; for it thick ' ns thin flegm, and qualifies the acrimonie thereof, and helps to expectorate. It is tak ' n from half an ounce to an ounce, alone, or else in Pectoral-Ptisanes, Juleps, Apozems, or mix ' d with Looches. 
 Syrupus Florum Tussilaginis Simplex.   Simple Syrup of Flowers of Colts-foot.   ℞. Florum Tussilaginis recentium, lb j ss. ℞. Fresh Flowers of Colts-foot, lb j ss. 
 Put the Flowers into an Earth ' n-pot glaz ' d within, having a streight mouth; and covering the Pot, set it upon hot cinders for twelve hours, at the end whereof give the Infusion some few bubling-boilings, strain it and press it out. Then putting the like quantity of fresh Colts foot Flowers into the same Pot, pour upon them the strain ' d Liquor. Cover the Pot and set it upon the hot embers, as long as before; then letting the Infusion boyl a little, strain it, squeeze it, and clarifie the Liquor with the white of an Egg with four pound of fine Sugar, and let it boyl over a soft fire to the consistence of a Syrup. 
 The Syrup of Flowers of Colts-foot is highly extoll ' d to cut and loos ' n tough-flegm from the rough Artery and Lungs, for which reason it gives great ease to those that are Asthmatic, and such as cannot freely breath. It is tak ' n alone by intervals fasting, from two drams to half an ounce. It is also mix ' d in Looches, and Pectoral Ptisanes. 
 Syrupus de Tussilagine Compositus.   Compound Syrup of Colts-foot.   ℞. Radicum Tussilaginis, lb ss. ℞. Roots of Colts-foot, lb ss. Foliorum &amp; florum ejusdem, an. M. iiij. Leaves and Flowers of the same, an. M. iiij. Capilli Veneris Monspel. M. ij. Montpelier Venus -Hair, M. ij. Glycyrrhizae. ℥ j. Liquorice, ℥ j. Aqua Fontanae, lb viij. Fountain-water, lb viij. 
 Gather the Roots toward the end of Winter, the same Flowers and Leaves, when they are shot forth. Dry the Roots and Flowers, and keep them till the Leaves are ready. Then bruise the Roots well, and boil them for half an hour in eight pints of Fountain-water. Then adding the Leaves cut, let them boil a quarter of an hour with the Roots. Then put in the Liquorice scrap ' d and bruis ' d, the Venus-hair cut, and the Flowers. Give them a gentle boiling, and at the same time take off the Decoction from the fire. Strain it and press it when it is a little cool. And having clarify ' d the Li∣quor with the white of an Egg with five pound of the finest Sugar, boil it to the con∣sistency of a Syrup, a little thicker then ordinary, by reason of the viscosity of the Colts-foot. 
 The different substance of the Ingredients that compound this substance, require different spaces of b ling: so that we cannot either infuse or boil them all together at the same time, unless we should despise the principal rules of Pharmacy, which teach us to begin our Decoctions and Infusions with the most solid Medicaments. 
 The same vertues may be attributed to this Syrup, as to the former; only we may believe that it acts with more force, by the Conjunction of the Roots and Leaves of Colts-foot, the Liquorice, and the Maiden-hair. But in lieu of that, it is somewhat more unpleasant. The Dose and use is much the same. 
 Syrupus Antiasthmaticus, D. D. D ' AQUIN.   An Anti-Asthmatic Syrup of Monsieur D '  AQUIN.   ℞. Hordei Mundati, ℥ ij ℞. Pickt Barley, ℥ ij. Radicum Petasitidis,   Roots of Butter-Bur,   Enulae Campana,   Elecampane,   Apii   Parsley,   Faeniculi   Fennel,   Liquoritiae, &amp;   Liquorice, and   Ʋvarum Damascenarum Mundatarum, an. ℥ j ss. The best and biggest sort of Rai∣sins of the Sun, an. ℥ j ss. Dactylos Enucleatos N o . xij. Ston ' d Dates, N o . xij. Jujubas,   Jujubs,   Sebesten, ana. N o . xxx. Sebestens, an. N o . xxx. Foliorum Tussilaginis,   Leaves of Colts-foot,   Pulmonaria,   Lungwort,   Summitatum Hyssopi,   Tops of Hysop,   Prassii Albi,   White Hore-hound,   Capill. ven. Monspel. an. M. j. Montpelier Maiden-hair, an. M. j. Seminum Anisi,   Seeds of Anise,   Bombacis, an. ℥ ss. Cotton-Tree, an. ℥ ss. Florum Tussilaginis,   Flowers of Colts-foot,   Pedis cati. an. M. ss. Cats-foot, an. M. ss. 
 Boyl the pickt Barley half an hour in nine pints of Water, then adding the Roots cleans ' d and cut, boil them half an hour longer: next put the Dates ston ' d and cut, with the Jujubs, Sebestens, and Raisins ston ' d, and having boyl ' d them among the rest, for a quarter of an hour, put in the Herbs shred, and let them boil another quarter; add then the Liquorice and Seeds bruis ' d, the Maiden-hair and Flowers, and after some few bublings, take the decoction from the fire. Strain it being somewhat cool ' d. Then cla∣rifie the Liquor with the white of an Egg and five pound of fine Sugar, and boil it over a gentle fire to the consistence of a Syrup. 
 This Syrup is very proper to cut and loosen cold, viscous and tough flegm, from all the parts serving to respiration. It principally helps those that are Asthmatick, and those that are troubled with inveterate Coughs, for it opens the passages and removes the flegm that stops them. It may be call ' d the Balsom of the Brest, and particularly for old Men. Take a spoonful at a time every foot by night or day, so that you may be said to be fasting, and continue it as occasion requires. 
 Syrupus Resumptivus, sive de Testu∣dinibus.   The Resumptive Syrup, or Syrup of Tortoises.   ℞. Carnis Testudinum Nemoralium, lb j. ℞. Of the flesh of Wood-Tortoises, lb j. Cancrorum fluviatilium ℥ viij. River-Crabs, ℥ viij. Hordei Mundati,   Pickt Barley,   Carnis Dactylorum &amp;   Pulp of Dates, and the   Passularum Damascenarum, an. ℥ ij. Fairest largest Raisins of the Sun, an. ℥ ij. Jujubas &amp;   Jujubs,   Sebesten, an. N o . xij. Sebesten, an. N o . xij. Glycyrrhizae rasae &amp; contusae, ℥ j. Liquorice scrap ' d and bruis ' d, ℥ j. Nucleorum Pineorum,   Pine-Kernels,   Pistaciarum Mundatarum,   Pistaches cleans ' d,   Seminis Bombacis,   Seed of the Cotton-Tree,   Melonis,   Melon,   Cucumeris,   Cucumber,   Citrulli,   Citrulls,   Florum Nymphaeae, &amp;   Flowers of Water-Lilly, and   Violarum, an. ℥ ss. Violets, an. ℥ ss. Seminum Lactucae,   Seeds of. Lettice,   Papaveris Albi, an. ʒ ij. White-Poppy, an. ʒ ij. 
 Take the flesh of Wood-Tortoises, parted from the Bones, the Skin, and the Entrails, and the River-Crabs; put them into a glaz ' d Earth ' n-Pot, with two ounces of pickt Barley. Pour upon them six pints of Fountain-water, and having cover ' d the Pot, boil the whole over a gentle fire for two hours. Then add the Fruits cleans ' d and cut, and boil them with the rest for a quarter of an hour. After which, put in the Pine-kernels, the Pistache ' s, and the Seeds bruis ' d, next to them the Liquorice and the flowers of Nymphaea, and lastly, the Violets; and having given them some few Bublings, take the Pot from the fire, and when the Decoction is somewhat cool, strain and clarifie it with the white of an Egg and three pound of Sugar. Then boil it to the consistency of a Syrup. And when it is cold aromatize it with six drops of Oyl of Anniseed, incorpo∣rated with an ounce of fine powder ' d Sugar.
This Syrup is not so much in use; whether it is for the difficulty of getting Wood-Tortoises, or for the aversion that several sick people have to those sort of Animals; or else for that it will not keep long: as being only to be prepar ' d upon occasion and for particular Patients. 
 However, the vertues of it are very considerable to restore strength to Persons wast∣ed, and extenuated by long sickness: It helps the Ptisical, and those that labour under a Marasmus, for it moist ' ns, and cools, and extinguishes preter-natural heat. It is to be taken between Meals in a spoon, from half an ounce to an ounce, continuing the use of it for a good while and often. It may be also mix ' d in Juleps or Emulsions. 
 Syrupus Nymphaeae. Syrup of Water-Lillies. ℞. Florum mediorum Albissinorum Nymphaeae, lb ij ℞. The middle whitest flowers of Water-Lillies. lb ij. 
 Take only the white part of the Flowers of Nymphaea, and weigh out two pound, and having put them into an Earth ' n-pot glaz ' d within, with a narrow mouth, pour upon them nine pints of boiling Water; thrust the Flowers down into the Water, and ha∣ving cover ' d the pot, set it upon hot embers for twenty four hours: then letting the in∣fusion buble a-while, strain it out, and pour it hot upon the same quantity of fresh Flow∣ers of Nymphaeae, put into the same pot; and having cover ' d it, repeat the same infusion, boyling and straining; then clarifie the Liquor with the white of an Egg, and four pound of Sugar, and boil it to the consistence of a Syrup, adding at the latter end of the boyling four ounces of clarify ' d Juice of Granates. This Syrup may be a little better boyl ' d then ordinary to prevent the viscosity of the infusion from spoiling the Syrup. 
 Syrup of Water-Lillies cools and moistens very much, for which reason the use of it is very proper, as well in continu ' d as intermitting Fevers. It qualifies the boiling of the choler, and appeases the pains that proceed from thence, particularly those of the Head. It quenches thirst and allays Venereal desire. It provokes a soft sleep, and is good against the heat of the Reins, and Genitals. It thick ' ns the humours, and takes away their acrimony. It may be tak ' n alone from half an ounce, to an ounce and a half. But usually it is mix ' d with distill ' d waters, Emulsions, or in Decoctions, like a Julep. 
 Syrupus Papaveris Albi. Syrup of white-Poppies. ℞. Capitum Papaveris Albi ad maturita∣tem vergentium, sed adhuc virentium in∣cisorum, lb iiij. ℞. Of the heads of White-Poppies enclining to ripeness, but yet green, and cut, lb iiij. Capitum papaveris Nigri ejusdem maturi∣tatie. lb ij. Heads of Black-Poppies of the same ripeness, lb ij. 
 Gather the heads of both the Poppies before they be ripe. Throw away the tail, and the small Crown upon the top of every head. Cut them, and put them into an Earth ' n-pot glaz ' d within, and pour upon them fifteen pints of boiling water, cover the pot, and set it upon the hot Embers for four and twenty hours, then having boyl ' d them a quarter of an hour, strain and press them out; Clarifie the Liquor with the white of an Egg, and six pound of fine Sugar, and boil it to the consistence of a Syrup. 
 The use of Syrup of white-Poppy is very frequent, being very proper to ease pains and stay defluxions, which interrupt sleep. It takes away the acrimony of the hu∣mours; and by insensible transpiration expels thin, sharp, and corroding humours. It mortifies acids, stops the violence of Coughing, allays the motion of Flegm, and gives great help to those that spit blood. The Dose is from half an ounce to an ounce in proper Liquors. 
 This Syrup is to be in every thing preferr ' d before the Diacodium of the Ancients. 
 Syrupus Papaveris Rhaeados. Syrup of wild-Poppy, or Corn-Rose. ℞. Florum Papaveris Rheaedos recentium, lb j. ℞. Flowers of wild-Poppy, new-ga∣ther ' d, lb j. 
 Put them into a glaz ' d Earth ' n-pot, and pour upon them four pints of boyling foun∣tain-water, cover the pot and set it for 6 hours over hot embers; then having caus ' d them to boyl a little while, strain and press them, and pour the liquor upon the same quantity of Poppy-Flowers put into the same Vessel; let them macerate and boyl as before; then strain and press them again, and having clarify ' d the Liquor with the white of an Egg, with four pound of Sugar, boyl it up to a Syrup somewhat thicker then ordinary, by reason of the excess of superfluous moisture in the Flowers of red-Poppy. 
 The Syrup of the Flowers of red-Poppy, is commended in Diseases of the Brest, more especially in Pleurisies, chiefly where sharp, acrimonious, and thin humours are to be staid and carry ' d off. It hinders the coagulation of the blood, it assists expecto∣ration, expels choler by transpiration, and causes sleep. The Dose is from half an ounce to an ounce, or an ounce and a half at most, either alone, or in distill ' d-Waters, Decoctions, or mix ' d with other Syrups. 
 Syrupus de Rosis siccis. Syrup of dry Roses. ℞. Rosarum Rubrarum exungulatarum siccarum, lb j. ℞. Red Rose-buds pick ' d and cleans ' d from their white bottoms and dry ' d, lb j. 
 Put them into a glaz ' d Earth ' n-pot, and pour upon them six pints of boiling foun∣tain-water, cover the pot, and keep it upon the hot ashes one or two hours, and having giv ' n the infusion two or three bublings, strain and press it forth. Clarifie the Liquor with the white of an Egg, and four pound of fine Sugar, and boyl it to the consistency of a Syrup, adding toward the end one dram of Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol. 
 Syrup of dry-Roses fortifies the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, and Bowels. It stays Vo∣miting, and all want of retention upwards or downwards. It is also very proper to stay defluxions that fall upon the Brest, to cleanse and heal little Ulcers in the Mouth and Throat, and to stop internal Bleedings. The Dose is from half an ounce to an ounce, ei∣ther alone, or in Gargarisms, Juleps, or common drink. 
 Syrupus Florum Tunicae sive Caryo∣phillorum hortensium. Syrup of Clove-gillow∣flowers. ℞. Florum Caryophillorum hortensium pur∣pureorum mundatorum. lb iij. ℞. Clove-gillow-flowers pick ' d and cleans ' d, lb iij. 
 Take only the red part of the body of the Clove-gillow-flower, cutting off the white bottom with a pair of Scissors; Weigh out three pound of the Flowers thus cleans ' d, and having put them into a Vessel of Earth glaz ' d within, with a streight mouth, pour upon them nine pints of boyling Fountain-water. Thrust down the Flowers with a Woodd ' n Spatula; cover the Pot and set it upon the hot embers for six hours, at the end whereof let the infusion boyl a little, then strain and press the Flowers, and pour the hot Liquor upon the same quantity of fresh Flowers, put into the same Vessel. Mace∣rate, boil, strain, and press them as before. Then clarifie the Liquor with the white of an Egg, with six pound of fine Sugar, and boyl it in the same Vessel over a gentle fire to the consistence of a Syrup. 
 Syrup of Gillow-flowers is as odoriferous as pleasing to the taste. It is very good to strength ' n the Heart, Brain, and all the noble parts. For which reason it is highly com∣mended against the Palpitations and Faintings of the Heart, weaknesses of the Stomach, Pestilential Air, Malignant Fevers, and Epidemic Diseases; as also to quick ' n the Spi∣rits, and strength ' n the Memory. It may be tak ' n in several Liquors, or in your usual Drink, or mix ' d with Opiates, and several other Medicines. The Dose is from half an ounce to an ounce. 
 Syrupus Melissophylli Compositus.   Compound Syrup of Balm.   ℞. Radicum Scorzonerae,   ℞. Roots of Vipers-grass,   Dictamni Albi,   White Dittany,   Buglossi,   Bugloss,   Pentaphylli, mundatarum, an. ℥ ij. Cinque-foil well-pickt, an. ℥ ij. Tartari Albi pulverati, ℥ j ss. White Tartar pulveriz ' d, ℥ j ss. Foliorum Melissae recentis, M. iij. Leaves of fresh Balm, M. iij. Menthae,   Mint,   Scabiosa,   Scabious,   Succisae, an. M. j. Devil ' s bit, an. M. j. Seminum Citri,   Seeds of Citron,   Ocymi,   Basil,   Oxalidis, &amp;   Sorrel, and   Cardui Benedict. an. ʒ iij. Carduus Benedictus, an. ʒ iij. 
 Cleanse the Roots, and having bruis ' d them in a Marble-Mortar, put them together with the white-Tartar into a glaz ' d Earth ' n-Vessel, in eight pints of Fountain Water▪ and let them boyl gently for a good half hour; then add the herbs cut, and the seeds bruis ' d, and let them boyl a good quarter of an hour with the Roots. After that, strain and press out the liquor, clarifie it with the white of an Egg, with half a pint of Juice of Balm, and four pound of fine Sugar, and boyl it to a Syrup. When it is cold aromatize it with four drops of distill ' d Oyl of Balm, or with Oyls of Citron, and Orange-peels, ana Gut. ij. incorporated with fine powder ' d Sugar.
The several parts of Plants so judiciously elected that makes up the composition of this Syrup, evidently demonstrate its efficacy to strength ' n the Heart, and to defend it, as well as the rest of the Noble Parts against Pestilential Air, and Diseases. It pre∣vents the putrefaction of the humours, keeps them from engendring. It cherishes the the Natural heat, creates an Appetite and helps Digestion. The dose is from half an ounce to an ounce, either alone or mixt with Potions, Opiates or other Medicines. 
 Syrupus de Stoechade correctus.   Syrup of Cassidonie correct.   ℞. Florum Stoechadis Arabicae siccorum, ℥ iiij. ℞. Drie Flowers of Arabian -Cassidonie, ℥ iiij. Summit. sicc. Betonicae,   Drie tops of Betonie,   Salviae,   Sage,   Thymi,   Thime,   Calaminthae, an. ℥ j ss. Calamint, an. ℥ j ss. Florum Calendulae,   Flowers of Marigolds,   Rorismarini,   Rosemary,   Lavendulae, &amp;   Lavender,   Lillii convallium, an. ℥ j. Lilly of the Vallies, an. ℥ j. Seminum Rutae,   Seeds of Rue,   Paeoniae,   Peonie,   Dauci Cretici, an. ℥ ss. Cretan Wild-carrot, an. ℥ ss. Tartari albi pulverati, ℥ j. White Tartar pulveriz ' d, ℥ j. 
 Cut the Herbs, bruise the Seeds, beat the Tartar in a mortar; and having mix ' d them with the Flowers and put them into a glass-Cucurbit, pour upon them four Pints of good Spanish -Wine, and as much of the distill ' d-water of flowers of the Tilet-tree. Fit an Alembic to the Cucurbit, and a small Recipient to the Beak of the Alembic, all well-luted. Let the Ingredients macerate cold for four and twenty hours. Then place the Cucurbit in a Sand-Bath, and with a moderate fire draw forth by Distillation 2 Pints of Sulphurie-Aromatic-Water, and put it up in a Vessel well-stopp ' d. After that, let the Vessels cool, and having unluted the Alembic, strain and press out all that re∣mains in the Cucurbit; and having clarify ' d the Liquor with the white of an Egg with four pound of fine Sugar, boyl it over a gentle-fire to the consistence of a solid Ele∣ctuary: and when it is almost cold, mix and incorporate with it the two Pints of re∣serv ' d Aromatic-distill ' d-water, together with distill ' d Oyls of Rosemary, Lavender, Cinnamon and Cloves, of each two drops mix ' d with an ounce and a half of fine∣powder ' d Sugar, and put it up in a Glass-bottle well-stopp ' d. 
 The addition of some Cephalics, and of certain distill ' d Oyls instead of some Aro∣matics, the leaving out the drie Raisins, and the new way of Preparing this, may per∣haps surprise those who had rather err with the Ancients, then either to seek for, or follow a better method. 
 But certainly this Method must be approv ' d by those who shall take the pains to compare this Preparation with those which are to be found in several Dispensatories. 
 For they shall find here no Ingredients but what are proper to second the intention for which they are prescrib ' d, and whose vertues could not be better embody ' d toge∣ther then by this Preparation. I say they must acknowledg, That the most effectual vertues of the parts of Plants here prescrib ' d, consisting of a volatile Sulphur, there was no better way to separate them then by Distillation, while that which is more fix ' d, is incorporated in the liquor that remains at the bottom of the Cucurbit. So that by this Preparation all the pure parts of the Ingredients, as well fix ' d as volatile, are united to∣gether, and embody ' d in the Syrup. 
 Syrup of Cassidonie is very proper to fortifie the Brain, Stomach, and all the Noble parts. It is chiefly made use of in Apoplexies, Palsies, Epilepsies, and other cold Diseases of the Brain. It attenuates thick humours, cuts and loos ' ns clammy and vis∣cous flegm: op ' ns obstructions, especially of the Brain: by little and little it con∣sumes cold Rhumes; it heats and strength ' ns the cold parts, and gives great ease to those that are troubl ' d with the Asthma ' s. The dose is usually from half an ounce to an ounce, alone or mix ' d with proper Liquors. 
 Syrupus Lientericus D. D. D ' AQUIN.   A Syrup against the Lientery, by Mon∣sieur D ' AQUIN.   ℞. Summitat. Absinthii Majoris,   ℞. The tops of the bigger Wormwood,   Rosarum Rubrarum Exungulatar. an. M. iij. Red-roses pickt, an. M. iij. Limaturae Chalybis Nodulo inclusae, ℥ ij. Filings of Steel ty ' d up in a little cloth, ℥ ij. Rhei Elect. &amp;   Chosen Rhubarb, and   Corticis Myrobalanorum Citrinorum, an. ℥ j ss Rind of yellow-Mirobalans, an. ℥ i ss. Tartari Alb. pulverati, ℥ j. White-Tartar pulveriz ' d, ℥ j. Santali rubri contusi, ℥ ss. Red Saunders bruis ' d, ℥ ss. 
 Bruise the Wormwood, cut the Rhubarb, red-Saunders, and the bark of the Miro∣balans, and loosely tye up the filings of steel. Then put the whole into an Earth ' n-pot glaz ' d within, with a streight mouth; and having pour ' d upon them three pints of the Juice of Plantain, and as much of the Juice of Roses, cover the pot, and set it upon hot embers for four and twenty hours. After which, boyl the whole over a little fire, for a good quarter of an hour; then strain and press out the Liquor, clarifie it with four pound of good Sugar, and boyl it to the consistency of a Syrup. 
 This Syrup is very powerful to stay Lienteries, for which purpose it is particularly prescrib ' d. It strengthens the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, and all the Bowels. So that it is proper against all defects of the retentive faculty, either upward or downward, and against all Diseases that proceed from feebleness of the Bowels. It qualifies the acri∣mony of the humours, and stops internal Fluxes of Blood. The Dose is from half an ounce to an ounce and a half, alone or mix ' d in proper Liquors, and may be taken se∣veral days together if occasion require. 
 Syrupus Chalybeatus Aperiens Ca∣tharticus D. D. D ' AQƲIN.   A Chalybeat opening purging Syrup of Monsieur D ' AQUIN.   ℞. Limaturae Chalybis in Nodulo laxo &amp; su∣spenso ligatae, ℥ vj. ℞. Filings of steel ty ' d in a loose hanging knot, ℥ vj. Radicum Foeniculi,   Roots of Fennel,   Ciehorei, &amp;   Succory, and   Rubiae Tinctorum, an. ℥ iij. Dyers-Madder, an. ℥ iij. Tartari Albi contusi, ℥ ij. White Tartar bruis ' d, ℥ ij. 
 Cleanse and bruise the Roots, beat the Tartar in a Mortar, and put them together in∣to an Earth ' n-pot glaz ' d within, with a streight mouth, and let the steel hang down, ty ' d in a linnen-cloth. Then pour upon them nine pints of boyling-water, wherein a good piece of red-hot steel had been quenched seven times at least, and covering the pot, set it upon the hot embers for twelve hours; which done, let them boyl for a whole hour. 
 Addetisque, Then add, Foliorum Rutae, Leaves of Rue, Rumicis, Pointed-docks, Lupuli, Hops, Agrimoniae, &amp; Agrimony, and, Capill. Ven. Monspeliensis, an. M. iij. Maiden-hair of Montpelier, an. M iij. 
 Boil the whole again to the consumption of the third part, strain and press them and keep the straining. 
 Interim,   In the mean while,   ℞. Foliorum, Sennae Orientalis mundato∣rum, ℥ vi. Take Leaves of Eastern Senna well∣pickt, ℥ vj. Seminis Carthami contusi, ℥ iiij. Seed of Spanish Saffron bruis ' d, ℥ iiij. Tartari Vitriolati, ℥ j. Tartar Vitrioliz ' d, ℥ j. 
 Macerate them apart in another Vessel for twelve hours, in four pints of steel-water, pour ' d boyling hot into the Vessel. Then give them a gentle boyling, and strain and press out the Liquor. Clarifie this Liquor with the white of an Egg, and half a pound of Sugar, and set this clarify ' d Liquor by it self. Then clarifie the Liquor of the first De∣coction with the white of an Egg, with six pound of fine Sugar, and boyl it to the con∣sistence of a solid Electuary. At which time, add the purgative infusion clarify ' d and boil it to a good consistency of a Syrup. Which being cool may be aromatiz ' d with six drops of Oyl of Cinamon, incorporated with an ounce of fine Sugar. 
 They that will be careful to prepare this Syrup, and make trial of its virtues, will ac∣knowledge that it was not without reason, that his Majesty ' s first Physician commanded me to insert the Receipt into this Pharmacopoea. 
 This Syrup is very proper to open Obstructions of the Spleen, Liver, Mesentery, and Pancreas, as also those of the Matrix, and to loosen and carry off the viscous and tartarous matters, that caus ' d the Obstructions. It is made use of with success to cure Cachexies, Dropsies, retentions of the Menstruums, and the Jaundies. The Dose is from half an ounce to two ounces, giv ' n alone, or mix ' d with proper Liquors. 
 Syrupus Anti-Scorbuticus, D. D. D ' AQUIN.   An Anti-Scorbutic Syrup of Monsieur D ' AQUIN.   ℞. Radicum Filicis Maris,   ℞. Roots of Male-fern,   Angelicae,   Angelica,   Eringii,   Eringo ' s,   Raphani Rusticani, an. ℥ iij. Horse-radish, an. ℥ iij. Corticum Citri,   Peels of Citron,   Aurantiorum, an. ℥ ij. Oranges, an. ℥ ij. Foliorum Melissae,   Leaves of Balm,   Fumariae,   Fumitory,   Scolopendrii,   Spleenwort,   Cocleariae,   Scurvy-grass,   Becabungae,   Brook-lime,   Nasturtici Aquatici,   Water-cresses,   Nummulariae,   Money-wort,   Mentae, an. M. iij. Mint, an. M. iij. Seminum Nasturtii hortens.   Seeds of Gard ' n-Cresses,   Cardui Benedicti,   Carduus Benedictus,   Citri, an. ℥ j. Citron, an. ℥ j. Florum Tunicae &amp;   Clove-gillow-flowers,   Genistae, an. M. j. Broom-flowers, an. M. j. Tartari Alb. contusi, ℥ ij. White-Tartar beaten, ℥ ij. 
 Bruise the Roots, and boyl them over a soft fire, with the Tartar powder ' d, in nine pints of steel ' d-water. Add then the Herbs cut, and the Seeds bruis ' d, and let them boyl all together for half an hour, then put in the flowers, and having thrust them down into the Decoction, take it off from the Fire, and strain and press out the Ingredients when they are half-cold. Clarifie the Liquor with the white of an Egg, and six pound of fine Sugar, and boyl it up to the consistence of a Syrup. When it is quite cold, aroma∣tize it with three drops of Oyl of Cinamon, and as much Oyl of Cloves incorporated with an ounce of fine-powder ' d Sugar.
The little skill which the Ancients had in Scorbutic Diseases, is the reason that speci∣fick Remedies for those Diseases are so rare in Dispensatories, and that several Physici∣ans find them so difficult to cure. For which reason his Majesty ' s chief Physician thought fit to communicate to the World this Receipt, the Ingredients whereof being as exactly chos ' n as dos ' d, cannot but produce good effects, as well for the ease as for the cure of these Distempers, which are very frequent in the Northern Countries, especially in Sea-Towns. 
 This Syrup effectually purifies the Mass of the Blood, quick ' ns its circulation, encreases the spirits that enliv ' n it, to the want or numness whereof, we have good reason to at∣tribute all the symptomes that accompany Scorbutic Diseases. And because these Di∣stempers are a long time a-growing, and for that the whole Mass of the Blood is in∣fected, it will not be amiss to continue the use of this Syrup, not only to get the upper hand of the Distemper, but to prevent its return. You may take one or two spoon∣fuls at a time, Evening and Morning, and also between Meals. 
 Syrupus Violatus Violaceus. Syrup of Violets Violetted. ℞. Florum Violarum recentium emundato∣rum, lb iiij. Take four pound of Violets deep-co∣lour ' d, newly gather ' d and very clean. 
 Put them without bruising into a fine tin-vessel large and deep enough, with a fit cover, and pour upon them three pints of boyling Fountain-water, Which make eight pints Physic measure. Paris -measure; let the flowers soak well in the water, and ha∣ving cover ' d the Vessel, set it six hours in a warm Balneum Mariae, and then strain and squeeze the Infusion strongly, and pour it hot upon four pound of fresh Violets, put in clean into the same Vessel, cover ' d and kept as long in Balneo Mariae as before. Strain and squeeze the infusion, and you shall have a tincture altogether Violetted, charg ' d equally both with the colour, smell, taste, and vir∣tues of the Violets. Put this tincture into a Bason of fine Tin, large and deep, and set the Bason over a moderate fire, with double the weight of fine Sugar in powder, stir the whole with a Woodd ' n-spatula, till all the Sugar be dissolv ' d, and continue the Ba∣son upon the fire, till the Syrup has only boyl ' d two or three simpers. Take the Bason off the fire, and when the Syrup is quite cold, scum it, and put it up. 
 For the better keeping of it, cover the top of it, with fine-powder Sugar, which with the superficial moisture of the Syrup will make a kind of a crust that will preserve the Syrup two years together, provided the Pots were dry when the Syrup was put up, and that they be well-cover ' d. 
 I confess that Syrup of Violets violetted, is so common in Shops; and so frequently made by the Ladies, that it might seem superfluous to insert it here; but not having met with any true Preparation yet, I thought fit to set down this Preparation, which experience will make you confess to be the better, and much supe∣riour to any other. 
 Some there are that add a spoonful or two of Juice of Citron, that the Violet co∣lour of the Syrup may look a little more red. But beside, that those acids will hinder the Syrup from keeping long, that addition is altogether needless, in regard the colour of the Syrup will be better without it, and those acids may alter the quality of the Violets. 
 Syrup of Violets thickens thin humours that fall from the Brain upon the Lungs, and corrects their acrimony. It cools the heat of the Liver and Stomach, as also of most Fevers, particularly choleric, adding some drops of spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol, or some other acid, and mingling it with Fountain, or River-water, or with some other proper Liquor. The pleasant taste of it makes it as much in use among those who are in health as among the sick; It is taken alone from half an ounce to an ounce, or else mingl ' d in Juleps, Apozems, Emulsions, Looches, and many other remedies. 
 Formerly they made a laxative Syrup of Violets, compos ' d of several infusions of whole Violets; but the Syrup prov ' d very unpleasing, ineffectual, and more fit for Cli∣sters then to be swallow ' d, and therefore not fit for this place. 
 Syrupus de Pomis simplex.   Simple Syrup of Pippins.   ℞. Succi Pomorum redolentium depu∣rati, lb ij. ℞. The Juice of fragrant Apples clari∣fy ' d, lb ij. Sacchari Albissimi, lb iiij. The whitest Sugar, lb iiij. 
 Having press ' d out the Juice from the Apples, set it in the Sun to clarifie, then pour it out by inclination and filter it. That done, put the Juice and the Sugar toge∣ther over a small fire, and there incorporate them to the consistence of a Syrup. 
 The Syrup may serve as an Example for several simple Syrups whose foundation is the Juice of any Fruit, such as are Cherries, Barberries, Red-Currans, Respiss, Granates, Verjuice, &amp;c. 
 You may also make the Syrup of Apples without fire, if when you have par ' d the Apples you cut them into thin slices, throwing away the cores, and lay the thin slices in a new Hair-sieve, set in a silver or white-earth ' n-bason, covering the Pippins with their thickness in Sugar, and continuing these layers of Pippins and Sugar till the Sieve be full. For then covering the sieve with another Plate or Bason, and leaving the whole two or three days in a cool place, you shall find in the lower Bason a very pleasant Syrup, well-colour ' d and of a good consistency. This Syrup thus made without fire undergoes no alteration, being endu ' d with all the good qualities that can be expected. 
 Syrup of Pippins is accounted a very high Cordial, and very proper against Palpi∣tations of the heart, especially when they proceed from melancholie-vapours rising from the Spleen. It is also very proper to comfort all the Noble Parts, quench thirst, and qualifie the heat of Choleric-Fevers. It is to be tak ' n by respites of time, either alone or mix ' d with Decoctions or other proper Liquors. 
 Syrupus de Pomis Compositus.   Syrup of Pippins compound.   ℞. Succi Pomorum redolentium, lb iiij. ℞. Juice of fragrant Pippins, lb iiij. Borraginis, &amp;   Of Borrage, and   Buglossi depuratorum, an. lb ij. Bugloss clarify ' d, an. lb ij. Folliculorum Sennae Orientalis incisorum, ℥ iiij. Seed-bags of Senna of the East cut, ℥ iiij. Tartari albi Monspeliensis contusi, ℥ ij. White Montpelier -Tartar bruis ' d, ℥ ij. 
 Bruise the Pippins in a Marble-mortar with a Wood ' n-Pestle, squeeze out the Juice, and having expos ' d it for some days to the Sun, filter it; cut the Senna-Seed-bags, and put them into a Glaz ' d-earth ' n-pot with two ounces of Tartar pulveriz ' d; pour up∣on them the purify ' d Juices: coyer the Pot, and set it upon the warm embers for 24 hours: then letting the Infusion simper a while, strain and press it out, and having cla∣rify ' d the Liquor with four pound of very white Sugar, boyl it up to a Syrup. When it is perfectly boyl ' d and quite cold, mixe with it the Tincture of two drams of Saffron in powder, extracted with three ounces of Distill ' d-oyl of Balm. 
 I have said already, that for the more easie extracting the Juices of viscous Plants, you must put them whole into some Vessel, and having set them for some time over a moderate fire, pour out the Liquor at several times by inclination; which method must be us ' d for extracting the Juices of Borrage and Bugloss here mention ' d; and the Juice will be clear enough: though if you would have it clearer you may expose it to the Sun, and filter it. 
 The Ancients ty ' d Saffron in a little Linnen-bag, and soak ' d it in the Syrup during the Decoction, pressing it out from time to time, and leaving it in the Syrup when it was put up in the Pot, not considering that the long boyling of the Saffron, though ty ' d in a Bag, could not be done without a manifest dissipation of the most volatile parts; that by those reiterated expressions a good part of the terrestrial and unprofitable part of the Saffron pass ' d through the cloth, mix ' d with the Syrup, and made it muddy; and that at length being left among the Syrup in the Pot, not being able to impart that vertue to it which it had lost, it occasion ' d its putrefaction. Whereas the Tincture communicating the most essential parts of the Saffron to the Syrup, contributes to its preservation and beauty. 
 Some there are that propose the Extract of Saffron, which is better then the Knot. But because the Tincture is the base of the Extract, and for that the Tincutre cannot be reduc ' d into an Extract without some dissipation of the subtle parts of the Saffron, there is more reason to make use of the Tincture. 
 The principal qualities of the compound Syrup of Pippins, are gently to purge choleric and melancholy humours: for which reason it is made use of in Distempers caus ' d by those humours, particularly in Madness and Hypochondriac passions. It is good also in Quartan-Agues, and to purge sharp and scalding humours that cause the Scurf and Itch, and most Diseases of the Skin. It may be tak ' n alone from one ounce to two or three. But more frequently dissolv ' d in Liquors, as the Decoctions of Apo∣zemes, Tinctures, and Laxative Infusions.
By this means, the Hydromel will have a taste like that of Malmsey, which having left its earthy parts and being exalted by Fermentation, will yield an inflammable spirit, like to that of Wine. 
 Sometimes we make compound drinks of Pectoral decoctions, sweeten ' d with Honey, scum ' d, clarify ' d, and boyl ' d to a thinner consistency then the preceding Hydromel, and which bear the name of Hydromel, because Water and Honey are their foundation; but these Hydromels are seldom prepar ' d but for present use. 
 Winy Hydromel is a Medicinal nourishment, as pleasing as profitable. It comforts and strengthens the Noble Parts, and affords good nourishment, being made use of by the healthy as well as by the sick. 
 CHAP. XVII. Of Looches. LOoches are Internal compositions, of a consistency between Syrups and soft Electu∣aries, and chiefly appointed for Diseases of the Lungs. The Greeks call them , and the Latines Linctus, or Lambatives. The Name of Looch, though Ara∣bian, has been always most in use. They are made thicker then Syrups, to the end that staying in the Throat, their vertue may have time to penetrate into the Brest, through the rough Artery, and to be imparted to the parts that want it, there to concoct and di∣gest the flegm, and fit it for expectoration, to stop and thick ' n the Rheum when it is too thin, and to cut and attenuate flegm that is tough and obstinate. Nevertheless though they are much in use, they are seldom prepar ' d, but when prescrib ' d, in regard the Medicaments that compose them are ready at all times, and for that their mixture is not difficult. However, I will produce two Receipts, the composition whereof may be kept for some time, if you please, or be prepar ' d upon occasion. 
 Looch Sanum Reformatum.   A sound reformed Looch.   ℞. Hordei Mundati, ℥ j. ℞. Pickt Barley, ℥ j. Radicum Petasitidis, &amp; Enulae Campana, an. ℥ ss. Roots of Butter-bur, Elecampane, an. ℥ ss. Passulas Damascenas Mundatas,   Large Ston ' d Raisins,   Ficus recentes siccas,   New dry Figgs,   Dactylos-pingues Enucleatos,   Fat Dates ston ' d,   Jujubas,   Jujubs,   Sebesten, ana. N o . xij. Sebestens, an. N o . xij. Foliorum Hyssopi,   Leaves of Hysop,   Calaminthae,   Calaminth,   Capil. Ven. Monspeliensis,   Venus -hair of Montpelier,   Adianti Vulgaris, an. M. j. Common Maiden-hair, an. M. j. Seminum Malvae   Seeds of Mallows,   Althaeae,   Marsh-mallows,   Bombacis, &amp;   Cotton, and   Papaveris albi, an. ʒ ij. White-Poppy, an. ʒ ij. 
 Boyl the pickt-Barley in a glaz ' d-Earth ' n-pot, over a soft fire, in six pints of Foun∣tain-water, for half an hour; then add the Roots cleans ' d and bruis ' d, let them boyl with the Barley a good quarter of an hour; after that, put in the Fruits cleans ' d and slic ' d, which must boyl a little while with the rest; which done, put in the Hysop, Ca∣lamint, and cold seeds bruis ' d. After they have boyl ' d a little while, take off the De∣coction from the fire, and when it is half-cold, strain it and press it lightly; and having clarify ' d it with the white of an Egg, with two pound of fine Sugar, boyl it to the consistency of a Syrup, a little thicker then ordinary. The Syrup being half cold, 
 Permisceantur,   Add thereto,   Pinearum, &amp; Amygdalarum dulcium emundatarum contusarum &amp; per cribrum trajecta∣rum, an. ʒ vi. Kernels of Pine-Apples, and Sweet Almonds cleans ' d, beaten to powder, and sifted, an. ʒ vj. Glycyrrhizae mundatae,   Liquorice cleans ' d,   Gummi Tragacanthi, &amp;   Gum-Tragacanth,   Arabici, &amp; Radicis Ireos subtiliter pulveratorum, an. ʒ iij. Arabic, and Root of Orrice beaten into fine pow∣der, an. ʒ iij. 
 Incorporate them with the Syrup, and when all the Ingredients are cold, aromatize it with Oyls of Annise, and Fennel, of each three drops, mix ' d with an ounce of fine powder-Sugar; then put up the Looch in a Gally-pot well-stopp ' d. 
 The pickt Barley being put into the Decoction, is the reason why fine-Sugar is pre∣scrib ' d instead of Pennets, usually prescrib ' d in the common Receipts of this Looch, whose Foundation is the Decoction of Barley. The Roots of Butter-bur, and Elecam∣pane augment the cutting quality of the other Ingredients, and facilitate expectoration. The Seeds of Mallows, Marsh-mallows, Cotton, and white-Poppy, serve to thick ' n and stop thin defluxions from the Head upon the Brest, and producing the same effects, as the seeds of Fennel and Line, prescrib ' d in other Receipts, do not give the Looch that unpleasing taste or smell as they do. You may leave the Liquorice out of the Decocti∣on, in regard it is mixt in Powder to a sufficient, quantity in the Looch. Lastly, the distill ' d Oyls of Annise and Fennel are better then the Seeds boyl ' d in the Decoction, that destroys their Volatile and Sulphury part, which is the principal. 
 This Looch cannot but be of great virtue to thick ' n and stop thin defluxions from the Head upon the Lungs, as also to cut and loosen those that are already got into the Muscles of the Larynx, to cleanse and mollifie the parts that serve for Respiration. 
 It may be taken in the Day and Night-time, every foot, about the bigness of a little Nut at once, with a little stick of Liquorice scrap ' d and bruis ' d at the end. These Medicines must be kept a long time in the Mouth, and swallow ' d slowly. 
 Looch Pectorale.   A Pectoral Looch.   ℞. Mucilaginis Gummi Tragacanthi in A∣qua Rosarum extractae,   ℞. Mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth, ex∣tracted in Rose-water,   Sacchari Candi, &amp; Penidiati, pulveratorum, an. ℥ ij. Sugar-Candy, and Penedite, pouder ' d, an. ℥ ij. Liquoritiae, ℥ ss. Liquorice, ℥ ss. Ireos Florentiae, ʒ ij. Florence -Orrice, ʒ ij. Radicis Enulae Campanae, ʒ j. Root of Elecampane, ʒ j. 
 Put a dram of Tragacanth powder ' d into a dish with 2 or. 3 ounces of good Rose-wa∣ter, set it over hot embers, stirring them from time to time with a Woodd ' n-Spatula, till the Gum-Tragacanth be well dissolv ' d, and reduc ' d into a white-Past. Powder the Sugar-candy, and Penidiate in a Marble-mortar with a Woodd ' n-Pestle; and adding to them the Mucilage, the powders of Liquorice, Orrice, and Elecampane, unite them together with equal parts of Magisterial Pectoral Syrup, and Syrup of white-Poppies, and reduce them to a consistency between a Syrup and a soft Electuary, which you may, if the Physician thinks fit, aromatize with distill ' d Oyls of Annise, and Fennel, an. two drops, incorporated with half an ounce of fine powder ' d Sugar. 
 The Vertues of this Looch come very near to those of the sound Looch. Neverthe∣less, you may change, increase or abate any of the Medicines, according to the con∣dition of the Disease, and the Patient who is to make use of the remedy 
 There is a preparation of Cassia with Sugar, to which the Ancients have given the name of a Looch, but it is rather to be put among the soft Electuaries, then among the Looches. 
 CHAP. XVIII. Of Tablets, or Solid Electuaries. THE use of Tablets so nearly resembles that of Looches, that they may well be rank ' d in the next place; and so much the rather, because that Tablets are frequently prepar ' d for diseases of the Brest, and are more frequently us ' d then Looches. Tablets are sometimes more, sometimes less compounded, and their composition is different, according to the purpose for which they are compound∣ed. Sugar is the ingredient most plentifully us ' d in their composition; as well to please the taste of the Patient, as to bind and incorporate the other Drugs, which could not be reduc ' d into a Solid form by the Sugar, did it not exceed them in quan∣tity: unless you make use of the mucilages of Gum-Tragacanth; for they are able to bind several Medicaments without any mixture of Sugar. Tablets are made of a solid consistence, that they may be the more easily carry ' d about in the Pocket, and that they may be held a long time in the Mouth, and that they may not be so soon dissolv ' d as Syrups or Looches. 
 For the Preparation of Tablets, we use to dissolve Sugar in some Liquor, to cla∣rifie or scum it if there be occasion, to boyl it to the consistence of a solid Electuary, and to mixe with it while it is hot, sometimes Powders, sometimes Conserves, Con∣ditements, Confections, Fruits beat ' n in a mortar, distill ' d Oyls, and sometimes Salts and Spirits, The proportion of the Powders to the Sugar cannot be well-limited, be∣cause of the various nature of the Powders, and the various purposes for which the Tablets are made. We use to put three ounces of Powder to one pound of Sugar, for solid Purgative-Electuaries. We also put sometimes the same quantity of Powder to every pound of Sugar for Pectoral Lozenges. But most frequently an ounce, or an ounce and a half serves turn, especially if the Medicament be of a strong scent or taste, or that operates in a small quantity. An ounce or an ounce and a half of Pow∣der serves turn to a pound of Sugar for Cordial Lozenges; and almost the same pro∣portion holds for Stomachical, Aperitive, Hepatic-Tablets. 
 But there must be great care tak ' n in reference to Pulps, and other soft or liquid Sub∣stances, which are to compound Lozenges, which are usually mix ' d when the Sugar is boyl ' d. For besides that they may occasion some augmentation of the quantity of the Powders, you may either boyl the Sugar the more before the mixture, or slack ' n boyling upon the fire after the Ingredients are mix ' d, to consume the superfluous moi∣sture that may be therein. In all which things the Artist must be guided more by his judgment then by any Rules that can be prescrib ' d. 
 Saccharum Rosatum.   Sugar of Roses.   ℞. Sacchari albissimi contusi, lb j. ℞. Fine white Sugar grosly-beat ' n, lb j. Aquae Rosarum fragrantissimae, ℥ iiij. The most fragrant Rose-water, ℥ iiij. 
 Pour the Rose-water upon the Sugar, and boyl them in a Posnet over a soft fire to the consistence of an Electuary. Take the Skillet from the fire, stir the Sugar with a Spatula, and when it begins to coagulate, pour it out upon a sheet of white Paper, or upon a Tin-dish to make Tablets. You may also mixe with the same boyl ' d Sugar an ounce and a half of red Roses pulveriz ' d, sprinkl ' d with some few drops of Spirit of Sulphur or Brimstone. And these Tablets are call ' d Conserve of drie Roses, or the Rock-Conserve.
Sugar of white Roses is detersive with a little astriction. It is very much us ' d in all diseases of the Brest, as well for its pleasant taste, and ease which it gives: You may take it day and night at all hours. Sugar of Roses is also mix ' d in Powder with Asses, Goats or Cows-Milk, and tak ' n in a morning fasting. The dose is from two drams to an ounce, according to the quantity of Milk and the Palate of the Patient. 
 Tablets of red Roses are more binding. It is good to strength ' n the Ventricle and the Liver, and to stop thin Rhumes that fall from the Head upon the Lungs. They are tak ' n after the same manner as ordinary Sugar of Roses. 
 Tabellae de Althea Simplices &amp; Compositae.   Simple and Compound Lozenges of Marsh-mallows.   ℞. Pulpae Radicum Althaeae per setaceum tra∣jectae, ℥ iiij. ℞. Of the Pulp of the Roots of Althea pass ' d through a Hair-sieve, ℥ iiij. Sacchari solidi, lb j ss. Loaf-Sugar, lb j ss. Aquae Rosarum, ℥ vj. Rose-water, ℥ vj. Fiant ex Arte Tabellae.   Make Lozenges according to Art. 
 Choose out large well-grown Roots of Marsh-mallows, wash them and take off the rind, and having cut them into thin round slices, boyl them over a soft fire with Foun∣tain-water in an Earth ' n-glaz ' d-pot, till they be very tender. Then bruise them in a Marble-mortar with a woodd ' n-pestle, and pass four ounces of the pulp through the wrong side of a Hair-sieve. Put a pound and a half of fine Sugar with six ounces of Rose-water into a Skillet, and boyl them to the consistence of a solid Electuary, wherein you must dissolve the pulp; then setting the Skillet over the fire for a very small time to evaporate the superfluous moisture, make your Lozenges. 
 Quod si compositas volueris,   If you desire them compounded,   ℞. Pulpae praedictae, ℥ ij. ℞. Of the fore-said Pulp, ℥ ij. Seminis Papaveris alb. contusi,   Seed of white Poppy beat ' n,   Pulveris Ireos Florentiae,   Powder of Florence -Orrice,   Diatragacanthi frigidi, &amp; Glycyrrhizae, an. ʒ iij. Cold Diatragacanth, and Liquorice, an. ʒ iij. Sacchari albissimi in Aqua Rosarum soluti, &amp; in Electuarium solidum cocti, lb j. Whitest Sugar dissolv ' d in Rose-water, and boil ' d to the consistence of a solid Ele∣ctuary, lb j. 
 Boyl the Sugar and the Rose-water to the consistence of a solid Electuary: take the Skillet from the fire, and first mixe the Pulp prescrib ' d, after that the Powders; and make your Lozenges of what form or bigness you please. 
 You may mixe with the Powders a dram of Magisterie of Sulphur. You may also in the same manner make several other Pectoral-Lozenges. 
 Talbets of Althea are us ' d to remedie old and new Coughs, and in all diseases of the Brest; especially to carry off the acrimony of the humours, and to stay Defluxions. They are to be tak ' n at all times, like Tablets of Sugar of Roses. 
 Succus Liquoritiae Niger.   Black Juice of Liquorice.   ℞. Extracti Liquoritiae consistentiae mollio∣ris,   ℞. Extract of Liquorice of a softer consi∣stencie,   Sacchari opt. pulverati, an. lb ij. Fine-powder ' d Sugar, an. lb ij. Gummi Arabici soluti &amp; colati ℥ j. Gum- Arabick dissolv ' d and strain ' d, ℥ j. Mucilaginis spissioris Gummi Tragacanthi in Aquae Rosarum extractae, ℥ j ss. Thicker Muscilage of Gum-Tragacanth, extracted with Rose-water, ℥ j ss. 
 Beat them and incorporate them well together in a Marble-mortar with a woodd ' n∣pestle, and make them into Rolls, Tablets or Lozenges as you please. 
 The Gum- Arabick must be pass ' d through a Hair-sieve, being first powder ' d and dis∣solv ' d in Rose-water. 
 I have plac ' d this Composition among the Tablets, as well for its Consistency, as for the Form of making it up. 
 There are several Preparations of the Black Juice of Liquorice, as well in Spain as in several Towns in France; and the quick vent there is for it, causes the Women to deal in it. But I take the Receipt which I have set down to be superiour to theirs, in re∣gard it contains all the vertue and good taste that can be expected. 
 The use of it is too familiar to want directions. 
 Succus Liquoritiae Albus.   White Juice of Liquorice.   ℞. Pulveris Liquoritia mundatae,   ℞. Clean-powder of Liquorice,   Radicis Ireos Florentiae, ʒ vj. Roots of Florence -Orrice, an. ʒ vj. Amyli, ℥ ij. Flower of Wheat pounded, ℥ ij. Sacchari opt. subtiliter pulverati, lb j. The best Sugar finely-powder ' d, lb j. Moschi Orientalis,   Oriental Musk,   Ambragrisea, an. Gr. iij. Ambergrise, an. Gr. iij. 
 Incorporate all these together with a muscilage of Gum-Tragacanth extracted in Rose-water, mixing and beating them together in a Marble-mortar with a woodd ' n∣pestle into a solid paste. Make them up into Rolls or Tablets, and drie them by the fire upon a white sheet of Paper. 
 This Composition is improperly call ' d by the Name of Juice of Liquorice; since there is nothing but the Powder of Liquorice in it. But in regard that custom has prevail ' d to continue the Name, we thought it convenient to place it here. 
 This Juice of White Liquorice is more pleasing then the Black, but much inferior to it in vertue. Yet it is as much or more in request, because of its acceptable taste and smell. 
 Manus Christi Perlata.   Manus-Christi Pearl ' d.   ℞. Succhari albissimi in frusta dissecti, lb j. ℞. Finest white Sugar brok ' n into pieces,         lb j. Aqua Rosarum fragrantissima, ℥ iiij. Fragrant Rose-water, ℥ iiij. 
 Boyl them together over a moderate fire to the consistence of a solid Electuary, and when they are half-cold, incorporate with them half an ounce of Oriental-Pearl, and make up your Tablets according to Art.
This Powder is highly esteem ' d for strength ' ning the Brain, and Stomach. It dissipates the superfluous moisture of the Entrails, resists Putrefaction, creates an Appetite, stays Vomitings, and want of retention in the Intestines, and is very proper to stren∣gth ' n and restore such as are newly recovered from sickness. The Dose is from half a scruple to half a Dram in Wine, Broth, or any Cordial-Liquor. It may be reduc ' d into a soft or solid Electuary, with a proportionable quantity of Sugar, or mixt with Opi∣ates, Potions, or other Medicines. 
 Pulvis Diarrhodon emendatus.   The Powder Diarrhodon, reform ' d.   ℞. Rosarum Rubrarum exungulatarum, ℥ j ss. ℞. Red Roses cleans ' d, ℥ j ss. Santali Citrini, &amp;   Yellow-Saunders and   Rubri, an. ʒ iij. Red, an. ʒ iij. Ligni Aloes,   Lignum Aloes,   Cinnamomi,   Cinamon,   Rapontici,   Rhubarb of Pontus,   Nardi Indic ,   Indian -Spikenard,   Rasurae Eboris,   Shavings of Ebony,   Ossis e corde Cervi,   The bone of a Deers-heart,   Crooi,   Saffron,   Mastices,   Mastick,   Cardamomi minoris,   Lesser Cardamom,   Gummi Tragacanthi, &amp;   Gum-Tragacanth, and   Arabici,   Arabic,   Succi Glycyrrhizae,   Juice of Liquorice,   Seminis Anisi,   Seed of Annise,   F niculi,   Fennel,   Ocymi,   Basil,   Melonum, &amp;   Melons, and   Cucumeris, mundatorum, &amp;   Cucumbers, cleans ' d and   Margaritarum praeparat rum, ana. ʒ j. Prepar ' d Pearls, an. ʒ j. Ambrae-grisiae, Gr. viij. Amber-grise, Gr. viij. Moschi Orientalis, Gr. iiij. Oriental Musk, Gr. iiij. 
 Make a Powder according to Art. 
 They who will compare the Receipt of this powder, with that which is to be found in several Dispensatories, under the name of an Abbot, will find that the Doses are re∣form ' d; that the Yellow-Saunders is put instead of the White, the shavings of Ivory▪ in the stead of Spodium or burnt-Ivory, Rhaphontic instead of Rhubarb, and that several Seeds are left out, which gave more trouble to the Artist, then vertue to the Medicine. There is no question, but that Yellow-Saunders is better than White, and that Rhubarb whose purgative vertue is not proper upon this occasion, ought to give place to Ra∣phontic, whose qualities agree with the purposes for which this powder was design ' d. There is nothing superfluous in this powder, and the Doses and proportion of the In∣gredients are such, that the effects cannot but be answerable to what Writers have at∣tributed to this composition. 
 This powder is of great use to fortifie the Stomach, create an Appetite, and expel Wind. It is particularly appointed for maladies of the Liver and Spleen, Jaundies, Ptisicks, difficultness of the Intestines, Weaknesses and Faintings of the Heart. It also consumes the superfluous moistures of the Stomach. The Dose and manner of using this powder is the same with the preceding. 
 Pulvis Diamargariti Frigidi.   Powder of cold Diamargaritum.   ℞. Margaritarum Orientalium praeparata∣rum, ℥ ss. ℞. Oriental Pearls prepar ' d, ℥ ss. Rosarum rubrarum exungulatarum,   Red-Roses cleans ' d,   Florum Nymph ae, &amp;   Flowers of Water-Lillies,   Violarum, an. ʒ iij. Violets, an. ʒ iij. Ligni Aloes,   Lignum-Aloes,   Santali Rubri, &amp;   Saunders Red, and   Citrini,   Yellow▪   Radicis Tormentillae,   Roots of Tormentil▪   Dictamni Albi,   White Dittany,   Pentaphylli,   Cinqu foyl,   Baccarum Myrti,   Myrtle-berries,   Gran rum Kermes,   Graines of Kermes,   Seminis Melonum excorticati,   Seeds of Melons husk ' d,   Endivi , &amp;   Endive, and   Oxalidis,   Sorrel,   Rasurae Eboris, &amp;   Shavings of Ebony,   Cornu Cervi,   Harts-horn,   Coralli Albi, &amp;   Coral White, and   Rubri pr paratorum, an. ʒ ij. Red prepar ' d, an. ʒ ij. Ambrae-Grisiae, &amp;   Amber-grise, and   Foliorum Auri, an. ʒ ss. Leaves of Gold, an. ʒ ss. Moschi Orientalis, Gr. iiij. Oriental Musk, Gr. iiij. 
 Make a Powder according to Art. 
 There is no composition in request, the Receipt whereof varies more in all Dispen∣satories then this Powder, that bears the name of no Authour. However, I am per∣swaded that this very Receipt is not inferiour to any of the other, as well for the choice as for the Doses of the Ingredients. This Powder carrie the name of Pearls, which are the foundation of it, and are us ' d in greater quantity here, then any other of the Ingredients. It is call ' d cold, because it admits of many cold Ingredients, or else but moderately hot, and to distinguish it from another which is nam ' d the hot, which is not now in use. The preparation of this Powder is like the former. 
 The principal use of cold Diamargaritum is to strength ' n the Noble-parts, restore their languishing force, to cure fainting and Swouning-fits, in Fevers, and other Disea∣ses. It is giv ' n to Asthmatic, and Consumptive persons, and to those that are wasted and brought low by long sickness. The Dose and manner of using, are the same with other Cordial-powders, which I have already set down. 
 Pulvis Laetificans.   A Powder creating Chearfulness.   ℞. Semini Ocymi Caryophyllati,   ℞. Seeds of Clove-Basil,   Croci,   Saffron,   Zedoariae,   Zedoary, or Set-wall,   Santali Citrini,   Yellow-Saunders,   Caryophyllorum,   Cloves,   Corticis exterioris Citri sicci,   Outward peel of Citron, dry,   Galangae,   Galanga,   Macis,   Mace,   Nucis Moschatae,   Nutmeg,   Storacis Calamitae, an. ʒ ij ss. Calamite Storax, an. ʒ ij ss. Rasurae Eboris,   Shavings of Ivory▪   Seminis Anisi,   Annise-seed,   Thymi,   Thyme,   Epithymi,   Dodder of Thyme,   Margaritarum Orientalium praeparat,   Oriental Pearls prepar ' d,   Ossis é corde cervi, an. ʒ j. Deer ' s Heart-bone, an. ʒ j. Ambrae-Grisiae,   Ambergrise,   Moschi Orientalis,   Oriental Musk,   Foliorum Auri et   Leaves of Gold, and   Argenti, an. ℈ j. Silver, an. ℈ j. 
 Make a Powder according to Art. 
 It imports not to know the Name of the Inventor of this Powder, the Receipt whereof agrees indifferently well in most Dispensatories. You may follow this which I have here set down; the Preparation being the same with the former. You must know, that though the Leaves of Gold and Silver may contribute some vertue to this, and other compositions; yet they are here chiefly us ' d for Ornament. For which rea∣son they are not usually pulveriz ' d and jumbl ' d with other Ingredients, but cut in little distinct bits, for beauty ' s fake, as Pills, and Cordial-Opiates are wrapt up in them to take away the ill tast. 
 This Powder is highly esteem ' d to correct the cold and moist temperature of the Sto∣mach and Liver, to help Digestion, and restore the Appetite. It is also very proper a∣gainst Weaknesses, and Palpitations of the Heart, to restore a good habit of Body, and to bring a good colour into the Face, to keep the Breath sweet, restore decay ' d Strength, and dissipate Melancholy that proceeds from an Internal or no real cause. The Dose is the same with the preceding Powders. 
 Pulvis Diatrion Santalon.   Powder of the three Saunders.   ℞. Santali Citrini,   ℞. Saunders Yellow,   Albi, et   White, and   Rubri,   Red,   Seminis Violarum,   Seeds of Violets,   Rosarum Rubrarum Exungulatarum, an. ℥ ss. Red Roses cleans ' d, an. ℥ ss. Rapontici,   Pontic Rhubarb,   Rasurae Eboris,   Shavings of Ivory,   Succi Glycyrrhizae, an. ʒ ij. Juice of Liquorice, an. ʒ ij. Gummi Tragacanthi, t   Gum Tragacanth, and   Arabici,   Arabic,   Seminum Endiviae,   Seeds of Endive,   Portulacae, &amp;   Purslain,   Melonis excorticati, an. ʒ j. Melons husk ' d, an. ʒ j. 
 Make a Powdor according to Art. 
 They that desire to make the Powder more red, beginning with the Saunders, must moisten them with Rose-water, and beat them a long time, and moisten them often, till they are sufficiently colour ' d, and when they are dry, add the other Ingredients, and perfect the Powder, which must be sifted through a fine silk sierce. 
 I am of opinion that the Amydon, or flower of pounded Wheat, together with some part of the Seeds were with judgement left out; for besides that the Amydon signifies nothing, the excess of Seeds might cause putrefaction in the powder. 
 This powder is highly commended against Diseases that proceed from weakness, or ill habit of the Liver; to temper the heat of the Entrails, to digest and discuss matters gather ' d together at the end of Agues. It is also very proper in faintings of the Heart, Jaundies, and Ptisicks. It is giv ' n inwardly in Potions, Opiates, and Electuaries, and outwardly apply ' d in Epithems, Frontals, and Liniments. 
 Pulvis Pannonicus.   The Hungarian Powder.   ℞. Boli Armenae, &amp;   ℞. Bole Armonack, &amp;   Terrae Lemniae, an. ℥ j ss. Lemnian Earth, an. ℥ j ss. Margaritarum Orientalium,   Eastern Pearls,   Lapidum Hyacinthorum,   Stones, Jacinths,   Smaragdorum,   Smaragds,   Saphyrorum, et   Saphyrs, and   Rubinorum, et   Rubies,   Coralli Albi, et   White-Coral, &amp;   Rubri, praeparatorum,   Red prepar ' d,   Radicum Tormentillae,   Roots of Tormentil,   Doronici, et   Doronicum or Wolfs-bane, and   Dictamni Albi,   White Dittany,   Santali Citrini,   Yellow Saunders,   Rasurae Ʋnicornis, et   Shavings of Unicorns-horn, and   Eboris, an. ℥ ss. Ivory, an. ℥ ss. Corticis Citri exterioris sicci, et   Dry outmost Citron-rind, and   Seminis Acetosae, an. ʒ iij. Seed of Sorrel, an. ʒ iij. Cinnamomi acutissimi ʒ j. Biting Cinamon, ʒ j. Caryophyllorum et   Cloves, and   Croci, an. ʒ ss. Saffron, an. ʒ ss. Folia Auri purissimi, N o . xxv. Leaves of purest Gold, N o . xxv. 
 Rasp the Ʋnicorns-horn, and Ivory; beat the Pearls, Stones, as also the Coral, and Bole-Ar∣monac in a Mortar, then grind them upon a Porphyrie-stone, till the Powder is not to be felt, moistning them now and then with Rose-water: make them into Trochiskes and let them dry in the shade. Beat the Ʋnicorns-horn and Ivory, in a great Brazen-Mortar, with the Saunders and the Roots; then put in the Cinamon, dry Citron-Peel, and then the Cloves, and Sorrel-seed, and sift them them through a silken sierce. Dry the Saffron and beat it apart; then having mix ' d all the Powders with the Stones, Corals, Bole-Armonac, and Terra-sigillata, cut the Leaves of Gold in small bits. Mix an ounce and a half of this Powder with twelve ounces of fine Sugar dissolv ' d in Rose-water, and you may boyl it up to the consistence of a solid Electu∣ary, and make it into Tablets.
In the fourth place I cannot allow the opinion of the Ancients in the mixture of the Medicaments of the Treacle, whereby they direct the dissolving the Gums in Wine, to strain them through a cloth, and to boyl them afterwards to a consistency somewhat thick, to mix them afterwards in the composition; since there are several good reasons opposite to that Method. 1. Because there is no necessity to dissolve and strain the Gums which should be pure. 2. Because we cannot dissolve them in Wine, strain them, and boyl them to that consistency which they direct, without a great dissipation of the volatile parts whereof they plentifully consist, and wherein lyes their principal vertue. 3. Because by that means the spiritous part of the Wine dissipates, and the watry and Terrestrial part only remains. 4. Because that after the dissolution and straining of the Gums, though you may have augmented the weight, yet it is impossible regularly to observe the dose which the Author hath prescrib ' d. And lastly, because that after you have put in the Gums very pure, by beating them among other Medicaments, the Powder becomes much better, by reason the viscous parts of the Gums stick to the light and dry parts of the other Ingredients of the Powder, which otherwise would be subject to dissipate, and by this means unless the Powder be too fatty, it beats better, and is made with less wast of its quantity and vertues. 
 As for the Opium, had it we in Tears that were pure, such as distills from the heads of the Poppy in the Country of Thebes, and such as Andromachus might have had in his time, it would be enough to beat it among other Ingredients, like the Gums in Tears. But by reason of the impurity of that which is brought to us, it is very proper to pre∣pare it in extract, according to the method which I shall prescribe when I come to speak of extracts; and to dissolve these Extracts in a little Wine, like that of Liquorice, and the Juices of Acacia, or the undergrowth of Cistus, as also Chalcitis, or the Stone that tryes Brass, and to strain through a Cloth these Extracts or Juices dissolv ' d, to separate and cast off the impurities, to the end they may be mingl ' d afterwards in the whole mass of the Treacle. 
 In the fifth place, I see nothing that should oblige us to imitate the Ancients in the despumation of Honey, by adding Wine to it; as well to prevent the spiritous part from flying away in the Ebullitions necessary for the despumation, and to the end the grosser part of the Wine may not remain among the Honey; as for that it is impossible that the Honey should be kept so long upon the fire, till the forreign moisture be consum ' d, without a remarkable dissipation of its Aromatic parts, which are not the least. And for as much as we never put into Treacle any Honey but what is perfectly fine, I can find nothing more proper then to allow it a small Ebullition without any Addition, and after it is taken off the fire and cool, to scum it, and strain it through a hair-sieve. In regard that little boyling is sufficient to put it into a condition to suck up about two pints of Wine, which are enough for the dissolution of the Juices prescrib ' d for this quantity of Treacle, and to give all the Ingredients mix ' d and united together, the con∣sistency of an Opiate. 
 As for the Opo-Balsamum, or the Oyl of Nutmegs, which may be us ' d in its stead; one part of the one or the other may be very properly mix ' d with the dry Medicaments, when you make the powder without any fear that it should be too fatty. The surplu∣sage must be incorporated with the Turpentine. 
 The Trochiskes of Squills must be beaten among the rest of the Ingredients, which are to be pulveriz ' d. The Saffron dry ' d in a Stove, or by a moderate fire, may be beaten apart or with the rest of the Ingredients. 
 The Extracts being made and dissolv ' d in wine, as also the Juices and the Powder being ready, the Turpentine must be melted with the Opo-Balsamum, or the Oyl of Nut∣megs, in Balneo Mariae, or over a very moderate fire. Fill three or four pints of Ho∣ney, scum ' d and warm ' d, into a large bason, mix therewith the Powder ' d Saffron, if it were beaten apart; if not, mix therewith some part of the Powder, stirring the whole with a large woodd ' n-Spatula; then add some pints of warm Honey; and after that put in some part of the dissolv ' d Extracts and Juices, and continue adding successively, sometimes the Powder, sometimes the Honey, and sometimes the dissolv ' d Juices and Extracts, till the mixture of all things be perfectly compleated. After that, mix the Turpentine, and the rest of the Opo-Balsamum or Oyl of Nutmegs incorporated: Stir the whole as long as you can, till the union and mixture of the whole be perfectly com∣pleated. 
 When the composition is quite cold, put it up into an Earth ' n-Vessel glaz ' d within, a third part larger then to contain the quantity of the Treacle, that it may have suffici∣ent room to swell, which the Treacle will do during Fermentation, which you may hasten by putting the Vessel into a warm place. Stir the Treacle with a woodd ' n Spatu∣la twice a week, about a quarter of an hour together every time, for the two first months, and repeat the same stirring once a Week for the next four months; which make in all six months; the time which all Writers judge necessary for the Fermenta∣tion of this Treacle. By this means you shall not only make a perfect Union of the substances, but also of the vertues of all the Medicaments, and then you may safely make use of this Treacle. 
 The considerable quantity of Opium in this composition, is the reason that it sensibly shews its Anodyne, or pain-easing, thickning, soporiferous qualities, especially when it is new, though the force of the other Medicaments is not diminish ' d, which serves as a curb to its operation. Treacle being compos ' d of a great quantity of hot Medica∣ments, ought to be very much esteem ' d for the cure of cold Diseases, and of all those where the Natural heat is feeble and languishing, especially among the rest, of Palsies, Epilepsies, Convulsions, and all cold Diseases of the Head. It is proper against all Weaknesses, and want of retention in the Stomach, and Intestines; against the Di∣arrhea, Dysentery, Lientery, Morbus Cholera, and all sort of Cholicks; against Agues, and particularly the Quartan; against the Worms, against all sorts of poyson, the Pe∣stilence, Small Pox, the Measles, and all Epidemic Diseases; against the biting of mad∣dogs, and all sorts of Venemous Animals; against want of sleep, and griping pains in Children; against Hysteric-passions, the Jaundies, and an infinite sort of other Diseases. 
 It is tak ' n in Bolus, and you may drink a little Wine after it if you please, or else dissolve it in Wine, or in Cordial-water. The Dose of it for Children, is from one grain to three or four, and sometimes six: For grown people, from a scruple to a dram; and two drams for strong constitutions, and upon urgent occasions. It may be laid upon the Stomach or Heart, like an Emplaister, or Epitheme, as well to strengthen, as to resist any malignity, and to kill Worms. It is also to be laid upon Carbuncles, and Buboes Pestilential or Venereal. It is also to be mix ' d with Spirit of Wine, and with Oyls and Oyntments, to be laid to the Chine of the Back, and upon the weaken ' d parts. It is also laid to the wrists, and soles of the Feet in the fits of intermitting Agues, and par∣ticularly the Quartan. It is mingl ' d in Opiates, and in divers potions. It is giv ' n as an infallible remedy to hinder the too great effect of purgative Medicines, and all sorts of superpurgations. 
 But because the mixture of so many several Ingredients in one only composition, has for a long time displeas ' d many Persons who are able to judge; and for that they have believ ' d with good reason, that there might be a Treacle compos ' d of fewer drugs, and more effectual then that of the Ancients. And for that I am well inform ' d that several Physicians, but more especially Apothecaries, have earnestly wish ' d that such a one might be invented and publish ' d; Monsieur D ' Aquin the King ' s chief Physician has been pleas ' d to give me the Receipt of a Treacle order ' d according to his own way, to impart on his behalf to publick view; wherein you shall find Medicaments, not only well-dos ' d, and well-proportion ' d, but also admirably well-chosen, and which will cer∣tainly work all the good effects which can be expected from an excellent Treacle, provi∣ded you take care to have sound and good Ingredients, and prepare them well, and ob∣serve the method which I shall set down. 
 Theriaca Reformat D. D. D ' AQUIN.   A Reform ' d Treacle of Mon∣sieur D ' AQUIN.   ℞. Truncorum, Cordum, &amp; Hepatum Viperi∣norum siccorum, ℥ xxiv. ℞. The Bodies, Hearts, and Livers of Vi∣pers dry ' d, ℥ xxiv. Trochiscorum Scilliticorum,   Trochiskes of Squills,   Extracti Opii Thebaici, an. ℥ xij. Extract of Theban-Opium, an. ℥ xij. Radicum Contra-yervae,   Roots of Spanish Counter-poyson,   Viperinae Virginianae,   Virginian Vipers-grass,   Angelicae,   Angelica,   Valerianae majoris,   The greater Valerian,   Meu Athamantici,   Cretan Spignell,   Gentianae,   Gentian,   Aristolochiae tenuis,   Slender Birthwort,   Costi,   Costus,   Nardi Indicae,   Indian -Spikenard,   Nardi Celticae,   Celtic -Spikenard,   Cinnamomi,   Cinamon,   Olei Nucis Moscatae per expressionem Extracti,   Oyl of Nutmegs prest,   Croci,   Saffron,   Dictamni Cretici,   Cretan-Dittany,   Folii Indi,   Indian-Leaf,   Scordii,   Water-Germander,   Calaminthae Montanae,   Mountain-Calamint,   Polii Montani lutei,   Yellow Mountain-Poley,   Chamaepityos,   Grand Pine,   Comarum Centaurii minoris &amp; Hyperici,   Hair of the Lesser Centaury, and St. John  ' s-wort,   Florum Stoechadis Arabicae,   Flowers of Arabian Cassidony,   Granorum Amomi Racemosi, &amp;   Berries of Amomum, and   Cardamomi minoris,   Lesser Cardamoms,   Seminis Petroselini Macedonici,   Macedonian Stone-Parsley,   Ameos,   Bishops-weed,   Seseleos Massiliensis,   Seseli of Massilia,   Myrrha Troglodytidis, an. ℥ viij. Aethiopian Myrrh, an. ℥ viij. Resinae Styracis electae purissimae,   The purest Rosin of Storax,   Opopanacis,   Opopanax,   Sagapeni,   Sagapen,   Castorei, an. ℥ iv. Castoreum, an. ℥ iv. Extracti Mellaginei Granorum Juniperi, lb lxxij ss. Mellaginous Extract of Juniper-berries, lb lxxij ss. Vini Malvatici, lb j ss. Malmsey-wine, lb j ss. 
 There is no need of preparing Trochiskes of Vipers for this Treacle, it being e∣nough to hang up the Bodies, Hearts, and Livers of the Vipers, to dry in the op ' n Air out of the Sun, and to take the weight prescrib ' d. The Trochiskes of Squills are pre∣par ' d with the Powder of the Root of White-Dittany, as I shall shew in the Chapter of Trochiskes. Draw the Extract of Opium according to the method which I shall give in the Chapter of Extracts in the Third Part of this Pharmacopoea, and reduce it into an indifferent solid consistence. 
 The Root of Contra-yerva, or Spanish -Counter-poyson, grows in Charcis a Province of Peru. It is smaller then that of Orrice, reddish without, white within, knotty and fi∣brous. The smell is like that of Figg-leaves. The word which signifies in Spanish, Counter-poyson, comes from the Spanish Yerva, by which name the Spaniards call white-Hellebore, with the Juice whereof the Spanish Huntsmen are wont to poyson their Ar∣rows in the Countrey where the Contra-yerva grows. The tast of the Root is Aroma∣tic, accompany ' d with a kind of Acrimony. 
 The Virginian Vipers-grass, is a kind of Contra-yerva, which grows in that part of Virginy possess ' d by the Spaniards in the Northern Tract of America; it is very Aroma∣tic, and much esteem ' d in England against Poysons, and all sorts of Venomes. For which reason it is added to the Root of Contra-yerva of Peru, in the Countess of Kent ' s Pow∣der, to which these two Roots do give its principal vertue. 
 What I have already said of the Roots of Angelica, Spignel and Gentian, speaking of Theriacal Vinegar, needs no repetition. 
 I cannot change my opinion as to what I have already said of slender Birthwort, in my Discourse upon Treacle. And say moreover, that for this, or the Treacle of An∣dromachus, you are to use no other Birthwort, then that which by Writers is call ' d Pistolochia, Polyrrhizon, or the bushy-rooted Birthwort, because it is of a slenderer sub∣stance then all the rest, and in particular more abounding in vertue, then the Clematitis, or Spanish climbing Birthwort, which Matthiolus, and some others, his followers take for the slender Birthwort. 
 For it is not enough, that Dioscorides, Matthiolus, and Theophrastus, knew but three sorts of Birthwort, the long, the round, and the Clematitis: That the Clematitis has a slenderer Root then any of the three; That Matthiolus believ ' d that it was to be made use of in the Treacle before the long or the round, and that it has in some places been put into the Treacle instead of the slender Birthwort; it ought also to have been in∣quir ' d whether there were no other sort of Birthwort in Europe; whether the Clema∣titis, had any other more evident marks of slenderness, then all the other Birthworts; and whether it surpass ' d them in vertues, that we might certainly know it to be that to which Andromachus has giv ' n the name of slender? Then it might have been seen that there are several other sorts of Birthwort, besides the three of Dioscorides, Matthiolus, and Theophrastus, and the Clematitis which Matthiolus, and some others take for the slender Birthwort: that instead of being slenderer then the rest, the stalks thereof are thicker and higher; the Leaves, Flowers and Fruits, larger and bigger, and the Roots much longer then those of all the other sorts of Birthwort, and in par∣ticular much bigger then those of Pistolochia or Polyrrhizon, or bushy-rooted Birth∣wort, of which all the parts are much more slender, then that of Clematitis, and all the other sorts. It might have been observ ' d that the bushy-rooted Birthwort, which I have made choice of, has a taste, smell, and colour, both External and Internal, much more like to those of the long and round Birthwort, then to that of the Clematitis; which on the contrary differs much from the rest, especially in taste and smell. As for the vertues, though that Matthiolus believ ' d that it was to be made use of in the Trea∣cle, for the slender Birthwort, in regard the Clematitis was the most slender that he knew, you shall find nothing in better Authors to support his opinion; On the contrary, you shall find, that the Clematitis is inferiour to the bushy-rooted Birthwort in vertue. 
 We shall find in Dioscorides, upon whom Matthiolus grounds his writings, that after he has extoll ' d the vertues of the long and round Birthwort, at last, says he, Clematitis is thought to have the same effects, but it is inferiour in vertue. But he does not say, as his Commentator does, that it is to be put into the Treacle. We shall find that Ruellius, af∣ter he had extoll ' d the vertues of the Birthworts, and above all, those of the bushy∣rooted, concludes in these words: That which is call ' d Clematitis is thought to work the same effects, but more slowly. We may find in Daleschamp, that Clematitis is proper for the same uses that all the other Birthworts are, but that it is inferiour in vertue. And the same Authour citing Galen, where he speaks of Birthworts, saith, that the Clematitis is much more odoriferous, for which reason it is us ' d in fragrant Oyntments; but that in Physic the Operation is less effectual then that of the rest. And the same Authour, quoting Aegineta, puts Clematitis among the Medicaments that evacuate Choler, which is no effect expected from the vertues that Treacle ought to have. You shall meet with Clusius also citing the same Galen to the disadvantage of Clematitis; as also Bauhinus, speaking by the mouth of Dioscorides, and saying, Clematitis is thought to do the same, but it is inferiour to the forementioned in vertue. And the same Bauhinus urging Galen, thus says; That which is call ' d Clematitis is more fragrant, therefore it is us ' d in Oyntments, but in Physic it is much weaker. You may find in Lobel, the same Citations of Dioscori∣des and Galen, to the decrying of the Clematitis. In particular he speaks thus, 
 Polyrrhizae Aristolochiae, &amp;c. The Roots of bushy-rooted Birthwort, not mention ' d by Dioscorides, and unknown to his Commentator, Rondeletius brought into use, utterly neglected through ignorance of the Plant, and yet to be preferr ' d before the other two, as well for its plea∣sing Acrimony, as for its more effectual operation in Physic, and therefore by Andromachus and Galen, recommended as more fit for Treacle; For he that observes the tast and savour shall find the Clematitis, much more ineffectual, which the Latins took to be the slender Birth∣wort, mention ' d by the ancient Writers of Treacle. Afterwards you shall find him thus dis∣coursing. Not less known, nor less common is the Clematitis, which grows of it self in the cold Fields and Vineyards in the other parts of France, in all Italy, Germany, and Flanders. It grows like a Vine-Branch, about a Cubit long, with a yellow Flower, the stalk about a Cu∣bit in length, the Fruit oblong, about the bigness of a small Egg, with a broad seed within, the Root small and fragrant. This is of less vertue then the rest, and less in use, unless it be with the omniscient Apollo, and Matthiolus, that follow the Rabble of vulgar Apothecaries; who when they never saw the long and bushy-rooted, and were perswaded that there was no Plant wanting in Italy, were easily perswaded that the Clematitis was the true long Birthwort. 
 I need not here recite what Dodoneus has written of the climbing the bushy-rooted Birthwort, as being conformable to Bauhinus, Daleschamp, and others. Nor is it ne∣cessary to search for any better or more certain Authorities, to maintain what I have said for the bushy-rooted Birthwort. And therefore I will say no more, but that I had done ill not to have chosen it for the slender Birthwort of Andromachus, and for that which is to be us ' d in Treacle, or had I taken it for the Plant to be us ' d in the absence of the other. For which use they that chuse the Clematitis, honour it beyond its deserts; all its parts being very far from Tenuity or slenderness, and therefore both in that, and in its vertues inferiour to the Pistolochia, or bushy-rooted Birthwort.
Having gather ' d this Birthwort in the beginning of the Spring, when it begins to sprout up, wash it and cleanse it from all its superfluities, and hang it up in an Airy place out of the Sun, to dry, and so to be afterwards mix ' d with the other Ingredients. 
 As for Costus, I believe the three sorts which Authours have describ ' d, may be re∣duc ' d into one. And I follow Clusius in this, who says, I am of this opinion, that there is but one sort of Costus. And Bontius, a Dutch Physician, affirms the same thing after Gar∣cias ab Horto. For though Dioscorides, and several others after him, have describ ' d three sorts of Costus, the Arabian, Indian, and Syriac, and that they have strain ' d themselves to give several shapes to these sorts of Costus, and beyond whatever Dioscorides has written, upon whom they all depend. Nevertheless, it is certain, that in Europe we see but one sort of Costus, which is generally receiv ' d and approv ' d by all, and which has, as it were in contraction, all the marks which Dioscorides has giv ' n to all the three sorts, except some kind of sweetness, which length of time may have in some measure dissipated. For the taste of a Plant fresh-gather ' d, is different from that which has been kept a∣long time. 
 The Costus which is brought to us, is a good thick Root, of the bigness of a Man ' s fist, and sometimes twice as big, and might well be a foot long, if it were brought to us intire; the outside is of the colour of Ashes, the inside is white, enclining to the co∣lour of Box. It is very fragrant, and at first taste is somewhat sweet, but afterwards it tasts bitter with a kind of Acrimony, but altogether Aromatic. Costus is rather light then ponderous, not being of a very compact substance. If we might take Costus for the rind of a shrub resembling Elder, as some would have it to be, we should then choose that sort of Costus which is call ' d Corticosus, or Barky; which is a Bark white all over, very fragrant, and of an Aromatic taste, having the resemblance, but not the taste nor colour of Cinamon. This Barky Costus seems to me not to differ much from the true Costus, either in vertue or good qualities. 
 Few Persons in France can aver that they have seen in the Indies the true Plant of Spikenard, which grows in great abundance in Java. Bontius says, that it grows upon the Mountains about fourteen leagues from Batavia, and that there is no going thither for fear of Tygers and Thieves, which are very numerous in those parts. I can safely say, that I my self have gather ' d the False Nard upon the Mountain Genevre, upon the Borders of the Dauphinate, next to Piemont, and found the Ears, or Spikes, crouded to∣gether in a round cluster, underneath and next the superficies of the Earth, having little Roots very slender underneath; the whole very much resembling the figure of the true Indian-Nard, describ ' d by Matthiolus and others. The Ears or Spikes of the False Nard are somewhat bigger then those of the Indian-Nard, the hairy fibers scat∣ter ' d, and standing like bristles, and of a brown colour. They have almost no smell or taste; in the middle is a woody part that serves all along for a foundation to the hairy part. The Ears of the true Indian-Nard are somewhat less, having no woody part; the fibers are of a yellow colour enclining to purple: it begins from the little Root, and being knit together, forms a kind of a Spike, or Ear, which keeps a-long time, very like to that of Cyperus; the taste is very Aromatic, with some bitterness and acri∣mony, drying the Tongue and leaving behind it a kind of pleasing scent. The little Roots of Spikenard under the Ear, are to be thrown away as of no use. The fairest are to be chosen which must be gently shak ' n in the hand to shake off the dust; and the inner part must be drawn out at the upper part of the Ear or Spike, which is usually more pale then all the rest, which must be thrown away: the Spike thus cleans ' d is to be made use of. You may also cut them before you go about to bruise them, according to the opinion of some. But it is better to let cutting alone, since the hair may be bruis ' d, and reduc ' d to Powder without it, among the other Ingredients. 
 Cinamon well-chosen, as I have already given directions, needs no other Pre∣paration. 
 The prest Oyl of Nutmegs, abounds so much in vertues, that we need not look after Natural Balsoms, for the most part sophisticated to put into Treacles, or any other in∣ternal compositions. I reserve the Preparation thereof, to the Chapter of Oyls drawn by the Press. 
 It is not without reason that I have said, That the most part of Balsoms which are sold for natural, are sophisticated: For we may be sure that the real Balm of Judea would be excessively dear, could we be assur ' d that it were right; and that if we had not great cause to believe, that that which is brought to us is no other then a suppos ' d Balsom. As for the Balsom of Peru, though it is probable, that we may have it right from thence, because it is more plentiful and cheap; yet it is very liable to be coun∣terfeited, and I could give the Description of one that has been tak ' n for true by many Apothecaries and Druggists of France, who having found there the principal markes which the right one ought to have, and finding it to be at a high rate, have purchas ' d considerable quantities of it: though I make no question but the cunningest of them all was deceiv ' d. But I rather choose to omit this Description, then to give any one the least occasion to cheat. I give this advice to those that may or have been couz ' n∣ed, and who because they may have this counterfeit Balsom at four Livres the pound, prefer it in the ancient Treacle before the press ' t Oyl of Nutmegs that costs three or four times as much. 
 Cretan -Dittany is a Plant which has a great number of stalks covered with a white woolly down, and very much tufted; the leaves are also round and thick, the flowers are purplish, and very like those of Violets, but of a more clear Violet-colour, and appear among the leaves at the tops of the stalks; the seed lies in the cup of the flower, when the flower is gone. You must endeavour to get fresh Dittany, gather ' d when it was in flower, if it may be had; otherwise you must be content with the leaves well cleans ' d. 
 The Indian leaf, call ' d Malabathrum, is not a leaf without a root growing upon the water, like the Sea-Lintel, as some Writers would have it to be; but it is the leaf of a great Tree growing in the Country of Cambaya, and in several other parts of the Indies. The ends of the boughs which are often fixed to the leaves apparently de∣monstrate, that it is a Tree which bears them. This leaf is very large, and resembles that of the Citron-Tree; of a pale green colour, having three strings separated by equal Intervals, running along from one end to the other of the leaf. The upper part is smooth and shining, the under part rough; the taste of it is Aromatical, partici∣pating of Nard, Mace, Cloves and Cinamon. It differs very much in smell, taste, bigness, and the disposal of the ribs from the Laurel-leaf, for which some have tak ' n it without any ground at all. The leaves which are whole and green are alwayes the best. 
 The true Amomum is well known, and is brought to us in bunches, about the length of three or four Thumbs: This bunch has a rib that serves for support to the husks, which are round, and as big as stones of Grapes of the colour of white Ashes, smooth, and thicker cluster ' d then usually Grapes are, being fix ' d against their Basis like the Grains of Pepper. The bunch is in part cover ' d with six leaves like the Pomgranate∣leaf, of which three are longer and grow farther out then the other three, which in∣ter-divide them. The shells are full of a purplish-seed, almost square, and very like in all things to the seeds of Cardamoms: These grains, or seeds, join ' d together make a round Figure, separated nevertheless by very thin skins, but so close thrust together, that the entire little Globe seems to be composed but of three parts, though the seeds may be easily separated by pressing them between your Fingers: the husks and the skins must be thrown away, there being nothing to be made use of but the purplish well-grown seeds, rejecting those that are black and wither ' d. The taste of these grains, is tart, piquant, and very Aromatick, and remains a good while in the Mouth. 
 The smaller Cardamom here prescrib ' d, is the most excellent of all; The seeds of it are four-square, in little triangular husks, of the colour of white Ashes, like the husks of Amomum; the seeds are also of the same colour and taste, and divided into three parts by very thin skins. They are to be chosen and cleans ' d like those of Amo∣mum. 
 The seed of Macedonian Parsley is of a pale green colour, small, somewhat long∣poynted and flat, of a sharp and very Aromatic taste and of a pleasing smell. They must be very well cleans ' d from dirt and other superfluities. 
 The seed of Ameos, or Bishop ' s-weed, is between that of common Parsley and Smal∣lage; it is almost round, and very like to that of Sand-dust, of which it bears the Name. We have two sorts brought us, the taste of which is very Aromatic and bitter. But the Ameos of Creet, the taste and smell whereof participates of those of Time and Basil, is to be prefer ' d before the other. This seed is to be cleans ' d like the former. 
 The seed of Sesili, or Hart-wort of Marseilles, is alittle smaller then that of wild-Fennel, and very like it in Figure. It is of a pale green colour, of a sharp Aromatic and somewhat bitter taste. It must be chosen new and well-grown, and must be well cleans ' d. 
 Myrh is a Rosiny-Gum, which being new is of a yellow green colour, enclining to red, fatty, fragrant, sharp, biting and very bitter; being full of whitish spots when it is broken, like the spots upon a Man ' s Nail. It must be chosen very pure, and as transparent as may be; and the bigger Tears are to be prefer ' d before the lesser. 
 We may be certain that the Tree which produces Storax, yields abundance of Tears. But I cannot believe that the Storax which is brought to us, or which they pretend to bring hither out of the East is the right Storax. The high price which it has been sold for those many years, has encourag ' d the wickedness of those Cheats; and the tryal I have made thereof has so far convinc ' d me as not to trust them any more. 
 It is not with Galbanum, nor salt Ammoniac that these Tears are to be counterfeited, as some have thought in regard the strong and noisome scent of the one and the other, could never compose that sweet and pleasing scent which they are careful to give to these Tears which are vended for Storax. But most certainly they are counterfeited with some white Tears of Benjamin, or with some Rosiny Gum without scent, or which is easily out-scented by the Storax. To which purpose I have thought fit to publish what I have experimented, which is, that having Storax in Tears, whose smell, taste, colour, and figure, were such as are requir ' d in true Storax, I undertook to soften one Tear in my hand intending to incorporate it afterwards with other drugs of a re∣sembling substance. I was astonish ' d when I found all the good scent of the Storax to be lost in my hand; and that same Tear was not fit to impart any thing of good scent or ver∣tue to an Aromatic Balsom which I was making. Thereupon, trusting neither to the Sto∣rax made up like bowls, which is encreas ' d with liquid Storax, nor to that other Storax sold in Shops, light, and very full of Saw-dust, I chose a Storax of a delicious scent, full of Grains, or little Tears, and free from dirt, out of which I extracted the Gum in the following manner. 
 Having put eight ounces of this Storax into a Skillet, with twelve ounces of good White-wine, I stirr ' d the whole gently with a Spatula, and when I found that the Storax was sufficiently dissolv ' d, I presently pour ' d it out hot as it was, into a close-woven strong linnen-bag, and having bound it hard just above the ingredients, I prest it between two hot plates, and drew out two ounces of pure Gum, as fair as it was fragrant, and which is in every thing superiour to the sorts of Storax in tears which are brought to us. I made use of this Gum in my Balsom with great satisfaction, and use it upon several other occasions for Medicines, both Internal and External. They that meet with such Storax as I have describ ' d, may take my advice, and purifie it by this means. 
 Opopanax is a Gum dissolvable in any watry Liquors, which flows after incision from one of the Fennel-like Plants, call ' d, All-heal, or Panax Heracleum. It comes out of the Plant liquid and white, but by degrees it becomes white and of a Gold-colour with∣out-side. Opopanax is to be chosen new, in pure drops, fat, and white, at least with∣in, of a sharp bitter taste, and a strong scent. Sagapenum call ' d also Serapinum, because it smells somewhat like the Pine, is a Gum dissolvable in moist Liquors like Opoponax. It proceeds also from one of the Ferula ' s, or Fennel-like Plants, of a sharp and some∣what bitter tast, of a strong and unpleasant smell, white without and within, while it is new, but afterwards it grows somewhat reddish without; and in time it be∣comes of a dark colour, both within and without, like other Gums, especially those that are of a watry substance. The purest and the newest drops are to be made choice of. 
 I cannot be beaten out of that rational opinion that the Bags or Cods, which the Castors carry in that part, where we see the Testicles of all other four-footed Animals, contain the true Castoreum that is to be put into this Treacle, and into all other Me∣dicines where Castoreum is prescrib ' d. Nor is it to be wonder ' d that while I acknow∣ledge the principal matter contain ' d in the Bags for the right Castoreum, I have tak ' n the whole for the real Testicles, as well in regard of the scituation of those bags, as for the Apellation of Fibri Testes, or Castor-stones, which many Writers have given them. Considering also, that when I had discover ' d the real Testicles, serving to Generation, their smalness, and their privation of scent, caus ' d me to neglect and throw them away, as altogether useless in Physic; especially when upon examination of the Cods that con∣tain the Castoreum, I observ ' d their figure, both external and internal, accompany ' d with several Fibers and Membranes, as also a substance very conformable to that of the Testicles of other Animals, which may be pulveriz ' d when they are dry. The unctu∣ous part contain ' d in a little distinct Vesicle in the same principal Tunicle that con∣tains the Castoreum, not being capable to divert us from that thought, especially taking the Castor for a kind of amphibious creature, that may be term ' d a Monster, as being one half like a Land-Animal, the other like a Fish. I am perswaded also that they who should see these Bags scituated as they are in the body of the living Animal, as also out of the body, and dry ' d, as they are sold to us, would absolutely take them for the real Testicles, unless they had examin ' d things so strictly as the Gentlemen of the Academy-Royal, in their Anatomy of a Castor some years since, of which they have set forth a very exact description. But it is not the name of Testicles improperly given to these Purses, that hinders them from the true Castoreum, or from being put into the Treacle, and indeed as being to be preferr ' d far before the true Testicles.
As for the choice of Castoreum, and the place where those Animals are tak ' n that carry it, though most Writers prefer those of Pontus, I make no question, but that the Castors which are taken up and down upon the Rivers of France, Swedeland, Poland, Germany, Canada, and over all the West-Indies, may be every jot as good. For I could never observe any difference but only between the true Castoreum, and the counter∣feit, which is not interdivided within with Fibers and Membranes, and is nothing but a mixture of certain stinking Gums, mingl ' d with Powder of Castoreum, and the unctuous Juice which is found in the common, and principal Vesicles that enclose the Castoreum, which together make a tenacious mass, very much unlike the fleshy-sub∣stance of the true Castoreum, which may be easily reduc ' d to Powder, and is only to be us ' d in Treacle. 
 If France did not produce Saffron endow ' d with all the good qualities that can be ex∣pected, we should be oblig ' d to Forraign Countries. But because we have very good, with which we also furnish Germany, Swedeland, Poland, and other parts, we should do ill not to make use of it. Of all the Saffron that grows in France, that which grows in those Provinces that lye most to the South, seems to be preferr ' d before any other, because of the Nature of the soyl. For all Aromatic Plants, that grow in such pla∣ces, are to be preferr ' d before those that grow toward the North. The yellow part upon which the hair of the Saffron grows, is to be clipp ' d off with the point of a pair of Scissors, and that part of the Hair is to be made use of which is of a scarlet∣colour. 
 Celtic -Spike, call ' d by the Latins Spica Celtica, grows upon the Pyrenean -Mountains, and upon the Mountains of Tyrol in Germany. It is a small Plant but very Aromatic, which is brought to us in little Sheaves or Bundles, having no appearance of any Spike, but in its Root. I suppose also that the name of Spike was giv ' n to it, because it smells very like to Spikenard. The vertue of the whole Plant is concenter ' d in the Root. The Leaves, the Flowers, the strings, and all the other superfluities are to be thrown away. The Roots also must be spread in a moist place, and must be moisten ' d them∣selves to make them less brittle, before you make them clean. Otherwise when you go about to pick out the superfluities with the point of a Pen-knife, the Root would break if it were too dry. 
 As for the Preparation of the Extract of Juniper-berries, I refer you to the Chap∣ter of Extracts in the third Part of this Pharmacopoea. 
 As for the mixture of all the ingredients for this Treacle, you must observe the same method, as for that of the Ancients; only I will say this for the Extract of Juniper-ber∣ries, that it does not only perform the same thing as the despumated Honey, for the mix∣ture and preservation of all the ingredients, but it very much augments the vertue of the Treacle, which is nothing inferiour to that of the Ancients, and works in all re∣spects much more powerfully; there being in the whole composition, not one ingredient but what is chosen with Judgement. The Dose and use of the ancient Treacle may serve as a rule for this. 
 Theriaca Diatessaron.   Diatessaron Treacle.   ℞. Radicum Gentianae,   ℞. Roots of Gentian,   Aristolochiae rotundae,   Round Birthwort,   Baccarum Lauri,   Laurel-berries,   Myrrhae Electae, an. ℥ ij. Choice Myrrh, an. ℥ ij. Mellis opt. despumati, &amp;   The best clarify ' d Honey, and   Extracti Baccarum Juniperi, an. lb j. Extract of Juniper-berries, an. lb j. 
 Make an Electuary according to Art. 
 This Treacle was invented particularly for the Poor. It is call ' d Diatessaron, because it consists but of four Ingredients that make up the Powder; which being mix ' d with the Honey and Extract, make a very Soveraign remedy against Poyson. 
 The Preparation of this Treacle is very easie; for there is no more to do, but to mix the Powder of the four ingredients, with the Honey and the Extract, and then to put up the composition for your occasions. 
 This Treacle is not to be despis ' d; it is good against all contagious Diseases, biting of venemous Beasts, the Apoplexy, Convulsions, and all cold Diseases of the Head, as also against Worms, to fortifie the Stomach, and open all Obstructions of the Bowels. The Dose is the same with the other Treacles. 
 Mithridatium Damocratis.   Damocrates '  s Mithridate.   ℞. Myrrae Troglodytidis,   ℞. Aethiopian Myrrh,   Croci,   Saffron,   Agarici,   Agaric,   Zinziberis,   Ginger,   Cinnamomi,   Cinamon,   Nardi Indici,   Indian -Spikenard,   Thuris Masculi,   Male-Frankincense,   Seminis Thlaspeos, an. ℥ ij ss. Treacle Mustard-seed, an. ℥ ij ss. Seseleos Massiliensis,   Hartwort of Marseilles,   Opobalsami,   Opobalsamum,   Schoenanthi,   Camels-Hair,   Staechadis Arabicae,   Arabian Cassidony,   Costi,   Costus,   Galbani,   Galbanum,   Terebinthinae Chiae,   Chio -Turpentine,   Piperis longi,   Long-Pepper,   Castorei,   Castoreum,   Succi Hypocystidis,   The juice of the Undergrowth of Cystus,   Storacis Calamitae,   Calamite Storax,   Opopanacis,   Opopanax.   Folii Indi,   Indian -Leaf,   Cassiae Ligneae,   Cassia -Wood,   Polii Montani,   Mountain-Poley.   Piperis Albi,   White-Pepper,   Scordii,   Water-Germander,   Seminis Dauci Cretici,   Seed of Cretan wild-Carrot,   Trochiscorum Cyphaeos,   Trochiskes de Cyphi,   Bdellii, an. ℥ j ss. Bdellium, an. ℥ ij ss. Nardi Celtici,   Celtic -Nard,   Gummi Arabici,   Arabian Gum,   Petroselini Macedonici,   Macedonian Stone-Parsley,   Opii Thebaici,   Theban -Opium,   Cardamomi minoris,   Lesser Cardamom,   Seminis Feniculi,   Fennel-seed,   Radicis Gentianae,   Root of Gentian,   Rosarum Rubrarum,   Red-Roses,   Dictamni Cretici, an. ʒ x. Cretan Dittany, an. ʒ x. Seminis Anisi,   Anniseed,   Radicis Acori Veri,   Roots of true Acorns,   Ari,   Wake-Robin,   Valerianae majoris,   The bigger Valerian,   Sagapeni, an. ʒ vj. Sagapen, an. ʒ vi. Meu Athamantici,   Athamantic Spignel,   Acaciae Verae,   True Acacia,   Ventris Scinci,   The belly of the Land Crocodile,   Seminis Hyperici, an. ʒ v. Seed of St. John ' s -wort, an. ʒ v. Mellis Opt. despumat. lb xix. The best clarify ' d Honey, lb xix. Vini Opt. q. ss. The best Wine, q ss. 
 I have inserted this Receipt for Mithridate, that I might not be complained of for omitting so famous a Composition. And though there be as much reason for the re∣formation of this Mithridate, as for that of the ancient Treacle; yet I thought it not necessary for the latter, since the reformation of the Treacle may serve for both, at least may serve as a good assistance to ingenuity. 
 A smaller quantity of Opium is here prescrib ' d than for the Mithridate, and the Trochiskes of Vipers and Squills are quite left out. 
 Agaric is an Excrescence growing like a Mushroom, upon the Trunks or upon the bigger boughs of old Trees. There are two sorts, the Male and the Female. The Male is yellowish, heavy and compact, and more fit for Dyers than for Physick. That which is call ' d the Female is most sought after. The best is found upon the Larch∣tree, by the Latines call ' d Laryx. The Ancients talk ' d of Agaric growing in a Pro∣vince of Sarmaria call ' d Agaria, either from the Agaric, or else from the River Aga∣rus that waters it. We at this time make use of that Agaric which grows upon the high Mountains of the Dauphinate, which are the ancient Alpes, or upon the Mountains of Trent; though we are not to despise that which comes from the East, or from any other place, provided it have the principal Marks which are to be sought for in Agaric, which are whiteness, lightness, cleanness, bigness, friability, penetra∣ting scent, and extraordinary bitterness. Agaric is one of those Medicines that purge with violence and by attraction. So that it may be as well left out of the Mithridate as out of the Treacle; by reason of the opposition of its vertue to the Cordial, and Alexipharmacal Quality of the other Medicines. 
 Ginger is very well known; and though there are reckoned two sorts, Male and Fe∣male, yet Physic makes no difference, but only chuses the newest and the best grown, white within, which is brought from the East-Indies; that which comes out of America not being so much in esteem, principally because of its dark colour. 
 Male Incense call ' d Olibanum is well known in Shops; it is a Gum which must be cho∣sen in large Tears; white, pure and weighty, of a sharp and bitter taste, and of a penetrating smell. I know not why they should give it the name of Male, but only to distinguish the large and fair Tears from the common ones. 
 Writers describe Opobalsamum to be a thick whitish transparent juice or Liquor, in smell resembling Turpentine, but much more pleasing. It ought to distil forth after incision made in the Dog-days, of the Branches of a Shrub call ' d Balsamum, the wood whereof is call ' d Christo-Balsamum, the Branches whereof are brought to us in streight pieces, but very brittle, and unequally knotted. The Bark of the wood is somewhat reddish without, but greenish within, and the wood underneath is whitish and full of pith. This wood when it is new, being broken, yields a smell very like to that of Opobalsamum, the taste whereof is bitter and somewhat tart. The most esteemed Plant of Balsom grows in Judea, and Arabia Felix, and by cultivation in the Gardens of the Grand Signior in Aegypt. It also grows in Peru, but inferiour in goodness and beau∣ty. There is no Opobalsamum properly of Judea, which is not very dry; so that we cannot observe the essential Marks which Authors ascribe to it; which are, that if you put a drop into water or Milk, it seems as if it would presently dissolve in those Li∣quors, but it afterwards swims a-top, and you may gather it together with a straw or a Needle; and that if you pour a drop upon a piece of Cloth, you may take it off a∣gain without leaving the least spot or stain. The same Writers represent Opobalsamum to us, to be so penetrating, that the force and sharpness of the smell is hard to be en∣dured; so that not meeting now-a-days with any of these qualities, we have great reason to question whether we have the right or no, and to be sorry that a Liquor so famous should be so little known to us. Which confirms in my opinion, that it is better to make use of press ' d Oyl of Nutmegs both in Treacle and Mithridate, and in other Medicines where Opobalsamum is prescrib ' d, than to make use of impos ' d Opo∣balsamum which we have so much reason to question. So much the rather, because that press ' d Oyl of Nutmegs is of a nature between Gummy and Oyly, and pressed from a Fruit very aromatical and full of vertue; and for that its taste, smell, and pene∣tration render it worthy of so good a place. 
 The word Schoenanthos is Greek, and signifies the Flower of a Reed, which is the best part of that Plant; for though the taste and smell of that Reed assure us, that it is not void of vertue, yet we must believe that the Flower has something more of con∣siderable in it, for beauty, taste, and smell being that of all Flowers, which longest pre∣serves all its good qualities, notwithstanding its smallness and thinness, so that ha∣ving been kept several years, it still fills the Nostrils with a strong scent, and the mouth with a sharp and Aromatic tast. The odoriferous Reed that bears this Flower grows in Nabatea a Province of Arabia, where it is so plentiful, that they littre their Ca∣mels and other Cattel with it. The hight of this Reed is about a foot, the Root small slender and full of knots. The Plant is tufted and compos ' d of several cluster ' d rows, of a pale green colour, intermix ' d with some long streight leaves, and pointed like the Reeds, near to the points whereof are to be found those little Flowers, which are of a whitish colour enclining to Purple, dispos ' d in double ranks. 
 The Flowers of the Odoriferous Reed are not to be made use of till they are very well cleans ' d; which I do thus. After I have sifted through a coarse Sieve the dust which is usually found among these Flowers, I spread them upon a sheet of Paper, then I lay upon them a new coarse coarse cloth well scatter ' d with hair, somewhat longer and bro der then my hand. Then taking up the piece of cloth you shall find many Flow∣ers sticking to the cloth, which mustbe pickt off and kept a-part: And this must be done till you have as many flowers as you stand in need of. 
 Galbanum, is a Gum dissolvable in watry Liquors, like Opoponax and Sagapenum; it also flows after incision from one of the Ferula ' s or Fennel-leav ' d-Plants, call ' d Fennel-Gyant. The biggest Tears are to be chosen, pure, white, thick, of a sharp and bitter taste, and a strong and unpleasing smell.
Of all the Turpentines that flow from several Trees, and which we acknowledge for liquid Rosins, that which flows from the Turpentine-Tree is esteem ' d the best; It ought to be transparent, of a whitish colour enclining to green, of an indifferent strong smell, and not displeasing. The best Turpentine is brought from the Island of Chio; it is usually not so thin as those of Venice, and other places. 
 The long Pepper consists of many small grains, as it were set together in Rows, and not op ' n and separate; of an Ash-colour, when it is ripe. The Leaves are like those of the long Pepper, but of a paler green, and thinner; longer-pointed, and with a shorter foot-stalk. The taste of long-Pepper, is like that of black-Pepper, but more moderate in heat and dryness; it ought to be new, and well-grown, and the foot-stalk ought to be cast away. 
 The Juice of the undergrowth of Cistus, is drawn from a small excrescence, rising from the Male and Female Cistus, Ledum, or sweet Cistus, with upright stalks co∣ver ' d thick with Leaves, scarce a foot high; that with Sea-Purslain Leaves is of a yel∣lowish colour. The roots are as big as two or three thumbs, sometimes a finger, sometimes the whole hand in length, somewhat bigger at the top then bottom, and representing a Pomegranate-flower at the top. They grow and flourish toward May. They are ten∣der and Juicy, and yield a black acid Juice, which is depurated by being boyl ' d over a small fire, in an Earth ' n-glaz ' d-Vessel, to the consistence of an Extract somewhat solid, call ' d Juice of Hypocistis. 
 The Tree call ' d Cassia Lignea, is almost like to that which bears the Cinamon, and they grow together in the Island of Ceylon. These two Barks, though born by different Trees, are boyl ' d and dry ' d after the same manner, and their taste and scent is almost alike; their colour, shape, and thickness, differ almost in nothing, but the Cassia Lignea is of a fatter, more muscilaginous substance, which dissolves by chewing in the mouth, whereas the Woody-part of Cinamon will not dissolve, though you chew it ne∣ver so long. 
 The seed of Cretan -Daucus, or Wild-Carrots, is to be preferr ' d before any other; it is long like that of Cummin-seed, but not so big: the colour is white with a Velvet superficies, the taste and smell are pleasing enough; however it is somewhat sharp, and hot, but very Aromatic. 
 There are two sorts of Mountain-Poley, one whose flowers, and all the upper part of the Leaves and Stalks is of a Gold-colour, the other white. Both the Plants are cover ' d with a tufted Cotton, especially the yellow; whose taste and smell are very Aromatic, so that they fill the mouth at the same time with a mixture of several Aromatics. The yellow-Poley is to be preferr ' d before the other. 
 The true Carpobalsamom is extremely scarce, or to say more truly, it is not to be had now-a-days, according to those marks which Authours give of it. For they describe it to be fix ' d to the Plant with a cup; to be large, weighty, picquant and sharp in taste, cover ' d with a small Membrane of a deep yellow-colour, inclining to red; lin ' d within, with other Membranes thicker then that without, and which contains with∣in a yellow Honey-like substance, with a pleasing scent like to that of Opobalsamum. But the Grains that we meet with in shops, have none of these marks: and though time might wear away some of these marks, yet it could not annihilate them all. Which makes me to doubt of their Legitimacy, and to substitute Cubebs in their place. 
 Cubebs, for colour, form and bigness, are very like black Pepper-corns, except that they have a little footstake which fastens them to a rib like the bunch of a Grape: Their taste is biting and glowing, very bitter, but very Aromatic: They grow in the Island of Java upon Shrubs that climb upon other Trees like Ivy. Some Authors have written, that the Inhabitants boyl them before they will suffer them to be transported, fearing they might be sown, and grow in some other place: But the little vent they have for them, and the small price they are at, utterly destroys the vanity of such a conjecture. They are good to heat and fortifie the Stomach, to open obstructions of the Spleen, to correct the cold intemperature of the Matrix, and to excite Venery. 
 Trochiskes de Cyphi, you shall find in the Chapter of Trochiskes. 
 Bdellium comes from Bactriana, where it is produc ' d by a black Tree as big as a white Olive-tree, the leaves whereof are like to those of an Oak. Bdellium is a Gum, to which Authors have ascrib ' d for marks to be clear and yellow, like Wax or strong Glue, to be bitter, fat, and to smell like Ʋnguis Odoratus, when it is burnt. 
 The true Acorus is brought us from Lithuania; it is a Root that crawls upon the Earth, and is nourish ' d by certain strings that belong to it: It is very knotty, about a finger in bigness; of a white inclining to flesh-colour, of a biting and bitter taste, of a thin light substance, of a strong scent, but very pleasing. 
 The true Acacia is the thick juice of the fruit of a great Thorn-tree that grows in Egypt, the Flowre whereof is white, and the fruit contain ' d in Husks like Lupins. This juice is of a high colour, and beautiful red, of a compact substance, but which will easily break by striking upon it, when it is very dry: It is brought to us in Bowls done up in thin Bladders; it must be clear, and shine within when it is bro∣ken. The taste should be styptic, stinging, and very Aromatic. 
 The Sea-Scinkes, are little Animals like to Lizards, or rather like to little Cro∣codiles, by which name they are call ' d; they live part in the Water, part upon the Land: They go upon four legs very short, and very small; their Snouts are more pointed then a Lizards, and their Tails are thin and short: They are beautiful to look upon, being cover ' d with scales dispos ' d in a wonderful order of Silver-colour, sometimes dark ' nd to a Gold-colour, especially upon the Backs. They are never so big as Crocodiles, and they breed in Egypt upon the Red Sea; in Lybia, and in the Indies: The reins or the belly of these Scinkes are chosen for Mithridate, though the other parts have their vertues also. 
 For the mixture of this Treacle, it is the same with that of Ancient Treacle. 
 As to the Vertues of Mithridate, they are almost the same with those of Treacle, though somewhat inferiour in all things, particularly against the bitings of Serpents, to which the flesh of Vipers is principally necessary; as also to asswage pain, and pro∣cure rest: but then it wants that quantity of Opium which is in the Treacle. 
 Confectio Alkermes Regia.   Royal Confection Alkermes.   ℞. Succi Pomorum redolentium,   ℞. Juice of fragrant Apples,   Aquae Rosarum fragrantissimae, an. lb iss. The most fragrant Rose-water, an. lb iss. Serici crudi mundati &amp; minut. incisi, lb j. Raw Silk cleans ' d and cut small, lb j. Omnia Matratio bene clauso excepta horis 24 in Balneo Mariae digerantur: Te∣pide deinde sericum torculari exprima∣tur; Liquor vero cum sacchari opt. lb ij. ad Electuarii solidi consistentiam, coquatur. Ab igne tunc removeatur E∣lectuarium &amp; in illo succi recentis Ker∣mesini spissioris lb j. dissolvatur &amp; post∣modum promisceantur,   Put them together into a Matrass well stopt, and digest them for twenty four hours in Balneo Mariae: Then squeeze the warm Silk in a Press, and boil the liquor to the consistence of a solid Electuary with lb ij. of the best Sugar: Then take the Electuary from the fire, and dissolve therein lb j. of the new thicker juice of Kermes: after that mix therewith,   Margaritarum Oriental. praeparat.   Oriental Pearls prepar ' d,   Santali Citrini,   Yellow Saunders,   Cinnamoni Acutissimi, an. ℥ j. Biting Cinamon, an. ℥ j. Ambrae Grisiae cum olei Cinnamomi Stillatitii Gut. iij. pulveratae, ℥ ss. Ambergrise pulveriz ' d with three drops of distill ' d Oyl of Cinamon, ℥ ss. Lapidis Lazuli usti, loti, &amp; laevigati ʒ ij. Lapis Lazuli burnt, wash ' d, and made smooth, ʒ ij. Foliorum Auri, ʒ j. Leaves of Gold, ʒ j. Moschi Orientalis, ʒ ss. Oriental Musk, ʒ ss. 
 Many Writers have attributed great vertue to raw Silk. But though the use there∣of had been at all times unknown in Physic, my judgement is, that it is too fragrant, that it has too much beauty, that it affords too many conveniencies to humane Life, that there are too many wonders in the first Original, progress, labour and metamorpho∣ses of the worm which produces it, to be despis ' d. And so much the rather, for that we know that all the parts of Animals, as also of their Excrements and Producti∣ons, are impregnated with a volatile Salt; and because I am so far convinc ' d of the extraordinary vertues of Volatile Salts, that I may be bold to call it the right hand of all Physic. For which reason, and for the continual use which several great and famous men have made of raw Silks in their Medicines, I say that it was not without sufficient grounds prescrib ' d among those other ingredients that make up this Composition. 
 That is call ' d Raw Silk, which was never boil ' d, but is still as it were in the grain, out of which the worm has been but newly taken, four or five days after that little Artist has finish ' d its work. For at that time this Silk is very pure, provided you take away the outward wrapping and the inward tunicle of the grain, which is next the worm. This Silk thus cleans ' d will not fail to impart its vertues to this Confection, or where-ever else it shall be prescrib ' d. 
 For the methodical preparation of this Confection, you must pulverize apart the yellow Saunders and the Cinnamon very finely, and prepare the Pearls upon Porphyrie. You must heat red-hot and three times quench the Lapis Lazuli in Rose-water, where it must also soak for 24 hours, then prepare it upon Porphyrie like the Pearls. Powder the Ambergrise and the Musk together, mixing therewith three drops of Oyl of Cinna∣mon, which will hasten the pulverization, and prevent them from sticking to the Mor∣tar; and when they are pulveriz ' d, mix them with the other Powders▪ In the mean time having taken away all the superfluities of the raw Silk, put it into a Matrass, and pour upon it the juice of Apples clarifi ' d, and the Rose-water prescrib ' d, and ha∣ving stopp ' d the Matrass keep it four and twenty hours in Balneo Mariae lukewarm. Then having strain ' d and strongly press ' d out the Silk, dissolve in the Liquor two pound of fine Sugar, and boil them together in a glaz ' d earthen Pipkin, over a mo∣derate fire, to the consistence of a solid Electuary, when you have taken it off the fire mingle with it a Pint of the press ' d grains of Kermes, new and perfectly ripe. After which add thereto by degrees the Powders, and last of all the Leaves of Gold, and having put up the Confection in a Gally-Pot close stopp ' d, keep it for your use. 
 You might melt the Ambergreese in a small part of the hot Syrup, with which it is to be incorporated, but it could not be well done, without some dissipation of the sweet odour, as also of the vertue of the Ambergreese, besides that the beauty of the colour of the Confection would be quite spoil ' d. And therefore the best Preparation of Ambergreese upon this occasion is to powder it. You will find in this Receipt the weight of the Pearls, yellow Saunders, Cinnamon and Ambergreese augmented beyond what you shall find in the most part of other Receipts: But besides that these ingre∣dients are not to be spar ' d in a Composition so highly esteem ' d, the increasing of the quanitty of the Powders serves to render the Confection much better then it is wont to be.
Make up the Mass with Tincture of Tartar. 
 Having chosen the Aloes Succotrine, very transparent, draw forth the Extract with Juice of Strawberries, as I shall direct in the preparation of Extracts, where you shall also meet with those of Gentian and Saffron. Magistery of Tartar, and tincture of Tartar, are to be found in their proper place, together with the preparation of the Salt of Mars of Riverius, which is most proper for these Pills, in regard that the Acid of the Spirit of Vitriol, necessary for the dissolution of Mars, cannot be better sweet ' nd then by the Volatile of the Spirit of Wine, which is there made use of. 
 Schroderus writes, that after he had had the Receipt a good while, and found the Ex∣cellency of its Vertues, he was resolv ' d to communicate it to public view, as a pro∣per Remedy to carry off tartarous and muscllaginous humours from the lower part of the Belly, to cleanse the Liver, Spleen, and Matrix from Obstructions, and to cure all Diseases that proceed from thence. Take them in the Evening before Supper, about half a scruple weight, and the next morning expect they should work. 
 Pilulae de Sagapeno Camilli.   Sagapen-Pills of Camillus.   ℞. Lachrymarum Sagapeni, ʒ vj. ℞. Tears of Sagapen, ʒ vj. Ammoniac. ʒ iij. Ammoniac, ʒ iij. Extracti Trochisch. Alhandal, ℥ j. Extract of Trochisks of Alhandal, ℥ j. Diagrydii, ℥ ss. Diagrydion, ℥ ss. Salis Gemmae, ʒ j ss. Sal-Gemmae, ʒ j ss. 
 Powder the Diagrydion and Sal-Gemmae, and having heated the Brass-Mortar and Pestle, melt the Gums by degrees: Then incorporate therewith the Extract of Alhan∣dal, and the Powders, adding thereto as much Syrup of Violets, sharp ' nd with a little Spirit of Vitriol, as will suffice to reduce it to a good consistency. These Pills are ap∣plauded by Camillus, and after him by Quercetan, for the cure of a Quartan Ague, ta∣king about the bigness of a Pea at the beginning of the Fit: For they insensibly dissolve viscous and tenacious humours, and carry them off by Stool. 
 I have not inserted certain Pills set down, and commended by Quercetan, having Eu∣phorbium for their Foundation: For though that Quercetan  ' s preparation of Euphor∣bium be as good, and as judicious as any that was ever invented; and that it be true, that the Acrimony of the Euphorbium, fix ' d to its volatile parts wherein it abounds, cannot be more properly carri ' d off, then by mixing those Acids among it which he does, as Juice of Citron, or Spirit of Vitriol. Nevertheless, though the Volatiles may seem to have chang ' d their nature, when joyn ' d to the Acids, and intermix ' d with their smallest particles; this strict Union may at first hinder that operation which they were capable of before in separation, but cannot destroy their first nature: So that when the Acid joyn ' d to the Euphorbium meets in the Stomach with any new Volatile, not failing to mix with that as it had mix ' d with the Euphorbium; and the latter find∣ing it self freed from the Union which it had with the Acid, is in that time in a condi∣tion to exercise its first Nature, and make the same havock it would have done before it was joyn ' d, which cannot be help ' d, unless it meets with some new Acids in the Sto∣mach, which may, as it were, inebriate it so, that it may suffer it self to be carri ' d off by the other Laxatives, and voided with the Excrements, before it has done all the mischief it would have done. These reasons make me stedfast in my Opinion, that it is better not to give Euphorbium by any means inwardly, then to endeavour to change its nature, which it is impossible to destroy, though it may be alter ' d for a time. 
 I was unwilling to swell this Chapter with any more Receipts of Pills, which have been formerly more in use, and which every one has his liberty to chuse as he plea∣ses. For besides that there is nothing particular in their preparation, I think I have al∣ready produc ' d enough sufficiently to furnish any Apothecaries Shop. 
 THE SECOND BOOK, OF EXTERNAL PREPARATIONS, AND COMPOSITIONS. CHAP. I. Of Oyls Extracted by Pressing. THe Health of Man being the Common End for which all Medicines both Internal and External are made use of, and there being so great a Sympathy between them, that many which are rank ' d among the number of the former, may al∣so serve for the same uses as the latter, it is impossible to divide Internal from External Compositions so well, but that there may be some ground of Exception. As may be observ ' d in Confection of Alkermes, which is usually giv ' n inwardly to strengthen the Heart and noble-parts; and which you may also for the same purpose, very advantageously apply outwardly like an Epitheme upon the Heart and Stomack: Or mix ' d in Oyl of Scorpions, invented against Poysons; which is chiefly made use of by way of Unction upon the Heart, Liver and Temples. However it is also taken in∣wardly for the same intent; not to speak of other mix ' d Bodies and other Composi∣tions, which may prove useful both outwardly and inwardly giv ' n. So that it is no wonder if among the Compositions which have at all times been rank ' d among exter∣nal, we meet with some that may be accompted internal, as being oft-times taken in∣wardly. Particularly many Oyls, especially Sallet-oyl, which besides the general ex∣ternal use that is made of it in dressing Meat, is often giv ' n to drink alone or mix ' d with other Medicaments. 
 Having by this means begun External Medicines with Oyls, I must say that the name of Oyl has been given to certain fat, oyly, combustible Liquors, that flow either naturally out of Rocks, as Petroleum; or from Plants, as Opobalsanum; or which is drawn by Art from divers mix ' d Bodies, especially those which are of the number of Vegetables, the diversity whereof is as great as the variety of substances from whence they are drawn. I do not comprehend under Oyls the Fat of Animals, though Unctuous and Inflamma∣ble, and that it be put sometimes in the Composition of several Oyls, among several other parts of Animals; having design ' d this Chapter principally for Oyls drawn forth by Pressing, or by Decoction; or for those to which we communicate the vertue of one or more mix ' d Bodies, which are call ' d either Simple or Compound. Referring Distill ' d Oyls, and their Preparation to the third part of this Pharmacopaea. 
 Fruits, Berries, and Seeds are the parts of Plants that usually abound most in Oyl; though the other parts are not quite destitute of it. But among all Fruits the Olive is that which yields most, and of which there is the greatest plenty every-where. This Oyl is as much us ' d in Dyet as in Physic, wherein the general use of it has been the reason it has receiv ' d for excellency and priority of distinctions sake, the name of Oyl, without the addition of Olives. This is one of those Oyls that are drawn forth by pressing. The use of it is chiefly to retain or receive the virtue of several sorts of Plants or Ani∣mals, of which it afterwards bears the name, serving as a foundation to a good part of the Simple and Compound Oyls, which are us ' d to be prepar ' d in Shops by Infusion or Decoction. 
 Most Authors are of opinion that Oyl that has been longest made is to be preferr ' d before any other for Physical uses, so that sometimes they prescribe Oyl of a hundred years old. However the Inhabitants of the Countries where the Oyl is made, generally prefer new pure Oyl before any other; especially for Diet, because it is usually more sweet and more acceptable to the taste: and though they do not despise that of two, three and four years old, they know by experience, that Oyl which has been kept be∣yond that time, grows at length so thick, and becomes so greasie, that it is only fit for Unguents, Emplaisters, or to make Sope. 
 The Ancients prescrib ' d the making of two sorts of Oyl, and that the most usual be∣ing drawn from Olives very ripe, there should be another drawn from green Olives be∣fore they come to maturity, to which they give the name of Oleum Omphacinum, which they affirm to be much more astringent and cooling then the other, and which they made use of in the composition of Oyls and other Remedies that requir ' d those quali∣ties. But we should be now at a great loss to find this Omphacine -Oyl, because that green Olives are not in a condition to afford much Oyl, and for that in the Countries where Olives grow in greatest abundance they know not what it is to draw forth Oyl from O∣lives that are not fully ripe. But though we have not this Omphacine -Oyl of the Anci∣ents, the Oyl which is made of ripe Olives, cannot be inferior to it; in regard we may endue it with qualities very neer to those which are attributed to Omphacine, by the means of Lotions or Infusions impregnated with the qualities which they desire, provi∣ded the Oyl be pure, and clarifi ' d from all its bad qualities. 
 Oleum Amygdalarum dulcium. Oyl of Sweet-Almonds. ℞. Amygdalarum dulcium putaminibus, &amp; cute membranosa purgatarum, quantum libue∣rit. ℞. Sweet-Almonds cleans ' d from their Husks and Membranous-skins, what quan∣tity you please. 
 Choose out new Almonds, well grown, out of their shells, well dry ' d, and having sisted the dust from them through a coarse Sieve, put them into hot-water; and keep them there till their Husks are well soak ' d, that you may slip them off with your fingers; and having taken off the membranous-skin, wipe them in a Linen-cloth, and spread them abroad to dry. Then put them in a Marble-Mortar, and beat them with a Wooden-Pe∣stle, till the Pulp be very thin and begin to yield Oyl; put this Pulp into a Bag of new strong linen: and after you have ty ' d the mouth of the Bag, and put it between two thin Tin-plates, or of Wood lin ' d with white Latten, put the whole into the Press, squeez∣ing it very gently at first, but afterwards with a considerable strength, leaving the Bag in the Press till the Oyl have time to drop forth. They who should be too impatient at first, and should press the Oyl of Almonds too strongly at the beginning, would force the Feces of the Almonds through the Bag; and the Oyl would come forth thick, which by observing my directions never happens. 
 The Ancients were wont to heat the Almonds and such other Fruits in Balneo Mariae, or otherwise, after they had beat them, and before they put them into the Press, to get the more Oyl. I confess that more Oyl may be had this way, but it will be more unacceptable to the taste and less cooling. However for some persons not so nice, the beating of the Almonds may be omitted, provided they be well shaken in a Bag of new coarse Cloath: by reason that then the Almond-pulp is less subject to pass through the Bag, as being hindred by the rind, that gives it a firmness; nor is the Oyl less pleasing to the taste, or less sightly to the eye. 
 Oyl of Sweet Almonds is very much commended against the roughness of the Aspera Arteria, and the Lungs. It appeases Colicks, especially the Nephretic, cures all retentions of Urine, facilitates the Labors of Women in Child-bed, and appeases their pains after delivery; asswages Coughs in young or old, and the Gripes of little infants. In a word, it is generally proper for all internal Maladies, where there is occasion to mollifie, as∣swage, make slippery or to qualifie the heat or acrimony of humours. It is us ' d both in∣wardly and outwardly. It is given alone fasting; it is also mix ' d with Looches Syrups, Emulsions, and Potions. The dose is from half an ounce to as ounce, and sometimes to two: it is also us ' d in pain-easing, and lubrifying Clysters from two to three ounces. It is also us ' d externally alone, or mix ' d with Pomatums or in Liniments, as well to smooth the Skin, as to soften and relax the Muscles of the Breast, when they are opprest. 
 Oleum Amygdalarum amararum. Oyl of Bitter Almonds. ℞. Amygdalarum amararum quantum li∣buerit. ℞. Bitter Almonds what quantity you please. 
 This Oyl may be prepar ' d in the same manner as the sweet Almonds; but because they are seldom taken inwardly, the beating of them may be omitted without Scruple: otherwise they may be beaten and after that moderately heated; and the Plates may be also heated, when you put them into the Press: But they must be gently press ' d at first, as I said of the former. Their bitterness lies only in their gross and terre∣strial part; so that the Oyl is as sweet as that of other Almonds, the bitterness re∣maining in the foeces: Which though neither hurtful to men, nor to the most part of other Animals, is yet the most dangerous Poyson that Poultry can meet with. 
 Oyl of bitter Almonds is very much esteem ' d against hardnesses, inflammations, and stranglings of the neck of the Matrix. It also gives great ease to those who are troubled in their Kidneys, by any gathering together of Flegm, Gravel, or Stone, or are pain ' d through difficulty of Urine. It is good against pains in the head, deaf∣ness, noise in the Ears, to take away the blemishes of the Face, and roughness of the Skin, and white Scurfs. It is us ' d outwardly alone, or mix ' d with Pomatums; and inwardly administer ' d from half an Ounce to an Ounce alone, or mix ' d in Emulsions or other Beverages. It may be also mix ' d in Clysters to expell wind, like as Oyl of sweet Almonds. 
 Oleum Nucum Juglandium, &amp; Avellanarum. Oyl of Wallnuts and Filberts.
Oyls of Wallnuts and Filberts, are to be prepar ' d in the same manner as Oyl of sweet Almonds. You must also forbear to heat the Pulps, especially when they are to be taken inwardly, or to be us ' d for Cosmetics. For by that means they will be more agreeable to the taste and smell, and be also more refreshing. 
 Oyl of ordinary Wallnuts is recommended against all sorts of Cholicks, especially windy. It is also good against crushing and pricking of the Nerves, against the Itch, Tetters, and Swellings. It is also outwardly apply ' d to anoint the Face against Sun-burning in the Month of March, by way of prevention: To which purpose they anoint the Faces of young Children newly born. The Dose and uses of it are much the same with those of Oyl of sweet Almonds: Yet sometimes they use four Ounces, or half a Pint at a time in Clysters, for violent Cholicks, mixing it with Urine and Spanish-Wine. 
 The Vertues of Oyl of Filberts are very near the same with that of common Wall∣nuts. It is us ' d against pains in the Joints, as well in Beverage, as in Unction; as al∣so against the biting of Serpents, about an Ounce at a time: it is apply ' d alone, or mix ' d with Bears-Grease, or among Pomatums to make the Hair grow. 
 Oleum Crysomelinum, seu ex Nucleis Ma∣lorum Persicorum &amp; Armeniacorum. Oyl of the Kernels of Peaches and Abricots. 
 The Oyls of the Kernels of Peaches and Apricots are drawn by the Press in the same manner as the Oyls already mention ' d. 
 The Vertues of both these Oyls are very near the same. They are highly applauded against Pains, Obstructions, and Noises in the Ears; as also against Deafness, being put into the Ear with a little Cotton dipp ' d in them. They appease the pains of the Hemorrhoids, and dissipate swellings which are caus ' d by them in those parts: They are good to cure Wounds and Ulcers growing in those places. They are highly com∣mended against Worms in Children great and small, being taken from two Drams to an Ounce. For which purpose the Kernels of Peaches and Almonds beaten, and given in a flowring Emulsion, are very much approv ' d and experimented against the Jaundise in both Sexes, repeating the use of them. 
 Oleum Balaninum. Oyl of the Nut-Ben. 
 The Nut-Ben, call ' d by the Greeks Balanus Mirepsica, by the Latins Glans Ʋnguen∣taria, affords its Oyl by pressing, in the same manner as the other Fruits before-men∣tion ' d. The Nut-Ben is in some sort triangular, cover ' d with a whitish, thin, smooth, and brittle rind: The substance of the Fruit is white, so is also the Oyl; and it is not only without scent, but very proper to receive any scent that you have a mind to give it; and it has this peculiar quality, that it does not grow Musty like other press ' d Oyls, but may be kept a long time in a good condition: For which reason Perfumers use it, to receive and preserve the Odours of certain Flowers, which they would otherwise make no advantage of. 
 The Vertues of this Oyl are highly esteem ' d, and among other things to take out freckles and scars from the face, and other parts of the body, apply ' d alone, or mix ' d with Pomatums. It asswages pains in the Ears, and dissipates the buzzing in them, be∣ing mix ' d with Goose-grease, and put into them: It is proper to open the Obstructions, and to soft ' n and digest the hardnesses of the Liver, Spleen, and other Bowels, being tak ' n inwardly: It is us ' d against cold diseases of the Nerves and Joynts, as also a∣gainst the Gout, apply ' d upon the parts affected. The dose is from half a dram to two drams, in White-wine, or some other Liquor. 
 By the same Method, Oyls may be extracted out of several Fruits of the same nature, and Seeds of like substance; as Pistaches, Pine-apple kernels, the four greater cold Seeds, Kernels of Oranges and Citrons, Sesamum, Palma-Christi-seed, seeds of Piony, Mustard, Hemp, Dwarf-Elder, Henbain, Lettice, Poppy, Carthamum, &amp;c. which have every one their particular vertues, though seldom ready prepar ' d in Shops, but upon occasion. 
 Oleum seminis Anisi per expressionem. Press ' d Oyl of Anniseed. 
 You must be careful to have your Anniseed new, very dry, well grown, and to make it very clean, and to beat it, and sift it through a close Hair-sieve. Take a pound of this Powder, and having fill ' d the hollow of a Plate, that may be set with the brims in the lower part of a Hair-sieve, cover the Plate with the lower part of the Sieve; and keeping one hand upon the Sieve, which must then touch and cover the Plate fill ' d with the Powder, and the other under the bottom of the Plate, of an instant turn the whole so, that the Powder may fall upon the Sieve, and be cover ' d with the Plate; and the same time have a Copper-posnet ready to that bigness, that the bottom of the Sieve may rest within-side, but not go down to the bottom: then put in three pints of water; and having plac ' d the Skillet upon a Furnace, as the water boils, let the Powder of Anniseed receive the vapour for a quarter of an hour, or till the boiling vapours of the water have well penetrated the Powder, and till you can no longer endure the heat of the Plate that covers it: At what time having a strong close Cloth-bag ready, put the powder immediately into it, and having ty ' d the Bag, press it between two hot Plates in a Press, with all the speed and strength that may be. By this means a pound of powder of Anniseed will yield an ounce and a half, and some∣times two ounces of Oyl, very sweet, pleasing, and having the true taste of An∣niseed. 
 The preparation of this Oyl may be seen in a Treatise of Chymistry, which I com∣pos ' d and set forth in another Name, about twelve years since: But I am sure it is not to be found in any Author that ever wrote before; so that I dare pretend to be the sole Inventor. 
 Oyl of Anniseed is very much extoll ' d for expelling Wind contain ' d in the Belly, and for appeasing Colics that proceed from thence: It is proper to strengthen the Stomach, to assist Digestion, and the distribution of the good Juice of the Nourish∣ment to all parts of the body. This Oyl thus prepar ' d, is less subtle, and less pene∣trating, then that which is drawn by Distillation; however, it has less Acrimony, and it may be also given in greater quantity, even to half a dram in Wine, or some other proper Liquor: It may be also apply ' d, by way of Unction, upon the Stomach, Na∣vel, and lower parts of the Belly, in Windy Colics. You may also put a drop or two in Childrens Broth that are troubled with griping pains. 
 Oleum Nucis Moschatae. Oyl of Nutmegs, 
 The Preparation of this Oyl is altogether agreeable to that of Anniseed. So that if you be but careful to chuse full grown Nutmegs, fat and weighty, to sift the Pow∣der through a close Hair-sieve, to follow punctually my Directions for the press ' d Oyl of Aniseed, you shall succeed better then by any other way, and have an Oyl of a very fair colour, and a very good smell; and more by half then from the same quantity of Anniseeds. This Oyl looks liquid and clear as any other Oyl at the time of the Expression, while it is warm; but it coagulates as soon as it is cold, and then appears of a yellow colour enclining to red, and of a solid consistence. 
 I have formerly given a Preparation of Oyl of Nutmegs, according to my method, in a Treatise which I made upon Treacle, where I blam ' d those who following the Precepts of the Ancients, content themselves with heating the Nutmegs beaten, and to press them hot, because that heating cannot be done without a dissipation of the most subtle, most volatile, and most odoriferous part of the Nutmegs, without a re∣markable diminution of some part of the Oyl, and without obscuring and spoiling the colour of it. Nor can I subscribe to those who having plac ' d Oyl of Nutmegs among the Number of press ' d Oyls, would have it prepar ' d without fire; believing that they never consider ' d what they wrote, and because they never prepar ' d, nor ne∣ver saw this Oyl prepar ' d. Others have made use of my method, but to little pur∣pose; but those I let alone. 
 Oyl of Nutmegs is good against all humidities and coldness of the Stomach, and the Noble parts. For by its moderate heat it dissipates and strengthens the parts both at the same time: it stays vomiting, restoring the Stomach and Bowels to their Functions. It is prescrib ' d to correct the stinking of the breath that proceeds from foulness of the Stomach; to help digestion, create an appetite, and excite venereal vigour. It is taken inwardly in meat-broth from six Grains to a Scruple. It is also made use of to anoint the hollow part of the Stomach, having first melted it in a Spoon. To excite Coition, the Natural parts may be anointed therewith. It is also good against cold Fluxes of the Brain, anointing the Temples and Sutures of the head; and against Colicks, anointing the Navel. It is also good for the ground of Balsoms, as well in respect of its odour, as of its vertue to fortifie the Brain and No∣ble parts, or to suppress the vapours of the Matrix. 
 Oyl of Mace, endu ' d almost with the same Vertues, may be also drawn by the press. You may also extract the Oyls of both by Distillation. But I refer these Pre∣parations to the third Part of this Pharmacopoea. 
 Oleum Ovorum. Oyl of Eggs.
℞. Sacchari Candi, ʒ ij. ℞. Sugar-Candy, ʒ ij. Tutiae praeparatae, &amp;   Tutia prepar ' d, and   Stercoris Lacertae, an. ʒ j. Lizards-Dung, an. ʒ ij. Vitrioli albi usti,   White-Vitriol burnt,   Aloes Succotrinae, &amp;   Aloes Succotrine,   Salis Saturni, an. ʒ ss. Salt of Saturn, ʒ ss. 
 Pulverize and mix them all together for a dry Collyrium. 
 Blow the weight of two or three grains at a time into the Eye. It may be also mingl ' d with Ophthalmic Waters for a liquid Collyrium. 
 Lanfrancus uses this Collyrium for the cure of Venereal Ulcers. 
 ℞. Vini Albi, lb j. ℞. White-wine, lb j. Aquarum Plantaginis, &amp;   Waters of Plantain, and   Rosarum, an. ℥ iij. Roses, an. ℥ iij. Auripigmenti, ʒ ij. Orpine, ʒ ij. Viridis Aeris, ʒ j. Verdigreese, ʒ j. Myrrhae   Myrrh,   Aloes, an. ℈ ij. Aloes, an. ℈ ij. 
 Mix them for use. 
 You must be careful in preparing this Collyrium to powder the Orpiment, Verdi∣greese, Myrrh and Aloes, very finely before you mix them with the Liquors. You may also dulcifie the Collyrium with three or four times the weight of Rose-water, Plantain∣water, or Night-shade-water, when it is to be us ' d, especially in injections, for Gonor∣rhea ' s when the venome is over; only take care that the Spermatic Vessels be neither ulcerated nor over-weaken ' d. 
 I pass over in silence several other External Remedies little in use; believing it to be now high time to make an end of these Galenical Preparations, and that I have not forgot any thing which to the best of my Judgment deserv ' d to be taken notice of, or which I may not have occasion to speak of in the next Part. 
 The end of the Royal Galenic Pharmacopoea. THE THIRD PART OF THE Royal Pharmacopoea, CONTAINING CHYMICAL PREPARATIONS. The Order and Method of the Third Part. THE great correspondence between the one and the other Phármacy▪ and the mutual helps which they daily afford each other, oblig ' d me to set down at the beginning of this Work such general obser∣vations as might contribute to the understanding of both; and there∣fore I will only lightly and occasionally touch upon what I believe I have already explain ' d: Only give me leave to make application, and declare the use of the whole, while I speak of Chymical Preparations in particular. 
 Chymical as well as Galenick Pharmacy acknowledges Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals, for the matter upon which all its operations are to be grounded, and of which she prepares Remedies proper for the ease and cure of Diseases. But whereas the Galenick Pharmacy separates those parts which it believes hurtful or unprofitable by ordinary means; and is contented to cleanse, wash, infuse, boil, stamp, or mingle, according to occasion, those parts which it judges to be the best; Chymistry pierces farther into the bowels of mixt bodies, artificially to separate all the parts which compose them; and thus displaying the pure sub∣stances, puts them into a condition to produce with efficacy all that can be ex∣pected from them. 
 This hinders not however, but that in this concord of matter and end, which is found to be between both the one and the other Pharmacy, Chymistry, as much exalted as it is, makes use of the same Instruments and Vessels which the Galenick employs, though it makes use of a great many more; while the industrious discover new ones every day, when they design to make a se∣paration of mixt bodies to the heigth of exactness. 
 I have divided this Third Part into Three Books: In the First, I treat of the Preparation of Vegetals, which are the first mixt bodies that seem to present themselves first to the eyes, upon the superficies of the Earth, which are fa∣miliar to us, and from which we draw abundance of Remedies. I make Ani∣mals the subject of the Second, not only because that being for the most part nourish ' d by Vegetals, their different parts seem in some measure to partake of their vertues, and to impart them to a great number of Remedies wherein they are us ' d; but because we feed upon several of them our selves. I have reserv ' d Minerals for the subject of the Last Book; because that being as it were all hid in the bowels of the Earth, they are not so familiar to us, and require more labour, and a more vehement f , and much more skill than Ve∣getals or Animals. 
 But because my main end is to shew the most f re and easie ways to accom∣plish all Chymical Operations, I will sincerely communicate those which I pra∣ctise every day; and displaying without any reservation Preparations fit to be known, I shall endeavour to explain my self in such so , that apprehending those which I shall give, it may be no difficult thing to perfect others which I may omit; provided you observe the operations of Artists, and want neither Inge∣nuity, Instruments, nor other necessary means. 
 Furthermore, I have this hope, that having founded my Preparations upon Experience and Reason, and having avoided the prolixities of other Authors, there will be no cause to complain of my method, as having fix ' d the vertues, doses, and uses upon the principal parts of which mixt bodies are compos ' d, upon the various alterations which they undergo in Preparation, and the success which I have observ ' d upon several trials which I have made, upon a thousand occasions. 
 The First Book: Containing the CHYMICAL PREPARATION OF VEGETALS CHAP. I. Of the Distillation of Vegetals in general. THE Extent of the Number of Vegetals being no less than that of the Surface of the whole Earth, and their Differences, Form, and Vertues being no less unlimited than their Number, it is no wonder, if Chy∣mistry having labour ' d from time to time to invent what she judg ' d expedient for the preparation of mixt bodies, find continual occasion to put those means in practice, and to add thereto several new ones to obtain its ends. 
 Distillation, as familiar as it is, is one of the principal operations of which it makes use for the separation and purification of the parts of Vegetals, as also of Animals and Minerals. And though the Galenick Pharmacy may have some knowledg thereof, and have made use thereof for a long time for the ordinary preparation of waters, however it cannot boast of having attain ' d the perfection of that operation, no more than of having gain ' d the knowledg of separating and distinguishing the parts that compose the mixt bodies. For not having follow ' d other than the ordinary ways, nor having had recourse to other than the most simple and most common Instruments and means; and neglecting besides those nu∣merous operations of Chymistry, they fail of their purposes, not being able to dissolve those mixt bodies which they submit to Distillation. 
 The reading of Mesues, Avicenn, Serapion, Rhases, and all the ancient Greek and Arabian Authors, will sufficiently justifie these truths, so that we must be forc ' d to confess, that Galenick Pharmacy would soon loose those advantages which it en∣joys, did it not borrow several exquisite preparations from Chymistry. 
 And for as much as the various nature of Vegetals, their different compositi∣on, and the more or less compactness of the parts, constrain the Artist to vary not only his Fire, but the Vessels and Instruments which he makes use of, more especially in Distillation; I will set down the various methods which the Apo∣thecary ought to use; nor will I forget to shew how he is to act when he is ob∣lig ' d to distill several parts of a different substance together, and to mix together some parts of Animals and Minerals. 
 The principal effect of Distillation is to dissolve by heat the fluid parts of mixt bodies, and above all of Vegetals; to separate them from the rest in vapour, and to embody them again, and to cause them to trickle drop by drop from the holes which the Artist has prepar ' d to give them passage forth. Chymistry acknow∣ledges three sorts of Liquors, which it draws from Vegetals by Distillation, the Watry, the Spiritous, and the Oily Liquor. Among which there is sometimes a fourth observ ' d issuing out of certain Plants; that is to say, a volatile Salt. The Watry humour, under the name of Flegm, is easily separated from the other parts of the mixt body, when you move it by the heat of the fire. It is usually most plentiful, but least efficacious; nevertheless it is not to be despis ' d, for besides that it is able to temper the activity of the other substances, it contains some essential parts of the mixt bodies, which it carries with it in Distillation; so that it may be kept sometimes for several months together without corruption, some∣times from one year to another, and produces good effects, as may be observ ' d in the distill ' d waters of Plants, that have neither taste nor smell. The Spiritous part is the most essential part that can be drawn forth by Distillation, and which all Chymistry acknowledges for an active principle, under the name of Mercury. There is usually to be met with, in this Spirit, a kind of acidity, with the scent of the Plant it self. It will keep a long time, and produces effects much more powerful than any that can be expected from the Watry humour. The Oily sub∣stance, which Chymistry acknowledges for one of the active principles, under the name of Sulphur, rises usually in Distillation among the Watry and Spiritous Li∣quors. It is burnable, and swims upon the top of the other substances, when it is pure; but it falls to the bottom when it is laden with any Salt or Terrestrial parts. This substance encloses within it self whatever the Aromatick Plants con∣tain of most vertue. It is of a strong scent, and piercing taste, and may pass for the Quintessence of the Aromaticks. It may be preserv ' d a long time, provided you do not expose it to the injuries of the Air. 
 CHAP. II. Of the Distillation of Roots, and the various sub∣stances that may be drawn from them. WE find some Plants without Stalks, some without Leaves, others without a Flower, others without Seed, and without several other productions, which are reckon ' d to be of the number of Vegetals; but we find no Plant with∣out some Root, from whence all the other parts draw matter for their nourishment, growth, and substence. And we may say, with reason enough, that it is as impossible for them to be what they are without the Root, as for the Root to be what it is with∣out the production of the Seed; at least by some kind of Root able to produce its species, as in those of Saffron, &amp;c. Nor can this Root subsist, nor produce all its parts, without the assistance of the Earth, which serves instead of a Matrix; with∣out the heat of the Sun, which affords it necessary heat; nor without the help of the Water, which conveighs to the Root whate ' re the Earth contains necessary for its subsistance, and for the growth, distribution, and perfection of all its parts. We must be also convinc ' d, that the Root, especially of Herbs that dye every year, can never impart those vertues to the Plant which it does, did it not pos∣sess them before. And therefore there we usually meet with all the principal ver∣tues contracted together, which it is able to impart to the rest of the parts of the Plants; provided you gather them in time, when the Root is fit for pro∣duction, which is at the end of Winter, or the beginning of Spring.
But though these considerations oblige an Artist to a particular esteem of the good parts and qualities which several Roots possess, and to endeavour to make several Chymical Preparations thereof; yet Distillation is one of those operations which it least employs, and which indeed is never practis ' d but upon some Aro∣matick Roots, the principal parts whereof are easie to be drawn forth, and from whence I think it expedient to begin the Examples of Distillation, which I have propos ' d to give in this Work. 
 Distillation by descent is not to be us ' d upon these Roots, for besides that it would consume the best of the substance of the Root; the violence of the Fire would manifestly alter their good qualities. But straight Distillation is to be made use of for this purpose; and you must also make choice of proper Men∣struums and Dissolvents, wherein you may not only dissolve those parts of the Root which are pure and fit to be dissolv ' d, but also cause the vapours to ascend together in Distillation, and then condens ' d into Liquor, to fall down into the Recipient ready prepar ' d. For this purpose you may make use of Cucurbits of Glass, of Potters Earth, or glaz ' d Earth, with Glass-heads, to distill a small quan∣tity of Roots. But when you distill any considerable quantity, you must make use of a Refrigerant, lesser or bigger, or of Vessels of Copper Tinn ' d within, co∣ver ' d with their Moors head, and furnish ' d with their Serpentine, which passes along a Vessel fill ' d with cold water. 
 You must follow the same method for the Distillation of the Roots of Valerian. Masterwort, Angelica, Spignel, the Carline Thistle, and other Aromatick Plants, which are full of odorous, spiritful, and volatile parts, accompany ' d with some Oil, and some volatile and fixed Salt. 
 For example: Take three pound of any one of these Roots dry ' d, and having grosly stamp ' d them, and put them into a great Cucurbit of Glass, pour upon them six pints of distill ' d Time-water, and as much White-wine; having made choice of such a Cucurbit that about a quarter of it may remain empty. Then having fitted and luted on a Glass-head, and a Recipient for the beak of the head, leave them three or four days in digestion, over a very gentle Fire of Embers, or over a Cook ' s or a Baker ' s Oven. After which, having plac ' d the Cucurbit in a Sand-Bath, make your Distillation with a moderate fire; which you must con∣tinue till the Water, that trickles forth, be almost without taste or smell; at which time let the Vessels cool, strain and press out the matters which remain in the Cu∣curbit, and having clarifi ' d the Liquor, evaporate the superfluous moisture, till it come to the consistence of an Extract, which you must keep apart by it self in a Pot close stopt. You may may also dry the sediment, burn it, and reduce it into Ashes, to make a Lye thereof, after you have filter ' d it, and consum ' d all its moisture, to the coagulation of a Salt, to mix and keep among the Extract. You may do well to rectifie the Liquor distill ' d, and in a Bath of Ashes or Sand, with a very moderate heat, to draw out the more subtle Spirit, which will be accom∣pany ' d with some odorous Oil that swims at the top; which you must separate and keep apart, in a little Glass Bottle very well stop ' d, as a very precious Essence. The Water which remains at the bottom of the Cucurbit, being good for no∣thing, may be thrown away. The Extract thus prepar ' d, containing nothing con∣siderable in it self but the fixed Salt part of the Root, all the good parts being ascended in Distillation, cannot alone produce any extraordinary effects; how∣ever it may be of use, by giving it dissolv ' d in its own Spiritful Water, which you may also enliven with its own Spirit, charg ' d with its own volatile Salt, and mix it with some few drops of its own distill ' d Oil, incorporated with a dram of Sugar finely powder ' d, by means whereof you may mingle this or the like Oils with any sort of watry Liquor. 
 The substances which I have spoken of, powerfully resist the putrefaction of humours, and bad Air; so that they are us ' d in all Epidemick distempers, and against the Pestilence. You may mingle and give them together, as I have said already, all these different substances, every one according to their just propor∣tion; according to the nature of the sickness, and the constitution and condition of the Patient. The dose of the Spirit, well rectifi ' d and mingl ' d with its volatile Salt, is from a scruple to a dram. The dose of the Spiritous Water, from two ounces to six, and sometimes eight. That of the Oil, from two to seven or eight drops. And that of the Extract, charg ' d with its fixed Salt, from half a dram to two drams. All these different parts tend to the same purpose, which is to fortifie the Heart, the Brain, and all the noble parts of the Body; to ex∣pel by sweat, or by insensible transpiration, the malignant humours that are ca∣pable of being expel ' d through the pores of the Body. And you shall feel the effects according to the quantity of the dose administred. The Extract is some∣what purgative, by reason of its fixed Salt. For which reason it may be very well mix ' d among Purgers, in sicknesses where the other good parts, that I have spoken of, are useful. 
 You may incorporate the distill ' d Oil with the press ' d Oil of Nutmegs, to make a Balsom to carry in your pocket, in some little Box of Gold, Silver, or Ivory. Giving to the Balsom the name of the Root of the Herb out of which the Oil was drawn; and making use of them not only for their pleasing scent, but also to fortifie the noble parts, especially the Head, by putting it up the Nostrils, and rubbing the Temples and Sutures of the Brain with it. 
 CHAP. III. Of the Distillation of Juicy Herbs, esteem ' d to be Cold. THough we may have some reason to prefer the Juice of moist Herbs, and without scent, before the Water which is to be drawn from them; and that we must confess, that the fixed Salt, which Herbs may have, does not usually ascend in Distillation; yet it would be a difficult thing to be without these Waters, where there is an intention to please those Patients that cannot endure the taste of Juices or Decoctions. Besides, these Herbs are not always to be found, in regard they are dead all the Winter; nor will the juice or decoction keep many days without spoiling, unless you can rid them of their superfluous humidity that causes the corruption, or change their consistency from liquid into thick; or unless you scum, clarifie, and boil them with Sugar or Honey, to keep them like a Syrup. 
 These Herbs are not to be distill ' d by descent, nor side-ways, because that by those ways there could be no reasonable separation made of the pure parts from the impure; and that it would be a hard matter to prevent the latter from run∣ning and mixing with the former. For these reasons we only make use of the streight Distillation, which is only able to raise in vapour the most subtle Liquor of the Herbs, which fails not afterwards to embody in the upper part of the Limbeck, and to descend again, and so trickle into the Pipe which is fix ' d into the Recipient. You must vary your Vessels and your fire according to the va∣rious nature of the Herbs which you distill; for you neither make use of such large Vessels, nor so great a fire, for those that are of a thin substance and cold in their quality, as for those whose substance is thick, and compos ' d of hot parts. We make use for the first of Glass Vessels, or of Vessels made of Potters Clay, and varnish ' d or glaz ' d within. Yet the Distillation may be made in Balneo Mariae, or the Evaporating Bath. But the latter must be distill ' d in Vessels of Copper Tinn ' d; of which there are some call ' d Refrigerants, which above the upper part, that re∣ceives the vapours that the fire sends up from the substances, contain a small quan∣tity of cold water, to condense those vapours, and cause them to descend into the Recipient. The others, call ' d great Vessels, are cover ' d with a Moors-head, so call ' d by reason of its form, to which there belongs a Beak, to which the Serpentine is join ' d, variously writh ' d, which passes along a Tunnel fill ' d with cold water. These great Serpentines are esteem ' d before Refrigerants, because the vapours being rais ' d, meet with more coolness, and are more easily condens ' d, passing thwart such a great quantity of cold water, than if they were only cool ' d by as much water as the Refrigerant could contain of it self. These latter consist of two parts, of which the lowermost, that contains the substances which are to be distill ' d, is round and flat, and not above eight inches high. The upper part made like a Cope or a Judges Hood, proportionable at the bottom to the wide∣ness of the Vessel below, which it ought to enchase, must be wider and more exalted than the ordinary Heads; you must also there fit on and sodder a kind of Box of Copper, higher and bigger, to serve as a Wall, which is to contain a good quantity of fresh and cool water, which environing all the Head, and being emp∣ty ' d and fill ' d from time to time, facilitates the dissolution of the vapours, and prevents the scent of burning too, which the distill ' d Waters easily contract, in those Vessels which are call ' d Rosaries, because the common people use them for the Distillation of Roses; making use for the most part of Leaden heads, not consi∣dering that the vapours rising from the substances, and meeting in the inside of the Head, gnaw and fret off some particles of the Lead, which manifestly change the quality of the Waters that corroded them; the taste whereof is sweetish, and the powder white, which precipitates it self by degrees to the bottom of the Water; and is a certain sign, as well as the tart taste and greenish powder, which is found in the bottom of Waters distill ' d in Copper Vessels not Tinn ' d, that cer∣tain particles of Copper are corroded off, and dissolv ' d in those Liquors. 
 Now for as much as Tin is the only metal able to resist the usual vapours which rise from Herbs in their Distillation, and the only metal that will not be corroded nor dissolv ' d; therefore great care must be taken, to Tin very well the inside of Copper Vessels; and indeed it would do better to make the Head of Lattin, instead of Copper Tinn ' d. Yet a Leaden Head is very pro∣per for the Distillation of Nightshade, Plantane, white Roses, and other such like, which are design ' d for Collyriums, and other outward uses, because the parts of the Lead which join thereto, increase the vertue of the Waters. 
 The heat of the Balneum Mariae, or the Evaporating Bath, being not of force enough to heat the quantity of matter contain ' d in those Vessels, especially in the two first, to make a dissolution, they generally make use of an immediate fire of Coals; but you must be very careful to govern it well; which it is impossible to do, if you have not Vessels proportionable to the bigness of the Vessels that contain the matters; and if you know not how to open and shut the doors and the Regiters just in the nick of time, to augment or abate the heat of the fire upon occasion. Nevertheless, sometimes the Bath of Ashes or Sand will serve turn, under the Rosary, especially when you would distill Herbs entire or chop ' d, with∣out any addition of moisture; or when you would distill the Juice of any Plant, whose cooling quality a fire too violent might chance to alter. 
 The best method of distilling Herbs to purpose, that abound in moisture, is to draw out the Juice and distill that, when you have purify ' d it. It will not be necessary for me to lay down in this place, the method how to draw forth and purifie all sorts of Juices, having already done it in the first Chapter of the Se∣cond Part of this Pharmacopoea, speaking of the Galenical preparation of these Juices. But it may not be amiss to make some reflexion upon the various nature of Juices, which depends upon the nature of the Herbs from whence they are drawn, and to have regard not only to the variety of the substances which compose them, but chiefly to the quantity of those that predominate in every one of them; to fit himself with Vessels, and order his fire in such manner, to the end he may find in the distill ' d Water, that which should ascend by Distillation, and at the same time be master of the Salt parts that usually remain in the sediments of the Juice, or in the setlings of the Herbs from whence it was drawn. 
 You may to very good purpose put into Cucurbits of Glass, or Potters Earth, or glaz ' d Earth with Glass heads, the purifi ' d Juice of the Leaves of the Water-Lilly, the greater and lesser Housleek▪ Wall-Penniwort, Lettice, Garden Night∣shade, and such like Herbs that abound in moisture, have very little Salt parts, and less Sulphury; the Distillation whereof is made in Balneo Mariae, or the Eva∣porating Bath, when you seek rather for the refreshing quality, than the preser∣vation of the Waters distill ' d. But when you would cause the most essential part of those Herbs to ascend by Distillation, then you must make use of the Bath of Ashes or Sand, moderately heated. For by this means the Water rises with some spiritful volatile parts, somewhat saltish, and accompanied with some aci∣dity, which serves to preserve and render it efficacious. You may also search for the fixed Salt in the settlement of the Herbs, to macerate it in their distill ' d Water, though the small quantity you will find is hardly worth your trouble. 
 You may distill also the Juice and also the Leaves of these Herbs entire, or chopt, by a Rosary cover ' d with a head of Lattin, or Copper Tinn ' d, plac ' d in a Bath of Ashes or Sand; and draw off the good Waters, provided you take care to order your fire, in Distillation; and be careful not to roast or scorch the substances when their moisture is almost consum ' d. 
 There is not much difference to be observ ' d in their vertues, no more than in the use of the Waters which are drawn from these Herbs. They are inwardly made use of to allay the heat of Fevers, and asswage the heat of cholerick hu∣mours, as also to provoke sleep, giving from two ounces to seven or eight, alone or mingl ' d with some proper Syrrup, in manner of a Julep. They are also made use of outwardly, as well to cool and smooth the complexion, as to dissipate red∣ness, to cure Erysipela ' s, and to extinguish all manner of volatile fires, and ex∣ternal inflamations. The Water of Garden Nightshade is with good success ap∣ply ' d to the last of these distempers; but it is never taken inwardly, unless in Gargarisms. 
 CHAP. IV. Of the Distillation of Sorrel. THE great affinity which the several sorts of Sorrel have with Herbs al∣ready treated of, may be a reason sufficient enough for you to distill them with the same fire, and to make use of the same Vessels: But because these Plants contain in their Juice an essential Salt, acid, tartarous, more plentiful, but very different from that of the Herbs of which I have spoken in the foregoing Chapter, the separation of which I have omitted, as of which there is no ad∣vantage to be made without a most particular care; it is requisite you should know how to draw forth this essential Salt. 
 After you have drawn forth a good quantity of the Juice of Sorrel, gathered just when it begins to run up into Seed, at which time the moisture thereof is best digested, and the good qualities thereof in their chiefest force; you must puri∣fie the said Juice, and having fill ' d therewith three quarters of several Glass Cu∣curbits, and cover ' d them with their heads, and plac ' d them in a Sand Bath, upon a moderate fire, distill the Water forth till the Juice in every Cucurbit be two thirds diminish ' d. Then letting the Bath cool, and having stop ' d up the distill ' d Water, pour out the Juice that remains in the Cucurbits by inclination into a Linnen Bag, to separate it well from the Feces; and putting the clear Liquor in∣to a clean Glass Cucurbit, cover ' d with its head, make a new Distillation, by a Balneum Mariae, between lukewarm and boiling; which you must continue, till the Juice remaining in the Cucurbit, come to be as thick as the consistence of a Rob; at which time let the Vessels cool, and afterwards carry the Cucurbit into a Cellar or a Vault, where the essential Salt of the Sorrel will christallize in a few days, and stick to the bottom and sides of the Cucurbit. Then by inclina∣tion pour forth into a little Cucurbit, the Liquor that swims above the Salt; and evaporating it in Balneo Mariae, till it prove as thick as the former, put it also into the Cellar to chrystallize. You may dry and keep both the one and the o∣ther in a Glass Bottle well stop ' d, or dissolve them and keep them in the distill ' d Water, to render it of more vertue. You may also, the better to purifie it, dis∣solve it in a quantity of the Water distill ' d; then filter that Liquor through a brown Paper, and having evaporated the Water to the thin skim, by a mode∣rate heat, chrystallize the Salt in a Cellar, put it in a Bottle close stop ' d, and keep it for your use. 
 This Salt contains in it the best and most essential part of the Sorrel. It opens obstructions of the Bowels; it cuts and attenuates thick and viscous humours, and by that means sensibly redresses the distempers of the Liver and Spleen; it ex∣cites an appetite, and helps the digestion. The dose is from half a scruple to half a dram, in its proper Water, or in some Broth. The distill ' d Water is good to cool the heat of cholerick Fevers especially. It is also put into Cordial Waters, and the same dose is given of the Water as of the Salt. 
 CHAP. V. Of the Distillation of hot Herbs, bitter, and without scent; and of some other Preparations that may be made at the same time. YOU may distill Fumitory, Hops, Succory, Blessed Thistle, and other Herbs juicy, bitter, and without scent, proceeding according to the same method as in the Distillation of Sorrel. You may also make use of the same Vessels, and distill with the same fire. But because there is much use made of the di∣still ' d Water of these Herbs; and for that they contain in them a plentiful Salt, between nitrous and tartarous; and for that you may also without altering their qualities, make them endure a hotter fire; you may, to good purpose, make use of a Refrigerant, or a large Vessel cover ' d with a Moors-head, and its Serpentine that runs athwart a Pipe fill ' d with cold water, to distill their Juice, which you must have purify ' d in the same manner as that of Sorrel. 
 But because the essential Salt, which chrystallizes in the Juice that remains at the bottom after Distillation, is usually foul and clouded, as well by reason of the Terrestreities that abound more in these Herbs than in the Sorrel, as by reason of some sulphury particles that accompany those bitter Herbs, especially when they are in their full vertue; you must not only be careful to filter the Juices with all the exactness that you observe in the filtering of Sorrel, but to seek out also other ways to purifie those Salts more perfectly. Wherein, that you may obtain your end, and save the Salt which remains in the sediments of the Herbs, from whence you have drawn the Juice, you must dry that sedi∣ment; then having burnt it, and reduc ' d it to. Ashes, make a Lixivium of the Water distill ' d from the same Herbs, and having dissolv ' d the chrystalliz ' d Juice, then strain the whole through a course Paper. Then putting the filter ' d Liquor into a Glass Cucurbit, with its head, draw forth the Water by a Balneum Mariae, till you observe in that which remains in the Cucurbit, a small film swimming upon the Liquor, and covering it like a little skin. Then give over Distillation, and let the Vessels cool; and after you have let the Cucurbit remain four or five days in the Cellar, pour forth into a little Glass Cucurbit by inclination the Li∣quor which remains; and having again evaporated it to the Pelliculae, dry that Salt with the former, and keep it for use, in some Glass Bottle very well stop ' d, or dissolve and keep it in its own distill ' d Water. 
 The Salt which you draw from the settlement of those Herbs, finding it self depriv ' d of its nitrous volatile part, consum ' d by the Ustion and incineration, con∣tains only the fixed tartarous Salt part. Whereas the Salt which remains at the bottom of the Vessels after Distillation, is equally compos ' d of the nitrous, vola∣tile, and tartarous fix ' d, which are the principal substances of those Herbs. Ne∣vertheless, the conjunction of the fix ' d tartarous Salt of the settlement, agrees very well, being united to the other two, the vertue whereof it sensibly in∣creases.
The Waters of Succory, Hops, and Fumitory are very much commended for purifying the mass of the Blood, and for curing the distempers of the Liver and Spleen, as also those of the Stomach which proceed from the putrefaction of hu∣mours. However they operate with more force when their Salt is dissolv ' d in them. The dose whereof is from half a scruple to half a dram, and sometimes to one dram. The dose of the Water from two to six or eight ounces. The Salt is also sometimes given in Broth, or other Liquors; or else mingl ' d with other Salts, or with Opiates, or with other Remedies. 
 Blessed Thistle abounding more in nitrous sulphury parts, than those Herbs I have mention ' d; the Salt and Water which is drawn from thence, work also more effectually. Now because the more volatile Salt and sulphurous parts of this Plant, easily ascend with the Water in Distillation, and being join ' d therewith, are able to insinuate themselves into all the little Veins and Pores of the Flesh, and to attenuate the gross and thick humours that are contain ' d therein. It is no wonder, that this Water should be every day given to provoke Sweats, and to carry away the subtil humours that accompany Fevers, especially such as are malignant, sending them forth in moist vapours, or by insensible transpiration. 
 CHAP. VI. Of the Distillation of Wormwood. VUlgar Wormwood, which is known for the largest of all, is more bitter than Succory, Hops, Fumitory, or Carduus Benedictus. It abounds more in fix ' d Salt. It contains a sulphury, oily, and somewhat volatile Salt part, which Succory, Hops, and Fumitory have not; and of which Carduus has much less; which cannot be separated to the purpose from the fix ' d parts, but by up∣right Distillation, and after you have added a good fair quantity of common water, or to do better, of its own proper Water. For though you may draw forth the Juice of Wormwood, while it is yet very young, and before it is grown up into Stalks, and then distill it as you distill the Herbs already spoken of; ne∣vertheless, the confusion of the parts, and their defect of digestion, hinder the suc∣cess of the Distillation. Whereas you may bring it to better perfection, if you stay till the Wormwood is grown up into Stalks, and that it is between flow ' ring and seeding; at what time the Plant has made its principal digestions, and is in a condition to afford the Artist all the good parts which he can look for. 
 The most part of the Authors who have wrote of the Distillation of Worm∣wood, advise to make use of Fermentation. But my opinion is, that it is much better to let it alone, because the acid extraneous Fermentative, which you must be oblig ' d to make use of, to procure the Fermentation pretended to, and the length of time which it▪ would take up, would give way to the fixation or dissi∣pation of the chiefest part of the sulphury and volatile parts which you look for; whereas you shall save all, proceeding otherwise. 
 Gather a good quantity of the Plants of Wormwood, about the full of the Moon, when they are between the Flower and the Seed, and after they have se∣parated and thrown off all that they had of hard and woody, weigh them into twelve pounds, bruise them well in a large marble Mortar with a wooden Pestel, and having put them into a large Copper Vessel Tinn ' d within, pour on forty Pints of River-water, heated between lukewarm and ready to boil; or if you would do better, pour on the same quantity of distill ' d Wormwood-water, as hot as the former. Let not the substances take up above two thirds of the Vessel; then place the Vessel upon a Baker ' s Oven, buried in Sand as high as that part which contains the substances; then having cover ' d the Vessel with a Blind-head, and well luted the jointures of both Vessels, leave it there for the space of four natural days; at the end whereof, having unluted the head, and set the Vessel upon a proper Furnace, cover it with a Moors-head with its Serpentine, and make a quick Distillation with Coal, but moderate, and distill it so long till the Water have neither taste nor smell; then letting the Vessels cool, strain and press out that which remains in the Vessel, and having clarify ' d the Liquor with whites of Eggs, and strain ' d it through a woollen Cloth, evaporate the superfluous moisture over a gentle fire, and continue evaporation till it have attain ' d the consistency of soft Electuries, or that of Pills. Then dry, burn, and reduce to Ashes the settle∣ment of the Distillation, and having made a Lixivium or Lye, and separated the fixed Salt by the usual ways, keep it apart, or dissolve it and preserve it in the spiritous Water. You may also rectifie all the distill ' d Water in Balneo Mariae, and receive the spiritous Liquor and volatile Salt, which will first ascend with the oily part; then having separated those two Liquors by a Glass Tunnel, or otherwise, preserve them apart in Glass Bottles well stop ' d. After that, continue the rectification, and receive and stop up the odoriferous and spiritous Water, which will follow the two separated Liquors; casting away the watry and unpro∣fitable part that remains in the Vessel after rectification. 
 The principal vertues which Authors attribute to Wormwood, is to cut and attenuate flegmatick humours that gather in the Stomach, and to assist nature to expel them. It is very proper against diseases of the Liver and Stomach, the weaknesses whereof it corrects, exciting the appetite▪ and helping digestion. It is also good against the Worms, and diseases of the Matrix. And in regard that Wormwood, without any preparation, has all these vertues, we may well believe that the purer parts thereof, which Chimistry undertakes to separate, being de∣liver ' d from the grosser and more earthy, will produce much more efficaciously all the effects that can be expected from it. 
 The same method is to be observ ' d in the Distillation of all other hot Plants, bitter and odoriferous; as also of those which having scarcely any thing of bit∣terness, and containing less fixed Salt, are recommendable for their oily, odori∣ferous, and some volatile Salt parts. 
 CHAP. VII. Of the Distillation of Scurvygrass, Cresses, and other moist Plants, accounted Antiscorbu∣tick. THough the most part of those who have written concerning the Chymical Distillation of Plants, recommend Fermentation to be us ' d to to all Anti∣scorbutick Plants, as well as for Wormwood and the like; and though perhaps I may not be of an opinion contrary to those, who loving tediousness and trouble, think it the best way; nevertheless the desire I have not to waste time, and to avoid trouble, when it may be done with advantage, have oblig ' d me to a method more easie, and which I esteem better. 
 All the World agrees, that Scurvygrass, Water-Cresses, and Garden Cresses, Rocket, Brooklime, and such like Herbs, that have a sharp, picquant, and in some measure Aromatick taste, abound in Spirits and volatile Salts; that those Salts and volatile Spirits are very subtle, and the most essential parts of those Plants; and that the chief design of the Artist ought to be, to separate them from the other parts, and to make good use of them. The subtlety of these good Spirits is the reason why they are so subject to dissipation▪ and that it is so difficult a thing to pass those Plants through all the degrees necessary to Fermentation, without loosing more of the good parts than the Artist, with all his care, knows how to retrieve, after that Fermentation. For which reason, my opinion is, that instead of having recourse to any extraneous matter to advance Fermentation, we ought to content our selves with a proper Menstruum, which by dissolving and then joining themselves to the most essential parts of these Plants, may also carry them away with it in Distillation, without changing their nature, but augmenting rather than di∣minishing their vertue. 
 For the better success wherein, having gather ' d the quantity which you intend of one of these Herbs when it is in Flower, having slightly chopt it, and having put it in a Copper Vessel Tinn ' d within, pour upon it White-wine, as much as will cover the Herbs and three fingers over and above; in such manner never∣theless that the substance shall not take up above a third part of the Vessel; then having plac ' d it upon a proper Furnace, and cover ' d it with a Moors-head well luted, and having its Serpentine to it, running athwart a Pipe fill ' d with cold water, and having also luted the Recipient to it, leave the Vessels in that condi∣tion, without any fire, for twenty-four hours; after which kindle the fire in the Furnace, and having begun Distillation with a continu ' d fire of Coals, so order it, that the drops that trickle down one after another, yet not too fast, may cause the spiritous and volatile parts of the Plant to ascend and distill by degrees with those of the Wine, and that all the fix ' d and particularly the Salt parts may re∣main among the settlement, at the bottom of the Vessel, to be separated after∣wards by straining and pressing the whole sediment; and to the end they may be reduc ' d to an Extract, after you have clarify ' d the Liquor which contains them, and evaporated the superfluous moisture over a very gentle fire. This Distilla∣tion is to end, when the drops that fall are almost insipid, which is a sign that all the spiritous matter is ascended. 
 But to the end you may have the Spirits of these Plants more full of vertue, more pure, and in greater quantity, after you have emptied the Vessel, and set apart that which was contain ' d therein, you shall put into it as much of the same Plant, as at first, and pour upon it all the Water which you have distill ' d, and as much good White-wine as of the same Water. Then having cover ' d the Vessel with his Moors-head and Serpentine join ' d to it, and having luted them as well as the Recipient, proceed by Maceration and Distillation, as the first time. After that, you shall still do better, if after you have set aside the settlement with the former, you put fresh Herbs into the Vessel, and having pour ' d upon them all the spiritous Water distill ' d, you make a new Distillation. For having carefully luted the Vessels, and well order ' d your fire during Distillation, you shall have a Water well charg ' d with the Spirit and volatile Salt of the Herb which you have distill ' d; of which you may afterwards make rectification in a Matras, or large big-bellied Bottle with a long neck, cover ' d with its head and well luted, with a Recipient well luted to it, plac ' d in a Sand Bath under a moderate fire, keeping apart in a Glass Bottle close stop ' d the Spirit charg ' d with the volatile Salt, that ascends first; and keeping apart also the spiritous Water that follows the same Spirit; continuing the Distillation till the drops that fall are almost insipid. As for the settlements, draw from them an Extract, according to the method al∣ready describ ' d. And that you may save all that the Plant has good for any thing, dry the settlement, and having reduc ' d it to Ashes, make a Lye with com∣mon water and filter it, and having evaporated the superfluous moisture, mix the Salt with the spiritous Water distill ' d, or which is better, with the Extract. In regard its principal vertue is to purge away the most gross matter by seige or by urine, for which purpose the fixed Salts principally serve. 
 This Extract is given alone in a Bolus, or dissolv ' d in some proper Liquor, from half a dram to two drams, and also to half an ounce; or else mingl ' d with pur∣gatives, abating the dose of the Extract, and proportionating it to their strength and quantity. 
 The Spirit and volatile Salt of Scurvy-grass, Cresses, and other Herbs of the same nature, and the spiritous Waters drawn off afterwards, are powerful remedies, and very specifick, for the ease and cure of Scorbutick distempers; the cause whereof is attributed to thick and cold Serosities, difficult to be dissolv ' d, which are mingl ' d with the mass of the Blood, and slack ' n its circulation; whence ensue all the noisom symptoms that attend upon that distemper. 
 The dose of the Spirit well rectify ' d, and charg ' d with its volatile Salt, is from half a scruple to half a dram, and also to one dram. The Spirit may be giv ' n in its own proper Water, in Wine or Broth; and the use thereof may be continu ' d as occasion requires, taking it sometimes several times in a day, though in a lesser quantity. The effect of these remedies is to consume and dissipate the most ob∣stinate Serosities of the Blood, either by sweat or insensible transpiration; to pu∣rifie the whole mass of Blood, and restore that activity which is necessary to circulation; to fortifie the noble parts, especially the concoctors of nourishment; and to remove all putrefaction. 
 CHAP. VIII. Of the Distillation of Baume. BAlm is an Herb so pleasing in its scent, and also in its taste, and so recom∣mendable for its vertues, that it well deserves to have its place among the Distillations of other Herbs. The greatest part of those who have written of Distillation, would have some other Liquor mixt with it, by reason of the little moisture it has when it is in Flower; but that would but do it an injury, in regard there is as much moisture in the Plant it self as needs to be desir ' d. 
 You must take care to gather a good quantity of Balm, when it is young, tender, and juicy; to the end you may either extract the Juice by Distillation, as I have already shew ' d, or distill it whole, or chopt in the Rosary, till its moi∣sture be almost all ascended. Either way you may distill as much as you have oc∣casion for, and keep it in Bottles well stop ' d, till there be more Balm in Flower and Seed, which you must bruise in a Marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle, or else cut very small; then having fill ' d the two thirds of a Copper Vessel Tinn ' d within side, pour upon it the distill ' d Water which you have ready, till it swim about three fingers breadth above the Herbs; after which having cover ' d the Vessel with the Moors-head, well luted, and having join ' d to it also its Serpen∣tine and Recipient, after a maceration of twenty-four hours over a very gentle heat, make the Distillation with a continu ' d Charcoal fire; but so order ' d, that the Distillation may be no more violent then I have already prescrib ' d for Herbs almost of the same nature, continuing it till the Water that distills have almost lost its savour and smell. You may also empty out that which remains in the Vessel, and put in fresh Balm; and having separated and set aside that little Oil that swims upon the top of the Water, pour that Water upon the fresh Balm, and make maceration and digestion, as before; by which means you shall have an odoriferous Water, containing in it all that the Balm has of volatile, and most spi∣ritous; and besides that, some little Oil that swims upon the top of it, and which deserves to be preserv ' d with the rest; as well for its pleasant smell, as for the good effects which it may produce, in distempers of the Brain, and in those of the Heart, the Stomach, and the Matrix; as also by reason of the mixture that may be made hereof with the press ' d Oil of Nutmegs, to use instead of a Balsom, like the Oil of Aromatick Roots. It may be mixt from two drops to seven or eight, with some drams of fine powder ' d, to divide all the parts, and make it fit to be mix ' d with all sorts of moist Liquors, particularly with its own Water, as the most proper to second all its vertues. 
 The Water is prescrib ' d with good success in melancholy distempers, in malig∣nant Fevers, suppression of Women ' s Courses. The dose and way to take Balm∣water is the same with the preceding Waters. 
 There may be an Extract made of that which remains at the bottom of the Vessel at every Distillation, proceeding in the same manner as in the preparation of other Herbs; that is, by drying, burning, and reducing to Ashes the sediment, to fetch out the Salt, either to keep it apart, or mingle with the Extract. The Extract is given in the same dose, and serves for the same uses as the former; for in regard it contains only the fix ' d parts of the Balm, it is chiefly proper to fortifie the principal parts, and the parts of concoction, to take away the sharp∣ness of acids, to cut and loosen gross and viscous humours; to resist putrefaction and putrifi ' d humours, which it helps to purge away by stool and urine. 
 CHAP. IX. Of the Distillation of Myrtle Leaves. THey that inhabit the Southern parts of France, where Myrtle grows in great abundance in the Woods, find among that great quantity of Leaves what∣ever is requisite for their Distillation. For they stamp and press the tops in the beginning of the Spring, for the Juice, which they may either distill alone, or with the Leaves bruis ' d. But because in these Northern parts, we have none but what we are forc ' d to plantand bring up with care and industry, which is not enough to afford that quantity which might be desir ' d, we must make use of that little we have, and supply the best we can the defect of moisture, without which we cannot well perfect Distillation. 
 For example, take three pound of the Leaves of Myrtle newly gather ' d, and having bruis ' d them in a Marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle, and put them into a Glass Cucurbit, pour upon them six pints of the Juice of Knotgrass, or Rupturewort, and having cover ' d the Cucurbit with its Glass Cover, luted the joints with Amy∣don, or paste of fine Flower, and fitted the Recipient to its beak, keep the whole in digestion over a Cook ' s Oven, during twenty-four hours; at the end whereof set the Cucurbit in a Sand Bath, and make a Distillation with a moderate fire, con∣tinuing it till the Water have neither favour nor smell; then take care to sepa∣rate and keep that little Oil which swims at the top of the distill ' d Water, and which would be more plentiful in hot Countries.
Could you get another equal quantity of Myrtle Leaves, you might after you had empty ' d and kept that which remains in the Cucurbit, put the fresh Myrtle Leaves in the Room of it, and having pour ' d the distill ' d Water upon them, ob∣serve the same maceration and Distillation as before; and by that means you shall have a Water much more efficaclous, upon which will swim a small quantity of new Oil, which you must add to the former; then draw forth the Extract from the re∣mains, and the Salt from the settlement, after you have reduc ' d it to Ashes, as I have said before; and keep them apart, or mingle them together. 
 The distill ' d Water of the Leaves of Myrtles, is very much commended for weaknesses of the Stomach and Bowels, and the distempers that attend it, as also for spitting and other losses of Blood. It is given either alone from two ounces to six, or else mix ' d with half▪ an ounce of Syrrup of Myrtles, or some other Astrin∣gent. It is also good to close up the natural parts of Women after lying-in, as well taken inwardly as apply ' d by fomentation to the parts. You may re-inforce the Water with a drop or two of its Oil, having incorporated it with a dram of fine powder ' d Sugar. You may also make use of the Oil in Balsoms, which are prepar ' d to comfort and fortifie the noble parts, for the smell is sweet and very Aromatick; you may also make use of it to anoint the parts, having first fomented them with the Water. The Extract preserving in it self the impression of the ter∣restrial part of the Leaves, may produce good effects in all distempers that have need of closing and fortifying. The dose is from half a dram to two drams, either dissolv ' d▪ in its own Water, or in some other Liquor; it may be mingl ' d also in Opiats, or in other Remedies. 
 I believe that these Distillations of Herbs which I have set down, will afford sufficient examples for all the rest, without any necessity of multiplying any more; so that it will be▪ time now to come to the Distillation of Flowers. 
 CHAP. X. Of the Distillation of Flowers in general. FLowers are esteem ' d the fairest production among Vegetals. They are the ornament of Gardens, the delight of the Country, the recreation of the Sight, the desire of the Smell, the hope of the Seeds and Fruits that are to follow, and the substance of several exquisite Remedies, every day prepar ' d by the one and the other Pharmacy. Flowers are those parts of Plants which to us seem to be most pure, which are least charg ' d with earthinesses, and most easie to be dissolv ' d; the different substances whereof Chymistry separates with less trouble and violence. Nevertheless there is more care to be us ' d in Distillation of them, then of any other part of the Plants, in regard their parts are very open, and for that the principal parts are very subject to dissipation; besides, that there are some Flowers that will not endure Distillation at all, nor the least touch of the fire, without a manifest alteration of their qualities, especially those that yeild any sweet odour, which is the thing most carefully to be preserv ' d. For this reason it is, that the Artist ought above all things to dive into the most secret know∣ledg of the parts that compose the Flowers, before he goes about to distill them, to the end he may be able to fit his fire, and to chuse the most proper Vessels and means to separate to the purpose, and at the same time to preserve in their purity the several substances which are to ascend and descend in Distillation, and to save as much as in him lies, the good fix ' d parts, which oftentimes remain at the bottom of the Vessel. 
 We many times make use of the same Vessels for the Distillation of Flowers as for that of Herbs, but because the delicacy of the substance of Flowers, renders them usually more apt to receive the impression of the fire then Herbs are, there is great care to be taken, so to order the fire that it may not alter the good qualities of those which you desire to separate from the rest by Distillation; or that it should not cause to ascend with the good ones those that should stay at the bottom of the Vessels; or least that by too much continuing the fire or aug∣menting it, you scorch the substances at the bottom of the Vessel, and cause the whole Distillation to smell of burning too. For the avoiding of all which incon∣veniences, I will endeavour to shew you the most proper ways. 
 CHAP. XI. Of the several Distillations of Roses. THE different methods which are to be observ ' d in the Distillation of Roses, proceeds rather from the diversity of spirits, places, opportunities, and and means to do it, then from the variety of the sorts of Roses, or the different proportions of the parts that compose them; in regard there is not any sort of Rose which may not undergo all the Distillations which are to be invented or practis ' d upon all the rest. We find in the parts that compose Roses, the five different substances which Chymistry acknowledges to be in the composition of mixt bodies, viz. the Watry, Spiritous, Sulphury, Salt, and Earthy parts. Never∣theless they are variously proportion ' d in every sort, whence proceed the diffe∣rences principally observ ' d in the colour, smell, and savour. For the volatile sub∣stances abound more in some, and the fix ' d in others. The Red Roses, commonly call ' d Provence Roses, abound more in earthy parts, and fix ' d Salt, then all the other Roses. They have also many watry parts that are united to the foregoing, so that the spiritous and sulphury lye very deeply conceal ' d, and appear not till after the watry parts have quitted their station. For which reason, it is not usual to distill these Roses till they have lost their superfluous moisture; and not then neither, without mixing them with other Aromaticks. 
 Pale Roses are they which we most often distill, and upon which we not only practise several Distillations, but also upon which both the one and the other Phar∣macy exercise most preparations, and extract most remedies. They contain much moisture, attended with several volatile spiritous particles, a few salt ones, and some few oily and sulphurous; both the one and the other very odoriferous. They have also less earthy pa then the Red ones, but as much fix ' d Salt; which being united with the more gross sulphury parts, and more deeply lodg ' d, and not having pass ' d the fire of Calcination, which the most part of Salts endure in their purification, purge most gently bad, but above all, flegmatick humours. I have said in the second Part of this Pharmacopoea, speaking of the preparation of Syr∣rup of Roses with Sugar and the Juice of Roses, that in making the decoction in a Glass Cucurbit, in Balneo Mariae, and covering it with a Glass head well luted, you may save then the vapours which rise from the Juice of Roses, which would otherwise dissipate, and draw out a very good Rose-water. But because the Shops have need of a much larger quantity of Rose-water then can possibly be drawn forth this way, recourse must be had to other means. 
 They that will distill Pale Roses, or make any other preparations thereof, must be careful to gather them soon after the rising of the Sun, and if possible, in fair weather, that they may not be charg ' d with any extraneous moisture, and that the several substances that are to be drawn forth by Distillation may be altoge∣ther pure. 
 The most gentle method, but the slowest for the Distillation of Roses so cleans ' d, is to bruise them, and fill about two thirds of a large Glass Cucurbit, and having cover ' d it with its head well luted, to make the Distillation in Balneo Mariae, be∣tween lukewarm and boiling, or in an evaporating Bath boiling, till the Roses are almost dry ' d in the Cucurbit. For by this means you shall have a Rose-water very odoriferous, but a small quantity. 
 You may also put equal parts of Roses stamp ' d and the Juice of the same Roses in one of the same Glass Cucurbits cover ' d with a head well luted, and make a Distillation thereof in a Bath of Ashes or Sand. For by well ordering your fire, especially toward the end, you shall have a Rose-water, at least as good as the first; and from the remains may draw a purgative Extract, as good as any other that may be drawn out of the Rose. 
 And to content those that would preserve the colour of the Roses in the Wa∣ter distill ' d, take a handful of dry ' d shred Provence Roses, and having sprinkl ' d them with never so little good Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol, or the Juice of Limons, fill the hollow of the Canal of the Glass head with it, before you fit and lute it to the Cucurbit; for then by well ordering your fire during the Distillation, you shall have, without changing the good smell, or qualities expected, a Rose-water of a fair colour, and as much or more Vermillion then the Roses from whence they were drawn. By means and ways not much unlike to this, you may in distilling all sorts of Waters of the same nature, give them the colour which you desire; as also, if you please, the scent of Musk, Ambergreese, or any other Aromatick, by pul∣verizing them, and putting them wrapt up in a little Cotton, into the Canal or beak of the head. 
 You may also put into a Rosary of Copper well Tinn ' d, the Rose-leaves, whole or bruis ' d, and add also as much as you please of the Juice of the same sort of Roses, and make the Distillation in a Bath of Ashes or Sand; for then ordering your fire prudently, you shall have an excellent Rose-water. You may also save the Extract, as before. 
 Some Ladies distill Rose-water by descent, with a great deal of ease, spreading the Roses about an inch thick upon a fine Linnen Cloth, ty ' d upon the top of a large Glass Pot, or else of glaz ' d Earth, and applying over it the bottom of a flat Dish of white Lattin, or of some other Vessel of some such kind of substance, pro∣portionable to the extent of the Roses, having the inside of its hollowness cover ' d with Ashes about half an inch thick, and the upper part of the Ashes cover ' d with soft burning Coals. For by this means the heat of the fire penetrating the Ashes and the Dish, and warming the Roses, distills the Water into the Pot. This Water in truth is not so good as that of which I have given you the preparation; nor will it continue so long; and yet it is not to be re∣jected. 
 Some there are that would have the Roses put into a Cucurbit of glaz ' d Earth, and applying thereto a Cover of white Lattin, or Copper Tinn ' d, and pierc ' d with little holes, turn it upside down, and place it in a proper Fur∣nace, and adding a Recipient underneath its orifice, light a fire round about the Curcurbit, and make the Distillation by descent, as we distill Wood. But this is the way to burn the Roses; and the Water would very much want the good qualities which it ought to have. Besides, it would but be an injury to the Distil∣lation, when there are so many better ways, and more to the purpose. 
 They that have need of much Rose-water, may instead of Cucurbits, or Rosa∣ries, distill their Roses in great Vessels of Copper Tinn ' d within, and cover ' d with their Refrigerant and their Moors-head, with a Serpentine running athwart a Pipe of cold Water, proceeding as I have already shew ' d in the Distillation of Herbs; bruising the Roses, and moistning them with the Juice of other Roses, or the di∣still ' d Water which you may have sav ' d the year before, and making Distillation over a continu ' d fire of Charcoal▪ but very moderate. You may also pour the distill ' d Water upon other Roses put into the same Vessel, to make a new Distil∣lation, and also repeat the same operation several times to have an excellent Rose∣water. 
 But because it is necessary for us to employ our greatest care to find out all the good parts of mixt bodies; and for that it is possible, in distilling Roses, to raise a sulphury and inflamable part, and by the same means also a most odoriferous Oil, though not much in quantity; it will not be from the purpose to shew you which way to go about it. 
 For example, take forty pound of Pale Roses cleans ' d, and having bruis ' d them well in a Marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle, and strew ' d the whole quantity by degrees with two pound of grey Salt powder ' d, put the whole, if you can, into a large Pitcher of Potters Earth, or at least into two; and having stamp ' d and crush ' d the Roses into a soft mass, so close as not to be penetrated by the Air, and having so order ' d it, that the Pitchers may be quite full, stop them up with a good Cork stopple cut fit, and clos ' d with yellow melted Wax, to prevent air from entring in; then set the Pitchers in a Cellar five or six weeks; after which, when you come to op ' n them, you shall perceive the Roses to have a kind of a smell of Wine intermix ' d with acid; which is a sign of their fermen∣tation, and of the aptness of the spiritual parts to separate from the terrestrial, and to ascend in Distillation. Then take out a pound of these Roses, and having put them into a Glass Cucurbit, stop up the Cucurbit as exactly as before, and cover it with a Glass head well luted; and having well fitted and luted the Recipient, make a Distillation in Balneo Mariae, between lukewarm and boiling hot, continu∣ing the same till the moisture of the Roses be almost quite distill ' d off. After which, having empty ' d the settlement out of the Cucurbit, put in the room thereof the quantity of seven or eight pound of the Roses enclos ' d in one of the Pitchers▪ and having stop ' d up the Cucurbit as before, and pour ' d upon the Roses the Wa∣ter of the first Distillation, put on the head again, well luted as well as the Re∣cipient, and set the Cucurbit in a Bath of Sand, and with a moderate fire make the Distillation, till the humidity of the Roses be almost all distill ' d. After which, the Vessels being cool ' d, and the settlement empty ' d out, put more sermented Roses into the Cucurbit, and so pour the distill ' d Water upon them, and renew the Distillation till you have no more Roses left. Then putting one part of the distill ' d Water into a Matras with a long neck, cover ' d with its head well luted, and having fitted a Recipient to it, well luted after the same manner, make a rectifi∣cation in Balneo Mariae with a moderate fire; and having distill ' d about the twelfth part, which is the spiritous and inflamable part, put it up into a Bottle very well stop ' d; keeping very carefully apart the Water that remains in the Matras, which will be very odoriferous. Then continue to rectifie, at several repetitions, all the Water distill ' d, and having mingl ' d together all that is ascended of spiritous, make a new rectification in an Evaporating Bath, in a Matras with a long neck perfectly well luted; by this means you shall have an inflamable Spirit▪ which may be call ' d an Ethereal Oil of Roses, charg ' d with their volatile Salt; as much to be com∣mended for its pleasant and penetrating odour, as for its vertues. Add the remains of this rectification to the rest you have made, and keep them together in Glass Bottles well stop ' d, as a Rose-water much better then you can draw forth by ordinary means. 
 Keep these Bottles for some days in the Cellar, where the Oil will ascend by degrees to the top of the Water, and swim above it in little flakes, almost like Snow; whence you may separate it by straining it through a fine Linnen Cloth, and taking up the Oil with a little Silver Spoon. Put this Oil at the same time in a double Glass Bottle well stop ' d, and keep it for your use, returning the Wa∣ter into the Bottles whence you took it out, and stopping them up close again. 
 The dissolution which the Ethereal and inflamable Spirit of Roses makes of the oily parts, during fermentation, and the similitude of the substance between them, is the reason that it unites to it several parts thereof in Distillation; and that you find much less Oil among the Rose-water after rectification, then by proceeding otherwise. And therefore, they that rather desire the Oil, then the inflamable Spirit, will sooner obtain their desire, by re-distilling several times their Rose∣water upon new Roses; for by that means they may separate much more Oil, then from a greater quantity of Roses after fermentation. 
 Some, to extract the ardent Spirit of Roses, content themselves with some days maceration; after which, having added an equal weight of Wine to that of Roses, they make the Distillation. This is truth is a shorter and more easie method. But then the inflamable part of the Spirit must be rather attributed to the Wine then to the Roses; whose Spirit is not able to disingage it self from the other sub∣stances, as not having been sufficiently fermented. Nevertheless this method is not to be rejected for the preparation of the ardent Spirit of several parts of Plants; which loose much of what they have of use, in staying too long for their fermentation; or may be subject to considerable alterations of their qualities, by the addition of other assistants which are made use of to advance fermentation. But for this I think it best to let it alone; provided care be but tak ' n of proceed∣ing as I have directed; because the Roses have in themselves that acid which is necessary to provoke fermentation, without being put to borrow any ascititious ferment, or that there should be any fear of any considerable dissipation of their volatile parts. We must also believe, that that acid having left the proper sub∣stance of the Roses, after it has disingag ' d the volatile Salt and sulphury Spirits from the grosser substances, unites it self strictly to them, and is to be found mix ' d with them, after the separation of the rest by Distillation from the grosser parts, unable to ascend.
The use of Rose-water, both inwardly and outwardly, is so well known, that it is needless to insist upon it. The ardent Spirit of Roses is so odoriferous and so peircing, that one drop alone is enough to perfume a full Glass of common wa∣ter. It is excellent against weaknesses, faintings, and palpitations of the heart. The dose is from three or four drops to fifteen, twenty, and thirty, in its own proper Water, in Wine or Broth, or in some other Cordial Liquor. It is also ap∣ply ' d to the Stomach, to the Region of the Heart, to the Temples, to the Wrists, and to the Soles of the Feet in fainting fits. It is given with success in malig∣nant Fevers. It may be us ' d also to provoke sweat, given in seven or eight ounces of Carduus-water. The Oil works the same effects as the Water; but be not too prodigal of it, because of its rarity. It is giv ' n inwardly, from one or two to five or six drops; being incorporated with some few drams of fine Su∣gar powder ' d, and dissolv ' d in its own proper Water, or in the same Liquors as the Spirit. You may also incorporate it with press ' d Oil of Nutmegs, and make thereof a Balsom of Roses very odoriferous. The Oil and Spirit of Roses are equally use∣ful for men and women; only it must be kept from them who cannot endure sweet smells. 
 You may draw by the ordinary way from the remains of all the Distillations, a purgative Extract; and by burning the sediment, and reducing it to Ashes, extract the Salt to keep it apart, or mingle with the Extract. The dose of the Extract is from half a dram to two or three drams, to be giv ' n either in a Bolus or else in some proper Liquor. It is also mingl ' d with other purgatives, putting in more or or less according to the quantity or dose of those things which you mingle with it. The dose of the Salt is from half a scruple to half a dram, and sometimes one dram, in some proper Liquor. 
 Musk Roses (call ' d Damask Roses), Dogs Rose, White Roses, and all the other sorts, may be distill ' d in the same manner as the Pale Roses; and you may extract▪ from thence almost the same substances; though you may observe in them consi∣derable differences, as well in their quantity as quality, by reason of the several proportions of the parts that compose every Rose, and their several knittings and compactures; the difference whereof is sensibly manifested by the diversity of smell, colour, and form. 
 CHAP. XII. Of the Distillation of Lavender Flowers. THE Flower of Lavender has too little Juice to think of distilling it to the purpose, without adding to it some other Liquor. For what you could draw from thence in a Glass Alembick, or a Balneum Mariae, or in a Ro∣sary in a moderate Bath of Ashes, would hardly recompence the time and trouble you must expend. Only you must be careful in pouring upon the Flowers some proper Liquor, but above all to chuse the Water of the same Flower, which you may have left of the last year; or for wnat of that, some other Cephalick Wa∣ter. 
 Having gather ' d your Lavender upon a fair day, about noon, when it is well in Flower, take only the Flower in the Ear, and so cleanse it, that the hard bottom of the Flower, which helps to sustain and form the Ear, may be taken away, and only the pure Flower remain. For example, take six pound of the Flowers, thus cleans ' d, and having put them into a great Copper Vessel Tinn ' d within, plac ' d in its proper Furnace, and having pour ' d upon them twenty pints of their own pro∣per Water, or some other Cephalick, cover the Vessel with a Moors-head well Tinn ' d within, furnish ' d with its Serpentine Tinn ' d in the same manner, and run∣ning along a Tunnel of cold water; then having luted well all the jointures, and the end of the Serpentine with the Recipient, kindle in the Cinder-place of the Furnace a very small fire, enough only to warm the substances, and to maintain them in their moderate lukewarmness; and having continu ' d them so for three or four natural days, kindle a Charcoal fire in the Hearth-place of the Furnace, so that the Water which distills may fall, not in drops, but in a continu ' d string, till you have drawn out by Distillation about two thirds of the Water which you have made use of. Then let the Vessels cool, and having separated them, and put the Oil that will swim upon the spiritous distill ' d Water into a Bottle apart, and having also strain ' d and press ' d out that which remains in the Vessel, put in again the like quantity of fresh Flowers; and having pour ' d upon them not only the spi∣ritous distill ' d Water, separated from its Oil, but also the Liquors press ' d out of the substances which remain ' d after Distillation, put on the Moors-head again, with the Serpentine and Recipient, and lute them all well, and after a maceration of three or four days, distill off the Water and the Oil as before, and make the same separation. You may also pour the same Water, and the Liquor press ' d from the remains, upon fresh Flowers, if you have them ready, and make a new Distil∣lation, and repeat the same several times. Though it be true, that after two or three cohobations of the Water upon the fresh Flowers, the Water will be charg ' d as much as is necessary with the spiritful parts of the Flowers of Lavender; there being no advantage in these reiterated cohobations, but to draw forth the greater quantity of Oil. 
 You may draw forth an Extract from the remains of these Distillations, pro∣ceeding after the same method which I have already describ ' d. You may also extract a Salt from the sediment press ' d, dry ' d, burnt, and reduc ' d into Ashes, though it will not be very much, no more then in any other odoriferous Cepha∣lick Flowers, which abound more in sulphury and in some volatile Salt parts, then in fix ' d Salt. 
 The dose and use of this Extract and Salt is almost the same with them that went before. The distill ' d Oil of Flowers of Lavender is very much commended for the Epilipsie, Apoplexy, and Palsie, and in general, for all diseases of the Brain▪ giving from two drops to seven or eight, incorporated with fine powder ' d Sugar, and dissolv ' d in its own Water, or in some other Cephalick which may assist its vertues. You may also put it up into the Nostrils, apply it to the Temples, and to the Sutures of the Skull; and also incorporate it with Oil of Nutmegs, and make a Lavender Balsom, to mix with Apoplectick Balsoms, at other distill ' d Oils are mingl ' d. 
 If instead of the distill ' d Water of Lavender, or any other Cephalick, you use the like quantity of good Wine in Distillation of these Flowers, you may draw forth an ardent Spirit very penetrating. 
 CHAP. XIII. Of the Distillation of Flowers of Rosemary. THE Flowers of Rosemary, well cleans ' d from their Cups, and whatever there is of green in the Flower, are of a substance so little compacted, and the parts which you design should ascend in Distillation, are so subtle, so vo∣latile, and so loose from the grosser parts, that I see no reason for those that have allow ' d it the preparation of the Queen of Hungary  ' s Water, which is the most common Distillation of the Flowers of Rosemary, to make a maceration for three days in the Spirit of Wine, or to put themselves to the trouble to seek out Vessels proper for that use, and after that to proportion a fire of digestion, during all that time, seeing that one maceration made in the cool of the morning, in the Cucurbit which you use for Distillation, is of power sufficient to cause the Spirit of Wine to penetrate into the very heart of the Flower; as also for that the volatile parts ascend more easily with the Spirit of Wine. I believe rather that these far fetches about, were only invented to puzzle young beginners, and to make that Distillation seem hard to them which is very easie, especially when you have good Spirit of Wine, and Rosemary Flowers that are every way in their prime. 
 Having caus ' d your Rosemary Flowers to be gather ' d in a fair day, two or three hours after Sun-rising, and having cleans ' d them from all the green part, weigh out four pound, and put them into a large Glass Cucurbit with a strait neck, and having pour ' d upon them six pints of Wine well rectify ' d, after you have press ' d down the Flowers into the Wine, and cover ' d the Cucurbit with its head, lute well the jointures, and place it in a Sand Bath, and having fitted and luted a Re∣cipient to the beak of the head, leave the Vessels in that condition all night long; in the morning kindle a fire under the Bath, and order it so, that while the Spi∣rit distills, the head may not be so much as warm; you may also cover the head with a Linnen Cloth, doubl ' d several times, and dipp ' d in cold Water, and re-dip the Cloth and cool the head from time to time, to hast ' n the dissolution of the vapours that ascend. Continue this Distillation till you have drawn forth about four pints of Spirit, which will be very pure, and charg ' d with the best and most volatile substance of the Flower. Then cool the Bath, unlute the Vessels, and put the distill ' d Spirits into a Bottle well stop ' d; then strain and press forth the Liquors that remain in the Cucurbit; and having clarify ' d the Liquor, and return ' d it into the Cucurbit, cover ' d with its head, and the Recipient ready, renew the Distil∣lation in the same Sand Bath, and continue it so long till you see the Liquor very near as thick as a Rob. After which, having cool ' d and unluted the Vessels, turn out the Liquor into a Pipkin well glaz ' d, and boil it over a gentle fire to the thick∣ness of an ordinary Extract; keep every Liquor apart, the first of which will prove the best, and the most piercing. 
 This is the Spirit to which our Moderns have giv ' n the name of the Queen of Hungary  ' s▪ Water; by reason of the wonderful effects which a Queen of Hun∣gary receiv ' d by it at the age of seventy-two years. This is that Water, the great reputation whereof, and the great vent for it at Paris for many years since, has caus ' d several persons, as ignorant as wicked, to prepare it after their man∣ner, in the Provinces where Rosemary Flowers abound, and where you may have the Spirit of Wine very cheap; and who instead of making use of the Flowers of Rosemary well cleans ' d, as they might easily do, leave a great part of the Herby part, which makes the scent of the Water stronger, but more tart and unpleasing, as well as the taste; and who instead of the Spirit of Wine well rectify ' d, make ordinary Aqua Vita serve their turns; deluding by means of the strong scent of the green parts mingl ' d with the Flower, upon the credulity of persons not able to distinguish the ascititious strong scent from that of the Flowers, which ought to be sweet and pleasant; and imposing the sharp and harsh taste of the same parts for the penetrating taste of the Spirit of Wine well rectify ' d. Neither is it to be wonder ' d at, that these abusers of the people to their faces, should gain so much by this Water, and sell more then they that prepare it with so much fi∣delity and skill, who are not able to sell it at so low▪ a rate, without great loss. 
 The Spirit of the Flowers of Rosemary well prepar ' d, is good against all cold distempers of the Brain. It is also an excellent remedy against the cold diseases and affections of the Nerves and Joints, against Rheumatisms and cold Gouts. It dissipates the pains of the Head caus ' d by Flegm, dissolves the vapours that cause Vertigo ' s, fortifies the memory, helps deafness and noises in the Ears, as also weakness of sight. It heals contusions of the Head and all parts of the body, and prevents the coagulation of the Blood in those parts; dissolving the coagu∣lation, and causing it to transpire. It asswages the Tooth-ach, it fortifies the Sto∣mach, preventing the looseness and weakness of that and of the Bowels, by ta∣king away the sharpness of the acids, which are usually the cause thereof. It creates an appetite, helps digestion, and opens obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and all the Bowels, as also of the Matrix, the vapours whereof it suppresses. It claims a power to preserve and revive the natural heat, and to restore the functions of all the parts of the body, and to make old men young, that is to say, to ease them of a great many of those diseases that attend upon old age. 
 It is giv ' n inwardly from a scruple to one dram, in Wine or some Cephalick Water or Cordial. Some drops may be snufft up into the Nostrils, lay ' d to the Temples, and to the Sutures of the Skull. It is apply ' d upon contusions by the means of little pillows dipt therein. It is apply ' d to Rheumatisms, and to all sorts of pains and defluxions, as also about the Eyes to fortifie the sight, and dropt into the Ears for the cure of such distempers as happ ' n therein. It is made use of to wash the Face, the Neck, the Arms, the Hands, alone or mix ' d with the Water of wild Tansie, Lillies, Water-Lillies, the Spawn of Frogs, and such like, to preserve the complexion of the Beauty, and prevent wrinkles. In short, there is hardly any remedy is to be found, that produces so many and so good effects, as this Spirit. 
 The Liquor which is press ' d forth and distill ' d, not possessing the more volatile parts of the Flower of Rosemary, which the first Distillation has tak ' n away, and finding it self charg ' d with the watry part which ascends with the Spirit of Wine that remains at the bottom of the Vessel, is neither in truth so pure, nei∣ther has it the same vertue as the first Spirit. But it deserves to be preserv ' d, in regard it also contains several parts less volatile of the Flowers, which the last Spi∣rit of Wine carry ' d with it, and which may produce good effects, by staying lon∣ger in the Stomach then the former. It may serve for the same uses as the former, especially inwardly; but then the dose must be doubl ' d, by reason of the watry part which is mingl ' d with it. There may be also an Extract prepar ' d of the Li∣quor which remains, which is very serviceable in Cordial, Stomachical, and Ce∣phalick remedies, giv ' n in the same dose as the other Extracts. 
 You may distill the Flowers of Petty Mugget, Sage, the Line-tree, French La∣vender, and the like, proceeding according to the same method set down for the distilling of Rosemary and Lavender Flowers. 
 CHAP. XIV. Of the Distillation of the most odoriferous Waters which are to be drawn from the Flowers of Ve∣getals. THE methods which I have set down for the Distillation of the several parts of Plants, are much better then any of those which Chymistry usually puts in practise. But in regard the Commands of Monsieur D ' Aquin, First Physitian to the King, have engag ' d me to communicate to publick, several things which I thought to have reserv ' d to my self, I freely impart what I have found to be best and most curious in these particulars. 
 You must be careful to distill Dew in its season, and keep the spiritous Water in a Bottle well stop ' d. You must be careful to gather together in the month of May or June, in fair weather, good store of Cows-dung or Ox-dung, dry ' d of it self in the meadows, where those creatures have been seeding. This Dung con∣tains in it the first principle of the Herbs which the Oxen or Cows have eaten; but it has lost the seminal vertue; the smell thereof being somewhat like the smell of Musk. The use thereof is well enough known, since the▪ Water has been di∣still ' d from time to time, and goes by the name of the Water of a thousand Flow∣ers, because of the great number of Herbs and Flowers that were in the first mat∣ter of the Dung from whence it was distill ' d. Make choice in their season of such Flowers as you would distill, and having laid them in beds or layers in a great and large Cucurbit, with equal portions of this Dung dry ' d and pulveriz ' d, and having water ' d every layer one after the other, with the spiritous Water of Dew, and continu ' d the watring and the stratification till the substances take up almost the half of the Cucurbit, cover it with its Glass-head, and having carefully fitted and luted it, together with the Recipient to its beak, make a Distillation thereof only by the heat of the Sun in the Summer, till the moisture be almost all distill ' d out. Then about midnight, or at least two hours before Sun-rising, unlute the Vessels (the choice of this time being absolutely necessary, if you intend to pre∣serve a good odour in the Water); and having at the same time got ready new Flowers in another Cucurbit of the same likeness, and pour ' d the distill ' d Water upon the Flowers, put on the head, and after you have well luted it, as well as the Recipient, make a Distillation thereof in the Sun, as at the first time. Then unlute the Vessels in the night, cohobate or sprinkle the distill ' d Water upon new Flowers, till the Water be perfectly odoriferous. You must so order it, that nei∣ther the head nor the Recipient may be expos ' d to the Rays of the Sun during Distillation, and that only the Cucurbit may be hot. You must also cover the head with a Linnen Cloth, several times doubl ' d, often dipp ' d in cold water, to advance the▪ dissolution of the vapours that ascend with the matters. Cows-dung and Spirit of Dew, are very necessary in the first Distillation of Flowers, but not in the latter. And in case it be a difficult thing to have the heat of the Sun so strong, as in some Northern Climates it may fall out, there an Evaporating Bath must serve turn, or a Bath of heated Air, if you have the convenience. By this means you shall have Waters perfectly odoriferous; of which one ounce will afford more good scent then ten times as much of those that are distill ' d the ordinary way. 
 CHAP. XV. Of the Distillation of ardent Spirits very odorife∣rous, which may be drawn from odoriferous Flow∣ers and Herbs. WE must believe, that though the Flowers have in themselves those advan∣tages which we do not observe in other parts of the Plants which pro∣duce them, they are nevertheless very subject to dissipation, by reason of the tenuity of their substance. And though we may in some measure reap the advantage of their good scent, and of many other excellent qualities which they contain, by the several helps of Chymistry daily practis ' d. However it is a very difficult thing to draw from all sorts of Flowers ardent Spirits well scented, if you do not search in the Plant it self for the basis and foundation of the odour of the Flower; and if you make not use of fermentation, which is as it were the Soul of the Spirits of Vegetals, as putrefaction is the Soul of their Oils. 
 You must add to wild Roses their fruit call ' d the Hep, containing the Seed; and to the manur ' d Roses theirs, well bruis ' d. To the Flowers of Sage, Rose∣mary, Marjoram, Mint, Betony, Balm, Lavender, Thyme, French Lavender, Gil∣low flowers, Violets, Jelsomine, &amp;c. their Seeds well bruis ' d. To the Flowers of Lillies, Flower-de-luces, Piony, Angelica, &amp;c. their Roots and Seeds bruis ' d and stamp ' d. To the Flowers of Oranges, Limons, and Citrons, the Fruits well stamp ' d. To the Flowers of Petty Mugget and Elder, their Berries well stamp ' d. 
 There is no necessity to add any moisture of another nature, to any of these, which have moisture enough in themselves, or in their Fruits or Berries. But there is a necessity of adding a little Spirit of Wine, or some other Liquor, as also a little Leaven of Bread or Yest, when the Flowers mingl ' d with the Seeds have not moisture enough in themselves to make up a mass reasonably soft, and fit to be fermented. To accomplish your design therefore, you must stamp the Flowers with their parts which are to sustain them, and be as it were a foundation to them; and if they be but soft enough to be penetrated by the acid ferment, which na∣turally breeds therein, put them into a great Pitcher of Potters Earth, and fill it well, often pressing and squeezing the substance down; but if the mass be not soft enough, add to it a little Wine, or Water of the Flower distill ' d the ordinary way▪ having first steep ' d a little Leven therein to hast ' n fermentation; then having carefully stop ' d the Pitcher with a Cork and yellow Wax melted, give it time to ferment, which will dispose the spiritous parts to separate from the gross; and when the Spirits have attain ' d a kind of scent like Wine, and somewhat sowre, make the Distillation thereof in Balneo Marioe, in a Glass Cucurbit, cover ' d with a well luted head, and receive the ardent Spirit into the Recipient, after you have fitted it and luted it well. By this means you shall have an ardent Spirit, extraor∣dinarily charg ' d with the odour of the Flower; which you may afterwards distill, if you please, upon new Flowers, without the addition of other parts, and keep it a long time in its perfect goodness, in a Bottle very well stop ' d. Roses afford so great a plenty of odour, that it is no wonder, that a man need take so little care for the conjunction of the parts, of which I have spok ' n, for the Distillation of their ardent Spirit. But though you may draw from them that Spirit, proceeding as I have said when I have spoke of their Distillation, yet that Spirit will be more powerful and more plentiful by adding their Hep to them.
But because it is not always possible to have ready▪ the Seeds, Berries, Roots, and other parts of Plants, which may serve as a foundation for the Flowers which you intend to distill, you must have recourse to some extraneous substance, though homogeneous, which joining its Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury to the Flowers, may retain and unite to it self their odour, and whatever they have of sulphury and inflammable, by means of the fermentation; and which serving them for a founda∣tion, may afford and join its Spirits to those of the Flowers in Distillation. 
 Manna, Sugar, and Honey are equally proper for these uses. You may make use of that which you have next at hand. The proportion must be one part of one of the three, to six parts of the Flower, out of which you would extract the in∣flamable Spirit. You may make an exact union, by adding also, if it be necessa∣ry, a small quantity of some other liquor, and a little Leven, proceeding over and above in the same manner for fermentation and Distillation of the Flowers with the Seeds and other parts of the Plants, according to the method already prescrib ' d. You must be careful to lute exactly the jointures of the Vessels, as well in fermentation as in Distillation, to save all the Spirits. You may do well to distill them also upon new Flowers, to the end they may be the stronger in scent and other good qualities. 
 You may according to this method, draw forth the odorous and inflamable Spi∣rit from all sorts of Aromatick, as also from all odoriferous Plants. 
 CHAP. XVI. Of the Distillation of Seeds and Berries; and in the first place of Anniseseed. GEnerally we make Infusions and Decoctions, rather then Distillations of most Seeds, which being accounted cold, or at least temperate, abound in wa∣try and muscilaginous parts, dissoluble in homogeneous Liquors, or which have a superfluity of oily parts accompany ' d with an aquosity, which may easily be separated from the grosser by expression, and without fire, extracting the emul∣sion thereof with proper Liquors. We acknowledg the Seeds of Mallows, Marsh∣mallows, Quinces, Fleawort, &amp;c. to be watry muscilaginous Seeds; those of Cu∣cumbers, Melons, Gourds, Lettice, &amp;c. to be oily. Sometimes we squeeze out an Oil by expression from hot Seeds. But not to speak of preparations here, which I have spok ' n of in the Galenick part, I will only shew you the Chymical Distil∣lations of the most principal Seeds, beginning with Anniseseed. 
 You may proceed several ways to the Distillation of Anniseseed, according to the different intentions which you propose to your self. For sometimes it is enough to mix two or three pound with fifteen, twenty, or thirty pints of Aqua Vitae, and to make a simple Distillation by a Refrigerant, or in a Vessel of Copper Tinn ' d, cover ' d with a Moors-head, and fitted with a Serpentine, to have a Spirit of Wine strong of the Anniseseed, which is call ' d Anniseseed-water. But if you desire to have by the same Distillation, the Water, Spirit, and Oil, charg ' d with their vo∣latile Salt, you must proceed thus: 
 Take for example, twelve or fifteen pound of Anniseseed, while it is yet green, or at least the greenest you can get; and having bruis ' d it, and put it into a great Copper Vessel well Tinn ' d within, pour upon it Rain or River-water, or which is better, distill ' d Anniseseed-water, till it swim above the Seed four good fingers breadth. At the same time, place the Vessel upon its Furnace, and having cover ' d it with its Moors-head, and fitted and luted on the Serpentine, crossing a great Pipe full of cold water, and also fitted and luted a Recipient to the Serpentine, kindle a small fire in the Cinder or Ember-place, enough only to heat the substances never so little, and only to cause the Water insensibly to penetrate the substance of the Anniseseed. Continue this heat for the space of three natural days, to make a kind of putrefaction of the Anniseseed. After which, having kindl ' d a fire in the Hearth-place of the Furnace, begin your Distillation, and continue it with a mo∣derate fire, till two thirds of the Water be distill ' d off, which you put with the Anniseseed into the Vessel; at which time take away the fire, and having unluted the Recipient, and separated and set apart in a double Glass Bottle well stop ' d, the Oil that will swim upon the spiritous Water distill ' d; when the substances are cold, empty the Vessel, and strain and press out the remainder. Then, having put into the Vessel as much more bruis ' d Anniseseed as at the first, and pour ' d the distill ' d Water upon it, and the Liquor press ' d out of the remainder; cover, lute, and fit the Vessel, Serpentine, and Recipient, as before; and proceed in all things as in the first Distillation; and separate the Oil from the spiritous Liquor. You may pour the distill ' d Water and Liquor upon the new Anniseseed; repeating the same as often as you find it convenient. For by this means you shall have as much more Oil, and a spiritous Water more plentifully charg ' d with the scent and good qualities of the Anniseseed. 
 The reiterated sprinkling of the distill ' d Water upon the new Seed, is that which makes more Oil then you would have by the sprinkling of new Water, which would always retain to it self some little quantity. Nor would it be amiss to take the same course upon other occasions. Nevertheless you may, if you please, se∣parate that little Oil from the Water distill ' d, by putting it in a double Glass Bottle very well stop ' d, and exposing it to the hot Sun for some days. For by this means that portion of the Oil which is mixt among the Water, and gives it a whitish co∣lour, will ascend to the top of the Water, and gather together at the neck of the Bottle, from whence you may separate it. 
 Some there are, that mingle an ounce of Niter, or Sal Tartar, or raw Tartar in powder, with every pound of Anniseseed, when they go about to distill it; pre∣tending this way to get more Oil. But they that consider the aptness of Oils to join themselves to the fix ' d Salts, as you may observe in the making of Soap, may well think, that these Salts, not being able to mount, fail not to retain to them∣selves some part of the Oils; so far are such practitioners from obtaining a larger quantity of Oil by that device. 
 And because we distill Anniseseed rather for the Oils sake, then for its other good parts, you may draw forth more then is usual, by putting the Anniseseed bruis ' d, with its Water distill ' d, into a Glass Cucurbit, cover ' d with a strong Ves∣sel well luted, and placing the Cucurbit in Horse-dung, as high as the substances, leaving it there for fifteen days, or three weeks. For by the putrefaction which will happ ' n to the Anniseseed, the oily parts will be better separated, and you shall have more Oil then by any other way. 
 The Oil and spiritous Water of Anniseseeds is very much commended in all cold distempers of the Stomach and Bowels, and particularly in windy Cholicks; it is no less commended for the creating an appetite, and helping digestion. It is very successfully us ' d in distempers of the Breast, when there is any occasion to cut and loosen the viscous Flegm that sticks to the Lungs. They are also very proper to increase milk in Nurses, to dissipate the wind of Dropsies, to stay the irregular motions of the Matrix, and to facilitate the Birth; to asswage the sharp pains of little Infants, and to ease the pains and noises in the ears, proceeding from wind and cold humours. The Oil is given in its proper Water, from two drops to seven or eight; being incorporated with powder ' d Sugar. The Stomach or Navil may be anointed therewith; it may be dropt into the Ears, mixt with Oil of sweet or bitter Almonds, or with some Cephalick Water. 
 The Seeds of Fennel, Caraways, Cummin, Dill, Hartwort, Smallage, Bishops∣weed, and the like, may be distill ' d the same way as Anniseseed; and you may draw from every one, according to its kind, substances not much unlike to those which you draw from Anniseseed. But you must expect less Oil; the chief rea∣son whereof is, because you never make use of these Seeds when they are green, but when they are dry, and sometimes very old. 
 CHAP. XVII. Of the Distillation of the Seeds of Scurvygrass, Mustard, and Cresses. IT is not to be wonder ' d at, that the Spirits, Oil, and volatile Salts of Plants, ascend usually one among another in Distillation, in regard they have very much affinity and aptitude to join together, and that it is also impossible to separate them in such manner, but that they will retain some particles the one of the other; besides, that there will be some Flegm mixt among them. The vola∣tile Salt, more especially, is ofttimes so intermix ' d with the other substances, that it is a very difficult thing to part it; or discern it either, unless it be very plen∣tiful, and manifest it self by the smell. Sometimes there is so small a quantity in several watry Herbs, accounted cold, that there is no way to discover it, much less to separate it. You may observe in the Distillation of several hot Seeds, particularly of Spoonwort or Scurvygrass, Mustard, Cresses, and such like, the mix∣ture of their Oil, Spirit, and volatile Salt; which are their most considerable parts. You may also make a separation thereof, but not purifie them so, but that there shall remain in every one of them some particles of one another. So that it is no great difficulty to understand the parts that predominate in those Seeds, because that while you champ them, they fill your Palat with their piercing and penetra∣ting parts; which are the certain evidences of their volatile parts, more especially of the salt and sulpury, that are so smart upon the sense of smelling, and ascend to the Brain with a more than ordinary violence. 
 Several ways are to be us ' d for the Distillation of these Seeds. For some, after they have well bruis ' d such a quantity of Seeds, as they intend to distill, and have fill ' d therewith two thirds of a large Pitcher, made of Potters Earth, pour upon▪ It Rain or River-water lukewarm, till it swim two or three fingers breadth above the Seed; then having stopt the Pitcher exactly, they set it three natural days upon a Bakers Oven, there to ferment; then having pour ' d it all out into a Cop∣pel Vessel Tinn ' d, with all the jointures of the Moors-head, Serpentine, and Re∣cipient well luted. They make a Distillation thereof, over a moderate fire: And in the first place, they draw forth the Spirit, Oil, and volatile Salt, mix ' d toge∣ther; together with a little Flegm, which they will raise along with them; then continuing the Distillation for some time, they draw forth a Water yet more charg ' d with the three principles, very proper not only in Scorbutick Distempers, but also to pour again upon more new Seeds, to make a new Distillation. They separate the Oil, and keep it apart in a double Glass-Bottle well stopp ' d; as also the Spirit, which is well laden with the volatile Salt, of which the Oil also is not unpro∣vided. 
 Others pour good White-wine upon the bruis ' d Seed, instead of Rain-water or River-water, and giving the Wine but just time to penetrate the Seed, they only make a maceration from the cool of the evening till morning; then they distill the whole, as before. 
 Others having well bruis ' d one sort of these Seeds, and put them into a Glass Cucurbit, they pour upon them the Spirit of Wine well rectify ' d; then having cover ' d it with its head well luted, and fitted a well luted Recipient to the beak, they make the Distillation thereof in Balneo Mariae, or else in the Bath of Ashes, with a moderate fire; and they draw out an Oil and a Spirit very penetrating, and very strong of the volatile Salt of the Seed. 
 But these Seeds may be distill ' d to very great purpose, without any addition, and without bruising; by filling therewith two thirds of a Cornute or Retort of Potters Earth or Glass luted; for having plac ' d it in a Furnace of Reverberation cover ' d, and having fitted and exactly luted a Recipient to its beak. The Distil∣lation may be made by a gradual fire, very small at the beginning, but augmented by degrees, for ten or twelve hours together, to extremity of heat. By this means you shall find in the Recipient, the Oil, Spirit, volatile Salt, and Flegm mingl ' d together, which you may afterwards rectifie in a Bath of Sand, with a moderate fire, in a Mattras with a long neck, cover ' d with its head exactly luted, and furnish ' d with a small Recipient fix ' d to it in the same manner. By which recti∣fication the volatile Salt will mount first, and coagulate like a white Chrystalline substance; from whence you may take it out if you please, unluting the head, and putting another luted in its place, and shutting up the Salt with great care and speed into a strong Glass-Bottle, so stop ' d that no part of it may exhale, nor the moisture of the Air dissolve it into Liquor. Then go on with your rectifica∣tion, separating and keeping apart the Spirit charg ' d with the volatile Salt, which will always ascend first, as well as the volatile Oil, which will swim at the top, while the greatest part of the watry substance remains at the bottom of the Mat∣tras, with the thickest and grossest part of the Oil, which may be thrown away by reason of its thickness and ill smell, though it may be well enough outwardly apply ' d against cold pains. 
 It will be needless for me here to set down the vertues, doses, and uses of the Spirits, volatile Salts, and Oils drawn from the Seeds, no more then those of the spiritous Waters which follow in Distillation; in regard the same proportion will hold which I have already set down, speaking of substances, almost of the same na∣ture, drawn from Scurvygrass. Yet I may say, that there is something to be got from these Seeds, better digested and more subtle then that which you can draw out of the Herbs, which have not attain ' d to the perfection of Seeds. We ought to believe also, that the Spirit, volatile Salt, and Oil of these Seeds, may produce good effects in all manner of cold diseases of the Brain, and in those of the Nerves and Muscles, as also in Palsies. In which cases, you may not only use with success, in anointing the parts, the rectify ' d Oil, but also that which was never rectify ' d, and apply it either alone, or mix ' d with Ʋnguentum Martiatum or Human Grease, or with Oil of Vipers, or the Philosophers Oil, Oils of Lawrell, St. Johnswort, and the like. 
 Some use Leven to advance the fermentation of these Seeds. But there is no need of it, by reason of the abundance of subtle parts whereof they are compos ' d, and their great inclination to quit the terrestrial parts, which are not many. 
 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Distillation of Elder-Berries. I Do not undertake to speak here of all Preparations that may be made of the greatest part of the parts of Elder; nor to give this shrub all the Encomiums it deserves, of which several others have sufficiently discours ' d. For, not be∣ing willing to depart from my subject, I shall only content my self here to set down the particular Distillation of the Berries, and the way to save all their parts. 
 Having caus ' d a good quantity of Elderberries to be gathered when they are full ripe, and having cleans ' d them and bruis ' d them, press out the Juice; and having fill ' d therewith a little oaken Barrel, set it in the Cellar to ferment: as if it were Wine. And then when you perceive that the Juice has acquir ' d a winish odour, somewhat intermixt with acid, tap the Barrel a little above the Faeces, and having drawn out the clear juice, put it into a Copper Vessel Tinn ' d within, and having cover ' d it with a Moors-head well luted, and having fitted to its beak a Serpen∣tine luted, crawling along a Pipe fill ' d with cold water, and a Recipient at the end of the Serpentine, make the Distillation with a moderate fire; and keep apart the ardent and penetrating Spirit, which will first ascend, till you have di∣still ' d about two thirds of the Juice which was put into the Vessel. At which time give over the Distillation, and put up the distill ' d Spirit very close; and then having cool ' d the Vessels, pour out by inclination into a woollen Bag, the Juice that remains in the Vessel, to separate it from the sediment. Then, putting the clear Liquor into an Earthen Pipkin glaz ' d within, evaporate the superfluous moisture over a very gentle fire, which you must continue till the Juice be as thick as an Extract, which is to be put up into a Glass Pot well cover ' d.
In the mean time take care to expose to the Sun, or to the Air, the sediment of the Berries, to separate the Grains, which you may make good use of by stamping them, and pressing out an Oil proper to provoke an easie vomit; which may be given from half a dram to a dram and a half, in Broth, in Beer, or in any other proper Liquor. 
 The Spirit of Elder is very much commended against cold distempers of the Brain. It is Diaphoretick; it purifies the mass of the Blood, and facilitates circu∣lation; it resists the putrefaction of humours, and expels the malignity of Fevers and Poyson. It eases those that are troubl ' d with the Gout and Dropsie. It opens the obstructions of the Matrix, and suppresses the vapours thence arising. It is gi∣ven in its own proper Water, or in some Water of the same nature, from half a dram to two drams. The Extract may be also giv ' n in the same dose▪ in Bolus or dissolv ' d in its own Water, or mingl ' d with the Spirit, for the same distempers for which the Spirit it self is commended. You may also burn and reduce the sedi∣ment to Ashes, and extract a Salt from it, to mingle with the Extract, or to dis∣solve in the distill ' d Water, to augment its vertues. You may also make the same preparations of the Berries of Dwarf-Elder, or Danewort. 
 CHAP. XIX. Of the Distillation of Juniper -Berries. THE Berries of Juniper, being of a substance that contains not much of moi∣sture, you cannot draw forth the Juice to distill, as you do from Elder-Berries. Whence it comes to pass, that you must have recourse to some foreign moisture, and to vary your method according to the several substances which you desire to draw from thence. For if you have a design to raise an ar∣dent Spirit from these Berries, you must cause them to undergo a fermentation; and also add a small quantity of Leven, Honey, Sugar, or Manna, to the Liquors necessary for the requisite dissolution and separation of the subtle and volatile from the gross parts. But this is to be consider ' d, that while you excite and cause this ardent Spirit to rise, you shall not compass so much Oil as otherwise you might do, because the fermentation carries the greatest part of it into the ardent Spi∣rit. Nor is there any doubt to be made, but that the Leven changes the nature and qualities of that which remains after Distillation; so that the Extract drawn from thence, will not be so well qualifi ' d. But because the vertues expected from the ardent Spirit will be much inferior to those which you will meet with, by proceeding otherwise in the Distillation of the Berries; and for that by using a small quantity of Spirit of Wine instead of Water, you may with more ease ex∣tract a Spirit as subtle, and of as great vertue, as that which is to be expected from fermentation; I think it the better way to follow that method. 
 Take five or six pound of Juniper-Berries, fully ripe, and full grown; and ha∣ving bruis ' d them in a Marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle, fill up the best half of a Glass Cucurbit; and having pour ' d upon them the Spirit of Wine well recti∣fy ' d, till there remain but one third part of the Cucurbit empty, cover it with a Vessel of Rencounter, and having perfectly luted the jointures, put it in Sand, or upon a Bakers Oven, and leave it there for three natural days, which will suffice for the penetration of the Wine into the Berries, and for the dissolution of their most volatile parts; then having unluted and tak ' n off the Vessel of Rencounter, and in its place luted on a head upon the Cucurbit, and fitted a Recipient to its beak, make the Distillation in a Sand-Bath, with a moderate fire, and you shall have a subtle inflammable Spirit, charg ' d with the best and most volatile parts of the Ju∣niper-Berries. 
 But you shall do better, and save at the same time all the best parts of the Juniper-Berries, proceeding after this method: After you have bruis ' d a good quantity of these Berries, and fill ' d about the two thirds of one or more large Pitchers of Potters Earth, pour in water between lukewarm and boiling hot, and stop them up well; and having let them stand eight days upon a Bakers Oven, make the Distillation in a Copper Vessel Tinn ' d within, and cover ' d with a Moors∣head carefully luted, having both the Serpentine and Recipient join ' d to it; pro∣ceeding in the same manner as in the former Distillations; and continuing the Distil∣lation till the Water that distills be almost insipid. By this means you shall have a Water charg ' d with the volatile Salt and spiritous parts of the Berries, accom∣pany ' d with a volatile Oil, white and odorifereus, which will swim at the top, which you may separate by a Cotton-week, or by a Tunnel, or by some other Vessel proper for these separations, and keep apart in a double Glass Bottle well stop ' d. You may, if you please, rectifie the Water in a Sand Bath, in a Cucurbit of Glass cover ' d with its head well luted, and cast away the part which is purely watry, which remains at the bottom of the Cucurbit after Distillation; or else pour upon new Berries the Water of the first distilling, and repeat maceration and Distillation as before. And by this means you shall have more Oil, and the Wa∣ter will be more spiritous, and more abounding in volatile Salt. 
 But for as much as all the good parts of the Berries do not ascend in Distillation; but that there remains considerable parts among the Water at the bottom of the Vessel, especially a kind of substance like Honey, accompany ' d with the grosser Sulphur and fix ' d Salt of the Berries; therefore when the Vessels are cool, strain and press out the remainder, and having clarify ' d the Liquor, pour it into a glaz ' d Earthen Pipkin, and evaporate the superfluous moisture over a very gentle fire, till that which remains be as thick as an Extract, which will be very acceptable to the taste, and somewhat Aromatical. You may also dry the Lees of the Expression, and ha∣ving burnt and reduc ' d it to Ashes, make a Lye with the Water; and having fil∣ter ' d it, and consum ' d it to the coagulation of Salt, mix it with the Extract, keep∣ing them together in a Gally-Pot well stopt. 
 The Oil and spiritous Water of Juniper-Berries, is very proper to free the Reins and Ureters from Gravel and viscous matters, which stop the passages, and hinder the Urine from having its course. They are also very useful in all cold maladies of the Brain, and in scorbutick distempers. They are good to fortifie the Stomach, create an appetite, help digestion, resist the putrefaction of the humours, and to kill the Worms in the body; as also to expel windy Chollicks, and all cold ma∣ladies of the Bowels. 
 The Oil is especially commended against bad Air, the Pestilence, and all Epide∣mick diseases; nor is it less to be prefer ' d against diseases of the Matrix. The Oil is given in its spiritous Water, when it is not rectify ' d, or else in Wine or Broth, from two drops to seven or eight, in the morning fasting, or a good while before meals. And you may continue the use thereof as you see occasion; as also of the spiritous Water, which must be giv ' n in a lesser or greater quantity, as it shall be more or less rectify ' d. The Oil is also outwardly apply ' d with success in diseases of the Nerves, especially in case of contractions. The Navel also may be anointed with it in Cholicks. It may be put into the Ears, to help deafness, and noise there∣in. It may be also put up the Nostrils; and the Temples and Sutures of the Skull may be anointed with it, in case of Epilepsies and Apoplexies, &amp;c. 
 As for the Extract of the Berries, Helmont had reason to cry it up for an ex∣cellent Purge, in regard it is really so, especially when its fix ' d Salt is added to it; for by fortifying the Stomach and the Bowels, it gently purges off bad hu∣mours. The dose is from two drams to half an ounce, either in Bolus or dissolv ' d in some proper Liquor. It is also sometimes mingl ' d in Opiats, or in other open∣ing and purgative medicines. 
 In the same manner you may make a Distillation of the Berries of Savine, Ivy, Myrtle, and the like. 
 CHAP. XX. Of the Distillation of Wheat, Rye, Barley, &amp;c. THE daily use of these Grains for the nourishment of men and beasts, gives us to understand, that they contain substances as essential as subtle, and pro∣per to be convey ' d to the most hidden and secret parts of our bodies; and their ability to produce their like, which they have common with all other Seeds, perswades us, that they contain eminently, and as it were in the Epitome, all the best part of the Plants that bears them, since they produce Plants that perish every year, only are perpetuated by their means. 
 The Mechanicks are sufficient to justifie these Truths, not only in the baking of Bread, but in the brewing of Beer. For the artificial fermentation which the Ba∣ker procures in his meal, by reducing it into Dough, with hot water and the ming∣ling of Yest or Leven with it, and afterwards by baking the Dough in his Oven, when the parts have been well divided by ferment, is that whereby the Bread be∣comes agreeable to the taste, and good to eat; though it has need of the heat of the Stomach, and of its acid, or natural ferment, to produce the last fermentation, and by that, the most especial division of all its particles, that the most pure and most subtle may be convey ' d to all the ports of the Body that have need thereof, and the thicker parts be expel ' d into the Bowels, and by them be thrown out, as unprofitable Excrements. 
 As for the Beer, after the Brewers have artificially giv ' n to the Grain a be∣ginning of Germination; and afterwards join ' d in one center, in the same Grain, the disposition which it had to germinate, they steep it in gross; then adding three times as much more not germinated, but steep ' d as the other, they pour upon the whole first Water half boiling hot, and then cold, to separate and dissolve, as much as in them lies, the volatile parts of the Grain, and to give the whole a temperate heat. Afterwards when they have giv ' n it its necessary raising, and stirr ' d the whole with proper instruments, they cover the Vessels diligently that contain the matters, and leave them so for four or five days, till the vapours that rise begin to smell strong, and have a winish, subtle, and penetrating scent, which is a certain mark of a perfect fermentation. Then is the true time to distill the sub∣stances in a Vessel cover ' d with a Moors-head, and to have an inflammable Spirit, charg ' d with the Salt and volatile Sulphur of the Grain, and altogether as subtle and penetrating as that of Wine, perhaps equally well rectify ' d. I could give a more exact description of this particular, and might also advise those that would be diligent in this part of Distillation, to be careful to provide themselves of Rain-water, falling at the time of the Equinoxes, especially the Vernal; but I thought it needless, because they may find in several Authors, especially in a Chymical Trea∣tise of Monsieur Le Fevre, all the light that they have use of upon this occa∣sion. 
 I will only say, that there is a way with far less trouble to separate the parts, of which Wheat, Rye, Barley, or any other Grain of the same nature are compos ' d, by filling about two thirds of a crooked or bending Limbeck with the Grain which you intend to distill, and making the Distillation in a close reverberating Furance, with a gradual fire, following the Rules of Art. For by this means you shall find in the Recipient, the Spirit, the Salts, and the volatile Oils, descended through the beak of the Cornet, intermix ' d with a good quantity of the Flegm, of which you may afterwards make a rectification upon a Sand Bath in a Matras, or Bottle with a long neck, cover ' d with its head well luted, and by repeated rectifications procure a volatile white chrystalline Salt, or at least a Spirit very penetrating, con∣taining the volatile Salt, which will be dissolv ' d therein. Which may well happen, by reason of the great disposition which the volatile Salts have to dissolve them∣selves in Liquor, or else to dissipate. Thus you shall also have a volatile Oil, very penetrating, united to some particles of the volatile Salt. 
 You may attribute to the ardent Spirit, drawn from these fermented Grains, almost the same qualities as to that of Wine, and it may also serve for the same uses. The Salts and the volatile Spirits are very proper in all distempers where there is a necessity of cutting and attenuating hurtfull humours, and to expel them through the pores of the flesh and the skin, by sweat or insensible transpiration. They are also very useful in Epidemick diseases, as also in those of the Breast, espe∣cially in Asthma ' s and Pleurisies; for they powerfully loosen Flegm which stops up the conduits of respiration, and help expectoration. They dissipate also the va∣pours that sometimes gather in those parts, and are sufficient to produce an Asth∣ma, without the concurrence of Flegm. They dissolve the coagulated Blood which causes the Pleurisie, provided it be given in time, and before the extravasated Blood be turn ' d to putrefaction. The dose is from half a scruple to half a dram, in Wine, Broth, or any other proper Liquor. They are mingl ' d also with Syrrups, or Opiats. The use thereof may be also continu ' d, only giving less at a time. The volatile Oil is chiefly apply ' d externally, by anointing the parts that are attack ' d with Rheumatisms, or any cold pain. It serves also to recall and dispierce the Spirits through the members of Paralytick persons. 
 CHAP. XXI. Of the Distillation of Pulse. AMong the several Spirits which are to be drawn from Pulse, in a close re∣verberating Furnace, there is chiefly to be got a volatile Salt, more distinct, and in greater quantity, then from any other Grain appointed for the nou∣rishment of man; and also with more ease then from most of the other parts of Vegetals, excepting from some Antiscorbutick Seeds or Roots. And I believe, that men would be more diligent in the search of it then they are, were they not diverted from it by the sight of such a quantity of fix ' d Salt, as usually they draw from their Husks, when they burn them to Ashes, and when they take the same course as in extracting the fix ' d Salt out of the other Plants. But if they make a serious reflection upon the various nature of Salts, and upon the great inclina∣tion which acids have to unite themselves entirely to the fix ' d Salts, and upon the power which they have to stay and fix the latter for a time, I believe they would be of the same opinion with me: an opinion common with several modern and judicious Chymists; which is, that all the Salts of Plants, which Chymistry has at all times acknowledg ' d for fix ' d, would neither prove to be Salts, nor in so great a quantity, nor would, as they do, resist the violence of the fire, if the acid Salt of the part of the Plant, reduc ' d to Ashes, together with that of the Air, and that of the combustible matters▪ which they make use for Ustion and calcination of the substances, did not stop the Salt naturally volatile, joining it self entirely to it, and making it capable to resistthe flame. Though to speak more truly, these Salts, as united as they are, would not be so permanent against the fire, had they not embrac ' d and united in their conjunction, the most Alkoliz ' d or purer part of the Earth, from which they seem nevertheless to have been well separated by filtration; and if they had not taken that Earth for the foun∣dation of their union. 
 We are to believe also, that the acid Salt is not altogether so necessary in the composition of all mix ' d bodies, especially in the composition of Plants, that with∣out it they can neither attain the production, growth, or perfection of their parts▪ that nothing can be perfect without its assistance; that this is the bond of all o∣ther substances, without which it were impossible for them to have any firmness or consistence; or that all the productions of the world would return to their ancient Chaos, if once depriv ' d of this acid Salt, which they make to be the Soul and upholder of nature. But to return to our business, which is the Distil∣lation of Pulse, without undertaking to set down the Distillation of every one in particular, I will fix upon that of Beans, which is in truth the grossest sort of Pulse, but which yeilds to none of the rest, as well for its subtlety and penetra∣tion, as for its abundance of volatile Salt. 
 CHAP. XXII. Of the Distillation of Beans. TAke about five or six pound of Beans whole and dry, and having put them into a Cornute of Potters Earth, or Glass environ ' d with lute, so that a∣bout the third part remain empty, place it upon a close Furnace of Re∣verberation; and having fitted and luted it to a very large Recipient, and stop ' d the Register of the Duomo, or Cover of the Furnace, kindle a small fire in the Cinder-place, enough to warm by degrees the Cornute and the Beans, and having kept it thus for a good hour, begin to kindle a fire in the Hearth-place, ordering it so that it may give no more heat then that in the Cinder-place; and having so continu ' d it for a good hour, increase the fire by degrees from hour to hour, but not to excess. During which time you shall see descend into the Recipient, the watry part of the Beans, in a very great quantity; after which give a little air to the Register of the Duomo, upon the Recipient side, and increase your fire from time to time, till you perceive the great Ball to be fill ' d with white Clouds, which will dissolve by little and little, and insensibly, into Liquor, the Oil and spi∣ritous Salt part descending to the bottom of the Vessel. Then keep an equal fire for two good hours, and give a little air to the Register; after which you may open it altogether, giving a more violent fire, and at length a flaming fire, which you must continue till you perceive no more vapours in the Cornute, and that the Recipient be clear. At which time stop up the Register of the Duomo, and the doors of the Furnace, and let the Vessels cool; then, having unluted the Recipient, you shall find a great quantity of Flegm mingl ' d with the Oil, the Spi∣rit, and the volatile Salt of the Beans, which will be so penetrating, that you will not be able to hold your Nose nor your Eyes over the mouths of the Vessels. Then quickly pour out all the Liquors into a Bottle with a very long neck; and having cover ' d it with its head perfectly well luted, and fitted a beak to the Recipient, place the Recipient in a Bath of Sand in an airy place, out of the Sun and far from any heat, but what is necessary to heat the Sand and the substances; by means whereof you will see the volatile Salt ascend by little and little, and co∣agulate it self very white and chrystalline in the inside of the head, which you must cover with a Linnen Cloth several times doubl ' d and dipt in cold water, to hinder the dissolution of the Salt, which will turn into Liquor with the least heat, sooner than any other volatile Salt; so that it is a hard thing to keep it otherwise then in Liquor. But with art and speed you may take it out of the head in a white chrystalline form, and preserve it also for some time in a Bottle very well stop ' d. But you must have ready another head to put on in the place of that which you take off, to continue, after you have well luted the jointures, the rectification of the substances, while you draw forth and put up the first Salt. And by that means you will receive into a little Recipient the rest of the volatile Salt, dissolv ' d in some small portion of Flegm, and the most volatile oily part of the Beans, which you may separate and keep apart, while the useless Flegm and stinking part of the Oil remain at the bottom of the Matras. 
 The volatile Salt of Beans, is a most powerful Diaphoretick, and may pass for the most subtle and penetrating volatile Salt that can be prepar ' d. It may be giv ' n for the same uses, and in the same dose, as the other volatile Salts of which I have spoken, and be giv ' n with success for the same distempers. The vertues of the Oil are very near the same with those of the Salt. You may give it from two drops to ten or twelve, mingl ' d with fine powder ' d Sugar, and afterwards mix ' d in some proper Liquor. It is good to anoint Paralytick Members, and such as are attack ' d with Rheumatisms; to anoint the Navel and Stomach of those that are troubl ' d with the Chollick, and to kill the Worms. In diseases of the Brain and Matrix, it is good to put up into the Nostrils, and to anoint the Temples. 
 The Distillation of Beans gives me an occasion to relate an Experiment of my own upon this subject, to justifie what I have said in the foregoing Chapter, about the fixation which happens to the Salts of Plants, by the conjunction of acids, in the Ustion and calcination which is made of the same Plants, when there might be another way to preserve their volatile Salts, by separating them from the sub∣stances by Distillation. I burnt on purpose in a Crucible, and reduc ' d to Ashes a pound of dry Beans, like to those which I distill ' d in the Cornute, yet perceiv ' d not, during the Ustion, any scent of volatile Salt, as it happens in burning Ani∣mals entire, or in their parts. Making use of a violent Charcoal fire for six hours, to reduce these Beans into Ashes, I found at the bottom of the Crucible about six drams of white Ashes, of a Salt taste, like a Lye, picquant and caustick. But ma∣king use of the same fire to burn to Ashes the sediment of six pound of Beans, out of which I had drawn the volatile Salt by Distillation, I could hardly get an ounce of Ashes, and not so white neither as the former, and of a taste much less picquant and Salt. So that I was convinc ' d that there was no finding the volatile Salt in the last Beans, which was drawn off by Distillation; and that their Salt could not be so tart as the Salt of those which had not been distill ' d, of which the acid and volatile Salt compos ' d the chiefest substance; which makes me be∣lieve, that the strong odours that rise from Animals in their Ustion, and which is a sign of the dissipation of their volatile Salt, proceeds only from the want of acids, the small quantity whereof not being able to stop the volatile Salts, they are con∣strain ' d to fly away, when they are expos ' d to the violence of the fire.
Pease, Kidney-Beans, Vetches, Lentils, and other Pulse, may be distill ' d the same way, and the same substances may be drawn from them, though they have less volatile Salt then Beans. 
 CHAP. XXIII. Of the Distillation of VVoods. WOods are not only the most solid parts of Vegetals, but also those which afford the most acid Salts, as is manifest by distilling them in the Cor∣nute; which gives us occasion to make two or three observations very considerable. The first of which is, that the acid, which they contain in great quantity, binds and fixes the volatile Salt in such manner, that it is a difficult thing to distinguish it by the scent, which is mingl ' d therewith, from the acid Spirit, the Oil, and the Flegm. Whereas the volatile Salts of Animals and Beans, predominating over their acid, immediately affect the Eyes and Nose of them that unlute the Recipient, into which they are fall ' n with the volatile Oil, the Spirit, and the Flegm. The second observation is, that it is harder to separate the vo∣latile Salt of Woods in their Spirit, or acid Salt, their volatile Oil and their Flegm, then to separate that of Animals, Beans, or Antiscorbutick Seeds, from the other substances▪ which are drawn forth with it by Distillation, because the vola∣tile Salt of Woods is found to be half fix ' d by the acid which exceeds in quantity. Whereas in the Distillation of Animals, Beans, and Antiscorbutick Seeds, the acid is found in less quantity, then the volatile Salt. The third observation is this, that the Salt which may be drawn from that which remains in the Cornute by calcination, is not so plentiful, nor of that strength, as that which may be drawn from the like quantity of the same Wood reduc ' d to Ashes, because the volatile Salt of the latter is retain ' d, during the Ustion, by the acid of the same Wood, as also by that of the Air, and the substances that reduc ' d it to Ashes. 
 CHAP. XXIV. Of the Distillation of Lignum Rhodium. I Begin the Distillation of Woods with that of Lignum Rhodium, otherwise Rosewood; so called, not that it bears Roses, but for that the smell of it is very like to that of Roses. 
 Having rasp ' d into small pieces a good quantity of this Wood, and having fill ' d about two thirds of a little Vessel, pour upon it Rain-water or River-water, and having quite fill ' d the Vessel, stop it well, and leave the substances in that con∣dition for about fifteen days. Then put one part of the Wood and the Liquor into a Copper Vessel well Tinn ' d within, and having cover ' d it with a Moors-head Tinn ' d in the same manner, and having luted the jointures, and fitted to it a well luted Serpentine, running athwart a Pipe of cold water, together with a Recipient, make a Distillation with a moderate fire, and continue it till about two thirds of the Water, which you put into the Vessel, be drawn off. Then having cool ' d the Vessels, and separated and put up into a little Glass Bottle well stop ' d, that little quantity of odoriferous Oil that will swim upon the Water, and set the same Wa∣ter aside, renew and continue the Distillation of that which remains, proceeding in every thing as you did before, till you have distill ' d all that you put up in the first Vessel. By this means you shall have a volatile clear Oil, of a yellow colour, the scent whereof will be very like to that which you draw from Roses by Di∣stillation; and a Water not much different in scent and vertue from that of or∣dinary Rose-water. 
 The quantity of Liquor which is necessary to be made use of in this Distilla∣tion, makes so great a diffusion and division of the acid and salt parts, which ascend in Distillation, that you cannot discern them among the Water, either in taste or smell, though they be certainly there, but in a less quantity then if you had di∣still ' d the Wood alone in a Cornute; which you must not do however, unless you value not the beauty and good scent of the Oil and Water, which you may draw from the Wood by this way which I have set down. 
 This distill ' d Oil of Lignum Rhodium is esteem ' d as well for its pleasing scent, as for its medicinal vertues. Some there are that prescribe it in diseases of the Mouth and Throat, as also for those of the Reins and Bladder, mixing it for those uses with fine powder ' d Sugar, and steeping it in its own proper Water; making use of it as well in Gargarisms for diseases of the Mouth, as in drink, from two or three to ten or twelve drops, in five or six ounces of its own proper Water. But the chiefest and most advantageous use of it is in Balsoms, call ' d Apopletick; where this Oil agrees marvellously well with Musk, Ambergreese, and the good scent of all sort of Aromaticks, Oils, and Essences that are wont to be mingl ' d with it. It is also the best Succedany that can be made use of in the place of the true Oil of distill ' d Roses. You may in the same manner distill Sassafras, Lig∣num Aloes, Santal-woods, and the like. 
 CHAP. XXV. Of the Distillation of Guaiacum. YOu may proceed in the Distillation of Guaiacum after the same manner as in the Distillation of Lignum Rhodium, especially if you desire a proper Oil to give inwardly. But because this Oil is generally outwardly apply ' d, and for that there is great reck ' ning made of the acid Spirit which may be drawn forth by the Cornute, it is but convenient that I should shew the preparation of it. 
 Having put into a luted Cornute about six pound of Guaicum rasp ' d, or if you please, grosly cut, yet small enough to put in through the beak of the Cornute, put it into a close Furnace of Reverberation, and having fitted and luted to it a large Recipient, kindle a small fire in the Cinder-place, enough only to heat by degrees the Furnace and the Cornute. And having continu ' d it very moderately for a good hour, translate the fire into the Hearth-place of the Furnace; where after you have kept it as long, increase it by degrees, till you perceive the wa∣try part of the Wood descend into the Recipient; then open a very little the Re∣gister of the Duomo toward the side of the Recipient, and continue and increase the fire a little, till you see white vapours come out of the Cornute like Clouds, which are a sign that the acid Salt and oily parts of the Guaiacum begin to come forth; at which time open also the Cover to the Duomo, and increase the fire more and more, till the great Recipient to look clear, by which you may guess the Distillation to be compleated. Then stopping up the Register of the Duomo, and the doors of the Furnace, and letting it cool at leisure, together with the Cor∣nute, unlute the Recipient, and you shall find an acid Spirit, charg ' d with the vo∣latile Salt part of the Guaiacum, mix ' d with a dark ill scented Oil, and much Flegm. Then pour the whole into a large Tunnel, lin ' d with wet waste Paper, through which the Flegm and Spirit charg ' d with the volatile Salt will pass, and drop into the Bottle out of the Tunnel; and the thick Oil will stay in the Paper, which you must afterwards set to drop into another Bottle, piercing the small end of the Pa∣per with a Bodkin, and keeping the Oil apart for your use. 
 For curiosity-sake you may burn to ashes the coal of the Guaiacum, remain∣ing in the Cornute after Distillation, and having extracted the Salt by the usual ways, separate that which is meerly terrestrial, and may be well call ' d the Ca∣put Mortuum. But this would waste more Coal then the profit would turn to; only the Salt may be useful in Purgatives, especially in Venereal distempers. 
 You may also distill Guaiacum, and such like Woods by descent, and draw forth almost the same substances as by sloping Distillation, but not so pure; by putting the Wood cut into a Cucurbit, covering it with an Iron Cover, with several little holes made in it, made like the Cover of a Box, so that it may just fit the or ∣fice of the Cucurbit; which you must afterwards turn upside down upon its Co∣ver, and place it upon a Furnace built on purpose, such an one as I have describ ' d in the first part of this Pharmacopoea, in the Chapter of the Furnaces. For after you have set a Recipient under the Cornute, fit for the neck of it, and care∣fully luted the jointures of the Vessels, and heated by degrees the body of the Cucurbit, you shall find at length in the Recipient, the Flegm, Oil, and Spirit, charg ' d with the volatile Salt of the Guaiacum, in as great a quantity as by the Cornute; which you may separate in the same manner as those that went be∣fore. 
 You may make choice of which of these three methods you please for the Distil∣lation of the Wood of the Hasell or Wood-nut, call ' d Corylus by the Latins, by others Lignum Heracleum; and also of the Woods of Box, Oak, Ash, Cyprus, Cedar, and other Woods. The Oil of Guaiacum distill ' d is very much applauded in Di∣seases of the Bladder, with an addition of Water, following the method prescrib ' d in Oil of Lignum Rhodium. To purifie the mass of the Blood; so that some do affirm that by continuing the use of it for several weeks, from four to ten or twelve drops, in its own Water, from three or four to seven or eight ounces, it is able to expel and carry away through the pores of the skin, the Veneral ve∣nom, especially if it be not too much inveterate, without making use of Mercury, the use whereof is not always so proper. It is good for the cure of Veneral Ul∣cers that happen in the mouth. Some are of opinion, that the Tablets which may be made of it, are very proper to hinder people from growing over fat, and to make them lean that are too fat▪ continuing the use of them. 
 The Oils of Guaiacum distill ' d through the Cornute, are never made use of inwardly, by reason of their ill scent; but outwardly they are successfully ap∣ply ' d for the cure of all sorts of Ulcers, especially Venereal; to cleanse wounds, and to consume proud flesh; as also for the opening or exfoliation of the Bones, and against their putrefaction. 
 The Spirit of Guaiacum is Diaphoretick, by reason of the volatile Salt with which it is charg ' d in Distillation. It is giv ' n in Venereal distempers, and in Rheumatisms, from a dram to half an ounce; in a Glass full of the decoction of the same Wood, or of some Cordial-water, when there is a necessity to expel by sweat or insensible transpiration, the sharp serosities which are the cause of those distempers. It is also proper for the cure of petty Ulcers in the Mouth or Gums, as well in Venereal as Scorbutick diseases. The same Spirit expels by Urine those serosities, which are not to be expel ' d by the pores. 
 You may if you please, rectifie the Spirit and Oil of Guaiacum, over a Sand-Bath moderately hot, in a Glass Cucurbit cover ' d with its head, and having sepa∣rated the almost insipid watry part, which will first ascend, receive and keep a∣part the spiritous acid and somewhat salt part, which will succeed, and which will be attended with an oily volatile, which contains also its part of the volatile Salt, and which may be also separated and kept apart as well as the acid, and may be administred inwardly, incorporating it with fine powder ' d Sugar, and mixing it in some proper Liquor. 
 It will be needless here to shew you the Distillation of the Rhind of Guaiacum, in regard you may proceed after the same manner, and make use of as many ways, as for that of the Wood. And though the Bark may work as efficaciously and in less quantity then the Wood, yet the vertues thereof are altogether the same. 
 CHAP. XXVI. Of the Distillation of . foot THey that only mind the dark colour, the bitter taste, and noisome smell of , may not only despise it, but have an aversion to it. But they that will take the pains to make a strict examination of all its parts, and to make an exact separation and purification thereof, will find therein qualities con∣siderable enough to merit the pains of Artists. For they will not only find the five different substances which are usually observ ' d in Vegetals, especially in Woods, but also the real marks of the existency of their volatile Salt, and the fixation of one part of the same volatile Salt with the Oil, by vertue of their own natural disposition. As you shall see in the following Distillation of . 
 Having made choice of , the greenest, the blackest, the most solid, the most glittering, and the biggest pieces you can get, and fill ' d about two thirds of a great Cornute of Fullers-Earth, and luted it round; place it in a Furnace of Reverberation, and having cover ' d it with its Duomo, and stopp ' d up the Register, kindle a fire of the first degree in the Hearth-place, shutting up the doors of the Cinder-place and Hearth-place, keeping a fire for two or three hours together, or till the liquor which distills from the Cornute begin to grow acid; at which time put a large Recipient to the beak of the Cornute, and having carefully luted the jointures, increase the fire by little and little from degree to degree, giving air pro∣portionably to the Register of the Duomo, and to the door of the Cinder-place; and you shall perceive the acid Spirits come forth of the Cornute in white Clouds, which will appear by degrees more thick, when the Volatile Salt comes to be mingl ' d with them, and more still when the Oyl comes first in great quantity. During which time, open the Register at times more and more, encreasing the fire from degree to degree, to the utmost extremity of heat, opening altogether the Register of the Duomo, and the door of the Cinder-place, and continuing the same fire till no more come forth of the Cornute, but that the Recipient become clear. After which having stopp ' d up the Register and the doors of the Furnace, and letting the Vessels cool of themselves, unlute the Recipient, and you shall find there the acid Spirit, the volatile Salt, the Oyl, and a part of the Flegm mingl ' d together, and which have need of being rectifi ' d. To which purpose, having put the whole into a Matras with a long neck, plac ' d in a Sand-bath and cover ' d with its head, perfectly well luted, and having fitted to it and well luted a Recipient, kindle a very moderate fire under the Sand-bath, by means whereof the volatile Salt will ascend first into the head, white and Christalline; which you must draw forth and put up close and carefully in a double glass bottle well stopp ' d; fixing and luting on another head in the place of the former. And then continuing the same fire, the spirit will ascend with the rest of the volatile Salt, already dissolv ' d, and will be attended with some part of the most pure and most volatile Oyl, while the thick and unprofitable Flegm remains at the bottom of the Matras. 
 The volatile Oyl of is a powerful Diaphoretick, partaking much of the qualities of those Oyls which are drawn from Animals. The Spirit partakes much of the vertues of the volatile Salt, a great portion whereof it contains. The vo∣latile Salt is giv ' n from five or six, to fifteen or twenty Grains, and the Spirit from half a scruple to one dram; both the one and the other in proper liquors. The Oyl is also giv ' n from two drops to seven or eight, incorporated with fine pow∣dred Sugar, and dissolv ' d in Wine, to the same purposes, as the volatile Salt. It is highly priz ' d in Oyntment, to cure Ring-worms and other diseases of the Skin. 
 In the mean time burn that which remains in the Cornute, and draw forth by the ordinary ways a fixed Salt, which is very good to cure open Cancers, applying it as follows▪ Having steep ' d this Salt in Vinegar, leave it to dissolve into liquor in the Cellar; then anoint the Cancer once or twice, to fetch out the venome like a smoak; afterwards continue to perfect the cure with the distill ' d Oyl, which will bring a scab or crust upon the Cancer, that will fall off of it self in five or six days, by which you may give a shrewd guess at the Cure. 
 CHAP. XXVII. Of the Distillation of Fruits. And first of Gourds, Coucumbers, and Melons. THough Fruits in their Composition, have the same Principles which we observe in all other parts of plants; the difference however which is in their quali∣ties, and the knitting together and proportion of their substances, being as various as the substance of the plants which produce them, we cannot prescribe any Rules so certain, as to be properly adapted for the distillation of these Fruits. Trees, Shrubs, Bushes, and also certain plants produce fruits. But though the trees exceed in greatness all other Vegitals, and produce their Fruits in greater abundance, better digested, and in greater perfection. Yet there are no fruits in Europe so big as those produced by certain plants that dye every year, and among the rest the Round and long Gourds, whose extraordinary bigness, softness, and swift decay, and the weak∣ness and moisture of the plants that bear them, demonstrates to us, that the princi∣pal and most abundant part of their composition consists in an ill concocted Flegm, and that they contain very little Spirit or volatile Salt, and little appearance of Oyl, but only in their seed when it is very ripe. So that as there is nothing to be expected from a mix ' d body beyond what it contains, there is nothing to be hop ' d for from these Fruits in Distillation, but only a clear water containing very little Spirit and vo∣latile Salt, only enough for its preservation. And therefore it is sufficient to bruise them well; and having put them into a Cucurbit of Glass, or Earth glaz ' d within, and cover ' d with its head, make a distillation thereof in Balneo Mariae, or in a Bath of Ashes with a very moderate fire, as I have shew ' d before in the distillation of cooling herbs.
CHAP. LVII. Of the Extract Rosin, or Magistery of Scam∣mony. ALthough in distilling Scammony through a Cornute, you may draw fine sub∣stances out of it, which are usually extracted out of several other parts of Vegetals, yet we seldome put our selves to the trouble, in regard the medicines would not be extraordinary. And therefore it is sufficient to make use of the Rosi∣ny part, which is useful upon many occasions, being once separated from the Ter∣restrial part. For the accomplishing whereof, after you have made choice of pure Scammony light and very Rosiny, beat it small, and put a pound thereof into a glass Cucurbit, and pour upon it good Spirit of Wine, four fingers breadth above the Scammony, cover the Cucurbit with a vessel of Rencounter, and having care∣fully luted the jointures, and well shak ' n the matters to facilitate the penetration of the wine, place the Cucurbit in a Sand-Bath, never so little heated, and keep it there for twenty four hours, every foot stirring or shaking the whole. Then ha∣ving pour ' d out by inclination, and set apart the colour ' d and clear Tincture, which swims at the top of that which is not dissolv ' d, pour in as much new Spirit of wine as at the first time, and stopping the Cucurbit again with its vessel of Rencounter, renew the digestion again in the same Bath for the same time, stirring it as before, which will suffice for the entire dissolution of the Rosiny part of the Scammony; then pass this Tincture through Cap-paper, and having made the Cucurbit very clean, pour it together with the first clear Tincture into the Cucurbit, which after you have cover ' d with its head well luted on, and fitted and luted a Recipient to the beak, you must place in a Sand-Bath, and with a moderate fire draw back about two thirds of the Spirit of Wine. After which having unluted the vessels, you shall find at the bottom of the Cucurbit the Rosiny part of the Scammony of a colour incli∣ning to purple, transparent, and as thick as well boil ' d honey; which may be call ' d the Extract of Scammony; above which you shall see the more watry part of the Spi∣rit of wine, which must be separated by inclination; then gently warming the Cu∣curbit, pour out the Rosin into an Earthen glaz ' d Pipkin, and having cover ' d it with a paper, expose it to the Sun, or set it over a Bakers oven to dry, so that you may pouder it, when you come to use it. 
 You may have a Magisterick of Scammony by emptying into a glaz ' d Earthen Pipkin, some part of the Tincture of Scammony, and pouring upon it eight or ten times the weight of cool fair water. For by that means the Spirit of wine which dissolv ' d the Rosiny part of the Scammony, being weakn ' d by the water, is con∣strain ' d to forsake the same substance; whence it comes to pass that the Liquor looks like milk, and that the Rosiny substance precipitates to the bottom, being se∣parated from the liquor; the rest swimming above the liquor, or adhering to the sides of the Tincture, whence it may be separated, after you have pour ' d out the liquor by Inclination. 
 The chief vertue of Rosin of Scammony is to purge cholerick and flegmatick humours. The dose is from five or six to twelve or fifteen grains, mingl ' d in some conserve, like, a bolus, or else in proper liquors. But you must be very care∣full to grind it very small, and to mix with it a fourth part of Almonds, or of some cold seed well cleans ' d to devide the parts of the Rosin, and to prevent it from sticking to the Tunicles of the stomach, when it swims above the liquor which may cause griping pains, and over-purgation. 
 CHAP. LVIII. Of the Extract Rosin, or Magistery of Jallap. JAllap consisting of more earthy and watry salt parts, and less Rosiny, then Scam∣mony, you will do well to employ two distinct Menstruums to dissolve and ex∣tract the two distinct substances; contrary to the judgement of most part of Au∣thors, who looking after the Rosony substance of the Jallap, and neglecting the rest, make use of only Spirit of Wine for its Extraction. But that you may not loose any of the good parts of the Jallap; after you have beat a pound very small, and put it into a glass Cucurbit, pour upon it four pints of white-wine, and having blen∣ded them well together, and cover ' d the Cucurbit with a vessel of Rencounter well luted, set it four and twenty hours in a Sand-bath over a very gentle fire, stirring the substances every foot, without unluting the vessels, unless at the end. At what time having taken off the vessel of Rencounter, put a head in its place, and fitted and luted a Recipient to the beak of the head, increase a little the fire of the Bath, to cause the Spiritous part to distill, which you must keep. Then having unluted the vessels, and strain ' d and squees ' d out, filter ' d and set aside the liquor, return the sedi∣ment into the Cucurbit, and pour upon it a pint of good Spirit of wine, together with that which was before distill ' d and set aside. After which having carefully shaken the Ingredients, and cover ' d the Cucurbit with a vessel of Rencounter, keep it four and twenty hours over a soft fire in a Sand-bath, then unluting the vessel of Rencounter, pour forth by inclination the clean clear Tincture that swims upon the sediment; upon which, after that, pour another pint of good Spirit of wine; co∣ver the Cucurbit with its vessel of Rencounter, and set it in the same Bath, and renew Maceration for the same time. Then having filter ' d and mix ' d the last Tincture with the former, you may if you please mingle both with the first of all, and having pour ' d them into a glaz ' d earthen Pipkin, evaporate the superfluous moisture over a very gentle heat, till the settlement be thick enough, and that it may be pro∣perly called, as it is a true Extract of Jallap. To which you may very properly add the fix ' d Salt, extracted from the sediment dried and reduc ' d to ashes. 
 But if you would have the Rosin or Magistery of Jallap apart, you must look for it only in the two last tinctures, drawn forth with the Spirit of wine, proceeding as I have directed for the Magistry of Scammony. 
 The vertues and dose of the Rosin and Magistery of Jallap are much the same with those of the Rosin and Magistery of Scammony. The Extract also tends to the same end. But you may increase the dose to half a dram, as well by reason of its moisture, as of the other parts of the Jalap, which increase the weight and quantity of the Rosin. 
 The same method is to be observ ' d in preparing the Extracts of Rosins, and Ma∣gesteries of Agarick, Mechoacan, Turbith, Hermodactiles, Ellebore, and such other Roots, the parts whereof resemble those of Jallap. 
 CHAP. LIX. Of the Panchymagogue Extract. THere is no Chymical Composition more varied in Authors then this Extract, as well in reference to the simple Ingredients, as to their dose and proportion. But setting all disputes aside, and leaving those Extracts to themselves, I will here produce one, which as to the doses, and preparation of the ingredients, seems to me very reasonable. 
 Take two ounces of the Extract of Aloes, and as much of the Extract of Rhu∣barb, one ounce of the Extract of Senna, much of each of those of Scammo∣ny, Jalop, Agarick, and Coloquintida, and half an ounce of that of black Helle∣bore. Prepare each of these Extracts as I have directed in the foregoing Chapters; but let them be no thicker then Honey. Having put together and well mingl ' d these Extracts, in a little glaz ' d earthen Pipkin, plac ' d in a Sand-bath over a very mode∣rate fire, evaporate by degrees the overplus of the superfluous moisture, stirring them gently from time to time with a Spatula, till they are come altogether of a good consistency of an Extract. At which time having taken off the Pipkin from the Bath, and let the Extract stand till it be almost cold, incorporate into it four drops of the distill ' d Oil of Cloves, and as much of each of the Oils of Fennel, La∣vender, and Marjoram. The Extract will then be perfect, and fit to be put up close in a Galley-pot, or some other Vessel, or oil ' d skin, to use upon occasion. 
 Proceeding according to this method, there is no fear of the separation of the Rosiny substances, from the concenter ' d watry salt ones; which might happen to this Extract, if the Rosins were not powder ' d and mix ' d with some Almonds, or some cold Seeds in grinding them, or if they were not dissolv ' d a-new in Spirit of Wine. For experience and reason plainly shew us, that these different substances unite exactly together, and remain united so long as the Extract keeps its usual consistency; and that the Rosiny cannot be separated from the watry substances, but by dissolving the latter in some watry liquor, which is not able to dissolve the Rosiny. And though it were impossible to mix these Rosins in a watry and salt Extract, thick and cold, without putting them in, in powder before, when they are dry, nor to reduce them well into powder without mixing some seed or some oily matter apt to divide the parts; yet it is certain, that being once well mingl ' d with the Extract, they cannot separate of themselves. Neither in this preparation is the dissipation of the principal parts of Aromaticks to be fear ' d, in regard that instead of an Extract, which some Authors would have drawn to mix in this, we make use of their distill ' d Oils, which contain in a small room their principal vertues; and because these Oils cannot dissipate themselves, as being mix ' d when the Extract is almost cold. 
 Now whereas Zwelfer pretends to draw forth with the Spirit of Wine, the Ex∣tracts of parts of Plants, whose substance contains a mixture of watry, salt, and Rosiny; I persist in my first opinion, which is, that the former ought to be extracted in watry liquors, before we make use of Spirit of Wine for the extraction of the latter; considering that that Spirit being well rectified, as it ought to be, has not force enough to extract the first. I wonder also, that a person who having been an Apothecary, and one that in his writings brings in question the sufficiency of his Bre∣thren, did not foresee, that he expos ' d himself to their censure, while he only pre∣tended to make use of the Spirit of Wine for the extraction of these mixt sub∣stances; and more, by affirming, that the volatile Salts easily unite themselves to the Spirit of Wine, since the trials that Apothecaries make thereof every day, make it manifest, that these Salts do not dissolve in Spirit of Wine, as being all inflam∣mable, and that the same Spirit dissolving the oily particles which are mix ' d among the same volatile Salts, preserves in its own body the same Salts without dissolu∣tion, and that it hinders also dissipation by swimming above them, provided the bottle be well stop ' d. Besides that he himself confesses, that the Spirit of Wine cannot dissolve the fix ' d Salts, which are with the volatile, which is the chiefest sub∣stance which the watry part of these parts of Plants contains. 
 This Extract is call ' d by the name of Panchymagogue, or universall purger of hu∣mours, because it purges in general all bad humours out of the body. It is giv ' n in Pills, like other Extracts, from half scruple to half a dram, or two scru∣ples. 
 CHAP. LX. Of Dregs. WE may put Dregs among Chymical preparations of the worst invention, which may be better let alone, then be prepar ' d with wast of time; especially following the opinion of those who have written first thereof. The name of dregs is rightly given to the filth, that separates and falls to the bottom of several liqours. But by the name of dregs we are here to understand only a white mealy substance, fall ' n down and gather ' d together at the bottom of the juice, or liquor of certain Roots, as of Briony, Aron or Wake-Robin, Iris. &amp;c. This white and mealy substance, being separated by Inclination from the liquor; is dry ' d in the shade or in the Sun; and though I advise no person to make these preparations, I will not omit to set down the method of making them. 
 Take the Roots of Briony, Orrice or any other root well grown and newly ga∣ther ' d, and having well wash ' d and cleans ' d them from their outward rind, rasp them very small, and having pres ' d out the juice through a very strong cloth, let it stand two or three days in an earthen Pipkin. Then by inclination pour out the clear li∣quor, that swims above the white substance, which is become Dregs. This is after∣wards to be dry ' d in the Sun, or in the shade at leisure, or if you are in hast, in a Bath of Sand, with a very moderate heat. By this means you have the Dregs of the root made use of. Which cannot be other then a substance void of vertue be∣ing despoil ' d of the vertue of the juice, which is separated rom it: and which can∣not produce the effect of Extracts drawn from the juice of those Roots; I say more∣over, that the powder of these Roots cut in little round pieces, and dry ' d with the juice, is much better then the dregs any way prepar ' d. 
 The Extract drawn from the juice of the Root of Bistort or snake weed is call ' d particularly by the name of Chersa or Ghersa. Of which they do not only separate the liquor that swims above the feces, but also dry it with the feces, dividing it into little vessels, and exposing it to the Sun, till it is fit to be powdred. 
 CHAP. LXI. Of the Salts of Vegetals. THE preparation of some Salts of Vegetals which I have occasionally set down, when discoursing of the distillation of some sorts of Plants, not being enough to give all the might necessary for such a subject, so considerable and of so large an Extent, I thought it convenient here to make some new Reflections, and at the same time to communicate my method to publick view; not only in reference to prepara∣tions that pass for common, but also those which having been known but only to few people, have been conceal ' d or counterfeited by those that had the true knowledg thereof. 
 Formerly it was not believ ' d that the Salts of Vegetals were volatile, because that that which is drawn from them by usual means, does not exhale with the fire, but ra∣ther endures Fusion, then to quit the bottom of the vessel where it is put. How∣ever they would not have fall ' n into such an error, had they well understood the na∣ture of Salts, especially of those which are drawn from Vegetals. For we must believe, that there are two sorts of them, the one of an acid, the other of a salt taste; that each of these Salts are naturally volatile, as well while they are mix ' d together in the mix ' d body, and as it were in confusion among the other principles, as when Chymistry has separated them by Art one from another. But in regard of their great inclination to unite together, they do it so soon as they are separated from the other principles; and uniting as soon as they can that small quantity of earthiness which serves to strengthen their union, they compose together a fix ' d Salt which most part of the ancients, and several of the moderns believe to be of it self, and naturally such. Not considering that the quality of fix ' d did not happen either to the one or the other of these Salts, but by the union of the volatile with the acid, and of both together with some particles of earth, which serv ' d them as a founda∣tion. 
 I believe moreover, though it cannot be said, that there is any Plant which has not its proper Salt, yet there is no possibility to distinguish it, or to qualifie it to be such, until it be separated from the other substances, and that ustion and incinera∣tion of the substances being the most proper ways to bring it to pass, the sulphury part flies away by that means, as also the watry, which tempering and weakning the acid Salt, hinder ' d its strict union with the volatile Salt. I say moreover, that the acid and volatile Salts finding themselves thus disingag ' d from their principal op∣pression, and assisted by the acid particles of the fire, which have much conformity with them, unite by degrees, but very strongly and strictly one to the other; that the small quantity of earth which is mix ' d among them, promotes their union, so far it is from hindering it; and that the Salt which proceeds from this union, is pro∣perly a body compos ' d of acid and volatile Salt, and some particles of earth which pass ' d through the filter with them after they were dissolv ' d in Water. 
 I also say, that in the ustion and incineration of the Plants, there is a colliquation or rather melting of the substances, and particularly of the Salts, without which they could not act, nor re-act as they do one upon another, to compleat their in∣timate union, or make such a composition as we find. The qualities whereof ap∣pear to us very different from those which are observ ' d to be in the same Salts when they are separated. That the generation, consistence, and form of all Vegetals de∣pends upon these two Salts; and though that they may severally subsist the one without the other, and be of themselves incorruptible, when they are so put up that the air cannot corrupt them; yet they much better maintain and uphold one the o∣ther, when they are entirely united; and that we may say of them, that they are like the two Poles of Nature; the foundation, cement, and sustainment of all ani∣mated or inanimate beings; and that there is no generation or production without them. 
 CHAP. LXII. Of the Salt of Carduus Benedictus. THE ustion and incineration of the parts of Plants, is not always necessary for the union of the acid with the volatile Salt, to compose a fix ' d Salt, in regard we find by experience, that without their help we can draw from Carduus Bene∣dictus, Wormwood, Sorrel, Centaury, and many other Plants, a Salt compos ' d of acid and Alkali, much resembling the nature of fix ' d Salts; though not so able to resist the fire, as that which you may draw from the same Plants by reducing them to Cinders. And though it is not to be expos ' d to the fire without some remarkable diminution of its quantity, and chiefly of the watry part, which was incorporated with it, and without some dissipation of the acid, which was not entirely united with the volatile, or had surmounted it in quantity; nevertheless, this Salt not ha∣ving suffer ' d the violence of the fire, ordinarily made use of for the ustion and in∣cineration of these Plants, and containing in it self their most essential part, is much better for physick then that which has suffer ' d incineration, in regard it still con∣tains one good part of the Sulphury substance of the same plant, whence it was drawn, and that it has in part the favour and scent of it, so long as the watry part of the plant which is incorporated with it, does not fail to abate it ' s acrimony. These Salts are call ' d Essential Salts, because they contain the most Essential parts of the plant. They are generally of a dark colour, unless calcin ' d in a Cru∣cible, or that you dissolve, filter and coagulate them again; though it be much better to keep and make use of them in their dark colour, then to dissipate their Sulphury part by Calcination, and withall the scent and taste of the plant which they retain ' d.
The presidents which I have set down for the Extraction, depuration and evapo∣ration of the juices of plants, thereby to extract their Essential Salt; as also for their Ustion, incineration, lixiviation, filtration, and coagulation, thereby to extract their fix ' d Salt, having no need of repetition, I shall not any farther enlarge this Chapter. 
 The Essential Salt of Carduus Benedictus, containing much of the sulphury parts of the plant, is proper to provoke sweats, being giv ' n especially in its own water. It is an enemy to worms, and resists the putrefaction of humors, and the malignity of Fevers. That which is drawn from the ashes of the same plant, has almost the same vertues, but the effects are rather purgative, then Diaphoretick. This latter, being more fix ' d, is much more proper to mortify the acids, which excite fermen∣tations in the stomach and lower parts. The dose of both these Salts, is from half a scruple, to half and sometimes a whole dram, in its own water, in broth, in wine, or in any other convenient Liquor. 
 CHAP. LXII. Of the Essential Salt, Cream or Crystal of Tar∣tar. THere is no mix ' d body among Vegetables, which abounds so much as Tartar, in volatile Salt, and acid Salt, for to speak properly these two Salts are, very nigh, the whole considerable substance of Tartar, in regard there is no notice to be tak ' n of the water or earth that is found therein. Tartar has the juice of Grapes for father, Fermentation for its mother, and the Cask is the Matrix. It is to be lookt upon as a remarkable example of the natural union of the volatile Salt salt with the acid Salt, and of the change of the first into fix ' d by the union of the latter; as al∣so, as an example of the Lapidification in our bodies by the conjunction of acid and volatile Salts, and of them two with some terrestrial particles. 
 This change of the volatile Salt salt of Tartar into fix ' d, is much more natural, and done with less violence, then that which happ ' ns to the Salt of plants by incine∣ration. Nor does it suffer any other heat then that which its own acidity causes, af∣ter it has rais ' d the fermentation. It is also in the reciprocal action upon one ano∣ther of this acid Salt with the volatile Salt salt, and the volatile sulphury Salt of the juice of the Grapes, during Fermentation, that the same volatile sulphury Salt unites to it the greatest share of the watry part of the same juice, and as much of the acid Salt as is requisite for its perfection, and for its alteration into wine: and that another part of the volatile Salt salt unites it self with the rest of the acid, and some small quantity of the Terrestrial part of the juice, and that being fix ' d and lapidifi ' d, it sticks like Cyrstal to the heads and bottoms of the Casks; and and that another portion of the volatil sulphury Salt mix ' d with a little of the Salt salt, some of the Terrestrial part, some remaining part of the wine, and a very little acid, descends to the bottom of the vessel, and makes the Lee. 
 But it is not enough that nature has made all these different separations and unions of substances in the same Cask, and that she has bestow ' d considerable preparation. Chymistry must make an improvement upon all these things, and by new separations and purifications, she must bring forth the conceal ' d and con∣fus ' d substances, and give them perfections beyond what nature has afforded them. 
 The first and most simple preparation of Tartar is that of its purification, which may be more or less perfect as you your self desire it to be. For after you have made choice of the purest, the most shining and the most Crystalline Tartar, and pow∣der ' d it very small, somtimes it is enough to stir this powder in fair fountain or river∣water, and to wash it over and over again, till there be no filth remaining, but that it come out as clear as it went in. Nevertheless this Lotion will not bring Tar∣tar to its height of purity; only it separates the wooddy and terrestrial parts, pro∣vided they be not Sandy, and makes the Tartar more fit for the uses to which it is design ' d. Yet some prefer Tartar thus cleans ' d before that which is dissolv ' d in boiling water, believing that the heat of the water diminishes the substance, or changes the virtues. 
 The second and highest putrifaction of Tartar is the reduction of it into Cream or Crystal, Which may be thus done. For example, put three or four pound of Tartar wash ' d as I have directed, into a clean copper Kettle, over a good Charcoal fire, in ten times as much fair water, and having let them boil for a good quarter of an hour, stirring them from time to time with a wooden Spatula, and taking off the scum, strain them through a wollen cloth, and then strain that liquor again, till it be all per∣fectly clear. Then letting it cool, you shall find a kind of a Cream swimming above the water, like a crust, and the rest of the essential Salt of Tartar sticking like pieces of Crystal to the sides and bottom of the vessels, which you must gather together, wash and dry, to use, if you please, in that condition. But if you desire to make it more beautiful, boil it in a large possnet in new fair water; and when it is alto∣gether dissolv ' d, and the water so far wasted, that you may perceive the Cream to settle at the top like a thick skin, take off the Possnet gently from the fire; and let∣ting the Liquor be quite cold without touching it, the Cream at the top will be very thick, and the clear and white Crystalls will stick to the bottom and sides of the Possnett, which having wash ' d and dry ' d, you may keep for use. 
 The great quantity of Crystal of Tartar which is made in those Countries where Tartar is very common, is the reason that there they make use of Copper-vessels; though it were better to boil your Tartar in Possnets of Pewter. For though the Tartar be not able presently to penetrate and dissolve much of the Cop∣per; yet during that small stay it makes in the Vessel, it fetches off some particles that certainly mix among the Cream or the Crystalls; as may be observ ' d in the Crystal of Tartar prepar ' d in those places, the substance whereof is dusk and the white colour enclines somewhat to the colour of Copper: whereas that which is prepar ' d in Pewter Vessels, is perfectly white, and very transpa∣rent. 
 The separation which the woollen bag makes of the parts of the Essential Salt, is the reason that it appears almost all in powder, at the bottom, and upon the sides of the Vessel; and that to have it in Crystalls, after you have boil ' d it and dissolv ' d it in fresh water, you must take it off so gently from the fire; to the end that the liquor, not being stirr ' d, the parts of the Essential Salt, may not be brok ' n, and that the Crystals may be fair and whole. 
 In the mean while, we have great reason to admire in the Essential Salt, the force of the acid, proportionably mingl ' d and united with the volatile; in regard that making a new body with it, it is not dissolvable in cold water, but only in boiling hot, and that it separates again and Crystallizes its self as the water grows cold. However this union is not so inseparable, but that it may be brok ' n by art: for be∣sides that by putting these Crystals to the fire, and causing some portion of the acid part to dissolve in a Crucible or a Cornute, the Salt which remains, having lost its acidite and having chang ' d its nature, becomes dissolvable in the water, though fix ' d and permanent in the fire. This union may be also broken, by adding to these united Salts some new acid; which being not of the Nature of the former, hinders not but that they may be dissolvable in water, as they were when separated; nevertheless, without restoring its nature to the volatile Salt, which is almost equally fix ' d, provided the acid do not exceed the necessary proportion. 
 The same union may be brok ' n by dissolving this Essential Salt in water, and mix∣ing with it Salt of Tartar, such as is prepar ' d by Calcination. For by that means, the acid being master ' d by the other Salts, and not being able to close with so great a quantity, which it could neither stop, nor contain, resumes its former na∣ture, so that they become together all of them dissolvable in water. 
 The principal use of Cream or Crystal of Tartar, is to cut and digest thick and vis∣cous humours, and to dispose them to purgation. It is successfully us ' d in obstructions of the Liver, the Spleen, and all the bowels; and the use thereof may be continu ' d for several days, as occasion requires. It is given from a scruple to a dram, in Broth, or dissolv ' d in some hot liquor. 
 CHAP. LXIV. Of Crystal of Tartar Chalybiate. THE opening virtue of Vitriol Salt, conceal ' d in Steel, being able very much to augment that of the Cream or Crystal of Tartar, I thought it to the pur∣pose to put them together, and by that means to make a compos ' d Medicine, called by the name of Cream or Crystal of Tartar Chalybeate: for the preparation where∣of some having bruis ' d, boil ' d and dissolv ' d a pound of Crystal of Tartar in ten pints of water, add thereto, toward the end, three ounces of the filings of Steel, and having well stirr ' d the said filings or dust, strain it hot through a woollen cloath, and after they have let the water cool, they separate and dry the Crystalls, laden with the vitriolick part of the Steel, which they have dissolv ' d. 
 Others observing the same proportion of water, Steel-dust, and Crystal of Tar∣tar, and putting them together at the beginning over the fire, cause them to boil about a quarter of an hour, in other things observing the same method as before. 
 There are some, who after they have dissolv ' d a pound of Crystal of Tartar in boiling water, think it enough to throw in an ounce of Vitriol of Mars, or Iron prepar ' d with Spirit of Vitriol, as I shall direct in place, then letting that liquor cool, they take off the Crystals that stick to the sides and bottom of the Vessel, and keep them for use. 
 Some having very judiciously pouder ' d four ounces of Crystal of Tartar, and two drams of Vitriol of Mars, moisten them, and reduce them into paste, with about two ounces of some Cordial water; then drying it, powdring and adding to it some few drops of distill ' d oil of Cinnamon or Cloves, they give it the name of Cyrstal of Tartar Chalybeate. You may choose which of these preparations you please. 
 Crystal of Tartar Chalybeate is look ' d upon as a specifick remedy for the cure of several Chronicall distempers, and among the rest, of obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Jaundies, quartane Agues, Hypochondriacal Melancholy, suppression of the Menstruums, Cachexies, and all distempers that come from obstructions of the Matrix. It is not us ' d till after general remedies; especially Purgatives. The dose is from half a scruple to half a dram in broth, or in some other hot liquor, in a morning fasting; and it may be continu ' d as the Physitian sees requisite. 
 CHAP. LXV. Of Crystal of Tartar Emetick. THE choice which is made here of Crystal of Tartar to envelop and as it were to concenter in its self the vomitive faculty of Antimonie, cannot but seem very reasonable to those, who considering that the acid part of this Crystal qualify∣ing the violence of the vomitorie, renders the effects more gentle, so that after a vomit or two, and that the stomack is thereby discharg ' d of some part of the ill humours, the rest falls downwards and works upon the matters which it meers with in those parts. 
 Crystal of Tartar being the Base of this preparation, I would not place it with those of Antimony, though the principal effects of it proceed from thence. The same reason obliges me not to speak here of that which concerns the Antimony, nor of the compos ' d water which is to be made use of for the preparation of this Crystal. 
 Take four ounces of Crystal of Tartar, and as much Crocus Metallorum, prepar ' d with Salt of wormwood, as I shall direct in the preparations of Antimony, and ha∣ving finely pouder ' d them and put the powder into a great Matras, pour upon them four pints of Aqua Benedicta of Serpoulet of Mynsich, of which I shall give you the receipt in the last part of this work. Then having stopp ' d up the Matrass, set it for three or four days in a Sand-bath over a very moderate fire, stirring the ingre∣dients from time to time. Then augment the fire of the Bath, to the end the liquor may boil a little, and pass it hot through a woollen cloath, leaving the Crocus Me∣tallorum at the bottom of the Matras. Then when the liquor is very cold, sepa∣rate and dry the Crystals; after they are dry, pouder them and keep them for your use.
This Crystal is one of the most gentle and most excellent Vomits that can be prepar ' d. For which reason it is giv ' n to all sorts of sexes and ages, and to persons the most nice and tender; and with much more safety then any other vomitory drawn from Antimony or any other Minerals. It is made use of very successfully in Lethargies, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Ravings and Rovings of the fancy, and in all other distempers of the brain. In diseases of the stomach, Vomitings, Jaundise, Dropsies, in Quartane, Tertian, Quotidian, and continu ' d Cholerick Agues. It is good also to empty the stomach of poysons and other Morbifick matters. The dose of this Crystal is from three or four to eight or ten grains, in broth or in some other hot liquor. 
 But though this Emetick Crystal work much more gently, then almost all other Emeticks; nevertheless you must not neglect the precautions to be observ ' d, when Vomits are given; of which the principal are, not to give them to persons who are subject to spitting of blood, Ulcers in their Lungs, narrow chested, their Lungs in∣wardly ulcer ' d; nor to such as are hard to vomit, nor to women with child. You must be careful also to give the Patient fat Broth, or Flesh when the vomit begins to work, to ease the operation, and make it work more kindly. 
 CHAP. LXVI. Of the fix ' d Salt of Tartar, and its dissolution in Liquor. IT is not seasonable here to contest about the fix ' d quality which the Ancients and Moderns have giv ' n to Sal Tartar, when they prepar ' d it by the ordinary ways, making use of a violent fire. But we should do ill to believe, that this Salt was of it self such, in regard it is naturally very volatile, and that it would continue in that condition, if as I have said in another place, the volatile acid Salt, which makes one part of the composition of Tartar, did not fix it, by making a strict union with it during its calcination. This alteration however, as considerable as it is, is not at all destructive, in regard you may restore to the greatest part of this Salt its first vola∣tility, if you free it from its chains, by separating or augmenting the acid, so that it may master it, or if you prevent its union with it. Yet their conjunction is not without a notable advantage, because that by fixing the volatile Salt, it hinders dissi∣pation, and for that it is serviceable for several uses, where the volatile Salt alone cannot produce the same effects, not being able to withstand the fire. 
 You may reserve the sediment of the Spirit and Oil of Tartar, of which I have spok ' n, and having calcin ' d it in an open fire, extract the Salt by the ordinary ways. But they that neither mind the Spirit nor the Oil of Tartar, may put some pounds of raw Tartar into a bag of large paper, and having ty ' d it fast, and laid it in water till it be well soak ' d, put it in the middle of a Hearth of a great Furnace half full of Charcoal well kindl ' d, and having cover ' d it well, keep a good fire for two long hours. The fire being quench ' d, the Tartar will remain calcin ' d in a black lump, com∣pos ' d of an acid Salt, united with a volatile Salt which it has fix ' d, and some earthy part of the Tartar which has mingl ' d with it. Afterwards boil this mass in a good quan∣tity of water, and having pass ' d the Liquor through a sheet of Cap-paper, return ' d it into the Vessel and boil ' d it again with the sediment in fresh water, refilter ' d it and mix ' d the same liquor with the former, evaporate the superfluous moisture over the fire, and the Sal Tartar will shew it self at the bottom of the Vessel very white and fix ' d, which you may keep as it is, in a double glass Bottle well stopp ' d, or set it in the Cellar or some moist place, till it be dissolv ' d into a liquor, which is impro∣perly call ' d Oil of Tartar, in regard it is only a Sal Tartar dissolv ' d; the dissolution whereof you may hasten by adding only as much water as is necessary to keep the Salt in dissolution. 
 They that desire to make Salt of Tartar, or any other Salts of Plants, accounted fix ' d, to look more white, and to preserve them in their beauty and dryness, so that the moisture of the air may neither penetrate nor dissolve them, after they have con∣sum ' d their superfluous moisture, may mingle them with about a third part of their weight of their Sulphur in powder, and cause it to burn and consume over a good Charcoal fire, and having made a Lye and filter ' d it, evaporate the liquor to a film, in a glass Cucurbit over a Sand fire. Then letting the substances cool, separate and dry the Crystals, and evaporate again the liquor that swims at the top, to a film, to gain the Salt which is contain ' d therein. 
 It is no wonder that these Salts, simply calcin ' d, cannot resist the penetration of the air; for having had in their calcination as much acid as was requisite for their fixation, but not to fill up all the little intervals which the operation of the fire had left there, they have their pores open, and subject to any penetration, especially that of the air, when environ ' d by it. But when they meet an acid more powerful, such as that which rises from the Sulphur, which was mix ' d and burnt with them in their last calcination, they fill themselves in such sort that having no more vacuities, the acid of the air cannot break the strict union which is between them. 
 Not that it is the best way to expose these Salts to such strong and frequent calci∣nations, which cannot be done without some notable diminution of some of their best parts, and among the rest of the spiritous Sulphur, as is observable in the dissi∣pation of the scent and savour of the Plant, which happens always to Salts thus cal∣cin ' d, which would preserve a good part of them, if they were not so expos ' d to the violence of the fire. Whence it comes to pass, that there is great reason to prefer the essential Salts, which may be drawn from Plants with a moderate and gentle fire, before those that undergo the violent fires of calcination. 
 Salt of Tartar is as it were a model of all the fix ' d Salts of Plants. There is none more us ' d, either in the one or the other Pharmacy, especially in Chymistry, which uses it not only among opening and purging medicines, and to mortifie the acids which cause the fermentations in our bodies; but also in the dissolutions and precipitations of several substances, especially of Minerals. Not to mention external applications as useful to take away scars and blemis s in the face, as for specifick remedies in all diseases of the skin, caus ' d by the acids. 
 There are some who after they have beaten equal parts of Tartar and Niter toge∣ther, put the powder into a great Iron Mortar well heated, and setting it over a fire of kindl ' d Charcoal, calcine the powders immediately, and find at the bottom a black Salt, which they put off for Salt of Tartar, though the fix ' d Salt of the Niter make above half of it. 
 There is a Crystalline Salt also to be prepar ' d, with equal parts of Salts of Tartar and Niter, well purify ' d, dissolv ' d in Rose-water heated, then filter ' d, coagulated, and crystalliz ' d after the ordinary manner; this by some is call ' d by the name of Sal Tar∣tar Niter ' d, very proper to open obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, and Ure∣ters; as also to asswage inflammations of the mouth and throat, giv ' n in proper li∣quors from half a scruple to half a dram. 
 CHAP. LXVII. Of Tartar vitrioliz ' d. THough the boiling and great heat, which is perceiv ' d in the vessel and in the sub∣stances, at the time of the conjunction of the Salt or Liquor of Tartar to the rectifi ' d Spirit of Vitriol, is taken by many for an effect of the Antimony which they believe there is, between the Acids and the Alkales; yet I dare presume to say, that the great inclination which these Salts have to unite reciprocally together, compelling them to act and react, one upon the other, with an extream quickness, and some sort of violence, is the cause of that boiling and heat which follows. For as the boiling and heat ceases, when the Salts have reciprocally penetrated and satisfied each other, so that neither happens afterwards, whatever superaddition you make of the one or the other to the two proportionally united: It would be ill done to impute that to any Antipathy, which if it were, would prove the destruction of the one or the other of these Salts, or of both together; which never happens. So that if you put the Tartar vitrioliz ' d into a Cornute, and urge it with a quick fire, you shall draw forth the Spirit of vitriol almost in the same condition as when you first made use of it, and find the Salt of Tartar at the bottom of the Cornute without any significant alteration. This Effervancy has urg ' d some to give to Tar∣tar vitrioliz ' d the name of a Magistery, though you perceive no precipitation, in the conjunction of the acid Spirit with the fix ' d Salt; but only a Coagulation which proceeds from the inward union, and corporification of the Spirit of Vitriol with the Salt of Tartar. 
 They are also in a great error, who fear lest the most volatile part of this Tar∣tar vitrioliz ' d, should be dissipated in that great heat and boiling of the substances, seeing it is most certain that nothing rises but an insipid water; and that reason and experience teach us, that the volatile and fix ' d Salts, having a mutual inclination to join to acids, embrace them, and mix themselves both very streight and closely to∣gether; So that it is a difficult thing to separate them; as may be verify ' d in the conjunction of volatile Salts of Animals to Acids; where the hear and effervescency, though very considerable, cause nothing to ascend but a water very insipid and with∣out scent. Though some have adviz ' d the use of small funnells, to pour the acids gently upon the volatile Salts, and to stop the orifices of the Vessels, fearing to little purpose, the dissipation of one part of a Salt whose volatile nature the Acid changes in a moment into fix ' d, by the strict union which it makes with it. 
 There is some difference in Authors about the proportion of the Salt of Tar∣tar with the Spirit of Vitriol for the preparation of Tartar vitrioliz ' d. For which the surest rule is to cease to pour the one upon the other, when the Ebullition ceases. For that is a sure sign that the fix ' d Salt, and the acid Spirit have suffici∣ently penetrated and satisfi ' d one another, and that they are mix ' d to their due pro∣portion. 
 This Salt and this Spirit is to be mix ' d in a large and high glass-Cucurbit, that the Ebullition may have room enough. You may either pour the Spirit of Vitriol upon the Liquor, or the Liquor upon the Spirit. Only you must be careful to pour the one upon the other very gently, to stir the liquors from time to time, the better to unite them well, and not to pour any more, when the Ebullition ceases. At which time place the Cucurbit in a Sand-bath over a very moderate fire, and gently evapo∣rate the superfluous moisture to attain a thin film, that you may have the Tartar vitrioliz ' d white and Crystalline; or else to the total consumption of the moi∣sture, that you may have it in Mass or in white powder. 
 Yet you may shorten your work very much, by putting what quantity you please of very white and very dry Salt of Tartar in powder, in the bottom of a glass-Cu∣curbit, pouring gently upon it as much good Spirit of Vitriol, as it can suck up, and forbearing to pour any more when you perceive the Ebullition cease. For by this means you have a Tartar vitrioliz ' d very white and dry, never needing to eva∣porate any superfluous moisture. This preparation may also serve for a general example not only of the union of Alkali ' s with acids; and of the great alteration which happens to their scent and their other qualities by their conjunction; but of the change of liquid into solid; which manifests it self in Spirit of Vitriol, which unites it self and makes but one body with the Salt of Tartar. 
 Tartar vitrioliz ' d is an excellent digestive; it cuts and opens. The great use of it is to open obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and all the Bowels, as also of those of the Matrix. The dose is from half a scruple to half a dram in con∣venient liquors. It is also mix ' d with Opiates, and among other opening and purging remedies. 
 CHAP. LXVIII. Of Salt of Tartar Foliated. SEveral Authors have treated of this preparation, under several names and me∣thods, which nevertheless tend all of them almost to the same end or significa∣tion. Their principal end being to satiate, as I may so say, the fix ' d Salt of Tartar with the acid of Vinegar, and to fill up the vacuums remaining as well in the one as in that of the Spirit of Wine, to unite them more closely together. Some ad∣vise to imbibe the Salt of Tartar several times in good Wine▪ and as often to draw off again by distillation the watry part, and to repeat these operations, till the Vin∣egar put in, distills as acid as when it was first made use of. But the following method is more short and easy. 
 Put the Salt of Tartar into a large glass Cucurbit, and gently pour upon it as much Spirit of Vinegar as the Salt can suck up, so that the Salt and the Spirit may find themselves reciprocally penetrated and satiated one by another, and that there be no effervency in the substances. For by this means you shall do more at one, then you could do at several times; so that the Salt of Tartar and the acid of Vinegar being intimately united, you may easily evaporate some-portion of the watry part of the Spirit of Vinegar in a Sand-bath over a moderate fire, and you shall find at the bottom of the Cucurbit a black substance, the same that would have appear ' d after all the repeated operations before mention ' d. Then letting the substance cool, you shall dissolve it in good Spirit of Wine, and having pass ' d it through a sheet of grey paper, put it into a Cucurbit, or into a glaz ' d earthen Pipkin, and evaporate the Spirit in a Bath of Ashes or Sand, over a very gentle fire, till the substance be fully dry ' d. Then dissolve it again and having refilter ' d it, evaporate this Spirit, as you did the former. Renew all these operations still, till you find the substance white, dry, and in distinct leaves at the bottom of the vessel; which is the reason that some Authors have given it the name of Salt of Tartar Foliated, or Foliated earth of Tartar. 
 Salt of Tartar charg ' d with the acid of Vinegar, partakes much of the virtues of Tartar vitrioliz ' d. But the addition of the Spirit of wine makes some alteration. For as the acid exceeding the volatile Sulphur, was the cause of the changing of Wine into Vinegar, so the volatile Sulphur of wine here added, qualifies the eager∣ness of the acid of the Vinegar, and changes the nature of the composition, whence arises a new effect and a virtue altogether particular. 
 In the mean time take notice that in the union of the acid of Vinegar with the Salt of Tartar, there is a precipitation of the latter terrestrial part of the same Salt, which would be otherwise almost inseparable; and that in the dissolutions, and filtrations made with the Spirit of wine it remains in the filter, and the mass becomes perfectly cleans ' d from all impurity.
You may dissolve this Salt in some Cordial water, and having Crystalliz ' d it and dry ' d it by the ordinary ways, keep it in a double glass bottle well stopp ' d; or put it up, when you have reduc ' d it into leaves; or set it in a damp Cellar, and there∣by dissolve it into a kind of purple colour ' d liquor. 
 This Salt is of a middle nature between fix ' d and volatile. It is moderately hot, and very proper to purify the mass of the blood; and to purge gently Tartarous humours, which are the cause of several obstinate distempers. It is giv ' n from five or six, to eight or ten grains; or else altogether as many drops, when dissolv ' d, either in broth, or in any other proper decoction. You may make use of this Salt to penetrate and open several Mineralls, and to extract Tinctures, especially from Iron, adding Spirit of Wine, or some other Menstruum. 
 CHAP. LXIX. Of the volatile Salt of Tartar. SAlt of Tartar being naturally volatile, there is no great study to be us ' d to change its nature, rather we must take care to hinder the acid part of Tartar from fixing the volatile; or else find out means to separate them, when they are united and fix ' d together. The Ancients and most part of the Moderns, not knowing the great in∣clination which the volatile and fix ' d Salts have to join with acids, nor the indissolu∣bility of their union when contracted together: we need not wonder at their ill success, in searching after this volatile Salt; and that the greatest part of Authors have rather chosen to suppress it, and thereby tacitly to testify that it was not with∣in their knowledg, then to manifest how ill they had improv ' d their time and pains, being not able to write any thing of certainty in this particular. 
 Certain it is that the acid and volatile Salts which are naturally found in Tartar, are not to be separated one from another, but with great difficulty; but that they are always inclin ' d to unite themselves as strictly as it is possible together; especi∣ally in Calcination, which dissipates the watry part, that sensibly divided and sepa∣rated their parts and manifestly closes up the terrestrial part, which serves as a means to their union. And though that by this violent fire which consumes the watry part, the acid suffer a notable diminution, yet there is enough behind to maintain the union, which they contracted, while they acted one upon the other, during Calcination. So that to break this union, by separating or surmounting the acid which remains, and keeps the volatile within its parts after Calcination, some of the Moderns make use of a new acid, to unite it self to that fix ' d Salt. And that with very great reason: for the Salt of Tartar having lost in Calcination much of the acid parts which stopp ' d it; and there being only enough remaining to preserve the quality of fix ' d; the most fix ' d part of this Salt, finds it self half starv ' d for want of acid, (which happens na∣turally to all fix ' d Salts) whence it comes to pass that swiftly uniting it self to this new acid, whose parts are ready to fill all the vacancies which the action of the fire had left empty, This new union is the cause that the more volatile part of the Salt of Tartar resumes its natural liberty and volatility, and soon makes it self ma∣nifest by its smell, and by all the marks Essential to volatile Salts. Which is not to be wonder ' d at, since that to restore to the volatile Salts of Animals the volatility which the acids have suppress ' d in fixing them, we have recourse to the fix ' d Salts, which are only able to force the acid Salts to abandon the volatiles, to unite them∣selves to them: whence it comes to pass, that these volatiles disingage themselves, and appear withall the qualities of which they are capable. 
 The moderns direct, that after you have calcin ' d to blackness two or three pound of raw Tartar, and put them into a great Iron pot, to pour common water into it, about a fingers breadth above the substances; afterwards to set the pot over a very gentle fire, and when the substances are well soak ' d and only lukewarm, to strow there∣by degrees about half a handful of raw Tartar finely powder ' d; so that you shall perceive several bubbles to rise upon the liquors. Then continuing to strew new pouder of Tartar by degrees, and from time to time upon the liquor, the Fermen∣tation will encrease, the bubbles grow bigger and multiply, and heap together, like clusters of Grapes. In the mean time you are so to manage the fire, so that it may not exceed in heat those that are generally us ' d for Fermentations, and to strow your powder very moderately, and not to strow too much at a time, for fear the substances boil over the sides of the vessel; and not to cast in any more pouder when the ebullition ceases. After which, this liquor is to be put into a Cucurbit of Iron very large and very high, which being cover ' d with its head well luted, with a Recipient well fitted and luted on, distillation is to be made in a Sand-bath over a very moderate fire, especially at the beginning, applying from time to time cold wet cloaths about the Cucurbit to suppress the boiling of the liquor: at length you must augment the fire to cause the volatile Salt to ascend, and rectify the distill ' d liquor as much as is necessary for the separation of the Salt, and to have it in all its beauty and purity. These writers assure us, that this Fermentation makes so entire a division of the parts, as well of the raw Tartar, as of the Calcin ' d, that after distillation, there is not to be found in the Sediment any Salt at all either volatile or fix ' d. 
 The raw Tartar and the Salt of Tartar calcin ' d, proceeding from the same sub∣stance, and being of the same nature in their original, it is a difficult thing to de∣termine which of the two volatizes soonest in Fermentation, especially ascending in great quantity, and none remaining among the sediment, as these writers believe. But my thoughts are, that in this confusion into which the fermentation puts the parts, to dispose them to separation, the acid of the Tartar fails not to unite it self to as much of the fix ' d Tartar as it can compass, and that the portion of Salt which is united to it, is no more troubl ' d to preserve its union, then that which separating from the juice of grapes in Fermentation, creates the principal parts of the substance of Tartar, 
 The Salt of Tartar may be also volatiz ' d by means of the black distill ' d oil of Tartar; of which you may take one part, and having incorporated it with twice as much of its weight of purified Salt of Tartar, put this mass into a glass Cor∣nute; and having exactly stopp ' d it, and set it five or six months over a Bakers oven, or in any other place, moderately hot, open the mouth of the Cornute, and ioyning to its beak a great Recipient carefully luted, you may draw forth in a Bath of Sand with a gradual fire a volatile Salt smelling like urine, white, Cry∣stalline, and of a very penetrating scent, accompani ' d with a small quantity of the same Salt, which is found dissolv ' d into liquor, mingl ' d with some little oil, almost as penetrating as the Salt it self. 
 Now though we may say that the oil of Tartar contains in it much of the vola∣tile Salt, as do several other oils, and that the volatile Salt which we draw out of it may proceed from it; nevertheless there is great likelihood that the Salt of Tartar affords the greatest part of it; because the volatile Salt ascends in very great quantity, because you have more then you put in oil; and because there remains nothing but an oily coal, representing chiefly the feces of the oil, and weigh∣ing much less then the Salt of Tartar made use of. I am of opinion also that the great digestion having made an opening and division even to the smallest particles of those two substances, and brok ' n the particular union of the Salt Tartar, with some portion of the acid, and some particles of earth, like to that which the oil had made with some part of the volatile Salt, and having also disorder ' d all their parts and giv ' n them another scituation in their new union, it is easy then for the volatile Salt, and the most pure part of the oil to manifest themselves with all their qualities, and to quit these chains that have now no longer power to stop them. To which we may add that the secret ferment of the volatile Salt conceal ' d in the oil of Tartar, having had time sufficient to raise and increase it self, has not only gain ' d the upper hand of the acid part, but has in some measure converted it into its own proper sub∣stance, taking advantage of the conjunction of the oil of Tartar, upon which the acids have no power, not being able to unite when they are alone, and to which they cannot unite but by means of the Salts: considering also that the acids not be∣ing able without great difficulty to break the union which the Salts easily make with the oils, are inforc ' d to change figure, and to conform to the nature of Salts, to the end they may share in the union which the same Salts have contra∣cted with the oils. 
 The use of Allum, which some of our Moderns employ for the volatizing of Salt Tartar, deserves to have its place here, notwithstanding some little disputes may arise, touching the diversity of the substance of Sal Tartar from that of Allum; wherein the scrupulous will soon be satisfy ' d, if they consider, that Allum yeilds nothing of evil or prejudicial, in distillation; and that the spiritous water thereof is us ' d with success, given inwardly in diseases of the mouth and throat. The Mo∣derns use this method. 
 They mingle three pound of Sal Tartar, very dry and well purify ' d, with the full weight of raw Allum in powder; and having put them into a great Earthen Cornute well luted about, and plac ' d it in a close Furnace of Reverberation, they distill it with a gradual fire, soft at first, but at last increas ' d to the utmost violence of heat; by which means, when the Vessels are cold, you shall find in the Reci∣pient very much volatile Salt of Tartar, the scent and taste whereof will be very keen and penetrating; and the spiritous water of Allum mix ' d with it; which you must rectifie by the ordinary way, to have the volatile Salt in its purity and perfection. 
 The same modern Writers, to take away all objections against the watry and spiritous parts of the Allum, which rise with those parts that ascend from the Salt of Tartar in distillation, direct instead of raw Allum, only to make use of its Caput Mortuum, which after you have beaten and mix ' d with an equal weight of Salt of Tartar, well dry ' d and in powder, you may draw forth the volatile Salt by a Cornute, doing as you did with the raw Allum. 
 The Acid contain ' d in Allum, is so weak and inconsiderable, that there is very little reason to attribute to it the volatilization of Salt of Tartar, but rather to its fix ' d part that remains after distillation; considering that according to the opinion of the moderns, it produces this effect without any participation with the Acid. As to the reasons of the volatilization of this Salt by the means of Allum, my Opinion is, that the terrestrial Salt of the latter, being mix ' d with the Salt of Tartar, meeting there the remainder of the Acid which had fix ' d this Salt, and finding it self more porous and more dry then it, sucks it up, or at least diminishes it in such sort, that not being able to retain so large a quantity in its pores, it forsakes the greatest part, which being at liberty, becomes volatile as it was na∣turally. 
 I have said in another place, that the most acid substance of the juice of the Grape, unites it self with a good part of the volatile Salt for the composition of Tartar; and that the Lee that lies at the bottom of the Casks, abounding in volatile Salt and sul∣phury Spirit, contains but very little acid, which would not be enough to fix but very little of the volatile. For which reasons it is, that the volatile Salt may be easily drawn from this Lee; and that there is no need of borrowing forreign assistance for that purpose. To which intent, having separated by filtration and expression the Wine which accompanies the more thick part of the Lee, where the volatile Salt lies hid in the terrestrial part; and having distill ' d this Wine to make advantage of its vola∣tile and inflammable Spirit, dry the thick part very well in the Sun, or over a Ba∣kers Oven; and having pulveriz ' d it, sprinkle it with its proper Spirit, or some other well rectify ' d, and having moderately moistned it, let the whole mass dry of it self, where you dry ' d it before; then fill with it two thirds of a large Cornute of Pot∣ters Earth, and having plac ' d it in a close Furnace of Reverberation, and fitted and well luted to its beak a large Recipient, make distillation; beginning with a gentle fire, increasing it by degrees for ten or twelve hours to the utmost violence. After which, the Vessels being cold and unluted, you shall find in the Recipient the vola∣tile Salt of Tartar mingl ' d with the oily part, and much flegm, which you must empty both together into a large Matras with a long neck, and having plac ' d it in a Sand∣bath, cover ' d with its head well luted, with a Recipient luted to it as exactly, make rectification with a moderate fire, using the same method as for the rectification of other volatile Salts; you shall then perceive, that the volatile Salt of the Tartar mounting first, will stick to the inside of the head in a white and crystalline form; whence it must be separated with as much art as celerity, to hinder as much as may be its separation and mixture with the oily part, which will follow next to this vo∣latile Salt, and ascend with the Flegm, that will have dissolv ' d and carry ' d with it the rest of this volatile Salt. 
 The sprinkling of the Spirit of Wine, well rectify ' d, upon the dry Lee, is not so absolutely necessary, that the volatile Salt cannot be drawn out, but by the help of this Spirit. But there is this advantage in it, that by embracing some part of the acid of the Lee, and taking it along with it in its dissipation, it frees the volatile Salt, so that you have it in greater quantity by that means, then otherwise you could do. 
 The volatile Salt of Tartar is very proper to purifie the mass of the blood, and to expel through the pores fuliginous and sharp humours; to mortifie acids, and pre∣vent fermentation; and to cause those humours to transpire, or else to carry them off by siege or urine. It may be successfully us ' d for the cure of intermitting Agues, especially the Quartane; for the cure of Dropsies, Jaundise, Cachexies, Scurvy, and the most part of Chronical diseases of men and women. It must be taken a good while before meals, from ten or twelve grains, to twenty or thirty, in convenient liquors, or in Bolus mix ' d with Conserves, or other medicines. It is very specifick to Gangrenes, taken inwardly, or apply ' d to the Gangrene it self. It is recommended for the dissolution of several Minerals. 
 I might have here inserted other preparations of volatile Salt of Tartar; but I think I have given enough. Besides that I am very well assur ' d, that the latter is no way inferiour either for its truth or easiness of preparation, to any that can be added to it. 
 As to what remains, the examples which I have given of volatile, white, and cry∣stalline Salts, which may be extracted according to my method, not only from the Lees of Wine and dry ' d Beans, but also from any other Pulse, and many antiscor∣butick Plants, may serve to rectifie the errors of those, who have thought that to be true which Zwelfer has maintain ' d in his fifteenth Classis, and his 688 page of his Royal Pharmacopoea, printed at Dordreckt in the year 1672; where after seve∣ral discourses tending to the same end, he concludes in these words, Quare vero ve∣rius comprobatum manet, &amp;c. Wherefore it remains a Maxim truer then Truth it self, That no substantial existing volatile Salt, can by Art be extracted from Vegetals, as from Animals it is every day done; only a fix ' d Salt; and not that neither, unless incinera∣tion precede. For the experience and trials which I have made of those things which I have preferr ' d, will utterly overthrow all his assertions; and at the same time de∣stroy all the pretended reasons which he has brought to uphold his opinion. For though it be a difficult thing to believe, that such a person as he, who has been ac∣counted learned and experimented in his Art, should be deceived in matters that may be thought to pass so frequently through his hands; nevertheless it appears to be true, that he has not made sufficient reflections upon what he has put to the Press; and that he would not have been so positive in his assertion, had he to the bottom examin ' d the nature of these very things whereof he has treated. Otherwise he might have had this, among other considerations, that Soot, which is scarcely com∣pos ' d of any thing else but the Salt and oily parts of the wood, which the violent operation of the fire has carry ' d up and fix ' d to the sides of the Chimney, affords in distillation by a Retort, very much volatile Salt, which cannot be accounted other then a real volatile Salt of Vegetals. And it is a convincing proof, that this Author forgot himself upon this argument; in regard that he falls into a manifest contradicti∣on, in the same Classis, p. 19. where he undertakes, contrary to his declar ' d judgment, to set down a method how to prepare a volatile Salt of Tartar, which all the world knows to be one part of a Vegetal. Though his method, very troublesome as it is, only tends to unite the fix ' d Salt of Tartar with the most subtle acid Salt of the air, which he pretends to join together; and that all which he draws from thence comes nothing near to the virtues of the true Salt of Tartar, of which I have shew ' d you the preparation. 
 CHAP. LXX. Of Oily Volatile Salt. THE high praises which Silvius, a Physitian of Leyden, has given to oily vola∣tile Salt, and the frequent use which he made of it in the cure of several di∣seases, having rais ' d in many persons a desire to know the preparation of it, may give them an occasion to complain of this learned man, in regard that having com∣municated to publick view so many excellent writings, yet he omits to impart a re∣ceipt, of which he makes such frequent mention therein. Nevertheless it was the judgment of some, that the consideration of those distempers for which he made use of it, and the examination of other remedies which he prescrib ' d for the same, or for diseases of the same nature, might give some insight to understand what this preparation should be, and that it might be infallibly found out, by making a pro∣portional union of oily substances with spiritous and salt volatiles. To which pur∣pose some there are who having incorporated certain drops of distill ' d Oils with fine powder ' d Sugar, dissolve them in spiritous Aromatick waters; afterwards mix∣ing therewith some volatile Salt of Animals or Vegetals. Others believe they reach the intention of Sylvius, by dissolving some portion of volatile Salt in the spiritous and oily water of Marjoram, Lavender, or some other Plant, odoriferous and con∣taining a certain Oil in it. Others mix the oily Spirits of Aromaticks with the vo∣latile Salts, or their salt Spirits, which are nothing else but the same Salts dissolv ' d in some portion of Flegm. But to know the proportion of the several substances that compose an oily volatile Salt, I cannot direct you better then by imparting the receipt which Monsieur Telingius, Physick-Professor at Ryntel, has communicated to us, in his Book enituled, Prodromus Praxeos Chymiatricae, printed at Ryntel in the year 1674, where you may find it, page 342. 
 Take, saith he, an ounce of Aromatick Spirit, (whereof he gives you after¦wards the receipt) two drams of volatile Salt Armoniack, and six drops of tin∣cture of Cloves; and having mingl ' d them well in a Bottle, and stop ' d them well, let the mixture stand all night, and then separate by inclination the clear liquor from the powder, that will be precipitated to the bottom; by which means you shall have a volatile oily Salt, or an Aromatick Spirit charg ' d with a volatile Salt, or a volatile Salt temper ' d of a pleasing smell and taste; which by reason of the fineness of its parts, is very proper to attenuate and discuss bad humours, and to expel them through the pores. It is us ' d with success in all sorts of cold distempers, especially those that proceed from some acid juice or ferment, whose boiling and the effects thereof it prevents. The dose is from five drops to ten, in proper di∣still ' d water. 
 The Receipt of his Aromatical Spirit is this:
Take two ounces of good Cinnamon, one ounce and a half of red Roses, six drams of Anniseseed, and as much Fennel-seed; half an ounce of Galanga-root, as much Cloves, two drams of Cardamum, as much of the seed of Barberries, two scruples of Santal Citron, as much Nutmegs, and as much of Cubebs; bruise the ingredients, all but the Roses, and having mix ' d them, and put them all together into a glass Cucurbit, and pour ' d upon them six pints of good Spirit of Wine, and one pint of Rain-water, cover the Cucurbit with its head well luted; then place the Cucurbit in a Sand-bath, and having fitted a Recipient to the beak of the head, digest the ingredients over a very slack fire for four and twenty hours, and then distill them, observing the same method as for the Spirits of all sorts of Aro∣maticks. This Spirit heats, attenuates, and dries; fortifies the heart and stomach, and is proper in all sorts of cold diseases. 
 The different substances of the Spices made use of in this Aromatick Spirit, might seem to require different macerations. But considering, that the most subtle parts of the Aromaticks easily separate from the grosser, the contusion, the four and twenty hours digestion, and the penetration of the Spirit of Wine, are enough to remove all scruples in this particular. 
 The Second Book: Containing the CHYMICAL PREPARATIONS OF ANIMALS. CHAP. I. Of Medicines extracted out of the Body of Man. VEgetals, the preparations whereof were the subject of the preceeding Book, are not the only things which God has created for the service of Man; for He has not only ordain ' d for him in several Animals, a good part of that which is necessary and proper for human sustenance; but He has furnish ' d him with the means and art to extract out of every one of them in par∣ticular, several excellent remedies; and not only so, but he has given to man a pe∣culiar knowledg of many other medicines contain ' d in his own Body in his life time, and in the Bodies of other men after their deaths, far superior to those that are comprehended in the bodies of any other creature whatsoever. So that Chymistry need not want work, while busied in those copious Preparations which include not only the Scull, and other Bones of Men, the Blood, the Fat, the Flesh, and Mum∣my, which is the Body embalm ' d and dry ' d, but also the Nails, the Hair, the Urine, and other Excrements, even to the very Secondines of Women. So that it may be said, that there is not any part or excrement, no superfluity in Man or Woman, which Chymistry cannot prepare for the cure or ease of the most diseases and pains to which both are subject. 
 Artists extract from the parts of Man and Animals, substances not much un∣like to those of Plants though not in the same proportion; for Animals have less of Earth, less of Acid, and much more volatile Salt then they. Animals have also much more Oil then some, and less then others. The little Acid which is con∣tain ' d in Animals, and consequently the want of power to put a stop to more then some small quantity of the volatile Salt that very much abounds in quantity, is the reason that we must not wonder that when there is nothing to hinder it from aban∣doning the other substances, there should be so little trouble to separate it, and to make it come forth in the first place into the Recipient, then to ascend from the bottom of a Matras with a long neck to the top of the head in rectification, as will happen in the making of the preparation. 
 As to what concerns the Oil, being of it self volatile enough, and participating very much of the nature, and also of the proper substance of this Salt, it so falls out that the oil follows next as well in rectification as in distillation. I say moreover that though there be Animals which eat one another for their nourishment, and that man himself, lives in part upon the flesh of several Animals, yet we must look up∣on the Plants as the most considerable, and principal nourishment of the most part of Animals, especially of those that serve for the food of men; and believe that it is from the volatile Salt of the plants, that the most part of Animals, espe∣cially men, receive theirs. We are also to believe that the quality and quantity of the volatile Salt of Animals proceeds from the exaltation which the natural heat of the stomach makes of the substances which serve for their nourishment; and that this volatility is absolutely necessary for them, to the end they may he quickly and equally, as they are, convey ' d to the remote parts from the stomach, as well as to those which are near it. Nor is there any doubt but that the principal parts of man, are abundantly furnish ' d with volatile Salt, in regard that not only the parts that are without sense, as the Nailes and Hair, but also the most vile excrements of the bo∣dy contain in them a very considerable quantity. 
 CHAP. II. Of the preparation of Mans Scull. I Cannot well approve Ustion or Calcination of a mans scull, nor the magistery which some Authors direct us to make of it; in regard it cannot be burnt or calcin ' d without dissipating the best parts, nor reduc ' d into a Magistery without de∣praving the virtues of it. And therefore I will not trouble my self to set down the description of it, being absolutely of opinion, that it would be much better to rasp the scull and make it into powder, according to the Galenick method, then to use other destructive means, so far from the true preparation of so good a remedy; it being impossible for a calcin ' d scull to have any other considerable virtue, but only to mortify or suck up certain acids. 
 The best Chymical preparation that can be made of a mans scull, is that of its distillation. For which purpose having got two or three sculls of men hang ' d or put to some other violent death in a healthy condition of body, bruise or saw them into small pieces, and put them into a Cornute of Potters-earth very well luted, never minding whether it be more or less full, in regard the distillation may be equally made, provided the rest of the operation be regular. Place this Cornute in a close Furnace of Reverberation, and having cover ' d it with its Duomo, and lighted in the ashes hole a soft Charcoal fire, shut the Register of the Duomo, the door of the fire-place, and that of the hole for the ashes almost quite close, and keep an e∣qual soft fire for two hours, or till you perceive the Duomo to be never so little hot: at which time remove the fire out of the Ashes-hole into the fire place; and having increas ' d it a little, fit a large Recipient to the beak of the Re∣tort, luting the closures very carefully, and giving sometime after never so little air to the Register of the Duomo, and so continue the same fire for two hours, or till the Flegm begin to distill into the Recipient. Then giving a little more air, and increasing the fire one degree hotter, you shall perceive the volatile Salt Spirits ac∣company ' d with the oil to come forth out of the Cornute in white Clouds. Then keep∣ing an equal fire for two hours longer, increase it one degree of heat more, opening the Register of the Duomo more and more by proportional Intervalls; till at length having set it quite open, and augmented the fire to the utmost degree of heat, continue it so till no more Clouds coming out of the Retort, the Recipient is be∣come altogether transparently clear. At which time let the Vessels cool, and then un∣luting them you shall find the Oil, and the Spiritous Salt and volatile part of the scull together with much Flegm descended to the bottom of the Recipient. Of which several substances make a Rectification, by putting them together into a Matrass with a long neck plac ' d in a Sand-bath, and cover ' d with its glass-head perfectly well luted, observing the same method as for the volatile Salts of Vegetals. 
 Some there are that separate the oil from the other substances before Rectifi∣cation, filtring the two latter substances through a sheet of course paper, upon which the oil stops, and which they reserve alone for external uses; not conside∣ring that this oil contains in it very much volatile Salt, that the qualities and vertues of it are almost the same with those of the Salt, and may be employ ' d for the same internal uses, especially being well rectify ' d. Which is the reason that it is much better to leave it with the other substances in Rectification. 
 The same Authors thinking to rectify this volatile Salt the more exactly, give di∣rection after the Salt and watry liquor is put into a Matrass with a long neck, to pour upon them by little and little through a small glass Funnel Spirit of Salt, till the Ebullition cease; pretending, after they have filter ' d and put the liquor into a glass Cucurbit cover ' d with its head, and made the watry part to ascend by a Sand∣bath, to raise the volatile Salt to the head or to the sides of the Cucurbit, being fix ' d by the Spirit of Salt. But they have not well consider ' d of the action and reopera∣tion of that acid Spirit with the volatile Salt; nor did they foresee that being by that reciprocally fix ' d, the volatile Salt is no more in a condition to raise it self. Con∣sidering that by their own confession, they cannot after that effect what they aim at, but by adding and uniting to those Salts so mingl ' d, double their weight of Salt of Tartar, or some other Alkali of the same Nature, which by uniting it self to the acid may give the Salt it ' s former liberty. 
 All Authors who have wrote of the scull of man, simply prepar ' d, have highly re∣commended it for the cure of all diseases of the brain, and particularly of the Apo∣plexy and epilepsy. But the oil and volatile Salt of the Scull, being not only freed from their earthy and watry part, but highly purify ' d by Distillation and Rec∣tification, are capable of producing effects incomparably more powerful, of which the smartness and penetration of their savour and smell are unquestionable marks. Besides, we are to understand that the heat of the stomach causes them to pass with as much ease as swiftness, not only to the brain, but to all the most remote parts of the body. The oil as well as the Salt may be both taken inwardly. But the Salt is to be preferr ' d, because it is a little more volatile, more pure, more sightly, and less displeasing to the tast and smell. The dose is from six, eight, and ten grains, to twenty and thirty in some water, decoction, Conserve or Cephalick Opiate. The dose of the Oil rectifi ' d is from two or three drops to eight or ten, in some liquors, Conserves or Opi∣ates. But it must be incorporated first with fine pouder Sugar, if you intend to u∣nite it well with those liquors. You may also use it to anoint the Temples, or the utures of the scull, or put it up into the Nostrlils. 
 Substances very much like to those which are extracted from the scull of Man, may be drawn out of all the bones, observing the same method in their di∣stillation. 
 You may also prepare an Extract or an Essence of the scull of Man, according to the following direction. After you have rasp ' d very small some pieces of the scull, put them into a Matrass, and pour ' d upon them Cephalick Magistrial Spirit of Wine, as I have order ' d it in the last part of this Pharmacopoea, till it rise four good fingers above the Pouder, stop the Matrass carefully; and having set it to ma∣cerate for fifteen days over a Bakers oven, strain and squeeze out the liquor strongly in a Press, and then putting it into a Cucurbit with its head well luted, place the Cucurbit in Balneo Mariae, and fitting a small Recipient to the beak, draw forth the Spirit till the liquor have acquir ' d the consistency of Honey, then put up both the one and the other in proper vessels. 
 Some make use of distill ' d Vinegar for this Extraction, though it be very ill done, for it changes the nature of the volatile Salt of Mans scull by fixing it. Nor is there any fear but that the Spirit of Wine will sufficiently penetrate the substance of the scull so rasp ' d, without any need of Spirit of Vinegar, or any Corrosive, since we see that the juice and the most pure substance of Harts-horn easily dissolve in the water, where you have boil ' d the shavings, though more grosly rasp ' d then the mans scull is wont to be. 
 This Essence or Extract is commended for the cure of the Epilepsy. It is giv ' n in some Cephalick water from half a scruple to half a dram. You may also mingle with it, from half a scruple to a dram of the water drawn from the Extract. 
 CHAP. III. Of the Chymical Preparation of Human Blood. I Am not of their opinion, that the Blood of Man, gulp ' d down warm as it runs out of the Veins, is a specifick remedy against the Epilepsie. For besides the detestation of such a cruel Beverage, and that the Blood running from the person let blood, does not contain in it any part which is not like to those of the Blood of the person which is to drink it; we are to believe, that the Blood, being once out of its proper Vessels, alters extremely in an instant, how careful soever we might be to preserve it in its natural condition; and that it would be so far from being con∣veigh ' d into the Veins or Arteries, just as it was swallow ' d, that it would change its nature in the stomach, and lose both its colour and its natural consistence. So that there is no reason to expect from it any other effect then what may be expected from ordinary food. 
 But by the way of distillation, and separation of the pure parts of Human Blood, most effectual remedies may be prepar ' d against the Epilepsie, and all diseases of the Brain, and that by the following directions. 
 In the month of May take a considerable quantity of healthy young mens blood, let blood in that season, who are not red hairs. Put this blood at the same time into one or more Cucurbits of Earth, of which three quarters must be empty, and ha∣ving fitted to them their heads and their small Recipients, draw off all the watry part in an Ember-Bath with a moderate fire, till that which remains in the Cucur∣bit he quite dry, but not burnt. To which purpose you must have great care of the fire, especially at the end. Then having cool ' d the Vessels and put up the di∣still ' d water, put into a great glass Cucurbit the dry blood in the other Cucurbits, and having set the Retort in a close Furnace of Reverberation, and fitted and luted to it a large Recipient, make a new distillation with a gradual fire, soft at first, but afterwards very violent, and by that means you shall have a new water with the Oil, and the volatile Salt will presently follow and accompany, issuing out of the Cu∣curbit in white Clouds, and dissolving themselves into the Recipient. Then letting the Vessels cool, turn out all the substances in the Recipient into a Matras with a long neck, cover it with its head exactly luted; lute also a small Recipient to the beak, and make a rectification in a Sand-bath with a moderate fire, according to my former directions for volatile Oils and Salts of Plants. This rectification may be also repeated, if you desire a more exact purity. 
 There are some, who observing that the water drawn from blood, distill ' d in a Cucurbit, is of no great virtue, only spread the blood upon several Plates, and let it dry in the Sun, or in some Stove as quick as they can, after which they distill it in a Retort the ordinary way. 
 All Writers extol the volatile Salt of Mans blood for the cure of the Epilepsie. Helmont also affirms, that the use of it cures persons that are grown in years. It is also very effectual in all other diseases of the brain. It purifies the mass of the blood, especially in Scorbuticks, making it fluid, and helping circulation. It is very pro∣per to suppress and dissipate vapours that rise from the Stomach, Spleen, and other Bowels. It is no less effectual against the vapours of the Matrix; to contend with the malignity of Fevers, though contageous, as also for the cure of the Dropsie, and to ease the pains of the Gout. The virtues of this volatile Salt and rectify ' d Oil, are very like to those which are drawn from the Sculs of men. The rectify ' d Oil is also made use of in external unction of those that are troubl ' d with the Gout and Rheumatisms, and of great advantage against the Palsie. 
 The blood that flows from women after labour, is distill ' d according to the same method.
I might here speak of Tinctures, Extracts, and other Preparations of Mum∣my, which some Authors have set down and very highly commended. But I think that these two preparations of Human Blood, Mens Skulls are incom∣parably much better for all intents and purposes, being drawn from parts that have suffer ' d no dissipation, then such whose operations must be upon subjects that have receiv ' d great alterations by the injury of time, or the deceit of Men. 
 CHAP. IV. Of the Distillation of Urine. THE salt and smart taste of mans Urine, and its strong smell, especially if it be kept awhile, make it manifest that all the parts of the Body out of which it was made, abound in volatile Salt, since there is so great a quantity in this excre∣ment. We usually make choice of the Urine of young men that drink Wine, as being to be preferr ' d before that of any other persons; but we proceed variously in the extraction of the volatile Salt. For we may putrifie Urine in Horsedung for thirty or forty days, the better to separate its salt volatile parts. And then having pour ' d out by inclination the liquor that swims above the sediment, make the distil∣lation in Balneo Mariae; or in an Ember-bath, with a very moderate heat, and recti∣fie afterwards the distill ' d liquor three or four times, making use of a Matras with a long neck for the last rectification of the Salt. But though this method may be very well follow ' d, yet the noisome smell which the Urine contracts in putrifying, and the long time this preparation takes up, have made some Writers to leave out putrefaction. For now they only evaporate the superfluous moisture of the Urine in a Balneum Mariae, or a bath of Ashes, over a very moderate fire, till it be be∣come as thick as a Rob. Then they distill it in a Sand-bath, in a large high Cucur∣bit, cover ' d with a head well luted, and a Recipient also luted to it in the same man∣ner. Then they rectifie the distill ' d liquor in the same Bath, in a long Matras, cover ' d with its head carefully luted; and they draw from it a volatile white crystalline Salt, very penetrating, attended by a liquor almost as subtle and penetrating, which is only the overplus of the volatile Salt dissolv ' d into a small parcel of Flegm, which they keep apart in double glass bottles perfectly well stopp ' d. 
 The volatile Salt of Urine powerfully mortifies the acids that usually raise the fer∣mentations in our bodies, and are the causes of several diseases. It is very much esteem ' d against all obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery; to purifie the mass of the blood, cure the Scurvy, Cachexies, Jaundise, and Hypocondriack diseases. It is prescrib ' d with good success in Lethargies, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, and Convulsions, as also in suffocations of the Matrix. It is highly commended against difficulty of making water, to dissolve the Stone in the Reins and Bladder. The Salt of Urine also that distills like a Spirit, is us ' d to extract the tincture of divers Stones, and of calcin ' d Flints, and in this preparation it becomes blue. And this is ascertain ' d to be a specifick remedy against the difficulty of making water, being given from a scruple to a dram in some proper liquor. The Salt of Urine is also steep ' d and us ' d in Liniments to asswage all sorts of pains, especially those of the Gout and Rheu∣matisms. The Salt of Urine is given from ten or twelve grains to twenty or thirty, in white Wine or some other liquor. It is also given against suffocations of the Matrix, to dissipate the vapours that arise from the lower parts, and to surcease the symptoms that happen in diseases of the head. 
 Mans Dung, to which some have given the name of Western Civet, when being dry ' d in the Sun it has lost its smell, and acquir ' d a good scent, does not want its vir∣tues. For being distill ' d in a Retort, with a gradual fire, it affords an Oil that is parti∣cularly recommended for the cure of ulcerated Erysipela ' s, scald heads, and all man∣ner of scurss and scabs. It is also good to mortifie and kill Cancers, and to asswage the pains of the Gout, being apply ' d to the part. 
 I might here recite the several distillations of the Fat, Hair, Nails, and many o∣ther parts and excrements of man; but that I fear to tire the Reader, considering that their preparations are not extraordinary, and that the instructions and examples which I have already given, together with those which I shall mention in speaking of other Animals may suffice, and satisfie them who have any knowledg of Chy∣mistry. 
 CHAP. V. Of the Distillation of the Viper. THE distillation of Vipers is the best and most usual preparation that Chymistry performs. All the parts of the body may be made use of, or only such as you like best; considering that you extract out of all the same flegm, the same Oil, and the same volatile Salt. It is only better to dry in the shade those parts which you intend to distill, then to put them into a Retort with all their moisture; which would very much exceed that which usually comes forth in the distillation of the dry ones. Take then the heads, the tails, the hearts, the livers, the truncks, the skin, and if you please the fat, the kidneys, and all the entrails of many Vipers, male or female, and having cut all their parts into small pieces, fill a large Retort of glass or earth almost quite up to the top, well clos ' d with lute, then having plac ' d it in a Furnace of Reverberation cover ' d with its Duomo, fitted a large Recipient to the beak of it, and shut up the Register of the Duomo, and the door of the fire-place, kindle a gentle fire in the Cinder-place, and keep a fire for two hours, only to heat the Re∣tort and the Furnace; then removing the fire into the hearth-place, keep the fire in the same heat for two hours longer, at the end whereof encrease the fire one degree, giving never so little air to the Register of the Duomo; and having continu ' d the fire so for two hours more, encrease the fire to the third degree for the same time. After which, having set the Register of the Duomo wide open, give the fire its ut∣most violence of heat; and continue it so till nothing come out of the Cornute, and that all the vapours in the Recipient be converted and dissolv ' d in Salt or Liquor. At which time cease distillation. Then let the Vessels cool, and unlute the Recipient, and when the Salt is well dissolv ' d in the liquor, pour it out into a Matras with a long neck, and having plac ' d it in a Sand-bath, and cover ' d it with its head, and luted a small Recipient to it, make rectification of it with a gentle fire, and you shall see the volatile Salt white and crystalline, mount to the top of the head, which is to be put up in a double glass Bottle carefully stopp ' d, and continuing rectification, separate and keep apart the Oil, and the rest of the volatile Salt, dissolv ' d in some portion of the flegm, that dropt forth together into the small Recipient, rejecting at last, that which lies at the bottom of the Matras, after you have caus ' d all the vola∣tile Salt and oily parts to ascend. 
 As for that which remains in the Cornute after distillation of the Vipers, it may be easily perceiv ' d by the volatile Salt and other substances drawn from thence, that there is nothing considerable remaining behind, and that the small quantity of fix ' d Salt which might be met with there, is not worth the trouble, and therefore it is better neither to imitate the Ancients nor the Moderns, who not understanding the extraordinary quantity of the volatile Salt of these Animals, thought to do wonders by making use of calcinations to extract forth a Salt, which the same calcination had dissipated. 
 The specifick quality of the volatile Salt of the Viper, to overcome the venom of the biting of the Viper, or of any other sort of Serpents, and many other crea∣tures, is not the only virtue it is endued with, as being a sovereign remedy against the Pestilence, the Measles, and the small Pox, all sorts of malignant Fevers, and epidemick distempers. It is an utter enemy to all putrefaction, curing Agues that are caus ' d thereby, as are the most part of intermitting Agues; and mortifying the acids which it meets with, it is a wonderful specifick against a Quartan Ague. There is not a medicine to be found more proper to purge the mass of the blood, to give it its natural fluidness, and help circulation; whence it comes to pass, that it is very proper to cure Scorbutick diseases, and to cause the transpiration of those sharp and fuliginous humours that cause Scurss, Scabs, Erysipela ' s, Itches, scald heads, and all diseases of the skin. It is also the most powerful remedy in nature for the cure of the Leprosie, the spots whereof are upon the back of the Viper, and seem to bear its signature. For it opens, penetrates, cuts, attenuates, expels thorough the pores, and drives to the very extremities of the body, the impurity that infects the mass of the blood, and all the habit of it. It very much assists and fortifies na∣ture, and disposes her to perform all her functions as she ought. For by the means and help of this Salt she sends necessary nourishment to all the parts of the body, as also to those that are deprived of it by some accident, and expels by Urine, Stool, and other means, all the ill humours of the body. It opens all the passages of the head, and frees it from cold and viscous flegm, that hinders the communication of the Spirits. So that it is of wonderful use in Lethargies, Apoplexies, Convulsions, Pal∣sies, and other cold diseases of the head. No less useful is it in swoonings, and palpi∣tations of the heart, in Asthma ' s, Plurisies, new and old Coughs, and other maladies of the breast. It strengthens the stomach, and helps digestion. It opens obstructi∣ons of the Liver, Spleen, and all the bowels. It dissolves coagulated blood, and pre∣vents internal Apostemes, especially at their first growing, as also external, being apply ' d thereto, or else the Oil alone. In a word, there is hardly in all Physick a more universal medicine, or that can afford quicker or more effectual relief to any disease. The dose and manner of using, both internal and external, are very much like to those of the volatile Salt of mans Skull; and so it is with the Oil, whose virtues it very much imitates. 
 Now though the volatile Salt and Oil of Vipers drawn through a Retort, be the most essential part, and that there remains in the Cornute but only a little fix ' d Salt, very deeply mix ' d with the terrestrial part of the Viper; yet they that desire this fix ' d Salt may compass it, if after they have powder ' d that residence, which is as black as a coal, they put it upon a Tyle, or some other Vessel in a Potters Oven, and there leave it till it be throughly calcin ' d. For after that, by making a Lye, filtring it, and evaporating the moisture, the fix ' d Salt will appear at the bottom of the Ves∣sel, though but a very small quantity, while the terrestrial part, which is a real Caput Mortuum, remains behind in the filter. The virtues of this Salt are much in∣feriour to those of the volatile, of which it neither has the smell, penetration, or sa∣vour. For it has a taste like Lye, and leaves a kind of a biting tartness in the mouth, which the other does not; yet it may be mix ' d among purgative and diuretick medicines, 
 As to the fixation of volatile Viper Salt, which has been attempted to have been done with acids, and among others with Spirit of Salt; though it be of no great necessity, yet it may be of some virtue and use upon some occasions, and especially for persons who have lost their taste, and for want of acids have wat ' rish and unsa∣voury relishes in their mouths. For though we may say, that the savour and shape of Salt thus fix ' d very much resembles Bay-salt, nevertheless it is not one and the same thing, for the volatile Salt, as much alter ' d as it is to outward appearance, keeps its own nature entire, as appears by this, that mixing it with double its weight of Sal Tartar, or any other fix ' d Salt, and putting them into any proper Vessel, it sublimes with its first force and purity, while the acid of the Spirit of Salt having quitted it, to unite it self to the Tartar, remains at the bottom of the Vessel with the same Salt, the little use of this volatile Salt of fix ' d Viper, and the easiness to fix it in a moment upon any occasion, by mixing it with some acid, are the reasons why I do not set down any particular preparations here. For it is enough only to pour upon this volatile Salt by degrees a small quantity of Spirit of Salt, while it is dis∣solv ' d in its own flegm, and to continue affusion, till the Ebullition cease, and then to evaporate the superfluous moisture till it be as dry as Salt. 
 I omit several Salts, Essences, Extract, and Opiates of Vipers, with several other Chymical remedies of which Vipers are the foundation; fully believing that there is in the volatile Salt of Vipers a full collection to be had at all times in a short abridgment of all that can be expected from the trouble of so many other prepa∣rations. 
 As to the contests that have happn ' d touching the Vipers venome, which I attri∣buted to only incens ' d or inrag ' d Spirits of that Animal; though I think I have ex∣plain ' d my self enough upon that subject, as well in my first, as in my second book of Experiments upon the Viper: yet I cannot but speak my thoughts upon what Monsieur Denis has utter ' d in his fix ' d Memorial of the Arts and Sciences, in refe∣rence to these two Treatises, immediately after I publish ' d the last. For though he seem ' d very earnest to see my book, that he might make his reflections upon it, and seems to profess a great deal of sincerity. Yet the Event makes it appear that he has neither consider ' d my book, or rather, not so much as read it, but out of a design to suppress what is most material in it: and to elude whatever he thought to the prejudice of Monsieur Redi who had wrote against my opinion. 
 In short this Author shews himself highly prejudic ' d against me in favour of Mon∣sieur Redi, to whom he gives the Title of first Physitian to the Duke of Tuscany, to to give the honour of a borrow ' d dignity. For not content to suppress the very Title of my very second Book, he attributes to him all that I have writt ' n against the passages of the Gall, through which the Ancients pretended that the yellow juice was convey ' d to the Gums of the Viper; and shews his prejudice yet more, while he would set up that Italian Physitian for the Author or Inventer of the slimy kernells of the Viper. Though in his own writings he never talks but at random, and by conjecture of two slimy kernells only, which he imagines to be fix ' d under the ve∣sicles of the yellow juice, where there are no such things. Whereas I have shew∣ed in my first Book, by the exact descriptions which I have giv ' n, and draughts which I have caus ' d to be drawn to the life, that there are a great number of kernels clu∣ster ' d as it were in a heap together behind the holes of the eyes, and upon the sides of the Temples of the Creature, far from the bottom of the vesicles, and that Monsieur Redi is extreamly deceiv ' d in his pretended discoveries, and that without doing me much injustice as M. Denis has done, he cannot deprive me of the advan∣tage of having been the first inventor of those kernells. 
 But it is evident that he had no other design in his Memoires, by maintaining the situation of the slimy kernells under the bottom of the vesicles, then to defend against all truth, the opinion of Monsieur Redi, concerning the pretended malignity of the yellow juice; for were he not wedded to the worst party to the prejudice of experience, he needed nothing but his eyes to have undeceiv ' d himself, and to have brought him to reason. Whence it appears, that it is meerly out of cunning when he says he is of my opinion touching the nature of the Gall, which is nothing to the controversy, to insinuate more dextrously that he is not of my opinion, as to the nature and qualities of the yellow juice; taking no notice of my convincing arguments, to justify that it is nothing venomous, nor of the experiments which I have publish ' d, and which were try ' d in publick, whereas Monsieur Redi  ' s are only par∣ticular and upon his own report. 
 But this is not all, for Monsieur Denys not content to suppress, as much as in him lies, whatever he observ ' d in my last book disadvantageous for Monsieur Redi, he goes about to betray truth it self, and to father opinions upon me which I never so much as thought of. But not being able to do that fairly, he takes upon him to quarrel about Terms, pretending that when I spoke of enrag ' d Spirits, I meant a substance purely spiritual, and that by the Idea of vengeance and anger, which I attributed to Vipers, I meant that those creatures had passions like to those which are rais ' d in men, upon violent changes that happ ' n in their Animal Spirits. But this trick takes little or no effect among rational men. For no man can think by my discourses that I ever question ' d but that the venome of the Viper was a material substance, but that I thought it so fine and subtiliz ' d, that not falling under the discernment of sense, it might with reason be call ' d Spiritual, or to say better Spiritous, to distinguish it from the yellow juice whose parts are discernable enough. So that by enrag ' d Spirits I meant the most subtiliz ' d and most agitated part of the hu∣mours, that unite together and separate themselves from the Mass in that violence of action, through an extraordinary impression which the objects make upon the body. And when I averr ' d those Spirits had no determinate place, when the Crea∣ture was unprovok ' d; I thought it but rational, because perhaps they might not be then in being, or if they were, they are so mix ' d with the rest of the humours that they have no particular place, but only when they unite from the rest and ascend to the brain when the Creature is provok ' d. However had I not thought them local, I could never have affirm ' d that they pass from the throat of the Vi∣per that bites into the blood of the other Animal, where it causes all that distur∣bance which is remarkable. 
 But all men of judgment may easily understand that I made use of those figura∣tive speeches, that I might the better clear my thoughts to the apprehension of all the world, intending by the word Imagination only the Organick part of the brain of that Animal, where these Spirits separated from the rest of the blood muster them∣selves up together. By the Idea of Vengeance, their flying to the Organs appro∣priated for their defence; and by Choler, the tumultuous and violent agitation wherewith those little bodies pass from one body to another. And when I said that this venome looses it self when the anger of the Creature is over, I meant no other but that the violent motion of the humours ceasing, they recover their natural condition, and ceasing to be enrag ' d, are not able to separate them∣selves, to work those tragical effects which are the consequences of their com∣motion. 
 So that it is no wonder, that Monsieur Denis having supprest my real Experi∣ments, should obtrude upon me such as never were in my thoughts to make or put down in writing, when he affirms it to be one of my observations, that in swallow∣ing the blood of the Viper, or by pouring it into a wound, no unhappy accident fell out. But it may be observ ' d that integrity is not the thing which he aims at in his writings, and that he rather chooses to vent whatever comes into his thoughts, then to trouble himself with the examination of truth. Had he only made a suc∣cinct repetition of what he found most remarkable in my experiments, and recited in short the reasons that confirm my opinion, as the Gentlemen of the Academy of London have done me the honour to do, he had done me but justice; but that was not his purpose; for to favour the part which he has chosen to defend, he has at∣tributed to another that which belongs to me, and overturning the whole sense of my writings talks of that which is not material, with saying a word of that which was most conducing to knowledg. So that I have the same reason to give him the same rebuke as formerly Martial gave Posthumus, his Advocate, who instead of pleading his cause about the three Goates which his neighbour had stol ' n from him, talk ' d about the bush, of nothing but Sylla and the war of Mithridates. Since that instead of keeping close to the truth contain ' d in my books, of which he un∣dertook to speak, he has supprest them to speak of Monsieur Redi, and attributing that to him which was in truth mine he has alter ' d the property of his friends writings, and drawn consequences quite contrary to the sence and meaning of the Author. 
 In the mean time neither the ill grounded opinions, nor irrational writings of any of Mr. Redi  ' s Copartners, shall ever make me change my opinion touching the Vi∣pers venome lying in the enrag ' d Spirits, excluding the yellow juice and all the rest of the parts of the body. The great number of trialls which I have made there∣of, and my own reason, will not permit me to doubt any farther upon this subject, and more effectually convince me, then any other writings which they have publishe either before or since mine. 
 CHAP. VI Of the Chymical preparation of Harts-horn. THE great eagerness of the Hart to devour Vipers, whose parts are so subtle, his swiftness, his Annual renewing of his Head, and the great age which he lives, make it manifest that this Creature is endu ' d with very considerable princi∣ples of life, and that consequently his parts must be very useful in Physick. We see that his body affords a good number of Medicines both to the one and the other Pharmacy; and that Chymistry finds work enough to exercise it self upon, espe∣cially in relation to the Horns, the various conditions whereof require variety of preparations. The first time proper for the preparation of these Hornes is from a∣bout the middle to the end of the Spring. For then it is that they abound in sub∣tle and volatile parts, which not being able to afford sufficient nourishment to those of the preceeding year, loosen them from their place, and thrust out others in their stead, at the same time almost that the sap rising in the Spring up into the Trees, produces fresh leaves and fruits instead of the growth of the former year. The subtle and volatile parts abounding very much, thrust out in a short time small shootes, very tender at first, and indeed for some weeks, as being full of a Sanguino∣lent Juice; but which hard ' n from day to day, growing bigger and bigger from the beginning of the Summer, till they have attain ' d their full growth, and that their time comes to fall off again. 
 Take these young Shoots when they are about seven or eight Inches high, and ha∣ving cut them into slices about the breadth of a half Crown put them into a glass Cu∣curbit, and set it in a Balneum Mariae, and having luted a head and a Recipient to it, di∣still the liquor with a moderate fire, till the pieces are become dry. This is call ' d Harts-head water; and is very much recommended for for the furthering of wo∣men in Travel. It is good also to fortify the heart and noble parts against malig∣nant Fevers. You may make double advantage of the pieces that remain in the Cucurbit. For having beaten them to pouder, keep it apart, or put them into a Cornute of Earth, and having plac ' d it upon a bed of Sand in a close furnace of Re∣verberation. and fitted and luted a large Recipient to the beak, make the distillation with a gradual fire according to the rules. For by that means you shall have a volatile Salt, an oil and much Flegm, which is to be rectify ' d afterwards in a Matrass with a long neck, like the volatile Salt of Vipers. The water of Harts-head is to be tak ' n at a distance from meals, from a spoonful to two. You may also at the same time add to the same dose, a scruple or half a dram of the pouder, or from four to seven or eight grains of the volatile Salt.
Take dry Cantharides without cutting off either their heads, their wings, or their feet, and fill up about three quarters of a glass or Earthen Retort luted round; then place it in a close Reverberatory, and having exactly fitted and luted a large Re∣cipient to the neck, make a distillation with a gradual fire, as for other Animals or their parts; and you shall find in the Receiver a volatile Salt and Oil, accompany ' d with much flegm, which you must empty into a Matrass, with a long neck, and having plac ' d it in a Sand-bath cover ' d with its own head carefully luted, with a small Recipient fitted and luted in the same manner to the neck, make a Rectification of the substances with a moderate fire, which will presently cause the volatile white and Crystalline Salt ascend, which you must stop up with as much speed as care, in a bottle of glass perfectly well stopp ' d, putting on another head in the place of that tak ' n off; the Commissures of which having carefully luted, continue the fire and draw forth into a small Recipient, the Oil and the rest of the volatile Salt dissolv ' d in some little Flegm, which it has carry ' d away with it. Which done, separate the Oil from the Liquor, and keep each apart in double glass bottles well stopp ' d. 
 The volatile Salt of Cantharides is one of the most powerful Diuretics that are to be met with, so that it is affirm ' d to be able to break, and dissolve the stone in the Kidneys and Bladder. It is so penetrating and so sharp, that it raises little blisters upon the tongues of those that taste it. So that it is not to be tak ' n but temper ' d in Liquors, or perfectly well mix ' d in Opiates, or other soft medicines from one or two grains, to five or six at most. The effects are much more advantageous and with much less hazard, then those of Cantharides giv ' n in the simple substance, to raise the vigour of either sex to amorous performance. For which purpose the Oil is very proper, mingl ' d with equal parts of distill ' d oil of Cloves, and twelve times as much press ' d oil of Nutmegs, to anoint the soles of the feet, the Testicles, and the Perineum, provided their strong smell can be endur ' d. The liquor containing the rest of the volatile Salt may be made use of for the same uses as the Salt it self, proportioning the dose, according to the greater or less quantity of Flegm that it contains. 
 CHAP. XV. Of the Distillation of Emmets. PUt into a Matrass proportionable as many Emmets as you can catch in Harvest time, and pouring upon them Spirit of Wine well rectifi ' d three fingers above the Emmets, stop the Matrass exactly well, and set it over a Bakers Oven till the Emmets be quite chang ' d into liquor. At which time having unstopp ' d the Ma∣trass, and pour ' d out the liquor into a glass Cucurbit, cover it with its head, and lute the Commissures exactly; and having plac ' d it in a Sand-bath, and fitted and luted a small Recipient to the neck, make distillation with a very moderate fire, till there remain behind but very little liquor in the Cucurbit. Then having cool ' d and un∣luted the Vessels, pour out and keep the spiritous water distill ' d, and full of the volatile Salt of Emmets into a double Viol well stopp ' d to keep for use. 
 This spiritous water is very much recommended to revive and strengthen the natural heat, to provoke lust; for which purpose they add to it certain Aroma∣ticks, as Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, &amp;c. It is also very good to restore persons that are wasted with Atrophies. It is given from half a spoonful to a whole spoonful, alone or mix ' d with a little Wine, or with a third or fourth part of Cinnamon-water. 
 Emmets may be also put into a Matrass, which being well stopp ' d, and lapp ' d a∣bout with dough about a fingers breadth, is to be put and kept in a Bakers Oven all the while the great Loaves are baking; after that the liquor is to be strain ' d out and kept in a double Viol well stopp ' d, as a most special remedy against deafness. 
 They are also to be infus ' d and boil ' d afterwards over a gentle fire in allet-Oil, then strain ' d and kept to anoint the parts of nature, to advance Giture. There may also a volatile Salt and Oil of Emmets be drawn, by distilling them in a Retort, like the Cantharides, which are almost for the same purposes. 
 CHAP. XVI. Of the Preparation of the Peacock. THE Peacock which is accompted one of the most beautiful birds, and one of those that live longest, has not for nothing gain ' d the Title of a Medicinal Bird, in regard that not only his body contains several remedies proper for Physick; but because his flesh will keep longer then that of any other Animal. Peacocks broth is accompted a particular Remedy for the Pluri y. However this is certain, that from the whole body of the Peacock, from his Excrements, and especially his dung, many specifick Remedies against the Epilepsy are to be drawn, not to speak of those other vertues attributed to other parts of the body. 
 Pick the Peacock well, and draw him, then ut him to pieces, and put him in∣to a Cucurbit of Glass plac ' d in a Sand-bath; cover the Cucurbit with its head, and having luted the closures with Amydon, and fitted a small Recipient to the neck, you shall draw forth a water, very fit to fortify the brain, and preserve it against such diseases as it is subject to. This Distillation being at an end, take that which remains out of the Cucurbit, and put it into an earthen Retort luted all over; set the Retort in a Reverberatory, and having exactly fit∣ted and luted to the beak a large Receiver, you shall with a graduated fire, draw forth a volatile Salt and an Oil together with much Flegm, which must be rectify ' d in a Matrass like the former. The Rectification will yeild a white Crystalline volatile Salt, and a clear oil of great vertue, especially against the Epilepsy, in the same dose and after the same manner as other volatile Salts of the same nature; and making use of the Oil to anoint the Temples, futures of the scull, and to put up into the Nostrills. 
 As for Peacoks dung, after you have well dry ' d and bruis ' d it, put it into an Earthen Retort, luted all over, and place it in a close Reverberatory; then having fitted and luted a large Recipient to the neck, you shall draw forth substances very like to those which the Peacock it self yeilds in Distillation, which must be also rectify ' d in a long Matrass, to be us ' d for the cure of the Epilepsy. The volatile Salt and oil of Peacock and his dung is also very proper to cure vertigoes▪ and to suppress the vapours which cause it. 
 It is believ ' d that the dry dung of the Peacock, to the weight of a dram being infus ' d in white-wine, then strain ' d and giv ' n to drink every morning fasting from the new to the full of the Moon, is a specifick remedy against the Epilepsy and Ver∣ticles. The fat of this foul is also recommended against Colicks, and the fea∣thers burnt, suppress the vapours that rise in the Matrix. 
 CHAP. XVII. Of the Preparation of Castor. YOU may through a Cornute distill all the parts of the Castor, as we do those of other Animals, and rectify all the substances drawn from them in a Matrass with a long neck. But the conveniency of Salts drawn from other Animals and there nearness in vertue to those which might be drawn from this Animal, make us forbear any such preparation. So much the more because the transcending qua∣lities which are known on all hands attributed to the substances contain ' d in the ve∣sicles of that Creature, which for their excellency are call ' d particularly Castoreum, cause us to neglect the other parts. These qualities, together with the dearness of the cods or pouches, together with the nature of the substances enclos ' d there∣in, is the reason that we never expose them to a fire of Reverberation, to sepa∣rate the volatile Salt and Oil which might be drawn forth by a Retort. And there∣fore having taken off the unctuous part that lies in the bladder by it self at the top of the bags, and set it by, we bruise or cut very small the fleshy substance, and putting it into a Matrass proportionable, pour upon it Spirit of wine well rectify ' d, till it swim four fingers above the substances; the having perfectly stopp ' d the Ma∣trass, we place it up on a Bakers oven, leaving it there to digest for fifteen days or three weeks, or longer if you please, stirring the Ingredient from time to time, the more effectually to impregnate the Spirit of Wine with their most Essential parts, which will be at length something of a high colour. Then having strain ' d and squeez ' d the substances, we keep this Liquor in a double glass bottle, under the name of Tincture of Castor: but if you desire a Distillation, pour out all the matters con∣tain ' d in the Matrass into a glass Cucurbit, and having plac ' d it in a Sand-bath, and cover ' d it with its head carefully luted, and also fitted a small Recipient luted as exactly, draw forth the Spirit with a moderate fire, till you have driv ' n all the Spiritous part to ascend. By which means you shall have that which they call the Spirit of Castor, which you will find to have rais ' d along with it in its Distillation, the most pure and most volatile substance of that part of the Animal, which else had remain ' d in the Tincture. The vertues Doses and manner of taking are much alike, in regard they are of greater prevalency in all cold diseases of the brain and stomack, but particularly against those of the Matrix. The dose is from half a dram to two, and sometimes and upon certain occasions to half an ounce mixing them in Cephalick, Hysterick or Stomack waters. Sometimes they are put up the Nostrils, or us ' d to anoint the Temples and Wrists. 
 As to what remains in the Cucurbit, having filter ' d it, and put it into an Earthen Pipkin well glaz ' d within, and the Pipkin upon a very soft fire, evaporate by degrees the superfluous moisture to the ordinary consistence of Extracts, then letting it cool, put it up in a Gally-pot close stopp ' d, and keep it for your use. This Extract con∣taining in it all the pureless volatile parts of the Castor, deserves to be sav ' d, to be dissolv ' d in Spirit of Castor, or in Cephalick or Historick Liquors, or to be tak ' n in Bo∣lus, from half a scruple to half a dram, for the same diseases for which the Tincture and Spirit are prescrib ' d. 
 As for the Uncturus part which is found in a Bladder by it self, at the upper end of the Bags or Cods, Chymistry takes no notice of it in preparation. But it may be by the Galenick Pharmacy properly used to make oil of Castor, as I have said in its due place. 
 I could have fill ' d this Book with several other Chymical preparations of Animals, or their parts, but I believe I have produced enough to satisfy those who apply them∣selves to Chymistry, and to enable them to undertake and to accomplish with success all those preparations of Animals. And therefore I proceed to Minerals. 
 The Third Book: Containing the CHYMICAL PREPARATIONS OF MINERALS. CHAP. I. Of the Preparation of Earths and Bolus ' s. I Began the first Book of this Third Part with the Chymical Preparation of Plants. For finding them upon the surface of the Earth which produces them, they present themselves first to my Eyes. Immediately after I treated of the Preparation of Animals, for whose sake the Earth produces those Plants. It behooves me now to shew you the way how to prepare the Earth it self: that it may afterwards proceed to the preparation of those mixt Bodies which it encloses within its Bowels, and of those other Substances that depend upon them; and which may be plac ' d in the Number of Minerals. I do not here undertake to speak of that Natural Chymistry which is continually practis ' d in the Earth, to bring forth those Productions which we see, and which lye concealed from us; but only of such Chymical Operations as may with advantage be made upon the Substance it self, and the mixt Bodies that belong to it, of the most part whereof the Earth is esteemed to be the Mother and the Nurse. 
 There is a fix ' d Salt to be drawn from an untill ' d Earth, naturally barren, obser∣ving this Method; Having digg ' d a hole about two foot deep, and taken out some bushels of the bottom Earth, put the Earth into a convenient tub, and having soak ' d and stir ' d it in three times as much Rain-water as there are measures of Earth, leave the Earth to settle for two or three days; then having pour ' d out the water by in∣clination, and strain ' d it through course Paper, evaporate the superfluous moisture in a Caldron, or an iron kettle over a moderate fire, and you will find the Salt of Earth at the bottom of the Vessel. You may make this Salt white and crystalline, by putting it into a Crucible, and exposing it to a violent fire for a good hour, stir∣ring it from time to time with an iron Spatula; then having dissolv ' d it in Rain-water, and filter ' d that water, you may coagulate it again. 
 The qualities of this Salt are very like to those of Sea-Salt, so that you may also draw from it a Spirit almost of the same nature. 
 In regard the Lotions of Earth, and their preparation upon Porphiry, are the same with those of Galerice Pharmacy, I will only say by the by, that over much Lotion carries away what the Earths have of Salt and Spiritous; and that Lotions not being made use of but to separate their Sandy parts, or their other impurities, you may without altering the vertues of those Earths, do as well by beating them in a Mortar, and sifting them thorough a silk Seirce, which the Sand nor other impurities cannot pass thorough▪ you may moist ' n clay Moulds with Cordial waters or decoctions; or the Boles that you grind upon Porphyry, or knead them into little Loaves, provided you do not wet them too much. 
 From Clay Earths dry ' d, especially those of Lemnos, you may extract a Flegm and Spirit, somewhat tartish, commended to provoke sweat, distilling it thorough a Re∣tort in a close Reverberatory. You may also prepare Magisteries of this Earth, dis∣solving them in Spirit of Salt, or Niter, and precipitating them with Salt of Tar∣tar dissolv ' d into Liquor, which uniting it self to those acid Spirits, causes them to abandon the body which they had dissolv ' d; or else by pouring fair water upon them, which weakning those Spirits, produces the same effect. But the violent o∣peration of those Spirits upon the Earth, being as little advantageous, as the dis∣sipation of its Salt and Spiritous parts, which happens by the conjunction of the same Spirits, and by the Lotions which must be us ' d to carry off their Acrimony, I am certain that these Clay Earths being taken out of their own place, and sifted thorough a silk ive, are incomparably much better. For they retain their parti∣cular quality to dry up and close, to resist the putrefaction of humours, poison, and the malignity of Feavers, to dissolve curdl ' d blood and provoke sweat. They are also of great force against Dysenteries and Diarrhea ' s. 
 CHAP. II. Of the Preparation of Waters. I do not undertake here to speak of the use of water, no more then of the ne∣cessity of its union with the Earth, for the generation and production of mixt bodies. But because it is usually plac ' d among the number of Minerals, it behoves me to speak of its principal preparations. Both the one and the other Pharmacy make use of Fountain and River water for several uses, with any preparation of them at all; in some places they are forc ' d to make use of well and standing water instead of others. But Chymistry observes something more excellent in Rain water, more especially at the time of the Equinoxes and chiefly the vernal. All Rain wa∣ter is generally more sweet, more thin, more light then any other water, because the Sun has rais ' d it, and compos ' d it of the most subtle vapours of the water, and that it has had time to purify it self, and to subtilize it self by passing thorough the air before it fall upon the ground. The Spring is also the time wherein the air most fill ' d with universal Spirit, the effects whereof are so potent for the production of all things, and that it abounds most in invisible volatile Salt, which animates all sub∣lunary substances.
Yet the purity of Rain water is not such neither, but that you may let it settle for two or three days, and that you must filter it, before you make use of it, and distill it in Balneo Mariae, or evaporating Baths, when you intend to augment its subtility and penetration. To which purpose it is enough with a moderate fire, to draw off but half of the moisture; then having emptied and kept apart the resi∣dence, and pour ' d in more Rain water, continue this Distillation till you have enough water subtiliz ' d and charg ' d with the most volatile Salt of Rain water; after which having put all the Residencies together, or in several glass Cucurbits, in the same Bath, evaporate the moisture, till only the fix ' d Salt of the Rain water remain at the bottom dry ' d and mix ' d with some Terrestreity. 
 Some to have a more Spiritous water, shut up the rain water in a Matrass, and having seal ' d it Hermetically, set it to digest or putrify for thirty or forty days, the better to precipitate the feces, and to make the Spiritous part more fit to forsake the watry, and to ascend first in Distillation. 
 Snow being only rain congeal ' d in the Air by the cold, and the volatile Salt part being by that means stopp ' d, you may after the same manner draw forth a water, not only like in colour, savour, and vertues, like that of Rain water, but also more penetrating, because that Snow abounds more in Salt. And that ' s the rea∣son there is more Salt found after the Evaporation of Snow then Rain water. 
 The distill ' d waters of Rain or Snow, are very proper to penetrate the substances of several mix ' d bodies, especially those of Vegetalls, and to draw forth their Tin∣cture; which they will do more effectually if you add to them their fix ' d Salt. It is said also that the Spirit which may be drawn from this fix ' d Salt, is good to dis∣solve Metalls, especially Gold. 
 The nature of dew very much resembles that of Rain water, or Snow, but it is more subject to dissipation. For proceeding only from the Exhalations of the earth, and not ascending so high as the vapours that cause Rain, it is in less quan∣tity, and remains not long. For being only in the middle of the Spring, when the Sun approaching toward the Solstice, the air is clear and serene, and not at other sea∣sons, or when the air is cover ' d with Clouds▪ which hinder the Rayes of the Sun from drawing up the Exhalations of the Earth, or turn to Rain; and not falling nei∣ther in windy weather; you must be very diligent to gather it when it falls, or which is better, to receive it into Basons and other Vessels as fast as it falls, and put it up at the same time into bottles well stopp ' d, to make use of it in that condition, or to draw from it a Spirit, having digested it for forty days in a Matrass with a long neck hermetically seal ' d, and observing the same method as for Rain water, though you must not think to find the same fix ' d Salt at the bottom of the vessel as Rain water would have yeilded, the extream volatile of the Spirit of dew, causing it to ascend in Distillation. 
 It is a custom with some to evaporate over the fire the Sea water, and the wa∣ter of the brackish fountains in the French Country, and in other places that they may get the Salt, which remains after Evaporation; but they never use to distill it for the waters sake, but only upon the Sea, when they want fresh water: though that which they do draw from thence be accompany ' d with a kind of Acrimony, be∣cause of the volatile particles of the same Salt which rise in Distillation. 
 I shall not speak here of the Distillation of Mineral waters, because it is not ne∣cessary for their use, and for that we never spend them but in their natural condi∣tion. Nor shall I speak of the method to be observ ' d for the discovery of the se∣veral substances which impart their principal vertues to Mineral waters, for which the curious may find all necessary instruction, in a book of Observations upon the Mi∣neral Waters of France, written by Monsieur Du Clos, Physitian in ordinary to the King, publish ' d in the year 1675. after a great number of experiences by him made upon that subject. Nor is it necessary to speak of the artificial waters that may be made by dissolving in Rain, River, or Fountain water diverse Salts and other Spirits, accomodating them to the malidies and temmperature of the Patients, the just and certain Composition whereof renders the use of them much more advantageous, then that of Mineral waters, which are made use of like one Saddle for all Horses. It being impossible to know the precise quantity of particles which they have taken along with them of the several Mineralls which they have met with in the Entrails of the earth: though by their smell, colour, and other distinctions which may be made, some considerable knowledg may be had of Mineralls which communicated their principal qualities to them, and that some judgment may be given from the advantages, which a good number of persons have found by them in diseases of the same nature which you desire to cure. 
 CHAP. III. Of the Preparation of Stones, and pretious Stones in general. I Will not examine the reasons upon which some men have grounded the solid∣ness and hardness of stones, or precious stones, or the cause of their lapidifi∣cation. For their attributing the cause thereof to the proportionate union of the Alkali ' s with the Earth, or of both of them with Acids, or with water or juices that have a ferment in them, or a petrifying seed, is of little moment. Though we find wood, bones, and other substances to petrifie in some waters, and stones that are hid in the bodies of certain Animals, as also of men, besides that the Birth has been petrified in the wombs of some women. Nor does it signifie much that they have attributed another cause to the Acid of the air, of which we see apparent effects in Earths, which lying upon the superficies of Plains and Mountains, petrifie in succession of time. Or that they would add thereto the natural disposi∣tion which some stones have to resume their shape of stone, after they have lost it, like Plaister; or to communicate that inclination to substances mix ' d with them, as Lime does. My chief intention is here to treat of the principal intentions that Chymistry practises upon stones, and precious stones. 
 The Mechanick imitating Chymistry, calcines in proper Furnaces, with a vio∣lent and long continu ' d fire, several common stones, as certain River Flints, and certain stones whereof they make Lime for building, and those whereof they make Plaister. Chymistry sometimes calcines certain precious stones, keeping them some hours in fusion over a violent fire, as is often practis ' d upon crystal; sometimes she mixes with them Niter, Salt of Tartar, or some other Salt, when she would calcine them to draw the liquor from them, as to have the liquor of Crystal. Some∣times she only heats them two or three times red hot in the fire, and quench them as often in Water, as is practis ' d upon Lapis Lazuli; sometimes she dissolves them in corrosive liquors, as the Saphir in that of Vitriol, and some other precious stones in distill ' d Vinegar, and which is that which they call Solntion, or potential Calcina∣tion, which is attended by other operations, of which in due place. She also makes Magisteries of these Stones, though to little purpose, in regard their vertue is much inferior to the stones from whence they are extracted. 
 CHAP. IV. Of the Preparation of Lime. ALL the world knows, that the Stones whereof Lime is made, cannot pro∣duce those effects which are remarkable in them; without having pass ' d the fire, and being reduc ' d into that condition by calcination.  ' Tis known also, that the violent operation of the fire consumes all their moisture, and that they have not acquir ' d the vertue of binding in one mass, and petrifying together Sand and other substances, till after they have been calcin ' d and soak ' d in water. We must also con∣fess, that the Lime is not free from the impressions of the fire which it has under∣gone. Yet we have no reason to conclude from thence, that its caustick quality proceeds from little fiery bodies, which they would have to be enclosed within it. For if that were true, Tyles and Bricks, which suffer as much violence of fire, would not be without those little igneous or fiery bodies. Those stones which are not of the same nature as those of which they make Lime, would have the same caustick quality, have endur ' d the same fire as the Lime-stones, and sometimes a much longer time, Iron, Copper, silver, Gold, and several other substances would be also Caustick, after they have endur ' d the fire as long, and renew ' d it as often. But since there is no such thing, and that they are not able to burn, but when they come just out of the fire, we must search in the proper substance of the Lime, and no where else for its Caustick quality, and particularly its half Spiritous Salt, the sub∣tility and penetration whereof manifests it self very apparently, though it can∣not be separated from its Terrestrial part to reduce it into a Mass▪ like other Salts. 
  ' Tis then the dryness of this Salt, and the Terrestrial part, and their great inclina∣tion to join with the water which has its natural acid with it, which is the sole cause of their heat and effervescency when they join together, which makes them act reciprocally one upon another. Whence proceeds the particular quality which the Lime has, to bind and petrify all bodies that are mix ' d with it, so that we are not to impute that action, no more then the Caustick quality to the little bodies of fire, the necessity whereof is so much the less maintainable, because we see by ex∣perience that Quicklime is not heated at all, by pouring upon it the Spirit of wine, or oil, though both the one and the other are very combustible, but that on the contrary they put out the heat which happens to Lime by its conjunction with the water. As to the Caustick effects of Lime, they are to be attributed to the So∣lidity, and incroaching resemblance of the parts of its own proper Salt, which are little different from those of the fire, to which they pretend to attribute those ef∣fects. 
 The most simple preparation of Quicklime is that of its Elixiviation, not that we can separate the Salt from it, as from other Lyes. But we dissolve in water the Spiritous desiccative Salt, which it is also burning when is concenter ' d with any Ana∣logous substance. To which purpose having put two or three pound of good Quick∣lime into a grat Peuter Bason, pour upon it by little and little, Rain or River-water, as much as suffices to open the Lime, and dispose it to dissolution. Then pour on more at several times, till the water be about five or six fingers above the Lime, stirring the substances often with a woodden Spatula, to the end the Spiritous Salt part of the Chalk may be well dissolv ' d in the water. After this letting the whole settle for some hours, pour out by Inclination and filter the clear water; which must be kept in double bottles well stopp ' d for use. For this is call ' d Lime-water. Then you may pour upon the same Lime as much more fresh water, as at the first time, and stir it, after that giving it leave to settle, filter it also and keep it apart. Re∣peat the same operation the third time, to take away utterly from the Lime all its Salt part. Having so done, you may if you please dry the settlement of the Lime, and keep it as an extraordinary good and gentle Dryer. It is easy to judg which of these waters is most effectual; and therefore they are to be kept both apart, the one for lesser, the other for greater causes, as well against Gangrenes, as maladies of the Eyes, and the most part of Ulcers. 
 There is also another water made of Lime which the Moderns Phagedenick, or the Canker-water, which is nothing but a mixture of three pints of the first water with three pints of good Spirit of wine, and half an ounce of good sublimate cor∣rosive. But this proportion is not so regular but that you may augment or abate of the dose of either▪ especially of the sublimate. Some also add as much Arsenick in Powder as sublimate, as also some drops of Spirit of Vitriol. This water is high∣ly esteem ' d for stopping that Gangrene and its accidents, and for the cure of malig∣nant and corroding Ulcers: to which purpose the bottle must be always well shak ' d to thick ' n the water: though it must not be done when apply ' d to the eyes: for then the water must be clear and temper ' d with Ophthalmick Waters. It is also made use of for the cure of Eryfipela ' s, red swellings call ' d Flegmons, burns, and all sorts of inflammations, tempring it with convenient waters. 
 You may make an Ophthalmy water with half a pint of the first water, one pint of the second, and a pint and a half the third, and three drams of Salt Ammoniack, putting all together into a Copper vessel, and there leaving it, till the liquor have acquir ' d a blew colour; then having filter ' d this water thorough a sheet of paper, keep it in a bottle well stopp ' d for your occasions. The particles of Copper dissol∣ved in this water, and mix ' d with the Sal Ammoniack produce a good effect, and make an excellent water for diseases of the eyes. 
 Schroder highly extolls the Spirit of Quicklime, to break and dissolve the stone in the kidneys and bladder, giving it in whitewine, or broth, from two drops to five or six. And for its preparation he prescibes, that having ground the Quicklime upon a Porphyry, you should imbibe it with the Spirit of good wine, distilling it, and cohobating or sprinkling eight or ten times in an Alembick of Glass exactly luted, and set it in a Balneum Mariae, or an evaporating Bath; and that having mix ' d ten ounces of this Lime dry ' d with an ounce of Salt of Tartar, and eleven ounces of the Ca∣put Mortuum of the same Salt well dry ' d, you should put this mixture into a large Retort luted all over, and distill it with a gradual fire in a close Reverberatory, ha∣ving fitted to the neck of the Retort a large Receiver, having a little Spirit of wine in the bottom, and a little Pipe underneath the part where the neck of the Retort ends, with a little Recipient to it. So that the Flegm being distill ' d into the small one, by encreasing by degrees the heat of the fire, the Spirit may follow, and en∣tring in vapours into the great Recipient, may there dissolve and mix it self with the Spirit of Wine. And then having at length lighted and burnt the latter, you may find at the bottom the Spirit of Lime, proper for the uses above men∣tion ' d. 
 Others, to put themselves to less trouble and care, having finely ground the Quicklime, and sprinkl ' d it with as much good Spirit of Wine well rectify ' d, as it can well suck up, fill therewith about the third part of a large Retort well luted about, and having set it in a close Reverberatory, and fitted and carefully luted a large Recipient to the neck of it, make the distillation with a gradual fire, and after they have drawn forth the Spirit of Lime with the Spirit of Wine, and fir ' d and consum ' d the latter in some Vessel, find at the bottom that of the Lime, which they keep in a double glass Bottle close stopp ' d. 
 The Caustick quality of the Lime agrees very well with that of the corro∣sive Salts, when you intend to make Caustick stones. For the preparation of which, having finely powder ' d a pound of Quicklime, and having mix ' d it with two pound of Salt of Tartar newly prepar ' d and powder ' d, calcine them together for two or three hours, in a large Crucible over an open fire; afterwards make a Lye thereof, which having filter ' d and evaporated, till the Salt remain dry at the bottom of the Vessel, put the same Salt in a German Crucible over a violent fire, till it come to run, at which time pour it into a Skillet of smooth Copper, heated before, where you may cut it while it is hot, into little pieces, fit for Caute∣ries, putting them up as speedily as you can into double glass Bottles, exactly well stopp ' d. 
 You may also prepare stones for Cauteries, with the strong Lye whereof black Soap is made, which is compos ' d of Quicklime and corrosive Salts. You may also prepare them with equal parts of Quicklime and Ashes made of Wine-Lees burnt, macerated together in water for some days, then filter ' d and boil ' d into Cauterizing stones. You may also prepare them by making Lyes of the Ashes of Ash, Oak, Vine-twigs, or Bean-shells, mix ' d with Quicklime, filtring them, and coagulating them into stones, as I have already said. 
 CHAP. V. Of the Preparation of the Stone of Judea, and that of Linx. THE great number of Remedies every day prepar ' d to open the passages of the Reins and Ureters, and other conveyances for the Urine, is the reason that the stone of Judea nor that of Linx are so frequently prepar ' d. Of which the former call ' d also the Stone of Phaenicia, and Syria is of a white Ashy colour, of a tender and crumbling substance, of the bigness and shape of an Olive, but sometimes a little longer, and upon the outside equal and proportionable streaks quite through the length. The latter call ' d also Belemnites, because its Pyramidical figure in some sort resembles an Arrow, is equally as brittle, but not of the same colour, and without streaks. However I thought good to shew you their prepara∣tion, which may serve as an example for other stones that are not unlike them in substance. 
 Having finely pouder ' d both the one and the other of these stones, and mix ' d them with their weight of Sulphur beaten in a Mortar, make them red-hot in a Cruci∣ble over a good Charcoal-Fire, and so by degrees at several times make projection of this mixture, before you put in any more, continuing your fire till all be pro∣jected, and that the Sulphur be all consum ' d; then having beaten the Residence o∣ver again in a Mortar, and put it into a glass-Cucurbit, make a mixture of two parts of Vinegar distill ' d, one part of good Spirit of Salt, and one other part of good Spirit of Honey well-rectify ' d, and pour it upon the residence swimming above it about four fingers. Then having plac ' d the Cucurbit in a Sand-bath, and cover ' d it with a Paper, kindle underneath a good soft fire, only enough to give the sub∣stances a lukewarm heat, stirring them from time to time with a wooden Spatula, till you find that the Menstruum be sufficiently impregnated with the substance of the stone which it has dissolv ' d. After which having pour ' d out by inclination, and set apart the liquor that swims at the top; pour upon the residence, the like quan∣tity of the same fresh Menstruum, placing the Cucurbit again in the same bath, keeping it there as long as at the first time. Then mixing this liquor with the for∣mer, and having filter ' d them, evaporate the superfluous moisture to the thin filme, if you desire a Crystalline Salt; or to the driness of the residence, if you only de∣sire a Coagulated Salt at the bottom of the Cucurbit.
This Salt is highly esteem ' d for breaking the stone in the Reins and Bladder, and to give great releif in all stoppages of Urine. You may give it from six to twelve or fifteen grains in Diuretick liquors. It may be also turn ' d into liquor, by expo∣sing it to the air; and make use of it, augmenting or abating the dose according to the proportion of liquors mix ' d with it. 
 Men would go upon wrong grounds, did they beleive that these Stones afford all that quanty of Salt which is found at the bottom of the vessel, after these Men∣struums made use of; for the Salt which they contain is very little: nor can we rea∣sonably ascribe that which we draw from them but to the Salt part of Menstruums incorporated with the proper substance of these stones which they dissolv ' d; the same thing befalling them, which may be observ ' d in Quicklime, and Pearles, when they are dissolv ' d in Vinegar distill ' d, or in some other corroding Spirit; of which you more certainly prove the truth, by pouring upon these dissolutions, the liquor of Salt of Tartar, or any other Alkali; for you shall find by the conjunction of these Salts with the acids, the latter having abandon ' d the proper substance of the Stones which they had dissolv ' d, will shew it self by precipitating in pouder to the bottom of the vessel like a Magistery. And if any be so curious as to dry and weigh it af∣terwards, they shall find that it weighs within very little as much as the stone weigh∣ed before it was dissolv ' d in the menstruum. 
 CHAP. VI. Of the Preparation of the Bloodstone. THE Blood-stone may pass for the substance of Iron, not only because it has its properties, but also because you may extract that mettal out of it. It had this name giv ' n it, either because of its vertue to stop bleeding, or because the colour of it resembles blood, though it be mix ' d with brown streaks somewhat larger then those of Cinnabar. 
 Galenick Pharmacy only moistens the blood-stone with some Astringent water, and grinds it into powder upon Porphyry, to make and dry it into Trochishes. But Chymistry goes farther, making thereof considerable preparations, among the rest Distillations, Sublimations, Tinctures, and Extracts. 
 This Stone may be distill ' d alone through a Retort, after the ordinary manner, and an acid martial Spirit drawn out of it with a gradual fire, like to that of Vi∣ iol. But you may expect other advantages, observing the following method▪ Having finely powder ' d two pound of Blood-stone, and two pound of Sal-Armo∣niack, mingle them together, and put them into a large Cucurbit of Potters-Earth well luted about, and having cover ' d it with its head, and exactly luted the Com∣missures, place it upon a proportionable Furnace; then having fitted and exactly luted a Receiver to the neck of the head, make your distillation with a naked fire, very soft at first, but increasing the heat by degrees, to the utmost violence at last; and by this means you shall find in the Recipient a nurinous Spirit, very penetrating, and of a yellow colour, and upon the sides of the Cucurbit above the substances, the Flowers, having the colour and smell of Saffron; for which reason it is call ' d the Philosophers Aromatick. 
 Advantage may be afterwards made of that which remains in the Cucurbit; for having put it into a Retort daub ' d over with lute, and having plac ' d it in a Furnace of close Reverberation, you shall extract by the ordinary ways a martial Acid Spi∣rit, containing in it also some small quantity of that of Bay-Salt, which made one part of the composition of Sal-Ammoniack. You may also extract a tincture of the Flowers; to which purpose having put them into a Matras, pour upon them Spi∣rit of Wine well-rectify ' d, about four fingers above the substances. Then having exactly luted the Matras, set it seven or eight hours in digestion upon a Bakers Oven; then filter and put up the tincture; which you may after that reduce into an Extract, by drawing off the greatest part of the Spirit of Wine through a glass-Alembick in a Cinder or Sand-bath, over a moderate fire. 
 The Acid Spirit of the Blood-stone participating very much of Mars or Iron is very opening, and of great vertue to unstop the obstructions of the Liver, the Spleen, and all the Bowels: it is also very diuretick. The urinous volatile Spirit proceeding chiefly from the Sal-Armoniack is diaphoretick, and very proper to pu∣rifie the whole mass of the blood. For which reason it may with great advantage be made use of in malignant Fevers, the Scurvy, and in diseases of the Head. The dose both of the one and the other is from five or six to twelve or fifteen grains in proper liquors. The volatile Salt, the Tincture, and Extract are highly esteem ' d to mortifie Acids, and cure diseases of which they are the causes. The dose of the Tincture is from eight or ten to twenty or thirty drops: of the Salt and Extract from half a scruple to half a dram, mixing them in proper liquors, or else in Bolus. 
 CHAP. VII. Of the Preparation of Crystal. IT may be said of the most part of Preparation which writers would have practi∣sed upon Crystal, that they are only impertinent occasions to give men trouble, and to waste Co es, and to make us of other Materials and vessels without any hopes of profit or advantage. As we may observe by the Salt, Magistery, Liquor, E∣lixir, Essence, and some other preparations of this nature which they have labour ' d to make of Crystal. For which they have made use of the utmost violence of fire, to which they would have the Crystal expos ' d for a long time, and for several times, for the actual calcination of it in an open fire; and then they have made use of Salts and corroding Spirits to dissolve it. But we must be assur ' d that the Salts and the liquor which we draw from thence, are nothing else but the Salts or corro∣ding Spirits embody ' d, which have corroded and dissolv ' d the proper substance of the Crystal. For the ashes of the burnt-Lees of wine, the Salt of Tartar, the Niter, the Bay-salt, or Sal-Ammoniack, mix ' d with the Crystal when it is calcin ' d in the Crucible in an open fire, and the Vinegar distill ' d, or the Spirit of Niter, which some make use of for the potential Calcination of Crystal, after it is actually cal∣cin ' d, doing an extream violence to the whole substance, cannot but change the qua∣lities of it in an extraordinary manner, while they are really the thing which is cal∣led Salt of Crystal, and the principal substance of the liquor that bears that name; and for that the substance of the Crystal is totally dissolv ' d therein, and in a condi∣tion to be separated when you would make a Magistery thereof, or satisfy curiosity. 
 Whence it is easy to judg that the best preparation of Crystal is that which does least violence to nature, and changes least the properties of it. For this reason it may be very fitly made use of, after you have ground it upon Porphyry, and re∣duc ' d it to a pouder almost impalpable, or after you have several times made it red hot in the fire, and quench ' d it as often in diuretick waters, enliven ' d with Spirit of Salt or Vitriol; for by this means you may have a liquor, very fit to be made use of to open the passages of the Urine; and a pouder of Crystal quench ' d, good against weakness of the stomach and intestines, or to qualify the sharpness of Acids, and the Acrimony of the humours. 
 As to the Tincture which is forcibly extracted out of Crystal, after you have cal∣cin ' d it a long time with corroding Salts, and put it with them in fusion, we must attribute the red colour rather to the union, which the long digestion has produc ' d of the most volatile parts of these Salts, with the Sulphury Spirit of wine, then to the substance of the Crystal dissolv ' d in those Salts; in regard the same thing happens▪ to Salt of Tartar digested with Sulphury Spirit of wine, without any Crystal being mix ' d with it. 
 But after all these considerations, there is great reason to fear, least the Chymi∣cal preparations which may be made of Crystal after its being reduc ' d to a Lime, may not rather incline the matters which they meet with, in the passages of the U∣rine to Petrification, then dissolve or drive them forth, as it is intended they should do. For it is a hard matter to perswade a man, that the petrifying Ferment of these sort of Limes change their nature by the preparations which others make of them; or that they may not produce effects quite contrary to those for which they seem to be absolutely provided. 
 I see no necessity for me here to set down particular preparations of Flints; for besides that they require no other, but the same as Crystal, there is as much reason to fear the effects of their petrifying Ferment, as of that of Crystal. 
 CHAP. VIII. Of the Preparation of Coral. NO man contests but that Red Coral carries the preeminency above all other Coralls. And therefore that all Authors have practised their principal prepara∣tions upon this Coral; touching which I am of the judgment, as in reference to Crystal that it is better to stick to those preparations that are more simple, and less destructive. 
 The ordinary Pharmacy very judiciously reduces Coral into pouder almost impal∣pable, grinding it upon Porphyry as it does other precious Stones. But it may be better done by making use of the Engine which Monsieur Joel Langelot, a most worthy Physitian to the Duke of Holsatia imparted to us, the figure whereof I have giv ' n you in this Pharmacopoea. 
 For Coral having nothing in its substance which can serve to the purposes for which it is made use of in Physick, there is nothing requir ' d but to open the body of it well, and all its parts, and to divide them almost into Atoms, which may be done by means of that new Engine; the effects whereof are so much the more recom∣mendable, as being a great furtherance to all other preparations, which whether well or ill done, are attempted upon this mix ' d body. 
 Actual Calcination of Coral, and reiterated Extinctions merit the name rather of destruction then of lawful preparations, as I have already made out in the Chap∣ter of Crystal. 
 Solutions made in acid Spirits more or less corroding, to extract the Salt or Ma∣gistery, are as little to the purpose, because it is a potential Calcination, and for that there is no reason to expect any real Salt out of Coral, but only the Salt of the Menstruum embody ' d with its proper substance. And because the Magistery which may be forc ' d to precipitate in these dissolutions, is only the most earthy part of the Coral, it must give way to Coral finely pouder ' d, that has suffer ' d no torture, nor lost any thing of its substance. 
 As for the numerous preparations of the Tinctures of Coral, with which some Authors are stuft; though we may find some that have some appearance of Truth, and benefit, yet can they not be altogether entitled Legitimate, especially when the Coral is expos ' d to the violence of the fire, or to corroding Salts or Spirits. For be∣sides that it is impossible that the Coral should communicate its colour which it has lost by the violence of the fire, or corroding Spirits, we must not look upon the red colour which appears in ordinary Menstruums to be other then an effect of long digestion. We must believe also that it is not a small matter to separate the red colour of Coral, and to carry it into another subject with its principal ver∣tue. 
 The Freturation of Coral by means of the Engine of Monsieur Langelot, is incom∣parably much better, then all the Calcinations that can be made use of. For with∣out changing the nature or the qualities of the Coral, it facilitates its dissolution, and provides a way to accomplish what is intended by means of more gentle Men∣struums. Among the rest by the Spirit of Honey and Turpentine; by juice of Le∣mons, Barberries and the like, by those of several woods, by those of Salt and Vi∣triol dulcify ' d, and united with Spirit of wine, and by the last enliven ' d with Flow∣ers of Sal Ammoniack, or some other Salt, and they may more easily after this in a Cornute extract the specious Tincture of Coral, then as some have practised by mixing it with equal parts of Sugar-Candy. And therefore raw Coral beaten to an impalpable powder, and giv ' n in some Liquor or otherwise, is far superi∣our then all the Tinctures of it; though these are least to be rejected, where the Coral has been dissolv ' d with less violence, and whose Menstruum was less corroding, and may be the most securely taken inwardly. 
 The little esteem I give to these Tinctures has kept me from swelling this Chap∣ter with their preparations, of which you may see a great number in S roderus, Grullengius, and several other Books. I shall only insert that which Monsieur Lan∣gelot▪ has some while since imparted to publick view, as well for the particular esteem which I have for his learning and knowledg, as for the softness of the Menstruum which he makes use of, the vertues of the fine Tincture which seem to appear in his preparation, and the hopes I have of it ' s success upon the word of such a Man.
This Author says, that having for some years before pour ' d upon certain whole fragments of Coral an oil which he thought to be the gentlest among those which are drawn from Vegetables, with a design to try whether or no he could draw any Tincture from them, a good while after perceiv ' d that neither the Oil nor the Co∣ral had suffer ' d the least change, and so being out of all hopes, neglected the vessel that contain ' d them. But the winter being pass ' d, and he busy about other Opera∣tions which he was experimenting in a Furnace of digestion, he remember ' d himself, and put the Vessel containing the Coral into the same furnace; and about a month after stirring the substances as he was wont to do, he perceiv ' d that the red colour of the Coral was somewhat height ' nd, and that the Coral was grown softer, though the Oil were not chang ' d at all. Then continuing digestion with the same heat of fire, he found some days after that the Coral was dissolv ' d, and turn ' d into a Mus∣cilaginous kind of substance, and that very red, though the Oil that swam above it had not chang ' d colour. He says morever that he could not change the said Oil, nor unite it with the Muscilaginous matter, what ever stirring or digestion he us ' d afterwards. For the Cil remain ' d at the top, and the Muscilaginous matters des∣cended to the bottom. He affirms moreover, that finding the oil to be of the same scent and tast as before, he pour ' d it into another vessel, and having pour ' d the Muscilaginous matter, the Spirit of wine Tartariz ' d, and so leaving a very little while to digest, the whole substance dissolv ' d into a very red Tincture; which he at∣tributes to long digestion, and the great effects which volatiles are able to produce, when you have put a stop to them. Some think that he made use either of the di∣still ' d oil of Anise, of Citron peel, or Juniper berries to soften the Coral, and to dis∣pose them to yield their Tincture. 
 I cannot boast to have tryed this preparation, but I intend it in a little time; I believe also that the success corresponding with the writings of Monsieur Langelot, as there is great probability of it. This Tincture of Coral ought to pass for the best and most legitimate that ever was invented, and that with much more reason, those vertues may be attributed to it, which have been allow ' d to the other Tinctures, as well to strengthen the heart and liver, as well to open the obstructions of the latter, and to redress all its distempers, as to purify and renew the whole mass of the blood, and to give notable relief in diseases that happen from its alteration. It is no less priz ' d against weakness of the stomach, and of the intestines, which cause vomitings, Diarrheas, Dysenteries, or Lienteries, and in all losses of blood either in men or women. 
 CHAP. IX. Of the Preparation of Pearls. THE engendring of Pearls in the Shells of certain Fish very much resembling the nature of Oysters, seems to make it reasonable that we should place them among Animals; if their whiteness, lustre, hardness, weight, and solidness of their parts, did not place them in the rank of the most precious stones. These quali∣ties have been the reason that Physick has from time to time conceiv ' d a very good opinion of them, and has believ ' d that their vertues, if not superior, yet are not inferior to those of any precious stones. This conceit has encourag ' d several Chy∣mists to make several preparations of them, and has caus ' d them to fall into errors as dangerous, if not more then those which concern Coral. Operating here upon a substance of far greater price, and not only more pure, and brought to a higher perfection by nature then Coral, but which is much more qualify ' d to receive with ease all sorts of good or bad impressions. 
 Ordinary Pharmacy grinds Pearls upon Porphyry, moist ' ning them with Rose∣water, or some Cordial-water, and like Coral and other precious stones. This pre∣paration, though very plain, is much better then some which the Chymists have in∣vented, provided you break the Pearls whole upon the same Porphyry, and that you continue to grind them, till they are pulveriz ' d to an exact fineness. To which purpose there is nothing like Monsieur Langelots Engine. For Pearls retaining some∣thing of the nature of Animals, and being of a substance in part volatile, they com∣pleat their dissolution in the heat of the stomach, or rather by the operation of the Archeum, especially when they are finely pulveriz ' d, so that by a quick digestion, what they contain of most essential, is suddenly convey ' d to the heart, and to the parts which have need thereof. 
 But to satisfie those that believe that Pearls are in a better condition to impart their vertues when they are dissolv ' d into liquor, they must understand that Pearls may be dissolv ' d in the juice of Lemons, well purify ' d by digestion; which may easily be brought to pass, by putting into a Matrass or a glass Cucurbit, about an ounce of Pearls well ground upon Porphyry, and pouring upon it the juice of puri∣fy ' d Lemons depurated, three fingers above the substances, and placing the Vessel in a temperate Sand-bath, where it is to be left three whole natural days, stirring the substances from time to time; after that pour out the clear liquor by inclina∣tion, filter it and put it up in a Bottle, mingling with it the same measure of Spirit of Roses. This liquor is to be taken in Cordial-waters from eight or ten drops to twenty or thirty. You may pour new purify ' d juice upon the Pearls that remain in the Vessel, and having made maceration, proceed in all things as before; and reiterate the same operations, till the Pearls are almost quite dissolv ' d. 
 For the Salt and Magistery of Pearls, of which some Authors make so great an ac∣count, they are neither the one nor the other more to be valued then those of Coral. For the first is nothing but the Salt of Vinegar distill ' d, embody ' d with the substance of the Pearls which it dissolv ' d; and the latter only the terrestrial part of the Pearls, depriv ' d of their pure substance, which the Dissolvants and Precipi∣tants have got to themselves. 
 The Oil or Liquor of Pearls, drawn forth for want of its Salt, is no better, for the same reasons; no more then the Essences, Tinctures, Arcanums, Flowers, or Spirit, which are drawn forth by the help of corroding Menstruums, which are rather Destructions then Preparations. 
 Pearls beaten to fine pouder are recommended to strengthen and comfort the heart and the Noble parts, to resist Poison, the Pestilence, malignant Fevers, and to restore persons that are feeble and languishing. It is giv ' n in Cordial waters or in broth from half a scruple to half a dram. It is mix ' d in Tablets, Opiates, Po∣tions, and several other remedies. The vertues and use of Pearls dissolv ' d in the juice of Lemons, and in Spirit of Roses, are very near the same. 
 This occasion of Pearls obliges me to tell my thoughts of the Chymical prepa∣ration of Emraulds, Saphires, Jacynths and other precious Stones; which is, that their substance being excessively hard, especially if they be fine and clear; and not being to be dissolv ' d but by potent Corrosives, it is much better to let them alone upon your finger, in regard it is impossible to use those violent means without de∣stroying the good qualities of the stones. I think it also much better to grind them upon Porphyry, like Pearls, till they are exactly fine, to which purpose you may make use of Monsieur Langelots Engine, to make use of them so upon all occasions. Though if credible Authors may be believ ' d, the Stones have a quality to impart their vertues without preparation being worn in Rings, about the neck or arms, ty ' d upon the legs or thighs, or others apply ' d to other parts of the body, like other stones of less value, as the Eagle stone, the Nephetick stone, and several o∣thers. 
 CHAP. X. Of the Preparation of Talk. TAlk, with the addition of Venetian, shining and silver-like, when it is divided as it may be into tender scales, but almost of a Sea green when it is quite whole, is that which of all the true or false Talks is most esteem ' d, and about which a great number of people have exercis ' d themselves from time to time, especially to draw forth an oil, which is esteem ' d to be beyond all the Cosmeticks in the world and is thought to lie conceal ' d in its substance, because of its sweetness, and unctuo∣sity which may be perceiv ' d by handling it, though it do not daub the fingers at all. I pass by the opinion that some have, that Talk red or yellow, contains in it self a Mine of Gold, and that a proper menstruum may be drawn from it for the trans∣mutation of Metalls into Gold or Silver, and for the fixation and Tincture of Mer∣cury; as also that it contains an universal medicine, able to cure all diseases that are tak ' n to be incurable. I shall only say that the preparation of a true oil of Talk is no less difficult then the Transmutation of imperfect Metalls into Gold or Sil∣ver, of which many have, and still do boast, though the Talent which they pretend to, is not able to free them from the miseries that usually attend them to the end of their lives. 
 Calcination of Venice Talk, of all its preparations has been most sought after, and for which they have made use of all sorts of fires, the most tedious and most violent, even those of glass Houses. Exposing the Talk, sometimes alone, sometimes mingl ' d with Silver, Copper, Lattin, Sulphur, Lime, Tartar Salts, and other cor∣roding substances. For though there be in England a Talk proper to be calcin ' d alone and to be reduc ' d in less then an hour to a very white and crumbling Lime, and that there be in France of those false Talk ' s that will not endure the fire; yet they can never promise to themselves the same thing from that of Venice, but by exposing it above a quarter of an hour to a flaming fire, and making an Iron Mortar almost red hot together with one end of the Pestle; and then indeed they may re∣duce it in a small time to pouder and that very fine, which may be presently sifted through a silk ' n seiree, fit to be mix ' d with Pomatums and other Cosmeticks. 
 This Talk thus pulveriz ' d may be strew ' d among shell snailes, and left in a glaz ' d Pipkin till they have suckt it up all; then having bruis ' d them, with all their shells, and put them into a Glass Cucurbit, cover ' d with its head, distil the whole mass, and there will come forth a water, very proper to clear Complexions of Ladies. 
 They who mingle Salts among Talk, to assist and forward Calcination, are wont to expose it to the moisture of a Cellar, after they have expos ' d it, or else in the open Air, to procure a Liquor, which they call oil of Talk; But very impro∣perly, in regard that Liquor is nothing but a Salt dissolv ' d in the moisture that has got within it, and is impregnated with particles of the Talk, which it has cor∣roded and dissolv ' d. 
 Crollius, and some other Modern Authors in imitation of him, thinking to do bet∣ter, direct you to prepare a Spirit of Vinegar of Span-ish Wine, and to have it more penetrating, to choose that which distils from the last half of the Vinegar; and af∣ter you have divided the Venice -Talk into thin pieces, to put them into a Matrass and moisten them well with Spirit of Vinegar, till the substances are at length be∣come Mucilaginous, and as it were Oil, to the end you may thereby know the dissolution of the Talk. After this they direct you to put the whole into a Luted Cornute, set in a close Reverberatory; to which having fitt ' d a large Ricipient, first with a gradual fire they draw off the Spirit of Vinegar, then the white Oil; the effects whereof are to beautifie the Complexion, and will remain above a month after single Unction. 
 The little likelihood of succeeding in this Operation, hinder me from making the Experiment; and therefore I will neither promise nor warrant any real Oil of Talk. Nor will I undertake to Calcine true Venetian -Talk in half an hour with a small fire, and to make it spungy, and in a condition to be rubb ' d between the fingers into an Impalpable Powder, as Monsieur Morhosius, in his Epistle Treating of the Trans∣mutation of Metals, dedicated to Monsieur Joel Langelot, assures us. Though I will not deny the possibility, since there is some reason to hope that so Famous a Man will one day Communicate in Publick a Preparation of so much Curiosity. 
 CHAP. XI. Of the Preparation of Common Salt. SAlt generally taken, is as it were the Foundation, Soul, Subsistence, and the Prin∣cipal Secret of the Life and Preservation of all mix ' d Bodies; there being no mix ' d Body that has not its proper Salt, more or less in quantity, and which does not lose it ' s principal Qualities, when it loses its Salt. But we are to look upon the Sea Salt as the most abundant in Nature, and as the Foundation and Seed of all other Salts. For being dissolved in a vast quantity of Water, and in a posture ready to be convey ' d to all parts of the Earth, either through the Subterraneal passages, or by the ins proceeding from the vapours rais ' d by the Sea; all other Salts bor∣row from it their Principal parts, not alter ' d from it, but only in the change of Form, and the Situation of these parts, or by the Dissolvable substances that are mix ' d with it, and make the diversity of Salts. For Vitriol, Niter, Alum, and Sal-Armoniack, have all of them some parts of the Sea-Salt for their Foundation; nor are they diversify ' d, but by the strange bodies which they have met with and dis∣solv ' d, or they are Artificially bleaded. Sal-Gemm ought to be accompted a real Sea-Salt, depriv ' d of the most part of its moisture, and coagulated by the Subter∣raneal heat, or by that of the Sun. That which is drawn from Salt Fountains, is much of the same nature with Sea-Salt, as coming from the Sea through Subter∣raneal passages: their great difference consisting in the manner of separating their moisture; considering that we make use of fire to evaporate fresh water, of Foun∣tain Salt; whereas in hot Countries, they make use of the heat of the Sun to con∣sume the moisture of the Sea; which Salt is most esteem ' d, because it suffers less alteration in its parts, then that which has endur ' d an ordinary fire. 
 The use of Sea-Salt is much more for the seasoning of Meats, then for Physical preparations; and the first preparation of it, is to purifie it: To which purpose, ha∣ving dissolv ' d it in Fountain, or River Water, and filter ' d this Dissolution through coarse Paper, evaporate the moisture in some Iron-Kettle, or Caldron, till the Salt remain white and Crystallime at the bottom of the Vessel. This way of purifying serves not only to separate the Earthy parts of the Salt, but it qualifies its Acrimo∣ny, and makes it fitter for all sorts of uses, especially for nourishment; above all if you reiterate Dissolution, Filtration and Coagulation. 
 But because that notwithstanding the first and second evaporation of the Salt, there still remains some particles of water in its proper substance, and that the strict Union of the Acid with the Alkali, the close binding of the parts, and the Cubick figure of the grains of Salt, so straitly enclose these particles of water, that having expos ' d these grains to the fire they cannot get out, but by offering violence to their bonds, and by causing the parts of the Salt to leap with a kind of flashing; and for that overmuch of that leaping and flashing of the Salt might chance to break the Glass, where the Salt is put to distil, there is a kind of Calcination or drying us ' d, which is call ' d Decrepitation, because of the crackling of the Salt while it is over the fire: and because that Crackling is either more or less according to the bigness of the grains, having dry ' d the grains of Salt in an Oven after the bread is out, bruise it in a Morter, and put it in a pot that is able to endure the fire, and placing it in a Furnace over a good Coal-fire, and stirring it from time to time with a long Iron Spatula, let it stand so till the Salt has done crackling, which is an evi∣dent sign of the dissipation of the particles of water, which were mix ' d confused∣ly among the Essential parts of the Salt. Which you may sooner bring to pass, if when you beat the grains of Salt in a Matrass, you beat them so small, that the Alien particles of the Water may the more easily issue forth. As touching the fu∣sion of Salt it is more facil, then necessary. For they that will have it so need no more but put the Sea-Salt powder ' d into a Crucible, and expose it to a Melting or Fusion-Fire, which hinders not but that you may at any time dissolve it in water, both before and after this operation. 
 CHAP. XII. The great Inclination that Sea-Salt has to Fu∣sion. THE impossibility for any Cornutes of Earthor Glass to continue this Salt in Fu∣sion long without breaking, and the strict union of the Spirits with the other substances, while the Salt is in Fusion, enforce us to make use of other substances, by the mixture whereof we divide the parts of the Salt, and preventing Fusion, constrain it to surrender its Spirit by the ordinary ways. 
 Not but that you may extract an acid Spirit of Salt without Addition, if after a perfect Decrepitation of the Sea-Salt, and after you have kept it a long time over the fire, you expose it afterwards to the Air for several days; for the more fix ' d part of the Salt having lost over the fire the most part of its Acid, and being as it were famish ' d easily impregnates it self with the Acid Salt of the air which embodying with this Salt, augments its quantity. And because the acid Salt of the Air is naturally more volatile then the acid of the Sea-Salt, and because it easily separates it self without the helf, it is no difficult thing to distil it without Addition. But the Spirit which is drawn from it, being almost nothing else but this acid of the Air, there is no reason to call it the Spirit of Sea-Salt, nor to account this Preparation, no more then such an augmentation of this Salt for any great Mistery; in regard the same corporifying and augmentation happen to Allum, Niter and Vitriol, by the conjunction of a new acid, when you have drawn off its Spirit; and for that Lead, Antimony and several other more compacted bodies then Sea-Salt, augment by means of the Air, which pierces into their pores instead of the other substances which the fire had driv ' n away.
Take two pound of Sea-Salt well-dry ' d and pouder ' d, and eight pound of Potters-Earth, or Bole, or earth of Blois, pulveriz ' d in the same manner; and after you have well mix ' d one of these Earths with two pound of Salt, put the whole into an Earthen Cornute well luted, so large that about a third part may remain empty: place the Cornute in a close Reverberatory, and stop the Register of the Duo∣mo; kindle a small fire of Coals in the fire-place, enough to heat by degrees the Furnace and the Cornute; and having continu ' d it so for an hour, begin to increase the fire insensibly, and after that from degree to degree; opening by little and little the Register of the Duomo on the side of the neck of the Retort; and when the flegm distils, keep the fire in the same condition, till you see certain white vapours come forth from the neck of the Cornute. At which time fit a large Re∣cipient to it, and having carefully luted the closures, encrease the fire still by little and little, and proportionably open the Register of the Duomo, encreasing yet more the fire from degree to degree to the utmost violence, t ll you see that no more va∣pours come forth of the Cornute, and that the Recipient becomes clear. Then giving the Vessels liberty to cool, and having unluted the Recipient, you shall find a yellow acid Spirit, of a very pleasing colour, accompany ' d with some flegm, and in the neck of the Recipient some little volatile Sal fix ' d to it. 
 You may also instead of drying the Sea-Salt, dissolve it in water, and having made a kind of a pickle, imbibe the same Earths or Bole in it; then having made a Paste of it, somewhat solid, make it up in little Balls as big as will go into the mouth of the Cornute; and having perfectly well dry ' d them in the Sun or in the open air, fill the two thirds of a Cornute; then observing my last directions, you shall draw forth a Spirit like that already mention ' d. 
 Some there are that cohobate this Spirit upon that which remains in the Cor∣nute, and after they have made the mass into little Balls and dry ' d it, they make a new distillation, reiterating several times the same cohobations and operations, the better to separate the spiritous part of the Salt from its body. And for that this Spirit contains very much flegm, you may pour it out into a small glass Cucurbit, and having plac ' d it in Balneo Mariae, and cover ' d it with its head, and fitted to it a small Recipient, rectifie it over a gentle fire. For by this means the flegm as∣cending first, will leave the acid Spirit at the bottom, which will be more or less penetrating, according to the quantity more or less of flegm which you have sepa∣rated by rectification.  ' Tis requisite to save this flegm, for notwithstanding the soft heat of the Bath, it has carried with it some of the acid volatile particles of the Salt; which not only render it diuretick, but also proper to allay the heat of cho∣lerick Fevers. You may also concenter this Spirit by rectifying it in a Sand-bath, when you desire to make it fit for the dissolution of Gold. 
 There is also a Spirit of Salt to be prepar ' d, by mixing two pound of Alum, burnt to powder, with three pound of Salt well dry ' d and powder ' d, and distilling them together through a Cornute the ordinary way. But the Spirit participates as well of the one as the other; however it may serve for several precipitations, and is a powerful opener and diuretick. 
 You may also mix equal parts of Sea-Salt and Salt of Niter, well dry ' d and pow∣der ' d, with four times as much of their weight of Bole, or Potters earth Pulve∣riz ' d, and after you have put them into a Retort, set them into a close Reverbe∣ratory. Thereby you shall draw forth a Spirit compos ' d of two Salts, commended not only for the cure of the Dropsie, and to consume the proud flesh of Ulcers, but for the immersive calcination of Gold and Silver. 
 Some Authors have pretended to prepare a Spirit of Salt impregnated with the vertues of Coral, mixing with the Salt the Coral ground upon▪ Porphyry, instead of Potters-Earth, or those other substances which are made use of in the distilla∣tion of it; but the acid part of the Salt acting more inwardly upon the Corals then it could do upon the Earths, corrodes them, and in corroding embodies it self with their parts; so that resting in the Cornute, there can be nothing ex∣pected but an unprofitable flegm; and therefore it is more to the purpose sepa∣rately to make use of the Salt, and the Corals, as occasion requires, then to mix them to no advantage. 
 CHAP. XIII. Of the Dulcifying of the Spirit of Salt. THE inconvenience which the acidity of the Spirit of Salt may bring to some persons, especially those whose diseases proceed from acids, have enforc ' d most Artists to have recourse to diverse fix ' d or volatile Salts, which they have mix ' d with this Spirit to qualify their sharpness and sweeten their effects. For besides that they mix with this Spirit Salt of Wormwood, and many other Salts of Plants, as also with the volatile Salts of Animals, to fix them, while it fixes it self and incorporates with them; they mix it also with equal parts of Spirit of wine, the volatile and Combustible Salt whereof inwardly uniting it self with the acid parts of this Spi∣rit, makes one Composition of two, of a sweet and pleasing odor, and of a taste less acid, the use and vertues whereof are incomparably better appropriated to the di∣seases and to the habitude of several persons then the ordinary Spirit of Salt. For which reason it is call ' d the sweet or Dulcify ' d Spirit of Salt. For the prepa∣ration whereof, fill about two thirds of a Glass-Cucurbit, with equal parts of Spirit of Salt and Spirit of Wine, and having plac ' d it in a Sand-bath, and cover ' d it with its head perfectly well-luted, with a Receiver luted in the same manner, begin your Distillation with a moderate fire, which you must continue, till the whole be almost distill ' d. Then having cool ' d the Vessels, and pour ' d out the distill ' d Liquor into a new Cucurbit, re-distil it in the same Bath, and reiterate the same operation the third time. By which means these two Spirits being perfectly well-united together will produce effectually the advantages expected from their Union. 
 All Authors highly recommend the Spirit of Salt to open the passages of the U∣rine, to cut and loosen Viscous and Tartarous Matters, and to open the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and the rest of the Bowels. For which reason it is success∣fully prescrib ' d in Dropsies; and in diseases that proceed from obstructions of the Vessels. In all which cases the Dulcify ' d Spirit is highly to be preferr ' d before the other. Both the one and the other are very good to quench Thirst, giving them from five or six to twelve or fifteen drops, in some proper Liquor. Or else you may put as much as will yield a pleasing sharpness in your ordinary drink. This Spirit is very good to kill Childblains in the hands or feet, before they come to be ulcera∣ted; anointing the part affected with a Feather. It is also good to cleanse and make white the Teeth, to take off the rottenness of the Bones, and to consume the proud flesh of Wounds and Ulcers. The first Spirit of Salt well-rectify ' d is us ' d for the dissolution of Gold. It is useful also for the precipitation of Minerals dissolv ' d in Aqua-Fortis or with Spirit of Niter. But you must not impute this precipitation to the weight nor the force, nor to any justle or shog which it gives the Aqua-Fortis, or to the matters dissolv ' d, as some have thought, but through the Con∣junction of the acid of this Spirit to the volatile and Sulphury Alkali of the Aqua-Fortis, or Spirit of Niter, which constrains the latter to abandon that part of the Mineral which it had dissolv ' d. 
 And to shew you that neither this nor any other precipitation happens through the weight or force, or any shog or justle, which this or any other Spirit can give to the Dissolvant or the matter dissolv ' d, but that it is the reciprocal conjunction of Alkali ' s to Acids, or the en eebling of the Dissolvent, or the addition of some new Matter, which the Dissolvant may penetrate afresh, which causes the pre∣cipitation; we find that the Spirit of Salt not being able to unite it self but with the volatile Alkali of the Aqua-Fortis, is not able to precipitate any more then what the Alkali had dissolv ' d; whence it comes to pass that the precipitation is nei∣ther very quick nor copious, because the acid part of the Aqua-Fortis still retains that part of the Mineral which it had it self dissolv ' d, not being able to unite with the Spirit of Salt. But if after the Spirit of Salt has done working upon the Mineral dissolv ' d you pour upon it the Liquor of Tartar or the fixt Salt of Niter, with which the acid of the Niter has a great willingness to unite, there will presently follow a new precipitation, which will be more plentiful then the former. By which you may understand the true cause of the principal Precipitations, examples whereof you shall find in the following discourse. 
 CHAP. XIV. Of the Preparation of Salt of Niter. SAlt of Niter commonly call ' d Salt-Peter, or Salt of the stone, by others the Dragon, Cerberus, Salt of Hell, by reason of the violent effects which it is able to produce, is accounted a Sulphury Salt, because of its quick disposition to fire such substances whose parts are mix ' d with Brimstone upon the fall of the least spark of fire; though of it self it will not take fire in a Crucible red-hot; unless you mix some Coal with it, the substance whereof contains something of Sulphur. We find in Niter three sorts of Salts, a volatile Sulphury Salt, a volatile Acid, and a fiz ' d Terrestrial. Nevertheless the natural union of these three Salts is not so firmly knit, but that an Artist can separate them at his pleasure. 
 We find in France three sorts of Salt-Peter, the one fix ' d to certain Rocks or Walls in little white Crystals, the other mix ' d among the Earth of certain Cel∣lars, or some old Stables, and the third among Rubbish or the Ruines of old Walls. 
 The Salt-Peter-Men put these Earths or any other substances containing the Salt-Peter in great Cauldrons over the fire, with as much water as is convenient, and having made lyes of the Salts, they filter them, then they Coagulate the Salt, which they dissolve, filter, and coagulate again, not only to make it more pure, but as much as in them lies to separate it from the Salt of the Earth; which is usually mix ' d among it, and which lying under Peter the Salt, very much partakes of the tast, shape, and nature of the Sea-Salt. The easiness to procure Salt-Peter fine, is the reason why we never trouble our selves to depurate it. It being e∣nough to choose it white, transparent, in long Crystals full of Angles, in length form∣ing a kind of a Cylender. This Salt is of a Saltish acid tast, with some bitterness. Besides all these marks the purity of it is known by putting some little piece of it under Coals well kindl ' d, and then if it consume almost all▪ away immediatly, so that there remain upon the Coals only a little white Salt, which is the fix ' d Salt of the Niter. The Salt-Peter first Chrystalliz ' d, and which is drawn from the first water, is that which has all the true Marks, and is esteem ' d the best. 
 The purifying of Niter makes it fit for all uses, especially to be taken inwardly. It is also the beginning of all its other preparations; of which the most frequent is that of its Calcination, the which is done more or less, according to the quan∣tity, more or less, of its parts which you intend to separate. That which is done for the preparation of Mineral-Crystal is the slightest. For then it sufi∣ces only to put one pound of the best Niter in a Crucible, set upon a Trevet in a Furnace, in the midst of live-Coals; where having melted it, cast upon it at several times one single ounce of Flower of Brimsto e, which you must cause to burn and consume upon the Niter; then pour it out spreadingly over the bottom of a clean Iron Skellet or Kettle, and having cool ' d it, and broke it to pieces, put it up in a Glass or Gally-pot well stopp ' d. They have also giv ' n the name of Sal Prunella to Mineral Crystal, because tis an excellent remedy against inflammations of the throat, especially the Squinancy, which some call Pruna or Prunella, especially when those diseases are caus ' d by volatile Salts, and have but newly seiz ' d the Patient. For the acid of the Niter uniting it self with the volatile Salts, changes their nature and prevents their Effects. This Crystal is also call ' d by the name of Mineral Anodine, because it is good to asswage pain, particularly those that are caus ' d by fix ' d and volatile Salts. It is opening, diuretick, and proper to cut viscous and Tartarous humours. It is mix ' d among purgatives as a Vehicle; and in divers Menstruums to assist in the extractions of the Tinctures of mixt bo∣dies, and to highten the colour. It resists putrefaction of the humours, and quen∣ches thirst and the burning of Fevers, taken in a small quantity in convenient Liquors. 
 They who have been acquainted with the heat of the most volatile and Sulphury part of Niter, thought they did well to burn a top of it the flowers of Sulphur to consume and carry that part away with them; which is grown into custom, and is not to be rejected, because of the good use which is made of it every day: though instead of that, you may make use of Niter it self very pure and in Crystals. 
 CHAP. XV. Of the Fixation of Niter. All Salts in general being separated from other substances, though dissolvable in in Liquors, carry the name of fix ' d, though they be in a condition to endure the fire. Which cannot be done but by stopping their volatile part with acid Spi∣rits or Salts, or with other substances, which may incorporate with them, out of their particular disposition to unite together. Niter being compos ' d of a volatile Sulphury Salt, an Acid Salt somewhat volatile, and a fix ' d Salt, it is a hard thing to find one Salt or one Spirit, able to fix all parts at a time. For if you mix only volatile Salts, some part of the other Salts will dissipate with them. And if you make use of new acids to stop the Salts, the excess of the acids will cause the dissolution, and change the nature of the whole. So that go which way you will to work, in fixing the Niter, you must lose a good part of its volatile part. 
 According to Glauber you may put three or four pound of good Niter in a large Iron-Crucible plac ' d upon a Trevet in a proper Furnace, and having kindl ' d Coals round about it, and forc ' d the Niter to Fusion, cast upon it about half an ounce of pouder of Coals, which will immediatly take fire, and begin to dissipate the vola∣tile parts of the Niter. This half ounce of pouder being consum ' d, throw on as much more, and renew the same projection and consumption, keeping the same fire, till there be little or no acid part left in the Niter, nor any thing at all com∣bustible, till the pouder of Coals take fire no more, and the Niter look of a green∣ish colour enclining to blew. Then take the Niter out of the Crucible, while it is yet hot, you may if you think good put it up as it is in a double-glass bottle exactly stopp ' d. Or else you may dissolve it in water, and having made a Lye, Filter it and Coagulate the Salt, which you may put up as you did the former. This Salt ha∣ving lost in its Calcination with its Combustible volatile, almost all that it had of acid, you cannot Crystallize it in that condition, as you may Crystallize Mineral Crystal, which having endur ' d only a slight Calcination, contains almost all its acid upon which depends Crystallization. However you may easily restore to it its Cry∣stalline figure, by pouring Spirit of Niter upon its filter ' d Dissolution, till Ebulli∣tion cease. For by consuming afterwards this liquor to a Film, and leaving it to cool, you shall find Crystal like those which the Niter had before it was put into the Crucible, and the weight and bulk of the Niter augmenting the Spirit which is im∣pregnated with it. 
 Glauber directs that having calcin ' d the Niter, as I have shew ' d, with pouder of Coal, having tak ' n it out of the Crucible, and put it into some convenient vessel, you should expose it to the moisture of the Air, or Cellar, till it be dissolv ' d into Liquor, to which he gives the name of Alkahest, pretending to make a Universal Menstruum thereof, by means of which to extract Tinctures from all sorts of mix ' d Bodies, as well Vegetables as Animals and Minerals. But though it may be made use of for the Menstruums of several Minerals; yet there are others much more gentle for Vegetables and Animals. 
 Some persons dissolve Niter thus calcin ' d in Spirit of Vinegar, filtring the Disso∣lution and Coagulating the Salt, reiterating three times, Dissolution, Filtration and Coagulation. Then having dissolv ' d this Salt in good Spirit of Wine; and having put the Dissolution into a Glass-Cucurbit cover ' d with his head well-luted, with a Receiver well luted to it also, they draw forth the Spirit of Wine in a Sand-bath with a moderate fire, to the dryness of the Residence, and find at the bottom of the Cucurbit a Scaly Earth like Talk, meltable in the fire like Wax, containing the fix ' d Salt of Niter, impregnated with the acid of the Vinegar. Which remedy he recommends to open the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery, giving from one Scruple to two in opening Liquors, or else mix ' d with Purgatives. 
 CHAP. XVI. Of Salt Polychrestes. I Add to the fixation of Niter the preparation of Salt Polychrestes, because that by its means the Niter becomes fix ' d, losing all that it had of volatile. The invention of this Salt is not so ancient as the word Polychrestes, which several Au∣thors formerly gave to Pills, and other Compositions proper to purge several bad humours at a time; for we find but some new Writers who have mentioned it, and propos ' d the use of it, though it be now more common in Paris, then a great num∣ber of other preparations with which the ancient Volumes are fill ' d. 
 To prepare this Salt after the ordinary manner, take equal parts of good Sul∣phur and Niter in Crystals; and having coarsely powder ' d them, set a large Cru∣cible upon a Trevet in the midst of the fire-place of a Wind-Furnace, where having kindl ' d a good Coal-fire round about it, and heated the Crucible red-hot, throw in about an ounce of the powder, which will take fire immediately, and the Sul∣phur consuming it self, will carry away with it the volatile part of the Niter; the flame being over, make the same projection of the powder into the Crucible, which you must reiterate from time to time, still giving the Sulphur time to con∣sume it self, and stirring the substances by intervals with a long iron-Spatula. Thus continue to do, till you have projected all the powder, or that the Crucible can contain no more. After which having continu ' d the fire for two or three hours, leave the Crucible to cool, take out the powder and dissolve it in water; and ha∣ving filter ' d and evaporated the dissolution over the fire, till it be cover ' d with a film, leave it to cool, then having pour ' d out by inclination the liquor that swims at the top, into a small Cucurbit, you shall find the Salt Polychrestes at the bot∣tom, and about the sides of the Vessel, whence you are to take it forth and dry it. Afterwards evaporate it in a Sand-bath over a moderate fire, the liquor which you pour ' d into the small Cucurbit, till it be cover ' d with a film; then take out the substance and dry it, as you are to do the first. Thus you must do with the liquor that swims above the Salt; to make the best advantage of that which remains; af∣terwards mingle and keep all the Salts for your use.
The dissipation of the acid and Spiritous part of the Niter, during its Calcination with the Sulphur, is the reason that the Crystals which you take forth lose the form which those of the Niter had, before they were put into the Crucible. Nor could you have it in Crystals, had not the Salt retain ' d some part of the acid of the Sulphur, during its Calcination with it. 
 But for as much as the Salt Polychrestes prepar ' d in this manner, contains in it only the fix ' d part of the Niter, and some part of the acid of the Sulphur, and that it cannot act in this condition but only by the Salts, like Salt of Tartar, and other fix ' d Salts. You may make it besides that partly Diaphoretick, and partly Diure∣tick, by adding and incorporating four ounces of Salt Armoniack, with a pound of Salt Polychrestes prepar ' d as I have shewn, and crystallizing them together again in a glass-Cucurbit plac ' d in a Sand-bath over a moderate fire. For the proportionable union of these two substances, will produce a composition much more deserving the name of Polychrestes, then that whereof I have describ ' d the preparation. For where∣as the first works with Acrimony enough, and does not take the right Road of the Bowels, the Salts of the latter being reciprocally dulcify ' d by uniting themselves together, operate in all things with much more gentleness. Not but that they ea∣sily penetrate the parts of the body, which have need of their operation; espe∣cially the parts of the Urine, the Veins, the Arteries, and also the fleshy parts, without leaving any impression of Acrimony. 
 Both the one and the other of these Salts are mix ' d together from half a dram to a dram among several remedies, especially among Purgatives to quicken their vertue, mixing them in five or six ounces of Liquor. They are also given alone from two or three drams to five or six, in two or three pints of River-water, or in some Ptisan, to be drank at several draughts as you drink Mineral-Waters, for the cut∣ting and loosening of gross humours, when you would expel them by the ordinary ways 
 CHAP. XVII. Of the Spirit of Niter. YOU should, according to the directions of some bruise, in a Mortar and mingle together two pound of Niter, and six pound of common Bole, and having made up a paste somewhat solid with a water impregnated with Niter, which it has dissolv ' d, make little Balls thereof; and having dry ' d them, distil them through a Retort according to the ordinary Method. But the best way and least troublesome is this. Having beaten in a Mortar and mix ' d together two pound of very good Niter in fair Crystalls, and four times as much the weight of Potters-Earth, exactly dry ' d and beaten to pouder, put them into an Earthen Cornute or Retort well luted about, so large that the substances may not fill above two thirds of the vessel, and having plac ' d it in a close Reverberatory, and fitted and well luted a large Recepient to the neck, make your distillation with a Gradual fire, increasing it from three hours to three hours, and at length to the utmost violence of heat; continuing it so, till you perceive an apparent diminution of the redness of the Spi∣rits in the Recipient, and that the heat of the Receiver be sensibly abated, which will fall out after you have given the last fire for three hours. After which, having stopp ' d up the Register of the Duomo, and the Dores of the fire and Cinder place, and left the Furnace and the Vessels to cool, unlute the Recipient, moistning the Lute with a wet cloth, and taking it away from the neck of the Cornute, empty the Spirit of Niter into a double Glass bottle, which must be carefully stopp ' d, and keep it for your use. You may receive apart the watry part of the Niter which comes out first in Distillation, forbearing to lute the Recipient till you have drawn it forth. And by this means you will have a Spirit of Niter that will work with much much more force, then that which is mix ' d with its Flegm. 
 The Sulphury Salt part of the Niter, being joyn ' d to the acid part comes forth out of the Cornute in red vapours, and dissolves it self into Spirit; which has occasi∣on ' d several writers to give it the name of Salamanders blood. Niter is also the only Salt that yields its Spirit in redvapours, the Spirits of all other Salts coming forth in white vapours. They that receive all together in one Recipient all that comes out of the Cornute or Retort in distilling Niter, find almost as much weight of the Liquor, as they had put in Niter into the Cornute. So that they who believ ' d that all the Niter pass ' d off into Spirit had no reason to think so. For besides that the Earth which is mix ' d therewith yeilds, for its own part, much Flegm is this distilla∣tion, as also in that of the Spirit of Salt, it fails not also to unite to it and to retain in the place of its Flegm the fix ' d part of the Niter. Whereas it cannot do this while it is alone, but unless it be mix ' d with its proper fix ' d Salt, or with that of the Tartar, or with some other of the same nature. By which you may judg of what it wants to resume its natural condition, since that if you would have it resume the body from whence it issu ' d forth, you cannot do it without joyning to it a fix ' d Salt of the same nature with that which remain ' d in the Cornute at the time of the Distillation. 
 The Spirit of Niter is highly recommended against Malignity of Fevers, as also to suppress the Vapours that rise from raw Nitrous, and Tartarous matters; and to calm the boiling of the humours, by reason of its volatile Sulphury Salt united with its Acid. It is also an excellent remedy against Cholicks. It opens the ob∣structions of the Liver, Spleen and all the Bowels; it dissolves curdl ' d blood; and expells by sweat, or by insensible transpiration, the humours that are to be that way expell ' d; which makes it highly esteem ' d against false and real Pleurisies, a∣gainst Rheumatisms and all sorts of moving pains, and the Dropsical Tympany. The dose is from half a scruple to one scruple, and also to half a dram in proper Liquors. 
 The sharp and gnawing parts of the Spirit of Niter render it fit for Corrosion, as also for the dissolution of all Metals, except Gold. Into which it cannot enter alone, because of the smallness and shape of the pores not able to give entrance to the parts of that Spirit, the bigness and shape whereof are very unfit for that purpose. Though you may bring it about, if you add the fourth part of its weight of Salt-Ammoniack, of Sea-Salt or Sal-Gemmae, which causing a new change of its parts, or forming them into subtle points, or a figure capable to enter into the pores of the Mettal, make it fit to penetrate and dissolve the substance. It also dissolves se∣veral Minerals, and changes the emetick and purgative vertue of some into Dia∣phoretick, particularly Antimony. 
 The same Acrimony rendring this Spirit in some measure unfit for internal uses, you must have recourse to the Spirit of Wine, which is to be mix ' d with it in equal parts, and a distillation to be made thereof in a Sand-bath in a glass Cucurbit, co∣ver ' d with its head carefully luted; which must be renew ' d three times, to make an exact union of the parts of the Spirit of Niter with those of the Spirit of Wine, proceeding after the same method as for the dulcifying the Spirit of Salt. And from this union arises a compos ' d Spirit, not only more agreeable in its smell, but more sweet to the taste, and more gentle in all its operations, and more agreeable to our natures, and which is more than all this, more fit to shew its diaphoretick vertue then the ordinary Spirit of Niter. The gentle qualities which it has, have giv ' n it the name of sweet or dulcify ' d Spirit of Niter. The preparation whereof may be very properly made in Vessels call ' d Twins, or double Pelicans) the figure whereof you may see among the rest) placing these Twins in a Sand-bath over a very mo∣derate fire, filling about half the body up with each of these two Spirits mix ' d in equal parts; luting well all their orifices and closures, and making a mutual and con∣tinual distillation of the Spirits for three days together, which must be accompa∣ny ' d with a continual cohobation of that which distils, upon the substances which shall lye successively in the bottom of the Vessels. You may give this Spirit in the same, and also in a larger dose then the former, in convenient liquors. 
 CHAP. XVIII. Of Aqua-Fortis ' s, and Regal Waters. THere is a greater difference to be seen in the choice, and in the doses of the substances, which are made use of for the composition of Aqua Fortis ' s, then in the manner of preparing them, which is almost the same. For though they be generally compounded of nothing but Salt-Peter and Vitriol, and that Niter be the foundation of them all their quantities nevertheless are not alike in all Authors; be∣sides that they mingle sometimes Allum, sometimes Verdigreese, sometimes Antimony, Arsenick, Sublimate, and Sal-Ammoniack, Sea-salt, Sal-Gammae, &amp;c. without Vitriol or with Vitriol. Some also only dry and beat the Niter and Vitriol in a Mortar; others make use of the latter without calcining it to whiteness. Some also put two parts of Vitriol to one of Niter. Others put equal parts both of the one and the other. Some there are also that put the whole weight, or the half of their weights, in Bole or Brick beaten small; so that every Artist follows his own me∣thod. Which shall not hinder me from setting down here the most common pre∣paration of Aqua-Fortis, that seems to me to be the best for corrosion and disso∣lution of the most part of Mettals, and some Minerals that resemble them in their Nature. 
 Having calcin ' d to whiteness, and powder ' d two pound and a half of common Vi∣triol, and dry ' d and beaten in a Mortar the like quantity of good Salt-Peter, min∣gle them together, and put them into a large Cornute of Potters-Earth, cover ' d over with lute; and having plac ' d it in a close Reverberatory, and fitted and care∣fully luted a large Recipient to its neck, begin your distillation with a very soft fire, then increase it from degree to degree to the utmost violence of heat; and so continue it till you perceive the brown red-colour of the vapours in the Reci∣pient to abate: and the heat of the same Recipient to slack ' n. At which time ha∣ving stopp ' d the Register of the Duomo, and the doors of the Cinder and Hearth∣place, leave the Vessels to cool; then having unluted the Recipient, and taken out the Aqua-Fortis, put it up in a double glass-Bottle perfectly well stopp ' d. 
 The malignity which Niter and Vitriol contract, when they are united, and di∣still ' d together, is the reason that the Aqua-Fortis drawn from thence, is much more dangerous, then the Spirits drawn separately from Niter and Vitriol. And there∣fore this water is never giv ' n inwardly; the principal uses of it being for Immer∣sive Calcination, and for the separation of Mettals, whence it is call ' d the Cau∣stick Water, or Water of departure. And though we should do ill to say, that all the Corroding Spirits of Vitriol, may ascend in the usual time alloted for the Di∣stillation of Aqua-Fortis; in regard that Vitriol endures the fire some days before it part with its last Spirits. Nevertheless we must believe that those of Niter carry away a good part with them, and as much as is necessary to augment their Corro∣sive quality. While the mixture of Vitriol with Niter serves to a double end, in re∣gard that by imparting its Spirits, it keeps the parts of the Niter divided in the Cornute, and hinders Fusion, which would retain and concenter the Spirits, and break the Retort. 
 The malignity of Aqua-Fortis prevents the use of the Salt which remains in the Cornute after Distillation. For though that some famous Authors have very much esteem ' d it, under the names of Duplicate Salt, or the Two-fold Mistery, the Two∣fold Allheal, or Salt of Two, and have attributed to it very great vertues; yet it is a very hard thing to separate the vomitive and corroding quality that is in∣herent to the Vitriol. And so much the rather, because this Salt still contains the last and most sharp Spirits of the Vitriol, and for that the Niter which is mix ' d with it, is become now more eager. I think too, that all the pains a man might take to dissolve, Filter, and Coagulate this Salt several times, would be in vain, as also the addition of Mineral-Crystal, which the same Authors direct to have done, the more easily to obtain from it the effects which they expect; in regard there are ma∣ny other Salts which may be more to the purpose, and with far less danger satisfy their Intentions. Besides that according to the opinion of Swelser, the residence of the Distillation of the Spirit of Vitriol may be so calcin ' d, that there shall not re∣main behind any Savour of the Vitriol, and that by exposing it to the Sun or the open Air for several days, you may separate from it the Salt of the Air, which has fill ' d its pores, which having neither sharp savour nor vomitive quality, but an acid Salt pleasing savour, is incomparably better and more proper to be mix ' d with the fix ' d Salt part of Niter: which you may extract by a Lixivium made of the settle∣ment of the distillation of its Spirit, or else with as much in weight of Salt Poly∣chrestes, or some other fix ' d Niter. 
 There is another Aqua-Fortis to be prepar ' d with equal parts of Niter, and A∣lum, distill ' d together in a Retort, setting apart the Flegm that comes forth first, and putting up the Aqua-Fortis that follows it in a double bottle well stopp ' d; as being a dissolvent very proper for Bismuth, Mercury, and for all other Minerals, and such other Minerals that serve to beautify the face. 
 But because these ordinary Aqua-Fortis ' s, though sufficient to dissolve Silver, and all other imperfect Metals, cannot do the same thing to Gold, we have recourse to the Salts Ammoniack, Gemmae, and Sea-Salt; by the conjunction whereof, the points of the parts of these waters being sharpn ' d, they dissolve Gold as easily as they did before the other Metals. And therefore they are called Regal Waters, as having power to dissolve Gold, which is the King of Metals. 
 You may Regalize Aqua-Fortis in a small time and very easily, putting into a small Matrass four ounces of good Aqua-Fortis, with an ounce of Sal-Ammo∣niack, beaten to a fine pouder; or an ounce of Sea-Salt or Sal-Gemmae, and dis∣solving one of these Salts in the Aqua-Fortis in a Sand-bath over a fire of Di∣gestion. 
 You may also prepare a Regal water by one single distillation, proceeding thus. Take a pound of good Salt-Peter, and a pound of Sea-Salt well dry ' d, and having beaten them to powder, mingle them and put them together in a large Cornute of Potters-Earth daub ' d all over with lute; and having plac ' d it in a Furnace of close Reverberation, and fitted a large Recipient to the neck of it, make your Distilla∣tion with a Gradual fire like as for ordinary Aqua-Fortis ' s; and you shall find in the Recipient a Regal water proper for the dissolution or Immersive Calcination of Gold. 
 There is also another Water to be prepar ' d, which some call the Philosophical Wa∣ter▪ or the Water of the Two Champions. For which, take two ounces of good Salt-Peter well dry ' d, and two ounces of Salt-Armoniack, and having beaten them in a Mortar, and put them together in a large Cornute of Potters-Earth, daub ' d over with lute, and plac ' d it in a close Furnace of Reverberation, and fitted a large Re∣cipient to the neck, you may draw forth with a gradual fire a Water which is not inferior to any Regal-water for the dissolution of Gold. In reference to which preparation, it is good to understand, that the largeness of the Retort, and that of the Recipient are as necessary as the government of the fire, because the Spirits that proceed from these four ounces of substance, rise with so much violence, that being forc ' d by the fire, they would burst the Retort and the Recipient, if they have not room enough to expand their fury. 
 The Butter of Niter vitriolated, invented by Peter John Faber, being applauded by several Modern Writers, I thought fit to insert it here. Take equal parts of Niter and raw Tartar, and having beaten and mix ' d them together in a great iron-Mortar, heated before, set it on fire in a Chimney with a little Coals, leaving the fire and the Niter to act together according to nature; then gather together and put into a Crucible the fix ' d Salts of Niter and Tartar, which remain together in the Mortar. Set the Crucible in a proper Furnace in the midst of a Coal-fire, and leave it there till the Salts are become perfectly white; then adding thereto, and mixing the full weight of Salt of Vitriol dissolv ' d in Rain-water, reduce them o∣ver a small fire to a Curdlement, or a kind of Butter, very white, and keep it in a double glass Bottle well stopp ' d. The Author of this Butter highly commends it both inwardly and outwardly, to purge gently melancholy and tartarous hu∣mours, being given from one dram to two, in half an ounce of Syrup of Roses or Violets; as also for the cure of the Gout, being apply ' d to the part; to dissolve cold and schirrous swellings, to dissipate those that are waterish and flegmatick, and to cure all sorts of Tettars and Scabs. 
 CHAP. XIX. Of the Preparation of Allum. ALlum is a salt juice proceeding out of certain Earths, or places that partici∣pate of the nature of Lead, and which is compos ' d of much flegm, some little a∣cid Spirit, and a good quantity of sharp and corroding Salt, accompanied with se∣veral terrestreities. Roch-Allum is the most esteem ' d and the most made use of, of all sorts of Allum, and of which there is the greatest quantity. It is also call ' d Ice-Allum, because it resembles water congeal ' d. There are three sorts of it of which the first is found naturally congeal ' d in the Earth. But the other two require art; for the one is drawn forth by bolling and coagulating the Mineral-waters, which are impregnated with it; and the other by making Lyes of Earths and stones, wherewith it is mix ' d Allum, whose colour inclines to red, and is call ' d Roman, is accounted the best of all that we meet with in France. But neither the Roman nor the rest abound ever awhit the more in remedies. For of all Salts, Allum is that whereof the least preparations are made. 
 Dissolve Allum in Rain-water, and having filter ' d the dissolution, evaporate it till it be cover ' d with a lm, then leaving it to dry, separate and filter the Crystals of the Allum; which some dissolve, filter, and crystallite several times, as well to make them more pure, as the better to qualifie their sharpness. This purification is very advantageous, when you would employ Allum for Gargarisms, or in other inward remedies. But it is never done for outward applications.
Allum is sometimes calcin ' d in a Crucible, or in an Earthen-Pot fit to resist the fire, where it becomes white, spungy, and light; at what time, having no need of its Spirit or flegm, you only look after the sharp and corroding Salt, which is the same that is commonly call ' d Burnt-Allum. But they that will have all the good parts of Allum, must distil it in a Retort, after the following manner. 
 Put two or three pound of Roman Allum into a Retort, encompass ' d with lute, and having plac ' d it in a close Reverberatory, and fitted to its neck a large Reci∣pient, but not luted, begin your distillation with a very soft fire, increasing it some∣times after to the second degree, and so keeping it till all the flegm be distill ' d off, and that you perceive the Spirit of Allum enter into the Recipient in white va∣pours. At which time having empty ' d and put apart the flegm, and luted the neck of the Recipient to the beak of the Cornute, continue the distillation, augmenting the fire from degree to degree to the utmost violence, and continuing it so till no more vapours come forth into the Cornute. After which, having stopp ' d up the Register of the Duomo, and the doors of the Furnace, unluted and given the Ves∣sels time to cool, you shall find in the Recipient the acid Spirit of Allum, and in the Retort the Allum calcin ' d, in a white lump, spungy, light, and like to that which is calcin ' d in the Crucible; and by this means you preserve all the good parts of the Allum. 
 The Spirit of Allum is very much recommended against difficulties of Urine; to unstop and clear the passages of Gravel, the Stone, and other matters which stop the course of it. It is very proper to open obstructions of the Liver, the Spleen, and the whole Region of the Bowels; as also to quench the thirst of Fevers, mixing it in proper liquors, from five or six to twelve or fifteen drops. It is also to be mix ' d in Gargarisms, to extinguish inflammations that happen in the inner parts of the mouth and throat; to stop the course, and take away the sharpness of thin and tart humours, that fall upon those parts; and to heal the little Ulcers of the Gums, the tongue, and all the neighbouring parts, only by touching them. The flegm is us ' d to cleanse and cicatrize Ulcers; and the sediment of the distillation to eat away proud flesh, and excrescencies that are common to Wounds and Ulcers, and to pre∣vent their putrefaction. You may also dulcifie the Spirit of Allum, like those of Salt and Niter, mingling with it the same measure of good Spirit of Wine; distilling them together, cohobating them, and proceeding in all things as for the dulcification of the Spirits before mentioned. The Spirit of Allum dulcify ' d is yet more proper to give for the inside of the mouth, then that which is not; and you may also dou∣ble the dose. 
 Some persons having dissolv ' d Roch-Allum in water, and having filter ' d the liquor, distill it in a Cinder-bath, till it be dry, in a low glass Cucurbit, cover ' d with its head well luted. Then leaving the Vessels to cool, they dissolve in the distll ' d water the Allum that remain ' d in the Cucurbit, filtring and distilling anew in the same Bath the liquor distill ' d to dryness; then they reiterate the dissolutions, filtrations, and distillations, till all the terrestreities of the Allum remaining in the filter, all the pure substance be ascended up in distillation. They call this water the Magisterial Spirit of Allum, and they account it one of the best Stipticks that can be prepar ' d. We may believe, that the use of this Spirit Magisterial may prove of great advan∣tage, by mixing a tenth part in Gargarisms, or in other liquors or decoctions, which are cooling, astringent, and detersive, as well for the diseases of the mouth, as for the other exterior parts, which have need of cooling, cleansing, and closing; as also in vulnerary potions, putting in a half part less, according to the propor∣tion of the liquors. So that having this water in a readiness, as at the same time the distill ' d waters, decoctions, and juices of the parts of Plants that are proper, you may prepare at any time those remedies, which will be incomparably much better then all the Alluminous waters distill ' d, which we find in Books. 
 Some having put the quantity of calcin ' d Allum into a glass Cucurbit plac ' d in a Sand-bath, and having pour ' d upon it as much good Vinegar as is requisite to dissolve it, filter this dissolution, and having evaporated it in the same Bath, till the film cover it, and leave the Bath to cool; after which they separate, dry, and put up the Crystals, which they find in the Cucurbit. Which is to be giv ' n upon occa∣sion in some proper purging liquor, from twelve or fifteen to eighteen or twenty grains, twice a week, a little before the fit, for the cure of Tertian Agues. But I cannot promise the success of a thing doubtful, whereof I have not had the experience. 
 CHAP. XX. Of the Preparation of Salt- Ammoniack. THE name of Ammoniack, giv ' n to this Salt, has carry ' d it at all times from above thirty other names which Authors have giv ' n it, the repetition where∣of is not necessary. The Temple of Jupiter , situated in the midst of the Deserts of Lybia, gave it its name; because this Salt was formerly found subli∣mated upon the superficies of the burnt Sands of that Country. 
 The Urine of Camels that generally travell ' d that way in Caravans, in the pil∣grimages that were continually made to this Temple, was the first and principal matter, and the acid Salt of the air, which impregnated this Salt in the night time, by its union stopp ' d the volatile parts, which the heat of the Sun had otherwise dissipated. But because we have not at this day the ancient Salt of the Ancients, we must of necessity content our selves with that which is prepar ' d at Venice, Ant∣werp, and in other places, with five parts of sound Mans Urine, one part of Sea∣salt, and a half part of Chimney-soot, which they boil together, and reduce into one Mass, and afterwards sublime in the form as we now see, under the name of that of the Ancients. The impurity of the soot, and the great vent for Salt-Am∣moniack, are the reason that it is usually cover ' d with dirt, and that to have it in its beauty and purity, you must be forc ' d to dissolve it in water, filter it and coagulate it afterwards into a mass, or into Crystals. 
 Salt-Ammoniack is calcin ' d, being mix ' d with equal parts of Quicklime, in a Crucible plac ' d upon the iron-square in the midst of a Wind-Furnace, where it is at length forc ' d into Fusion, then it is dissolv ' d in water, and having filter ' d and co∣agulated the dissolution, it is left to dissolve by little and little in a Cellar, in a liquor fit to dissolve Gold or Silver. 
 You may sublimate Salt-Ammoniack in a Sand-bath with a gradual fire, having mix ' d it with equal parts of Sea-salt. You may also very properly sublimate it by the same fire, having incorporated it with its weight of Steel-filings, or else with equal parts of those little scales of Iron, which are to be gather ' d up under Smiths Anvils, and force the flowers of it to ascend, which are highly commended in Quar∣tan Agues, giving them at the beginning of the fit, from five or six grains to a scruple, in Wine or in some other liquor, having us ' d purgative or emetick teme∣dies before. 
 You may also sublimate the flowers of Salt-Ammoniack, mixing them with equal parts of Salt-Tartar, or Blood-stone. But because the Salt Ammoniack prin∣cipally contains in its composition much of volatile urinous Salt, and one part of Sea-Salt, part acid, part fix ' d, and that you may by raising these flowers save two different Spirits, the one urinous, and the other acid, which the same Salt encloses in its substance, I refer the preparation thereof to the next Chap∣ter. 
 without the addition of any moisture, or that we cannot cause a good quantity of the Flowers to sublime, provided you leave empty about three fourths of the Cucurbit, that you carefully lute the vessels, and that you govern your fire so, that you do not hasten too much the distillation of the Spirit, nor the sublimation of the Flowers. For these Salts having usually receiv ' d from the air some certain moisture sufficient to dissolve and unite some part of the acid to the fix ' d Salt, the same moisture finding it self afterwards forc ' d by the fire, and constrain ' d to rise in vapours, dissolves also, and carries with it some part of the Urinous volatile Salt, by forsaking the fix ' d, whence it comes to pass that afterwards it distils in Liquor into the Recipient. While notwithstanding the defect of moisture, the union of most part of the acid with the fix ' d Salt, hinders it not from so doing by little and little, though much more slowly and with less perfection, and that it give way to the separation and sublimation of the Flowers of a good part of the volatile Salt. 
 CHAP. XXII. Of the Distillation of the Acid Spirit of Salt-Am∣moniack. THE acid Spirit of the Salt-Ammoniack proceeding only from the acid of the Sea-Salt, and the quantity of the latter being much less in the composition of the same Salt-Ammoniack, then that of the volatile Urinous, we cannot separate this Spirit from the other substances, while the volatile Salt is mix ' d with it. And therefore you must begin to distil that first, and not undertake that of the acid Spirit till the volatile has made way. 
 Take the mass which remains in the Cucurbit after the Distillation of the volatile Spirit, and having reduc ' d it to pouder, and mix ' d it with four times as much of common Bole, powder ' d in the same manner, put them into a Cornute, and having plac ' d it in a close Reverberatory, and fitted and luted a large Recipient to the neck, draw forth the acid Spirit with a gradual fire: but you may take another course, and thereby preparing a good Urinous Spirit of Salt, and saving all the good parts of the substances mix ' d together, gain at length an acid Spirit. 
 To which purpose having pouder ' d two pound of Salt-Ammoniack, and as much Blood-stone, and having mix ' d them, and put them together, into a large Glass Cucurbit, place it in a Sand-bath; and cover ' d it with its head, fitted a reci∣pient to the head, and perfectly well luted all the closures of the Vessels, kindle under the Bath a very soft fire at once; which you must encrease a little and a little by degrees, and at length to the utmost violence, continuing it so for five or six hours. Then leaving the Vessels to cool you shall find in the Recipient, the odor whereof will be very penetrating, which is to be put up in a double glass bottle per∣fectly well luted: and in the head and upon the sides of the Cucurbit above the substances you shall find the Flowers of Salt-Ammoniack of a yellow colour, which you may keep as they are, if you please in a double glass-bottle well stopp ' d. But you may make a better advantage of them, if after you have pouder ' d them very finely, and put them into a Matrass, you extract the tincture with good Spirit of Wine by the most gentle ordinary ways: and if after you have filter ' d all the Tinctures, you draw forth the Spirit in Balneo Mariae to the dryness of the Salt, which will be much more beautiful then the Flowers, and will have the colour and Aromatick odor of Saffron. You may also keep it in that condition, or dissolve it into a Cellar in a Golden Liquor, which may be giv ' n from five or six drops, to ten or twelve, in proper Liquors, against all manner of obstructions, particular those of the Hypochondria. 
 But for as much as the acid part of the Salt-Ammoniack remains at the bottom of the Cucurbit, among the settlement of the Blood-stone. After you have pou∣der ' d and mix ' d the whole with four times as much Potters-Earth dry ' d and pou∣der ' d in the same manner put the whole into a large Retort of Earth, encompass ' d with lute, and having plac ' d it in a close Furnace of Reverberation, make your distil∣lation with a Gradual fire, proceeding in all things as for the distillation of the same Spirit: and you shall have an acid yellow Spirit, much more pleasing and much more proper for all uses, then that which is drawn from the Salt-Marine. You may also prepare a Urinous Spirit, Flowers, and an acid Spirit of Salt-Ammoniack im∣pregnated with the impressions of the acid, proceeding as follows. 
 Having powder ' d and mix ' d two pound of Salt-Ammoniack, and as much filings of Steel, put them together into a large Cucurbit, plac ' d in a Sand-bath, and ha∣ving cover ' d it with its head, fitted a Recipient to the pipe of the head, and care∣fully luted all the closures, kindle and keep for some time a very soft fire under the Bath; but increase it by little and little, and by degrees to its utmost violence, and having proceeded in all things as for the distillation and sublimation of this Salt with the Blood-stone, put up apart the Urinous Spirit in a glass-Bottle perfectly well stop ' d; then having scrap ' d together the Flowers in the head and from the sides of the Cucurbit, of a brown colour; bruise and mix the remainder with the Flow∣ers, and put all together into a convenient vessel; expose it night and day in the air for some weeks, and you shall perceive by little and little a kind of a Flower to rise above the substances, and how that by moistning themselves, swelling and raising themselves, they will become soft, and of an ashy colour enclining to yellow, having then a sharp eager vitrioliz ' d savor, near to that of Mars or Iron a little Sweetish. At which time having put the whole into a Retort of Potters-Earth, daub ' d over with Lute with a long neck, place it in a close Furnace of Reverberation, and ha∣ving fitted to it a large Recipient, and carefully luted all the Closures, make your Distillation over an open fire, soft at the beginning, but augmented by degrees to the utmost heat it can give, and continue it in the same manner as for the last Distillation of the Blood-stone. By this means you shall have an acid Spirit, of a Gold ' n colour, which may be rectifi ' d over a soft fire, to separate the watry part, with which it is more impregnated then the preceding Spirit, because of the moisture of the air which is mix ' d therewith. 
 This Spirit is highly recommended to open all obstructions of the lower Belly, to break and expel the Stone, to asswage the pains of the Intestines; strength ' ning them, as well as the stomach, the Liver, and the Spleen. The dose is from five or six to ten or twelve drops in proper Liquors. 
 You may instead of mixing the Flowers with the Mass that remains after distilla∣tion, mingle them with half their weight in new Salt-Ammoniack, and having put the whole over a Sand-Bath in a Cucurbit of glass cover ' d with its head, carefully luted and fitted a Recipient to it luted in the same manner, sublimate them in yellow Flowers, and draw forth by the same means a small quantity of Spirit, participating of Acid and Urinous, and employ them for the same uses, as the Spirits before mention ' d. 
 The different qualities of the Urinous Spirit, and the acid Spirit drawn from Salt-Ammoniack, may surprise those who seeing this Salt, should not know its Compo∣sition, nor the nature of the Salts which compose it. Many also may wonder to see these two Spirits converted into one Salt compos ' d of both, and that clear Liquors, such as these Spirits are, should take the body, shape and savor of Salt, without the addition of any strange matter which may be active or assisting in this Corpo∣rification. The tryal however which may be made of these things, will easily stop the mouths of those who doubt of it; especially when they shall have seen, that by putting into a Cucurbit the acid Spirit of Salt-Ammoniack, and by pouring upon it by degrees, and at several Repetitions the Urinous Spirit of the same Salt; or else by putting in the same vessel the Urinous Spirit, and pouring upon it the same acid Spirit, till Ebullition cease, the two Spirits united together, as having recipro∣cally penetrated each other, shall be found not only to have lost their savour and odour which they had particularly by themselves before their conjunction, but if you keep the Cucurbit which contains them, for some time upon a Bath of Ashes or Sand, over a moderate heat, you shall see that the insipid flegm which was mingl ' d among them, dissipating it self, they will assume the body, shape, and all the qualities of Salt, without destroying each other, and that they will be in a condi∣tion also both of them their particular substance of a Spirit, when the Artist has a mind to separate them by the means of some fix ' d Salt. 
 CHAP. XXIII. Of the Preparation of Vitriol. VItriol has been always rank ' d among the Salts, though some have thought it very different from their nature, and have taken it for a Salt altogether par∣ticular, compos ' d of an acid Spirit, very much resembling that of Sulphur; and of some particles of Iron or Copper, or some other Metal or Metallick matter, in part terrestrial, which the same Spirit has met withal, and dissolv ' d in the Bowels of the Earth, and with which it is incorporated in form of a Salt. The variety of the colour and substance of Vitriols, and the parts which compose them, has much contributed to this opinion; because that though we find some Vitriols, and par∣ticularly the white, which contain no apparent Metal or Metallick matter, the most part however of the rest have in them particles of Iron or Copper, and sometimes both together. Whence it falls out, that when there is no intention but to open the passages by fortifying the parts, those Vitriols are made choice of that have no Iron; but principally those which contain much Copper, when their Emetick vertue is requir ' d, accommodating them to the effects which you desire, with regard to the substances which compose them.
All the Vitriols have been much us ' d both in the one and the other Pharmacy. Some Authors also who have aspir ' d to a universal remedy, have thought that it was conceal ' d in Vitriol, and that the word Vitriol m, containing in it something of Mysterious, every one of the Letters signifying a word, which they thus expound∣ed, Visitando Interior a Terrae, Rectificando Invenies Occultum Lapidem, Veram Me∣decinam; by searching the Bowels of the Earth, by rectification thou shalt find the Occult Stone, which is the true Physick. But all these imaginations, nor all they can say of it, not being able to change the nature of the Vitriol, and the colour and place where it is bred, causing for the most part the differences, and demonstrating the various composition, and different qualities; I shall only say, that the blew colour, as well in Salts as waters, being an essential mark of the mixture of Copper among the other substances, we are not to doubt but that the blew Vitriol, being that of Cyprus, is that of all the rest which participates most of that Metal; that the green colour, being compos ' d of blew and yellow, and the deepest green being most charg ' d with blew, the greenest Vitriol participates more of Copper then that which is less green; whose pale colour enclining to yellow or earthy, denotes nothing else but the earthy or ferruginous matter which is incorporated with it. It may be also said, that the white Vitriol is that which is less mix ' d with Metallick substances. As for the red colour, which is natural to certain Vitriols, which the Philosophers have de∣scrib ' d under the names of S ri, Cha itis, and Misi, it is only to be attributed to the subterraneal heat, which has given them that colour, which the ordinary fire gives to Vitriols that are expos ' d to it. 
 Vitriol is variously prepar ' d according to the various intentions of the Artist. The purifying of it is the most common of all its preparations; though it be not always necessary, but to separate the terrestreities, and to have the Crystals transpa∣rent, or to mix with other internal preparations. To which purpose it is enough sometimes to dissolve the Vitriol in common water, to filter and crystallize it, as is done to all other Salts. But when you would perfectly purifie it, and separate very much of the terrestrial parts, as also of the Metallick particles which are inwardly and deeply mix ' d with it, and which may be apt to pass through the filter, we are obliged to have recourse to long digestions, by means whereof the terrestreities and Metallick parts precipitate to the bottom of the liquor, where∣by the Crystals afterwards are much fairer in colour, and more transparent then the Vitriol before it was purify ' d. Some to save expence of time, pour upon the dissolution of Vitriol some new acid, among the rest the liquor of Niter or Vine∣gar distill ' d; which uniting it self with the fix ' d Salt-part of the Vitriol, cause it to abandon the terrestrial or Metallick parts, which it has dissolv ' d, whence follows their precipitation to the bottom of the liquor. But these means are not to be us ' d but upon certain occasions, where the mixture of these new acids is not contrary to the effects, which you expect from the Vitriol or its parts; or where their mix∣ture may be necessary, as you may observe by the following water. 
 CHAP. XXIII. The Stiptick water of Monsieur Matte La Fa∣veur Distiller in Montpelier. DIssolve twenty five pound of Vitriol in a sufficient quantity of Common wa∣ter, and having strain ' d this Dissolution through a course Linnen-Cloath, put it over the fire in a Copper Caldron, where after it has boil ' d some few bublings take off the Vessel from the fire, and pour immediately upon the Liquor, a pint of Spirit of Vinegar, to cause the Terrestrial part of the Vitriol, improperly call ' d Sulphur, to precipitate to the bottom of the vessel; then leaving the Liquor for ten or twelve hours to settle, and to give the Earth time to sink to one place, pour out by inclination the Liquor that swims at the top: and having well wash ' d, dul∣cify ' d, and dry ' d the pouder resting at the bottom, over hot Embers, put eight ounces of it into a glass Cornute, and having pour ' d upon it eight ounces of Spirit of Vitriol well purify ' d from its Flegm, make your Distillation with a gradual fire, soft at the beginning, and at length very violent, continuing it so till nothing come out of the Cornute. Then give the Vessels time to cool, break the Retort, beat the Mass that remains to pouder, and put it into a Matrass, upon which having pour ' d Spirit of Wine rectify ' d with Salt of Tartar, about five or six fingers breadth above the substances, cover the Matrass with a Vessel of Rencounter carefully luted, and set it upon a Bath of digestion for four and twenty hours. After which the Spi∣rit of wine being become very red filter it hot through a course Paper, then draw∣ing it off again through a glass-Alembick, or gently evaporating it to the driness of the sediment, you shall find at the bottom a whitish pouder, upon an ounce whereof having pour ' d four ounces of Rain-water, leave the mixture in the Sun for some days, then Filter the Liquor, which will be a Stiptick water proper to stop all sorts of bleedings. 
 I have inserted this water among the preparations of Vitriol by the order of Mon∣sieur D ' Aquin, chief Physitian to his Majesty, who having discover ' d the Author, who prepar ' d it in his presence, for which the Doctor has testify ' d his acknowledg∣ment by obtaining several favours of the King in his behalf. The said Monsieur Fa∣veur, has prepar ' d another Stiptick water which has the same vertue with the preceeding, though somewhat different from it, proceeding after the following Method. 
 Boil seven or eight pound of Vitriol of Piza, in sixteen pints of water, and when the Vitriol is dissolv ' d, take it off the fire and pour upon it half a pint of Spirit of Vinegar; let the matters settle, and pour out the Liquor by inclination; wash, dul∣cify, and dry the pouder which was precipitated to the bottom. Then having put it into a Retort luted only in the under-part, and pour ' d upon it double its weight in Spirit of Vitriol well rectify ' d, make the Distillation over a naked fire, but moderate, till the substances be dry, which will be then of a Greyish colour. Then break the Retort, pouder the Mass and put it into a Crucible over burning Coals, stirring it continually with an Iron-Spatula, till it turn yellowish. At which time having pour ' d it into a Mortar and well bea en it, put two ounces into a Matrass, with three oun∣ces of ordinary water, and after a digestion of half an hour; filter the Liquor through a coarse paper, and keep it in a double glass bottle well stopp ' d as a remedy against all Haemorraghia ' s or violent fluxes of blood. 
 CHAP. XXIV. Of Precipitates, Earths, or Sulphurs of Vi∣triol. THE purifying of Vitriol by the means of long and reiterated digestions, made in common water, and the preparation of Stiptick water, already describ ' d, are examples of the precipitation of most of the terrestrial parts of the Vitriol. But we may by other means make a precipitation, and a much more absolute sepa∣ration of the solid parts which the acid Spirit of Vitriol had dissolv ' d, which some call simply Earth, others Metallick Earth, or Sulphur of Vitriol. 
 Some having made choice of a green and crystalline Vitriol, dissolve it in hot Rain-water, and having filter ' d the whole, they pour upon it by little and little the liquor of Tartar, or the Lye of Wine-Lee ' s Ashes, till ebullition cease, to the end the acid of the Vitriol, and the fix ' d Salt of the Tartar, or of the Wine-Lees, acting reciprocally the one upon the other and uniting together, the first may be compell ' d to forsake the matter which they have dissolv ' d, and to permit it to precipitate to the bottom in form of an Earth, which is to be wash ' d in several wa∣ters and dry ' d, after you have pour ' d out the liquor that swims uppermost by in∣clination, and put it up apart by it self. 
 This Earth is call ' d Sweet Sulphur of Vitriol, though very improperly, since that in reality it is only a Metallick Earth, principally recommended to cure diseases of the Lungs, and to cleanse and cicatrize Wounds and Ulcers, as also to kill Worms. 
 Neither is the liquor that swims above the precipitated Earth pour ' d out by in∣clination, as if it were good for little, since it contains in it the most pure acid and salt part of the Vitriol, united with the fix ' d salt part of the Tartar, or of the ashes of Wine-Lees; and a very good medicine may be made of this liquor after preci∣pitation of the Earth of Vitriol with the liquor of Tartar. For by this means the terrestrial part naturally conceal ' d in the Salt of Tartar, precipitates with that of the Vitriol; so that by the conjunction of the acid part of the Vitriol with the fix ' d Salt of the Tartar, and by the evaporation of the water made use of, you shall find at the bottom of the Vessel, a pure and crystalline Salt, compos ' d of two Salts, the effects whereof are different from the ordinary sorts of Vitriol, which are Eme∣tick, whereas this works generally by stool, and rarely provokes vomiting; the dose being from half a dram to a whole dram; besides that it is recommended against intermitting Fevers, especially when there is an occasion to purge melan∣choly. 
 You may very properly use Vitriol of Mars, instead of common Vitriol; and ha∣ving dissolv ' d it in distill ' d Rain-water, or in flegm of Vitriol, and digested it in a Matrass for some time, filter the liquor. Then precipitate it with the liquor of Tar∣tar; separate, wash, and dry the precipitated Earth; and having evaporated the moisture of the Salts, and crystalliz ' d them together, keep them for your occa∣sions. For the astriction of Mars, or Iron, still better correcting the vomitive qua∣lity of the Vitriol, renders this Salt in a condition only to act by stool or u∣rine. 
 Some there are that having put into a Cucurbit one part of the filings of Steel, and two parts of excellent Vitriol, pour upon them distill ' d Vinegar, two or three fingers above the substances; then placing the Cucurbit in a Sand-bath, they eva∣porate the moisture till the substances prove dry, and also till they look red. Then leaving the Vessels to cool, powder ' d and put the mass into a new Cucurbit, they pour more distill ' d Vinegar upon it, four or five fingers above the substance; which done, having digested the whole till the Vinegar look red, they filter this tincture, and precipitate it with the liquor of Tartar, expecting to have by this means a true Sulphur of Tartar. 
 Others thinking to do better, after they have dissolv ' d Vitriol of Mars, or com∣mon Vitriol in Water, they sprinkle the filings of Steel, and having dry ' d it in a Sand-bath, and continue this sprinkling and drying of the Steel-dust, till it be be∣come very red. Having after that pouder ' d the Mass, they extract a Tincture with distill ' d Vinegar; they filter, it, and precipitate it with Liquor of Tartar, in ex∣pectation of a Sulphur of Vitriol, which they have entitl ' d Anodyne, and would have it to be a second Landanum; but no wonder the Effects do not answer their promises, since all this pretended Sulphur, is nothing else but a Metallick Earth. 
 CHAP. XXV. Of the Distillation of Vitriol. THey that contemplate one part of the substances which they may extract by the Distillation of Vitriol who only look after the first and second Spirit, and un∣willing to spend time, are not diligent to seek for all that force and penetration which they might meet with in the Distillation, use no other but English Vitriol, which participating more of Iron then of Copper, and having less fix ' d Salt then most of the other Vitriols, consists of less compacted parts, and affords its Spirit in greater quantity and with less trouble. However it is not to be thought, for all that, that the English Vitriol is without some particles of Copper, as some have written. For if it were, the Mars would shew it self by its brown colour which would predominate. Whereas the red colour, which appears very suddenly in this Vitriol, as also in the est, except the white, when they are expos ' d to the violence of the fire, is an undenyable sign of the Copper that lyes conceal ' d in it; as also the red colour, which happens to the Verdigreese being upon the fire, is also an assur ' d mark that it contains in it several particles of Copper. But though the dear∣ness and the abundance of the particles of Copper which the Vitriol of Cyprus contains, of which the blew colour is a certain evidence, be the reason that it is not so much us ' d for the extraction of its Spirit; however most sure it is, that Angelus Sala, Schroderus and several other Writers, recommend a meaner Vitriol for Di∣stillation, and which contains more particles of Copper. And we see by experience that the Vitriol of Germany in fair green Crystals, and by consequence more full of the mixture of Copper then that of England, is that whose Spirits are more power∣ful, and which affords them in greater quantity. Whence it happens that we seldom distil that of England, but when the Astriction of the Mars is requir ' d, rather then the penetration of the Spirit. 
 But to obtain all the good parts of the Vitriol: After you have made choice of that which you judg most proper for your purpose, fill up with it, about the half of a glass Cucurbit somewhat low, plac ' d in Balneo Mariae, and having cover ' d it with its head, fitted a Recipient to the pipe, and carefully luted the closures, cause the Bath to boil without intermission, till nothing more distil into the Recipient. Then let the Vessels cool, and having unluted the Recipient, put up the distill ' d wa∣ter in a Bottle close stopp ' d. Which water Writers call the Dew of Vitriol; prin∣cipally rcommending it against Distempers of the head, and to strength ' n the Bowels, as also to restore and preserve the Radical moisture; giving the weight of two Drams, especially in the Spring and after Purgation. 
 At the same time take the Cucurbit out of the Balneum Mariae; and ha∣ving plac ' d it in a Sand-bath, and reluted the closures of the Recipient, draw off by a stronger heat, then that of a boiling Bath, all the water that will come forth; which will prove clear, of a pleasing scent, and deserves to be kept apart; as being proper to cleanse the Reins, open the passages of the Urine, and heal inter∣nal Corrosions, giving the weight of a dram in meat-Broth. It cools the Inflamma∣tions of Wounds, asswages the pain, and cicatrizes them being apply ' d. It is also very good to cure the scurfe. 
 Having sav ' d these two Waters and let the Sand-bath cool, beat the Mass that remains in the Cucurbit to pouder, and having fill ' d therewith two thirds of an Earthen Retort, daub ' d over with Lute, set in a close Furnace of Reverberation; and having fitted and luted a large Recipient to the pipe, begin your distillation with a gradual fire soft at first, but increas ' d by degrees from time to time, and forc ' d at length to the utmost violence; continuing it so, till no more vapours come forth of the Retort, but that the Recipient appear altogether clear. At which time the Vessels being cool and the Recipient unluted, pour out the distill ' d Liquor into a double glass Bottle, and having well stopp ' d it keep this Spirit for your occasions. Or else, pour it forth into a Glass Cucurbit, cover ' d with its head, and having plac ' d it in a Sand-bath, fitted a Recipient to the Nozel, and carefully luted all the closures, you shall draw forth in the first place a very subtle penetrating Sulphury Spirit, which you must keep apart in double glass bottles very close stopp ' d. Then continuing the fire, the Flegm will rise and distil; after that a Spirit indifferently Acid, and at the bottom of the Cucurbit you shall find the more weighty Spirits, and most tart, which they call improperly Oil of Vitriol. 
 Vitriol yields its Spirits in white Clouds as all other Salts except Niter, whose vapours are red; but the compactness of its parts are the reason why the Spirits come forth so slowly: for you are forc ' d to continue the fire for three or four na∣tural days, and sometimes also longer, especially for the Distillation of German Vi∣triol; when you would have the last Spirits. And if you will continue the fire till you can see cross the Rebipient the mouth of the Retort red, it is a sign that nothing more comes out of the Retort, and that the vapours are all dissolv ' d into Liquor in the Recipient. But because these last Spirits are extremly corrosive, and impreg∣nated with Metallick substances, contain ' d in the Vitriol, you may cease the Distil∣lation, twelve hours after the white vapours begin to appear, or when you perceive certain di ky drops about the neck of the Recipient. Which hinders not, but that having unluted the Recipient, by moistning the Lute of the closures with hot water, and put up the Spirit safe, you may put on again and relute the little Globe, or Ba∣lon, and continue the Distillation with a very violent fire, till the Vitriol has yielded its utmost Spirits. 
 The first Spirit of Vitriol, not being so Corrosive as the latter, is more proper to take inwardly; it is Diuretick and somewhat Diaphoretick: it cuts, attenuates, and resists the putrefaction of the humours. It stirr ' s up an appetite; it opens the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Mesentery, it qualifies the heat of Fevers mix ' d in drink from four or five, to twelve or fifteen drops; or till the Liquor be pleasingly sharp: it heals the Ulcers of the tongue, and the inside of the mouth, being touch ' d with it: it is very proper to cure all diseases of the Skin that proceed from Salt Flegm. 
 The Metallick Earth or Oaker wherewith Vitriol abounds, hindring its Fusion when the fire has consum ' d its greatest moisture; and this consumption being ef∣fected before the Vitriol is put into the Retort, we never mix with it those dry and acid substances which are usually mix ' d with other Salts to prevent their Fusion, when we intend to extract their Spirits, but we put it alone thus dry ' d into the Cornute. The Earth it self wherewith it abounds, makes it fit to hinder the sepa∣ration and Fusion of the Niter, with which we mix it for the preparation of Aqua-Fortis. 
 Some Authors having put the Vitriol into a Glass Cucurbit plac ' d in a Cinder-Bath, cover it with its head, and having well luted the Closures, and fitted a Recipient to the Pipe, with a moderate heat they draw off the Flegm and acid Spirit, as much as they can force to ascend from it; then having cohobated the distill ' d Liquor upon the sediment, and repeated Distillation and Cohobation seven or eight times, and redoubl ' d the heat in the last distillation, they at length draw forth a Flegm mix ' d with much Acid Spirit, whose odor becomes very grateful, if circulated two or three days in a proper Vessel, very well stopp ' d, and plac ' d in a Sand-bath, over a fire of digestion.
This Acid Flegm, as also the volatile Spirit of Vitriol, is very much recommen∣ded to dissipate pains in the head, and to cure the Epilepsy. There is no better way to limit the dose then by ordering it, till the sharpness be pleasing to the Palate, in those Liquors wherewith it is mix ' d. All the Spirits of Vitriol are good to kill Worms, and peculiarly to stop internal fluxes of blood, and to cool the inflam∣mations of the Eyes. 
 CHAP. XXVI. Of the Spirit of sweet Vitriol and some other Spi∣rits of Vitriol. SOme Writers direct you to pour Spirit of Vinegar upon calcin ' d Vitriol, about four fingers above it, and to let them digest together for some days, then to pour out the Liquor that swims at the top by Inclination, and to keep it apart: after that to pour fresh Spirit of Vinegar upon the sediment, and repeat digestion during the same time as before, having pour ' d out the liquor by Inclination to preserve it as the first, reiterating the same Operations seven or eight times. This done, they order you to put all the Tinctures into a glass-Cucurbit, plac ' d in a Cinder-Bath, cover ' d with its head, and to draw off the Flegm of the Vinegar, and that of the Vitriol, with a soft fire, till the sediment of the Tinctures come to be as thick as the consistence of Honey; and having afterwards mix ' d it with some handfuls of Sand, or with some other such like matter, to put the mixture into a Cornute, or Retort, and with a Gradual fire to draw forth a Spirit of Vitriol which they call Dulcify ' d. But besides that this Spirit is not free from Acidity, they cannot call it a true Spirit of Vitriol being rather a Spirit of Vinegar. 
 Others having digested the Spirit of Vitriol upon filings of Steel, pouder ' d Co∣ral, or some such kind of substances, upon which the Spirit of Vitriol may expend its Acrimony; or else having singly mix ' d the Spirit of Vitriol with the same matters they by the usual ways draw forth a Spirit, which is not so tart, as being depriv ' d of the most acid parts which those substances have suckt up. But this Spi∣rit cannot be accounted otherwise then imperfect, since it has lost the most part of its good parts I also think it is to be rejected, as likewise the first, and that the best dulcifying of the Spirit of Vitriol, is to observe the same method as for the dul∣cifying the Spirits of Salt and Niter; by mixing it with equal parts of Spirit of Wine well rectifi ' d, and distilling the mixture in a glass-Alembick in a Cinder-Bath with a moderate heat. For by the inward Union which by that means is made of the acid part of the Spirit of Vitriol, with the volatile Sulphury Salt part of the Spirit of Wine, where arises a Spirit much more sweet in savour, and gentle in all its effects, then was the Spirit of Vitriol before its Conjunction. And though we must confess that this Spirit is compos ' d of two, nevertheless we must have a beter opinion of it, because they unite without the destruction of each other, and that by this new disposal of their parts by this Union, that which both of them had of violent is qualify ' d, and their joint Operation much more proper and fitted to our nature. So that the use of this Spirit is of much more advantage, then that of the ordinary Spirit, especially to those persons to whom acids are injurious; and that it is much more proper for several diseases, chiefly the Scurvy. For the Spirit of Wine imparts to the Spirit of Vitriol a Diaphoretick vertue, yet does not deprive it of the quality it has to open obstructions, and strengthen the parts. This Spirit may be tak ' n in a larger dose then that which is not Dulcify ' d. 
 You may also extract from the Dead Head that remains after Distillation an acid Spirit much less violent, then that which is drawn from Vitriol after the ordinary manner, by laying it in a place where it may receive the beams of the Sun, the influences of the Moon and other Stars, with the moisture of the air, so that no Rain may fall upon it, and leaving it there, for several months or which is better for a whole year. For by this means the dry earth of the Vitriol, being depriv ' d of its natural Salt, but not of its Ferment, will be impregnated with the acid Salt of the air, and become in some sort a new kind of Vitriol, whence you may draw by the ordinary ways, and in ten or twelve hours time an acid Spirit, very pleasing, which some call Spirit of Vitriol Regenerate, which you may safely make use of, and with success in all diseases, for which the ordinary Spirit of Vitriol is prescrib ' d, giving it in the same dose and in the same Liquors. 
 There is also a Compound Spirit of Vitriol to be prepar ' d, after the following Method. Beat in a Mortar, and mix four pound of Vitriol calcin ' d to redness, with five pound of River-Flints calcin ' d, and a pound of Salt of Tartar calcin ' d to whiteness, and put them all together into a Retort, and having set it in a close Fur∣nace of Reverberation; begin your Distillation after the ordinary manner with a Gradual fire, till the Flegm and all the Spirits are come forth. After which ha∣ving cool ' d the Vessels, and unluted the Recipient, mix the Liquor with that which remains in the Retort, and reiterate Distillation, the better to loos ' n the parts which are to ascend in distilling. To which purpose repeat the same operations two or three times over; and then you shall have a Spirit, which some Authors esteem very much to open the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Bowels, especially in Drop∣sies and Jaundise, using it as you do the Spirits preceding. Paracelsus highly com∣mends a Spirit of Vitriol, which he calls Corrected, which he directs to be prepar ' d by Cohobating the Spirit upon that which remains in the Cornute after Distillation, reiterating the same Cohobations and Distillations eight or nine times. After which he directs you, that having pour ' d the last Spirit, upon the sediment, together with as much rectify ' d Spirit of wine as is necessary to reduce the whole into a paste, you should put it into a Retort, and distil it with a gradual fire as before, highly recom∣mending this Spirit against the Epilepsy, giv ' n from five or six to eight or ten drops in Cephalick waters. 
 Hartman very much commends a Spirit, which he calls Anti-Epileptick, which he composes of equal parts of Vitriol of Hungary well purify ' d and the Urine of heal∣thy Children, digested for some time in a glass Cucurbit cover ' d, in Balneo Mariae, and then distill ' d in the same Bath. Affirming that the first water that distills is an excellent remedy to cure the pains of the Gout apply ' d to the part; and that the second is a particular remedy for all diseases of the eyes. Afterwards he directs you to pouder and put the sediment into a Retort, and having fitted and luted a large Recipient to the Beak, to draw forth with a naked and Gradual fire, a Spirit of an Austere savour, and of a Sulphury smell, and to rectify it once or twice. Affirming that this Spirit is an infallible remedy for the absolute▪ cure of the Epilepsy in chil∣dren, mixing a Scruple of it with the distill ' d water of Peony-Roots, and Flowers of Tylet tree, and giving half a spoonful in the Fit, and continuing the use of it by Intervals as occasion serves. 
 CHAP. XXVII. Of the Salt and Earth of Vitriol. IT is not enough to have drawn out of Vitriol by distillation, the flegm and seve∣ral Spirits which it contains; for there is some salt part of the Vitriol which remains in the Caput Mortuum which remains behind, and which, to speak properly, is a real Vitriol▪ though most writers have tak ' n it for something distinct, and of another nature then Vitriol. But to have it, such as i is, you must make a Lye of that which remains after distillation, and having filter ' d it, evaporate the superflu∣ous moisture, that you may have the Salt which you shall find coagulated at the bottom of the Vessel, of a colour inclining to carnation, by reason of the impres∣sion of the fire which made the Vitriol red. This Salt having the savour of Vitriol which is the principal matter, retains also the qualities, especially the Emetick. But though the small quantity of this Salt, or to say better Vitriol, which remains in the dead head, after distillation, is not worth the looking after, nor the making of the Lye; yet we are forc ' d to do it for the Earths sake that ac∣companies it, the astringent quality whereof all Writers highly commend. For to have it in its purity, if you will not make a Lixivium, you must at least wash it over and over again, till it be all pure, and without any mixture of the salt parts of the Vitriol, that it may have the qualities that are attributed to it; which are chiefly to heal Dysenteries, Lienteries, and Diarrhaea ' s, to stay vomiting, and both outward and inward Fluxes of blood, to help weakness of the stomach and bowels, and to cleanse wounds and ulcers. 
 But although the salt vitriolick substance which you may draw from the mass which remains after distillation, may have all the vertues which writers have ascrib ' d to the Salt of Vitriol; yet the small quantity which is to be got, is the reason that white Vitriol is made use of, dissolv ' d in water, filter ' d and crystalliz ' d, instead of Salt of Vitriol; and that so much the rather, because it produces the good effects which are expected from Salt of Vitriol with much more gentleness, the chief of which are to expel by vomit or stool the bad humours that gather in the stomach or in the bowels, to prevent their sending up vapours to the brain, and their cau∣sing the Epilepsie, and other maladies of the head; to kill worms, cure intermitting Agues, and to open obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, the Kidneys and passages of the Urine. The dose is from half a scruple to half a dram, in broth or in some other proper liquor. 
 I could here insert many other preparations of Vitriol, but being out of use, I omit them. 
 CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Preparation of Sulphur. THE great resemblance which there is between the acid Spirit of Sulphur and that which is drawn from Vitriol, of which the first is the ground, obliges me to give you the preparation thereof next in order. I intend not to speak of that Sulphur which all Chymistry acknowledges for one of the principles of mix ' d bo∣dies, not more then of that which is to be separated from Antimony, Cinnabar and some other Minerals, of which it makes one part of the Composition; but of the Com∣mon ordinary Sulphur, which passes for a Rosine, or Gum, or fat Oily Mineral juice; which is found in the bowels of the Earth pure or mix ' d with it, or with Stones, or in certain waters from whence it is separated by art. The fat Rosiny and Com∣bustible part, is that which is in greatest quantity in the Composition of Sulphur, but it is accompany ' d with a little Salt, or acid Spirit, some little water and some Earth, which remains after the consumption and separation of the rest of the parts by fire. Brimstone is brought pure and refin ' d to our hands. The best is the smooth∣est, and that which burns without going out when it is once lighted. The colour whereof enclines a little thought toward Green, and is most proper for Chymical preparations. 
 The Gummy and Combustible part of Brimstone prevailing above the rest and be∣ing of it self, it not only rises with ease when it is set over the fire in Vessels, but it carries with it some other parts; so that there remains little or nothing in the Vessel, after long exposing to the fire; as you may observe by the following preparation of the flowers of Brimstone. 
 Having plac ' d an Earth ' n Cucurbit glaz ' d within, somewhat low, and fit to resist the fire upon a Furnace proportionable, lute the inside of the upper-part of the Fur∣nace, as also round about the Cucurbit, so that no Flame nor Sparkle of fire may go out that way, to set the Sulphur on fire, leaving nevertheless round about three or four little Registers, with their shutters fit to take off or put on as occasion serves. Then having kindl ' d a moderate fire in the Hearth-place of the Furnace, put into the Cucurbit about three or four ounces of Brimstone grosly pouder ' d, and cover it with a glass-head whose mouth may be proportionable to the neck, so to streight ' n it that there may be no occasion of any Lute. By this means the Flowers of Brimstone will rise, and gather together in the head of the Cucurbit. You must always keep a moderate and equal heat under the Cucurbit, take off and keep the Flowers that stick to the bottom of the head, and cast in new Sulphur, as the first ascends in Flow∣ers; and have two heads of the same bigness; to cover the Cucurbit with the one, while you take off the Flowers from the other. You may also make use of seve∣ral Vessels at at a time, of those of Earth made in the fashion of Aludels, having a▪ large beak upon every side, to each of which you may fix half-Balls, having an opening at the top, which you may cover with a glass-head like the Cucurbit ' s. And by this means one part of the Flowers will sublime into the head, the other issuig out of the beaks of the Aludels, will stick to the inside of the half Balls, whence you must take them off from time to time, with a spoon fitted for the purpose. 
 Some Writers set down preparations of Flowers of Sulphur, with an addition of Myrth, Aloes, Olibanum, Mastich, Benjamin, Saffron, &amp;c. eating these ingredients, mixing them with the brimstone, and subliming them together, as you sublime the flowers of brimstone. But though these persons have found some Assenters; never∣theless it being certain, that these drugs are not able to endure a fire necessary for the sublimation of the flowers of Sulphur, without a remarkable dissipation of the best parts, I think it better to mingle one or t ' other, according to occasion, with the flowers of Sulphur, without any farther trouble. 
 The preparation of white flowers of Sulphur, of which Angel Sala, and others after him have prescribed the receipt, deserves to be here set down. 
 Take half a pound of calcin ' d Niter, and fix ' d with Sulphur, according to the method set down for Sal-Polycrestes, speaking of the preparations of Niter; and having reduc ' d it into very fine powder, and mix ' d it with a pound of brimstone in rolls, powder ' d also, make a sublimation thereof in a Cucurbit plac ' d upon a Sand∣bath, cover ' d with its head, employing fire and time requisite. By this means you shall have the flowers of Sulphur white, less unpleasant, but at least as efficacious as the Magistery of Sulphur, of which I shall give you the preparation, more out of reverence to the same of those ancient Authors who have wrote thereof, then for any good opinion I have of it. 
 CHAP. XXIX. Magistery or Milk of Sulphur. THE method which most Authors have observ ' d for the preparation of Magistery or Milk of Sulphur, is this▪ They mingle one part of the flowers of Sulphur, with three parts of Salt Tarra , and having put this mixture into a great Earthen∣pot glaz ' d within, they pour upon it seven or eight times of its weight in River∣water; then putting the pot over the fire, and having boil ' d the substances five or six hours▪ or till the flowers of Sulphur are dissolv ' d in the liquor, adding neverthe∣less from time to time more boiling water, to supply the place of that which is exaporated in boiling. And when the liquor is consum ' d to the half, they empty by inclination the clear liquor warm into a great earthen Pipkin glaz ' d within, pour∣ring upon it at the same time distill ' d Vinegar, or liquor of Allum, till the ebullition ease. By this means the acid of the Vinegar, uniting it self with the fix ' d Salt of the Tartar▪ which had dissolv ' d the flower of Sulphur, constrains it to forsake them; and those flowers having lost their yellow colour in the Menstruum, and having left the po es of the Tartar which the acid of the Vinegar or Tartar has fill ' d, swim∣ming immediately among all the parts of the liquor▪ give it the colour of milk, till they come at length to be precipitated to the bottom of the liquor in a white substance. At which me having pour ' d out by inclination the liquor that swims at the top▪ they wash them several times in fair water▪ till having carry ' d off by lo∣tions all the acrimony of the Dissolvent and Precipitant, they become altogether dulcif ' d▪ and fit to be dry ' d and kept under the name of Magistery or Milk of Sul∣phur. 
 There is also another Magistery of Sulphur, which is this way to be prepar ' d: Having▪ put into a great Iron-Caldron, a pound of Sulphur in powder, and two pound of Quicklime, and pour ' d upon them a good quantity of ordinary water, boil them together till the liquor be wasted to three quarts, or for more certainty till it be become very red, and that you may udg by that, that the Alkali of the Lime has penetrated and dissolv ' d the Sulphur. At which time having pass ' d the liquor through a bag▪ leave it to cool, and pour out by inclination the clear liquor into a great earthen-Pot glaz ' d▪ then our upon it Urine very hot, till ebullition cease, and that the fix ' d Alkali▪ of the ime being united with the volatile Salt of the Urine leave the Sulphur which it has dissolv ' d to precipitate to the bottom. Then leave the substances to settle from the evening till morning. After which having pour ' d out by inclination the liquor that swims above the Sulphur precipitated, wash t ten or twelve times, till all the acrimony of the Salts be carry ' d off. 
 Writers do very much recommend the Magistery of Sulphur, calling it the Balsom of the Lungs, and a singular remedy against Coughs, Asthma ' s, Ptysicks, and to divert Fluxes of humours that fall upon the breast, to facilitate expectoration, ease the pains of Colicks, dissipating the wind of the stomach and intestines. It is giv ' n from five or six to ten or twelve grains, in some Cordial or Pectoral liquor, re∣inforc ' d with Cinnamon-water. 
 But by reason of the various alterations that happen to Magistery of Sulphur, as well in its dissolutions as in its precipitations, and the ill qualities which it receives from the substances with which it is mingl ' d, and of which the ill scent that remains after Lotion is an evident sign; I think it better to lay it aside, and rather to make use of the Spirit of Sulphur, especially the white ones, of which I have shew ' d you the preparation, in regard that being less unpleasant, they may be able to work all the effects which Authors promise to themselves from the Magistery, giving them from one scruple to half a dram. 
 CHAP. XXX. Of the Distillation of Sulphur. THE small quantity of Spirit which is drawn from Sulphur, the impossibility to have the Spirit without burning the Sulphur, without the assistance of the air, and the difficulty to meet with Vessels fit to be made use of in this distillation, have very much taken up the thoughts of several persons, and of such in particular as have not accustomed themselves to fully their fingers with other Chymical prepa∣rations. There is hardly any Author that has not given a different preparation. They have also propos ' d several Vessels, by the means whereof they have promis ' d suc∣cess to those that have them, and know how to make use of them. But all that o∣thers have wrote, does not hinder me from acquitting my self of the obligation that lies upon me of imparting to publick view the most easie and best means which I make use of to succeed in this distillation, and the▪ form of the Vessels them∣selves.
You must have at least four several Vessels for the distillation of Spirit of Sulphur, of which the lowest, that is to be the biggest, and to be of Glass or Potters Earth, is to receive the Spirit while it distills; the second is to be plac ' d in the middle of the bottom of the other, and to serve as a prop to the third, which is to contain the Sulphur; and the fourth is to be hung or plac ' d in that manner that it may stop and make room for the vapours that arise from the Spirit of Sulphur, at the time when it burns. The last Vessel is of glass, and usually made like a Bell, bigger or les∣ser, and sometimes open at the top, sometimes not; but that wherein the Sulphur burns, is to be of Earth fit to resist the fire, and to be upheld by some little pot of fine Earth or Glass; for if it should rest upon the bottom of the Vessel below, it would suck up all the Spirit that gather ' d▪ together within it. Usually we stay for Rainy∣weather, or else moisten the inside of the Bell and the Vessel below to facilitate the dissolution of the vapours, and by that means to obtain a greater quantity o Spirit. It is also convenient at the beginning, to put in some little water into the bottom of the Vessel below, that the Spirit may mix with it the more easily with∣out changing its nature, since it may be separated with all its force, by rectifying it like Spirits of Salt and Vitriol. 
 I my self for this distillation make use of large pots, call ' d vulgarly Sal ires, or poudering Vessels, containing about two Pailfuls. These pots have a Rim round a∣bout their upper part▪ wherein there are three or four holes; which holes I we , and fill the bottoms with water. Then having put in a little pot of Earth, I place upon it the pot of Earth where the Sulphur is to burn; I chuse the greenest brim∣stone, and in smallest Rolls, and having melted it, and dipp ' d Cotton-weiks into it, I kindle and cause some part of it to burn in the pot, covering at the same time with a Glass-Bell, such as Gardners make use of, proportionable to the mouth and rim of the pot, and moistned in the inside. By this means, the white vapours that rise from the Sulphur, finding room enough as well in the capacious part of the pot, as in that of the Bell, and moisture enough to fix them, dissolve into Spirit; so that you shall have a greater quantity by continuing this operation, still putting in and lighting more wicks as the first are consum ' d, than by any other contri∣vance yet found out. You shall see in this Book the figure of the Pots and their Bell. But the invention would be much more profitable, were it possible to make such Pots and as big in Glass-houses; for the Pots of Potters-Earth are not able to withstand any long time the subtle force of the Spirit of Sulphur, which in the end penetrates them, in regard they always suck up some part, especially if you be not careful to moisten them within-side from time to time. 
 I have also given you the figure of the great Plates of Iron, with which I use to receive the Spirit of Sulphur which distils from the Bells open at the top, and having two Ears or handles to support the sticks that bear them; the opening whereof I cover with a little head of Glass, to which you may join a small Re∣ceiver, proceeding to the distillation of the Spirit, after the same method as be∣fore, only that you must leave about a fingers distance between the brim of the Bell hung and the brims of the Platter, so ordering it, that the flame of the Sul∣phur may not touch the Bell while that the Sulphur has enough of air to burn. True it is, you have not so great a quantity of Spirit by means of these Vessels, and that one part of the vapours is lost, neither dissolving in the Bell nor in the Plat∣ter; but the Spirit is very good and penetrative; and using a good number of Vessels, you may have a reasonable quantity of Spirit. 
 The Acid of Sulphur passing for the foundation, and the first and principal mat∣ter of Vitriol, to which it communicates its most considerable vertues; you may with good reason attribute to Spirit of Sulphur, almost all those of Spirit of Vi∣triol. But besides that the savour of Spirit of Sulphur is much more acceptable than that of Spirit of Vitriol, its effects are much more profitable, as well to quench the heat of Fevers, especially Cholerick, as to resist the putrefaction of humours, to create an appetite, fortifie the Stomach and Vitals, to cure diseases of the breast, and particularly Asthma ' s and Ptysicks. And though the most part of the world believes, that Salts are injurious to the Lungs; yet I can assure them, that some years since there was a Preacher of this City, who having almost lost his voice, wholly recover ' d the use of it, by the use of Spirit of Sulphur; which he took in his usual drink, in his broths, and also among his victuals, and that it was only the Spirit of Sulphur that I prepar ' d him, which cur ' d him of so strange a distem∣per. 
 CHAP. XXXI. Of Salt of Sulphur. SUlphur consuming it self almost all in the fire, and leaving after its consumption only a little Earth, we cannot pretend to extract a true Salt, unless you will give to this Spirit, as liquid as it is, the name of acid Salt of Sulphur. For that reason it is, that Authors who have written of Sulphur, have giv ' n us no prepara∣tion of its Salt. But Chymistry, which upon many occasions, sends its assistance to nature, fails not of means for the preparation of a Salt, to which we may justly give the name of Salt of Sulphur, of which I will shew you two or three preparations. 
 Beat a pound of excellent Niter with as much Sulphur, and having plac ' d a good Crucible upon the Culot or Iron-square in the Hearth-place of the Furnace, and kindl ' d about it a good Coal-fire, the Crucible being red-hot, put into it about an ounce of the pouder of Niter and Sulphur, which will quickly light, and when the Flame is pass ' d throw into the Crucible as much new pouder, and still let the Flame cease, till you have thrown it in all. After which keep a quick fire round about the Crucible for two good hours: then letting the substances cool, make a lye in an Iron-Skillet very clean, and having filter ' d the hot liquor put it into a Cucurbit in a Sand-Bath moderately hot. Then having evaporated about three quarters of the moisture, and cool ' d that which remains in the Cucurbit, continue to pour upon it by little and little good Spirit of Sulphur, so long till you can perceive no more Effervescency. That done, having rekindl ' d the bath-fire evaporate in the same Cu∣curbit plac ' d there the superfluous moisture to the thin Film, if you desire a Salt in Crystals, or to the driness of Salt if you desire it in pouder or in the lump. By this means you shall have a very white Salt, compos ' d of the fix ' d Salt part of Niter, and the acid of Sulphur, which may be administer ' d with success, as well to quench the heat of Fevers, as to open all obstructions of the Bowels. It is mix ' d in ordinary Drink or other Liquors, wherein the plesiang taste of the acidity must be your rule to go by. 
 You may also prepare a Salt of Sulphur with less trouble, observing a method which was imparted to me by Monsieur Freslin, a person as curious after the know∣ledg of natural things, as solid and judicious in both the one and the other Philoso∣phy. Put into a Retort of Glass large enough, a pound of Niter in Pouder; and having pour ' d upon it Spirit of Sulphur rectify ' d, till there appear no more Effer∣vescency upon their conjunction, and having well shak ' n the Retort, entirely to dis∣solve the Niter in the Spirit, place the Cornute in a Sand-bath, and having fitted and luted a large Recipient to its beak, begin your Distillation with a soft fire, then augmented by degrees, by putting the lighted-coals upon and about the Sand-bath, and round about the Cornute, the better to▪ force what is to be forc ' d out of the Niter. By this means you shall have a good Spirit of Niter very proper for all sorts of uses, while the Spirit of Sulphur being strictly united with the fix ' d Salt of Niter, makes but one body with it, which is to be found in a lump in the Retort, when brok ' n; very white in colour, and very pleasing for its acidity in taste; the vertues whereof are the same with that before. 
 The most natural reflection that can be made upon this preparation is, that the Niter being compos ' d of a double Spirit, the one passably acid, the other Sulphury volatile Salt, both engag ' d within the pores of a natural fix ' d Salt, and that the Spi∣rit of Sulphur being compos ' d of parts more solid and penetrating then those of Niter, and capable of insinuating themselves into all the parts of this Salt; it hap∣pens that in the mixture of these two substances, the parts of the Spirit of Sul∣phur penetrate the whole body of the Niter, and so assisted by the operation of the fire, they have strength enough to force out and take the place of the nitrous Spi∣rits, among the parts of the fix ' d Salt; to which they unite themselves so closely that they make but one solid body, the union whereof the fire can hardly separate: the Spirits of Niter fly away in red vapours, and pass into the Recipient where they condense into Liquor. 
 You must also consider, that by this operation you gain the Spirit of Niter, which else would vanish, when the Salt is calcin ' d with the Sulphur. And I beleive that the consideration of this Spirit ' s leaving the mixture, ought to make us conceive a very good opinion of the Salt which remains in the Retort; so little reason we have to fear its Effects. Since that besides that we use Niter as it is for several Internal uses, and that we often mix the Spirit in Potions, as also in drinks; here remains nothing but the fix ' d part of the Niter not only good of it self, but much more excellent by its union with the Spirit of Sulphur which failes not to temper the dreaded Acri∣mony of the Salt. 
 You may also prepare a Salt of Sulphur, which being nothing inferiour to the for∣mer two, is much more proper to purify the mass he of blood, and to expel by sweat or insensible transpiration sharp and subtle humours, and which will be also as white and as pleasant. For this purpose put a pound of Salt of Urine, very pure and white into a Cucurbit large and high, and having pour ' d upon it Spirit of Sulphur well rectify ' d, till Ebullition cease, place the Cucurbit in a Sand-bath over a mode∣rate fire, and evaporate the superfluous moisture to the Film, separating and drying the Crystals; or else go on, and evaporate the moisture to the dryness of a Salt. For this volatile Salt of Urine, though fix ' d for a time by the Spirit of Sulphur, not losing its first nature, may be able to shew its Effects, especially when the acid of the Sulphur which has fix ' d it, meets in the stomach some other body to which it can unite it self, and so restore to the volatile Salt of Urine its first liberty. The volatile Spirit of Urine may be also us ' d, which to speak properly is nothing but its Salt dissolv ' d, instead of its Salt coagulated, and by uniting it with Spirit of Sulphur, reduce these two Spirits into a white and Salt body like to that which I have spok ' n of. They that can away with the acid savour of these Salts, may take from half a scruple to half a dram, and sometimes a whole dram in some convenient Liquor. 
 I omit many other preparations of Sulphur, which may be found in several Au∣thors, of which some are not feaseable, others not true, and others altogether unnecessary and out of use: referring the Reader to my Galenick Compositions for the preparations of two Balsomes of Sulphur there prepar ' d. 
 CHAP. XXXII. Of the Preparation of Arsenick. WE look upon Arsenick as a kind of Soote or a Mineral juice, thick, unctuous and participating of the nature of Sulphur, but very contrary to the Bal∣some of our life. And therefore it is reck ' nd in the number of Poisons, being ne∣ver made use of but with great caution, and after the dangerous parts of it have been separated and corrected by Art. Most Authors who confound the names and qualities of Arsenick, observe but three sorts, the white, the yellow, the red. But I find four, of which the first is ordinary Arsenick, which is white, and sometimes in some parts transparent as Crystal: The second, having the shape of that Arsenick which I have nam ' d, in colour is yellow, and bears the name of Realgar, or Realgal. The third is also yellow, but of a scaly substance, hard to beat, like a Mineral, and bearing the name of Orpiment: the fourth call ' d Sandarac, is of a red colour, very like the ordinary Arsenick in shape, and Realgar, differing only in colour. The or∣dinary Arsenick, which is brought us, is a sublimated substance of equal parts of Sea-Salt and Orpiment in pouder, mix ' d together in sublimating Vessels; so that we need not wonder that this Arsenick is a most pernicious poison, since that in its sublima∣tion, the Acrimony of the Salt, augments yet more the natural Malignity of the Orpiment; and that the same Salt assisted by the Vitriol, being mix ' d with the Mer∣cury at the time of its sublimation, renders it corrosive, and consequently a dange∣rous poison. I also think it is very ill done of those Persons that mingle the same Salt with Arsenick, or that add to it the Filings of Steel or Copper, when they sub∣lime it out of a design to dulcify it, because those substances rather increase then ba e it ' s Acrimony, which I believe can never be truly qualify ' d: not knowing any preparation, that to any appearance is able to dulcify it in such sort, as that which is call ' d the Ruby of Arsenick, which as thus prepar ' d. 
 Beat the Vulgar Arsenick in a Mortar, and having put it into a Glass-Cucurbit, of which at the least three fourths must remain unfill ' d, and plac ' d it in a Sand-bath cover ' d with a blind head, make sublimation thereof with a gradual fire, as you do to Mercury. Then throwing away the Faeces, and the pouder, which separating from the Lump, sticks to the Vessels, repeat sublimation, and separation of the saeces and pouder three times. After which having finely pouder ' d and mix ' d this Arsenick sublimated with equal parts of Flowers of Sulphur, make the last sublimation, by means whereof the Flowers of Sulphur, uniting themselves inwardly with the Arse∣nick, and sublimating with it, will not only imprint upon it, but also take them∣seves the colour of Rubies, of which this Arsenick carries the name, and of which some Authors recommend the use from three or four to seven or eight grains, In some Con ection, Conserve, or Loo h, in Maladies of the Lungs, or in such where there is occasion to provoke Sweat, as also for the cure of Malignant and obstinate Ulcers, applying it upon them. But notwithstanding this preparation, though it may be good to lay upon Ulcers, or for external cures, I believe that it is not to be giv ' n inwardly; in regard a remedy of this nature ought to be always suspected, and for that there be other remedies and Medicaments far more safe then any that can be made of Arsenick. 
 There is a preparation of Arsenick very serviceable for external cares. For they make a Regulus of it, out of which they draw a moist substance like Butter, like the Regulus of Antimony, proceeding thus: Having beaten to powder, mix ' d, and put equal parts of Niter and Tartar in an Iron Mortar heated, and having put a lighted coal-fire to it, the detonation being pass ' d, weigh six ounces of the com∣bustible matter in the Mortar, and having beaten them and mix ' d them with eight ounces of Arsenick or Orpiment, pouder ' d in the same manner, and four ounces of filings of Steel, put this mixture into a great Crucible, plac ' d upon a square Iron In the midst of a proper Furnace, and having well melted the substances, pour them speedily out into an Iron Horn, heated before, and rubb ' d within with Candle∣grease, knocking at the same time upon the Horn to hasten the precipitation of the Regulus to the bottom; the matte s being cold, separate the Regulus from the scum of the Metal, which will be at the top, to use it in making the Spirit and Butter according to the following method. 
 Reduce this Regulus to pouder, and having mix ' d it with double its weight sublimated corrosive, put this mixture into a glass Retort encompass ' d with lute, of which two thirds must be very near empty. Then having plac ' d it in a little close Reverberatory, begin your distillation with an immediate, but very soft fire; then aug∣mented by little and little, keeping apart the smoaking Spirit that comes out first, and receiving into another Vessel the butter-like liquor that will succeed. After which, ha∣ving chang ' d the Recipient, increase the fire, till all the Mercury of the sublima e be descended. Then expose this Butter of Arsenick to the Sun, and when it is dis∣solv ' d into liquor, keep it in a double glass Bottle well stopp ' d, to eat away the proud flesh of wounds and ulcers, and to take off the rottenness of the bones▪ which it does with more violence then Butter of Antimony; for which reason a less quantity must be us ' d, and with an extraordinary wariness. The Spirit that comes out first, is very corrosive, and will perfectly dissolve Mars, and penetrate several o∣ther Metals. Nor is it to be wonder ' d, that the substances which proceed from the conjunction of Regulus of Arsenick with Mercury sublimate corrosive, are more corroding then those drawn from Antimony mix ' d with the same Mercury corro∣sive, since the parts of Arsenick are infinitely more malignant and corrosive then those of Antimony, and for that the mixture of the Mercury sublimate much en∣creases that very malignity and corrosion. 
 You may also prepare a fix ' d Arsenick, or a fix ' d liquor of Arsenick, thus: Pul∣ erize eight ounces of Arsenick, twelve ounces of Niter, and twelve ounces of Tar∣tar, and having well mix ' d them, and plac ' d a Crucible upon a Culot, in the mid∣dle of a Furnace built under a Chimney, kindle a good fire round about the Cru∣cible, and when it is red hot, throw into it about an ounce of the pouder, leaving the Niter and the Tartar alone to operate upon the Arsenick, and staying till the stinking smoak that will rise be gone; continuing this projection, according to the same method, till all the powder be spent, taking care to stir the substances from time to time with a long Iron-Spatula, to cause the Sulphur of the Arsenick to ex∣hale; the malignity whereof you must avoid by keeping at a distance from the vapours, being as hurtful as their scent is noisome. After which keep a violent fire round about the Crucible for five or six hours, or else, which will be better, during a whole day, the better to dissipate what the Arsenick has of evil. Then leaving the Crucible to cool, and having pouder ' d the lump which remains within it, separate by often lotions whatever it contains of Salt, and when it is rightly ulcify ' d, keep the pouder in a double glass-bottle well stopp ' d; and this is that which some call fix ' d Arsenick, that some commend for a good Sudorifick; but the cheifest use of it is to cleanse wounds and Ulcers. For which purpose instead of washing the pou∣der, it will be enough to expose the lump to the moisture of a Cellar where the Salts dissolve into Liquor, which you must keep in a double bottle well stopp ' d, by the name of fix ' d Liquor of Arsenick: good for the cure of Maligant Cankrou and Fistulous Ulcers, especially Venereal, mixing it with Vulnerary waters in a greater or lesser quantity, according to occasion. 
 I shall not any farther enlarge upon preparations of Arsenick, as dangerous, as they are little in use. 
 CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Preparation of Ambergrise. THE several opinions about the Original of Ambergrise do not at all change its nature. For though some have taken it for the scum of the Sea; others for the Excrement of certain Birds which appear in the Islands of Madagascar, or in some of those toward the bottom of the Archipelag : others for the Sperm of the Whale; yet they who affirm it to be a Bitumen that issues out of the bowels of the Earth, and empties it self into the Sea like Amber, seem to be the most rational in their thoughts. For if it were the Scum of the Sea, it would retain some quali∣ties or things which are contain ' d therein. And if it were an Excrement of Birds, we should not meet with it in such huge Uniform Lumps, weighing sometimes a∣bove a hundred pound. Besides, were it an excrement of Birds or the Sperm of a Whale, it would dissolve in water, and would not be able to resist so long as it does the violence of the waves or the injuries of the Air and Rain, without receiving any notable Alteration. 
 Ambergrise according to the latter opinion flowes liquid out of the Entrailes of the Earth: its lightness causes it to swim upon the superficies of the Sea, and its oily substance is the reason that it does not dissove, and that it has time to be reduc ' d by the heat of the Sun into a lump sufficiently dry and solid, which is carry ' d by tempests to the shoars of the Sea, where it is found not only in the Indies and Ame∣rica, but sometimes in our Seas near the shoar, though very rarely. And if at any time it has been found in the body of a Whale, we may well believe that that Crea∣ture might have swallow ' d it for its nourishment. 
 Some Moderns nevertheless would assure us, that Ambergrise proceeded from certain drainings of Honey, which having in time been bak ' d and dry ' d by the heat of the Sun, fall off from the Rocks, where the Bees had made it, into the Sea▪ the Salt whereof and the Agitation of the Waves perfect their digestion, give them that colour and consistency which we observe, and at the same the remaining parts of the Honey to yield that pleasing scent which the Mass ex∣hales.
CHAP. LVII. Of the Distillation of Crystals of Venus. BEfore you undertake to distill the Crystals of Saffrons of Venus, or those which you shall have drawn from Vertdegrise, you must, after you have put them into a glass Cucurbit, pour upon them Spirit of Wine well rectify ' d four fingers above the substance. Then having plac ' d the Cucurbit in a Sand-bath over a very gentle fire, cover ' d it with its head well luted, and fix ' d to it a little Recipi∣ent luted after the same manner, draw back the spirit of wine, and return twice more other spirit of wine upon the Crystals, to qualifie their Acrimony in some measure. Then having dry ' d and beaten them, fill about two thirds of a great glass Retort environ ' d with lute, and having plac ' d it in a close Furnace of Reverberation, and adapted and carefully luted a grand Recipient to the neck, distill the spirit with an immediate fire gentle at first, then encreas ' d by degrees, and from degree to degree, and continuing it till no more vapours rise out of the Cornute; then when the vessels are cold, put the Residence into a new Cornute environ ' d with Lute, and having pour ' d the distill ' d spirit in the Recipient upon it, and plac ' d the Retort as be∣fore in a close furnace of Reverberation, and fitted and luted a Recipient to the neck, reiterate Distillation, as also Cohobation of the spirit distill ' d upon the sediment▪ and make a third Distillation. By this means you shall have a spirit impregnated with the most essential parts of the Saffron of Venus, or of those of Vert-degrise, recom∣mended by several good Authors for a specifick against the Epilepsie, Apoplexie, Con∣vulsions, and other maladies of the brain; as also against those of the matrix. They also esteem it highly against the Jaundise, weaknesses of the stomach, and to break the stone in the Reins and Bladder. Against all sorts of Agues, the Pestilence, and that it may be successfully used instead of the Prophylactick water of Sylvius, in all diseases for which that is commended. Insomuch that Paracelsus avers that this spi∣rit makes the fourth part of an Apothecaries shop. The dose is from five or six to ten or twelve drops, in proper liquors. It is us ' d in ointments to make the hair grow, and to cure the Itch, Scurf, and Scald-heads. 
 But besides all these vertues, they pretend that it is a real Alkahest, able to dis∣solve totally all Pearls, Corals, Crabs-eyes, and other such kind of substances, with much more ease then any other dissolvants, which altering and destroying themselves in some measure, while they act upon the substances that they dissolve, leave great impressions of their Acrimony▪ and with that the most part of their Acidity. Where∣as if you believe them, after this Spirit has dissolv ' d all sorts of substances, it quits them altogether, when it is forc ' d out by distillation, issuing out with the same strength which it had before distillation, and is still in a capacity to dissolve more, and as often as you can desire. But because the salt part of these substances is sure to retain with it some part of the Acid, with which it may have united it self, and that besides this, the terrestrial part fixes and detains some other particles, which cannot well be separated but by Lotions, it is not to be thought that this spirit is al∣waies the same. Nor do I find the use of it very necessary for those dissolutions, be∣cause for reasons otherwhere alledg ' d the Magisteries of Pearls, Corals and such other kind of substances, are much inferiour, and of less use then the substances themselves ground to a very fine powder upon Porphyry; and that the apparent salt which a man might draw from them causing this spirit to incorporate with the substances which it has dissolved, would prove more sharp then that which should be drawn from the same substances with Vinegar distill ' d, and the Acid Salt would be also in∣corporated with the substance which it has dissolv ' d. We should deceive our selves also to let Copper, Iron, Pearls, Corals, &amp;c. pass for pure Alkali ' s, upon this ground that Acid spirits act upon them. For though these substances are not destitute of their proper Alkali, it follows not that this part is the whole, nor that it can trans∣form the other parts into it self, since that when the Acid spirits dissolve those sorts of substances, they do it not by uniting themselves to them, as they do with the true Alkali ' s, but by destroying them by the division which they make of their parts; quitting them, and suffering them to precipitate downward, when they meet any fix ' d or volatile Salt with which they may unite, considering that only salt sub∣stances dissolvable in water, and capable to unite and incorporate themselves with the oils, which can be accompted real Alkali  ' s. For though the boiling water, as I have said, may make some dissolution of Copper reduc ' d into Saffron, after it has been calcin ' d with sulphur, nevertheless it can only dissolve that part which the Acid of the sulfur has corroded and half dissolv ' d during Calcination. 
 Some have pretended to draw forth a sulphur of Venus, by mixing its Vitriol with half its weight of filings of Steel, moistening them several times with Vinegar distill ' d, drying them full as many times, and at length reducing them into a red mass, over a gradual fire augmented toward the end. After which they bruise the Mass in a Mor∣tar, and extract the Tincture by the usual waies with Vinegar distill ' d, which they afterwards evaporate to the half part; then pouring upon it liquor of Tartar, they precipitate a substance which they call by the name of Sulphur of Venus; though in∣deed it be nothing else but the proper substance of the Copper, which lay hid in its Vitriol, and that portion of filings of Steel, which the distill ' d Vinegar had dissolv ' d, when it was us ' d for the extract of the Tincture. But this preparation, in my opi∣nion, having more of vanity then profit, I think it to no more purpose to dilate any more upon it. No more to purpose do I think it to multiply any more preparations of Copper, believing that if those which I have given will not satisfie, to all intents the curious may have, they may find by their own progresses, or by the several pre∣parations which I have given upon Mars, whatever is necessary to be practis ' d upon Copper. 
 CHAP. LVIII. Of Preparations of Lead. LEAD is not only put into the last rank of imperfect Metals, but has been alwaies accompted the coursest, most terrestrial, coldest, softest, and most easie to melt of all Metals. It is thought to be compos ' d of a terrestrial Salt and Sulphur, and an imperfect Mercury, somewhat of the nature of Antimony. It is call ' d Saturn, from the influence which that planet has over. Particular qualities are ascrib ' d to it also, for the cure of diseases of the Spleen, and Head, because there is alwaies some portion of Silver mix ' d with it in the Mine. Its Terrestrious Salt and Sulphur are the reason, that being melted, it mixes it self with all Metals, and that being expos ' d with them to the violence of the fire, it reduces all imperfect Metals into dross and scum. The same Sulphur is the reason that being reduc ' d into Lime and pouder ' d, it easily unites with all sorts of unctuous matters. For which reason it is often made use of in ointments and emplasters, with which it incorporates very well. The im∣perfectness of its substance hinders however, but that both Pharmacies make several preparations of it, and that it is more us ' d than all the other Metals together. 
 The meanest and most simple preparation of Lead is that of its purifying. To which purpose, having melted it in a convenient Earthen Pot, or in some great Iron Ladle, and thrown upon it some pieces of Suet or Wax, let them flame together, and the flame being pass ' d, scum off the impurities. You may also keep it a longer time over the fire, and throw in more pieces of Suet or Wax, and still separate the scum that rises; but all the Lead would turn into scum, should you continue to hold it over the fire, burning more Suet or Wax upon it. And therefore once burning, and once scumming is enough, and then to pour it into some vessel half full of hot water, to have your Lead sufficiently pure, and fit for any other preparations which you intend. 
 Having thus purifi ' d your Lead, if you would calcine it into a grey Calx, you may keep it over a moderate fire in the same vessel, stirring it continually with a long Iron Spatula, and separating from time to time the grey Powder enclining to yellow, which will gather together; still keeping it upon the fire, and separating the Powder till the Lead be changed into that kind of Calx or Lime. 
 Afterwards quench this Calx in some flat Earthen Capsula, and placing it in a por∣per Furnace of Reverberation, kindle and keep a moderate fire, not to melt the Lime, which must be left to reverberate for some hours, till it becomes yellow, which the Painters call Macicot; or of an orange colour, enclining to red, which they call Minium. 
 You may also reduce the Lead into thin Plates, and having hung them up, let them receive the vapours of Vinegar put into a proper vessel over a moderate fire, and af∣terwards separate the white substance that will gather together, which is that which they call Ceruse. Or else melt the Lead in a Crucible, and having mingled with it the half of its weight in pounder ' d Brimstone, leave it upon the fire, till the Brimstone be all consum ' d, at what time you shall find the Lead in a dark colour ' d Powder, which is call ' d Burne Lead. 
 I leave apart the Calcination of Lead in Lytharge, which is done in purifying the perfect Metals, and the immersive Calcinations of Lead in corroding spirits; of which that which is done with spirit of Vinegar in preparing Salt of Saturn, may serve for a sufficient example. 
 I will only tell you my thoughts upon the augmentation of weight to the eleventh part, which happens to Calx of Lead, and other Metals or Metallick substances, which have been long expos ' d to the Action of the fire; that is to say, that so long as the violence of the flame opens and divides the parts, the Acid of the woods or other substances that burn, insinuates it self into the pores of these Limes, where it is stopp ' d by the secret Alkali, which is there meets with. So that as long as the pores into which it is entr ' d, keep themselves open, it remains there conceal ' d, like the Acid and Volatile Salt of Woods in the foot of the Chimneys; and making but one body with the Calx, the weight of it is manifestly augmented for a time. But if you melt the Calx ' s, and cause them to resume their natural Metallick body, the closure of the pores of the Metal, drives out the forraign Acid; so that finding it self only compos ' d of its proper parts, it weighs no more then it did before it was re∣duc ' d into a Calx. And though the Calx of Lead in some measure does the office of Alkali, by contracting a kind of union with the Acids; and that it cannot be deny ' d but that Lead has its secret Alkali, like all other Metals and Metallick substances, yet we should do ill to take the whole for that part; and to look upon the whole substance of Lead as a true, pure and simple Alkali. For if it were so, it would not only suck up much more Acid, but having once suckt it up, it would make but one body with it, and would not be separated from it, as it is, by Fusion, which it would endure as the Acids united with the true Alkali  ' s do, without any division of their substance. 
 CHAP. LIX. Of Salt and Magistery of Saturn. YOU may indifferently make use of for these Preparations either of Lytharge, Minium, Ceruse, or the other Calx ' s of Lead. Because it is sufficient to have a Lead that is open, and in a condition to be easily dissolv ' d by Vinegar distill ' d. But because this Metal calcin ' d to whiteness, comes nearest to the colour of Salt, it is better to make use of Ceruse, or some other white of Lead. But you must be sure to chuse a true Ceruse of Lead, such as we call Venetian Ceruse▪ and not the coun∣erfeit Ceruses, which being mingl ' d with Chalk, or other alien substances, have nei∣ther the brittleness, weight nor whiteness of that of Venice. 
 Put then into a Cucurbit of Glass or Potters Earth, what quantity of Geruse you please, and having set it in a Sand-bath, and pourd distill ' d Vinegar upon it, five or six fingers above the substances, kindle a fire under the Bath, stirring the Ingredients with a long woodden Spatula, as well to hinder the Ceruse from lying in a heap at the bottom of the Vessel, as to hasten the dissolution. Continue the fire very mode∣rate, till the distill ' d Vinegar be become very sweet, which is a sign that it has dis∣solv ' d a good part of the Ceruse. At which time, after you have cool ' d the Bath, pour ' d out by Inclination, and filter ' d the Liquor, keep it apart in a double Glass-bottle, which done, return the Cucurbit again upon the Bath, pour fresh distill ' d Vinegar upon the sediment of the Ceruse, and kindling the fire under the Bath, re∣peat the same maceration and other operations, till the pure substance of the Ceruse be almost quite dissolv ' d in the distill ' d Vinegar; then having put all the filter ' d dissolutions into a clear glass Cucurbit, and set it upon a Sand bath over a moderate heat, evaporate by degrees the superfluous moisture, till there remain not above a fourth part of the tincture. At which time, having re-filter ' d this liquor hot, leave it four and twenty hours in a cool place, where a good part of it will coagulate into white Crystals, long and glistering, which will be cover ' d with one part of the liquor, not able to crystallize it self, by reason of its superfluous moisture. Pour that liquor into the Cucurbit by inclination, and having evaporated in the same Bath about half of the moisture, crystallize it again, repeating the same operation till all the Salt of Vinegar, incorporated with the substance of the Lead, be crystalliz ' d. Then dry the Crystals, and keep them for your use. 
 The great sweetness of the Salt of Saturn, is the reason that some have taken it for a Salt of Lead; though indeed it be no other then a real Salt of Vinegar incor∣porated with the proper substance of the Lead, which the Spirit of Vinegar has dis∣solv ' d; of which you will be satisfi ' d, when having distill ' d this Salt of Saturn through a Retort, the salt part of the Vinegar being exhal ' d in Spirit, you shall find in the Retort the proper substance of the Lead, which was conceal ' d in that Salt, reincor∣porated and become again a real Lead. You may be also farther convinc ' d, by putting this Salt of Saturn with Salt of Tartar into a Crucible, and setting them in a melting fire; for the acid of the Spirit of Vinegar quitting the Lead, to unite with the Salt of Tartar, the same Lead rebecomes what it was before it was dis∣solv ' d by the Spirit of Vinegar, and reduc ' d into Ceruse or Calx. 
 As for the sweet savour of the Salt, there is as little reason to attribute it to the internal Salt of Lead; for besides that it cannot be separated from the other parts of the Lead, and that this Metal has no sweetness in it self, nor any other considerable savour; the same thing is to be concluded of the Salts of Pearls, Co∣ral, &amp;c. Since that after they are dissolv ' d in distill ' d Vinegar, and the dissolution reduc ' d to Salt, this Salt, which is also the Salt of the Spirit of Vinegar, incor∣porated with the substance of the Pearls, Coral, &amp;c. which the same Spirit of Vi∣negar has dissolv ' d, has a sweet savour very like to that of Salt of Saturn; though it may be averr ' d, that this sweet savour does not proceed from any separable Salt which those substances may have; in regard that after precipitation of those dis∣solv ' d substances, or distillation of those Salts, you shall find very near the same weight which they had before the Spirit of Vinegar had dissolv ' d them, and that af∣ter you have wash ' d and cleans ' d them from all mixture of the Spirit of Vine∣gar, you shall find them as insipid as they were before; so far shall you be from perceiving any sweetness in them, no more then in Lead. So that we cannot ra∣tionally attribute this sweet savour of the Salt of Saturn but only to the action of the Spirit of Vinegar upon the Lead; nor look upon the sweetness of Salt of Pearls or Coral, but as an effect of the action of the Vinegar upon those substances, and of its union with them, by means of which action the sharpness of the Spirit of Vine∣gar being carry ' d off, they leave a more sweet and soft impression upon the tongue then they did before. 
 Lead not being able to act, like the Salts, upon the Spirit of Vinegar, and this latter being the only agent in the dissolution of the Calx of Lead, we observe there much less ebullition, and much less heat, then in the union of acids with real Alkali ' s, where every one does its own proper endeavour, and hastens to contract an union, which is very natural to them, ebullition and heat being the effects of their recipro∣cal motion. We also see that this ebullition and ervour cease, when after their union is perfected, their action and motion also cease. But here can happen no o∣ther heat or ebullition, then what the Spirit of Vinegar only raises by its operation upon the Calx of Lime; upon which also the Spirit of Vinegar works but very gently, because that being usually very much impregnated with flegm, its points are more slender, and less capable of action and motion. 
 They who are affraid of the coldness of Lead, and the acrimony of the Spirit of Vinegar, may pour upon the Salt of Saturn, Spirit of Wine well rectify ' d four fingers high, and having caus ' d digestion for three or four days, draw it off again, then dry the Salt and keep it. 
 Salt of Saturn is highly commended to quench the internal inflammations and heats of Fevers, as also to temper venereal desires, giving it in proper liquors from three or four, to five or six grains. It is also very much esteem ' d for the dissolving hard and schirrous tumors, and to dissipate contusions. It is made use of with suc∣cess in Collyriums, as well to stop fluxes, as to cool inflammations of the eyes, and consume the Pin and Web at the beginning, dissolving it from one scruple to two, in five or six ounces of Celandine or Eyebright water; of which you may augment the quantity, if you desire a more temperate Collyrium. It is also very useful in in∣jections for Gonorthaeas, Inflammations, and Ulcers of the Bladder, Matrix, and their passages. It is also serviceable in Gargarisms, for the most part of diseases of the mouth, caus ' d by volatile or fix ' d Alkali ' s; for the acid of the Spirit of Vine∣gar, assisted by the cold quality of the Lead, sensibly mortifies the working of these Salts, and extinguishes the inflammation which they cause. Which is so much the more conformable to reason, in regard we find by experience, that Sal Prunella, Spirit of Salt, Sulphur, and Vitriol, and all sorts of acids, even to simple Vinegar, are very good for these sorts of distempers; which would be the worse by the use of all other Salts, as well fix ' d as volatile. 
 There is a Liniment to be made call ' d the Liniment of Saturn, by stirring together equal parts of the dissolution of Calx of Lead, and Oil of Roses, and reducing it to a kind of Ʋnguentum Nutritum, which is very proper for the cure of malignant Ulcers that proceed from a sharp and salt humour; as also for Tetters, Scabs, Ring∣worms, and Burns. 
 There is no need of any particular dissolution of Calx of Lead to make a Magistery of Saturn; it being enough to put into a Cucurbit, or a large glass Pan, as much as you think convenient of the filter ' d liquor of Saturn, prepar ' d for extraction of the Salt, and to pour upon it softly liquor of Tartar, till the ebullition cease. For the liquor of Tartar uniting it self with the Spirit of Vinegar which had dissolv ' d the Calx of Lead, will cause it to quit the Calx, and suffer it to precipitate to the bot∣tom. After which, letting the precipitated substance settle, and having pour ' d out the liquor that swims above by inclination, wash the settlement several times with very fair water, till it be dulcify ' d, then dry the Magistery, and keep it for use. 
 This Magistery, to speak properly, is nothing but a Calx of Lead purify ' d and subtilliz ' d, which is useful in cooling and drying external medicines. Some there are that mix it in Pomatums. But the seeming whiteness which these Pomatums seem to impart to the Skin, is often attended with a colour inclining to that of Lead, and leaves a tincture of the first matter whence the Magistery was drawn, and into which you may change the Salt of Saturn.
