Plantains and Bonanoes grow and thrive here as well as any where, but they are used here only as Fruit, and not for Bread, as in many places of Ame|rica. Besides these here are divers sorts of excellent Fruits, both Ground-fruit and Tree fruit. The Ground-fruits are Pumpkins, Melons, Pine-apples, &c. the Tree-fruits are Mangoes, a few Oranges, Limes, Coco-nuts, Guava ' s, Mulberries, their much esteemed Betle, a Fruit called Lichea, &c. The Oranges are of divers sorts, and two of them more excellent than the rest. One sort is called Cam-chain, the other is call ' d Cam-quit. Cam, in the Tonquinese Language, signifies an Orange, but what the distinguishing Words Cam and Quit signifie I know not. 
  
 The Cam-chain is a large Orange, of a yellowish colour: the rind is prety thick and rough; and the inside is yellow like Amber. It has a most fra|grant smell ? , and the taste is very delicious. This sort of Orange is the best that I did ever taste; I believe there are not better in the World: A Man may eat freely of them; for they are so innocent that they are not denied to such as have Fevers, and other sick People. 
  
 The Cam-quit is a very small round Fruit, not above half so big as the former. It is of a deep red colour, and the rind is very smooth and thin. The inside also is very red, the taste is not inferi|our to the Cam-chain, but it is accounted very un|wholesome Fruit, especially to such as are subject to Fluxes; for it both creates and heightens that 
 Page  24 
 [year 1688] distemper. These 2 sorts are very plentiful and cheap, and they are in season from October till Fe|bruary, but then the Cham-chain becomes redder, and the rind is also thinner. The other sorts of O|ranges are not much esteemed. 
  
 The Limes of Tonquin are the largest I ever saw. They are commonly as big as an ordinary Limon, but rounder. The rind is of a pale yellow colour when ripe; very thin and smooth. They are ex|traordinary juicy, but not near so sharp or tart in taste as the West-Indian Limes. 
  
 Coco-nnts and Guava ' s do thrive here very well: but there are not many of the latter. 
  
 The Betle of Tonquin is said to be the best in India; there is great plenty of it; and  ' tis most esteemed when it is young, green and tender; for  ' tis then very juicy. At Mindanao also they like it best green: but in other places of the East-Indies it is commonly chew ' d when it is hard and dry. 
  
 The Lichea is another delicate Fruit.  ' Tis as big as a small Pear, somewhat long shaped, of a red|dish colour, the rind pretty thick and rough, the inside white, inclosing a large black kernel, in shape like a Bean. 
  
 The Country is in some part woody; but the low Land in general is either grassy Pasture, or Rice Fields, only thick set with small Groves, which stand scattering very pleasantly over all the low-Country. The Trees in the Groves are of di|vers sorts, and most unknown to us. There is good Timber for building either Ships or Houses, and indifferent good Masts may here be had. 
  
 There is a Tree called by the Natives Pone, chiefly used for making Cabinets, or other Wares to be la•kred. This is a soft sort of wood, not much unlike Fir, but not so serviceable. Another Tree grows in this Country that yields the Lack, with which Cabinets and other sine things are overlaid. 
 Page  25
[year 1688] These grow plentifully in some places, especially in the Champion Lands. Here are also Mulberry Trees in great plenty, to feed the Silk-worms, from whence comes the chief Trade in the Country. The Leaves of the old Trees are not so nourishing to the Silk-worms, as those of the young Trees; and therefore they raise crops of young ones every year, to feed the Worms: for when the season is over, the young Treees are pluckt up by the Roots, and more planted against the next year; so the Natives suffer none of these Trees to grow to bear Fruit. I heard of no Mulberries kept for eating, but some few raised by our English Merchants at Hean; and these bare but small hungry Fruit. 
  
 Here is good plenty of Rice, especially in the low Land, that is fatned by the overflowing Ri|vers. They have two crops every year, with great increase, if they have seasonable Rains and Floods. One crop is in May, and the other in November: and tho '  the low Land is sometimes overflown with Water in the time of Harvest, yet they matter it not, but gather the crop and fetch it home wet in their Canoas; and making the Rice fast in small bundles, hang it up on their Houses to dry. This serves them for Bread-corn; and as the Country is very kindly for it, so their Inhabitants live chiefly of it. 
  
 Of Land-Animals in this Country there are Elephants, Horses, Buffaloes, Bullocks, Goats, Deer, a few Sheep for the King, Hogs, Dogs, Cats, Lizards, Snakes, Scorpions, Centapees, Toads, Frogs, &c. The Country is so very popu|lous, that they have but few Deer or wild Game for hunting, unless it be in the remoter parts of the Kingdom. But they have abundance of Fowls both tame and wild. The tame Fowls are Cocks and Hens, and Ducks also in great plenty, of the same sort with ours. The Inhabitants have little 
 Page  26 
 [year 1688] Houses made purposely for the Ducks to lay their Eggs in, driving them in every Night in laying time, and letting them out again in the morning. There are also some Geese, Parrots, Partridges, Para|kites, Turtle-Doves, &c. with many sorts of smal|ler Birds. Of wild Water-fowls they have Ducks, Widgeons, Teals, Herons, Pellicans, and Crab|catchers, (which I shall describe in the Bay of Campeachy) and other smaller Water-fowls. The Duck, Widgeon, and Teal are innumerable: They breed here in the Months of May, June, and July; then they fly only in couples: but from October to March you will see over all the low watry Lands great Companies together: and I have no where seen such large flights, nor such plenty of Game. They are very shy since the English and Dutch settled here; for now the Natives as well as they shoot them: but before their arrival the Tonquinese took them only with Nets, neither is this custom left off yet. The Net that is used for this Game is made square, and either bigger or less according as they have occasion. They fix two Poles about 10 or 11 foot high, upright in the Ground, near the Pond, where the Ducks haunt; and the Net has a head-cord, which is stretched out streight, made from the top of one Pole to the other; from whence the lower part of the Net hangs down loose towards the Ground; and when in the even|ing they fly towards the Pond, many of them strike against the Net, and are there entangled. 
  
 There is a kind of Locust in Tonquin, in great abundance. This Creature is about the bigness of the top of a Mans Finger, and as long as the first joynt. It breeds in the Earth, especially in the Banks of Rivers and Ditches in the low Country. In the months of January and February, which is the season of taking them, being then only seen, this Creature first comes out of the Earth in huge 
 Page  27 
 [year 1688] swarms. It is then of a whitish colour, having 2 small Wings, like the Wings of a Bee: at its first coming out of the Earth it takes its flight; but for want of strength or use falls down again in a short time. Such as strive to fly over the River, do com|monly fall down into the Water and are drowned, or become a prey to the Fish of the River, or are carried out into the Sea to be devoured there: But the Natives in these Months watch the Rivers, and take up thence Multitudes, skimming them from off the Water with little Nets. They eat them fresh, broiled on the Coals; or pickle them to keep. They are plump and fat, and are much esteemed both by rich and poor, as good wholesome food, either fresh or pickled. 
  
 The Rivers and Ponds are stored with divers sorts of excellent Fish, besides abundance of Frogs, which they angle for, being highly esteemed by the Tonquinese. The Sea too contributes much to|wards the support of poor People, by yielding plentiful stores of Fish, that swarm on this Coast in their seasons, and which are commonly pre|ferr ' d before the River Fish. Of these here are divers sorts, besides Sea Turtle, which frequently come ashore on the sandy Bays in their seasons to lay their Eggs. Here are also both Land-crabs and Sea-crabs good store, and other Shell-fish, viz. Craw-fish, Shrimps, and Prawns. Here is one sort of small Fish much like an Anchovy, both in shape and size, which is very good pickled. There are other sorts of small Fish, which I know not the names of. One sort of them comes in great •hoals near the shore, and these the Fishermen with their Nets take so plentifully as to load their Boats with them. Among these they generally take a great many Shrimps in their Nets, which they •arry ashore mixt together as they take them, and make Balachaun with them. 
  
 Page  28 
 [year 1688] Balachaun is a composition of a strong favour; yet a very delightsom Dish to the Natives of this Country. To make it, they throw the mixture of Shrimps and small Fish into a sort of weak pickle made with Salt and Water, and put it into a tight earthen Vessel or Jar. The pickle being thus weak, it keeps not the Fish firm and hard, neither is it probably so designed, for the Fish are never gutted. Therefore in a short time they turn all to a mash in the Vessel; and when they have lain thus a good while, so that the Fish is reduced to a Pap, they then draw off the Liquor into fresh Jars, and preserve it for use. The masht Fish that remains behind is called Balachaun, and the liquor pour ' d off is called Nuke-mum. The poor People eat the Balachaun with their Rice.  ' Tis rank scented, yet the taste is not altogether unpleasant; but rather savory, after one is a little used to it. The Nuke-mum is of a pale brown colour, inclining to grey; and pretty clear. It is also very savory and used as a good sauce for Fowls, not only by the Natives, but also by many Europeans, who esteem it equal with Soy. I have been told that Soy is made partly with a fishy composition, and it seems most likely by the taste: tho a Gentleman of my acquaintance, who was very intimate with one that sailed often from Tonquin to Japan, from whence the true Soy comes, told me, that it was made only with Wheat, and a sort of Beans mixt with Water and Salt. 
  
 Their way of Fishing differs little from ours: in the Rivers they take some of their Fish with Hook and Line, others with Nets of several sorts. At the Mouths of the Rivers they set Nets against the Stream or Tide. These have two long Wings opening on each side the Mouth of the Net, to guide the Fish into it; where passing through a narrow neck, they are caught in a bag at the far|ther end. 
  
 Page  29
[year 1688] Where the Rivers mouth is so wide, that the wing of the Net will not reach from side to side, as at Batsha particularly it will not, there they sup|ply that defect, with long slender Canes, which they stick upright near one another in a row: for on both sides of the River, when the tide runs strong (which is the time that the Fish are mo|ving) the limber Canes make such a rattling by striking against each other, that thereby the Fish are scared from thence towards the Mouth of the Net, in the middle of the stream. Farther up the River, they have Nets made square like a great sheet. This sort hath two long Poles laid across each other. At this crossing of the Poles a long Rope is fastned; and the Net hangs down in a bag by its corners from them. To manage it there is a substantial post, set upright and firm in the Ri|ver; and the top of it may be 8 or 10 foot above the water. On the top of this post there is a Mortice made to receive a long pole, that lies athwart like the Beam of a Balance: to the heavier end of which they tie the Rope, which holds the Net; and to the other end another Rope to pull up the Net on occasion. The Fishermen sink it with Stones to the Rivers bottom, and when they see any Fish come over it, one suddenly pulls the Rope at the opposite end of the Beam, and heaves Net and Fish out of the Water. They take a great deal of Fish this way: and sometimes they use Drag-Nets, which go quite across, and sweep the Ri|ver. 
  
 In the stagnant Ponds, such as the Mandarins have commonly about their Houses, they go in and trouble the water with their feet, till  ' tis all mud|dy and thick: and as the Fish rise to the furface they take what they please with small Nets, fastned to a hoop, at the end of a pole. 
  
 Page  30 
 [year 1688] For all these sorts of provision there are Markets duly kept all over Tonquin one in the week, in a neighbourhood of 4 or 5 Villages; and held at each of them successively in its order: so that the same Village has not the Market returned to it till 4 or 5 weeks after. These Markets are abundantly more stor ' d with Rice (as being their chief subsistence, especially of the poorer sort) than either with Flesh or Fish, yet wants there not for Pork, and young Pigs good store, Ducks and Hens, plenty of Eggs, Fish great and small, fresh and salted Balachaun and Nuke-Mum; with all sorts of Roots, Herbs, and Fruits, even in these Country Markets. But at Cachao, where there are Markets kept every day, they have besides these, Beef of Bullocks, Buffa|loes Flesh, Goats Flesh, Horse Flesh, Cats and Dogs, (as I have been told) and Locusts. 
  
 They dress their food very cleanly, and make savory: for which they have several ways un|known in Europe; but they have many sorts of dishes, that would turn the Stomach of a Stranger, which yet they themselves like very well, as par|ticularly, a dish of raw Pork, which is very cheap and common. This is only Pork cut and minced very small, fat and lean together; which being afterwards made up in balls, or rolls like Sausages, and prest very hard together, is then neatly wrapt up in clean Leaves, and without more ado, served up to the Table. Raw Beef is another dish, much esteemed at Cachao. When they kill a Bullock they singe the hair off with Fire, as we singe Bacon-Hogs in England. Then they open it; and while the Flesh is yet hot, they cut good Collops from off the lean parts, and put them into a very tart Vine|gar, where it remains 3 or 4 hours longer, till it is sufficiently soaked, and then, without more trouble, they take it out, and eat it with great delight. As for Horse-flesh, I know not whether 
 Page  31 
 [year 1688] they kill any purposely for the Shambles; or whe|ther they only do it, when they are not likely •o live; as I have seen them do their working Bullocks at Galicia in Old Spain; where the Cattel falling down with labour, and being so poor and tired that they cannot rise, they are slaughtered, and sent to Market; and I think I never eat worse Beef than at the Groin. The Horse-flesh comes to Market at Cachao very frequently, and is as much esteemed as Beef. Elephants they eat also; and the Trunk of this Beast is an acceptable present for a Nobleman, and that too tho '  the Beast dyes with Age or Sickness. For here are but few wild Elephants, and those so shy, that they are not easily taken. But the King having a great number of tame Elephants, when one of these dyes,  ' tis given to the poor, who presently fetch away the Flesh, but the Trunk is cut in pieces, and presented to the Mandarins. Dogs and Cats are killed purpose|ly for the Shambles, and their Flesh is much e|steemed by people of the best fashion, as I have been credibly informed. Great yellow Frogs also are much admired, especially when they come fresh out of the Pond. They have many other such choice dishes: and in all the Villages, at any time of the day, be it Market day or not, there are several to be sold by poor people, who make it their Trade. The most common sorts of Cookeries, next to boiled Rice, is to dress little bits of Pork, spitted 5 or 6 of them at once on a small skiver, and roasted. In the Markets also, and daily in every Village, there are Women sitting in the Streets, with a Pipkin over a small Fire, full of Chau, as they call it, a sort of very ordinary Tea, of a reddish brown colour, and  ' tis their ordinary drink. 
  
 The Kingdom of Tonquin is in general healthy enough, especially in the dry season, when also it is very delightsom. For the seasons of the year 
 Page  32 
 [year 1688] at Tonquin and all the Countries between the Tro|picks, are distinguished into Wet and Dry, as pro|perly as others are into Winter and Summer: But as the alteration from Winter to Summer, and vice versa is not made of a sudden, but with the interchangeable Weather of Spring and Autumn; so also towards the end of the dry season, there are some gentle showers now and then, that precede the violent wet months; and again toward the end of these, several fair days that introduce the dry time. These seasons are generally much alike at the same time of the year in all places of the Torrid Zone, on the same side of the Equator: but for 2 or 3 degrees on each side of it, the weather is more mixt and uncertain, (tho '  inclining to the wet extreme) and is often contrary to that which is then settled on the same side of the Equator more toward the Tropick. So that even when the wet season is set in, in the Northern parts of the Torrid Zone, it may yet be dry weather for 2 or 3 degrees North of the Line: and the same may be said of the con|trary Latitudes and Seasons. This I speak with respect to the dryness or moisture of Countries in the Torrid Zone: but it may also hold good of their Heat or Cold, generally: for as to all these qualities there is a further difference arises from the make or situation of the Land, or other acciden|tal causes, besides what depends on the respective latitude or regard to the Sun. Thus the Bay of Campeachy in the West Indies, and that of Bengal in the East, in much the same latitude, are ex|ceeding hot and moist; and whether their situa|tion, being very low Countries, and the scarcity and faintness of the Sea-breezes, as in most Bays, may not contribute hereunto, I leave others to judge. Yet even as to the Latitudes of these places, lying near the Tropicks, they are generally upon that account alone more inclined to great Heats, 
 Page  33 
 [year 1688] than places near the Equator. This is what I have experienc ' d in many places in such Latitudes both in the East and West-Indies, that the hottest parts of the World are these near the Tropicks, especially 3 or 4 Degrees within them; sensibly hotter than under the Line it self. Many reasons may be assign ' d for this, beside the accidental ones from the make of the particular Countries, Tropical Winds, or the like. For the longest day at the Equator never exceeds 12 Hours, and the Night is always of the same length: But near the Tropicks the longest day is about 13 hours and an half; and an hour and an half being also taken from the Night, what with the length of the day, and the shortness of the night, there is a difference of three hours: which is very considerable. Be|sides which, at such places as are about 3 Degrees within the Tropicks, or in the Lat. of 20 Deg. N. the Sun comes within 2 or 3 degrees of the Ze|nith in the beginning of May; and having past the Zenith, goes not above 2 or 3 degrees beyond it, before it returns and passeth the Zenith once more; and by this means is at least 3 Months within 4 degrees of the Zenith: so that they have the Sun in a manner over their Heads from the be|ginning of May, till the latter end of July. Where|as when the Sun comes under the Line, in March or September, it immediately posts away to the North or the South, and is not 20 days in passing from 3 degrees on one side, to 3 degrees on the other side the Line. So that by his small stay there, the heat cannot be answerable to what it is near the Tropick, where he so long continues in a manner Vertical at Noon, and is so much longer above the Horrizon each particular day, with the intervening of a shorter Night. 
  
 But to return to Tonquin. During the wet Months there  ' tis excessive hot, especially when|ever 
 Page  34 
 [year 1688] the Sun breaks out of the Clouds, and there is then but little Wind stirring: And I have been told by a Gentleman who lived there many Years, that he thought it was the hottest place that ever he was in, tho '  he had been in many other parts of India. And as to the Rains, it has not the least share of them, tho '  neither altogether the greatest of what I have met with in the Torrid Zone; and even in the same Latitude, and on the same side of the Equator. The wet Season begins here the lat|ter end of April, or the beginning of May; and holds till the latter end of August, in which time are very violent Rains, some of many hours, others of two or three Days continuance. Yet are not these Rains without some considerable intervals of fair Weather, especially toward the beginning or end of the Season.
Page  125 
 [year 1688] Pine apples, &c. Of all these sorts of Fruits, I think the Mangastan is without compare the most delicate. This Fruit is in shape much like the Pomgranate, but a great deal less. The outside rind or shell is a little thicker than that of the Pomgranate, but softer, yet more brittle; and is of a dark red. The inside of the shell is of a deep crimson colour. Within this shell the Fruit appears in 3 or 4 Cloves, about the bigness of the top of a man ' s thumb. These will easily seperate each from the other; they are as white as Milk, very soft and juicy, inclosing a small black Stone or Kernel. The outside rind is said to be binding, and therefore many when they eat the Fruit, which is very delicious, do save the rind or shell, drying it and preserving it, to give to such as have Fluxes. In a small Book, entituled, A new Voyage to the East-Indies, there is mention made of Mangastans, among the Fruits of Java: but the Author is mistaken, in that he compares it to a Sloe, in shape, and taste: Yet I remember there is such a sort of Fruit at Achin; and believe by the description he gives of it, it may probably be the same that he calls the Mangastan, tho '  nothing like the true Mangastan. 
  
 The Pumple-nose is a large Fruit like a Citron, with a very thick tender uneven rind. The inside is full of Fruit: It grows all in cloves as big as a small Barly-corn, and these are all full of juice, as an Orange or a Lemon, tho '  not growing in such partitions.  ' Tis of a pleasant taste, and tho '  there are of them in other parts of the East-Indies, yet these at Achin are accounted the best. They are ripe commonly about Christmas, and they are so much esteemed, that English men carry them from hence to Fort St George, and make Presents of them to their Friends there. The other Fruits mentioned here, are most of them described by me in my first Volume. 
  
 Page  126 
 [year 1688] The eatable Roots of this Country are Yams and Potatoes, &c. but their chiefest bread kind is Rice. The Natives have lately planted some quanities of this Grain, and might produce much more were they so disposed, the Land being so fruitful. They have here a sort of Herb or Plant called Ganga, or Bang. I never saw any but once, and that was at some distance from me. It ap|peared to me like Hemp, and I thought it had been Hemp, till I was told to the contrary. It is re|ported of this Plant, that if it is infused in any Liquor, it will stupify the brains of any person that drinks thereof; but it operates diversly, ac|cording to the constitution of the person. Some it makes sleepy, some merry, putting them into a Laughing fit, and others it makes mad: but after 2 or 3 hours they come to themselves again. I never saw the effects of it on any person, but have heard much discourse of it. What other use this Plant may serve for I know not: but I know it is much esteemed here, and in other places too whither it is transported. 
  
 This Country abounds also with Medicinal Drugs and Herbs, and with variety of Herbs for the Pot. The chief of their Drugs is Camphire, of which there are quanities found on this Island, but most of it either on the borders of this King|dom to the Southward, or more remote still, without the precincts of it. This that is found on the Island Sumatra is commonly sent to Japan to be refined, and then brought from thence pure, and transported whither the Merchants please after|terwards. I know that here are several sorts of Me|dicinal Herbs made use of by the Natives, who go often a simpling, seeming to understand their Virtues much, and making great use of them: but this being wholly out of my Sphere, I can give no account of them; and tho '  here are plenty of Pot-Herbs, 
 Page  127 
 [year 1688] yet I know the names of none, but Onions, of which they have great abundance, and of a very good sort, but small. 
  
 There are many other very profitable Commodi|ties on this Island: but some of them are more pe|culiar to other parts of it than Achin, especially Pepper. All the Island abounds with that Spice, except only this North West end; at least so much of it, as is comprehended within the Kingdom of Achin. Whether this defect is through the negli|gence or laziness of these People, I know not. 
  
 Gold also is found, by report, in many parts of this Island: but the Kingdom of Achin is at present most plentifully stored with it. Neither does any place in the East-Indies, that I know of, yield such quantities of it as this Kingdom. I have never been at Japan, and therefore can make no estimate of the great Riches of that Kingdom: but here I am certain there is abundance of it. 
  
 The Land Animals of this Country are Deer, Hogs, Elephants, Goats, Bullocks, Buffaloes, Horses, Porcupines, Monkeys, Squirrils, Guanoes, Lizards, Snakes, &c. Here are also abundance of Ants of several sorts, and Woodlice, called by the English in the East-Indies White Ants. The Elephants that I saw here were all tame: yet  ' tis reported there are some wild; but I judge not many, if any at all. In some places there are plenty of Hogs; they are all wild, and commonly very poor. At some times of the Year, when the wild Fruits fall from the Trees, they are indifferent fat, or at least fleshy: and then they are sweet and good: they are very numerous; and whether for that reason, or scarcity of Food, it is very rare to find them fat. The Goats are not very many, neither are there many Bullocks: but the Savannahs swarm with Buffaloes, belonging to some or other of the Inhabi|tants, 
 Page  128 
 [year 1688] who milk them and eat them; but don ' t work them, so far as I saw. The Horses of this Country are but small, yet sprightly; and some|times they are transported hence to the Coast of Coromandel. The Porcupines and Squirrels are ac|counted good food by the English; but how they are esteemed by the Natives I know not. 
 
Now the reason why Europeans do account the dry Season Summer, and the wet Season Winter, is because the dry Season is their Harvest time, espe|cially in our Plantations, where we chiefly make Sugar; for then the Canes are as yellow as Gold. They have then indeed less juice, but that little there is, is very sweet. Whereas in the wet Season, tho '  
 Page  82 
  
 the Canes are ripe, and come to their Maturity; yet do they not yield such quantities of Sugar, nei|ther is it so good, tho '  the pains in boiling it be also greater. Therefore in Northern Climates, as all our Plantations are in, they commonly begin to work about making of Sugar at Christmas, after the dry Season has brought the Canes to a good per|fection. But in South Climates, as on the Coast of Brazil, they begin to work in July. Some Pla|ces there are in the North Latitudes also near the Line, where the Weather bears time with the Sea|sons in South Lat. as at Suranam, which tho '  it is in North Lat. yet are the Seasons there the same as in South Latitudes; but I know not such another in|stance any where. And tho '  the dry Season is the time to gather in the Canes, and the wet Season to plant, yet are they not so limited as to make use only of these Seasons for either, but do it chiefly for their best convenience; for they may plant at any time of the Year, and that with good success, especially after a moderate shower of Rain, which often happens even in the dry Seasons. 
  
 But I must proceed. 
  
 I have said before, that Bays have greater quan|tities of Rain than Head-Lands. 
  
 The Bay of Campeachy is a good Instance of this, for the Rains are very great there, especially in the Months of July and August. On the contrary, the Coast from Cape Catoch, to Cape Cond•cedo, which lies more exposed to the Trade, has not near the Rains as the Bay of Campeachy hath. 
  
 The Bay of Honduras also is very wet, and all that bending Coast from Cape Gratia de Dios, even to Carthagena. But on the Coast of Caraccos, and about Cape La Vela, where the Breezes are more brisk, the Weather is more moderate. Whereas in those little Bays between, there is still a difference: For in the Bay of Mericaya, which lies a little to 
 Page  83 
  
 the East of Cape La Vela, there is much more Rain than at or near the Cape. 
  
 The Bay of Panama also will furnish us with a proof of this, by its Immoderate Rains; especially the South side of it, even from the Gulph of St. Michael, to Cape St. Francis; the Rains there are from April till November; but in June, July and August, they are most violent. 
  
 There are many small Bays also West from the Bay of Panama, which have their shares of these wet Seasons, as the Gulph of Dulce, Caldera Bay, Amapala, &c. but to the West of that, where the Coast runs more plain and even, there are not such wet Sea|sons; yet many times very violent Tornadoes. 
 
