From hence it may be easily inferr ' d, that the Ap∣petite is the seat of the Inclinations, in regard that is the onely part of the Soul, which may be moved. And whereas there are three sorts of Appetite, the Will, the Sensitive appetite, and the Natural appetite, each of them hath such inclinations as are suitable and conformable thereto: that is to say, the spiritual are in the Will, as those which Arts and Sciences leave in the mind; the Sensible are in the Sensitive appetite, as those which a man hath to the passions of the sen∣sitive Soul; and those which are purely corporeal make their aboad in the Natural appetite, such as are those which Nature hath for certain motions of the humours in diseases, and for all the actions, for which the organs are design ' d. For, even before the parts are in a capacity and condition to act, the Soul hath an inclination to the functions, which they ought to per∣form. Whence it comes, that a young Ramm runs his head against things before his horns are in sight; a young wild Boar will offer to bite, before his tusks are grown out; and Birds endeavour to flie, though though they are not fully fledg ' d. Yet are we to make this observation by the way, that the inclinations of one Appetite are many times communicated to ano∣ther: For the Inclination a man hath to passions is at last entertain ' d into the Will, and those of the Natural appetite commonly spread themselves into the Sen∣sitive, as the examples we have alledged sufficiently evince. 
 Art. 4. How Inclination is to be defin ' d. FRom all these considerations, me thinks it were no hard matter to frame an exact definition of Inclination, which may be this. Inclination is a cer∣tain disposition deeply rooted in the Appetite, which re∣ceives from it a bent towards certain objects acceptable thereto. But to speak more significantly, we are to acknowledge that these Metaphorical kinds of ex∣pression are not proper to define things, and the words of bending, or bowing, or weighing, whereby Inclination is commonly defin ' d, cannot be properly said of any thing, but bodies, and are not to be attri∣buted to the Soul. Let us endeavour then to find out some other expedient, to clear up this matter, and to look after some other notions and terms, which may be more proper to the thing, now under our exami∣nation. 
 Art. 5. Whence proceeds the Disposition, wherein the Inclination consists. OUt of all controversie then it is, that the Ap∣petite hath certain motions, whereto it is com∣monly more inclin ' d then to others, and it may be said, that it hath a disposition to perform them, and that the said disposition consists in the facility, which it meets with, in the performance of them. The question then is, to know, whence it receives this disposition and facility: for it cannot proceed from the weight, sci∣tuation, figure, or any other circumstances of that kind, which cause, in Bodies, a disposition and facility to move themselves. 
 To discover this secret, it is to be laid down as granted, that the Inclination is a disposition, and a fixt and permanent facility, that happens to the Ap∣petite; and consequently it is necessary, that the cause which produces it, should also be durable and per∣manent. Now all the causes of that order which may be imagin ' d, as to the present enquiry, are reducible either to the disposition of the organ of the appetite, or to the habit, which it may have acquired, or to the images which are preserv ' d in the memory, and frame the knowledge precedent to its motion: for these things onely are permanent, and may cause that disposition and constant facility, wherein the inclinati∣on consists. It might then be affirmed, that, if the Spirits are the organs, and immediate seat of the Ap∣petite, as we shall have occasion to shew hereafter, it must follow, that according as they are more subtile or more gross, they are the more or the less asily mov ' d, and that the Appetite, which moves along with them, receives its motion with greater slowness or activity. And that hence it proceeds, there are some constitu∣tions which are so changeable, love with so much fa∣cility, and desire things with so much earnestness; and on the contrary, there are others, whose Souls are so heavie, that it is almost impossible to stirr them, and prosecute the attainment of their desires with a lethargick supinity and negligence. 
 But this reason is not general for all the Inclinati∣ons; for, besides that there are some which proceed from the instinct, and have no dependance on the qua∣lities of the spirits, there are some also in the Will, which is not engag ' d to any organ; nay, we acknow∣ledge, that there are such even in Angels, in whom it is out of all dispute, that neither that cause, nor any other corporeal disposition, can have any place. The same thing is to be said concerning the habit, which the Appetite may have contracted, since the habit is a quality acquired by many act ons, and that there are some natural inclinations, which are derived from the very birth. 
 If these things be as they are laid down, there re∣main only the Images, preserv ' d in the memory, which may be the general and immediate cause of this dispo∣sition and facility, wherein the Inclination consists. 
 Art. 6. How the motions of the Appetite are wrought. TO understand how this is done, we are to ob∣serve, that the Appetite, what order soever it be of, is a blind power, which, of it self, hath not any knowledge, but suffers it self to be guided by another faculty, that hath the priviledge of discerning, whe∣ther the things are good or evil, and afterwards to command the Appetite, to move conformably to the judgment it hath pass ' d of them. This Faculty is called the Practick Ʋnderstanding, in the Superiour part; and in the Sensitive, it hath the name of the Estimative faculty. And there is not any motion wrought in these two parts of the Soul, which is not preceded by the judgment of one of these two fa∣culties. 
 The said faculties have also this further property, that they do not pass their judgment according to the nature of the things, but according to the Sentiment they have of them. For it somtimes happens, that those things may be profitable, which they judge evil, and, on the contrary, those may be evil, which, according to their judgment, seem good. Nor is this to be wondred at at all, in as much as Good and Evil are of things relative, which yet are not known to be such, but according to the comparison made by the Soul between them; things which have no particular species to smite the Senses, as all sensible qualities have; and which are not known, but onely by the Images which these faculties frame of themselves, without borrowing of them elsewhere. Whence it comes, that it is said in the Scholes, the knowledge of them is attain ' d, per species non sensatas. In a word, what is good to one, is not such to another, nay, one and the same person thinks that delightfull to him now, which, a little before, he had thought trouble∣some; whence it may be easily seen, that Good and Evil depend on the opinion conceiv ' d thereof. 
 To find out now whence the opinion may derive this knowledge, and what obliges it to judg that things are good or evil, is a busines that requires a more par∣ticular consideration, than to be fully determin ' d here. Let it then suffice, that we give this satisfaction at present, That it is the Instinct, experience, &amp; the true or false ratiocination which it makes of things. For, upon the knowledge it hath of the Temperament, and the parts organically subservient thereto; upon that which it receives from the conceit of its own strength or weakness; and lastly, upon that, which proceeds from the defect or abundance wherein it is it judges, that the things are conformable, or contrary to it, ad∣vantageous or hurtfull, in a word, good, or bad. 
 Art. 7. Of the Judgments of the said Faculties. AS soon then as either of these two Faculties hath thus fram ' d to it self an Idaea of Good and Evil, it ordinarily makes two judgments; according to the former whereof, it is convinc ' d, that the Good ought to be persu ' d, and the Evil avoided, and this is that which is simply called Practick. By the second, it effe∣ctually commands the Appetite to persue, or to avoid▪ and accordingly it is called in the Schools actually Pra∣tick, Practice practicum. Thereupon the Appetite moves, commanding the motive vertue, which is in the members to perform the motions necessary, either to attain the Good, or avoid the Evil. 
 All these actions are performed consequently, and commonly wrought in a moment; but sometimes they are also distinct and separate, and that especially in Man. For the understanding may know a thing to be good, yet without judging that it ought to be persu ' d; and many times it judges that a thing is to be persu ' d, and yet does not order the will to do it. Nay, it often happens, that, after all these judgments, the Will, which is at liberty, follows not those or∣ders, and may remain immovable, or make a contrary motion. But in other Animals, the Practick Judg∣ment, and the motion of the Appetite, cannot be se∣parated, and as soon as the Estimative faculty hath known a thing to be good, there is a necessity, that, in the same moment, it should judge, and command the Appetite to persue it; and this latter punctually obeys, and never fails moving, conformably to those judgments. 
 There remains then onely the command, which the Appetite lays on the motive vertue of the members, that may be suspended. For we commonly find, that a Beast desires some thing, which it dares not take, by reason of the awe it is in. In which case, the Appetite moves and frames the desire, but it proceeds no further, suspending the concurrent action of the members. 
 However it be then, it may be easily inferr ' d, from all we have already delivered, not onely, that the Appetite moves conformably to the Practick Judgment, that is to say, that its motions are strong or weak, according as the Estimative faculty does strongly or weakly command it to perform them; but also, that the Practick Judgment answers the No∣tion which the Estimavite faculty hath fram ' d to it self of the good or evil, and that the command is more or less pressing, according to the imagination it frames to it self of higher or lower degrees of goodness or evil in the things. For a greater good requires a more imperious command then a lesser, and such a com∣mand raises a passion so much the more violent. 
 Art. 8. That the Images which are in the memory, are the causes of Inclination. NOw, if the motions of the Appetite have this dependance on the judgments of the Estima∣tive faculty, it must follow, that the dispositions, which make it inclinable to those motions, should also have some relation to the said judgments. Yet shall not this relation be to those, which the estimative faculty frames to it self when it knows; for they are transient, and the Inclination is a permanent disposition; but it shall be to those, which are preserv ' d in the memory, as we said before. Of these, there are two kinds; for they are either Natural, or Accidental. The natural con∣sist in the Images which Nature imprints in the Souls of Animals at their coming into the World, and this is that which is called Instinct, as we have shewn in our Treatise, concerning the Knowledge of Animals. The acquired or accidental consist also in the Images, which remain in the memory, after the action of the Estimative faculty. Under this name I comprehend also the Practick Understanding. 
 Now, as these two sorts of Images serve for Mo∣dels to the estimative faculty, in order to the framing of its Judgments, according as they shall be more expressive, and have a greater representation of the goodness or evil of the objects; so will they be more proper to raise, in the Estimative faculty, such com∣mands as shall be more pressing, and in the Appetite, greater motions. 
 In the mean time, it is certain, that the Natural are perfectly representative, in as much as they are of Nature ' s own framing, in order to the conservati∣on of the Animal, and that they are the more deeply graven in the Soul, to the end they might not be blotted out. But the acquired are but superficial, and if they be not often renewed, they are so lost or weakned, that they cannot make a perfect represen∣tation of things.  ' Tis true, there are certain objects, which upon the first sight make so strong an impres∣sion in the Soul, that the species thereof are pre∣serv ' d a long time in the memory, and that the first apprehension, which is had of them, hath as great an influence upon him, as many several apprehensi∣ons often reiterated would have, upon some other oc∣casion. Hence it comes, that the first sight of a very beautifull person, many times, raises a Love which continues many years. Upon this account, it is said commonly in the Schools, that there are certain acts, which, alone, and upon the first performance of them, may produce habits. But otherwise, that is, those onely excepted, there is a necessity, that the Images, which the Soul frames, and continues in the me∣mory, should be often renew ' d, and, as it were, re∣ceive a second touch, by several subsequent reflecti∣ons, that they may be perfectly expressive and re∣presentative. For as often as ever the Soul makes an apprehension, or a commemoration of some object, so often does she frame an Image thereof to her self; in regard that, by apprehending or re∣membring, she acts, and that she can have no other action, then the production of Images; which Images, joyn ' d with those that are in the memory, render them stronger, and more lively, much after the same manner, as the colours, which are often touched over; as we have shewn in the place before alledged. 
 Art. 9. That the disposition and facility of the Appe∣tite ' s motion proceeds from the same Images. THese Images therefore which are in the memo∣ry, and are accordingly perfectly expressive, are those, from which, the disposition and facility, which the Appetite hath to motion toward certain objects, does proceed. 
 And certainly, it may be affirm ' d, that the Soul, which finds her self stored with these Images, and sees her self in a condition to produce the apprehen∣sions necessary to her, is raised up to a certain confi∣dence in her self; and, without any reflection of hers thereupon, she is sensible of her own strength and courage. And as a man who hath a vigorons body, much wealth, or is of noble extraction, assumes a confidence in himself, and is at all times in a condi∣tion to undertake things conformably to his power, though he thinks not of it: in like manner, the Soul does the same, when she hath the Images in a readiness, in order to the making of her judgments; she hath all her faculties in a disposition fit to act; and, when she is in action, it may be easily perceiv ' d she was prepar ' d thereto. 
 And thence it will not be hard to judge, that the Instinct, the Temperament, the Habits, &amp;c. cause the inclinations, because all these things presuppose Images perfectly expressive. For those of the In∣stinct are strong and deep, as we have already shewn; those of the Habits ought to be often reiterated: and the Temperament, the Conformation of the parts, kind of life, &amp;c. which the Soul knows, and is sensible of, have the same effect on the Images, as the Habit. Whence it may be inferr ' d, that, in all these the Images are perfectly representative, the Appetite is in a condition to move, as soon as the Practick understanding, or the Estimative facul∣ty, shall present them to it. And here does con∣sist the facility which it hath to be inclin ' d thereto, as the Inclination consists in that facility, as we have already affirmed. These things thus laid down, we may define the Inclination, by proper notions and terms, thus: The Inclination is a permanent dispo∣sition, and a facility, attain ' d by a long progress of time, which the Appetite hath to move towards certain objects, which are acceptable and delightfull thereto. 
 SECT. 2. What are the Causes of the Inclinations. Art. 1. The several distinctions of the said causes. THus farr have we discoursed concerning the nature, object, and seat of the Inclinations; we now come to an examination of the causes thereof. For, though we have already spoken of the principal cause, and that which is the immediate source of them, to wit, the Images, which are preserv ' d in the memory, yet are there yet remaining some others, which, albeit not so nearly adjacent to the Inclination, are nevertheless, in a certain degree, ne∣cessary thereto; nay, they are such, as, being better known, and more manifest, will accordingly give a greater light to a thing so obscure as this is.
Besides therefore that secret and immediate Cause we have treated of before, there are two other kinds, to wit, Next causes and Remote, and both of them are either Natural, or Moral. 
 Of the Natural, the Next are, the Instinct, the Temperament, and the Conformation of the parts. The Remote are, the Starrs, the Climate, difference of Age, of Sustenance, and indispositions of the body. 
 The Moral are, nobleness, or meanness, of Ex∣traction, Riches and Poverty, Power and Subjection, good and bad Fortune, and kind of Life, which com∣prehends Arts, Sciences, Habits, and Counsels, Ex∣amples, Punishments, and Rewards. For all these things raise particular inclinations, by disposing the Soul, to judge, whether the things are good, and givng her a bent towards them. We are now to con∣sider how this is done. 
 Art. 2. That the Instinct is one of the causes of the In∣clinations. AS to the Instinct, there is no doubt, but that it must be numbred among the said Causes, when it shall be found, that it consists in the Images, which have their birth with the Animal, in order to its appre∣hension of those things, which are necessary for its conservation, and whereof he cannot come to the knowledg by the Senses. For as these Images are per∣fectly expressive, as being perfectly present to the Soul; so, upon all occasions, they are the Sollicitours and remembrancers of the Estimative faculty, that it would propose them to the Appetite, and raise, in that, as we said before, the inclination it hath to the action, which they command should be done. 
 Thus is it, that the Soul apprehends, and is in∣clin ' d to the functions, whereto she is design ' d, and to a search after most of those things, which are ne∣cessary for her. For thence proceeds the inclination which Birds have to flie, Fish to swim, Men to dis∣course; and which all living Creatures have, to seek out the sustenance and remedies, which they know are naturally fit and profitable for them. 
 Art. 3. That the Temperament is one of the causes of the Inclinations. AS concerning the Temperament, it is unanimous∣ly acknowledged by all, to be the most ge∣neral, and most eminent cause of the Inclinations; that, according to that quality of the humours which is predominant in the body, men are inclin ' d to such and such passions, that such as are subject to Me∣lancholy are naturally sad, and ingenious; the Cho∣lerick, active and angry; the Sanguine, jovial and affable; the Flegmatick, stupid and slothful. As to Climates, there are some, in which men are more in∣genious, and more civiliz ' d; in others, more dull and savage, according to the quality of the air they breath, and which produces that effect, by the impres∣sion it makes upon the Temperament. Lastly, that the very Animals themselves are fearful, or ventu∣rous, docile or untractable, proportionably to the coldness or heat, the thickness or subtility of their blood. 
 The reason, for which the Temperament is the cause of all these effects, is deduced from the secret knowledge which the soul hath of the instruments whereof she makes use in her actions; for being so neerly united or joyned to them, she knows the weakness or strength thereof, and consequently is soon satisfi ' d what she may, and what she may not do by their means. 
 Now though this knowledge be secret, yet does it not proceed from the instinct, for the instinct is a clear and distinct knowledge, which is be∣stow ' d only on the species, and consequently ought to be common to all the individuals that are under it, whereas this knowledge is different in every one of them, and is withall obscure and confused. For the Soul hath but a confused knowledge of choler: and thence it comes, that she represents it to her self in dreams, by certain Images, which do not absolute∣ly resemble it, but have only a certain conformity to it, such as are those of fire, fighting, bright co∣lours, &amp;c. She does the same thing in Melancholy, which she figures to her self by spectres, obscurity, and inextricable disturbances; and so proportionably of the others, as we shall press more particularly in the Treatise of the TEMPERAMENTS. 
 Now this knowledge, how confus ' d soever it may be, is sufficient to instruct the soul, how far she may be able to act, or not to act, by the assistance of these humours. For it teaches her, by the experience she makes of it ever and anon, that choler is an active and unconstant humour, and that it may be serviceable to her, in assaulting, fighting with, and destroying what∣ever injures her: That, on the contrary, Melancho∣ly is not easily stirr ' d, troublesome, and opposite to the principles of life; and so of the rest. And upon this knowledge, the Estimative faculty frames its judgment, conformably to the effects produced by these humours, which it keeps in the memory, and every foot, refreshes by new apprehensions, by that means rendring them perfectly representative, and capable of producing the inclinati ns, which we com∣monly observe therein. 
 Art. 4. That the Conformation of the parts is a cause of the Inclination. AS to the Conformation of the parts, I do not think any body doubts, but that it is a certain sign of many Inclinations, in as much as it is observable, that, without any art, but only, by the bare inspection of the lineaments of the face, the humour and thoughts of some persons may be, in some measure, discovered; That those men, in whom there is a certain resem∣blance to certain other Animals, are inclinable to the same passions as they are; That such as deal in Hor∣ses, and Huntsmen, consult it very exactly, that they may thereby judge of the docility and tractability of Horses and Dogs; And lastly, that it is come into a Proverb, affirming, that those are not to be trusted, who are guilty of any strange default or miscarriage of Nature. 
 But I am further to add, that this Conformation of the parts is not only the sign, but is also the cause of those inclinations, for it gives the soul a bent to certain actions, as the Temperament doth. Yet is it not to be said, that the Conformation is the effect of the Temperament, and consequently, that it does not denote the inclinations upon any other ground, then that it denotes the Temperament, which is the true cause thereof, and not it. For though this may be true, in many occasions, and that it is certain also, that ordinarily the parts are lengthned, contracted, and assume several figures, according to the quality of the predominant humour; yet does it very often happen, that the Conformation agrees not with the Temperament, and that, for instance, a cold com∣plexion may be consistent with a Conformation, which seems to denote heat. Accordingly the heart and brain are sometimes too great or too little in the same Temperament; which must needs cause a notable difference in the passions, over which those two parts have any power. Add to this, how many cholerick persons are there who have thick and short noses; and how many subject to melancholy have them long and sharp, contrary to the nature of those humours? Who would affirm, that all the Tartars and all the Chineses are of the same Temperament, because all the former have large faces, and that the latter are all flat-nos ' d? Are there not some crea∣tures of different species, that have the same Tempe∣rament, and yet the figure of their parts is wholy dif∣ferent? 
 To be short, it is not the Temperament which pe∣netrates the veines and arteries which makes the ar∣ticulation of the bones, divides the fingers; and builds up that admirable structure of the parts of every animal. But it is the formative vertue is the Archi∣tect, which the soul imployes to build up a body, such as may be fit to perform the actions, whereto it is designed; and whereas this vertue alwaies endea∣vours to make the Animal it frames, like unto that which produces it, if this latter have parts of such a largness and figure the aforesaid vertue, which bears the character of it, alwaies frames the like, if it be not obstructed. It is true, that many times the Temperament opposes its design, and hinders the parts from receiving that figure, which the formative vertue had design ' d to give them: but many times also, it does not oppose, but leaves it to act, according to the measures it hath taken. Hence it comes, that the imagination of Women with child causes it to change the figure of the Embryo ' s parts, so as that the Temperament makes no opposition: Thus the Stars imprint on the body such marks as are not correspon∣dent to the natural complexion thereof, &amp;c. 
 Art. 5. How Figure acts. ALl this presuppos ' d, the next question is, to know, how Figure, which is a barren quality, and does not act at all, may cause inclinations. Nor is it to be imagin ' d▪ that it produces them by an a∣ctive vertue: for the Temperament it self, though it have that vertue, yet does not employ it upon the soul, which is not susceptible of material qualities: there being not any thing, that can really either warm or cool the soul. So that both the Temperament and Conformation of the parts, are only occasional causes and motives, which excite her to the perfor∣mance of her actions. When she hath taken cogni∣zance of the heat which is predominant in the body; she frames her judgements conformably to the effects, which she is able to produce, and afterwards disposes her self to set the organs on work, according to the design she hath taken. The same thing is to be said of Figure, she knows which is, which is not pro∣per for certain functions, she afterwards makes her judgment of them, and lastly sollicits the Appetite to move conformably to the resolution she hath taken. 
 Now as there are some figures, which are fit for the motion of natural bodies; others, opposite there∣to; so is it certain, that every organicall function hath a certain figure, that is suitable to it, and with∣out which it cannot be otherwise then imperfectly performed. Thence it comes, that every part, nay every species of living creature, hath a different fi∣gure, because the functions of it are different. And as the body, which should have been square, and was consequently design ' d for rest, receives a property and aptitude to motion, when it is reduc ' d to a round figure; in like manner, when any one of the orga∣nical parts, which should have been of such a fi∣gure, receives some other, it is deprived of the dispo∣sition it had for the function, for which it was de∣sign ' d, and acquires that which hath some corre∣spondence with the extraordinary figure it hath re∣ceiv ' d. 
 The case is the same, as when an Artisan makes use of an Instrument, which is not convenient and fit for the design he had propos ' d to himself; for instead of doing what he intended, he does the quite contrary; he cuts off that which he should have bo∣red, he makes uneven, what he should have smooth ' d, and whereas his design was to cast the statue of a man, he does that of a Lyon, if the mold he makes use of be such as may represent that creature. 
 Such is the procedure of the soul, when she hath such organs as have not the natural figure they ought to have. For there is nothing more certain, then that man, as well as all other Animals, hath a proper and peculiar figure, design ' d by nature to every one of his parts. And therefore as the soul hath an inclina∣tion to perform the actions, which are proper to the organs, she ought to have, so must it needs follow, that that inclination will be chang ' d, when the organ is chang ' d. 
 But there remains yet a difficulty which seems nor easily resolvable. It is this, that the soul knows, by the instinct, the action, which the organs ought to perform, when they have the conformation proper and natural to them. On the contrary, this cannot be said, when the organ hath not the figure it ought to have, because the Instinct gives her not the appre∣hension of the action, which is not proper to her, since it is a particular default, and that the Instinct is a general apprehension bestow ' d on the whole species. 
 To rid our hands of this difficulty, we are to ob∣serve, that the figure of the parts is the effect of the formative vertue, and that the said vertue follows the Temperament, or the impression, and image it hath receiv ' d from the animal engendring. If it follow the Temperament, the figure is not the cause of the inclination, it is only the sign of it, in regard the Temperament is the true cause thereof, and in that case, the soul knows the action of the part by means of the Temperament, as we have said before. But if it follow the impression, or the image of the ani∣mal which engenders, the formative vertue is the cause of the inclination, inasmuch as it is a faculty, which brings along with it, not only the character of the parts of the animal engendring, but also the dis∣position which it had to act conformably to their figure. And this is so unquestionable, that, many times, the child betrayes the same inclinations as his parents had done before him, though he do not re∣semble them, the Temperament having opposed the figure of the parts, yet not had strength enough to deface the disposition to the inclination, which they had. Now it is certain, that it is only the for∣mative vertue which brings the character of these inclinations, there being not any thing which the ani∣mal engendring communicates to that which is en∣gendred, but only that vertue, as several modern ex∣periences have made apparent. 
 Now as the formative vertue, which is in the organs of the animal engendring, moves with those organs, so it acquires the same bent, and the same disposition to move, which those organs have; so that, coming to frame another animal, it carries along with it that very same disposition, which it hath acquir ' d, and communicates it thereto. And whereas this disposi∣tion is as it were a weight, continually pressing and solliciting the soul to move; the soul sensible of that sollicitation, at last frames the judgment conformable to the impression she hath receiv ' d from it, and after∣wards derives it to the Appetite, which entertains the same bent: and this bent is the true Inclination, in regard the Inclination cannot be any where but in the appetite. 
 Art. 6. How Inclinations are produc ' d by the remote Causes. THus far have we discours ' d of the Natural and Next causes of the Inclinations. As to the Re∣mote, they are all in a manner reducible to the Tem∣perament. For the Stars, the Climate, Age, Aliment, and the Indispositions of body, have no other influ∣ence on the inclinations, then what is caus ' d by the alteration they make in the temperament. True it is, there are some diseases, which alter them, by de∣stroying the Conformation of the parts, as a man, who is maim ' d in the hand or leg, looses the inclina∣tion he had to play on the Lute, or dance.
As concerning the Moral Causes, they dispose the Estimative faculty to make its judgments, according to the apprehension it receives from them, of the strength or weakness they have: as Nobleness of birth, Wealth, good Fortune, raise in men an incli∣nation to Ambition, Pride, and Courage, in regard they are perswaded, by the power they derive from them, that they deserve honours, and that there is not any thing, which they may not attempt; whereas, on the contrary, the inclinations arising from meanness of birth, poverty, and ill fortune, are opposite to the other. All the rest, as course of Life, Arts, Sciences, Vertues, and Vices, are grounded on Custome, which renders things easie and agreeable, upon the recom∣mendation of the profit or pleasure, that may be rea∣ped thereby. For all this being frequently re∣presented to the Estimative faculty, it makes favou∣rable judgments thereof, which are preserv ' d in the memory, and at last cause the Appetite to incline, as we have shewn elswhere. 
 But we must not in this place omit one advertise∣ment, which is absolutely necessary in reference to the subject we treat of. It is this, that, when we speak of the Temperament, we do not understand only▪ by that word, the conjunction and mixture of the first qualities, but our meaning is, to add thereto the second qualities. And therefore we do not speak only of the hot, cold, dry, or moist Temperament, but also of the Sanguine, Cholerick, Plegmatick, and Melancholick Temperament, in regard the hu∣mours, which give the denominations to these Tem∣peraments, comprehend these two sorts of qualities. But, of all the second qualities, there are not any so considerable, in reference to the Inclinations, as sub∣tilty and grossness, for every humour may be either subtile or gross, and a subtile Melancholy is more different from a gross, then it is from choler. Ac∣cordingly, the effects of it are promptitude, incon∣stancy, anger, as they are of choler; whereas the productions of the gross melancholy are slothfulness, stupidity, obstinacy. And it is upon this particular, that medicine hath not sufficiently explicated it self, in the division of the Temperaments; for it hath set down but nine, one temperate, and the other eight in excess, which might have been multiplied, by ad∣dition of subtilty and grossness, and by the inter∣changeable mixtures, which may be assign ' d in men; as the Cholerick-Sanguine; the Melancholick-San∣guine, &amp;c. as we shall shew more exactly in the Treatise of the Temperaments. 
 Art. 7. Of the nature of Aversion. Thus have we given an account of all we could discover in a business, which haply is the most obscure, and most abstruse, of any relating to Ani∣mals. I must, for my part, ingenuously confess, that I never met with any thing, more hard to conceive, then the nature of the inclination, the manner after which it is fram ' d in the soul, and how it causes the Appetite to move. But if I have perform ' d what I aim ' d at in this disquisition, I may say, that I have made two discoveries for one; for the reasons I have used to clear up these difficulties, may also serve for those that may occur in the knowledge of Aversion, and are in all respects like unto them. 
 Accordingly the tearm Aversion is not here taken for that motion of the Appetite, which frames Ha∣tred, but only for a Disposition and facility that it hath to assume that motion, the account we have to give of this, as to our meaning thereby, being the same we have already given of the word Inclina∣tion. 
 Suitably to this explication, we are to affirm, that as the Inclinations are either Natural or Acquired, so are there the same divisions of Aversion. The Appetite also is the seat of both. All the same causes, whether Natural, or Moral, or Next, or Remote, act therein after the same manner, and equally dispose the soul to move. All the difference is, that they have con∣trary objects, and that they alwaies tend to contrary motions. For the inclination looks only after things agreeable, and gives the soul a bent towards them; but Aversion is for those that are unpleasant, and dis∣poses the Appetite to avoid them. 
 So that it may be thus defin ' d, Aversion is a per∣manent Disposition, and a facility attain ' d by a long pro∣gress of time, which the Appetite hath to recede from certain objects, which are disagreeable thereto. 
 There is no necessity of any further explication, how the soul comes to attain and contract this facility; for whatever we have said concerning that which is in the Inclination is common to both. 
 CHAP. III. Of the Motions of the Soul. SECT. I. That the Soul moves. ALL people talk of the motions of the Soul;  ' tis generally said, that she is inclin ' d towards the good, and avoids evil; that she grows resolute, or is discourag ' d, at the meeting of difficul∣ties; and there is no language but hath certain terms, whereby to express the agitations she gives her self: so that it is a thing manifest, and such as ought not to be admitted into dispute, that the soul can move, and that she effectually hath such motions as are proper and peculiar to her. 
 And certainly, as it is to be granted, that she ought to know the things that are good and evil, and that this knowledge were of no advantage, nay would be prejudicial to her, if she had not the means to enjoy the good, and shun the evil; In like manner, is it necessary, that, with the said knowledge, she should have the vertue of moving, that so she may approach the good, and recede from the evil, which she knows. 
 Art. 1. What part of the Soul moves. FOr this reason therefore hath the Soul two prin∣cipal flaculties ; one, in reference to her know∣ledge, the other, to her motion ; which faculties are in all the orders of the soul. For in the Intellectual Soul, the Ʋnderstanding knows, and the Will moves; in the Sensitive, the Imagination supplies the place of the knowing faculty, and the sensitive Appetite frames the motions: And in the Natural, there is also a cer∣tain vertue, which, after its manner, knows what is good or bad for it; and an appetite which causes all the motions that we observe therein. 
 Art. 2. That the motions of the Soul are not metapho∣rical. THe greatest difficulty of all, is, to know, of what nature these motions are, and whether the soul does effectually move, or that this is a figurative manner of speaking, representing the actions of the soul, according to a certain conformity, which may be between them and the motions of the body. For my part, I am fully satisfy ' d as to the question, and therefore affirm, (though contrary to the Te∣nents of all Philosophy and the Schools, maintaining that they are only metaphorical motions) that they are true and real motions, whereby the Soul changes place, and puts her self into diverse situations. 
 Art. 3. That the rational Soul hath a real motion, as the Angels have. TO establish therefore this doctrine, which must serve to explicate the nature of the Passions, we are, in the first place, to consider the motions of the rational Soul. For if it can be shewn, that, being wholy spiritual, as she is, she nevertheless moves, it will be a great presumption for the others, which are fasten ' d and chain ' d to matter. 
 Now to do this would be no hard task, could we but comply so far with Theology, as to grant that Angels really move, that they pass from one place to another, that they dilate and contract themselves, taking up a greater or lesser space. For this verity presuppos ' d, it may be inferr ' d, that the rational soul, which is of the same nature with them, ought to have the same advantage. 
 But what, is not the soul dilated when a child grows bigger? Is she not contracted, and restrain ' d into a less space, when some members are cut off? And when one dies, does she not depart out of the body, and remove into some other place? Which, if it is not to be doubted, that she is susceptible of a re∣all motion, since that in all these, there is a change of situation and place, as in the Angels. 
 And certainly it cannot well enter into a man ' s imagination, that being Noble, as she is, she should be depriv ' d of a vertue, which is common to all things created. For there is not any body, but hath the power to move it self, either by the weight or lightness it hath; all things having life grow and diminish; all animals move of themselves; and if, to all this, we add the motion of Angelical sub∣stances, it is not probable, the soul should be the only thing in the Universe, that hath not any motion, and should, of its own nature, be im∣movable. 
 Art. 4. That the motions of the Will are reall mo∣tions. I imagine to my self there are few persons will oppose this kind of motion, but they will haply object, that it is not in this the knot of the dif∣ficulty consists; and that the question is, to know, whether the internal motions of the Will, as Love, Hate, &amp;c. are of the same kind with the fore∣mentioned. 
 To make our way into this deep and subtile part of Philosophy, we are to presuppose, that all the intel∣lectual substances, which are created, have certain bounds and limits, in regard Immensity is one of the incommunicable attributes of the Creator. Now, that which hath limits, must of necessity have extension, and that extension ought to have parts; for a man cannot conceive limits without extension, nor any ex∣tension without parts, at least virtual and assignab1e, as they are called in the Schools. True it is indeed, that this extension, and these parts, are of another kind then those of bodies; for they are spiritual, in∣divisible, and may be penetrated, without being sub∣ject to any place, whereby they should be limitted or confin ' d: wheras those of bodies are material, divisible, and impenetrable, and really take up place, which limits and contains them. Upon this ground we may affirm, that the Rational Soul hath extension, and the parts that are proper to substances separated from matter, that is to say, such as are spiritual, indivisible and penetrable, and that, by their means, she takes up some certain space, wherein she is. 
 If the Soul moves then, as we have shewn she does, as being movable in all its substance, it is in her power, not onely to pass from one part to another, and take up another space, then that which she had before; but she may also, without changing the place, or part where she is, cause her parts to move in her self, after the same manner, as the water, contain ' d in a Vessel, may be agitated in its parts, without changing its place. For since she hath parts, and that those parts are movable, as her self, she may move such as she pleases, and as she thinks fit. And thence it is consequent, that one appetite may be moved, while the other rests, or suffers a contrary motion; as it is said, that an Angel may have some parts that move, while others rest. When therefore the Soul changes place, she makes that kind of motion, which is called transient, which is like that which the Angels make, when they remove from one place to another. But when she changes not, and is onely mov ' d within her self, she makes the interiour motions of the Will: for, according as she either sends forth, or calls in her parts within her self; according as she dilates or contracts them, she frames all the Passions, as we shall shew hereafter. 
 And certainly the Soul may, with just grounds, be compar ' d to a great abyss, which, without exceeding its bounds, suffers all the motion, which the tempest can raise therein: one while it is violently forc ' d against the banks, and then immediately to recede again; another, it seems to be forc ' d out of its pro∣fundities, and then again to enter into them; but how impetuous soever the tempest be, the other never exceeds its bounds. 
 The case is much the same with the Will, when it makes after the good, or shuns the evil, it makes place for it self; if it go forward, or retreat, it neither gains nor loses any thing of the space, which it took up, in so much that it may be said, that it is already where it would go, and that it still continues in the same place whence it went. For, in fine, we must ne∣cessarily acknowledge, that there are in this vast and profound power many, and those different, parts, which like waves follow one in the neck of the other, and keep in motion the current, into which it suffers it self to be carried away. When one is advanc ' d to the highest pitch, another that follows takes its place, which it as soon resigns to another, and so succes∣sively, till such time as the Soul gives over moving!
True it is, that the agitation, which the Will raises in the spirits, and humours, makes its motion last much longer then it intended it should: for when they are gross and dense, the impetuosity, which they have re∣ceiv ' d, cannot be so soon calm ' d, as when they are rare and subtile, and the Soul suffers her self to be car∣ried away by the motion, whereby they are agitated. Thus is it, that the Passions continue longer in Men then Children: for these latter pass in a moment from joy to sadness, nay, when they give over laugh∣ing, we see the lines and lineaments of the precedent laughter immediately vanished: whereas in Men, they pass away slowly, and leave in the face, for the space of some minutes, the impression they have made there∣in. For all this difference proceeds hence, that the spi∣rits of Children are more delicate and subtile, and consequently, as all other things of the like nature, do not long retain the violence of the motion, which is imprinted in them, and that those of Men, being more gross, preserve them a long time. 
 How ere it be, according to the principle we have laid down, it may be easily conceiv ' d how the Soul is mov ' d in the passions, and the mind remains much more satisfy ' d with this manner of acting, which is conformable to that of corporeal motions, then when it is affirm ' d, that there are no real motions in the Soul, and that they are onely Metaphorical, For, if by that word, it be not understood, that they are not absolutely like the motions of the body, the thing it self remains as obscure as it was before. 
 Art. 5. The Objections made against the motions of the Soul considered. I Know very well, what Objections Aristotle made against Plato, who maintain ' d, as we do, that the Soul really moves I have also look ' d on those, which the Schools have added unto Aristole. But there is but one answer to be made to them all which, is this, that taking away the motion of the Soul, they take away that of angels, upon which the same inconveniences, which are attributed to the other, must necessarily fall, though, that Angels do move, be a truth, not to be brought into dispute. 
 It is argu ' d further, that whatsoever moves ought to take up some places, and, as place, to have quanti∣ty; that the Soul hath no quantity, since she is indi∣visible, and wholly in every part of the body, and con∣sequently that she cannot move. Moreover, it is re∣quisite that in all motion, what moves should be diffe∣rent from that which is moved; and that the Soul, which is simple and indivisible, cannot have things separate and different, and consequently, that it is impossible she should move. But do ' s not al this reflect on the An∣gels as well as on the Soul, who, notwithstanding these reasons, are yet granted to move of themselves? But when all is done, these maximes are proper onely to corporeal motions, and not to those of spiritual sub∣stances, as we learn in the Metaphysicks. 
 What might be objected of greatest weight, is, that Motion is, of its own nature, successive, and that suc∣cession implies time, wherereas most part of the Souls motions are instantaneous, that is, made in an in∣stant. But we have shewn in our Treatise, Of Light, that there are real motions of those taht are momen∣tany; That those of Light, and those of Angels, which after they have been contracted, resume their former dilation or extent, are so wrought; And consequently, that the motions of the Will, being eminent, are of that order, since it is a thing affirm ' d by many eminent Philosophers, that those Motions of immaterial sub∣stances, which are transient, are made in an instant. 
 It is therefore a thing to be maintain ' d as manifest, that the rational Soul moves; That, being a limited substance, she hath some extension, without which, we cannot conceive any limits; That the said extension cannot be without parts, and that those parts are mov∣able, as well as the whole; That accordingly she may move within her self, by moving her parts, and that thence proceed all the interiour motions of the Will. 
 Art. 6. The Motions of the Appetites. NOw, if this be true of the Rational Soul, which is spiritual, it will be much more easily com∣prehended to be so in the others, which are fastened to matter, and there will be no question made, but that they are susceptible of the same motions, in as much as motion belongs principally to things material. Accordingly therefore, the sensitive and natural Ap∣petites, suffer the same agitations as the Will, when it loves, when it hates, &amp;c. and these motions are interiour and immanent, and are fram ' d in a moment▪ as those of the Will. 
 But what? wil some body say, If these two Appetites are chain ' d to matter, there is a necessity the matter should move along with them; and how can matter move in an instant? It may be said in the first place, that we are not to imagine the matter, whereto the Appetite is chain ' d, to be gross and weighty, as most of the parts of the body are, but it is requisite that the power have a subject proportionable to it self, and that the Appetite, which is the most movable part of the Soul, should have a subject the most movable of any. Thus, though the Appetite have its seat in the heart, yet it is not to be inferr ' d, that the whole heart is its first and principal seat. No, that seat is the spi∣rits, and that moist heat, which is the source of life, and ever in motion, as Hippocrates affirms. So that it is not to be admir ' d, the matter whereto it is fastned, should so easily and so readily follow the agitation, which it gives it self. 
 Secondly, it is to be noted, that matter doth not always hinder things from moving in an instant, in regard there are massie bodies, that do move so. For it is not to be doubted, but that a weighty body, sustain ' d in the air, makes some effort to descend, that it presses upon the hand that stays it there, and that a man feels every moment the impulsion which it makes therein, which impulsion is, no doubt, a real motion. 
 Moreover, Light, which is a material quality, and requires a subject to support it, does nevertheless move in an instant, as we have shewn in its proper place. Now, these two examples do not onely make it manifest, that material things are mov ' d instanta∣neously; but they also give us a certain apprehensi∣on of the manner, whereby the Appetite moves the Soul, and whereby it moves it self in the body. For it may be said, that it is like a weight, which thrusts the Soul to that whereto it would have her to go. And it moves in the heart, as Light does in a transparent body; that is, it enters into it; it comes out of it; it dilates it self in it; it also contracts it self; yet so as the diaphanous body hath no sense of all those moti∣ons, though it be the subject, whereto the light is annexed. 
 The case is the same with the Appetite which, though fastened to its subject, may dilate it self in joy, contract it self in grief, issue out of, and return into, it self in love and hatred, and all, so as that the body suffers nothing of all these motions. True it is, that the heart and spirits are agitated and stirr ' d in great passions; but, not to urge that they are effects which follow and come after the emotion of the Soul, it is to be observ ' d, that there are some passions, which continue in the Appetite, without making any impres∣sion on those parts. And this may suffice, to shew, that the Appetite may move, so as that the body be not chang ' d thereby. 
 SECT. 2. How Good and Evil move the Appetite. BUt in order to a more exact knowledge of all these motions, we are yet to find out, what it is that engages and excites the Appetite to make them, which is one of the most abstruse things, of any in the nature of the Soul, and the most hard to be conceiv ' d, according to the maximes of the Schools, For, though it be out of all controversie, that Good and Evil are the onely objects, which cause all the motions of the Appetite, yet is it not easie, to express the manner, how it is done, since Good and Evil make no impression on the Soul, otherwise then by the Images, which the knowing Faculties frame there∣of, of, and that those Images have not any other vertue, then to represent. 
 For, if that representation be not subservient to the knowledge of things, it will not be any way usefull to the Appetite, which is a blind power, and, as it is affirmed, not capable of any knowledge. I am content that the Practick Ʋnderstanding, and the Estimative faculty should judge, whether things are Good or Evil; that they should present them to the Appetite, and command it to move, in order either to its union with them, or recession from them. But how does the Appetite see? How does it know, when it neither sees nor knows any thing but those Images, those judg∣ments and commands being fram ' d in the said facul∣ties? What is it that teaches the Appetite, that it ought, at that time, to move after such or such a man∣ner, in order to its union with the Good, and, after another manner, to recede from the Evil, when it knows not whether the Good or Evil have been pre∣sented to the Soul? 
 All these difficulties are the brood of two prin∣ciples, which some have brought into the Schools. One is, that the Images, which are fram ' d in the Soul, depart not out of the faculty, whereby they are produced: the other, that the Appetite, of what order soever it be, hath no any knowledge. And upon these two foundations, they imagin ' d that this inference must ne∣cessarily be built, that the faculties act one after ano∣ther, by a certain sympathy there is between them, or by the direction of the Soul, in the substance, unto which they are reunited. Now, we shall elsewhere make it appear, that these two means cannot be main∣tain ' d; and therefore some other must be found, to take away the difficulties proposed, without destroy∣ing those principles. 
 We must then subscribe unto, as certain, That the Image, Idaea, and Conceit, which the knowing faculty frames, goes not out of it; and that the Appetite, of what order soever it be, hath not any Animal know∣ledge, which it may frame by Images, as the Under∣standing and Imagination. But it is as certain also, that the Image, which the Understanding and the Imaginati∣on frame, produces another▪ which is spread into all the parts of the Soul; And that the Appetite hath a natural knowledge, which is common to all things, by which knowledge they know what is good, what evil, for them, as also the actions whereto they are desig ' nd. 
 Art. 1. How Knowledge is wrought. TO make an absolute establishment of this Do∣ctrine, it is to be presuppos ' d, that Knowledge is an action, and that, without doubt, the noblest of all those that are performed in Nature, and that the Soul acts and does something, when she knows. Now, in regard we cannot make any other conceit of Know∣ledge, then as the representation of things, which is made in the Soul, it follows, that the Soul, which acts, while she knows the things, must her self make this re∣presentation, that is, frame the Pourtraiture and Image of the things. For there is no other action then that, that the Soul can do in knowing, and so to know, signifies as much as to frame the Image of the Objects, as we have shewn at large in our Treatise, Of the Knowledge of Animals. 
 Now, whereas there are several faculties that know, it is requisite, for the reasons by us before alledged, that every one of them frame its image. For my part, who acknowledge but three principal ones in the sensitive soul, to wit the Sense, the Imagination, and the Estimative faculty, and two in the Intellectu∣all, to wit, the Speculative Understanding and the Practick, I must accordingly allow, that there may be framed but five sorts of Images in general. And though they all represent the same thing, yet are they different one from another, not onely by reason of the subtilty which they acquire by so many different examinations, but also by that of the several circum∣stances, which each of the faculties add thereto. 
 For the external Sense frames its Image, according to the model of the sensible species, which come from without, and represents the object, with the circum∣stances of Time, Place, &amp;c. as a Whole, whereof it distinguishes not the parts. From this first Image, the Imagination afterwards produces, that which is proper to it; but it distinguishes the circumstances, and the parts of the object; it separates, or unites them; and so frames its judgments, which may be called, in some sort, speculative, because the Animal makes no advan∣tage of them, in order to action, but onely in order to knowledge. Then the Estimative faculty makes its Image, according to the model of that of the Senses and Imagination; but it adds thereto the notions of Good and Evil, which it also unites, and which it separates, that so it may make the Practick judgment, which is to move the Sensitive Appetite. 
 But if, after all this, there be a necessity, that the understanding should take cognizance of the same ob∣ject, according to all the precedent material Images, it also frames its own, which is wholly spiritual, which it separates from all material accidents, and whereof it considers all the parts, and the relations it may have, uniting, or dividing them, in order to the making of speculative propositions: And then it adds thereto, the notions of conformity, or contrariety, goodness or evil, from which it frames the practick Judgment, which excites the Will and Sensitive Ap∣petite. All this would require a longe, elucidation; But it would not be proper for this place; and there∣fore let it suffice, that we have given an account, in general, of the progress made, in the business of Knowledge. 
 Art. 2. That the Images are multiply ' d. BUt however the case may stand, this Image, so framed as before shewn, of what order soever it may be, is a quality, which, after it is once produced, is multiply ' d, and diffused into the parts of the Soul, as was said before. For, since there is not any sensible qua∣lity, which hath not the vertue of multiplying it self, and diffusing it se;lf into the air, and other bodies sus∣ceptible thereof, as may be observ ' d in light, colour, sound, scent, &amp;c. it is not likely, that this, which is the noblest of all, as being the term and effect of the most perfect action of all, should be depriv ' d of an advan∣tage, common to all the rest. Besides, were it not for this multiplication, it would be impossible, to give any reason, for most things that happen in Animals.
For example, we should not be able to comprehend, how the formative faculty does sometimes change the order, which Nature hath prescrib ' d it, in the Con∣formation of the parts, to follow the designs which the Imagination proposes to it, without judging whether it ought to participate of the Images, which the latter hath framed, since there is so great a resemblance be∣tween its work and the imagination. And as these images cannot get out of the Imagination, so is it ne∣cessary, they should produce others like themselves, which should descend to the lower part of the Soul, to design to her the figure which it is then giving to the organs. 
 Moreover, if the Memory be a power, different from the Imagination, it is necessary, that all the species, which it hath in keeping, should be of this nature, and the effects, and, as it were, the copies of those first Ima∣ges, which were produced by Knowledge, and which can no more pass from one power to another, then any of all the other accidents. 
 In fine, there will be no ground to make any doubt of this truth, if it may be shewn, that after the mages of the Imagination are blotted out, there are still found some remainders thereof in the other powers, and sub∣sist there a long time, after the others are lost. Now, besides that the proof of it is clear in the Memory, which so preserves its images, is prejudic ' d by a too intentive application of spirit, and grows less faithfull, when the Imagination would relieve it. It may be also drawn, from those marks, which Mothers give their children, during their being with child; From that kind of Reminiscency which remains in the fingers of a Lu∣tinist, even after he hath forgotten the Lessons he could have play ' d; And from those deep impressions and inclinations, which certain objects leave in the Appetite and Will. For it is impossible all this should happen, as it does, but that there must remain some Character of these first Images, which the Understanding or Ima∣gination frame, and are preserv ' d in those other facul∣ties, a long time after the former are vanished. 
 Yet it is not to be imagin ' d, that the faculties, into which thsee Images are diffus ' d, should be of the rank of the knowing faculties, because they have the Instru∣ments of knowledge, for we have shewn in the place alledg ' d, that a faculty cannot know, but it must with∣all produce in it self the images of the things. So that these, not producing the images which they have, and onely receiving them, as an effect of the first image, fram ' d by the Imagination, they cannot know it by a clear and perfect knowledge, but onely, according to that which is competent to all natural things, which, if we may use an odd kind expression, Know without knowing, what is conformable or contrary to them. Thus is it, that the Magnetick vertue, which is commu∣nicated to Iron, makes it know, and sensible of, the presence of the Load-stone, and afterwards excites it to move, and make towards it. 
 When therefore there is an image fram ' d, in any one of the knowing faculties, it is, as it were, a Light, which is multiply ' d, and diffuses it self into all parts of the Soul susceptible thereof Our meaning is, that that which is spiritual is communicated to the spiri∣al faculties, and that which is material, to the corporeal faculties, and both kinds act therein according to the nature of the faculty, into which they are entertain ' d. For, if it be movable, as the Appetite, that Image moves: if it hath no action, as the Memory, it pro∣duces nothing, but is onely preserv ' d in it: if it be alterative, as the formative vertue, it serves for a model for the alteration, which it causes in the mem∣bers; and so of the rest. The case is the same with it, as with that Magnetick vertue we spoke of before, which, though equally communicated to all bodies, does not equally act upon them; it alters and moves the Load-stone, Iron, and glaz ' d Tiles, yet without causing any alteration or motion in all the rest 
 If it be so, it will be no hard matter to affirm, how the Appetite, blind as it is, may know Good and Evil, and move conformably to the nature of either. For since the Im ge, which the Estimative faculty, or Practick Ʋnderstanding, hath fram ' d thereof; is multi∣ply ' d, and diffus ' d through all the parts of the Soul; the Appetite receives it, feels it, and afterwards moves, as it ought, in order to its union with the Good, or re∣cession from the Evil, to its assaulting, or opposing of it, according to the instruction receiv ' d from the Instinct, and the knowledge which all natural things have, either to be united to that which is conformable, or to avoid and resist that which is contrary to them. 
 SECT. 3. What are Motions of the Soul. TO resume the Discourse we have interrupted, we say further, that, of what kind soever the motions of the ppetite are, whether real, or metaphorical, they are those which frame the Passions of the Soul. For though the Schools have restrained that name, to the Motions of the sensitive Appetite, either by reason of the violence they do Reason, or that the body sensibly suffers thereby; yet, if we con∣sider the agitation, which the Soul endures, we shall find, that not onely that which is made in the Will, but also that in the natural Appetite, is like that, which the Sensitive Appetite suffers. For the Will loves and hates, rejoyces and is sad, as well a the other: and there are in the natural Appetite, such motions as are answerable to those others, since Nature seeks that, which is behovefull, and shuns what is prejudicial to it, is satisfy ' d, or troubled, at the occurrence thereof, is heightned or discourag ' d, as we shall shew more particularly hereafter. And as to the violence which the Sensitive Passions do Reason, and the alteration they cause in the body, they are the effects which they produce, yet enter not into their essence, but are com∣mon to all the motions of the Appetite, of what order soever it be, and do not always accompany the emo∣tions of the sensitive Appetite. 
 Accordingly, as the Appetite is the principle of all corporeal motions, so is it requisite, that it should be moved, before any Part of the body can be; and con∣sequently the agitation of the Spirits, which is ob∣serv ' d in the Passions, and causes all the changes, that happen in the body, is not wrought, till after the Soul is moved. Moreover, the Motions of the Will are, many times, contrary to reason, as well as those of the sensitive Appetite, and in the most spiritual Pas∣sions, such as Ambition, Envie, &amp;c. it alters the body, as well as the other. Nay, it may be affirmed, that, in the motions of the natural Appetite, the body some∣times endures a greater alterat on, then in those of the sensitive Appetite, as it appears in a Fever, which is the choler of the natural faculty. To be short, nei∣ther doth that violence, nor that alteration always follow the emotions of the sensitive Appetite. Of these, there are some conformable to Reason; there are some that remain in the Soul, and do not descend to the corporeal faculties, as being raised up and dis∣pers ' d so of a sudden, that they have not the time to spread themselves into them. Whereto may be added, that Angels are susceptible of love, hatred, joy, sad∣ness, &amp;c. as Theology teacheth. 
 Whence it may be inferr ' d, that there is no ground, for the taking away of the name of Passions, from the motions of the Will and natural Appetite, and conse∣quently, it may be affirm ' d, that all the motions of every Appetite are Passions, since the agitation, which the Soul endures thereby, is equal in them all, and that the end, which she proposeth to her self therein, is, as to them, also alike: for by them all she is agitated and mov ' d, either towards the enjoyment of Good, or the eschewing of Evil. 
 True it is, that these motions are called by divers names, according as they are more or less vehement. For, as we call those winds which are more then ordi∣narily violent, by the name of Storms and Tempests; so, when the Passions are great and extraordinary, they are called Perturbations. And certainly, it may, with some ground, be affirm ' d, that the Passions are, as it were, the winds of the Soul. For, as the Air, which continues in a constant calmness and tranquili∣ty, is unwholesom; and yet is purify ' d by moderate winds, but if they are too violent, they raise tem∣pests in it: in like manner, the Soul, which is not stirr ' d by any passion, must needs be heavie, and of an unhealthy constitution; and therefore it is requisite, it should be moderately agitated, that it may be the more pure and more susceptible of vertue. But if it happen that the passions become too violent, they raise in her such tempests, as di∣sturb Reason, confound the humours, and alter the whole constitution of the body. 
 SECT. 4. Of the Number of the Passions. THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN, Having promised to discover the motions of the Soul, we now come to examine, how many ways it may be mov ' d, and what number there may be of the Passions, whereby it may be so mov ' d. In order to the prosecution of that design, it is to be presup∣posed, that every Appetite hath two parts, the Con∣cupiscible, and the Irascible ; by the former, it per∣sues Good, and shuns Evil; by the latter, it either opposes, or complies with, the difficulties, which pre∣sent themselves. For, as the Universe consists, and is full of things contrary and opposite one to another; so is there not any thing can continue in it, without meeting with enemies, which assault and endeavour to destroy it. So that it was the work of the provi∣dence of Nature, to bestow on every thing, not onely the vertues, which were necessary for the execution of its ordinary, and, as it were, domestick Functions, but also those, which should secure it against the at∣tempts of others, and prevent the violences which it might be exposed to abroad. Upon this account it is, that all things have some qualities, conducing to the preservation of their being; and others, en∣abling them to oppose what is contrary thereto; and that the Animals, wherein these vertues are more di∣stinct, have bestow ' d on them two different Appetites; the Concupiscible, to seek out what is convenient for them, and avoid what is hurtfull; and the Irascible, to resist Evil, to ingage against, and destroy it, if there be a necessity. In fine, the Irascible is that part of the Soul, which governs the forces of the Animal, and manages them, according as the Evil seems to require a weak or powerfull resistance. 
 Now, these two parts of the Appetite may move either together, or distinctly: for, in Grief, onely the Co cupiscible part is mov ' d; in Courage, onely the Irascible; but in Anger, both are mov ' d at the same time, in as much as Anger is a combination of Grief and Courage. When they move distinctly, they frame Simple Passions; when they move together, they make mixt Passions. 
 Art. 1. What the Simple Passions, and how many there are. THe Schools set down eleven Simple Passions; i the Concupiscible Appetite, six; to wit, Love, Hate, Desire, Aversion, Pleasure and Grief: and in the Irascible, five to wit, Hope, Despair, Confidence, or Audacity, Fear, and Anger. 
 But we are to observe, that, in this division, Con∣stancy is forgotten, which is a real Passion, and serves for matter to the vertue of CONSTANCY, Patience, and Perseverance, Obstinacy and Hardness; of heart; as also, that among the Simple pasions, Anger and Hope are numbred, which, no doubt, are mixt passions; the former, consisting of Grief and Courage; and Hope being framed of Desire and Constancy. Moreover, Aversion is propos ' d, as a Passion distinct from Hate, though it be the same thing. Nay indeed, Desire ought not to have been put into the number, as being a species of love, and ha∣ving not any motion, different from that of the other. 
 Art. 2. That there aro but eight simple Passions. HAving therefore taken off these four passions▪ and establish ' d Constancy in their stead, there remain but eight simple Passions; four in the Concu∣piscible Appetite, to wit Love, Hate, Pleasure and Grief; and four more in the Irascible; that is to say, Audacity, Fear, Constancy, and Consternation, under which Despaire is comprehended, 
 Art. 3. Why there are but eight simple Passions. THis is the natural division of the Passions, as being grounded on the several kinds of motions, whereby the Soul is stirr ' d: for since the Passions are the motions of the Soul, it is according to the diversity of the motions, that the Passions ought prin∣cipally to be distingish ' d. It is also easie to be com∣prehended, by the consideration of the motions, which the Spirits suffer in the Passions; for being like those of the soul, which communicates to them the agitation that she endures, it is manifest, after how many fashions soever the Spirits are moved, so many several waies is the Soul also moved. 
 Now the Spirits are susceptible of four motions, which are common to all natural bodies, and are the first and simplest of all motions; to wit, those of Ascent, Descent, Rarefaction, and Condensation. For when they issue out of the heart, to spread them∣selves into the exteriour parts, the motion is from the centre to the circumference, and that is, to ascend; and when they make their retreat into the heart,  ' tis the contrary motion, from the circumference to the centre, that is, descent: they are rarified, when they spread and are dilated; and lastly, they are condens ' d, when they are contracted in themselves. 
 The Appetite suffers proportionably the same mo∣tions; for though it changes not place, as they do, and that its motions are interiour and immanent, yet does it nevertheless cause those parts to move, which are in the extension of the Soul; so that, one while, it forces them to issue out; another, it makes them re∣treat in again; one while, it dilates; another, it con∣tracts them, 
 When therefore chese four motions are made in the concupiscible Appetite, they frame the four first Passions, of that Appetite, to wit, Love, Hate, Plea∣sure and Grief. For the Soul does as it were issue out of her self in Love; she retires into her self in Hate; she dilates her self in Pleasure, and she contracts her self in Grief. 
 But when the same motions are made in the Ira∣scible Appetite, which is that part, which hath a re∣spect to the difficulties that encompass Good and E∣vil, they frame the four first Passions of that Appetite, to wit, Audacity, Fear, Constancy, and Consterna∣tion. For in Audacity, the Soul issues out, as in Love, in Fear, she retires, as in Hate, in Constancy, she contracts her self, and is confirmed, as in Grief; and in Consternation, she dilates herself, and is enlar∣ged, as in Joy.
So that there is a resemblance, between the motions of both Appetites, and they differ only in reference to the power, whereby they are excited, and the end, which the Soul proposes to herself therein. For, in Love, the Soul issues out of her self in order to the embracing of the Good she persues; but in Au∣dacity, she issues out of her self, to engage the Evil she would oppose; and so of the rest, as we shall shew more particularly in the Discourse of every Passion, and as may be observ ' d in the several defi∣nitions we shall give of them, in the subsequent Ar∣ticle. 
 Art 4. The Definitions of the Simple Passions. THere are therefore, according to the precedent deduction, four Simple Passions in the Concupisci∣ble Appetite; to wit, 
 Love, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul is inclin ' d towards the Good, in order to its union thereto. 
 Hate, which is a motion of the Appetite, where∣by the Soul separates her self, and recedes from the Evil. 
 Pleasure, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul is dilated, and spreads her self into the Good, in order to her more absolute possession thereof. 
 Grief, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul contracts her self, to shun the Evil that presses upon her. 
 The four other Passions, which belong to the Ira∣scible Appetite, are, 
 Constancy, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the soul is fortifi ' d, and grows resolute, in order to the resistance of those Evils which set upon her. 
 Consternation, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul is weakned, and gives way to the violence of the Evil. 
 Audacity, which is a motion of the Appetite, where∣by the Soul violently bestirs her self against the Evil, to overcome it. 
 Fear, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul retreats, and with a certain precipitation, shuns the Evil, which she perceives coming upon her. 
 Art. 5. The definitions of the mixt Passions. AS concerning the mixt Passions, which are made up of the Simple, and are framed, when both the Appetites are moved at the same time, the most considerable of them are these: 1. Hope. 2. Arrogance. 3. Impudence. 4. Emu∣lation. 5. Anger. 6. Repentance. 7. Shame. 8. Jea∣lousie. 9. Compassion. 10. Envy. 11. Agony. 
 Hope is a mixture of the desire of the Good, and the Constancy a man expresses, in opposing the diffi∣culties, whereby it is encompassed. 
 Arrogance proceeds from Self love, and the Auda∣city a man hath to surpass others. 
 Impudence is fram ' d of the Pleasure and Confi∣dence a man hath to do unhansome things. 
 Emulation is a mixture of Grief which a man is apt to be subject to, that he is not master of those perfections, of which he imagines another to be, and the Hope of being able to acquire them. 
 Anger consists of the Grief, which a man endures for an injury receiv ' d, and the Audacity he hath to retort it. 
 Repentance proceeds from the Grief, which a man conceives for the evil he hath committed, attended by a Detestation of it; which may be termed a kind of Audacity, as we shall shew in its proper place. 
 Shame proceeds from a mixture of Grief, and Fear of infamy. 
 Jealousie is a confusion of Love, Hate, Fear and Despair.
Compassion consists of the Grief, which other mens misfortunes raise in us, and a Fear lest we our selves may fall into the like inconveniences. 
 Envy, is a mixture of Grief, and a certain Despair of coming to the enjoyment of that Good, which we see happens to others. 
 Agony is a mixture of Grief, Fear, and Audacity. 
 Art. 6. The Natural order of the Passions. THe order, which all these Passions ought, natu∣rally, to observe among themselves; requires that the Simple should be rank ' d before the mixt, since these last are but so many compositions of the others; as also that the Passions of the Concupiscible part should have precedence of those of the Irascible, in regard the Concupiscible Appetite, being employed about the simple consideration of Good and Evil, and the Irascible considering the same with the diffi∣culties whereby they are encompass ' d, the said diffi∣culties are only subsequent circumstances. 
 But if we compare them, according to their par∣ticular kinds, Love and Hate ought to have prece∣dence of all the rest. For there is not any one of those, which have the Good for their Object, but it is preceded, and accompany ' d by Love, as all those that have Evil for their Object are the same, by Hate. Ac∣cordingly, he, who is sensible of the Evil, or opposes it, who engages against it, or shuns it, does infallibly hate it: in like manner, Love is the first motion which the Appetite makes towards the Good as Hate is the first it makes, in reference to Evil. 
 But what Love and Hate are in respect of all the Passions, the same is Constancy, and Consternation, in respect of all the Passions of the Irascible Appe∣tite, whether they be simple, or mixt. For it is re∣quisite, that the Soul should be fortify ' d, in Audacity, Hope, Arrogance, Impudence, Emulation, Anger and Repentance: on the contrary, in Fear, Shame, Jealousie, Compassion and Envy, it is expected she should be enlarged, or admit of some relaxation. 
 Love also hath the precedence of Hate, because Good ought naturally to have it of Evil, as the form precedes privation. Pleasure should also go before Grief, in as much as the former proceeds from the presence of the Good, the latter, from the presence of Evil. The same thing is to be affirm ' d proportiona∣bly of Constancy and Audacity, in reference to Con∣sternation and Fear. And according to these rules, the mixt Passions ought to be ranked, as we have done it: for Hope ought to be the first, because it consists of Love and Constancy, which are the first Passions of both the Appetites. Arrogance hath the next place, as being a mixture of Love and Audacity; and so of the rest. 
 Art 7. That there are three Orders of the Passions. NOw all these Passions, as well the Simple as the mixt, are of three Orders, or Classes; for they are framed, either in the Will, or in the sensitive Appetite, or the natural Appetite, each whereof hath its distinct concupiscible and irascible parts. But there is nevertheless this difference between them, that those parts are more distinct, and more compleat in the Will, then they are in the Sensitive Appetite, and more perfect yet in this latter, then in the natural Appetite. For there are some, especially of the mixt passions, which can hardly be observ ' d in the sensitive Appetite, and in case they be fram ' d therein, they are (if we may use that expression) but shadows and rude images of those, which are rais ' d in the Will. Accordingly, though Anger, Hope, Arrogance, Jea∣lousie, Emulation, and Envy are apparent in Beasts, yet are all the rest but trick ' d and rudely drawn▪ and therefore it is not easie, to make, in them, any observation of Shame, Impudence, Compassion, and Remorse, though they may discover certain obscure lines and tracks thereof. But all, even the Simple passions themselves, are so obscure in the natural Appetite, that never any body yet gave them the name of Passions, though they be really such, and ought to be so called, as we said before. 
 We are however to observe, that those Passions which belong to the Irascible Appetite, are more apparent in the natural Appetite then the others: for it is certain, that Nature opposes Evils, that she en∣gages against them, that sometimes she is discourag ' d, and quits the field, and there is not any thing so com∣mon in Medicine, as to say, that she is stirr ' d and provoked; nay, we have shewn elswhere, that a Fe∣ver is the anger of the natural faculty, so that it is not to be doubted, but that Audacity and Anger, Constancy, and Consternation, are framed in that inferiour part of the Soul. But as to those of the con∣cupiscible Appetite, they are not so manifest in it; neither are Love, Hate, Pleasure and Grief, to be observ ' d in it so sensibly as the others: and yet there is a necessity they should be framed therein. For it is not to be imagined, that the evil can be shunn ' d, unless it be first hated, since Hate is the first motion, which Evil excites in the Appetite. Neither can An∣ger be without Grief, since it is part thereof. So that the natural Appetite is susceptible of Hate and Grief, and consequently of Love and Pleasure, since they are contraries compatible to the same subject. 
 Moreover, if nature knows and shuns what is hurt∣ful to her, it is requisite that she should also know and pursue that which is good for her; and this can∣not be done unless she have a love to it, since Love is the first motion fram ' d by the Appetite, in order to the pursuit of Good: and as the presence of evil pro∣cureth Grief to her so is it necessary, that the presence of Good should cause pleasure to her. 
 But, as we said before, these passions are so weak and obscure, that the senses cannot easily take notice of them; and indeed they are not easily discoverable, otherwise then by reason and discourse. 
 The cause of this diversity proceeds not only hence, that these Appetites are more inclin ' d to motion, one then another. For the Will, being disengag ' d from matter, moves more easily then the sensitive Appe∣tite, and this more easily then the natural, in regard it hath, for its subject, a more subtile matter, and con∣sequently more inclinable to motion then it. But it proceeds also from the more or less perfect know∣ledge, which directs them. For as the Understanding knows more perfectly, and more things, then the Ima∣gination, so does it withall inspire the Will with a greater variety of motions, then the other does; and this latter also, having a greater and more exact knowledge, then the natural faculty, does accordingly frame more Passions in the sensitive Appetite than there are in the Natural Appetite. 
 SECT. 5. How the Passions of one Appetite are com∣municated to another. THere is yet another thing to be considered, which is of very great importance, to wit, that the Passions, framed in either of the three Appe∣tites, are ordinarily communicated from one to ano∣ther; so that those of the Will descend into the sen∣sitive Appetite, and the natural Appetite, as theirs do ascend into the Will. For it is certain, that the Will does many times suffer it self to be transported with the Love, Pleasure, and Grief, by which the sensitive Appetite is stirr ' d, in the same manner as Love, and the gladness and sadness of the mind spread themselves into the body, and cause conformable emo∣tions therein. 
 But the difficulty is, to know how this communica∣tion is wrought. For it might seem, since things ma∣terial can have no action upon the spiritual, that nei∣ther sensible goods nor sensible evils can touch the Spirit; nor consequenly, be acceptable or delightful objects thereto. On the other side, though the Un∣derstanding may heighten the Phantasmes of the Imagination, and render them spiritual, yet is it not in the power of the Imagination, to change the Idaea ' s of the Understanding, which are spiritual, into cor∣poreal Phantasms: consequent whereto it is, that the goods and evils of the mind cannot touch the sensitive Soul, nor raise any Passion therein. 
 To answer these reasons, and resolve this great difficulty, we might affirm, with the Schools, that there is a Sympathy between the faculties of the Soul, and that they are so strictly combin ' d together, that it is impossible, one should not have a sentiment of what passes in the other; or haply, that, being all reunited in the substance of the Soul, which is the Centre and principle thereof, and, as it were, the main wheel, which keeps them all in their several motions; It is the Soul her self that causes them to act, one after another, conformably to the actions that are to be done. So that, for example, the Appetite moves, af∣ter the knowledge of Imagination, and the members move after the emotion of the Appetite, in regard there is a certain sympathy betwixt these faculties, or that the Soul excites them, and disposes them to act in that order. 
 This being so, it would be no hard matter to tell how the Passions of one Appetite pass into another, in as much as these powers acting one after another, according to the sympathy there is between them▪ or by the particular direction of the Soul, it is necessary, not onely that the Soul should move, after she hath been enlightned by the Understanding, but it is also requisite, that the Sensitive Appetite should stirr after her; in the same manner as we apprehend, that the Will is oblig ' d to move, as soon as the Imagination hath excited some motion in the Sensitive Appetite. 
 But to deal ingenuously, we must acknowledge, that these opinions do not fully satisfie the mind. For, besides that the word Sympathy is one of those tearms that serve to elude difficulties, and flatter our igno∣rance; it may be farther press ' d, that if, by it onely, the rational Soul and the sensitive communicate their passions to each other, it will be requisite, that there should not be any passion in the latter, which does not ascend into the Will, and that all kinds of sadness should be attended by grief, and in like manner all grief by sadness. But this is not true; since they are onely the greatest sadnesses whereof the body hath any resentment, and that light griefs reach not the mind, and cast it not into sadness. 
 Besides, this Sympathy does not exclude that man∣ner of acting, which is natural to the faculties: it is an order establish ' d by Nature, that the Sensitive Appe∣tite should be enlightned by the magination, and that the Imagination should take cognizance onely of things sensible. How comes it then to pass, that it should know the object of a spiritual passion? On the other side, how are we to conceive, that the Understanding and Will, which are spiritual powers, suffer themselves to be mov ' d by corporeal objects? And how can Grief, for example, be said to excite sadness in the mind, what Sympathy soever may be imagin ' d between these powers? In fine, Sympathy does always presuppose some knowledge; for the Iron ought to feel the presence of the Load-stone, that it may move towards it. And consequently it is re∣quisite, that every Appetite should know the judg∣ment of the faculty, which enlightens it; whereas, in the mean time, the Appetite is a blind-power, and such as hath not any knowledge. 
 Again, if it be said, that it is the substance of the Soul which sets these faculties in action, which yet cannot be done without her having a knowledge of the order they ought to observe in their actions, and a particu∣lar cognizance of the manner, after which the Ap∣petite ought to move in every passion; it will follow, that the Soul ought to have in her self the knowledge of an infinity of things, and that she should know them by her own proper substance, without the as∣sistance of any faculty; an excellency not to be found in any created Being, and to be attributed onely to Divine Nature. 
 Let us therefore endeavour to find out some other plausible means, whereby the Body &amp; Soul may be said to communicate one to the other, the good and evil they resent. To do that, we are to observe, that the Mind, which is the noblest, and most excellent part of Man, is also, as it were, King of that little Monarchy, taking notice of whatsoever passes therein, that is worth the consideration, and having a particular care of the Body, as being the instrument of most of its actions, and, together with it, making up a Whole, in the subsistence and preservation whereof it is no less concern ' d, then in its own. In so much that it is not to be admir ' d, that it should have a certain sentiment of the good or evil things which happen to the other, and that it should frame the same passions, which they raise in the Sensitive Appetite. And this is no hard matter for it to do, in as much as it sees the phan∣tasms, which the imgination hath made thereof, upon which, it frames its idaeas and judgments, and after∣wards presents them to the Will.
By this means is it then, that the passions of the Body are ordinarily communicated to the Mind. But the case is not the same with those of the Mind, in re∣ference to the Body, in as much as it is not by know∣ledge that the Understanding communicates them to the Sensitive Soul, for the reason by us before al∣ledged; but it is immediately done by the motion, which the Will imprints in the sensitive Appetite. For there is no inconvenience in affirming, that the Will moves the Appetite, because motion is common as well to things spiritual as corporeal; but in main∣taining, that the thoughts of the Understanding are communicated to the Imagination, there is, in regard spiritual things cannot ever become corporeal. 
 To clear up this Proposition a little further, we are to observe, that the Will hath an immediate command &amp; superintendency, over all the parts of the Soul and Body, which are moved voluntarily. For it is in its power to move the members, without any interposi∣tion of the Sensitive Appetite; it being unlikely, for example, that, in a resolution which the Understand∣ing hath made to stretch forth the hand, it should be requisite, that that motion be made by the directions of the sensitive Soul, which hath not any apprehensi∣on of the object, or the motive of that action. Now, if it hath this power over the members, with much more reason shall it have the same over the Appetite, which being nearer, and more apt to move, then they are, ought accordingly to be the more subject there∣to; and consequently, the Will may stirr it, and im∣print in it the same motions which it hath given it self. 
 Hence it also follows, that all those things which are in motion, as well the corporeal as the spiritual, pro∣duce, in those others whereto they are apply ' d, a certain motive quality, which may be called Impetuo∣sity, and that is, as it were, an impression and com∣munication of their motion. For, it is by this com∣munication, that the bodies, which are forced or darted, continue the motion they have receiv ' d from the hand, though they be at a distance from it. By the same communication is it also, that Angels do en∣force bodies, &amp; chase away evil Spirits, in regard they have not any vertue or means to act really and phy∣sically on things, other then the motion they imprint in them. 
 This being certain, it follows, that the Will, which moves, should imprint its motion in the sensitive Ap∣petite, and that it should stirr, yet so, as that the latter stand not in need of any precedent knowledge of the imagination. For, though it be true, that the sensi∣tive Appetite cannot move, but it must receive a pre∣vious illumination from that Faculty, yet is this to be understood onely when it moves of it self, and suffers no violence, by any other strange cause, as it is here. 
 Now, as the Will imprints in this Appetite the emotion it gives it self; in like manner, when this lat∣ter is stirr ' d, it communicates its motion to the Will, in regard that, whatsoever moves may imprint its motion on the things which are near it, if they do not oppose it either by the weight, or some contrary motion. For the Will and Appetite do many times oppose one the other, by their contrary agitations; Nor do the members, and other bodies, always obey them, by reason of their weight, which is stronger then the motion imprinted in them by the Will and Appetite. 
 All that may be said hereupon, amounts onely to this, that, in this case, the motions of the Will and Appetite would not be vital actions, which cannot be forc ' d, nor proceed from without, but ought to issue from the ground of that power, by wh ch they are performed. But it may be answer ' d, that the Will and Appetite, having receiv ' d that external motion, move themselves, and produce their own, proper, imma∣nent and vital actions, after the same manner, that a man, who is thrust forward, moves afterwards and goes of himself; or as he who is forc ' d to do some∣thing against his will: For his Will is immediately shaken, by the violence that had been done him; but at last it consents thereto, and moves it self, in order to the performance of the action. So that those ex∣ternal motions which the Appetite and Will reci∣procally give and receive, one from the other, are not real Passions, while those powers move not of themselves. But as there are some springs, or re∣sorts, which immediately move upon the least touch; in like manner, these faculties have such an aptitude to motion, that as soon as ever they have received the impression one from another, they are stirr ' d, &amp; produce real Passions. Not but that it happens very often, they are shaken, yet do not move themselves; and no doubt, when the Will, which would not be transported with any Passion of the sensitive Appe∣tite, does nevertheless feel a sweet violence, which gives her a certain bent towards it, it may be said, that the Will then suffers the impression of the mo∣tion, which it receives from the Appetite; but not that it does stirr, or that any emotion can be attri∣buted thereto. 
 Now the difference there is between the Passions, which are thus excited, consists in this, that the Un∣derstanding hath an immediate sight of the object, whereby the sensitive Appetite hath been moved; But the Imagination, which cannot know the object of the Will, observing the motion excited by this latter in the Appetite, frames to it self an object and motive conformable to that motion, and so renders the Passion compleat, just as it does in dreams, in that kind of Love which proceeds purely from In∣clination, and in those Passions, which Musick inspires, as we have said elswhere. For we have shewn, that, when the Soul observes, in the Appetite or Spirits, some motion, which is proper to Passion, though she be ignorant of the object, which raises that motion, frames to her self another of it, which is proportio∣nable to that Passion. Hence it comes to pass, that a man, who falls asleep upon his anger, represents to himself, in his dreams, enemies and fighting, in regard the disturbance rais ' d in the Spirits is observ ' d by the Imagination, which afterwards frames to its self objects, conformable to that motion. 
 The same thing may be said of Musick, and the fore∣mentioned Love of Inclination; for both of these imprint in the Spirits such motions, as being like those of the Passions, cause the Soul, which takes notice of them, to represent to her self such objects, as are proper to those Passions, and so to frame the Passions themselves. 
 However it be, this is deducible hence, that when the Imagination hath felt the emotion excited by the Will in the Appetite, it frames to its self such an ob∣ject, as is requisite, for the producing of that Passion. But it is an uncertain, and confused object, which does not precisely determine it; and therefore it many times happens, that in such a case, a man cannot give any reason why he is sad or merry, and though he be sensible of the Good or Evil, yet can he not specifie which it is. 
 SECT. 6. What is the Seat and first Subject of the Appetite. BY all we have hitherto said, it is sufficiently ap∣parent, that the Appetite is the first Subject of the Passions, because they are motions, and that the Appetite is the only part of the Soul, which moves. But as the Soul is the Form of the Body, and the fa∣culties have certain proper Organs, wherein they reside, and where they act, we are now to examine, what part of the Body it is, which serves for a Seat to the Appetite, and where it frames its first moti∣ons; for this examination is necessary to our de∣sign, since we shall be ever and anon oblig ' d, to speak of the place, whence the Passions have their first rise. 
 We are then in the first place to suppose, that the Faculties of the Soul are inseparable from its sub∣stance, and that whereever she is, they also are. But in regard that, of these, there are some, which stand in need of Organs, in order to action, though they are in all places where the Soul is, yet they act only in their own Organs. 
 Those Faculties which are Spiritual, being not con∣fin ' d to matter, do not stand in need of Organs, and consequently, they are, and act, in all places, where the Soul is, as the Understanding and Will. For though the actions of the Understanding are more apparent in the Head, and those of the Will, in the Heart, then they are any where else, yet is it not to be conceiv ' d, that these two parts are the Organs thereof; but, because the faculties, subservient to them, are in those places, and that we commonly attribute, to those high powers, the actions of those faculties which are subservient thereto, as we attri∣bute to the Prince, what is done by his Ministers. 
 But the case is otherwise in the Corporeal Facul∣ties, for it is requisite, that they should be restrain ' d to some part of the Body, which serves them for a subject, and instrument, in order to the performance of their functions. And it is out of all doubt, that the Sensitive and Natural Appetites are of that or∣der; but there is a great dispute among Philoso∣phers, to know, which is the proper seat of either of them. 
 Art. 1. What is the Seat of the Sensitive Appetite. AS to the Sensitive Appetite, we find by expe∣rience, that, in any Passion whatsoever, the Heart is troubled and mov ' d, and that there are very few, how secret soever they may be, which may not be discover ' d, by the beating of the Arteries. The ordinary manner of speaking, nay indeed Religion it self, will have it, that this part should not only be a source of all the Passions, which cause any altera∣tion in the Body, but also, of all the affections and mo∣tions of the Soul; so that we may affirm it to be the Seat, Subject, and principal Organ of the sensitive Appetite. 
 But we see further, that in Insects and Serpents, the parts, after separation from the Heart, discover sense and motion, when they are touch ' d. Nay some have observ ' d, that, in the more perfect Animals, the Members move for a certain time, after this part hath been taken away from them. And we are as∣sur ' d, by our late observations, that, before the for∣mation of the Heart and Brain, there is motion and sentiment in the Embryo. To be short, Hunger and Thirst are two sensitive Appetites, and it is generally acknowledg ' d, that the mouth of the Stomach, and not the Heart, is the real subject thereof. Nay, there is no sensible part can be so slightly wounded, as not to move at the same instant, and yet it cannot be said, that the Heart is the cause of that motion. And therefore, it seems probable, that the Appetite ought to be whereever there is sentiment, since the Sense enlightens the Appetite, and that the latter cannot move without it. And thence some have imagin ' d, that the Brain, which is the principle of sentiment, and the Organ of the Imagination, should also have the same relation to the sensitive Appetite. 
 From all these observations it may be concluded, that there are two kinds of sensitive Appetite; one, which is general and common, regarding the conser∣vation of the whole Animal, such as is that which frames the ordinary Passions of Love, Hate, &amp;c. the other, particular and proper to every part. The first, no doubt, is plac ' d in the Heart, which is the spring of Life, and the Centre, from which do pro∣ceed all the powers, whereby the Animal is govern ' d. The second hath its seat in every part, as Hunger and Thirst, in the Stomach. 
 But considering further, that these two Appetites are of one and the same nature, having the same mo∣tions, the same objects, and the same end, and that they differ one from the other, but as homogenial parts of the same whole, it is accordingly requisite, that they should have one subject, which ought also to be of the same nature; And consequently, it is ne∣cessary, that there should be in the Heart, and in every part, some Organ, which may be common, in order to its being the chief Subject of that Faculty, which is common to them. 
 To discover this, we are to remember, and reflect on what we said before, to wit, that all the powers of the Soul are inseparable from her substance, and that, nevertheless, they do not act whereever she is, but only in certain parts. Now, this cannot proceed from any thing, but the particular disposition, which those parts have, to be assistant to their actions, whether they be more proper to receive the Impres∣sion of the objects, as for instance the Eye, which ought to be transparent, that it might give passage to Light, and the visible Species, and so of the other Senses; or that they are more proper to execute the motion, which the Soul ought to make; as the Muscles are the instruments of voluntary motions, in regard they consist of tendons and flesh, which are capable of contraction, without which these motions cannot be made. 
 This presuppos ' d, as a truth not to be brought into dispute, it is requisite, that the part, wherein the Ap∣petite hath its immediate residence, should be pro∣per to the action it ought to do; and whereas there is no other action then motion, it is also necessary, that the said part should have the dispositions proper to motion. Now there is not any disposition more proper to motion then Levity and Rarity, and con∣sequently, it is requisite, that the Organ, and first Subject of the Appetite, should be of a rare and light matter, and that it should be present in all those places, where all the motions of the Appetite are made. So that there not being any part, whereto this may be attributed, but only the Spirits, it fol∣lows, that the Appetite hath its residence in them, as its first and chiefest subject. 
 But in regard there are two kinds of Spirits in general, those that are fixt and restrain ' d to some part, which are the first Bonds, whereby the Soul and Body are joyned together▪ and those, which are errant and unconfin ' d, which distribute to all the members, the heat particularly assign ' d them by the heart: it is requisite, that they should be the fixt Spirits, that have the Prerogative, of being the first subject of the Appetite, for it is the part the most apt to motion, of any that enter into the composition of the Members; one that hath a durable and permanent consistence, as the Appetite, and is without dispute animate; it being certain, that the faculties of the Soul cannot be in a subject, which is not animate. For it is not to be imagin ' d, that the errant Spirits, which are not only depriv ' d of Soul, and Life, as it is commonly held, but also have not any durable subsistence, no more then the Flame, which assoon as lighted is thence-forward continually decaying, can support a Faculty of the Soul, which is fixt and permanent, as the Appetite is.
Whence it may be concluded, that the Heart is indeed the Seat of the generall Appetite, but it is, by reason of the fixt Spirits, which enter into its com∣position; and the case is the same of every Mem∣ber, in reference to the particular Appetite. 
 Art. 2. The Seat of the naturall Appetite. ALl that we have said of the Sensitive Appetite may be apply ' d to the Naturall Appetite. For of this also there are two kinds; one Generall, which hath a care of the whole Body, and is accordingly plac ' d in the heart; and this is the same with that which disperses the Spirits and humours into all the parts, which shakes them in Fevers, and makes the Crises, and such like motions, which regard the whole Body. The other is Particular, and hath its Seat in every part; it attracts what is good for it, it drives away what is hurtfull, it causes the contraction of the Fibres, the convulsion of the Nerves, &amp;c. 
 But whereas the Sensitive Appetite is not plac ' d in the Heart and other parts, but upon the accompt of the fixt Spirits, which enter into their composition, the case is the same with the Naturall Appetite; they are also the same Spirits, which serve it for a first subject, and first Organ, upon the same grounds as they are so of the other. For since that part is the most apt to motion, of any of the Vegetative Soul, it should accordingly have a Subject, furnished with the dispositions proper to make its motions, and there are not any other then these Spirits, as we said be∣fore. 
 I question not but some will make this Objection against what hath been deliver ' d, That diverse Facul∣ties require diverse Organs, and that these two Ap∣petites, being different, not only in the Species, but also in the Genus, as belonging to several orders of the Soul, cannot have for their subject the same Spi∣rits. But it is easily answer ' d, since we have experi∣ence on our side, and opposite to these maximes: for the same animal Spirits dispose of sentiment and mo∣tion; the same Substance of the Brain becomes the subject of all the superiour powers of the Sensitive Soul; and the flesh, as simple as it is, hath both the sensitive and vegetative vertue. 
 But after all, the motion of the sensitive Appetite is not different from that of the naturall Appetite, as to the nature and species of motion; it is made after the same manner in both, and all the diversity found therein is accidental, and not relating to the motion. For it proceeds only from the cause and condition of the object that moves it, which are things not relating to the motion. In the one, it is the Sensitive faculty, that moves for the sensible good or evil; in the other, the natural faculty moves, for the natural good or evil: but both move after the same manner, and frame the same Passions; as we have shewn, and consequently, there is not any inconvenience, that these two powers should have the same Subject, in order to the same action. 
 We have not any thing to add hereto, save that, according as the parts have a greater or lesser por∣tion of these fixt Spirits, they have proportionably one or the other Appetite more strong and vigorous. As also, that the general Appetite and particular Ap∣petite, do many times assist one the other, and many times also they act distinctly. But we shall ever and anon have occasion to hint at these matters, when we come to treat of the Passions in particular. 
 Art. 3. How the Passions are compleated. NOw to put a period to that which appertains to the general discourse of the Passions we are to consider all the passes in the body, after the emotion of the Soul, and the fixt Spirits. For though the nature of every Passion consists in this emotion, yet may it be said, that it is not compleat, if there be not joyn ' d thereto the agitation, which the Heart endures, and the alteration which is occasion ' d in the whole body. 
 We are therefore to observe, that, after the Soul hath been mov ' d, the Heart and vital Spirits follow her motion; and if she would execute without, what she hath propos ' d in her self, she at last causes the Muscles to move, in the Passions of the Will and sen∣sitive Appetite, and the Fibres, in those of the natu∣ral Appetite; in regard the Muscles are the instru∣ments of voluntary motion, as the Fibres are of that which is made by the natural Appetite. But how these motions are made, we shall treat more at large in the ensuing Chapter. 
 CHAP. IV. Of the Motion of the Heart, and Spirits, in the Passions. THe motion of the Heart is made for the Spi∣rits, and that of the Spirits, for the whole Body. For the Heart is mov ' d in order to the production and conservation of the Spirits, and these are also moved, for the communication of the vital heat to all the parts, to bring into them the aliment, whereby they are to be nourish ' d, and to transport the humours from one place to ano∣ther, as the Soul thinks it necessary; as it happens in the Passions, as also in Crises, and upon other oc∣casions. 
 That this may be the better comprehended, it is requisite, that we ascend to a higher disquisition of things, and since there is so much spoken of the Spi∣rits, our next examination must be, to find out, what they are, of what matter they are compos ' d, and how they are framed. And indeed, it may be affirm ' d, that neither Philosophy nor Medicine have suf∣ficiently explain ' d themselves, upon this Subject, and the difficulties they have left therein give every man the liberty, to propose his conjectures, in order to the clearing up of a thing so obscure, and so intricate. 
 Art. 1. Of the Nature of the Spirits. WIthout engaging our selves upon an exact dis∣quisition of the Elements, whereof bodies are compos ' d, it is a thing both certain, and sensibly ac∣knowledg ' d, that there are three sorts of parts, which enter into the composition of all mixt bodies. Of those parts some are subtile, active and volatile; o∣thers gross, passive, and heavy; and the third are moist, as being design ' d to joyn together those two so opposite extreams. For they have somewhat of the subtilty of the first, and of the grossness of the others; and when these are resolved, the whole mixt body is destroy ' d, in regard they are the ce∣ment, whereby all the parts are united together. 
 Those subtile parts are called Spirits; inasmuch as they have so little matter, and so much activity, that they seem not fit to be ranked among bodies; and while they are united with the others, they serve for principal Organs to the forms, as being the most active parts; and they are as it were the bond, which keeps them within the body. The reason whereof is, that Nature, which ever joyns the extreams by a certain mean, that hath some rapport thereto, em∣ploys the subtile parts, which have little of matter, to joyn and unite the forms, which have not any, to the grosser parts, that have much. 
 True it is, that they may be separated, and yet be afterwards conserv ' d, as we find by experience, in distillations; for so it is, that the Spirit of Wine, Sul∣phur, &amp;c. is extracted. And being so extracted, though they lose the use they had when they were united to their natural forms, yet do they not lose any thing of their substance, or subtilty. 
 Art. 2. Of the matter of the Spirits. NOw as Plants are nourish ' d by the juices which they draw out of the Earth, so have these juices their subtile and spirituous parts, as well as all the o∣ther Mixt bodies: which parts, not being lost, as we said before, pass into the Animals, which feed on those Plants as those of the Animals pass into such, as they become nourishment to. So that it is not to be doubted but that the blood is full of these subtile essences, which the natural heat after∣wards digests and refines in the veins, to be made the instruments of the Soul: and that they are the mat∣ter us ' d by Nature to frame, and entertain the vital Spirits; since subtile things are to be made of those which are of the same nature with them. 
 Art. 3. How the Spirits are framed. BUt to find out the secret of all this Oeconomy, we are to represent to our selves, that the blood, which is in the Hollow Vein, enters into the right ventricle of the Heart, where it is warm ' d, by the heat and motion of that part, which is the hottest of any about the body. After its being warm ' d there, it issues out boyling and reeking, and enters into the Lungs, where it meets with the air, attracted in by respiration, which by its coolness thickens the fumes, which it exhales from all parts, which fumes are no other then the spirituous parts, wherewith it is fill ' d, and which, upon the accession of the least heat, are separated and evaporated. So that Nature does, in this, what commonly happens in the distilling of Aqua-Vitae, in which work, there is cold water cast about the Recipient, as it were, to gather together, and reduce into a body the spirits of the wine, then chang ' d into vapour, and to promote their passage along with the others. Thence it comes, that the vein, which carries this reeking blood into the Lungs, is as big as an Artery, as it were to prevent the dis∣sipation, which might be made thereof, before it be so cooled. On the contrary, the Artery which re∣ceives it, after it hath been cool ' d, is as small as any vein; there being not then any fear of dissipation. And it is not unlikely, that this is the reason, why that Artery hath but two valvula, whereas the other Vessels which enter into the Heart have three. For as these valvulae, whatever some others may be plea∣sed to say, were made only to prevent the impetuo∣sity of the blood, which is to enter into the heart, and afterwards to come out of it; so was there not any necessity that the veiny Artery should have so many obstacles, to retain the impetuosity of the blood it carries, in regard it must needs have left much thereof, after it hath been cool ' d, and temperated, by the air, which is in the Lungs. 
 But however it be, hence proceeds the indispensa∣ble necessity of respiration; for if those parts of the blood, which are so reduc ' d into fumes, should not be condens ' d, and reassume a kind of body, they would be immediately dissipated: And whereas this must be the matter of the Spirits, as being the most subtile, and most pure portion thereof, there would not be made any new generation, if nature had not found out a means to condense these vapours, by the coolness of the air, which is continually attracted by the Lungs. Thence it comes, that there is no pos∣sibility of continuing long without respiration, in re∣gard that, all parts of the body standing in need of the continuall influence of the Spirits, it is requisite, the Heart should continually repair them, and that cannot be done without respiration, for the reason we gave before. 
 Art 4. An Objection against the precedent Doctrine answered. I Know well enough that the common Doctrine would have the Air to enter into the composition of the Spirits, and that natural heat, nay indeed fire it self, stands in need of air to moderate th m, as not being able to conserve themselves without it; And that this is the reason why respiration is necessary, in regard it conducts air to the Heart, and moderates the excessive heat thereof. But we are taught by Anatomical observations, that there is not any ves∣sel, which conducts the air into that part, and that the veiny Artery, which was heretofore conceiv ' d to serve for that use, is alwaies full of blood, and does undoubtedly convey, to the Heart, all that which is entered into the Lungs. Besides, it may be urged, that Fishes have their vital Spirits, though there be not any air, which may contribute to their produ∣ction. True it is, they have the motion of the Gills, as also of the holes, at which they sprout out the water, and that is answerable to that of the Lungs, and causes the same effect, with the water, which they ever and anon attract, as the Lungs do, with the air they respire. 
 Yet is there not any thing to be deduc ' d hence, which may imply my not being of opinion, that the air respir ' d, which is all full of these spirituous parts exhal ' d by all bodies, do not furnish the vitall Spirits, with some portion of themselves, which being mixt therewith passes and insinuates it self into the Heart and Arteries, through the Pores of the Vessels. Hence it comes, that Animals are sensible of the qua∣lities of the air, which they respire; and Hippocrates affirms, that the most sudden nourishment is wrought by odors. But this is a thing happens by chance, and is not to be admitted into the design of Nature And as to the cooling or refreshment, which is caused by the air, it is not intended to moderate the excess of the heat; but for the reason given by us before, which is common to fire and the spirits: For the coldness of the air condenses the exhalations which should be enflam ' d, it gathers them together, and hinders their rarefaction and dispersion. And therefore, when it is very cold, the fire is the more violent and scorching, in regard the matter of the flame suffers a greater contraction; And the light of the Sun diminishes the heat of the fire, in regard it rarifies and disperses the exhalation, which feeds it. Not but that the air does moderate the heat of the Heart, when it is vio∣lent; but that is not the main end, at which Nature aims; it is only a slender service, and convenience, which she derives, by the by, from her principal de∣sign. 
 But howere it be, this is certain, that after the blood, which came out of the right ventricle, hath travers ' d the Lungs, it is discharged into the left, where, it may be said, it is return ' d into the furnace, and is stirr ' d and agitated afresh, and where its more subtile parts are so refin ' d, that they acquire all the dispositions, necessary to Spirits, to make them vital, and then they are endu ' d with the form and vertue thereof, and assume the place and function of those, which have been distributed to the parts. 
 Art. 5. Why the heart moves. FRom what hath been deliver ' d, it may be inferr ' d, that the motion of the Heart serves for the ge∣neration of Spirits; But that that should be the principal motive, which oblig ' d Nature to give it that motion, is what cannot be easily affirm ' d. For, in a word, all Animals have those sorts of spirits, but all have not that motion; so that this may be stood up∣on, that it is not absolutely necessary to their genera∣tion.
In effect, they are the general Organs of all the functions of the Soul, and all the faculties, what order soever they are of, equally employ them in their ser∣vice. They are serviceable as to life, sentiment, mo∣tion, nay reason it self, and in the highest meditati∣ons, they are stirr ' d, as well as in natural actions. They are like an Instrument, whereof divers Artizans make use, in several works. For as the same pair of Compasses, wherewith a Mason hath taken his mea∣sures, serves the Geometrician, to draw his figures; and the Astronomer, to measure the Heavens and the Stars. So the Spirits, which have serv ' d the natural faculty, for the meanest actions of life, are employ ' d, by the sensitive Soul, in the animal functions, and the Understanding it self makes use of them, in operations of the highest consequence. 
 But what! their motion is not free in the Passions, as it might seem it ought to be, if the sensitive Appe∣tite were Director thereof, as it is of voluntary mo∣tions. It matters not, since even the Animal Spirits, which flow through the nerves, to make those moti∣ons, and no doubt are mov ' d by the sensitive Appe∣tite, have not their motion more free, then that which is made in the Veins and Arteries. The necessity of motion is many times found in the sensitive faculty, as well as in the natural; and though the Muscles be the Organs of free motion, yet we find, that respi∣ration, which is wrought by their means, is necessary; that the motion of the Heart, which is as it were a composure of several Muscles, and receives a Nerve from the Brain, to give it sentiment and motion, is not to be ranked among those that are voluntary. Nay the Will it self, notwithstanding that Soveraign liberty which it hath, is not free in its first sallies, and what time soever it may take to consider of the Good and Evil, yet is it not in its power, to hate the Good, and love the Evil. 
 Whence then proceeds this diversity? Doubtless from the Instinct, which is a Law that forces the Soul to do what it commands for the welfare of the Ani∣mal. It is this Law that guids all the actions of the Natural faculty, that assigns the sensitive Soul the motions which she ought to make, not only those that are not to be balked, as those of the Heart and Lungs, and those of the Animal Spirits; but also all those that are done casually, wherein the knowledge of the Senses is of no advantage. For though the mo∣tion of the Spirits in the Passions be not made pre∣cisely by it, yet does the Soul cause them to do it, ac∣cording to the coppy which the Instinct gives her upon other occasions, as we have shewn elswhere. 
 Art. 1. Of what kind the motion of the Heart and Spi∣rits is in the other Passions. THus far as to what concerns the motion of the Heart and Spirits in the Passions of the sensitive Appetite; we now come to examine, whether it be performed after the manner, in those of the Will and natural Appetite. 
 We may in the first place affirm, that there are many Passions rais ' d in the Will, so as that neither the Heart, nor Spirits are thereby stirr ' d, in regard it is a spiritual Faculty, which may act of it self without the assistance of any Organ. But it is to be observ ' d, that they must be very slight ones; for when they come to be of any force, they fail not both of them to be mov ' d thereby, as well as in the Passions of the sensitive Ap∣petite. 
 Not but that the Will, consider ' d in it self, might be able alone, to excite the most violent Passions, as we know it does in Angels. But in Man, in whom there is an union between the Corporeal and Spiri∣tual faculties, it is impossible, but that one must assist and relieve the other, when any considerable Good or Evil presents it self to either of them. Which happens either hence, that there is a necessary com∣munication of their motions one to the other, as we have declared; or that the Soul, upon such occasions; is distrustful of her own strength, and would rally together all the forces she hath. Thence it comes, that she thinks it not enough to move the sensitive Appetite, in extraordinary Griefs, to shun the Evil that presses hard upon her, but she also excites sad∣ness, in the superiour part, in order to the same de∣sign: and as if all that were not sufficient, she many times raises a Fever in the natural Faculty, to force away and destroy that enemy. 
 As to the Passions of that inferiour part of the Soul, there is not any one, wherein the Spirits are not stirr ' d▪ but it is requisite, they should be violent ere they can move the Heart. For the case is not the same in them, as in those of the other Appetites, which, though ever so much inclining to mediocrity, are nevertheless capable of altering her motion. Ac∣cordingly, we find, that, in wounds and swellings, the Spirits have their recourse thither, with a certain impetuosity, yet so as there happens not any change in the beating of the Heart and Arteries; and there are considerable evacuations made in Crises, without any alteration in those motions. But, in a Fever, which is the choler of the natural Appetite, in the Consternation, which Nature is sometimes subject to, in malignant diseases, and in the agonies immediately preceding death, there may be observ ' d a remarkable alteration in the Pulse. 
 The reason of this difference proceeds from the nature of the Vegetative Faculty, which is more ma∣terial, and consequently more heavy, then the Sen∣sitive. For as a slothful person engages himself only in those things, that are most easily done, and never undertakes the more difficult, but when he is thereto constrain ' d by necessity: So that faculty, which is mov ' d with some trouble, thinks it enough, in the lighter Passions to stirr the Spirits, because they are easily mov ' d; but it attempts not therein the mo∣ving of the Heart, by reason that is an Engine stirr ' d with greater difficulty, unless it be when the Evil seems considerable, and that it thinks it requisite to imploy all its organs, and all its force, towards the re∣sistance thereof. 
 SECT. 4. How the Soul causes the Body to move. BUt we are not yet come to the most difficult point of any, in this whole matter, to wit, how the Soul gives motion to the Heart and Spirits, and, to express it in a word, how she causes all the parts to move. For it is hard enough to conceive how a thing, which hath no body, is able to move a Body, and yet much more, to imagine, that, what is it self immove∣able, as it may be thought the Soul is, can cause the members of the Animal to move. It is indeed easily seen, that they move, by the means of the Muscles, and that the Muscles act by the contraction of the Fi∣bres, which enter into their composition. But the que∣stion is, how the Soul causes that contraction of the Fibres. 
 Let not any one think to urge here, that the Ap∣petite commands the motive vertue, which is in the members, and that the said vertue executes what commands it hath received from the other. These are but words, which, instead of clearing up the thing, render it more obscure and hard to be comprehen∣ded: And he who shall narrowly consider the nature of that command, and the manner how it may be made by the Appetite, as also, that, whereby it ought to be receiv ' d by the motive vertue, will be no fur∣ther instructed in what we enquite after, then he was before, and shall not find how the Fibres meet toge∣ther and are contracted. 
 To express our selves therefore clearly, and in few words, in order to the clearing up of these difficul∣ties, we affirm, that all the parts are mov ' d, in regard the Soul, between whom and them there is a strict union, moves her self, and that she forces them to fol∣low the same motion which she hath given herself: So that the Fibres are contracted, because the Soul, by whom they are animated, closes and reinforces her self first, and afterwards causes them to contract. 
 The same thing is to be said of the Spirits for when they go from one place to another, when they dilate or contract themselves in the Passions, it is the Soul that gives them these motions, consequently to her giving of them to her self. 
 This will not be hard to conceive, it we reflect on what was said in the fourth Chapter of this work, where we have shewn, that the Soul was movable in all her substance, and, having a proper extension she had also some parts, which she might move as she pleas ' d. For, this presuppos ' d, it is certain, that being united with the members, it is impossible she should give her self any motion, but she must also give the like to them. 
 But it may be said, that, if the case stands thus, there is no necessity, the Animal Spirits should flow into the Muscles, to cause them to move, in asmuch as the Soul, being wholy in every part, hath no need that those Spirits should convey into it that vertue, which it is already possess ' d of. We have already touch ' d at this difficulty, which hath put all the Scholes into so much distraction. For some would have the Animal Spirits carry the motive faculty along with them; and others affirm, that what they do so carry with them, is only a certain quality, which is not animal, and serves only for a disposition, to set the motive faculty, residing in the parts, upon action. 
 But the maintainers of both these opinions are, no doubt, mistaken, though it were only in this, that they suppose, as they do, the Spirits not to be animate; the former, in that they assign animal vertues to Bodies, which they conceive have no life; the latter, in that they advance an imaginary quality, whereof they make no explication, and which leaves the thing as doubtful at is was before. 
 We must therefore affirm, that the Animal Spirits do not convey the motive vertue to the parts, but that the command of the Estimative faculty does it, without which there can no motion be made. 
 That this may be the better understood, we are to remember, what hath been delivered in the prece∣dent discourses; to wit, That the Appetite moves not but upon the command of the Estimative faculty, which orders what things are to be done; That the said command consists in the Image, or Idaea which that faculty frames in it self; And that after such an Image hath been therein produced, it is multiplicable and diffusive, as a light, into all the parts of the Soul. 
 Now it is by the Spirits that this communication is wrought. For, as corporeal actions are done by means of the Organs that are proper thereto, so knowledge ought to be made in the Brain, in which are all the Organs necessary for that action. And whereas the parts, which ought to execute what the Estimative Faculty commands, are remote from it, there is a necessity, the Soul should have certain mi∣nisters, whose work it is, to carry about the resoluti∣ons she hath taken in her Privy-councel, without which, as in a well-govern ' d Commonwealth, nothing either ought or can be done. 
 And this is the proper imployment of the Animal Spirits, which communicate the orders and decrees of the Estimative Faculty to the parts, which, upon re∣ceipt thereof, move, as we said before. 
 CHAP V. Of the Vertues and Vices, whereof the Art how to know men may judge. SInce The Art how to kn w Men pretends to the discovery of Vertues, and Vices, how secret so∣ever they may be, it may be also expected from it, that it would acquaint us, what Vertues and Vi∣ces are thereby meant; and withall, whether it hath that prerogative as to all in general, or only as to some of them. In order to the prosecution of that design, it ought to make an enumeration thereof, that it nay afterwards give us a particular account of those which are within its jurisdiction, and falls under its cognizance.
But before we come to that, this is to be premis ' d, as of necessary knowledge, that the Vertues and Vi∣ces are certain Habits, fram ' d in the Soul, by se∣veral Moral actions, which, often reiterated, leave in her an inclination and facility to do the like. 
 Art. 1. What Moral actions are. FOr the clearing up of this doctrine, we are to ob∣serve, that our Souls may do two kinds of actions, whereof some are necessary the others free. The for∣mer are called in the Scholes the Actions of Man ; and those which are free, Humane Actions, in regard they are proper to man, as he is Rational, he only, of all Animals, having liberty. 
 There are some who confound the latter with the Moral Actions, which have a reference to good and evil manners, which deserve praise or dispraise, re∣ward or punishment. But if among the free actions, there are such as may be called indifferent, which are neither good nor bad, as many Philosophers are of opinion, it is necessary there should be some diffe∣rence between Humane Actions and Moral Actions, and that the former should be as it were the Genus of the latter; so as that all Moral Actions may be Hu∣mane, in regard they are free, and that all Humane Actions may not be Moral, in regard there be some, which are neither good nor bad. 
 Art. 2. What Right Reason is. BUt howere the case stand, as to the distinction of Actions, it is to be noted, that the Moral are good or bad, according to their conformity or contrariety to Right Reason. Now Right Reason is a just knowledge of the end and means, which Man ought to have, to arrive to his perfection. And his perfection consists in two points; that of the Understanding, to know the Truth, and that of the Will, to attain the Soveraign Good, for which he is design ' d. In a word, it is said, that Art is a habit of the Understanding, causing a man to operate according to Right Rea∣son; and that Vertue is a habit of the Will, which makes a man act according to Right Reason. So that there is one Right Reason for the Understanding, and another for the Will; one, leading to Truth; the o∣ther, tending to Good. 
 This Right Reason, or Knowledge, proceeds ei∣ther from God, or from Nature, or from Ratiocina∣tion. For God makes Men to know what he desires they should do; and that knowledge is the Soveraign rule of our thoughts and actions. Nature also does inspire men with a general knowledge, which is as it were the first guide she gives us, to conduct our mind whither it ought to go. Under this knowledge do fall the common Notions, which contribute to the attainment of the Speculative Sciences; as also those natural Laws, whereby our manners are regulated. In fine, Ratiocination, assisted by these first appre∣hensions and experience, hath found out Rules for Arts and Sciences, civil Laws, for the maintenance of society among men, and Maxims, for the conduct of every one in particular: And he, who acts accor∣ding to any one of these lights, acts according to Right Reason. But to keep as close as may be to our subject, we are, from all we have said, to conclude, that Moral Actions are conformable to Right Reason, when they are regulated either by divine Law, or by natural and civil Laws, or by the Ratiocination of Mo∣ral Philosophy. 
 Art. 3. Why the Vertues are in the mean. NOw, among the many rules, which this part of Philosophy does furnish us withall, there is one that hath an influence almost over the whole matter whereof we treat. This is, that the actions of the Will and sensitive Appetite, and the Vertues them∣selves, which they produce, ought to consist in a me∣diocrity, not inclining to either excess or defect. Hence it is that Vertue alwaies keeps the mean be∣tween two Vices, which are opposite one to the other. And though there are some, which seem to be ex∣empted out of this rule, as for example, Justice and Charity, and some others; yet is there a certain me∣diocrity which even those ought to observe, as we are taught by the Scholes. 
 The reason upon which this mediocrity is groun∣ded is hard enough to be found. For that which is commonly alledged, to wit, that the conformity of actions to Right Reason, consists in this, that there is neither more nor less in the actions, then ought to be, and that the disconformity observable therein proceeds from the addition of some thing or some circumstance, which is not suitable thereto, or the substraction of those that are; and that this Addi∣tion and Substraction makes the excess and defect of the actions: This reason, I say, presupposes what is in the Question; for it may be ask ' d why these things and these circumstances are or are not suitable thereto; and a man may maintain which side he pleases. 
 I conceive it therefore much more pertinent, to affirm, that the mediocrity of actions is grounded on the Indifference, which is proper and natural to the Soul. For an action being nothing but a progressi∣on, and as it were an efflux or effusion of the Active power, ought accordingly to be conformable to that power; And consequently the humane Soul being indifferent and indeterminate, in regard that, in power, she is all things, it is requisite that her actions should be so too: and thence does proceed, not only the liberty she hath to do them, or not do them, but also the mediocrity, which she gives them, when they are done by her. For though she be then de∣termin ' d by the action, whereto she applies herself, yet does she therein preserve her indifference by the mediocrity, wherein she disposes it, in asmuch as what is in the midst is indifferent, as to the extremities, and what is in the extremity, is more determin ' d then what is in the midst. Hence it comes, that the mo∣tions of the sensitive Appetite, which, in all other Animals, are the more perfect, the more they are in∣clin ' d to the excess and defect which is natural there∣to, ought to be moderate in Man, in regard that he being subject to Reason, it is requisite they should be conformable thereto as we said before. 
 Those Moral Actions therefore, which are dispos ' d according to tha mediocrity, which is prescribed by Right Reason, are good and commendable, and those that are chargable with any excess or defect, are evil, and destitute of moral honesty and cannot pre∣tend to commendation. They are called Vertuous and Vicious, yet so as that they do not communicate that denomination to the persons, by whom they are done. For a man is not called vertuous or vicious, upon his doing of a good or bad action; but, to gain that name, it is requisite, he should do many, and that he should acquire the Habit thereof; in asmuch as he he cannot be so called, but upon his having of Vertue or Vice, which, as we said before, are Habits. 
 Art 4. Of the Seat of Moral Habits. BUt where shall we find these Habits, and in what part of the Soul are they framed? The difficulty lyes not, in reference to the Understanding, nor the Will, in regard it is necessary that the Habits should have their rise in those Faculties, whereby the actions are done, since the actions produce the habits. And there is no doubt to be made, but that those Moral Actions, which ought to be done with liberty and election, proceed from the Understanding and the Will, which are free powers, and consequently, that Vertues and Vices are in those Faculties, as in their true and proper subject. The Question then is only in reference to the sensitive Appetite, to wit, whether it be capable of Vertues and Vices, since it is such a faculty as is not free, nor can take cognizance of Right Reason, which is the rule of all Moral actions? And what breeds the dif∣ficulty as to this point, is, that the sensitive Appetite is subject to the Superiour faculties, and that its mo∣tions enter into Vertuous or Vicious actions, accor∣ding as it moderates them, or permits them to be chargeable with excess or defect. So that if these motions, often reiterated, do leave therein an incli∣nation and facility to do the like, it shall be a Habit, which, as it seems, can be no other then a Vertue or Vice. And thus the sensitive Appetite shall be sus∣sceptible of either of them, as well as the Will. 
 Now it is certain, that there are habits fram ' d in the sensitive Appetite, as may be deduced from the instruction given to beasts, as also from the facility, wherewith our Appetite is inclin ' d to certain actions after it hath done them several times. To this may be added, that, being a power, which is not deter∣minated to one peculiar manner of acting, and hath its motions sometimes stronger, sometimes weaker, towards the same object, it is impossible, but that it should be capable of some habits, and that the actions, it often reiterates, should leave in it the same facility, which all the other faculties, acting after the same manner, are acknowledg ' d to have. 
 To rid our hands of these doubts, we are to lay it down as a certain ground, that the Habits, which Beasts acquire, cannot be ranked among Vertues and Vices, and consequently, that the sensitive Appetite of man, which is of the same order with that of Beasts, is not, of it self, capable of having any other habits then they are. 
 But if it be further considered, that in Moral acti∣ons, the Will ever acts along with it, there is fram ' d, at the same time, one habit in the Will, and another in the sensitive Appetite. The former is really ver∣tuous or vicious; the latter, indifferent, as being neither good nor bad. And in regard they are not distinguish ' d, there is attributed to the sensitive Ap∣petite what belongs only to the Will. So that all may be said of these last habits, amounts only to this, that they serve for matter and body to the vertues and vices, whereof the form and essence is in the Will; And that the vertues, which are in the Will, are living and animate vertues, and the productions of them are, merit, esteem and praise, whereas those of the sensitive Appetite are (if we may be permi∣ted so to express our selves) but ude draughts and pictures, without life and soul, having not the vigour to produce any of those things, unless it be when they are accompany ' d by the other. 
 For, when any person is naturally inclin ' d to Tem∣perance, he may acquire the habit thereof, but it shall not be a vertue, deserving either praise or reward, if the Will do not contribute somewhat thereto. Nay it is further requisite, that the Will be illuminated by Right Reason, otherwise the habit, which it shall have contracted, shall be of the same order with those of the sensitive Appetite. Whereto this may be ad∣ded, that the said Habit shall be vicious, since it is conceiv ' d, the Will hath not made the advantages it ougth of the illumination, whereby it should have been guided. It is not sufficient that it should do good actions, but requisite that it should do them well. And thence comes it to be commonly said, that Ver∣tue consists rather in Adverbs, then Adjectives, and that to deserve the name of just, it is not only expe∣cted, that the things be just, but also that they be just∣ly done. 
 Now in order to their being so done, there is a ne∣cessity of having knowledge, of making choice of the means &amp; circumstances; in a word, of following the di∣rections of Right Reason, which are actions, whereto the sensitive faculty cannot attain, unless it be indi∣rectly. For it is to be observ ' d, that Right Reason being a knowledge, fram ' d by intellectual Images, cannot have any connexion or reference to the sen∣sitive Appetite, and cannot excite it to motion, in re∣gard it is not susceptible of those kinds of Images, as the Will, upon the accompt of its spirituality, is. But when this latter hath been thereby illuminated, it moves, and afterwards imprints its motion on the sensitive Appetite, which implicitely suffers it self to be carried away whithersoever it is driven. So that if it happen, that its motions then prove conformable to Right Reason the Appetite is not the cause there∣of▪ but it is the Will which forces it: &amp; its procedure may be compar ' d to the motions of a Clock, which ow all their measures and regularity to the Art, which is in the mind of the Maker. 
 Art. 5. That there are four powers which may be regu∣lated by Right Reason. BUt after what manner soever the sensitive Appe∣tite be moved, certain it is, that it may be regu∣lated by Right Reason, either directly or indirectly, and consequently, it may be affirmed, that, since it is twofold, and hath its concupiscible and irascible parts, there are, in Man, four Powers, which ought to be regulated by Right Reason, to wit, the Understan∣ding, the Will, and these two Appetites. And as Vertue is the settled and constant rule of Right Rea∣son, so is it requisite, that every one of these powers should have its particular Vertue, as well to guide, as prevent it from falling into evil, which is against Right Reason. Thus there shall be four general ver∣tues; to wit, Prudence, for the conduct of the Un∣derstanding; Justice, to direct the Actions of the the Will; Temperance, to regulate the Passions of the Concupiscible Appetite; and Fortitude, for the regu∣lation of those of the Irascible; whether these or any of them be rais ' d in the sensitive Appetite, or in the Will. For the Will hath two sorts of actions, where∣of some are referrable to the Good and Evil of the person who acts, and these have appropriated to themselves the name of Passions ; and the others re∣late to the Good and Evil which may be done to o∣thers, and these are simply called Actions or Operations, that is, just and unjust actions. 
 To these four Vertues are referr ' d not only all those others, which are as it were species of them, but also the Vices, which are opposite thereto. We shall therefore divide the ensuing discourse into four parts, or Sections, in each whereof we shall treat of one of these Vertues, of all the several species of it, and lastly of the Vices contrary thereto. 
 SECT. 1. Of PRƲDENCE. PRudence and Synderisis, or Remorse of Consci∣ence, are two habits of the Understanding, where∣by Moral Actions are regulated. But they are dif∣ferent in this particular, that the Synderesis prescribes to all the vertues the end which they ought to have; and Prudence treats only of the means whereof they ought to make use, in order to their arrival thereto. 
 Now, all the employment which the latter hath in this business may be reduc ' d to three general acti∣ons; the first whereof is to find out the means; the second, to make choice of that which is best; and the third, to prescribe: And this is properly to delibe∣rate, or consult; to judge, or conclude; to enjoyn, or prescribe. And these things are so different one from the other, that, many times, there are some men fit for one of them, who are not for the others. Some will propose all the expedients imaginable in a bu∣siness, and yet will not be able to judge, which is the best; and another will do his work well enough as to that, but will come short of the ingenuity to put it in execution. 
 This difference proceeds from the defect of some one of the intellectual faculties, which hath not the dispositions requisite to produce those actions. For, to deliberate well, a man should have a vivacity of Spirit to find out expedients; and Docility, to un∣derstand and follow good counsels. To judge well, a man must dive into the bottom, and unravel the in∣tricacy of affairs, which requires a smartness of Ap∣prehension and soundness of Judgment ; and to see, at a distance, the successes, which things may have, and that is Perspicacity, or Foresight. To enjoyn well, he must examine all the circumstances of the actions, and that is Circumspection ; he must consider the incon∣veniences and obstructions, which may happen; and that is Precaution. In fine, all three make their ad∣vantages of Ratiocination and Memory ; for nothing is to be said without reason, and that, which is grounded on experience, is the most certain.
But in regard it is not sufficient to have consulted well, judged well, and enjoy ' d well, if things be not speedily put in execution, we must add, to all these qualities, Diligence, which is the final perfection and accomplishment of Prudence. 
 Moreover, if these actions be apply ' d to the con∣duct of a mans Person, Family, the Countrey wherein he lives, or that of Warre, they spread into those par∣ticular Species of Prudence, which are called Mona∣stical, Oeconomical, Political and Military. And these are the true Species of Prudence, the rest may rather be called the integral parts thereof. 
 Now though it be commonly affirm ' d, that Vertue lies between two vicious extremities, yet is it not easie to set them down here. For there are some, whereto there cannot any thing be opposite, but the defect, as for example, Memory. Nay there are some, which have for their contraries the same vices that are op∣posite to others. 
 He therefore, who is endu ' d with a vivacity of Spi∣rit, hath for his extreams the Extravagant person and the Stupid. He who is Docile, the Credulous, and the Obstinate. He who is Judicious hath the same extreams as the Ingenious. The Fore-seeing or perspicacious person hath the Distrustful and the Stupid. The Circumspect hath the Inconsiderate and the Negligent. The Well-advis ' d hath the Subtle and the Simple, he who hath a good memory hath, for opposite, only him that hath a bad one; as also he who hath the experience of things, only him who hath it not. The Diligent hath the Precipitate and the sloathful. 
 These are the Vertues and Vices which have some relation to Prudence, according to the distribution which Moral Philosophy hath made thereof, and which the Art we treat of promises to discover. But it considers them not as they lie in that division, nor under the same names. For it makes no difference between the Circumspect, the Perspicacious, and the well-Advis ' d person. And whatever appertains to Ingenuity, Judgment, and Memory, it comprehends under the name of Fortunate birth, which ought to bring along with it vivacity of Spirit, soundness or strength of Judgment, and goodness of Memory; it being requisite that he who is called , well, or fortunately born, should have all these qualities to∣gether. True it is, that it particularly examines those who have only one of these endowments, as we shall shew anon. Now the reason why this our Art does not alwaies follow the order of Moral Philosophy, is, that all its knowledge is grounded upon signs, and that there are not such for all these habits, so exactly distinguish ' d. For there being some of them, which are diversify ' d only by certain external cir∣cumstances they give not any precise marks, where∣by they may be distinguish ' d one from the other, it being sufficient, that the Principle, on which they de∣pend, should be known. And when it shall be known that a man is Judicious, it will be easie to conclude, that he is well Advis ' d, Circumspect, and Provident, which are the effects of Judgment, which considers both present and future circumstances. 
 The order therefore, which our Art shall observe in this matter, stands thus: A person well or fortu∣nately born hath for his opposites The Extravagant. The Stupid. The Ingenious, and the Judicious, have The same opposites. He who hath a good memory Him who hath none. The Wise or Conside∣rate person The Heedless. The Sottish. The Prudent or well-Advis ' d The Crafty or Subtle. The Simple. The Docile. The Credulous. The Obstinate. The Diligent. The over-Hasty. The Sloathfull. 
 SECT 2. Of JƲSTICE. JƲSTICE is a Vertue which renders every one what belongs to him. For, as we are not born of our selves, nor only for our selves, so must we be oblig ' d to those, from whom we derive our Being, and also to those, for whose sake we have receiv ' d it. And therefore both these have a certain right over us, and we ought, in Justice, to render them that which belongs to them. 
 As therefore there are two Causes, to whom we are oblig ' d for our Being, God and our Parents, so is it requisite there should be two kinds of Justice, whereby we ought to render what we ow them, and these are Religion and Piety. 
 Now, in regard we are born in order to Society, and that Society is consider ' d as a Whole, whereof every one makes a Part, it is accordingly requisite, that every one should have that reference to Society it self, and all those, who contribute to the compo∣sition thereof, which ought to be between the part and the whole, and all the parts taken together: o∣therwise the connexion and order, which ought to be therein, would be wanting, and there will be nothing but disorder and confusion. Whence it comes, that the common Concernment, and that of every one in particular, oblige us to render them, what we ow them, upon this relation and union. That Justice, which regards the publick concernment, is called Policy, whereby we render to the Community, what we ow it. 
 As to that which concerns particular persons, there being some who are design ' d to govern and com∣mand, either upon the account of their dignity, or by reason of the Excellence they have, the Justice we ow them is, Obedience and Respect 
 In all others we are to consider what we may ow them upon a rigorous account of Justice, or meerly upon a pure Moral obligation. The former consists in Distributive and Commutative Justice; of the other, there are six Species; to wit, Friendship and Grati∣tude; Affability and Truth; Fidelity and Liberality ; whereof the two first are answerable to the Heart ; the two subsequent, to the Words ; and the two last to Actions ; whatsoever we ow being to be derived from the Heart, Words, and Effects. 
 Thus it is that our Art makes use of these Maxims. In the first place it considers the Honest, Just, or Up∣right person, under whom is particularly compre∣hended whatsoever appertains to Politicall, Com∣mutative, and Distributive Justice. And to the Just person it opposes the Simple and Mischievous; but it examines not the Simple person upon the same ac∣count, as he makes one of the extreams of Prudence. In the next place comes Religion, which we call Piety, for now that word is reduc ' d to the business of Religion: and the Justice we ow to our Parents is comprehended under Goodness. The opposites to Piety, are the Superstitious, and the Impious person. As to Obedience, it does not assign any markes of it, since those of Docility may serve instead thereof. Respect may also have a certain reference to Pru∣dence, or the other Species of Justice: for he who does not pay the Respect he ows, is either foolish or proud. So that it places the Friend in the third Classis, to whom it opposes the Flatterer and the Enemy. Next follows the Grateful person, who hath, for his opposite, onely the Ungrateful. The Affable comes in the first rank, who hath for oppo∣sites, the Cajoler and the Rustick. In the sixt, comes the Tell-troth, or Sincere person, who hath for his opposite the Lyar. But in regard Lying may be re∣ferr ' d to words, actions, a mans own affairs, and ano∣thers; thence it comes that there are five kinds of Lyars, the Vain person, the Dissembler, the Arro∣gant, the Hypocrite, and the Evil-speaker. Then follows Fidelity, whereto there cannot any excess be opposed, but only the defect, which is Perfidiousness. In fine, the last of all is the Liberal person, who hath for opposites the Prodigal and the Covetous. But in regard Compassion and Clemency come somewhat neer Liberality, the former relieving those that are in want, and the other remitting the punishment which was due, our Art adds the Merciful and the Charitable, to the former whereof there is but one opposite, to wit, the Unmerciful; and of Clemency, the excessive Vice is Indulgency, or Fondness, and the defective, Cruelty. Magnificence hath also some rela∣tion to Liberality; for it seems to be a sumptuous and excelling Liberality; and that hath for its opposites, superfluous Expence, and Misership. 
 These, reduc ' d into the order observ ' d in the pre∣cedent Section, will stand thus. 
 The Honest and Just person hath for Op∣positor The Simple. The Ʋnjust, or mischie∣vous person. The Pious, or devout The Superstitious. The Impious. The Friend The Flatterer. The Enemy. The Grateful person The Ʋngrateful. The Affable The Cajoller. The Rustick. The Tell∣troth The Lyar In Words The Vain person. The Dissembler. The Evil-speaker. In Actions The Arrogant. The Hypocrite. The Faithful person The Perfidious. The Liberal The Prodigal. The Covetous. The Magnificent The superfluously Expensive. The Miser. The Compassionate The Ʋnmerciful, or Ʋncompassionate. The Clement The Indulgent. The Cruel. SECT. 3. Of TEMPERANCE. THe perfection of every power consists in the force of its action, so that the Passions, how violent soever they may be, are so many perfections, respect being had to the Appetite, whereby they are produc ' d. But in regard the Appetite was bestow ' d on the Animal, for its conservation, and that, in Man, it ought to be subject to the superiour Faculties, the actions of it should not be defective, since perfection consists in the force of the action; nor should they on the other side be excessive, because they would destroy health, and disturb the noblest actions of the Soul. And therefore it is requisite, they should be moderate, that so they may be conformable to Rea∣son; for, to be conformable to Reason, amounts to no more, then to be convenient for Man, that is, for his Nature. Nay, those very Passions, which are ex∣cited in the Will, ought to admit the same tempera∣ment or moderation: for though they cannot alwaies cause an alteration in the Health, yet may they find the Soul work about objects, which ought not to move her, or keep her too long engag ' d about such as are not bad. Thence it comes, that over-earnest∣ness of study is vicious, in regard it employes the Spirit too much in Contemplation, and diverts it from that Activity, and those lawful cares of Life, which justly pretend to a share in the actions of man. How∣ere it be, all the Passions are regulated by two Ver∣tues, those of the Concupiscible Appetite by Tempe∣rance, and those of the Irascible, by Fortitude. 
 As for Temperance, there are but two kinds of Passions about which it is employ ' d, and which constitute the Species thereof, to wit, Pleasure and Desire. For though Love be the first, and most powerful of them all, yet is it impossible to make any conceit or apprehension thereof, otherwise then as it is inclin ' d to some Good, which is either present or absent. If it be present, it causes Pleasure; if it be absent, it frames Desire: so that Love is, as it were, involv ' d and confin ' d within these two Passions, and that Ver∣tue, whose business it is to moderate them, does also at the same time regulate the Passion of Love. Nay if things be narrowly examin ' d, we shall find, that Pleasure comprehends the two others, and that, in effect, Temperance hath no other design then to mo∣derate the Pleasures, derivable from the Goods of the Soul the Body, ot External things. But in re∣gard, that, of these Goods, there are some, which are consider ' d rather as Absent then Present, and others on the contrary: accordingly, Desire is more manifest in some, and Pleasure n others, and therefore we have though to separate them. 
 For there are three things in generall, wherein our Desire may be vicious, to wit, Knowledge, Wealth and Honours: and there are two others which contribute to immoderate Pleasures, that is, the Senses, and Di∣vertisements. 
 As to Knowledge there being some things evil and unprofitable which may be learnt, and that too much or too little time may be spent about such as are good and profitable, the Vertue which regulates our desires in the pursuit thereof may be called Study, or a commendable Curiosity. 
 For Wealth, if we regard the disposall, which is to be made thereof to others, the Vertue employ ' d to that purpose is called Liberality, and belongs to Justice: But if it be desired for a mans private use, the Vertue which moderates the cares, which a man takes in the acquisition and use thereof, is called Fru∣gality. 
 The Desire of Honour is regulated by Humility, Mo∣desty, and Magnanimity. Humility keeps a man from falling too low in the pursuit thereof; Magnanimity, from attempting things too high; And Modesty moderates the desires a man may have for meaner honours. 
 Pleasure does principally regard the Senses, espe∣cially those of the Tasting and Touching, in asmuch as the irregularity of those two is most prejudicial to Health, and the Functions of the Understanding. The Pleasure of Eating and Drinking is moderated by So∣briety, and Chastity gives a check to the enjoyments of the flesh.
Now whereas there is a necessity of Divertisement, for the relaxation of Mind and Body, and for the re∣cruiting of them with new forces, and that some abuse may be made of the Pleasure found therein; there is a particular Vertue design ' d for the regula∣tion of them, to wit, Eutrapelii, whereof there are several Species, according to the diversity of the ob∣jects, wherein diversion may be found; such as are Conversation, Gaming, Musick, Hunting, Walking, and others, whereto there have not yet any names been given, unless it be to that which moderates the pleasure taken in Raillery. 
 THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN is not, as to this particular, more exact then Moral Philosophy, which hath not been able to make a dis∣covery of all the Species of Temperance. For there are many Passions of the Concupiscible Appetite, whereto it hath not assign ' d particular Vertues, for their regulation, as for example, Hatred, Aversion, and Sadness. Nay it hath not express ' d all the diffe∣rences of Desires and Pleasure wherein here may be some failing, as well as in what concerns the use of the superiour enses, since the same excesses which happen in the Tasting and Touching, do also occur in the Sight, Hearing, and Smelling. But as Moral Philosophy hath, by the general tearm of Tempe∣rance, made provision for all the particular Vertues requisite for that purpose: So our Art hath assum ' d the freedom, to comprehend, under moderation, all that concerns the ordering and direction of these Passions. 
 We therefore place the Moderate person between the Voluptuous, and the Insensible. The Studious is comprehended under the Curious, the extreams whereof are, the Over-curious and the Negligent. The Frugal person lies between the same opposite Vices as the Liberal; those two being distinguish ' d only by the different ends which they have in the dispo∣sal of Wealth. The Humble, the Modest &amp; the Magna∣nimous, have in a manner the same extreams. There be only the Proud and the Ambitious which are dif∣ferent. That Modesty▪ which consists in the Gesture, is confounded with the character of the Wise, or Di∣screet person: That which relates to Cloaths is cal∣led Handsomness, which hath for opposites the Gaw∣dy, and the Slovenly. But our Art considers not that Vertue, which is only in the external part, as being easily perceiv ' d of it self. The Sober person is attended by two Vices, both which are in the ex∣cess, and hath not any defect at all. The rest may be seen by the ensuing Table. 
 The Moderate person hath for opposites The Voluptuous. The Insensible. The Curious The over-Inquisitive. The Negligent. The Frugal The Prodigal. The Covetous. The Humble The Proud. The Abject. The Magnanimous The Presumptuous. The Pusillanimous. The Modest The Ambitious. The Over-bashful. The Sober or Temperate The Glutton. The Drunkard. The Chast The Ʋnchast. The Impotent. The Cheerful The Ridiculous. The Austere. To these may be added The excessive Gamster. The excessive Huntsman SECT. 4. Of FORTITƲDE. FORTITƲDE moderates the Passions of the Irascible Appetite; for this is the Vertue, which regulates the Soul, upon the occurrence of things troublesome and difficult. Now, though there be three kinds of Passion in this Appetite, to wit, Hope, Audacity, and Anger, yet are the two latter the more violent, and the least tractable; so that this Vertue is more apparent, in Anger and Audacity, then it is in Hope. And whereas Audacity relates to Dan∣gers, and particularly that which is most to be fear ' d of any, to wit, Death; thence it proceeds, that most of the Philosophers assign this Vertue to moderate that Passion alone. But following the Order we have propos ' d to our selves, it is to be extended to all those Passions. Nevertheless; before we come to treat of the Species of it, this observation is to be pre∣mis ' d, to wit, that there are three sorts of Fortitude, that of the Body, that of the Mind, and that of the Appetite. The first is purely natural; the last is ac∣quir ' d by Study and Reason; the other is partly na∣tural, partly acquir ' d, All these three have two principal functions, which are, to assault or set upon, and oppose. 
 Now as Anger is the strongest, and most ordinary Passion of this Appetite, Meekness is accordingly put in the first place, as being the Vertue, by which this Passion is moderated. There are several Species of Audacity, according to the several objects which oblige it to attack or oppose. For, in attacking the Evil, if it be done in Arms, it makes Valour ; in all other cases, it is Audacity, or Confidence. But if it slight and contemn great Dangers, it is tearmed Mag∣nanimity, or Greatness of Courage. On the contrary, in opposing, it is Constancy and Patience. 
 As concerning Hope, it is regulated by Patience and Perseverance. The latter hath a respect to the delay, the former considers all the other difficulties, which may occur in the expectation of Good. 
 According to this Order, our Art ought in the first place to examine the Strength and Weakness of the Body and Mind; then speak of Meekness, which hath for its opposites, Anger and Insensibility, and so of the rest, as may be seen in the ensuing Table. 
 A Person of a strong Consti∣tution of Body hath but one contrary, which is The Weak of Body A strong Constitution of Mind hath also but one, which is Weakness of Mind The Meek or Courteous The Angry. The Insensible. The Valiant The Rash. The Coward. The Bold The Impudent. The Timorous. The Magnanimous The Presumptuous The Pusillanimous. The Constant The Ʋnconstant. The Obstinate. The Patient The Impatient. The Stupid. The Perseverant The Self-will ' d. The Faint-hearted. The End of the First Book. THE ART How to know MEN. The Second Book. CHAP. I. Of the Means whereby Men may be known. H Aving, in the precedent Book, explicated the Nature of the Inclinations, the Mo∣tions of the Soul, and the Habits, which THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN pretends it self able to disco∣ver; our design call upon us now, to an examination of the Means, whereby this Knowledge is to be at∣tain ' d. 
 Now, whereas it is impossible to come to the know∣ledge of things obscure, otherwise then by that of those which are already known to us, there is a ne∣cessity, that if there be an Art, whereby may be taught what lies hid in men, it ought to make use of some manifest and known means, between which and the things it would know, there should be such a rapport and connexion, as that some certain conse∣quences might be drawn from the one to the other. And whereas there is not any rapport of this nature, other then what is between the cause and its effect, or the effect and its cause, or between one effect and another, upon this account that both of them pro∣ceed from the same source, it follows, that there are three means whereof this Art may make use, to arrive at the end, which it proposes to it self, and that it may discover a secret effect, by the cause which is known to it, or an obscure cause by a manifest effect, and an unknown effect by another which is evident. And these means are called Signs, because they denote, signifie, and design the things that are obscure. 
 Thus, when we know a man to be of a Tempera∣ment subject to Melancholy, it may be said, that he hath an inclination to Sadness, in asmuch as that Temperament is the cause of such an Inclination; and then the cause is the sign of the effect. On the contrary, by the natural inclination which some man may have to Sadness, it is presum ' d, that he is of a Melancholick Temperament; and in that case, the effect is the sign of the cause. In fine, by the Timo∣rousness, which may be observ ' d in both these per∣sons, it may be judg ' d that they are Dissemblers, in regard that both Timorousness and Dissimulation proceed from the weakness which attends the melan∣cholick Temperament, and then it is, that the effect is sign of an effect. Now, since causes and effects serve for Signs to the Art we treat of, the next thing to be known is, what these causes and effects are. 
 Art. 1. What Causes they are which serve for Signs. IT is not to be doubted but that the Causes, which contribute to the discovery of men, must be such as have an influence over Man, and are in him; that is, such as cause some alteration in the Body and Soul, and promote and change the actions of both. Of these there are two Orders; some are Internal, some External. 
 The Internal causes are the Faculties of the Soul, the Temperament, the Conformation of the parts, Age, Nobleness or meanness of Birth, the Habits, as well Intellectual, as Moral, and the Passions. The External are Parents, the Celestial Bodies, the Cli∣mate, the Seasons, Aliment, prosperous or adverse Fortune, Example, Advice, Punishments, and Re∣wards. For all these Causes make different impres∣sions upon Man, and according to the strength they have, they produce in him different effects, and dis∣pose him to such and such actions. So that every Fa∣culty of the Soul, every Temperament, every Age, every several kind of Birth, hath its proper acti∣ons, its particular dispositions, its inclinations, and aversions. 
 Parents do many times derive to their children those qualities of body and mind, which are natural to themselves; the Climate, Health and Sickness, course of Life, Prosperity and Adversity, Good and Bad Example; in fine, the different aspects of the Ce∣lestial Bodies cause an alteration in the Body and Soul, imprinting in them divers qualities, and making them inclinable to certain Actions. 
 Art. 2. What the Effects are which serve for Signs. THe Effects which proceed from these Causes are also of two kinds; for some are Corporeal ; o∣thers, Spiritual. 
 The Spiritual are the qualities of the mind; the Inclinations, the Habits, all the actions and motions of the Soul: for, that they have been numbred a∣mong the Causes, was in consideration of the Effects which they produce; as here they are ranked among the Effects▪ by reason of the Causes from which they proceed. For instance, the Inclination which a man hath to Anger, is the cause of the Anger; but it is also the effect of the cholerick Temperament, which gives birth to that Inclination 
 The Corporeal Effects consist in the Bulk of the Fi∣gure of the parts▪ in the first and second Qualities, in the Air of the Countenance, in the Carriage and motion of the Body, as we shall shew more particu∣larly hereafter. 
 So that upon cognizance taken of these Causes, and a knowledge of the power they have, some judgment may be made of their present or future effects; And on the other side, upon an observation of the Effects, and a knowledge of that whereto they ought to be referred, the present or past causes may be ghess ' d at. Thus are they Signs one of the other, and THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN, hath a priviledge to make its advantage of them, in order to the performance of what it promises. 
 But in regard all these Signs create not an equal knowledge of the things whereto they are referr ' d, &amp; that some of them denote the same with more cer∣tainty then others, it is requisite there should be a careful examination taken of their Strength and Weakness, since that is the chiefest and most solid ground of this Art. 
 CHAP. 2. Of the Strength and Weakness of Signs. Art 1. What Judgment is made by the Causes. GEnerally speaking, the judgment which is made by the Causes, is more uncertain then that which is made by the Effects, in regard that from the knowledge of the cause of some thing, it does not follow, that it should produce the effect it is imagin ' d to do, by reason of divers obstructions, which may happen in the production thereof: But when an effect is seen, it must of necessity be, that the cause did precede. Thence it comes, that the knowledge which is had of the Temperaments, by the marks they leave upon the Body, is more certain then that which is had of the inclinations by the Temperament, in asmuch as these marks are the effects of the Temperament, and that the Temperament is the cause of the Inclinations. 
 Art. 2. Of the next Causes. MOreover the causes are of two kinds; some are termed the Next Causes, others are Remote. From the former, a more certaine judgment may be deduced, in regard they have a stricter connexion with their effects. Accordingly, the knowledge which is had of the Temperament, better discovers the inclinations, then any thing that can be inferr ' d from Birth, Age, or the Climate, &amp;c. But there is not any Cause, from which there may be a more certaine judgment deduc ' d of a mans actions, then the Habit: For he who shall know one to be a just person, will be the more apt to affirm, that upon such or such an occasion, he will do an act of justice.
Into this rank may also be reduced the Passions themselves, in reference to those others which are wont to accompany them; for the Passions never march alone, and there is not any of them but pro∣duces some others which either appear with it, or fol∣low it very closely. Thus Arrogance, Impatience, Indiscretion, accompany Anger; and therefore he who knows a man to be sometimes transported with the latter, may affirm that he is apt to fall into the others. And this observation is so considerable, that it makes way for the Noblest rule of all Physiognomy, whereof Aristotle is the author, and which he calls Syllogistick ; and of which we shall have occasion to speak here∣after. 
 The Qualities or Endowments of the mind do also give a certain judgment of the good &amp; bad producti∣ons, which shall proceed from them. And it may be affirmed, that when some man shall conceive himself oblig ' d, out of the bent of his own inclination, to em∣brace some opinion, or to speak to some business, he will judge and discourse of it, answerable to the o∣pinion the world hath of his capacity and endow∣ments. 
 Art. 3. Of the Remote Causes. AS to the remote Causes, if there were so great certainty in Astrology as some imagine to them∣selves, no question but the judgments, which might be made upon consideration of the Celestial Bodies, would be the most certain of any. But we do not acknowledge so great a power in those Bodies, as is attributed to them, and we can grant them, at most, but some small advantage over the Climate, which gives some ground to judge of the Inclinations, upon the accompt of the Temperament, whereof it is a Re∣mote cause as well as they. Age and Sickness may be put in the some rank. But good and bad Fortune, Nobleness or meanness of Birth, Examples (under which I comprehend Counsels, Advice, Rewards, and Punishments) afford but very doubtful conjectures. Lastly, the Seasons and Aliment make the most uncer∣tain judgments of any. 
 Art. 4. What Judgment that is which is made by the Effects. AS to what concerns the discovery which may be of the Causes by the Effects, we are to presup∣pose the distinction we have already made thereof, that is, that of these latter, there are some Spiritual, some Corporeal. For, generally speaking, the judg∣ment which is made by the Corporeal, is more cer∣tain then that deduc ' d from the Spiritual, in as much as the former immediately proceed from the Tempe∣rament, and the Conformation of the parts, which are the Next Causes of the Inclinations; or they (viz the effects) proceed from the Passion it self, which produces them on the Body, when the Soul is stirr ' d thereby. 
 And as to the Spiritual, which are the Qualities or Endowments of the mind, the Inclinations, the Acti∣ons and Motions of the Soul, and the Habits; as there are many several Causes, whereby each of them may be produc ' d, so the judgment made thereof is the more indeterminate and uncertain. For the Pas∣sion may be caus ' d by divers objects, by the Weak∣ness of the Mind, by the Inclination, &amp;c. In like manner, the Inclination may be the product of the Instinct, to the Temperament, and of Custome. The Habits also have diverse Principles as well as the Qualities of the mind, so that it is no easie matter precisely to assigne the Cause, from which each of these Effects proceeds. 
 Now, since there may be a more exact knowledge deduced from the Corporeal Effects, and that it is of them only that Physiognomy makes use, in order to the discovery of the Inclinations, it concerns us to engage upon a more careful examination of them, and to see what their number may be, what the cau∣ses thereof are, and what Strength and Weakness they have, that so we may judge, not only of the In∣clinations, as Physiognomy does, but also of the Qualities of the mind, the Passions and Habits, which THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN pretends it self able to discover by them. 
 CHAP. III. Of the Natural Signs. IN the first place, we are here to presuppose, that there are two kinds of Effects, or Signs, which are imprinted on the Body. Of these, one is the Natural, which proceeds from the constitution of the Body, and the other Elementary Causes: the other, the Astrological, which proceeds from the Stars or Celestial Bodies, whereof Metoposcopy and Chiro∣mancy make use. We shall hereafter examine, whe∣ther there be any certainty in those Sciences, and whether the Signs, upon which they have fram ' d their Rules, may contribute any knowledge of the Incli∣nations, the Passions, and the Habits, as they pre∣tend to do. 
 As to the Natural Signs, Aristotle hath reduc ' d them to nine Heads or Articles, which are these: 1. The Motion of the Body, as the Cate, the Gesture, and Carriage of it. 2. Beauty, and Deformity. 3. Colour. 4. The Air of the Countenance, 5. The quality of the Skin. 6. The Voice. 7. The Fleshiness of the Body. 8. The Figure &amp; Of the Parts. 9. The Largness Of the Parts. 
 All these Signs proceed from Internal or External Causes. And this distinction is so necessary, that it makes in a manner, the whole difference there is be∣tween those which are advantageous and those that are otherwise, as we shall make appear. 
 The Internal Causes are, the Conformation of the Parts, the Temperament and the Motive Vertue; the External are all those things, which come from with∣out, and work some alteration in the Body. Thus a man may go slowly, either out of his natural Incli∣nation, or out of Design, or through Weakness, Beauty and Deformity proceed from Nature, Arti∣fice, or Accident. The Colour ought to be conso∣nant to the Temperament; but the Air, and such other things may alter it. The Air of the Counte∣nance, and the Voice, the Skin, and the Fleshiness of the parts, may receive alteration upon the same ac∣count. In fine, the Figure of the Parts s either Na∣tural or Accidental, for a man may become crooked, and crump-shoulder ' d, either by a Fluxion, or by a Fall, or by Nature. True it is, that, of these Signs, some are not so easily changed by the External Cau∣ses, as the Figure, the Air of the Countenance, and Motion; but the Colour, the Skin, and the Voice, do easily receive the impressions thereof. 
 But it being suppos ' d, as it is certain, that the In∣ternal causes are those which produce the most cer∣tain Signs, we make this further observation, That the Figure and Largness of the Parts proceed from the Conformation; the Temperament gives the Co∣lour, the quality of the Skin, and the Fleshiness of the Parts; The particular kind of Gate, and the other Motions proceed from the Motive Vertue: But Beauty, the Voice, &amp; the Air of the Countenance pro∣ceed from all these three Causes joyned together. For Beauty consisting in a symmetry, and just propor∣tion of the Members, as to colour and grace, the proportion proceeds from the Conformation; Co∣lour, from the Temperament; and the grace, from Motion. The Voice is answerable to the Conforma∣tion of the Organs, their Temperament, and the mo∣tion of the Muscles. In fine, the Air of the Counte∣nance, and the Carriage of the Body, have their prin∣cipal dependence on the Motion: for in the distur∣bance of the Passions, the Air, which accompanies them, is nothing else then a certain proportion of the parts, resulting from the diverse motions they make in pursuit of Good and Evil, which moves the Appetite. But that disturbance of the Passion being calm ' d, and taken away, the Air, which remains fix ' d on the Countenance, relates to the Conformati∣on and the Temperament, as may be observ ' d in those, who naturally have the same constitution and disposi∣tion of the Parts, with those, which the Passion is wont to cause. 
 Art. 1. Of the Difference of Signs. OF the Signs before-mentioned some are Com∣mon, others Proper. The Common Signs are not determinated to any one quality, but may signifie many; on the contrary, the Proper are determinated only to one. 
 Moreover, there are some Signs, which, in a man∣ner, never change, as the Conformation; all the rest may be chang ' d. And among these last, some are Stable and Permanent, others are Transient, and con∣tinue but a short time. Thus those which proceed from Age and the Climate, are Stable; but such as proceed from Sickness and the Passions, are of small continuance. 
 From these Distinctions, something may be de∣duc ' d, which may contribute to the discovery of the Strength and Weakness of the Signs; for those which proceed from external causes do not denote any thing certain. And of those which the Internal cau∣ses have produc ' d, the Stable are significators of Per∣manent Inclinations; the others may possibly de∣note the present Passions, but not the natural Incli∣nations, unless it be by accident, as Aristotle speaks. 
 Besides, the signs which are the least easily chang ' d by the External causes, are the most certain; such as are the Figure, the Air of the Countenance, and Mo∣tion; but the Colour, the Skin, the Fleshiness of the parts, and the Voice, are consequently the less certain. 
 Whereto this may be added, that the Common Signs do not signifie any thing certain, unless there be some proper Sign, whereby they should be determi∣nated. 
 Art. 2. Of the Means assign ' d by Aristotle to discover the efficacy of Signs. ARistotle proposes another Maxim, tO find out the efficacy and certitude of Signs. For he af∣firms, that, such as are observable in the principal, and most excellent parts, are accordingly the most certain, and that, among those, the Head is the most considerable; but, in that, the Eyes challenge the pre∣heminence, the Forehead hath the next place, and then the Face, comprehending all that is below the Eyes. Next to the Head, are accounted the Breast and shoulders; in the third place come the Arms and Legs; The Belly is the last of all, and the least consi∣derable. 
 But this Rule seems somewhat disconsonant to the Maxims of Aristotle, nay indeed to Reason it self. For he, who assigns the Heart for the principle of all Actions, as being that part, wherein he affirms the Passions to be framed, should have bestow ' d the first and most excellent place on the Breast, and not on the Head, and have maintain ' d, that the most certain signs of the Inclinations and Passions are derivable from that part, which encompasses the place, where they have their first birth. But it is to be observed, that Aristotle does not there pass his judgment, of the excellency of the parts, as a Philosopher or Physician would do; he considers them only upon this refle∣ction, that the Passions are more discoverable in those, then others. And accordingly, he places the Arms and Leggs before the Belly, though they be much less excellent and less considerable, as to the essence and nature of the Animal. Now it is certain, that there is not any part, wherein the Passions are sooner, and more apparently observable, then they are in the Head: as we shall shew more particularly in the next Article. 
 Art. 3. That the Passions are most apparent in the Head. THe first reason we shall give for the more re∣markable manifestation of the Passions in the Head, is this, that they are not fram ' d without the use of the Senses, from which is derived the first knowledge of those things, that move the Passions, and that all of them, Touching only excepted, are placed in the Head. Add to this, that the Estimative Faculty, whose work it is to conceive the things which are good and bad, and gives the first shock to the Appetite, is in the Brain; and that the strength and weakness of mind, which have also a depen∣dence on the same part, hath a great influence over the Inclinations and Passions. For it is certain, that Children, Sick persons, and Women are ordinarily enclin ' d to Anger, out of pure weakness of mind, as having not that heat of blood and heart, which is re∣quisite for a disposition to that Passion. 
 But the principal reason hereof proceeds from the impression, which the Passions make on that part. For as the Soul hath no other design in the motions of the Appetite, then to bring the Animal to the en∣joyment of that Good, which she conceives necessary thereto, and to remove the Evil, whereby it may be injur ' d; so, to compass her desires, she employs all the parts, that are under her jurisdiction, and causes them to move answerably to the intention she hath. Now, of these, some being more susceptible of mo∣tion then others, they accordingly make a speedier discovery of the agitation wherein she is, and the progress she makes therein: for there are several degrees in every Passion In the first place, there is the emotion, or first stirring, of the Appetite, which does not issue out of the Soul, as being an immanent action: Then the Heart and Spirits are stirr ' d, as being the chief Organs of the sensitive Appetite; and, if the Passion increase, the eyes, the forehead, and the other parts of the Head, are shaken: but if it still advance, and come to execution, and that the Soul would really arrive at the enjoyment of the Good, and shun the Evil, she moves the parts design ' d for that purpose▪ till at last, she puts the whole body into motion, if she be not prevented.
So that it is to be hence observ ' d, that the Heart and Spirits are those parts of the body, which are first moved in the Passions. But the motion of the Heart is not sensible, as that of the Spirits, which is imme∣diately to be seen in the Countenance, in regard they carry the blood along with them, the sudden arrival or departure whereof alters, in a moment, the colour and figure of the face; which alteration hap∣pens not to the other parts, and that for two reasons. One is, because the Spirits make their recourse to the face more abundantly then to any of the other parts, upon this account, that the Senses are lodg ' d therein, which stand in need of spacious channels, whereby the Spirits may flow thither in greater quan∣tities, and with more ease. The other is, that the skin of the Face is of a particular constitution, which is not to be found in any of the other parts. For all elswhere, unless it be in the palms of the hands, or the soals of the feet, the skin may be separated from the flesh: But in the Face, they are both so united toge∣ther, that they cannot be separated one from the other, without tearing and rending it. Whence it comes that the colour, which proceeds from the mo∣tion and quality of the blood, is more manifest there, then in all the rest of the body; and this also so much the more, for that the skin there is very thin and de∣licate; which is not to be found in the hands and feet. So that, it being shewn, that the Passions do principally and more easily change the colour of the Face, then that of any of the other parts, it is to be maintain ' d as certain, that, in such a case, it must be the place where they appear soonest and most evi∣dently. 
 Moreover, whereas the Soul, being stirr ' d, moves, not onely the Heart, the Spirits, and Humours, but also those parts, which move voluntarily; it is not to be question ' d, but that those which are most apt to motion are the first stirr ' d by her, though their moti∣on contribute but very little to the execution of her design. For, to what end serves the wrinkling of the forehead, the lifting up of the Eye-brows, and the widening of the nostrils in the Passion of Anger; or, in Bashfulness, the casting down of the eyes, blushing, and being out of countenance? And yet it is not to be doubted, but that all these motions proceed from the disturbance caus ' d by the Passion in the Soul, and whereby she is hurried, to make use of whatever stands in her way, though it be no advantage to her, as we said before. 
 Since therefore that, of the parts, there are not any so susceptible of motion, nor so suddenly betray their resentment of the Passions, as those which are in the Head, Aristotle had reason to assign it the first place, as to what concerns Physiognomical Signs; and to dispose the eyes in the most excellent place therein, then to bring in the forehead, and so consequently the others, for the reasons we have alledged. 
 Art 4. That the Inclinations are most apparent in the Head. IT might be said, that all this Discourse does indeed demonstrate the appearance of the Passions more remarkably in the Face, then any where else; but that the same thing is not to be concluded as to the incli∣nations, and that all this alteration, and all these mo∣tions, which are consequent to the agitation of the Soul, are only transient Signs, incapable of denoting permanent disposition, such as are those of the Incli∣nations and Habits. But we conceive it no inconsi∣derable advancement to have shewn, that the Cha∣racters of the Passions are principally apparent in that part of the Body, since that, according to the rule of conformity, whereof we shall speak hereafter, those who naturally have the same air, which the Pas∣sion causes, are inclinable to the same Passion. 
 However it may happen, if the Temperament, the Conformation of the parts, and the Motive vertue, be the causes of permanent Signs, it is consequently certain, that there are not any parts, wherein the Formative vertue acts more efficaciously, then it does in the Head, by reason of the excellency of its Operations, and its Organs; no parts, wherein the Temperament can be more easily discover ' d, by rea∣son of the particular constitution, which the skin is of; in fine, no parts, wherein the motive vertue is stron∣ger, and more free in its motions, since there it is in its proper seat and vigour. 
 To these reasons, this may be added, that the great variety of the organs, which are in the Head, supplies us with a greater number of Signs, then any other part whatsoever, and that, Audacity and Fear taken away, as also some others which have dependance on them, there is not any Passion that leaves its marks on the parts, whereby the Heart is encompass ' d. So that, without any further difficulty, we may allow the Head the preheminence, as to what concerns the Signs ob∣servable in Physiognomy. 
 Art. 5. That the Inclinations are discoverable by the Arms and Leggs. IT may seem deducible from these last reasons, that we are willing to allow the second rank to the Arms and Leggs, and admit them to be the places, from which, next to the Head, there may be drawn such Signs, as may pretend to most certainty, and whereof there are a greater number; and conse∣quently, that the Breast is not so considerable as they are. And indeed, if the Air of the Face, the Be∣haviour, and motion, be more certain Signs then the Figure, as Aristotle, in these words seems to affirm, , placing the Figure after the Motions, it is cer∣tain, that they are much more apparent in the Gesture and Gate, then in the Breast, where it may be thought there is only the Figure to be consider ' d. 
 But we are here to call to mind, what we have said elsewhere, to wit, that the Passions may be consi∣der ' d in their first stirring, and in their execution, and that the execution is not alwaies consequent to the stirring and emotion. Now the Arms and Legs are the principal organs in order to the execution of what the Appetite commands, and the Heart is the principle and source of the emotion. So that the marks which this latter gives are more universal, and more certain, then those of the others, it being affirmed, that the Heart is alwaies mov ' d in the Pas∣sions, and that every Passion comes not to execution. 
 I add further, that the Breast and Shoulders have also their particular carriage and motion, as well as the Arms; besides, that the motion of the Arms, and the manner of Going, may be chang ' d by custom, whereas the same thing cannot be said of the Figure of the Breast, which alwaies denotes the Tempera∣ment of the Heart, and consequently, the Inclina∣tions. And as for Aristotle, we are to affirm, that he does not make any comparison between the Air of the Countenance, and Motion, and Figure; but he compares these three together with the other Signs, as, for example, the Colour, the Voice, the quality of the Skin, and the Fleshy parts, which no doubt are much less certain then the former, as we said else∣where. So that it is to be maintain ' d, as manifest, that the most excellent place, from which the most re∣markable Signs of Physiognomy are to be drawn, is the Head; the next to that, the parts which enclose the Heart; the third, the Arms and Leggs; and the last, the Belly. For though this last hath some right to dispute the precedence with the Arms, by reason of the many Signs found therein, especially as to what concerns the Temperament; yet it is most certain, that modesty does not easily permit that part to be consi∣der ' d, whence it must needs follow, that the Signs are so much the less manifest; whereto may be added this also, that they do not principally denote the ope∣rations of the sensitive Soul, but only of the Vegeta∣tive, and that it is only by accident, that it makes any signification of the other. 
 Art. 6. From what places the Signs are taken. THe most considerable places, from which the Signs are to be taken, are, as Aristotle affirms, those , In quibus sapientiae multae apparentia fit ; which assertion may be explicated two ways. The former, that the parts where Wisdom and Modesty ought to be most appa∣rent, are those which discover the most certain marks of the Inclinations. So that the air of the countenance, and the carriage or deportment of the Body, making the principal discovery of Wisdom in a man, it is ac∣cordingly from those places, that we are to derive the most assured Signs of Physiognomy. For, as Prudence brings along with it a general disposition to all the other Vertues; So, on the other side, Imprudence invests a man with a susceptibility of all sorts of Vices and Imperfections. So that the places, where those two qualities are most remarkable, must of necessity furnish us with the Signs of all the other Inclinations. 
 The second Explication of that Assertion, and, in my judgment, the better, is, that the external parts, whereof the Soul seems to stand most in need, and wherein she imploys the more art and conduct, whe∣ther as to the framing of them, or keeping them af∣ter they are fram ' d, are those from which we are to extract the most certain Signs of the Inclinations. The reason, this, that the Soul, making a fuller discovery of her self, and, in some sort, more manifestly pro∣ducing her self in those parts, than in the others, may in them also make a greater discovery of her Inclinati∣ons. Now, it is generally acknowledg ' d, that there are not any, wherein her cares, her conduct, and her industry are more apparent, than in the eyes, and in the other parts of the Head; in regard that all the Senses, nay, Reason it self, are lodg ' d therein; and, next to them, in the Breast, upon this account, that it comprehends the source of life, and that the Ap∣petite hath its residence there; And lastly, in the Arms and Leggs, as being the instruments of volun∣tary motion, which, next to Sentiment, is the noblest quality of the Animal. 
 From the precedent Discourse, it is easily seen, that there cannot be an assured judgment made of the Soul ' s Inclinations, otherwise than by the proper and permanent Signs, and that these are commonly drawn from the Figure, the Air of the countenance, the Motions, and the Fleshy parts of the Body. So that among the Signs propos ' d by Aristotle, the Figure, and Air of the countenance have the first place. Then follows the Motion, in as much as the Animal does not move, but answerably to the motion of the Ap∣petite; and so it is easie to judge, of what quality the Appetite is, by Motion, which is one of its ef∣fects. The fleshy parts of the body have the third place, in regard they denote the matter, whereof the body consists: Now, every matter requires its par∣ticular form, and so, by the qualities of the matter, the qualities of the form may be known. The Skin and Hair come next, in as much as they are certain discoveries of the fleshiness. In fine, Colour and the Voice bring up the Rear, and have the last place, in regard they may be easily alter ' d, especially the Voice, which is chang ' d in a moment, by the Passi∣ons, by the least fluxion, and by an hundred other such accidents. 
 CHAP. IV. Of the Rules, which Physiognomy hath fram ' d upon the natural Signs, in order to the discovery of the Inclinations. AS all the Signs, whereof we have treated, taken distinctly one from the other, afford us not a very certain judgment of what we would deduce from them; and that it is requisite, there should be a concurrence of several of them, to make a perfect denotation of what we would discover therby; so Physiognomy hath reduc ' d them into divers Classes, wherein are comprehended all those which have any relation to the same end and signification. And the number of these Classes is drawn from four rapports and resemblances, which may be between Men &amp; other things; it being conceivable, that one man may have some resemblance to another, who shall be mov ' d by some passion, or to Men of another Climate, or to Women, or to Brutes. Now, upon these four resemblances, Physiognomy hath made four general Rules, which, besides that they promote its particular design, do further discover the initials of that Science, and the improvements it hath made, in several Times and Ages. 
 Art. 1. Of the Progress of Physiognomy. I Conceive then, it may be laid down as a thing not question ' d, that Physiognomy had its beginnings and advancements, as the other Sciences had, which have not of a sudden, and, as it were, at the first start, nor yet in the same Age, attain ' d the perfection and accomplishment, which Time and after-experiences have brought them to. And it is very pro∣bable, that the first observations made thereof, were taken from the effects, which the Passions produce in the countenance; and that it having been observ ' d, that a Man transported with Anger, or cast down by sadness, had his countenance in such or such a posture, some observant Person inferr ' d the likelihood there was, that those who naturally had their countenances so, were accordingly inclin ' d to the same Passions. For this manner of judging of the Inclinations is more consonant to common sence, and the most easie to be observ ' d. Afterwards there was taken into consideration the resemblance which may be between men, and other Animals, and a judgment was made of the conformity of their Inclinations, by the re∣semblance there was between them. Then was there notice taken of that which is between the Sexes; and, at last, that between men of different Climates. For it is certain, that the Sexes, in each Species, have the Figure of the Body and the Inclinations different, as well as men of different Climates; and that if there be a resemblance, as to Figure, between any two of them, there ought to be also the same, as to their Inclinations. 
 Art. 2. That the Syllogistical Rule was added by Aristotle. THus far went the Antient Physiognomy. To these observations Aristotle hath since added the Rule which he calls Syllogistical. Now, though the rules which the antient Professors of Physiognomy made use of were not bad, yet were they not certain enough, to establish a Science upon them, in regard they did not employ them all in their judgments, nay, indeed us ' d them not as they should have done, and that they wanted the Syllogistical Rule, without which, the other are defective. And thence it came, that Aristotle found fault with them, and hath shewn, by solid reasons, that there was no certainty in their Science. 
 Art. 3. The defect of the first Rule of Physiognomy. FOr, as to what concerns the first means, which they call apparent Conformity or Resemblance, , they minded not, that there are many contrary In∣clinations, which cause the same constitution of coun∣tenance, as, for instance, Fortitude, and Impudence. Besides, the Air of countenance is chang ' d in a mo∣ment, according as the Soul is mov ' d; and so a man naturally sad, may express a certain cheerfulness in his countenance, upon the occurrence of some agreeable object. In fine, this Rule is very imperfect, and confin ' d the study of Physiognomy to too narrow limits. 
 Art. 4. The defectiveness of the second Rule. THe second Rule, which they draw from the re∣semblance there may be, between Man and other Animals, is yet more doubtfull, especially con∣sidering the manner, how they made use of it. For there is not any man, as Aristotle affirms, who hath an absolute resemblance with any other Animal whatso∣ever, but onely in some particular part; and there is ground to doubt, whether any one part is capable of creating a judgment of an Inclination, proper to the whole Species. Secondly, it is to be considered, that there are few Signs proper and peculiar to any one Species, and that there be many common ones; and therefore the resemblance which is made between a man and some other Animal, by the common Signs, will be defective, and signifie nothing, since it may be also made to another different Species. Nay, if the resemblance be made by Signs proper to such a Species, there will still be reason to question, whether those Signs do determinately denote such an Inclinati∣on, since it is to be conceiv ' d, every Animal hath se∣veral others. Thus the Figure, proper to a Tygre, is, to have a very spacious mouth, short ears, and the skin spotted; But this cannot design a particular In∣clination, in regard that being a strong, cruel, and indocible creature, it cannot be determined to which of these qualities that Figure may have any cor∣respondence. And therefore the antient Physiogno∣mists, could not, by this Rule, make any judgment of the Inclinations, whether they made use of those Signs, which are common, or those which are proper to the Animals. 
 Art. 5. How Aristotle makes use of the second Rule. IT will be said, that, by this reason, Aristotle de∣stroys as well his own doctrine, as that of the An∣tients, it being found, that, in other places, he makes use of this very Maxime, That such, or such a Figure denotes such, or such an Inclination, and that this is applicable to Lions, Eagles, Ravens, &amp;c. It is true, that Aristotle, in appearance, makes use of the same Rule, but it is after another manner then the old Physiognomists had done. For these consider ' d not the marks and signs of Animals; and thereupon they concluded, that he who resembled them in that, had the same Inclinations, as were found in the Souls of those Animals. 
 On the contrary, Aristotle considers not the Signs as proper to the Animals, but as proper to the Incli∣nations; which having not been observ ' d by Baldus, occasion ' d that great person to fall into a manifest con∣tradiction. And accordingly, he afterwards teaches, how that observation is to be made, and affirms, that we ought to consider several persons who have the same natural habit, such as may be, for example, For∣titude, and mark, in what particular Sign they agree: and it shall be found, that their resemblance will be in these particulars, in having the mouth large, and the extremities thick and strong. Then you are to make your reflection on those Creatures, which are known to be naturally strong, as Lions, Bulls, Eagles, and Tigres, and finding that all these kinds of Ani∣mals have those parts after the same manner, it will be very probably judg ' d, that they are the marks of Strength or Fortitude. 
 But this is not yet sufficient, it is further requisite, that we examine, whether there may not be some other Creatures, which, though they be strong, yet have not those marks: for if there be not, the Sign is certain, otherwise, some doubt may be made of it. And the same course is to be taken, in order to the discovery of all the other Inclinations. But after what manner soever we may make use of this Rule, yet is it not of extent enough, to perform what may be made out by Physiognomy, in regard there are but very few Creatures, whereof we can have the knowledge of their particular inclinations, and the Figure of the parts correspondent to those Inclinations. So that it it is then only to be accounted certain, when it is con∣firmed by the others, and particularly by the Syllo∣gistical Rule, which supplies the defect of these four.
