There is also founde in the gardens of some Herboristes of this countrey, an other forte of this kinde of Wormwood, the whiche is named of some men Absynthiū Ponticum, much like to our cōmon wormwood, sauing the leaues are much more iagged and finelier cut, and not so bitter (at the least way) as that whiche is set and sowen in this countrey. 
 The second kinde, whiche is the Sea Wormwood is also of a whitishe or gray colour, and hath many whitish leaues much like to cōmon Wormwood, but much smaller, tenderer and whiter, &amp; finelier cut, it hath many floures like to small buttons, &amp; the seede ioyning to the braunches, like as in the common Wormwood. It groweth to the heigth of a foote and halfe or more, it is of a strong smell, salt, &amp; of a straunge &amp; bitter taste, being gathered in his naturall &amp; proper place: but being remoued into gardens, or into groundes which are naturally holpē w t sweete waters, it doth maruelously alter both in sauour &amp; nature, as diuers other herbes, but especially such as grow in salt groundes, &amp; are remoued frō their naturall soyle, to some other place of a cōtrary kinde. 
 The thirde kinde of Wormwood called Santonicum is almost like to Sea Wormwood, in his small tender and iagged leaues, but the colour of this is whiter, and the smell thereof is not so ranke. 
 W Ormwood Romayne is like the Worm∣wood aforesaide, sauing that it is lower and smaller, the leaues be also smaller and finer, and not so white as the cōmon Wormewood, but chaunging more towardes greene, yet they turne somwhat grayish and ashe coloured. It putteth forth yellow buttons, the whiche afterwarde do bring forth both floures &amp; seede. The roote is full of hearie threedes, tray∣ling here and there, and putting foorth on euery side much encrease of new springs. 
 The fifth kinde of Wormwood is like vnto Sea Wormwood in his smal and tender leaues, also it is like in the stalke of floures: but it is of a sadde or deeper colour, and it hath neyther bit∣ter taste nor sauour. 
 The sixth kinde of Wormwood, his leaues be long and narrow, and of a whitish colour muche like the leaues of Lauender, and somwhat like it also in sauour. The stalkes also be of wooddishe substance, in the toppes whereof there groweth both floures and seede, like as in the reste of the Wormwoodes, but smaller. 
 Absynthiū Pōticum Galeni. Wormwood gentle / or Romayne. 
 ❀ The Place. The common Wormwood groweth naturally in stony places and rough mountaynes, &amp; in dry, rude &amp; vntoyled places. There is plentie of it, in many places of this countrey. 
 Sea wormwood groweth in salte ground, and in places adioyning to the Sea. It groweth plentifully in Zeland and Flaunders, alongst the sea coast, and in some places of Brabant, as about Barowgh. 
 The third kind groweth in some places of Zwiserland, vnder the hilles or at the foote of mountaines, as Conrade Gesner, that famous Clerke writeth. 
 Wormwood Romayne groweth plentifully in Hungarie, &amp; places neare about Constantinople, &amp; in some places of Almaigne, also vpō mountaynes, &amp; about sandy wayes. Yet it groweth not in this countrie, except it be planted. 
 The other twayne are not common in Base Almaigne: sauing onely in the gardens of certaine diligent Herboristes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. All the sortes of Wormwood, are in flowre in Iuly or August, or somwhat late: And shortly after, the seede is ready to be gathered. 
 ❀ The Names. Wormwood is called in Greeke , &amp; , or , bycause of his bitternesse: in Latine Absynthiū, whiche name it hath retayned in shops euen vntill this present time. Apuleius calleth it Absynthium rusticum: in I∣talian Assenzo: in Spanishe Axensios, y Assensios, y Alosna. The high Douchmen do cal it Wermut, &amp; Werommout, or Acker Werommout, that is to say, Field wormwood: the base Almaignes do call it Alsene: in French it is called Aluyne. 
 The first kind (which is our common Wormwood) may be rightly named Absynthium Latifolium, that is to say, great or broade leaued Wormwood. 
 That Wormwood that is most like vnto the aforesaid, is called of the Her∣boristes, Absynthium Ponticum, and Absynthium Graecię, &amp; is a kinde of the first sort of Wormwood: &amp; so is the Wormwood of Cappadocia, &amp; the Worm∣wood of mount Taurus, and likewise that Wormwood that groweth alongst by the old walles at Roome. Whereof the good religious fathers, that wrote the Commentarie vpon Antidotarium Mesue, haue writen. For all these sortes of Wormwood are of the first kinde, and may well be called Absynthia Latifo∣lia, as a difference from the other Wormwoods, whose leaues be a great deale finer and smaller: for there is no great diuersitie betwixt these Wormwoods, sauing in respect of the places where as they growe. 
 The second kinde of Wormwood is called in Greeke : in Latine Seriphium, and Absynthium Marinum: vnknowen of the Apothecaries. In English Sea wormwood. 
 The third is called of some Herba alba: &amp; without question, is the true Ab∣synthium Santonicum. Miratur fortasse, haec legens, Santonicum a Santonibus vt Dioscorides scribit cognominatū, apud Heluetios requiri, at hunc magis ad∣mirari aequum est, Santonum prouinciam à quoquam in ea Galliae parte, quae al∣pibus vicina est, reponi. Santones enim Aquitanię populi sunt, ad oram mariti∣mam Oceani, infra Garumnam fluuium versus Septentriones siti, longissimè ab Alpibus, procul etiam à Pyrenęis. Quam ob causam mendosum hunc Dioscori∣dis locum esse oportet: aut Dioscoridem, vel eum ex quo hęc transcripsit, Geo∣graphiae fuisse rudem &amp; imperitum. 
 The fourth kinde of Wormwood is called of Galen, in the .xi. booke of his Methode in Greeke : in Latine Absynthiū Ponticum: of the A∣pothecaries of Brabant Absynthium Romanum: in Frenche, Aluyne Romaine or Pontique: in base Almaigne, Roomsche Alsene, bycause this is a straunge herbe &amp; not cōmon in that countrey. For they do cōmonly call al such straunge herbes as be vnknowen of the cōmon people, Romish or Romayne herbes, although the same be brought frō Norweigh, which is a coūtrey far distant frō Roome. 
 The fifth is called in Latine Absynthium fatuum, &amp; Absynthium infipidum.
The sixth is called Absynthiū angustifolium, &amp; it is thought of some to be a kinde of Lauender, bicause his leaues hath smal leaues like Lauender: it may be called in English Lauender-wormewood, or narrow leaued wormewood. 
 ❀ The Nature or Temperament. Our common Wormwood is hoate in the first degree, and dry in the thirde, bitter, sharp and astringent: wherefore it clenseth, purgeth, comforteth, maketh warme and dryeth. 
 Sea wormwood is hoate in the second degree, &amp; dry in the thirde, &amp; of sub∣tile parts, &amp; of the same nature is Santoni wormwood, or French wormwood. 
 Wormwood Romayne is in temperature not muche vnlike the common wormwood, neuerthelesse it is more astringent. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The common Wormwood is a profitable &amp; excellent medicine against the payne of the stomacke, that is oppressed or charged with hoate Cholericke hu∣mors: for it expelleth them partly by the stoole, &amp; partly by vrine, besides that it comforteth the stomacke. Yet notwithstanding it will not serue, to purge y e stomacke that is charged with fleume and colde humors, neither can it mun∣difie and cleanse the breast and lunges that are stopped and charged with the saide humors, as Galen sayeth. 
 Likewise it doth both by seige &amp; vrine purge Cholerike humors, compact &amp; gathered together in the vaynes and liuer: wherefore the infusion or decoctiō thereof, taken day by day, cureth the Iaundise or Yealowsought. 
 If it be taken fasting in the morning, it preserueth frō drōkennes that day. 
 It is good against the windinesse and blastings of the belly, against the paynes and appetite to vomit, and the boyling vp or wamblings of the sto∣macke: if it be drunken with Annis seede or Sesely. 
 The same drunken with vineger is good for such as are sicke, with eating venemous Champions or Tode stooles. 
 The same taken with wine, resisteth all venom, but chiefly Hemloke, and the bittings and stingings of spiders and other venemouse beasts. 
 Wormwood mingled with hony, is good to be layde to the dimnesse of the sight, and to the eyes that are bloudshotten, or haue blacke spottes. And with the same boyled in Bastarde, or any other sweete wine, they vse to rubbe and strake painefull bleered eyes. 
 The same pounde or mengled with figges, salte peter, and Iuray meale, &amp; layde to the belly, sides or flankes, helpeth the dropsie, &amp; such as are splenitike. 
 The same layde in chestes, presses &amp; wardrobes, keepeth clothe &amp; garments from mothes and vermine. And with the oyle of Wormwood, a man may an∣noynt &amp; rubbe any place to driue away fleas, flies, knattes, and wormes. 
 Inke made with the infusion or decoctiō of Wormwood, keepeth writings from being eaten with Mice and Rattes. 
 Some do vse to make Wormwood wine, very excellent for all the diseases aforesayde. 
 Sea Wormwood boyled by it selfe or with Rice, or with any other foode or meate, and eaten with Hony, sleeth both long and flatte wormes, and all o∣ther kindes whatsoeuer, loosing the belly very gentilly. It is of like operatiō being layde too, outwardly vpon the belly or nauell, and for this purpose it is of more strength and vertue, then all the other kindes of Wormwood: but it is more hurtefull to the stomacke. 
 The seede of Sea Wormwood also, is very excellent against all sortes of wormes engendred within the bodie. 
 Dioscorides writeth, that such Beeues, Sheepe and Cattell, as feede vpon Sea Wormwood do waxe very fatte. 
 Wormwood Romayne is singular against all inflammation, and heate of the stomacke &amp; liuer, passing for this purpose, all other kindes of Wormwood as Galen writeth. 
 Of Buglosse / or common langue de Beuse. Chap. iij. ❀ The Kindes. T He common Buglosse, or langue de beuf (as it is now called) is of di∣uerse kindes, whereof the first is the greatest, and it is familiar and common in gardens: The three others are small: The fifth is the wilde Buglosse, or Sheepes tongue.
The second is named in Greeke : in Latine Anthyllis altera, as a difference from the first Anthyllis: some of our time do call it Borda. 
 ❀ The Nature. It is dry, and serueth properly, to heale and close vp woundes. 
 ❀ The Vertues. If one drinke halfe an ounce of the first Anthyllis: it shall preuayle much a∣gainst the hoate pisse, the Strangury or difficultie to make water, and against the payne of the Reynes. 
 The same mingled with milke and oyle of Roses, is good for the Matrix or Mother being charged and oppressed with colde humors, to be applied or layde outwardly to the belly. 
 Also it cureth woundes by it self, being layde vpō them, or being mixte with salues, oyntments, or oyles. 
 The other Anthyllis taken with Oximell (that is honied Vineger) is good for them that haue the falling sickenesse. 
 Of the Clote Burre. Chap. viij. ❧ The Kindes. T Here be two sortes of Clote Burres in this countrey: the one is the great Burre, &amp; the other y e lesser Burre, the whiche Dioscorides descri∣bed aparte. Neuerthelesse we haue reduced both into one chapter, by∣cause of the likelihood that is betwixt them both in name &amp; fasshion. 
 Arcium siue Personata. Great Clote Burre. 
 Xanthium. Louse Burre, or the lesser Clote. 
 ❀ The Description. THe great Clote hath leaues very large and long, greater than Gourde leaues, of a swarte greene colour, but of a grayish colour on the side next y e ground. The stalke is round &amp; hollow, of colour somwhat white &amp; redde, with diuers side bowghes &amp; braunches set ful of small leaues: vpon the braun∣ches there groweth small bullets or rounde balles, garnisshed full of little crookes or hookes, wherewithal they take holde or cleaue fast, and hang vpon garments: at last the sayde bullets or knoppes do open and put forth a fayre purple, thromde, or veluet floure. The roote is single, long, blacke w thout, white within, and in taste bitter. 
 The lesser Clote Burre hath grayish leaues like vnto Orache, iagged or snipte round about the edges. The stalke is a foote and half long, full of blacke spottes, diuiding it selfe into many branches or winges. Betwixt the leaues and the sayde branches, there groweth three or foure small Burres in a cluster, somewhat long, like to a small Oliue, or Cornell berry, prickly, and cleauing fast vnto garments. In the middell of those small Burres, there groweth forth as it were a little Crownet, somewhat aboue the Burres, vpon whiche groweth small floures, the which do perish after their opening, and do fall with their Crowne: than commeth the little Burres with long seede: the which af∣terward do neuer open, nor floure otherwise than is aforesayde. The roote is redde, and full of small threedes or hearie strings. 
 ❀ The Place. The Clote Burres delight to grow by the way side, about the borders of fieldes, in untilled places, and dry Diches. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Theyr season is in Iuly, and August. 
 ❀ The Names. The great Burre called in Greeke : in Latine Personatia, Personata and Arcium: of Apulcius Dardana: in Shoppes Bardana maior, and Lappa maior: in Italiā Lappola maggiore: in Spanish Lampazos, yerua dos pegamazos, pagamacera mayor: in English the great Burre or great Clote Burre: in French Bardane la grande, &amp; Lappe grande: grand Glouteron or Gleteron: in high Douch Grosz kletten: in base Almaigne Groote Clissen. 
 The lesser is called in Greeke : in Latine Xanthium: in Shoppes Lappa minor, and Lappa inuersa: in Italian Lappola minore in Spanish Pagamacera menor, that is to say, the small Burre, &amp; the Burre turned in &amp; out: in French Le petit Glouteron in high Douch Bettlertsz leusz, and Spitz kletten, that is to say, Rams lyce, or Beggers lysse, and the poynted or sharpe Burre: in base Almaigne cleyn Clissen: in English Diche Burre, and lowse Burre. 
 ❀ The Nature. The Clote Burres haue power to dry vp, consume, or dissolue: but the les∣ser is the hoater. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The iuyce of the great Burre dronken with Hony prouoketh vryne, and swageth the payne of the bladder. 
 The same dronken with olde wine, healeth the bitings and stingings of ve∣nemous beasts. 
 The leaues pound with a littell salte, is with great profite layd vnto the bi∣tings and stingings of Serpents, madde Dogges, &amp; other venemous beasts. 
 The scede made into pouder &amp; taken with the best wine that may be gotten by the space of fortie dayes, is very profitable for such as haue the Sciatica.
A dramme (which is the eigth parte of an vnce) of the roote, pound with the kernesses of Pine apple, and dronken, is a soueraigne medicine for such, as spit bloud and corrupt matter. 
 It is good for such as haue ache or payne in their ioyntes, by reason that the sayde ioyntes or bones haue bene before out of ioynt, broken or hurte. 
 The greene leaues pounde with the white of Egges, cureth burnings and olde sores, being layde thereto. 
 The iuyce of the lesser Burre dronken with wine, is much vsed against the bitings of venemous beasts, and also against the grauell and the stone. 
 The fruite pounde &amp; layde vnto colde swellings (called in Greeke Oedema ) consumeth the same, and scattereth or wasteth all colde humors: and is specially good against the Kings euell, called Strumas and Strofulas. 
 Of Mugworte. Chap. ix. ❀ The Description. M Ugworte hath broade leaues, all iagged &amp; torne like the leaues of Mormwood, but something smal∣ler, &amp; specially those whiche grow about y t stalke, they are of a browne greene colour aboue, and white hoare or gray vn∣derneath. The stalke is long and straight &amp; full of branches. The floures are smal round buttons, growing alongst the branches, like Mormwood, smelling whan they begin to ware ripe somewhat after Marioram. The roote is of a wooddy substance &amp; hath small hearie strings. Of this herbe there be twoo kindes moe, differing onely in colour. 
 The one hath redde branches &amp; floures, and is called redde Mugworte. 
 The other hath greenish branches, chan∣ging towardes white, and is called white Mugworte, in all things els like one to an other. 
 ❀ The Place. Mugworte groweth in the borders of fieldes, &amp; about highwaies, and the bankes of brookes or quiet standing waters. 
 ❀ The Tymes It floureth in Iuly &amp; August, and some∣times later. 
 Artemisia communis. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in shops Artemisia, &amp; of some Mater herbarum: in Spanish Artemya: in English Mugworte: in French Armoyse, Cherbe S. Ian: in high Douch Beyfusz, Bucken, &amp; S. Iohans gurtel: in base Almaigne Byuoet, &amp; S. Ians cruyt, the which is this kind of Mugwort, whiche is called in Greeke : in Latine Artemisia tenuifolia, the which is the fourth kinde in Dioscorides, and the third kinde in Apuleius. 
 ❀ The cause of the Name. Mugworte as Plinie saith, had this name of Artemisia Queene of Halicar∣nassus and wife of Mausolus King of Carie, who chose this herbe &amp; gaue it her name, for before that it was called . Parthenis, that is to say, Virginal: some say that Artemisia was so called of the Goddesse Diana who was also cal∣led Artemis, &amp; for bycause this herbe is singular for womens disseases, who are all vnder the gouernment of Diana, as the Heathen do imagine and dreame. 
 ❀ The Nature. Mugworte is somewhat astringent, and not to hoate. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Mugworte pound with oyle of sweete Almondes, and layd to the stomake as aplayster, cureth all the payne and griefe of the same. 
 Also if one do annoynt his ioynts, with the iuyce thereof mengled with oyle of Roses, it cureth the ache, shaking, and drawing to gither of Sinewes. 
 If it be hanged or cast into barrels or hoggesheads of Bier, it will preserue the same from so wring. 
 Whosoeuer shal carrie this herbe about him (as Plinie saieth) no venemous beast, or any like thing shall hurte him, and if he trauell vpon the way, he shall not be weary. 
 Of Tansie. Chap. x. ❀ The Kindes. Three be two sortes of Tansie. The one great and yellow, the other small and white. 
 Tanacetum maius. Great Tansie.
Tanacetum minus. White Tansie. 
 ❀ The Description. The great or common Tansie hath a blackishe stalke, three or foure foote high, diuided at the top into many single braunches, at the end wherof are round tuftes, bearing yellow floures like small round buttons, or like the middle of the floure of Cammomill, but greater and of stronger sauour. The leaues be long &amp; made of many small leaues, set directly one against an other, and spread abroade like wings, the whiche be also iagged and snipte like small feathers, especially round aboute the edges: the roote is slender casting it selfe here and there. 
 The small Tansie hath broade leaues, much iagged and cut, well like the leaues of Feuerfew, but smaller and more cut and iagged. The stalke is small, of the length of a foote or more, vpon the which groweth small tuftes, bearing little white floures, much like to the floures and tuftes of the white Mylfoyll or common Parrow. The roote is harde, and sometimes parted into two or three: all the herbe is much like in smell and sauour to the other Tansie, sauing that it is not so strong. 
 ❀ The Place. The first groweth about high wayes, hedges, and the borders of fieldes, and is very common in this countrie. 
 The second groweth in some places of Italie: in this countrey ye shall not finde it but in the gardens of certayne Herboristes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. They do bothe floure in Iuly and August. 
 ❀ The Names. The first is now called in shoppes Tanacetum, and Athanasia: in Englishe Tansie: in French Athanasie, in high Douch Reinfarn: in base Almaigne Reyn∣uaer, and Wormcruyt. Some learned men iudge it for to be the third kinde of Artemisia, called in Greeke : in Latine Artemisia vnicaulis, of Apuleius Artemisia Tragantes, or Tagetes. 
 The second without doubt is also a kinde of Tansie, the whiche some lear∣ned (and especially the famous Matthiolus of Siena, ) do thinke it to be right Milfoyle, called in Greeke . But if this herbe shoulde be the right A∣chillea, the common Tansie should be also without doubte a kinde of Achillea, for they are very much like one an other, not onely in smell and taste, but also in vertues and operation, as we haue written in our Annotations. 
 ❀ The Nature. Tansie is hoate in the second degree, and dry in the third, as it doth well ap∣peere by his strong smell, and bitter taste. 
 The small Tansie is of the like operation, or facultie. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The seede of Tansie is a singular and proued medicine against wormes: for in what forte so euer it be taken, it killeth and driueth forth wormes. 
 The same pounde and afterwarde mengled with oyle, is very good against the payne and swelling of Sinewes. 
 If before the cōming of fittes of the Ague, the body be annoynted with the iuyce of Tansie mengled with the oyle of Roses, it will cause the Ague to be gone. 
 The same dronken with wine, is good against the payne of the bladder, and whan one cannot pisse but by droppes. 
 The roote condited or preserued with hony and taken of them that be sicke, doth ease &amp; helpe very much, such as are troubled with the goute in their feete. 
 Of Feuerfew. Chap. xi. ❀ The Description. F Euerfew hath many tēder leaues much torne &amp; iagged of a grayishe or white greene colour, in colour and fasshion, like to the first &amp; ne∣thermost leaues of Coriander: the stalkes be two or three foote long, vpon whiche groweth many smal floures yellow in the middest, and compassed aboute as it were with a little pale of small white leaues, like to the order of Cammomil floures, of a strong smell and bitter taste: whan the floures be past, the knoppes be ful of seede, like to the knops of Cāmomill. The roote is of wooddy substāce with diuers hearie threedes or strings hanging by. 
 ❀ The Place. It groweth well in dry places, by olde walles, and such like rough places. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Feuerfew floureth in Iuly &amp; August, and almost all the Sommer. 
 ❀ The Names. It is called in Greeke , of Ga∣len, and Paule : in Latine Parthe∣nium and Amaracus: in shoppes, and of Se∣rapio Chap. 253. Matricaria, of some Ama∣rella or Marella: in English, Feuerfew, &amp; of some Whitewurte, also S. Peters wurt: in French Espargoutte, or Matricaire: in high Douch Mutterkraut, and Meidt blumen: in base Almaigne Mater &amp; Moedercruyt. 
 Parthenium.
❀ The Nature. It is hoate in the third degree, and dry in the second degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Feuerfew dryed and made into pouder, and two drammes of it taken with hony, or other thing, purgeth by siege Melancholy and fleume: wherefore it is very good for such as haue the giddinesse &amp; turning in the head or swimming, for them that are purse or troubled with the shortnes of winde, and for Melan∣cholique people, and such as be sadde and pensiue and without speach. 
 The herbe without his floures, boyled in water is good to be dronken of such as haue the stoone. 
 The same is good against the Suffocation of the Matrix (that is, the stop∣ping and hardnesse of the Mother) to be boyled in wine, and applied to the na∣uell, the harte, or the side. 
 The broth also, or decoction of Feuerfew, is very good for wemen to bathe and sitte in against the hardnesse of the Mother, and the Matrix that is ouer∣charged or swollen. 
 The greene leaues with the floures of Feuerfew stamped, is good to be layde to the disscase called the wilde fyre or Saint Anthonies fyre, and other cholerike inflammations. 
 Of Fole foote / or Horse houe. Chap xij. ❀ The Description. E Ole foote hath greate broade leaues, growing out into many corners, or indēted angles, with many vaynes, like to a Horse foote, fire or seuen leaues springing out of one roote, of a white, hoare, or grayish colour next to the ground, and greene a∣boue. The stem or stalke is white, and as it were cottoned with fine heare of a span long, at the end wherof are fayre yellow floures and full, which do suddenly fade, and chaūge into downe, or cotton, which is carried away with the winde, like to y e head of Dandelion. The roote is white and long creping here and there. 
 ❀ The Place. Fole foote groweth well in watery places and moyst fieldes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. It putteth forth his wolly stalke with∣out leaues, at the beginning of March &amp; April. At the toppe of the stalke is the yel∣low floure: After the floures the leaues spring out from the roote: then vanisheth away the stalke and the floures, so that one shall seldome finde the leaues and floures altogether at one time. 
 Bechion, Tussilago. 
 ❀ The Names. It is called in Greeke : in Latine Tussilago: in shoppes Tarfara, and Vngula Caballina: in Italian Vnghia di cauallo in Spanishe Vn̄a de asno: in English Fole foote, Horse houe, Coltes foote, and Bull foote: in French Pas de Cheual, of some Pas d ' asne: in high Douch Roszhub, or Brandtlattich: in base Almaine, Hoefbladeren, Peerdts clauw, Brant lattowe, and Saint Ca∣rijus cruyt. 
 ❀ The Nature. The greene and fresh leaues are moyst, but whan they are dry they become sharpe or sower, and therefore are of a drying nature. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The greene leaues of Fole foote pounde with Hony, do cure and heale the hoate inflammation called Saint Anthonies fyre, and all other kindes of in∣flammation. 
 The parfume of the dryed leaues layde vpon quicke coles, taken into the mouth through the pipe of a funnell, or tunnell, helpeth suche as are troubled with the shortnesse of winde, and fetche their breath thicke or often, &amp; do breake without daunger the impostems of the breast. 
 The roote is of the same vertue, if it be layde vpon the coles, and the fume thereof receiued into the mouth. 
 Of Butter Burre. Chap. xiij. ❀ The Description. B Vtter Burre hath great round leaues, at the firste lyke the leaues of Folefoote, the which do afterwardes waxe so great, that with one leafe, one may couer a smal rounde table, as with a carpet. Of a greene colour vpon the outside, and of a gray whitishe colour nexte the grounde. It putteth forth a hollow stalke of a span long, set full of small incarnate floures at the toppe, as it were clustering thicke to∣gither: the which togither with the stalke do perish and vanish away. The roote is thicke, white within &amp; hollow, of a strong smell and bitter taste. 
 ❀ The Place. It groweth well in freshe and moyste places, bysides small riuers and brookes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The floures do appeare at the begin∣ning of Marche, and do vanish away in Aprill: then the leaues come forth, and re∣mayne all the Somer. 
 ❀ The Names. It is called in Greeke : in La∣tine Petasites, vnknowen in shoppes: yet some call it Bardana maior: in Englishe, Butter Burre: in French Herbe aux tigneux: in high Douch Pestilentz wurtz: in base Almaigne Dockebladeren, and Pestilentie wortel. 
 Petasites.
❀ The Nature. Butter Burre is dry in the thirde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Butter Burre dried, and made into powder and than dronken in wine, is a soueraigne medicine against the Plague, and Pestilent feuers, bycause it pro∣uoketh iweate, and for that cause it driueth from the harte all venim, and euill heate. It killeth wormes, and is of great force against the Suffocation, and strangling of the Mother to be taken in the same sorte. 
 It cureth all naughty Ulcers, or olde filthie, fretting, sores, or consuming Pockes, and inflammations, if the pouder bestrewed thereon. 
 The same cureth the Farcyn, in Horses, howsoeuer it be ministred, whether it be giuen inwardly to receyue, or applied outwardly. 
 Of Britannica or Bistorte. Chap. xiiij. ❀ The Kyndes. T Here is two sortes of Bistorte, as Leonard Fuchs, and Hierome Bock, (men of great knowledge and learning) haue lately writen: the one cal∣led the Great Bistorte, the other the Small Bistorte. 
 Bistorta maior. Great Bistorte. 
 Bistorta minor. Small Bistorte. 
 ❀ The Description. THe great Bistorte hath long leaues, like Patience, but smaller, and not so smothe or playne, but wrinkled or drawen into rimples, of a swart greene colour vpon one side, and of a blewishe greene on the side next the ground. The stalke is long, smothe and tender, hauing a spiked knap at the ende, set full of small incarnate floures clustering togither. The seede is angled and broune. The roote is great and long, wounden and turned backe, or crokedly turning togither like a Snayle, blacke and hearie without, and somewhat redde with∣in, in taste like an Oke kernell. 
 The small Bistorte is like the other in leaues, knap, floures, seede &amp; stalke, but smaller, his leaues also are smother and playner. The roote is shorter and more roundly turned togither without any small threeds, or hearines, browne without, and of a darke redde colour within, in taste like the first. 
 ❀ The Place. They grow well in moyst &amp; watery places, as in medowes, and darke sha∣dowy wooddes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. They floure in May and Iune. 
 ❀ The Names. The learned do call the herbes Bistortae and Serpentariae: in French Bistorte in high Douch Naterwurtz: in Brabant Hertstonghen. This should seeme to be Dracunculus Latinorū, wherof Plinie wrote in the. 6. chap. of the. 24. Booke. 
 The first is called of some in Latine Colubrina, &amp; of Leonard Fouchs, Na∣terwurtz weiblin, that is to say, Female Adderwurte or Snakeweede: in French Grande Bistorte: and Serpentair femelle: in base Almaigne Hertstonghe. 
 The second is the small Bistorte: &amp; is called in some places of England Dy∣sterloyte: of the same Leonard Fouchs Naterwurtz menlin, that is to say, male Adderwurte or Snakeweede. 
 ❀ The Nature. Bistorte doth coole and dry in the third degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The roote of Bistorte boyled in water or wine, and dronken, stoppeth the laske, and is good against the bloudy flixe. 
 It stoppeth the ouermuch flowing of womens termes or floures, and all o∣ther issue of bloud. 
 Also if it be taken as is aforesayd, or if it be made into pouder and dronken with redde wine, it taketh away the desire to vomite or parbrake. 
 The decoctiō of the leaues is very good against all sores, &amp; inflāmatiō of the mouth &amp; throote, &amp; it fasteneth loose teeth, if it be oftē vsed, or holdē in y e mouth. 
 Of Fumeterre. Chap. xv. ❀ The Kindes. T here is two kindes of Fumeterre, (as Plinie writeth in the .xiij. chap. of the .xxv. booke of his naturall History.) Wherof the first is the com∣mon Fumetory the which was knowen &amp; vsed in Medicine, of Galen, Paule, &amp; other the Greeke Physitions. The second is an other herbe, onely knowen of Plinie: the whiche both are knowen in this countrey.
Capnos fumaria. Fumeterre. 
 Capnos Plinij. Phragmites. Nedge Fumeterre. 
 ❀ The Description. THe common Fumeterre hath a square stalke, beset with small leaues, very tender, weake, and finely iagged, &amp; somewhat gray like asshie colour, like to the leaues of Coriander but much smaller: the floure is small and pur∣ple, growing togither like a littell cluster, and changeth into littell small knops or beries, wherein is very small seede. The roote is but simple with a very few small heares or strings about the same. 
 Small Fumeterre, hath also many slender branches, vpon whiche groweth small iagged leaues, in colour, taste, and in fashion also, somewhat like the Fu∣meterre aforesayde. It hath also certaine small threedes or clasping tendrels, by the whiche it taketh holdfast in all places by Hedges, and other herbes. The floures are small and clustering togither, of a white colour mixed with a littell blew: after the floures there commeth forth small huskes or coddes, in which is conteyned the seede. The roote is single and of the length of a fingar. 
 ❀ The Place. Fumeterre groweth best amongst wheate &amp; Barley, also it groweth in gar∣dens amongst potherbes, in Vineyardes, and such other open places. 
 Small Fumeterre groweth vnder hedges, in the borders of fieldes, and a∣bout olde walles. 
 ❀ The Tyme. They do bothe floure in May and Iune. 
 ❀ The Names. The first of these herbes is called in Greeke : in La∣tine Fumaria and Capnium: in Shoppes Fumus terrae: in Spanish Palomilla, y palomina, y yerua malarin̄a: in English Fumeterre: in French Fumeterre: in high Douch Erdtrauch, Taubencropff, Katzenkorbel: in base Almaigne, Grysecom, Duyuekeruel, and Eerdtroock. 
 The second is called of Plinie Capnos, &amp; Pes Gallinaceus: Therfore Capnos Plinij, and this is that whiche is called Hermolaus, of Aëtius, , in Latine Capnum Chelidoniū, not knowen in shoppes, some following Plinie do call it in Latine Pes gallinaceus: in French, Pied de geline: in base Almaigne cleyn Eerdtroock: in English Hedge Fumeterre, and Hennes foote. 
 ❀ The Nature. Fumeterre is hoate and dry, almost in the second degree, and so is Hennes foote, as one may know by the sharpnes, and bitter taste. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The iuyce of Fumeterre dropped into the eyes, doth sharpen and quicken the sight, the same mengled with gumme, and layd to the eye liddes, will cause that the heare that hath bene ones pulled of, shall not grow againe. 
 The decoction of Fumeterre dronken, driueth forth by vrine &amp; siege all hoate Cholerique, burnte, &amp; pernicious humors. Bysides this it is very good against the foule scurffe, and rebellious olde sores, and the great Pockes. 
 The iuyce of Fumeterre dronken worketh the like effect, &amp; for this purpose is of greater power, than the Decoction of Fumeterre. 
 Henfoote or hedge Fumeterre (as Plinie sayth) is of the same nature &amp; ver∣tue as the other Fumeterre: and is a singular medicine against the weakenesse of the sight, especially for such as seeme to see small strawes, if the iuyce thereof be dropped into the eyes. 
 Of Germander. Chap. xvi. ❀ The Description. GErmander is a shorte herbe, of a spanne or foote long, bringing foorth from his roote many tender stemmes or branches. The leaues are smal &amp; tender, indēted &amp; cut about, much like the leaues of certayne Okes, but farre smaller. The floures are small of a broune blew colour compassing round the toppe of the stalke. The seede is small, blacke, and rounde. The roote is small and slender, creping vnder the earth, here and there. 
 ❀ The Place. Germander groweth luckely in stony hilles &amp; mountaynes, &amp; such like places, also it groweth in wooddes, it is to be found growing in certayne wooddes of Brabant, and it is planted in gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Germander floureth in Iune &amp; Iuly. 
 ❀ The Names. The first is called in Greeke : in Latine Chamaedrys, Trixago, &amp; of som Quercula minor, &amp; Serratula: in Shoppes Chamędryos: of the Italians Querinola, Chamedrio, Chamandrina: in Spanish Cha∣medreos yerua: in French Germandreé, or Che∣snette: in English Germander, &amp; English Treacle: in high Almaigne Gamander∣lein and Kleyn Bathengel: in base Al∣maigne, Gamanderlijn. 
 Chamaedrys. Germander. 
 ❀ The Nature. It is hoate &amp; dry in the third degrée.
It is very good for Lazer people and Lepers if they vse to eate it, &amp; drinke the whay of sweete milke after. 
 The same eaten rawe or sodde with meates, or dronke with salte and hony, sleeth and driueth foorth al kindes of worines, in what part of the bodie soeuer they be. The same vertue hath the iuyce dronken, &amp; layde to any place whereas wormes are. 
 Also it taketh away scarres, and blacke and blewe markes, whan it is boy∣led in wine and the places often wasshed therewith, or else the herbe it self fresh gathered, pounde and layde vpon. 
 Of Costemary / or Galsamynte. Chap. lxvij. ❀ The Kyndes. BAlsamynte is of two sortes, great and small, resembling one an other in sa∣uour, leaues and seede. 
 Balsamita maior. Costemary. 
 Balsamita minor. Mawdeleyn. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE great Balsamynt hath slender stalkes, round and harde: the leaues be long and meetely large, of a white or light greene colour, very finely hackte or snipt about the edges. The floures grow in tuftes, or bun∣dels like Nosegayes, and are nothing else like but to small yellow buttons, ve∣ry like the floures of Tansie, sauing that they be smaller. The roote is threddy and beareth diuers stalkes and branches, and putteth vp yearely new springs. The whole herbe is of a strong sauour, but yet pleasant, and in tast bitter. 
 The small Balsamynte is much like to the first &amp; great Balsamynte, aswell in stalkes, floures and seede, as in smell and sauour, but altogither smaller and not so high of groweth, his leaues be a great deale smaller and narrower, and much deeper snipt or cut about the edges. The roote also is threddie and put∣teth vp yearely many new springs. 
 ❀ The Place. They are both planted in the gardens of this coūtrie, but especially the first, the whiche is very common in all gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Balsamynte floureth in Iuly and August. 
 ❀ The Names. The first kinde is called in Latine Balsamita maior: in the Shoppes of Bra∣bant Balsamita, of some Menta Graeca, Saluia Romana, Lassulata, and Herba diuae Mariae: in English Cooste Marie, and of some Balsamynte: in French Coq, or du Coq: in high Douch Frauwenkraut: in base Almaigne Balseme. It should seeme to be that Panax Chironia, whiche Theophrastus describeth in his ix. Booke. 
 The seconde kinde is called of some Balsamita minor: in Languedoc Herba diuae Mariae: in English Mawdelein, and of some small Balsamynte: in Italie Herba Giulia: And some take it for , Ageratum of Dioscorides: others take it to be , Elichrysum: and others for Eupatorium Mesue. But in mine o∣pinion it is none of them three, for I thinke it an herbe not described of any of the Auncients vnlesse it be a kinde of Panaces Chironium Theophaasti. 
 ❀ The Nature. These two herbes be hoate and dry in the second degree, as their smell, and bitter taste doth declare. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The leaues of Costemarie alone, or with Parsenip seede boyled in wine &amp; dronken cureth the trenches of the belly, that is a griping payne and torment in the guttes or bowels, and it cureth the bloudie flixe. 
 The conserue made of the leaues of Costemarie and Suger, doth warme and dry the brayne, and openeth the stoppings of the same, and it is very good to stoppe all superfluous Catarrhes, Reumes, and distillations, to be taken in quantitie of a Beane. 
 This herbe is also vsed in meates as Sage and other herbes, especially in Salades and sawces, for whiche purpose it is excellent, for it yeeldeth a proper sent and taste. 
 As Mawdelein herbe or small Balsaminte, is like to Costemary or great Balsamynte in taste and sauour, so is it like in vertues and operations, &amp; may be alwayes vsed in steede of the great Balsaminte. 
 Of Sage. Chap. lxxvij. ❀ The Kyndes. THere be two sortes of Sage, the one is small &amp; franke, &amp; the other is great. The great Sage is of three sortes, that is to say, greene, white, and redde. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE franke Sage hath sundry wooddie branches, and leaues growing vpon long stemmes whiche leaues be long, narrow, vneuen, hoare, or of a grayishe white colour, by the sides of the sayde leaues at the lower ende, there groweth two other small leaues, like vnto a payre of little eares. The floures growe alongst the stalkes in proportion like the floures of Dead Nettell, but smaller and of colour blewe. The seede is blackishe, and the roote wooddie. 
 The great Sage is not much vnlike the small or franke Sage, sauing it is larger: the stalkes are square and browne. The leaues be rough, vn∣euen and whitishe, like to the leaues of franke Sage, but a greate deale larger, rougher, and without eares. The floures, seede, and roote are like vnto the other.
Coriandrum. 
 Ye must also note, that the Apothecaries ought not to sell to any person, of Coriander seede vnprepared, nor to couer it with Sugar, nor to put it in Me∣dicine: for albeit it be wel dryed and of good taste, yet notwithstanding it may not be but a little vsed in medicine without great perill and danger. 
 The herbe Coriander being yet fresh and greene, &amp; boyled with the crōmes of white bread, or Barley meale, dryueth away &amp; consumeth all hoate tumors, swellings and inflammations, and with Beane meale it dissolueth the Kings euill, and wennes or harde lumpes. 
 The iuyce of Coriander layde to with Ceruse, Litharge, or skūme of Sil∣uer, vineger, and oyle of Roses, cureth S. Anthonies fire, and swageth and easeth all inflammations that chaunce on the skinne. 
 ❀ The Daunger. Greene Coriander taken into the bodie causeth one to waxe hoarse, and to fall into Frensie, and doth so much dul the vnderstāding, that it seemeth as the partie were dronken. And the iuyce thereof dronken in quantitie of foure Drammes, killeth the bodie, as Serapio writeth. 
 Of Git or Nigella. Chap. xcvi. ❀ The Kyndes. NIgella is of two sortes, tame and wilde, whereof the tame or garden Ni∣gella, is agayne parted into two sortes, the one bearing blacke seede, the other a Citren colour or pale yellow seede, but otherwise like one to an other, as in stalkes, leaues, floures, and smell. 
 Melanthium satiuum. Garden Nigella. 
 Melanthium syluestre. Wilde Nigella. 
 ❧ The Description. T He garden Nigella hath a weake and brittle stalke, full of braunches, and of a foote long. The leaues be all to cut and iagged, much like to y e leaues of Fumeterrie, but much greener. The floures grow at the toppe of the braunches, and are white, turning towardes a whitishe or light blewe, eache floure parted into fiue small leaues, after the maner of a little starre or rowell. After that the floures be past, there commeth vp small knops or heads, with fiue or sixe little sharpe hornes vpon them, eache knop is diuided in the inside into fiue or sixe celles, or little chambers, in whiche is con∣teyned the seede, the whiche (as we haue before sayde) is sometimes blacke, and somtimes a bleeke or faynt yellow, and like to Onyon seede, in tast sharpe, and of a good pleasant strong sauour. 
 The wilde Nigella hath a straked, or crested stalke, of two spānes long, his leaues be ashe colour, and all to cut, more iagged than the leaues of garden Ni∣gella, drawing towardes the leaues of Dill. The floures are like to the floures of garden Nigella, sauing that they be blewer: The heades or knoppes are al∣so parted into fiue horned huskes, much like to Columbyne huskes, in whiche is conteyned the sweete and pleasant seede. 
 There is yet an other Nigella, whiche is both fayre and pleasant, and is cal∣led Damaske Nigella, it is much like to the wilde Nigella in the small cut and iagge of his leaues, but his stalke is lon∣ger. The floures are blewe and diuided into fiue partes lyke to the others, but a greate deale fayrer and blewer with fiue little leaues vnderneath them, very small cut and iagged, from the middle poynt or center whereof, the floure springeth. Whā the floures are gone, there appeareth the knoppes or horny heades, like as in the garden Nigella, in whiche also is contey∣ned the seede, and it is blacke like to the seede of the gardē Nigella, but it hath no sweete sauour. 
 ❀ The Place. These Nigellas are not found in this countrie, sauing in gardens whereas they be sowen. 
 The wild is found growing in fields, in certayne places of Fraunce and Al∣maigne. 
 The Damaske Nigella groweth plen∣tifully through-out all Languedoc. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The Nigellas do floure in Iune and Iuly. 
 Melanthium Damascenum. Damaske Nigella. 
 ❀ The Names. Nigella is called in Greeke : in Latine Melanthium, Nigella, and Papa∣uer nigrum: in Shoppes Nigella, and of some Gith: in French Nielle. 
 The firste kinde is called Melanthium satiuum, and Nigella domestica, of some Salusandria: in English Garden Nigella: in Italian Nigella ortelana: in Spanish Alipiure, Axenuz: in high Douche Schwartz kumich, Schwartz ku∣mel, in base Almaigne Nardus, and the seede is called Nardus saet: in French Poyur tte, and of some Barbue. 
 The wilde Nigella is called Melanthium syluestre, and Nigella syluestris: in French Nielle sauuage, or Barbues. in high Douch S. Catharinen blumen, that is to say, S. Catharines floure, of some Waldt schwartz kumich: some lear∣ned men thinke it to be wilde Comyn, whereof we haue written in the lxxxiiij. Chapter of this Booke. 
 The thirde kinde is now called Melanthium Damascenum, and Nigella Da∣mascena, that is to say, Damaske Nigella: in French Nielle de Damas: in high Douch Schwartz Coriander.
❀ The Nature. The seede of Nigella is hoate and dry in the thirde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The seede of Nigella dronken with wine, is a remedie against the short∣nesse of breath, it dissolueth, and scattereth all ventositie and windinesse in the body, it prouoketh vrine, &amp; floures, it increaseth womans milke, if they drinke it often. 
 The same slayeth, and driueth out wormes, whether it be dronken with wine or water, or else layde to the Nauell of the belly. The same vertue hath the oyle that is drawen forth of Nigella seede, to annoynt the region of the belly and nauell therewith. 
 The quantitie of a Dramme of it dronkē with water, is very good against all poyson, and the biting of venimous beasts. 
 The onely fume or smoake of Nigella tosted or burnt, driueth away Ser∣pents and other venimous beasts, and killeth Flies, Bees, and Waspes. 
 The same mingled with the oyle of Ireos, and layde to the forehead cureth the head ache: and oftentimes put into the Nose, is good against the webbe, &amp; bloudshotten of the eyes, in the beginning of the same. 
 The same well dried and pound, and wrapped in a piece of Sarsenet, or fine linencloath, and often smelled vnto, cureth all Murres, Catharrhes, &amp; poses, drieth the brayne, and restoreth the smelling being lost. 
 And boyled with water and vineger, and holden in the mouth, swageth the tootheache, and if one chewe it (being well dried,) it cureth the vlcers and sores of the mouth. 
 It taketh out Lentils, Freckles, and other spottes of the face, and clenseth foule scuruinesse and itche, and doth soften olde, colde, and harde swellings, be∣ing pounde with vineger and layde vpon. 
 The same stieped in olde wine, or stale pisse (as Plinie saith) causeth the Cornes and Agnayles to fall of from the feete, if they be first scarified and scot∣ched rounde aboute. 
 ❀ The Daunger. Take heede that ye take not to much of this herbe, for if ye go beyonde the measure, it bringeth death. Turner lib. secundo, fol. 10. 
 Of libanotis Rosmarie. Chap. xcvij. ❀ The Kyndes. LIbanotis, as Dioscorides writeth, is of twoo sortes, the one is frute∣full, the other is barren. Of the frutefull sorte there is two or three kindes. 
 ❧ The Description. T He first frutefull kinde, hath leaues (as Dioscorides saith) very much diuided and cut lyke vnto Fenell leaues, sauing they be greater and larger, moste commonly spread abroade vpon the grounde: amongst them groweth vp a stalke of a cubite, that is a foote and halfe long or more, vpon whiche grow the floures in spokie tuffets like Dill, and it beareth great, round, cornered seede, of a strong sauour, and sharpe taste. The roote is thicke, and hearie aboue, and sauoring like Rosin. 
 The seconde kinde hath a long stalke with ioyntes like the Fenell stalke, on whiche growe leaues almoste like Charuill, or Homlocke, sauing they be greater, broader, and thicker. At the toppe of the stalkes groweth spokie tuffets, bearing white floures, the whiche do turne into sweete smelling seede, flatte, and almost like to the seede of Angelica and Brank vrsine. The roote is blacke without and white within, hearie aboue, and sauereth like to Rosin or Frankencence. 
 There is yet an other sorte of these fruteful kindes of Libanotis, the which is described by Theophrastus Lib .ix. Chapt .xij. It hath also a straight stalke with knottes and ioyntes, and leaues greater than Marche or Smallache. The floures grow in tuftes, like as in the two other kindes, &amp; bringe foorth great long, and vneuen seede, which is sharpe in taste. The roote is long, great, thicke, and white, with a certayne kinde of great thicke heare aboue, and smel∣leth also of Frankencence or Rosin. 
 Libanotidis alterum genus. 
 Libanotis Theophrasti. 
 The barren Libanotides (as Dioscorides writeth) are like to the frutefull in leaues &amp; rootes, sauing they beare neither stalkes, floures, nor seede. 
 The other kinde of Libanotis called Rosmarinum coronarium, in English Rosmarie, hath bene already described Chap. lxxv. of this Booke. 
 ❀ The Place. The frutefull Libanotides, are now founde vpon the high mountaynes, hilles, and desertes of Germany.
❧ The Tyme. These herbes do floure most commonly in Iuly. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greeke , Libanotis, bicause that his roote sa∣uoreth like y e Encens, which is called in Greke Libanos, in Latine Rosmarinus. 
 The first kind (as Dioscorides writeth) is called of some Zea, and Campsa∣nema: in Shoppes Faeniculus porcinus: in high Douche Beerwurtz: in base Almaigne Beerwortel, that is to say, Beers roote. 
 The seede therof is called in Greeke : in Latine Canchrys or Cachrys. 
 The second kinde is called in high Douch Schwartz hirtzwurtz, that is to say, blacke Harte roote. 
 The thirde is described of Theophrastus, wherefore we haue named it Li∣banotis Theophrasti: in high Douch weisz Hirtzwurtz, that is to say, white Hartes roote, the seede of this kinde is also called of Theophrastus, Canchrys, or Cachrys. 
 ❀ The Nature. These herbes with their seedes and rootes are hoate and dry in the second degree, and are proper to digest, dissolue, and mundifie. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The rootes of Libanotis dronken with wine, prouoketh vrine, &amp; floures, &amp; healeth the griping paynes and torment of the belly, and are very good against the bytings of Serpents, and other venimous beasts. 
 The seede of Libanotis, is good for the purposes aforesayde: Moreouer it is singuler good against the falling sicknesse, and the olde and colde diseases of the breast. They vse to giue it to drinke with pepper against the Iaūders, espe∣cially the seede of the seconde kynde of Libanotis, for as touching the seede of the first kinde called Cachrys, it is not very good to be taken into the bodie, seing that by his great heate and sharpnesse, it causeth the throote to be rough and grieuouse. 
 The leaues of al the Libanotides pounde, do stoppe the fluxe of the Hemor∣rhoides or Pyles, and do souple the swellings and inflammations of the tuell or fundement, and it mollifieth and ripeth all olde colde and harde swellings, being layde therevpon. 
 The iuyce of the herbe and rootes put into the eyes with hony, doth quic∣ken the sight, and cleareth the dimnesse of the same. 
 The dry roote mengled with Hony, doth scoure and clense rottē vlcers, and doth consume and waste all tumors or swellings. 
 The seede mengled with oyle, is good to annoynt them y t haue the Crampe, and it prouoketh sweate. 
 The same mengled with Yuray meale and vineger, swageth the payne of the goute when it is layde thereto. 
 It doth also clense and heale the white dry scurffe, and manginesse, if it be layde on with good strong vineger. 
 They lay to the forehead the seede called Cachrys, against the bloudshotten or watering eyes. 
 Of Seseli. Chap. xcviij. ❀ The Kindes. SEseli, as Dioscorides writeth is of three sortes. The first is called Seseli Mas∣siliense. The second Seseli Aethiopicum. The third Seseli Peloponnese. 
 ❀ The Description. T He first kinde of Seseli named Massiliense, his leaues are very muche clouen and finely iagged, but yet they be greater and thicker than the leaues of Fenell, the stalke is long and high, with knottie ioyntes, and beareth tuffets at the toppe like to Dill, and seede somewhat long, &amp; cornered, sharpe and biting. The roote is long like to the roote of the great Saxifrage, of a pleasant smell (as Dioscorides writeth) and sharpe taste. 
 The seconde Seseli (as Dioscorides saith) hath leaues like Iuye, but smal∣ler and longer drawing neare to the proportion of Woodbine leaues. The stalke is blackishe, of three or foure foote long and ful of branches. The floures are yellow and grow in spokie rundels like Dill. The seede is as great as a wheate Corne, thicke, swarte, and bitter: And this is counted to be the Ethio∣pian Seseli, although in deede it is not the right Ethiopian Seseli. 
 Seseli Massiliense.
Seseli Aethiopicum. 
 Seseleos species. 
 The thirde is Seseli Peloponnense, which hath a straight long stalke like Fe∣nell, or longer, and groweth higher then Seseli of Marsiles. The leaues are all to cut and parted into diuers other small leaues, yet greater and larger than the leaues of Homlock. The seede groweth likewise in spokie toppes, and is broade and thicke. 
 Amōgst the kindes of Seseli, we may place that strange herbe which is foūd in the gardens of certayne Herboristes. It hath at the first broade leaues spread vpō the grounde, very tender &amp; finely iagged. The stalke is aboute foure or fiue foote long, with knottie ioynts, and round like to a Fenel stalke, but a great deale slende∣rer, and of a faynt greene colour changing towards yellow. The leaues that grow at the knots or ioyntes of the stalkes do bende and hang downewardes, but espe∣cially y e highest (except a few smal leaues) whiche grow betwixt the others, &amp; they grow vpward. The toppes of the stalkes and branches, are full of small spoky tuffets, bearing yellow floures, and after∣warde seede. The roote is long and lasteth many yeares. 
 ❀ The Place. The first kinde (as writeth Dioscorides) groweth in Prouence, and espe∣cially about Marsels, wherfore it is called Seseli of Marsels. 
 The second groweth, as witnesseth the sayd Dioscorides, in Ethiopia: and it groweth also meetely plentifully in Prouence, and Languedoc. 
 The third kinde groweth in Peloponneso, the whiche is now called Mo∣rea, and it lieth in Greece, and is now vnder the Empire and dominion of the Turcke. 
 The fourth is found vpō certayne Mountaynes of Lombardie, a man shall also finde, it as some say, in certayne places of Brabant. 
 ❧ The Tyme. The first floureth twise a yeare, in the spring, and Autumne. 
 The second, thirde and fourth, do floure in Autumne. 
 ❀ The Names. The first kinde is called in Greeke : in Latine Seseli Mas∣siliense, of some , that is Latum Cuminum, which is as much to say in English as large, and broade Comyn. 
 The second kind is called in Greeke : in Latine Seseli Aethio∣picum, and of Egyptians , Cyonos phrice. 
 The third kinde is called : in Latine Seseli Peloponnēse, that is to say, Seseli Peloponnense. 
 The fourth hath no speciall name, sauing that some take it for a kinde of Se∣seli, and some for Libanotis. 
 ❀ The Nature. The seede and roote of Seseli, are hoate and dry in the second degree, and of subtile partes. 
 ❧ The Vertues. The seede dronken with wine, comforteth and warmeth the stomacke, hel∣peth digestion, and driueth away the gnawing and griping of the belly, it cu∣reth the shakings and brusing of a Feuer, and is very good against the short∣nesse of breath &amp; an old Cough, to be short it is good for al the inwarde partes. 
 It prouoketh vrine, and is good against the strangurie, and hoate pisse, it prouoketh the menstruall Termes, expulseth the dead childe, and setteleth in his naturall place againe the Matrix or Mother that is risen out of his place. 
 It is much worth vnto them that haue the falling sicknesse. 
 The traueler that drinketh the seede of Seseli, with Pepper and wine, shal not complayne much of colde in his iourney. 
 The same giuen vnto Goates, and other foure footed beasts to drinke, cau∣seth them easilie to deliuer their yōg ones. The same propertie hath the leaues to be giuen to the cattell to eate.
Of Seseli of Candie. Chap. xcix. ❀ The Description. T His is a tender herbe, about the length of a foote and halfe, his bran∣ches are tender and small, and set but with a fewe leaues, whiche be very small iagged and cut. At the toppe of the branches growe the little spokie tuffets or rundels, with white floures, the whiche being past, there commeth seede, whiche is redde, round, and flatte, garnished or com∣passed aboute with a white border, two seedes growing togither one against an other, eache of them hauing the shape and propor∣tion of a Target or Buckler. The roote is small and tender, and dieth yearely, so that it muste be euery yeare new sowen againe. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe (as Dioscorides writeth) groweth vpon the Mountayne Amanus in Cilicia: it is to be found in this countrie, in the gardēs of some diligent Herboristes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. It floureth in Iuly and the seede is ripe in Au∣gust. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greeke , of Paulus Egineta : in Latine Tor∣dylium, &amp; Seseli Creticum: in English Seseli of Can∣dy: vnknowen for the most parte in Shoppes. 
 ❀ The Nature. The seede of Seseli of Candie, is hoate and dry in the second degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The seede of Tordylion dronken in wine, prouo∣keth vrine, and is good against the strangurie, &amp; cau∣seth wemen to haue their moneths or termes. 
 Tordylion. 
 The iuyce of it drōken (in the quātitie of a drāme, boyled with good wine,) by the space of tenne dayes, cureth the disease of the raynes of kidneys. 
 The roote thereof mengled with Hony and often licked vpon, causeth to spitte out the tough and grosse Phlegmes, that are gathered aboute the breast and lunges. 
 Of Daucus. Chap. c. ❀ The Kyndes. MEn do finde three sortes of herbes, comprehended vnder the name of Daucus, as Dioscorides &amp; all the Auncients do write, whereof the third, is onely knowen at this day. 
 ❧ The Description. T He firste kinde of Daucus is a tender herbe, with a stalke of a spanne long, set with leaues a great deale smaller and tenderer than Fenell leaues. At the toppe of the stalke groweth little spokie tuffets, with white floures, like to the tops of Coriander, yeelding a little long rough white seede, of a good sauour and a sharpe taste. The roote is of the thicknesse of ones finger, and of a spanne long. 
 The seconde kinde is like to wilde Persley, the seede whereof is of a very pleasant and Aromaticall sauour, and of a sharpe and byting taste: &amp; both these kindes are yet vnknowen. 
 The thirde kinde (as Dioscorides writeth) hath leaues like Coriander, white flouresrand a tufte or spokie bushe, like to wilde Carot, and long seede. For this kinde of Daucus, there is now taken, the herbe whiche some do call wilde Carrot, other call it burdes nest: for it hath leaues like Coriander, but greater, and not muche vnlike the leaues of the yellow Carrot. His floures be white growing vpon tuffets or run∣dels, like to the tuffets of y e yellow Car∣rot, in the middle whereof there is founde a little small floure or twayne of a broune redde colour, turning towardes blacke. The seede is long and hearie, and sticketh or cleaueth fast vnto garmēts. The roote is small and harde. 
 ❀ The Place. The firste kinde groweth in stony places, that stād full in the Sunne, especi∣ally in Candy, as Dioscorides writeth. 
 The third kinde groweth euerywhere in this countrie, aboute the borders of fields, in stony places, &amp; by the way sides. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The third kinde of Daucus floureth in Iuly and August. 
 ❀ The Names. The Daucus is called in greke : in Latine Daucum and Daucium. 
 The first kind is called Daucum Creti∣cum, that is to say, Daucus of Candie. 
 The third kinde is called in Shoppes Daucus, &amp; of some also Daucus Creticus: in English Daucus, and wilde Carrot: in Frēch Carrotte sauuage. in high Douch Vo∣gelnest, that is to say, Birdes nest: in base Almaigne Croonkēs cruyt: &amp; the same is but a certayne wilde Carrot. 
 Dauci tertium genus.
❀ The Nature. The seede of Daucus is hoate and dry, almost vnto the thirde degree. 
 ❧ The Vertues. The seede of Daucus dronken is good against the strangurie, and painefull making of water, against the grauell &amp; the stone: it prouoketh vrine, &amp; floures, and expulseth the dead fruyte and Secondine. 
 It swageth the torment and griping payne of the bellie, dissolueth windi∣nesse, cureth the Colique, and ripeth an old Cough. 
 The same taken in wine, is very good against the bitings of venimous beasts, especially against the stingings of Phalanges or fielde spiders. 
 The same pounde and layde to, dissolueth &amp; scattereth colde softe swellings and tumors. 
 The roote of Daucus of Candie dronken in wine, stoppeth the laske, and is a soueraigne remedie against venim and poyson. 
 Of Saxifrage. Chap. ci. ❀ The Kyndes. The Saxifrage is of two sortes, great and small. 
 ❀ The Description. THe great Saxifrage hath a long hollow stalke with ioyntes or knees, whereon groweth darke greene leaues, turning towards blacke, made &amp; fashioned of many small leaues growing vpon one stem, after the order of the garden (Carrot or) Parsenip, but much smaller, &amp; each little leafe alone, is snipt round about the edges saw-fashiō, the floures are white, &amp; grow in roūd Cronettes or spoky tuffets. The seede is like to common Parselie seede, sauing that it is hoater, and byting vpon the tongue. The roote is single, white and long, like the Parselie roote, but sharpe and hoate in taste like Ginger. 
 Saxifragia maior. The great Saxifrage. 
 Saxifragia minor. The small Saxifrage. 
 The small Saxifrage is altogither like the great, in stalkes, leaues, floures and seede, sauing that it is a great deale smaller, and of a greater heate, and sharpnesse. The roote is also long and single, of a very hoate and sharpe taste. 
 There is yet an other small Saxifrage like to the aforesayde in stalkes, floures, seede and roote, and in proportion, smacke and smell, sauing his leaues are deeper cut, and of an other fasshion, not much vnlike the leaues of Parselie of the garden, or the wilde Parselie. 
 ❀ The Place. The great Saxifrage groweth in high medowes, and good groundes. 
 The smal Saxifrages growe vnder hedges, and alongst the grasie fieldes, in dry pastures, both these kindes are very common in this countrie. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Saxifrage floureth after Iune vnto the ende of August, and from that time foorth the seede is ripe. 
 ❀ The Names. The Saxifrage is called in Latine and in the Shoppes of this countrie Saxifragia, and Saxifraga, of Symon Iannensis Petra findula, of some Bibinella: in high Douch Bibernell, and Feldmoren: in base Almaigne Beuernaert, and Beuernelle. There be some also whiche call it Bipennula, Pimpinella, and Pam∣pinula, the whiche is the peculier or proper name of our Burnet described in the xcv. Chapter of the first booke: and doth not apperteyne vnto these herbes, as it appeareth by this olde Verse: Pimpinella pilos, Saxifraga non habet vllos: that is to say, Pimpinell or Burnet hath heares but Saxifrage hath none. Whereby it appeareth that our Pimpinell commonly called in Englinsh Bur∣net, (which hath certayne fine heares appearing in the leaues whan they are broken) was called in times paste in Latine Pimpinella, and this whiche hath no hearinesse at all was called Saxifragia. Some learned men of our time, tra∣ueling to bring the small Saxifrage vnder certayne Chapiters of Dioscorides do call it Sison: and others Petroselinum Macedonicum: The third sorte wolde haue it a kinde of Daucus. But in my iudgement it is much like to Dioscorides , Bunium. 
 ❀ The Nature. Saxifrage with his leaues, seede and roote is hoate and dry euen to the thirde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The seede &amp; roote of Saxifrage dronken with wine, or the decoction there∣of made in wine, causeth to pisse well, breaketh the stone of the kidneys and bladder, and is singular against the strangurie, and the stoppings of the kid∣neys and bladder. 
 The roote bringeth to women their termes, &amp; driueth forth of the Matrix, the Secondine and the dead fruyte, if it be taken in maner aforesayde. 
 The roote dried and made into pouder, and taken with Sugar, comforteth and warmeth the stomacke, helpeth digestion, and cureth the gnawing and gri∣ping paynes in the belly, and the Colique, by dryuing away ventositie or win∣dinesse.
The same with the seede, are very good for them whiche are troubled with any Conuulsion or Crampe, and Apoplexie, and for such as are troubled with long colde Feuers, and for them that are bitten with any venimous beast, or haue taken any poyson. 
 The same dronken with wine and vineger, cureth the Pestilence, and hol∣den in the mouth preserueth a man from the sayde disease, and purifieth the corrupt ayre. 
 The same chewen vpon, maketh one to auoyde much flegme, and draweth from the brayne all grosse and clammy superfluities, it swageth toothache, and bringeth speach againe, to them that are taken with the Apoplexie. It hath the same vertue if it be boyled in vineger alone, or with some water put thereto, and afterwarde to holde it in the mouth. 
 The iuyce of the leaues of Saxifrage, doth clense and take away all spots and freckles and beautifieth the face, and leaueth a good colour. 
 It mundifieth corrupt and rotten vlcers, if it be put into them. The same vertue hath the leaues brused and layde vpon. 
 The destilled water, alone or with vineger cleareth the sight, and taketh a∣way all obscuritie and darkenesse, if it be put into the same. 
 Of white Saxifrage or Stonebreake. Chap. cij. ❧ The Description. T He white Saxifrage hath round leaues, cōmonly spread abrode vpon the ground &amp; somwhat iagged about the borders, not much vnlike the leaues of groūd Iuie, but softer &amp; smaller, &amp; of a more yellowish grene. The stalke riseth amongst the leaues, &amp; is round and hearie, and of the length Saxifraga alba. White Saxifrage. Saxifraga aurea. Golden Saxifrage. of a foote and halfe, it carieth at the toppe di∣uers white floures, almost like to stocke Gil∣lofers. The roote is blackishe with many threddie strings, by whiche hangeth diuerse little rounde graynes, cornes, or berries, of a darke or reddish purple colour, greater than Coriander seede, sharpe and bitter, the which little graynes or berries they vse in medicine and do cal it Semen Saxifragae albae, that is to say, the seede of white Saxifrage or Stone breake. 
 There is yet an other called golden Saxifrage, which groweth to the lēgth of a spanne and halfe, with compassed leaues, and iagges like to the other, at the toppe of the stalke growe two or three littel leaues togither, and out of the middle of them springeth small floures, of a golden colour, and after them little rounde huskes, full of small redde seede, and they open and disclose themselues whan the seede is ripe. The roote is tender creeping in the grounde, with lon∣ger threades and heares, and putteth foorth a great many stems or branches. 
 ❀ The Place. The white Saxifrage groweth in drye, rough, stony, places, as about the Colemynes, bysides Bathe in England: it groweth also in France and Al∣maigne. Ye shall also finde it planted in the gardens of Herborists. 
 The golden Saxifrage groweth in certayne moyst and watery places, in England, Normandie and Flaunders. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The white Saxifrage floureth in Maye, and in Iune the herbe with his floures perissheth, and are no more to be seene, vntill the next yeare. 
 The golden Saxifrage floureth in March and Aprill. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Latine Saxifraga alba: in English Stone breake, &amp; white Saxifrage: in French Rompierre, &amp; Saxifrage blanche: in high Douch weisz Steinbrech: in base Almaigne Wit Steenbreeck. 
 The secōd is called Saxifraga aurea: in English Goldē Saxifrage: in French Rompierre, or Saxifrage dorée: in high Douch Goldē Steinbrech: in base Almaigne Gulden Steenbreek, and this name is giuen it: because it is like to the white Saxifrage, and beareth yellow or golden flowers. 
 ❀ The Nature. This herbe especially the roote with the seede, is of a warme or hoate com∣plexion. 
 But the golden Saxifrage is of a colde nature, as the taste doth manifestly declare. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The roote of white Saxifrage with the graynes or berries of the same, boyled in wine, and dronken, prouoketh vrine, mundifieth and clenseth the kidneyes and bladder, breaketh the Stone, and bringeth it foorth, and is singuler against the Strangurie and all the imperfections, and griefes of the reynes. 
 What vertue the seconde hath, is to vs as yet vnknowen, bycause there is none hath yet proued it. 
 Of Gromell. Chap. ciij. ❀ The Kyndes. THe Gromell is of two sortes, one of the garden, the other wilde: and the garden Gromell also is of two sortes, great and small. 
 Lithospermum maius. The great Gromell.
Lithospermum minus. The small Gromell. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE great Gromel hath long, slender, hearie stalkes, the whiche do most commonly trayle alongest the grounde, beset with long browne hearie leaues, betwixt the whiche leaues and the stalkes groweth certayne bearded huskes, bearing at the first a smal blewe floure, and afterwarde, a little harde, rounde, stonie seede, of a reasonable quantitie. The roote is harde of a wooddie substance. 
 The small garden Gromel hath straight rounde wooddie stalkes, and full of branches, his leaues be long, smal, sharpe, and of a swart greene colour, smal∣ler than the leaues of the great Gromel. Betwixt the leaues and the stalkes groweth smal white floures, and they bring foorth faire rounde, white, harde, and stonie seede, lyke vnto Perles, and smaller than the seede of the aforesayd kinde. 
 The wilde Gromel is like vnto the small in stalkes, leaues and floures, sa∣uing that the seede is not so white, neither so smooth &amp; playne: but somwhat shriueled or wrinckled, like to the seede of the common langue de beufe, and the leaues be a little rougher. 
 Besides these two kindes there is yet founde a wilde kinde of Gromel, which is very small, of whiche kinde the learned Ierome Bocke hath treated in his herball, it groweth a span long, with his stalke set with small narrowe leaues, like to the leaues of lyne or flaxe, betwixt the which leaues &amp; the stalke, it bringeth foorth a little smooth, blacke, harde seede, very lyke the seede of the small garden Gromel. 
 ❀ The Place. The garden or tame Gromel groweth in some Countries in rough places: here they sowe it in gardens. The smaller garden Gromel groweth not often of him selfe, sauing alongest the Riuers and water sides. 
 The wilde is founde in rough and stonie places. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Gromel floureth in Iune, Iuly, and August, in whiche season it doth also deliuer his seede. 
 ❀ The Names. Gromel is called in Greke : and in Latine Lithospermum, of some : of the Arabians Milium Soler: in Shoppes Milium solis: in Englishe Gromel and Gremil: some name it also Pearle plante: in Frenche Gremil, or Herbe aux perles: in high Douch Meerhirsch, or Meerhirsen, and Steinsomen: in base Almaigne Peerlencruyt, and Steensaet: in Italion Milium Solis. 
 ❀ The Nature. The seede of Gremil is hoate and drie in the seconde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Gromel seede pounde and dronken in white wine, breaketh the Stone, dri∣ueth it foorth and prouoketh vrine: but especially the Stone in the bladder, as the Authors write. Turner. 
 Of Betony. Chap. ciiij. ❧ The Description. BEtony hath leaues somwhat long and broade, of a darke greene colour, bluntly iagged rounde about the edges like a sawe, and of a good sauour. Amongst the sayd leaues groweth vp a rough square stalke of a foote and halfe long, decked with suche like leaues but a great deale smaller, and bearing at the top a short spykie eare, full of flowers, most commonly of a crymsin, or redde pur∣ple colour, and somtymes (but very sel∣dome), as white as snowe: after whiche flowers there commeth in the sayd spykie tuffets, blacke seede, long and cornered. The roote hath threddie stringes. 
 Paulus Aegineta maketh mention of an other Betony, called of the later writers Veronica, the which we haue described in the 17. Chapter of the first booke. 
 ❀ The Place. Betony groweth in meddowes, sha∣dowy wooddes, and mountaynes: It is also commonly planted in gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Betony flowreth commonly in Iuly and August. 
 ❀ The Names. Betony or Betayne, is called in Greeke : In Latine and in shoppes Betonica and Vetonica: In Spa∣nishe Bretonica: In Frenche Betonie: In high Douch Braun Betonick: In base Almaigne Betonie. 
 Betonica. Betony. 
 ❀ The Nature. Betony is hoate and dry in the seconde degree. 
 ❧ The Vertues. The Decoction of Betonie dronken, prouoketh vrine, breaketh the Stone of the kidneyes, doth clense and scoure the breast and lunges from flegme and slyme, and is very profitable for such as haue the Phthisik or consumptiō, and are vexed with the Cough. 
 The leaues of Bettayne dried, are good to be giuen the quantitie of a dram with Hydromel, that is to say, Honied water, vnto such as are troubled with the Crampe, and also agaynst the diseases of the Mother or matrix.
The same taken in like manner, bringeth the fluxe menstruall. 
 The dreid leaues dronken in wine, are profitable against the biting of Ser∣pentes, and so be they to be applyed or layde outwardly vpon the wounde: and it is good also for them that haue taken any poyson. And if it be taken before hande, it preserueth the people from all poyson. 
 Betany openeth and cureth the oppillation or stopping of the liuer, the melt, and the kidneyes, and is good agaynst the Dropsie. 
 The same dronken with wine and water is good for them that spet blood, and it cureth al inwarde and outwarde woundes. 
 The same taken with Hydromel or Meade, looseth the belly very gentilly, and helpeth them that haue the falling sicknesse, madnesse, and head ache. 
 It comforteth the stomacke, helpeth digestion, swageth belching &amp; the desire to vomit if it be taken with clarifyed honie, in the euening after supper. The same vertue hath the Conserue therof made with sugar and taken in the quan∣titie of a beane. 
 The roote of Betony dried, and taken with honied water, causeth one to cast out and vomit tough clammie flegme, and other superfluous humors. 
 Of Panax. Chap. cv. ❀ The Kyndes. DIoscorides that famous, and auncient writer of Plantes, hath described vnto vs three sortes of Panaces: wherof the first is Panaces Heraclium: The seconde is Panaces Asclepij: The thirde is Panaces Chironium. 
 ❧ The Description. T HE first kinde of Panaces, hath great greene and rough leaues, layd &amp; spread abroade vpon the ground, and parted into fine iagges and cuttes, almost lyke the leaues of the figge tree. Amongst them springeth vp, a long thicke stalke with ioyntes, white without and hearie, set here and there with the lyke leaues: but somwhat smaller, and bearing at the top a bushe, or spo∣kie tuffete lyke vnto Dyll, the floure or blossom of it yellowe, and the seede is of a pleasant sauour sharpe &amp; hoate. It hath diuers white rootes grow∣ing or comming foorth of one head, of a strong sauour, and couered with a thicke bitter barke. Out of the sayde roote, and the stem, or stalke cut, and scarrified, floweth the gomme or li∣quor, called Opopanax, the whiche being fresh and newly drawen foorth of the plante is white: but beyng drie it waxeth all yellowe without, as though it were coloured with Saf∣fron. 
 . Panaces Heracleum. 
 The seconde kinde of Panaces, hath a slender stalke of a cubite long with knottes or ioyntes, the leaues be greater, more hearie, and of a stronger sauour than the leaues of Fenell. The floures growe also in tuffetes or run∣dels, and they are yellowe of an odiferous sauour, and sharpe taste. The roote is small and tender. 
 The thirde kinde as Dioscorides and others do write, hath leaues like vn∣to Marierom, floures of a golden colour, a small roote, not goyng deepe in the grounde, and of a sharpe taste. But as Theophrastus, and Plinic do describe it, This thirde kinde of Panaces shoulde haue leaues lyke vnto Patience, or Sorrel, floures of a golden colour, and a long roote, so that amongst the olde writers, is no perfit consent touching this thirde kinde of Panax. 
 ❀ The Description. V Nto these three kindes of Pa∣naces, we may ioyne a certayne other strange plant, whose seede is founde amongst Opopanax. And this plante hath great large leaues, somwhat rough &amp; hearie, largely spread abroade, and made of sundry leaues ioy∣ned togither all in one, wherof eache col∣laterall (or by, leafe) is long and large almost like to y e leaues of Patience: The stalke or stem of this plante is full of ioyntes, and of fiue or sixe foote long, di∣uiding it selfe agayne into other stalkes and branches: The floures be yellow, growing in spokie tuffetes or rundels: The seede is playne, &amp; the roote is long and white. 
 ❀ The Place. The first kinde groweth about Cyren in Lybia, and Macedonia: also in Boeotia, &amp; in Phocis of Arcadia, whereas they vse to sowe it, and manure it diligently, for the gayne that is gotten of the sappe or iuyce thereof. 
 The thirde kinde groweth vppon the mount Pelius in Thessalie, &amp; loueth good grounde. 
 Quarta Panacis Species. The fourth kinde of Panax. 
 ❧ The Tyme. The Opopanax is drawen, gathered in the time of haruest. 
 ❀ The Names. The first kinde is called in Greeke , that is to say in Latine Panaces Herculeum, of Galien also Panax: vnknowen in the shoppes here. 
 The liquor that commeth from it, is called in Greeke : in Latine al∣so Opopanax: in shoppes Opopanacum. 
 The seconde kinde is called , that is to say in Latine Panaces Asclepij, or Aesculapij Panaces.
The thirde is called , Panaces Chironium. 
 The fourth shoulde seeme to be Panaces Syriacum, wherof Theophrastus &amp; Plinie haue mentioned: which differeth from the former kindes, as we haue els where, more largely written in Latine. 
 Panaces: in shoppes is called Siler montanum. 
 ❀ The Nature. The first Panaces is hoate in the thirde degree, and drye in the se∣conde. 
 The liquor thereof is also of the lyke temperament. 
 The three other kindes are of the like temperature, but not so hoate, nor so strong. 
 ❧ The Vertues. The seede of the first Panaces dronken with wormewood, moueth wo∣mens flowres: And taken with Herbe Sarrasine, whiche is Aristolochia Cle∣matitis, it is good agaynst the poyson of all venimous beastes. Being dronken with wine, it cureth the suffocation and strangling, or choking of the Ma∣trix or Mother, and causeth the same to fall and returne agayne to his natu∣rall place. 
 The roote of Panaces chopped or hackt very small, and applied belowe to the Mother or Matrix, draweth foorth the dead Chylde, and the vnnaturall birth. 
 The same roote mengled with Hony, and layde vppon, and also put into olde vlcers, cureth the same, and couereth bare, or naked bones with flesh agayne. 
 The flowers and seede of the seconde kinde of Panaces, are very profitable agaynst the bytinges of Serpentes, to be dronken in wine, or layde vpon the wounde with Oyle. 
 The same flowers and seede mingled with Hony, and layde thereunto, do cure olde malignant, corrupt, and fretting soares, and also knobbes or harde swellinges. 
 The seede, the flowers, and also the roote of the thirde Panaces, are very good to be dronken, against the venom of Serpentes, and Vipers. 
 Of Louage. Chap. cvi. ❀ The Kyndes. IF men take that herbe whiche is commonly called in Shoppes Leuisti∣cum, for one of the sortes of Ligusticum: Then there are two kindes of Ligusticum, the one whiche is the right Ligusticum, described by the Auncientes, And the other whiche may be a bastarde or wilde kinde of Ligu∣sticum. 
 ❧ The Description. T HE right Ligusticum, described by Dioscorides, is in his roote lyke to the first kinde of Panax: it hath slender stalkes, with ioyntes like vn∣to Dill. The leaues are lyke to the leaues of Melilot, but they be softer and of a better sauour, whereof the vppermost leaues are tenderest, and more iagged or cut. At the top of the stalkes groweth the seede in spokie tuffetes, the whiche is harde and longe, almost like to Fenell seede, of an aro∣maticall or Spycie sauour, and in taste sharpe and byting. The roote is white, and odoriferous, much lyke to the roote of the first kinde of Panax. Neuerthe∣lesse it is not yet knowen in this Countrie. 
 The other herbe, whiche is taken in this Countrie for Ligusticum, hath great, large, odoriferous leaues, muche iagged and cut, almost lyke to the leaues of Angelica: but a great deale larger, fayrer and of a deeper greene colour, deeper cut and more clouen. The stalke is smooth, rounde, holowe, and ioyntie, of the length of a man or more, with spokie rundels, or tuffetes, at the top of the stalkes: bearing a yellow flower, and a round, flat, broade, seede: lar∣ger then Dyll seede, and smaller then Angelica seede. The roote is long and thicke and bringeth foorth yerely newe Stemmes. 
 Ligusticum verum. The right Louage. 
 Ligusticum vulgare. The common Louage. 
 ❀ The Place. The right Ligusticum, groweth in Liguria, vppon the mount Apennian, neare to the Towne or Citie of Genues, and in other mountaynes there about. 
 The seconde kinde is planted in our gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Louage flowreth most commonly in Iuly and August.
❀ The Names. The first and right kinde is called in Greeke , and of Galien : in Latine Ligusticum: and of some also as Dioscorides writeth Panaces, by the which name it is yet knowen in the Shoppes of Genues: in the Shoppes of Flaunders they call it Siler Montanum: in Englishe Louage: in Frenche Li∣uesche: and in Douch Ligusticum. 
 The seconde kinde is called in Shoppes Leuisticum, and the Apothecaries vse it in steede of the right Ligusticum: in Englishe Louage: in Frenche Leuesse, or Liuesche: in Douche Liebstockel: in Brabant Lauetse, and Leui∣stock. 
 ❀ The Nature. Ligusticum is hoate and dry in the thirde degree. 
 Louage is also hoate and drye, and of qualitie muche like to Ligusti∣cum. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The roote of Ligusticum is very good for all inwarde diseases, driuing a∣way all ventositie, or windinesse, especially the windinesse of the stomacke, and is good agaynst the byting of Serpentes, and al other venimous beastes. 
 The same roote well dried and dronken with wine, prouoketh vrine, and the menstruall termes: it hath the same vertue, if it be applyed to the secrete place in a Pessarie or mother Suppositorie. 
 The seede of Ligusticum warmeth the stomacke, helpeth digestion, and is pleasant to the mouth and taste, wherfore in times past the people of Genues dyd vse it in their meates in stede of Pepper, as some do yet, as witnesseth An∣tonius Musa. 
 The roote and seede of louage dryed and dronke in wine, doth drie vp and warme the stomacke, easeth trenches or griping payne of the belly, driuing a∣way the blastinges and windinesse of the same. 
 The same roote and seede do moue vrine, and the naturall sicknesse of wo∣men, whether they take it inwardly, or whether they bathe them selues with the decoction thereof, in some hollowe seate, or stue. 
 To conclude, the louage in facultie and vertues, doth not differ much from Ligusticum, and it may be vsed without error, in steede thereof. 
 The distilled water of louage, cleareth the sight, and putteth away all spottes, lentiles, or frecles, and rednesse of the face, if it be often wasshed there∣with. 
 Of Angelica. Chap. cvij. ❀ The Kyndes. ANGELICA is of two sortes, that is the garden and wilde Angelica. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE garden Angelica hath great broade leaues, diuided agayne into other leaues, which are snipt and dented about, much like to the highest leaues of Spondilium, or Douch Branck vrsine, but they be tenderer, longer, greener, and of a stronger sauour. Amongst those leaues springeth vp the stalke, three yeeres after the sowing of the seede, the whiche stalke is thicke, and ioyntie, hollowe within, and smelleth almost like to Petroleum. At the top of the stalkes groweth certayne little felmes, puffed or bolne vp lyke to small bladders or bagges, out of which commeth the spokie toppes or rundels almost like vnto the tops of Fenell, bearing white floures, &amp; afterward great, broade double seede, muche greater then Dill seede, and like to the seede of the thirde kinde of Sesely. The roote is great and thicke, blacke without &amp; white within, out of which, when it is hurt or cut, there floweth a fat or oylie liquor, like gomme, of a strong smell or taste. 
 The wilde Angelica is like to that of the garden, sauing that his leaues are not so deepely cut or clouen, and they be narrower and blacker. The stalkes be muche slenderer and shorter and the floures be whiter. The roote is a great deale smaller, and hath more threddie stringes, and it is not by a great deale of so strong a sauour. 
 ❀ The Place. The tame Angelica is sowen and planted in the gardens of this Countrie. 
 The wilde groweth in darke shadowy places, alongest by water sides, and wooddes standing lowe. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The two kindes of Angelica, do flower in Iuly and August. 
 Angelica Satiua. Garden Angelica. 
 Angelica Syluestris. Wilde Angelica. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Englishe Angelica: in Frenche Angelique: in high Douch Angelick, des heylighen gheistswurtzel, oder Brustwurtz: in the shoppes of Brabante Angelica. There is yet none other name knowen to vs.
❀ The correction and preparation therof. The malice and violence of Euphorbium is corrected many waies: and first ye must annoynt it with Oyle of sweete Almondes, after put it into the midle of a Citron, and wrap it, or close it vp in leauened paste, and so bake it, &amp; when the paste is readie, ye may take the Euphorbium out of it, to vse in medicine. 
 Maynardus taketh Mastick &amp; gumme Dragagante, as much as the Euphor∣bium commeth to, and mingling them well togeather, putteth it into the midle of an vnbackte loafe, so letting it bake vntil the bread be wel backte: then taketh he of the crumbe or pulpe of that loafe, and maketh small pilles thereof, whiche be very singuler against the weakenesse or debilitie comming of the Frenche pockes, and al anguish and payne of the outwarde partes. 
 An other mingleth with Euphorbium, the lyke quantitie of Masticke, and maketh pilles with the iuyce of Citrons or Orenges, the whiche are muche praysed against the Pestilence. 
 Of Sarcocolla. Chap. cxvij. SArcocolla is the gumme of a certaine thornie plant growing in Persia. And the best is that which is yellowish, bitter in taste and like to the fragmentes or small peeces of Frankensence: yet Plinie in the xiij. Chap. of the xj. booke of his historie preferreth the white before the other, and so doth he also in the xxiiij. booke, the xiiij. Chap. 
 ❀ The Names. This gumme is called in Greeke : in Latine and in Shoppes Sarcocolla: in Englishe Sarcocoll: in Frenche Sarcocolle: in Douche Sarco∣colla. 
 ❀ The cause of the Name. The Greekes called this gumme or teare Sarcocolla, bycause it sodereth and gleweth togyther woundes and cuttes of the flesh, euen as glewe doth ioyne togyther timber. 
 ❀ The Temperament or Nature. Sarcocolla is hoate in the second degree, and drie almost in the same degree, and it drieth without any byting sharpnesse, as Galen saith. 
 Sarcocolla, as Mesue writeth, purgeth rawe and grosse fleame, and the tough flymie humours, that are in the ioyntes and extreame partes: It mundi∣fieth the brayne, the sinewes, the breast, and the lunges: and is very good against an olde cough that hath continued long, and for suche as are flegma∣tique and Reumatique, to be taken the quantitie of a Dram or somwhat more. 
 It is very consolidatiue or healing, wherefore it closeth vp woundes and vlcers, and it mundifieth and clenseth malignant and corrupt vlcers, and filleth the same with newe flesh, especially being reduced and brought into a powder, and strowed thereon, or applied or layde therevnto with honie. 
 This gumme is very conuenient to bloodshotten eyes, the spottes, darkenesse, scarres, and such lyke impedimentes or defaultes of the same: especially if it be stieped in Asses milke by the space of foure or fiue dayes (as Mesue writeth) but the milke must be euery day renewed, and the stale or olde milke cast away. 
 ❀ The daunger and correction of the same. They that vse it muche waxe balde: it is slowe in operation, and it trou∣bleth them that haue Cholerique stomackes: wherefore heede must be taken, that it be not giuen to suche. 
 One may augmente and increase his vertue to loose the belly, by putting thereto some ginger and Cardamome. 
 The ende of the seconde part. Twise corrected and augmented by the Aucthor. ¶ The thirde part of the Historie of Plantes / intreating of Medicinal rootes / and herbes / that purge the body, also of noysome weedes, and dangerous Plantes, Their sundrie fashions, Names, and Natures, their vertuous Operations and dangers. Compiled by the learned D. Rembert Dodoens, nowe Phisition to the Emperour. Of Aristolochia. Chap. i. ❀ The Kyndes. ARistolochia, as Dioscorides writeth, is of three sortes, that is to say long Aristolochia, rounde Aristolochia, and the Aristolochia called clematitis. Whereunto Plinie hath added a fourth kinde, called Pistolochia, and the later writers haue ioyned to them a fifth kinde, called Sarrasines herbe or Astroloche. 
 1. Aristolochia longa. Long Aristoloche. 
 2. Aristolochia rotunda. Rounde Aristoloche. 
 ❧ The Description. T HE long Aristolochia, hath diuers square slender branches of a span long or more, growing vp from the roote, about which groweth here and there certayne broade leaues like Iuy leaues. The floures be purple and most commonly pale, of a strong greeuous sauour, they growe fast by leaues, and are in proportion long and holowe, yet longer by one syde than by another: whan they are past, there foloweth a certayne fruit like vnto small peares, sauing they be ridged alongest the sydes, or crested and clo∣uen lyke garlike heades: the which do also chop and cleeue a sunder whan the seede is rype, and the seede that than appeareth is triangled, and of blackish co∣lour. The roote is halfe a foote long or more, and as thicke as ones thombe or finger, of a yellowish colour like Boxe, of a sharpe bitter taste, and strong sauor. 
 The rounde Aristolochia in his stalkes and leaues is like to the first, but his leaues be somewhat rounder. The flowres differ onelye in this, that they be somewhat longer and narrower, and of a faynte yellowishe colour: shorter by one side than another, and of a blackishe purple colour vpon that syde that turneth backe agayne: The fruit of this Aristolochia is also sharpe fashio∣ned lyke to a top, or peare, sauing it is rounder and fuller, and straked or ribbed like the other. The seede is like to the seede of the lōg Aristolochia. The rootes be round and swollen like to a Puffe or Turnep, in taste and sauour like to the long. 
 3. Aristolochia Clematitis. Branched Aristolochia. 
 4. Pistolochia. Smal Aristolochia. 
 5. Aristolochia Sarracenica. Sarasins Aristolochia.
The thirde kinde of Aristolochia his stalkes and branches are smal and ten∣der, his leaues be like to the others, but the little stemmes or footstalkes of the leaues are somwhat longer, The flowers also belong and holow, of a yellow or deepe violet colour: The rootes be small and slender, dispearsed or growing here and there. 
 The fourth Aristolochia in his leaues and stalkes, is like to the long and rounde Aristolochias, sauing it is smaller and finer or tenderer, his leaues be also broade lyke Iuy leaues. The flowres be also long and hollowe, and blac∣kishe about the toppes or endes. The fruit is also round and like to the others, his rootes be long and small as russhes, or threddes. 
 The fifth kinde which is called Sarasins wurt, or Sarasins Aristolochia, hath longer and higher stalkes than any of the kindes aforesayd: his leaues be also larger, but otherwise they differ not, for they be also lyke Iuy leaues. The small flowres growe betwixt the leaues, in proportion also long and hollowe of a yellowish colour. The fruit also is fashioned lyke to a peare. The rootes be long, and sometimes thicke, and couered with a thicke rinde or barke, in sa∣uour and taste lyke the others. 
 ❀ The Place. The long and rounde Aristolochias, growe plentifully in Spayne, and in many places of Italie, and certayne places of Fraunce, it delighteth muche in fertile grounde and good pastures. 
 Aristolochia Clematitis (as Peter Bellon writeth) groweth vppon the mountayne Ida in Crete or Candie. Carolus Clusius saith it groweth about Hispalis a Citie in Spayne nowe called Ciuill, and that he hath founde it a∣mongst the busshes and briers there. 
 The Pistolochia also groweth in certayne places of Fraunce and Spayne. 
 The Sarasines Aristolochia, delighteth muche in vineyardes, and high de∣serte places, and wildernesses, and is founde in sundrie places of Germanie, and Brabant. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The Aristolochias do flowre in May &amp; Iuly, &amp; timelier in hoate Countries. 
 ❀ The Names. They are called in Greeke : in Latine Aristolochia: in English Ari∣stologia, and of some Byrthwort, &amp; Hartwort: in Shoppes also Aristolochia. 
 The first is called in Greeke : in Latine Aristolochiam lon∣gam, bycause of the fashion of the roote: it is also called , Dactilis Melocarpon, and Teuxinon, &amp; Aristolochiam marem: In En∣glishe long Aristolochia. 
 The seconde is called in Greeke , Aristolochia rotunda, and Aristolochia foemina: of some , and Malum terrę: in Englishe Aristolo∣chia rotunda, and rounde Aristologia. 
 The thirde is called , Aristolochia Clematitis: Branched Aristologia. 
 The fourth kinde called of Plinie in the eyght Chapter of his xxv. booke Pistolochia and Polyrhizon. 
 The fifth Aristolochia is nowe called of some Herba Sarracenica: in Frenche Sarrasine: in Douche Zarasijn cruyt: in Shoppes Aristolochia longa, which is in Douche lange Osterlucey: in English long Aristolochia, in steede whereof it may be vsed. We may also name it in Englishe Sarasines herbe, &amp; Sarasines Aristolochia. 
 ❀ The Nature. The rootes of Aristolochia, are all hoate and dry in the extremitie of the se∣conde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The rootes of Aristolochia are excellent against al poyson, and agaynst the bitinges &amp; stinginges of venimous beastes, if it be taken in wine, or layd vpon the woundes, or bitinges. 
 The long Aristolochia moueth the menstrual termes, and prouoketh vrine: And if it be dronken with Pepper and Myrrhe, it expelleth the Secondine, &amp; dead childe, &amp; al other superfluities gathered togyther in the Matrix. It wor∣keth the same effect, to be ministred in a Pessarie or mother Suppositorie. 
 The rounde Aristolochia is lykewise good for the same purpose: and it is al∣so very good for them that are short winded, and troubled with the yeox or hy∣quet, it is profitable against the payne of the syde, the hardnesse of the melt or splene, the crampe, or connultiō, or drawing togyther of the sinewes, the falling sicknesse, the gowt, and the shakinges or shiueringes of Agues: and for al such as are hurt or bursten inwardly, if it be giuen them to drinke with water. 
 The same draweth foorth splinters of broken bones, Shaftes and Dartes, thornes, and shiuers, if it be layde to the place with Pitche or Rosen, as Plinie writeth. 
 It mundifieth and scoureth all corrupt and filthy sores, fistulas, and virulēt holowe vlcers: and filleth them vp agayne with newe flesh (if it be mixt with Ireos and hony) &amp; especially it cureth the faultes, &amp; vlcers of the secret partes, if ye wash the same with the Decoction of this Aristolochia made in wine.
Aristolochia rotunda, doth beautifie, clense, and fasten the teeth, if they be of∣ten frotted or rubde with the powder thereof. 
 The thirde kinde is much like to the other in vertue, sauing it is not so strōg as Dioscorides writeth: and Galen saith, that this kinde is of the sweetest, and pleasantest sauor, and therfore is much vsed in oyntmentes: but it is wea∣ker in operation than the aforesayde. 
 Pistolochia or smal Aristolochia, is also of the same vertues and operatiōs, but not so strong as the others. 
 Sarrasines or braunched Aristolochia is also lyke y t others, it is very hoate and bitter: and not inferior to Aristolochia longa, wherfore in all compositiōs one may be vsed in steede of the other, without errour. 
 ❧ The Choice. The rounde Aristolochia, is of fine and subtile partes, and of stronger ope∣ratiō than the rest, it mundifieth and clenseth mightily, and it soupleth and ma∣keth thinne, grosse humours. 
 The long Aristolochia is not of suche subtile partes, neither doth it clense so mightily, but is better to incarnate, and ingender flesh in vlcers. 
 Aristolochia Clematitis hath the best sauour, wherefore it is best to make Oyntmentes. 
 Of Holeworte. Chap. ij. ❀ The Kyndes. HOleworte is of two sortes, the one hath a rounde roote, which is not ho∣lowe within: And the roote of the other is holowe within: but other∣wayes they are like one another, in their stalkes, leaues, floures, &amp; seede. 
 ❧ The Description. H Oleworte hath smal tender talkes of a span long: his leaues be also small and iagde lyke Rue or Coriander, of a light greene or rather a grayishe colour. At the top of the stalke it beareth flowers after the proportion of larkes spurre, but muche smaller, and of Carnation or a light redde purple colour, and oftentimes white, and growing meetly thicke togyther. After the flowers there cōmeth certaine huskes or coddes, in which is the seede, whiche is rounde and blacke. The roote of one of these kindes, is all rounde, and firme, yellowe within and couered ouer with a blackishe pyll or skinne. The roote of the other is most commonly long, &amp; growen like a peare, holowe both vnderneath and within. 
 ❀ The Place. These rootes growe by olde quicke set hedges, and bushes in the borders of feeldes, and in the pendant and hanging of hilles and mountaynes. The smaller roote whiche is not hollowe is founde in certayne places of Brabant by Louaigne. The greater whiche is also holow, grow∣eth in Germany: &amp; wheras the one grow∣eth, the other groweth not at all, so that ye shal neuer finde y e full roote growing with the holowe roote, nor the holowe roote growing by the full roote. 
 ❀ The Tyme. This herbe springeth betimes, and brin∣geth foorth his stalkes and leaues in Fe∣bruarie, and flowreth in Marche, and de∣liuereth his seede in April, &amp; afterwardes the herbe fadeth so, that nothing of him re∣mayneth sauing the roote vnder grounde. 
 ❀ The Names. The roote whiche is holowe within is called in Germanie Holwurtz, that is to say in English Holowe roote, or Hole∣wurt: in Frenche Racine creuse: in Brabant Hoolwortele: that is to say in Latine Ra∣dix caua. 
 The other whiche is full, close, and firme, is called in Brabant Boonkēs Hol∣wortel. 
 Radix caua maior. The great Holewurt. Radix caua minor. The small Holewurt. 
 This roote especially that whiche is holowe, hath ben of long time vsed in the Shoppes of this Countrey for rounde Aristolochia, &amp; it is so taken yet of some ignorant Apothecaries. Some of the learned do thinke this herbe to be the Pistolochia described of Plinie, Others woulde haue it to be a kinde of fume∣torie, caled Capnos Phragmites: and some thinke it to be Thesium Theo∣phrasti. Some also thinke it to be Eriphiam Plinij: and it seemeth to be somewhat lyke Eriphya (that is written with y) bycause it is founde in the spring time onely: and therefore it may be well called , that is in Latine Planta veris. 
 ❀ The Nature. Holeworte is hoate and dry in the seconde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Holeworte cureth the Squinancie, and olde tumoures or swelling of the throte, or kernelles and Almondes of the same, if one gargle or wash his mouth with the decoction of the same roote boyled in water onely or vineger, for it hath power to cut and consume grosse humours. 
 It is also good agaynst the tumoures, and inflammations of the vuula, to be kept in the mouth and chewed vppon, or the powder of the same layde thereto. 
 The same mingled with Vnguentum Populion nigrum, or with some other of the same nature, is good to waste and consume the Hęmęroydes, or piles, and to swage the paynes of the same. 
 Of Swallowurte or Vincetoxicum. Chap. iij. ❀ The Description A Sclepias is somewhat lyke the third kinde of Aristolochia, in stalkes and leaues, his stalkes be smothe, rounde, and small, about two foote long, with blackish leaues, not much vnlyke Iuye leaues, sauing they be longer &amp; sharper poynted. The flowers growe vpon small stemmes betwixt the leaues, of a pale or bleake white colour, and sometime eyellowish, and also blacke, of a certayne strong sweetish sa∣uour: after them commeth long sharpe-poynted huskes or coddes, the which do opē of themselues whan they are ripe, and within them is conteined seede, lapped as it were in a certaine white wooll, the whiche seede is reddish and broade, not muche vnlyke the seede of Gentian. The rootes be long &amp; round, as it were small round threddie stringes or laces, enterlaced one with another, almost lyke the rootes of blacke Hellebor, or Oxe heele, and of a rancke sauour.
❀ The Place. Asclepias groweth in rough, high, grauely, and Stonie mountaynes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. It flowreth in Iune, and his seede is ripe in August. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greke : and in Latine Asclepias, of some it is called in Greeke , Hederuncula, &amp; , that is, Hederae folium, and nowe it is called Hirundinaria, and Vincetoxicū: in Germanie Schwalben wurtzel: in Brabant Swaluwe wortele: we may call it in English Asclepias, Vincetoxicū, &amp; Swallowurt. 
 Asclepias. 
 ❀ The cause of his first Name. This herbe tooke his name of the Ancient fa∣ther Esculapius, which was called in Greke , whom both the Greekes and Gentils say, that he was the first that found out Physicke, wherefore they honoured him as a God. 
 ❀ The Nature. The rootes of Asclepias are hoate and drie, and resist poyson. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The roote of this Herbe boyled in water and dronken, slaketh the gryping paynes of the belly, &amp; is very good for suche as are bitten of venimous beastes, and madde Dogges, not onely to be giuen to drinke inwardly with wine, but also if the leaues be applyed outwardly. 
 The leaues of Asclepias pounde and layde to, are good agaynst the ma∣lignant vlcers, and corrupt sores both of the breastes and Matrix, or mother. 
 Of Periploca. Chap. iiij. ❀ The Kyndes. THere are two sortes of Periploca: wherof one hath no surname, the other is called Periploca repens. 
 Periploca prior. The first Periploca. 
 Periploca altera. The seconde Periploca. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE first Periploca is many wayes like vn . Swallowurt or Asclepi∣as, but his leaues be somewhat larger and greater, his little stalkes or branches are longer, his huskes or coddes all are longer and thicker, and his rootes are like threddie stringes creeping on the grounde. 
 The other hath longer and larger leaues, his stalkes and braunches are thicker and harder, &amp; they perishe not in winter as the first do: and his huskes or coddes are also greater. 
 Both these herbes (beyng scarrified or hurt) do giue foorth a milkie iuyce, or liquor, and specially the last: for the iuyce of the first is oftentimes yellowish. 
 ❀ The Place. These plantes growe in Syria, and suche lyke hoate regions, they do not lightly beare their huskes in Brabant. 
 ❀ The Names. They are both called Periplocae: and the second is called Periplocca repens: both are thought to be , Apocynon of Dioscorides, the whiche is also called , and Brassica Canina, yet there is another Brassica canina, a kind of wilde Mercurie. 
 ❧ The Nature and Vertues. Apocynon is a deadly and hurtful plant not onely to man, but also to cattel: his leaues mixt with meale, and tempered or made into bread, it destroyeth Dogges, Wolues, and Foxes, and other suche beastes that eate thereof. 
 Of Asarabacca. Chap. v. ❀ The Description. A Sarabacca hath swart greene, rounde, shining leaues, lyke Iuye, but a great dealerounder, and tenderer: in and amongst those leaues (next the grounde) growe the flowers vppon short stemmes, which be of a fayre browne purple colour, and of a good sauour somwhat like Nar∣dus, &amp; fashioned like the flower of a Granat tree, called Balaustia or Cytinus which is the buddes of Balaustia, and some∣what lyke the cuppes or huskes of Henbane. The rootes be smal, long, and crookedly layd, ouerthwaxt, here and there, with diuers small hearie stringes, of a pleasant sharpe sauor and taste byting the tongue. 
 ❀ The Place. It delighteth in shadowy places, and rough dry groundes, especially in thependent or han∣ging of hilles &amp; mountaynes, in thicke darke wooddes, and commonly vnder the Haselles (as Cordus sayth.) 
 It is alwayes greene, and springeth anew and floureth in the spring time, and it floureth agayne at the ende of Sommer.
❀ The Place. The Herboristes of this Countrie do sowe it in their gardens, and it groweth prosperously in shadowy places. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Staphis-acre flowreth at Midsomer. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greeke : in Latine Herba pedicularis, or Pi∣tuitaria, of some in Greke , that is to say, Lousebane, or : in shops Staphis agria: in Frenche Staphisaigre, or Herbe aux pouilleux: in high Douche Leusz∣kraut, and Speichelkraut: in base Al∣maigne Luyscruyt, and the seede made into powder Luysepouder, that is to say, Lousepowder. 
 ¶ The Nature. Staphisacre, especially the seede, is hoate almost in the fourth degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Fifteene seedes of Staphisacre taken with honied water, will cause one to vo∣mit grosse fleme and slymie matter, with violence. 
 The seede of Stafisacre mingled with oyle driueth away lise from the head and from all other places of the body, and cureth all scuruie itche, and mangines. 
 Staphisagria. 
 The same boyled in vineger and holden in the mouth, swageth tooth ache. 
 The same chwed in the mouth, draweth foorth much moysture from the head, and mundifieth the brayne. 
 The same tempered with vineger, is good to rubbe vpon lousie apparell, to kill and driue away lise. 
 ❀ The Danger. The seede of Stafisaker to be taken inwardly, is very hurtfull to nature, for it chafeth and inflameth all inwarde partes, and ouerturneth the stomacke, if one holde it in his mouth, it causeth inflammation in the mouth and throte: wherefore one ought not rashly to vse this seede, except it be giuen outwardly. 
 ❀ The Remedie. Before ye occupie the seede of Stafisakre, ye must stipe it in vineger and drie it, and whan it is drie, ye may giue it to drinke with Meade or watered honie. Meade is honie and water boyled togither, and whosoeuer hath receiued of this seede, must walke without staying, and should drinke Hidromel very oftē, when he feeleth any kinde of choking, and in this dooing it shall perfourme his operation without any great danger. 
 Of the wilde spirting Eueumbre. Chap. xl. ❀ The Description. W Ilde Cucumbre hath leaues somewhat rounde and rough, but lesser and rougher then the leaues of common Cucumber. The stalkes be rounde and rough, creeping alongst the grounde without any claspers or holders, vpon whiche out of the holownesse of the collaterall bran∣ches or winges, amongst y e leaues grow shorte stemmes bearing a flower of a faynte yellow colour, after the flowers there commeth little rough Cucumbers of the bignesse &amp; length of ones thombe, full of sappe with a browne kernell, the which being ripe, skippeth forth assoone as one touche y e Cucumbers. The roote is white, thicke, and great, with many other small rootes hanging by. All the herbe is of a very bitter taste, but espe∣cially the fruite, whereof men vse to ga∣ther the iuyce and drye it, the whiche is vsed in medicine. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe is found in the gardens of Herboristes of this Countrie: and where as it hath ben once sowen, it com∣meth easily agayne euery yere. 
 ❀ The Tyme. These Cucumbers do flower in Au∣gust, &amp; their seede is ripe in September. 
 ❀ The Names. This Cucumber is called in Greeke : in Latine Cucumis Agrestis, syluestris, &amp; erraticus: of some Cucumis anguinus: in shoppes Cucumis asininus: in English Wylde Cucumbre: in French Concombre sauuage: in high Douche Wilde Cucumer, or Esels Cucumer: in base Almaigne Wilde Concommeren, or Esels Concommeren: in Englishe Wilde Cucumber, or leaping Cucumber. 
 Cucumissyluestris. 
 The iuyce of the roote being dry, is called Elaterium: in shoppes Elacterium. 
 ❀ The Nature. The iuyce of wilde Cucumbre is hoate and drie in the second degree, and of a resoluing and clensing nature. The roote is of the same working, but not so strong as the iuyce. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Elaterium (whiche is the iuyce of wilde Cucumbers dryed) taken in quan∣titie of halfe a scruple, driueth foorth by siege grosse fleme, cholerique, and espe∣cially waterishe humours. Moreouer it is good against the Dropsie, and for them that be troubled with shortnesse of breath.
The same delayed with sweete milke, and powred into the nose, putteth a∣way from the eyes the euyl colour whiche remayneth after the Iaundise, swa∣geth headache and clenseth the brayne. 
 The same put into the place of conception sodden with honied wine, helpeth women to their naturall sicknesse, and deliuereth the dead childe. 
 Elaterium layd to outwardely with olde Oyle, or honie, or with the gall of an Oxe, or Bull, healeth the Squinancie, and the swellinges in the throte. 
 The iuyce of the barke and roote of wilde Cucumber, doth also purge fleme, and cholerique, and waterish humours, &amp; is good for such as haue the Dropsie, but not of so strong operation as Elaterium. 
 The roote of wilde Cucumber made soft or soked in vineger and layde to, swageth the payne, and taketh away the swelling of the gowte. The vineger wherein it hath ben boyled, holden in the mouth, swageth the tooth ache. 
 The same layde to with parched barlie meale, dissolueth cold tumours, and layde to with Turpentine, it breaketh and openeth impostemes. 
 The same made into powder, and layd to with honie, clenseth, scoureth, and taketh away foule scuruines, spreading tetters, manginesse, pushes or wheales, red spottes, and all other blemishes, and scarres of mans body. 
 The iuyce of the leaues dropped into y e eares, taketh away the payne of the same. 
 ❧ The Danger. Elaterium taken into the body, hurteth the inward partes, and openeth the smal vaynes, prouoketh gripinges and torments in the belly in doing his ope∣ration. 
 ❀ The Remedie. To cause that it shal do no hurt, it must be geuen with Mede, or with swete mylke, a litle salt and Annys seede, or geue it in powder with gumme Traga∣gante, a litle Annys seede and salt. 
 Of Coloquintiba. Chap. xli. ❀ The Description. C Oloquintida creepeth with his branches alongst by the ground, with rough hearie leaues of a grayish colour, muche clouen or cut almost like the leaues of y e Citron Cucumber. The flowers are bleake or pale. The fruit round, of a greene colour at the beginning, and after yellowe, the barke thereof is neither thicke nor hard, the inner part or pulpe, is open &amp; spōgie, full of gray seede, in taste very bitter, the which men dry &amp; kepe to vse in medicine. 
 There is yet founde another kind of Coloquintiba, nothing lyke the first: for this hath long rough stalkes, mounting somewhat high, and taking holde with his claspers euerywhere, like Goordes. The leaues be like the leaues of wilde Cucumber. The fruite in all thinges is like the Goorde, but farre smaller, onely of the quantitie of a peare. These wilde Goordes haue a very hard vpper barke, or pille of a wooddy substance &amp; greene, the inside is full of iuyce, and of a very bitter taste. 
 Colocynthis. 
 ❀ The Place. The first kind groweth in Italie and Spayne, from which places the dried fruite is brought vnto vs. 
 The seconde kinde we haue sometime seene in the gardens of certayne Her∣boristes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Coloquintida bringeth foorth his fruite in September. 
 Coloquintida is called in Greeke : in Latine Colocynthis of Pau∣lus Aegineta Sicyonia: in shoppes Coloquintida: in Douche Coloquint opffe∣lin, and Coloquint appel. 
 The seconde kinde may be called in Greeke : in Latine Cucur∣bita syluestris: in French Courge sauuage: in Douch Wilde Cauwoorden, for this is a kinde of the right Goorde. 
 ❧ The Nature. Coloquintida is hoate and drie in the thirde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The white and inwarde pith or poulpe of Coloquintida, taken about the weight of a scruple, openeth the belly mightily, and purgeth grosse flemes, and cholerique humours, and the slymie filthinesse, and stinking corruption or scra∣pinges of the guttes, yea sometimes it causeth blood to come foorth, if it be ta∣ken in to great quantitie.
Like vertue it hath, if it be boyled, or layde to soke in honied water or any other liquor, and after geuen to be dronken: it profiteth muche against all colde dangerous sicknesses, as the Ipoplerie, falling sickenes, giddinesse of the head, payne to fetche breath, the cholique, loosenesse of the sinewes, and places out of ioynt. 
 For the same purposes, it may be put into Clisters and Suppositories, that are put into the fundement. 
 The Oyle wherein Coloquintida hath ben boyled, or whiche hath ben boy∣led in the Coloquintida, dropped into the eares, taketh away the noyse and singing of the same. 
 ❧ The Danger. Coloquintida is exceeding hurtfull to the hart, the stomacke and liuer, and troubleth and hurteth the bowelles, and other partes of the entrayles. 
 ❀ The Remedie. Ye must put to the pulpe or pithe of Coloquintida gumme Tragan and Masticke, and after make it into trochisques or balles with hony: for of this they vse to make medicine. 
 Of Gratia Dei. Chap. xlij. ❀ The Description. C Ratiola is a lowe herbe, about a spanne long, something lyke to commō hysope, with many square stalkes or branches, the leaues are somwhat large, broader then the leaues of hysope, and longer then the leaues of the lesser Centaurie. The flowers growe be∣twixt the leaues vpon short stemmes, of a white colour mixt with a litle blewe. All the herbe in taste is bitter, almost like the lesser Centaurie. 
 ¶ The Place. This herbe delighteth to growe in lowe and moyst places, and is found in medowes: in this Countrie the Herboristes do plant it in their gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. This herbe is in flower in Iuly and August. 
 ¶ The Names. This herbe is called of men in these dayes in Latine Gratiola, and of some also Gratia Dei, that is to say, the grace of God: and Limnesion: in Italian Stanca cauallo: and to the eye it sheweth to be a kinde of Centaurium minus, and therefore of some it is called Cen∣tauris. 
 ¶ The Nature. Gratiola without doubt is of nature hoate and dry, and in dede it is more dry then hoate, in quali∣tie very like vnto the lesse Cento∣rie. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Gratiola boyled and dronke, or eaten with any kind of meat, ope∣neth the belly freely, &amp; causeth one to scoure muche, &amp; by that meanes it purgeth grosse flemes, and cho∣lerique humours. 
 The same dried and made into powder, &amp; strowed vpō wounds, doth heale and make sounde them that are newe or greene, and clen∣seth the old and rotten woundes. And therefore it is very necessari∣ly put into Oyles &amp; Oyntmentes that are made to clense and heale woundes. 
 Gratiola. 
 Of Sene. Chap. xliij. ❀ The Description. S Ena is but a litle lowe plante, with smal tender branches, the leaues are soft and tender, and somewhat rounde or hooked, not muche differing from the leaues of Fenugrek. The flowers be of a pale or faynt yellowe colour: the whiche fallen or faded away, there commeth small coddes or huskes flatte and crooked, hauing a flatte seede, and somewhat browne. 
 ❀ The Place. Sena groweth in Alexandria, and in many places of Italie and Prouence, but the best is that of Alexandria. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Men do sowe it in the spring time, it flowreth at Midsomer, and bringeth foorth his coddes, sodaynely after men gather and drie it. 
 ❀ The Names. Sena is called of Actuarius in Greke, and of the Arabian Physitions in their Sena. language Sena: and by that name it is knowen of the Apothecaries in France, Flaunders, and Englande. 
 ❧ The Nature. The coddes and leaues of Sena are hoate in the seconde degree, and drie in the first. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The coddes and leaues of Sena taken in the quantitie of a Dram, do lose and purge the belly, scoure away fleme and choler, especially blacke choler and Melancholie. 
 For the same purpose men geue it to drinke with the broth of a chicken, or with Perrie made of Pease, or some other lyke liquor.
The flowers of Iuye layde to, in manner of a playster with oyle and waxe, healeth all burninges. 
 The decoction of the same flowers made in wine, and dronke twise a day, healeth the dangerous flixe called Dysenterie. 
 Fiue Iuie beries boyled with oyle of roses in the pille of a Pomgarnet: This oyle doth cure and helpe the toothach, being put into the eare, on the con∣trarie syde where the payne of the teeth is. 
 The gumme of Iuy kylleth. Lyce and Nittes. And being layde to, it taketh away heare from the place you lay it vpon. 
 ❧ The Danger. The fruite of Iuye taken in to great a quantitie, weakeneth the hart, and troubleth the sense and vnderstanding. The vse therof is also very dangerous for women, especially for women with childe, and such as are newly deliuered. 
 Of grounde Iuye. Chap. l. ❀ The Description. G Rounde Iuye hath many square tender stalkes growing foorth from a roote full of threddes or stringes, vppon whiche growe leaues somewhat rounde, vneuen, and in∣dented rounde about, of a strong smell and bitter taste, smaller, rounder, and tenderer then the leaues of Iuye. The flowers do growe amongst the leaues, in taste bitter, and of a purple colour. 
 ❀ The Place. Grounde Iuye is very common in all this Countrie, and groweth in many gar∣dens, and shadowie moyst places. 
 ❀ The Tyme. It flowreth from Aprill, vnto the ende of sommer, and continueth greene the most part of all the yere. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called of men in these dayes, in Latine Hedera terrestris, and Corona terrae: and by this name it is knowen of the Apothecaries. It is called in Frenche Lyarre, or Lierre terrestre: in high Douche Gundelreb, and Grundreb: in base Almaigne Onderhaue. And this herbe hath ben long tyme taken, for that, which is called in Greke, , Chamaecissus, but as I do thinke, it is better like , for whiche it is taken of some. 
 Hedera terrestris officinarum. 
 ❀ The Nature. Grounde Iuye is hoate and drie. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Grounde Iuie brused and put into the eares, taketh away the humming noyse or ringing sounde of the same. And is good for suche as are harde of hea∣ring. 
 Of Woodbine or Honysuckle. Chap. li. Periclymenum. Woodbine or Honysuckce. 
 Periclymeni tertia species. The thirde kinde of Periclymenum. 
 ❀ The Description. W Oodbine or Honysuckle hath many small branches, whereby it windeth and wrappeth it selfe about trees and hedges: vpon the sayde branches grow long leaues and tender, white vpon the one syde, &amp; on the other side, of a bleake or faint colour, betwixt white and greene, at the end of the branches grow the flowers in tuftes lyke nosegayes, of a pleasant colour and sweete sauour, betwixt white and yellow, or pale and purple, long &amp; holow, almost like the little bags of Colombine. After the flowers come rounde beries; which are as red as Co∣rall when they be ripe. The roote is of a wooddy substance. 
 There is yet another kinde, the whiche bringeth foorth leaues standing di∣rectly one agaynst the other, and so closed or ioyned togither, that the stalkes passe through them: but in all other poyntes, meetely well like to the aforesayd kinde. 
 Byside these two sortes of Honysuckle or Woodbine, there is yet another, in leaues lyke the first, the whiche kinde doth not wrap nor winde it selfe about trees and hedges, as the other sortes do, but groweth and standeth vpright of it self, without y e helpe of winding branches or clinging claspers. The flowers are white, muche smaller then the other sorte of flowers, in figure somewhat long, conteyning within them many small threddes, and they growe euer two and two togither by couples, and no moe, vpon a stemme, amongst the leaues and branches: the whiche being gone &amp; past, there grow vp two round beries, eyther red or browne when they be ripe. 
 ❀ The Place. Woodbine groweth in all this Countrie in hedges, about inclosed feeldes, and amongst broome or firres. It is founde also in woodes, especially the two last recited kindes. The third kind groweth in many places of Sauoye, and in the Countrie of the Swysers. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Woodbine flowreth in Iune, and Iuly: the seede is rype in August and September. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe or kinde of Bindeweede, is called in Greeke , of some , Aegina, Carpathon, Spleniō, Epaetitis, Clematitis, and Calycanthemon: in Latine Volucrum maius, Pericly∣menum, and Syluae mater: of the Apothecaries Caprifolium, and Mater Sylua, and of some Lilium inter spinas: in French Cheurefueille: in high Almaigne Geisz∣bladt, Speckgilgen, Zeunling, and Waldgilgen: in base Almaigne Gheyten∣bladt, and Mammekens cruyt: in Englishe Honysuckle, or Woodbine, and of some Caprifoyle.
The thirde kinde is called in high Douchlande Hundtszkirschen, that is to say, Dogges Cherries. 
 ¶ The Nature. Woodbine is hoate and drie, almost in the thirde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The fruit of Honysuckle dronken in wine by the space of fourtie dayes, doth heale the stopping and hardenesse of the Melt or Splene, by consuming of the same, and making it lesse. And purgeth by vrine the corrupt and euil humours, so strongly, that after the dayly vse thereof, by the space of sixe, or ten dayes to∣gither, it will cause the vrine to be red and blooddy. 
 It is good for such as be troubled with shortnes of breath: &amp; for them that haue any dangerous cough: moreouer, it helpeth women that are in trauell of child, and drieth vp the natural seede of man to be taken in manner abouesayd. 
 The leaues haue the lyke vertue, as the fruite hath, as Dioscorides sayth. Moreouer, it keepeth backe the brusinges which are wonte to come at the be∣ginning of Agues, when the sayd leaues are sodden in oyle, and pound or stam∣ped very smal, and the backe or ridge be annoynted therewithal before or at the first comming of the fittes of the Ague. 
 The same healeth woundes and corrupt moyst vlcers, and taketh away the spottes and scarres of the body and face. 
 ❧ The Danger. The leaues and fruit of Woodbine, are very hurtfull to women with child, and altogither contrarie. 
 Of smothe Bindweede / or Withiwinde. Chap. lij. ❀ The Kyndes. TThere be two sortes of Bindeweede or withywinde, the one bearing a blewe flower, the other a white, whereof one is great, the other small. The greater kind windeth it selfe about hedges and trees, the lesser most com∣monly trayleth vpon the grounde. 
 Smilax lenis maior. Gentle Withiwinde the great. 
 Smilax lenis minor. Chamaecissus. Gentle Withiwinde the smal. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE blewe Withiwinde hath slender branches and small, by whiche it clymbeth vp, and wrappeth or windeth it selfe about trees and poles. The leaues be large and cornered, lyke to the olde leaues of Iuye, sauing that they be not so harde. The flowers are fashioned like belles, blewe and holowe, the seede is blacke, and almost three square, lying in knoppes or huskes, after the same manner, as the seede of the white Bindeweede. 
 The great white Bindeweede or soft withiwinde hath lykewise stalkes and branches, small and tender, whereby it windeth it selfe about trees and hedges lyke the hoppe. Vpon the same branches, grow tender and soft leaues; greene, and smothe, almost like the leaues of Iuye, but muche smaller and ten∣derer. The flowers be great, white, and hollowe, in proportion like to a Bell. And when they are gone, there come in their steede little close knoppes or buttons, which haue in them a blacke &amp; cornered or angled seede. The roote is smal and white, like to a sort of thicke heares, creping alongst vnder the earth, growing out or sending foorth new shutes in sundrie places, of taste somewhat bitter, and full of white iuyce or sappe. 
 The lesser white Withywinde, is muche lyke to the aforesayd, in stalkes, leaues, flowers, seede, and rootes, sauing that in all these thinges, it is muche smaller, and most commonly it creepeth alongst vppon the grounde. The bran∣ches are small and smooth: the little leaues are tender and soft: the flowers are like to litle belles of a purple or flesh colour: the seede is cornered or angled, as the seede of the others. 
 ❀ The Place. The blew groweth not in this Countrie, but in the gardens of Herboristes, whereas it is sowen. 
 The great white Withywinde groweth in most places of this Countrie, in euery garden, and about hedges; and inclosures. 
 The litle white Withiwinde groweth in feeldes, especially amongst the stubble and sometimes amongst the Barley, Otes, and other grayne. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The blew flowreth very late in this Countrie. 
 The white kindes do flower in Iune and Iuly. 
 ❀ The Names. The Withiwinde or Bindeweede is called in Greeke , of Galen . Milax: in Latine Smilax lenis, of Marcus Cato Coniugulum: in shoppes Volubilis, of some Campanula, and Funis arborum: in Frenche Liset, or Liseron: in Douche Winde, and Wranghe. 
 The kinde which beareth blewe flowers, is called Coniugulum nigrum: and after the opinion of some learned men in these dayes, of Columella in hor∣tis, Ligustrum nigrum: of Herboristes Campana Lazura.
The great white smothe Withiwinde, is called of the Apothecaries Volu∣bilis maior: in high Douche Grosz Windenkraut, and Groszweisz glocken: in base Almaigne Groote Winde. This kinde is taken of some to be Ligustrum album, whereof Virgil treateth. 
 The smal Withiwinde or Bindeweede is called Volubilis minor: in French Campanette, or Vitreole: in high Douchlande Klein Windenkraut: in Neather Douchlande Cleyne cloexkens Winde. And it seemeth to be much like to that which the Greekes cal in Latine Chamaecissus, &amp; Hedera terrestris. 
 ❀ The Nature. Bindeweede or Withiwinde, is of a hoate and drie qualitie or nature. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Withiwinde or Bindeweede, is not fit to be put in medicine, as Galen and Plinie witnesseth. 
 Of blacke Withiwinde / or Bindeweede. Chap. liij. ❀ The Description. B Lacke Bindeweede hath smothe red branches, very small lyke great threddes, wherewithal it wrappeth and windeth it selfe a∣bout trees, hedges, stakes, and about al herbes that it may catch or take holde vpon. The leaues are lyke to Iuie, but smaller and tenderer, much resembling the leanes of the white Bindeweede. The flowers be white and very small. The seede is blacke and triangled, or three square, like to the seede of Bockweyde or Bolymong, but smaller and blacker, growing thicke togither. Euery seede is inclosed and co∣nered with a litle skinne. The roote is also small and tender as a thred. 
 ❀ The Place. Blacke Bindweede groweth in Vineyardes, and in the borders of feeldes, and gardens, about hedges and ditches, and amongst herbes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. It deliuereth his seede in August and September, &amp; afterward it perisheth. 
 ❀ The Names. This kinde of Bindeweede is called in Greke , and of the Emperour Constantine , Malacocissos, hoc est, Mollis Hedera. Some call it in Latine Conuoluolus, of some Vitealis, that is to say, Bindeweede of the Vineyardes, or belonging to the Vine: in Shoppes Volubilis media, that is to say, The meane Bindeweede: in high Douche Swerte winde, and Middel∣winde: in English Weede winde, and Wind∣weede, or Iuybindweede. 
 ¶ The Nature. Swerte Bindeweede is of a hoate nature, and hath power to dissolue. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The iuyce of the leaues of this Binde∣weede dronken, doth lose and open the bel∣lye. 
 The leaues pounde, and layde to the greeued place, dissolueth, wasteth, and consu∣meth swellinges, as Galen sayth. 
 Helxine Cissampelos. 
 Of Soldanella or Sea Cawle. Chap. liiij. ❀ The Description. S Oldanella hath many small branches, somwhat red, by the whiche it trayleth or creepeth alongst the grounde, casting or spreading it self here and there, couered or decked here &amp; there with litle, round, greene leaues, more rounder and smal∣ler, then the leaues Asarabacca, or lyke to the leaues of the round Aristolochia, or Birthworte, but smaller. The flow∣ers are lyke them of the lesser Binde∣weede, of a bright red, or incarnate co∣lour. The seede is blacke, and groweth in huskes or rounde coddes, like the Bindeweedes. The roote is small and long. But to conclude, this kinde of Bindeweede is muche like the lesser Withiwinde, sauing that the leaues are muche rounder and thicker, and of a sal∣tish taste. 
 Brassica Marina. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe groweth abundantly in Zealande vpon the Sea bankes, and alongst the coast, or Sea side in Flaunders, and in all salt grounde standing neare the Sea. 
 ❀ The Tyme. This herbe flowreth in Iune, after which time men may gather it, to keepe to serue in medicine. 
 ❧ The Names. This herbe is called in Greeke : in Latine Brassica Marina: in Shoppes of the Apothecaries and common Herbaries, Soldanella: in high Douche Zee winde. 
 ❀ The Nature. Soldanella, is hoate and drie in the seconde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Soldanella purgeth downe mightily all kindes of waterie humours, and openeth the stoppinges of the liuer, and is geuen with great profite vnto suche as haue the Dropsie: but it must be boyled with the brothe of some fatte meate or fleshe, and dronken: or els it must be dried and taken in powder. 
 ❧ The Danger. Soldanella, especially if it be taken in powder, hurteth and troubleth the stomacke very muche.
❀ The Nature. Kidney beanes are somewhat hoate and moyst of Complexion, after the opinion of the Arabian Physitions. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Kidneybeanes do nourishe meetely well, and without engendring win∣dinesse, as some other pulses do: also they do gently loose and open the belly, as Hipocrates and Diocles do write. 
 The fruite and Coddes boyled and eaten before they be ripe, do prouoke vrine, and cause dreames, as Dioscorides sayth. 
 Of Pease or Peason. Chap. xx. ❀ The Kyndes. THere be three kindes of Peason, the great, the meane, &amp; the smal, the which are lyke one another, in stalkes, leaues, flowers and coddes, but not in fruite, as ye may perceaue hereafter. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE great branched Peason, are not muche knowen in this Coun∣trey. They growe when they be stayed vp, by rises, stakes, or other helpes to the length of a man, or higher. The stalkes be rounde and holowe, and somewhat cornered, as big as a finger, vpon the which at euery knot there growe two leaues, very well closed and ioyned togither, as if it were but one leafe: amongst the leaues growe smal stemmes, the which haue foure or fiue grosse or fatte leaues set directly opposite, one against ano∣ther, hauing at the ende foure or fiue griping or ramping claspers, whereby the Pease doth take holde, and is stayed vp, and fastened to such thinges as it stan∣deth by. Adioyning harde to the stemmes of the leaues aforesayd, there growe other naked and bare stemmes, vpō the which grow pleasant flowers of blew or purple colour. After the sayde flowers there come vp long coddes, rounde, playne, and shining, hanging downewardes, in which the Peason are couched and layde, the whiche beyng yet but greene, are rounde and whitishe, but when they be drie, they are gray and cornered. 
 Pisum. Great Peason. Branche Peason. 
 Ochros. Eruilia. Middle Peason. 
 The seconde sorte whiche are the common pease, is muche like to the afore∣sayde, but that his leaues and branchie stalkes, are smaller, neyther do they growe so high, although they be stayed vp and succoured with bowes or bran∣ches. The flowers are most commonly white, the fruite is rounde and white, and remayneth rounde whan it is drie. 
 The thirde, whiche is the least kinde, is lyke vnto the seconde, sauing that it is much smaller in leaues, stalkes, coddes and fruite. It is suffered for the most part to lye vppon the grounde in the feeldes, without any stay or helpe of bran∣ches or bowes. The fruite thereof is lykewise rounde, of colour sometimes white, sometimes greene, and sometimes gray or blackish. 
 Besides the aforesayde kindes, there is yet a certayne kind of Pease lyke vnto the wilde or least kinde. It hath flat stalkes, the leaues are long with clasping tendrels at the endes, whole beneath next to the stemme, but at the toppe of the branches, the leaues are clouen and diuided into two or three small narrowe leaues, almost lyke the leaues of Cicercula, (whiche Turner calleth Cicheling.) The flowers are white, after the which flowers there come vp round coddes or huskes, lesser then pease-coddes, within them groweth the fruite, which is rounde lyke vnto Pease, sauing it is lesser, and in taste bitter, while it is yet greene, &amp; very harde when it is drie. 
 ❀ The Place. The great and branched Peason are planted in gardens: but the midle and least kind are sowen and planted in fruitful feeldes, and are very com∣mon in this Countrie. 
 The Herb oristes do sow the wild kinde in their gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Men plant them in Marche and Aprill, and they be rype in August. 
 Eruilia syluestris. Wilde Peason. 
 ❀ The Names. The branche Peason are called in Greke : in Latine Pisum: in Brabant Groote Erweten, Roomsche Erweten, and of some Stock Erweten. This kinde is the right Pisum, described of Plinie and the Auncientes: in Englishe Great Peason, Garden Peason, and Branche Peason, bycause, as I thinke, they must be holpen or stayed vp with branches. 
 The two other kindes are called in Greke : in Latine of Plinie Eruiliae: in French Pois in high Douch Erweyssen: in base Almaigne Erweten: in Ita∣lian Rouiglione: at Veniz Pisareli: in Englishe, Common Peason. 
 The fourth is very wel like to be a kinde of wilde pease, and especially that kinde whereof Hermolaus Barbarus writeth, calling it Eruilia syluestris, that is to sayde wilde Peason. 
 ❀ The Nature, and Vertues. Branche Peason being eaten do nourish meanely, engender windinesse, but not so muche as the pulse whiche the Auncientes call Faba. 
 The other rounde and common Pease are beter, and do nourish better then the great or branched Peason, and they do lose and open the belly gently. 
 Of the Cicheling or flat Peason. Chap. xxi. ❀ The Kindes. THere be two sortes of Cichelinges, the great and the small, or garden and wilde Cichelinges.
Lathyrus Cicercula. Cicheling or brode Peason. 
 Lathyrus syluestris. Wilde Cicheling. 
 ❀ The Description. T He Cicheling or flat pease, hath flat and crested stalkes: the leaues be long and narrow, standing vpward, almost like the two eares of a Hare, with Clasping tendrelles, by the which they take holde by poles and branches that are set by thē. The flowers be white lyke the flowers of branche Peason, after them come flat coddes, &amp; large, wherein is a white fruite, large, flat, &amp; vneuenly cornered hauing almost the sent or smell of the pease. The roote is tender and threddy. 
 The lesser Cicheling is like to the aforesaid, in stalkes leaues &amp; coddes. The flowers are reddish. The fruit is also flat, vneuenly cornered as the great kind, but it is smaller, harder, and of a more browne colour, drawing towardes blacke. 
 There is also founde a wilde kinde of this pulse much lyke to the aforesayd in the flatnesse of the stalkes, and in his long and narrowe leaues. The whiche in like manner bringeth foorth reddish flowers, and afterward narrow coddes, wherin is conteyned a small browne seede, round and hard. The roote is great and thicke, of a wooddy substance, and dieth not, but putteth foorth new euery yere. 
 ¶ The Place. These pulses are found in this Countrie, amōgst some diligent Herboristes. 
 The wild groweth in hedges, and in the borders of feeldes, in good &amp; fertill ground, and is found in great plentie about Louayne and Brussels. 
 ❀ The Tyme. These Pulses do flower in Iune, and are ripe in Iuly and August. 
 ❀ The Names. The first and greatest kinde is called in Greeke , Lathyrus: of Colu∣mella and Paladius Cicercula. Turner calleth it a Cicheling. 
 The seconde is called in Greeke , Aracus: in Latine Cicera They are both called in Frenche Des Sars but they haue no Douche name that I knowe, yet the Authour of this booke in the last Douche copie by him corrected, calleth the first kinde in Douche Platte Erwten, that is to say in English, Broade or Flat Pease: not knowen of the Apothecaries. 
 ❀ The Nature, and Vertues. The first kinde is of nature and qualitie like vnto Pease, and doth meanely nourishe the body, as Galen saith. 
 The seconde is like to the first, as witnesseth the same Galen, sauing that it is harder, for whiche cause it ought to be longer boyled. 
 Of Chiche Peason. Chap. xxij. ❀ The Kyndes. There be three kindes of Ciche Peason (as Dioscorides writeth) the do∣mestical or tame kinde, the square or cornered kinde, the which some do cal Arietinum, and the wilde Ciche, and there be two sortes of that kinde whiche is called Arietinum, white, and blacke. 
 Cicer satiuum. Tame Ciches. 
 Cicer Arietinum. Sheepes Ciches. 
 ❀ The Description. T He tame Ciche Peason is a smal kinde of pulse, almost like to a lentil, it hath foure or fiue branches, and therevpon small, narrowe, diuidid leaues, not muche vnlyke the leaues of lentilles. The flowers grow vpon short stemmes, small and somewhat whitishe, after the whiche there come vp small rounde huskes or coddes, wherein is commonly founde three or foure round Peason, hauing a certayne bunch, hillock, or outgrowing by one side, not muche vnlike Sheepes Ciche Peason, but a great deale smal∣ler, and not so harde, and of a better taste. 
 Sheepes Ciches haue slender stalkes, and harde with many branches, and rounde leaues iagged about the brimmes, like the lentil or feche: growing di∣rectly or opposite one against the other, the flowers be either white or purple, and bring foorth shorte rounde Coddes or huskes, bollen or swelling vp like small bladders, wherein growe two or three Peason cornered, and fashioned almost lyke a sheepes head, in colour sometymes white, and sometimes blacke. 
 The wild Ciche pease, in leaues are lyke to the tame, but they are of a ranke and strong sauour, and the fruite of another fashion (as Dioscorides saith) vn∣like the tame Ciches. 
 ❀ The Place. These Ciche Peason, are founde planted in the gardens of Herboristes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. All the Ciches are ripe in August, like to the other sortes of pulse.
❀ The Names. Ciche Peason are called in Greeke : in Latine Cicer: in Frenche Cices▪ or Pois Cice. 
 The first kind is called Cicer satiuum, Columbinum Venereū: and in Greke , Orobiaeon, that is to say in Latine Cicer eruillum: vnknowen in Shoppes. This is not Eruum, as many at this time do thinke, and for that purpose they put it into their triacles and other suche medicines. 
 The seconde kinde is called in Greeke : in Latine Cicer Arie∣tinum, that is to say, Sheepes Ciche pease: in Shoppes Cicer: in Englishe Sheepes Cichpeason, in French Pois Ciches: in high Douch Zysern erweyssen: in base Almaigne Ciceren. 
 The thirde kinde is called Cicer syluestre, that is to say, Wilde Ciches. 
 ❀ The Nature. The Ciche pease is hoate and drie in the first degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The domestical or tame Ciches, prouoke vrine, and cause milke to encrease in womens brestes, it taketh away the euyll colour, and causeth good colour to ensue. 
 The same boyled with Orobus (called in Englishe the bitter Fiche) doth asswage and heale the blastinges or swellinges of the yearde or priuie mem∣bers, if it be layde thereon: also men vse with great profite, to applie it to run∣ning sores, and vlcers of the head, and the scurffe. 
 The same mingled with Barley meale and honie, is good against corrupt and festred sores, and Canckers, being layde therevppon. 
 Sheepes Ciches do prouoke vrine, and vnstoppe the Melt, the Liuer, and the kidneyes: and the decoction thereof drunken, breaketh the stone, and grauell. 
 To conclude, the Ciche peason do wast, clense, and make thinne, all cold and grosse humours, and are good agaynst all spreading sores, and the inflamma∣tions and swellinges behinde the eares. 
 They do likewise nourish sufficiently, but they engender muche windinesse. 
 ❧ The Danger. The vse of Ciches is not very good for them whiche haue any vlceration, in the kidneyes or bladder, for they be to much scouring, and do cause the vrine to be sharpe. 
 Of Lupines. Chap. xxiij. ❀ The Kindes. THere be two sortes of Lupines, the white or garden Lupine, and the wild Lupine. The wild kind agayne is of sundrie sortes for somtimes you shall see some of them with a yellowe flower, sometymes with a blewe flower, and sometimes with a reddishe flower. 
 Lupinus Satiuus. 
 Lupinus syluestris. Lupines. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE tame or garden Lupine hath round harde stemmes, standing vp∣right of him selfe, without any succour stay or helpe, eyther of bowes, or branches: and after it hath brought foorth his first flowers, then it parteth it selfe aboue, into three branches, which when they haue also brought foorth their flowers, euery of the sayde branches doth part and di∣nide them selues agayne into thrée branches, continuing so in flowers &amp; parted branches vntill they be hindered by frostes. The leaues are cut and slit downe into fiue sixe, or seuen partes. The flowers do grow many togither at the end, or parting of the stalkes, after whiche flowers there come in their places long coddes, somwhat rough without. The fruit is white and flat like a cake, in taste very bitter. 
 The wilde Lupine hath yellow flowers, and is very like to the aforesayd, sauing that his leaues and stalkes are much lesse, &amp; his flowers are not white, but yellow, and the seede or fruite is not white, but spotted. 
 The wilde Lupines, with the blewe and red flowers, are yet lesser then the yellow, the fruite is also marked or spotted, and it is the least of the Lupines. 
 ❀ The Place. The Herboristes do plante Lupines in their gardens. The wilde with the blewe, do growe amongst the corne about Monpellier. 
 ❀ The Tyme. In warme Countries and hoate seasons, the Lupine flowreth three times a yere. The first flower commeth foorth about the end of May, afterward the three first collaterall branches do spring out, the whiche three branches do like∣wise flower about the beginning of Iuly. The sayd collaterall bowes or bran∣ches, do agayne bring foorth three other branches, &amp; they do flower in August, where as they be well placed in the Sonne. The fruite of the first and seconde bloweing doth come to perfect ripenes in this Countrie, but the thirde blowing doth hardly come to ripenesse, except it chaunce in a very hoate sommer.
❀ The Names. This kinde of pulse is called in Greeke : in Latine and in Shoppes, Lupinus: in Frenche Lupin in English Lupines: in high Douche Feigbonen: in base Almaigne Lupinen, and Vijchboonen. 
 The first kinde is called Lupinus satiuus, that is to say, The manured or garden Lupine. 
 The three other sortes are called Wilde Lupines, in Latine Lupini sylue∣stres: and these be not vsed in medicine. 
 ❀ The Nature. The garden Lupine is hoate and drie in the seconde degree, it hath vertue to digest, make subtil, and to clense. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The meale of Lupines taken with hony, or els with water and vineger, doth kill and driue foorth by siege al kindes of wormes. The same vertue hath the decoction of Lupines, when it is dronken. And for the same purpose men vse to lay Lupines stamped vpon the nauel of young children fasting. 
 Men giue the decoction of Lupins, boyled with Rue and Pepper, to drinke to open the stoppinges of the liuer and melt. 
 Apessarie made of Lupins, Mirrhe, and Hony mingled togither, moo∣ueth womens natural sicknesse or flowers, and expelleth or deliuereth the dead birth. 
 She decoction of Lupines doth beautifie the colour of the face, and driueth away all frekles, and spottes like lentils. The meale thereof is of the like ver∣tue, mingled with water and layde therto. 
 The flower or meale of Lupines, with the meale of parched barley &amp; water swageth all impostumations and swellinges. 
 The same with vineger, or boyled in vineger, swageth the payne of the Sciatica, it digesteth, consumeth and dissolueth the kinges euill or swelling in the throte, it openeth and bursteth wennes, botches, boyles, and pestilential or plague sores. 
 Lupins may be eaten, when as by long soking in water they are become sweete, and haue lost their bitternesse: for when they be so prepared, they take away the lothsomnesse of the stomacke, and the desyre to vomit, and do cause good appetite. Yet for all that this kinde of foode or nourishment, engendreth grosse blood, and grosse humours. For Lupins are harde to digest, and vneasie to descende, as Galen saith. 
 The wilde Lupins haue the lyke vertue, but more strong. 
 Of the bitter Veche called in Greeke Orobos, and in Latine Eruum. Chap. xxiiij. ❀ The Description. E Ruum or the bitter Fetche is nowe vnknowen, and therefore we can geue none other description, but so much as is written in Dioscorides and Galen. They say that Orobos, or Eruilia is a small plant, bearing his fruit in coddes, round, of a white or yellowish colour, of a strange and vnpleasant taste, so that they serue not to be eaten, but of cattel, neither wil cattell feede vpon them, before that with long soking or stieping in water, their vnpleasant taste be gone and lost: wherefore it is very easie to iudge, that the flat Pease called in Greeke Lathyri, and described in the xxj. Chapter of this booke, are not Ers or Eruilia, as some haue thought: for those flat Peason are in taste lyke the common Peason, as we haue before declared. 
 ❧ The Names. This pulse is called in Greeke : in Latine Eruum: and the Frenchmen folowing the Latine name, do cal it Ers: in Douche Eruen: in Englishe Bitter Vetche, or Ers. 
 ❀ The Nature. Ers are hoate in the first degree, and drie in the seconde. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The meale of Eruum often licked in with hony in maner of a Lohoch, clen∣seth the breast, and cutteth and ripeth grosse and tough humours, falling vpon the lunges. 
 It loseth the belly, prouoketh vrine, maketh a man to haue a good colour, if it be taken in reasonable quantitie: for to muche thereof is hurtfull. 
 With honie it scoureth away lentiles or freckles from the face, and all o∣ther spottes and scarres from the bodie. It stayeth spreading vlcers: it doth soften the hardnesse of womens breastes, it breaketh Carboncles and impo∣stumes. 
 Being kneded or tempered with wine, it is layde very profitably vnto the bitinges of dogges, of men, and wilde beastes. 
 The decoction of the same, helpeth the itche, and kibed heeles, if they be wa∣shed therein.
Ers are neuer taken in meate, but it fatteth oxen well. 
 ❧ The Danger. Ers or Orobos being vsed often, and in to great a quantitie causeth head∣ache, and heauie dulnesse, it bringeth foorth blood, both by the vrine, and excre∣mentes of the belly. 
 Of the Vetche. Chap. xxv. T He Vetche hath stalkes of a sufficient thicknesse, and square about the heigh of three foote, with leaues displayed &amp; spread abroad, compassed about with many smal leaues, set opposite one direetly against another: at the ende of whiche leaues, ye haue tendrelles or claspers wherby it taketh hold and is stayed vp. The flowers are purple and fashioned like the Beaneflowers, afterward there come vp long flat coddes, wherein are Vetches, which are flat and of a blackish colour. 
 ❀ The Place. They sowe Vetches in this Countrie, in the feeldes, for fourrage or prouender for Horses. 
 ❀ The Tyme. They be rype in Iuly and August. 
 ❀ The Names. This pulse is called in Greke , and of some : in Latine Vicia: of some Osmūdi: in English a Vetche, or Vetches: in Frenche Vesse: in high Douche Wicken: in base Almaigne Vitsen. And that this is not Eruum, it appeareth euidently by that which is described in the former Chapter. This shoulde seeme to be Theophrastus Aphace or Taare. 
 ❀ The cause of the Name. The Vetche, as Varro sayth, is called in Latine Vicia, bycause it bindeth it selfe a∣bout other plantes, and ouercometh them, and is deriued from this Latine worde (Vincire) whiche signifieth to binde sure, to ouercome and to restrayne from liber∣tie. 
 Vicia. 
 ❀ The Nature and Vertues. The Vetche is not vsed in medicine, neyther vsed to be eaten of men, but to be giuen to Horses and other cattel, and this Galen doth also witnesse. 
 Of Arachus or wilde Fitche. Chap. xxvi. ❀ The Description. A Rachus is muche lyke to the common Vetche, in stalkes, leaues, and coddes, but in all these muche lesse. The stalkes be tēder, weake and slēder with cornered trayles or square crested edges. The leaues are spread abroade like the other Vetche, but clouen and parted aboue at the endes, into two or three clasping tendrelles. The flowers be smal, of a light purple, or incar∣nate colour, and do growe vppon the stalke selfe, as the flowers of beanes or common Vetches do, without any foote stalkes. The coddes be small, long, and narrowe, wherein is couched sixe or seuen seedes, of a blackishe colour, harde, and smaller than Vetches. 
 Arachus. 
 Of this forte there is found an other kinde, the which is very wel like to the abouesaid, in leaues and stalkes, but it is smaller. It hath smal white flowers growing clusterwise at the ende vpon long stems, almost like the wild Vetche, the whiche do turne into litle short huskes, clustering togither, smaller then the lentil huskes, in the whiche is founde, but onely two graynes, harde, rounde, gray speckled, blackish, in making and taste like to the Vetche. 
 ❀ The Place. These two kindes of Vetches do grow in the feeldes, amongst Rye &amp; Otes, and other lyke graynes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. They are both ripe in Iune. 
 ❀ The Names. This plant is called of Galen, Lib. 1. de alimentorum facultatibus, , A∣rachus, the whiche name is written by chin the last syllabe, as a difference from the other Aracus, written with ac, wherof we haue alredy treated. They call it in French Vesseron: in Brabant, Crock: in Englishe, Wilde Vetche. 
 ❀ The Nature, and Vertues. Arachus or the wild Vetche, is not fit for man, but serueth only for prouender or fourrage, for Bieues and horses, vnto whom the whole herbe is giuen. 
 Of smal wild Fetchelinges. Chap. xxvij. Galega altera. Vetcheling or smal wild Fitches. 
 Onobrichis fortè, Medica Ruellij. Saint Foin. Medick Vetcheling. 
 T HE wild Vetche is much like Arachus, described in the former Chapt. in stalkes leaues and clasping tendrelles, but that his flowers grow not in the like order, but do grow in tuffed clusters about long stemmes, almost like to spiked eares, of colour pur∣ple in blew, the which past &amp; gone, there come vp litle flat huskes, wherin lieth the seede, like to the seede of Arachus. 
 You may set by this wild Vetche, a certaine plant not much vnlike the afore∣sayd in leaues and growing, the whiche beareth rough and prickie buttons, or bosses. It doth not commonly growe in this Countrie, but planted in the gar∣dens of some Herboristes. This kind of plant hath leaues like to the other, but somwhat narrower, whiter &amp; smother. His flowers do likewise growe thicke vpon long stemmes, commonly of acleare red or Crymsen colour. After whiche there come flat prickley round huskes, bossed or bunched, and somtimes fashio∣ned like a smal Hedgehogge, which is nothing els but the seede.
The other kind is called of the writers in these dayes Crista gallinacea, and Crista galli, bycause that in proportion of flowers and pouches, it is like to Red Rattel: in high Douch Geel Rodel: in base Almaigne, Geel and witte Ratelē, &amp; of some Hanekammekens, that is to say, Hennes Commes, or Coxecombes: also yellowe or white Rattel. This may wel be that herbe, whereof Plinie writeth in his xviii. booke, the xxviii. Chapter, and there is called Nimmulus, the which is very hurtfull to medowes. 
 ¶ The Nature. Both of these herbes are colde, drie, and astringent. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Redde Rattel is taken of the Physitions in these dayes, against the fluxe menstruall, and all other issue of blood, boyled in wine and drunken. 
 The other kinde hath no peculier vertue that I knowe. 
 Of the Thistel Chameleon. Chap. lvii. ❀ The Kindes. Chamaeleon is of two sortes, as Dioscorides writeth, the white and the blacke. 
 The figures which my Aucthor attributeth to Leucacantha, wil agree well with this de∣scription, and they be so placed of Matthiolus. 
 ❀ The Description. T He great Chameleon, hath great brode prickley leaues, not much vnlike the wilde Thistle, but rougher &amp; sharper, the which leaues are greater, stronger &amp; grosser, then the leaues of the blacke Cha∣meleon: amongst which leaues there riseth immediatly from the roote, a prickley head or bowle, almost like the heades of Harti∣chokes, and beareth a purple thrommed flower like veluet. The seede is almost lyke the seede of bastarde saffron. The roote is long, and white within, of a sweete taste, and aromaticall smell. 
 The blacke Chameleons leaues, are also almost lyke to the leaues of the wilde Thistel, but smaller and finer, and sprinckled or spotted with red spottes. The stemme is reddish or browne red, of the bignesse of a finger, &amp; groweth to the height of a foote, whervpō grow round heades with smal prickley flowers of diuers coloures, whereof eche flower is not much vnlyke the flowers of the Hyacynthe. The roote is great &amp; firme, or strong, blacke without and yellowish within, sharpe and biting the tongue, the whiche for the most part is found, as it were already tasted or bitten. 
 ❀ The Place. The white Chameleon groweth vpon hilles and mountaynes, &amp; such lyke vntoyled places. Yet for all that it desyreth good grounde. It is founde in Spayne in the region of Arragon by the high way sides. 
 The blacke groweth in drye soyles, and places neare the Sea. 
 ❀ The Names. The first kinde is called in Greeke : in Latine Chamaeleo al∣bus, of Apuleius Carduus syluaticus, of some also Erisisceptrum, lx , Carduus varinus, Carduus irinus, Carduus lacteus. Matthiolus sayth, that the Italians cal this herbe Carlina in Spayne Cardo pinto: in Frenche Carline. 
 The seconde kinde is called in Greeke : in Latine Chamaeleo niger, of some Pancarpon, Vlophonon, Cynomazon, Cynoxylon, Ocymoides, Cnidos coccos, Carduus niger, Veruilago, Vstilago, &amp;c. Both these kindes are vnknowen in this Countrie. 
 ❧ The Nature. Chameleon is temperate in heate and drynes, specially the blacke, the which is almost hoate in the seconde degree, and altogither drie in the thirde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The roote of the white Chameleon dronken with redde wine wherin Ori∣ganum hath bene sodden, killeth and bringeth foorth large or brode wormes. 
 The same boyled in good wine, is very good for such as haue the Dropsie, and strangurie, for it delayeth the swelling of them that haue the Dropsie, and dispatcheth vrine. 
 It is good against al kindes of venome or poyson that may be giuen. 
 The roote of the blacke Chameleon, is not very meete to be receiued in∣wardly: for it is indued with a certayne hidden euill qualitie, as Galen sayth, and therefore it was neuer ministred of the Auncientes, but in outward medi∣cines. 
 The same with a litle Copperose and Swines grease, healeth the scabbe, and if you put thereto of Brimstone and Rosen or Tarre, it wil heale the hoate running or creeping scabbe or scurffe, foule tetters, and all noughtie itche or manginesse. 
 The same layde to in the Sonne but onely with Brimstone, putteth away the creeping scabbe and tetter, white spottes, sonne burning, and other suche de∣formities of the face. 
 The decoction of this roote boyled in water or vineger being holden in the mouth, healeth the tooth ache. The lyke propertie hath the roote, broken or brused with Pepper and Salt, to be applyed and layde vppon the noughtie tooth.
Of Sea Holly. Chap. lviij. ❀ The Kindes. IN this Countrie is founde two kindes of Eryngium, the one called the great Eryngium, or Eryngium of the Sea, and the other is called but Eryn∣gium onely. 
 Eryngium marinum. Sea Holly. 
 Eryngium vulgare. The hundred headed Thistel. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE great Eryngium hath great, large, whitishe, somewhat rounde and thicke leaues, a litle crompled or cronkeled about the edges, set here and there with certayne prickles rounde about vppon the edges, the sayde leaues be of an aromaticall or spicelyke taste. The stalkes be rounde, and growe about the height of a foote, of a reddishe colour belowe neare the grounde, vpon the toppes of the branches come foorth round knoppie and sharpe prickley heades, about the quantitie of a nut, set rounde a∣bout full of small flowers, most commonly of a Celestiall or skie colour, and in this Countrie they haue small tippes or white markes. And harde ioyning vnder the flowers grow fiue or fixe small prickley leaues, set in compasse round about the stalke like a starre, the whiche with the vppermost part of the stemme are altogither of a skie colour in this Countrey. The roote is of ten or twelue foote long, and oftentimes so long, that you cannot drawe it vp whole, as bigge as ones finger, full of ioyntes by spaces, and of a pleasant taste. 
 The seconde kinde hath broade crompled leaues, al to pounced and iagged, whitish, &amp; set rounde about with sharpe prickles. The stalke is of a foote long, with many branches, at the toppe whereof growe rounde, rough, and prickle bullettes or knoppes, like to the heades of Sea Holly or Huluer, but muche smaller, vnderneath which knoppes grow also fiue or fixe small narrow sharpe leaues, set rounde about the stemme after the fashion of Starres. The roote is long and playne or single, as bigge as a mans finger, blackishe without, and white within. 
 ❀ The Place. Erynge, as Dioscorides writeth, groweth in rough vntoyled feeldes: it is founde in this Countrie in Zealand, &amp; Flaunders, vpon banckes, and alongst by the Sea coast. 
 The common Erynge groweth also in this Countrie in the like places: it groweth also in Almaigne alongst by the riuer Rhene, and in drie Countries by the high wayes. There is plentie growing about Strasbourge. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Both these kindes do bring foorth their flowers in this Countrie, in Iune and Iuly. 
 ❧ The Names. The first kinde of these Thistels is called in Greeke : in Latine Eryn∣gium: Plinie calleth it also Erynge: the writers of our time cal it Eryngium ma∣rinum: the Arabians with the Apothecaries cal it Iringus: in Almaigne Cruys∣wortele, and Endeloos, and in some places of Flaunders, Meere wortele: in Englishe, Sea Holme, or Huluer, and Sea Holly. 
 The other kinde is called in English, the Hundred headed Thistel: in French Chardon a cent testes: in high Douch Manstrew, Brachen distel, and Rad distel: in base Almaigne Cruysdistel: in the Shoppes also it is nowe called Iringus. This without doubt is a kinde of Eringium, the whiche may also very be well called Centumcapita. 
 ❀ The Nature. Sea Holly is temperate of heate and colde, yet of drie and subtil partes. 
 The hundred headed Thistell, is hoate and drie as one may easyly gather by the taste. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The first leaues of Eryngium are good to be eaten in Salade, and was for that purpose so vsed of the Auncientes, as Dioscorides writeth. 
 The rootes of the same boyled in wine and dronken, are good for them that are troubled with the Colique and gripings of the belly, for it cureth them, and driueth foorth windinesse. 
 The same taken in the same manner, bringeth foorth womens natural sick∣nesse. 
 It is good to drinke the wine wherein Sea Holly hath boyled, against the stone and grauel, and against the payne to make water, for it prouoketh vrine, driueth foorth the stone, &amp; cureth the infirmities, that chaunce to the kidneyes, if it be dronken fiftiene dayes togither one after another. 
 The same rootes taken in the same manner, are good for suche as be liuer sicke, and for those that are bitten of any venemous beastes, or haue receiued or dronke poyson, especially if it be dronken with the seede of wilde Carrot. 
 It doth also helpe those that are troubled with the Crampe, and the falling sicknesse. 
 The greene herbe is good to be pounde, and layde to the bytinges of vene∣mous beastes, especially to the bitinges of Frogges. 
 The Apothecaries of this Countrie do vse to preserue and comfit the roote of Eringium, to be giuen to the aged, and olde people, and others that are con∣sumed or withered, to nourishe and restore them againe.
The roote of Centumcapita, or the Thistel of a hundred heades, is likewise comfited, to restore, nourishe, and strengthen, albeit it commeth not neare by a great way, to the goodnesse of the other. 
 Of Starre Thistel / or Caltrop. Chap. lix. ❀ The Description. S Tarre Thistell hath softe fri∣sed leaues, deepely cutte or gaysle, the stalkes grow of a foote and a halfe high, full of branches, wherevppon growe small knappes or heades like to other Thistelles, but muche smaller, and set rounde about with sharpe thornie prickles, fashioned lyke a Starre at y e beginning, either greene or browne redde, but afterwarde pale or white: when those heades do opē, they bring foorth a purple flower, &amp; afterwarde a small flat and round seede, the roote is long and somewhat browne with∣out. 
 ¶ The Place. This Thistell groweth in rude vntoyled places, &amp; alongst the waies, &amp; is founde in great quantitie, about the Marte Towne of Anwarpe, nere to the riuer Scelde, and alongst by the newe walles of the Towne. 
 ❀ The Tyme. This Thistell flowreth from the moneth of Iuly, vntill August. 
 Carduus stellatus. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is nowe called in Latine Carduus stellatus, and Stellaria, also Calcit apa: and some take it for , Polyacanthus of Theophrast, the which Gaza calleth in Latine Aculeosa, they call it in Frenche Chaussetrape: in high Douch, Wallen Distell, ano Raden Distel: in base Almaigne, Sterre distel: in English, Starre Thistel, or Caltrop. 
 ❀ The Nature. This Thistel also is of a hoate nature, as the taste of the roote doth shewe. 
 ❀ The Vertues. They vse greatly to take the powder of the seede of this Thistel in wine to drinke, to prouoke vrine, and to driue foorth grauel, and against the strangury. 
 Of the Teasel. Chap. lx. ❀ The Kindes. THe Cardthistel or Teasel is of two sortes, the tame &amp; the wild. The tame Teasel is sowen of Fullers and clothworkers to serue their purposes, the wilde groweth without husbanding of it selfe, &amp; serueth to smal purpose. 
 Dipsacum satiuum. Fullers Teasel. 
 Dipsacum syluestre. Wilde Teasel. 
 T HE Cardthistel his first leaues be long, and large, hackt round about with natches, lyke the teeth of a sawe, betwixt those leaues riseth a holowe stalke of three foote long or more, with many branches, set here and there with diuers hooked sharpe prickles, and spaced or se∣uered by ioyntes, &amp; at euery of the sayd ioyntes, grow two great long leaues, the which at the lower endes be so closely ioyned and fastened togither, round about the stalke, that it holdeth the water, falling either by rayne or dewe, so sure, as a dishe or bason. At the top of the branches growe long, rough, and prickle heades, set full of hookes: out of the same knops or heades, grow smal white flowers placed in Celles and Cabbins, like the honie Combe, in whiche Chambers or Celles (after the falling away of the flower) is found a sede like Fenil, but bitter in taste. The knoppes or heades are holow within, and for the most part hauing wormes in them, the whiche you shall finde in cleauing the heades. The roote is long, playne, and white. 
 The wild Teasel is much like to the other, but his leaues be narrower, and his flowers purple, the hookes of this Teasel be nothing so harde, nor sharpe as the other. 
 There is yet another wilde kinde of these Carde Thistels, the which grow highest of al the other sortes, whose knopped heades are no bigger then a nut, in all thinges els lyke to the other wilde kindes. 
 ❀ The Place. The tame Teasel is sowen in this Countrie, and in other places of Flaun∣ders, to serue Fullers and Clothworkers. 
 The wild groweth in moyst places, by brookes, riuers, &amp; such other places. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Carde Thistel flowreth for the most part in Iune and Iuly. 
 ¶ The Names. This kinde of Thistel is called in Greeke : in Latine Dipsacum, and Labrū Veneris, of some also Chamaeleon, Crocodilion, Onocardion, Cneoron, Meleta, Cinara rustica, Moraria, Carduus Veneris, Veneris lauacrum, &amp; Sciaria: in Shoppes Virga Pastoris, and Carduus Fullonum. in French Verge de berger, Car∣don a Foulon or A Carder: in high Douche Karten distel, Bubenstrel, Weberkar∣ten: in base Almaigne, Caerden, and Volders Caerden: in Englishe, Fullers Teasel, Carde Thistell, and Venus bath or Bason. 
 The tame Teasel is called Dipsacum satiuum, and Dipsacum album. 
 The wilde Teasel is called Dipsaca syluestris, or Purpurea.
❀ The Nature. The roote of Carde Thistell (as Galen saith) is drie in the seconde degree, and somwhat scouring. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The roote of Teasell boyled in wine, and afterwarde pounde vntill it come to the substance or thicknesse of an oyntment, healeth the chappes, riftes, and fistulas of the fundement. But to preserue this oyntment, ye must keepe it in a boxe of Copper. 
 The small wormes that are founde within the knoppes or heades of Tea∣selles, do cure and heale the Quartayne ague, to be worne or tyed about the necke or arme, as Dioscorides writeth. 
 Of Artechokes. Chap. lxi. ❀ The Kyndes. There is now found two kindes of Artechokes, the one with brode leaues, and nothing prickley, which is called the right Artechoke, the other whose leaues be all to gashed full of sharpe prickles and deepe cuttes, which may be called the Thistell, or prickley Artechoke. 
 ❀ The Description. T He right Artechoke hath great long broade leaues, like the leaues of our Ladyes Thistel, but blacker, greater, &amp; without prickles, amongst the whiche springeth vp a stalke garnished or set here and there with Cynara. Artechokes. Cynaraealiud genus. Prickley Artechokes. the like leaues, but smaller, bearing at the top great rounde scalie heades, the whiche at their opening beare a purple flower or blossom, and after it yeeldeth seede, like to the seede of our Ladies Thistel, but greater. The roote is long and grosse. 
 The Thistell or prickley Artechoke, hath great long leaues, very much and deepely cut vpō both sides (euen to the very sinewes which depart the leaues) and full of sharpe cruel prickles. The stalke is long, vpon the which grow scaly heades, almost like the others. 
 They are both of one kinde, &amp; not otherwise to be accounted: for oftentimes of the seede of one springeth the other, especially the Thistell Artechoke com∣meth of the seede of the right Arrechoke. Whiche thing was very well knowen of Palladius, who commaunded to breake the point of the seede, for bycause it shoulde not bring foorth the prickley kinde. 
 ¶ The Place. These two kindes growe not in this Countrie of their owne accorde, but are sowen and planted in gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The right &amp; prickley Artechokes, bring forth their great heades in August. 
 ❀ The Names. This kinde of Thistell, especially the first sorte, is called of Galen in Greeke . of Math. : in Latine Cynara, Cinara, Carduus, &amp; Carduus satiuus, of writers of our time, Arocum, Alcoralum and Articocalus: in Frenche Arti∣chaut: in Italian Articoca: in high Douch Strobildorn: in Brabāt Artichauts, folowing the Frenche: the heades be called in Greeke Spondyli: in Englishe, the great and right Artechok. 
 The other is called Cinaraacuta: in French Chardonnerette: in Brabant, Char∣dons. It may be wel Englished, the Thistel or prickley Artichoke. 
 ❀ The Nature and Vertues. The heades of Artechokes are vnhole some to be eaten, as Galen writeth in his boooke, De Alimentis and of harde digestion, wherefore they engender noughtie humours, especially being eaten rawe and vnprepared. Therefore they must be boyled after the order of Asparagus, in some good broth of beefe or other flesh, then serue them with a sause of butter or oyle, salt and vineger: some vse them rawe with pepper and salt, and the powder of Coriander, and so they yeelde a natural pleasant and kindly sweetenesse in taste. They are not vsed in medicine, as my Aucthor in folowing Dioscorides and Galen writeth. 
 Some write, if the young and tender shelles or Nuttes of the Artechok (being first srieped or soked in strong wine) be eaten, that they prouoke vrine, and stirre vp the lust of the body. 
 Also they write, that the roote is good agaynst the rancke sinel of the arme pittes, if after the taking cleane away of the pith, the same roote be boyled in wine and dronken. For it sendeth foorth plentie of stinking vrine, whereby the ranke and rammishe sauour of al the body is amended. 
 The same boyled in water and dronken, doth strengthen the stomacke, and so confirme the place of naturall conception in women, that it maketh them apt to conceaue male Children. 
 The first springes or tender impes of the Artechok sodden in good broth with Butter, doth mightely stirre vp the lust of the body both in men and women, it causeth sluggishe men to be diligent in Sommer, and wil not suffer women to be slowe at winter. It stayeth the inuo∣luntarie course of the naturall seede in man or woman. 
 Of our Zadyes Thistell. Chap. lxij. ❀ The Description. O Vr Ladies Thistel hath great, broade, white, greene leaues, speckled w t many white spots, &amp; set rounde about with sharpe prickles. The stalkes be long, as bigge as ones finger, at the top whereof grow rounde knapped headdes with sharpe prickles, out of the same knappes come foorth fayre purple flowers, and after them within the same heades groweth the seede inclosed or wrapt in a certayne cotton or downe. The which is not much vnlyke the seede of wilde Carthamus, but lesser, rounder, and blacker. The roote is long, thicke and white. 
 Spina alba. Our Ladyes Thistel. 
 ❀ The Place. Our Ladyes Thistel groweth of his owne kinde in this Countrie, almost in euery garden of potherbes, and is also founde in rough vntoyled places. 
 ❀ The Tyme. It flowreth in Iune and Iuly, the same yere it is first sowen, and when it hath brought foorth his seede, it decayeth and starueth.
❀ The Names. This Thistell is called in Greeke : in Latine Spina alba, of some also Agriocinara, Donacitis, Erysisceptrum, Spina regia, and Carduus Rampta∣rius: of the Arabian Physitions, Bedeguar: in Englishe, Our Ladies Thistell: in Frenche, Chardou nostre Dame: in high Douche Marien Distel, and Frauwen Distel: in base Almaigne, Onser Vrouwen Distel: in shoppes, Carduus Mariae. 
 ❀ The Nature. The roote of our Ladies Thistel, is dry and astringent. The seede is hoate, and of subtill partes. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The roote of our Ladyes Thistel dronke in wine, is good for them that spit blood, and for those that haue feeble stomackes, and lose bellyes. 
 Taken in the same sort, it prouoketh vrine, and driueth it foorth. 
 It consumeth colde and soft swellinges, being layde therevnto. 
 The wine wherein it hath bene boyled, swageth the tooth ache. 
 The seede is giuen with great profite, to children that be troubled with the crampe, or the drawing awry of any member, and to suche as are bitten with Serpentes, or other venemous beastes. 
 Of the Globe Thistel. Chap. lxiij. ❀ The Description. T His thistel hath also great broade leaues, of a sadde greene colour aboue, or in the vpper side, and next the grounde they are rough, &amp; of a grayish colour, deepely iagged and hackt rounde about, the in∣dented edges are full of sharpe &amp; prickley pointes. The stalke is rounde, and blat∣kishe, as bigge as ones finger, and of foure or fiue foote long, whervpon grow faire round heades, and rough, bearing rounde about a great many of smal whi∣tish flowers mixt with blew. The roote is browne without. 
 ❀ The Place. This Thistell is a stranger in this Countrie, and is not founde but in the gardens of Herboristes, and such as loue herbes. 
 Spina peregrina. 
 ❀ The Tyme. It flowreth in Iune and Iuly, a yere after it hath bene sowen. 
 ❀ The Names. The Thistel is called of the writers in these dayes, in Latine, Spina pere∣grina: &amp; of Valerius Cordus, Carduus Sphaerocephalus: in high Douche Welsch Distel, or Romisch distel: in base Almaigne, Roomsche distel, &amp; Vremde distel, that is to say, the Romaynes Thistel, or the strange Thistel. How this Thistel was called of the Auncientes, we knowe not, except it be Acanthus syluestris, wherewithall it seemes to be much like. Turner calleth it Ote Thistel, or Cot∣ton Thistel: in folowing Valerius Cordus, we may also call it Globe Thistell, bycause the heades be of a rounde forme lyke to a Globe or bowle. 
 ❀ The Nature. This strange Thistel is hoate and drie, the whiche may be perceiued by the strong smell, in rubbing it betweene your handes: also it may be diserned by the sharpe taste thereof. 
 ❀ The Vertues. This Thistell is not in vse that I knowe, except as some do write, that in Italy they boyle the round heades with flesh, and eate them like Hartechokes. 
 Of white Cotton Thistel. Chap. lciiij. ❀ The Description. A Canthium is not muche vnlyke our Ladies Thistell, it beareth great large leaues al to mangled and cut by the edges, and set full of sharpe prickles, couered and layd ouer with a fine Cotton or soft downe. The stalke is great &amp; thicke set full of prickiey stings, at the top of the stalkes are rough heades, in sashion like to the heades of our Ladies Thistel. The roote is great and thicke. 
 ❀ The Place. This Thistell groweth here by the high wayes and borders of feeldes, and in sandy vntoyled places. 
 ❀ The Tyme. It flowreth from the moneth of Iune, vnto the eude of August, and sometimes longer. 
 ❀ The Names. This Thistel is called in Greke : in Latine Acanthium: in high Douche Weisz wege distel: in neather Douche laude, Witte wech Distel, and Wilde or Groote witte Distel: in Frenche Chardon argentin, or Chardon saluage: in Englishe White Cotton Thistell, Wilde white Thistell, and Argentine, or Siluer Thistel. 
 Acanthium. 
 ❀ The Nature. This Thistel is hoate of complexion.
Of Purcelayne. Chap. xx. ❀ The Kyndes. THere be two kindes of Purcelayne, one of the garden, the other wilde: by∣sides these there is also a thirde kinde, the whiche groweth onely in salt groundes. 
 ❀ The Description. G Arden Purcelayne hath grosse stalkes, fat, round, and of a brownred colour, the which do grow vp to the length of a span or more, vpō the sayd stalkes are y e thicke fat or fleshie leaues, somthing long &amp; brode, round before. The flowers grow betwixt the leaues and stalkes, and also at the highest of the stalkes, the which be very smal, &amp; of a faynt yellowish colour. The same being past, there come little rounde close huskes, in whiche is founde smal blacke seede. The roote is tender and hearie. 
 The wild Purcelaine hath thicke fat round stalkes, like the garden Purce∣layne, but tenderer, smaller, and redder, the which grow nothing at al vpright, but are spread abrode, and trayle vpon the ground. The leaues be smaller then the leaues of the other, but the flowers &amp; sede is like. These two Purcelaynes are full of iuyce, and of a sharpe or quicke taste. They are vsed in the sommer to be eaten in Salade, as they vse Letuce. 
 The thirde kinde, the which groweth in salt ground, hath many smal, hard, and wooddy stalkes. The leaues be thicke, of a white greene or ashe colour, ve∣ry much like to the leaues of the other Purcelayne, but whiter and softer in Portulaca hortensis. Garden Pyrcelayne. Portulaca syluestris. Wilde Purcelayne. Portulaca marina. Sea Purcelayne. handeling, yet not so smoothe nor shining. The flowers growe at the toppe of the stalkes, clustering togither lyke y e flowers of Orache or Blite. The roote is long and of a wooddy substance, and liueth with his stalke, and certayne of his leaues all the winter. 
 ¶ The Place. The tame Purcelayne is sowen in gar∣dens. 
 The wild groweth of his owne accorde in wayes and alies of gardens, &amp; in some places it groweth vppon rockes, cleeues, and viniardes. 
 Sea Purcelayne groweth vpō bankes or walles cast vp in places adioyning to the sea: and great store therof is founde in Zeeland, and bysides the Ile of Purbeck in Englande. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The garden &amp; wilde Purcelayne, do flower from after the moneth of Iune, vntill September, and in this space they yeelde their seede. 
 The sea Purcelayne flowreth in Iuly. 
 ¶ The Names. Purcelayne is called in Greke : in Latine and in shoppes Portulaca: in Frenche, Pourpier, or Pourcelaine: in high Douche, Burgel: in base Almaigne, Porceleyne: in English, Purcelayne. 
 The first kinde is called Portulaca satiua, or Hortensis: in Frenche, Pourpier, or Pourcelaine domestique, or cultinée: in high Douche, Heymisch Burgel, or Burtzes∣kraut: in base Almaigne, Roomsche Porceleyne, or tamme Porceleyne: in En∣glish, garden and tame Purcelayne. 
 The seconde kinde is called of the newe writers, Portulaca syluestris: in Frenche, Pourpier sauuage: in high Douche, Wildt Burtzel: in base Almaigne, Ghemeyne, or wilde Porceleyne: in English, Wild Purcelayne: but yet this is not that wild Purcelayne, which is described in some copies of Dioscorides, the which is of a hoate nature or complexion. 
 The thirde kinde of Purcelayne of the later writers, is called Portulaca ma∣rina: in Frenche, Pourcelaine de mer▪ in Douch, Zee Porceleyne. This seemeth to be that herbe which the Greekes call : the Latinistes, Halimus, especially the seconde kinde described by Plinie. 
 ❀ The Nature. The garden and wilde Purcelayne are cold in the thirde degree, and moyst in the seconde. 
 Sea Purcelayne is playnely hoate and drie in the seconde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. They vse to eate the garden and wild Purcelayne in Salades and meates, as they do Letuce, but it cooleth the blood, and maketh it waterie &amp; nourisheth very litle: yet for all that, it is good for those that haue great heate in their sto∣mackes and inwarde partes. 
 The same taken in lyke sort, stoppeth all defluxions and falling downe of humours, and is good for the paynes of the bladder and kidneyes, &amp; it healeth them, albeit they be exulcerated, fret or hurt. 
 Purcelayne comforteth the weake inflamed stomacke, &amp; it taketh away the imaginations, dreames, fansies, &amp; the outragious desire to the lust of the body. 
 The iuyce of Purcelayne dronken hath the same vertue: also it is good a∣gainst burning feuers, &amp; against the wormes that ingender in the body of man. 
 It is good for such as spit blood, it stoppeth the blooddy flixe, the fluxe of the Hemoroides, &amp; al issues of blood. It hath the like vertue being boyled &amp; eaten.
The iuyce of Purcelayne powred vpon the head with oyle &amp; vineger roset, swageth the head ache comming of heate, or of standing to long in the Sonne. 
 The same throwen vp into the mother or matrix, helpeth the burning in∣flammations, exulceratiōs, or gnawing frettings in the same, &amp; powred in by a glister, it is good against the flixe of the guttes &amp; exulceration of the bowelles. 
 The leaues of Purcelayne mingled with parched barley meale, and layde to the inflammations of the eyes, easeth the same, and taketh away the hoate swelling: so it is likewise good against S. Antonies fier, called Erysipelas: a∣gainst the heate and payne of the head, and against all hoate inflammations and tumours. 
 The same eaten rawe, are good against the teeth being set on edge, or asto∣nied, and it fasteneth them that be loose. 
 To conclude, Purcelayne cooleth all that is hoate, wherefore being layde vpon woundes, eyther by it selfe or with the meale of parched barley, it preser∣ueth woundes from inflammation. 
 The seede of Purcelayne beyng taken, kylleth and driueth foorth wormes, and stoppeth the laske. 
 The Sea Purcelayne is gathered in the sommer, and is of some preserued and kept in vineger for Salade, to be eaten at winter like Capers: for being so eaten, it doth heate and comfort the stomacke, causeth good appetite, or meate lust, and prouoketh vrine. 
 If this Purcelayne be Halimus, the roote thereof is good against crampes and drawing awry of sinewes, burstinges and gnawinges in the belly, to be taken in Meade the waight of a dramme. It also causeth Nurses to haue store of milke. 
 Of Sampiere. Chap. xxi. Crithmum. 
 Crithmum spinosum. 
 ❀ The Description. S Ampiere hath fat, thicke, long, smal leaues almost lyke Purce∣layne, the stalke is rounde of a foote, or a foote and a halfe long bearing round spokie tufts, which bring foorth litle white flowers, and a seede lyke Fenyll, but greater. The roote is thicke, and of a pleasant sauour. Searche the commentaries of Matthiolus in the seconde booke of Dioscorides, there you shal finde three kindes more of Crith∣mum. 
 Of this is founde another kinde of Crithmus, whose leaues are lyke vnto the first, the crowne set about with harde pricking thornes, otherwise in all thinges like vnto the other. 
 Yet is there founde a thirde kinde of Crithmus, the whiche bringeth foorth many stalkes of one roote, set about with long small leaues, the whiche are very thicke, vpon the top of the stalkes grow yellow flowers, almost lyke vnto the flowers of Chrysanthemū, in the middes yellow, and round about set with yellow leaues. The roote is long. And this herbe is of taste like vnto the first Crithmus, the whiche is very lyke to Creta marina. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe groweth in salt ground by the sea coast, and is found very plentiful∣ly in many places of Spayne, Fraunce, and England, alongst the shoare or coast. The Herboristes of this Countrie doo plant it in their gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Sampiere bloweth in this Countrie in August and September, but wheras it groweth of his owne kind, it flowreth more timely. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greeke : in Latine Crithmum, and Bati: in shoppes, Creta marina, by whiche name it is knowen in Brabant: in French, Bacille, Crete marine, and Fenoil marin: in Englishe, Sampier, and Crestmarine. 
 ❀ The Nature. Crestmarine is drie and scouring, and meetely warme. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The leaues, seede, or rootes, or al togi∣ther boyled in wine and dronken, prouo∣keth vrine and womens flowers: &amp; hel∣peth muche against the Iaundise. 
 They keepe and preserue the leaues &amp; branches of Crestmarin, or Sampier, in vrine or pickle, to be eaten lyke Cappers: for being so eaten, they are good for y e stomacke and open the stoppinges of the liuer, the splene and the kidneyes. 
 Crithmus Chrysanthemus.
Of Brookelime. Chap. xxij. ❀ The Description. B Rookelime hath rounde fat stalkes, full of branches, &amp; vppon the same fat thicke leaues: the which being brused do yeelde a good sauour. At the toppe of the stalkes and branches growe many fayre blewe flowers, not much vnlike the flowers of blewe Pimpernel, The roote is white &amp; ful of hearie stringes. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe groweth in y e borders &amp; brinkes of ditches and pooles, and sometimes also by running streames, and brookes harde by the water, so that sometimes it is ouerflowen and drenched in the same. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Brookelime flowreth in May, and Iune. 
 ❧ The Names. This herbe is called now in these dayes Ana∣gallis aquatica, and Becabunga, and of some it is taken for that herbe that of Dioscorides is na∣med in Greeke : in Latine, Cepaea: and it Anagallis Aquatica. seemeth to be a kinde of Soum, of the whiche is written by Cratenas: in high Douche, Wasserpunghen, Bachpunghe, or Punghen: in base Almaigne, Wa∣terpunghen: in English, Brookelyme. 
 ❀ The Nature. This herbe is hoate almost in the seconde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Brookelime leaues dronken in wine do helpe the strangullion, &amp; the inward scabbes of the bladder, especially if it be taken with the roote of Asparagus or Sperage. 
 They be also eaten with oyle and vineger, and are good for them that are troubled with the strangurie, and stone. 
 Of Earth Chesnut. Chap. xxiij. ❀ The Description. T HE small Earth Chestnut hath euen crested stalkes, of a foote and a halfe long or more. The first leaues are lyke the leaues of com∣mon Parsely, but they be lesser, &amp; smaller iagged &amp; they that grow about the stemme, are not muche vnlyke the leaues of Dil, the flowers which are white, do growe in spokie tuftes lyke the toppes of Dyl. The seede is small of a flagrant smel, not much vnlyke the seede of Commin or Fenill, but a great deale smaller. The roote is rounde lyke a wherrow or wherle, or rather like a litle round appel, browne without and white within, in taste almost lyke to Carrottes. 
 ¶ The Place. This herbe groweth in many places of Hol∣lande and Zeelande, in corne feeldes &amp; alongst the wayes, there is good store of it in some places of Englande. The Herboristes of Bra∣bant, do plant it in their gardens. 
 ❀ The Time. This herbe flowreth and deliuereth his seede in Iune. 
 Bolbocastanon. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Zeelande, Cleyn Eerdtnoten, some Herboristes take it for Apios, others for Meum, and the thirde for Bulbina: but it hath no lykenesse vnto any of them three, it seemeth better in my iudgement to , Bolbocastanon, of Alexander Trallianus, the whiche the later Grecians do call , Agriocastanon, wherevnto it is very muche lyke: for the roote is lyke Bulbus, and in taste it is muche lyke to the Chestnut: in consy∣deration whereof, it may be well be called Bolbocastanon, and Agriocastanon: in French, Noix-Chastaigne: in base Almaigne, Eerdtrastanien: in English, Earth Chestnut. 
 ❀ The Nature. Bolbocastanon is hoate almost in the seconde degree, and somewhat astrin∣gent, the seede is hoate and drie almost in the thirde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. In Sealande they eate this roote in meates, in whiche Countrie, it is not muche differing in taste and vertue from Parsneppes and Carrottes: it prouo∣keth vrine comforteth the stomacke, nourisheth indifferently, &amp; is good for the bladder and kidneyes. 
 Bolbocastanon, as Alexander Trallianus writeth, is good to be eaten of them that spit blood. 
 The seede of the same causeth women to haue their natural sicknes; bringeth foorth the secondines, prouoketh vrine, and is very profitable for the reynes, the kidneyes, the bladder, and the spleene or milte being stopped. 
 Of Mallowes. Chap. xxiiij. ❀ The Kindes. THere be diuers sortes of Mallowes, whereof some be of the garden, and some be wilde, the whiche also be of diuers kindes. The garden Mallow, called the winter or beyondsea roose, is of diuers sorts, not only in leaues, stalkes, and growing, but in proportion, colour, &amp; flowers: for some be single, some double, some white, some carnation, some of a cleare or light red, some of a darke redde, some gray, and speckled. The wilde Mallowes are also of two sortes, the great and the small. 
 Malua satiua. Holyhocke or garden Mallow. 
 Malua syluestris elatior. Wild Hocke or the greater wild Mallow. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE great tame Mallow which beareth the beyondsea or winter rose, hath great round rough leaues, larger, whiter, and vneuener: then the leaues of the other Hockes or Mallowes. The stalke is rounde, and groweth sixe or seuen foote high or more: it beareth fayre great flowers of di∣uers coloures, in figure lyke to the common Mallowe or Hocke: but a great deale bigger, sometimes single, somtimes double. The flowers fallen the seede commeth vp lyke smal cheeses. The roote is great and long, and continueth a long time, putting foorth yerely newe leaues and stalkes.
Rapum syluestre paruum. Litle Rampions. 
 Rapum syluestre aliud. Wilde Rampions. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE smal common Rampion, his first leaues be roundishe, almost lyke the leaues of the March Violet, afterward it bringeth foorth a round harde stalke of two foote long, set about with long narrowe leaues, at the top of the stalkes growe pleasant flowers, very much lyke to the wild Bel flowers described in the seconde booke the xxiij. Chap. after the flowers come long cornered or square huskes, wherin the sede is inclosed which is very smal. The roote is long and white, sometimes as bigge as a mans litle finger, in tast almost like the Nauew gentle, the whiche in y e winter season is vsed in salades. 
 The other Rampion, the whiche is not yet very well knowen his first leaues be brode, and they that grow vp afterward about y e stalke are narrowe: it hath one or two straight holow stems, in the top of the sayd stems groweth a great thicke bushie eare, ful of litle long smal flowers, which before their ope∣ning, are lyke litle crooked hornes, &amp; being openly spread, are parted into foure litle narrowe leaues, of a blewe colour, purple, gray, or white. The flowers fallen, there appeare many rounde little huskes, ioyning one to another, lyke to the huskes or cuppes of the other Rampion, but much smaller. The roote is great white &amp; full of sap, in fashion &amp; taste like the roote of the other Rampion. 
 The Marians Violet, and the Gauntelet, described in the second booke, are also of the kindes of Rampions. 
 ¶ The Place. The little Rampion groweth in feeldes and pastures of this Countrie vn∣der hedges and bushes. 
 The other Rampion groweth most cōmonly in wooddes, in clay groundes, and other fat, moyst and darke places. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The litle Rampion flowreth in Iune and Iuly. 
 The other flowreth in May. 
 ❀ The Names. Rampion is called in Greeke : in Latine, Rapa syluestris, that is to say, Wilde Rapes. 
 The first kinde, is nowe called of the writers in these dayes, Rapontium, Rapunculum, and Rapunculum paruum: in French, Raiponce, and Petite Raiponce: in high Douche, Klein Rapuntzeln: in base Almaigne, Cleyn or ghemeyne Ra∣poncelen: in Englishe, Rampions and the litle Rampion. 
 The seconde is lykewise a kinde of Rampion; or wilde Rapes. 
 ❀ The Nature. Rampion is of nature somewhat like the Turnep. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The Rampion eaten with vineger and salt stirreth vp appetite or meate lust, and prouoketh vrine, especially when it is but a litle boyled or parboyled. 
 Rampions mengled with the meale of Lupines or Iuray, doth clense and beautifie the face and all other partes of the body, being layde therevnto. 
 The iuyce of the stalkes &amp; leaues of Rampions, especially of the lesser kind, dropped into the eyes with womens milke, cleareth the fight. 
 Of Radishe. Chap. xxxvi. ¶ The Kindes. THere be two kindes of Radish, the tame, and the wilde, whereof the tame or garden Radish is of two sortes, the one with a round roote, like the Na∣uew or garden Rape, and is not very commō in Brabant. The other hath a very long white roote and is the common Radish of this Countrie. To this may be ioyned a thirde kinde of garden or tame Radishe, with the blacke roote whiche of late yeeres hath ben brought into Englande, and now beginneth al∣so to waxe common. 
 ❀ The Description. T He common Radishe hath great brode rough leaues, muche clouen or deepely cut in vpon both sides, not muche vnlyke the Turney leaues. The stalkes be round, with many flowers of a purple or wan colour, euery flower parted into foure small leaues, the whiche being fallen, there come in their steede, long, rounde, sharpe poynted huskes, sometimes as bigge as ones little fingar, wherein is inclosed a rounde krowne seede. The roote of the one kind of garden Radishe, is of a foote or foote and a halfe long, white both without and within, and of a sharpe taste. The roote of the other is short, and as bigge as a Nauew, and of a stronger and sharper taste then the longer roote. The third roote is blacke without and white within, in taste like to the others. 
 The wilde Radishe hath leaues like the common Radishe, but smaller and fuller of cuttes or iagges. The stalke is of a foote and a halfe long, or more, vpon which grow many yellow flowers, and afterward smal huskes, wherein the seede, which is very smal, is inclosed. The roote is as bigge as ones finger, in taste very lyke to a young Radishe, but stronger. 
 Radicula satiua. Garden Radish.
Radicula syluestris. Wilde Radish. 
 ❀ The Place. They sow Radish in gardens, and it requireth to be new sowen euery yere. 
 The wilde Radish groweth alongst by ditches sides, both by standing and running waters. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The garden Radish is sowen most commonly in Iune and Iuly, and that will serue to be eaten at winter, and it flowreth in Aprill and Maye: and that whiche is sowen in Marche flowreth the selfe same yere in May or Iune, and is nothing worth for to eate. 
 The wilde flowreth in Iune, and shortly after it yeeldeth his seede. 
 ¶ The Names. The first kind is called of the Athenienses, and other Auncientes in Greke : in Latine Radicula, and Radicula satiua: of some Rapha∣nus: and in Shoppes, Raphanus minor: in Frenche, Raue &amp; Raueforte: in high Douche, Rettich: in base Almaigne, Radijs: in Englishe, Radish. 
 The seconde kinde is called in Greeke : in Latine, Radicula syl∣uestris: of some Radicula palustris: in French, Raue sauuage. or Raifort d ' eaue: in high Almaigne, Wilder Rettich: in base Almaigne, Wilde Radijs, and Water Ra∣dijs: in English, wilde Radish, or water Radish. 
 ❀ The Nature. Radishe is hoate in the thirde degree, and drie in the seconde. 
 The wilde Radish is stronger, and more biting than the garden Radishe. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Radish is now eaten with other meates, as they vsed in times past, Neuer∣thelesse it is rather medicine then meate or nourishment, as witnesseth Galen: for it giueth very litle or no nourishment to the body, seing that it is sharpe and biting vpon the tongue. 
 The young stemmes and tender croppes or buddes of Radish, may be lyke∣wyse eaten with oyle and vineger being first boyled, and they nourishe better then the rootes, although in deede they yeelde but litle nourishment. 
 Dioscorides sayth, that the roote of Radish is pleasant to the mouth, but euill for the stomacke: for it engendreth belching and windinesse, with a desire to vomit. 
 The same eaten before meate, lifteth vp the meate, and taken after meate or meale, it suppresseth the same, causing it to descende and digest. 
 It is good to be eaten before meale to cause vomit, especially the barke ther∣of, the whiche taken with Oximel (that is honied vineger) hath the greater strength to stirre vp vomiting, and purgeth tough and slymie fleme, and quick∣neth the wit and vnderstanding. 
 The decoction or broth of Radishe, dronken prouoketh vrine, breaketh the stone, and driueth it foorth. 
 The same rypeth tough fleme, and grosse humours, wherwithhall the brest and stomacke is charged, and causeth them to be spet out: it is also good against an olde cough, and the brest that is stuffed with grosse humours. 
 Radishe is good agaynst the Dropsie, and for them that be liuer sicke, and for them that haue any payne or stopping of the raynes, and eaten with vineger and mustarde, it is good against the Lethargie, whiche is a drowsie and for∣getfull sicknesse. 
 It is also good for such as are sicke with eating Tadestooles or Mushrumes, or Henbane, or other venome, and for them that haue the cholique and griping paynes in their bellyes, as Plistonicus, and Praxagoras writeth. 
 It moueth womens flowers, and as Plinie writeth, causeth abundance of milke. 
 The roote stamped very smal with vineger, cureth the hardnesse of the melt or splene, being layde therevpon.
The same with hony stayeth fretting, festering and consuming sores, also it is good against scurffenesse, and scales of the head, and filleth vp agayne bare places with heare. 
 The same with the meale of Darnel or Iuray, taketh away blewe spottes of brused places, and al blemishes and freckles of the face. 
 The seede thereof causeth one to vomit vehemently, and prouoketh vrine, and being dronken with hony and vineger, it kylleth &amp; driueth foorth wormes of the body. 
 The same taken with vineger, wasteth the melt or splene, and flaketh the hardnesse therof. 
 The same sodden in honied vineger, is good to be often vsed hoate for a gar∣garisme against the Squinancie. 
 The wilde or water Radish hath the same vertue, and in working is like to the garden Radish, but altogither stronger, and is inguler to prouoke vrine. 
 Of Raifort or mountayne Radish. Chap. xxxvij. ❀ The Description. M Ountayne Radish or Rayfort hath great brode leanes, in fashion lyke to the great Docke, called Patience, but greater and rougher. The stalkes be tender, short, and small, at the top whereof are small white flowers, and after them very smal huskes, wherein is the seede. The roote is long and thicke of a very sharpe taste, and biting vpon the tongue: &amp; there∣fore it is pound or stamped very small to be eaten with meates, and specially fishe in steede of Mustarde. 
 ¶ The Place. It is founde for the most part planted in gardens, and where as it hath ben once set, it remayneth a long season without pe∣rishing. 
 ❀ The Time. The great Raifort springeth vp in April, and flowreth in Iune. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called of the later wri∣ters, Raphanus magnus, &amp; Raphanus mon∣tanus: in Frenche, Grand Raifort, &amp; Raphanus: in high Douche, Meerretich, and Kern: in Brabant most commōly Raphanus, of some also Merradijs. Some of the learned sort of the later writers doo take it for , Raphanus, of the Auncient Atheniens, the whiche as some write, is an enimie to the vine, but this is not of Theophrast, or of the other Greekes their successours: Who take for Raphanus, Brassica Romano∣rum, whiche is our common Colewurtes. Some others iudge it to be Thlaspi, wher∣of Cratenas writeth, but their opinion is nothing like to the trueth. 
 Raphanus magnus. 
 ❀ The Nature. The great Rayfort is hoate and drie almost in the thirde degree, especially the roote, in whiche is the cheefest vertue. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The roote of the great Rayfort is in vertue muche like to Radishe, but it is hoater and stronger, but not so muche troubling the stomacke. 
 The same being very small grounde or stamped, may be serued to men in steede of Mustarde, or other sawce to eate fishe withall: for being so taken it warmeth the stomacke, and causeth good appetite, and digesteth fish very wel. 
 It hath bene also founde by experience, that the great Raifort doth hinder the growing of the vine, and being planted neare it, causeth the vine to starue and wither away, the whiche thing the later Greeke writers, &amp; not the Athe∣niens, do ascribe to Colewurtes. 
 Of Carrottes. Chap. xxxviij. ❀ The Kindes. THere be three sortes of Carrottes, yellowe and red, whereof two be tame and of the garden, the thirde is wilde growing of it selfe. 
 ❀ The Description. T He Yellow Carrot hath darke greene leaues, al cut and hackt, almost like the leaues of Cheruil, but a great deale browner, larger, stronger, and smaller cut. The stemmes be rounde, rough without, and hollowe Staphilinus luteus. Yellow Carrot. Staphilinus niger. Red Carrot. Staphilinus syluestris. Wilde Carrot. within: at the highest of the stems growe great shadowie tuftes, or spokie toppes, with white flowers, &amp; after them rough seede, in proportion not muche vnlike An∣nys seede. The roote is thicke and long, yellowe both without and within, and is vsed to be eaten in meates. 
 The red Carrot is lyke to the afore∣sayde in the cuttes of his leaues, and in stalkes, flowers, and seede. The roote is lykewise long and thicke, but of a purple red colour both within and without. 
 The wilde is not much vnlyke the gar∣den Carrot, in leaues, stalkes, &amp; flowers. sauing the leaues be a little rougher, and not so much cut or iagged, &amp; in the middle of the flowrie tuftes, amongst the white flowers groweth one or two little purple markes or speckes. The seede is rougher, and the roote smaller and harder then the other Carrottes. 
 ❀ The Place. The manured or tame Carrot is sowen in gardens.
The wilde groweth in the borders of feeldes, by high wayes and pathes, and in rough vntoyled places. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Carrotes doo flower in Iune and Iuly, and their seede is rype in August. 
 ¶ The Names. Carrottes are called in Greeke : and in Latine Pastinacae. 
 The first kinde is called : and Pastinaca satiua: of the later writers, Staphilinus Luteus: in high Douche, Zam Pastiney, Zam Pastina∣chen, and Geel Ruben: in French, Pastinade iaulne: in base Almaigne, Geel Peen, Pooten, and Geel wortelen: in Englishe, Yellowe Carrottes, 
 The second kinde is also Staphilinus satiuus, and is called Staphilinus niger: in Frenche, Pastenade rouge: in high Douch, Rot Pastiny: in base Almaigne, Ca∣roten: in English, Red Carrottes. 
 And these two garden Carrottes are in sight lyke to , Daucus, descri∣bed by Theophraste lib. ix. Chap. xv. and lyke to the herbe whiche Galen in his syxth booke of Symples nameth , that is to say, Daucus Pasti∣naca. 
 The wilde kinde is called in Greeke, : in Latine, Pastinaca syluestris: in Shoppes, Daucus, as we haue declared in the seconde booke, of some it is also named Pastinaca rustica, Carota, Babyron, and Sicha: in Frenche, Des Panaz, or Pastenade sauuage. in high Douche, Wild Pastnach, or wild Paste∣ney, and Vogelnest: in base Almaigne, Vogels nest, and Croonkens cruyt: in Englishe, Wilde Carrot. 
 ❀ The Nature. The roote of Carrottes is temperate in heate and drynesse. The seede ther∣of, especially of the wilde kinde is hoate and drie in the second degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Carrot rootes eaten in meates, nourishe indifferently well, and bycause it is somewhat aromaticall or of a spicelyke taste, it warmeth the inward partes, being eaten moderately: for when it is to muche and to often vsed, it engen∣dreth euill blood. 
 The rootes of Carrottes, especially of the wilde kinde, taken in what sorte soeuer it be, prouoke vrine, and the worke of veneri. And therefore Orpheus writeth, that this roote hath power to encrease loue. 
 Carrot rootes made into powder, and dronken with Meade or honied wa∣ter open the stoppinges of the liuer, the melt or splene, the kidneyes &amp; raines, and are good against the Iaunders and grauel. 
 The seede of wilde Carrot prouoketh womens flowers, and is very good agaynst the suffocation and stiflinges of the Matrix, being dronken in wine, or layde to outwardly in manner of a pessarie or mother suppositorie. 
 It prouoketh vrine, and casteth foorth grauel, and is very good agaynst the strangurie, and Dropsie, and for suche as haue payne in the syde, the belly and raynes. 
 It is good against all venome, and agaynst the bitinges and stinginges of venemous beastes. 
 Some men write, that it maketh the women fruitfull that vse often to eate of the seede thereof. 
 The greene leaues of Carrottes brused with hony and layde to, doo clense and mundifie vncleane and fretting sores. 
 The seede of the garden Carrot, is in vertue lyke to the wilde Carrot, but nothing so strong, but the roote of the garden Carrot, is more conuenient and better to be eaten. 
 Of Parseneppes. Chap. xxxix. ❀ The Kindes. There be two sortes of Parseneppes, the garden and wilde Parsenep. 
 Pastinaca vulgaris. Garden Parsenep. 
 Elaphoboscum. Wilde Parsenep.
❀ The Description. T HE garden Parsenep hath great long leaues, made of diuers leaues set togither vpon one stemme, after the fashion or order of the leaues of the Walnut or Ashe tree, whereof eache single leafe is broade or somewhat large, and nickt or snipt round about the edges, the stalke groweth to the height of a man, channell straked and forrowed, hauing many ioyntes, lyke the stalke or stemme of Fenill: at the toppe growe spokie tuftes, bearing yellowe flowers, and flat seedes, almost lyke the seede of Dyll, but greater. The roote is great and long, of a pleasant taste, and good to be eaten. 
 The wylde Parsenep, in leaues flowers and seede is much lyke the garden Parsenep, sauing that his leaues be smaller, &amp; his stalkes slenderer, the roote is also harder and smaller, and not so good to be eaten. 
 ❀ The Place. The manured and tame kinde is sowen in gardens. 
 The wilde groweth in this Countrie, about wayes and pathes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Parseneppes doo flower in Iune and Iuly: and the garden Parseneppes are best and most meete to be eaten, the winter before their flowring. 
 ¶ The Names. The first kind is called in the Shoppes of this Countrie, Pastinaca, and the neather Douchemen borowing of the Latine do cal it Pastinaken: in Englishe lykewise Parsenep: in Frenche, Grand Cheruy: in high Douche, Moren, and Zam Moren, and according to the same the base Almaignes call it, Tamme Mooren. Some take it for , Sisarum, others take it for a kind of Staphi∣linus, and Pastinaca And in deede it seemeth to be , that is, Pastinaca, whereof Galen writeth in his viij. booke of Simples. 
 The wilde kinde is called in some Shoppes, Branca leonina, or Baucia: in Frenche, Cheruy sauuage. in high Douch, Wild Moren: in base Almaigne, Wilde Moren: it is called in Greeke , of some, as witnesseth Dioscorides, : in Latine, Elaphoboscum, and Cerui ocel∣lus: in Englishe, Wilde Parsenep. 
 ❀ The Nature. Parsenep is hoate and drie, especially the seede whiche is hoater and drier then the roote. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The roote of the garden Parsenep eatē in meates, as the Carrot, doth yeeld more and better nourishment then Carrot rootes, and is good for the lunges, the raynes, and the brest. 
 The same roote causeth one to make water well, and swageth the paynes of the sydes, and driueth away the windinesse of the belly, and is good for such as be bruysed, squat, or bursten. 
 The seede of the wilde Parsenep is good agaynst all poyson, and it healeth the bitinges and stinginges of all venemous beastes, being dronken in wine. And truely it is so excellent for this purpose, that it is left vs in writing, that when the Stagges or rather the wild Hartes haue eaten of this herbe, no venemous beasts may annoy or hurt them. 
 Of Skirwurtes. Chap. xl. ❀ The Description. T He Skirwurt hath roūd stalkes, the leaues be cut and snipt about lyke the teeth of a sawe, diuers set vppon one stemme not muche vnlyke y e leaues of garden Pars∣nep, but a great deale smaller &amp; smoother. The flowers grow in round tuftes of spoky toppes, and are of a white colour, and after that commeth a seede somewhat broade, (as I reade in my copie) but the Skirworte that groweth in my garden which agreeth in al things els with the de∣scription of this Skirwort, hath a litle long crooked seede of a browne colour, the which being rubbed smelleth plea¦santly, somewhat lyke the seede of Gith, or Nigella Romana, or lyke the sauour of Cypres wood. The rootes are white of a finger length, diuers hanging togither, and as it were growing out of one moare, of a sweete taste, and pleasant in eating. 
 Sisarum. 
 ¶ The Place. These rootes are planted in gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. These rootes are digged out of the grounde to be eaten in Marche, and the least or smallest of them are at the same time planted agayne, the which be good and in season to serue agayne the yeere folowing to be eaten. But whan they be left in the grounde without remouing, they flower and are in seede in Iuly, and August. 
 ❀ The Names. This roote is called in Greeke : in Latine Siser, and Sisarum: &amp; some men cal it Seruillum, Seruilla, or Cheruilla: in Frēch, Petit Cheruy: in high Douch Gerlin, Gierlin, &amp; of some Zam Rapuntzel: in base Almaigne, Suycker wor∣telkens, and Serillen: in English, Skyrwurt, and Skirwit rootes. 
 ❀ The Nature. Skirwurtes are hoate and drie in the seconde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The roote of Skirrets boyled, is good for the stomacke, stirreth vp appe∣tite, and prouoketh vrine. 
 The iuyce of the roote dronken with Goates milke, stoppeth the laske. 
 The same dronken with wine, driueth away windinesse, and gripinges of the belly, and cureth the hicket or yexe.
Of Garden Parsely. Chap. xli. ❀ The Description. G Arden Parsely hath greene leaues, iagged, &amp; in diuers places deepe cut, and snypt rounde about lyke the teeth of a sawe. The stalkes be rounde, vppon the whiche growe crownes or small spokie toppes, with flowers of a pale yellowe colour, and after them a small seede somewhat rounde, and of a sharpe or biting tast, and good smell. The roote is white and long as the roote of Fenill, but a great deale smaller. 
 ❀ The Place. Parsely is sowen in gardens amongst wurtes and potherbes, and loueth a fat and fruitfull grounde. 
 ❀ The Time. The common Parsely flowreth in Iune, &amp; his seede is ripe in Iuly, a yere after the first sowing of it. 
 ❀ The Names. The cōmon Parsely is called in Greke : in Latine, Apium, and Apium hortense: in shoppes, Petrose∣linum, and the Douchmen folowyng the same, calleth it Petersilgen, or Peterlin: in neather Douchland it is called Peterselie: in Frenche, Persil, or Persil de iardin: in Englishe, Parsely, and garden Parsely. 
 Apium hortense. 
 ❀ The Nature. Garden Parsely is hoate in the seconde degree, and drie in the thirde, espe∣cially the seede whiche doth heate and drie more then the leaues or roote. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Garden Parsely taken with meates is very wholesome and agreeable to the stomacke, it causeth good appetite and digestion, and prouoketh vrine. 
 The broth or decoction of the roote of garden Parsely dronken, openeth the stopping of the liuer, the kidneyes, and all interior partes, it causeth to make water, it driueth foorth the stone and grauell, and is a remedie agaynst all poy∣son. 
 The seede of Parsely is good for all the aforesayde purposes, and is of grea∣ter vertue and efficacie then the roote: for it doth not only open al stoppinges, &amp; resist poyson, but also it dispatcheth and driueth away all blastinges and win∣dinesse, and therefore it is put into al preseruatiues and medicines, made to ex∣pell poyson. 
 It is also good against the cough, to be mixt with Electuaries &amp; medicines made for that purpose. 
 The leaues or blades of Parsely pound with the crōbes of bread (or barley flower) is good to be layde to against the inflammations and rednesse of the eyes, and the swelling of the pappes, that commeth of clustered mylke. 
 Of Marish Parsely / March or Smallache. Chap. xlij. ❀ The Description. S Mallache hath shynyng leaues, of a darke greene colour, muche diuided, and snipt rounde about with small cuttes or natches, muche greater and larger then the leaues of common garden Parsely. The stalkes be rounde and full of branches, vppon the which grow spoky tufts or litle shadowy toppes with white flowers, which after∣warde bring foorth a very small seede, lyke to garden Parsely seede, but smaller. The roote is small and set full of hearie threddes or stringes. 
 ❀ The Place. Smalllache groweth in moyst places that stande lowe, and is sometimes plan∣ted in gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Smallache flowreth in Iune and yel∣deth foorth his sede in Iuly and August, a yere after the sowing thereof, euen lyke to garden Parsely. 
 Elioselinon. 
 ❧ The Names. Smallache is called in Greke : in Latine, Apium palustre, &amp; Paludapium, that is to say, Marrish Parsely: of some , Hydroselinon agriō, that is, Wilde water Parsely, and Apium rusticum: in shoppes, Apium: in Frenche, De L ' ache: in high Douche, Epffich: in base Almaigne, Iouffrouw merck, and of some after the Apothecaries Eppe: in Englishe, Marche, Smallache, and Marrishe Parsely. 
 ❀ The Nature. Smallache is hoate and drie lyke garden Parsely. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The seede and rootes of Smallage, in working are much like to the rootes and seede of garden Parsely, as Dioscorides writeth. 
 The iuyce of Smallache doth mundifie and clense corrupt and festered sores, especially of the mouth and throte, mingled with other stuffe, seruing to the same purpose. 
 Smallache, as Plinie writeth, is good against the poyson of Spiders.
Of Mountayne Parsely. Chap. xliij. Orioselinon. 
 ❀ The Description. A Mongst the kindes of Parsely, the Auncientes haue alwayes descri∣bed a kinde whiche they name Mountayne Parsely. And albeit it be nowe growen out of knowledge, yet we haue thought it good to de∣scribe the same, to the intent that nothing should fayle of that, whiche apparteyneth to the kindes of Parsely, also we hope that this Parsely shalbe the sooner founde, bycause we do here expresse it by name. This Parsely, as writeth Dioscorides, hath smal tender stalkes of a span long, hauing litle bran∣ches, with smal spokie tops or crownets, lyke to Hemlocke, but much smaller, vpon the which groweth a litle seede somewhat long, like to the seede of Com∣min, smal, of a very good and aromatical sent, and sharpe vpon the tongue. 
 ❀ The Place. This kinde of Parsely groweth in rough vntoyled places, and vppon high stonie hylles, for the whiche consyderation it is called Mountayne Persely. 
 ❧ The Names. This Parsely is called in Greeke, : in Latine, Apium montanum, that is to say in Englishe, Hyll Parsely, or Mountayne Parsely: in Frenche, Persil de montaigne: in high Douch, Berch Epffich: in base Almaigne, berch Eppe. 
 ❀ The Nature. This Persely is of complexion, or temperament lyke the other, but a great deale stronger, as witnesseth Galen. 
 ❧ The Vertues. The seede and roote of hill, or mountayne Parsely dronken in wine, prouo∣keth vrine and womens flowers, 
 The seede with great proffite is put into preseruatiues and medicines pre∣pared to prouoke vrine. 
 Of stone Parsely. Chp. xliiij. ❀ The Description. T His Parlely hath meetely large leaues, seuered into sundrie partes, or diuers smal leaues, the which vpō eache side are deepe cut and fynely hackt or snipt round about. The stalkes be small of two foote long, vpō whiche growe small spokie toppes with white flowers, and after them a seede somewhat browne, not muche vnlyke the seede of the garden Parsely, but bet∣ter, and of an aromaticall sauour, &amp; sharper taste. The roote is small with many hearie stringes hanging thereat. 
 ❀ The Place. This kinde which is the right Parsely, groweth plentifully in Macedonia, in rough stony and vntoyled places, and also in some places of Douchland, that be lykewise rough stony and vntoyled. The Hetboristes of this Countrie doo sow it in their gardens. 
 ❀ The Time. This Parsely flowreth in Iuly, and yeeldeth his seede in August. 
 ❀ The Names. This strange (but yet the true Parse∣ly) is called in Greeke . and by∣cause it groweth plentifully in Macedo∣nia, , Petroselinon Macedonicon: in Latine, Petrapium, A∣pium saxatile, and Petroselinum, that is to say in English, Stone Parsely, in high Douch, Stein Epffich, or Stein Peter∣lin: in base Almagne, Steen Eppe. It is also called of some ignorāt Apothecaries Amomū: in Brabant they cal it, Vremde Peterselie, that is to say, Strange Pars∣ly, the whiche without all doubt is the true Parsely, called by the name of the place, where as it groweth most plenti∣fully, Parsely of Macedonie: the French men call it Persil de Roches and Persil vray. 
 ❀ The Nature. This Parsely is hoate and drie almost in the thirde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The seede of this Parsely moueth wo∣mens flowers, prouoketh vrine, breaketh and driueth foorth the stone and grauel togither with the vrine. 
 It dispatcheth and dissolueth all win∣dinesse and blastinges, and easeth the gri¦pinges of the stomacke and bowels: it is also very excellent against all colde passi∣ons of the sides, the kidneyes, and blad∣der. 
 It is also put with great profite in pre∣paratiues, and medicines ordayned to prouoke vrine. 
 Petroselinum Macedonicum. 
 Of great Parsely or Alexander. Chap. xlv. ❀ The Description. T HE great Parsely hath large leaues, broade, and somewhat browne, not muche vnlyke the leaues of garden Parsely, but muche larger and blacker, almost lyke the leaues of Angelica. The stalke is rounde of three or foure foote high, at the toppe whereof it bringeth foorth round spokie tufts or circles with smal white flowers, Hypposelinon. and after them a blacke seede (somewhat long, and almost as bigge as the ker∣nell of an Orenge) of a spicie sauour and bitterishe taste. The roote is white within, and blacke without, which being taken foorth of the ground, &amp; broken in peeces putteth foorth a thicke liquer, or oylie gumme of a yellowishe colour, in taste very bitter and lyke to Myrrhe. 
 ❀ The Place. This Parsely groweth in some Countries in lowe shadowie places. The Herboristes of this Countrie do sowe it in their gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. This Parsely flowreth in Iuly, and in August the seede is rype. 
 ❀ The Names. This Parsely is called in Greeke : in Latine, Equapium, and Olu∣satrum, of some , Smyrnium: and , that is to say, Apium sylue∣stre: and of the later writers, Petroselinum Alexandrinum: in shoppes not with∣out errour (Petroselinum Macedonicum) for it hath no similitude at all with the Parsely of Macedonie: in Frenche, Grand Persil or Grand Ache, or Alexandre: in high Douche, Grosz Eppich, or Grosz Epffich: in base Almaigne, Groote Eppe: in English, Alexanders.
¶ The Nature. This Parsely in temperament is hoate and drie, like the others. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The seede of the great Parsely dronken alone, or with honyed water, brin∣geth to women their desyred sicknesse, dissolueth windinesse, and grypinges of the belly, it warmeth the astonied members, or limmes taken with colde, and bruysing shiueringes or shakinges that come with extreame colde: and is good against the strangurie. 
 The roote of the great Parsely breaketh and driueth foorth the stone, cau∣seth one to make water, and is good against the paines of the raines, and ache in the sides. 
 To conclude the seede of great Parsely is of lyke vertue to the seede of the garden Parsely, and in all thinges better and more conuenient then the com∣mon Parsely seede. 
 Of wilde Parsely. Chap. xlvi. ❀ The Description. T HE herbe which we (in folowing the auncient Theophrastus) do cal wilde Ache or Parsely, hath large leaues, al iagged, cut, and vittered, muche lyke the leaues of the wilde Carrot but larger. The stalkes be rounde and holow of foure or fiue foote long, of a browne red colour next the grounde, at the top of them growe spokie rundels, or rounde tuffetes with white flowers, after them commeth a flat rough seede, not muche vnlyke the sede of Dyl, but greater. The roote is parted into two or three long rootes, the whiche doo growe very seldome downewardes, but most commonly are founde lying ouerthwarte and alongst, here and there, and are hoate and bur∣ning vpon the tongue. The whole herbe both stalkes &amp; leaues, is full of white sappe, lyke to the Tithymales or Spurges, the whiche commeth foorth when it is broken or pluckt. 
 ¶ The Place. This herbe is founde in this Countrie in moyst places, about pondes, and alongst by diches, neuerthelesse it is not very common. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The wilde Parsely flowreth in Iune, and his seede is ripe in Iuly. 
 ❧ The Names. This herbe is called in Greeke, : in La∣tine, Apium syluestre, that is to say, Wilde Parsely: in Frenche, Persil, or Ache sauuage: in high Douche, Wilder Eppich, or Epffich: in base Almaigne, Wilde Eppe. Of this herbe Theo∣phrastus writeth, in his vij. booke the iiij. Chap. saying that y e wilde Parsely hath red stemmes. And Dioscorides in his third booke the lxvij. Chap. In some shops of this Countrie it is cal∣led Meum: &amp; they vse the rootes of this Parsely in steede of Meum. 
 ❀ The Nature. The wilde Parsely and specially the roote thereof is hoate and drye in the thirde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The roote of wilde Parsely holden in the mouth &amp; chewed, appeaseth the rigour of the tooth ache, and draweth abundance of humours frō the braine. 
 Apium syluestre. 
 Of water Parsly. Chap. xlvij. ❀ The Kyndes. THere is founde in this Countrie two kyndes of this herbe, one great, the other smal, the which do differ but onely in figure, and that is long of the diuersite of the places where as it groweth, for the one is changed into the other, whē as it is remoued frō one place to another. That is to say, that which groweth alwayes in the water, becommeth smal being planted vpon the lande or d ie grounde: and on the contrarie, that whiche groweth vppon the drie land becommeth great, being planted in the water: so that to say the trueth, these two herbes are but all one, which doth not only happen to this herbe, but also to diuers others, that grow in the waters or moyst medowes. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE great water Parsely, hath round, holow, smooth brittel stalkes, &amp; long leaues made &amp; fashioned of diuers little leaues standing directly one agaynst another, and spread abrode like winges, wherof each litle leafe by it selfe is playne and smooth, and snipt about the edges lyke to a sawe. At the top of the stalkes growe litle spokie rundels with white flowers. The roote is ful of hearie threds, &amp; it putteth foorth on the sides new springs, al the herbe is of a stronger &amp; pleasanter sauour then any of the kindes of Parsely, &amp; being brused &amp; rubbed betwixt the handes doth smell almost like Petrolium. 
 The lesser water Parsely, in sent is lyke to the abouesayde, his stalkes be lykewise holowe, but smaller. The leaues be not lyke to the greater, but draw∣ing neare to the leaues of Cheruill, but yet more tenderer, and more mangled, pounsed or iagged the smal flowers be white and do also growe in litle round tuftes, and shadowie or spokie circles growing thicke and neare throng togi∣ther. The roote is ful of threddy stringes, and doth lykewyse put foorth diuers newe springes or branches, the whiche do stretche and spreade abroade vppon the grounde, and cleaue fast to the grounde taking roote here and there. 
 Lauer Crateuae. Great water Parsely. 
 Lauer minus. Small water Parsely. Iuncus adoratus. 
 ❀ The Place. The greater water Parsely groweth in diches and pondes. 
 The lesser groweth in moyst medowes that stande lowe and waterie, not very farre from pooles, and standing waters, yet sometimes lykewise therein. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Water Parsely flowreth in Iune and Iuly. 
 ❀ The Names. The first herbe shoulde seeme to be a kind of that which is called in Greeke : in Latine, Lauer, and Sium: in Frenche, Berle: in high Douche, Wass Epffich: in base Almaigne, Water Eppe, that is to say, Ache, or water Parse∣ly. Turner and Cooper do call it, Sallade Parsely, Yellow water cresses, and Bell ragges.
The seconde is lykewise a kinde of Sium, as namely that whiche is called Iuncus odoratus. And yet it is not the vpright Iuncus, for this is but named for a likenesse vnto it, bycause that his stalkes be like rushes, and it hath a pleasant smell. 
 ❀ The Nature and Vertues. Without doubt this herbe is of complexion hoate and drie, and in vertue lyke to the other Sium. 
 Of Bastarde Parsley. Chap. xlviij. ❀ The Description C Aucalis is a hearie herbe &amp; somwhat rough, not much vnlike Carrot. The leaues be almost lyke the leaues of Cori∣ander, but disembred and parted into smaller iagges or frengis. At the toppe of the branches growe shadowy bushes or spoke rundels. with white flowers whose grea∣test blades or leaues are turned outwardes. The seede is long and rough like Carrot seede, but grea∣ter then Commin seede. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe is founde in this Countrie in the Menze of Corne feeldes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. It flowreth in Iune, and with∣in short space after the sede is ripe. 
 ❧ The Names. This herbe is called in Greeke : and also in Latine, Cauca∣lis, of some : that is to say, Daucus syluestris: vnknowen in shoppes: Cooper calleth it, Ba∣starde Parsley, and sayth it is an herbe lyke Fenill with a white flower and commeth of noughtie Parsly seede. 
 Caucalis. 
 ¶ The Nature. Caucalis is hoate and drie. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Caucalis prouoketh to make water like Daucus, whervnto Caucalis is much muche like in vertues, as witnesseth Galen. Matthiolus attributeth many o∣ther excellent vertues to the herbe Caucalis, as you may see in his Commenta∣ries vpon the seconde booke of Dioscorides. 
 Of Smyrnium. Chap. xlix. ❀ The Description. T His herbe, as Dioscorides writeth, hath leaues lyke Parsley, and they bende downewarde, of a strong and pleasant Aromaticall smell with some sharpenes, and of a yellowish colour, greater and thicker then the leaues of Parsley: at the top of the stalkes grow smal spoky tuffets or rundels lyke Dyll, with yellowe flowers, and after them a small blacke seede, lyke the seede of Colewurtes, it is sharpe and bitter in taste like Myrrhe. The roote is of a good length, playne, and ful of iuyce, of a good smal and sharpe taste, blacke without and white within. 
 ❀ The Place. Smyrnium, as saith Dioscorides, groweth in Cilicia vpon the mount Amanus, in stonie rough and drie grounde, but now some diligēt Herboristes do sowe it in their gardens. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greeke : in Latine, Smyrnium: in Cilicia, Petroselinon, and of some as Galen writeth, Hipposelinon a∣greste, that is wilde Alexander. 
 ❀ The Nature. Smyrnium is hoate and drie in the thirde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The leaues and roote of Smyr∣nium doo appease and mitigate the olde cough, and the hardnesse in fetching breath, they stoppe the bel∣ly, and are very good agaynst the bytinges and stingynges of vene∣mous beastes, &amp; agaynst the payne to make water. 
 The leaues of Smyrnion layde to, doth dissolue wennes and harde swellinges that be newe, it dryeth vp sores, and exulcerations, and gleweth togither woundes. 
 The seede is good agaynst the diseases &amp; stoppinges of the splene, the kidneyes, and the bladder, it moueth womens natural sicknes, and driueth foorth the after birth or secondines. 
 Smyrnion Dioscorides. 
 To be dronken in wine it is good against the Sciatique, that is the disease of the hippes or hanche. 
 It stayeth the windinesse and blastings of the stomacke, taken as is before∣sayde. 
 It prouoketh sweat, and helpeth muche them that haue the Dropsie, and is good against the comming againe of suche feuers, as come by fittes.
Of Cheruill. Chap. l. ❀ The Description. C Heruill leaues are of a light greene colour, tender, brittel, much iagged and cut, somewhat hearie, and of good sauour. The stalkes be rounde smal and holow, vpon the which grow rundels or spokie tuffetes with white flowers, and after them a long sharpe browne seede. The roote is white and small. 
 ❀ The Place. Cheruill is common in this Countrie, and is sowen in al gardens amongst wortes and potherbes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The Cheruill that is sowen in March or Aprill flowreth bytimes, and de∣liuereth his seede in Iune and Iuly, but that whiche is sowen in August, aby∣deth the winter and flowreth not before April next folowing. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called of Columella, Chaerophyllum, and Chaerephyllum: of y e Apothecaries in our time Cerefolium: in Frenche, Cerfueill: in high Douch, Korffel∣krant, or Kerbelkraut: in base Almaigne, Keruel: in English, Cheruil, and Cheruel. 
 ❀ The Nature. This herbe is hoate and drie. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Cheruill eaten with other meates, is good for the stomacke, for it giueth a good taste to the meates, and stirreth vp meate lust. 
 This herbe boyled in wine, is good for them that haue the strangurie, if the wine be dronken, and the herbe be layde as an implayster, vpon the place of the bladder. 
 It is good for people that be dul, olde, and without courage, for it reioyceth and comforteth them, and increaseth theyr strength. 
 Cerefolium. 
 Of Gingidium, in Spanish Visnaga. Chap. li. ❀ The Description. G Ingidium, in leaues, flowers, knobby stalkes, and fashion, is lyke to the wilde Carrot, sauing that his leaues be tenderer, thic∣ker set, and cut into smaller thrommes, or iagged frenges, and the stalkes be slende∣rer and playner, and the whole herbe is neyther rough nor hearie as the wylde Carrot is, but playne and smothe and of a bitter taste. The flowers be white and growe vppon spokie toppes or tuftes lyke the wilde Carrot: after them commeth the seede, the which being ripe, the stems with their spokie tuftes become stiffe, and waxe strong and harde, lyke small staues or little stickes, and the spokes or little stickes of the tuft of this herbe, the Ita∣lians and Spaniardes doo vse as tooth∣pickes. For the whiche purpose it is mar∣uelous good and excellent. The roote is white and bitter. 
 Gingidium. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe groweth of his owne kind in Spayne, and as Dioscorides sayth, in Syria and Cilicia: it is not founde in this Countrie, but amongst certayne Herboristes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. This herbe flowreth in this Countrie in August, and deliuereth his seede in September. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greeke : in Latine, Gingidium: in Syria, Lepidion: and of some also, as witnesseth Dioscorides, especially of the Ro∣maynes, Bisacutum: therefore it is yet at this day called in Spayne, Visnaga: vnknowen in the Shoppes of Douchlande, Brabant, and this Countrie: it may be called Toothpicke Cheruill. 
 ❀ The Nature. Gingidium, as witnesseth Galen, is not so exceeeding hoate, but it is drie in the seconde degree. 
 ❧ The Vertues. Gingidium eaten rawe or boyled with other meates, is very good for the stomacke, as Dioscorides sayth, bycause it is drie and comfortable, as Plinie writeth. 
 The same boyled in wine and dronken, is good for the bladder, prouoketh vrine, and is good against the grauell and the stone. 
 The harde stemmes of the great rundels or spokie tuftes are good to clense the teeth, bycause they be harde, and do easily take away such filth &amp; baggage, as sticke fast in the teeth, without hurting the iawes or gummes: and bysides this they leaue a good sent or tast to the mouth. 
 Of Shepheardes Needel or wilde Cheruil. Chap. lij. ❀ The Description. T His herbe doth not muche differ in the quantitie of his stalkes, leaues and flowers from Cher∣uill, but it hath no pleasant smell. The stalkes be round and harde. The leaues be like the leaues of Cheruil, but greater and more finely cut, &amp; of a browne grene colour. The flowers whiche be white grow vpon crownes or tuftes, after the whiche come vp long seedes, muche like to smal packe Needelles. The roote is white, and as long as ones finger. 
 ❀ The Place. Ye may finde it in this Countrie in fat and fertill feeldes.
❀ The Time. Shepheardes Needell flowreth in May and Iune, and in shorte space after it yeeldeth his seede. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greke : in Latine, Scandix, herba scauaria, Acus pastoris, or Acula, bycause his sede is like to a needel, in Frenche, Aguille de berger: in Spanishe, Quixones: in base Al∣maigne, Naeldenkeruel: in Englishe, Shepheardes Needel, wilde Cheruel, and Needel Cheruill. 
 Scandix. 
 ¶ The Nature. Scandix is hoate and drie in the seconde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Scandix eaten is good &amp; wholesome for the stomacke and belly, &amp; in times past hath bene a common herbe amongst the Greekes, but of smal estimation &amp; value, &amp; taken but onely for a wilde wurt or herbe. Aristophanes in times past by occasion of this herbe taunted Euripides, saying, that his mother was not a seller of wurtes or good potherbes, but onely of Scandix, as Plinie writeth. 
 The same boyled and dronken, openeth the stoppings of the liuer, kidneyes, and the bladder, and is good for all the inwarde partes, and bowels of man. 
 Of Myrrhis Casshes or Caxes. Chap. liij. ❀ The Description. M Yrrhis in leaues and stalkes is somwhat lyke Hemlocke: it hath great large leaues, very much cut and iagged, &amp; diuided into many partes, hauing sometime white speckles or spottes. The stalkes be rounde (somewhat crested) and two or three foote long: at the top of the stalkes growe rundels, or spokie tuftes with white flowers, and after them commeth a long seede. The roote is long &amp; rounde, not much differing in taste and sa∣uour from Carrot. The whole herbe, but especially the first leaues are beset with a soft downe or fine heare, and are in smell &amp; sauour much lyke to Cheruil, and therfore it is called in base Almaigne wilde Keruel, that is to say, Wilde Cheruel. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe groweth of his owne kind in some medowes of Douchlande: in this Countrie the Herboristes doo sowe it in their gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. This herbe bloweth in May, and his seede is rype in Iune. 
 Myrrhis. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greeke , and in Latine, Myrrhis, of some also , Myrrha: and of the writers at these dayes, Cicutaria, bycause it doth some∣what resemble Hemlocke, whiche is named in Latine, Cicuta: in Frenche, Cicu∣taire, or Persil d ' asne: in high Douche, Wilder Korffel: in base Almaigne, Wilde Keruel: in Englishe, as Turner sayth, Casshes, or Caxes, bycause Spinsters vse the stemmes both of this herbe and Hemlocke, for quilles and Caxes, to winde yarne vpon, it may be called also wilde Cheruell, or mocke Cheruill. 
 ❀ The Nature. Myrrhis, especially the roote is hoate in the second degree, &amp; of subtil partes. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The roote of Myrrhis dronken w t wine prouoketh womēs flowers, deliuereth the secondine &amp; dead child, &amp; purgeth &amp; clenseth women after their deliuerance. 
 The same taken in lyke fort prouoketh vrine, &amp; is good against the bitinges of feelde Spiders, and suche lyke venemous beastes. 
 The same boyled in the broth of fleshe, doth clense the breast from fleme and other coruption, and is very good for suche as are leane and vnlustie, or falling into consumption. 
 They say also that it is good to be drōken in wine, in the time of Pestilence, and that suche as haue dronken three or foure times of the same wine, shall not be infected with the plague. 
 Of Asparagus. Chap. liiij. ❀ The Kindes. There be two sortes of Asparagus, the garden and wilde Asparagus. 
 Asparagus. Sperage. 
 Corruda. Wilde Sperage. 
 ❀ The Description. T He Asparagus of the gardē at his first comming foorth of the ground, putteth foorth long shutes or ten∣der stalkes, playne, rounde, without leaues, as bigge as ones finger, grosse, and thicke, hauing at the top a certayne bud or knop, the whiche after∣warde spreadeth abrode into many branches hanging lyke heares. The fruite groweth vpon the branches lyke round berries, first greene, and afterward of a yellowish red▪ euen of the colour of Coral, within that berrie is a blacke sede. The rootes be long and slender and interlaced or wouen one in another.
The wilde Asparagus in his first springes and fruite, is muche lyke to the garden Sparagus, the rest is altogither rough and pricking, for in steede of the long soft heares, wherewithal the garden Asparagus is couered, this hath no∣thing els but thornes, very smal, hard, short, &amp; prickley, wherwithal the brāches are furnished. 
 ❀ The Place. The manured or tame Asparagus groweth in Burgundie and some other Countries as in Almaigne, in stony places, where as is good earth, and fatte ground: in this Countrie it is planted in the gardens of Herboristes. 
 The wilde kinde groweth in certayne places of Italy, and throughout all Languedoc. 
 The bare stalkes or first tender springes of Asparagus shute vp in Aprill, at what time they be boyled &amp; eaten in salade, with oyle, salt, &amp; vineger. The fruit is ripe in August. 
 ❧ The Names. Garden Asparagus is called in greke : in Latine, Asparagus, &amp; in shops Sparag: in high douch, Spargē: in base Almain Coraelcruyt: in english sperage. 
 The wild Asparagus is called in Greke : in Latine Asparagus syluestris, and Curruda: vnknowen in the shoppes of this Countrie. 
 ¶ The Nature. Asparagus, especially the rootes are temperate in heate and cold, taking part of a certaine drynesse. 
 ❧ The Vertues. The first tender springs of Asparagus parboyled &amp; eaten with oyle &amp; vineger, prouoke vrine, and are good agaynst the strangurie, and they soften the belly. 
 The decoction or broth of Asparagus, by it selfe (or with Ciche Peason) dronken openeth the stoppinges of the liuer and kidneyes: and also it is good against the Iaundice, stopping of the water, strangury, and the grauel &amp; stone. 
 Some say, that if it be taken in the same maner, it easeth and consumeth the Sciatica and payne of members out of ioynt. 
 The roote boyled in wine is good for thē y t are bitten of any venemous beast. 
 Of Senuie or Mustarde. Chap. lv. ❀ The Kyndes. There be two sortes of Senuie, the tame &amp; the wilde, wherof also the tame or garden Senuie is of two sortes: the one with a great white seede, the other hauing a litle browne seede. 
 Sinapi hortense. Mustarde seede. 
 Sinapi syluestre. Wilde Mustarde seede. 
 ❀ The Description. T He tame white Mustarde hath great rough leaues, at the first not much vnlike y e leaues of Turnep, but after the first leaues there folowe other y t are smaller &amp; more iagged, growing vpon the stalkes whiche hearie &amp; three or foure foote long, &amp; diuideth it self into many brāches alongest y t which grow yellowish flowers, &amp; after them long hearie huskes or coddes, wherin is the sede which is round &amp; pale, greater then Rape sede, in taste sharpe &amp; hoate. 
 The seconde kinde of tame Mustarde with the browne seede, whiche is the blacke Mustarde &amp; common Senuy, is like to the aforesayd in leaues, sralkes and growing. The flowers be yellow. The sede is browne, smaller then Rape seede, and in taste also sharpe and hoate. 
 The wilde kind hath great large leaues, very much iagged and rough with stalkes like the other, but it groweth not so high. The flowers be of a pale yel∣low, fashioned like a crosse, after which commeth the seede which is reddish, en∣closed in long round huskes. 
 ❀ The Place. Mustarde or Senuie is so wen in gardens and feeldes. 
 The wilde kind groweth of his owne nature, in stonie places, and waterie groundes, and alongst the high wayes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The Mustarde and Charlock do flower in Iune and Iuly, and during the same time, they yeelde their seede.
❧ The Names. Mustarde is called in Greeke : in Latine, Sinapi, in shoppes Sinapis and Sinapium: in high Douche, Seuff: in base Almaigne, Mostaert: in English, Senuie and Mustarde. 
 The first kind is called , Sinapi hortēse: &amp; in y e shops of this Coun∣trie Eruca: in Frenche, Blanche Moustarde: in high Douche, Weisser Seuff: in base Almaigne, Wit Mostaert: in English, White Senuie, &amp; white Mustarde sede. 
 The seconde is also counted for a kind of Mustarde, and of the later writers is called Sinapi commune: in Frenche, Seneue de iardin, ou Moustarde noire▪ in hygh Douch, Zamer Seuff: in base Almaigne, Chemeyne Mostaert: in Englishe, the common Senuie or Mustarde. 
 The wilde kinde is called of the later writers : Sinapi syluestre in French, Sanele: in high Douch, Wilder Seuff: in base Almaigne, Wilden Mo∣staert. 
 ¶ The Nature. The Mustarde, especially the seede which men cal Senuie, is hoate and dry, almost in the fourth degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Senuie bruysed or ground with vineger is a wholesome sawce meete to be eaten with harde &amp; grosse meates, either flesh or fishe: for it helpeth their dige∣stiō, and is good for the stomacke to warme the same, and prouoketh appetite. 
 It is good to be giuen in meates, to such as be short winded, &amp; are stopped in the breast: for it ripeth and causeth to cast foorth tough fleme, that troubleth or loadeth the stomacke and breast. 
 Mustarde seede chewed in the mouth draweth downe thinne fleme from the head and brayne: appeaseth toothache: it hath the same vertue, if it be min∣gled with Meade, and holden in the mouth, and gargled. 
 They vse to make a good gargarisme with hony vineger &amp; Mustarde seede, against the tumours and swelling of the vuula and the Almondes about the throte, and roote of the tongue. 
 For the same intent, especially when suche tumours are become harde and waxen old, they make a necessarie and profitable gargarisme with the iuyce of Mustarde seede &amp; Meade, for it slaketh, wasteth, or consumeth such swellings and hardnesse of the Almondes and throte. 
 Senuie dronken with Hydromel or honyed water, is good agaynst the ter∣rour and shaking of agues, prouoketh the flowers and vrine. 
 The same sede snift vp into the nosethrilles, causeth one to sneese; helpeth thē that haue the falling sicknesse, and women that haue the strangling of the mo∣ther, to waken them vp agayne. 
 The same pound with figges, &amp; layd to in manner of a playster, taketh away the homming noyse &amp; ringing of the eares or head, &amp; is good against deafnesse. 
 The iuyce of the same dryed in the Sonne, and afterwarde delayed with ho∣ny cleareth the sight, and taketh away roughnesse of the eye browes. 
 They make an emplayster with the same &amp; figges, very good for to be layd vpon the heades of suche as are fallen into the Lethargie or drowsie euill, and cannot waken them selues: it is likewise good against the Sciatica or payne of the hanche, the hardnesse of the splene or melte: and against the Dropsie, to be layde as an emplayster to the bellyes of suche as are greeued therewithall. To be short this emplayster is of great force agaynst all colde greefes and diseases, especially when they are waxen old, for it doth warme and bring heate agayne into the diseased partes, it digesteth colde humours and draweth them foorth. 
 Senuie mingled with hony and newe grease, or with a Cerote made of waxe, cureth the noughtie scurffe or scales in the head whiche cause the heare to fall of, it scoureth the face from all freckles and spottes, and taketh away the blewe markes that come of brusing. 
 If it be layde to with vineger, it is good for Lepres, wilde scabbes and run∣ning scurffe, and is good agaynst the bitinges of Serpentes. 
 The parfume or sauor therof driueth away al venom, &amp; venemous beastes. 
 Of Rapistrum, or Charlock. Chap. lvi. ❀ The Description. C Harlock hath great rough brode leaues, lyke the leaues of Tur∣nep, the stalkes be rough &amp; slen∣der most commonly of a foote long, with many yellow flowers, coddes and seede like y e Turnep, but hoate or biting sharpe lyke to Mustarde seede. The roote is small and single. 
 ❀ The Place. Charlocke groweth in all places a∣longst the wayes, about old walles and ruynous places and oftentimes in the feeldes, especially there, where as Tur∣neppes and Nauewes haue ben sowen, so that it shoulde seeme to be a corrupt &amp; euill weede, or enimie to the Nauew.
❀ The Time. Charlocke flowreth from Marche or April vntill midsomer, and the seede also rypeth from time to tyme in the meane space. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called of the later wri∣ters Rapistrum, and of some also Synapi syluestre: in Frenche, Velar, or Tortelle: in high Douche, Hederich: in base Al∣maigne Hericke: in Englishe, Charlock. 
 Rapistrum. Charlock. 
 ❀ The Nature. Charlock, and specially the seede is hoate and drie in the thirde degree, and of temperament lyke Senuie. 
 ❀ The Vertues. This herbe of the later Physitions, is not vsed in medicine, but some with this seede do make Mustarde, as with Senuie, the whiche they eate with meate in steede of Mustarde: whereby it is euident that the seede of this herbe doth not much differ from Senuie in vertue and operation, and that it may be taken in steede thereof, although it be not al thing so good, and therfore it was reckoned of Theophrast and Galen amongst those seedes, wherewithall men vsed commonly to prepare and dresse their meates. 
 Of Rockat. Chap. lvij. ❀ The Kindes. OF this herbe be found two kindes, the one tame which is the common Roc∣kat most vsed, the other is wilde. 
 Eruca. Rockat. 
 Eruca syluestris Wild Rockat. 
 ❀ The Description. T He tame Rockat hath leaues of a browne greene colour, very much and deepely iagged or rather torne vpō both sides, of a hoate biting taste, the stalkes be a foote lōg or somwhat more: vpon which grow many yellowe flowers, and after them little coddes, in whiche the seede is contayned. The roote is long with hearie stringes, and doth not light∣ly dye in winter, but putteth foorth newe stemmes euery yere. 
 The wylde kinde is muche lyke to the garden Rockat, sauing that it is alto∣ther smaller, especially the leaues and flowers, whiche be also yellower, and do bring foorth small coddes. 
 Bysides these two kindes, a man shall fynde in the gardens of this Coun∣trie another kynde of Rockat, called Rockat gentle, or Romayne Rockat, in leaues and flowers much lyke to the wilde Mustarde, wherof we haue before spoken, sauing that his leaues be not so rough nor hearie, and are more conue∣nient to be beaten. 
 ¶ The Place. The garden Rockat is planted in gardens, and is also found in this Coun∣trie in certayne rude vntoyled and stonie places, and vpon olde broken walles. 
 The wild Rockat is found also in stony places about high wayes &amp; pathes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Rockat flowreth cheefely in Iune and Iuly. 
 ¶ The Names. Rockat is called in Greeke : in Latine, Eruca: in Frenche, Roquette: in Douche, Roket: in base Almaigne, Rakette. 
 The first and also the third kind is called Eruca satiua, &amp; hortensis in French, Roquette domestique or cultiueé in base Almaigne, Roomsche Rakette: in English, Garden or tame Rockat, and Rockat gentil. 
 The wilde is called Eruca syluestris, that is to say, wilde Rockat: in base Al∣maigne, wilde Rakette. 
 ❀ The Nature. Rockat is hoate and drie in the thirde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Rockat is a good Salade herbe to be eaten with Letuce, Purcelayne, and other like colde herbes, for being so eaten it is good and wholesome for the sto∣macke, &amp; causeth that such colde herbes do not hurt the stomacke: but if Rockat be eaten alone, it causeth headache, and heateth to much, therfore it must neuer be eaten alone, but alwayes with Letuce or Purcelayne. 
 The vse therof stirreth vp bodyly pleasure, especially of the seede, also it pro∣uoketh vrine, and helpeth the digestion of the meates.
The seede thereof is good against the poyson of the Scorpion, &amp; Shrowe and suche like venemous beastes. 
 The seede layd to with hony, taketh away freckles, lentils, &amp; other faultes of the face, also it taketh away blacke and blewe spottes and scarres, layde to with the gawle of an Oxe. 
 Men say, that who so taketh the seede of Rockat before he be beaten or whipt, shalbe so hardened, that he shall easily endure the payne, according as Plinie writeth. 
 The roote boyled in water, draweth foorth shardes and splinters of broken bones being layde therevpon. 
 Of Tarragon or biting Dragon. Chap. lviij. ❀ The Description. T Arragon hath long, narrow, darke, grene leaues, in taste very sharpe, and burning or biting the tongue almost like Rockat, not muche vn∣lyke the leaues of common Hysope, but muche longer, and somewhat larger. The stalkes be rounde of two foote hygh, parted into many branches, vpon whiche growe many small knoppes or litle buttons, the which at their opening shewe many small flowers, as yellowe as golde intermingled with blacke. They being past commeth the seede. The roote is long and small, very threddy creeping alongst the grounde hither and thither, &amp; putteth foorth yerely here and there newe stalkes and springes. Ruellius in his second booke Chap. xcvj. saith, that this herbe cōmeth of Lineseede put into a Radish roote, or within the scale of the sea Onyon, called Scylla in Latine, and so set into the grounde and planted, and therefore he saith, it hath part of both their natures, for it draweth partly towardes vineger, and partly towardes salt, as may be iudged by the taste. 
 ❀ The Place. Tarragon is planted in gardens, but yet it is not very common. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Tarragon abideth greene, from the moneth of Marche, almost to winter, but it flowreth in Iuly. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe hath not bene written of by any learned man before Ruellius tyme, neyther is it yet wel knowen, but in some places of Englande, France, and certayne Townes of this Countrie, as Anwarpe, Bruxelles, Malines, &amp;c. where as it was first brought out of France. And therfore it hath none other name, but that whiche was geuen first by the Frenchemen, who called it Targon, and Dragon: and according to the same it is called in Latine, Draco: and of some Dracunculus hortensis: that is the litle Dragon of the garden: it is al∣so called in Englishe, Tarragon, whiche shoulde seeme to be borowed from the Frenche, neuerthelesse it was allowed a Denizon in England long before the time of Ruelius writing. 
 Draco. 
 ❀ The Nature. All this herbe is hoate and burning in the mouth and vpon the tongue, whereby it is certayne that it is hoate and dry in the thirde degree, and in temperature muche lyke to Rockat. 
 ❀ The Vertues. This herbe is also good to be eaten in Salade with Letuce, as Rockat, for it correcteth the coldenesse of Letuce and suche lyke colde herbes. Moreouer where this herbe is put into the Salade, there needeth not much vineger nor salt, for as Ruelius writeth, it is sharpe and salt ynough of it selfe. 
 Of Cresses. Chap. lix. ❀ The Description. G Arden Cresses haue small narrowe iagged leaues, of a sharpe burnyng taste: the stalkes be rounde of a foote long, and bring foorth many small white flowers, and after them little rounde flat huskes, within which the seede is contayned of abrowne reddish colour. 
 ¶ The Place. Cresses are commonly sowen in all gardens of this Countrie. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Cresses that are timely sowen, bring foorth their seede bytime, but that whiche is later sowen, bringeth foorth flowers and seeede more lately. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greke : in Latine, Nasturtium of some later writers Cressio: in Frenche, Cresson alnoys, or Nasitort: in high Douche, Kresz and Garten Kresz: in base Almaigne, Kersse: in English, Cresses, Towne Kars, or Towne Cresses. 
 ❀ The Nature. Cresses are hoate and dry almost in the fourth degree, especially the seede, and the herbe when it is drie: for being but yet greene they do not heate nor dry so vehemently, but that they may be eaten with bread, as Galen saith. 
 ❧ The Vertues. Cresses eaten in Salade with Letuce, is of vertue like to Rockat, &amp; good amōgst cold herbes, for eaten alone it ouerturneth the stomacke, and hurteth the same, bycause of his great heate and sharpenesse. 
 The seede looseth the belly, and killeth, and dri∣ueth foorth wormes, it diminisheth the melte, pro∣uoketh the flowers, and putteth foorth the secon∣dine and the dead childe. 
 It is good against Serpentes and venemous beastes, and the parfume of the same causeth them them auoyde. 
 The same taken with the broth of a pullet or chicken, or any other lyke moyst meates, doth ripe and bring foorth tough fleme, wherewithall the breast is combred or charged.
The same laide to with hony, cureth the hard∣nesse of the melte, scoureth away scuruinesse, and fowle spreading scabbes, dissolueth colde swel∣linges, and keepeth the heare from falling of. 
 Nasturtium. 
 Being layd to with hony &amp; vineger, it is good against the Sciatica, &amp; payne in the hippes, and the head ache that is olde, and against all olde colde diseases. 
 To conclude the seede of Cresses is in vertue very lyke Senuie, as Galen writeth. 
 Of water Cresses. Chap. lx. ¶ The Kindes. Water Cresses are of two sortes, great and small. 
 ❀ The Description. The great water Cresse hath rounde holowe stalkes of a foote and a halfe long, with lōg leaues made of diuers other litle roundish leaues standing togither vpon one stemme. The flowers be small and white, growing at the toppe of the branches alongst the stemmes, after whiche folow smal coddes or huskes, within which is the seede, which is small and yellowe. The roote is white and full of hearie laces or stringes. 
 The lesser water Cresse, at the first hath rounde leaues, then commeth the rounde stalke of a foote long, vpoyn the whiche growe long leaues iagged on both sides, almost like the leaues of Rockat. The flowers growe at the highest of the stalkes, of colour somewhat white, or of a light Carnation, after whiche come smal huskes, wherein the seede lyeth. 
 ❀ The Place. The greater watercresse groweth in diches, standing waters, and foun∣taynes or springes. 
 The lesser watercresse groweth in moyst groundes and medowes that are Sium. Nasturtium aquaticum. Great Watercresse. Sisymbrium alterum cardamine. Small watercresse. ouerwhelmed and drenched with water in the winter season, also in standing waters and diches. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The great watercresse flowreth in Iuly and August. 
 The lesser flowreth in May, and almost vntil the ende of sommer. 
 ❀ The Names. The first kinde is called in high Douche, Braun Kersz: in base Almaigne, waterkersse: in Shoppes also Nasturtium aquaticum: and seemeth very wel to be that Sium of the which Cratenas maketh mention, in English, Water Kars, and Water Cresse. 
 The seconde kinde is called in Greeke : in Latine, Sisymbrium alterum cardamine: of some also Sium: in Frenche, Passerage sauuage, or Petit Cresson aquatique: in high Douch, Gauchblum, wilder Kresz, and Wisen Kresz: in base Almaigne, Coeckoecxbloemen, and Cleyn Waterkersse: of the Herboristes, Flos cuculi, of some Nasturtium aquaticum: in Englishe, the lesser Watercresse, and Coccow flowers. This is no Iberis as some haue deemed it. 
 ❀ The Nature. These two herbes are hoate and drie in the seconde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Water Cresse is good to be eaten in Salade, either by it selfe or with other herbes, for it causeth one to make water, it breaketh and bringeth foorth the grauel and stone, and is good for suche as haue the strangurie, and agaynst all stoppinges of the kidneyes and bladder. 
 The lesser watercresse taketh away spottes and freckles from the face and al such blemishes, if it be laid therto in the euening &amp; taken away in the morning. 
 The wilde Passerage boyled in lye, driueth away lyce, if the head or place where they be, are washed therwithall. 
 The kine feeding where, as store of the wild Passerage or Coccow flowers growe, giue very good milke wherewithal is made excellent sweete butter. 
 Of winter Cresses. Chap. lxi. ❀ The Description. T HIS herbe hath greene grosse leaues, broade, smooth, and some∣what round, not muche vnlyke the leaues of Smallage, or garden Rape, but greater and larger thē Smallage leaues. The stalkes be rounde &amp; full of bran∣ches aboue bringing forth many litle yellow flowers, and after them long rounde coddes, wherin is enclosed a litle seede. The roote is thicke and long. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe groweth in the feeldeg, &amp; som∣time also in gardens of potherbes, &amp; places not toyled or husbanded.
❀ The Tyme. This herbe is greene most commonly all the winter, but it flowreth &amp; seedeth in May and Iune. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Douche S. Bar∣barakraut: and according to the same in La∣tine, Sanctae Barbarę herba: we haue named it Barbaraea: the Frenchmen, Herbe de S. Barbe: in some places of Brabant they call it Steen∣cruyt, bycause it is good against the stone and grauel: in Holland and other places Winter∣kersse, bycause they do vse to eate of it in the winter time in salades, in steede of Cresses, &amp; therefore it is called Nasturtium, or Cardamum hybernum. This seemeth to be , Pseudobunium of Dioscorides: for surely this is not Sideritis latifolia, or Scopa regia, as some do take it: Herbe Sainbarbe 
 Pseudobunium. Barbaraea. 
 ❀ The Nature. This herbe is hoate and drie in the seconde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Herbe S. Barbe is a good herbe for salade, and is vsed in the winter season for Salades like Cresses, for the whiche purpose it doth aswell as Cresses or Rockat. 
 It doth mundifie and clense corrupt woundes and vlcers, and consumeth dead flesh that groweth to fast, being either layde thereto, or the iuyce thereof dropped in. 
 Also it is certaynely proued by experience, that the seede of this herbe cau∣seth one to make water, driueth forth grauel, and cureth the strangurie, which vertues be lykewise attributed to Pseudobunium. 
 Of Thlaspi. Chap. lxij. ¶ The Kyndes. THere be foure kindes of wilde Cresse, or Thlaspi, the which are not muche vnlyke one another, nor vnlyke cresse in taste. 
 Thlaspi. The first kinde of Thlaspi. 
 Thlaspi alterum. The seconde kinde of Thlaspi, or treacle Mustarde. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE first kinde of Thlaspi hath long narrowe leaues. The stemmes be hard and pliant or tough, of a foote and a halfe long, vpon which grow litle branches bringing foorth smal white flowers, and afterward flat huskes and round, with a certayne clouen brim, or edge all aboue at the vpmost part of eache huske, which chappe or clift, causeth the huske to resemble the hart of a man, within the sayde huskes is founde small seede the whiche is rounde, eger, and burning the mouth, and in the ende it tasteth and smacketh of garlike or onyons, and is of a brownish colour. 
 The seconde kinde hath long leaues and meetely large, longer and broader then the first, &amp; iagged or cut about the edges. The stalkes be round of a foote long diuided into sundry smal branches, vpon which grow smal huskes, almost lyke the seede of Shepheardes pouche, within which huskes is likewise found a sharpe biting seede. 
 The thirde kinde of Thlaspi hath smaller stalkes and leaues then the afore∣said and hath more smal slender branches, vpon which grow flowers and seede lyke to the other, but altogither smaller. 
 The fourth kinde hath long, small, rough, white greene leaues, the stalkes be of a wooddy substance, round and tough or pliant, vpō the same grow smal white flowers, the whiche past, it brin∣geth foorth broade huskes or seede ves∣sels, hauing a brownishe kinde of seede, very hoate in taste lyke to the seede of Cressis. 
 ¶ The Place. These herbes do grow in feeldes, and all alongst the same, in vntoyled places about wayes, &amp; there is store growing togither, the one kinde in one place, and the other in another. 
 ❀ The Tyme. These herbes doo flower and are in seede at sommer from Maye to August. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greke : in Latine, Thlaspi, Capsella, and Scandulaceum, of some also Myitis, Bytron, Dasmophon, Myopteron: in high Douche, Wilder Cresz: in Frenche, Seneue sauuage: in base Almaigne, Wilde Kersse: it may be also called in Englishe, Thlaspi. 
 The first kinde is the right Thlaspi of Dioscorides: and is called in base Al∣maigne, Visselcruyt: and of some in La∣tine, Scordothlaspi: that is to say, Gar∣likethlaspi. 
 Thlaspi minus. Besom grasse. 
 The second kind is called of the later writers, Nasturtium rusticum, &amp; Sinapi rusticum: in high Douche, Baurn seuff, or Baurn Kresz, &amp; the neather Douch∣men in folowing the same call it, Boeren mostaert, or Boeren kersse, that is to say, Seneui, or Carles Cresse: or Churles Cresse: Turner calleth Thlaspi, trea∣cle mustarde, Bowers mustarde, or dishe mustarde: but I thinke it best next to Thlaspi, whiche is the Greeke name to call it Churles mustarde, both bycause of the strong and violent nature of this noughtie plant, as also in respect of the Boures, who began to be more mischieuous to the state of their Country, then this herbe is to mans nature.
The thirde kinde is called Thlaspi angustifolium, &amp; Thlaspi minus: in high Douche, Bysemkraut: in base Almaigne Bessemcruyt: that is to say, Bessem weede, or y e herbe seruing for Bysoms. Turner calleth this Iberis Dioscoridis. 
 The fourth without all doubt is a kind of Thlaspi, but it hath no other par∣ticuler name. 
 ❀ The Nature. Thlaspi, especially the seede thereof, is hoate and drie almost in the fourth degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The seede of the first Thlaspi eaten, purgeth choler, both vpward &amp; downe∣warde, it prouoketh womens flowers, and breaketh inwarde impostumes. 
 The same as a Clyster powred in at the fundement, helpeth the Sciatica. And it is good for the same purpose to be layde vppon the greeued place, lyke Mustarde seede. 
 ❀ The Danger. Seing the seede of Thlaspi is very hoate, and of a strong or vehement wor∣king, insomuche that being taken in to great a quantitie, it purgeth or scoureth euen vnto blood, and is very hurtful to women with child, therfore it may not rashly be giuen or minished inwardly. 
 Of Candy Thlaspi. Chap. lxiij. ❀ The Description. T His herbe groweth with narrow leaues, to the length of a foote, al∣most lyke to the leaues of Iberis. The flowers grow at the top of the plant in rounde tuftes lyke the flower of Elder, of a white or light Carnation colour: after them come flat huskes fashioned lyke the huskes of of the other Thlaspi, but muche smaller, within the whiche is contayned a seede of a sharpe biting taste, lyke the seede of the other Thlaspi. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe is not found in this Coun∣trie, but in the gardens of some diligent Herboristes. 
 ❀ The Time. It flowreth in Maye, and shortly after the seed is ripe. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greeke : in Latine, Arabis &amp; Draba: of Plinie as some men holde, Dryophonon: of y e Herboristes at these dayes, Thlaspi de Candie, vn∣knowen in shoppes. 
 Arabis siue Draba. 
 ❧ The Nature. Candie Thlaspi is in complexion lyke to the other Thlaspies. 
 ❀ The Vertues. They vse to eate the dryed sede of this herbe with meates in steede of Pepper, in the Countrie of Capadocia, as Dioscori∣des writeth. 
 Of Erysimon Dioscorides. Chap. lxiiij. ❀ The Description. E Rysimon hath lōg leaues deepe∣ly rent, &amp; iagged vpō both sides, not muche vnlyke the leaues of of Rockat gentle or Romayne Rockat, or wilde Mustarde. The stalkes be smal, slender, and plyant, and wil twist and winde lyke Ozier withie, vppon the same stalkes or branches grow many yel∣low flowers, &amp; after thē come litle slender huskes, wherin also is a seede of a sharpe bitingt aste: the roote is long and thicke, with many smal strings or hearie threds. 
 Erysimon Dioscorides. Iiro. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe groweth in all places of this Countrie alongst the wayes, and in vntoyled stonie places. 
 ❀ The Time. Erysimon flowreth very plentifully in this Countrie, in the moneth of Iune and Iuly. 
 ¶ The Names. This herbe is called in Greeke : in Latine, Irio: of some : Chamaeplion. This is the Erysimum of Dioscorides, and not of Theophrastus, for the Erysimum of Theophrastus, is not all one with that of Dioscorides, as we haue sufficiently declared elswhere. Cooper Englisheth Irio: by the name of winter Cresses. 
 ❀ The Nature. Erysimon is hoate and drie lyke Cresses. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The seede of Erysimon taken with honie in manner of a Lohoc, and often licked, ripeth and causeth to spet out the tough and clammie fleme gathered within the breast &amp; lunges: likewise it is good against the shortnesse of breath, and the olde cough: it shalbe the more conuenient for the same purpose, if you stiepe the seede first in faire water, and then drie it by the fire, or els lappe it in paste and bake it, for els it wilbe to hoate.
The same seede so prepared and put into the medicines, is good agaynst the Iaunders, and gripinges of the belly, against the Sciatica, and against all ve∣nome and poyson. 
 The seede of Erysimon mingled with hony and water auayleth much to be layd vnto hidden Cankers, harde swellinges, impostumes behinde the eares, the olde and harde impostumes of the breastes, and genitours: for it wasteth and consumeth cold swellinges. 
 Of Iberis. Chap. lxv. ❀ The Description. I Beris hath round stalkes of a cubite long, full of bran∣ches: the small leaues be narrowe, yet a litle greater then the leaues of Cresses. The flowers be smal &amp; white, after which there folowe small shelles or huskes wherin the seede is, the roote is som∣what thicke &amp; white, in taste hoate &amp; sharpe. 
 ❀ The Place. Iberis groweth in Italy and other hoate Countries, about olde walles and other vntoyled places. The Her∣boristes of this Countrie do sowe it in their gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Iberis flowreth and is in seede at Midsomer. 
 ❧ The Names. This herbe is called in Greke , and of some : in Latine, Iberis, Cardamantice, Le∣pidium, and of some Nasturtium syl∣uestre: in English, Iberis, and of Tur∣ner Sciatica Cresse. 
 Iberis. Sciatica Cresse. 
 ¶ The Nature. Iberis is very hoate and drie, of nature lyke to Cresses. 
 ❧ The Vertues. The Auncient Physitions, especially Damocrates, say that the roote of I∣beris mengled with Swines grease, cureth the Sciatica gowt, if a man binde of this oyntmēt to his hanche huckle bone, or the aking place the space of soure houres, &amp; the women two houres, but immediatly after the remouing of this oyntment, they must enter into a bathe. Reade Turner for the rest of this cure vnder the title Iberis. 
 Of Dittander Dittany / but rather Pepperwurt. Chap. lxvi. ❀ The Description. D Ittany whiche we may more right∣ly cal Pepperwurt, hath long brode leaues, not muche vnlyke the Baye tree leafe, but a great deale larger and longer, and a little natched or toothed a∣bout lyke a sawe. The stalkes and branches be round, vneasie or harde to be broken, and about two foote high: at the toppe whereof growe a number of small white flowers, and after them a small seede. The roote is long &amp; single creeping vnder the earth, and putteth foorth yeerely in diuers places new springes and leaues. 
 ❀ The Place. Dittany is sowen in some gardens of this Countrie, and where as it hath ben once set, it abideth or continueth well, so that after∣warde it cannot be easily destroyed. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Dittany flowreth &amp; is in Seede in Iune and Iuly. 
 ❧ The Names. This herbe is called of the later writers in these dayes, in Latine, Piperitis, of some also Syl estris Raphanus: in Frenche, Passerage: in high Almaigne, Pfefferkraut: in base Al∣maigne, Pepercruyt: This shoulde seeme to be , Lepidium, of Paulus Aegineta, &amp; of Plinie: yet for all that, this is not Lepi∣dium of Dioscorides, neither yet Plinies Piperitis, although it be of some men, sometimes so called: it is fondly and vnlearnedly named in Englishe, Dittany. It were better in folowing the Douchemen to call it Pepperwurt. 
 Piperitis. 
 ¶ The Nature. This herbe is hoate and drie in the thirde degree. 
 ❧ The Vertues. Some in these dayes vse this herbe with meates, in steede of Pepper, by∣cause it hath the nature and taste of Pepper, wherof it tooke y e name Piperitis. 
 And bycause the roote of this herbe is very hoate and of complexion lyke to Mustarde or Rockat, it is therfore also very good agaynst the Sciatica, being applyed outwardly to the huckle bone or hanche, with some soft grease, as of the Goose or Capon. 
 Of water Pepper. Chap. lxvij. ❀ The Description. W Ater Pepper, hath plaine, roūd, smooth, or naked stalkes &amp; bran∣ches, ful of ioyntes, y e leaues be long &amp; narrow, not much vnlyke the leaues of withy, of a hoate burning taste, lyke Pepper, at the top of y e stalkes amongst the leaues growe the flowers vpon short stems, clustering or growyng thicke togither, almost lyke the flowers of Blite, smal and white, the whiche past there commeth a broade seede somewhat browne, which biteth the tongue, y e roote is hearie. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe groweth in all this Coun∣trie in pooles &amp; diches, standing waters and moyst places. 
 ❀ The Tyme. It flowreth most commonly in Iuly &amp; August.
❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greke in Latine Hydropiper, &amp; Piper aquati∣cū in French, Poyure aquatique, or Couraige: in high Douch, Waster Pfeffer, or Muc∣kenkraut: in base Almaigne, Water Pe∣per: in English, Water pepper, or Water-pepperwurt, and of some Curagie. 
 ❀ The Nature. Water Pepper is hoate and drie in the third degre. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The leaues &amp; seede of water Pepper or Curaige, doth wast &amp; consume colde swel∣linges and old hardnes, also it dissolueth &amp; scattereth congeled or clotted blood y t com∣meth of stripes &amp; bruses, being laid therto. 
 The dried leaues be made into powder, to be vsed with meate in steede of Pepper, as our Dyttanie, or Passerage is vsed. 
 Of Arsesmart. Chap. lxviij. ❀ The Description. T His herbe is lyke to water Pep∣per, in leaues, stalkes, &amp; clustering flowers, but it is neither hoat nor sharpe, but most cōmonly without any manifest taste. The stalkes be round &amp; haue many knobby ioyntes lyke knees. The leaues be long and narrowe lyke the leaues of water Pepper, but browner, with blackish spottes in the middle, which are not found in the leaues of water Pep∣per. The flowers be of a carnation or light Hydropiper. Persicaria. red colour clustering togither in knops, after whiche commeth abrode browne seede. The roote is yellowe and hearie. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe groweth also in moyst marrishe places, and alongst the water plasshettes, and is oftentimes founde growing neare to the water Pepper. 
 ❀ The Tyme. It flowreth in Iuly and August, and shortly after it is in seede. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called of the latter writers in Latine, Persicaria: in Frenche, Persicaire, of some Curaige in high Douch, Persichkraut, or Flochkraut: in base Almaigne, Persickcruyt, and of some Vloocruyt: in Englishe, Arsse-smart, or Ciderage. 
 ❀ The Nature. Arsesmart is colde and dry of complexion. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The greene Arsesmart pound, is good to be laid to greene or fresh woundes, for it doth coole and comfort them, and keepeth them both from inflammation and apostumation, and so doth the iuyce of the leaues dropped in. 
 Of Indian Pepper. Chap. lxix. ❀ The Kindes. THere be three sortes of this Pepper, the one with huskes of a meane lēgth and greatnesse, the others huskes be long and narrow, and the third hath short brode huskes in al things els not much vnlyke one another, in figure and manner of growing. 
 Capsiacum. Indian Pepper. 
 Capsiacum oblongius. Long Indian Pepper. 
 ❀ The Description. T He Indian Pepper hath square stalkes somewhat browne of a foote high, vpon whiche growe brownish leaues, smooth &amp; ten∣der, almost lyke to the leaues of common Morrel or Nightshade, but narrower &amp; sharper poynted. Amongst the leaues growe flowers, vpō short stemmes, with fiue or sixe smal leaues, of colour white, with a greene starre in the middle. After the flowers come smooth and playne huskes, whiche before they be rype are of a greene colour, and afterwarde red and purple. The huskes of the first kinde are of a finger length. The huskes of the se∣cond kind be lōger &amp; narrower. They of the third kind are large, short and round. In the sayde huskes is founde the seede or graines, of a pale yellow color, brode, hoate, and of a biting taste lyke Pepper. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe groweth not of his owne kinde in this Countrie, but some Herbo∣ristes doo set and maintayne it in their gardens, with great care and diligence. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The seede of this Pepper is ripe in this Countrie in Septēber &amp; before winter. 
 Capsicum latum. Large Pepper of Indie. 
 ¶ The Names. This strange herbe is called of Actuarius in Greeke : in Latine, Capsicum: of Auicen, Zingiber caninū: of Plinie after the opinion of some men, Siliquastrum, and Piperitis: of such as write in these dayes, Piper Indianum Pi∣per Calecuthium, and Piper Hispanum: in high Douche, Indianischer Pfeffer, Calecutischer Pfeffer: in Frenche, Poyure d ' Inde, or d '  Espaigne: in base Almaigne, Peper van Indien, and Bresilie Peper: in Englishe, Indian Pepper, or Cale∣cute Pepper. 
 ❀ The Nature. The Indian Pepper is hoate and drie in thirde degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Indian Pepper is vsed in diuers places for the dressing of meates, for it hath the same vertue and taste as the vsual Pepper hath: furthermore it coloureth lyke Saffron, and being taken in such sorte, it warmeth the stomacke, and hel∣peth greatly the digestion of meates.
The same doth also dissolue and consume the swelling about the throte cal∣led the kinges euyll, all kernelles, and al colde swellinges, and taketh away al spottes and Lentiles of the face, being layed therevnto with hony. 
 ❀ The Danger. It is dangerous to be often vsed or in to great a quantitie: for this Pepper hath in it a certayne hidden euyll qualitie, whereby it killeth Dogges, if it be giuen them to eate. 
 Of Pepper. Chap. lxx. ❀ The Kindes. THe old and ancient Physitions do describe and set foorth there kindes of Pepper, that is to say, the long, the white, and the klacke Pepper, y e which a man shal euen in these dayes find to be sold in the shops of the Apotheca∣ries and Grossers. 
 ❀ The Description. A S touching the proportion &amp; figure of the tree or plante that beareth Pepper, we haue nothing els to write, sauing that we haue found de∣scribed of the Auncientes, and such as haue trauayled into India, and the Countries about Calecute: and bycause this is a strange kynde of of fruite, not growing amongst vs, we wyll write no more thereof, but as we haue gathered frō the writinges of the Ancientes, &amp; others, which lately haue trauayled into those Countries, who notwithstanding be not yet all of one mind or opinion: for Plinie writeth that the tree which beareth Pepper is like to our Iuniper: Philostratus saith, the Pepper tree with his fruite, is lyke to Agnus castus. Dioscorides with certayne others do write, y e Pepper groweth in India vpon a litle or smal tree. And that the long Pepper (the which is lyke to the knoppes or agglettes that hang in the Birche or Hasell trees before the comming foorth of the leaues) is as it were the first fruit which cōmeth foorth immediatly after the flowers, the which also in processe of time do waxe long, great and white bringing foorth many berries hanging togither, vpō one and the selfe same stem. The which berries being yet vnripe, are the white Pepper. and being ripe &amp; blacke is our common blacke Pepper. Suche as trauel to the Indians, Calecute, &amp; the Countries there aboutes do say, that Pepper grow∣eth not vpon trees, but vpon a plante lyke Iuie or Bindweede, the which doth twist and wrap it selfe about trees and hedges, bringing foorth long weake stemmes, where vpon hang the Pepper cornes or berries, euen like the Ribes, or beyondsea Gooseberries, as ye may see in this Countrie: for Pepper is brought frō the Indians to Anwarpe preserued in comsiture with the stems, and foote stalkes hanging in it. The greene and vnripe berries, remayne white, and it is that we call white Pepper, but when they be through ripe they waxe blacke, &amp; full of shriueled wrinckles, and that is our common blacke Pepper. The same aucthours or later trauaylers do affirme, that long Pepper is not the fruite of this plante, but that it groweth vppon other trees, lyke the thinges that you see hanging lyke Cattes tayles, or Agglettes, vpon the Nut trees and Birche trees in the winter, the which fruit they cal long Pepper, by∣cause in taste and working it is like Pepper. 
 ¶ The Place. Pepper groweth in the Iles of the Indian seas, as Taprobane Sumatra, and certayne other Ilandes adioyning, from which Ilandes it is brought to Cale∣cute, the which is the most famous and cheefest citie, as also the greatest marte towne of the Indians: and there it is solde not by waight, but by measures as they sel corne in this Countrie. 
 ❀ The Names. Pepper is called in Greeke : Latine, Piper in high Douche, Pfeffer: in base Almaigne, Peper: and in English, Pepper. 
 Long Pepper is called in Greeke : in Latine, Piper longum: in Shoppes, Macropiper. 
 The white Pepper is called in Greeke : in Latine, Piper album: in Shoppes, Leucopiper. 
 The blacke Pepper is called in Greke, : in Latine, Piper nigrum: in Shoppes, Melanopiper. 
 ❀ The Nature. Pepper is hoate and drie in the thirde degree, especially the white and the blacke, for the long Pepper is not so drie, bycause it is partaker of a certayne moysture. 
 ❀ The Vertues. It is put into sauces to giue a good smacke &amp; taste vnto meates, to prouoke appetite, and helpe digestion. 
 It prouoketh vrine, driueth forth windinesse, and paynes in the belly, to be ken with the tender leaues of Bay or Commin: it is also very good agaynst poyson, and the bitinges and stinginges of venemous beastes, and therefore it is put into treacles and preseruatiue medicines. 
 The same dronken before the cōming of the fit of the Ague, or layde to &amp; an∣nointed outwardly with oyle, is good against y e shakings &amp; brusings of agues. 
 The same licked in with hony, is good agaynst the cough comming of a cold cause, and against all the colde infirmities of the breast and lunges. 
 The same chewed with Raysons, draweth downe from the head thinne fleme, and purgeth the brayne. 
 Layd to with hony it is good against the Squinancie, for it consumeth and wasteth the swellinges and tumours. 
 The same with Pitche dissolueth the kinges euill and kernels, and wennes or harde colde swellinges, and draweth foorth shardes and splinters. 
 Pepper, but especially long Pepper, is good to be mingled with eye medi∣cines or Collyries made to cleare and strengthen the sight. 
 Of Garlike. Chap. lxxi. ¶ The Kyndes. THere be three sortes of Garlike, that is the common or garden Garlike, wilde Garlike, and Ramsons. 
 Allium satiuum. Garden Garlike.
Allium syluestre. Crow Garlike. 
 Allium vrsinum. Ramsons. 
 ❀ The Description. G Arden Garlike hath leaues lyke grasse, or Leekes, a∣mongst which (the yere after the sowing) come vp rounde holowe stems, whiche beare flowers and seede lyke to to the Onyon. The roote is rounde swel∣ling out lyke the Onyon, heaped vp with many cloues or kernelles ioyned togither, vnder whiche hangeth a bearde or tassell of many small hearie stringes. 
 The wylde Garlyke hath no leaues, but in steede thereof it hath long, rounde, small, holowe, pyped blades, amongst whiche springeth vp a round hard stemme of two or three foote long, vppon whiche grow the flowers and seede. The roote is also round Bulbus fashion, without cloues or kernelles growing in it, yet sometimes it hath ioyned therevnto newe heades or or rootes, from which spring new plants. 
 Of this sorte is founde another kynde whiche is smaller, in all thinges els like the other, aswell in leaues, or blades, stemmes, and seede, as also in rootes, the whiche doo growe most commonly in me∣dowes. 
 Allium vrsinum. Ramsons. 
 The thirde kinde of garlike (called Ramsons) hath most commonly two drode blades or large leaues, almost like the leaues of Liricumphancy, or May Lyllies: betwixt whiche commeth vp a stemme or twayne, bearing many smal white flowers. The roote is lyke to a young Garlyke head, of a very ranke sa∣uour and taste. 
 ❀ The Place. Garden Garlike is planted in gardens. 
 The wilde Garlyke groweth by it selfe in feeldes, and hedges, and me∣dowes, especially the smaller sort, for the bigger keepeth the feeldes &amp; pastures most commonly. 
 Ramsons growe in moyst darke places. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The wilde Garlyke flowreth and is in seede in Iune and Iuly. 
 Ramsons flowreth in Aprill and May. 
 ❀ The Names. Garlyke is called in Greeke : in Latine, Allium: in hygh Douche, Knobloch, or Knoblouch: in base Almaigne. Loock. 
 The first kinde is called Allium satiuum: in Englishe, Garden Garlyke, and poore mens treacle: in Frenche, Ail de iardin: in Douche, Tam Loock, or Loock. 
 The seconde kind is called in Greeke : in Latine, Allium angui∣num, &amp; Allium syluestre: in French, Ail sauuage in high Douche, Wilder Knob∣loch, or feld Knobloch: in base Almaigne, Wilt Loock: in English, Crow Gar∣like, and wilde Garlike. 
 The thirde kinde is called of the later writers in Latine, Allium vrsinum: in Frenche, Ail d ' ours: in high Douch, Waldt knoblauch: in base Almaigne, Das Loock: in English, Ramsons, Buckrammes, &amp; Beares Garlike. This shoulde seeme to be that Garlyke, whiche Dioscorides calleth Scorodoprassum, or as some others thinke Ampeloprasum. 
 ❀ The Nature. Garlyke is hoate and drie almost in the fourth degree. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Garlyke eaten rawe, and fasting nourisheth not, but contrariewise it ingen∣dreth euill blood, bycause of his exceeding heate: Neuerthelesse being boyled vntil it hath lost his sharpnesse, it engendreth not so euil blood, and although it nourisheth but litle, yet it nourisheth more then when it is eaten rawe. 
 It is good for suche people as are full of grosse, rawe, and tough humours, for it wasteth and consumeth colde humours. 
 It dispatcheth windinesse, openeth al stoppinges, killeth and driueth foorth brode wormes, and prouoketh vrine.
It is good against all venome &amp; poyson, taken in meates or boyled in wine and dronken, for of his owne nature it withstandeth al poyson: in so much that it driueth away all venemous beastes, from the place where it is. Therefore Galen prince of Physitions, called it poore mens Treacle. 
 It is layde with great profite to the bitinges of mad Dogges, and vpon the bitinges &amp; stinginges of venemous beastes, as Spiders, Scorpions, Vipers, and suche lyke: and for the same purpose it auayleth muche to drinke the decoc∣tion or broth of Garlyke sodde in wine. 
 It is also good to keepe such from danger of sicknesse, as are forced to drinke of diuers sortes of corrupt waters. 
 The same eaten raw or boyled cleareth the voyce, cureth the old cough, and is very good for them that haue the Dropsie: for it drieth the stomacke and con∣sumeth the water: and doth not much alter nor distemper the body. 
 The decoction thereof made with Orygan and wine, being dronken, killeth lyce and nittes. 
 It is very good against the tooth ache, for it slaketh the same, pounde with vineger, &amp; laid to the teeth: or boyled in water with a litle incence, &amp; the mouth washed therewith, or put into the holownesse of the corrupt teeth. It is of the same vertue mixt with goose grease and powred into the eares. 
 The same brused betwixt the handes and layde to the temples, slaketh the olde headache. 
 The same burned into ashes &amp; mingled with hony, healeth the wild scabbe, and scurffe of the head, and the falling of the heare, being layde therevpon. 
 Layde to in the same manner, it healeth blacke and blewe scarres, that re∣mayne after bruses and stripes. 
 It is also good against the fowle white scurffe, leprie, and running vlcers of the head and all other manginesse pounde with oyle and salte, and layde there vpon. Also it is good against the hoate inflammation called wilde fier, which is a spreading scabbe lyke a tetter. 
 With Swines grease in wafteth and dissolueth harde swellinges, and layd to with Sulpher and Rosen, it draweth foorth the euill qualitie or noughtie humour from fistulas, as Plinie writeth. 
 It moueth womens natural sicknes, driueth foorth the secondine, if women sit ouer the decoction thereof, or if it be cast vpon the quicke coles, and women receiue the fume of it through a fonnel or holow stole. 
 They cure the pipe or roupe of Pultrie and Chickens with Garlyke. 
 ❀ The Danger. Garlyke is hurtfull and nought for cholerique people, and suche as be of a hoate complexion, it hurteth the eyes and sight, the head and kidneyes. It is also nought for women with childe and suche as giue sucke to children. 
 Of Sauwce alone or Iacke by the hedge. Chap. lxxij. ❀ The Description. T His herbe at his first springing vp, hath roundish leaues, almost lyke to Marche violettes, but much greater and larger, &amp; of a paler color. Amōgst those leaues cōmeth vp the stalke of two foote high, with lon∣ger and narrower leaues then the first were, and creuised or iagged about, not much vnlike the Nettle leaues, but grea∣ter. The whiche beyng brused betweene the fingers, haue the sauour and smell of Garlyke. About the highest of the stalke grow many small white flowers, and af∣ter them long coddes or huskes wherein is blacke seede. The roote is long &amp; slen∣der, and of wooddy substance. 
 ¶ The Place. This herbe delighteth to growe in lowe vntoyled places, as about the bor∣ders of medowes, and moyst pasture groundes, and somtimes in hedges, and vpon walles. 
 ❀ The Tyme. This herbe flowreth most commonly in May and Iune, and afterwarde com∣meth the seede. 
 Alliaria. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called of the later writers in the Latine tongue, Alliaria, of some also Scordotis: but this is not the true Scordotis, the whiche is also called Scordium, and is described in the first booke of this historie: Pandectarius cal∣leth it Pes Asininus: it is named in French, Alliaire: in high Douch, Knobloch∣kraut, Leuchel, or Saszkraut: in base Almaigne, Loock sonder loock: in En∣glishe, Sauce alone, and Iacke by the hedge. 
 ❀ The Nature. This herbe is hoate and drie almost in (the thirde degree) fourth degree.
❀ The Vertues. This herbe is not much vsed in medicine: but some do vse it with meates in steede of garlyke. 
 The ignorant Apothecaries doo vse this herbe for Scordium, not without errour, as it is manifest to all such as are learned in y e knowledge of Simples. 
 Of Onyons. Chap. lxxiij. ¶ The Kindes. THere be diuers sortes of Onyons, some white, some red, some long, some rounde, some great, and some small: but al of one sauour and propertie, sa∣uing that the one is a litle stronger then the other. Yet they differ not in leaues, flowers, and seede. 
 ❀ The Description. T He Onyon hath leaues or blades almost like garlike, holow within. The stemmes be round, vpon whiche grow rounde bawles or heades, couered with little fine or tēder white skinnes, out of which breake many white flowers lyke starres, whiche turne into smal pellettes or but∣tons, in whiche are contayned two or three blacke cornered seedes. The roote is rounde or long, made of many foldes, pylles, or coueringes, growing one vpon another, wherof the vpmost pilles or scales are thinnest. In the neather part of the roote is a bearde of hearie rootes, or stringes lyke a tassel. 
 ❀ The Place. They are sowen in euery garden of this Countrie, but they loue a soft and gentle grounde. 
 ❀ The Tyme. They are commonly sowen in Februarie and March, and are ful growen in August, &amp; are then pluckt out of the ground to be kept. And if they be plāted againe in December, Ianua∣ry, or February, then they wil blow in Iune, and bring foorth in Iuly and August. 
 ❧ The Names. The Onyon is called in Greek : in Latine, Cepa, and Cepe: in high Douche, Zwibel: in base Almaigne, seede Ayeuyn. 
 ❀ The Nature. The Onyon is almost hoate in the fourth degree, and ra∣ther of grosse, then subtil partes. 
 Crommion, Cepa. Onyons. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The Onyon engendreth windynesse, and causeth appetite, and it doth scat∣ter, and make thinne grosse and clammie humours, without nourishing: espe∣cially to be eaten raw. But being boyled twise or thrise it is nothing so sharpe, and it nourisheth somewhat, but not muche. 
 Onyons eaten in meate, open the belly gently, and prouoke vrine plenti∣fully. 
 They open the Hemorrhoides, so called in Greeke, layd to the fundement or siege with oyle or vineger, and so doth the iuyce or the whole Onyon mingled with rosted apples, and layde vpon the fundement with cotten. 
 Onyons sodden and layde to with Raysens and figges, do ripe and breake wennes and suche lyke colde swellinges. 
 The iuyce of them dropped into the eyes, cleareth the dimnesse of the sight, and at the beginning remoueth the spottes, cloudes, and hawes of the eyes. 
 The same iuyce dropped into the eares, is good agaynst deafenesse, and the humming noyse or ringing of the same, and is good to clense the eares from all filthinesse, and corrupt matter of the same. 
 The same powred or snift vp into the nosethrilles, causeth one to sneese, and purgeth the brayne. 
 Being put vnder in a pessarie, it bringeth out the flowers and secondine. 
 It is laide to y e bitings of dogges, with hony Rue &amp; salt, with good successe. 
 It cureth the noughtie scabbe and itche, &amp; the white spottes of all the body, and also the scurffe and scales of the head: and filleth agayne with heare the pylde places of the head, being layde thereto in the Sonne. 
 The same layde to with Capons grease, is good against the blisters of the feete, and against the chafing and gaulling of the shoe.
❀ The Danger. The often vse of Onyons, causeth headache, and ouermuche sleepe, and is hurtfull to the eyes. 
 Of Leekes. Chap. lxxiiij. ❀ The Description. T HE Leeke hath long brode blades, folden togither with a keele or crest in the backside, in taste and sauour not muche vnlyke the Onyon, be∣twixt which leaues in the second yere grow∣eth a rounde stemme, whiche bringeth foorth a rounde head or bawle, with his flowers lyke the Onyon, and after the flowers it bea∣reth seede, in fashion lyke to Onyon seede, but that it is of a grayishe colour. The roote is white and lesser then a meane Onyon, with a bearde or tassell of hearie stringes. 
 ¶ The Place. The Leeke is planted almost in euery gar∣den of this Countrie, and is but seldome suf∣fered to seede: but the blades are cut almost euery day harde by the grounde, to be day∣lye vsed in pottages, and other meates, and therefore it can vnethe or scarsely growe vp. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The Leeke flowreth in Maye and Iune, a yeere after the sowing, if it hath not bene cut, for if it be continually cut, it beareth very seldome flowers or seede, and therefore some do write that the Leeke bringeth foorth ney∣ther flowers nor seede, whiche is vntrue, for the Leeke whiche hath not bene cutte bryngeth foorth both flowers and seede. 
 Porrum. 
 ¶ The Names. The Leeke is called in Greeke : in Latine, Porrum: in Frenche, Pou∣reau. in high Douche, Lauch: in base Almaigne, Paraye: in Englishe, a Leeke, or Leekes. 
 The vncut Leeke is called in Greeke : in Latine, Porrum ca∣pitatum: that to say in Englishe, the headded or knopped Leeke. 
 The cut Leeke is called of Columella and of Palladius in Latine, Porrum sectiuum: in Englishe, Frenche Leeke, vnset Leeke, Mayden Leeke. 
 ❀ The Nature. The Leeke is hoate and drie in the third degree, of Nature lyke the Onyon, but not so strong. 
 ❧ The Vertues. Leekes engender grosse and euill blood, breede winde, and cause heauie dreames, especially to be eaten raw: but boyled in water twise or thrise, it wil∣be the better and more conuenient to be eaten. 
 It stirreth one to make water, it maketh the humours fine and thinne and softeneth the belly. 
 The iuyce of Leekes dronken with hony, is good agaynst the bitinges and stinginges of venemous beastes. 
 The iuyce of Leekes taken in an electuarie of Lohoc, doth mundifie &amp; clense the breast, causeth one to spet out, and is good against hoarsenesse and the olde cough. 
 A bath of Leekes made with salt sea water, prouoketh womens flowers, openeth the stoppings of the Matrix, and doth mollifie and soften all hardnesse of the same, if they sit ouer the fume thereof. 
 The leaues, or as we say the the blades of Leekes will stanche bleeding, especially nosebleeding: the same vertue hath the iuyce mingled with vineger, and fine powder of Frankensence to be put into the nosethrilles. 
 The sede is good to be mingled and put into medicines, that serue to breake the stone. 
 It stoppeth and stancheth all superfluous bleeding to be taken with the like quantitie of Myrtill berries. 
 ❀ The Danger. Leekes engender euil humours, and windinesse: they cause heauy and terri∣ble dreames, they darken the eye sight, and are very hurtful for them that haue any exulcerations or goyng of, of the skinne, of the bladder, or raynes. 
 Of Cyues / or Rushe Onions Leekes. Chap. lxxv. ❀ The Description. C Yues or Rushe Onyons, in the steede of leaues haue litle, smal, holowe, &amp; slender piped blades, lyke to smal Rushes, growing thicke to∣gither, in taste not much vnlyke the taste of Leekes. Amōgst the Rushlyke leaues growe smal rounde stemmes, with smal bowles, or rounde knopped heades, like the bawle in the top of the seede Onyon, but much smaller, and ful of smal purple flowers. The rootes be lyke to small Oniōs, but a great deale smaller, grow∣ing close and thicke togither, ful of long hearie threds or stringes, lyke the beard of the Onyons, or leekes, 
 ❀ The Place. It is set in gardens amongst potte herbes, or wurtes.
❀ The Time. It flowreth in May and Iune a yere after y e sowing, new planting or setting. 
 Schoenoprasum. 
 ❀ The Names. This kinde of Leekes is called in En∣glish, Cyues, &amp; of Turner in Latine, Ce∣pa pallacana, &amp; in greke Gethyū, which he Englisheth by al these names a Cyue, a Ciuet, a Chyue, or Sweth, and giueth to the same a very strange figure: but this kinde is called in French, des Oignon∣cettes, or Porrettes: in high Douche, Schnitlauch, Bryszlauch: in base Almaigne, Biesloock, that is to say, Rushe Garlike, bycause in steede of leaues it bringeth forth smal rushes like Crow Garlike. It hath neither Greke nor Latine name that I knowe. Therefore in folowing the Douche, we doo call it in Greeke : and in Latine, Scoenoprasum: whiche may be Englished, Rushe Leekes: and if any man had called it in Greeke , I without any pre∣sumption might haue called it Rushe Onyons. Some take it to be Porrum se∣ctiuum: but it appeareth well by that whiche Columella and Palladius haue written, howe shamefully they erre, and by the same aucthoritie of Columella and Palladius we haue sufficiently proued in the former Chapter, that the cut Leeke, and the headed Leeke, whiche is our common Leeke are al one, and do come both of one seede, and do differ but only in this: that the one is suffered to growe and beare seede, and the other is oftentimes cut. 
 ❀ The Nature. Cyues are hoate and drie in the thirde degree, and of complexion or tempe∣rament lyke vnto Leekes. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Cyues are vsed in meates and Pottages euen as Leekes, whiche they do resemble in operation and vertue. 
 Of wilde Bulbus / or wilde Onyon. Chap. lxxvi. ❀ The Description. T His herbe hath long leaues or blades lyke Garlyke, but very seldome bringing foorth more thē two blades, betwixt which springeth vp a rounde holow stemme of a spanne long at the top thereof growe many yellowe sterrelyke flowers, the whiche doo change into a three square or triāgled huske or huskes: in which the seede is contayned. The roote is rounde as an Onyon. 
 ❀ The Place. This Onyon groweth in diuers places of Almaigne, in sandy Countries in dales and vallyes about brookes and little streames, and sometimes also vnder hedges. 
 ❀ The Tyme. This kind of Bulbus flowreth in March, and is in seede in April, &amp; in short space after it vanisheth away, so y t in May folowing a man shal find neither stalkes neither leaues. 
 ❀ The Names. Howe this kinde of Bulbus hath bene cal¦led of the Auncientes or olde writers, is not certainly knowē, some think it to be Bulbina: some others would haue it , that is to say, Bulbus esculentus, but as some learned men and I do thinke, this Bulbus is Bulbus syluestris. neyther the one nor the other. And therfore we call it Bulbus syluestris: the high Douchemen do call it feldswibel, Ackerzwibel: and there after it is called in base Almaigne, Velt Ayeuyn: in Frenche, Oignon sauuage: that is to say, Wilde Onyon. Turner calleth it Bulbyne, wilde Leeke, and Corne Leeke, li. 1. fo. 97. and in the first unpression. fol. 5. 
 ❀ The Nature. This wilde Onyon is hoate and drie in the seconde degree, the whiche is to be perceiued by his bitter taste and rough astriction, or binding qualitie. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Suche as haue put this Bulbus in proofe, do affirme that it softeneth and driueth away harde swellinges being layde therevnto. 
 It is also (with great profite) applyed and layde vnto moyst, corrupt, rot ten, festered, fretting and consuming sores, being first rosted vnder imbers, and then pounde with hony and layde to. 
 Of the white felde Onyon. Chap. lxxvij. Ornithogalum minus. Bulbus Leucanthemus. 
 Ornithogalum maius. 
 ❀ The Description. T His kinde of Bulbus at the first springing vp hath long small narrow grassie leaues or blades of a span long: from amongst which springeth vp a rounde greene stemme, of a span long or theraboutes, bringing foorth foure or fiue smal flowers, greene without and white within, not much differing in proportion from the fashion of the Lylie flower, especial∣ly before they be fully spread abroade and opened, but they be much lesser. The roote is rounde lyke an Onyon or Bulbe, white both within and without, and very slymie lyke Comfrey, when it is brused or broken in peeces: in taste some∣what sharpe. This agreeth not with Ornithogalum of Dioscorides, for his Ornithogalum is described to haue a certayne aglet, or a thing called Cachryos, growing vp in the middle of the flower: Neither is it lyke to be Matthiolus Ornithogalum: for that which he setteth betwixt Ornithogalum and Trasi, hath a roote blacke without and white within. 
 This Ornithogalum maius, is lyke the other, but much greater. The leaues of this be long and smal, but bigger then the first. The stalke groweth a foote &amp; a halfe high, and is very euen. There grow vpō the top of the stalke faire plea∣sant flowers, of colour white, lyke vnto small Lylies, in the middle is a head lyke the seede that is named Cachrys. The roote is a Bulbus▪ the whiche lightly multiplyeth into many other. 
 ❀ The Place. This herbe groweth in sandy places that lye open to the ayre, and be manu∣red or toyled, and is founde in many places of Brabant, especially about Ma∣lines or Mechelen almost in euery feelde. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The leaues of this Bulbus do spring vp first in March &amp; Aprill, &amp; the flowers in May, &amp; about Iune they do so vanish, that they be not any longer to be seene or founde. 
 ❀ The Names. This herbe is called in Greeke : and in Latine, Ornithogalum: vn∣knowen in shoppes: in base Almaigne it is called, Wit velt Ayueyn, that is to say, the wilde white feelde Onyon: in some places of France, it is called Chur∣les. It may lykewyse be very wel called, Bulbus Leucanthemus. 
 The other Bulbus, is lykewise an Ornithogalum, and is called of some nowe in these dayes, Lilium Alexandrinum, that is to say, Lylies Alexandria, bycause it is thought that it is first brought into knowledge in this Countrie from A∣lexandria.
❀ The Nature. This Bulbus is temperate in heate and drynesse. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Dioscorides saith, that it may be eaten either rawe or rosted as ye liste. 
 It is also very good to soulder and close vp fresh or greene wounds, being layde vpon lyke Comfrey. 
 Of the Sea Vnyon called Squilla. Chap. lxxviij. ¶ The Kyndes. AT this day there be found two kinds of Squilla, or Sea Vnion: the one bearing straight or narrow blades, the which is the right Squilla: the o∣ther hath brode blades, and is commonly vsed for Squilla. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE rounde bollens, or imbossed heades of the first &amp; right Squilla, are very great and thicke, and whiter then the bollens or heades of the vsual &amp; common Squilla. The blades be long and narrow, and of a white greene or grayish colour. 
 The common Squilla hath also great thicke heades or bollens, but they are most commonly redder, and the pilles or scales are thicker then the scales or coueringes of the other Squilla. The leaues be great and broade almost lyke to Lylie leaues. The flowers be smal and yellow growing at the highest and alongst the stalkes or stemmes, after them commeth the seede. 
 ❀ The Place. Squilla groweth not of his owne accorde in this Countrie, but is brought from Spayne hither to serue for medicine, wherof some is planted in gardens. 
 ❀ The Names. The first kind of this strange Vnyon, is called in Greeke : &amp; in Latine, Scilla: in Shoppes, Squilla: in French, Stiboule, Squille, Oignon de mer: in high douch Meerzwibel: in base Almaigne, Zee Ayeuyn: of Serapio, Cepe muris, that is to say, Mowce Onyon: in Englishe, Squilla, and Sea Onyon. 
 The second kind is taken of the grea∣ter number of Apothecaries for Squilla, albeit it is not the right kinde, but of that sort whiche the Grekes do cal : the Latines Pancratiū, which is of nature lyke to Squilla, and therefore without any errour it may be vsed in steede of Squilla. And this kinde of the learned Peter Belon is counted to be Bulbus lit∣toralis of Theophrastus, wherevnto it is very muche lyke: for Dioscorides Pancra∣tium, and Theophrastus Bulbus littoralis do seeme to be all one. 
 ❀ The Nature. Squilla is hoate in the second degree, and drie in the thirde degree, and of very subtile partes, also of a cutting and scou∣ring nature. 
 Scilla c\ōmunis Pancrati\ū Squilla. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Squilla (being first couered rounde a∣bout with dowe, or lapt in paste &amp; baked in an ouen, or rosted vnder coles vntill it be soft or tender) then a spoonefull or two thereof taken, with the eight part of salt, causeth a man to go to the stoole, and putteth foorth plenty of tough and clammie humours. 
 The same rosted or prepared after the same manner, is good to be put into medicines that prouoke vrine, and in suche medicines as are vsed agaynst the Dropsie, the Iaundise, belching or working vp of the stomacke, and gripinges or frettinges of the belly. 
 Taken with hony and oyle, it driueth foorth of the belly, both the long and rounde wormes. 
 Prepared in manner aforesayde, it is put with great profite, into medicines that are made against an old inueterate cough, and shortnesse of breath, which medicines do cause to spit out the tough and clammie flemes, that are gathered togither within the holownesse of the breast: for taken in the same manner it doth dissolue and loose grosse humours, and bringeth them foorth. 
 The same ordered with hony loseth the belly very gently: and the like ver∣tue hath the seede to be taken with figges or hony. 
 A scale or twaine of the roote of Squilla being yet greene and raw is good to be layde vnder the tongue, to quenche the thirste of them that haue the Dropsie, as Plinie writeth. 
 Squilla sodden in vineger vntill it be tender, and pouned small, is good to be layde as an emplayster, vpon the bitinges of Vipers and Adders, and suche other lyke venemous beastes. 
 The inner part of Squilla boyled in Oyle, or Turpentine is applyed with great profite to the chappes or riftes of the feete, and also to kibed or moldye heeles, and hanginge wartes, especially when it is first rosted vnder the im∣bers. 
 In the same maner it healeth the running sores of the head, and the scurffie scales or bran of the head being layde therevnto.
The leaues of Squilla do dissolue and wast the kinges euyl and kernelles vnder and about the throte, beyng layd therevpon by the space of foure dayes. 
 Pythagoras saith, that if Squilla be hanged ouer the doore or chiefe entrie into the house, it keepeth the same from all mishap, witchcraft or sorcerie. 
 Bertius writeth that whan the flowers of Squilla be of a brownish colour and doo not soone fall, or vade away, that the yeere shalbe very fruitefull, and there shalbe great ftore of Corne. 
 Pancratium in vertue and working is muche lyke to Squilla, sauing that it is not so strong nor effectuall. And it may be vsed for want of the right Squilla in al things as witnesseth Galen, and is to be prepared in the lyke or∣der as they prepare Squilla, as saith Dioscorides. 
 ❀ The Danger. Squilla is a very sharpe medicine, both subtil &amp; wasting, hurtful and forsing the nature of man, when it is taken or vsed rawe: and therefore Galen saith, it ought not to be vsed or taken into the body without it be first soddē or rosted. 
 Of Affodyll. Chap. lxxix. ❀ The Kyndes. THere be three kindes of Affodill, that is to say, the male, and female, and a thirde sort with yellowe flowers. 
 Asphodelus mas. The male Affodyll. 
 Asphodelus foemina. The female Affodyl. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE first kinde of Affodyll hath long narrow leaues, like Leeke blades, amōgst which springeth vp a roūd stalke of a cubite, or cubite and a halfe long: vppon whiche from the middle vp to the toppe growe faire white flowers, or of a very pale carnation colour, which do begin to flower below, and do end their flowring aboue. The flowers past ther come smal huskes, round and writhed or turned a∣bout, and are found diuided and seuered into partes whē they waxe ripe: within the sayd huskes is a browne seede. The rootes do growe by great nūbers or cō∣panyes, &amp; like to the rootes of the femal Pionie, eache one fashioned like to a lōg thicke kernell or somewhat longer, and within somwhat opē or spongie, in taste at the first somewhat astringent, and af∣terwarde bitter. Yet of no very strange taste, so that it is no maruell that men in times past dyd vse to of eate this roote as Hesiodus &amp; certaine other do report. 
 Asphodelitertia species. Yellow Affodyll. 
 The second kind of Affodyll hath nar∣row blades also lyke to the abouesayde, but smaller and shorter, amongst whiche springeth foorth a plaine straight stem of two foote high, from the middle of the top set with pale flowers, diuided into sixe partes, not much vnlike the flowers of the other Affodyl. They once past there appeare small triangled huskes, within the whiche lyeth the seede. The roote of this kinde is rounde as the head of an Onyon, almost lyke the roote of garden Bulbus, but somewhat bigger. To conclude, this Affodyll is not muche vnlyke the first kind but only in the roote, wherein is all the difference betwixt these two herbes: for they varie not much one from another in leaues, stalkes, flowers, and seedes, sauing that the leaues of this kind are shorter, the flowers stande further a sunder, and not so thicke set, or throng togither. 
 Bysides these two kindes there is found another Affodyl, whose leaues be longer &amp; narrower then the leaues of the first kind, the stalkes be also round, &amp; loden with pleasant yellow flowers, after whiche appeareth rounde huskes or knops lyke little heades, wherein the seede is contayned: it hath a number of rootes growing thicke togither like the first Affodyl, but euery roote is longer and smaller. The leaues of this Affodyl remayne greene al the winter, &amp; do not vade and perish as the leaues of the other. And the rootes doo put foorth a cer∣tayne increase of newe springes and blades, wherby it incrocheth and winneth more grounde, and doth so multiply: that of one plant within a fewe yeres you shal get a number of others. 
 ❀ The Place. Affodyl is not founde growing of his owne kind in this Countrie, but in the gardens of Herboristes, where as they do both sowe and playnt it. 
 ❀ The Time. The first kinde flowreth in May, and is in seede in Iune. 
 The seconde doth also flower and seede in Iune. 
 ❧ The Names. This herbe is called in Greke : in Latine, Albucus, and Hastula re∣gia: in shops Affodilus: in French, Hache royale, or Asphodel: of the common Herbo∣ristes of Brabant, Affodilen. The flower with his stemme is called in Greeke , Anthericos: and in Latine, as Plinie sayth, Albucum: in English also Affodyl, and Daffodyll. 
 The first kinde is called Asphodelus mas, and Hastula regia mas, and is that same whiche Dioscorides describeth. 
 The seconde is called Asphodelus foemina, and Hastula regia foemina, and is that whiche Galen describeth, in lib. de alimentorum facultatibus. 
 ¶ The Nature. Affodyl especially the roote of the first kind is hoate &amp; dry in y e second degree. 
 The rootes of the other kinde, are hoate and dry almost in the thirde degree.
he fruite and leaues of Capers haue the lyke vertue as the rootes, but not so strong, as Galen sayth. 
 The seede of Capers boyled in vineger, and kept warme in the mouth, swageth toothe ache. 
 The iuyce of the leaues, flowers and young fruite of Capers, killeth the wormes of the eares when it is dropped in. 
 The Capers preserued in salt or pickel, as they be brought into this Coun∣trie, being washed, boyled, and eaten with vineger, are meate and medicine: for it stirreth vp appetite, openeth the stoppinges of the liuer and milt, consumeth and wasteth the colde flemes that is gathered about the stomacke. Yet they nourishe very litle or nothing at all, as Galen saith. 
 Of Gooseberies. Chap. xix. ❀ The Description T HE Gooseberie bushe is a wooddishe prickley plante growing to y e height of two three, or foure foote, with many whitishe branches, set full of sharpe prickles, and smothe leaues of a light greene colour, somewhat large and round, cut in, &amp; snipt about almost like to vine leaues. Amongst the leaues growe smal flowers, and after them rounde beries, the whiche are first greene, but when they waxe ripe, they are somewhat yellowe or reddishe and cleare through shining, of a pleasant taste some what sweete. The roote is slender, harde wooddishe, and full of hearie stringes. 
 ❀ The Place. The Gooseberie is planted commonly almost in euery garden of this Coūtrie a∣longest the hedges &amp; borders of the same. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The Goosebery bush springeth bytimes, and waxeth greene in Marche, yea and sometimes in Februarie, it flowreth in A∣pril, and bringeth foorth his fruit in May the which is muche vsed in meates. The fruite is ripe at the ende of Iune. 
 Vua Crispa. 
 ❀ The Names. The Gooseberie is called of the later writers in Latine, Grossularia. Gesnere thinketh it to be , Spina Ceanothos of Theophrastus. 
 The fruite is called in Latine, Vua crispa: of some Grossula: of Matthiolus, Vua spina, whiche may be Englished, Thorne grape: in Frenche, des Groisselles▪ in high Douche, Kreuszbeer, and Kruselbeer: in base Almaigne Stekelbesien, or Kroesbesien, and of some also Knoeselen. 
 ❀ The Nature. The fruite before it is ripe (for then it is most vsed) is colde and drie in the seconde degree, and binding, almost of the same nature that the vnripe grapes of the vine are. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The vnripe Gooseberie stoppeth the belly, and all issue of blood, especially the iuyce of them pressed foorth and dried. 
 The same greene Gooseberies or their iuyce, is very good to be layd vpon hoate inflammations, Erysipelas, and wilde fire. The leaues be likewise good for the same purpose, but not al thing so vertuous. 
 The greene Gooseberie eaten with meates prouoketh appetite, &amp; cooleth the vehemēt heate of the stomacke and liuer, and doth swage and mitigate the inwarde heate of the same, and is good against agues. 
 The young leaues eaten rawe, do prouoke vrine, and are good for suche as are troubled with the grauell and stone. 
 Of redde Gooseberies. Chap. xx. ¶ The Kyndes. OF these beries there be two sortes in this Countrie: the one beareth ared fruite of a pleasant taste, the other beareth a blacke fruit of an vnpleasant taste. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE red beyondsea Gooseberie, hath woddishe pliant branches, couered with a brownish barke, and brode blackishe leaues, not muche vnlyke vine leaues, but smaller. The flowers growe amongst the leaues, vppon the young sprigges or sprayes clustering togither, and a great many hanging downeward by smal stringes or stemmes: whē those flowers be past there grow vpon euery syde of the said stringes many small greene berries at the first, y e which afterwarde waxered, of a pleasant quicke and sharpe taste. 
 The blacke Gooseberies are lyke to the aforesayde, in branches, leaues, flowers, and fruite, sauing they be of a blacke colour and vnpleasant taste, and therefore not vsed. 
 ❀ The Place. Beyondsea Gooseberies are planted in diuers gardens, wherewithall they vse to make twisted hedges alongst by the allies and borders of gardens. 
 The blacke Goosederies growe of them selues in moyst vntoyled places, alongst by the ditches &amp; water courses.
Vua vrsi Galeni. Ribes, vulgò. 
 ❀ The Time. Beyondsea Gooseberies are most commonly rype in Iuly. 
 ❀ The Names. This plant is called of the later writers in Latine, Grossularia rubra, Grossu laria transmarina, Ribes, and Ribesum: yet this is not right Ribes. 
 The fruite is also called of the later writers Groslulę transmarinae, and it shoulde seeme to be the fruite the whiche Galen lib. 7. de medicamentis secun∣dùm loca, calleth , Vuae vrsi: in shoppes they cal it Ribes: in French, Groiselles d ' outre mer: in high Douche, S. Iohans treuble, or Treublin, and S. Iohans beerlin: in base Almaigne, Besiekens ouer zea, and Aelbesiekens. 
 The first kinde is called Grossulae rubrae, Ribes rubrum: in Englishe, Redde Gooseberies, Beyondsea Gooseberies, Bastard Corinthes, &amp; common Ribes: in Frenche, Groiselles rouges: in base Almaigne, Roode Aelbesien, and of this sort onely they vse in shoppes, and meates. 
 The second kinde is called Ribes nigrum: in English, Blacke Gooseberies, or blacke Ribes: in Frenche, Groiselles noires: in base Almaigne, Swerte Aelbe∣sien. 
 ❀ The Nature. The red Gooseberies are cold and drie in the second degree, and astringent or binding. 
 ❧ The Vertues. Red Gooseberies do refreshe and coole the hoate stomacke and liuer, and it is very good to be takē against al inflammation, &amp; burning heate of the blood, and hoate agues. 
 The same holden in the mouth &amp; chewed, is good against al inflammation, and hoate tumours in the mouth, and quencheth thirst in hoate agues. 
 It stoppeth the laske comming of a cholerique humour, and the blooddy flixe, especially the Robbe or dried iuyce thereof. 
 The rob made with the iuyce of common Ribes and Sugar, is very good for all the diseases abouesayde, it stoppeth vomitinges, and the vpbreakinges of the stomacke, and is very good in hoate agues to be dronkē with a litle cold water, or to be holden in the mouth against thirst. 
 The blacke Gooseberies are not vsed in Physicke. 
 Of Berberis. Chap. xxi. ❀ The Description. T HE Barberie plante, is a shrub or bushe of ten or twelue foote high or more, bringing foorth many wooddish branches, set with sharpe prick∣ley thornes. The leaues be of a whitish greene &amp; snipt round about, the edges like a saw set with fine prickles, of a sharpe sower tast, &amp; therfore is vsed in sawces in steede of sorrel. The flowers be smal, of a pale yellowishe colour, growing amongst the leaues vpon short clustering stems, after y e flowers there hang by the sayd stemmes litle long round beries, red at the the first when they be ripe, but when they be dry, they are blackish, in taste sower &amp; astringēt, with a harde gray or blackishe kernel in the middle whiche is the seede. The roote is harde and long, diuided into many branches, very yellow within as al the rest of the wood of this plant is, of taste somewhat rough or sowre binding. 
 ❀ The Place. The Barberie bushe is founde in Brabant about the borders of wooddes and hedges. It is also muche planted in gardens, especially in the gardens of Herboristes. 
 ❀ The Time. The Barberie bushe putteth foorth newe leaues in April, as the most part of other trees doth: it flowreth in Maye, and the fruite is ripe in Septem∣ber. 
 ❀ The Names. This plant is called in shops Berberis, especially the fruit therof, y e which to them is best knowen: the learned Matthiolus calleth this plant in Latine, Crespinus: in English, Barberies, &amp; the Barberie bushe or tree: in Frenche, Espine vinette: in high Douche, Paisselbeer, Saurich, Erbsel, Versich: in base Almaigne Sauseboom. This is a kinde of Amyrberis, that is to say, Oxyacantha, in Auicen and Serapiō, the which do set out two kindes of Amyr∣beris: The one hauing a redde fruite, the whiche Dioscorides calleth Oxyacantha, &amp; is described hereafter in the xxxi. Chap. the other with a long blackishe fruite, and is counted for the best Amyrberis, and is that whiche the later writers do call Ber∣beris, it is also very lyke to be the Oxya∣cantha, described by Galen, lib. 2. de Ali∣mentor. facultat. amongst those kindes of shrubbes or plantes whose young shutes and springes are good to be eaten. 
 ¶ The Nature. The leaues and fruite of Barberies, are of complexion colde and drie in the se∣cond degree, &amp; somewhat of subtil partes. 
 Crespinus Matthioli. 
 ❧ The Vertues. With the greene leaues of the Barberie bush they make sawce to eate with meates as they do with Sorrel, the which doth refresh and prouoke appetite, and is good for hoate people and them that are vexed with burning agues. 
 The fruite stoppeth the laske, and all superfluous fluxes of women, and al vnnaturall fluxe of blood.
¶ The Nature. The fruite of White Thorne is drie and astringent. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The fruit of this Thorne stop∣peth the laske, and the flowers of women. 
 And as some of the later wri∣ters affirme, it is good against the grauell and the stone. 
 Oxyacantha Dioscoridis. 
 Of Boxe tree. Chap. xxxij. ¶ The Kindes. THere are two kinds of Boxe, that is to say, the great &amp; the smal, and both are meetely commō in this Countrie. 
 ❀ The Description. T He great Boxe, is a faire great tree, with a bigge body or stemme, that is harde, and meete for to make diuers and sundrie kindes of workes and instrumentes: for the timber therof is firme, hard, and thicke, very good to be wrought, and cut all manner wayes: and lasteth a long space with∣out rotting or corruption. It hath many bowes and harde branches, as bigge as the armes and branches of some other trees, couered with many smal darke greene leaues, the which do not fal away in the winter, but do remayne greene both winter and Sommer. The flowers growe amongst the leaues vpon the litle small branches, after whiche commeth the seede whiche is blacke, inclosed in round cuppes or huskes somewhat bigger then Coriander beries, of colour greene, with three feete or legges, like the fashion of a kitchin pot wherin meat is prepared and boyled, the whiche is very lyuely pictured in Matthiolus last edition. 
 The smaller Boxe is a little bushe, not lightly exceeding the height of two foote, but spreadeth his branches abrode, the whiche most commonly do grow very thicke from the roote, and sometimes they growe out of a small tronke or stubbed stemme. The leaues of this kinde are of a clearer greene or lighter co∣lour, and they be also rounder, and somewhat smaller than the leaues of the greater Boxe, in all other partes lyke to the aforesayde. 
 ¶ The Place. Boxe delighteth to growe vpon high colde mountaynes, as vpon the hilles and desertes of Switserland, and Sauoye and other lyke places, where as it groweth plentifully. In this Countrie they plante both kindes in some gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Boxe is planted at the beginning of No∣uember, it flowreth in February &amp; March, and in some Countries the seede is ripe in September. 
 ❀ The Names. Boxe is called in Greke : in Latine, Buxus: in Frēch, Grand Buys: in high Douch, Buxbaum: in base Almaigne, Buxboom, and of the common people Palmboom, that is to say, the Boxe tree, and Palme tree, by∣cause vpon Palme Sunday they carie it in their Churches, and sticke it rounde about in their houses. 
 The smal Boxe is called of some in Greke : in Latine, Humi Buxus: that is to say, Ground Boxe, or Dwarffe Boxe: in Frenche, Petit Buys. 
 ❀ The Nature. The leaues of Boxe are hoate, drie, and astringent, as the taste doth playnely de∣clare. 
 Boxe. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Boxe is not vsed in medicine, and amongst the Auncient writers, a man shal find nothing to any purpose, written of the faculties therof. Notwithstanding there be some ignorant women (which do aduance them selues, &amp; take in hand to cure diseases that they know not) who do minister the croppes of the Boxe tree, to people sicke of the Apoplexie, which is contrarie to al reason. For Boxe taken into the body, doth not onely hurt the brayne, but is very hurtfull for the brayne when it is but smelled to. 
 Some learned writers at this time do affirme, that the lye in which Boxen leaues haue bene stieped, maketh the heare yellow, if the head be often washed therewithall. 
 Of the prickley Goxe. Chap. xxxiij. ❀ The Description. P Rickley Boxe is a tree not muche vnlyke to the other Boxe, with many great armes or branches of fiue or sixe foote long or more, the leaues be thicke and somewhat rounde, lyke Boxen leaues, and amongst them growe sharpe pricking Thornes, the flowers also growe amongst the leaues, and after them there commeth a blacke rounde seede, as bigge as a Pepper corne. The rootes are woddishe, and spreade muche abrode. 
 Of the smal branches and rootes of this tree, soked in water and boyled, or of the pressing foorth of the iuyce of the seede, they make Lycium, the whiche in times past was muche vsed of Physitions. 
 ❀ The Place. This prickley Boxe groweth in Cap∣padocia and Lycia, and in some partes of Italie and Slauonia, it is yet vn∣knowen in this Countrie. 
 ❀ The Names. This thorne is called in Greke : in Latine also, Pyxacantha and Lycium, of Theophrastus, , that is to say, Buxus asinina: in Frenche, Buys espineux, or Buys d ' asne in base Al∣maigne, Buxdoren, after the Greke: we may cal it in English, Boxe thorne, Asses Boxe tree, and prickley Boxe, also Ly∣cium: Thorne Boxe. 
 ❀ The Nature. Lycium dried, is of subtil partes, and astringent, as Galen saith.
❧ The Vertues. Lycium whiche is made of the bran∣ches, rootes, or seede of Boxe thorne, or prickley Boxe, helpeth them that haue the laske, and blooddy flixe, as also those that spet blood, and haue the cough. 
 It stoppeth the inordinate course of the flowers, taken either inwardly, or applyed outwardly. 
 It is good against corrupt vlcers, and running scabbes, and sanious running eares, the inflammation of the gummes and kernelles, called the Almondes vnder the tongue, and against the choppes of the lippes, and fundament, to be layde thereto. 
 Pyxacantha, Lycium. 
 It cleareth the sight, and cureth the scurffie festered sores of the eye liddes, and corners of the eyes. 
 Of Holme / Holly / or Huluer. Chap. xxxiiij. ❀ The Description. H Olme groweth sometimes after the maner af a hedge plant, amongst other thornes and bushes, and somtimes also it groweth vpright and straight, and becommeth a tall high and great tree, with a big stemme or body, and limbes and branches according to the same. The tymber of this tree is harde and heauie, and sinketh to the bottome of the water lyke Guaiacum, or Lignum sanctum, wherevnto our Holly in figure is not much vn∣lyke. The leaues of Holly are thicke and harde, of the quantitie of a Bay leafe, but full of sharpe poyntes or prickley corners. The whiche leaues remayne greene both winter and sommer, as the leaues of Boxe and Bay, and doo not lightly vade or wither. The beries or fruite of Holme is rounde, of the quanti∣tie of a Pease, of colour red, and of an euill vnpleasant taste. 
 ❀ The Place. Holme groweth much in this Countrie in rough, stony, barraine &amp; vntoyled places, alongst the wayes and in wooddes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The same fruite or beries of Holme, are ripe in September, and hang fast vpon the tree a long tyme after without falling of. 
 ❀ The Names. Holme is called of some late writers in Greeke : in Latine, Rus∣cus syluestris: in high Douch, Walddistel oder Stehpalmen: in base Almaigne, Hulst: in Italian, Agrifolium, as Mat∣thiolus writeth. And in sight it appea∣reth to be much lyke Plinies Aquifoliū, whiche is called of Theophrastus in Greeke , and , as wit∣nesseth Plinie lib. 27. Cap. 7. Neither can it be Paliurus, as some do esteeme it: but it seemeth to be somwhat lyke . Oxycanthus of Theophrastus, the which is alwayes greene: in Englishe it is cal∣led Holme, Holly, and Husuer. 
 ❀ The Nature. The beries of Holme or Holly, are hoate. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Some boasting of their experience vpon Holme, do affirme that fiue beries therof taken inwardly, are good against the cholique, and prouoke to go to the stoole. 
 Agrifolium. 
 With the barkes of Holme they make Birdlyme: the order of making therof is very wel knowen, but if any be yet desirous to learne the same, let him seeke the thirde booke of Maister Turners herball Chap. lxxxj. 
 They vse the smal branches and leaues of Holme to clense and sweepe chim∣neyes, as they vse to do in Burgundie and other places, with Kneeholme or Butchers broome. Other then this we dare not affirme of Holme, bycause it serueth not in Physicke. 
 Of the Apple tree. Chap. xxxv. ❀ The Kyndes. THere be diuers sortes of Apples, not onely differing in figure and propor∣tion of making, but also in taste, quantitie, and colour, so that it is not pos∣sible, neither yet necessarie, to recite or number al the kindes, consydering that all Apple trees are almost lyke one another: and all sortes of Apples may be comprehended in a few kindes, for the playner declaration of their natures, faculties, or powers: as into sweet, sower, rough, astringent, waterish apples, and apples of a mixt temperature, as betwixt sweete and sower, &amp;c. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE Apple trees in continuance of time, do for the most part become high and great trees, with many armes &amp; branches spread abroade. The leaues be greene and roundishe, more rounde then the Peare-tree leaues, and do fall of a litle before winter, and do spring and re∣new agayne in May. The flowers for the most part are white, and vpon some apple trees chaungeable, betwixt white and redde. The fruite is round and of many fashions, in colour &amp; taste as is abouesayde. In the middle of the apples are inclosed blacke kernels couered ouer with hard pilles or skinnes. 
 ❀ The Place. Apple trees are planted in gar∣dens and Orchardes, and they delight in good fertil grounde. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Apple trees do most common∣ly blow, at the ende of April and beginning of May. The fruit is ripe, of some in Iuly, of some in August, and of the last sorte in September. 
 ¶ The Names. The Apple tree is called in Greeke : in Latine, Malus, &amp; Pomus: in high Douche, Apffel∣baum: in base Almaigne, Appel∣boom: in Frenche, Pommier. The fruite is called in Greeke, : in Latine, Pomum, and Malum: in English, an Apple: in French, Pomme: in high Douch, Apffel: in base Almaigne, Appel. 
 Malus.
❀ The Nature. All sortes of Apples be colde and moyst, yet some more thē the rest: those that be sower or sharpe, do dry more then the rest, especially if they be astringent or binding. Sweete Apples are not so colde, but rather of a meane temperature. The waterishe apples are moystiest, especially those that are ney∣ther sower nor sweete but taking part of both tastes. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Apples do coole and comfort the hoate stomacke, especially those that be sow∣rish and astringent of taste, and they may be vsed in hoate agues, and other in∣flammations or heates of the stomacke, and against thirste: but otherwise they are hurtful to the stomacke, causing windinesse and blastinges in the belly. 
 Sower Apples boyled &amp; eaten colde before meate, do lose the belly gently. 
 Apples eaten before meate do nourishe very litle, and do yeelde a moyst and noughty iuyce or nourishment: for they are soone corrupted in the stomacke, and turne to noughtie humours, especially the waterishe Apples. 
 The leaues of the Apple tree are good to be layde vpon the beginninges of phlegmons (that is hoate simple tumours or swellinges) and are good to be layde vpon woundes to keepe them from euyll heate and a postumation. 
 Of Orenges / Citrons / and Limons. Chap. xxxvi. ¶ The Kindes. There be at this present, three sortes of Apples or rather fruites, which of the Auncientes in times past were cōprehended vnder the name of Citrium, wher∣of the first is called an Orenge, the seconde a Citron, the thirde a Limon. 
 ❀ The Description. T He trees y t bring foorth Orenges, Citrons, and Limons, growe as high as other trees do, with many greene branches, in some places set with stiffe prickles, or sharpe thornes. The leaues be alwaies greene and thicke, not much vnlyke the Bay leaues. The fruite hath a very thicke pyl or rinde, within the rinde is a cleare through shining pulpe or moyst substance, full of iuyce &amp; liquor, a∣mongst the which is the seede or kernels. 
 The Orēge is round as an apple, with a thicke pyll, at the first greene without, but after when they be ripe, of a faire red or pleasant tawnie colour, or browne yel∣lowe lyke Saffron, but the sayde pill is white within &amp; spongious or somewhat open. The pulpe or inner pith is through shining cleare and ful of iuyce, the whiche in some is sower, &amp; in others sweete. The seede or kernelles are most commonly as bigge as wheate cornes, &amp; bitter in taste. 
 The Citron is long almost lyke a Cu∣cumber, or somwhat longer and rugged, or wrinckled, the rinde or pil is thicke, yel∣low without, &amp; white within. The inner part or substance is also cleare &amp; through shining, like y e pulpe of the Orenge, wher∣in is also the seede or kernelles not much vnlyke Orenge kernelles. 
 The Limon in fashion is longer then the Orenge, but otherwayes not muche vnlike, sauing that the outsyde of the Li∣mon pill is paler and smother, and the kernels smaller. 
 Aurantia Mala. Medica Mala. Limonia Mala. Orenge. Citrons. Limons. 
 ¶ The Place. These fruites do now grow in Italy, Spayne, and some places of Fraunce. In this Countrie the Herboristes do set and plante the Orenge trees in their gardens, but they beare no fruite without they be wel kept and defended from colde, and yet for all that they beare very seldome. 
 ❧ The Names. The tree that beareth these fruites, is called in Greeke : in Latine, Malus medica, and Malus citria. And albeit the Citron and eche of the other are seuerall trees one from another, as it is playnely to be seene in Matthiolus Commentaries vpon Diosc. li. j. where also it is to be noted in the Citron tree, that his leafe is finely snipt about y e edges or toothed lyke a saw, but the Limō and Orenge trees, whose leaues be euer greene lyke the Bay tree, are not in∣dented, but smothe about the edges, so that at the first sight Citron, Orenge and Limon trees, do shew lyke Bay trees, but the pleasant sauour and smell of the leaues, be farre vnlyke the smell of the Bay leaues: these three trees, I say, be of the Auncientes, all contayned vnder the Citron tree. 
 The fruites also be all called of the Auncientes by one Greeke name : in Latine, Mala citria. 
 The first kinde is also called of the Auncientes in Greeke : in La∣tine, Aureū malum, &amp; Malum Hespericum, of some also Nerantzium, of the later writers Anarantium, and Arantium: in Englishe, an Orenge: in French, Pomme d ' Orenge▪ in high Douche, Pomerantsen: in base Almaigne, Arangie appelen: in Spanish, Naranzas, the whiche name seemeth to be taken from the worde, Narantzium, by the which the Apples were once called, as witnesseth, Nicāder. 
 The seconde kinde is called Cedromelon, and in this Countrie Citrones, &amp; Mala citria: in Frenche, Citrons: in Englishe, Citrons: in high Douche, Citrina∣ten: in base Almaigne, Citroenen. This kind is called of the Italians, as Musa writeth, Limones. 
 The thirde kinde is called in the Shoppes of this Countrie Limones, and Malum Limonium: in Englishe, Limons, in Douche, Limoenen: in Frenche, Limons: Antonie Musa writeth, that the Italians doo call this fruite Citrium malum. 
 ❀ The Nature. The pill, especially the outwarde parte thereof is hoate and drie. 
 The pulpe with the iuyce is colde and drie in the thirde degree. 
 The seede is hoate and dry in the second degree, and the leaues be almost of the same nature.
❀ The Vertues. The iuyce of these fruites, and the inner substance wherein the iuyce is con∣tayned, especially of the Orenges, is very good against contagiousnesse and corruption of the ayre, against the plague &amp; other hoate feuers, and it doth not onely preserue and defende the people from suche dangerous sicknesse, but also it cureth the same. 
 It comforteth the hart, &amp; aboue al other the mouth of the stomacke: where∣fore it is good against the weakenesse of the same, the trembling of the hart and pensiue heauinesse, wamblinges, vomitinges, and lothsomnesse, that hap∣pen in hoate agues and suche other diseases that trouble the stomacke. 
 The same fruite with his iuyce quencheth thirst, and reuiueth the appetite. 
 The syrupe that is made of the iuyce of this fruite, is almost of the same na∣ture and operation that the iuyce is: but more fit and pleasant to be taken at the mouth. 
 The pylles or barkes of these fruites condited or preserued with hony or sugar and eaten, do warme the stomacke and helpe digestion, wasting and dri∣uing away all superfluities of the stomacke, and amending the stinking breath. 
 The seede withstandeth all venome and poyson, and the bitinges and stin∣ginges of all venemous beastes: it killeth and driueth foorth wormes, wher∣fore it is good to be giuen to children against the wormes. 
 Of Musa or Mose tree. Chap. xxxviij. ❀ The Description. T HE Mose tree leaues be so great and large, that one may easyly wrap a childe of twelue monethes old in them, so that as I thinke in seeking ouer the whole worlde a man shall not agayne finde a tree hauing so large a leafe. The fruite is lyke a Cucumber most sauerie &amp; plea∣sant in taste aboue all other fruites of y e Countrie of Leuant. 
 ¶ The Place. This tree was found by a cer∣tayne Fryer named Andro The∣net, in the Countrie of Syria, by the great towne Aleph, so called of the first letter of the Hebrue Alphabet, where as is great re∣sort and traffique of marchants, aswell of Indians, Persians, &amp; Venitians, as of diuers other strange nations. 
 ❀ The Names. This tree with his fruite is called of Auicen Chap. 495. Musa, &amp; at this present in Syria Mose: And the Grekes and Christians of y e Countrie, as also y e Iewes, do say that this was the fruite whereof Adam dyd eate. This may be the tree which Plinie de∣scribeth lib. 12. Cap. 6. called Pala, whose fruite is called Ariene. 
 ❀ The Nature. The fruite of Mose tree is hoate and moyst. 
 Musa. 
 ❀ The Vertues. This fruite eaten nourisheth muche, and very quickly, as Auicen saith, but eaten in to great a quantitie, it stoppeth the liuer, and engendreth fleme and choler. 
 It is also good for the breast, the stomacke, and the kidneyes, it mollifieth the roughnesse and sharpnesse of the throte, prouoketh vrine, and encreaseth na∣turall seede. 
 Of the Pome Granate. Chap. xxxviij. ❀ The Kindes. THere be two sortes of Pomegranates, the tame and the wilde: the fruite of the tame is three maner of wayes, y e one hauing a sowre iuyce or liquor, the other is sweete, and the thirde hath the taste of wine. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE tame Pomegranate is not very great, it hath many pliant bowes or branches, set with cruell thornes. The leaues be very greene and straight or narrowe, lyke vnto willow leaues, but shorter and thicker, with small litle red veynes going through them, &amp; hanging by a litle red foote stalke. The flowers be holow like a wine cup or goblet, cut about the brimmes after the fashiō of a starre, of the colour Scarlet or Vermilion, after them com∣meth the fruite whiche is rounde, and within it is full of graynes of a Crimsin red colour, the whiche graynes haue corners or edges, lyke the stones called Granati, and within them lyeth small stones. The whiche graynes and beries (by the wonderful &amp; maruelous worke of nature) are with cer∣tayne thinne and yellowish fyne velmes and skinnes, going be∣twixt, set and couched in very good order: from those graynes commeth the iuyce, the which is sower or sweete, or hauing the taste of wine. The shell or pyll of the Pomegranate is thinne and tender before it is dry, but being dried, it waxeth harde, and of a woodish substance, yellow with∣in, but without coloured lyke a Chesnut. 
 The wild Pomegranate tree is lykewise lyke vnto the afore∣sayde: but it bringeth foorth no fruite, and his flowers be very double, the whiche is the cause that it bringeth foorth no fruite. 
 ❀ The Place. The Pomegranates growe in hoate Countries, as Italy, Spayne, &amp; diuers other places. 
 Malus punica. The Pomegranate. 
 ❀ The Names. The Pomegranate is called in Greeke : in Latine, Malum punicum, &amp; Malum Gra∣natum: in Shoppes, Pomum Granatum: in Englishe, a Pomegranate: in high Douche, Granat apffel: in base Almaigne, Granate apple: in Frenche, Pommes Granades. 
 The flowers of the tame Pomegranate tree, is called in Greeke , and in Latine, Cytini.
The flowers of the wilde after Dioscorides, are called in Greeke : &amp; accordingly in Latine, Balaustium: in French, Des Balustres. And these flowers are very double, and there foloweth no fruite after. The flowers that bring foorth fruite are single, and therefore they are named the tame. 
 The rinde or pill of the Pomegranate, is called in Greeke : in Latine, Malicorium, and Sidium. 
 ❀ The Nature. Pomegranates be colde and somewhat astringent, but not al of a lyke sort. The sower are more drying and astringent. The sweete are not so much astrin∣gent, but more moyst then the others. Those that be in taste lyke wine, are in∣different. 
 ❧ The Vertues. The iuyce of the Pomegrate is very good for the stomacke comforting the same when it is weake and feeble, and cooling when it is to hoate or burning: it is good also against the weaknesse and wambling of the stomacke, lyke as the iuyce of Orenges and Citrons, and it is very good against al hoate agues, and the inflammation of the liuer and blood, especially the iuyce of the sower Pomegranates, and next to them suche as be of winish taste: for the sweete Pomegranates (bycause they engender a litle heate and breede winde) are not very meete to be vsed in agues. 
 The blossomes both of the tame and wilde Pomegranate trees, as also the rinde or shell of the Pomegranate, made into powder and eaten, or boyled in red wine and dronken, are good against the blooddy flixe, and the inordinate course of the mother, not onely taken as is aforesayde, but also to sit or bath in the decoction of the same. 
 The same barke or blossoms do stoppe the blood of greene woundes, if it be applied in what sort so euer it be. 
 The same barke killeth wormes, and is a good remedie against the corrup∣tion in the stomacke and bowels. 
 With the same barke or with the flowers of the Pomegranate, the moyst and weake gummes are healed, and it fasteneth loose teeth, if they be washed with the broth or decoction of the same. 
 The barke (and as Turner saith the flowers) are good to be put into the playsters that are made against burstinges, that come by the falling downe of the guttes. 
 The seede of Pomegranates dried in the Sonne, haue y e lyke vertue as the flowers: it stoppeth the laske, &amp; al issue of blood to be taken in the same maner. 
 The same mingled with hony is good against the sores and vlcers of the mouth, the priuities and fundament. 
 Some say, as Dioscorides writeth, that whosoeuer eateth three flowers of the tame Pomegranate, shalbe for one whole yere after preserued from drop∣ping or bleared eyes. 
 Of the Quince tree. Chap. xxxix. ¶ The Kyndes. THere be two sortes of Quinces: y e one is rounde &amp; called the Apple Quince: the other is greater, and fashioned lyke a Peare, and is called the Peare Quince. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE Quince tree neuer groweth very high, but it bringeth foorth many brāches as other trees do. The leaues be roundishe, greene vppon the vpper side, and white and soft vnder, the rest of the proportion, is lyke to the leaues of the common Apple tree. The flower changeth vpon purple mixed with white: after the flowers cōmeth the fruite of a pleasant smel, in proportion somtimes rounde as an Apple thruste togither, and sometimes long lyke a Peare, with cer∣tayne embowed or swellyng diuisions, somewhat resembing the fashion of a gar∣lyke head, and when the hearie cotton or downe is rubbed of, they appeare as yel∣low as golde. In the middest of the fruite is the seede or kernelles lyke to other Apples. 
 Malus Cotonea. 
 ❀ The Place. Quince trees are planted in gardens, and they loue shadowy moyst places. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The Quince is ripe in September and October. 
 ❀ The Names. The Quince tree is called in Greeke : in Latine, Malus cotonea: in high Douche Quittenbaum, oder Kuttenbaum: in base Almaigne, Queap∣pelboom: in Frenche, Coingnaciere. 
 The fruite is called in Greeke : in Latine, Malum Cotoneum: in Shoppes, Cytonium: in Frenche, Coing: in high Douch, Quitten opffel, and Kutten opffel: in base Almaigne, Queappel: in English, a Quince, &amp; an Apple, or Peare Quince. 
 Some call the rounde fruite, Poma Citonia: in Englishe, Apples Quinces: in Frenche, Pomme de Coing or Coing in base Almaigne, Queappelen.
The other fruite whiche hath the likenes of a Peare, Galen calleth , Struthia: and it is called in Englishe, the Peare Quince: in Frenche, Pomme de Coing, Coignasse: in base Almaigne, Quepeeren, of some Pyra Cytonia. 
 ❀ The Nature. The Quince is colde in the first degree, and drie in the second, and astringent or binding. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The Quince stoppeth the laske or common fluxe of the belly, the Dysenterie, &amp; all fluxes of blood, and is good against the spitting of blood, especially when it is rawe: for when it is either boyled or rosted, it stoppeth not so muche, but it is than fitter to be eaten, and more pleasant to the taste. 
 The woman with childe that eateth of Quinces oftentimes, either in meate or otherwayes, shal bring foorth wise children of good vnderstanding, as Si∣meon Sethy writeth. 
 The Codignac, or Marmelade made with honie (as it was wonte to be made in times past) or with sugar, as they vse to make it nowe a dayes, is very good and profitable for the stomacke to strengthen the same, and to retaine and keepe the meates in the same, vntill they be perfectly digested. 
 Being taken before meate, it stoppeth the laske: and after meate it loseth the belly, and closeth the mouth of the stomacke so fast, that no vapours can come foorth, nor ascende vp to the brayne: also it cureth the headache springing of suche vapours. 
 The decoction or broth of Quinces, hath the lyke vertue, and stoppeth the belly and all fluxe of blood, with the violent running foorth of womens sicke∣nesse. 
 With the same they vse to bathe the loose fundement, and falling downe of the mother, to make them returne into their natural places. 
 They do very profitably mixe them with emplaysters, that be made to stop the laske and vomiting. They be also layde vpon the inflammations, and hoate swellinges of the breastes and other partes. 
 The downe or heare Cotton that is founde vppon the Quinces, sodden in wine, and layde therevnto healeth Carbuncles, as Plinie writeth. 
 The oyle of Quinces stayeth vomitinges, gripings in the belly or stomacke with the casting vp of blood, if the stomacke be annoynted therewith. 
 The flowers of the Quince tree do stoppe the fluxe of the belly, the spetting of blood, and the menstruall flowers. To conclude, it hath the same vertue as the Quinces them selues. 
 Of the Peache and Abrecok trees. Chap. xl. ❀ The Kindes. THere be two kindes of Peaches, whereof the one kinde is late ripe, and most commonly white, and sometimes yellow, also there be some that are red. The other kindes are soner ripe, wherefore they be called Abrecox, or Aprecox. 
 Malus Persica. The Peache tree. 
 Malus Armeniaca. The Aprecok tree. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE Peache tree is more tender then other trees, and of long conti∣tinuance, but doth perishe and die much sooner, then any other fruiteful trees. The leaues of Peache tree be long and lightly iagged about the edges, nothing differing from willowe leaues, sauing that they be somewhat shorter and bitterer. The flowers are of a reddishe skye colour, after whiche commeth the fruite whiche is rounde lyke an Apple, with a deepe and straight clift or forrow vpon one side, and couered ouer with a soft downe or hoare cot∣ton, of colour sometimes white, sometimes greene, sometimes reddishe, and sometimes yellowe, and of a winishe taste, soft in feeling, and of a fleshy pulpe or substance, in the middest whereof is a rough harde stone, full of creastes and gutters, within whiche is a kernell lyke an Almonde. 
 The Abrecok in timber flowers and maner of growing is not much vnlyke the other Peache tree, sauing that his leaues be shorter &amp; broder, and nothing like to the Peache leaues. The fruite is like to a Peache, but smaller, &amp; sooner ripe. 
 ❀ The Place. They plante the Peache tree in gardens and vineyardes, and they loue a soft and gentle grounde standing wel in the Sonne. 
 ❀ The Time. The Peaches flower in Aprill, and the Abrecox are ripe in Iune, but the Peaches in September. 
 ❀ The Names. The Peache tree is called in Greeke : in Latine, Malus Persica: in high Douche, Pfersich baum: in base Almaigne, Perseboom: in French, Vng Pescher: in English, a Peache tree.
The fruite is called in Greeke : in Latine, Malum Persicum: in shops, Persicum: in French, Pesches: in high Douch, Pfersing: in base Almaigne, Persen: in Englishe, Peaches. That kinde whiche will not easily be separated from the stone, are called Duracina, in Frenche, Des Presses. 
 The Abrecok tree is called in Greeke : in Latine, Malus Arme∣niaca: in Douche, Vroeghe Perseboom. 
 The fruite is called : in Latine, Mala Armeniaca, Praecoqua, and Praecocia: in English, Abrecok, Aprecok, and Aprecox: in Frenche, Abricoz: in high Douch, Mollelin, and Molleten: in base Almaigne, Vroege Persekens, &amp; Auant Perses: also of the high Douch men, S. Iohans Pfersich, which may be Englished, S. Iohns Peaches, Hastie Peaches, and Midsomer Peaches. 
 The tree Persea with his fruite, is not to be reckoned amongst these kindes (as some thinke) for Persea is a great tree, like a Peare tree, alwayes greene and lodē with fruit, as Theophrastus in his fourth booke the second Chapter writeth. 
 ❀ The Nature. The Peache is colde and moyste in the seconde degree. The leaues of the tree and the kernels of the fruite are hoate and drie, almost in the third degree, and of a scowring power by meanes of their bitternesse. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Peaches before they be ripe, do stoppe the laske, as Dioscorides saith. 
 But being ripe, they loose the belly, &amp; engender noughtie humours: for they are soone corrupted in the stomacke, wherefore they ought not to be eaten after meates, but before, as Galen saith. 
 The leaues of the Peache tree, do open the stoppinges of the liuer, and doo gently loose the belly, and are good with other conuenient herbes, agaynst ter∣tian feuers. 
 The same layde vpon the nauell, do kyl and driue out wormes, especially in young children. 
 The same dried and strawed vpon newe woundes, do cure and heale them. 
 The Peache kernel openeth all stoppinges of the liuer and lunges, and in vertue is much lyke to bitter Almondes. 
 It is good to recouer againe the speache of such as be taken with the Apo∣plexie, if it be stieped in the water of Penny Ryall. 
 Peache kernelles pownde or beaten very smal, and boyled in vineger vntil they dissolue or melte, and become lyke pappe, is good to be vsed against the A∣lopetiam: for it doth woonderfully restore the heare if the place be annoynted therewithall, as Matthiolus saith. There be other vertues attributed to the same kernelles, as ye may reade in Matthiolus and Myzalde. 
 Of the Almonde tree. Chap. xli. ¶ The Kindes. There be two sortes of Almondes, that is to say, the sweete and bitter Al∣mondes. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE Almonde tree, in groth, and leaues, is lyke to the Peache tree, but it waxeth bigger, and stronger, &amp; is of a longer con∣tinuance or lasting. The fruite is a harde nut like the Peache stone, but smooth without, and couered with an vtter huske or shale lyke the Walnut: within the inner shale is the Almonde, in taste bitter or sweete, as is abouesayde. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The Almonde tree flowreth bytimes, with the Peache tree. The fruite is ripe in Iune &amp; Iuly. 
 ❀ The Names. The Almonde tree is called in Greke : in Latine, Amyg∣dalus: in high Douche, Mandel∣baum, in base Almaigne, Aman∣delboom: in Frenche, Amandier. 
 The fruite is called in Greeke : in Latine, Amygdala, and Amygdalum: in English, Almondes, or Almonde: in French, Amand: in high Douch, Mandel: in base Almaigne, A∣mandele. 
 Amygdalus. Almondes. 
 ❀ The Nature. Almondes are somewhat hoate, especially the bitter Almondes, the whiche be not onely hoate, but also drie, and of clensing, and cutting power.
❀ The Vertues. Almondes taken before meate, do stop the belly and nourishe but litle, espe∣cially being blanched or made cleane from their skinnes or huddes. 
 Bitter Almondes doo open the stopping of the lunges or lightes, the liuer, the melt, or splene, the kidneyes, &amp; of al other inwarde partes: therefore they be good against the cough, the shortnes of wind, the inflammation &amp; exulceration of lunges, to be mingled with Turpentine &amp; licked in, as Dioscorides writeth. 
 Almondes are good for them that spet blood, to be taken in with the fine flower called Amylum. 
 The bitter Almondes taken with a litle sweete wine, as Muscadel or Ba∣starde, prouoke vrine, and do cure the hardnesse of the same, and painefulnes in making water, &amp; are good for thē that are troubled with the grauel &amp; stone. 
 They vse to take fiue or sixe bitter Almondes fasting, to be preserued from dronkennesse al the same day. 
 They take away headache to be applied to the forehead with oyle of Roses, and vineger. 
 They are with great profite layde to with hony, vpon corrupt and noughty spreading sores, and the bitinges of mad Dogges. 
 They clense the skinne and face from al spottes, pimples and lentiles. 
 Of the Peare tree. Chap. xlij. ❀ The Kindes. THere be diuers sortes of Peares, aswell as there be kindes of Apples, whereof some be rathe ripe, some haue a later riping, and some be winter Peares, some perish quickly, some last a longer time and may be wel kept: some be sweete and full of sap or iuyce, some fat and grosse, and some harde and drie, &amp;c. so that it is not possible to recite all the kindes of Peares: wherefore we do aduise the Readers to consyder the taste more then the proportion, or the time of the riping of Peares: for the taste doth best declare and giue notice of the qualitities and temperature of Peares. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE Pearetree is as great or greater thē the Apple tree, and higher, with a great body or stemme, and manye great bran∣ches, the which for the most parte doo shute or mount vpright, &amp; not one ouer another, as the branches of the Apple tree. The leaues be roundish, smoth, and very greene aboue: but vnderneath most com∣monly they be whitish. The fruite for the most part is long, brode be∣neath, and narrowe, and sharpe vpwarde towardes the stemme, very diuers or cōtrary, in colour, quantitie, proportion, and taste, as is abouesayde. In the middle of the fruite there is a coare with kernels or peppins, lyke as in the middest of the Apples. 
 ❀ The Place. The Peare tree is planted in gardens and Orchardes: also it groweth sometimes in woods &amp; wild vntoyled places, but they be none otherwyse esteemed, but as wildings or wild hedge Peares. 
 Pirus. The Peare tree. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The Pearetree flowreth in Aprill or May, and the fruite is ripe in sommer and Autumne. 
 ❧ The Names. The Pearetree is called in Greeke : in Latine, Pirus: in Frenche, Vng Poirier: in high Douch, Byrbaum: in base Almaigne, Peerboom. 
 The fruite is called in Greke : in Latine, Pira, or as some do write Pyra: in French, Poyres▪ in high Douch, Byren: in base Almaigne, Peeren, in English, Peares. 
 ¶ The Nature. All kindes of Peares are of a colde temperature, and the most part of them be drie and binding, but not all alyke: for the wilde Peares, and others that be rough, binding, and chokely, do drie &amp; stop a great deale more then the others. The sweete &amp; grouse Peares, are moystier and very litle astringent or nothing at all. The middle sorte of Peares whiche are betwixt sweete and sower, are of complexion or temperature nearest to them vnto whom their taste draweth nearest. 
 The Pearetree leaues are colde of complexion, drie and astringent, as Ga∣len saith. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Peares taken before meate, do nourish but litle, yet they nourish more then Apples, especially those that be grouse and sweete. 
 The sower, rough, and chokely Peares, and others that are not waterie, to be eaten rawe or backte before meale, do stop the common laske or flowing of the belly, and do fortifie and strengthen the mouth of the stomacke. 
 They be also good to be laide to the beginnings of hoate tumours or phleg∣mons, and greene woundes.
The leaues are good for the same purpose, for they close togither and heale newe woundes. 
 Of the Medler tree. Chap. xliij. ❀ The Kyndes. DIoscorides setteth foorth two kindes of Medlars. The first kind grow∣ing vpon thornes. The second kinde is our common Medlars, the which also be of two sortes: for some be small and some great, but in fashiō both lyke, and therefore some take them but for one kinde. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE firste kinde is a thornie tree, with prickles and leaues, not muche vnlyke the hawthorne. The fruite of this plante is small and rounde, and, as Dioscorides saith, it hath three kernelles or stones in it: and they growe in clusters, fine or sixe, or more togi∣ther. 
 The common Medler is a tree in some places not altogither without pric∣kles, growing almost lyke to the other trees. The leaues be somewhat long and narrowe, lesser then the leaues of the Apple tree, nothing at all dented or snipt about the edges. The flowers be white, and parted into fiue leaues. Af∣ter the flowers groweth the fruite, whiche is of a browne russet colour, of a rounde proportion and somewhat broade or flat, of this kinde one is smal, the other great, yet they be alwayes lesser then Apples, with a great broade nauel or Crowne at the toppe, or ende, in the middle of the same fruite are fiue flatte stones, the whiche be the seede thereof. 
 ❀ The Place. The first kinde of Medler called Aronia, hath bene seene growing at Na∣ples by the learned and famous Matthiolus: and is yet vnknowen to vs. 
 The common Medler is planted in gardens and Orchardes, &amp; delighteth to growe in rough vntoyled places, about hedges and bushes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Our common Medlers doo flower in Aprill and May, and are ripe at the ende of September. 
 ❀ The Names. The Medler is called in Greke : in Latine, Mespilus: in high Douch, Nespelbaum: in base Almaigne, Mispelboom: in Frenche, Nefflier. 
 Mespilus Aronia The Neapolitan Medler. 
 Mespilus altera. The common Medlers. 
 The fruite is called in Greeke : in Latine, Mespilum: in Englishe, a Medle, or an open arsse: in French, Neffle: in Douch, Nespel: in neather Douch∣lande, Mispele. 
 The first kinde is called in Greeke : in Latine, A∣ronia, and Trigrania: at Naples Azaerolo: we may call it also Azarola, the three grayne Medler, or the Neapolitan Medler. 
 The seconde kinde is called in Greeke , Epimelis, and of some : Sitanium, or as some write Setanium. 
 The biggest of this late recited kinde is called in English, a great Medler: or the garden Medler: in French, Neffle cultiuée: in Brabant, Pote Mispelen. 
 ❀ The Nature. Medlers be colde, drie, and astringent. The leaues of the Medler tree, be of the same nature. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Medlers do stoppe the belly, especially being yet greene and harde, for after they haue bene a while kept, so that they become soft and tender, they doo not stoppe so muche: but then they are more conuenient to be eaten, yet they nourish but litle, or nothing at all. 
 The Medler stones made into powder and dronken, doo breake the stone and expulse grauel, as Antony Musa writeth. 
 Matthiolus &amp; Mizalde, do intreate more largely of the vertues of this fruit. 
 Of the Mulberie tree. Chap. xliiij. ❀ The Description. T HE Mulberie tree is great and large, spreading his branches in∣to breadth and lēgth, his leaues be greene &amp; large, snipt about the edges, after the maner of a sawe. The flower is smal with a fine hoare or soft cotton. The fruite consisteth of many beries growing togither like the fruite of y e Bramble, but it is larger and longer, of colour white at the beginning, after redde, and at the last blacke, of a winishe taste. The rootes be yellowishe, especially the barkes of them whiche be also bitter in taste. 
 ❀ The Place. The Mulberie tree reioyceth in the gar∣den soyle, and other hoate and fat manu∣red places.
Of Plum trees / Bullies / Slose / &amp; Snagges. Chap. xlvij. ❀ The Kindes. FIrst to speake generally of Plummes there be two kindes, whereof some apparteyne to the garden, and some are of a wilde kinde. The garden or tame sort of Plummes are of diuers kindes, some white some yellow, some blacke, some of the colour of a Chesnet, and some of a lyght or cleare redde: and some great, and some small: some sweete and dry, some fresh and sharpe, wherof eche kinde hath a particuler name. The wilde Plummes are the least of al, and are called Slose, Bullies, and Snagges. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE Plumme tree groweth vpright lyke other trees, especially if it be well guyded, and gouerned, and putteth foorth many branches, ouer couered with a smooth brownishe barke, from out of the which being scarrified or otherwise hurte, In sommer it putteth foorth gumme. The leaues are somewhat long, yet for all that almost rounde, and finely snipt or hackt about the edges lyke a sawe. The flowers be white lyke the blossoms of the Cherrie tree, and are also parted into fiue or sixe smal leaues. The fruite is most commonly somewhat long, whereof some are great, some small: of co∣lour some be white, some yellowishe, some blacke, and some red. In the middle whereof is inclosed a litle long harde stone, hauing in it a nut or kernel of a bit∣ter taste. The roote of this tree spreadeth muche abroade in the grounde, and putteth foorth in many places newe springes and scyons, the whiche will also growe vp to the height, if they be not cut of in season. 
 Prunus. The Plum tree. 
 Prunus syluestris. The Sloo or wilde Plum tree. 
 The wilde Plumtree groweth not vp to the stature of a tree, but remaineth lowe by the grounde, lyke to a hedge bushe, whereof it is a certayne kinde: it putteth vp many branches from one roote, set here and there with pricking thornes, &amp; leaues like to thē of the garden Plummes or Damsons, sauing that they be smaller. The flowers be also white. The fruit is smal, a great deale lesse then any other Plummes, in taste sower and binding, the roote also spreadeth farre abrode in the grounde or earth, very plyant, and of a woddishe substance. 
 ❀ The Place. The Damsons and other of the garden kindes, are founde almost euery where in Orchardes. 
 The wilde Plummes do grow in feeldes and wayes, and other vntoyled places and in hedges. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The Plumtrees do flower in Aprill or sommer, especially the wilde Plum∣tree, the whiche flowreth rather then the other. 
 The kindes of garden Plummes are ripe in August, the wilde most com∣monly in September. 
 ❀ The Names. The Plumtree is called in Greeke : in Latine, Prunus: in high Douche, Pflaumenbaum: in base Almaigne, Pruymboom: in Frenche, Vng Prunier. 
 The fruite is called in Greeke : in Latine, Prunum: in Englishe, a Plumme or Prune: in Frenche, Vne Prune: in high Douche, Ein Pflaume oder Praume: in base Almaigne, Een Pruyme. 
 The great sweete blewish Plummes, are called of Theocritus, , Bra∣byla: of the Latinistes, Pruma Damascena: in Englishe, Damaske Prunes: in Frenche, Prunes de Damas: in high Douche, Quetschen, and Blauw Spilling: in base Almaigne, Pruymen van Damasch. 
 The common browne blewe, and Crimsen Damsons, are called Hispanica. 
 The yellowishe Plummes are called in Latine, Cerea, and Cereola Pruna: in Englishe, the Wheaten, or white Plumme: in Frenche, Prunes blanches. 
 The great rounde redde Plummes, are called of some in Latine, Pruna asinina: in English, Horse Plummes: in French, Prunes de Cheual▪ in high Douch, Roszp flaumen: in base Almaigne, Rospruymen. 
 The least of all whiche be small and rounde, are called in Frenche, Dauoines: in high Douche, Herbstp flaumen, and in base Almaigne, Palloken. 
 The wilde Plumme tree, Blacke thorne, and Sloo tree, is called in Greeke : in Latine, Prunus syluestris: in high Douche, Schlehedorn: in base Almaigne, Slehedoren: in Frenche, Prunier sauluage. 
 The fruite is called in Greeke : in Englishe, Slose, whereof that kinde whiche is founde growing vpon the blacke thorne, is called Catte Slose, and Snagges: in Frenche, Prunelles, or Fourdeines: in La∣tine, Prunum syluestre, Pruneolum, and Prunulum: in high Douche, Schlehen: in base Almaigne, Slehen. 
 The iuyce of Snagges or Catte Slose, is commonly called in Shoppes, Acatia, and is vsed in steede of Acacia. 
 ¶ The Nature. The garden Plummes do coole and moysten the stomacke and belly.
The Snagges and Catte Slose, are colde, drie, and astringent. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Plummes do nourishe but litle, and ingender noughtie blood: but they doo gently loose and open the belly, especially when they be freshe and newe gathe∣red, after they be ripe. 
 Plummetree leaues are good against the swelling of the vuula, the throte, gummes, and kernelles vnder the iawes, for they stop the Reume, &amp; flowing downe of humours, if a man will gargle with the decoction thereof made in wine, as Dioscorides writeth. 
 The gumme of the Plummetree dronken in wine, breaketh the stone and expelleth grauell, as some do write. 
 The wilde Plummes doo staye and binde the belly: and so doo the vnripe Plummes, and all others that be sower and astringent. 
 The iuyce of wilde Plummes or Snagges, doo stoppe the laske, womens flowers, and all issue of blood, and it may be very wel vsed in steede of Acatia. 
 Of Sebestens. Chap. xlviij. ❀ The Description. A Mongst the kindes of Plummes (those which are called in Shoppes Sebestens) may be accounted, the which do also growe vppon trees, whereof the body or stemme is couered with a white barke, and the branches with a greene pil or rind. The leaues be roundish. The fruit is not muche vnlyke the least kinde of Damsons or Plummes, but smaller, of a blewishe colour and sweete taste, white within, and of a viscus or clammie substance, in the middle whereof are small stones with kernelles in them, lyke to Plumme stones. 
 ❀ The Place. This fruite groweth in Italy, and other hoate regions, from whence it is brought alredy dryed vnto vs. 
 ❀ The Names. This fruite bycause of his clammishnesse and slyme, is called in Greke , Myxa, and , Myxaria: in Shoppes, Sebesten, &amp; of some Sebastae: of Mat∣thiolus, Prunus Sebestena. 
 ¶ The Nature. The complexion of Sebestens drawe towardes colde and moyst, and ther∣fore they be of nature muche lyke to garden Plummes. 
 ❧ The Vertues. Sebestens be good in hoate agues, especially when the belly is stopte or bounde. 
 They be also very good against the cough, and flowing downe of hoate and salt Catarres and Reumes vpon the breast and lunges. 
 They be also good against the inflammation of the bladder and kidneyes, and against the strangurie and hoate pisse, or the burninges of vrine. 
 Of Iuiubes. Chap. xlix. ❀ The Kindes. THere be two fortes of Iuiubes, as Columella writeth, that is to say, redde and white. 
 ❀ The Description. I Viubes is the fruit of a tree, as the Sebestens be, they be round and long, not muche vnlyke an Oliue, but smaller, of colour either white or red, in taste sweete, the whiche being long kept, waxe drie and full of wrinckles: eache Plumine or fruite hath a harde long stone in it, lyke in fashion to an Olyue stone, but muche lesser. 
 ¶ The Place. Iuiubes do growe in hoate regions, as in Italy and other lyke places. 
 ❧ The Names. This tree is called of Columella in Latine, Ziziphus: in English, the Iuiub tree: in Frenche, Iuiubier, and Guindoulier. 
 The fruite is called Zizipha: in shops, Iuiubae: in English, Iuiubes: in Frēch, Iuiubes, and Guindoules: in high Douche, Brustbeerlin: some thinke that Galen called this fruite in Greeke, , Serica. 
 ❀ The Nature. Iuiubes are temperate in heate and moysture. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Iuiubes eaten are harde of digestion, and nourishe very little, but taken in Electuaries, syrupes, and other medicines, they appease &amp; mollifie the rough∣nesse of the throte, the breast and lunges, and are very good against the cough.
In the selfe same maner they are very good for the reynes of the backe, the kidneyes, and the bladder, whether they be exulcerated or inflamed, or vexed with any sharpe and salt humour. 
 Of Cherries. Chap. l. ¶ The Kindes. THere be two sortes of Cherries, great and small: the small Cherries doo growe vpon high trees, and the greater Cherries vpon meane trees. And of euery kinde there be two fortes, some red, some blacke. Bysides these kindes there are Cherries that grow, three, foure, and fiue vpon a stemme, and also that hang in clusters lyke grapes, whereof of the learned Matthiolus hath giuen vs the figures. 
 ❀ The Description. T Hat tree which beareth the common small Cherries, or Mazars, is most commonly great, high, and thicke, lyke to other trees. The barke of this tree is playne &amp; smooth of colour lyke the barke of the Chesnut tree, three or foure fold double, the which will suffer to be scaled, rinded, stripte, and pylde, like to the barke of the Birche tree. The leaues be great and somewhat long, hackt about the edges with teeth lyke a sawe. The flowers be white and parted into fiue or sixe small leaues. The fruite hath a sweete smak or taste, of colour sometimes redde, sometimes browne, in proportion like the greater Cherries, but smaller, yea sometimes very small. In the same there is founde a small stone, with a kernell therein closed. 
 The tree that beareth the great Cher∣ries, is not very high, but most commonly of a meane stature, in al thinges els like y e other, both in leaues and flowers. The fruite is a litle long and rounde, and of a pleasant sweete taste, of colour somtimes of a faynt red, and almost halfe white and halfe red, sometimes browne, &amp; wel neareall blacke, whereof the iuyce stayneth purple, or a faire Crimsen lyke to Brasill. 
 Cerasia. Sweete Cherries. Cerasa Racemosa. Cluster Cherries. Cerasa austera. Sower Cherries. 
 The sower Cherries are to be be accounted amongst the rest. This tree is most commonly weake and tender, neither high nor great: and therefore of no long continuance. The leaues be also smaller, but other wayes lyke the leaues of the sweete Cherries, the flowers be white, the fruite is rounde and sower, sometimes red, and somtimes blacke, lyke the Mazar or Hurtel Cherries, this Cherrie hath also a stone in the middle of the fruite, but smaller and rounder then the Guyan or sweete Cherries. 
 Out of al these Cherrie trees, there issueth gumme like that of the Plumme trees, or Peache trees, especially when the rinde or barke is any wayes hurt or brused. 
 ❀ The Place. The tree that beareth the sweete Guyan Cherries, or the great Frenche Cherries is planted in gardens and Orchardes. But that whiche beareth the Mazars, or y e smal Cherries groweth in some places very plentifully in feeldes and wooddes. 
 Matthiolus writeth that about Trent a Citie in Italy, about the Citie of Prage in the Coūtrie of Bohem, &amp; about Vienna in the Countrie of Austrige, there growe naturally wilde Cherries vpon lowe bushes or shrubbes, of little more then halfe a fa foote high, and their fruite is in all respectes aunswerable to the other small Cherries. 
 ❀ The Time. The great French Cherries, &amp; the common Cherries do commonly flower in Aprill. The redde Cherries are rype in Iune, and continue vntyll Iuly: but the blacke waxe ripe in Iuly, and they may be kept fresh &amp; whole vnto the ende of August. 
 ¶ The Names. The Cherrie tree is called in Greeke : in Latine, Cerasus: in high Douch, Kirschenbaum: in base Almaigne, Kerseboō: in Frēch, Cerisier: &amp; Guisnier. 
 The fruite lykewise is called , Cerasa: in English, Cherries, in French, Guinnes in high Douche, Kirschen: in base Almaigne, Kersen. 
 And for the better declaration both of the names and kindes of Cherries, I haue thought good to giue you to vnderstande, what I haue conceiued of this matter. I reade in Matthiolus, that the common people of Italy doo call the waterishe Cherries Acquaiuola. The famous learned man Robertus Ste∣phanus in his Frenche Dictionarie, doth turne this French worde Guisnes into Latine, as foloweth (Aquitanica cerasa) whiche soundeth in English, Guyan Cherries, now whether the people of Italy do cal Guyan Aquitan, I referre that to them that be expert in that language. But the French word seemeth to haue his first originall of the Countrie Guyan, for they expound Cerasia, Guisnes doul∣ces, Sweete Cherries. 
 Grosses guisnes, Duracina cerasa, Harde Cherries. 
 Guisnes noires, Cerasia Actiana, Small Cherries lyke Eldren beries. 
 Guisnes fort rondes, Cerasia Caeciliana, Rounde Cherries. 
 Guisnes fort rouges, Cerasia Aproniana, Grape or cluster Cherries: so that Guisnes is their proper worde for all sortes of Cherries, except sower Cherries, which they call Griotes: in Latine, Cerasia acida. 
 The first kind, especially that which beareth the smallest fruite, is the Cher∣rie tree described by Theophrastus. 
 The other is called of some , Chamaecerasus: yet it is not that Chamaecerasus whereof Asclepiades Myrleanus writeth, the fruite whereof maketh men dronken like wine. The Brabanders name this tree Spaensche Kerselaer, and the fruite Spaensche Kersen, that is to say, Spanish Cherries, or Cherrie tree: in Frenche, Guinnier, and Guinnes: in English, Frenche Cherries, and Spanish Cherries: they be also called in Frenche, Cueurs: and they that be halfe white Bigarreans. 
 The common sower Cherries is of the later writers taken to be a kinde of Cerasus, and therefore the fruite is lykewise called Cerasa, of some Merendae, or Marenae: Platina writeth of one Moretum ex Merendis, Cordus writeth of one compounde named Diamarenatum, and both these are made of Cherries.
