well as Berbice and Demerara, are much smaller, and have only from six 
 to fifteen; their development being less perfect than other parts of 
 South America. After the maturation of the fruit, when their green 
 colour has changed to a dark yellow, they are plucked, opened, their 
 beans cleared of the marrowy substance, and spread out to dry in the 
 air. In the West Indies they are immediately packed up for the market 
 when they are dried; but in Caraccas they are subjected to a species 
 of slight fermentation, by putting them into tubs or chests, covering 
 them with boards or stones, and turning them over every morning to 
 equalize the operation. They emit a good deal of moisture, and lose 
 the natural bitterness and acrimony of their taste by this process, as 
 well as some of their weight. Instead of wooden tubs, pits or trenches 
 dug in the ground are sometimes had recourse to for curing the beans; 
 an operation called earthing. They are, lastly, exposed to the sun and 
 dried. According to Lampadius, the kernels of the West India cacao 
 beans contain in 100 parts, besides water, 53.1 of fat or oil, 16.7 of 
 an albuminous brown matter, which contains all the aroma of the bean; 
 10.91 of starch, 7¾ of gum or mucilage, 0.9 of lignine, and 2.01 of a 
 reddish dye-stuff, somewhat akin to the pigment of cochineal. The 
 husks form 12 per cent, of the weight of the beans. The fatty matter
is of the consistence of tallow, white, of a mild agreeable taste, and 
 not apt to turn rancid by keeping. It melts only at 112 degrees Fahr., 
 and should, therefore, make tolerable candles. It is obtained by 
 exposing the beans to strong pressure in canvas bags, after they have 
 been steamed or soaked in boiling water for some time. From five to 
 six ounces of butter may be thus obtained from a pound of cacao. It 
 has a reddish tinge when first expressed, but it becomes white by 
 boiling with water. 
  
 The beans, being freed from all spoiled and mouldy portions, are to be 
 gently roasted over a fire in an iron cylinder, with holes in its ends 
 for allowing the vapors to escape, the apparatus being similar to a 
 coffee-roaster. When the aroma begins to be well developed, the 
 roasting is known to be finished, and the beans must be turned out, 
 cooled, and freed by fanning and sifting from their husks. The kernels 
 are then to be converted into a paste, either by trituration in a 
 mortar heated to 130 degrees Fahr., or by a powerful mill.[1] The 
 cacao tree resembles our dwarf apple tree both in body and branches, 
 but the leaf, which is of a dark green, is considerably broader and 
 larger. The nuts are of the color and about the size of an almond, and
hang eighteen to thirty together by a slender stringy film, enclosed 
 in a pod. A ripe pod is of a beautiful yellow, intermixed with crimson 
 streaks; when dried, it shrivels up and changes to a deep brown; the 
 juice squeezed from the mucilaginous pulp contained in the husks of 
 these nuts appears like cream, and has a very grateful taste of a 
 cordial quality. The nuts have a light pleasant smell, and an 
 unctuous, bitterish, roughish (not ungrateful) taste. Those of 
 Nicaragua and Caracas are the most agreeable and are the largest; 
 those of the French Antilles, and our own West India islands, are the 
 most unctuous. 
  
 The Mexicans, in preparing the chocolate paste, add some long pepper, 
 a little annatto, and lastly vanilla; some add cinnamon, cloves and 
 anise, and those who love perfumes, musk and ambergris. 
  
 The finest American cacao is said to be that of Soconusco, but the 
 principal imports are from Caracas and Guayaquil, which is of a very 
 good quality. The province of Barcelona, adjoining Caracas exports 
 annually from 200,000 to 300,000 cwt. 
 
 
 The mode of the preparation by the natives is this. The ends of the 
 branches and suckers, with the leaves on; are taken from the tree and 
 broken into lengths of from twelve to eighteen inches. These are 
 arranged in the split of a stick or small bamboo, side by side, 
 forming a truss in such a manner, that the leaves all appear on one 
 side, and the stalk on the other, the object of which is to secure 
 equal roasting, the stalks being thus exposed to the fire together, 
 and the leaves together. The slit being tied up in two or three 
 places, and a part of the stick or bamboo left as a handle, the truss 
 is held over a fire without smoke, and kept moving about, so as to 
 roast the whole equally, without burning, on the success of which 
 operation the quality and flavor of the article must depend. When 
 successfully roasted, the raw vegetable taste is entirely dissipated, 
 which is not the ease if insufficiently done. When singed or overdone, 
 the extract is destroyed and the aroma lost. When the fire is smoky, 
 the flavor varies with the nature of the smoke. The stalks are roasted 
 equally with the leaves, and are said to add fully as much to the 
 strength of the infusion. By roasting the whole becomes brittle, and 
 is reduced to a coarse powder by rubbing between the hands. In this
green teas which are exported to England. The leaf has a much more 
 natural color, and has little or none of what we call the   '  beautiful 
 bloom  '   upon it, which is so much admired in Europe and America. 
 There is now no doubt that all these   '  blooming  '   green teas, which 
 are manufactured at Canton, are dyed with Prussian blue and gypsum, 
 to suit the taste of the foreign   '  barbarians;  '   indeed the process 
 may be seen any day, during the season, by those who give themselves 
 the trouble to seek after it. It is very likely that the same 
 ingredients are also used in dyeing the northern green teas for the 
 foreign market; of this, however, I am not quite certain. There is a 
 vegetable dye obtained from _Isatis indigotica_ much used in the 
 northern districts, and called _Teinsing_; and it is not unlikely 
 that it may be the substance which is employed. The Chinese never 
 use these dyed teas themselves, and I certainly think their taste in 
 this respect is more correct than ours. It is not to be supposed 
 that the dye used can produce any very bad effects on the consumer, 
 for, had this been the case, it would have been discovered before 
 now; but if entirely harmless or inert, its being so must be 
 ascribed to the very small quantity which is employed in the 
 manufacture."
 
 In short, the black and green teas which are generally exported to 
 England and the United States from the northern provinces of China, 
 are made from the same species; and the difference of color, flavor, 
 &c., is solely the result of the different modes of preparation. 
  
 I shall make an extract, also, from Williams  '  s "Middle Kingdom:"-- 
  
 "The native names given to the various sorts of tea are derived for 
 the most part from their appearance or place of growth; the names of 
 many of the best kinds are not commonly known abroad. _Bohea_ is the 
 name of the Wu-i hills, (or Bu-i, as the people on the spot call 
 them,) where the tea is grown, and not a term for a particular sort 
 among the Chinese, though it is applied to a very poor kind of black 
 tea at Canton. _Sunglo_ is likewise a general term for the green 
 teas produced on the hills in Kiangsu. The names of the principal 
 varieties of black tea are as follows: _Pecco_,   '  white hairs,  '   so 
 called from the whitish down on the leaves, is one of the choicest 
 kinds, and has a peculiar taste; _Orange Pecco_, called _shang 
 hiang_, or   '  most fragrant,  '   differs from it slightly; _Hungmuey_,
 '  red plum blossoms,  '   has a slightly reddish tinge; the terms 
 _prince  '  s eyebrows_, _carnation hair_, _lotus kernel_, _sparrow  '  s 
 tongue_, _fir-leaf pattern_, _dragon  '  s pellet_, and _dragon  '  s 
 whiskers_, are all translations of the native names of different 
 kinds of Souchong or Pecco. _Souchong_, or _siau chung_, means 
 _little plant_ or sort, as _Pouchong_, or _folded sort_, refers to 
 the mode of packing it; _Campoi_ is corrupted from _kan pei_ i.e. 
 carefully fired; _Chulan_ is the tea scented with the chulan flower, 
 and applied to some kinds of scented green tea. The names of green 
 teas are less numerous: _Gunpowder_, or _ma chu_, i.e. hemp pearl, 
 derives its name from the form into which the leaves are rolled; _ta 
 chu_ or   '  great pearl,  '   and _chu lan_, or   '  pearl flower,  '   denote two 
 kinds of _Imperial_; _Hyson_, or _yu tsien_, i.e. before the rains, 
 originally denoted the tenderest leaves of the plant, and is now 
 applied to _Young Hyson_; as is also another name, _mei pein_, or 
  '  plum petals;  '   while _hi chun_,   '  flourishing spring,  '   describes 
 _Hyson_; _Twankay_ is the name of a stream in Chehkiang, where this 
 sort is produced; and _Hyson skin_, or _pi cha_, i.e. skin tea, is 
 the poorest kind, the siftings of the other varieties; _Oolung_, 
  '  black dragon,  '   is a kind of black tea with green flavor. Ankoi teas
are produced in the district of Ngankí, not far from Tsiuenchau fu, 
 possessing a peculiar taste, supposed to be owing to the ferruginous 
 nature of the soil. De Guignes speaks of the Pu-  '  rh tea, from the 
 place in Kiangsu where it grows, and says it is cured from wild 
 plants found there; the infusion is unpleasant, and is used for 
 medical purposes. The Mongols and others in the west of China 
 prepare tea by pressing it, when fresh, into cakes like bricks, and 
 thoroughly drying it in that shape to carry in their wanderings. 
  
 "Considering the enormous labor of preparing tea, it is surprising 
 that even the poorest kind can be afforded to the foreign purchaser 
 at Canton, more than a thousand miles from the place of its growth, 
 for 9d. and less a pound; and in their ability to furnish it at this 
 rate, the Chinese have a security of retaining the trade in their 
 hands, notwithstanding the efforts to grow the plant elsewhere. 
 Comparatively little adulteration is practised, if the amount used 
 at home and abroad be considered, though the temptation is great, as 
 the infusion of other plants is drunk instead of the true tea. The 
 poorer natives substitute the leaves of a species of Rhamnus or 
 Fallopia, which they dry; Camellia leaves are perhaps mixed up with
it, but probably to no great extent. The refuse of packing-houses is 
 sold to the poor at a low rate, under the name of tea endings and 
 tea bones; and if a few of the rarest sorts do not go abroad, 
 neither do the poorest. It is a necessary of life to all classes of 
 Chinese, and that its use is not injurious is abundantly evident 
 from its general acceptance and extending adoption; and the 
 prejudice against it among some out of China may be attributed 
 chiefly to the use of strong green tea, which is no doubt 
 prejudicial. If those who have given it up on this account will 
 adopt a weaker infusion of black tea, general experience is proof 
 that it will do them no great harm, and they may be sure that they 
 will not be deceived by a colored article; Neither the Chinese nor 
 Japanese use milk or sugar in their tea, and the peculiar taste and 
 aroma of the infusion is much better perceived without those 
 additions; nor can it be drunk so strong without tasting an 
 unpleasant bitterness, which the milk partly hides. The Japanese 
 sometimes reduce the leaves to a powder, and pour boiling water 
 through them in a cullender, in the same way that coffee is often 
 made." 
 
they make a very palatable and nutritious bread. M. Lamare Picot, a 
 French naturalist, has lately incurred a very considerable expense to 
 obtain the seed, which he has carried to France, believing that it is 
 capable of cultivation, and may form a substitute both for potato and 
 wheat. 
  
 The wild bean is found in all parts of the valleys where the land is 
 moist and rich. It is of the size of a large white bean, with a rich 
 and very pleasant flavor. When used in a stew, I have thought it 
 superior to any garden vegetable I had ever tasted. The Indians are 
 very fond of them, and pigeons get fat on them in spring. The plant is 
 a slender vine, from two to four feet in height, with small pods two 
 to three inches long, containing three to five small beans. The pod 
 dries and opens, the beans fall to the ground, and in spring take root 
 and grow again. The beans on the ground are gathered by the Indians, 
 who sometimes find a peck at once, gathered by mice for their winter 
 store. 
  
 There are also several kinds of edible roots growing in the ponds or 
 small lakes, which are gathered by the Indians for food.
 
 The _psui-cinh-chah_, or swamp potato, is found in mud and water, 
 about three feet deep. The leaf is as large as the cabbage leaf. The 
 stem has but one leaf, which has, as it were, two horns or points. The 
 root is obtained by the Indian women; they wade into the water and 
 loosen the root with their feet, which then floats, and is picked up 
 and thrown into a canoe. It is of an oblong shape, of a whitish 
 yellow, with four black rings around it, of a slightly pungent taste, 
 and not disagreeable when eaten with salt or meat. 
  
 The _psui-chah_, with a stem and leaf similar to the last, has a root 
 about the size of a large hickory-nut. They grow in deep water, and 
 being smaller are much more difficult to get, but the Indians prefer 
 them; they have an agreeable taste, and are harder and firmer when 
 cooked. Both these roots are found in large quantities in the musk-rat 
 lodges, stored by them for winter use. 
  
 The _ta-wah-pah_, with a stem, leaf, and yellow flower, like the 
 pond-lily, is found in the lakes, in water and mud, from four to five 
 feet deep. The Indian women dive for them, and frequently obtain as
many as they are able to carry. The root is from one to two feet in 
 height, very porous; there are as many as six or eight cells running 
 the whole length of the root. It is very difficult to describe the 
 flavor. It is slightly sweet and glutinous, and is generally boiled 
 with wild fowl, but is occasionally roasted. 
  
 In his exploring expedition into the interior of Guiana, in the region 
 of the Upper Essequibo, Sir E. Schomburgk notices the discovery of a 
 variety of Leguminosæ, whose tubers grow to an enormous size, fully 
 equal to the largest yam. These roots were not, at the time he was 
 there, in full perfection, but their taste was somewhat between the 
 yam and the sweet potato. The Taruma Indians called them Cuyupa. The 
 roots are considered fit for use when the herb above ground dies. Sir 
 Robert brought a few of the seeds of the plant with him on his return 
 to Demerara. 
  
 Two interesting productions have been recently introduced into the 
 Jardin des Plantes, at Paris, from the Ecuador, by M. Bourcier, 
 formerly Consul-General of France in that country. One is the red and 
 yellow _ocas_, which is of the form of a long potato, and has the
taste of a chesnut; the other is the _milloco_, which has the taste 
 and form of our best potatoes. These two roots, which are found in 
 great abundance in the neighbourhood of Quito, grow readily in the 
 poorest land. The _oca_ is cultivated in the fields of Mexico, but 
 only succeeds in the warmer districts. From the bulbous roots of the 
 cacomite, a species of _Tigridia_, a good flour is also prepared 
 there. 
  
 Stevenson ("Travels in South America," vol. ii., p. 55) says, a root 
 called the oca is cultivated in several of the colder provinces of 
 Peru. "This plant," he states, "is of a moderate size, in appearance 
 somewhat like the acetous trefoil; the roots yellow, each about five 
 or six inches long, and two in circumference. They have many eyes, and 
 the roots, several of which are yielded by one plant, are somewhat 
 curved. When boiled it is much sweeter than the camote or batata; 
 indeed it appears to contain more saccharine matter than any root I 
 ever tasted; if eaten raw it is very much like the chesnut. The roots 
 may be kept for many months in a dry place. The transplanting of the 
 oca (he adds) to England, where I am persuaded it would prosper, would 
 add another agreeable and useful esculent to our tables."
 
 The Brussels paper, _L  '  Emancipation_, mentions that a root has been 
 discovered by the Director of the Museum of Industry, in that place, 
 destined to take the place of the potato. It is the _Lathyrus 
 tuberosus_, called by the peasants the earth mouse, on account of its 
 form, and the earth chesnut on account of its taste. This plant exists 
 only in some localities of Lorraine and Burgundy. The Lathyrus has 
 never been cultivated, and it is thought that it will attain, with 
 cultivation, the size of the potato. The French peasants have a 
 prejudice against cultivating it, because they say it walks under 
 ground, and leaves the place it is planted in to go into the 
 neighbouring field. The fact is, that it grows in a chaplet, of which 
 the bulbs are arranged along a root running horizontally, of which the 
 two extremities are very rarely found, so that on taking up the 
 hinder tubercles it continues its growth in front, which gives rise to 
 the saying that if the plant had only time enough, it would make the 
 tour of the world. 
  
 The bulb of _Gastrodia sesamoides_ (R. Brown), a curious herbaceous 
 species of orchis, native of New Holland, is edible, and preferred by
mountains of Venezuela and other parts of tropical and Southern 
 America, for culinary purposes. It is propagated by planting pieces of 
 the tuberous root, in each of which is an eye or shoot. The late Baron 
 de Shack introduced it into Trinidad, from Caraccas, and it has thence 
 been carried to the island of Grenada. It throve there remarkably 
 well, but has been unaccountably neglected. He also sent roots of this 
 valuable plant to London, Liverpool, and Glasgow. Although it bears 
 cold better than the potato, it requires a warmer and more equal 
 temperature than most of the countries of Europe afford. It would, 
 however, make an excellent addition to the culinary vegetables of many 
 tropical countries, uniting the taste of the potato and parsnip, but 
 being superior to both. 
  
 The arracacha has been introduced into the South of Europe, not as a 
 substitute for, but as a provision against a failure of the potato 
 crop. It is highly recommended by the Rev. J.M. Wilson, in the "Rural 
 Encyclopædia." 
  
 Stevenson ("Travels in South America," vol. ii., p. 383) says the 
 yucas (cassava), camotes (sweet potatoes), and yams cultivated at
It fetches there four to six cents a pound. 
  
 The root of the kooyah plant (_Valeriana edulis_) is much used by some 
 of the North American Indians as food. The root is of a very bright 
 yellow color, with a peculiar taste and odor, and hence is called 
 "tobacco root." It is deprived of its strong poisonous qualities by 
 being baked in the ground for about two days. A variety of other roots 
 and tubers furnish them with food. Among these are kamas root 
 (_Camassia esculenta_), which is highly esteemed; the bulb has a sweet 
 pleasant flavor, somewhat of the taste of preserved quince. It is a 
 strikingly handsome bulbous plant, with large beautiful purple 
 flowers. Yampah root (_Anethum graveolens_) is a common article of 
 food with the Indians of the Rocky Mountains. 
  
 The roots of a thistle (_Cersium virginianium_, or _Carduus 
 virginianus_), which are about the ordinary size of carrots, are also 
 eaten by them. They are sweet and well flavored, but require a long 
 preparation to fit them for use. 
  
 The people of Southern India and Ceylon have for many hundred years
Australian aborigines during a portion of the year. They cut it into 
 thin slices, which are first dried, afterwards soaked in water, and 
 finally packed up in sheets of tea-tree bark. In this condition it 
 undergoes a species of fermentation; the deleterious properties of the 
 fruit are destroyed, and a mealy substance with a musty flavor 
 remains, which the blacks probably bake into cakes. They appear also 
 to like the fruit of the _Pandanus_, of which large quantities were 
 found by Dr. Leichardt in their camps, soaking in water, contained in 
 vessels formed of stringy bark. 
  
 The flour obtained from the seeds of Spurry (_Spergula sativa_), when 
 mixed with that of wheat or rye, produces wholesome bread, for which 
 purpose it is often used in Norway and Gothland. In New Zealand, 
 before the introduction of the potato, the roots of the fern were 
 largely consumed. 
  
 Many species of _Bolitus_ are used as food by the natives in Western 
 Australia, according to Drummond. 
  
 The thick tuberous roots of a climbing species of bean (_Pachyrhizus
angulatus_, or _Dolichos bulbosus_) are cultivated and eaten in some 
 parts of the Polynesian islands. The bulbous roots of some species of 
 Orchideæ are eagerly sought after in New South Wales by the natives, 
 being termed "boyams," and highly esteemed as an article of food for 
 the viscid mucilage which they contain. The root of the Berar 
 (_Caladium costatum_) is eaten by the natives of the Pedir coast 
 (Achin), after being well washed. 
  
 The pignons or edible seeds of _Pinus Pinea_ are consumed occasionally 
 in Italy. In Chili the cone or fruit of the _pehuen_, or _pino de la 
 tierra_, are considered a great delicacy. The _pinones_ are sometimes 
 boiled, and afterwards, by grinding them on a stone, converted into a 
 kind of paste, from which very delicate pastry is made. The pine is 
 cultivated in different parts of this province on account of its 
 valuable wood and the pinones. The seeds from the cones of the 
 Auracanean pine, collected in autumn, furnish the Pawenches (from 
 _pawen_ pine) and Auracanians with a very nutritious food. When 
 cooked, the flavor is not unlike that of the chesnut, and as they will 
 keep for some time, they constitute, when the gathering season has 
 been favorable, a great part of their diet.
 
 The seeds of the cones of the nut pine (_Pinus monophyllus_), a new 
 species described by Dr. Torrey, and alluded to by Col. Fremont in his 
 exploring expedition to the Rocky Mountains, are largely used by the 
 North American Indians. The nut is oily, of a most agreeable flavor, 
 and must be very nutritious as it constitutes the principal 
 subsistence of many of the native tribes. 
  
 The cone of another magnificent pine (_Auracaria Bidwillii_), 
 indigenous to the Eastern coast of Australia, about the Moreton Bay 
 district, is frequently met with twelve inches in diameter, and 
 containing 150 edible seeds as large as a walnut. The aborigines 
 roast these seeds, crack the husk between two stones, and eat them 
 hot. They taste something like a yam or hard dry potato. The trees 
 bear cones only once in four years, during a period of six months. 
 This season is held as a great festival by the aborigines of that 
 locality, called by them Bunga Bunga, and they congregate in greater 
 numbers than is known in any other part of Australia, frequently 
 coming from a distance of 300 miles. They grow sleek and fat upon this 
 diet. An Act has been passed by the legislature of the colony,
obtained from the plantations of the interior. 
  
 4. _Kahate_ or _canalle kuroondu_, astringent cinnamon. In this 
 species the bark peels off very easily, and smells agreeably when 
 fresh, but it has a bitter taste. 
  
 5. _Savel kuroondu_, mucilaginous or glutinous cinnamon. This sort 
 acquires a very considerable degree of hardness, which the chewing of 
 it sufficiently proves. It has otherwise little taste, and an 
 ungrateful smell; but the color is very fine, and it is often mixed 
 with the first and best sort; the color being much alike, excepting 
 only that in the good sort some few yellowish spots appear towards the 
 extremities. 
  
 6. _Dawool kuroondu_, or drum cinnamon. The wood of this tree, when 
 grown hard, is light and tough, and the natives make some of their 
 vessels and drums of it. The bark is of a pale color. 
  
 7. _Nika kuroondu_, wild cinnamon, whose leaf resembles that of the 
 nicasol (_Vitex Negundo_). The bark of this tree has neither taste or
rather pliable; it ought to be about the substance of royal paper, or 
 somewhat thicker. It admits of a considerable degree of pressure, and 
 bends before it breaks; the fracture is then splintering. It is of a 
 light color, approaching to yellow, bordering but little upon the 
 brown; it possesses a sweetish taste, at the same time it is not 
 stronger than can be borne without pain, and is not succeeded by any 
 after-taste. The more cinnamon departs from these characteristics, the 
 coarser and less serviceable it is esteemed; and it should be rejected 
 if it be hard, and thick as a half-crown piece; if it be very dark 
 colored or brown; if it be very pungent and hot on the tongue, with a 
 taste bordering upon that of cloves, so that it cannot be suffered 
 without pain. Particular care should be taken that it is not 
 false-packed, or mixed with cinnamon of a common sort. 
  
 The following remarks, by Mr. Dunewille, of Malacca, as to the 
 suitability of the Straits  '   Settlements for cinnamon culture, are 
 interesting, although in some instances a repetition of previous 
 observations:-- 
  
 It appears, from experience, that the soil of Ceylon is more
brownish yellow. It contains many angular, blackish or reddish brown 
 rugose seeds, which are white internally, have a pleasant aromatic 
 odor, and a warm agreeable taste. 100 parts of the fruit yield 74 
 parts of seeds, and 26 parts of pericarpal coats. 
  
 This seems to be identical with _Amomum Cardamomum_. 
  
 _Elettaria major_, is a perennial, native of Ceylon, which grows in 
 shady situations in a rich mixed soil. The dried capsules are known in 
 commerce as wild or Ceylon cardamoms, and are of less value in the 
 market than those of Malabar (_Elettaria Cardamomum_, Maton). It is 
 chiefly grown about the Kandyan district; and in the eight years 
 ending with 1813, the average export was nine and a-half candies per 
 annum. The seeds in taste resemble our carraways, and are used for 
 seasoning various dishes. 
  
 Ceylon cardamoms are now worth in the London market (Sept., 1853) 1s. 
 to 1s. 3d. per lb.; Malabar ditto, 2s. 3d. to 3s. 
  
 
hitherto valued merely as an ornamental shrub, and cultivated for 
 the sake of its young pods or the horseradish of its roots, as 
 luxuries for the table. 
  
 The oil is peculiarly valuable for the formation of ointments, from 
 its capability of being kept for almost any length of time without 
 entering into combination with oxygen. This property, together with 
 the total absence of color, smell, and taste, peculiarly adapts it 
 to the purposes of the perfumer, who is able to make it the medium 
 for arresting the flight of those highly volatile particles of 
 essential oil, which constitute the aroma of many of the most 
 odoriferous flowers, and cannot be obtained by any other means, in a 
 concentrated and permanent form. To effect this, the petals of the 
 flowers, whose odor it is desired to obtain, are thinly spread over 
 flakes of cotton wool saturated with this oil, and the whole 
 enclosed in air tight tin cases, where they are suffered to remain 
 till they begin to wither, when they are replaced by fresh ones, and 
 the process thus continued till the oil has absorbed as much as was 
 desired of the aroma; it is then separated from the wool by 
 pressure, and preserved under the name of _essence_, in well stopped
bottles. 
  
 By digesting the oil thus impregnated in alcohol, which does not 
 take up the fixed oil, a solution of the aroma is effected in the 
 spirit, and many odoriferous tinctures or waters, as they are 
 somewhat inaccurately termed, prepared. By this process most 
 delicious perfumes might be obtained from the flowers of the _Acacia 
 tortuosa_, _Pancratium carribeum_, _Plumeria alba_, _Plumeria 
 rubra_, and innumerable other flowers, of the most exquisite 
 fragrance, which abound within the tropics, blooming unregarded, and 
 wasting their odors on the barren air." 
  
  
 THE OIL PALM. 
  
 There are several species of this genus of beautiful palms of the 
 tribe _Cococinæ_, but that chiefly turned to account is _Elais 
 guineensis_, a native of the Coast of Guinea to the south of Fernando 
 Po, which furnishes the best oil. 
 
the exterior part. 
  
 On making an effort to extract the oil from the kernel (which was by 
 means of a little machine, of our own invention and contrivance), we 
 found that our thoughts upon the matter were correct, that the oil 
 possessed admirable beauty in its appearance, with a taste, when 
 used for cooking purposes, unexcelled by that of the best lard. 
  
 After being made and set by, it assumes a consistence like that of 
 hard butter, and has to be cut out with a knife or spoon; its 
 appearance in this state is very beautiful, presenting such 
 richness, clearness, and adaptedness to table purposes, that one 
 would not suppose that this oil is obtained from the same tree from 
 which palm oil is, for there is as much disparity both in their 
 appearance and taste as there is between lard and butter. 
  
 The exquisite transparency which the kernel oil bears in a liquid 
 state, especially when undergoing the purifying process, is a cause 
 of admiration. On showing some of it to several foreigners, I was 
 asked in two instances which was the oil and which the water, or
whether it was oil or water; thus you may have an idea of its 
 clearness. We make two qualities of this oil, differing however in 
 taste only, the one being for table uses and the other for 
 exportation and for whatever use they may choose to put it to 
 abroad. 
  
 There have been many conjectures in respect to the uses to which 
 this oil might he put in foreign countries; but that it will be a 
 useful article, and especially in our trade, when made more 
 extensively, there can be no doubt, for the quantity in which it 
 might be had would undoubtedly introduce it to a respectable rank 
 among the other commodities of our productive country so eagerly 
 sought after. 
  
 There is nothing, to my knowledge, that can be turned to as good 
 account and at the same time so abundant and easily obtained, as the 
 palm kernel, for they are as common as the pebbles of stony land, 
 especially in this section of the country, where we have palm 
 orchards of spontaneous growth for miles together, and interspersing 
 the surrounding country in almost innumerable numbers.
mill, the stones of which are set so wide as not to crush the kernel. 
 The pulp is then subjected to the press in bags made of rushes; and, 
 by means of a gentle pressure, the best or virgin oil flows first. A 
 second, and afterwards a third quality of oil is obtained, by 
 moistening the residuum, breaking the kernel, &c., and increasing the 
 pressure. When the fruit is not sufficiently ripe, the recent oil has 
 a bitterish taste, and when too ripe it is fatty. 
  
 The following are the present market prices of olive oil in 
 Liverpool, (October, 1853,) and they are 40 per cent, higher than a 
 few years ago:--Galipoli, per tun of 252 gallons, £68; Spanish, £64; 
 Levant, £60. French olives, in half barrels of two gallons, are worth 
 £3 to £4; Spanish, in two gallon kegs, 9s. to 10s. 
  
 The preserved or pickled olives, so admired as an accompaniment to 
 wine, are, as we have seen the green unripe fruit, deprived of part of 
 their bitterness by soaking them in water, and then preserved in an 
 aromatised solution of salt. 
  
 The marc of olives after the oil has been expressed, indeed, the
3. _Oil of the infernal regions_.--The water which has been employed 
 in the preceding operation is in some districts conducted into large 
 reservoirs called the _infernal regions_, where it is left for many 
 days. During this period, any oil that might have remained mixed with 
 the water separates and collects on the surface. This oil being very 
 inferior in quality, is only fit for burning in lamps, and is 
 generally locally used. 
  
 4. _Fermented oil_ is obtained in the departments of Aix and 
 Montpellier, by leaving the fresh olives in heaps for some time, and 
 pouring boiling water over them before pressing the oil. But this 
 method is very seldom put in practice, for the olives during this 
 fermentation lose their peculiar flavor, become much heated, and 
 acquire a musty taste, which is communicated to the oil. 
  
 The fruity flavor of the oil depends upon the quality of the olives 
 from which it is pressed, and not upon the method adopted in its 
 preparation,"--(French "Journal de Pharmacie.") 
  
 The price of olive oil is sufficiently high to lead to its admixture
In Mysore, after being cut it is stacked for a week, then exposed to 
 the sun for three days, but gathered into heaps at night; and between 
 every two days of such drying, it is kept a day in the heap. By this 
 process, the pods burst and shed their seeds without thrashing. 
  
 The seeds contain an abundance of oil, which might be substituted for 
 olive oil; it is procured from them in great quantities, in Egypt, 
 India, Kashmir, China, and Japan, where it is used both for cooking 
 and burning. It will keep for many years and not acquire any rancid 
 smell or taste, but in the course of a year or two becomes quite mild, 
 so that when the warm taste of the seed, which is in the oil when 
 first expressed, is worn off, it is used for all the purposes of salad 
 oil. It possesses such qualities as fairly entitle it to introduction 
 into Europe; and if divested of its mucilage, it might perhaps compete 
 with oil of olives, at least for medicinal purposes, and could be 
 raised in any quantity in the British Indian Presidencies. It is 
 sufficiently free from smell to admit of being made the medium for 
 extracting the perfume of the jasmine, the tuberose, narcissus, 
 camomile, and of the yellow rose. The process is managed by adding one 
 weight of flowers to three weights of oil in a bottle, which being
of a dollar per hundred in their natural state, to captains of ships, 
 who freely purchase them, or manufactured into oil, they are a very 
 remunerative product. Each tree in the West Indies is calculated to 
 produce nuts to the value of one dollar yearly. There is one thing to 
 which we would draw the attention of chemists and other scientific 
 men. 
  
 For twenty-four or even forty-eight hours after its manufacture this 
 oil is as free from any unpleasant taste as olive oil, and can be used 
 in lieu of it for all culinary purposes, but after that time it 
 acquires such a rancid taste as to be wholly unpalateable. If any 
 means could be discovered of preventing this deterioration in quality, 
 and preserving it fresh and sweet, it could compete with olive oil, 
 and the price and consumption would be largely raised. 
  
 COCO-NUT OIL IMPORTED INTO THE UNITED KINGDOM. 
  
 Imports.   Retained for home consumption. 
 cwts.                 cwts. 
 1835            19,838                14,015
The seeds or nuts form a chief ingredient in the celebrated eastern 
 masticatory called Pan and which seems to owe its stimulating 
 properties to the leaves of the _Piper Betel_. When prepared for use, 
 the nut is cut into slices and wrapped in the fresh leaves of the 
 betel pepper vine, together with a quantity of quicklime (_Chunam_) to 
 give it a flavor. The flavor is peculiar, between an herbaceous and an 
 aromatic taste. 
  
 All classes, male and female, chew it; they say it sweetens the 
 breath, strengthens the stomach, and preserves the teeth, to which it 
 gives a reddish hue; there is probably less objection to its use than 
 tobacco or opium, and its taste is more pleasant; but, if taken to 
 excess, it will produce stupor like other narcotics, and even 
 intoxication. The nuts grow in large bunches at the top, and when ripe 
 are red and have a beautiful appearance; they resemble the nutmeg in 
 shape and color, but are larger and harder. When gathered they are 
 laid in heaps until the shell be somewhat rotted, and then dried in 
 the sun, after which the process of shelling commences. The trees vary 
 in their yield from 300 to 1,000 nuts, averaging about 14 lbs.; which 
 the cultivators sell at about half a dollar (2s.) a picul of 133 lbs.
natural limit, the tobacco sensibly degenerates in quality. A light 
 sandy soil and rather low situation suit the best. 
  
 The "Vuelta abajo" is usually divided into five classes. 
  
 Calidad or Libra. 
 Ynjuriado Principal or Firsts. 
 Segundas or Seconds. 
 Terceiras or Thirds. 
 Cuartas or Fourths. 
  
 Calidad is the best tobacco, selected for its good color, flavor, 
 elasticity and entireness of the leaves. The bales contain sixty hands 
 of four gabillas, or fingers of twenty-five leaves each, and are 
 marked L.60. Ynjuriado Principal has less flavor, and is usually of a 
 lighter color. The leaves should be whole and somewhat elastic. The 
 bales contain eighty hands of four gabillas, or thirty leaves each, 
 and are marked B. 80. Segundas is the most inferior class of wrapper. 
 There are many good leaves in it, but the hands are usually made up of 
 those which are stained, have a bad color, or have been slightly
touched by the worm. The bales contain eighty hands of four gabillas 
 of thirty-six to forty leaves each, and are marked Y. 2a. 80. 
  
 Terceiras is the best tilling, and much wrapper can usually be 
 selected from it when new. The bales contain eighty hands of four 
 gabillas of more than forty leaves each, and are marked 3a. 80. 
  
 Cuartas is the most inferior class, fit only for filling. The bales 
 contain eighty hands of four gabillas of no determined number of 
 leaves, and are marked 4a. 80. 
  
 The Vuelta arriba tobacco is prepared in a similar manner, but neither 
 its color or flavor is good, and it does not burn well. 
  
 The crop is gathered in the spring, and usually begins to appear at 
 market in July. Good tobacco should be aromatic, of a rich brown 
 color, without stains, and the leaf thin and elastic. It should burn 
 well and the taste should be neither bitter nor biting. The best is 
 grown on the margins of rivers which are periodically overflowed, and 
 is called "De rio." It is distinguished from other tobacco by a fine
their comforts, and to leave a large balance for their expenses in 
 dress, &c., they are seldom very constant laborers, and never enter 
 the factory on Sundays, or, at least, on as great an annual number 
 of feast days as there are Sundays in a year. 
  
 The Japanese grow a good deal of tobacco for their own consumption, 
 which is very considerable. They consider that from Sasma as the best, 
 then that from Nangasakay, Sinday, &c. The worst comes from the 
 province of Tzyngaru; it is strong, of a black color, and has a 
 disgusting taste and smell. The tobacco from Sasma is, indeed, also 
 strong, but it has an agreeable taste and smell, and is of a bright 
 yellow color. The tobacco from Nangasakay is very weak, in taste and 
 smell perhaps the best, and of a bright brown color. The tobacco from 
 Sinday is very good. The Japanese manufacture the tobacco so well, 
 says Capt. Golownin, (Recollections of Japan,) that though I was 
 before no friend to smoking, and even when I was at Jamaica could but 
 seldom persuade myself to smoke an Havana cigar, yet I smoked the 
 Japanese tobacco very frequently, and with great pleasure. 
  
 The culture of tobacco is a very profitable article for the laborers,
