It has an operation pretty strange, which is, that when it is 
 new it will make them that eat it like drunk, sick and spue; and this 
 only when it is sown in some Grounds, for in all it will not have this 
 effect: and being old, none will have it. Minere, a small seed. Boumas, 
 we call them Garavances. Tolla, a seed used to make Oyl, with which 
 they anoint themselves; and sometimes they will parch it and eat it 
 with Jaggory, a kind of brown Sugar. And thus much of their Corn. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 CHAP. IV. 
  
 Of their Fruits, and Trees 
  
  
 [Great variety of Fruits, and delicious.] Of Fruits here are great 
 plenty and variety, and far more might be if they did esteem or
nourish them. Pleasant Fruits to eat ripe they care not at all to do, 
 They look only after those that may fill the Belly, and satisfie their 
 hunger when their Corn is spent, or to make it go the further. These 
 onely they plant, the other Fruits of Pleasure plant themselves, the 
 seeds of the ripe Fruits shedding and falling on the ground naturally 
 spring up again. They have all Fruits that grow in India. Most sorts 
 of these delicious Fruits they gather before they be ripe, and boyl 
 them to make Carrees, to use the Portuguez word, that is somewhat to 
 eat with and relish their Rice. [The best Fruits, where-ever they 
 grow, reserved for the King.] But wheresoever there is any Fruit 
 better than ordinary, the Ponudecarso, or Officers of the Countrey, 
 will tie a string about the Tree in the Kings Name with three knots 
 on the end thereof, and then, no man, not the Owner himself, dares 
 presume under pain of some great punishment, if not death, to touch 
 them. And when they are ripe, they are wrapped in white cloth, and 
 carried to him who is Governour of that Countrey wherein they grow: 
 and if they be without any defect or blemish, then being wrapped up 
 again in white cloth, he presents them to the King. But the owner in 
 whose Ground they grow is paid nothing at all for them: it is well 
 if he be not compelled to carry them himself into the bargain unto
like an Hedg-hog, and of a greenish colour; there are in them Seeds 
 or Kernels, or Eggs as the Chingulayes call them, which lie dispersed 
 in the Fruit like Seeds in a Cucumber. They usually gather them before 
 they be full ripe, boreing an hole in them, and feeling of the Kernel, 
 they know if they be ripe enough for their purpose. Then being cut in 
 pieces they boil them, and eat to save Rice and fill their Bellies; 
 they eat them as we would do Turnips or Cabbage, and tast and smell 
 much like the latter: one may suffice six or seven men. When they 
 are ripe they are sweet and good to eat raw. The Kernels do very 
 much resemble Chesnuts both in colour and tast, and are almost as 
 good: the poor people will boyl them or roast them in the embers, 
 there being usually a good heap of them lying in a corner by the 
 fire side; and when they go a Journey, they will put them in a bag 
 for their Provisions by the way. One Jack may contain three pints 
 or two quarts of these seeds or kernels. When they cut these Jacks, 
 there comes running out a white thick substance like tar, and will 
 stick just like Birdlime, which the Boyes make use of to catch Birds, 
 which they call Cola, or bloud of the Cos. Some will mix this with 
 the flower of Rice, and it will eat like Eggs. 
 
[Jombo.] Another Fruit there is which I never saw in any other Parts 
 of India, they call it Jombo. In tast it is like to an Apple, full 
 of Juice, and pleasant to the Palate, and not unwholsom to the Body, 
 and to the Eye no Fruit more amiable, being white, and delicately 
 coloured with red, as if it were painted. 
  
 [Other fruits found in the Woods.] Also in the wild Woods are 
 several sorts of pretty Fruits, as Murros, round in shape, and as 
 big as a Cherry, and sweet to the tast; Dongs, nearest like to a 
 black Cherry. Ambelo  '  s like to Barberries. Carolla cabella, Cabela 
 pooke, and Polla  '  s, these are like to little Plums, and very well 
 tasted. Paragidde, like to our Pears, and many more such like Fruits. 
  
 [Fruits common with other parts of India.] Here are also, of Indian 
 Fruits, Coker-nuts; Plantins also and Banana  '  s of divers and sundry 
 sorts, which are distinguished by the tast as well as by the names; 
 rare sweet Oranges and sower ones, Limes but no Lemons, such as ours 
 are; Pautaurings, in tast all one with a Lemon, but much bigger 
 than a mans two fists, right Citrons, and a small sort of sweet 
 Oranges. Here are several other sorts of Lemons, and Oranges, Mangoes
of several sorts, and some very good and sweet to eat. In this sort 
 of Fruit the King much delights, and hath them brought to him from 
 all Parts of the Island. Pine-Apples also grow there, Sugar Canes, 
 Water-Melons, Pomegranates, Grapes both black and white, Mirablins, 
 Codjeu  '  s, and several other. 
  
 There are three other Trees that must not here be omitted; Which 
 tho they bear no eatable Fruit, yet the Leaves of the one, and the 
 Juice of the other, and the Bark of the third are very renowned, 
 and of great benefit. 
  
 [The Tallipot; the rare Uses of the Leaf.] The first is the Tallipot; 
 It is as big and tall as a Ships Mast, and very streight, bearing 
 only Leaves: which are of great use and benefit to this People; 
 one single Leaf being so broad and large, that it will cover some 
 fifteen or twenty men, and keep them dry when it rains. The leaf being 
 dryed is very strong, and limber and most wonderfully made for mens 
 Convenience to carry along with them; for tho this leaf be thus broad 
 when it is open, yet it will fold close like a Ladies Fan, and then 
 it is no bigger than a mans arm. It is wonderful light, they cut them
that they regarding not the seed, forthwith cut them down. This Tree 
 is within a [The pith good to eat.] Pith only, which is very good to 
 eat if they cut the Tree down before it runs to seed. They beat it in 
 Mortars to Flower, and bake Cakes of it; which tast much like to white 
 bread. It serves them instead of Corn before their Harvest be ripe. 
  
 [The Kettule yields a delicious juice.] The next Tree is 
 the Kettule. It groweth streight, but not so tall or big as a 
 Coker-Nut-Tree; the inside nothing but a white Pith, as the former. It 
 yieldeth a sort of Liquor, which they call Tellegie: it is rarely 
 sweet and pleasing to the Pallate, and as wholsom to the Body, 
 but no stronger than water. They take it down from the Tree twice, 
 and from some good Trees thrice, in a day. An ordinary Tree will 
 yield some three, some four Gallons in a day, some more and some 
 less. The which Liquor they boyl and make a kind of brown Sugar, 
 called Jaggory; but if they will use their skill, they can make it 
 as white as the second best Sugar: and for any use it is but little 
 inferior to ordinary Sugar. The manner how they take this Liquor 
 from the Tree is thus; When the Tree is come to maturity, first out 
 of the very top there cometh out a bud, which if they let it grow,
little in general of them. They serve both for Food, and for Carrees, 
 that is, sauce, or for a relish to their Rice. But they make many 
 a meal of them alone to lengthen out their Rice, or for want of it: 
 and of these there is no want to those that will take pains but to 
 set them, and cheap enough to those that will, buy. 
  
 [The manner of their growing.] There are two sorts of these Alloes; 
 some require Trees or Sticks to run up on; others require neither. Of 
 the former sort, some will run up to the tops of very large Trees, and 
 spread out very full of branches, and bear great bunches of blossoms, 
 but no use made of them; The Leaves dy every year, but the Roots grow 
 still, which some of them will do to a prodigious bigness within a 
 Year or two  '  s time, becoming as big as a mans wast. The fashion of 
 them somewhat roundish, rugged and uneven, and in divers odd shapes, 
 like a log of cleft wood: they have a very good, savoury mellow tast. 
  
 Of those that do not run up on Trees, there are likewise sundry sorts; 
 they bear a long stalk and a broad leaf; the fashion of these Roots 
 are somewhat roundish, some grow out like a mans fingers, which they 
 call Angul-alloes, as much as to say Finger-Roots; some are of a
white colour, some of a red. 
  
 Those that grow in the Woods run deeper into the Earth, they run up 
 Trees also. Some bear blossoms somewhat like Hopps, and they may be 
 as big as a mans Arm. 
  
 [Boyling Herbs.] For Herbs to boyl and eat with Butter they have 
 excellent good ones, and several sorts: some of them are six months 
 growing to maturity, the stalk as high as a man can reach, and being 
 boyled almost as good as Asparagus. There are of this sort, some having 
 leaves and stalks as red as blood, some green: some the leaves green, 
 and the stalk very white. 
  
 [Fruits for sawce.] They have several other sorts of Fruits which 
 they dress and eat with their Rice, and tast very savoury, called 
 Carowela, Wattacul, Morongo, Cacorebouns, &c. the which I cannot 
 compare to any things that grow here in England. 
  
 [European Herbs and Plants among them.] They have of our English Herbs 
 and Plants, Colworts, Carrots, Radishes, Fennel, Balsam, Spearmint,
at the other; and before they can turn, will fill both bellies and 
 hands full, to carry away with them; and to stand all round to guard 
 their Fields is more than they can do. This sort of Monkeys have 
 no beards, white faces, and long hair on the top of their heads, 
 which parteth and hangeth down like a mans. These are so impudent 
 that they will come into their Gardens, and eat such Fruit as grows 
 there. They call these Rillowes. The flesh of all these sorts of Apes 
 they account good to eat. There are several sorts of Squirrels also, 
 which they do eat when they can catch them. 
  
 Before I make an end of my discourse of their Beasts, it may be 
 worthwhile to relate the ways they use to catch them. At which they 
 are very crafty. 
  
 [How they catch wild Beasts.] For the catching of Deer or other wild 
 Beasts, they have this ingenious device. In dark Moons when there 
 are drisling Rains, they go about this design. They have a basket 
 made with canes somewhat like unto a funnel, in which they put a 
 potsheard with fire in it, together with a certain wood, which they 
 have growing there, full of sap like pitch, and that will burn like a
Alligators may be reduced hither: there be many of them. Of which we 
 have said somewhat before. 
  
 [Kobbera-guion, a creature like an Alligator.] There is a Creature 
 here called Kobbera guion, resembling an Alligator. The biggest may 
 be five or six foot long, speckled black and white. He lives most 
 upon the Land but will take the water and dive under it: hath a long 
 blew forked tongue like a sting, which he puts forth and hisseth and 
 gapeth, but doth not bite nor sting, tho the appearance of him would 
 scare those that knew not what he was. He is not afraid of people, 
 but will ly gaping and hissing at them in the way, and will scarce 
 stir out of it. He will come and eat Carrion with the Dogs and Jackals, 
 and will not be feared away by them, but if they come near to bark or 
 snap at him, with his tayl, which is about an Ell long like a whip, 
 he will so slash them, that they will run away and howl. This Creature 
 is not eatable. 
  
 [Tolla-guion.] But there is the Tolla guion very like the former, 
 which is eaten, and reckoned excellent meat. The Chingulays say it 
 is the best sort of flesh; and for this reason, That if you eat other
flesh at the same time you eat of this, and have occasion to vomit, you 
 will never vomit out this tho you vomit all the other. This creature 
 eats not carrion, but only leaves and herbs; is less of size than 
 the Kobbera guion, and blackish, lives in hollow Trees and holes in 
 the Humbosses: And I suppose is the same with that which in the West 
 Indies they call the Guiana. 
  
 [The People eat Rats.] This Countrey has its Vermin also. They have 
 a sort of Rats, they call Musk-Rats, because they smell strong of 
 Musk. These the Inhabitants do not eat of, but of all other sort of 
 Rats they do. 
  
 Before I conclude my discourse of the Growth and Product of this 
 Countrey, it will not be improper to reduce under this head its 
 Precious Stones, Minerals, and other Commodities. Of which I shall 
 briefly speak, and so make an end of this First Part. 
  
 [Precious Stones.] In this Island are several sorts of Precious Stones, 
 which the King for his part has enough of, and so careth not to have 
 more discovery made. For in certain places where they are known to
in other things. The greatest part of the Inhabitants of the Land 
 are of the degree of Hondrews. 
  
 All Christians either White or Black are accounted equal with the 
 Hondrews. The Whites are generally Honourable, only it is an abatement 
 of their Honour that they eat Beef, and wash not after they have been 
 at Stool; which things are reckoned with this People an Abomination. 
  
 [An Honour like unto Knighthood.] Among the Noblemen may be mentioned 
 an Honour, that the King confers, like unto Knighthood; it ceaseth 
 in the Person  '  s death, and is not Hereditary. The King confers it 
 by putting about their Heads a piece of Silk or Ribbond embroidered 
 with Gold and Silver, and bestowing a Title upon them. They are 
 stiled Mundianna. There are not above two or three of them now in 
 the Realm living. 
  
 [Goldsmiths, Blacksmiths, Carpenters, &c.] Next after the degree 
 of Hondrews may be placed Goldsmiths, Blacksmiths, Carpenters and 
 Painters. Who are all of one degree and quality. But the Hondrews will 
 not eat with them: however in Apparel there is no difference; and they
are also privileged to sit on Stools, which none of the Inferior ranks 
 of People hereafter mentioned, may do. Heretofore they were accounted 
 almost equal to the Inferior sort of Hondrewes, and they would eat 
 in these Artificers Houses, but afterwards they were degraded upon 
 this occasion. It chanced some Hondrews came to a Smith  '  s Shop to 
 have their Tools mended, when it came to be Dinner time, the Smith 
 leaves work, and goes in to his House to dine, leaving the Hondrewes 
 in his Shop: who had waited there a great while to have their work 
 done. Now whether the Smith fearing lest their hunger might move them 
 to be so impudent or desperate as to partake with him of his Dinner, 
 clapt to his Door after him: Which was taken so hainously by those 
 hungry People in his Shop, that immediately they all went and declared 
 abroad what an affront the Smith had put upon them. Whereupon it was 
 decreed and confirmed, that for ever after all the People of that rank 
 should be deposed, and deprived of the Honour of having the Hondrewes 
 to eat in their Houses. Which Decree hath stood in force ever since. 
  
 [The Privilege and state of the Smiths.] Nevertheless these Smiths 
 take much upon them, especially those who are the King  '  s Smiths; that 
 is, such who live in the King  '  s Towns, and do his work. These have
it. That which makes these Smiths thus stately is, because the Towns 
 People are compelled to go to their own Smith, and none else. And if 
 they should, that Smith is liable to pay Dammages that should do work 
 for any in another Smith  '  s Jurisdiction. 
  
 [Craftsmen.] All that are of any Craft or Profession are accounted 
 of an inferior degree, as Elephant Catchers, and Keepers, who are 
 reckoned equal with the Smiths, &c. abovesaid, tho they neither eat 
 nor marry together; and these may wear Apparel as do the Hondrews, 
 and sit on Stools, but the Hondrews eat not with them. 
  
 No Artificers ever change their Trade from Generation to Generation; 
 but the Son is the same as was his Father, and the Daughter marries 
 only to those of the same Craft: and her Portion is such Tools as 
 are of use, and do belong unto the Trade: tho the Father may give 
 over and above what he pleaseth. 
  
 [Barbars.] Next are are Barbars; both the Women and Men may wear 
 Doublets, but not sit on Stools, neither will any eat with them. 
 
of the water goes into the Cloths and scalds them. Then they take 
 them and carry them to a River side, and instead of rubbing them with 
 their hands, slap them against the Rock, and they become very clean; 
 nor doth this tear the Cloths at all, as they order it. 
  
 [Jaggory-Makers.] Another rank after these are the Hungrams, or 
 Jaggory-Makers. Tho none will eat with them, yet it is lawful to 
 buy and eat the Jaggory they make, (which is a kind of Sugar) but 
 nothing else. 
  
 [The Poddah.] Another sort among them is the Poddah. These are of no 
 Trade or Craft, but are Husbandmen and Soldiers, yet are inferior to 
 all that have been named hitherto. For what reason neither I, nor, 
 I think, themselves can tell: only thus it falls to them by Succession 
 from their Predecessors, and so will ever remain. 
  
 [Weavers.] After these are the Weavers. Who beside their Trade, 
 which is Weaving Cloth, are Astrologers, and tell the People good 
 Days and good Seasons: and at the Birth of a Child write for them an 
 account of the day, time and Planet, it was born in and under. These
accounts they keep with great Care all their Life-time: by which they 
 know their Age, and what success or evil shall befall them. 
  
 These People also beat Drums, and play on Pipes, and dance in the 
 Temples of their Gods, and at their Sacrifices; they eat and carry 
 away all such Victuals as are offered to their Idols. Both which to 
 do and take, is accounted to belong to People of a very low degree 
 and quality. These also will eat dead Cows. 
  
 [Basket-Makers.] Next to the Weavers are the Kiddeas or 
 Basket-Makers. Who make Fans to fan Corn, and Baskets of Canes, 
 and Lace, Bedsteds and Stools. 
  
 [Mat-Makers.] Then follow the Kirinerahs. Whose Trade is to make fine 
 Matts. These Men may not wear any thing on their Heads. The Women of 
 none of these sorts ever do. Of these two last there are but few. 
  
 [The lower ranks may not assume the Habit or Names of the higher.] All 
 below the Couratto or Elephant-Men, may not sit on Stools, nor 
 wear Doublets, except the Barbar, nor wear the Cloth low down their
and comes over their left shoulder, girt about with a belt of fine 
 pack-thread. Their heads are shaved, and they go bare-headed and 
 carry in their hands a round fan with a wooden handle, which is to 
 keep the sun off their hands. 
  
 [Their Priviledges.] They have great benefit and honour. They 
 enjoy their own lands without paying scot or lot or any Taxes to the 
 King. They are honoured in such a measure, that the people, where ever 
 they go, bow down to them as they do to their Gods, but themselves 
 bow to none. They have the honour of carrying the Tallipot with the 
 broad end over their heads foremost; which none but the King does: 
 Wheresoever they come, they have a mat and a white cloth laid over 
 upon a stool for them to sit upon; which is also an honour used only 
 to the King. 
  
 [What they are prohibited.] They are debarred from laying their hands 
 to any manner of work; and may not marry nor touch women, nor eat but 
 one meal a day, unless it be fruit and rice and water, that they may 
 eat morning and evening: nor must they drink wine. They will eat any 
 lawful flesh that is dressed for them, but they will have no hand in
but only build a new house in their yard, like a Barn very slight, 
 covered only with leaves, and adorn it with Branches and Flowers. Into 
 this House they bring some of the Weapons or Instruments, which are 
 in the Pagods or Temples, and place them on Stools at one end of 
 the house, which is hanged with Cloth for that purpose, and before 
 them on other Stools they lay Victuals: and all that time of the 
 Sacrifice there is Drumming, Piping, Singing, and Dancing. [Who eat 
 the Sacrifices.] Which being ended, they take the Victuals away, and 
 give it to those which Drum and Pipe, with other Beggars and Vagabonds; 
 for only such do eat of their Sacrifices; not that they do account such 
 things hallowed, and so dare not presume to eat them, but contrariwise 
 they are now looked upon as polluted meat. And if they should attempt 
 to eat thereof, it would be a reproach to them and their Generations. 
  
 [Their Gods are local.] These Spirits or Gods are local. For those 
 which they worship in one County or part of the Land, are not known or 
 owned to have power over the People in other parts. But each Countrey 
 hath several Spirits or Devils, that are peculiar to those places, 
 and do domineer over them, and are known by several names they call 
 them by: under whose subjection the People do acknowledge themselves
back. There are also some baskets to put corn in, some mats to spread 
 upon the ground to sleep on: which is the bedding both for themselves 
 and friends when they come to their houses. Also some Ebeny pestels 
 about four foot long to beat rice out of the husk, and a wooden Morter 
 to beat it in afterwards to make it white, a Hirimony or Grater to 
 grate their Coker-nuts with, a flat stone upon which they grind their 
 Pepper and Turmeric, &c. With another stone which they hold in their 
 hands at the same time. They have also in their houses Axes, Bills, 
 Houghs, Atches Chissels, and other Tools for their use. Tables they 
 have none, but sit and eat on the ground. 
  
 [How they eat.] And now we are mentioning eating, let us take a 
 view of this people at their meals. Their Dyet and ordinary fare is 
 but very mean, as to our account. If they have but Rice and Salt in 
 their house, they reckon they want for nothing. For with a few green 
 Leaves and the juice of a Lemmon with Pepper and Salt, they will 
 make a hearty meal. Beef here may not be eaten; it is abominable: 
 Flesh and Fish is somewhat scarce. And that little of it they have, 
 they had rather sell to get mony to keep, then eat it themselves: 
 neither is there any but outlandish men, that will buy any of them. It
is they indeed do eat the fat and best of the Land. Nor is it counted 
 any shame or disgrace, to be a niggard and sparing in dyet; but rather 
 a credit even to the greatest of them, that they can fare hard and 
 suffer hunger, which they say, Soldiers ought to be able to endure. 
  
 [How the great men eat.] The great ones have always five or fix sorts 
 of food at one meal, and of them not above one or two at most of 
 Flesh or Fish, end of them more pottage than meat, after the Portugal 
 fashion. The rest is only what groweth out of the ground. The main 
 substance with which they fill their bellies is Rice, the other things 
 are but to give it a relish. 
  
 [Discouraged from nourishing Cattel.] If these people were not 
 discouraged from rearing and nourishing of Cattle and Poultry, 
 provisions might be far more plentiful. For here are many Jackalls, 
 which catch their Hens and some Tigres, that destroy their Cattle: 
 but the greatest of all is the King; whose endeavour is to keep them 
 poor and in want. For from them that have Hens his Officers take 
 them for the Kings use giving little or nothing for them; the like 
 they do by Hogs. Goats none are suffered to keep, besides the King,
except strangers. 
  
 [Cleanly in dressing their meet.] In dressing of their victuals they 
 are not to be discommended: for generally they are cleanly and very 
 handy about the fame. And after one is used to that kind of fare, 
 as they dress it, it is very savoury and good. They sit upon a mat 
 on the ground, and eat. But he, whom they do honour and respect, 
 sits on a stool and his victuals on another before him. 
  
 [Their drink and manner of eating.] Their common drink is only water: 
 and if they drink Rack, it is before they eat, that it may have the 
 more operation upon their bodies. When they drink they touch not the 
 Pot with their mouths, but hold it at a distance, and pour it in. They 
 eat their Rice out of China dishes, or Brass Basons, and they that 
 have not them, on leaves. The Carrees, or other sorts of Food which 
 they eat with their Rice, is kept in the Pans it is dressed in, 
 and their wives serve them with it, when they call for it. For it 
 is their duties to wait and serve their Husbands while they eat, 
 and when they have done, then to take and eat that which they have 
 left upon their Trenchers. During their eating they neither use nor
earthen Pot, and set over the fire, and boil it so long, till it 
 becomes thick and black like Tar. This they set by for their use, 
 and it will keep as long as they please. A very small quantity of it 
 will suffice for sawce. They call it Annego. 
  
 [Their sweet meats.] They have several sorts of sweet-meats. One 
 they call Caown. It is like to a Fritter made of Rice-flower, and 
 Jaggory. They make them up in little lumps, and lay them upon a Leaf, 
 and then press them with their thumbs, and put them into a Frying-Pan, 
 and fry them in Coker-nut Oyl or Butter. When the Dutch came first to 
 Columba, the King ordered these Caown to be made and sent to them as 
 a royal Treat. And they say, the Dutch did so admire them, that they 
 asked if they grew not upon Trees, supposing it past the Art of man 
 to make such dainties. 
  
 Oggulas another sort of sweet-meats, made of parched Rice, Jaggory, 
 Pepper, Cardamum, and a little Cinnamons. They rowl them up in Balls, 
 which will grow hard. These they tie up in bags and carry them with 
 them when they travail to eat in afternoons when they are hungry. 
 
Alloways made much after the former manner, only they are flat in the 
 fashion of a Lozenge; which are good for faintings and thirsty souls 
 to relish their water, and to eat of in afternoons when they are at 
 home. We carried some of these along with us in our travayl. 
  
 [A kind of Puddings.] Tacpetties, made of Rice-flower, and the meat of 
 the Coker-nut and Jaggory. They are made up into small lumps, and so 
 put in a Leaf, and laid on a cloth over a Pot of boyling water. The 
 stream of which heats that which is laid upon it: and so they are 
 sodden like a Pudding. They tast like white bread, Almonds and Sugar. 
  
 Pitu. Which is made thus. They take flower of Coracan, and sprinkle 
 a little water into it, being both put into a large Pot for the 
 purpose. Then they stir and rowl it in the Pot with their hands: by 
 which means it crumbles into corns like Gun-Powder. Then they have a 
 Pot of boyling water with a cloth tyed over it; and upon this cloth 
 they lay so much of this corn flower as they can conveniently cover 
 with another Pot. And so the steam coming through the cloth boils it, 
 that it will be much like unto a Pudding. And this they use to eat 
 as they do Rice.
 
 [The Manner of their eating Betel-leaves.] But to describe the 
 particular manner of their eating these Leaves. They carry about with 
 them a small Box filled with wet Lime; and as often as they are minded 
 to eat Betel, they take some of this Lime, as much as they judge 
 convenient, and spread it thin upon their leaf; then they take some 
 slices of the Betel-nut, and wrap them up in the leaf, and so eat it, 
 rubbing their Teeth therewith ever and anon to make them black. Thus 
 they eat it generally: but sometimes they eat it otherwise, according 
 as they please; neither spreading the Lime on the leaf, nor rolling 
 up slices of the Nut into it: But they will take a little of the Lime 
 out of their Box between their Fingers, and put it in their mouths, 
 and eat of the Nut and the Leaf by themselves. But whensoever they 
 eat of the Betel-leaf, the Lime and the Nut always accompany it. 
  
 [How they make Lime.] They have a pretty shift of making their 
 Lime, when they chance to need it as they are travailing. They take 
 certain Shells, almost resembling Snails Shells, which they pick up 
 in fresh water Rivers, washed a shore with the water beating upon the 
 Rocks. These Shells, mixed with Charcoal and, fire they wrap up in
 
  
 But usually when they have occasion to speak of many they express 
 themselves by Numerals set after the Noun; as Dissawva two, three, 
 &c. An Egg, Bittera, Eggs, Bittera cattei, word for word, Egg many. 
  
 Their Verbs they form after this manner: 
  
  
 Mam conna,              I eat. 
 Mam conyum,             I will eat. 
 Mam cava,               I have eat. 
 Conowa,                 Eating. 
 Caupoudi,               Let him eat. 
 Caum,                   Let us eat. 
 Conda,                  To eat. 
 Caula,                  Eaten. 
  
  
 Mam denyam,             I will give.
