The flavour of the seeds and leaves is very perishable, particularly 
 that of the latter, which, on being barely dried, lose greatest part of 
 their taste and smell: the roots are more tenacious of their flavour, 
 though even these lose part of it upon keeping. The fresh root, wounded 
 early in the spring, yields and odorous yellow juice, which slowly 
 exsiccated proves an elegant gummy resin, very rich in the virtues of 
 the Angelica. On drying the root, this juice concretes into distinct 
 moleculae, which, on cutting it longitudinally, appear distributed in 
 little veins: in this state they are extracted by pure spirit, but not 
 by watery liquors. 
  
 This resin is considered one of the most elegant aromatics of European 
 growth, though little regarded in the present practice, and is rarely 
 met with in prescription; neither does it enter any officinal 
 composition. 
  
  
  
 172. ANTHEMIS nobilis. CHAMOMILE. The Flowers. L.E.D.--These have a 
 strong not ungrateful, aromatic smell, but a very bitter nauseous taste.
immediate relief in all cases of that malady. 
  
  
  
 174. APIUM Petroselium. COMMON PARSLEY. The Root. E.--Both the roots and 
 seeds of Parsley are directed by the London College for medicinal use: 
 the former have a sweetish taste, accompanied with a slight warmth of 
 flavour somewhat resembling that of a carrot; the latter are in taste 
 warmer and more aromatic than any other part of the plant, and also 
 manifest considerable bittenress. 
  
 These roots are said to be aperient and diuretic, and have been 
 employed in apozems to relieve nephritic pains, and obstructions of 
 urine. 
  
 Although Parsley is commonly used at table, it is remarkable that facts 
 have been adducted to prove, that in some constitutions it occasions 
 epilepsy, or at least aggravates the epileptic fit in those who are 
 subject to this disease. It has been supposed also to produce 
 inflammation in the eyes.--Woodville  '  s Med. Bot. p. 43. A variety which
 
  
  
 188. CENTAUREA benedicta. BLESSED THISTLE. The Leaves. E. D.--The herb 
 should be gathered when in flower, great care taken in drying it, and 
 kept in a very dry airy place, to prevent its rotting or growing mouldy, 
 which it is very apt to do. The leaves have a penetrating bitter taste, 
 not very strong or very durable, accompanied with an ungrateful flavour, 
 which they are in great measure freed from by keeping. 
  
 The virtues of this plant seem to be little known in the present 
 practice. We have frequently experienced excellent effects from a light 
 infusion of carduus in loss of appetite, where the stomach was injured 
 by irregularities. A stronger infusion made in cold or warm water, if 
 drunk freely, and the patient kept warm, occasions a plentiful sweat, 
 and promotes all the secretions in general. 
  
 The seeds of this plant are also considerably bitter, and have been 
 sometimes used for the same purposes as the leaves. 
 
bitter, and, as such, very frequently made use of in practice: in taste 
 it is less exceptionable than most of the other substances of this 
 class: infusions of it, flavoured with orange peel, are sufficiently 
 grateful. It is the capital ingredient in the bitter wine; and a 
 tincture and infusion of it are kept in the shops. 
  
 Lewis mentions a poisonous root being mixed among some of the Gentian 
 brought to London; the use of which occasioned in some instances death. 
 This was internally of a white colour, and void of bitterness. There is 
 no doubt but this was the root of the Veratrum album, a poisonous plant 
 so similar, that it might readily be mistaken for it.--Lewis  '  s Mat. Med. 
  
  
  
 210. GEUM urbanum. COMMON AVENS. Root. D.--This has a warm, bitterish, 
 astringent taste, and a pleasant smell, somewhat of the clove kind, 
 especially in the spring, and when produced in dry warm soils. Parkinson 
 observes, that such as is the growth of moist soils has nothing of this 
 flavour. This root has been employed as a stomachic, and for 
 strengthening the tone of the viscera in general: it is still in some
p. 333. 
  
 Similar Plants.--Ballota nigra; B. alba. 
  
  
  
 233. MELISSA officinalis. BALM. Herb. L. E.--This herb, in its recent 
 state, has a weak roughish aromatic taste, and a pleasant smell, 
 somewhat of the lemon kind. On distilling the fresh herb with water, it 
 impregnates the first runnings pretty strongly with its grateful 
 flavour. Prepared as tea, however, it makes a grateful diluent drink in 
 fevers; and in this way it is commonly used, either by itself, or 
 acidulated with the juice of lemons.--Woodville  '  s Med. Bot. p. 335, 336. 
  
  
  
 234. MENTHA viridis. SPEAR-MINT. Leaves. L. D.--The virtues of Mint are 
 those of a warm stomachic and carminative: in loss of appetite, nauseae, 
 continual retchings to vomit, and (as Boerhaave expresses it) almost 
 paralytic weakness of the stomach, there are few simples perhaps of
a safe and mild laxative in cases where we wish to avoid irritation, as 
 in those of colic, calculus, gonorrhoea, &c. and some likewise use it as 
 a purgative in worm-cases. Half an ounce or an ounce commonly answers 
 with an adult, and a dram or two with an infant. The castor oil which is 
 imported is not so good as the expressed oil from the nut made in this 
 country. The disagreeable taste is from the coats of the seeds; the best 
 kind is pressed out after the seeds are decorticated. 
  
  
  
 259. ROSA centifolia. DAMASK ROSE. Petals. L. E. D.--In distillation 
 with water, it yields a small portion of a butyraceous oil, whose 
 flavour exactly resembles that of the roses. This oil, and the distilled 
 water, are very useful and agreeable cordials. Hoffmann strongly 
 recommends them as of singular efficacy for raising the strength, 
 cheering and recruiting the spirits, and allaying pain; which they 
 perform without raising any heat in the constitution, rather abating it 
 when inordinate. Although the damask rose is recommended by Dr. 
 Woodville, yet, having grown this article for sale, I find that the 
 preference is always given to the Provence rose by those who distil
them.   
  
  
 260. ROSA gallica. RED OFFICINAL ROSE. Petals. L. E. D.-This has very 
 little of the fragrance of the foregoing sort; it is a mild and grateful 
 astringent, especially before the flower has opened: this is 
 considerably improved by hasty exsiccation, but both the astringency and 
 colour are impaired by slow drying. In the shops are prepared a conserve 
 and a tincture. 
  
  
  
 261. ROSA canina. DOG-ROSE. The Pulp of the Fruit. L. E.-The fruit, 
 called heps or hips, has a sourish taste, and obtains a place in the 
 London Pharmacopoeia in the form of a conserve: for this purpose, the 
 seeds and chaffy fibres are to be carefully removed; for, if these 
 prickly fibres are not entirely scraped off from the internal surface of 
 the hips, the conserve is liable to produce considerable irritation on 
 the primae viae.
 
  
  
 262. ROSMARINUS officinalis. ROSEMARY. Tops. L. E. D.--Rosemary has a 
 fragrant smell and a warm pungent bitterish taste, approaching to those 
 of lavender: the leaves and tender tops are strongest; next to these the 
 cup of the flower; the flowers themselves are considerably the weakest, 
 but most pleasant. Aqueous liquors extract great share of the virtues of 
 rosemary leaves by infusion, and elevate them in distillation: along 
 with the water arises a considerable quantity of essential oil, of an 
 agreeable strong penetrating smell. Pure spirit extracts in great 
 perfection the whole aromatic flavour of the rosemary, and elevates very 
 little of it in distillation: hence the resinous mass left upon 
 abstracting the spirit, proves an elegant aromatic, very rich in the 
 peculiar qualities of the plant. The flowers of rosemary give over great 
 part of their flavour in distillation with pure spirit; by watery 
 liquors, their fragrance is much injured; by beating, destroyed. 
  
  
 
263. RUBIA tinctorum. MADDER. Roots. L. E. D.--It has little or no 
 smell; a sweetish taste, mixed with a little bitterness. The virtues 
 attributed to it are those of a detergent and aperient; whence it has 
 been usually ranked among the opening roots, and recommended in 
 obstructions of the viscera, particularly of the kidneys, in 
 coagulations of the blood from falls or bruises, in the jaundice, and 
 beginning dropsies. 
  
 It is observable, that this root, taken internally, tinges the urine of 
 a deep red colour; and in the Philosophical Transactions we have an 
 account of its producing a like effect upon the bones of animals which 
 had it mixed with their food: all the bones, particularly the more solid 
 ones, were changed, both externally and internally, to a deep red, but 
 neither the fleshy nor cartilaginous parts suffered any alteration: some 
 of these bones macerated in water for many weeks together, and 
 afterwards steeped and boiled in spirit of wine, lost none of their 
 colour, nor communicated any tinge to the liquors. 
  
  
 [|||||               ]	1  	264. RUMEX Acetosa. SORREL. Leaves. L.--These have an agreeable acid 
 taste. They have the same medicinal qualities as the Oxalis Acetosella, 
 and are employed for the same purposes. 
  
 Sorrel taken in considerable quantities, or used prepared for food, will 
 be found of great advantage when a refrigerant and antiscorbutic regimen 
 is required.--Woodville  '  s Med. Bot. 
  
  
  
 265. RUTA graveolens. RUE. Leaves. L. E. D.--These are powerfully 
 stimulating, attenuating, and detergent: and hence, in cold phlegmatic 
 habits, they quicken the circulation, dissolve tenacious juices, open 
 obstructions of the excretory glands, and promote the fluid secretions. 
 The writers on the Materia Medica in general have entertained a very 
 high opinion of the virtues of this pant. Boerhaave is full of its 
 praises; particularly of the essential oil, and the distilled water 
 cohobated or redistilled several times from fresh parcels of the herb: 
 after somewhat extravagantly commending other waters prepared in this 
 manner, he adds, with regard to that of rue, that the greatest
commendations he can bestow upon it fall short of its merit: "What 
 medicine (says he) can be more efficacious for promoting perspiration, 
 in cases of epilepsies, and for expelling poison?" Whatever service rue 
 may be of generally, it undoubtedly has its use in the two last cases: 
 the cohobated water, however, is not the most efficacious preparation. 
  
  
  
 266. SALIX fragilis. CRACK WILLOW. Bark. L. D.-The bark of the branches 
 of this tree manifests a considerable degree of bitterness to the taste, 
 and is also astringent; hence it has been thought a good substitute for 
 the Peruvian bark, and, upon trial, was found to stop the paroxysms of 
 intermittents: it is likewise recommended in other cases requiring tonic 
 or astringent remedies. Not only the bark of this species of Salix, but 
 that of several others, possess similar qualities, particularly of the 
 Salix alba pentandria, and capraea, all of which are recommended in 
 foreign Pharmacopoeias. But, in our opinion, the bark of the Salix 
 triandria is more effectual than that of any other of this genus; at 
 least, its sensible qualities give it a decided preference.--Woodville  '  s 
 Med Bot.
 
  
  
 267. SALVIA officinalis. GREEN AND RED SAGE. Herb. E. D.--Its effects 
 are, to moderately warm and strengthen the vessels; and hence, in cold 
 phlegmatic habits, it excites appetite, and proves serviceable in 
 debilities of the nervous system. 
  
 The red sage, mixed with honey and vinegar, is used for a gargle in sore 
 throats. Aqueous infusions of the leaves, with the addition of a little 
 lemon juice, prove an useful diluting drink in febrile disorders, of an 
 elegant colour, and sufficiently acceptable to the palate. 
  
  
  
 268. SAMBUCUS nigra. COMMON ELDER. Flowers and Berries. L. E. D.--The 
 parts of the Sambucus which are proposed for medicinal use in the 
 Pharmacopoeias, are the inner bark, the flowers, and the berries. The 
 flowers have an agreeable flavour, which they give over in distillation 
 with water, and impart by infusion, both to water and rectified spirit:
270. SCROPHULARIA nodosa. KNOTTY FIGWORT. Herb. D.--The roots are of a 
 white colour, full of little knobs or protuberances on the surface: this 
 appearance gained it formerly some repute against scrophulous disorders 
 and the piles; and from hence it received its name: but modern 
 practitioners expect no such virtues from it. It has a faint unpleasant 
 smell, and a somewhat bitter disagreeable taste. 
  
  
  
 271. SINAPIS nigra. BLACK MUSTARD. Seeds. L. E. D.--By writers on the 
 Materia Medica, mustard is considered to promote appetite, assist 
 digestion, attenuate viscid juices, and, by stimulating the fibres, to 
 prove a general remedy in paralytic and rheumatic affections. Joined to 
 its stimulant qualities, it frequently, if taken in considerable 
 quantity, opens the body, and increases the urinary discharge; and hence 
 has been found useful in dropsical complaints.--Woodville  '  s Med. Bot. p. 
 404. 
  
  
 
character which it bore at first, it is in some cases of considerable 
 use as a sudorific, where more acrid medicines are improper. 
  
  
  
 276. SOLANUM Dulcamara. BITTERSWEET. Stalk. L. D.--The taste of the 
 twigs and roots, as the name of the plant expresses, is both bitter and 
 sweet; the bitterness being first perceived, and the sweet afterwards. 
 They are commended for resolving coagulated blood, and as a cathartic, 
 diuretic, and deobstruent. 
  
  
  
 277. SOLIDAGO Virga aurea. GOLDEN ROD. Flowers and Leaves. D.--The 
 leaves have a moderately astringent bitter taste, and hence prove 
 serviceable in debility and laxity of the viscera, and disorders 
 proceeding from that cause. 
  
  
 
bitterish taste; and, when rubbed betwixt the fingers, a quick pungent 
 smell, which soon affects the head, and occasions sneezing: distilled 
 with water, they yield a very acrid, penetrating essential oil, 
 resembling one obtained by the same means from scurvy-grass. These 
 qualities sufficiently point out the uses to which this plant might be 
 applied; at present, it is little otherwise employed than in cephalic 
 snuffs. 
  
  
  
 282. TEUCRIUM Chamaedrys. GERMANDER. Herb. D.--The leaves, tops, and 
 seeds, have a bitter taste, with some degree of astringency and aromatic 
 flavour. They were recommended as sudorific, diuretic, and emmenagogue, 
 and for strengthening the stomach and viscera in general. With some they 
 have been in great esteem in intermittent fevers; as also in scrophulous 
 and other chronic disorders. 
  
  
  
 283. TORMENTILLA erecta. TORMENTIL, or UPRIGHT SEPTFOIL. Root. L. E. D.
--The root is the only part of this plant which is used medicinally; it 
 has a strong styptic taste, but imparts no peculiar sapid flavour. This 
 has been long held in great estimation as an astringent. Dr. Cullen has 
 used it with gentian with great effect in intermittent fevers. Lewis 
 recommends an ounce and a half of the powdered root to be boiled in 
 three pints of water to a quart, adding towards the end of the boiling a 
 dram of cinnamon. Of the strained liquor, sweetened with an ounce of any 
 agreeable syrup, two ounces or more may be taken four or five times a-day. 
  
  
  
 284. TUSSILAGO Farfara. COLTSFOOT. Herb. L. E. D.--Tussilago stands 
 recommended in coughs and other disorders of the breast and lungs: the 
 flowers were an ingredient in the pectoral decoction of the Edinburgh 
 Pharmacopoeia. 
  
  
  
 285. VALERIANA officinalis. VALERIAN. Root. L. E. D.--Valerian is a 
 medicine of great use in nervous disorders, and is particularly
taken out: nevertheless I have not found that they have any disagreeable 
 taste.--Lewis  '  s Mat. Med. 
  
  
  
 289. ULMUS campestris. ELM. Bark. L. E. D.--The leaves have a bitterish 
 astringent taste, and are recommended in powder, to the extent of at 
 least two drams a-day, in ulcerations of the urinary passages and 
 catarrhus vesicae. The powder has been used with opium, the latter being 
 gradually increased to a considerable quantity, in diabetes, and it is 
 said with advantage. Some use it for alleviating the dyspeptic symptoms 
 in nephritic calculous ailments.--Lewis  '  s Mat. Med. 
  
  
  
 290. RHODODENDRON Chrysanthemum. YELLOW-FLOWERED RHO-DODENDRON. E. The 
 Leaves.--This species of Rhododendron has lately been introduced into 
 Britain: it is a native of Siberia, affecting mountainous situations, 
 and flowering in June and July. 
 
291. ACANTHUS mollis. SMOOTH BEARS-BREECH. The Leaves.--Are of a soft 
 sweetish taste, and abound with a mucilaginous juice: its virtues do not 
 seem to differ from those of Althea and other mucilaginous plants. 
  
  
  
 292. ACHILLA Ptarmica. SNEEZEWORT. The Root.--The roots have and acrid 
 smell, and a hot biting taste: chewed, they occasion a plentiful 
 discharge of saliva; and when powdered and snuffed up the nose, provoke 
 sneezing. These are sold at the herb-shops as a substitute for pellitory 
 of Spain. 
  
  
  
 293. ACHILLEA Ageratum. MAUDLIN. The Leaves and Flowers.--This has a 
 light agreeable smell; and a roughish, somewhat warm and bitterish 
 taste. These qualities point out its use as a mild corroborant; but it 
 has long been a stranger in practice, and is now omitted both by the 
 London and Edinburgh Colleges. It is however in use by the common 
 people.
 
  
  
 294. ACHILLEA Millefolium. YARROW. The Leaves.--The leaves have a rough 
 bitterish taste, and a faint aromatic smell. Their virtues are those of 
 a very mild astringent, and as such they stand recommended in 
 haemorrhages both internal and external, diarrhoeas, debility and laxity 
 of the fibres; and likewise in spasmodic hysterical affections. 
  
  
  
 295. AJUGA reptans. BUGLE. The Leaves.--These have at first a sweetish 
 taste, which gradually becomes bitterish and roughish. They are 
 recommended as vulnerary medicines, and in all cases where mild 
 astringents or corroborants are proper. 
  
  
  
 296. ALCHEMILLA vulgaris. LADY  '  S MANTLE. The Leaves.--These discover to 
 the taste a moderate astringency, and were formerly much esteemed in
 
  
  
 313. BELLIS perennis. DAISIES. The Leaves.--They have a subtile subacrid 
 taste, and are recommended as vulneraries, and in asthmas and hectic 
 fevers, and such disorders as are occasioned by drinking cold liquors 
 when the body has been much heated. 
  
  
  
 214. BERBERIS vulgaris. BERBERRY. The Bark and Fruit.--The outward bark 
 of the branches and the leaves have an astringent acid taste; the inner 
 yellow bark, a bitter one: this last is said to be serviceable in the 
 jaundice; and by some, to be an useful purgative. 
  
 The berries, which to the taste are gratefully acid, and moderately 
 restringent, have been given with good success in bilious fluxes, and 
 diseases proceeding from heat, acrimony, or thinness of the juices. 
  
 
 
 315. BETONICA officinalis. WOOD BETONY. The Leaves.--These and the 
 flowers have an herbaceous, roughish, somewhat bitterish taste, 
 accompanied with a very weak aromatic flavour. This herb has long been a 
 favourite among writers on the Materia Medica, who have not been wanting 
 to attribute to it abundance of good qualities. Experience does not 
 discover any other virtue in betony than that of a mild corroborant: as 
 such, an infusion or light decoction of it may be drunk as tea, or a 
 saturated tincture in rectified spirit given in suitable doses, in 
 laxity and debility of the viscera, and disorders proceeding from 
 thence. 
  
  
  
 316. BETULA alba. BIRCH TREE. The bark and Sap.--Upon deeply wounding or 
 boring the trunk of the tree in the beginning of spring, a sweetish 
 juice issues forth, sometimes, as is said, in so large quantity, as to 
 equal in weigth to the whole tree and root: one branch will bleed a 
 gallon or more a day. This juice is chiefly recommended in scorbutic 
 disorders, and other foulnesses of the blood: its most sensible effect[                    ]	0  	is to promote the urinary discharge. 
  
  
  
 317. BORAGO officinalis. BORAGE. The Flowers.--An exhilarating virtue 
 has been attributed to the flowers of borage, which are hence ranked 
 among the so called cordial flowers: but they appear to have very little 
 claim to any virtue of this kind, and seem to be altogether 
 insignificant. 
  
  
  
 318. BRYONIA alba. WHITE BRYONY. The Roots.--This is a strong irritating 
 cathartic; and as such has sometimes been successfully exhibited in 
 maniacal cases, in some kinds of dropsies, and in several chronical 
 disorders, where a quick solution of viscid juices, and a sudden 
 stimulus on the solids, were required. 
  
  
 
319. CALENDULA officinalis. MARIGOLD. The Flowers.--These are supposed 
 to be aperient and attenuating; as also cardiac, alexipharmic, and 
 sudorific: they are principally celebrated in uterine obstructions, the 
 jaundice, and for throwing out the small-pox. Their sensible qualities 
 give little foundation for these virtues: they have scarcely any taste, 
 and no considerable smell. The leaves of the plant discover a viscid 
 sweetishness, accompanied with a more durable saponaceous pungency and 
 warmth: these seem capable of answering some useful purposes, as a 
 stimulating, aperient, antiscorbutic medicine. 
  
  
  
 320. CANNABIS sativa. HEMP. The Seeds.--These have some smell of the 
 herb; their taste is unctuous and sweetish; on expression they yield a 
 considerable quantity of insipid oil: hence they are recommended (boiled 
 in milk, or triturated with water into an emulsion) against coughs, heat 
 of urine, and the like. They are also said to be useful in incontinence 
 of urine; but experience does not warrant their having any virtues of 
 this kind. 
 
335. CYPERUS longus. LONG CYPERUS. The Root.--This is long, slender, 
 crooked, and full of knots: outwardly of a dark-brown or blackish 
 colour, inwardly whitish; of an aromatic smell, and an agreeable warm 
 taste: both the taste and smell are improved by moderate exsiccation. 
 Cyperus is accounted a good stomachic and carminative, but is at present 
 very little regarded. 
  
  
  
 336. DICTAMNUS albus. WHITE or BASTARD DITTANY. The Root.--The cortical 
 part of the root, dried and rolled up into quills, is sometimes brought 
 to us. This is of a white colour, a weak, not very agreeable smell; and 
 a durable bitter, lightly pungent taste. It is recommended as an 
 alexipharmic. 
  
  
  
 337. EQUISETUM palustre. HORSE-TAIL. The Herb.--It is said to be a very 
 strong astringent: it has indeed a manifest astringency, but in a very 
 low degree.
 
 357. LAMIUM album. WHITE ARCHANGEL, OR DEAD NETTLE. The Flowers.--The 
 flowers have been particularly celebrated in female weaknesses, as also 
 in disorders of the lungs; but they appear to be of very weak powers. 
  
  
  
 358. LAVENDULA Stoechas. ARABIAN STOECHAS, OR FRENCH LAVEN-DER. The 
 Flowers.--They have a very fragrant smell, and a warm, aromatic, 
 bitterish, subacrid taste: distilled with water, they yield a 
 considerable quantity of a fragrant essential oil; to rectified spirit 
 it imparts a strong tincture, which inspissated proves an elegant 
 aromatic extract, but is seldom used in medicine. 
  
  
  
 359. LEONURUS Cardiaca. MOTHERWORT. The Leaves.--These have a bitter 
 taste, and a pretty strong smell: they are supposed to be useful in 
 hysteric disorders, to strengthen the stomach, to promote urine; and 
 indeed it may be judged from their smell and taste, that their medical
and pennyroyal; it is also recommended in hysteric cases. 
  
  
  
 367. NIGELLA romana. FENNEL-FLOWER. The Seeds.--They have a strong, not 
 unpleasant smell; and a subacrid, somewhat unctuous disagreeable taste. 
 They stand recommended as aperient, diuretic, &c. but being suspected to 
 have noxious qualities should be used with caution. 
  
  
  
 368. NYMPHAEA alba. WHITE WATER-LILY. The Root and Flowers.--These have a 
 rough, bitterish, glutinous taste, (the flowers are the least rough,) 
 and when fresh a disagreeable smell, which is in great measure lost by 
 drying: they are recommended in alvine fluxes, gleets, and the like. The 
 roots are supposed by some to be in an eminent degree narcotic. 
  
  
  
 369. OCYMUM Basilicum. BASIL. The Leaves.--These have a soft, somewhat
 
  
 378. PRIMULA officinalis. COWSLIP. The Flowers.--The flowers appear in 
 April; they have a pleasant sweet smell, and a subacrid, bitterish, 
 subastringent taste. An infusion of them, used as tea, is recommended as 
 a mild corroborant in nervous complaints. A strong infusion of them, 
 with a proper quantity of sugar, forms an agreeable syrup, which for a 
 long time maintained a place in the shops. By boiling, even for a little 
 time, their fine flavour is destroyed. A wine is also made of the 
 flowers, which is given as an opiate. 
  
  
  
 379. PRUNELLA vulgaris. SELFHEAL. The Leaves.--It has an herbaceous 
 roughish taste, and hence stands recommended in haemorrhages and alvine 
 fluxes. It has been principally celebrated as a vulnerary, whence its 
 name; and in gargarisms for aphthae and inflammations of the fauces. 
  
  
 
intention, it is said by Haller to be frequently used in Switzerland, in 
 the dose of a dram. 
  
  
  
 389. SANICULA officinalis. SANICLE. The Leaves.--These have an 
 herbaceous, roughish taste: they have long been celebrated for sanative 
 virtues, both internally and externally; nevertheless their effects, in 
 any intention, are not considerable enough to gain them a place in the 
 present practice. 
  
  
  
 390. SAPONARIA officinalis. SOAPWORT. The Herb and Root.--The roots 
 taste sweetish and somewhat pungent; and have a light smell like those 
 of liquorice: digested in rectified spirit they yield a strong tincture, 
 which loses nothing of its taste or flavour in being inspissated to the 
 consistence of an extract. This elegant root has not come much into 
 practice among us, though it promises, from its sensible qualities, to 
 be a medicine of considerable utility: it is greatly esteemed by the
German physicians as an aperient, corroborant, and sudorific; and 
 preferred by the College of Wirtemberg, by Stahl, Neumann, and others, 
 to sarsaparilla. 
  
  
  
 391. SAXIFRAGA granulata.--Linnaeus describes the taste of this plant to 
 be acrid and pungent, which we have not been able to discover. Neither 
 the tubercles of this root, nor the leaves, manifest to the organs of 
 taste any quality likely to be of medicinal use; and therefore, though 
 this species of Saxifraga has been long employed as a popular remedy in 
 nephritic and gravelly disorders, yet we do not find, either from its 
 sensible qualities or from any published instances of its efficacy, that 
 it deserves a place in the Materia Medica.--Woodville  '  s Med. Bot. p. 
 551. 
  
  
  
 392. SCABIOSA succisa. DEVIL  '  S BIT. The Leaves and Roots.--These stand 
 recommended as alexipharmics, but they have long given place to
medicines of greater efficacy. 
  
  
  
 393. SCANDIX Cerefolium. Chervil. The Leaves.--Geoffroy assures us, that 
 he has found it from experience to be of excellent service in dropsies: 
 that in this disorder it promotes the discharge of urine when 
 suppressed, renders it clear when feculent and turbid, and when high and 
 fiery of a paler colour; that it acts midly without irritation, and 
 tends rather to allay than excite inflammation. He goes so far as to 
 say, that dropsies which do not yield to this medicine are scarce 
 capable of being cured by any other. He directs the juice to be given in 
 the dose of three or four ounces every fourth hour, and continued for 
 some time, either alone, or in conjunction with nitre and syrup. 
  
  
  
 394. SEDUM Telephium. ORPINE. The Leaves.--This is a very thick-leaved 
 juicy plant, not unlike the houseleeks. It has a mucilaginous roughish 
 taste, and hence is recommended as emollient and astringent, but has
never been much regarded in practice. 
  
  
  
 395. SEMPERVIVUM tectorum. GREATER HOUSE-LEEK. The Leaves.--These are 
 principally applied in cases of erysipelatous and other hot eruptions of 
 the skin, in which they are of immediate service in allaying the pain 
 arising therefrom: great quantities are cultivated in Surrey, and 
 brought to the London markets. It is remarkable of this plant, that its 
 juice, when purified by filtration, appears of a dilute yellowish colour 
 upon the admixture of an equal quantity of rectified spirit of wine; but 
 forms a beautiful white, light coagulum, like the finer kinds of 
 pomatum: this proves extremely volatile; for when freed from the aqueous 
 phlegm, and exposed to the air, it altogether exhales in a very little 
 time. 
  
  
  
 396. SENECIO Jacobaea. RAGWORT. The Leaves.--Their taste is roughish, 
 bitter, pungent, and extremely unpleasant: they stand strongly
recommended by Simon Pauli against dysenteries; but their forbidding 
 taste has prevented its coming into practice. 
  
  
  
 397. SOLANUM nigrum. COMMON NIGHTSHADE. The Leaves and Berries.--In the 
 year 1757, Mr. Gataker, surgeon to the Westminster Hospital, called the 
 attention of the Faculty to this plant, by a publication recommending 
 its internal use in old sores, srophulous and cancerous ulcers, 
 cutaneous eruptions, and even dropsies; all of which were much relieved 
 or completely cured of it. 
  
  
  
 398. SPIRAEA Ulmaria. MEADOW-SWEET. The Leaves and Flowers.--The flowers 
 have a very pleasant flavour, which water extracts from them by 
 infusion, and elevates in distillation. 
  
  
 
399. SPIRAEA Filipendula. DROPWORT. The Root.--The root consists of a 
 number of tubercles, fastened together by slender strings; its taste is 
 rough and bitterish, with a slight degree of pungency. These qualities 
 point out its use in a flaccid state of the vessels, and a sluggishness 
 of the juices: the natural evacuations are in some measure restrained or 
 promoted by it, where the excess or deficiency proceeds from this cause. 
 Hence some have recommended it as an astringent in dysenteries, a 
 diuretic, and others as an aperient and deobstruent in scrophulous 
 habits. 
  
  
  
 400. SYMPHYTUM officinale. COMFREY. The Root.--The roots are very large, 
 black on the outside, white within, full of a viscid glutinous juice, of 
 no particular taste. They agree in quality with the roots of Althaea; 
 with this difference, that the mucilage of it is somewhat 
 stronger-bodied. Many ridiculous histories of the consolidating virtues 
 of this plant are related by authors. 
  
 
 
 401. TAMUS communis. BLACK BRYONY.--The root is one of the best 
 diuretics known in medicine. It is an excellent remedy in the gravel and 
 all obstructions of urine, and other disorders of the like nature. 
  
  
  
 402. TANACETUM vulgare. TANSY. The Leaves.--These have a bitterish warm 
 aromatic taste; and a very pleasant smell, approaching to that of mint 
 or a mixture of mint and maudlin. Water elevates their flavour in 
 distillation; and rectified spirit extracts it by infusion. They have 
 been recommended in hysteric cases. 
  
  
  
 403. TEUCRIUM Chamaepitys. GROUND PINE. The Leaves.--These are 
 recommended as aperient and vulnerary, as also in gouty and rheumatic 
 pains. 
  
 
 
 404. THYMUS vulgaris. THYME. The Leaves and Flowers.--A tea made of the 
 fresh tops of thyme is good in asthmas and diseases of the lungs. It is 
 recommended against nervous complaints; but for this purpose the wild 
 thyme is preferable. There is an oil made from thyme that cures the 
 tooth-ache, a drop or two of it being put upon lint and applied to the 
 tooth; this is commonly called oil of origanum. 
  
  
  
 405. TRIGONELLA Foenum-graecum. FOENUGREEK. The Seeds.--They are of a 
 yellow colour, a rhomboidal figure; have a disagreeable strong smell, 
 and a mucilaginous taste. Their principal use is in cataplasms, 
 fomentations, and the like, and in emollient glysters. 
  
  
  
 406. VERBASCUM Thapsus. MULLEIN. The Leaves and Flowers.--Their taste 
 discovers a glutinous quality; and hence they stand recommended as an 
 emollient, and is in some places held in great esteem in consumptions.
449. MARYGOLD. Calendula officinalis.--An annual plant usually sown in 
 the spring. The petals of the flowers are eaten in broths and soups, to 
 which they impart a very pleasant flavour. 
  
  
  
 450. MUSHROOM. Agaricus campestris.--Is cultivated and well known at our 
 tables for its fine taste and utility in sauces. These plants do not 
 produce seeds that can be saved; they are therefore cultivated by 
 collecting the spawn, which is found in old hot-beds and in meadow 
 lands. 
  
 Various methods have been lately devised for raising mushrooms 
 artificially: but none seem to be equal to those raised in beds, as is 
 described in all our books of gardening. Raising this vegetable in close 
 rooms by fire heat has been found to produce them with a bad flavour; 
 and they are not considered so wholesome as those grown in the open air, 
 or when that element is admitted at times freely to the beds. 
  
 
 
  
 479. AGARIC, ORANGE. Agaricus deliciosus.--This agaric well boiled and 
 seasoned with pepper and salt, has a flavour similar to that of a 
 roasted muscle. In this way the French, in general, make use of it. It 
 is in high perfection about September, and is chiefly to be found in dry 
 woods. 
  
  
  
 480. ALEXANDERS. Smyrnium Olustratum.--If the poorer people were aware 
 of the value of this plant, which is now quite neglected, it might be 
 turned to good account as an article of food, and that, in all 
 likelihood, of the most wholesome kind. 
  
 Bryant thinks it was much esteemed by the monks, and states that it has, 
 ever since the destruction of the abbeys in this country, remained in 
 many places growing among the rubbish; hence the reason of its being 
 found wild in such places. 
 
 
  
 481. ALEXANDERS, ROUND-LEAVED. Smyrnium perfoliatum.---It is said that 
 the leaves and stalks boiled are more pleasant to the taste than the 
 other kind of Alexanders. 
  
  
  
 482. ARROWHEAD. Sagittaria sagittifolia.--The roots of this plant are 
 said to be very similar to the West-India arrow-root. They are sometimes 
 dried and pounded, but are reported to have an acrid unpleasant taste; 
 but this might perhaps be got rid of by washing the powder in water. 
  
  
  
 483. BLACKBERRY. Rubus fruticosus.--The berries of this plant are well 
 known in the country; but if too many be eaten, they are apt to cause 
 swelling in the stomach, sickness, &c. 
  
 
 
 484. BRIONY, BLACK. Tamus communis.--Although this is considered a 
 poisonous plant, the young leaves and shoots are eaten boiled by the 
 common people in the spring. 
  
  
  
 485. BURDOCK. Arctium Lappa.--Mr. Bryant in his Flora Diaetetica says 
 that many people eat the tenders talks of this plant boiled as 
 asparagus. 
  
  
  
 486. BURNET. Sanguisorba officinalis.--The young leaves form a good 
 ingredient in salads. They have somewhat the flavour of cucumbers. 
  
  
  
 487. BUTTERWORT. Pinguicula vulgaris.--The inhabitants of Lapland and 
 the north of Sweden give to milk the consistence of cream by pouring it
warm from the cow upon the leaves of this plant, and then instantly 
 straining it and laying it aside for two or three days till it acquires 
 a degree of acidity. 
  
 This milk they are extremely fond of; and once made, they need not 
 repeat the use of the leaves as above, for a spoonful or less of it will 
 turn another quantity of warm milk, and make it like the first, and so 
 on, as often as they please to renew their food.--Lightfoot  '  s Flor. 
 Scot. p. 77. 
  
  
  
 488. CHAMPIGNON. Agaricus pratensis.--There is little or no smell to be 
 perceived in this plant, and it is rather dry; yet when boiled or stewed 
 it communicates a good flavour, and is equal to the common mushroom. 
  
  
  
 489. CHANTARELLE. Agaricus Chantarellus.--This agaric, when broiled with 
 pepper and salt, has a taste very similar to that of a roasted cockle,
of the north of England: the fruit has nearly the shape of the currant, 
 and is reckoned in Norway, where it grows abundantly, a favourite dish. 
  
  
  
 493. COTTON-THISTLE. Onopordon Acanthium.--The tender stalks of this 
 plant, peeled and boiled, are by some considered good; but it has a 
 peculiar taste which is not agreeable to all. 
  
 Bryant in his Flora Diaetetica says that the bottoms of the flowers are 
 eaten as artichokes. 
  
  
  
 494. COW-PARSNEP. Heracleum Sphondylium.--The inhabitants of Kamschatka 
 about the beginning of July collect the foot-stalks of the radical 
 leaves of this plant, and, after peeling off the rind, dry them 
 separately in the sun; and then tying them in bundles, they lay them up 
 carefully in the shade. In a short time afterwards, these dried stalks 
 are covered over with a yellow saccharine efflorescence tasting like
liquorice, and in this state they are eaten as a delicacy. 
  
 The Russians, not content with eating the stalks thus prepared, contrive 
 to get a very intoxicating spirit from them, by first fermenting them in 
 water with the greater bilberry (Vaccinium uliginosum), and then 
 distilling the liquor to what degree of strength they please; which 
 Gmelin says is more agreeable to the taste than spirits made from corn. 
 This may, therefore, prove a good succedaneum for whisky, and prevent 
 the consumption of much barley, which ought to be applied to better 
 purposes. Swine and rabbits are very fond of this plant.---Lightfoot  '  s 
 Fl. Scot. 
  
  
  
 495. DANDELION. Leontodum Taraxacum.--This is a good salad when blanched 
 in the spring. The French, who eat more vegetables than our country 
 people do, use this in the spring as a common dish: it is similar to 
 endive in taste. 
  
 
 
 496. DEWBERRY. Rubus caesius.--The dewberry is very apt to be mistaken 
 for the blackberry; but it may be easily distinguished by its fruit 
 being not so large, and being covered with blue bloom similar to that 
 seen on plums: it has a very pleasant taste, and is said to communicate 
 a grateful flavour to red wine when steeped in it. 
  
  
  
 497. EARTH-NUT. Bunium Bulbocastanum.--The roots are eaten raw, and 
 considered a delicacy here, but thought much more of in Sweden, where 
 they are an article of trade: they are eaten also stewed as chesnuts. 
  
  
  
 498. ELDER. Sambucus nigra.--The young shoots of elder are boiled with 
 other herbs in the spring and eaten; they are also very good pickled in 
 vinegar. Lightfoot says, in some countries they dye cloth of a brown 
 colour with them. 
 
 
 627. PRUNUS Lauro-cerasus. THE COMON LAUREL.--The leaves of the laurel 
 have a bitter taste, with a flavour resembling that of the kernels of 
 the peach or apricot; they communicate an agreeable flavour to aqueous 
 and spirituous fluids, either by infusion or distillation. The distilled 
 water applied to the organs of smelling strongly impresses the mind with 
 the same ideas as arise from the taste of peach blossoms or apricot 
 kernels: it is so extremely deleterious in its nature, and sometimes so 
 sudden in its operation, as to occasion instantaneous death; but it more 
 frequently happens that epileptic symptoms are first produced. This 
 poison was discovered by accident in Ireland in the year 1728: before 
 which, it was no uncommon practice there, to add a certain quantity of 
 laurel water to brandy, or other spirituous liquors, to render them 
 agreeable to the palate. At that time three women drank some 
 laurel-water; and one of them a short time afterwards became violently 
 disordered, lost her speech, and died in about an hour. 
  
 A gentleman at Guildford, some few years back, also, by making an 
 experiment as he intended on himself, was poisoned by a small dose: he 
 did not survive the taking it more than two hours.
