celebrated as a locality for taking this really fine and delicious fish, 
 as Saint Mary  '  s Falls, or the _Sault_,[27] as it is more generally and 
 appropriately called. This fish resorts here in vast numbers, and is in 
 season after the autumnal equinox, and continues so till the ice begins 
 to run. It is worthy the attention of ichthyologists. It is a 
 remarkable, but not singular fact in its natural history, that it is 
 perpetually found in the attitude of ascent at these falls. It is taken 
 only in the swift water at the foot of the last leap or descent. Into 
 this swift water the Indians push their canoes. It requires great skill 
 and dexterity for this. The fishing canoe is of small size. It is 
 steered by a man in the stern. The fisherman takes his stand in the 
 bows, sometimes bestriding the light and frail vessel from gunwale to 
 gunwale, having a scoop-net in his hands. This net has a long slender 
 handle, ten feet or more in length. The net is made of strong twine, 
 open at the top, like an entomologist  '  s. When the canoe has been run 
 into the uppermost rapids, and a school of fish is seen below or 
 alongside, he dexterously puts down his net, and having swooped up a 
 number of the fish, instantly reverses it in water, whips it up, and 
 discharges its contents into the canoe. This he repeats till his canoe 
 is loaded, when he shoots out of the tail of the rapids, and makes for
shore. The fish will average three pounds, but individuals are sometimes 
 two and three times that weight. It is shad-shaped, with well-developed 
 scales, easily removed, but has the mouth of the sucker, very small. The 
 flesh is perfectly white and firm, with very few bones. It is boiled by 
 the Indians in pure water, in a peculiar manner, the kettle hung high 
 above a small blaze; and thus cooked, it is eaten with the liquid for a 
 gravy, and is delicate and delicious. If boiled in the ordinary way, by 
 a low hung pot and quick fire, it is soft and comparatively flabby. It 
 is also broiled by the inhabitants, on a gridiron, after cutting it open 
 on the back, and brought on the table slightly browned. This must be 
 done, like a steak, quickly. It is the most delicious when immediately 
 taken from the water, and connoisseurs will tell you, by its taste at 
 the table, whether it is immediately from the water, or has lain any 
 time before cooking. It is sometimes made into small ovate masses, 
 dipped into batter, and fried in butter, and in this shape, it is called 
 _petite pâte._ It is also chowdered or baked in a pie. It is the great 
 resource of the Indians and the French, and of the poor generally at 
 these falls, who eat it with potatoes, which are abundantly raised here. 
 It is also a standing dish with all. 
 
with the power of motion or locomotion has been exerting itself to quit 
 the place and the region, and hie to more kindly latitudes for the 
 winter. Nature has also become imperceptibly sour tempered, and shows 
 her teeth in ice and snows. _Man-kind_ and _bird-kind_ have concurred in 
 the effort to go. We have witnessed the long-drawn flight of swans, 
 brant, and cranes, towards the south. Singing birds have long since 
 gone. Ducks, all but a very few, have also silently disappeared, and 
 have probably gone to pick up spicy roots in the Susquehannah 
 or Altamaha. 
  
 Prescient in the changes of the season, they have been the first to go. 
 Men, who can endure greater changes and vicissitudes than all the animal 
 creation put together, have lingered longer; but at last one after 
 another has left Pa-wa-teeg, till all who _can_ go have gone. Col. Brady 
 did not leave his command till after the snow fell, and he saw them 
 tolerably "cantoned." The last vessel for the season has departed--the 
 last mail has been sent. Our population has been thinned off by the 
 departure of every temporary dweller, and lingering trader, and belated 
 visitor, till no one is left but the doomed and fated number whose duty 
 is here, who came here to abide the winter in all its regions, and who
New Year  '  s day among the descendants of the Norman 
 French--Anti-philosophic speculations of Brydone--Schlegel 
 on language--A peculiar native expression evincing 
 delicacy--Graywacke in the basin of Lake Superior--Temperature--Snow 
 shoes--Translation of Gen. i. 3--Historical reminiscences--Morals of 
 visiting--Ojibwa numerals--Harmon  '  s travels--Mackenzie  '  s 
 vocabularies--Criticism--Mungo Park. 
  
 _January 1st_. This is a day of hilarity here, as in New York. Gayety 
 and good humor appear on every countenance. Visiting from house to house 
 is the order. The humblest individual is expected to make his appearance 
 in the routine, and "has his claims allowed." The French custom of 
 salutation prevails. The Indians are not the last to remember the day. 
 To them, it is a season of privileges, although, alas! it is only the 
 privilege to beg. Standing in an official relation to them, I was 
 occupied in receiving their visits from eight o  '  clock till three. I 
 read, however, at intervals, Dr. Johnson  '  s Lives of Rochester, 
 Roscommon, Otway, Phillips, and Walsh. 
  
 _2d_. Brydone, the traveler, says, on the authority of Recupero, a
A trammel was found in the solid substance of a tree in Onondaga. A gun 
 barrel in a similar position in the Wabash Valley.[40] Growing wood soon 
 closes over articles left upon it, in the wilderness, where they are 
 long undisturbed. 
  
 [Footnote 40: Hon. R.W. Thompson.] 
  
 _27th. Monedo_ is strictly a term belonging to the Indian mythology and 
 necromancy, and is constantly used to indicate a spirit. It has not the 
 regular termination of the noun in _win_, and seems rather verbal in its 
 aspect, and so far as we can decipher its meaning, _mon_ is a syllable 
 having a bad meaning generally, as in _monaudud_, &c. _Edo_ may possibly 
 be a derivation from _ekedo_, he speaks. 
  
 _28th_. It is a year ago to-day since I visited the tomb of Washington, 
 at Mount Vernon. There were three representatives in Congress, in 
 company. We left the city of Washington in the morning, in a private 
 carriage, and drove down in good season. I looked about the tomb 
 narrowly for some memento to bring away, and found some mineralogical 
 fragments on the small mound over the tomb, which would bear the
application of their book names. On coming back through Alexandria, we 
 dined at a public hotel, where, among other productions of the season, 
 we had cucumbers. What a contrast in climate to my present position! 
 Here, as the eyes search the fields, heaps of snow are still seen in 
 shaded situations, and the ice still disfigures the bays and 
 indentations of the shore in some places, as if it were animated with a 
 determination to hold out against the power of the sun to the utmost. 
 Nature, however, indicates its great vernal throe. White fish were first 
 taken during the season, this day, which is rare. 
  
 _29th_. A friend at Detroit writes under this date: "I had expected that 
 before now, instructions would have reached here requiring you to repair 
 to the St. Peter  '  s. But as the season advances, and they do not arrive, 
 I begin to fear that one of those mutations, to which of all governments 
 upon this _mundane sphere_ ours is the most exposed, has changed the 
 intended disposition." 
  
 _May 1st_. Winter still holds its grasp upon the ice in the lower part 
 of the river and straits. 
 
"In this country," he says, "life is at least fifty per cent, below par 
 in the months of August and September. I have often thought that I run 
 as great a risk every season which I spend here, as I would in an 
 ordinary battle. I really believe it seldom happens that a greater 
 proportion of an army fall victims to the sword, during a campaign, than 
 there was, of the inhabitants of Illinois, falling victims to disease 
 during a season that I have been here." 
  
 "I have little doubt but the trade of this part of the State of Illinois 
 will pass through that channel (the northern lakes). Our produce is of a 
 description that ought to find its way to a northern market, and that, 
 too, without passing through a tropical climate. Our pork and beef may 
 arrive at Chicago with nearly the same ease that it can at St. Louis; 
 and, if packed there and taken through the lakes, would be much more 
 valuable than if taken by the way of the South; besides, the posts 
 spoken of (Chicago, Green Bay, &c.) may possibly be supplied cheaper 
 from this than any other source." 
  
 "Moses Austin, I presume you have heard, is dead, and his son Stephen is 
 acting a very conspicuous part in the province of Texas. Old Mr. Bates,
_26th_. Mr. T.G. Anderson, of Drummond Island, transmits a translation 
 of the Lord  '  s Prayer, in Odjibwa, which he requests to be examined. 
  
 _Feb. 5th_. No State seems comparable, for its enterprise and rapid 
 improvements, to New York. Mr. E.B. Allen, who recently removed from 
 this remote village to Ogdensburgh, New York, expresses his agreeable 
 surprise, after seven years  '   absence in the West, at the vast 
 improvements that have been made in that State. "There is a spirit of 
 enterprise and energy, that is deeply interesting to men of business and 
 also men of science." 
  
 _March 1st_. Dr. Martyn Paine, of New York, proposes a system of 
 philosophic exchanges. The large and fine collection of mineralogical 
 and geological specimens which I brought from Missouri and other parts 
 of the Mississippi valley in 1819, appears to have had an effect on the 
 prevalent taste for these subjects, and at least, it has fixed the eyes 
 of naturalists on my position on the frontiers. Cabinets of minerals 
 have been in vogue for about nine or ten years. Mr. Maclure, of 
 Philadelphia, Colonel Gibbs, of New Haven, and Drs. De Witt, Bruce and 
 Mitchill, of New York, and above Profs. Silliman and Cleveland, may be
said to have originated the taste. Before their day, minerals were 
 regarded as mere "stones." Now, it is rare to find a college or academy 
 without, at least, the nucleus of a cabinet. By transferring my 
 collection here, I have increased very much my own means of intellectual 
 enjoyment and resistance to the power of solitariness, if it has not 
 been the means of promoting discovery in others. 
  
 *       *       *       *       * 
  
 _4th. Fatalism_,--An Indian, called Wabishkipenace, _The White Bird_, 
 brings an express mail from the sub-agency of La Pointe, in Lake 
 Superior. This proved to be the individual who, in 1820, acted as one of 
 the guides of the exploring expedition to the Copper Rock, on the 
 Ontonagon River. Trifles light as air arouse an Indian  '  s suspicions, and 
 the circumstance of his being thus employed by the government agents, 
 was made use of by his fellows to his prejudice. They told him that this 
 act was displeasing to the Great Spirit, who had visited him with his 
 displeasure. Whatever influence this idea had on others, on 
 Wabishkipenace it seemed to tell. He looked the image of despair. He 
 wore his hair long, and was nearly naked. He had a countenance of the
most melancholy cast. Poverty itself could not be poorer. Now, he 
 appears to have taken courage, and is willing once more to enter into 
 the conflicts of life. But, alas! what are these conflicts with an 
 Indian? A mere struggle for meat and bread enough to live. 
  
 _13th_. This is a day long to be remembered in my domestic annals, as it 
 carried to the tomb the gem of a once happy circle, the cherished 
 darling of it, in the person of a beloved, beautiful, intellectually 
 promising, and only son. William Henry had not yet quite completed his 
 third year, and yet such had been the impression created by his manly 
 precocity, his decision of character, perpetual liveliness of temper and 
 manners, and sweet and classic lineaments, and attachable traits, that 
 he appeared to have lived a long time. The word _time_ is, indeed, a 
 relative term, and ever means much or little, as much or little has been 
 enjoyed or suffered. Our enjoyment of him, and communion with him, was 
 intimate. From the earliest day of his existence, his intelligence and 
 quick expressive eye was remarkable, and all his waking hours were full 
 of pleasing innocent action and affectionate appreciation. 
  
 We took him to the city of New York during the winter of 1824-25, where
he made many friends and had many admirers. He was always remembered by 
 the youthful name of Willy and _Penaci_, or the bird--a term that was 
 playfully bestowed by the Chippewas while he was still in his cradle. He 
 was, indeed, a bird in our circle, for the agility of his motions, the 
 liveliness of his voice, and the diamond sparkle of his full hazel eyes, 
 reminded one of nothing so much. The month of March was more than 
 usually changeable in its temperature, with disagreeable rains and much 
 humidity, which nearly carried away the heavy amount of snow on the 
 ground. A cold and croup rapidly developed themselves, and no efforts of 
 skill or kindness had power to arrest its fatal progress. He sank under 
 it about eleven o  '  clock at night. Such was the rapidity of this fatal 
 disease, that his silver playful voice still seemed to ring through the 
 house when he lay a placid corpse. Several poetic tributes to his memory 
 were made, but none more touching than some lines from his own mother, 
 which are fit to be preserved as a specimen of native composition.[47] 
  
 [Footnote 47: 
 Who was it nestled on my breast, 
 And on my cheek sweet kisses prest, 
 And in whose smile I felt so blest?
Sweet Willy. 
  
 Who hail  '  d my form as home I stept, 
 And in my arms so eager leapt, 
 And to my bosom joyous crept? 
 My Willy. 
  
 Who was it wiped my tearful eye, 
 And kiss  '  d away the coming sigh, 
 And smiling, bid me say, "good boy?" 
 Sweet Willy. 
  
 Who was it, looked divinely fair, 
 Whilst lisping sweet the evening pray  '  r, 
 Guileless and free from earthly care? 
 My Willy. 
  
 Where is that voice attuned to love, 
 That bid me say "my darling dove?" 
 But, oh! that soul has flown above,
Sweet Willy. 
  
 Whither has fled the rose  '  s hue? 
 The lily  '  s whiteness blending grew 
 Upon thy cheek--so fair to view, 
 My Willy. 
  
 Oft have I gaz  '  d with rapt delight, 
 Upon those eyes that sparkled bright, 
 Emitting beams of joy and light! 
 Sweet Willy. 
  
 Oft have I kiss  '  d that forehead high, 
 Like polished marble to the eye, 
 And blessing, breathed an anxious sigh, 
 For Willy. 
  
 My son! thy coral lips are pale-- 
 Can I believe the heart-sick tale, 
 That I thy loss must ever wail?
My Willy. 
  
 The clouds in darkness seemed to low  '  r, 
 The storm has past with awful pow  '  r, 
 And nipt my tender, beauteous flow  '  r! 
 Sweet Willy. 
  
 But soon my spirit will be free, 
 And I my lovely son shall see, 
 For God, I know did this decree! 
 My Willy. 
 ] 
  
 _17th_. This being St. Patrick  '  s day, we dined with our excellent, 
 warm-hearted, and truly sympathizing friend, Mr. Johnston, in a private 
 way. He is the soul of hospitality, honor, friendship, and love, and no 
 one can be in his company an hour without loving and admiring a man who 
 gave up everything at home to raise up a family of most interesting 
 children in the heart of the American wilderness. No man  '  s motives have 
 been more mistaken, no one has been more wronged, in public and private,
fuel, books, and studies. Besides the fruitful theme of the Indian 
 language, I amused myself, in the early part of the season, by writing a 
 review for one of the periodicals, and with keeping up, throughout the 
 season, an extensive correspondence with friends and men of letters in 
 various parts of the Union. I revised and refreshed myself in some of my 
 early studies, I continued to read whatever I could lay my hands on 
 respecting the philosophy of language. Appearances of spring--the more 
 deepened sound of the falls, the floating of large cakes of ice from the 
 great northern depository, Lake Superior, and the return of some early 
 species of ducks and other birds--presented themselves as harbingers of 
 spring almost unawares. It is still wintry cold during the nights and 
 mornings, but there is a degree of solar heat at noon which betokens the 
 speedy decline of the reign of frosts and snows. 
  
 The Indians, to whom the rising of the sap in its capillary vessels in 
 the rock-maple is the sign of a sort of carnival, are now in the midst 
 of their season of sugar-making. It is one of their old customs to move, 
 men, women, children, and dogs, to their accustomed sugar-forests about 
 the 20th of March. Besides the quantity of maple-sugar that all eat, 
 which bears no small proportion to all that is made, some of them sell a
Ottawas of the peninsula determined to send a delegation to Washington 
 on the subject. I could not hesitate as to the course which duty 
 proscribed to me, under these important circumstances, and determined to 
 proceed to Washington, although the Secretary and acting Governor of the 
 Territory, Mr. Horner, on being consulted by letter, refused his assent 
 to this step. His want of proper information on the subject, being but 
 recently come to the territory, did not appear to be such as to justify 
 me in remaining on the island, while the question had been carried by 
 the Indians themselves to, and was, probably, to be decided at 
 Washington before another season. I determined, therefore, to proceed to 
 Washington, taking one of the latest vessels for the season, on their 
 return from the ports on Lake Michigan. 
  
 _Nov. 2d_. Mr. Featherstonehaugh writes to me from Galena, on his return 
 from his geological reconnoisance in the north-west, sketching some of 
 the leading events of his progress:-- 
  
 "Desirous of giving you a passing notice of my progress, I make time, a 
 few moments  '   leisure, to say that, when I had entered the Terre Bleu 
 River, which you remember is that tributary of the St. Peter  '  s I was
the Indian improvements North, under the eighth art. of the treaty of 
 March 28th, 1836. The weather being fine, and anticipating no high winds 
 at this season, I determined, as a means of health and recreation, to 
 take Mrs. S. and her niece, Julia, a maid, and the children along, 
 having tents and every camping apparatus to make the trip a pleasant 
 one. My boat was one of the largest and best of those usually employed 
 in the trade, manned with seven rowers and provided with a mast and 
 sails. An awning was prepared to cover the centre-bar, which was 
 furnished with seats made of our rolled-up beds. Magazines, a 
 spy-glass, &c., &c., served to while away the time, and a 
 well-furnished mess-basket served to make us quite easy in that 
 department. At Sault St. Marie I took on board Mr. Placidus Ord to keep, 
 the record of appraisements. 
  
 While here, the notorious John Tanner, who had been on very ill terms 
 with the civilized world for many years--for no reason, it seems, but 
 that it would not support him in idleness--this man, whose thoughts were 
 bitter and suspicious of every one, followed me one day unperceived into 
 a canoe-house, where I had gone alone to inspect a newly-made canoe. He 
 began to talk after his manner, when, lifting my eyes to meet his
mirage. Its deep volcanic chasms, and upheaved rocks, tell a story of 
 mighty elemental conflicts in the season of storms; but it did not 
 reward me with much in the way of natural history, except in geological 
 specimens. 
  
 _Aug. 7th_. The Chippewas have some strange notions. Articles which have 
 been stepped over by Indian females are considered unclean, and are 
 condemned by the men. Great aversion is shown by the females at finding 
 hairs drawn out by the comb, which they roll up, and, making a hole in 
 the ashes, bury. 
  
 Indian females never go before a man: they never walk in front in the 
 path, or cross in front of the place where a sachem is sitting. 
  
 A man will never eat out of the same dish with a woman. The 
 lodge-separation, at the period of illness, is universally observed, 
 where the original manners have not been broken down. If she have no 
 barks, or apukwas to make a separate lodge, a mere booth or bower of 
 branches is made near by. 
 
seems to have attained its maximum, and to have commenced its reflux. 
 Since the first day of June last, as I have ascertained by means of 
 graduated rods at different points along the coast of Lake Erie, the 
 water has fallen perpendicularly nineteen inches, and is still falling. 
 The meteorological character of the present season, as compared with 
 that of several previous seasons, clearly shows the cause of the rise 
 and fall of the lakes not to be periodical, as has heretofore been 
 asserted, but entirely accidental. For several years the summers have 
 been cloudy and cold, with a prevalence of easterly winds and rainy 
 weather. The last summer has been excessively warm for the whole season, 
 and of exceeding drought. When it is remembered that the amount of water 
 evaporated over the surface of these vast bodies of water, during a 
 period of warm sunny weather, greatly exceeds that which passes the 
 outlet of one of these lakes (Niagara River, for example), the cause of 
 the phenomenon is apparent."--See _Mr. Barrett  '  s inquiries, ante_. 
  
 _26th_. The _New York Star_ publishes a notice of _Delafield  '  s 
 Antiquities_. This handsomely printed and illustrated work contains four 
 things that are new to the antiquarian inquirer: 1. A theory by the 
 author, by which he conceives the Indian race to be descended from the
_3d_. Some of the incidents of the fictitious legends of the Indians 
 teach lessons which would scarcely be expected. Manibozho, when he had 
 killed a moose, was greatly troubled as to the manner in which he should 
 eat the animal. "If I begin at the head," said he, "they will say I eat 
 him head first. If I begin at the side, they will say I eat him 
 sideways. If I begin at the tail, they will say I eat him tail first." 
  
 While he deliberated, the wind caused two limbs of a tree that touched 
 to make a harsh creaking noise. "I cannot eat with this noise," said he, 
 and immediately climbed the tree to prevent it, where he was caught by 
 the arm and held fast between the two trees. Whilst thus held, a pack of 
 hungry wolves came that way and devoured the carcass of the moose 
 before his eyes. 
  
 The listener to the story is plainly taught to draw this conclusion: If 
 thou hast meat in thy wanderings, trouble not thyself as to little 
 things, nor let trifles disturb thy temper, lest in trying to rectify 
 small things thou lose greater ones. 
