Used among the Dutch people in a kind of loblolly or hotchpot, 
 which they do eat, calling it _warmus_. The seeds taken as a salad 
 whilst they are yet green, exceed all other salads by many degrees 
 in pleasantness of taste, sweetness of smell, and wholesomeness 
 for the cold and feeble stomach." In common with other camphoraceous 
 and strongly aromatic herbs, by reason of its volatile oil 
 and its terebinthine properties, the Scandix, or Sweet Chervil, 
 was entitled to make one of the choice spices used for composing 
 the holy oil with which the sacred vessels of the Tabernacle 
 were anointed by Moses. It belongs to the particular group 
 of umbelliferous plants which is endowed with balsamic gums, 
 and with carminative essences appealing powerfully to the 
 sense of smell. 
  
  
 During the winter the sap is thick, sweet, and albuminous; but in 
 summer time it is bitter and acrid. Frost causes the bitterness to 
 diminish, and sweetness to take its place; but after the frost this
bitterness returns, and is intensified. The root is at its best for 
 a cultivated herb ill the kitchen-garden, known as "Patience-dock." 
 It is a remarkable fact that the toughest flesh-meat, if boiled with 
 the herb, or with other kindred docks, will become quite tender. 
 The name Patience, or Passions, was probably from the Italian 
 _Lapazio_, a corruption of _Lapathum_, which was mistaken for 
 _la passio_, the passion of Christ. 
  
 Our _Garden Rhubarb_ is a true Dock, and belongs to the "many-kneed," 
 buckwheat order of plants. Its brilliant colouring is due to 
 varying states of its natural pigment (chlorophyll), in 
 combination with oxygen. For culinary purposes the stalk, or 
 petiole of the broad leaf, is used. Its chief nutrient property is 
 glucose, which is identical with grape-sugar. The agreeable taste 
 and odour of the  plant are not brought out until the leaf 
 stalks are cooked. It came originally from the Volga, and has been 
 grown in this country since 1573. The sour taste of the stalks is 
 due to oxalic acid, or rather to the acid oxalate of potash. This 
 combines with the lime elaborated in the system of a gouty person 
 (having an "oxalic acid" disposition), and makes insoluble and
hedge" is derived from "jack," or "jakes," an old English word 
 alkaline carbonates. With full-blooded, excitable persons, grapes in 
 any quantity are apt to produce palpitation, and to quicken the 
 circulation for a time. Also with persons of slow and feeble 
 energies, having a languid digestion (and especially if predisposed 
 to acid fermentation in the stomach), Grapes are apt to disagree. 
 They send their glucose straightway into the circulation combined 
 with acids found in the stomach, and create considerable distress of 
 heartburn and dyspepsia. "Thus," says Dr. King Chambers, "is 
 generated acidity of the stomach, parent of gout, and of all its 
 hideous crew." Likewise wine, especially if sweet, new, or 
 full-bodied, when taken by such persons at a meal, is absorbed but 
 slowly by the stomach, and much of the sugar, with some alcohol, 
 becomes converted by fermentation into acetic acid, which further 
 causes the oily ingredients in the food which has been swallowed to 
 turn rancid. "Things sweet to taste prove to digestion sour." But 
 otherwise, with a person in good health, and not given to gout or 
 rheumatism, Grapes are an excellent food for supplying warmth as 
 combustion material, by their ready-made sugar; whilst the essential 
 flavours of the fruit are cordial, and  whilst a surplus of the
its name from the Celtic _jeneprus_, "rude or rough." Gerard notes 
 that "it grows most commonly very low, like unto our ground 
 furzes." Gum Sandarach, or Pounce, is the product of this tree. 
  
 Medicinally, the berries and the fragrant tops are employed. They 
 contain "juniperin," sugar, resins, wax, fat, formic and acetic acids, 
 and malates. The fresh tops have a balsamic odour, and a 
 carminative, bitterish taste. The berries afford a yellow aromatic oil, 
 which acts on the kidneys, and gives cordial warmth to the stomach. 
 Forty berries should yield an ounce of the oil. Steeped in alcohol the 
 berries make a capital _ratafia_; they are used in several 
 confections, as well as for flavouring gin, being put into a spirit 
 more common than the true geneva of Holland. The French obtain 
 from these berries the _Genièvre_ (Anglice_ "geneva"), from 
 which we have taken our English word "gin." In France, Savoy, and 
 Italy, the berries are largely collected, and are sometimes eaten as 
 such, fifteen or twenty at a time, to stimulate the kidneys; or they 
 are taken in powder for the same  purpose. Being fragrant of 
 smell, they have a warm, sweet, pungent flavour, which becomes 
 bitter on further mastication.
herb yields one per cent. 
 Wormwood; but the odour of Mugwort is not fragrant or aromatic, 
 because it does not possess a volatile essential oil like that of the 
 _Artemisia absinthium_ (Wormwood). 
  
 This Wormwood is also a Composite plant of the same tribe and 
 character, but with an intensely bitter taste; and hence its name, 
 _Absinthium_, has been derived from the Greek privative, _a_, and 
 _psinthos_, "delight," because the flavour is so bitterly distasteful. 
 It is a bushy plant, which abounds in our rural districts, having silky 
 stems and leaves, with small heads of dull yellow flowers, the whole 
 plant being _amara et aromatica_. 
  
 The Mugwort, as an allied Wormwood of the same genus, is taller 
 and more slender than the Absinthium, and is distinguished by being 
 scentless, its leaves being green above, and white below. The bitter 
 taste of the true Wormwood is also due to "absinthin," and each 
 kind contains nitrate of potash, tannin, and resin, with succinic, 
 malic, and acetic acids. 
 
It quickly induces a sharp burning pain, and it excites a destructive 
 wrinkled aspect, with an aromatic smell, and a bitter fragrant taste. 
 Officinally the tree is named _Myristica officinalis_, and the oil 
 distilled from the Nutmeg in Britain is much superior to foreign oil. 
  
 Ordinarily as a condiment of a warming character the Nutmeg is 
 employed to correct cold indigestible food, or as a cordial addition 
 to negus: and medicinally for languid digestion, with giddiness and 
 flatulence, causing oppressed breathing. Its activity depends on the 
 volatile oil, contained in the proportion of six per cent. in the nut. 
 This when given at all largely is essentially narcotic. Four Nutmegs 
 have been known to completely paralyse all nervous sensibility, and 
 have produced a sort of wakeful unconsciousness for three entire 
 days, with loss of memory afterwards, and with more or less 
 paralysis until after eight days. 
  
 The Banda, or Nutmeg Islands in the Indian Ocean, are twelve in 
 number, and the strength of the Nutmeg in its season is said to 
 overcome birds of Paradise so that they fall helplessly intoxicated. 
 
grain_, and contain citrates, and malates of lime and potash, with 
 "hesperidin," sulphur, and mineral salts. The Orange flowers yield a 
 volatile, odorous oil, acetic acid, and acetate of lime. The juice of 
 the Orange consists of citric and malic acids, with sugar; 
 citrate of lime, and water. The peel furnishes hesperidin, a volatile 
 oil, gallic acid, and a bitter principle. 
  
 By druggists, a confection of bitter orange peel is sold; also a syrup 
 of this orange peel, and a tincture of the same, made with spirit of 
 wine, to be given in doses of from one to two teaspoonfuls with 
 water, as an agreeable stomachic bitter. _Eau de Cologne_ contains 
 oil of neroli, oil of citron, and oil of orange. 
  
 The fresh juice of Oranges is antiseptic, and will prevent scurvy if 
 taken in moderation daily. Common Oranges cut through the middle 
 while green, and dried in the air, being afterwards steeped for forty 
 days in oil, are used by the Arabs for preparing an essence famous 
 among their old women because it will restore a fresh dark, or 
 black colour to grey hair. The custom of a bride wearing Orange 
 blossoms, is probably due to the fact that flowers and fruit appear
and there is now a common saying in Leicestershire that for bad 
 abundantly in our dry chalky pastures, bearing terminal umbels of 
 white flowers. It contains an essential oil and a bitter resin, which 
 are useful as warmly carminative to relieve flatulent indigestion, and 
 to promote the monthly flow in women. An infusion of the herb is 
 made, and given in two tablespoonfuls for a dose. Cows which feed 
 on this plant have their flow of milk increased thereby. Small 
 bunches of the leaves and shoots when tied together and suspended 
 in a cask of beer impart to it an agreeable aromatic flavour, and are 
 thought to correct tart, or spoiled wines. The root, when fresh, 
 has a hot pungent bitterish taste, and may be usefully chewed for 
 tooth-ache, or to obviate paralysis of the tongue. In Germany a variety 
 of this Burnet yields a blue essential oil which is used for colouring 
 brandy. Again the herb is allied to the Anise (Pimpinella 
 Anisum). The term Burnet was formerly applied to a brown cloth. 
 Smaller than this Common Burnet is the Salad Burnet, _Poterium 
 sanguisorba, quod sanguineos fluxus sistat_, a useful  styptic, 
 which is also cordial, and promotes perspiration. It has the smell of 
 cucumber, and is, therefore, an ingredient of the salad bowl, or often 
 put into a cool tankard, whereto, says Gerard, "it gives a grace in the
taste of the plant. 
  
 "It is eaten," says Gerard, "in salads, as watercresses are, and is 
 good against that _malum_ of such as dwell near the German seas, 
 which we term the scurvie, or skirby, being used after the same 
 manner that watercress and scurvy-grass is used, yet is it not of so 
 great operation and virtue." The leaves and stem are slightly acid 
 and astringent, with a somewhat bitter taste, and frequently 
 the former are mixed by sellers of water-cresses with their 
 stock-in-trade. 
  
 A full dose of the juice of fresh Brooklime is an easy purge; 
 and the plant has always been a popular Simple for scrofulous 
 affections, especially of the skin. Chemically, this Water Pimpernel 
 contains some tannin, and a special bitter principle; whilst, in 
 common with most of the Cruciferous plants, it is endowed with a 
 pungent volatile oil, and some sulphur. The bruised plant has been 
 applied externally for healing ulcers, burns, whitlows, and for the 
 mitigation of swollen piles. 
 
The Bog Pimpernel (Anagallis tenella), is common in boggy 
 country, growing on watery banks, and very plentiful in the river   '   s 
 of Norfolk, from whence the London market is supplied. The roots 
 have a warm, bitter taste, and the essential oil is highly aromatic, 
 this being used for preparing aromatic vinegar. In Norfolk the 
 powdered dry rhizome is given for ague. With sugar it makes an 
 agreeable cordial conserve. (See _Flag (Sweet)_, _page_ 201 ). For 
 preserving the aromatic qualities within the dried rhizome; or root, it 
 should be kept in stock unpeeled. This contains "oleum calami," and 
 the bitter principle "acorin." Some of the root may be habitually 
 chewed for the relief of chronic indigestion. The odorous delights of 
 a pastoral time passed near these sweetly-fragrant plants have been 
 happily alluded to in the well-known lines of idyllic verse:-- 
  
 "Green grow the Rushes, oh! 
 Green grow the Rushes, oh! 
 The sweetest hours that e   '   er I spent 
 Were spent among the lasses, oh!" 
  
 "Virent junci fluviales,
chloride of sodium, with a little charcoal. 
 "Thestlis for mowers tired with parching heat 
 Garlic and Thyme, strong smelling herbs, doth beat." 
  
 Tournefort writes: "A conserve made from the flowers and leaves of 
 wild Thyme (Serpyllum) relieves those troubled with the falling 
 sickness, whilst the distilled oil promotes the monthly flow in 
 women." 
  
 The delicious flavour of the noted honey of Hymettus was said to be 
 derived from the wild Thyme there visited by the bees. Likewise the 
 flesh of sheep fed on pasturage where the wild Thyme grows freely 
 has been said to gain a delicate flavour and taste from this source: 
 but herein a mistake is committed, because sheep are really averse 
 to such pasturage, and refuse it if they can get other food. 
  
 An infusion of the leaves of Thyme, whether wild, or cultivated, 
 makes an excellent aromatic tea, the odour of which is sweet and 
 fragrant, whilst the taste of the  plant is bitter and 
 camphoraceous. There is in some districts an old superstition that to
throughout our woods, and in other moist, shady places. It belongs 
 to the natural order of Geraniums, and bears the provincial names of 
 Sour trefoil, Cuckoo   '   s bread, or Gowk   '   s-meat, and Stubwort (from 
 growing about the stubs of hewn trees). Its botanical title is got from 
 the Greek word _oxus_, sharp, or acid, because of its penetrating 
 sour taste. This is due to the acid oxalate of potash which it contains 
 abundantly, in common with the Dock Sorrel, and the Garden 
 Rhubarb. 
  
 By reason of this chemical salt being present in combination with 
 less leafy matter than in the other plants which are akin to it, the 
 Wood Sorrel makes a lighter and more palatable salad. 
  
  
 WORMWOOD. 
  
 The common Wormwood (Artemisia absinthium) has been partly 
 considered here together with Mugwort, to which it is closely allied. 
