If ere the Salamander hap to bite thee, 
 Thy coffin and thy winding sheet invite thee. 
 Si mordu t ' a une Arissade, 
 Pren ' s ton linceul é la flassade 
 We have said enough: let my vale-dictum now be this; the Land mournes to see it selfe so trod upon by a people, strangers to God and vertue: concea?ling such usefull treasures, and making unusefull so many ports, obscured farre beyond her meriting; seated so advantagiously for traffique with all the world, both the Indies possible to be awed by her; and vicinating those gol?den countries of Mozambiq ' , Quiloa, Soffala, Mombassa, Magadoxa and other parts of Aegisimba; proffering also many petty Ilands under her, as those of Cumrho, Primero, Mascarenas, Castle Ile, Moritius, Dygarrois, and Englands Forrest, environing and in a sort defending her upon occasions. 
  
 Nine leagues from Madagascar (in a North-East course) we had welnigh (for want of heed) runne upon the sholes of Iudaea; sands memorably dan?gerous, since Annius a French man with all his Navy here perished; our vari?ation at this time being 13 degrees, 18 minutes in longitude from the Cape, Whence wee steered N. E. and by E. aiming at Mohelia. By the way, one of our men tooke a Shark (a man eating fish, and who seldome misse the hook, out of too much greedinesse) 9 foot she was in length and a halfe by the rule, I speak it in this respect, wee found in her paunch five and fifty young ones, every fish a Geometricall foot in length, (100 of our Ship saw it) all which, go out and in at pleasure: that night, wee sailed merrily by the Mascarenas, a Charybdis in 21 degrees, var. 13 and 17 minutes, where suspe?cting no danger, the wind favouring us, wee were at tenne at night throwne (by an insensible current) upon the shoalds of Mozambique, and sounding (where wee thought wee had a 1000 fadome) the plummet or lead found bare eight fadome: the wind was high, sea rough, and Cinthya clouded; it stood our Captaine upon to give speedy notice (that night we bore the light in our maine top) by eccho of 2. roring Culverings warning our Fleet, 
 Page  24 
  
 guided by our Lanterne to tack about, loring our top-sailes, and hovering till day light might help us by discovery: at our second sounding wee had 14 fathoms, 12.15. and 14. after that; then 22 24.33.35. and 40. fadoms by which wee saw, the Lord in mercy had (as by a thred) directed our course from out these flats of death, and where (if his providence, which let us ever magnifie, had not prevented it) in halfe an houres sayle further we had beene cast away most miserably: 
  
 —Cave fis ibi tu sorbente charybdi, 
 Nam neque Neptunus posset tibi ferre salutem. 
 From us, learne to avoid that deadly sand, 
 Where Neptune cannot lend a helping hand. 
 Iohn de Novo, Primero and other dangerous Iles on every side invironing us: we had here 17 degr. 37 min. lat. 20 degr. 20 min. long. cape var. 13 degr. 52. min. the current sets S. W. At day break we were close by the Peninsule Mozambique (part of Quiloa) inhabited by Negroes; abundant in Gold, Silver, and Ambergreece; at small distance, that part wee saw appeared thus unto us: [illustration] 
 Mozambique. 
 which we scarce lost sight of, when an Armado of Dolphins assaulted us; and such we saulted as we could intice to taste our hooks or fissgiggs: a fish (it me?rits your patience) from its swiftnesse metonymically surnam ' d the Prince and Arrow of the Sea: celebrated by many learned pens, by many Epethites; Phi?lanthropoi, foraffecting men; Mono-gamoi, for their turtle constancy; genera?ted of sperme, nourisht like man, imbrace, joyne, and go great 10 months. In faciem versi dulces celebrant hymenaeos Dolphines, similes hominis complexique haerent: a carefull husband oves his gravid associate, detesting incest, abhorring bigamy, tenderly affecting their parents, who when 300 yeers old, they feed and defend against other hungry fishes; and when dead (to avoid the Sharks and like marine Tyants) carry it ashoare and there (if Aristotle, Aelyan, and Pliny erre not) inhume him and bedew his sepulcher: they were glad of our com?pany many hundred miles concomitating and frisking about us. 
 Vndi{que} dant saltus, multaque aspergine rorant 
 Emergunt{que} itetum, redeunt{que} sub aequora rursus
These Iles, (call ' d the Iles of Cumro) be 5: either because Chumro (or Cumr-yne the Welshmens Ile) is greater, than the rest, or that it was first disco?vered: named Cumro, Meottis, Ioanna, Mohelia & Gazidia: by others thus; St. Iohn di Castro, Spirito Sancto, Sancto Christofero, Anguzezia, and Mayotto: each of them excellent for refreshing passengers, abounding with delicate fruit and such cattell as are had at easie prices: none of them are above a hun?dred miles about yet very populous and full of natures blessings. Chumro is the highest and best land, but branded with the most subtle and bloody Sava?ges: Ioanna has courteous people, and such as readily help strangers in ne?cessity: It lately obeyed a Queen rectrix much commended for sagacity, but now submits to a King, who tho tyrannicall yet better so (as Tacitus pro?tests) than be anarchicall; to these Iles we sent our boates ashoare (intending to ride at Mohelia) and returned with Oxen and Buffolls, Goats, and variety of Fruits, all which were very heartily wellcomed. And tho our Randezvous be now in sight, suffer me (whiles in memory) to tell you of a fish or 2 which in these seas were obvious. The Sea Tortoise is not much differing from those at land, her house or shell is only flatter;* by overturning them they are easily taken, disabled then to sinck or help themselves: some we tooke, for pastime more than food, they taste waterish and inforce fluxes; they su?perabound in eggs, in those we took every one having neere 2000, pale and 
 Page  26 
  
 round, but never made hard though extremely boyled: some eat them and the flesh (or fish as you please to call it), but by the Leviticall law it was for?bidden; and tho our religion consists not in ceremonies (ending in the proto?tipe, our Saviour) yet except famine or novelty so invite mee, with such cates my pallat craves not to be refreshed. The Mannatee is good meat, and from their using the shoare have a fleshie taste, resembling in shew and eating, Veale;* the intralls differing little from a Cow, and from whom in respect of its phisnomy, some new name her: her face is like a Buffolos, her eyes small and round, hard gums in stead of teeth: the stone generated in the head is most valuable, soveraigne against choler adust, the stone chollick and dissen?tery, so it be beat small, infus ' d in wine and drunk fasting: the body of this fish is commonly 3 yards long and one broad, slow in swimming, wanting fins, in their place ayded with 2 paps which are not only suckles but stilts to creep a shoare upon such time shes grazes; where shes sleep long, sucking the coole Ayre, unable (contrary to other watery inhabitants) to be halfe an houre under water: are famoused (like Lizards) for their love to man, whose face they delight to look upon, and in weaknesse have refreshed them; tho most unhappy to our Captaine Andrew Evans, who by striking one at the Moritius with his harping-iron, and leaping into the sea to make short work with his steletto, was so crusht, that he dyed shortly after, as I speak in our description of St. Helena, were we intombed him. 
  
 *The Carvell is a meere sea fome, every where floating upon the surface of the Ocean, of a globous forme, like so many lines throwing abroad her strings, which she can spread at pleasure, angling for small fishes which she captivates at leisure: a sea spider she may be cal ' d, for when she sees her webb too weak, she can blow an infectious breath, foming death, or such a sting as if she had borrowed it from the Scorpion. 
  
 We are now ready to cast Anchor, hopefull of fresh refreshment. September the eleventh, we rode in five and twenty fadoms, the ensuing morne wafting neerer shoare, dropping it againe in seventeene fathoms, at the West side of Mohelia, a bow shot from a small scatter ' d village of straw, unworthy a name, yet called Meriangwy, governed by a Sha-bander, Alicusary by name, a blacke big-bon ' d knave, savage in shew, but slie and crafty in curtesie and bartring. 
  
  
  
 [illustration] 
 Mohelyae pars Insulae. 
 Mohelia elevates the Pole Antartick twelve degrees, fifteene minutes; has longitude from the Meridian of the Cape of good Hope, foure and twenty degrees, and variation of the Compasse 16 degrees, 20 minutes; is about three?score miles in circuit: from Cumroh South East 14 leagues, and from Ioannae East and by South about 10: the Marittim places rising gently, the inland 
 Page  27 
  
 woody and mountanous; a little village here and there scattered; the houses are of reeds and straw, fitted to the heat of such a torrid climate. Moella some pronounce it, Molala others, and worst of all one Best (thinking the derivation would carry it) Mal-Ilha or bad Ile, an incongruity, that from his ill judgement, so sweet and usefull a place should be defamed. 
  
 From Madagascar it is removed about 50 leagues, from Quiloa in the Africk continent sixty; the Inhabitants are a mixture of Gentiles and Ma?homitans: the Portugall has preacht Christ, but have few Proselites; some fragments of their language take thus in their owne idiom. A King, Sultan; Bracelets, Arembo; a Hen, Coquo; an Oxe, Gumbey; Coco-nuts, Sejavoye; Plan?tains, Figo; a Goat, Buze; an Orenge, Tudah; Lemon, Demon; Water, Ma?ge; Paper, Cartassa; a Needle, Sinzano, &c. a mish-mash of Arabick and Portuguise. 
 
 
  
 [illustration] 
 A Mohelian. 
 The people are cole black, have great heads, big lips, are flat nos ' d, sharp chind, huge limbd, affecting Adams garb, a few Plantaine leaves girding their wasts, vailing their modest parts; cut and pinckt in severall works, upon their duretto skins, face, armes, and thighs, striving to exceed each other for varie?ty: The Meccan zealists have here a few poore built Mosques, straw and wood without, matted and neat within, admitting no entrance with shooes 
 Page  28 
  
 on; the other sort of men are doubtlesse magicall: I thus imagine it; ano?ther Gentleman and I, one evening got us under a Tree to avoid the storme, at that time thundring and raining excessively. A Negro stood by all the while trembling, now and then lifting up his hands and eyes, muttering his black Art to some hobgoblin, and (when we least suspected it) skips out, and in a limphatic rapture drew a long knife which he brandisht about his head 7 or 8 times, and after so many spells put it up againe; hee then kisses the humid earth 3 times and rises merrily: upon a sudden, the skie cleared and no more noise affrighted us. 
  
 Two Kings of late commanded them, Phancomall and Synal-beg; the one a Native, th ' other an Arabian; both made great by their wives, the only daugh?ters of the late King Sultan Sheriph Booboocharee, and Queene Nannan-galla, both of them alive in lesse than 20 yeares passed. The two Kings (envious of one anothers greatnesse) live at defiance, and oft times the poore Savages pay deerely for eithers ambition; the two sisters (whom Nature has united) burne in jealousie, and exasperate their Lords, so as (tis thought) one of them will downe the streame ere long, if the proverb say right; that 
  
 Non bene cum focijs 
 Regna Venus{que} manent. 
 Love and Scepters ill agree, 
 To admit Societie. 
 Tobacco is of great account here; not strong (as our men love) but weake and leafie; suckt out of long canes call ' d hubble-bubbles; sneezing-powder is not more frequent with the Irish, than chawing Arec, (by Arab and Indians call ' d Tauffet and Suparee) is with these Savages: the Arecca (resembling the Nutmeg, the Tree the Toddy) is not us ' d alone, they add to it Betele, which like the Jvie leafe involves the Arec and combured oyster-shells, a chalky sub?stance, good in operative property, as colouring their white teeth to a pure crimson; it also sweetens the breath, kills wormes, giddies the braine, dries rheumes, helps Venus, and begets an appetite. If I erre, blame the Interpre?ter I had there; I professe no Physick. The Ile inricht us with many good things; Buffolls, Goats, Turtles, Hens, huge Batts, Camelions, Rice, Pease, Cuscus, Hony, Oysters, Breams, Cavalloes, and store of other fish; also with Toddy, Cocos, Plantains, Orenges, Lemons, Lymes, Pomcitrons; Ananas, Cowcumbers, Tamarind, and Sugar canes; Mother of pearle and good pearle too if it were div ' d for; an Ile so verdant all the yeare (each day a gentle breese and showre bedewing the earth, and lenifying the flaming Sunne) atti?red in Flora ' s Summer livery, yea roabed with Natures best Arras; so pleasant, so refresht with silver purling streames, so shaded, as may parallell the proud Paradise of Alcinoe. 
  
 Of fruits we will select but three, such as may merit our acceptance. 
  
 *The Plantaine (for taste and odour second to none in Mohelia) is a fruit so good and vailed with so broad a leafe that Goropius (if he be worht be?leeving) perswades us, Adam offended in eating it, and with these leaves made his transgression manifest; and that also, which was brought Moses out of the Holy Land: by the Arabians it is called Musa-mawm, Pican by the In?dians: they hang in great clusters, their shape is long and round, not unlike a Soffage; the rind peels off, the fruit is gold-yellow, relisht like a Windsor Peare; good for urine, but bad for fluxes, cold crude stomacks, and dis?senteries.
 
 Page  29 
 The Coco (an excellent fruit) is cover ' d with a thick rynd; both together,* equall in bignesse to a Cabbage: the shell is like the skull of man, or rather a Deaths head; eyes, nose and mouth, being easily discerned; intus vita! with?in, we find better than the out-side promised; a quart of Ambrosie, coloured like new white Wine, but farre more aromatick tasted; the meat or kernell cleaves to the shell, and is not easily parted; above an inch thick, better relisht than our Philberts, and enough to satiate the appetite of two reasonable men. It has other excellencies, The Tree (which is straight and lofty, not branch?ing save at the very top, where it spreads in beautifying plumes, the Nuts like pendants or pearles adorning them) is good for timber, or Canooes, Masts, Anchors: the leaves for Tents or thatching; the rynd for Sailes, Mattresses, Cables and Linnen; the shell for furniture; the meat for victualling: rare blessings! I will give thee them contracted in that excellent Poem of my Cosen Herbert, late Cambridge Orator. 
  
 —The Indian Nut alone 
 Is cloathing, meat and trencher, drink and kan, 
 Boat, Cable, Saile, Mast, Needle, all in one. 
 The Toddy Tree is not unlike the Date or Palmeto,* the Wine is got by pearcing and putting a Iar or Pitcher under, that the liquor may distill into it, at the very top it has a pith or marrow, which being boyl ' d is like a Colli-flower, but the taking that part is as if another Tree should be eradicated, the soule therein consisting; these (as the Dates) thrive not nor fructifie, except the flowring male and female be united. The Toddy is like Whay in colour, in taste and quality like Rhenish wine, at first draught uncouthly relisht, but every draught tasts better and better, and will easily inebriate; a little makes men merry; too much makes them mad; extreame is mortall: in the mor?ning tis laxative; in the eve costive; at midnight dangerous. Of this or the Coco, Herodotus and Pliny write thus: Ex quibus, panem, mel, vinum, acetum & vestitum conficiunt. To end, these are bought without much charges; thirty Orenges or Lemons for a sheet of paper: for two sheets tenne Coco Nuts: an Ox for a ryall of eight: a Goat for six pence. They have no Ships, nor Boats, save such as are hewed out of one stump or tree, capable to receive three Fishermen in faire weather; and if they sink, their swimming helps them: but though of no use with us, yet for rarity sake I give thee the shape better to be imagined. 
  
  
  
 [illustration] 
 a Canoe 
 The 15 of September we had farewell to Mohelia, by benefit of a faire gale that fild all our sailes, plowing up the yeelding Ocean. The long billowes 
 Page  30 
  
 made us dance apace, but without dread; the whistler with his iron Pipe en?couraging the Marriners; who made so good use of this advantage, that in foure dayes wee found our selves but foure degrees from the Aequinoctiall; that night the 19 of September,* the Sea was for 10 leagues as white as snow, not froathy or by agitation of wind, but in calmest weather (as many say) is here still the same, from whence caused is not now to be disputed. Next day we made the Sunne our Zenith: in this Latitude opposing that rich part of Afrique we call Soffala and Mombassa (in three degrees 50 min. South:) Maga?doxa (in 3 degrees:) Zanzibar, Pata, and Brava, terminating one another, till with Bernagasso (the Port to the great Neguz or Priest Iohn) the red Sea limits Africk from Asia. 
  
 *The three and twentieth day wee once more sail ' d under the Aequator and againe bad farewell to those late usefull Antartique constellations: the Crosiers (foure starres like a crosse, of a second magnitude 17 degrees 30 min. from the Pole) Noahs Dove, Polophilax and others: the two Beares now ri?sing in our Horizon againe, and at eight degrees North, the wind grew wea?rie of too much constancie, veering into E.N.E, so that the Monzoon affronted us, and we could lie no neerer than South-East; at which time many of your company died, imputing the cause of their Calentures, Fluxes, Aches, Scur?vie, Feavers, and the like, to the sulphurous heat there, stinking water, rotten meat, and worm-eaten Biskets (in the Torrid Zone, no mans care can better it, but in the temperate they all recover and become sweet and nourishing again) But rather I beleeve, their over-eating themselves at Mohelia, where they far?cinated their crude stomacks with unsalted flesh, and gulped downe too much Toddy, caused it; here our Admirall threw over-board five and thirty dead men: the Hopewell, eleven; the Starre, five: every ship lost some, too many if God had pleased. But of most note were Harvey Keynell, an expert Masters Mate in the Starre, Captaine Goodall, all good, if skill in Navigation, huma?nity, courage, and piety may have it: at whose putting into the Sea (a spati?ous grave) a volley of one and twenty great Gunns awaked the watery Citi?zens to safeguard such a Treasure, heaven it selfe at that instant weeping so abundantly, that I never saw a sadder raine and of lesse continuance. The Ma?ster of our ship was removed into the Vice Admirall, and Captaine Malim out of the Hopewell into ours, who also died shortly after, a Sea-man as wise and valiant as any other: most memorable in that never to be forgot pollicie hee us ' d in the Levant Seas after a brave fight to save his men and ship from fury of Algier Pirats: for whom we may fitly apply that of the Prince of Poets. 
 
well-becomming Funeralls; they lodge the Carcasse where none lay for?merly: supposing it a vile part to disturb the dead, whom in the grave they think sensible of torment: they place his head towards Medyna and (after the old mode, septem ad Luctum, septem ad convivium) for seven dayes, his next of kinne watches to keep the evill Angell from his Tomb; during which, he incessantly warbles out his Elegiac Threnodies, as the last expres?sion of love he can shew him.* Others are thus buried: In the first place, go those of his own blood and family, next them his slaves and other do?mestic varlets naked to their waist, the rest in troozes: who to expresse their zeale the better, burne and scratch their armes and breasts, cutting their flesh, and printing circles, (a trick borrowed from the rebellious Jewes, and prohibited by Moses. Levit. 19.28. and in Deut. 14.1.) so ef?fectually that the blood trickles out in many places. Next them are ranckt fifty young Gallants, whose shoulders are made to beare some texts taken out of the Alcoran; mixing with them selected Eulogies which they sing and ingeminate. Next these, follow a hundred or two hundred men of note, each holding the cord that drawes the Corps or Hearse: on every side throng the multitude; some bearing in their hands Lawrel or Cypresse boughs, others Coronets of flowers, fruits, or what best befits the season: some semi-naked horsemen play along, and oft times to demonstrate their love, spare not to wound themselves: and in the last place go the Preficae or women hyred to weep, to howle, to teare their periwiggs, to smell to onyons (hinc illae Lacrymae) and to do such impostures as did the antick Romans noted in Livy; and Jewes as Ieremy speaks, 9.17. In this Decorum they march slowly, and with great silence: but at his Dormitory ululate Lala-Hillulla, there uncloathing, and mundifying the carcasse, his sins there?by also vanishing: they anoynt him with odours and pretious unguents, and so wrapt in fine linnen they burie him in the earth, and place his head towards Arabia; his face looking up to heauen (I note it in regard they put the other sex, their faces downwards,) his armes spread, as prepar ' d to imbrace Mahomet: above him, they fix two stones, at ' s head and feet; which in Arabiq '  characters ingrav ' d and colour ' d, denotates his name, quality, religion, and time of buriall: there they leave him, but give not over twice every day to come and sing his Requiem, beseeching Mahomet to suc?cour him against his bad Angells, of whom they nourish this opinion. That so soone as any Mussulman is inhumed, forthwith Muengar and Quarequar two ougly,* huge, black, and furious Devills do assaile him; the one being arm ' d with an iron club, th ' other with a hook of flaming brasse: in that terrible sort they view the Carcasse, and in as imperious sort command him to lift up his head, to fall prostrate upon his knees, and beg his soule, till then departed: the dead bodie revives and entertaines his soule again, and faile not both together to accompt their life, and how they have profest Don Mahomet: If it appeare his life was morally good, the two Devills ter?ribly affrighted flie away and give way to two good Angels (apparreled in pure white silke) to comfort him; to the day of doome not budging from him, nor seeming wearie nor unwilling to protect him. But in case his life prov ' d bad or repugnant to Mahometry; then without all pit?ty or respect, the black-fac ' t Caco-Daemon with the iron club hits him so 
 Page  239 
  
 pat, so fiercely on the head, as by its fury and force thumps him ten yards deep into the ground: but there hee sleepes not long; for immediatly the other spitefull helhound with the flaming hook pulls him up againe: in that horrid sort tormenting that miserable Mahomitan, till Mahomet calls a generall Parliament; where, in one place of his Alcoran hee pro?mises to save them all, but in another (forgetting his promise it seemes) appoints them all to passe over a narrow Bridge (he calls it the Bridge of judgement) each man carrying his sinnes in a bagg behinde him; but in passing over, such as have heavie loads, the bridge breaks, and they all fall into hell; such as have lesse weight, into purgatory, &c. as I shall di?sport you with in his Alcoram. 
  
 The Persians at this day, when ere they receive a mandat or other letter from the King or wherein his name is used,* give it no small reve?rence; they bow their bodies at the receiving it, kisse it in divers places, & then open it: Such is their transcendent opinion of his Majesty, that they repute no lesse of him, than of old times they did of their Elementall Gods; they swear usually by his name, Sha-ambashy or Serry-shaw i.e. by the Kings head, and is of no lesse force to beget beleife than if they ratified a truth by Serry-Mortis-Ally, i.e. Mortis Alli ' s head, a Prophet than whom they think non greater: or by putting a finger to their eye, and saying chash, the King sees; then (though the story bee never so paradoxicall) if you please, you may beleeve them: yea, in most conceits they parallell Abbas with Mahomet; in every prayer desiring his content and increase of life, though by the losse of theirs it were augmented: 
  
 By losse of ours, the Gods increase your life. 
 De nostris annis tibi Iupiter augeat annos? 
 acknowledging their happinesse from him, and entitling (not without much pride too) their lives, wives, and estates, by him wholly to be dispo?sed of: they imagine hee knowes their thoughts; and when in his pre?sence, never speak, cough, spit, or looke upon him, least the fulgor of his aspect might peradventure prove no lesse formidable than the Trisulk of Iupiter: they register (now, as of old) his acts and apophthegms, in Cae?dar Tablets, gum ' d with Cynabre, and seldome write his name but in characters of gold, upon paper of excellent glosse and finenesse, varied in?to azure, vermillion, yellow, and other colours; in a word reputing him the true reptesentator of Ally and his glorie, whose perfections they com?pare to Amber, Nutmegs, Roses, Flowers, and Odours; Animate Dei Imago in terris, and (with Homer) The best beloved sonne of Iove. 
 We were yet abroad; now let me entertaine you in their houses, the cost what ere it be, you shall be welcome to; if it agree not with your ap?petite I cannot help it, the countrie will afford no better: first satiate your eyes, and note their furniture, and remember that brave man who by Alcydes foot found out his monstrous big dimension. A pan, a platter,* and a carpet is the epitomè of all their domestic utensills: their dyet is soone dreft, soone eaten, soone digested, and soone described: their table is the solid ground, cover ' d with some sort of carpet, over which they spread pintado cloths; afore each man they lay five or six thin cakes of wheat, or pancakes: every one his spoone also, very memorable woodden spoones; 
 Page  240 
  
 their handles being well-nigh a yard long, the spoone it selfe so vast, as my mouth could seldome master it, though I gaped extreamly to welcome it: they seldome go beyond Pelo, but in that dish expresse they think a wit?tie invention, setting before you fortie dishes, call ' d by fortie names as Pelo, Chelo, Kishmy-pelo, &c. albeit indeed it differ but thus; all are of ryce, mutton, and hens boyl ' d together; some have butter, some have none; some have fruit, some have none; some have turmerack & saffron, some have none; some have onyons and garlick, some have none; some have almonds and raisins, some have none; and so ad infinitum: making us also beleeve they make us gallant cheere and great varietie, though the ingredients bee one, diffring only in colour or complement; some comming to the Table as black as a coale, some as white as a curd; others (that you may know their Cooks are wittie) be yellow, greene, blew, red, or as they fan?cie: and wot you forsooth why Rice is so generally eaten & so valuable? not that it exceeds wheat or other graine in goodnesse, finenesse, round?nesse or the like; but from a most reverent tradition delivered by their grand Annalist Iacob-ben-siet-Ally, a right Cabalist. And this it is? On a time,*Mahomet being earnest in his prayers was accidentally conveighed into Paradize, where being very earnest in beholding its rare varieties, at length hee cast his eyes upon the glorious Throne of the Almighty; and (perceiving the Lord to turne about) fearing he should bee severely whipt for such presumption, blushes for shame, and sweats with terror; but loth to have it seene, wipes off his brow the pretious sweat with his first finger, and threw it out of Paradise: it was not lost, for, forthwith dividing it selfe into six drops, all of them became miraculous creatures: the first drop became a fragrant Rose (therefore is rose-water so much used there, and in honor of the Rose an Annuall feast solemnized:) the second, a grain of Ryce, (a holy graine:) the other foure, foure famous Doctors, who (ha?ving Pallas for their sister) helpt Mahomet to compile his holy Alcoran. You have not tasted all yet; sallads, a charrs, and hard egs, parti-coloured; and therefore hard, that their stomack be not too soone emptied: the mut?ton there is sweet, but fat only in the taile, the weight commonly pon?derizing above twentie pounds, sometimes the Carcasse: Camell, Goat, and Pheasant are also manducable; the countrie yeelds, the Law allowes it: contrary to Beefe, Veale, Swines-flesh, Hare, & Buffols, prohibited by Mahomet, either to collogue with Jewes, or that his owne pallat detested them. Camells flesh they sell commonly in the Buzzars roasted upon scu?ets or cut in mammocks and carbonadode, three or foure spits valuing two pence. Bad pastery men they are, they put a lamb whole into a kinde of oven, and take it out as black as a cole; they say (I dare not second it) it tasts curiously; it may bee so, but I feare scarce well: well it may bee to a famisht martialist, not so in banquets. The poore are not so voluptuous: they content themselves with drie ryce, herbs, roots, fruit, lentills, and a meat resembling thlummery: Dates also preserved in sirrup commixt with butter-milk, is pretious food and physicall. But, to memorize their Cheese and Butter will make your mouths water at it; I ironize: in good earnest the cheese is the worst any ever tasted of, both that it wants Art and ma?terialls: tis drie, and blew, and hard; ill to the eye, bad to the taste, 
 Page  241 
  
 naught for digestion; of an unsaporie taste, rough, and in a month shewes no moysture: the worst is towards the Gulph; the best in Mozendram; neither of them praise worthie. Will you taste their butter? first,* inquire how they make it: I enquired of some there, they say they sometimes take what is generated in the Guspans (or sheeps tailes) it saves them chur?ning: others, boyle the cream soundly in a raw skin ' d leather-bag, full of hayres and unsalted: this sort will keep fresh (sweet I say not) six months, in that poynt commendable; but when wee drew our knives thorow it, a thousand sluts haires were then discovered, therein abominable; yet they commend it, we no way condiscended: their liquour may perhaps better delight you; tis faire water, sugar, rose-water,* and juyce of Le?mons mixt, call ' d Sherbets or Zerbet, wholsome and potable: they drink wine (coloured like a pale Claret,) Arac or Aquavitae, Tobacco, (suckt through water (that it inebriate not) by long canes or pipes issuing from a round vessell,) and above all the rest, Coho or Copha: by Turk and Arab calld Caphe and Cahua: a drink imitating that in the Stigian lake, black, thick, and better; destrain ' d from Bunchy, Bunnu, or Bay berries; whol?some they say, if hot, for it expells melancholy, purges choler, begets mirth, and an excellent concoction; but not so much regarded for those good properties, as from a Romance that it was invented & brew ' d by Ga?briel (what Gab. we despute not of) to restore the decayed radical moysture of kind hearted Mahomet; who (as he speaks himselfe to his inimitable glo?ry) never drunk it, but immediatly by vertue thereof made it a matter of nothing to unhorse forty men, and in Venus Camp (with more than a Herculean fortitude) to bring under forty women. Opium (the juyce of Poppie) is of epidemick use there also, good if taken moderatly; bad, nay mortall if beyond measure; they chaw it much, it helps catarrhs, cowardise, and the epilepsie; strengthens Venus, and which is admirable, the Foot-posts by continuall chawing it, runne sleeping day and night in a constant dreame or giddinesse, seeing, but not knowing whom they meet, though well acquainted, and misse not their intended places; by a strange efficacie expulsing the tedious thoughts of travell, and rarely de?ceiving the poore body of its seasonable rest and lodging. I have devi?ated, this was discourse at dinner, not yet ended.* They commonly eat in earth or porceline, not valuing silver (the King by such an Article of of their Faith, the neatlier attracting it to his own Table;) they have an?other reason (very ridiculous,) that Mahomet at his stealing into hell disco?vered the Devills at dinner, and served in silver; earthen ware was holier, and therefore better for all kind of Mussulmen. In feeding they use not knives, nor count they it luckie to imploy but one finger or two; three or foure is injoyned them from tradition. Nor do they cut their bread but break or rend it: equally fictitious; the storie lying thus; that Ozman in his parody assures them, The Devil (Shitan they call him) ever diets so: a palinody they might sing, knew they how Ozman borrow ' d it from the Jewes, who ever us ' d to break their bread; and from Xenophon, in his description of the Persians: but they owe all to miracle, deriding Historie. 
  
 At meales they are the merriest men that may be: no people in the world have better stomacks, drinke more, or more affect voracity: yet 
 Page  242
I could hardly beget passages. The Palmeto is a remarkable Tree and most beneficiall to Travellers:  ' tis like the Coco or Date in growth, save that her boughes are large and rounder: the Palmeto is long, and straight, and round, and soft; without leafe, bough, or branch, save at the very top; and those are few, and greene, and sedgie: under the branch appeare certaine codded seeds: both trees (male and female) blossome, but the shee is only fruitfull; and not so neither, unlesse a flowring branch of the male tree be yearely innoculated or incorporated, that by a commixture of seed the fe?male may fructifie; no miracle in Nature: the leaves serve for many uses; wee made them cover our Tents, to shade us from the Sun and the sere?nes which fall nightly, and are dangerous: at the top of the Palmeto tree is a soft pith, in which consists the soule or vergetative vertue, for being cut out the tree dyes; the pith is in bignesse like a small Cabbage, in taste like a Nut, but boyld eats like a Colli-flory. Of more value is the Palmeto wine; it is must or sweet, pleasant and nourishing; in colour and taste not unlike new Muskadine. It is intoxicating, but cold in the digestion; it pur?ges and helps obstructions, kills wormes, and let stand two dayes in the Sun, becomes good vinegar. The wine is thus gathered: we peirce or cut small holes in three or foure trees that grow together; the sap or liquor effudes presently, and all the holes or vessells are quickly filled: impatience for?bids to bring wooden barrycoes thither, our bellies were prepared to re?ceive it; by help of a Cane or Quill we suck and suck againe, from one tree to another, two or three trees in lesse than an houre repletiating the gree?diest appetites, though they bowze their bellies full. 
 The shape of which and Coco, after my rude way I thus present thee: Their excellencies I cannot more elegantly expresse, than Silvester has already celebrated. 
  
  
  
 [illustration] 
 A Coco-tree 
 A Batt 
 A Tropique bird 
 A Palmeto-tree 
 Page  346 
 The Indian I ' les most admirable be 
 In those rare fruits call ' d Coquo ' s commonly: 
 The which alone farre richer wonder yeilds 
 Than all our Groves, Meades, Orchards, Gardens, Feilds! 
 What, would ' st thou Drink? the wounded leaves drop wine. 
 Lack ' st thou fine Linnen? dresse the tender rine, 
 Dresse it like flax, spin it, then weave it well: 
 It shall thy Cambrick and thy Lawne excell. 
 Long ' st thou for Butter? bite the poulpy part.
For, never better came to any Mart. 
 Do ' st need good Oyle? then boult it too and fro, 
 And passing oyle it soone becommeth so. 
 Or Vinegar? to whet thine appetite. 
 Why, sunne it well and it will sharply bite. 
 Or, wants thou Sugar? steepe the same a stownd, 
 And sweeter Sugar is not to be found. 
 Tis what you will, or will be what you would: 
 Should Mydas touch it, sure it would be gould. 
 And God (all good) to crowne our life with Bayes, 
 The earth with plenty, and his name with prayes, 
 Had done enough if he had made no more 
 But this one plant, so full of choisest store. 
 Save that the world (where one thing breeds satiety) 
 Could not be faire, without so great variety. 
 For indeed, such is the life and pleasure of this Ambrosia, that (I often noted it) wee were no sooner parted from these trees (no not three yards space) but divers birds, as Parrats, Kites, Thrushes, &c. and Lizards (here abounding, and not a little curious in their shape and colours) would speed to suck the distilling Nectar. 
  
 Divers other Trees here are, various in their shape and nature: one, out of curiosity I bit and tasted of, but for halfe an houre it so malignantly wrongd my mouth and lips, as if Vitriol had beene imbrued with Sulphur: it procreates nothing that is greene or good, destitute of shade and beauty, wholy naked, without leafe or flower; the bole or body is soft and pene?trable, such as a Musquet bullet can make way thorough though the Tree be of five yards circuit; the softnesse of it invited my knife to carve my name in, and which, it as easily performed, as with a stick you can write in sand; I have no name for it. Nor for another very frequent there, but by its likenesse the same which the barbarous Africans at Sierra-leon call O ' gou, with which they invenome their Darts and Shafts: the Tree is not high nor bungie; the branches spread to a great length, and beare many Cods (not unlike the Indian Beanes) arm ' d with many sharp prickles: by such a defence one would think the fruit or kernell valuable, but it decei?ved us; the fruit (or kernell hid within those Cods) is round, scarce so big as a Doves egge; the shell, and colour very like a Bezar stone; hard to crack, but crackt it may be; within, it has a Nut, tasted like an Acorne, the quality (if not the same) little better than poyson. Many other rare 
 Page  347 
 
Trees there are; some, like unto Pines; like Ashes, some; some, Box; some like to Cypresses. The fruits are also variable, some like Pine-Apples, like Artichoakes some, others like Plums, and Nuts, and Berries: whose seve?rall names or vertues, my small skill in that Theory apprehends not. This I tooke notice of, that what the Birds eat not, the Tortoyses doe eat; and what the Tortoyses refuse to eat, the Hoggs devoure: so, as by one or other, all is tasted of. Againe, as this noble Ile is prodigall in her water and wood, so shee corresponds in what else a fruitfull Parent labours in: not only boasting in that variety, but in feathered creatures also; yea, in the rarenesse of that variety: I will but name some of them; you shall lick them to perfection. The Dodo comes first to our description: here, and in Dygarrois (and no where else, that ever I could see or heare of) is gene?rated the Dodo (a Portuguize name it is, and has reference to her simple?nes,) a Bird which for shape and rarenesse might be call ' d a Phoenix (wer ' t in Arabia:) her body is round and extreame fat, her slow pace begets that corpulencie; few of them weigh lesse than fifty pound: better to the eye than stomack: greasie appetites may perhaps commend them, but to the indifferently curious, nourishment, but prove offensive. Let ' s take her picture: her visage darts forth melancholy, as sensible of Natures injurie in framing so great and massie a body to be directed by such small and com?plementall wings, as are unable to hoise her from the ground, serving only to prove her a Bird; which otherwise might be doubted of: her head is va?riously drest, the one halfe hooded with downy blackish feathers; the other, perfectly naked; of a whitish hue, as if a transparent Lawne had co?vered it: her bill is very howked and bends downwards, the thrill or breathing place is in the midst of it; from which part to the end, the co?lour is a light greene mixt with a pale yellow; her eyes be round and small, and bright as Diamonds; her cloathing is of finest Downe, such as you see in Goslins: her trayne is (like a China beard) of three or foure short feathers; her legs thick, and black, and strong; her tallons or pounces sharp, her stomack fiery hot, so as stones and iron are easily digested in it; in that and shape, not a little resembling the Africk Oestriches: but so much, as for their more certain difference I dare to give thee (with two others) her representation. 
  
  
  
 [illustration] 
 A Catato 
 A Hen 
 A Dodo 
 Page  348 
 Here are also sundry other fowle, yea birds of highest quality; as Gos?hawkes, Hobbies, Lannars; and also Reer-mice or Bats as large as Gos?hawkes, Passe-flemingoes, Geese, Powts, Swallowes, Kites, Black-birds, Sparrowes, Robbins, Herons, white and beautifull; in their flesh good, in their feathers more valewable: Cacatoes, a bird somewhat like a Parrat, but may seeme to borrow his name from ? in non-Latin alphabet ?, he is so fierce, so ra?venous, and so indomitable, Bitters, Hens, and many other; which I for?beare to name to avoyd impatience: But I must give the Parrats a pecu?liar salutation, they made mee so admire their feathers, and are so catho?lickly beloved and pointed at; Such are their curious liveries, and such their language, not unaptly thence cal ' d ? in non-Latin alphabet ? a good Epithiton. 
  
 Psittacus, humanas depromit voce loquetas 
 Atque suo Domino ? in non-Latin alphabet ? valeque sonat. 
 The Parrat, humane language knows right well, 
 And to his Lord, saies Save you, and Farewell. 
 Here are also as great variety of fish, as in any other part of the world, I thinck: such as wee took and tasted of I noted. The Man-atee or Cow-fish was best and rarest; for taste and shape equally can appose both feeder and beholder. They use both elements; those very fins which steare them in the Sea, serve as stilts on shore to creep along, and to support them; their paps also in their land travels do befriend them: and though a fish, yet differ little from Veale in tast, save that it is somewhat waterish; the ribs and entralls resemble a Cows, so do their face, and thence have their denomination: for doubtlesse the land has not that creature which the watery citizens resemble not. This fish is of a great length, and swims but slowly; they affect shoald waters, and to be neare the shoare to graze on; Andrew Evans our honest Captaine, struck one of them with a Trident or Fis-gigg, and (here in this Bay) leapt upon her, wounding her above fifty times with his steletto, but ere hee got the victory, she crusht him by incir?cling him with her taile, enraged by sharp pangs of death, so that his con?quest was dearly bought; for though at that present he spat blood without feeling other torture, yet so mortall was his bruise, that he bade this world farewell, within three weekes after; as in my description of Saint Helena is remembred. The head of this fish is like an Elephant (save that the pro?boscis is wanting:) but to a Cow most liken her: her eyes are very small; her bulk, about three yards long; and in bredth halfe so much:  ' tis fa?moused for a gentle fish; yea in their love to the visage of a man, are ranckt with Dolphins: most certaine and most valewable is the stone con?solidated in their heads: for, being pounded, put in wine, & drunck fasting, it is (as are the brains of Sharks, some call them Tuberons) most soveraigne against the stone and collick: questionlesse of more prise than his other six great teeth, which yet to him are farre more usefull. 
  
 Give mee leave to name what fish wee took,  ' twill ease my memory: Dolphins, Bonetates, Albicores, Cavalloes, Whale, Porpice, Grampasse, (or Sus-marinus,) Mullet, Bream, Tench, Trout, Soles, Flounders, Tor?toyses, Eeles, Pikes, Sharkes, Crabs, Lobsters, Oysters, Crafish, Cuttle-fish, Rock-fish, Limpits, and a speckled Toad-fish or poyson fish, as the Sea-men from experience named it: This came first to net and was eaten 
 Page  349 
 
too greedily by the heedles Sailers; an error which cost some their lives, others their sences; a deere rate, a bad reckning: It is not unlike a Tench, but farre more black, meazled, and deformedly painted. Other strange made Fishes we had there, who met with some strange stomacks, who in a dangerous curiosity would needs tast them: some of them had the shape of Hedg-hogs, of Cats some: some were bungy, others bristly and trian?guler; such as Gorraeus calls Lepus marinus, of which and the rest this caveat may be inserted. 
  
 The poysonous Sea-fish drinck, learn to beware: 
 Whom the deep Channells of the Seas prepare. 
 Her Scales have bane, her Oyles like purging are. 
 Disce venenatos Leporis cognoscere potus 
 Pestiferi, mediis peperit quem fluctibus aequor 
 Virosi Squammas et purgaménta marini 
 piscis olei. 
 The Torpaedo or Cramp-fish came also to our hands, but were amazed (not knowing that fish but by its quality) when a sudden trembling seazed on us; a device it has to beget liberty; by evaporating a cold breath to stupifie such as either touch, or hold a thing that touches it: heare Oppian. 
  
 Along her stretched guts two branches rise 
 With fraud (not strength) endued; they patronise 
 The Fish: whom who so wounds, his joynts decay 
 His blood conjeales, his limbs move not, they say 
 His powers dissolve, he shakes, and falls away. 
 At duo se tollunt distenta per Ilia rami, 
 Qui fraudem pro robore habent, Piscem{que} tuentur 
 Quos si quis tractat, perdit per membra vigorem 
 Sanguine concreto, rigidos nec commovet attus,
Solvuntur subitò contracto in corpore vires. 
 Moreover, this Ile affoords us Goats, Hogs, Beeves, and land Tortoi?ses: so great, as suffer two men with ease to sit upon them; so strong, as they can carry them: yea (in Portugall reports,) fifteene men have alto?gether stood on one of them: Sailers affect to eat them; but are better meat for Hogs, in my opinion: they make pretty sport, but are odious food; and so are their Rats, Bats, and Monkeys: most of which usefull and unusefull creatures were first brought hither (men say) by the Portu?gall to refresh them in their returne from India, but at this day dare nei?ther anchor there (searing the Eaglish and Dutch,) nor owne their first?lings. The Birds, had here at no charge and little labour, are Hens, Bats, Herns, &c. The Hens flock together twenty and forty in a company; if you catch one, take all: the surest way is to shew them a red cloth; that colour exasperates their spleen, they shew it by flying out-ragiously at it; and when wee struck downe one, the residue budgd not one jot till all were vanquished: they eat like parcht Piggs if you roast them. The Herons also through a long continued security (ignorant of the deceits of men, and unused to the villany of powder) are as easily gotten: wee have come in shot of six, and when wee had killd one, the other took not wing but suffered us to shoot and take them all, one after another; neither know?ing nor valuing danger, but quicken destruction to themselves by a strange condoling their late dead associates. All sorts of fish are easily taken. The Bats are innumerable, and admirable in their bignesse: Some of them are not lesse than Gos-haukes: Sea-men case them like Rabbets, but (if my stomack deceive me not) worse meat cannot be tasted of: a fierce ilfavo?red 
 Page  350 
  
 carrion it is, ever squeaking, and in most hidious and offensive noises calling one another: they hang in swarmes upon the boughs of trees, by clawes fixed at the extreame part of their wings; their monkey faces tur?ned downwards. 
  
 Tectaque cum silvis celebrant, lucemque perosae 
 Nocte volant, seroque tenent a vespere Nomen. 
 Houses and Woods they haunt, hate Day, and game 
 In Night time, and from twi light have their Name. 
 Their shapes which I have formerly put upon the Coquos, best speaks  ' em. 
  
 A day afore wee parted thence, wee took a Fish, an Eagle-fish I ima?gin ' d it: the eyes were five quarters asunder: from one fin end to ano?ther, were above foure yards: its mouth and teeth resembled a Port-cul?lice; a long small taile it had: a creature (take it altogether) rather made to wonder at, than to juncket on. 
  
 [illustration] [depiction of fish] A word now of the Soyle it selfe. 
 The Ile has many good places to anchor in: two are well knowne; the one, at the North-West side, which beares the forme of a Hemi-cicle, and elevates the Pole Antartique, 19 degrees, and 30 minutes: the other, at the South-East is directly opposite, and in 20 degrees, 15 minutes; in lon?gitude from Cape Comryn the utmost promontory of India, 20 degrees, 20 minutes: and from the Lizard the extreamest part of England, 99. both Bayes seeme land-lockt, the ground is oazy, the depth in 5, 10, 15, or 20 fadoms, as the Sea-man best affects: No where dangerous. The Soile it selfe; is stony and troublesome towards the shoare; howbeit the in?land parts are fat, and pleasant, full of shadowing trees, and drilling rivo?lets, reciprocally benevolent, equally delightfull to the eye and taste: some few places excepted; which either storming at the aspiring height of some adjacent Mountaines, or efflated in their owne noise, descend so violently that they become Cataracts in their violent and precipitious 
 Page  351 
  
 fluxes: but, though the eare be angry at it, the other sences derive much happinesse; for hereby the earth is mellowed and made fruitfull, which otherwise would bee too full of stones and sand; yet such is the richnesse of it, as rather commands us wonder at, than describe it. Amber-grease is often found flooting about this Iland: how generated, whether in the Whale, or froth of Seas, or other wise, is yet doubted of. Corall, white and pleasant to look upon, grows here in abunda-ce: but how that stincking weed Tobacco came thither I know not: whether by Art or Nature que?stionable. To conclude, this pleasantest of Asiatick Iles is un-inhabited, unlesse you please to intitle Beasts and Birds Inhabitants: those live here without dread of Lyon, Tygre, Wolfe, Fox, Dog, or such offensive crea?tures; and have it upon this condition, to pay a gracefull Tith or Tribute to such ships as famine or foule weather direct to ride here: a fit place for Sir Thomas Moore to have seated his Utopia in. But his conceits were for?ged: this merits the best of people. 
 
