in one of the districts into which the island is divided, and several 
 precipices among the mountains, evidently produced by sudden violence, 
 indicate the volcanic origin of this highly favoured country. There is 
 plenty of good water to be had over all the island. The weather from 
 March till August is usually mild and pleasant. During the rough season, 
 which lasts from December till March, the wind often blows very hard 
 from the west, and is attended with rain.--E.] 
  
 The produce of this island is bread-fruit, cocoa-nuts, bananas of 
 thirteen sorts, the best we had ever eaten; plantains; a fruit not 
 unlike an apple, which, when ripe, is very pleasant; sweet potatoes, 
 yams, cocoas, a kind of _Arum_ fruit known here by the name of 
 _Jambu_, and reckoned most delicious; sugar-cane, which the inhabitants 
 eat raw; a root of the salop kind, called by the inhabitants _Pea_; a 
 plant called _Ethee_, of which the root only is eaten; a fruit that 
 grows in a pod, like that of a large kidney-bean, which, when it is 
 roasted, eats very much like a chesnut, by the natives called _Ahee_; a 
 tree called _Wharra_, called in the East Indies _Pandanes_, which 
 produces fruit, something like the pine-apple; a shrub called _Nono_; 
 the _Morinda_, which also produces fruit; a species of fern, of which
variety of fish. The smaller fish, when they catch any, are generally 
 eaten raw, as we eat oysters; and nothing that the sea produces comes 
 amiss to them: They are fond of lobsters, crabs, and other shell-fish, 
 which are found upon the coast; and they will eat not only sea-insects, 
 but what the seamen call _blubbers_, though some of them are so tough, 
 that they are obliged, to suffer them to become putrid before they can 
 be chewed. Of the many vegetables that have been mentioned already as 
 serving them for food, the principal is the bread-fruit, to procure 
 which costs them no trouble or labour but climbing a tree: The tree 
 which produces it, does not indeed shoot up spontaneously; but if a man 
 plants ten of them in his lifetime, which he may do in about an hour, he 
 will as completely fulfil his duty to his own and future generations, as 
 the natives of our less temperate climate can do by ploughing in the 
 cold of winter, and reaping in the summer  '  s heat, as often as these 
 seasons return; even if, after he has procured bread for his present 
 household, he should convert a surplus into money, and lay it up for his 
 children. 
  
 It is true, indeed, that the bread-fruit is not always in season; but 
 cocoa-nuts, bananas, plantains, and a great variety of other fruits,
supply the deficiency. 
  
 It may well be supposed, that cookery is but little studied by these 
 people as an art; and, indeed, they have but two ways of applying fire 
 to dress their food, broiling and baking; the operation of broiling is 
 so simple that it requires no description, and their baking has been 
 described already, in the account of an entertainment prepared for us by 
 Tupia. Hogs and large fish are extremely well dressed in the same 
 manner; and, in our opinion, were more juicy, and more equally done, 
 than by any art of cookery now practised in Europe. Bread-fruit is also 
 cooked in an oven of the same kind, which renders it soft, and something 
 like a boiled potatoe; not quite so farinaceous as a good one, but more 
 so than those of the middling sort. 
  
 Of the-bread-fruit they also make three dishes, by putting either water 
 or the milk of the cocoa-nut to it, then beating it to a paste with a 
 stone pestle, and afterwards mixing it with ripe plantains, bananas, or 
 the sour paste which they call _mahie_. 
  
 The mahie, which has been mentioned as a succedaneum for ripe
bread-fruit, before the season for gathering a fresh crop comes on, is 
 thus made: 
  
 The fruit is gathered just before it is perfectly ripe, and being laid 
 in heaps, is closely covered with leaves; in this state it undergoes a 
 fermentation, and becomes disagreeably sweet: The core is then taken out 
 entire, which is done by gently pulling the stalk, and the rest of the 
 fruit is thrown into a hole which is dug for that purpose, generally in 
 the houses, and neatly lined in the bottom and sides with grass; the 
 whole is then covered with leaves, and heavy stones laid upon them: In 
 this state it undergoes a second fermentation, and becomes sour, after 
 which it will suffer no change for many months: It is taken out of the 
 hole as it is wanted for use, and being made into balls, it is wrapped 
 up in leaves and baked; after it is dressed, it will keep five or 
 six-weeks. It is eaten both cold and hot, and the natives seldom make a 
 meal without it, though to us the taste was as disagreeable as that of a 
 pickled olive generally is the first time it is eaten. 
  
 As the making of this mahie depends, like brewing, upon fermentation, 
 so, like brewing, it sometimes fails, without their being able to
ascertain the cause; it is very natural, therefore, that the making it 
 should be connected with superstitious notions and ceremonies: It 
 generally falls to the lot of the old women, who will suffer no creature 
 to touch any thing belonging to it, but those whom they employ as 
 assistants, nor even to go into that part of the house where the 
 operation is carrying on. Mr Banks happened to spoil a large quantity of 
 it only by inadvertently touching a leaf which lay upon it. The old 
 woman, who then presided over these mysteries, told him, that the 
 process would fail; and immediately uncovered the hole in a fit of 
 vexation and despair. Mr Banks regretted the mischief he had done, but 
 was somewhat consoled by the opportunity which it gave him of examining 
 the preparation, which perhaps, but for such an accident, would never 
 have offered.[9] 
  
 [Footnote 9: "This paste," we are told in the missionary account, "makes 
 a most nutritious and sweet pudding, and all the children of the family 
 and their relations feast on it eagerly. During this festive season they 
 seldom quit the house, and continue wrapped up in cloth: And it is 
 surprising to see them in a month become so fair and fat, that they can 
 scarcely breathe. The children afterwards grow amazingly. The baked
bread-fruit in this state very much in taste resembles gingerbread." 
 This delicate and wholesome provision, it is said, is not confined to 
 the chiefs and wealthier people, as all who will be at the pains to 
 provide an oven, may readily be supplied with bread-fruit from their 
 neighbours. Such is the generosity of these interesting people, that 
 all of a man  '  s own rank are at all times ready to contribute largely to 
 his support, on his making known his need. In how many respects are 
 these islanders worthy of being held up as examples for us!--E.] 
  
 Such is their food, to which salt-water is the universal sauce, no meal 
 being eaten without it: Those who live near the sea have it fetched as 
 it is wanted; those who live at some distance keep it in large bamboos, 
 which are set up in their houses for use. Salt-water, however, is not 
 their only sauce; they make another of the kernels of cocoa-nuts, which 
 being fermented till they dissolve into a paste somewhat resembling 
 butter, are beaten up with salt-water. The flavour of this is very 
 strong, and was, when we first tasted it, exceedingly nauseous; a little 
 use, however, reconciled some of our people to it so much, that they 
 preferred it to our own sauces, especially with fish. The natives seemed 
 to consider it as a dainty, and do not use it at their common meals;
are always in plenty, and tossed to him by an attendant: He immediately 
 begins to cut or scrape off the rind, but so awkwardly that great part 
 of the fruit is wasted. If, instead of fish, he has flesh, he must have 
 some succedaneum for a knife to divide it; and for this purpose a piece 
 of bamboo is tossed to him, of which he makes the necessary implement by 
 splitting it transversely with his nail. While all this has been doing, 
 some of his attendants have been employed in beating bread-fruit with a 
 stone-pestle upon a block of wood; by being beaten in this manner, and 
 sprinkled from time to time with water, it is reduced to the consistence 
 of a soft paste, and is then put into a vessel somewhat like a butcher  '  s 
 tray, and either made up alone, or mixed with banana or mahie, according 
 to the taste of the master, by pouring water upon it by degrees and 
 squeezing it often through the hand: Under this operation it acquires 
 the consistence of a thick custard, and a large cocoa-nut shell full of 
 it being set before him, he sips it as we should do a jelly if we had 
 no spoon to take it from the glass: The meal is then finished by again 
 washing his hands and his mouth. After which the cocoa-nut shells are 
 cleaned, and every thing that is left is replaced in the basket. 
  
 The quantity of food which these people eat at a meal is prodigious: I
have seen one man devour two or three fishes as big as a perch; three 
 bread-fruits, each bigger than two fists; fourteen or fifteen plantains 
 or bananas, each of them six or seven inches long, and four or five 
 round; and near a quart of the pounded bread-fruit, which is as 
 substantial as the thickest unbaked custard. This is so extraordinary 
 that I scarcely expect to be believed; and I would not have related it 
 upon my own single testimony, but Mr Banks, Dr Solander, and most of the 
 other gentlemen, have had ocular demonstration of its truth, and know 
 that I mention them upon the occasion. 
  
 It is very wonderful, that these people, who are remarkably fond of 
 society, and particularly that of their women, should exclude its 
 pleasures from the table, where among all other nations, whether civil 
 or savage, they have been principally enjoyed.[11] How a meal, which 
 every where else brings families and friends together, came to separate 
 them here, we often enquired, but could never learn. They eat alone, 
 they said, because it was right; but why it was right to eat alone, they 
 never attempted to tell us: Such, however, was the force of habit, that 
 they expressed the strongest dislike, and even disgust, at our eating in 
 society, especially with our women, and of the same victuals. At first,
we thought this strange singularity arose from some superstitious 
 opinion; but they constantly affirmed the contrary. We observed also 
 some caprices in the custom, for which we could as little account as for 
 the custom itself. We could never prevail with any of the women to 
 partake of the victuals at our table when we were dining, in company; 
 yet they would go, five or six together, into the servants  '   apartments, 
 and there eat very heartily of whatever they could find, of which I have 
 before given a particular instance; nor were they in the least 
 disconcerted if we came in while they were doing it. When any of us have 
 been alone with a woman, she has sometimes eaten in our company; but 
 then she has expressed the greatest unwillingness that it should be 
 known, and always extorted the strongest promises of secrecy. 
  
 [Footnote 11: This is not true, as the reader will find, if he knows it 
 not already, when he comes to the next note. Dr H. does not seem to have 
 read extensively on the customs of different nations. It is indeed 
 wonderful, that he did not advert to what had long been known of the 
 practices of the East. A single quotation from one author, may be 
 sufficient to prepare the reader for any additional information, on the 
 subject of the public separation of the sexes. "The regulations of the
But though they would not eat with us or with each other, they have 
 often asked us to eat with them, when we have visited those with whom we 
 were particularly acquainted at their houses; and we have often upon 
 such occasions eaten out of the same basket, and drunk out of the same 
 cup. The elder women, however, always appeared to be offended at this 
 liberty; and if we happened to touch their victuals, or even the basket 
 that contained it, would throw it away.[12] 
  
 [Footnote 12: Nothing can be more difficult in the way of philosophical 
 investigation, than to ascertain the origin and reasons of the customs, 
 opinions, and prejudices established among different people. Their 
 variety is quite destructive of any theory which might be built on the 
 well-known general principles of human nature; and their insignificance 
 often derides every process of formal enquiry, which attempts by any 
 thing more recondite than the supposition of whim or caprice, to account 
 for them. The peculiarities of all nations are, perhaps, on a par in 
 this respect, and only escape scrutiny and wonder, because unnoticed by 
 those to whom they are not familiar. But certainly, to the inhabitants 
 of Otaheite, our eating parties, where the sexes at times vie with each 
 other in the management of knife and fork, and where it usually happens
that a woman presides, would seem as unaccountable and as indelicate, as 
 a certain social exhibition, already mentioned as occurring amongst 
 them, appeared to be to those who witnessed it. And perhaps it is less 
 easy, than at first sight may be imagined, to justify one more than the 
 other. Of actions equally natural, necessary, and proper, and at the 
 same time equally inoffensive to others, it is exceedingly perplexing to 
 discover good reasons for saying, that some are fitted for public notice 
 more than others. In the cases alluded to, a skilful controversialist 
 might be able to argue, why the Otaheitan practice ought to be esteemed 
 the more rational one. The writer has heard of a person, whose 
 refinement of taste and feeling was such, as made him quite disgusted 
 with any woman who eat in his presence; and perhaps the ladies in 
 general are somewhat apprehensive of their running the risk of being 
 depreciated by the appearance of a good appetite in public, and hence 
 their common practice of taking what is called a luncheon before going 
 to a feast, or social eating-party, and their being pleased with the 
 compliment given in the form of complaint, that they have very poor 
 stomachs! The Otaheitans, however, are by no means singular in dividing 
 the sexes during their repasts. On the contrary, there is ground to 
 think, that in Persia, and indeed throughout almost all the East, it is
usual for the women to eat apart from the men. See Harmer  '  s Observations 
 on Scripture, 4th ed. vol. ii. p. 109. Capt. Carver, speaking of the 
 Naudowesses, a tribe of Americans, says, "The men and women feast apart; 
 and each sex invites by turns their companions to partake with them of 
 the food they happen to have." He tells us, however, that in their 
 domestic way of living, the sexes usually associate. Of the female 
 Charaibes, Mr Edwards, quoting Labat, says, that they were not allowed 
 the privilege of eating in presence of their husbands. And Rochon, in 
 his account of Madagascar, tells us something to the same purport of the 
 women of that island. It would be easy to multiply instances of the 
 custom which Hawkesworth thinks to be peculiar to the Otaheitans.--E.] 
  
 After meals, and in the heat of the day, the middle-aged people of the 
 better sort generally sleep; they are indeed extremely indolent, and 
 sleeping and eating is almost all that they do. Those that are older are 
 less drowsy, and the boys and girls are kept awake by the natural 
 activity and sprightliness of their age. 
  
 Their amusements have occasionally been mentioned in my account of the 
 incidents that happened during our residence in this island,
after a short time applied to their ordinary occupations, as if no 
 stranger had been among them. In the forenoon, several of their boats 
 went out a-fishing, and at dinner time every one repaired to his 
 respective dwelling; from which, after a certain time, he returned. 
 These fair appearances encouraged Mr Banks and Dr Solander to range the 
 bay with very little precaution, where they found many plants, and shot 
 some birds of exquisite beauty. In their walk, they visited several 
 houses of the natives, and saw something of their manner of life; for 
 they showed, without any reserve, every thing which the gentlemen 
 desired to see. They were sometimes found at their meals, which the 
 approach of the strangers never interrupted. Their food at this season 
 consisted of fish, with which, instead of bread, they eat the root of a 
 kind of fern, very like that which grows upon our commons in England. 
 These roots they scorch over the fire, and then beat with a stick, till 
 the bark and dry outside fall off; what remains is a soft substance, 
 somewhat clammy and sweet, not unpleasing to the taste, but mixed with 
 three or four times its quantity of strings and fibres, which are very 
 disagreeable; these were swallowed by some, but spit out by the far 
 greater number, who had baskets under them to receive the rejected part 
 of what had been chewed, which had an appearance very like that of
tobacco in the same state. In other seasons they have certainly plenty 
 of excellent vegetables; but no tame animals were seen among them except 
 dogs, which were very small and ugly. Mr Banks saw some of their 
 plantations, where the ground was as well broken down and tilled as even 
 in the gardens of the most curious people among us: In these spots were 
 sweet potatoes, coccos or eddas, which are well known and much esteemed 
 both in the East and West Indies, and some gourds: The sweet potatoes 
 were planted in small hills, some ranged in rows, and others in 
 quincunx, all laid by a line with the greatest regularity: The coccos 
 were planted upon flat land, but none of them yet appeared above ground; 
 and the gourds were set in small hollows, or dishes, much as in England. 
 These plantations were of different extent, from one or two acres to 
 ten: Taken together, there appeared to be from 150 to 200 acres in 
 cultivation in the whole bay, though we never saw an hundred people. 
 Each district was fenced in, generally with reeds, which were placed so 
 close together that there was scarcely room for a mouse to creep 
 between. 
  
 The women were plain, and made themselves more so by painting their 
 faces with red ochre and oil, which being generally fresh and wet upon
This afternoon, we set up the armourer  '  s forge, to repair the braces of 
 the tiller which had been broken, and went on getting our wood and 
 water, without suffering the least molestation from the natives; who 
 came down with different sorts of fish, which we purchased with cloth, 
 beads, and glass bottles, as usual. 
  
 On the 25th, Mr Banks and Dr Solander went again on shore; and while 
 they were searching for plants, Tupia staid with the waterers: Among 
 other Indians who came down to them was a priest, with whom Tupia 
 entered into a very learned conversation. In their notions of religion 
 they seemed to agree very well, which is not often the case between 
 learned divines on our side of the ocean: Tupia, however, seemed to have 
 the most knowledge, and he was listened to with great deference and 
 attention by the other. In the course of this conversation, after the 
 important points of divinity had been settled, Tupia enquired if it was 
 their practice to eat men, to which they answered in the affirmative; 
 but said that they eat only their enemies who were slain in battle.[58] 
  
 [Footnote 58: There is some reason, however, to believe that they make 
 battle in order that they may have enemies to eat. It is something like
abounded in cockles and clams: In many places there were rock oysters, 
 and everywhere plenty of wild fowl, principally shags, ducks, curlieus, 
 and the sea-pie, that, has been described before. We also saw fish in 
 the river, but of what kind we could not discover: The country on the 
 east side of this river is for the most part barren and destitute of 
 wood; but on the west it has a better aspect, and in some places is 
 adorned with trees, but has in no part the appearance of cultivation. In 
 the entrance of the river, and for two or three miles up, there is good 
 anchoring in four and five fathom water, and places very convenient for 
 laying a vessel on shore, where the tide rises and falls seven feet at 
 the full and change of the moon. We could not determine whether any 
 considerable stream of fresh water came into this river out of the 
 country; but we saw a number of small rivulets issue from the adjacent 
 hills. Near the mouth of this river, on the east side, we found a little 
 Indian village, consisting of small temporary sheds, where we landed, 
 and were received by the people with the utmost kindness and 
 hospitality: They treated us with a flat shell-fish of a most delicious 
 taste, somewhat like a cockle, which we eat hot from the coals. Near 
 this place is a high point or peninsula, projecting into the river, and 
 upon it are the remains of a fort, which they call _eppah_, or _heppah_.
low; but in the middle of the island there are hills of a considerable 
 height. We were upon the coast at the latter end of the dry season, when 
 there had been no rain for seven months; and we were told that when the 
 dry season continues so long, there is no running stream of fresh water 
 upon the whole island, but only small springs, which are at a 
 considerable distance from the sea-side; yet nothing can be imagined so 
 beautiful as the prospect of the country from the ship. The level ground 
 next to the sea-side was covered with cocoa-nut trees, and a kind of 
 palm called _arecas_; and beyond them the hills, which rose in a gentle 
 and regular ascent, were richly clothed, quite to the summit, with 
 plantations of the fan-palm, forming an almost impenetrable grove. How 
 much even this prospect must be improved, when every foot of ground 
 between the trees is covered with verdure, by maize, and millet, and 
 indigo, can scarcely be conceived but by a powerful imagination, not 
 unacquainted with the stateliness and beauty of the trees that adorn 
 this part of the earth. The dry season commences in March or April, and 
 ends in October or November. 
  
 [Footnote 105: These islands are far from being well known to Europeans; 
 The policy of both Portuguese and Dutch has ever been unfavourable to
towards each end: It is covered with a very thin skin of a light green 
 colour, and in the inside are a few seeds disposed in the form of a 
 star: Its flavour is a light, clean, pleasant acid, but it cannot be 
 eaten raw; it is said to be excellent as a pickle; and stewed, it made a 
 most agreeable sour sauce to our boiled dishes. 
  
 The tame animals are buffaloes, sheep, goats, hogs, fowls, pigeons, 
 horses, asses, dogs, and cats; and of all these there is great plenty. 
 The buffaloes differ very considerably from the horned cattle of Europe 
 in several particulars; their ears are much larger, their skins are 
 almost without hair, their horns are curved towards each other, but 
 together bend directly backwards, and they have no dewlaps. We saw 
 several that were as big as a well-grown European ox, and there must be 
 some much larger; for Mr Banks saw a pair of horns which measured, from 
 tip to tip, three feet nine inches and a half, across their widest 
 diameter, four feet one inch and a half, and in the whole sweep of their 
 semicircle in front, seven feet six inches and a half. It must, however, 
 be observed, that a buffalo here of any given size, does not weigh above 
 half as much as an ox of the same size in England: Those that we guessed 
 to weigh four hundred weight, did not weigh more than two hundred and
fifty; the reason is, that so late in the dry season the bones are very 
 thinly covered with flesh: There is not an ounce of fat in a whole 
 carcase, and the flanks are literally nothing but skin and bone: The 
 flesh, however, is well tasted and juicy, and I suppose better than the 
 flesh of an English ox would be if he was to starve in this sun-burnt 
 country. 
  
 The horses are from eleven to twelve hands high, but though they are 
 small, they are spirited and nimble, especially in pacing, which is 
 their common step: The inhabitants generally ride them without a saddle, 
 and with no better bridle than a halter. The sheep are of the kind which 
 in England are called Bengal sheep, and differ from ours in many 
 particulars. They are covered with hair instead of wool; their ears are 
 very large, and hang down under their horns, and their noses are arched; 
 they are thought to have a general resemblance to a goat, and for that 
 reason are frequently called _cabritos_: Their flesh we thought the 
 worst mutton we had ever eaten, being as lean as that of the buffaloes, 
 and without flavour. The hogs, however, were some of the fattest we had 
 ever seen, though, as we were told, their principal food is the outside 
 husks of rice, and a palm syrup dissolved in water.[106] The fowls are
gather when young, and toast in the ear. Here is also a great variety of 
 kidney-beans, and lentiles which they call _Cadjang_, and which make a 
 considerable part of the food of the common people; besides millet, yams 
 both wet and dry, sweet potatoes, and European potatoes, which are very 
 good, but not cultivated in great plenty. In the gardens, there are 
 cabbages, lettuces, cucumbers, radishes, the white radishes of China, 
 which boil almost as well as a turnip; carrots, parsley, celery, pigeon 
 peas, the egg plant, which, broiled and eaten with pepper and salt, is 
 very delicious; a kind of greens resembling spinnage; onions, very 
 small, but excellent; and asparagus: Besides some European plants of a 
 strong smell, particularly sage, hysop, and rue. Sugar is also produced 
 here in immense quantities; very great crops of the finest and largest 
 canes that can be imagined are produced with very little care, and yield 
 a much larger proportion of sugar than the canes in the West Indies. 
 White sugar is sold here at two-pence half-penny a pound; and the 
 molasses makes the arrack, of which, as of rum, it is the chief 
 ingredient; a small quantity of rice, and some cocoa-nut wine, being 
 added, chiefly, I suppose, to give it flavour. A small quantity of 
 indigo is also produced here, not as an article of trade, but merely for 
 home consumption.[147]
from a hot-house in England: They are however so luxuriant in their 
 growth that most of them have two or three crowns, and a great number of 
 suckers from the bottom of the fruit; of these Mr Banks once counted 
 nine, and they are so forward that very often while they still adhered 
 to the parent plant they shot out their fruit, which, by the time the 
 large one became ripe, were of no inconsiderable size. We several times 
 saw three upon one apple, and were told that a plant once produced a 
 cluster of nine, besides the principal: This indeed was considered as so 
 great a curiosity, that it was preserved in sugar, and sent to the 
 Prince of Orange. 
  
 2. Sweet oranges. These are very good, but while we were here, sold for 
 six-pence a piece. 
  
 3. Pumplemoeses, which in the West Indies are called Shaddocks. These 
 were well flavoured, but not juicy; their want of juice, however, was an 
 accidental effect of the season. 
  
 4. Lemons. These were very scarce; but the want of them was amply 
 compensated by the plenty of limes.
 
 5. Limes. These were excellent, and to be bought at about twelve-pence a 
 hundred. We saw only two or three Seville oranges, which were almost all 
 rind; and there are many sorts, both of oranges and lemons, which I 
 shall not particularly mention, because they are neither esteemed by 
 Europeans nor the natives themselves. 
  
 6. Mangos. This fruit during our stay was so infested with maggots, 
 which bred in the inside of them, that scarcely one in three was 
 eatable; and the best of them were much inferior to those of Brazil: 
 They are generally compared by Europeans to a melting peach, which 
 indeed they resemble in softness and sweetness, but certainly fall much 
 short in flavour. The climate here, we were told, is too hot and damp 
 for them; but there are as many sorts of them as there are of apples in 
 England, and some are much superior to others. One sort, which is called 
 _Mangha Cowani_, has so strong a smell that a European can scarcely bear 
 one in the room. These, however, the natives are fond of. The three 
 sorts which are generally preferred, are the _Mangha Doodool_, the 
 _Mangha Santock_, and the _Mangha Gure_. 
 
7. Bananas. Of these also there are innumerable sorts, but three only 
 are good; the _Pissang Mas_, the _Pissang Radja_, and the _Pissang 
 Ambou_: All these have a pleasant vinous taste, and the rest are useful 
 in different ways; some are fried in batter, and others are boiled and 
 eaten as bread. There is one which deserves the particular notice of the 
 botanist, because, contrary to the nature of its tribe, it is full of 
 seeds, and is therefore called _Pissang Batu_, or _Pissang Bidjie_; it 
 his however no excellence to recommend it to the taste, but the Malays 
 use it as a remedy for the flux. 
  
 8. Grapes. These are not in great perfection, but they are very dear; 
 for we could not buy a moderate bunch for less than a shilling or 
 eighteen-pence. 
  
 9. Tamarinds. These are in great plenty, and very cheap: The people, 
 however, do not put them up in the manner practised by the West Indians, 
 but cure them with salt, by which means they become a black mass, so 
 disagreeable to the sight and taste, that few Europeans chuse to meddle 
 with them. 
 
10. Water melons. These are in great plenty, and very good. 
  
 11. Pumpkins. These are beyond comparison the most useful fruit that can 
 be carried to sea; for they will keep without any care several months, 
 and with sugar and lemon-juice, make a pye that can scarcely be 
 distinguished from one made of the best of apples; and with pepper and 
 salt, they are a substitute for turnips, not to be despised. 
  
 12 Papaws. This fruit when it is ripe is full of seeds, and almost 
 without flavour; but if when it is green it is pared, and the core taken 
 out, it is better than the best turnip. 
  
 13. Guava. This fruit is much commended by the inhabitants of our 
 islands in the West Indies, who probably have a better sort than we met 
 with here, where the smell of them was so disagreeably strong that it 
 made some of us sick; those who tasted them said, that the flavour was 
 equally rank. 
  
 14. Sweet sop. The _Annona Squammosa_ of Linnæus. This is also a 
 West-Indian fruit: It consists only of a mass of large kernels, from
which a small proportion of pulp may be sucked, which is very sweet, but 
 has little flavour. 
  
 15. Custard apple. The _Annona Reticulata_ of Linnæus. The quality of 
 this fruit is well expressed by its English name, which it acquired in 
 the West Indies; for it is as like a custard, and a good one too, as can 
 be imagined. 
  
 16. The cashew apple. This is seldom eaten on account of its 
 astringency. The nut that grows upon the top of it is well known in 
 Europe. 
  
 17. The cocoa-nut. This is also well known in Europe: There are several 
 sorts, but the best of those we found here is called _Calappi Edjou_, 
 and is easily known by the redness of the flesh between the skin and the 
 shell. 
  
 18. Mangostan. The _Garcinia Mangostana_ of Linnæus. This fruit, which 
 is peculiar to the East Indies, is about the size of the crab apple, and 
 of a deep red-wine colour: On the top of it is the figure of five or six
small triangles joined in a circle, and at the bottom several hollow 
 green leaves, which are remains of the blossom. When they are to be 
 eaten, the skin, or rather flesh, must be taken off, under which are 
 found six or seven white kernels, placed in a circular order, and the 
 pulp with which these are enveloped, is the fruit, than which nothing 
 can be more delicious: It is a happy mixture of the tart and the sweet, 
 which is no less wholesome than pleasant; and with the sweet orange, 
 this fruit is allowed in any quantity to those who are afflicted with 
 fevers, either of the putrid or inflammatory kind. 
  
 19. The jamboo. The _Eugenia Mallaccensis_ of Linnæus. This fruit is of 
 a deep red colour, and an oval shape; the largest, which are always the 
 best, are not bigger than a small apple; they are pleasant and cooling, 
 though they have not much flavour. 
  
 20. The jambu-eyer. A species of the _Eugenia_ of Linnæus. Of this fruit 
 there are two sorts of a similar shape, resembling a bell, but differing 
 in colour; one being red, the other white. They somewhat exceed a large 
 cherry in size, and in taste have neither flavour nor even sweetness, 
 containing nothing but a watery juice, slightly acidulated; yet their
coolness recommends them in this hot country. 
  
 21. Jambu-eyer mauwar. The _Eugenia Jambos_ of Linnæus. This is more 
 grateful to the smell than the taste: In taste it resembles the conserve 
 of roses, and in smell the fresh scent of those flowers. 
  
 22. The pomegranate. This is the same fruit that is known by the same 
 name all over Europe. 
  
 23. Durion. A fruit that in shape resembles a small melon, but the skin 
 is covered with sharp conical spines, whence its name; for _dure_, in 
 the Malay language, signifies prickle. When it is ripe, it divides 
 longitudinally into seven or eight compartments, each of which contains 
 six or seven nuts, not quite so large as chesnuts, which are covered 
 with a substance that in colour and consistence very much resembles 
 thick cream: This is the part that is eaten, and the natives are fond of 
 it to excess. To Europeans it is generally disagreeable at first; for in 
 taste it somewhat resembles a mixture of cream, sugar, and onions; and 
 in the smell, the onions predominate. 
 
24. Nanca. This fruit, which in some parts of India is called Jakes, 
 has, like the Durion, a smell very disagreeable to strangers, and 
 somewhat resembling that of mellow apples mixed with garlic: The flavour 
 is not more adapted to the general taste. In some countries that are 
 favourable to it, it is said to grow to an immense size. Rumphius 
 relates, that it is sometimes so large that a man cannot easily lift it; 
 and we were told by a Malay, that at Madura it is sometimes so large as 
 not to be carried but by the united efforts of two men. At Batavia, 
 however, they never exceed the size of a large melon, which in shape 
 they very much resemble: They are covered with angular prickles, like 
 the shootings of some crystals, which however are not hard enough to 
 wound those who handle them. 
  
 25. Champada. This differs from the Nanca in little except size, it not 
 being so big. . 
  
 26. Rambutan. This is a fruit little known to Europeans. In appearance 
 it very much resembles a chesnut with the husk on, and like that, is 
 covered with small points, which are soft, and of a deep red colour: 
 Under this skin is the fruit, and within the fruit a stone; the eatable
part thereof is small in quantity, but its acid is perhaps more 
 agreeable than any other in the whole vegetable kingdom. 
  
 27. Jambolan. This, in size and appearance, is not unlike a damascene; 
 but in taste is still more astringent, and therefore less agreeable. 
  
 28. The Boa Bidarra, or _Rhamnus Jujuba_ of Linnæus. This is a round 
 yellow fruit, about the size of a gooseberry; its flavour is like that 
 of an apple, but it has the astringency of a crab. 
  
 29. Nam nam. The _Cynometra Cauliflora_ of Linnæus. This fruit in shape 
 somewhat resembles a kidney; it is about three inches long, and the 
 outside is very rough: It is seldom eaten raw, but fried with batter it 
 makes a good fritter. 
  
 30, 31. The Catappa, or _Terminalia Catappa_; and the Canare, the 
 _Canarium Commune_ of Linnæus, are both nuts, with kernels somewhat 
 resembling an almond; but the difficulty of breaking the shell is so 
 great, that they are no where publicly sold. Those which we tasted were 
 gathered for curiosity by Mr Banks from the tree upon which they grew.
 
 32. The Madja, or _Limoni_ of Linnæus, contains, under a hard brittle 
 shell, a lightly acid pulp, which cannot be eaten without sugar; and 
 with it, is not generally thought pleasant. 
  
 33. Suntul. The _Trichilia_ of Linnæus. This is the worst of all the 
 fruits that I shall particularly mention: In size and shape it resembles 
 the Madja, and within a thick skin contains kernels like those of the 
 Mangostan, the taste of which is both acid and astringent, and so 
 disagreeable, that we were surprised to see it exposed upon the 
 fruit-stalls. 
  
 34, 35, 36. The Blimbing, or _Averrhoa Belimbi_; the Blimbing Besse, or 
 _Averrhoa Carambola_; and the Cherrema, or _Averrhoa Acida_ of Linnæus, 
 are three species of one genus; and though they differ in shape, are 
 nearly of the same taste. The Blimbing Besse is the sweetest: the other 
 two are so austerely acid, that they cannot be used without dressing; 
 they make, however, excellent pickles and sour sauce. 
  
 37. The Salack, or _Calamus Rotang Zalacca_ of Linnæus. This is the
we were inclined to doubt it: They have indeed the _palearia_ or 
 _dewlap_, which naturalists make the distinguishing characteristic of 
 the European species, but they certainly are found wild, not only in 
 Java, but several of the eastern islands. The flesh of those that we eat 
 at Batavia, had a finer grain than European beef, but it was less juicy, 
 and miserably lean. Buffaloes are plenty, but the Dutch never eat them, 
 nor will they drink their milk, being prepossessed with a notion that 
 both are unwholesome, and tend to produce fevers; though the natives and 
 Chinese eat both, without any injury to their health. The sheep are of 
 the kind which have long ears that hang down, and hair instead of wool: 
 The flesh of these is hard and tough, and in every respect the worst 
 mutton we ever saw. We found here, however, a few Cape sheep, which are 
 excellent, but so dear that we gave five-and-forty shillings a-piece for 
 four of them, the heaviest of which weighed only five-and-forty pounds. 
 The goats are not better than the sheep; but the hogs, especially the 
 Chinese breed, are incomparable, and so fat, that the purchaser agrees 
 for the lean separately. The butcher, who is always a Chinese, without 
 the least scruple cuts off as much of the fat as he is desired, and 
 afterwards sells it to his countrymen, who melt it down, and eat it 
 instead of butter with their rice: But notwithstanding the excellence of
other places, that vanity gets the better even of appetite: The cheap 
 fish, most of which is of the best kind, is the food only of slaves, and 
 that which is dear, only because it is scarce, and very much inferior in 
 every respect, is placed upon the tables of the rich. A. sensible 
 house-keeper once spoke to us freely upon the subject. "I know," said 
 he, "as well as you, that I could purchase a better dish of fish for a 
 shilling, than what now costs me ten; but if I should make so good a use 
 of my money, I should here be as much despised, as you would be in 
 Europe, if you were to cover your table with offals, fit only for 
 beggars, or dogs." 
  
 Turtle is also found here, but it is neither so sweet nor so fat as the 
 West-Indian turtle, even in London; such as it is, however, we should 
 consider it as a dainty; but the Dutch, among other singularities, do 
 not eat it. We saw some lizards, or Iguanas, here of a very large size; 
 we were told that some were as thick as a man  '  s thigh, and Mr Banks shot 
 one that was five feet long: The flesh of this animal proved to be very 
 good food. 
  
 Poultry is very good here, and in great plenty: Fowls of a very large
some preparation altogether unknown to us, in consequence of which it 
 will keep eight-and-forty hours, though otherwise it would spoil in 
 twelve: In this state it has an agreeable sweetness, and will not 
 intoxicate. In the other two states it has undergone a fermentation, and 
 received an infusion of certain herbs and roots, by which it loses its 
 sweetness, and acquires a taste very austere and disagreeable. In one of 
 these states it  '  s called _Tuac cras_, and in the other _Tuac cuning_, 
 but the specific difference I do not know; in both, however, it 
 intoxicates very powerfully. A liquor called Tuac is also made from the 
 cocoa-nut tree, but this is used chiefly to put into the arrack, for in 
 that which is good it is an essential ingredient. 
  
  
 SECTION XXXIX. 
  
 _Some Account of the Inhabitants of Batavia, and the adjacent Country, 
 their Manners, Customs, and Manner of Life_. 
  
  
 The town of Batavia, although, as I have already observed, it is the
on a little plate of cocoa-nut leaves, are hung upon the branch of a 
 tree near the river, so that it seems not to be the opinion of these 
 people, that in prowling the earth "the devil walketh through dry 
 places." Mr Banks once asked, whether they thought Satan spent the 
 money, or eat the victuals? he was answered, that as to the money, it 
 was considered rather as a mulct upon an offender, than a gift to him 
 who had enjoined it, and that therefore, if it was devoted by the 
 dreamer, it mattered not into whose hands it came, and they supposed 
 that it was generally the prize of some stranger who wandered that way; 
 but as to the meat, they were clearly of opinion that although the devil 
 did not eat the gross parts, yet, by bringing his mouth near it, he 
 sucked out all its savour without changing its position, so that 
 afterwards it was as tasteless as water.[152] 
  
 [Footnote 152: The people of Borneo are said to have a similar mode of 
 placating the devil by means of victuals, &c. A curious account of it is 
 given by Capt. Daniel Beeckman, in his relation of a voyage to that 
 island, published at London, 1718. The following extract may 
 amuse:--"There was one Cay Deponattee, a very honest man, who often used 
 to visit us; he happened to come one day when Mr Becher was delirious,
detestable. We shall not pollute our page by the slightest mention of 
 the abominable gratifications in which they are said to indulge, 
 contrary to the most palpable enactments of nature.--E.] 
  
 In eating, they are easily satisfied, though the few that are rich have 
 many savory dishes. Rice, with a small proportion of flesh or fish, is 
 the food of the poor; and they have greatly the advantage of the 
 Mahometan Indians, whose religion forbids them to eat of many things 
 which they could most easily procure. The Chinese, on the contrary, 
 being under no restraint, eat, besides pork, dogs, cats, frogs, lizards, 
 serpents of many kinds, and a great variety of sea-animals, which the 
 other inhabitants of this country do not consider as food: They also eat 
 many vegetables, which an European, except he was perishing with hunger, 
 would never touch.[157] 
  
 [Footnote 157: The reader may turn to our account of Anson  '  s voyage for 
 some particulars respecting their taste. Indeed, in almost every voyage 
 he will find abundantly disgusting information of this singularly 
 unamiable people. It is but fair, however, to allow them credit for one 
 of the virtues of necessity. Their capability of subsisting on such food
