Of the Wild Asse. A Wild Asse, called of the Latins, Onager; of the Hebrews, Arod and Ere, and as Sebastian Munster affirmeth, Meroda and Arda; in the German tongue it may be termed Ein Waldesell, and the young ones are called Lalisions. 
 Dum tener est Onager, solaque lalisio matre Martial. Pascitur: hoc infans, sed breve nomen habet. These wild Asses are not Elks, as some have reported of Elks, nor that Oryx which the ancient wri∣ters do constantly affirm to live in a continual thirst, as for the most part wild Asses do. Of these Asses are great store in Phrygia, Lycaonia, and Africa, and it is said, that the Saracen King of Tunis in Countrey of breed. Africk, sent unto Ferdinand King of Naples, a goodly great wild Asse, such an one as hath not been seen in this part of the world. 
 Apollonius affirmeth, that he saw wild Asses in great plenty beyond Catadupa in Egypt; so are there many in Cauda, an Island neer Cre t: in Persis, in Asia, in Madera, and Abasia, Arabia desert, Maurita∣nia, and Armenia. Callisius reporteth that there are such wild Asses in that region under the Equi∣noctial towards the East and South, of wonderful stature, their skins (beside the usual manner) being Pliny. of divers colours, interlined variably with white and black, and the Zones and strakes descending from the top of the back unto the sides, and there divided by their winding and turning, make the foles appear of admirable variety. 
 These Asses love the highest Mountains and rocks, as holy Scripture teacheth, Jer. 14. The Asses stood in the high places and drew in the wind like Dragons: which words gave occasion to some to imagine, that wild Asses would quench their thirst with the wind without water; whereas it is the manner of all wild beasts, in extremity of thirst, to gape wide and greedily draw in the cold refresh∣ing air, and they will not drink but of pure fountain water. They live in flocks and great compa∣nies together, but in desolate places: the males going before the females, and commonly one male will lead and rule the whole flock of females, being exceeding swift, and fearful, and therefore do they often change their places of abode; and yet it is observed, that the wild Asses of Licia never go over the mountain that divideth them from Cappadocia. 
 They engender among themselves, their females being much more lustfull then the males, and Their copula∣tion. therefore do the males observe and watch them with a jealous eye toward their own foles, especially after they have conceived; and the female as warily avoideth the sight of the male, espcially at the time of her foling; for if she bring forth a female, the male receiveth it with all love, joy, and wel∣come; but if a male, then doth he with angry and envious countenance look upon it, taking it heavily that another male is bred, which in time may in the fathers place possess his dam; wherefore in a raging madness he falleth upon the fole, seeking by all his power to bite off his stones; the poor female although weakned with pain of delivery, yet helpeth her young one against the fathers rage, and like a Mother who seeing her Son slain in war, embraceth his bleeding corps, and cryeth out with doleful voice, tearing her cheeks and bleeding betwixt her brests: so would you think this silly female Asse, to mourn for her fole, now ready to die by the Sires cruelty; saying, O my husband why is thy aspect so ireful? Why are thy eyes now become so bloudy, which even now were as white as light? Dost thou look upon the face of that monster Medusa? which turneth men into stones; or dost thou look upon some new hatched horrible Dragon, or the whelp of some Lion lately littered? Why wilt thou geld this our young one which nature hath given unto us both by procreation? O wretched beast that I am, which have con∣ceived an unhappy fole by the fathers wickedness! O my poor and unhappy son, which for a jealous fear art de∣prived of thy natural parts, not by the claws of Lions (for that I would endure) but by the unnatural and more then hostile teeth of thy own father. 
 These wild Asses have good and strong hoofs, their swiftness is compared to the wind, and in the time that they are hunted, they cast backward with their heels stones with such violence, as they pierce the brests of them that prosecute them if they be not very wary. They are of a large, broad, tall and beautiful body; long ears, and a silver colour, (that is as I ghesse) a bright cloud-colour, for it is but vain to imagine, that an Asse can be all white, for then were all the ancients deceived, which with one voice affirm, that he hath a black list on the back, at either side whereof are two white lines. 
 Their food is only grasse and herbs of the earth, whereby they grow very fat, their heart being Aelianus. Albertus. Oppianus. Varro. the fattest part of their body, and they will not abide any flesh-eating beast, especially the Lion whom he feareth very much, for all these strong beasts devour and eat them. These Asses are very fit for civil uses, as for plowing and sowing, for being tamed they never grow wild again, as other beasts will, and they easily grow tame. It is observed, that the same being tamed, is most tame which before time was most wild. They love figs and meal above all things, wherefore the Aelianus. Armenians use to take a certain black fish bred in their waters which is poison, and covering it with meal the wild Asses come and lick thereof, and so are destroyed. The best of them are generated of a Mare and a wild Asse tamed, for they are the swiftest in course, of hardest hoof, a lean body, but of a generous and untireable stomach. The Indian wild Asses have one horn in their forehead, and their body all white, but their head is red: So is there another beast in India very like a wild Asse, which the Inhabitants eat (as we have read) about the straights of Magellana: When these Asses Phyles. Pliny. are hunted with Dogs, they cast forth their time or dung, with the favour whereof the Dogs are stayed while it is hot, and by that means the beast escapeth danger: but the Asses of Mauritania are very short winded, and subject to weariness and stumbling, for which cause they are more easily taken, and the best of all are not so swift as a Barbary horse; besides their nature is, when they see a man to stand stone still, crying, braying, and kicking, till you come at them, and when one is ready Aelianus. to take them, they take their heels and run away. The Inhabitants of Arabia Desert, by many gins and other deceitful devises take them, and on horseback follow them till they tyre, or can strike them with their darts. Their flesh being hot, doth stink and taste like an other Asses, but boyled and kept two dayes hath a pleasant taste; yet doth it not breed good bloud, because it is viscous and hard to be concocted, although there be many which eat that, as also the flesh of Panthers and other such beasts. 
 Pliny teacheth that there is more vertue in the wild Asses milk and bones against venome and Medicines, Milke. poison, then in the tame. Likewise, in the heel of an Asse, is a principal remedy against Apostema∣tions and bunches in the flesh, if it be applyed to the inner part of the thigh. The gall draweth out Pliny. botches, and must be anointed upon impostumate scars. It is used also in Emplasters against Saint Antonies fire, the leprosie, and swelling in the legs and guts. The fat with oil of herbe Mary by a∣nointing the reins of the back, helpeth and easeth that pain which was engendred by wind. The spleen dryed to powder and drunk in wine or drink, is good against the sickness of the spleen. The flesh is good against the pain in the ridge and hip-bones: and Galen affirmeth, that the urine breaketh and dissolveth the stone in the bladder. The ashes of the hoof helpeth the falling evill, and mingled with oil, cureth the kings evill, and the looseness of the hair. The marrow easeth the Gowt, and the dung mixed with the yolk of an egge and applyed to the forehead, stayeth bleed∣ing: also the same curleth the hair if it be mingled with an Oxes gall and dryed: put into wine and drunk, cureth the sting of a Scorpion: and Zo an Hebrew affirmeth very constantly, that if a man look into an Asse; eye, it preserveth the sight, and hindereth the water that descendeth into the eye. 
 Of the Scythian Asses. THe Asses of Scythia have horns wherein it is reported that the Stygian water of Arcadia may Aelianus. be contained, although it will eat through all other vessels be they never so hard. Sosipater brought of them to Alexander the great, who admiring the rareness, would not put them to any pri∣vate use, but sent them to Delphos, to be offered to Pythias; but that these can be properly called Asses, no man can defend, although Herodotus also affirm, that among the Africans called Aratours, Lib. 4. there be Asses with horns. 
 Of the Indian Asses. IT is questionable whether the Monoceros, commonly called a Ʋnicorne, the Rhinoceros, the Oryx, and the Indian Asse be all one beast or divers; for the Vnicorn and Rhinoceros have the same things attributed to them in stories, and differ in very few reports: but for the Asses of India, both Aristo∣tle, Pliny and Aelianus, joyntly agree, that they differ from all other whole-footed beasts, because they have one horn in the forehead, and so also have the Rhinoceros, Monoceros, and Oryx, but the In∣dians call a Ʋnicorne, Cartazono; and the horn so highly prized at this day, is thought to be of the Rhinoceros; but Aelianus and Philes acknowledge no other Ʋnicorne then the Indian Asse, who in bigness equalleth a Horse among the Indians, being all white on the body, but purple headed or red (as some say) black eyes, but Volateranus saith blew, having one horn in the forehead a cubit and a half long, whose upper part is red or bay, the middle black, and the neather part white, wherein the Kings and mighty men of India use to drink, adorning it for that purpose with sundry bracelets, pretious stones, and works of gold, holding for truth that all those which drink in those horns, shall be freed from annoyance of incurable diseases, as Convulsions, the Falling evill, and deadly poysons. 
 These wilde Asses exceed all other, both in stature of body, and also swiftness of foot, for at the first, they set forth very gently, and afterward speed their journey with better pace, so that it is very hard for any to follow them, but impossible to overgo them. The males take great pains in keeping their young ones, whom they continually watch and hide in the most remote and desert places they can finde. When they are hunted, they keep their weak young ones behind them, and fight for them very furiously, neither fear they to encounter horsemen. They are so strong, that no beast may stand before them, for they will receive the charge of Horses with such violence, that in their encounter they bite out their sides and tear their guts out of their belly: for which cause they are dreadful to Horses, who are most unwilling to joyn with them, for they never meet but they both perish. 
 They fight with their heels, but their teeth are most dangerous, for what they apprehend in them they bring it clean away: and because of this rage, those which are of any years, can never be tamed. The great King of India doth once every year appoint all manner of fights both men and beasts, wherein are wilde Buls, tame Rams, these wild Asses with one horn, Hyaenaes and Elephants. To conclude, it is but a fable of Volaterranus, that saith, these Asses want a gall, for they have the bladder of the gall, a portion whereof drunk, cureth the falling evill. 
 Of the ALBORACH and AXIS. THere are two other beasts to be added to the end of this rank, namely the Alborach among the Turks, being a fair white beast like an Asse, whereupon the Turkish Priests blasphemous idoia∣ters, perswade the silly Pilgrims of Mecha, that Mahomet was carryed up to heaven. The Axis, of which Pliny speaketh, is a wilde beast, having a skin like the Hinnulus aforesaid, but spred over with whiter spots, which is bred in India. Bellonius affirmeth, that he saw two of them in the Castle of Cair, a male and a female, and either sex wanted horns, having long tails down to their mid-legs like Deer, and differ very little from Deer, saving in their large white spots and yellow colour, yeelding a much more clear and sounding voice then a Deer, and the female thereof is smaller then the male. This beast is by idolatrous people, dedicated to their drunken god Bacchus. 
 Of the BADGER, otherwise called a Brocke, a Gray, or a Bauson. 
 THe Badger could never find a Greek name, although some through ignorance have foisted into a Greek Dictionary Melis, whereas in truth that is his Latin word, Mele or Meles, and so called, because above all other things, he loveth hony, and some later writers call him Taxus, Tassus, Taxo, and Albertus Magnus, Daxus. But whereas in the Scripture some translate Tesson, Tahas, or Tachasch, and plurally Techaseim, Badgers, yet is not the matter so clear, for there is no such beauty in a Badgers skin, as to cover the Arke, or to make Princes shooes thereof: therefore some Hebrews say, that it signifieth an Oxe of an exceeding hard skin. Onkelus translateth it Sasgona, that is, a beast skin of divers colours; Symmachus and Aquila a jacinct colour, which cannot be; but the Arabians; Darasch, and the Persians, Asthak; yet it may be rather said, that those skins spoken of Exod. 25. Numb. 4. Ezek. 26. be of the Lynx, or some such other beast: for Tachasch cometh neer Thos, signifying a kind of Wolf not hurtful to men, being rough and hairy in Winter, but smooth in Summer. 
 The Italians call a Badger Tasso, the Rhetians, Tasoh; the French, Tausson, Taixin, Tasson, Tesson, and sometime Grisart, for her colour: sometime Blareau, and at Paris, Bedevo. The Spaniards, Tasugo, Texon; the Germans, Tachs, or Daxs; the Illyrians, Gezwecz. 
 Badgers are plentiful in Naples, Sicily, Lucane, and in the Alpino and Helvetian coasts, so are they Countrey of breed. Caelius Curio. also in England. In Lueane there is a certain wilde beast, resembling both a Bear and a Hog, not in quantity, but in form and proportion of body; which therefore may fitly be called in Greek, Su∣arctos, for a Gray, in short legs, ears and feet, is like a Bear, but in fatness like a Swine. Therefore Diversity of kinds. it is observed, that there be two kinds of this beast, one resembling a Dog in his feet, which is is cald Canine; the other a Hog in his cloven hoof, and is cald Swinish: also these differ in the fashion of their snowt, one resembling the snowt of a Dog, the other of a Swine: and in their meat, the one eating flesh and carrion like a Dog, the other roots and fruits like a Hog, as both kinds have been found in Normandy and other parts of France and Sicilie. This beast diggeth her a den or cave in the earth, and there liveth; never coming forth but for meat and easement, which it maketh out of his den: when they dig their den, after they have entred a good depth for avoiding the earth out, one of them falleth on the back, and the other layeth all the earth on his belly, and so A secret in their manner of digging. Ipdaus. Albertus. taking his hinder feet in his mouth, draweth the belly-laden Badger out of the cave, which disburde∣neth her cariage, and goeth in for more till all be finished and emptied. The wily Fox never makth a Den for himself, but finding a Badgers cave, in her absence, layeth his excrements at the hole of the Den, the which when the Gray returneth, if she smell (as the savour is strong) she forbeareth to enter as noisome, and so leaveth her elaborate house to the Fox. These Badgers are very sleepy, especially in the day time, and stir not abroad but in the night, for which cause they are called Luci∣fugae; that is, avoiders of the light. They eat hony, and wormes, and hornets, and such like things, be∣cause Their meat. they are not very swift of foot to take other creatures. They love Orchards, Vines, and places of fruits also, and in the autumn they grow therewith very fat. 
 They are in quantity as big as a Fox, but of a shorter and thicker body; their skin is hard, but rough and rugged, their hair harsh and stubborn, of an intermingled grisard colour, sometime white, sometime black, his back covered with black, and his belly with white, his head from the top thereof to the ridge of his shoulder, is adorned with strakes of white and black, being black in the middle, and white at each side. He hath very sharp teeth, and is therefore accounted a deep-biting beast. His back is broad, his legs (as some say) longer on the right side then on the left, and therefore he runneth best when he getteth to the side of a hill, or a cart-road-way. His tail is short but hairy, Cardanus. and of divers colours, having a long face or snowt like the Zibethus: his forelegs being a full span long, and the hinder legs shorter, short ears and little eyes, a great bladder of gall, a body very fat betwixt the skin and the flesh, and about the heart; and it is held that this fat increaseth with the Moon, and decreaseth with the same, being none at all at the change: his forelegs have very sharp nails, bare and apt to dig withall, being five both before and behind, but the hinder very short ones and covered with hair. His savour is strong, and is much troubled with lice about his secrets; the length of his body from the nose which hangeth out like a Hogs nose, to the tail or rump, is some thirty inches and a little more, the hair of his back three fingers long; his neck is short and like a Dogs: both male and female have under their hole another outwardly, but not inwardly in the male. If she be hunted out of her Den with Hounds, she biteth them grievously if she lay hold on Her defence a∣gainst Hunters and their dogs. them, wherefore they avoid her carefully, and the Hunters put great broad collars made of a Grayes skin about their Dogs neck, to keep them the safer from the Badgers teeth: her manner is to fight on her back, using thereby both her teeth and her nails, and by blowing up her skin above mea∣sure after an unknown manner, she defendeth her self against the strokes of men, and the teeth of Dogs: wherefore she is hardly taken, but by devises and gins for that purpose invented; with their skins they make quivers for arrows, and some shepheards in Italy use thereof to make sacks, wherein they wrap themselves from the injury of rain. 
 In Italy and Germany they eat Grays flesh, and boil with it pears, which maketh the flesh tast like Badgers eaten. Platina. the flesh of a Porcupine. The flesh is best in September if it be fat, and of the two kinds, the Swinish Badger is better flesh then the other. There are sundry vertues confected out of this beast; for it Medicine made of Badgers. Gratius. Brasavolus. is affirmed, that if the fat of a Badger mingled with crude hony, and anointed upon a bare place of a horse, where the former hairs are pulled off, it will make new white hairs grow in that place: and it is certain (although the Grecians make no reckoning of Badgers grease, yet) it is a very soveraign thing to soften, and therefore Serenus prescribeth it to anoint them that have Fevers or Inflama∣tions of the body, 
 Nec spernendus adept dederit, quem bestia melis. Albertus. And not to be despised for other cures: as for example, the easing of the pain of the reins if it be given in a glyster, and likewise the fat of a Dog and a Badger mingled together, do loosen con∣tracted sinews.
The Beavers of Spain yeeld not such virtuous Castoreum as they of Pontus, and therefore if it be Hermolaus. up∣ of Casto∣reum. possible, take a Pontique Beaver, next one of Gallatia, and lastly of Africk. Some do corrupt them putting into their skin Gum and Ammoniack with blood, other take the reins of the beast, and so make the Castoreum very big, which in it self is but small. This beast hath two bladders, which I remember not are in any other living creature, and you must beware that none of these be joyned to the Castoreum. You may know if it be mingled with Ammoniack by the tast, for although the colour be like, yet is the savour different. Platearius sheweth, that some adulterate Castoreum, by taking off his skin, or some cod newly taken forth of another beast, filling it with bloud, sinews and the powder of Castoreum, that so it may not want his strong smell or favour: other fill it with earth and bloud: other with bloud, rosen, gum, sinews and pepper, to make it tast sharp: but this is a falsi∣fication discernible, and of this sort is the Castoreum which is sold in Venice, as Brasovala affirmeth: and the most of them sold at this day are bigger then the true Castoreum, for the just weight of the right stones is not above twelve ounces and a half, one of them being bigger then the other, be∣ing six fingers breadth long, and four in breadth. Now the substance contained in the bag is yellowish, solid like wax, and sticking like glew, not sharp and cracking betwixt the teeth (as the counterfeit is). These stones are of a strong and stinking savour, such as is not in any other, but not rotten and sharp, as Grammarians affirm; yer I have smelled of it dryed, which was not un∣pleasant, and things once seasoned with the savour thereof, will ever tast of it, although they have not touched it, but lie covered with it in the same box or pot; and therefore the Castoreum of Persia is counterfeit, which hath no such smell, for if a man smell to the right Castoreum, it will draw bloud out of his nose. 
 After it is taken forth from the beast, it must be hung up in some place to be dryed in the shadow, and when it is dry, it is soft and white: it will continue it strength six years, and some say seven; the Persians affirm, that their Castoreum will hold his virtue ten years, which is as false as the matter they speak of is counterfeit. Archigenes wrote a whole book of the virtue of this Castoreum, whereunto they may resort, that require an exact and full declaration of all his medicinal operati∣ons: it shall only be our purpose, to touch some general heads, and not to enter into a particular discovery thereof. 
 Being so dryed as is declared, it must be warily used, for it falleth out herein as in other medici∣nal subjects, that ignorance turneth a curing herb or substance, into a venemous and destructive quality; therefore we will first of all set down the dangers to be avoided, and afterward some par∣ticular cures that come by the right use of it. Therefore it must be understood that there is poyson The dangers in the use of Castoreum. Servius. in it, not naturally, but by accident, as may be in any other good and wholesome matter: and that especially in the smell or savour thereof, whereunto if a woman with childe do smell, it will kill the childe unborn and cause abortment; for a womans womb is like a creature, nourished with good favours, and destroyed with evill: therefore burning of feathers, shoo-soles, woollen clothes, pitch, Galbanum, gum, onions, and garlick is noysom to them. It may be corrupted not only as is before declared; but also, if it be shut up close without vent into pure aire, when it is hanged up to be dryed, or if the bag be kept moist, so that it cannot dry; and it is true (as Avicen saith) that if it: be used being so corrupted, it killeth within a dayes space, driving one into madness, making the sick person continually to hold forth his tongue, and infecting him with a Fever by inflaming the body, loosing the continuity of the parts, through sharp vapors arising from the stomach: and for a proof that it will inflame, if you take a little of it mingled with oil, and rub upon any part of the body, or upon your nail, you shall feel it. 
 But there is also a remedy for it being corrupted; namely, Asses milk mingled with some sharp syrup of Citron, or if need require, drink a dram of Philons Antidote at the most; or take but∣ter and sweet water which will cause vomit, and vomit therewith so long, as you feel the savour of the stone, and afterward take syrup of Limmons or Citrons: and some affirm upon experience, that two penny weight of Coriander-seed, scorched in the fire, is a present remedy for this evill. And it is most strange, that seeing it is in greatest strength, when the favour is hottest, which is very displeasing to a mans nature in outward appearance, yet doth it never harm a man taken inwardly, (being pure and rightly compounded) if the person be without a Fever, for in that case only it doth hurt inwardly, otherwise apply it to a moist body lacking refrigeration, or to a cold body wanting excalfaction, or to a cold and moist body, you shall perceive an evident commodity thereby, if there be no Fever: and yet it hath profited many where the Fever hath not been over hot, as in Extasies and Lethargies, ministred with white Pepper, and Melicrate, and with Rose cakes laid to the neck or head. The same virtues it hath being outwardly applyed and mingled with oil, if the bodies be in any heat, and purely without oil, if the body be cold, for in heating it holdeth the third degree, and in drying the second. The manner how it is to be administred is in drink, for the most part, the sweet liquor being taken from it, and the little skins appearing therein cleansed away, and so it hath among many other these operations following. Drunk with Vinegar, it is good against all venom of Serpents, and against the Chameleon, but with this difference, against the Scor∣pion with wine, against Spiders with sweet water, against the Lizzards with Myrtite, against Dipsas and Cerastes, with Oponax, or wine made of Rew, and against other-Serpents with wine simply. Take of every one two drams, for a cold take it a scruple and a half in four cups of wine, used Castoreo{que} gra∣vi mulier scpita recumbit. with Ladanum, it cureth the Fistulaes and Ulcers, provoking sneezing by smelling to it; procureth sleep, they being anointed with it; Maiden-weed and Conserve of Roses, and being drunk in water, helpeth Phrensie, and with the Roses and Maiden-weed aforesaid, easeth head-ach; being laid to the head like a plaister, it cureth all cold and windy affections therein; or if one draw in the smoak of it perfumed, though the pain be from the mothers womb, and given in three cups of sweet Vinegar fasting, it helpeth the Falling sickness, but if the person have often fits, the same given in a Glyster, giveth great ease: Then must the quantity be two drams of Castoreum, one sextary of honey and oil, and the like quantity of water, but in the fit it helpeth with Vinegar by smelling to it. It helpeth the Palsie, taken in Rew or wine, sod in Rew, so also all heart trembling, ach in the stomach, and quaking of the sinews. It being infused into them that lie in Lethargies with Vinegar and Conserve of Roses doth presently awake them, for it strengthneth the brain, and moveth sternu∣tation. It helpeth oblivion coming by reason of sickness, the party being first purged with Hiera Ruffi, Castoreum, with oil bound to the hinder part of the head, and afterward a dram drunk with M rate, also taken with oil, cureth all Convulsion proceeding of cold humors, if the Convul∣sion be full and perfect, and not temporal or in some particular member, which may come to passe in any sickness. 
 The same mixed with hony helpeth the clearness of the eyes, and their inflamations; likewise used with the juice of Popy, and infused to the ears, or mixed with hony, helpeth all pains in them. With the seed of Hemlocks beaten in Vinegar, it sharneth the sense of hearing, if the cause be cold, and it cureth toothach infused into that ear with oil on which side the pain resteth; for Hippocrates sent unto the wife of Aspasius (complaining of the pain in her cheek and teeth) a little Castoreum with Pepper, advising her to hold it in her mouth betwixt her teeth. A perfume of it drawn up into the head and stomach, easeth the pains of the lights and intrails, and given to them that sigh much with sweet Vinegar fasting, it recovereth them. It easeth the Cough, and distil∣lations of rhume from the head to the stomach, taken with the juyce of black Popy. It is preserva∣tive against inflamations and pains in the guts or belly (although the belly be swoln with cold windy humors) being drunk with Vinegar, or Oyxycrate; it easeth the Colick being given with Annis beaten small, and two spoonfuls of sweet water; and it is found by experiment, that when a horse cannot make water, let him be covered over with his cloth, and then put underneath him a fire of coals, wherein make a perfume with that Castoreum till the Horses belly and cods smell Vegetius. thereof, then taking away the coals, walk the horse up and down covered, and he will present∣ly stale. 
 To soften the belly they use Castoreum with sweet water two drams, and if it be not forcible enough, they take the root of a set Cucumber one dram, and the some of Salt Peter two drams. It is also used with the juice of Withy and decoction of Vinegar applyed to the reins and genital parts like a plaister against the Gonorrhaean passion. It will stir up a womans monethly courses, and cause an easie travail, two drams being drunk in water with Penny-royal. And if a Woman with childe go A secret: over a Beaver, she will suffer abortment; and Hippocrates affirmeth, that a perfume made with Casto∣reum, Asses dung, and Swines grease, openeth a closed womb. 
 There is an Antidote called Diacostu, made of this Castoreum, good against the Megrim, Falling sickness, Apoplexies, Palsies, and weakness of lims, as may be seen in Myrepsus: against the impoten∣cy of the tongue, trembling of the members, and other such infirmities. These vertues of a A miraculous History of a Monster. Beaver thus described, I will conclude this discourse with a History of a strange beast like unto this, related by Dunranus Campus-bellus (a noble Knight) who affirmed, that there are in Arcadia, seaven great lakes some 30 miles compass, and some lesse, whereof one is called Garloil, out of which in Anno 1510 about the midst of Summer, in a morning came a beast about the bigness of a water Dog, having feet like a Goose, who with his tail easily threw down small trees, and present∣ly with a swift pace he made after some men that he saw, and with three strokes he likewise over∣threw three of them, the residue climbing up into trees escaped, and the beast without any long tarrying, returned back again into the water, which beast hath at other times been seen, and it is observed, that this appearance of the Monster, did give warning of some strange evils upon the Land: which story is recorded by Hector Boethius. 
 Of the BISON. A Bison called of some Latins, though corruptly, Ʋrson, and Veson; of the Grecians, Bisoon; of the Of the name. Lituanians, Suber; of the Polonians, Zuber, from whence some Latins derived Zubro, for a Bison. Of the Germans, Visent, and Vaesent, and Wisent: a beast very strange as may appear by his figure prefixed, which by many Authors is taken for Ʋrus, some for a Bugil, or wilde Ox; other for Rangifer, and many for the beast Tarandus a Buffe. By reason whereof there are not many things, which can by infallible collection be learned of this beast among the writers; yet it is truly Place of their breed. Philostephan. The reason of their name. and generally held for a kind of wilde Ox, bred in the Northern parts of the World for the most part, and never tamed, as in Scythia, Moscovia, Hercynia, Thracia, and Prussia. But those tall wilde Oxen which are said to be in Lapponia, and the Dukedom of Angermannia, are more truly said to be Ʋri, as in their story shall be afterward declared. Their name is taken from Thracia, which was once called Bistonia, and the people thereof Bistones, from Bisto the Son of Cicas and Terpsicho∣re; Varinus. Stephanus. A secret in the Lake Dicaea. and thereof came Bistoniae Grues, cranes of Thracia, and Bistoniae Lacus, for the lake or sea of Dicaea, near Abdera, where never living thing, or other of lesse weight was cast in but it presently sunk and was drowned. 
 This Bison is called Taurus Paeonicus, the Paeonian. Bull, whereof I finde two kinds, one of greater, and Several kindes. another of lesser size, called the Scotian, or Calydonian Bison, whereof you shall see the picture and qua∣lities at the foot of this History. 
 The greater is as big as any Bull or Oxe, being maned about the neck and back like a Lion, and The great Bi∣son. The several parts. hath hair hanging down under his chin or neather lip like a large beard: and a rising or little ridge down along his face, beginning at the height of his head, and continuing to his nose very hairy; his horns great and very sharp, yet turning up towards his back, and at the points hooked like the wilde Goats of the Alpes, but much greater: they are black of colour, and with them through the admirable strength of his neck can he tosse into the air, a horse and horseman both together. They The strength of this Beast. The quantity of Bisons. The strength of their tongue. are as big as the Dextarii which are the greatest Stallions of Italy. Their face looketh downward, and they have a strange strength in their tongue, for by licking they grate like a file any indifferent hard substance, but especially they can therewith draw unto them any man or beast of inferior con∣dition, whom by licking they wound to death. 
 Their hair is red, yellow, or black, their eyes very great and terrible; they smell like a Moschus or Musk-cat, and their mane reacheth over their shoulders, shaking it irefully when he brayeth; their face or forehead very broad, especially betwixt their horns, for Sigismond King of Polonia, having kild one of them in hunting, stood betwixt his horns, with two other men not much lesser in quan∣tity then himself, who was a goodly well proportioned and personal Prince. 
 There are two bunches on his back, the former near his shoulders, which is the higher, and the other near the rump, which is somewhat lower. I have seen the horns of a Bison, which was in the hands of a Goldsmith to tip with silver and gilt, that it might be fit to drink in: it did bend like the talon of an Eagle or Gryphin, or some ravenous bird. The flesh in Summer time is most The flesh of this Beast. Bonarus. Baro. fat, but it tasteth so much of wilde Garlick, or Ramsens, that it is not pleasant to eat, being full of small veins and strings, and is accounted a noble and strong kind of flesh: the bloud is the most purest in the world, excelling in colour any purple, and yet for all that it is so hot, that being let forth when the Beast dyeth, within two houres space it putrefieth, and the flesh it self in the coldest Winter will not keep sweet many hours, by reason of the immoderate heat thereof, if the Hunter do not after the fall of the beast, separate from it the intrails: and which is most strange of all, being pierced alive with any hunting spear, dart, or sword, the weapon by the heat of the body A secret in the inward heat of this beast. is made so weak and soluble, that it cometh forth as flexible as lead: and to conclude, it is a most noble and fierce spirited b ast, never afraid, or yeelding till breath faileth, neither can he be taken with any nets or gins, untill they be thoroughly wearyed: wherefore they which hunt him, must Their hunting be very strong, nimble and skilful men, or else that sport will be their own undoing and over∣throw. Sigism. Bars. 
 Therefore when they go to hunt this Bison, they choose a place replenished with large trees, neither so great that they cannot easily wind about them; nor so little that they shall not be able to cover their bodies from the horn or tongue of the beast: behind which the hunters place them∣selves out of sight: and then the Dogs rouze up the beast, driving him to that place where the hun∣ters stand; whom the beast first espyeth, to him he maketh force, who must warily keep the tree for his shield, and with his spear wound him where he can, who will not fall without many mortal strokes, but waxe more and more eager, not only with horn but with tongue, for if he can but ap∣prehend any part of the hunters garment with his tongue, he loseth no hold but draweth him un∣to him, and with his horn and feet killeth him: but if the fight be long, and so the hunter wearied and out of breath, then doth he cast a red cap unto the beast, who maketh at it with head and feet, never leaving till it be all in pieces; and if another come to help him as hunters must, if they will return alive, then shall he easily draw the beast to combate, and forsake the first man, if he cry Lu-lu-lu. 
 Pausanias sheweth how these Bisons are taken alive, in this sort. The hunters (faith he) chuse out In Phocicis. How B ons are taken alive. some steep and slippery down hill, whereupon they lay skins of beasts newly taken off, and if they want such, then anoint they old skins with oil, and so leave them spread upon those steeping or ben∣ding passages; then raise they the beasts, and with Dogs and other means on horseback drive them along to the places where they laid their hides, and as soon as they come upon the skins they slip and fall down, rowling headlong till they come into the valleys, from whence they constrain them back again some other way, three or four times a day, making them fall down the hils as aforesaid, and so wearying them with continual hunting, and fasting. At the last they come unto them, when they are no more able to rise for faintness, and give them Pine-apples taken out of the shels, (for with that meat are they delighted) and so while they eagerly feed and lie weary on the ground, they intoil them in bands and manacles, and lead them away alive. The medicines coming from The medicines not known. this beast may be conjectured to be more forcible, then of common and ordinary Oxen, but because they were not known to the Grecians and Arabians, and we finde nothing recorded thereof; we will conclude the story of this great Bison, with good opinion of the virtues, though we are not able to learn or discover them to others. 
 Of the white SCOTIAN BISON. 
 IN the Woods of Scotland, called Callender or Caldar, and in ancient time Calydonia, which reacheth Places where these Bisons abide. from Monteth and Erunal, unto Atholia and Loqubabria, there are bred white Oxen, maned about the neck like a Lyon, but in other parts like ordinary and common Oxen. This wood was once full of them, but now they are all slain, except in that part which is called Cummirnald. This beast is so hateful and fearful of mankind, that it will not feed of that grasse or those hearbs, whereof he favour∣eth The nature of this Bison. a man hath touched, no not for many days together; and if by art or policy they happen to be taken alive, they will die with very sullen grief. If they meet a man, presently they make force at him, fearing neither Dogs, Spears, nor other weapons. Their flesh is very pleasant, though full of sinews, and very acceptable to the greatest Nobles, for which cause they are grown to a small number; their qualities being like to the former beast, excepting their colour and beard, I will term them a white Calydonian, or Scotian BISON. 
 BONASUS, the figure of the Head and Horns. 
 THis beast is called in Greek Of the name. Bonasos, and in Latin, Bo∣nasus, and is also called Monops, or Monopios, and once in Aristo∣tle, Bolinthus, the Bohemians, Loli, now the Germans &amp; English call the long hair about the neck of any beast, a Maene or Mane, from whence cometh this word Monapios, which signifi∣eth a maned Ox. This Bison is The reason of the name Mo∣napios. the greatest beast, Bull or Ox, though it be shorter in length, yet are the sides larger and broader then all other. They are bred in Paeonia in the Places of their breed. mountain Mesapus, not in Ly∣dia and Phrygia, as Solinus and Albertus have delivered; being deceived, because the Paeonians were joyned with the Medians which they derive from Madi a people of Asia, whereas the Paeonians and Medi in Pliny, (as is observed by Hermolaus in his Castigations of Pliny) are a people of Thracia in Europe: so called of Paeon the Son of Endymion and brother of Epeus, who was seated near the river Axius in Macedonia: for it was agreed Pausanias. betwixt the two brethren striving for the kingdom, that he which was overrun by the other, should yeeld the kingdom in quietness to his brother. 
 The head of this beast is like the head of an Ox or Bull his horns bending round to the sides of the His parts. cheek, by reason whereof he hath no defence by them, neither can a man be hurt that is cast upon them. His neck is very thick with a large mane, from his eyes down to his shoulders in length like Aristotle. an Horses, but the hair thereof is much softer, and lyeth more smoothly, the uppermost hairs being harsher, and the undermost softer like wool. Their colour betwixt red and ash colour, but black and yellow appeareth not in them. They have no upper teeth, in this point resembling an Ox and other horned beasts; their horns being in compass about nine inches and somewhat more, are very smooth and black like varnish. Their voice is like the voice of an Ox, their legs all hairy, and their feet cloven, their tail too short for the other members of the body like a Bugles, their back stretched out at length, is as long as a seat for seaven men; their flesh is very sweet, for which cause he is much sought for in hunting; he will with his feet dig up the ground like an Ox or Bull in his rage; His flesh, and d n to anges. His light in flying. The secret operation of his dung. when he is once struck, he flyeth away, fighting with his heels backward; and whereas nature hath denyed him the benefit of horns, which other beasts have, so that he is only adorned and not armed by those weapons, like a Souldier that cannot draw forth his Sword; she hath given him the secret operation of his dung, which in his chase he casteth forth of his body so plentifully upon the Dogs or other that pursue him, by the space of four paces backward, that he stayeth their course, and the heat of his dung is so admirable, that it scorcheth or burneth the hair or skin of any beasts or men that hunt him: neither hath this ime such vertuous operation at any other time, but only when the beast flyeth, being hunted and pursued for life, at other times it lying quiet, there is no such virtue therein: neither ought this to seem incredible, seeing many other beasts in their chase, have the like or at the least do then eject their excrement more plentifully and noisomly then at other The reason of the heat and operation of their excre∣ment. times: as the Cuttell-fish, for when in chase the intrails are heated, and the passage somewhat re∣strained, so that the holding in of breath breedeth more wind in the guts, it may very naturally chance, the excrement being with the inclosed wind and heat sent forth by violent eruption, that it may flie far backward, and also burn as aforesaid. These beasts Calve in the Mountains, and before that Their place and succour for Calving. time cometh she chuseth a place, which she walleth in with the abundance of her own dung, so high as it may cover her young one, for there is no beast that is naturally so full of excrement as a Bonasus. Their ears are very broad as the Poet saith, Patulae camuris sub cornibus aures, broad ears, under crooked winding blunt horns; the skin is so large, that it hath covered a good part of a house, the inward colour whereof is like the earth whereon the beast did use to feed. That excellent Physitian of England John Cay, did send me the head of this beast, with this description, in an Epistle, saying. 
 I Send unto thee the head of a great wilde beast, the bare mouth and the bones supporters of the The relation of John Cay a Doctor of Physick in Englan . horns being very weighty, and therefore bearing up some like heavy burden, the horns are recurved and bending backward, so that they do not spire directly downward but rather forward, though in a crooked manner, which because it could not appear forward, as they do when the beast is alive, therefore they are described turning on the one side: the space betwixt the horns or breadth of the forehead, is three Roman palms and a half; the length of the horns, three palms one finger and a half; and their compass where they are joyned to the head, is one foot one palm and a half. In the Castle of Warwick where are preserved the Armor and Spear of one Earl Guy of Warwick a most valiant strong man, I have seen the head of a beast not unlike to this, saving that if the bones whereon the horns grow should be joyned together, then would the horns be longer, and of another crooked fashion. And in the same place there is also the neckbone of the same beast, the compasse thereof is at the least three Roman feet two palms and a half, whereunto I may also add that shoulder-blade which hangeth on the North gate of the City of Coventry, being in the lowest part three foot broad and two fingers, and four foot long and two palms: and the compasse of the arme hole wherein the shoulder is joyned, is three foot and one palm, and the whole compasse of them both in breadth and length is eleven foot one palm and a half.
A Cat is in all parts like a Lioness, except in her sharp ears, wherefore the Poets seign, that when Venus had turned a Cat into a beautiful woman, (calling her Aeluros) who forgetting her good turn, contended with the Goddesse for beauty; in indignation whereof, she returned her to her first nature, only making her outward shape to resemble a Lion; which is not altoge∣ther idle, but may admonish the wisest, that fair and foul, men and beasts, hold nothing by their own worth and benefit, but by the virtue of their Creator: Wherefore if at any time they rise against their maker, let them think to lose their honour and dignity in their best part, and to return to baseness and inglorious contempt; out of which they were first taken, and howsoever their outward shape and condition please them, yet at the best are but beasts that perish, for the Lions suffer hunger. 
 Cats are of divers colours, Sipontius. Of the several parts. but for the most part griseld, like to congealed ise, which cometh from the condition of her meat: her head is like unto the head of a Lion, except in her sharp ears: her flesh is soft and smooth: her eyes glister above measure, es∣pecially when a man cometh to see them on the suddain, and in the night they can hardly be endured, for their flaming aspect. Wherefore Democrit us describing the Per∣sian Smaragde saith that it is not transparent, but filleth the eye with pleasant bright∣ness, such as is in the eyes of Panthers and Cats, for they cast forth beams in the sha∣dow and darkness, but in sun-shine they have no such clear∣ness, and thereof Alexan∣der Aphrodise giveth this rea∣son, both for the sight of Cats and Bats, that they have by nature a most sharpe spirit of seeing. 
 Albertus compareth their eye-sight to Carbuncles in dark places, because in the night they can see perfectly to kill Rats and Mice: the root of the herb Valerian (commonly called Phu) is very like to the eye of a Cat, and wheresoever it groweth, if Cats come thereunto, they instantly dig it up, for the love thereof, as I my self have seen in mine own Garden, and not once only, but often, even then when as I had caused it to be hedged or compassed round about with thornes, for it smelleth marvellous like to a Cat. 
 The Egyptians have observed in the eyes of a Cat, the encrease of the Moon light, for with the Moon they skin more fully at the full, and more dimly in the change and wane, and the male Cat doth also vary his eyes with the Sun; for when the Sun ariseth, the apple of his eye Gillius. is long; toward noon it is round, and at the evening it cannot be seen at all, but the whole eye sheweth alike. 
 The tongue of a Cat is very attractive and forcible like a file, attenuating by licking the flesh of a man, for which cause, when she is come neer to the bloud, so that her own spittle be mingled therewith, she falleth mad. Her teeth are like a saw, and if the long hairs growing about Pliny. her mouth (which some call Granons) be cut away, she loseth her courage. Her nails sheathed like the nails of a Lion, striking with her forefeet, both Dogs and other things, as a man doth with his hand. 
 This beast is wonderful nimble, setting upon her prey like a Lion, by leaping, and therefore The game and food on Cats. she hunteth both Rats, all kind of Mice, and Birds, eating not only them, but also fish, where∣withall she is best pleased. Having taken a Mouse, she first playeth with it, and then devoureth it, but her watchful eye is most strange, to see with what pace and soft steps, she taketh birds and flies; and her nature is to hide her own dung or excrement, for she knoweth that the savour and presence thereof, will drive away her sport, the little Mouse being able by that stool, to smell the presence of her mortal foe. Pliny. A secret. 
 To keep Cats from hunting of Hens, they use to tie a little wilde Rew under their wings, and so likewise from Dove-coates, if they set it in the windowes, they dare not approach unto it for some secret in nature. Some have said that Cats will fight with Serpents, and Toads, and kill them, and perceiving that she is hurt by them; she presently drinketh water and is cured: but I cannot consent unto this opinion: it being true of the Weasell as shall be afterward declared. Pontzetius Of their love and hatred. sheweth by experience that Cats and Serpents love one another, for there was (saith he) in a certain Monastery, a Cat nourished by the Monkes, and suddenly the most parts of the Monks which used to play with the Cat fell sick: whereof the Physitians could find no cause, but some secret poison, and all of them were assured that they never tasted any: at the last a poor labouring man came unto them, affirming that he saw the Abbey-cat playing with a Serpent, which the Physitians understan∣ding, presently conceived that the Serpent had emptied some of her poison upon the Cat, which brought the same to the Monks, and they by stroking and handling the Cat, were infected therewith; and whereas there remained one difficulty, namely, how it came to passe, the Cat her self was not poisoned thereby, it was resolved, that for as much as the Serpents poison came from him but in play and sport, and not in malice and wrath, that therefore the venom thereof being lost in play, neither harmed the Cat at all, nor much endangered the Monks: and the very like is observed of Mice that will play with Serpents. 
 Cats will also hunt Apes, and follow them to the woods, for in Egypt certain Cats set upon an Ape, Aelianus. who presently took himself to his heels, and climed into a tree, after whom the Cats followed with the same celerity &amp; agility: (for they can fasten their clawes to the barke and run up very speedily:) the Ape seeing himself overmatched with number of his adversaries, leaped from branch to branch, and at last took hold of the top of a bough, whereupon he did hang so ingeniously, that the Cats durst not approach unto him for fear of falling, and so departed. 
 The nature of this beast is, to love the place of her breeding, neither will she tarry in any strange The love of home. place, although carryed far, being never willing to forsake the house, for the love of any man, and most contrary to the nature of a Dog, who will travaile abroad with his master; and although their masters forsake their houses, yet will not these beasts bear them company, and being carryed forth in close baskets or sacks, they will yet return again or lose themselves. A Cat is much de∣lighted to play with her image in a glasse, and if at any time she behold it in water, presently she leapeth down into the water which naturally she doth abhor, but if she be not quickly pulled forth and dryed she dyeth thereof, because she is impatient of all wet. Those which will keep their, Cats within doors, and from hunting birds abroad, must cut off their ears, for they cannot endure to Albertus. A way to make Cats keep home. have drops of rain distill into them, and therefore keep themselves in harbour. Nothing is more contrary to the nature of a Cat, then is wet and water, and for this cause came the proverb that they love not to wet their feet. It is a neat and cleanly creature, oftentimes licking her own body to keep it neat and fair, having naturally a flexible back for this purpose, and washing her face with her forefeet: but some observe, that if she put her feet beyond the crown of her head, that it is a A conjectural secret. presage of rain, and if the back of a Cat be thin the beast is of no courage or valew. They love fire and warm places, whereby it often falleth out that they often burn their Coats. They desire to lie soft, and in the time of their lust (commonly called cat-wralling) they are wilde and fierce, especially the males, who at that time (except they be gelded) will not keep the house: at which time they have a peculiar direful voice. The manner of their copulation is this, the female lyeth down, Their copula∣tion. and the male standeth, and their females are above measure desirous of procreation, for which cause they provoke the male, and if he yeeld not to their lust, they beat and claw him, but it is only Aristotle. for love of young, and not for lust: the male is most libidinous, and therefore seeing the female will never more engender with him during the time her young ones suck, he killeth and eateth them if he meet with them, (to provoke the female to copulation with him again, for when she is deprived of her young, she seeketh out the male of her own accord) for which the female most Aelianus. warily keepeth them from his sight. During the time of copulation, the female continually cryeth, whereof the Writers give a double cause; one, because she is pinched with the talons or clawes of the male in the time of his lustful rage; and the other, because his seed is so fiery hot, that it almost burneth the females place of conception. When they have littered, or as we com∣monly say kittened, they rage against Dogs, and will suffer none to come neer their young ones. The best to keep are such as are littered in March; they go with young fifty daies, Choise of yong Cats. and the females live not above six or seven years, the males live longer, especially if they be gelt or libbed: the reason of their short life is their ravening of meat which corrupteth within them. 
 They cannot abide the savour of ointments, but fall mad thereby; they are sometimes infected Gillius. Coelius. Alu. Mundel. Their diseases. with the falling evill, but are cured with Gobium. It is needless to spend any time about her loving nature to man, how she flattereth by rubbing her skin against ones Legs, she whurleth with her voice, having as many tunes as turnes, for she hath one voice to beg and to complain, another to testifie her delight and pleasure, another among her own kind by flattering, by hissing, by puffing, by spitting, in so much as some have thought that they have a peculiar intelligible language a∣mong themselves. Therefore how she beggeth, playeth, leapeth, looketh, catcheth, tosseth with her foot, riseth up to strings held over her head, sometimes creeping, sometimes lying on the back, playing with one foot, sometime on the belly, snatching now with mouth, and anon with foot, apprehending greedily any thing save the hand of a man, with divers such gestical actions, it is needless to stand upon; in so much as Coelius was wont to say, that being free from his Studies and more urgent weighty affaires, he was not ashamed to play and sport himself with his Cat, and verily it may well be called an idle mans pastime. As this beast hath been familiarly nouri∣shed of many, so have they payed dear for their love, being requited with the losse of their health, and sometime of their life for their friendship: and worthily, because they which love any beast in a high measure, have so much the lesse charity unto man. 
 Therefore it must be considered what harmes and perils come unto men by this beast. It is The hurt that cometh by the familiarity of a Cat. Alex. Benidi. Abynzoar. most certain, that the breath and savour of Cats consume the radical humour and destoy the lungs, and therefore they which keep their Cats with them in their beds have the air corrupted, and fall into severall Hecticks and Consumptions. There was a certain company of Munks much given to nourish and play with Cats, whereby they were so infected, that within a short space none of them were able either to say, read, pray, or sing, in all the Monastery; and therefore also they are dangerous in the time of Pestilence, for they are not only apt to bring home venemous infection, but to poison a man with very looking upon him; wherefore there is in some men a natural dislike and abhorring of Cats, their natures being so composed, that not only when they see them, but be∣ing neer them and unseen, and hid of purpose, they fall into passions, frettings, sweatings, pulling off their hats, and trembling fearfully, as I have known many in Germany; the reason whereof is, be∣cause the constellation which threatneth their bodies which is peculiar to every man, worketh by the presence and offence of these creatures: and therefore they have cryed out to take away the Cats. 
 The like may be said of the flesh of Cats, which can seldom be free from poison, by reason of Of a Cats flesh. their daily food, eating Rats and Mice, Wrens and other birds which feed on poison, and above all the brain of a Cat is most venomous, for it being above measure dry, stoppeth the animal spirits, that they cannot passe into the ventricle, by reason whereof memory faileth, and the infected per∣son Ponzettus. Alexander. falleth into a Phrenzie. The cure whereof may be this, take of the water of sweet Marjoram with Terra lemnia the weight of a groat mingled together, and drink it twice in a month, putting good store of spices into all your meat to recreate the spirits withall, let him drink pure Wine, wherein put the seed of Diamoschu. But a Cat doth as much harm with her venemous teeth, therefore to cure her biting, they prescribe a good diet, sometime taking Hony, Turpentine, and Oil of Roses melt together and laid to the wound with Centory: sometime they wash the would with the urine of a man, and lay to it the brains of some other beast and pure Wine mingled both together. 
 The hair also of a Cat being eaten unawares, stoppeth the Artery and causeth Suffocation: and Mathaeolus. I have heard that when a childe hath gotten the hair of a Cat into his mouth, it hath so cloven and stuck to the place that it could not be gotten off again, and hath in that place bred either the wens or the Kings evill. To conclude this point, it appeareth that this is a dangerous beast, and that there∣fore as for necessity we are constrained to nourish them for the suppressing of small vermine: so with a wary and discreet eye we must avoid their harms, making more account of their use then of their persons. 
 In Spain and Gallia Narbon, they eat Cats, but first of all take away their head and tail, and hang the prepared flesh a night or two in the open cold air, to exhalt the savour and poison of it, finding the flesh thereof to be almost as sweet as a Cony. It must needs be an unclean and impure beast that liveth only upon vermin and by ravening, for it is commonly said of a man when he neeseth, that he hath eaten with Cats: likewise the familiars of Witches do most ordinarily appear in the shape of Cats, which is an argument that this beast is dangerous to soul and body. It is said that if bread be Perottus. made wherein the dung of Cats is mixed, it will drive away Rats and Mice. But we conclude the story of this beast with the medicinal observations, and tarry no longer in the breath of such a creature compounded of good and evill. It is reported that the flesh of Cats salted and sweetned hath power in it to draw wens from the body, and being warmed to cure the Hemorrhoids and pains in the reins and back, according to the Verse of Ʋrsinus. 
 Et lumbus lumbis praestat adesus opem. Aylsius prescribeth a fat Cat sod for the Gowt, first taking the fat, and anointing therewith the Galenus. The medicinal virtues of a Cat. sick part, and then wetting Wool or Tow in the same, and binding it to the offended place. 
 For the pain and blindness in the eye, by reason of any skins, webs, or nails, this is an ap∣proved medicine; Take the head of a black Cat, which hath not a spot of another colour in it, and burn it to powder in an earthen pot leaded or glazed within, then take this powder and through a quill blow it thrice a day into thy eye, and if in the night time any heat do thereby annoy thee, take two leaves of an Oke wet in cold water and bind them to the eye, and so shall all pain flie away, and blindness depart although it hath oppressed thee a whole year: and this medicine is approved by many Physicians both elder and later. 
 The liver of a Cat dryed and beat to powder is good against the stone: the dung of a female Cat Galen. with the claw of an Oul hanged about the neck of a man that hath had seven fits of a Quartain Ague, cureth the same: a neesing powder made of the gall of a black Cat, and the weight of a groat there∣of Sextus. taken and mingled with four crowns weight of Zambach, helpeth the convulsion and wryness of the mouth: and if the gall of a Cat with the black dung of the same Cat, be burned in perfume un∣der a woman travelling with a dead childe, it will cause it presently to come forth: and Pliny saith Aetius. Rasis. Albertus. Pliny. that if a pin, or thorn, or fish bone, stick in ones mouth, let him rub the outside against it with a little Cats dung, and it will easily come forth. Given to a woman suffering the flux, with a little Rozen and Oil of Roses, it stayeth the humour; and for a Web in the eye of an horse, evening and morningblow in the powder of Cats dung, and it shall be cured. 
 Of the Wilde CAT. ALl Cats at the beginning were wilde, and therefore some do interpret Iim, Isa. 34. for wilde Cats; and the Germans call it Bonumruter, that is, a tree-rider, because she hunteth Birds and fowles from tree to tree. The Spantard calleth it Gato-montes, and in some places of France it is called Chatcarets. There are great store of them in Helvetia, especially in the Woods, and sometime neer the waters, also being in colour like tame Cats but blacker, such as in England is called a Poolcat. I saw one of them, which was taken in September, and observed, that it was in length from the fore-head to the top of the tail, four full spans, and a black line or strake all along the back, and likewise some black upon the legs; betwixt the breast and the neck there was a large white spot, and the colour of her other parts was dusky, red, and yellow, especially about the buttocks, the heels of her feet were black, her tail longer then an ordinary house Cats, having two or three black circles about it, but toward the top all black. 
 They abound in Scandivania, where the Linxes devour them; otherwise they are nted with Olaus Mag. Dogs, or shot with Guns, and many times the Countrey men seeing one in a tree, doth com∣passe it about with multitude, and when she leapeth down kill her with their cubs, according to the verse of Neversianus: 
 —Felemque minacem Arboris in trunco, longis perfigere telis. In the province of Malabar, these Cats live upon trees, because they are not swift to run, but leap with such a gility, that some have thought they did flie: and verily they do flie, for they have a certain skin, which when they lie in quiet, cleaveth or shrinketh up to their bellies, but being stir∣red, the same spreadeth from their forefeet to their hinder, like the wing of a Bat; by vertue where∣of, they stay up themselves in the air, passing from tree to tree like a fowl; as also doth the Pontique Mouse, as shall be declared afterward.
The vertue of smelling called in Latine, Sagacitas, is attributed to these as to the former hunt∣ing Hound, of whom we will first of all discourse, and for the qualities of this sense, which maketh the Beast admirable, Plautus seemeth to be of opinion, that it received this title from some Magi∣cians or sage Wisards (called Sagae) for this e saith, speaking of this Beast: anem hanc esse quidem In Curcul. What smelling or sagacity in Dogs is. Magis par fuit: nasum aedepol sagax habet: It is also attributed to Mice, not for smelling, but for the sense of their palace or taste; and also to Geese: In a Dog it is that sense which searcheth out and descryeth the rousts, fourms, and lodgings of wilde Beasts, as appeareth in this verrse of L s Andronicus. 
 —Cum primis fida Canum vis Dirige oderisequos ad certa cubilia canes. And for this cause it hath his proper Epithets, as Odora canum vis, promissa canum vis, &amp; naribus es, &amp; utilis: P ncianns called this kinde Plaudi, for so did Festus before him, and the Germans, Spurhund; and Leidthund, Iaghund▪ because their ears are long, thin, and hanging down, and they differ not from vulgar Dogs in any other outward proportion, except only in their cry or barking voyce. 
 The nature of these is, being set on by the voyce and words of their leader, to cast about for the sitting of the Beast, and so having found it, with continual cry to follow after it till it be wearyed, without changing for any other; so that sometimes the Hunters themselves take up the Beast, at least wise the Hounds seldom fail to kill it. They seldom bark, except in their hunting chase; and then they follow their game through woods, thickets, thorns, and other difficult places, being al∣way Bellisarius. obedient and attentive to their leaders voyce, so as they may not go forward when lie forbid∣deth, nor yet remain neer to the Hunters, whereunto they are framed by Art and discipline, rather then by any natural instinct. 
 The White Hounds are said to be the quickest sented and surest nosed, and therefore best for the Hare: the black ones for the Boar, and the ded ones for the Hart and Roe: but hereunto I cannot agree, because their colour, (especially of the two later) are too like the game they hunt; although there can be nothing certain collected of their colour, yet is the black Hound harder and better able to endure cold, then the other which is white. In Italy they make account of the spotted one; espe∣cially white and yellowish, for they are quicker nosed: they must be kept tyed up they hunt, yet so as they be let loose now and then a little to ease their bellies, for it is necessary that their be kept sweet and dry. 
 It is questionable how to discern a Hound of excellent sense, (yet as Blondus saith) the square The choice of a Hound of the best nose. and flat nose is the best sign and index thereof: likewise a small head, having all his legs of equal length, his breast not deeper then his belly, and his back is plain to his tail, his eyes quick, his ears long hanging, but sometimes stand up: his tail nimble, and the beak of his nose alway to the earth, and especially such as are most silent or bark least. 
 There are some of that nature, who when they have found the Beast they will stand still untill their Xenophon. Omni Bonus. Oppianus. Hunter come, to whom in silence by their face, eye, and tail, they shew their game. Now you are to observe the divers and variable disposition of Hounds in their finding out of the Beast: some, when they have found the footsteps go forward without any voyce or other shew of ear or tail. Again, another sort, when they have found the footings of the Beast, prick up their ear a little, but either bark, or wag their tails; other will wag their tail, but not move their ears, other again wring their faces, and draw their skins through over much intention, (like sorrowful persons) and so fol∣low the sent, holding the tail immoveable. 
 There be some again, which do none of these, but wander up and down, barking about the surest marks, and confounding their own foot-steps with the Beasts they hunt, or else forsake the way, and so run back again to the first head; but when they see the Hare, they tremble and are afraid, not daring to come near her, except she run away first: these with the other, which hinder the cunning labours of their colleagues, trusting to their feet, and running before their betters, deface the best mark, or else hunt counter (as they tearm it) take up any false sent for the truth, or which is more reprehensible, never forsake the high ways, and yet have not learned to hold their peace: unto these also you may adde those which cannot discern the footings or pricking of the Hare, yet will they run speedily when they see her, or else at the beginning set forth very hot, and afterward tyre, and give over lazily; all these are not to be admitted into the kennel of good Hunds. 
 But the good and approved Hounds on the contrary, when they have found the Hare, make shew thereof to the Hunter, by running more speedily, and with gesture of head, eyes, ears, and tail, wind∣ing to the Hares muse, never give over prosecution with a gallant noise, no not returning to their leaders, lest they lose advantage: they have good and hard feet, and are of stately stomacks, not giving over for any hate, and fear not the rocks or other mountain places, as the Poet expresseth: 
 Quae laus prima canum? quibus est audacia praeceps: Quae nunc elatis rimantur naribus auras: Et perdunt clamore feram, dominumque vocando Insequitur tumulosque canis camposque per omnes. Venandi sagax virtus viresque sequendi, Et nunc demisso quaerunt vestigia rostro. Increpitant quem si collatis effugit armis, Noster in arte labor positus, spes omnis in illa, &amp;c. And therefore also it is good oftentimes to lead the Hounds to the Mountains for exercise of their feet, when you have no Hare or other Beast. 
 And whereas the nature of this Hare is, sometimes to leap and make headings, sometimes to tread softly, without any great impression in the earth, or sometimes to lye down and ever to leap or jump out &amp; in to her own fourm or sitting, the poor Hound is so much the more busied and troubled to retain the small savour of her footings which she leaveth behinde her: for this cause also it is to The best time of hunting. be noted, that the Hound must be holp not only with the voyce, eye, and hand of the Hunter, but also with a seasonable time, for in frosty weather the savour congealeth and freezeth with the earth, so as you cannot hunt with any certainty untill the thaw thereof, or till the Sun arise. 
 Likewise if rain fall betwixt the going of the Hare and the hunting time, you cannot hunt till the water be dryed up, for the drops disperse the sent of the Hare, and the dry weather recollecteth it again. The Summer time also is not for hunting, by reason the heat of the earth consumeth the savour, and the night being then but short, the Hare travelleth but little, feeding only in the even∣ing and morning. Likewise the fragrancy of every green herb yeeldeth such a savour, as doth not a little obliterate, and oversway the savour of the Beast: and therefore Aristotle in his Wonders, sheweth that in Aetna in the Summer time, there are such plenty of sweet smelling flowers, especially of Violets, which overcome the nostrils of the Hounds, so as in vain they follow the Hare. The best time therefore for hunting with these Hounds is the Autumn or fall of the leaf, because that The first training of Hounds. then the odours of herbs are weakned, and the earth barer then at other times. The best manner to teach these Hounds, is to take a live Hare and trail her after you upon the earth, now one way, now another; and so having drawn it a convenient space, hide it in the earth; afterward set forth your Hound neer the trail, who taking winde, runneth to and fro neer the woods, fields, pastures, path-ways, and hedges, untill he finde which way the Hare is gone, but with a soft and gentle pace, untill at length coming neer the lodged Hare, he mendeth his pace, and bestirreth himself more speedily, leaping upon his prey like some Serpent, or as an arrow shot out of a Bow, and so tearing it in pieces or killing it with joy, loadeth himself with his conquest, and bringeth it to his Master with triumph, who must receive both Dog and it, with all tokens of love into his own bosome, which thing caused Nemesian to write thus; 
 Quae fre a si Morinum dubio refluentia ponto, O quanta est merces, &amp; quantum impendia supra Si non ad speciem menturosque decores Protinus, haec una est catulis jactura Britannis. —Diversa Britannia mittit Veloces, nostrique orbis venatibus aptos. There are divers Countrey Dogs like unto these, as the Geloni and Gnosii, which caused Ovid to Of the Hounds of sundry Countre s. reckon and call Ichnobates one of Actaeons Dogs Gnosius: whom Oppianus compareth to the Polypus fish, which smelling in the waters the leaves of Olives, by the sent is drawn to the land to eat them. The Spanish Dogs whom the French call Espagneulx, have long ears, but not like a Braches, and by their noses hunt both Hares and Conies, they are not rough, but smooth haired. The Tuscan Dogs are commended by Nemesian; notwithstanding, they are not beautiful to look upon, having a deep shaggy hair, yet is their game not unpleasant. 
 Quin &amp; Tuscorum uon est extrema voluptas Saepe Canum: forma est illis licet obsita villo, &amp;c. Haud tamen injucunda dabunt tibi munera praedae, &amp;c. Atque etiam leporum secreta cubilia monstrant. The Ʋmbrian Dog is sharp nosed, but fearfull of his sport, as Gratius expresseth. 
 —Aut exigit Ʋmber Nare sagax e calle feras, At fugit adversus idem quos efferent hostes Tanta foret virtus; &amp; tantum vellet in armis. The Aetolian Dogs have also excellent smelling noses, and are not slow or fearful, whom Gratius expresseth as followeth: 
 At clangore citat, quos nondum conspicit apros, Aetola quaeounque Canis de stirpe (malignum Officium) &amp;c.— Seu frustra nimius properat furor, Mirum quam celeres &amp; quantum nare metentur: The French Dogs are derived or propagated of the Dogs of Great Britain, and are swift and quick sented, but not all, for they have of divers kindes, as Gratius expresseth in these words; 
 Magnaque diversos extollit gloria Celtas. They are very swift, and not sharp nosed, wherefore they are mingled in generation with the Ʋm∣brian Dogs, and therefore he celebrateth in many verses, the praise of the first Hunter (as he taketh him.) Hagno Baeonius and his Dog Metagon, and afterward the Dog Petronius: but it may be, that by Metagon, he meaneth the Dogs of Lybia, because there is a City of that name: and by Petronius the Dogs of Italy, for Petronia is a river that falleth into Tiber. 
 The Grammarians call a Dog engendered of a Hound, and an ordinary French Dog, Vertagus, a Tumbler: because he setteth himself to hunting, and bringeth his prey to his Master, whereupon Martial made this Distichon: 
 Non sibi, sed Domino venatur vertagus acer, Illaesum leporem qui tibi dente seret. The WATER SPAGNEL. 
 Such be also other smelling Dogs, called in the German tongue (Lochundle) that is, Ter∣riars or Beagles: these will set upon Foxes and Badgers in the earth, and by biting expel them out of their dens; whereof Ari∣stotle reporteth a wonder, that one of them followed a Fox un∣der the ground in Boeotia, and there made so great a noise by barking, that the Hunters went also into the Cave, where they saw many strange things which they related to the chief Magi∣strate. 
 Unto all these smelling Dogs, I may also adde the water Spag∣nel, called in French, Barbeti; and in Germany (Wasserhund:) who is taught by his Master to seek for things that are lost, (by words and tokens) and if he meet any person that hath taken them up, he ceaseth not to bay at him, and follow him till he appear in his Masters presence. These also will take water-fowl, and hunt Otters and Beavers, (although Hounds also will do the same) and watch the stroke of a Gun when the fowler shooteth, and instantly run into the water for the dead fowl, which they bring to their Ma∣ster. They use to shear their hinder parts, that so they may be the less annoyed in swimming; whose figure is in the bottom of the former page described.
Hic olidam clamosus ages in retia vulpem. Touching the hunting or taking of Foxes, I approve the opinion of Xenophon, who avoucheth, The hunting and taking of Foxes. Leporum capturam venatico studio quam vulpium digniorem; that is, the hunting of the Hare is a more noble game or pastime then the hunting of the Fox. 
 This beast is more fearful of a Dog then a Hare, for the only barking of Dogs causeth him to rise many times from his den or lodgings out of the earth, or from the middle of bushes, briars, and Aelianus. brambles, wherein he hid himself: and for his hunting this is to be observed, that as in hunting of a Hart it hath been already related, the Hunter must drive the beast with the winde, because it Oppianus. hindereth his refrigeration; so in hunting of a Fox he drive him against the winde, and then he pre∣venteth all his crafty and subtill agitations and devises; for it stayeth his speed in running, and also Bellesarius. keepeth his savour fresh alway in the nose of the Dogs that follow him: for the Dogs that kill a Fox must be swift, strong and quick sented, and it is not good to put on a few at once, but a good com∣pany together, for be assured the Fox will not lose his own bloud till he hazzard some of his enemies, and with his tail which he windeth every way, doth he delude the Hunters: when the Dogs are pressed neer unto him, and are ready to bite him, he striketh his tail betwixt his Textor. legs, and with his own urine wetteth the same, and so instantly striketh it into the Dogs mouths, whereof when they have tasted, so many of them as it toucheth will commonly leave off and fol∣low no farther. 
 Their teeth are exceeding sharp, and therefore they fear not to assault or contend with beasts, exceeding their stature, strength, and quantity. Sometime he leapeth up into a tree, and there standeth to be seen and bayed at by the Dogs and Hunters, like as a Champion in some Fort or Oppianus. Castle, and although fire be cast at him, yet will he not descend down among the Dogs; yea he endureth to be beaten and pierced with Hunters spears, but at length being compelled to forsake his hold and give over to his enemies, down he leapeth, falling upon the crew of barking Dogs, like a flash of lightning, and where he layeth hold there he never looseth teeth, or asswageth wrath, till other Dogs▪ have torn his limbs, and driven breath out of his body. 
 If at any time he take the earth, then with Terriar Dogs they ferret him out of his den again. In some places they take upon them to take him with nets, which seldom proveth, because with his teeth he teareth them in pieces; yet by Calentius this devise is allowed in this Verse; 
 Et laqueo Vulpes &amp; decipe casse fuinas. But this must be wrought under the earth in the caves, dens, or surrowes, made of purpose, which is to be performed two manner of wayes, one by placing the Gin in some perch of wood, so as that as soon as the beast is taken by the Neck, it may presently flie up and hang him, for otherwise with his teeth he will shear it asunder and escape away alive: or else that neer the place where the rope is fastened, to slip upon the head of the Fox, there be placed some thick collar or brace, so as he can never bite it asunder. 
 The French have a kinde of Gin to take by the legs (which they call Hausepied) and I have heard A noble in∣stance of a Foxes courage. of some which have found the Foxes leg in the same Gin, bitten off with his own teeth from his body, rather putting himself to that torment with his own teeth, then to expect the mercy of the Hunter, and so went away upon three feet: and other have counterfeited themselves dead, re∣straining their breath and winking, not stirring any member when they saw the Hunter come to take The subtlery of a Fox taken in a snare. them out of the Gin, who coming and taking his leg forth, not suspecting any life in them, so soon as the Fox perceiveth himself free, away he went and never gave thanks for his deliverance: for this cause Blondus saith truly, that only wise and old Hunters are fit to take Foxes, for they have so many devises to beguile men, and deliver themselves, that it is hard to know when he is safely taken, untill he be throughly dead. 
 They also use to set up Gins for them baited with Chickens in bushes and hedges: but if the setter be not at hand so soon as the Fox is insnared, it is dangerous but that the beast will deliver it self. In some places again they set up an iron toile, having in it a ring for the Fox to thrust in his head, and through that sharp pikes, at the farther end whereof is placed a piece of flesh, so that when the hungry Fox cometh to bite at the meat and thrusteth in his head, the pikes stick fast in his neck, and he inevitably insnared. Moreover, as the harmefulness of this beast hath troubled many, so also they have devised more engins to deceive and take him; for this cause there is another policy to kill him by a bow, full bent, with a sharp arrow, and so tenderly placed as is a trap for a Mouse, and as soon as ever the Fox treadeth thereon, presently the arrow is discharged into his own bowels, by the weight of his foot. 
 Again, for the killing of this beast they use this sleight, they take of Bacon-grease or Bacon as much as ones hand, and rost the same a little, and therewith anoint their shooe-soles, and then take the liver of a Hog cut in pieces, and as they come out of the wood where the beast lodgeth, they must scatter the said pieces in their foot-steps and draw the carcasse of a dead Cat after them, the savour whereof will provoke the beast to follow the foot-steps, then have they a cunning Archer or handler of a Gun, who observeth and watcheth in secret till the beast come within his reach, and so giveth him his great and deadly wound. 
 But if the Fox be in the earth, and they have found his den, then they take this course to work him out. They take a long thing like a Bee-hive, and open at one end, and iron wiers at the other like a grate, and at the open end is set a little door to fall down upon the mouth, and to inclose the Fox when he entreth in by touching of a small rod that supporteth that door. This frame is set to the Foxes dens mouth, and all the other passages watched and stopped. The Fox having a desire to go forth, and seeing light by the wiers, misdeemeth no harm, and entreth into the hive which is wrought close into the mouth of his den, and being entred into it, the rod turneth the door fast at the lower end or entrance, and so the Fox is intrapped, to be disposed of at the will of the taker. 
 Foxes are annoyed with many enemies; and to begin with the least, the small flies, called The beasts that are ene∣mies of Foxes. Gnats, do much trouble and infect them, against whom the Fox useth this policy; He taketh a mouthful of straw or soft hay, or hair, and so goeth into the water, dipping his hinder parts by little and little, then the flies betake themselves to his head, which be keepeth out of the water, which the Fox feeling, dippeth or diveth also the same under water to his mouth, wherein he holdeth the hay as aforesaid, whereunto the flies runne for sanctuary or dry refuge, which the Fox perceiving, Abertus. suddenly casteth it out of his mouth, and runneth out of the water, by this means easing himself of all those enemies. 
 In like manner, as all beasts are his enemies, and he friend and loving to none, so with strength, courage, and policy, he dealeth with every one, not only against the beasts of the Land, but also against the monsters of the Sea. When he findeth a nest of Waspes in the earth, or in other places, as in trees, he layeth his tail to the hole, and so gathereth into it a great many of them, which he presently dasheth against the wall, or tree, or stones adjoyning, and so destroyeth them, and thus he continueth untill he have killed them all, and so maketh himself executor to their heaps of hony. 
 His manner is when he perceiveth or seeth a flock of fowl to flie in the air, to rowl himself in G us. red earth, making his skin to look bloody, and lie upon his back, winking with his eye, and holding in his breath as if he were dead, which thing the birds, namely Crows, Ravens and such like observing, because of the hatred of his person, they for joy alight and triumph at his overthrow, and this the Fox endureth for a good season, till opportunity serving his turn, and some of the fowl come neer his snowt, then suddenly he catcheth some one of them in his mouth, feeding upon him like a living and not a dead Fox, and so doth devour and eat him, as the Leopard doth devour and eat Apes, and the Sea frog other little fishes. 
 In like sort he deceiveth the Hedge-hog, for when the Hedge-hog perceiveth the Fox coming to him, he rowleth himself together, like a foot-ball, and so nothing appeareth outward except his prickles, which the Fox cannot indure to take into his mouth, and then the cunning Fox to compasse his desire, licketh gently the face and snowt of the Hedge-hog, by that means bringing him to unfold himself again, and to stand upon his legs, which being done, he instantly devoureth, or else poisoneth the beast with the urine that he rendereth upon the Hedge-hogs face: and at other times he goeth to the waters, and with his tail draweth fishes to the brim of the River, and when that he observeth a good booty, he casteth the Fishes clean out of the water upon the dry land, and then devoureth them. 
 All kindes of Hawkes are enemies to Foxes, and Foxes to them, because they live upon Carrion, and so in the Province of Ʋla. Avicen saw a Fox and a Crow▪ fight together a long season, and the Crow with his talons so be-gripling the Foxes mouth that he could not bark, and in the mean time she beat and picked his head with her bill untill he bled again. The Eagles fight with Foxes and kill them; and Olaus Magnus affirmeth, that in the Northern Regions they lay Egges and hatch their young in those skins which they themselves have stripped off from Foxes and other beasts. 
 The Kites, Vultures, and Wolves, are Enemies to Foxes, because they are all flesh-devouring creatures, but the Fox which hath so many enemies, by strength or subtilties overcometh all. Whereupon Persius calleth a subtil man a Fox, saying, 
 Astutam vapido servas sub▪ pectore vulpem. The medicinal uses of this beast are these, First, (as Pliny and Marcellus affirm) a Fox sod in The medicines arising out of Foxes. water till nothing of the Fox be left whole except the bones, and the legs or other parts of a gowty body washed and daily bathed therein, it shall drive away all pain and grief, strengthning the de∣fective and weak members; so also it cureth all the shrinking up and pains in the sinews: and Galen attributeth the same virtue to an Hyaena sod in Oil, and the lame person bathed therein, for it hath such power to evacuate and draw forth whatsoever evill humour aboundeth in the body of man, Sex us. that it leaveth nothing hurtful behind. 
 Neverthelesse, such bodies are soon again replenished through evill diet, and relapsed into the same disease again. The Fox may be boyled in fresh or salt water with Annise and Thyme, and with his skin on whole and not slit, or else his head cut off, there being added to the decoction two pintes of Oil. 
 The flesh of a Fox sod and layed to a sore bitten by a Sea-hare, it cureth and healeth the same. Mathaeolus. The Foxes skin (as is already said) is profitable against all moist Fluxes in the skin of the body, and also the Gowt, and cold in the sinews. The ashes of Foxes flesh burnt and drunk in wine, is profita∣ble against the shortness of breath and stoppings of the Liver. 
 The bloud of a Fox dissected and taken forth of his urine alive, and so drunk, breaketh the stone Albertus. Silvius. in the bladder; or else (as Myrepsus saith) kill the Fox, and take the bloud and drink a cupful there∣of, and afterward with the same wash the genital parts, and within an hour the stone shall be voided: the same virtue is in it being dryed and drunk in Wine with Sugar. 
 Oxycraton and Foxes blood infused into the Nostrils of a lethargick Horse, cureth him. The fat is A syrtus. next to a Buls and a Swines, so as the fat or lard of Swine may be used for the fat of Foxes, and the fat of Foxes for the Swines grease in medicine. Some do herewith anoint the places which have the Cramp, and all trembling and shaking members. The fat of a Fox and a Drake inclosed in the belly of a Goose, and so rosted, with the dripping that cometh from it, they anoint paralytick members.
But all this is easily answered, if a man follow the counsel of Archadius, and look upon the secrets of nature, he shall finde a most plain distinction: but the Hunters object that there be some which are only females, and no more: but no male that is not also a female, and so they make him an Hermaphrodite. Niphus also affirmeth so much, for he saw a Hare which had stones and a yard, and yet was great with young, and also another which wanted stones; and the males genital, and also had young in her belly. Rondelius saith, that they are not stones, but certain little bladders filled with matter, which men finde in female Hares with young, such as are upon the belly of a Beaver, where∣in also the vulgar sort are deceived, taking those bunches for stones, as they do these bladders. And the use of these parts both in Beavers and Hares is this; that against rain both one and other sex suck thereout a certain humor, and anoint their bodies all over therewith, and so are defended in time of rain. The belly of a Sow, a Bitch, and a Hare, have many cels in them, because they bring forth many at a time, when a Hare lyeth down, she bendeth her hinder legs under her loins, as all rough-footed Beasts do. 
 They are deceived, which deliver by authority of holy Scriptures, that Hares love to lodge them upon Rocks, but we have manifested elsewhere, that those places are to be understood of Conies. They have fore-knowledge both of winde and weather, Summer and Winter by their noses, for Aelianus. Their nature and dispositi∣on. in the Winter they make their forms in the Sun-shine, because they cannot abide frost and cold, and in the Summer they rest toward the North, remaining in some higher ground, where they re∣ceive colder air. 
 We have shewed already that their sight is dim, but yet herein it is true that Plutarch saith, they have Visum indefessum, an indefatigable sense of seeing, so that the continuance in a mean degree, countervaileth in them the want of excellency. Their hearing is most pregnant; for the Egyptians when they signifie hearing, picture a Hare; and for this cause we have shewed you already that their ears are long like horns, their voyce is a whining voyce, and therefore Authors call it Vagitum, as they do a young childes, according to the verse of Ovid: 
 Intus ut infanti vagiat ore Puer. They rest in the day time, and walk abroad to feed in the night, never feeding near home, either Their time of sleep and food. because they are delighted with forein food, or else because they would exercise their legs in go∣ing, or else by secret instinct of nature, to conceal their forms and lodging places unknown; their heart and bloud is cold, which Albertus assigneth for a cause of their night-feeding: they eat also Grapes, and when they are overcome with heat, they eat of an herb called Lactuca Leporina, and of Aelianus. the Romans, and Hetrurians, Ciserbita, of the Venetians, Lactucinos; of the French, Lacterones; that is, Hares-lettice, Hares-house, Hares palace; and there is no disease in this Beast the cure whereof she doth not seek for in this herb. Hares are said to chew the cud in holy Scripture, they never drink, but content themselves with the dew, and for that cause they often fall rotten. It is reported by Philippus Belot, that when a Hare drunk Wine, she instantly dyed; they render their urine back∣ward, and their milk is as thick as a Swines, and of all creatures they have milk in udders before they deliver their young. 
 They are very exceedingly given to sleep, because they never wink perfectly: some Author ' s derive their name Lagon in Greek, from Laein to see, and thereupon the Graecians have a com∣mon proverb Lagos Catheudon, a sleeping Hare for a dissembling and counterfeiting person, be∣cause the H seeth when she sleepeth; for this is an admirable and rare work of Nature, that all the residue of her bodily parts take their rest, but the eye standeth continually senti∣nel. Hares admit copulation backward, and herein they are like to Conies, because they Of their copu∣lation and en∣gendering. breed every moneth for the most part, and that many; at that time the female provoking the male to carnal copulation, and while they have young ones in their belly they admit co∣pulation, whereby it cometh to pass, that they do not litter all at a time, but many dayes asunder, bringing forth one perfect, and another bald without hair, but all blinde like other cloven-footed-beasts. It is reported that two Hares brought into the Isle Carpathus, filled that Island with such abundance, that in short time they destroyed all the fruits, whereupon came the proverb Carpathius Leporem, to signifie them which plow and sow their own miseries. 
 It falleth out by divine Providence, that Hares and other fearfull Beasts which are good for meat, shall multiply to greater numbers in short space, because they are naked and unarmed, ly∣ing open to the violence of men and beasts, but the cruel and malignant creatures, which live only upon the devouring of their inferiours, as the Lyons, Wolves, Foxes, and Bears, conceive but very seldom, because there is less use for them in the world, and God in his creatures keepeth down the cruel and ravenous, but advanceth the simple, weak, and despised: when the female hath littered her young ones, she first sicketh them with her tongue, and afterward seeketh out the male for copulation. 
 Hares do seldom wax tame, and yet they are amongst them, which are neither Plaoidae nor Ferae, tame nor wilde, but middle betwixt both, and Cardane giveth this reason of their untameable nature, Hares seldom tamed. because they are perswaded that all men are their enemies. Scaliger writeth; that he saw a tame Hare in the Castle of Mount- Pesal, who with her hinder legs would come and strike the Dogs of her An example of a tame Hare. own accord, as it were defying their force, and provoking them to follow her. Therefore for their meat they may be tamed and accustomed to the hand of man, but they remain uncapable of all di∣scipline, and ignorant of their teachers voyce, so as they can never be brought to be obedient to the call and command of their teacher, neither will goe nor come at his pleasure. 
 It is a simple creature, having no defence but to run away, yet it is subtile, as may appear by changing of her form, and by scraping out her footsteps when she leapeth into her form, that so she may deceive her Hunters, also she keepeth not her young ones together in one litter, but layeth them a furlong one from another, that so she may not lose them all together, if peradventure men Aelianus. The subtilty of Hares. The defence of the Hare against her enemies. or beasts light upon them. Neither is she careful to feed her self alone, but also to be defended against her enemies, the Eagle, the Hawk, the Fox, and the Woolf, for she feareth all these naturally, nei∣ther can there be any peace made betwixt her and them, but she rather trusteth the scratching bram∣bles, the solitary woods, the ditches and corners of rocks or hedges, the bodies of hollow trees, and such like places, then a dissembling peace with her adversaries. 
 The wilde Hawk when she taketh a Hare, she setteth one of her talons in the earth, and with the other holding her prey, striving and wrestling with the Beast untill she have pulled out his eyes, Albertus. and then killeth him. The Foxes also compass the poor Hare by cunning, for in the night time when he falleth into her foot-steps, he restraineth his breath, and holdeth in his savour, going forward by little and little, untill, he finde the form of the Hare, and then thinking to surprize her, on a sudden leapeth at her to catch her; but the watchful Hare doth not take sleep after a careless man∣ner, delighting rather in suspition than security, when she perceiveth the approaching of such a guest, (for she windeth him with her nostrils) and thinketh it better to go from home, than make a feast to her foe. 
 Wherefore she leapeth out of her form and runneth away with all speed she can. The Fox also fol∣loweth, but a far off, and she hearing her adversary no more, betaketh her self to rest again, under some bramble, or other bush, supposing that the ground she hath gotten shall never be recovered of her again: but the Proverb is old and true, Fair and softly goeth far; so the Fox which seldom getteth meat, but winneth it with his wit and his heels, followeth as fast as he can; for a slow pace over-taketh the Hare at rest, which when she perceiveth, forth she goeth again, forsaking her quiet sleep, for the safe-gard of her life, and having gone so much ground as she did before, she betaketh her to rest the second time, hoping that now she hath quit her self from her foe; but the Foxes belly hath no ears, and therefore hunger is to him like a thousand whips, or a whole kennel of Hounds, forcing him forward after his game. 
 The Hare for her better safegard getteth up into some small tree, being sleepy and weary through the Foxes pursute; the Fox cometh to the tree and shaketh it by the roots, and will not suffer the Hare to take any rest, for he hopeth that time and travel will bring her to his dish; she leaps away again, and letteth no grass grow under his feet, hoping that her heels shall deliver her from the Foxes teeth: After follows the Fox, and at length (as the greater purse over-weigheth the smaller, and the great Horse of War over-wearieth the little hunting Nag,) so doth the lusty limbs of the Fox, out-last the weak legs of the Hare, and when she can go no more, needs must her weakness betray her to her foe, and so was her flight and want of rest like a sickness before her death, and the Foxes pre∣sence like the voyce of a passing bell. 
 And on the contrary, all the labour of the Fox, like a gentle and kinde exercise for the preparing of his stomach to such a feast. The fift and least kinde of Wolves are also enemies to Hares, and the Aelianus. Weasil do craftily sport and play with the Hare untill he have wearied him, and then hangeth fast up∣on her throat, and will not lose her hold, run the Hare never so fast, till at last through want of breath, and loss of bloud, she falleth into the hands of her cruel play-fellow, who turneth sport into good earnest, and taketh nothing from her but her bloud, leaving her carcase to be devoured by the hands of others, and in this manner is the silly Hare hunted by beasts: Now let us hear how she is hunted of men. 
 It is before expressed, that every limb of a Hare is composed for celerity, and therefore she never travelleth but jumpeth, her ears lead her the way in her chase, for with one of them she harkeneth The hunting of Hares. to the voyce of the Dogs, and the other she stretcheth forth like a sail to hasten her course, always stretching her hinder-feet beyond her former, and yet not hindering them at all; but sometimes when her ardent desire maketh her strain to fly from the Dogs, she falleth into the nets, for such is the state of the miserable, that while they run from one perill, they fall into another; according to the saying of holy Scripture, Isa. 24. He that scapeth out of the snare, shall fall into the ditch. And this is to be noted, that if the Hare had the wit to run forthright, and never to turn, she could not be so easily over-taken; but because of her love to the place of her breed, there she is taken and loseth her life where she had her beginning: for she preferreth that place above all other for safe∣ty. Again some of the elder Hares; assoon as they hear the Dogs, fly to the tops of the high Moun∣tains, for they more easily run up the hill, then down. 
 Wherefore the Hunter must studiously avoid that disadvantage, and keep her down in the vallies. In paths and high ways she runneth more speedily, wherefore they must be kept from that also. The Hares of the Mountains do oftentimes exercise themselves in the plain, and through practise grow acquainted with the neerest ways to their own lodging; so that if at any time the husbandmen set upon them in the fields, they dally with them till they seem to be almost taken, and then on a sudden take the neerest way to the Mountains, not suspected by the Hunters, and so take sanctuary in the unaccessible places, whither Dogs nor Horse dare ascend. For the Hares which we keep in the bushes are not able to endure labour, and not very swift (by reason of the pain in their feet) growing fat through idleness and discontinuance of running, they must be hunted on this sort: first of all they go through young woods and hedges, such as grow not very thick, for the thicker hedges they leap over, but when they come to many thick places that they must leap over, they quickly fall down and are tired. 
 The Dogs first of all go from them carelessly, because they cannot see them through the trees, but suffer them to run in the Woods following a far off by the scent, untill at last they get the sight of her, and through their better exercise and skill, easily overtake her: but the campestrial or Field-hare being leaner of body, and oftner chased, is taken with more difficulty, by reason of her singular agility, she therefore when she begins her course, leapeth up from the ground as if she flew; afterward passeth through brambles and thick bushes with all expedition; and if at any time she come into deep grass or corn she easily delivereth her self and slideth through it. And as it is said of the Lyons, that with their tails they stir up their strength and courage; so are the ears of this Beast like Angels wings, Ships sails, and rowing Oars, to help her in her flight; for when she runneth she bendeth them backward, and useth them in stead of sharp spurs to prick forward her dulness, and in her course she taketh not one way, but maketh heads like labyrinths to circumvent and trouble the Dogs, that so she may go whither she will, always holding up one ear, and bending it at her pleasure to be the moderator of her chase. Neither is she so unprovident or prodigal of her strength, as to spend it all in one course, but observeth the force of her prosecutor, who if he be slow and sluggish, she is not profuse of her celerity, but only walketh gently before the Dogs, and yet safely from their clutches, reserving her greatest strength to her greatest necessity; for she knoweth that she can out-run the Dogs when she pleaseth, and therefore it is a vain conceit to trouble her self more then she is urged. But if there be a Dog following her more swiftly then the residue, then she setteth forward with all the force she can, and when she hath left both Hunters and Dogs a great way behinde her, she getteth to some little hill or rising of the earth, there she raiseth her self upon her hinder legs, like a Watch-man in his Tower, observing how far or near the enemy approacheth, and perceiving that she is delivered from persuit of all danger, seemeth to deride the imbecillity of their forces. 
 The younger Hares by reason of their weak members, tread heavier upon the earth then the elder, and therefore leave the greater savour behinde them: and in ancient time, if the Hunters had taken a young Leverit, they let her go again in the honour of Diana. At a year old they run very swift, and their savour is stronger in the Woods then in the plain fields. 
 The Hare is followed by the foot and so descryed, especially in soft grounds or high-ways, but if they go to the Rocks, to the Mountains, or to the hollow places, they are more un∣certain, if they ly down upon the earth (as they love to do) in red fallow grounds they are ea∣sily descryed. 
 When they are started in the plain fields they run far, but in the Woods they make short courses: If they hear the Dogs, they raise themselves on their legs and run from them; but if fearful imagi∣nation oppress them, as they oftentimes are very sad and melancholy, supposing to hear the noise of Dogs where there are none such stirring, then do they run to and fro, fearing and trembling, as if they were fallen mad. 
 Their footsteps in the Winter time are more apparent then in the Summer, because as the nights be longer, so they travel farther: neither do they smell in the Winter mornings so soon as it is day, untill the frost and ice be thawed, but especially their footsteps are uncertain in the full Moon, for then they leap and play together, scattering and putting out the savour; nor in the Spring time also when they do ingender, they confound one anothers footsteps by multitude. 
 They which will go forth to hunt or take pleasure in that pastime, must rise early, lest they be deprived of the smell of her footsteps, so shall not the Dogs be able any way to finde the Hare, nor the Hunters their game and pastime: for the nature of the footstep remaineth not long, but sud∣denly in a manner vanisheth away every hour. Again, they must set the Hils and Rocks, the Rivers, and also the Brooks with nets and gins, thereby as it were stopping up the starting holes, paths, and ways, wherein the Hare for the most part trusteth, whether they be broad or narrow: The best time for the effecting and bringing hereof is after the Sun-rising, and not in twylight or break of the day, lest the nets be set neer the Hares form, and she be scared away, but if they be set a far off, there is no danger of her departure after the Sun is up, because then she giveth her self to sleep: the nets must be set on this manner, let the rodes be pitched up∣right, fastning their snares to the tops, raising the net in the middle, and hang a long stone at one side, that when the Hare is in the net she may not go out again. When the Hare is raised, he which followeth her to the nets, must drive her in with a great cry, and being in the net, he must gently restrain the Dogs, and make signification to the hunter that she is taken, or else if it fail, let him shew the contrary.
As for his food, let it be sodden Barly, and now and then a little Rie in the sheaf to clense and purge him, chiefly if he be dry inwardly and grow costive. This I have proved uneffectless for this disease, and also much availeable for any other inward sickness proceeding either of raw digestion, too extream riding, or other surfet. Divers have written diversly of divers Agues, and I could pre∣scribe receipts for them, but since I have not been experimented in them all, I mean to omit them, intending not to exceed mine own knowledge in any thing. 
 Of the Pestilence. THe Pestilence is a contagious disease, proceeding, as Pelaganius saith, sometime of overmuch Blundevile. labour, heat, cold, hunger, and sometime of sudden running after long rest, or of the reten∣tion or holding of stale or urine; or of drinking cold water whiles the Horse is hot and sweating; for all these things do breed corrupt humors in the Horses body, whereof the Pestilence doth chiefly proceed, or else of the corruption of the air, poisoning the breath whereby the Beasts should live, which also happeneth sometime of the corruption of evill vapors and exhalations that spring out of the earth, and after great floods or earthquakes, and sometime by means of some evill distillation or influence of the Planets, corrupting sometime the plants and fruits of the earth▪ and sometime divers kind of Cattle, and sometime both Men, Women and Children, as we dayly see by experience. It seemeth that this evill or mischief in times past came suddenly, without giving any warning, for none of mine Authors doth declare any signes how to know whether a Horse hath this disease or not, but only affirm, that if one Horse do die of it, all his fellows that bear him com∣pany will follow after, if they be not remedied in time: so that as far as I can learn, the sudden death of one or two first, must be the only mean to know that this disease doth reign. And the remedy that they give is this; First separate the whole from the sick; yea, and have them out of the air of those that be dead, the bodies whereof, as Vegetius saith, if they be not buryed, will infect all the rest. And let them bloud as well in the neck, as in the mouth▪ and then give them this drink, Take of Gentian, of Aristoloch, of Bay es▪ of of the scraping of Ivory, of each like quantity, beat them into fine powder, and give as to the sick as to the whole, whom you would preserve from this co tagion, every day a spoonful two of this powder in a pinte of good Wine, so long as you shall see it needful. This before rehearsed, is called of the ancient writers Diapente, that is to say, a composition simples, and is praised to be a soveraign medicine and preservative against all inward diseases, and therefore they would have such as travell by the way, to carry of this powder alwayes them. 
 There be many other medicines which I leave to write, because if I should rehearse every medicine, my book would be infinite; I for my part would use no other then that before expressed, or else Wine and Treacle only. 
 Of the Diseases in the Head. THe head is subject to divers diseases according to the divers parts thereof: for in the panicles or little fine skins cleaving to the bones, and covering the brain, do most properly breed head-ach Blundevile. and Migram. Again, in the substance of the brain, (which in a Horse is as much in quantity as is almost the brain of a mean Hog) do breed the Frensie, madness, sleeping evill, the Palsie and forget∣fulness. Finally, in the ventricles or cels of the brain, and in those conducts through which the spirits animal do give feeling and moving to the body, do breed the Turnsick or staggers, the Falling-evill, the Night-mare, the Apoplexy, the Palsie, and the Convulsion or Cramp, the Catar or Rhume, which in a Horse is called the Glaunders: but first of Head-ach. 
 Of Head-ach. THe Head-ach either cometh of some inward causes: as of some cholerick humor, bred in the the panicles of the brain, or else of some outward cause, as of extream heat or cold, of some blow, or of some violent savour. Eumelus saith, that it cometh of raw digestion: but Martin saith most commonly of cold: the signes be these; the Horse will hang down his head, and also hang down his ears; his sight will be dim, his eyes swollen and waterish; and he will forsake his meat The cure. Let him bloud in the palat of his mouth: also purge his head with this perfume; Take of Gar∣like stalks a handful, all to broken in short pieces, and a good quantity of Frankincense, and being put into a chafing-dish of fresh coals, hold the chafing-dish under the Horses nostrils, so as the fume may ascend up into his head: and in using him thus once or twice, it will make him to cast at the nose, and so purge his head of all filth. Pelagonius saith, that it is good to pour into his nostrils Wine, wherein hath been sodden Euforbium, Centaury, and Frankincense. 
 Of the Frenzy and Madness of a Horse. THe learned Physitians do make divers kindes, as well of Frensie, as of Madness, which are not needful to be recited, sith I could never read in any Author, nor learn of any Farriar, that a Horse were subject to the one half of them. Absyrtus, Hierocles, Eumelus, Pelagonius, and Hippocrates, do write simply de furore &amp; rabie: that is to say, of the madness of a Horse. But indeed, Vegetius in his se∣cond Book of Horse-leach-craft, seemeth to make four mad passions belonging to a Horse, intitu∣ling his Chapters in this sort, de Appioso, de Frenetico, de Cardiacis, de Rabioso, the effects thereof, though I fear me it will be to no great purpose, yet to content such as perhaps have read the Author as well as I my self, I will here briefly rehearse the same. 
 When some naughty bloud (saith he) doth strike the film or pannicle of the brain, in one part only, and maketh the same grievously to ake, then the beast becometh Appiosum; that is to say, as it seemeth by his own words next following, both dull of minde and of sight. This word Appiosum is a strange word, and not to be found again in any other Author, and because in this passion, the one side of the head is only grieved, the Horse turneth round, as though he went in a Mill. But when the poyson of such corrupt bloud doth infect the mid brain, then the Horse becometh Frantick, and will leap and fling, and will run against the wals. And if such bloud filleth the veins of the stomach, or breast, then it infecteth as well the heart as the brain, and causeth alienation of minde, and the body to sweat, and this disease is called of Vegetius, Passocardiaca, which if Equus Appiosus chance to have, then he becometh Rabiosus, that is to say, stark-mad. For saith he, by overmuch heat of the liver and bloud, the veins, and arteries of the heart are choaked up, for grief and pain whereof the Horse biteth himself, and gnaweth his own flesh. 
 Of two sorts of mad Horses, I believe I have seen my self here in this Realm. For I saw once a black Sweatbland Horse (as I took him to be) in my Lord of Hunsdons stable at Hunsdon, coming thi∣ther by chance with my Lord Morley, which Horse would stand all day long biting of the manger, and eat little meat or none, suffering no man to approach unto him, by which his doings, and partly by his colour and complexion, I judged him to be vexed with a melancholy madness called of the Phy∣sitians Mania, or rather Melancholia, which cometh of a corrupt Melancholy, and filthy bloud or humor, sometime spread throughout all the veins of the body, and sometimes perhaps remaining only in the head, or else in the spleen, or places next adjoyning. The other mad Horse was a Roan of Master Ashlies, Master of the Jewel house, which with his teeth crushed his Masters right fore-finger in pieces, whilest he offered him a little Hay to eat, whereby he lost in a manner the use of his whole hand, to the great grief of all his friends, and also of all the Muses, which were wont to be much delighted with such passing sweet musick as that his fine quavering hand could sometime make upon divers Instruments, but especially upon the Virginals. 
 This Horse I say, though he could eat his meat, drink his drink, and sleep: yet if he were never so little offended, he would take on like a spirit, and both bite and strike at any man that came nigh him: yea and would bite himself by the shoulders most terribly, pulling away lumps of flesh, so broad as a mans hand: and whensoever he was ridden, he was fain to be musled with a muslel of iron, made of purpose to keep him from biting either of his Rider or of himself, which no doubt pro∣ceeded of some kinde of frenzy or madness, whereunto the Horse was subject; by means that hot bloud (as I take it) abounded over-much in him. But now as touching the causes, signes, and cure of Horses madness, you shall hear the opinion of old Writers: for Martin never took such cure in hand. Absyrtus and the other Authors before mentioned, say, that the madness of a Horse cometh ei∣ther by means of some extream heat taken by travelling, or long standing in the hot Sun, or else by eating over many fitches, or by some hot bloud resorting to the panicles of the brain; or through abundance of choler remaining in the veins; or else by drinking of some very unwholesome water. The signes be these, he will bite the manger and his own body, and run upon every man that comes nigh him, he will continually shake his ears, and stare with his eyes, and some at the mouth: and al∣so, as Hippocrates saith, he will forsake his meat, and pine himself with hunger. 
 The cure, Cause him to be let bloud in his legs abundantly, which is done (as I take it) to divert the bloud from his head. Notwithstanding it were not amiss, to let him bloud in the neck and brest veins. Then give him this drink: take the roots of wilde Cowcumber, and boil it in harsh red Wine, and put thereunto a little Nitre, and give it him with a horn luke-warm: or if you can get no Cowcumber, then take Rue, and Mints, and boil them in the Wine: it were not amiss also to add there∣unto a handful of black Elleborus, for that is a very good herb against madness. Eumelius saith, that if you give him mans dung in Wine, to drink three mornings together, it will heal him: also to take of black Elleborus two or three handfuls, and boil it in a sufficient quantity of strong Vinegar, and therewith rub and chafe both his head, and all his body once or twice a day; for the oftner his head is rubbed, the better, and often exercise is very profitable to all his body. Some again would have the skin of his body to be pierced in divers places with an hot iron, to let out the evill humors: but if none of all this will prevail, then the last remedy is to geld him of both his stones, or else of one at the least; for either that will heal him, or else nothing. As touching the diet and usage of a mad Horse, the Authors do not agree; for some would have him kept in a close, dark and quiet house, void from all noise, which as Absyrtus saith, will either make him madder, or else kill him out of hand. His diet would be thin, that is to say, without any provender, and that day that he is let bloud, and receiveth his drink, they would have him fast untill even, and then to have a warm mash of Barley meal: yea, me thinks it were not amiss to feed him only with warm mashes and hay; and that by a little at once, untill he be somewhat recovered. 
 Another of the Head-ach. THe Head-ach, as most are opinionated, proceedeth of cold and raw digestion: the cure is; Take Markham. a Goose feather anointed with Oyl-de-bay, and thrust it up into the Horses nostrils, to make him neese; then take a wreath of Pease-straw or wet hay, and putting fire thereunto, hold it un∣der the Horses nose, so as the smoke may ascend up into his head; then being thus perfumed, take a knife and prick him in the palat of the mouth, so that he may lick up and chaw his own bloud, which done, have great care in keeping his head warm, and doubt not his recovery. 
 Of the Sleeping-evil. THis is a disease forcing the Beast continually to sleep, whether he will or not, taking his memory and appetite clean away, and therefore is called of the Physitians Lethargus, it proceedeth of Blundevile. abundance of flegm moistning the brain overmuch. It is easie to know it, by the continual sleeping of the Horse. The cure of this disease according to Pelagonius, Vegetius, and others, is in this sort: Let him bloud in the neck, and then give him this drink: Take of Camomile and Mother-wort, of each two or three handfuls, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, and put thereunto a lit∣tle Wheat-bran, Salt and Vinegar, and let him drink a pinte of that every day, the space of three or four days together. It is good also to perfume and chafe his head, with Thyme and Pennyroyal sodden together in Vinegar, or with Brimstone and feathers burned upon a chafingdish of coals under his nose: and to provoke him to neese, by blowing Pepper and Pyrethre beaten to powder, up into his nostrils: yea and to anoint the palate of his mouth, with Honey and Mustard mingled together, and in his drink, which would be always warm water, to put Parsley seed, and Fennel seed, to provoke urine. His legs also would be bathed, and his hoofs filled with Wheat-bran, Salt, and Vinegar, sod∣den together, and laid to so hot as he may endure it, and in any case suffer him not to sleep, but keep him waking and stirring, by continual crying unto him, or pricking him with some sharp thing that cannot pass through the skin, or else by beating him with a whip, and this doing he shall recover. 
 Another of the Sleeping-evill. THe Sleeping-evill in a Horse, differeth nothing from that which the Physitians call the Lethargy Markham. in men, for it provoketh the Horse to sleep continually, without desisting, robbing his memo∣ry and appetite of their qualities: the knowledge thereof is easily known by his drowsiness, and the cure in this sort: Let one stand by him, and either with fearful noise or stripes, perforce keep him waking; then let him bloud under the eyes, and in the neck, and then take a leaf or two of the best Tobacco, which being dryed and beaten to powder, with a quill blow it up into his nostrils, and give him to drink Vinegar, Salt, and Mustard mingled well together, to which if you put a little Honey, it shall not be amiss; and also when he drinketh any water, put thereto either Fennel-seeds, Aniseeds or Pepper. 
 Of a Horse that is taken. A Horse is said to be taken, when he is deprived of his feeling and moving, so as he is able to stir no manner of way, but remaineth in such state and form, as he was taken in; which disease is Blundevile. called of the Physitians by the Greek name Catalepsis, and in Latine, Deprehensio, or Congelatio; and of Vegetius, Sideratio; which also calleth those Beasts that have this disease Jumenta sideratitia. The Physitians say, that it cometh of abundance of phlegm and choler mixt together, or else of melan∣choly bloud, which is a cold dry humor oppressing the hinder parts of the brain. But Vegetius saith, that it comes of some extream outward cold, striking suddenly into the empty veins, or some ex∣tream heat or raw digestion; or else of some great hunger, caused by long fasting. It is easie to know by the description before mentioned. 
 As touching the cure, Vegetius saith, that if it come of cold, then it is good to give him to drink one ounce of Laserpitium, with Wine and Oyl mixt together, and made luke-warm: if of heat, then to give it him with Water and Honey: if of crudity, then to heal him by fasting: if of hunger, then by feeding him well with Pease▪ But Martin saith, that this disease is called of the French men Surprins, and it cometh (as he saith) most chiefly of cold taken after heat, and he wisheth a Horse that is thus taken, to be cured in this sort. First to be let bloud on both sides of the breast, and then to be put in a heat either by continual stirring and molesting him; or else if he will stir by no means, then to bury him all save the head in a warm dunghill, and there to let him ly untill his limbs have some feeling. And before you so bury him, it shall be good to give him this drink: Take of Malmsie three pintes, and put thereunto a quartern of Sugar, and some Cinamon and Cloves, and let him drink it good and warm, and untill he be perfectly whole, let him be kept warm, and often exercised and walked up and down in the stable, and thinly dieted, and drink nothing but warm water, wherein if you put some Fennel and Parsley seed, to provoke him to urine, it shall be the better. And if he cannot dung, let him be raked, and have a Glyster made of the broth of Mal∣lows and fresh Butter. 
 Another of a Horse that is taken. A Horse which is bereft of his feeling, moving or stirring, is said to be taken, and in sooth so he is, in that he is arrested by so villainous a disease; yet some Farryers, not well understanding Markham. the ground of the disease, conster the word taken, to be stricken by some Planet, or evill spirit, which is false; for it proceedeth of too great abundance of phlegm and choler, symbolized together: the cure is thus; Let him bloud in his spur veins, and his breast veins, and then by foulding him in abun∣dant number of cloaths, drive him into an extream sweat, during which time of his sweating, let one chafe his legs with Oyl-de-bay; then after he hath sweat the space of two hours, abate his clothes moderately; and throughly after he is dry, anoint him all over with Oyl Petrolium, and in twice or thrice dressing him he will be found. 
 Of the Staggers. THis is a dizziness of the head, called in Latine, Vertigo; and of the Italians, as I remember, Capi∣stura. It cometh of some corrupt bloud, or gross and tough humors oppressing the brain, from Blundevile. whence proceedeth a vaporous spirit, dissolved by a weak heat, which troubleth all the head. The signes be these; dimness of sight, the reeling and staggering of the Horse, who for very pain will thrust his head against the walls, and forsake his meat. The cure according to Martin is thus: 
 Let him bloud in the temple veins, and then with a knife make an hole an inch long over-thwart his fore-head, hard underneath his fore-top, and raise the skin with a Cornet, thrusting it upward towards the head-stale a good handful, and then put in a tent dipt in Turpentine and Hogs grease molten together, renewing the tent every day once untill it be whole, and do the like upon the ridge of the rump; but me thinks it were better to do the like, in the powl of his head, or nape of his neck, for so should the evill humors have both ways the easier and speedier passage: and as touching his diet, let him have continually warm drink, and mashes; and once a day be walked up and down fair and softly to exercise his body. 
 Of the Staggers. THe Staggers is a dizy disease, breeding frenzy in a Horse, which if it be not instantly helped, is mortal: the cure is thus; Let him bloud in the temple veins, and then apply to his temples Markham. cloth wet in the juyce of Garlike, and Aqua vitae mixt together: if you crush Garlike, and put it in his ears, it is excellent; or if you slit his fore-head, and loosening the skin from the bone, taint is with Turpentine and Sallet-oyl, it will undoubtedly help him. 
 Of the Failing-evil. THis is a kinde of Convulsion or Cramp, called of the Latines by the Greek name Epilepsia; in Ita∣lian, Blundevile. Il morbo caduco, depriving the Beast at certain times, and for a certain space of the use of feeling, hearing, and seeing, and of all the other senses. And although it be a disease hath been seldom seen to chance unto Horses of this Countrey, yet it appeareth by Absyrtus, and also by Vege∣tius, and divers others, that Horses he subject thereunto. For Absyrtus writing to his friend Tibe∣rius Claudius saith, that unto Horses chanceth many times the Falling-sickness. The signs whereof are these; The Horse will fall down suddenly, partly through the resolution of his members, and part∣ly through distension of his sinews, and all his body will quiver and quake, and sometime he will some at the mouth. Vegetius again writeth in this sort; By a certain course of the Moon Horses and other beasts many times do fall, and dy for a time as well as men. The signes whereof are these: Being fallen, their bodies will quiver and quake, and their mouths will some, and when a man would think that they would dy out of hand, they rise suddenly up and fall to their meat. And by feeling the gristle of their nostrils with your finger, you shall know whether they will fall often or not; for the more cold the gristle be, the oftner, and the less cold it be, the seldomer they will fall. The cure:
Take as much of the middle bark of an Elder tree, growing on the water side, as will fill a new earthen pot of a mean size, putting thereunto as much clear water as a pot will hold, and let it boyl until one half be consumed, and then to be filled up again with fresh water, continuing so to do three times one after another, and at the last time that the one half is consumed, take it from the fire, and strain it through a linnen cloth. Then take two parts of that decoction, and one part of Hogs grease, or Butter, and being warmed again together, give the Horse to drink thereof one hornful, and powre another hornful into his Nostril that casteth; and whensoever you give him this medicine, let the Horse be empty and fasting, and keep him without meat also two or three hours after, for this is a very good drink for any sickness that cometh of cold. Moreover, open the skin of his forehead, and of his temples, and also of his tail with a sharp hot iron, that the cor∣rupt humors may issue outward. That done, take hot brickes, or else a pan of fresh burning coles, and hold it nigh unto his belly and flanks, to the intent that they may be throughly warmed, and being so warmed, anoint them all over with Oyl-de-bay, or Dialthea, to defend his body from the cold, and let his head be well covered, and all his belly kept warm. Yea, and it were good to bathe his head sometime, as Russius saith, with a bath made of Rew, Wormwood, Sage, Ju iper, Bay leaves, and Hysop. And let his drink be warm water mingled with Wheat meal; yea, and to make it the more comfortable, it were good, as Russius saith, to put thereunto some Cinamon, Ginger, Galingale, and such hot pieces. And his meat in Winter season would be no other but sodden Corn, or warm Mashes, made of ground Malt and Wheat bran: in Summer season, if he went to grasse, I think it would do him most good, so that he go in a dry warm ground, for by feeding alwayes downward, he shall purge his head the better, as Russius saith. Thus much of the Glanders, and mourning of the Chine. Now we will speak somewhat of the Strangul∣lion, according to the opinion of the Authors, though not to the satisfaction perhaps of our English Farriars. 
 Of the Strangullion or Squinancy. THe Strangullion, called of the Latines, Anginae, according to the Physitians, is an inflama∣tion of the inward parts of the throat, and as I said before, is called of the Greeks, Cynanche, which is as much to say in English as Strangling, whereof this name Strangullion as I think is deri∣ved, for this disease doth strangle every Man or Beast, and therefore is numbred amongst the perillous and sharp diseases, called of the Latines, Morbi acuti; of which strangling, the Physi∣ ians in Mans body make four differences; The first and worst is, when no part within the mouth nor without, appeareth manifestly to be inflamed, and yet the patient is in great peril of strangling. The second is, when the inward parts of the throat only be inflamed. The third is, when the inward and outward parts of the throat be both inflamed. The fourth is, when the muscles of the neck are inflamed, or the inward joynts thereof so loosened, as they straiten thereby both the throat, or wesand, or wind-pipe; for short breath is incident to all the four kinds before recited, and they proceed all of one cause; that is to say, of some cholerick or bloudy fluxion, which comes out of the branches of the throat veins into those parts, and there breedeth some hot inflamation. But now to prove that a Horse is subject to this disease, you shall hear what Absyrtus, Hierocles. Vegetius, and others do say, Absyrtus writing to his friend a certain Farriar or Horse-leach, called A storicus, speaketh in this manner, When a Horse hath the Strangullion it quickly killeth him; the signes whereof be these; His temples will be hollow, his tongue will swell and hang out of his mouth, his eyes also will be swollen, and the passage of his throat stopt so as he can neither eat nor drink. All these signes be also confirmed by Hi rocles. 
 Moreover, Vegetius rendereth the cause of this disease, affirming that it proceedeth of aboundance of subtle bloud, which after long travel will inflame the inward or outward muscles of the throat or wesand, or such affluence of bloud may come, by use of hot meate after great travel, being so altera∣tive as they cause those parts to swell in such sort, as the Horse can neither eat nor drink nor draw his breath. The cure, according to Vege ius, is in this sort: First bathe his mouth and tongue in hot water, and then anoint it with the gall of a Bull; that done, give him this drink, Take of old Oyl two pound, of old Wine a quart, nine Figs, and nine Leeks heads well stamped and brayed together. And after you have boiled these a while before you strain them, put thereunto a little Nitrum Alexandrinum, and give him a quart of this every morning and evening. Absyrtus and Hierocles would have you to let him bloud in the palace of his mouth, and also to powre. Wine and Oyl into his Nostrils, and also give him to drink this decoction of Figs and Nitrum sodden together, or else to anoint his throat within with Nitre, Oil, and Hony, or else with Hony and Hogs dung mingled together, which differeth not much from Galên his medicine, to be given unto man. For he saith, that Hony mingled with the powder of Hogs dung that is white, and swallowed down, doth remedy the Squinancy pre∣sently. Absyrtus also praiseth the ointment made of Bdellium, and when the inflamation beginneth somewhat to decrease, he saith it is good to purge the Horse, by giving him wilde Cucumber and Nitre to drink. Let his meat be grasse if it may be gotten, or else wet hay, and sprinkled with Nitre. Let his drink also be lukewarm water, with some Barley meal in it. 
 Of the Cough. OF Coughs, some be outward, and some be inward. Those be outward which do come of out∣ward causes, as by eating a feather, or by eating dusty or sharp straw, and such like things: which tickling his throat, causeth him to cough: you shall perceive it by wagging and wrying his head in his coughing, and by stamping sometime with his foot, labouring to get out the thing that grieveth him, and cannot. The cure, according to Martin, is thus: Take a Willow wand, rolled throughout with a fine linnen clout, and then anoint it all over with Hony, and thrust it down his throat, drawing your hand to and fro, to the intent it may either drive down the thing that grieveth him, or else bring it up, and do this twice or thrice, anointing every time the stick with fresh Hony. 
 Of the inward and wet Cough. OF inward Coughs, some be wet, and some be dry. The wet Cough is that cometh of cold, taken after some great heat given to the Horse, dissolving humors, which being afterward congea∣led, do cause obstruction and stopping in the Lungs. And I call it the wet Cough, because the Horse in his coughing will void moist matter at his mouth after that it is once broken. The signes be these; The Horse will be heavie, and his eyes will run with water, and he will forsake his meat; and when he cougheth, he thrusteth out his head, and reacheth with great pain at the first, as though he had a dry Cough, untill the fleam be broken, and then he will cough more hollow, which is a signe of amendment. And therefore, according to Martins experience, to the intent the fleam may break the sooner, it shall be necessary to keep him warm, by clothing him with a double cloth, and by littering him up to the belly with fresh straw, and then to give him this drink; Take of Barley one peck, and boyl it in two or three gallons of fair water, untill the Barley begin to burst, and boyl therewith of bruised Licoras, of Anise seeds or Raisins, of each one pound, then strain it, and to that liquor put of Hony a pinte, and a quartern of Sugarcandy, and keep it close in a pot to serve the Horse therewith four several mornings, and cast not away the sodden Barley with the rest of the strainings, but make it hot every day to perfume the Horse withal, being put in a bag and ied to his head, and if the Horse will eat of it, it shall do him the more good. And this perfuming in Winter season would be used about ten of the clock in the morning, when the Sun is of some height, to the intent the Horse may be walked abroad, if the Sun shine, to exercise him moderately. And untill his Cough wear away, fail not to give him warm water, with a little ground Mault. And as his Cough breaketh more and more, so let his every day be lesse warmed then other. 
 Of the dry Cough. THis seemeth to come of some grosse and tough humor cleaving hard to the hollow places of the Lungs which stoppeth the winde-pipes, so as the Horse cannot easily draw his breath, and if it continue, it will either grow to the Pursick, or else break his winde altogether. The signs be these; He will cough both often, drily, and also vehemently, without voiding at the nose or mouth. The cure, according to Martin, is in this sort; Take a close earthen pot, and put therein three pintes of strong Vinegar, and four Eggs, shels and all unbroken, and four Garlick heads clean pilled and bruised, and set the pot being very close covered in some warm dunghil, and there let it stand a whole night; and the next morning with your hand take out the Egges, which will be so soft as silk, and lay them by untill you have strained the Garlick and Vinegar through a fair cloth, then put to that liquor a quartern of Hony, and half a quartern of Sugarcandy, and two ounces of Licoras, and two ounces of Anise seeds, beaten all into fine powder And then the Horse having fasted all the night before, in the morning betwixt seven and eight of the clock, open his mouth with a cord, and whorle therein one of the Egges, so as he may swallow it down, and then immediately powre in after a hornefull of the aforesaid drink, being first made lukewarm, and cast in another Egge with another hornful of drink, and so continue to do, untill he hath swallowed up all the Egges, and drunk up all the drink; and then bridle him, and cover him with warmer clothes then he had before, and bring him into the stable, and there let him stand on the bit, at the bate rack, well littered up to the belly, the space of two hours. Then unbit him, and if it be in Winter, offer him Blundevile. a handfull of Wheaten straw; if in Summer, give him grasse, and let him eat no hay unless it be very well dusted and sprinkled with water, and give him not much thereof. And therefore you shall need to give him the more provender, which also must be well cleansed of all filth and dust, and give him no water the space of nine dayes. And if you perceive that the Cough doth not wear away, then if it be in Winter, purge him with these pils; Take of Lard two pound laid in water two hours, then take nothing but the clean fat thereof, and stamp it in a morter, and thereto put of Licoras, of Anise seeds, of Fenegreek, of each beaten into powder three ounces, of Aloes in powder two ounces, of Agarick one ounce: Knead these together like paste, and make thereof six bals as big as an Egge. Then the Horse having fasted over night, give him the next morning these pils one after another, anointed with Hony and Oyl mingled together in a platter; and to the intent he may swallow them down whether he will or not, when you have opened his mouth, catch hold of his tongue, and hold it fast while you whirle in one of the pils▪ that done▪ thrust it into his throat with rolling∣pin, and then let his tongue go untill he hath swallowed it down; then give him all the rest of the pils, and let him stand on the bit warm clothed and littered, the space of three hours at the least, and after that give him a little wet hay, and warm water with a little ground mault in it to drink, and let him drink other but warm water the space of a week▪ And now and then in a fair sunny day, it shall be good to trot him one hour abroad to breath him. 
 Of the Fretized, broken and rotten Lungs. THis proceedeth, as Absyrtus and Theomnestus saith, either of an extreme Cough, or of vehement running, or leaping, or of over greedy drinking after great thirst, for the Lungs be inclosed in a very thin film or skin, and therefore easie to be broken, which if it be not cured in time, doth grow to Apostumation, and to corruption, oppressing all the Lungs, which of old Authors is called Vomic , and Suppuratio. But Theomnestus saith, that broken Lungs, and rotten Lungs, be two divers diseases, and have divers signes, and divers cures. The signes of broken Lungs be these; the Horse draweth his wind short, and by little at once, he will turn his head often toward the place grieved, and groaneth in his breathing, he is afraid to cough, and yet cougheth as though he had eaten small bones. The same Theomnestus healed a friends Horse of his, whose Lungs were st , or rather broken as he saith, by continual eating of Salt, with this manner of cure here following▪ Let the Horse have quiet and rest, and then let him bloud in the hanches, where the veins appear most: and give him to drink the space of seven dayes, Barley▪ or rather Oates sodden in Goats milk▪ o if you can get no milk, boil it in water, and put therein some thick collops of Lard and of , and let him drink that: and let his common drink in Winter season e the decoction of Wheat meal; and in the Summer time, the decoction of Barley▪ and this as he saith will bind his ngs again together. Vegetius utterly disalloweth letting of bloud in any such disease as this is and all manner of sharp medicines, for fear of provoking the Cough, by means whereof the broken places can never heal perfectly. And therefore neither his medicines nor meat would be harsh, but smooth, gentle and cooling. The best medicine that may be given him at all times is this; Take of F k, and of Linseed, of each half a pound, of Gum dragant, of Mastick, of Myrrhe, of Sugar, of Fitch flowre, of each one ounce. Let all these things be beaten into fine powder, and then o whole night in a sufficient quantity of warm water, and the next day give him a quart of this luke-warm, putting thereunto two or three ounces of Oyl of Roses, continuing so to do many dayes together, and if the disease be new, this will heal him; yea, and it will ease him very much, although the disease be old, which is thought uncurable. And in Winter season so long as he standeth in the stable, let him drink no cold water, and let his meat be clean without dust, but in Summer season it were best to let him run to grasse; for so long as he eateth grasse, a man shall scantly perceive this disease. Thus much of broken lungs. 
 Of putrified and rotten lungs. THe signes to know whether a Horses lungs be putrified or rotten, according to Theomnestus are these▪ The Horse will eat and drink greedilye then he was wont to do▪ he shall be oftner vexed with a Cough, and in coughing he will cast little lumps of matter out of his mouth. The cure whereof, according to Theomnestus, is thus; Give him to drink every morning, the space of seven dayes, the juyce of Purslain mingled with Oil of Roses, and add thereunto a little Tragagantum that hath been layed before in steep in Goats milk, or else in Barley or Oaten milk, strained out of the Corn. When the Apostume is broken, then a very strong vile and evill avour will come out of his Nostrils, for remedy whereof it shall be good to give him the space o seven dayes this drink here following; Take of the root called Costus two ounces, and of Gasia or else of Cinnamon three ounces into fine powder, and a few Raisins, and give it him to drink with wine. But Vegetius would have him to be cured in this sort, and with lesse cost I assure you; Take of Frankincense and Aristoloch, of each two ounces, beaten into fine powder, and give him that with wine; or else take of unburnt Brimstone two ounces, and of Aristoloch one ounce and a half beaten into powder, and give him that with wine. And he would have you also to draw his beast with a hot iron, to the intent the hu∣mors may issue forth outwardly. 
 Of shortness of breath. A Horse may have shortness of breath, by hasty running after drinking, or upon a full stomach, or by the descending of humors unto his throat or lungs after some extreme heat dissolving the said humors, which so long as there is nothing broken, may in the beginning be easily holpen. The signes be these; The Horse will continually pant, and fetch his breath short, which will come very hot out at his nose, and in his breathing he will quise in the nose, and his flanks will beat thick: yea and some cannot fetch their breath unlesse they hold their necks right out and straight, which disease is called of the old writers by the Greek name Orthopnoea. The cure; Let him bloud in the neck, and give him this drink; Take of Wine and Oil, of each a pinte, of Frankincense half an ounce, and of the juice of Horehound half a pinte. It is good also to powre into his throat Hony, Butter and Hogs grease moulten together, and made lukewarm▪ Tiberius saith, it is good to give him whole Egges, shels and all, steeped and made soft in Vinegar; that is to say; the first day three, the second day five, and the third day seven, and to powre Wine and oil into his nostrils. I for my part would take nothing but Annis seeds, Licoras and Sugarcandy, beaten all into fine powder, give him that to drink, with Wine and Oil mingled together. 
 Of the Pursick. THis is a shortness of breath, and the Horse that is so diseased is called of the Italians, Cavallo pulsivo, or Bolso, which I think is derived of the Latin word Vulsus, by changing V. into B. and I think differeth not much from him that hath broken lungs, called of Vegetius and other old writers Vulsus, for such shortness of breath comes either of the same causes, or else much like▪ as aboundance of grosse humors, cleaving hard to the hollow places of the Lungs, and stopping the windepipes. And the winde being kept in, doth resort downward, as Russius saith, into the Horses guts, and so causeth his flanks to beat continually without order; that is to say, more swiftly and higher up to the back, then the flanks of any Horse that is sound of winde. And if the disease be old, it is seldom or never cured; and though I finde many medicines, prescribed by divers Authors, few or none do content me, unless it be that of Vegetius, recited before in the Chapter of broken Lungs. And if that prevaileth not, then I think it were not amisse according to Russius to purge him with this drink here following; Take of Maiden hair, of Ireos, of A h, of Licoras, of Fenigreek, of Raisins, of each half an ounce, of Cardanum, of Pepper, of Bitter Almonds, of Baurach, of each two Blundevile. ounces, of Nettle seed, and of Aristoloch, of each three ounces, boil them all together in a sufficient quantity of water, and in that decoction dissolve half an ounce of Agarick, and two ounces of Co∣loquintida, together with two pound of Hony, and give him of this a pinte or a quart at divers times: and if it be too thick, make it thinner, by putting thereunto water wherein Licoras hath been sodden: and if need be, you may also draw both his flanks crosse-wise with a hot iron, to restrain the beating of them, and also slit his Nostrils, to give him more air. And if it be in Summer, turn him to grasse; if in Winter, let him be kept warm, and give him now and then a little sodden wh at. Russius would have it to be given him three dayes together, and also new sweet wine to drink, o lse other good wine mingled with Licoras water. 
 Of a Consumption. A Consumption is no other thing but an exulceration of the lungs, proceeding of some fretting or gnawing humor, descending out of the head into the lungs And I take it to be that disease which the old Writers are wont to call the dry Malady; which perhaps some would rather interpret to be the mourning of the chine▪ with whom I intend not to strive. But thus much I must needs say, that every Horse having the mourning of the Chine, doth continually cast at the nose, but in the dry Malady it is contrary. For all the Authors that write thereof affirm, that the Horse avoideth nothing at the nose. And the signes to know the dry Malady, according to their doctrine, be these: His flesh doth clean consume away, his belly is gaunt, and the skin thereof so hard stretched, or rather shrunk up, as if you strike on him with your hand it will sound like a Taber, and he will be hollow backt, and forsake his meat, and though he eateth i , (as Absyrtus saith) yet he doth not digest it, nor prospereth not withal, he would cough and cannot but hicking∣ly, as though he had eaten small bones. And this disease is judged of all the Authors to be in∣curable. Notwithstanding they say, that it is good to purge his head with such perfumes as have been shewed you before in the Chapter of the Glanders, and also to give him always Coleworts, chopt small with his provender. Some would have him to drink the warm bloud of sucking Pigs new slain; and some the juyce of Leeks, with Oyl and Wine mingled together. Others praise Wine and Frankincense; some, Oyl and Rue; some would have his body to be purged and set to grass. 
 Of the Consumption of the Flesh, and how to make a lean Horse fat. MArtin aith, that if a Horse take a great cold after a heat, it will cause his flesh to wast, and his skin to wax hard and dry, and to cleave fast to his sides, and he shall have no appetite unto his meat, and the fillets of his back will fall away, and all the flesh of his buttocks, and of his shoul∣ders will be consumed. The cure whereof is thus: Take two Sheeps heads unflead, boyl them in three gallons of Ale, or fair running water, until the flesh be consumed from the bones, that done, strain it through a fine cloth, and then put thereunto of Sugar one pound, of Cinamon two ounces, of Conserve of Roses, of Barberries, of Cherries, of each two ounces; and mingle them together, and give the Horse every day in the morning a quart thereof luke warm, untill all be spent: and after every time he drinketh, let him be walked up and down in the stable, or else abroad if the weather be warm, and not windy, and let him neither eat nor drink in two hours after, and let him drink no cold water, but luke-warm, the space of fifteen days, and let him be fed by little and little, with such meat as the Horse hath most appetite unto. But if the Horse he nesh and tender, and so wax lean without any apparent grief or disease, then the old Writers would have him to be fed now and then with parched Wheat, and also to drink Wine with his water, and eat continually Wheat-bran mingled with his provender, untill he wax strong; and he must be often dressed and trimmed, and ly soft, without the which things his meat will do him but little good. And his meat must be fine and clean, and given often and by little at once. Russius saith, that if a Horse eating his meat with good appetite, doth not for all that prosper, but is still lean: then it is good to give him Sage, Savin, Bay-berries, Earth-nuts, and Boares-grease, to drink with Wine: or to give him the intrails of a Barbel or Tench, with white Wine. He saith also that sodden Beans mingled with Bran and Salt, will make a lean Horse fat in very short space. 
 Of grief in the Breast. LAurentius Russius writeth of a disease called in Italian, Gravezza di petto, which hath not been in experience amongst our Farriers, that I can learn. It comes, as Russius saith, of the super∣fluity Blundevile. of bloud, or other humors dissolved by some extream heat, and resorting down the breast, paining the Horse, so as he cannot well go. The cure whereof according to Russius is thus: Let him bloud on both sides of the breast in the accustomed veins, and rowel him under the breast, and twice a day turn the rowels with your hand, to move the humors that they may issue forth, and let him go so roweled the space of fifteen days. 
 Of the pain in the Heart called Anticor, that is to say, contrary to the Heart. THis proceedeth of abundance of ranck bloud bred with good feeding and over much rest: which bloud resorting to the inward parts doth suffocate the heart, and many times causeth swellings to appear before the brest, which will grow upward to the neck, and then it kil∣leth the Horse. The signes: The Horse will hang down his head in the manger, for saking his meat, and is not able to lift up his head. The cure according to Martin is thus: Let him bloud on both sides abundantly in the plat veins, and then give him this drink: Take a quart of Malm∣sie, and put thereunto half a quartern of Sugar, and two ounces of Cinamon, and give it him luke-warm, then keep him warm in the stable, stuffing him well about the stomach, that the wind offend him no manner of way; and give him warm water with mault always to drink, and give him such meat as he will eat. And if the swelling do appear, then besides letting him bloud, strike the swelling in divers places with your fleam, that the corruption may go forth: and anoint the place with warm Hogs grease, and that will either make it to wear away, or else to grow to a head, if it be covered and kept warm. 
 Of tired Horses. BEcause we are in hand here with the vital parts, and that when the Horses be tired with over-much labour, their vital spirits wax feeble, I think it best to speak of them even here, not with long discoursing, as Vegetius useth; but briefly to shew you how to refresh the poor Horse, having need thereof, which is done chiefly by giving him rest, warmth and good feeding as with warm mashes and plenty of provender. And to quicken his spirits, it shall be g od to pour a little Oyl and Vinegar into his nostrils, and to give him the drink of Sheeps heads recited before in the Chapter of Consumption of the flesh; yea, and also to bath his legs with this bath: Take of Mallows, of Sage, of each two or three handfuls, and of a Rose-cake; boil these things together, and being boyled, then put unto it a good quantity of Butter, or of Sallet-oyl. Or else make him this charge: Take of Bole Armony, and of Wheat-flowre, of each half a pound, and a little Rozen beaten into powder, and a quart of strong Vinegar, and mingle them together, and cover all his legs there∣with; and if it be Summer turn him to grass. 
 Of the diseased parts under the Midriff, and first of the Stomach. THe old Authors make mention of many di eases incident to a Horses stomach, as loathing of meat, spewing up his drink, surfeting of provender, the hungry evil, and such like, which few of our Farriers have observed: and therefore I will briefly speak of as many as I think necessary Blundevile. to be known; and first of the loathing of meat. 
 Of the loathing of Meat. A Horse may loath his meat through the intemperature of his stomach, as for that it is too hot or too cold. If his stomach be too hot, then most commonly it will either inflame his mouth and make it to break out in blisters, yea and perhaps cause some Cancker to breed there. The cure of all which things hath been taught before. But if he forsake his meat only for very heat, which you shall perceive by the hotness of his breath and mouth, then cool his stomach by giving him cold water, mingled with a little Vinegar and Oyl to drink, or else give him this drink: Take of Milk, and of Wine, of each one pinte, and put thereunto three ounces of Mel Rosatum, and wash all his mouth with Vinegar and Salt. If his stomach be too cold, then his hair will stare and stand right up, which Absyrtus and others were wont to cure, by giving the Horse good Wine and Oyl to drink, and some would seethe in Wine Rew, or Sage; some would adde thereunto white Pepper and Myrrhe; some would give him Onyons and Rocket-seed to drink with Wine: Again, there be other some which pre∣scribe the bloud of a young Sow with old Wine. Absyrtus would have the Horse to eat the green blades of Wheat, if the time of the year will serve for it. Columella saith, that if a Horse, or any other Beast, do loath his meat, it is good to give him Wine, and the seed of Gith; or else Wine and stampt Garlick. 
 Of casting out his Drink. VEgetius saith, that the Horse may have such a Palsie proceeding of cold in his stomach, as he is not able to keep his drink, but many times to cast it out again at his mouth. The remedy where∣of is to let him bloud in the neck, and to give him Cordial drinks, that is to say, made of hot and comfortable Spices; and also to anoint all his breast, and under his shoulders with hot Oyls, and to purge his head, by blowing up into his nostrils, powders that provoke neezing, such as have been taught you before. 
 Of Surfeting with glut of Provender. THe glut of provender or other meat not digested, doth cause a Horse to have great pain in his body, so as he is not able to stand on his feet, but lyeth down, and waltereth as though he had the Bots. The cure whereof according to Martins experience, is in this sort: Let him bloud in the neck, then trot him up and down for the space of an hour; and if he cannot stale, draw out his vard, and wash it with a little white Wine luke-warm, and thrust into his yard either a bruised clove of Garlick, or else a little oyl of Camomile, with a wax Candle. If he cannot dung, then rake his funda∣ment, and give him this Glyster: Take of Mallows two or three handfuls, and boil them in a pottle of fair running water; and when the Mallows be sodden, then strain it, and put thereunto a quart of fresh Butter, and half a pinte of Oyl Olive; and having received this Glyster, lead him up and down, untill he hath emptyed his belly, then set him up, and keep him hungry the space of three or four days, and the Hay that he eateth, let it be sprinkled with water, and let him drink water, where∣in should be put a little Bran, and when he hath drunk, give him the Bran to eat, and give him little or no provender at all, for the space of eight or ten days. 
 Of another kinde of Surfeting with meat or drink, called of us, Foundering in the body. THis disease is alled of the old Writers in Greek; Crithiasis; in Latine, Hordeatio; it cometh as they say, by eating of much provender suddenly after labour, whilest the Horse is hot and pant∣ing, Blundevile. whereby his meat not being digested, breedeth evill humors, which by little and little do spread throughout his members, and at length do oppress all his body, and do clean take away his strength, and make him in such a case, as he can neither go, nor bow his joynts, nor being laid, he is not able to rise again; neither can he stale, but with great pain. It may come also, as they say, of drinking too much in travelling by the way when the Horse is hot, but then it is not so dangerous, as when it cometh of eating too much.
But howsoever it cometh, they say all, that the humors will immediately resort down into the Horses legs, and feet, and make him to cast his hoofs: and therefore I must needs judge it to be no other thing but a plain foundering, which word foundering is borrowed, as I take it, of the French word Fundu, that is to say, molten. For foundering is a melting or dissolution of humors, which the Italians call Infusione. Martin maketh divers kindes of foundering, as the foundering of the body, which the French men call most commonly Mor undu; and foundering in the legs and feet; also foun∣dering before and behinde, which some Authors do deny, as Magister Maurus, and Laurentius Russius, affirming that there are fewer humors behinde then before, and that they cannot easily be dissolved or molten, being so far distant from the heart, and the other vital parts. Whereunto a man might answer, that the natural heat of the heart doth not cause dissolution of humors, but some unnatu∣ral and accidental heat, spred throughout all the members, which is dayly proved by good experi∣ence. For we see Horses foundered not only before or behinde, but also of all four legs at once, which most commonly chanceth either by taking cold suddenly after a great heat; as by standing still upon some cold pavement, or abroad in the cold winde; or else perhaps the Horse travelling by the way, and being in a sweat, was suffered to stand in some cold water whilest he did drink, which was worse then his drinking: for in the mean time the cold entering at his feet, ascended, upward, and congealed the humors which the heat before had dissolved, and thereby when he cometh once to rest, he waxeth stiffe and lame of his legs. But leaving to speak of foundering in the legs, as well before as behinde, untill we come to the griefs in the legs and feet; we intend to talk here only of foundering in the body, according to Martins experience. The signes to know if a Horse be foundered in the body, be these: His hair will stare, and he will be chill, and shrug for cold, and forsake his meat, hanging down his head, and quiver after cold water; and after two or three days he will be∣gin to cough. The cure, according to Martin is thus: First, scour his belly with the Glyster last mentioned, and then give him a comfortable drink made in this sort: Take of Malmsie a quart, of Sugar half a quartern, of Honey half a quartern, of Cinnamon half an ounce, of Licoras and Anise seeds, of each two spoonfuls, beaten into fine powder, which being put into the Malmsie, warm them together at the fire, so as the Honey may be molten, and then give it him luke-warm: that done, walk him up and down in the warm stable the space of half an hour, and then let him stand on the bit two or three hours without meat; but let him be warm covered, and well littered; and give him Hay sprinkled with a little water, and clean sifted provender by a little at once; and let his wa∣ter be warmed with a little ground Malt therein. And if you see him somewhat cheered, then let him bloud in the neck, and also perfume him once a day with a little Frankincense; and use to walk him abroad, when the weather is fair and not windy, or else in the house, if the weather be foul: and by thus using him you shall quickly recover him. 
 Of the Hungry Evill. THis is a very great desire to eat, following some great emptiness, or lack of meat, and it is called of the old Authors by the Greek name Bulimos, which is as much to say, as a great hunger pro∣ceeding, as the Physitians say, at the first of some extream outward cold, taken by long travelling in cold barren places, and especially where Snow aboundeth, which outward cold causeth the sto∣mach to be cold, and the inward powers to be feeble. The cure according to Absyrtus and Hiero∣cles, is in the beginning to comfort the Horses stomach, by giving him Bread sopt in Wine. And if you be in a place of rest, to give him Wheat-flowre and Wine to drink; or to make him Cakes or Bals of Flowre and Wine kneaded together, and to feed him with that; or with Wine and Nuts of Pine trees. Hierocles saith, if any such thing chance by the way whereas no flowre is to be had, then it shall be best to give him Wine and earth wrought together, either to drink, or else to eat in Bals. 
 Of the Disease in the Liver. ALl the old Authors speak much of the pain in the liver, but none of them do declare whereof it cometh, or by what means, saving that Hippocrates saith, that some Horses get it by violent running upon some stony or hard ground. I for my part think that the liver of a Horse is subject to as many diseases as the liver of a man, and therefore may be pained diversly. As sometime by the intemperateness of the same, as for that it is perhaps too hot, or too cold, too moist, or too dry: sometimes by means of evill humors, as choler, or flegm abounding in the same, according as the liver is either hot or cold: for heat breedeth choser, and cold, flegm, by means of which intempe∣rature proceedeth all the weakness of the liver. It may be pained also sometime by obstruction and stopping, and sometime by hard knobs, inflamation, A postume, or Ulcer bred therein, sometime by Consumption of the substance thereof. The signes of heat and hot humors, be these; loathing of meat, great thirst, and looseness of belly, voiding dung of strong sent, and leanness of body. The signes of cold, and cold humors be these: appetite to meat without thirst, a belly neither continu∣ally loose nor stiptike, but between times, no strong sent of dung, nor leanness of body, by which kinde of signes, both first and last mentioned, and such like, the weakness and grief of the liver is also to be learned and sought out. Obstruction or stopping most commonly chanceth by travelling or labouring upon a full stomach, whereby the meat not being perfectly digested, breedeth gross and tough humors, which humors by vehemency of the labour, are also driven violently into the small veins, whereby the liver should receive good nutriment, and so breedeth obstruction and stop∣ping. The signes whereof in mans body is heaviness and distension, or swelling, with some grief in the right side under the short ribs, and especially when he laboureth immediately after meat, which things I believe if it were diligently observed, were easie enough to finde in a Horse, by his heavy going at his setting forth, and often turning his head to the side grieved: Of an old obstruction, and especially if the humors be cholerick, breedeth many times a hard knob on the liver, called of the Physitians Schirrus, which in mans body may be felt, if the body be not over fat: and it is more easie for him to ly on the right side than on the left, because that lying on the left side, the weight of the knob would oppress the stomach and vital parts very sore, by which signes methinks a di∣ligent Farrier may learn, whether a Horse hath any such disease or not. The inflamation of the liver cometh by means that the bloud either through the abundance, thinness, boyling heat, or sharpness thereof; or else through the violence of some outward cause, breaketh out of the veins, and flow∣eth into the body of the liver, and there being out of his proper vessels doth immediately putrifie and is inflamed, and therewith corrupteth so much fleshy substance of the liver as is imbrewed with∣all; and therefore for the most part, the hollow side of the liver is confumed▪ yea, and sometime the full side. 
 This hot bloudy matter then is properly called an Inflamation, which by natural heat is after∣ward turned into a plain corruption, and then it is called an Impostume, which if it break out and run, then it is called an Ulcer, or filthy sore: Thus you see, of one evill Fountain may spring di∣vers griefs, requiring divers cures. And though none of mine Authors, nor any other Farrier that I know have waded thus far, yet I thought good by writing thus much, to give such Farriers as he Blundevilé. wise, discreet and diligent, occasion to seek for more knowledge and understanding then is aught them; and me thinks that it is a great shame, that the Farriers of this age should not know much more than the Farriers of old time, sith that besides that the old mens knowledge is not hidden from them, they have also their own experience; and time also bringeth every day new things to light. But now to proceed in discoursing of the liver according to the Physitians doctrine as I have begun; I say then of an inflamation in the hollow side of the liver, the signes be these: loathing of meat, great thirst, looseness of belly, easie lying on the right side, and painful lying on the left. But if the inflamation be on the full side or swelling side of the liver, then the patient is troubled with difficulty of breathing, with a dry cough and grievous pain, pulling and twitching the winde-pipe, and to ly upon the right side is more painful than the left, and the swelling may be felt with a mans hand. But you must understand by the way▪ that all these things last mentioned be the signes of some great in∣flamation, for small inflamations have no such signes, but are to be judged only by grief under the short ribs and fetching of the breath. 
 The signes of Apostumation is painful and great heat. The signes of Ulcerations is decrease of the heat with feebleness and fainting. For the filthy matter flowing abroad with evill vapours cor∣rupteth the heart, and many times causeth death. The signes of the Consumption of the liver, shall be declared in the next Chapter; and as for the curing of all other diseases before mentioned, experience must first teach it ere I can write it. Notwithstanding, I cannot think but that such things as are good to heal the like diseases in Mans body, are also good for a Horse▪ for his liver is like in substance and shape to a mans liver, differing in nothing but only in greatness. And therefore I would wish you to learn at the Physitians hands, who I am s first, as touching, the weakness of the liver, proceeding of the untemperateness thereof, will bid you to heal every untemperate∣ness by his contrary; that is to say, heat by cold, and driness by moisture: and so contrary: And therefore it shall be very necessary for you to learn the qualities, natures, and of hear , drugs, and all other simples, and how to apply them in time. And for to heal the obstruction of the liver, they will counsel you perhaps to make the Horse drinks of ples as these be, Agrimony, Fumitory, Camomise, Wormwood, Licoras, Anise seeds, Smallage, Parsly, Spikenard, Gentian, Succory, Endive, Sperage, Lupines, the vertues whereof you shall learn in the Herbals: but amongst all simples, there is none more praised than the liver of a Woolf beaten into powder, and mingled in any medicine that is made for any disease in the liver. 
 The cure of an inflamation consisteth in letting bloud, and in bathing, or fomenting the sore place with such herbs and Oyls, as may mollifie and disperse humors abroad, wherewith some sim∣ples that be astringent would be always mingled: yea, and in all other medicines that be applyed to the liver, for any manner of diseases. Simples that mollifie and disperse be these: Linseed, Fe∣nigreek, Camomile, Anise seeds, Melliot; and such like things. Simples astringent be these: Red Rose leaves, Bramble leaves, Wormwood, Plantain, Myrrhe, Mastick, Stirax, and such like. Apo∣stumes are to be ripened and voided. Ulcers must be cleansed, and scowred downward, either by the belly, or by urine: and therefore the use of such simples as provoke urine in such case is necessary. The old Writers of Horse-leech-craft do say, that when a Horse is grieved in his liver, he will for∣sake his meat, and his body will waste, his mouth will be dry, his tongue rough and harsh: yea, and it will smell, and he will refuse to ly on that side where his grief is. The cure whereof accord∣ing to Absyrtus is in this sort: Let him drink stampt Ireos with Wine allayed with water. He praiseth also an herb much like unto Calamint; called of Pliny, Polymoria; or let him drink Savory with Wine and Oyl. I think that Agrimony or Liver-wort is as good as the best of them. Absyrtus would have his body to be chafed with Wine and Oyl mixt together; and to be well littered that he may ly soft ' : and his provender that should be given him to be steeped first in warm water: and now and then some Nitrum to be put into his drink. 
 Of the Consumption in the Liver. I Believe that no inward member of a Horse doth suffer so much as the lungs and liver, and that not so much by continual, as by unordinate, and untimely travail, labour, and exercise, whereby either the Horses lungs, or his liver do most commonly perish, and is consumed: yea, and some-time both. Of the Consumption of the lungs, we have talked sufficiently before: therefore let us shew you here the causes whereof the Consumption of the liver proceedeth. The Physitians say, that it may come of any humor, but chiefly and most commonly of cholerick matter, shed throughout the substance of the liver, which putrifying by little and little, and leisurely, doth at length corrupt and perish all the substance of the liver, which thing in mans body doth first proceed, as the Physitians say, either by eating corrupt meats, or else by continual drinking of sweet Wines. 
 But me thinks that the Consumption of a Horses liver, should come by some extreme heat, in∣flaming the bloud, which afterward being putrified, doth corrupt and exulcerate the substance of the liver. For after inflamation, as I said before, cometh Apostumation, and Exulceration, which is very hard to cure, because the substance of the liver is spongeous like unto the lungs. And whilest the liver is so corrupted, there can be no good digestion, for lack whereof the body receiveth no good nutriment, and therefore must needs also languish and consume. The signes according to Mar∣tin be these: 
 The Horse will forsake his meat, and will stand stretching himself in length, and never cover to ly down; and his breath will be so strong, as no man can abide it, and he will continually cast yellowish matter at the one nostril, or else at both, according as one or both sides of the liver is corrupted; and on that side that he casteth most, he will have under his jaw, even about the midst thereof, a knob or kernel as much as a Walnut, which when Martin findeth, he committeth his car∣kase to the Crows, taking him to be past cure. But if he were let bloud in time, and had such drinks given him, as are good to comfort and strengthen the liver, he thinketh that the Horse might be recovered. I never read any medicine for the wasting of the liver, as I remember, but this only diet, which I found in an old English Book: Let him drink for the space of three days no other thing but warm wort; and let him eat no other meat but Oats baked in an Oven, and let him stand meatless the first night before you give him the wort: But I think it were not am iss to put into the wort that he drinketh every morning some good confection of powder made of Agrimony, red Rose leaves, Saccharum, Rosaceum, Diarchadon, Abbatis, Diasantalon, Licoras, and of the liver of a Wolf, and such other simples as do comfort and strengthen the liver; or else to give him the same things with Goats milk luke-warm. 
 Of the diseases in the Gall. IN my opinion the gall of a Horse is subject to divers diseases, as well as the gall of a Man, as to obstruction, whereof cometh the fulness and emptiness of the bladder, and likewise the stone in the gall. But obstruction may chance two manner of ways: First, when the way, whereby the choler should proceed from the liver unto the bladder of the gall as unto his receptacle, is stop∣ped, and thereby the bladder remaineth empty, whereof may spring divers evill accidents: as vo-miting, the Lax or Bloudy flix. Secondly, when the way whereby such choler should issue forth of the bladder of the gall down into the guts is shut up, whereby the bladder is over full and abound∣eth with two much choler, which causeth heaviness, suffocation, belching, heat, thirst, and disposition to angryness. The signes of both kindes of obstruction in the gall is costiveness and yellowishness of skin infected with the yellow Jaundise. The stone in the gall, which is somewhat blackish, pro∣ceedeth of the obstruction of the conduits of the bladder, whereby the choler being long kept in, waxeth dry, and turneth at length to hard gravel or stones, whereof because there is neither signes nor any grievous accident known to the Physitians, I leave to talk any farther thereof, and the rather for that none of mine Authors do make any mention of the gall at all. Notwithstanding to give some light to the learned Farriers, and that they may the better understand the inward parts of a Horse; I thought good to write thus much, thinking it no time lost while I may profit them any way. 
 Of the diseases in the Spleen. THe Spleen, as I have said before in many places, is the receptacle of melancholy, and of the dregs of bloud, and is subject to the like diseases that the Liver is, that is to say; to swelling, obstruction, hard knobs, and inflamation, for the substance of the Spleen is spongeous, and there∣fore apt to suck in all filth, and to dilate it self; wherefore being full it must needs swell, which will appear in the left side under the short ribs; and such swelling causeth also shortness of breath, and especially when the body doth labour or travel. It is painful also to ly on the right side, because the Spleen being swoln so oppresseth the midriffe, and especially when the stomach is full of meat, and the patient hath worse digestion then appetite, and is troubled with much winde, both upward and downward. Moreover the vapour of the humor doth offend the heart, making it faint, and causeth all the body to be heavy and dull; and if such swelling be suffered to go uncured, then if it be a melancholy humor, and abounding over-much, it waxeth every day thicker and thicker, causing obstruction not only in the veins &amp; arteries, which is to be perceived by heaviness and grief on the left side, but also in the Spleen it self; whereas by vertue of the heat it is hardned every day more and more, and so by little and little waxeth to a hard knob, which doth not only occupy all the substance of the Spleen, but also many times all the left side of the womb, and thereby maketh the evill acci∣dents or griefs before recited much more than they were. 
 Now as touching the inflamation of the Spleen which chanceth very seldom; for so much as every inflamation proceedeth of pure bloud▪, which seldom entereth into the Spleen: I shall not need to make many words, but refer you over to the Chapter of the Liver, for in such case they differ not, but proceeding of like cause, have also like signes, and do require like cure. The old Writers say, that Horses be often grieved with grief in the Spleen, and specially in Summer season with gree∣dy eating of sweet green meats, a d they call those Horses L eno os; that is to say, Spleenetick. The signes whereof (say they) are these, hard swelling on the left side, short breath, often groning, and greedy appetite to meat. The remedy whereof according to Absyrtus is to make a Horse to sweat once a day during a certain time, by riding him, or otherwise travelling him, and to pour in∣to his left nostril every day the juyce of Mirabolans mingled with Wine and Water, amounting in all to the quantity of a pinte. But me thinks it would do him more good, if he drank it as Hierocles would have him to do. Eumelius praiseth this drink: Take of Cummin seed and of Honey, of each six ounces, and of Laserpitium as much as a Bean, of Vinegar a pinte; and put all these into three quarts of water, and let it stand so all night, and the next morning give the Horse thereof to drink, being kept over night fasting. Theomnestus praiseth the decoction of Capers, especially if the bark of the root thereof may be gotten sodden in water to a syrup. Or else make him a drink of Garlick, Ni∣trum, Hore-hound, and Wormwood, sodden in harsh Wine: and he would have the left side to be bathed in warm water, and to be hard rubbed. And if all this will not help, then to give him the fire, which Absyrtus doth not allow, saying the Spleen lyeth so, as it cannot easily be fired, to do him any good. But for so much as the Liver and Spleen are members much occupied in the ingendring and separating of humors, many evill accidents and griefs do take their first be∣ginning of them, as the Jaundise, called in a Horse, the yellows, driness of body, and Consumpti∣on of the flesh, without any apparent cause why, which the Physitians call Atrophia; also evill habit of the body, called of them Cachexid, and the Dropsie. But first we will speak of the Jaun∣dise or Yellows. 
 Of the Yellows. THe Physitians in a mans body do make two kindes of Jaundise: that is to say, the Yellow, pro∣ceeding of choler dispersed throughout the whole body, and dying the skin yellow; and the Black, proceeding of melancholy, dispersed likewise throughout the whole body, and making all the skin black. And as the yellow Jaundise cometh for the most part, either by obstruction or stop∣ping of the conduits belonging to the bladder of the gall, which (as I said before) is the receptacle of choler; or by some inflamation of the Liver, whereby the bloud is converted into choler, and so spreadeth throughout the body: even so the black Jaundise cometh by mean of some obstruction in the Liver-vein▪ that goeth to the Spleen, not suffering the Spleen to do his office, in receiving the dregs of the loud from the Liver, wherein they abound too much; or else for that the Spleen is already too full of dregs, and so sheddeth them back again into the veins. But as for the Black Jaundise▪ they have not been observed to be in Horses as in Men, by any of our arriers in these days that I can learn. And yet the old Writers of Horse-leech-craft, do seem to make two kindes of Jaundise called of them Cholera, that is to say, the dry choler, and also the moist choler. The signes of the dry choler, as absyrtus saith, is great heat in the body, and costiyeness of the belly, whereof it is said to be dry. Moreover, the Horse will not covet to ly down, because he is so pained in his body, and his mouth will be hot and dry. 
 It cometh, as he saith, by obstruction of the conduit, whereby the choler should resort into the bladder of the gall, and by obstruction also of the urine vessels, so as he cannot stale. The cure ac∣cording to his experience, is to give him a Glyster made of Oyl, Water and Nitrum, and to give him no provender, before that you have raked his fundament, and to pour the decoction of Mal∣lows mingled with sweet Wine into his nostrils, and let his meat be grass, or else sweet Hay sprinkled with Nitre and Water; and he must rest from labour, and be often rubbed. Hierocles would have him to drink the decoction of wilde Coleworts sodden in Wine. Again of the moist choler of Jaun∣dise, these are the signes: The Horses eyes will look yellow, and his nostrils will open wide; his ears and his flancks will sweat, and his stale will be yellow and cholerick; and he will grone when he ly∣eth down; which disease the said Absyrtus was wont to heal, as he saith, by giving the Horse a drink made of Thyme and Cumin, of each like quantity stampt together, and mingled with Wine, Honey, and Water, and also by letting him bloud in the pasterns. This last disease seemeth to differ nothing at all from that which our Farriers call the Yellows. The signes whereof, according to Martin, be these: The Horse will be faint, and sweat as he standeth in the stable, and forsake his meat: and his eyes, and the inside of his lips and all his mouth within will be yellow. The cure whereof accord∣ing to him is in this sort: Let him bloud in the neck-vein, a good quantity, and then give him this drink: Take of white Wine, of Ale a quart, and put thereunto of Saffron, Turmerick, of each half an ounce, and the juyce that is wrung out of a handful of Celandine, and being luke-warm, give it the Horse to drink, and keep him warm the space of three or four days, giving him warm wa∣ter with a little Bran in it. 
 Of the Yellows. THe Yellows is a general disease in Horses, and differ nothing from the yellow Jaundise in men: It is mortal, and many Horses die thereof: the signes to know it is thus; pull down the lids of Markham. the Horses eyes, and the white of the eye will be yellow, the inside of his lips will be yellow, and gums; the cure followeth: First, let him bloud in the palat of his mouth, that he may suck up the same, then give him this drink: Take of strong Ale a quart, of the green or dure of Geese strained, three or four spoonfuls, of the juyce of Celandine as much, of Saffron half an ounce; mix these to∣gether, and being warm, give it the Horse to drink. 
 Of the evill habit of the Body, and of the Dropsie. AS touching the driness and Consumption of the flesh, without any apparent cause why, called Blundevik. of the Physitians as I said before Atrophia; I know not what to say more then I have already before in the Chapter of Consumption of the flesh, and therefore resort thither. And as for the evill habit of the body, which is to be evill coloured, heavy, dull, and of no force, strength, nor live∣liness, cometh not for lack of nutriment, but for lack of good nutriment, for that the bloud is cor∣rupted with flegm, choler, or melancholy, proceeding either from the Spleen, or else through weak∣ness of the stomach or liver, causing evill digestion, or it may come by foul feeding: yea, and also for lack of moderate exercise. The Evill habit of the body, is next cousen to the Dropsie, whereof though our Farriers have had no experience, yet because mine old Authors writing of Horse-leech∣craft do speak much thereof: I think it good here briefly to shew you their experience therein, that is to say, how to know it, and also how to cure it. But sith none of them do shew the cause whereof it proceeds; I think it meet first therefore to declare unto you the causes thereof, according to the do∣ctrine of the learned Physitians, which in mans body do make three kindes of Dropsies, calling the first Anasarca, the second Ascites, and the third Timpanias. Anasarca, is an universal swelling of the body through the abundance of the water, sying betwixt the skin and the flesh, and differeth not from the disease last mentioned, called Cachexia, that is to say, Evill habit of the bloud, saving that the body is more swoln in this then in Cachexia, albeit they proceed both of like causes as of coldness and weakness of the liver, or by means that the heart, spleen, stomach, and other members serving to digestion, be grieved or diseased. Ascites is a swelling in the covering of the belly, called of the Phy∣sitians. Abdomen, comprehending both the skin, the fat, eight muscles, and the film, or panicle called Peritoneum, through the abundance of some whayish humor entred into the same, which besides the causes before alleadged, proceedeth most chiefly by means that some of the vessels, within be broken or rather cracked, out of the which, though the bloud being somewhat gross cannot issue forth, yet the whayish humor being subtil, may run out into the belly, like water distilling through a crack∣ed pot. 
 Timpanias, called of us commonly the Timpany, is a swelling of the aforesaid covering of the belly, through the abundance of winde entred into the same, which winde is inge ered of crudity and evill digestion, and whilest it aboundeth in the stomach, or other intrails finding no issue out, it breaketh in violently through the small conduits among the panicles of the aforesaid covering not without great pain to the patient, and so by tossing to and fro, windeth at length into the space of the covering it self. But surely such winde cannot be altogether void of moisture. 
 Notwithstanding, the body swelleth not so much with this kinde of Dropsie as with the other kinde called Ascites. The signes of the Dropsie is shortness of breath, swelling of the body, evill colour, lothing of meat, and great desire to drink, especially in the Dropsie called Ascites, in which also the belly will sound like a bottle half full of water: but in the Timpany it will sound like a Ta∣ber. But now though mine Authors make not so many kindes of Dropsies, yet they say all gene∣rally, that a Horse is much subject to the Dropsie. The signes according to Absyrtus and Hierocles, be these: His belly, legs, and stones, will be swoln; but his back, buttocks, and flancks, will be dryed and shrunk up to the very bones. 
 Moreover the veins of his face and temples, and also the veins under his tongue will be so hidden, as you cannot see them; and if you thrust your finger hard against his body, you shall leave the print thereof behinde, for the flesh lacking natural heat will not return again to his place, and when the Horse lyeth down he spreadeth himself abroad, not being able to lie round toge∣ther on his belly; and the hair of his back by rubbing will fall away. Pelagonius in shewing the signes of the Dropsie, not much differing from the Physitians first recited, seemeth to make two kindes thereof, calling the one the Timpany, which for difference sake may be called in English the Winde Dropsie, and the other the Water Dropsie. Notwithstanding both have one cure, so far as I can perceive, which is in this sort: Let him be warm covered, and walked a good while together in the Sun to provoke sweat, and let all his body be well and often rubbed alongst the hair, and let him feed upon Coleworts, Smallage, and Elming boughs, and on all other things that may loosen the belly, or provoke urine; and let his common meat be grass if it may be gotten, if not, then Hay sprinkled with Water and Nitrum. It is good also to give him a kinde of Pulse called Cich, steeped a day and a night in water, and then taken out, and laid so as the water may drop away from it. Pelagonius would have him to drink Parsly stampt with Wine, or the root of the herb called in Latine, Panax, with Wine. But if the swelling of the belly will not decrease for all this, then slit a little hole under his belly a handful behinde the navil, and put into that hole a hollow reed or some other pipe, that the water or winde may go out, not all at once, but by little and little at divers times, and beware that you make not the hole over wide, lest the kall of the belly fall down thereunto; and when all the water is clean run out, then heal up the wound as you do all other wounds, and let the Horse drink as little as is possible. 
 Of the Evil habit of the Stomach. IF your Horse either by inward sickness, or by present surfeit, grow to a loath of his meat, or Markham. by weakness of his stomach cast up his meat and drink; this shall be the cure for the same: First, in all the drink he drinks, let him have the powder of hot Spices; as namely, of Ginger, Anise seeds, Licoras, Cinamon, and Pepper; then blow up into his nostrils the powder of Tobacco to oc∣casion him to neese, instantly after he hath eaten any meat, for an hour together after, let one stand by him, and hold at his nose a piece of sowre leaven steept in Vinegar, then anoint all his breast over with the Oyl of Ginnuper and Pepper mixt together.
Likewise there was a most odoriferous Musk-cat at Venice, which a Merchant there had to be seen, brought as he said out of Cathay, and for proof whereof he shewed the way that he went, namely through the Euxine Sea, Colchis, Iberia, and Albania, even to the entrance of Scythia. For the Coun∣trey Cathay is a part of Scythia, beyond Imaus, neither ought this to seem wonderful, for in that place there was a Region, called by Ptolemeus, Randa marcostra, wherein he placeth the eleventh Table of Asia. This Region is watered by the River Sotus, and therein aboundeth Spikenard, and the Inha∣bitants call the Countrey wherein the best Musk-cats are bred, Ergimul, and the greatest City of that Brassavolus. Countrey Singuy. The same Author writeth also, that Musk-cats are brought out of Egypt, and out of many places of Africk. In Thebeth also there are many Cities, and Beasts about those Ci∣ties called Gadery, which do bring forth the Musk; and the Inhabitants hunt them with Dogs. The Province of Canicluet, doth also yeeld many of these Beasts, and likewise Syria. S. Jerom also writeth thus: Muscus &amp; Oenanthe, &amp; peregrini muris pellicula, by which skin of the strange Mouse, he meaneth the little bag, or skin wherein the Musk of the Musk-cat is included. The Princes of Tame Musk-cats. Europe do nourish these tame, being brought out of the New-found World, and many other rich men especially in Italy, be delighted with the odoriferous savour which cometh from it. Brassavo∣lus saith, that he saw a Merchant offer one of these to be sold unto Alphonsus Dake of Ferrara, which had the Navel full of Musk. And Catherinus Zenus, an ancient Nobleman of Venice, had a Roe of this kinde, which he left after his death unto his heirs; and by this it doth plainly appear, that the Musk-cat is neither like a Cat, nor a Mouse, and that all those which have affirmed so much thereof, have been deceived of their own conjectural derivation of Moscus or Muscus, or by the errour of some Writer of the ancient Books, which instead of Magnitudo Capreoli a Roe, have in∣serted Catti, a Cat. And thus much shall suffice for the description of this Beast, and for the Regions where it is bred, except I may adde the Relation of Ludovicus Romanus, who affirmeth, that the Musk-cats of Calecut are brought out of the Countrey Pegus. These Roes of the New-found∣land Their strength, nim∣bleness, and quickness. Alex. Bene∣dictus. are wonderful nimble and quick, and so swift, that they are seldom taken alive; but after they are taken, by pulling out their longer teeth they wax tame. When they are prosecuted with the Hunt∣ers, and with Dogs, they defend themselves with their teeth. In some places they take them in snares, and in ditches, also kill them with darts; and so having killed them, they cut off the little bag wherein the Musk groweth, for that Musk doth exceed in sweetness of odor all things that were ever made by the art of man, and therefore the use of it is more plentiful then of any other thing, for they carry it about in Garments. 
 They make perfume of it; they anoint Beads whereupon they tell their prayers; they also make Of the Musk, and the use thereof. Bals of it, and include it in Gold or Silver, carrying it about, either to be seen, or because they are delicate and wanton; or to shew their riches and abundance; or to preserve themselves from pu∣trified and stinking airs; or else against cold and moist diseases of the brain. With this the luxurious women perfume themselves, to entrap the love of their Wooers: for as the thing it self is a vice or sickness of the Breast; so also by men it is used to vice and wickedness; yet the Venetian Matrons will never use it, and he that beareth it about him shall never perceive it himself. 
 We haye shewed already, that it groweth in the nav l, or in a little bag neer unto it; and it is The place where the Musk groweth. true by Gyraldus and Varinus, that when the Beast beginneth to be luxurious, and prone to the rage of venery and carnal copulation, then the bloud floweth to the navel, and there putteth the Beast to pain, because it swelleth above measure. The Beast then abstaineth from all meat and drink, and rowleth himself upon the ground, and so by the waight of his body presseth forth the humor that troubled him, which after a certain time doth coagulate and congeal together, and then render∣eth such an acceptable savour, as you see it hath. The relation whereof you shall hear out of the words of Serapion. The wilde Roes (saith he) which wander to and fro in the Mountains free∣ly, The natural expression of Musk. without the government of man, have in a little bag, certain putrified matter or bloud, which of it self groweth to be ripe, whereunto when it is come, the Beast itcheth, and is pained as it were with launcing, therefore he rubbeth himself upon stones, rocks, and trees, a great while together, for it delighteth him, whereby the stones grow white through his rubbing, and therefore in time he weareth the bag asunder, making issue unto it for the corruptible matter to come forth, which pre∣sently runneth out upon the sores, no otherwise then if it had been lanced. Then the wound groweth to be whole again, and the Beast departeth, until the like exsuperance of bloud come into the same place again. For every year this happeneth them. 
 The Inhabitants of the Countrey know all the Hunters of these wilde Beasts, and therefore note them where they empty their bellies. For the humor so pressed out as before is declared, through the heat of the Sun congealeth and dryeth upon the stone, growing more commendable and plea∣sant through the Suns heat; Then come the Inhabitants, and in little bottles made of the skins of these Beasts, which before they have killed, and so put the musk into them. 
 This they sell for a great price, because it is thought, (and that worthily) to be a gift fit for a King. But if this Musk be taken out of the creature by violence, then will he bring forth no more; yet express it by his own natural art he beareth again and again. The greatest cause of this humor is the sweetness of his food, and the air wherein they are bred; therefore if one of them be brought into this part of the world, with Musk in his cod, it will grow to ripeness in a tempe∣rate air, but if it be brought without Musk in the cod, then it will never yeeld any among us: and besides that it liveth but a little while. And therefore my opinion is, that this excremental hu∣mour, is unto it like a menstruous purgation, for the want whereof it dyeth speedily. Every part of this Beast is called Musk, which cometh forth of his ulcerous issue; for although the other parts smell sweet, yet we will shew afterwards more at large, that it is not of themselves, but by reason of this humor. 
 The pretiousness of this thing deserveth a further treatise, for thy better direction and instructi∣on The best musk declared by these several Countries. of the knowledge hereof, both for the choise of that which is best, and for the avoiding and putting away of that which is adulterate. At Venice at this day it is sold in the cods, and the Indian Musk is better then the African. The brown is always better then the black, except it be of Catha; for that of Catha is black, and best of all. There is some that is yellowish, or betwixt red and yel∣low, after the very same colour of Spikenard; this also is of the best sort, because the Beasts that render it do feed upon Spikenard. 
 Therefore this is good to be chosen, because it cannot be adulterated, and besides the tast of it is Sylvius. bitter, and assoon as ever it is tasted, it presently ascendeth to the brain, where it remaineth very fragrant without resistance, and is not easily dissolved. It is not bright within, but muddy, having Avicenna. broad grains, and equal throughout, like the wood of Baulm. But according to the Regions, they chuse Musk in this sort. 
 Of the Indian Musk, that of the Region of Sceni, (called Antebeuus,) they set in the first place, and next unto it, the Beasts of the Sea side; The Musk of Cubit is known by the thin bladder of the Beast Elluchacem. wherein it is contained; but that of Gergeri, is less Aromatical, and more thick. The Musk of Ca∣ram is in the middle place betwixt both, wherewithal they mingle powder of Gold and Silver, to en∣crease the waight. The musk of Salmindy is worst of al, because it is taken out of his bladder or cod, and put into a glass. There are some which prefer the Tumbascine Musk, and they say, that the odor thereof cometh from the sweet herbs whereupon the Beast feedeth, and the like is said of the Re∣gion of Sceni; but the odor is not equal to the other. And the Tumbascines do not gather the Musk after the fashions of others: for they draw not forth this matter out of the cod, nor yet gather it in calm weather. The Genians, they press forth the matter out of the ventricle, and when they have it forth, mingle it with other things, and that in cloudy and tempestuous weather: afterwards they put them up in glasses, and stop the mouth close, and so they send it to be sold unto the Sari∣zines, and to Amanus, and to Parsis, and to Haharac, as if he were a Tumbescine. When this Beast goeth furthest from the Sea, and feedeth toward the Desert upon Spikenard, then is his Musk sweeter, but when they feed neer the Sea, it is not so fragrant, because they feed upon Myrrh. Avi∣cen saith, there is some kinde of Musk like a Citron, but such hath not been seen in this part of the world, for our Musk is most commonly like the colour of Iron, and the savour of it like a Cyre∣nian Serap. Apple, but stronger; and consisteth of little pieces, but it is better that hangeth together, and hath a savour of the Wilderness; but if it be adulterated with Snakes or Birds-dung, then will it be lesser pleasant in the savour, and also pinch and offend the nose. 
 The Hunters of Tebeth, and Seni, as we have shewed already, do kill their sweet Rose, and after∣wards take out from them their bladder of Musk, which Musk being excerpted before it be ripe, smel∣leth strongly and unpleasantly. And then they hang it up a little while in the open and free air, wherein it ripeneth as it were by concoction in the Sun, and thereby receiveth an admirable sweet∣ness. And the like do divers Gardners use towards Apples, and fruits of trees which are gathered be∣fore they be ripe. For by laying them up in a dry place, they wear away their sharpness and become pleasant. But it is to be remembred, that Musk is the best which doth ripen in its own cod, before it be taken out of the Beast, for before it is ripe, it smelleth displeasantly. 
 There is not much perfect Musk brought into this part of the World, but the strength of it cometh from the vertue of the cod wherein it is put, and so it is brought to us; but the best is brought out of the East, where groweth Spikenard and sweet herbs. Rodericus Lusitanus saith, that our Musk is compounded of divers things, the ground whereof is the bloud of a little Beast like a Cony, which is brought out of Pegun a Province of India. But the means whereby to try it may be this, after it The tryal of Musk. is waighed, they put it into some moist or wet powder, and after a little while they weigh it the se∣cond time, and if it exceed the former waight, then do they take it for sound, perfect, and good, but if it do not exceed, then do they judge it adulterate. 
 Some Merchants when they are to buy Musk stop it to their noses, and holding their breath run Simion . Sylvius. half a stones cast, afterwards they pull it from their nose, and if they perceive the savour of the Musk, then do they buy it, and take it for good, but if not, they refuse it for corrupted. In some Churches they make perfumes with Musk, and by mingling Stirax, Aloes, Amber, and juyce of Roses, they make a perfume called Regium Suffumigium, the Kings perfume; likewise unto sweet waters, drawn out of the furnaces of Chymists, whereunto they add simple Rose Water, and for the richer sort of people Musk and Camphory. 
 Andreas Furnerius, in his French Book of adorning mans nature, teacheth a composition to be made of certain Oyls, Sope, and Musk; and also Ointments and musked Oyls. He also sheweth how to Platearius. make little round Balls of Musk, and other confections, and afterwards to draw a thread through the middle of them, and so wear them about ones neck. 
 Some put it into Silken wool, through which they first draw a thread, and so dissolve it in Rose The preser∣ving of Musk. water, afterward make it up in medicines, and use it as aforesaid. It may be preserved in a vessel of Lead, close stopped a long time, for the lead which is cold and moist, agreeth well with the nature of the Musk, and therefore if a leaden vessel be wanting, so as ye be forced to use glass and silver, then must you put two or three pieces of lead into it, for the better preservation, and covering the passage all over with Wax, and above all things you must avoid all kinde of Spices, taking heed that no grain thereof come into it. If while it is in the vessel it lose the savour and be dead, then it is to be recovered by opening the mouth of the Vial, and hanging it over a privy; for when the stink and evill savour cometh unto it, Contra foetorem eluctatur, &amp; quasi luctando reviviscit, it striveth against the filthy stink, and as it were reviveth in that contention, saith Isidorus, Albertus, and Platearius. 
 But concerning the adulterating of Musk, I will say more in this place. First of all, the Mounte-banks Benedictus. The adultera∣ting of Musk, and the means to descry it. do corrupt it by mingling with it the liver of a Calf. Also by a root called Makir, and an herb Salich. Many times the dung of Mice is sold for Musk, and so great is the deceit herein, that a man may not trust the outward shape of an intire cod, for there be Imposters which can counterfeit them, and make them in all parts for the outward appearance, and fill them with certain stuffe, interposing some little true Musk among it until it have a reasonable savour, and therewithal deceive simple people. 
 It is also adulterated by mingling with it a little Goats bloud fryed, or brown Bread fryed, so that three or four parts of these, will receive seasonable tast from one part of the Musk. It is also adul∣terated in the skin by putting pieces of the skin into it, and it may be known from the true Musk, because it will weigh twice so heavy. The Sarazens use this shift above all others, and there is one principal way of making counterfeit Musk, which is this; they take Nutmegs, Mace, Cinamon, Cloves, Gilly-flowers, and Spikenard, of every one a handful, all these being beat diligently toge∣ther, and dryed and sifted, they are mingled with the warm bloud of a Dove, and afterwards dryed in the Sun, then are they seven times sprinkled over, or moistened with the water of Musk-roses, and be∣twixt every sprinkling they are dryed; at length they mingle therewithall a third or fourth part of true Musk, and then sprinckle it over again with Musk-rose-water, so divide it into three or four lumps, and take the white hairs from under the tail of a Roe or Kid, and so put it in a vessel of glass. 
 Benyvine, white Wax taken out of a new Hive of Bees, the rotten part of Eve-tree, and a little Musk, are mingled all together to make a counterfeit Amber, for it will smell like Civet, or Musk, or else Stirax, and the powder of Lignum aloes, with Civet, and Rose-water; but the fraud in one and other is easily deprehended, for both the odor and the colour are different from the true Amber, and also it will sooner wax soft in water, then that which is natural. 
 Some do corrupt their Musk with the seed of Angelica, or rather with the root of it, because the root smelleth sweet like Musk, but the cosenage may be easily discovered, by putting it into water: for the Angelica will sink, and the Musk will swim. The true Musk is sold for forty shillings an ounce at the least. It is also observed by Arnoldus Villanovanus, that in the presence of Assa foetida or Casto∣reum, the best Musk will have a horrible and intolerable savour, although they touch not one ano∣ther, which cannot be ascribed to any known reason, but to some secret in nature. The sweetness of the Arabian Musk is described by Alciatus in this verse; 
 Et celebris suavi est unguine Muscus Arabs. There be divers herbs which smell sweet like Musk, as Angelica, Dorsis, Musk-gilliflowers, Musk∣grapes, Herbs resem∣bling Musk. the leaves of a Winter Cherry, and an herb growing near Basil without a name, like wilde Parsley, the Damasine-rose, and many other. Wilde Cats and Martins do also render an excre∣ment much like, Musk; and there are Hares called Moschiae, which leave such an intolerable smell in the impression of their foot-steps, that the Dogs by touching them grow mad, as we have shewed in the story of the Hare: And thus much for the description of this Beast; now followeth the medicines. 
 The Medicines of the Musk-cat. A very little part or quantity of a Musk-cat is of great vertue and efficacy; wherefore it is very sparingly used in medicines or potions, neither is there any part thereof beaten or bruised, as it is of all other Beasts, but it is melted and dissolved in water which proceedeth from the sweetest Roses. It is also a Beast which is very hot and dry, but rather more dry then hot, yet not∣withstanding the same his heat is asswaged and allayed by no other thing but only the Gum called Camphire; and his driness is only moistned or mollified with Oyls, and very sweet, as Oyl of Vi∣olets, and Oyl of Roses. Amongst sweet smels and savours, the principallest and chiefest laud and commendation is attributed unto the smell which proceedethfrom the Musk-cat: For he doth not only with his odoriferous and delightful savour please and content the scent of men, but also doth strengthen the spirits, and all the parts of mans body, yea and that in a moment, for the slenderness of his parts, which although it doth forthwith penetrate or enter into the scent of man, yet doth it endure longer, and is not so speedily or quickly dissolved as the scent or savour of any other sweet smell whatsoever. 
 A Musk-cat and the herb called Mercuries-fingers or Dogs bane, being given in purging medi∣cines to drink, do greatly renew and refresh the decayed strength or force of those which have been before times weakened with divers and continual medicines in their members. The same is also very profitable for those which are effeminate or defective, and eclipsed in their minde or courage, as also for those which are weak and feeble in their joynts, not by any hurt, or any other casua∣lity being enfeebled, but being always so even from their childhood. A Musk-cat is an excel∣lent Symeon. remedy for those which are troubled with fear in their heart; and also for those which do qui∣ver or shake either for fear of any other thing throughout all the parts of their body. The same Isidorus. is a very profitable and medicinable cure for those which are grieved with any ach or pain in their head, or with any enormity or trouble in their liver, and is also being given simply by it self, without any thing mixed in it, or compounded in Wine, very good and wholesome for the heal∣ing and curing of those who have any pain or grief in their stomach, which cometh by the occasion of any cold.
First of all therefore for as much as all the question hath arisen from the Greek and Latine names, it is most requisite to express them, and shew how the different construction began▪ The Graecians do indifferently call Pordalis, Pardalis, and Panther the Latines, Panthera, Pardalis, Par∣dus, and Leopardus, and these names are thus distinguished by the learned. Pordalis they say signifieth the male, and Pardalis the female, and also Panther among the Latines for the female, and Pardus for the male, and these are understood of a simple kinde without commixture of generation. Leopardus the Leopard or Libbard, is a word devised by the later writers, com∣pounded of Leo and Pardus, upon opinion that this Beast is generated betwixt a Pardal and a Lion, and so indeed it ought properly to be taken, if there be any such. Pliny is of opinion, that Pardus differeth from Panthera in nothing but in sex, and other say, that betwixt the Lions and the Pardals there is such a confused mixed generation as is betwixt Asses and Mares, or Stallions and Asses: as for example, when the Lion covereth the Pardal then is the Whelp called Leopardus, a Leo∣pard or Libbard, but when the Pardal covereth the Lioness, then is it called Panthera a Panther 
 In this controversie the Hebre and Arabian names which are generally indifferently translated Panthers or Libbards, do take up the strife and almost end the controversie, for Name in Hebrew, and Alph or Al hed in Ara k are so translated both in holy Scripture, and also in Avicen, as may appear by these places following▪ Esa. 11. Habitabit Lupus cum agno, &amp; (Name ) Pardus cum do de∣ . That is to say. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Pardal, Libbard, and Panther shall lie with the Kid. So in the vision of Daniel, chap. 7. among the four beasts com∣ming out of the Sea, the Prophet seeth, Name a Leopard. In the 13▪ Revel of 8. John, he seeth another Beast rising out of the Sea, having ten horns, and he saith it was like Pardalet, which Erasmus translateth Pardo a Leopard Je 5, Pardus (Name ) vigilat super civ atem eorum, ut omnen inde g dientem d ce pat. That is a Panther or Pardal watcheth at the gates of the City, that he may tear in pieces every one that cometh forth, Factus sum eis sicut Leo, &amp; sicut Pardus (sicut Namer) directus ad viam suam. For Namer in that place the Graecians translate Pardalis, a Pardal. In the 13. Jer. Si mu are potest Aethiops suam, ut Pardus maculas suas, &amp; vos poteritis be e facere, cum diuiceritis malum. If the Blackmoore can change his skin or the Leopard his spots, the may you do well which have learned to do ill Cant, 14. Coronab is de vertice Siner, &amp; Hermon, de cubilibus Leonum de montibus Pardorum. That is, Thou shalt be crowned from the top of Siner and Hermon, from the dens of the Lions, and the Mountains of the Leopards. Now ac∣cording to Brocardus, the Mountain of the Leopards is distant from Tripolis, in the holy lan two leagues Ra s and Avicen, two Arabians, do call the Panther and Leopard by one name, Alpheth, or Alphil, so that by comparing all these together, the Panther, Pardal Libbard, and Leopard, are but one Beast, called by divers names. For the farther manifesting hereof, it is good to examin what is A more exact definition of Pardals and Leopards. said of the Pardal and Leopard in particular, that so having expressed that, it may be clear by the discourse succeeding, that there is no difference betwixt them and the Panther, or very small. First of all therefore it is said of the Pardus, that it differeth not from the Panther, but only in sex, and that the skin hath received a natural tincture of divers spots. Aristotle writeth thus of it, Cutis Cha∣maeleontis distincta m culis ut Pardalia. The skin of the Chamaelion is spotted like a Pardals, and in re∣lation of Lampridius, where he sheweth how Heliogabalus was wont to shut up his drunken friends, um Leonibus, Leopardis, &amp; ursis, ita ut expergefacti in cubiculo eodem Leones, ursos, Pardos cum luce, vel quod est gravius nocte invenirent, ex quo pleri{que} exanimati sunt, and so forth. 
 By which words it is apparent, that those which in the first place he calleth Leopards, in the last place he calleth Pardals, and the only difference betwixt the Leopard, Pardal, and Lion, is that the Leopard or Pardal have no manes: and therefore they are called Ignobiles Leones. Isidorus and Solinus write in this manner: Pardus secundum post Pantheram est genus, varium ac velocissimum, &amp; praeceps ad sanguinem, saltu enim ad mortem ruit, ex ad ulterio Pardi &amp; Le nae, Leopardus noscitur, &amp; tertiam originem efficit. That is to say, the Pardal is the next kinde to a Panther, being divers coloured and very swift, greedy after bloud, and catcheth his prey by leaping: the Leopard is bred betwixt the Pardal and the Lioness, and so that maketh a third kinde: by which testimony it appeareth, that these names make three several kindes of Beasts, not distinct in nature, but in quantity, through commix∣ture of generation. 
 The greatest therefore they call Panthers, as Bellunensis writeth. The second they call Pardals, and the third, least of all, they call Leopards, which for the same cause in England is called a Cat of the Mountain. And truly in my opinion, until some other can shew me better reason I will subscribe hereunto, namely that they are all one kinde of Beast, and differ in quantity only through adulterous generation. For in Africk there is great want of waters, and therefore the Lions, Pan∣thers, Boytius. and other Beasts do assemble themselves in great numbers together at the running Rivers, where the Pardals and the Lions do engender one with another: I mean the greater Panthers with the Lionesses, and the greater Lions with the Panthers; and so likewise the smaller with the smaller, and thereby it cometh to pass that some of them are spotted, and some of them without spots. 
 The Pardal is a fierce and cruel Beast, very violent, having a body and minde like ravening birds, Pliny. and some say they are ingendered now and then betwixt Dogs and Panthers, or betwixt Leopards and Dogs, even as the Lycopanthers are ingendred betwixt Wolves and Panthers. It is the nature of these Pardals in Africk, to get up into the rough and thick trees, where they hide themselves amongst the boughes and leaves, and do not only take birds, but also from thence leap down up∣on Beasts and Men when they espy their advantage; and all these things do belong unto the Panthers. 
 Concerning the Leopard, the word it self is new and lately invented, for it is never found among any of the ancients, before Julius Capitolinus or Spartianus. Sylvaticus maketh no difference betwixt Par∣dalis Of the Leo∣pard. and Leopardus, and the Italians generally call a Pardal Leopardo, and never Pardo, except some of the Poets, for brevity sake in a verse. The Leopard is like to a Lion in the head and form of his members, but yet he is lesser and nothing so strong: by the sight of a Leopards skin Gesner made this description of the Beast: 
 The length (saith he) from the head to the tail, was as much as a mans stature, and half a cubit. The tail of it self three spans and a half, the breadth in the middle three spans, the colour a bright yellow distinguished into divers spots, the hair short and mossie. 
 The price of the skin was about five nobles, or forty shillings, for they differ in price, according to the Regions out of which they are brought, they which come furthest are sold dearest, and they which come less way are sold cheapest. It is a wrathful and an angry Beast, and whensoever it is sick, it thirsteth after the bloud of a wilde Cat, and recovereth by sucking that bloud, or else by eating the dung of a man. Above all other things it delighteth in the Camphory tree, and therefore lyeth underneath it, to keep it from spoil; and in like sort the Panther delighteth in sweet gums and spices, and therefore no marvel if they cannot abide Garlick, because it annoyeth their sense of smelling: And it is reported by S. Ambrose, that if the walls of ones house or sheep-coat be anointed with the juyce of Garlick, both Panthers and Leopards will run away from it, but of this matter we shall say more afterwards. 
 The Leopard is sometimes tamed, and used in stead of a Dog for hunting both among the Tarta∣rians, and other Princes, for they carry them behinde them on Horse-back, and when they see a Albertus. Deer or Hart, or convenient prey, they turn them down upon them sodainly, who take them and destroy them; yet such is the nature of this Beast, as also of the Pardal, that if he doe not take his prey at the fourth or fift jump, he falleth so angry and fierce, that he destroy∣eth whomsoever he meeteth, yea many times his Hunter. Therefore the Hunters have always a regard to carry with them a Lamb or a Kid, or some such live thing, wherewithal they pacific him after he hath missed his game, for without bloud he will never be appea ed: and thus much shall suffice to have spoken of the difference betwixt Panthers, Pardals, and Leopards, and their several names in Greek and Latine, from whom almost all Nations do derive their denomination, for the Italians call it Leonpardo; the French, Leopard, and Lyopard; and Germans, Lep∣pard, The names in other lan∣guages. and Lefarad, and Pantherthier; the Spaniards, Leonpardal, and Leopardo; the Illyrians, Leuhart; the Chaldeans, Nimra; and some make no difference betwixt this and the Arabian Wolf: The reason of the Greek word Pardalis, or Pordalis, (for they signifie both one) seemeth to me in most probabi∣lity to be derived from the Hebrew word Pardes, signifying a Garden, because as colours in a Gar∣den make it spotted, and render a fragrant smell, so the Panther is divers coloured like a Garden of sundry flowers, and also it is said to carry with him a most sweet savour whither soever he goeth, and therefore in ancient time they made their Ivory tables standing upon pictures of Panthers, whereof Juvenal writeth thus in one of his Satyres: 
 Olim ex quavis rbore mensa fie at, At nun divitbus c ndi nulla voluptas —nisi sustinet orbes Grande , &amp; magne sublimis Pardus iatu, Dentibus ex illis quos mit porta Syenes Jam nimi s capiti{que} graves, &amp;c. For the same cause Pardalis was the name of a notable Harlot, for as the Panthers by their sweet smells draw the Beasts unto them and then destroy them, so also do Harlots deck and adorn them∣selves with all alluring provocations, as it were with inchanted odours, to draw men unto them, of whom they make spoil and repine: There is a pretious stone also called Lapis Pantherus, brought out Evax. Sylvaticus. Albertus. Vartoman. Countries of Panthers. of India, whereupon if a man look before the Sun-rising he shall see divers colours, namely, black, red, green, russet, purple, and Rose colour, and they say it hath as many vertues as it hath colours, but I list not to follow the name any further. 
 The Countries breeding Panthers are Abasia in the Kingdom of Melacha, in the Isle of Sumatra. Likewise , especially Syria, for there are none in Europe, all Africk over they are plentiful, as in Lybia and Mauritania, where abound all store of wilde Beasts. Likewise beyond G p ; for Apol∣lonius and his companions saw there many Lions and Panthers. In Arabi the furthest part, namely the Promontory of Dyra towards the South, are the strongest Pardals of the world, (as saith Strab ) Likewise in the Mediterranean Region beyond Barygaza toward the South, unto Dachinabades, and to∣wards the East are all sorts of wilde Beasts, both Tygers and Panthers; and Diodorus writeth that in that part of Arabia, joyning upon Syria, there Lions and Pardals are both more in number and greater in quantity then in Lybia. 
 Also it is said by Volaterranus and Gillius, that the Panther of Lycia and Caria are very long, but yet weak and without carriage, being not able to leap far, yet is their skin so hard as no Iron can pierce. Betwixt the River Ganges and Hiphasis, Apollonius saw many Panthers. The Indians also breed many Leo Afric. and make them tame, and Leopards do live in the Woods of Barbaria. 
 It is apparent by that which is already said, that the Panther is the name of the greater Pardal, The several parts of Pan∣thers. and the Leopard of the lesser, which the Arabians call Alne , and Alfbead, Al r is bigger then a Linx, but like a Leopard, having greater and sharper nails and feet, black and terrible eyes, and therefore stronger, fiercer, and bolder then the Leopard, for it setteth upon men, and destroyeth them. Oppianus describeth both kindes in this manner, There are (saith he) two kindes of Par∣dals, a greater and a lesser, the greater are broader backe, and bigger in quantity, the lesser be∣ing less in quantity, but not inferior in strength: both of them have the same shape and colour of body, except in their tail: for the greater Pardal hath the lesser tail, and the lesser the greater: either of them have solid and found thighs, a very long body, bright seeing eyes, the apples where∣of do glister under their eye-lids, which are gray and red within like to burning coals, their teeth pale and venemous, their skin of divers colours, yet bright and pleasant, the spots standing like so many black eyes upon it: thus fat Oppianus. Such skins are oftentimes sold in the Marts of Europe which are brought in bundles twenty or thirty together, and it is not to be forgotten, which Vole∣terran citeth out of Aelianus, that there is in this kinde of Pardals a Beast called Bitis not unlike to the vulgar Leopards in all parts, except that is wanteth a tail; and they say that if this Beast be seen by a woman, it will instantly make her to be sick; but to proceed to the residue of the parts of these Beasts, we must remember that which Aristole writeth in his Physiognomy; as is recorded by Ada∣ : Leopersectis sim ideam prae se sert, Pardalis vero , exceptis, quibus ad invadendum fortiter utitur, that is to say: Among all Beasts the Lion doth most resemble the male, and the Pardal the female, except in the legs which she useth to take her prey. 
 In hath a little face, a little m nth, little ▪ somewhat white, plain, and not much hollow, along fore-head, ears rather round then smooth or broad, a neck very long and slender, the breast not well set out with ribs, because they are small; the back long, the buttocks and thighs very fleshy, the parts about the small of the belly or l ins are more smooth, less hollow and bunchy; the colour di∣vers, and the whole body , and not well compounded for the outward sight: and it is to be remembered (saith Gard ) that all ravening Beasts like a Cat, as Lions, Panthers, Linces; and Pardals, for they have in common the length and strength of their claws, beautiful party co∣loured skins; a little head and round face, a long tail, nimbleness of body, and wildeness of , living upon the meat they get in hunting. 
 The Persians call a Pardal , and Soaliger describeth it thus: In his red or yellow hair he is like a Lioness, but set with divers black spots both in length and breadth, as if they were pa ted. It hath a brown face, aspersed with black and white, and it is to be remembered, that as other Beasts are either all black, or all red, or all white, or all of one colour by nature, so also it is natu∣ral to Pea-cocks and Panthers, to have divers colours in them, for there are in Hircania Panthers with little round spots like eyes, both black, white, blew, and green, as both Solinus and Claudius te∣stifie, which caused Martial to write thus; Picto quod juga delicata collo Pardus sustinet. There is a land called Terra eremborum, inhabited by the Troglodytes and Sarazens in Lybia, where the upper Alb▪ rtus. Pliny. face of the earth is compared unto the Panthers skin, because through the heat of the Sun it is burned, and died as it were into divers colours; so that ye shall see divers spots of white, black, and green earth, as if it were done of purpose by the hand of man. The teeth of the Panther are like saws, as are also a Dogs and a Lions: their tongue of such incredible sharpness, that in licking it grateth like a file. 
 The females have four udders in the midst of their belly, the heart is great in proportion, because he is a violent Beast, terrifying man. There are many fissures in their feet. Their former feet have Aristotle. five distinct claws or fingers, and their hinder-feet but four, for little ones among four-footed beasts have five fingers upon their hinder-feet: when they go, they hide their nails within the skin of their feet, as it were in sheaths, never bringing them forth but when they are in their prey, to the intent they should never be broken nor dulled. Their tails have no long hairs at the end like a Lions or Oxes; and the Leopard hath a wider mouth then the Pardal. 
 The female is oftener times taken then the male, the reason is given by Volaterran; because she is inforced to seek abroad for her own meat and her young ones. The place of their aboad is among the Mountains and Woods, and especially they delight in the tree Camphory. They raven upon flesh The food of Panthers. both Birds and Beasts: for which cause they hide themselves in trees, especially in Mauritania, where they are not very swift of foot, and therefore they give themselves to take Apes, which they at∣tain by this policy: when they see the Apes, they make after them, who at their first approaching climbe up into the tops of trees, and there sit to avoid the Panthers teeth, for she is not able to fol∣low them so high, but yet she is more cunning then the Apes, and therefore deviseth more shifts to take them, that where nature hath denyed her bodily power, there she might supply that want by the gifts of the minde. Forth therefore she goeth, and under the tree where the Apes are lodged, she lyeth down as though she were dead, stretching out her limbs, and restraining her breath, shut∣ting her eyes, and shewing all other tokens of expiration. The Apes that sit on the tops of the tree behold from on high the behaviour of their adversary, and because all of them wish her dead, they more easily believe that which so much they desire, and yet dare not descend to make tryal. Then to end their doubts, they chuse out one from among them all, whom they think to be of the best courage, and him they send down as it were for an espy, to certifie all the residue: forth then he goeth with a thousand fears in his minde, and leapeth from bough to bough with no great hast, (for dread of an ill bargain:) yet being come down, dareth not approach high, but having taken a view of the counterfeit, and repressed his own fear, returneth back again: After a little space he descendeth the second time, and cometh nearer the Panther then before, yet returneth without touching him. Then he descendeth the third time, looking into his eyes, and maketh trial whether he draweth breath or no, but the Panther keepeth both breath and limbs immoveable, by that means im oldning the Apes to their own destruction; for the Spie-ape sitteth down beside the Panther, and stirreth not: now when those which are above in the tree, see how their intelligencer abideth constantly beside their adversary without harm, they gather their spirits together, and de∣scend down in great multitudes, running about the Panther, first of all going upon him, and after∣wards leaping with great joy and exultation, mocking this their adversary with all their apish toys, and testifying their joy for her supposed death: and in this sort the Panther suffereth them to con∣tinue a great season, till he perceiveth they are throughly wearied, and then upon a sudden he leap∣eth up alive again, taking some of them in his claws, destroying and killing them with teeth and nails, till he have prepared for himself a rich dinner out of his adversaries flesh. And like as Ʋlysses en∣dured all the contumelies and reproaches both of his maids and Wives suiters, until he had a just oc∣casion given him of revenge, so doth the Panther the disdainful dealing of the Apes▪ whereupon came the proverb, Pardi mort ni dissimulat, Thanaton Pardaleos hypo rinetai, against a cunning dis∣sembling fellow; such a one as Brutu was, who counterfeited madness that he might get the Empire. 
 So great is the love of this Beast to all Spices and Aromatical trees, that they come over all the Mountain Taurus through Armenia and Silia, when the windes bring the savour of the sweet gum Their love of spices. unto them, out of Pamphilia from the tree Storax: whereupon lyeth this story; There was a cer∣tain Panther which was taken by King Arsaces, and a golden collar put upon his neck, with this in∣scription; Rex Arsaces Deo Nisaeo, that is, King Arsaces to the God Bacchus: for Bacchus was called Nisaeu , of a City Nisae in India. This Beast grew very tame, and would suffer himself to be handled and stroked by the hands of men, until the Spring time that he winded the savour of the Aromatical trees, and then he would run away from all his acquaintance, according to his kinde, and so at last was taken in the neather part of the Mountain Taurus, which was many hundred miles distant from the Kings Court of Armenia. 
 We have shewed already how they love the gum of Camphory, watching that tree, to the end The savour or smell of Pan∣thers. to preserve it for their own use, and indeed as Aelianus saith: Admirab lem quantam od ris suavitatem o et Pardalis, quam bene olendi praestantiam divino munere donatam, cum sibi propriam plane tenet, tam tera animalia ejus hanc vim praeclare sentiunt: that is to say, The Panther or Pardal smelleth most sweetly, which savour he hath received from a divine gift, and doth only feel the benefit of it himself, but also bewray it unto other Beasts: for when he feeleth himself to be hungry and Aristotle. Volaterranus. stand in need of meat, then doth he get up into some rough tree, and by his savour or sweet smell, draweth unto him an innumerable company of wilde Goats, Harts, Roes, and Hindes, and such other Beasts, and so upon a sudden leapeth down upon them, when he espyeth his conveni∣ent time. 
 And Solinus saith, that the sweetness of his savour worketh the same effect upon them in the open fields, for they are so mightily delighted with his spotted skin and fragrant smell, that they will alwayes come running unto him from all parts, striving who shall come nearest him to be satis∣fied with the sight, but when once they look upon his fierce and grim face, they all are terrified and turn away: for which cause the subtle Beast, turneth away his head, and keepeth that from their sight, offering the more beautiful parts of his body, as an alluring bait to a Mouse, and destroy them: and from hence there are some which are of opinion, that he receiveth his name Panthera, of congregating together all kinde of Beasts to look on him, for Pan signifieth all, and Theria signifieth Beasts. Albertus is of opinion, that the report of the Panthers savour or sweet smell Isidorus. is but a fable, because (he saith) it is written as a Maxim among Philosophers, that Caetera. anima∣lia praeter hominem ne{que} suaviter ne{que} moleste odoribus affici, that is: That no creatures (man excepted) can be said to smell either sweetly or sowrely: and Theophractus writeth, Animal nullum penitus odo∣ratum est nisi qui dixerit Pardalin, belluarum censui bene olere, that is: There is no creature that can be said to be so odoriferous, except the Pardal seem to smell well to the scents of other Beasts: for it is cer∣tain, that there be some savours and smels which Beasts do follow and refuse, being led thereunto onely for the choise of their meat; for by their noses they choose that which is the convenient and agreeable to their natures, but that they should be drawn by any smells or savours meerly, and for no other cause but the pleasure of the scents, as it is a reasonable part in man, so it is unreasonable, to attribute the very same unto a Beast.
Monkeys are also the haters of Crocodiles, as is shewed in the story, and lie in wait to dis∣cover, and if it were in their power to destroy them. The Scorpion also and the Crocodile are ene∣mies one to the other, and therefore when the Egyptians will describe the combat of two notable enemies, they paint a Crocodile and a Scorpion fighting together, for ever one of them killeth ano∣ther: but if they will decipher a speedy overthrow to ones enemy, then they picture a Crocodile; if a slow and slack victory, they picture a Scorpion. And as we have already shewed out of Philes, that out of the egges of Crocodiles, many times come Scorpions, which devour and destroy them that lay them. 
 Fishes also in their kinde are enemies to Crocodiles, the first place whereof belongeth to the most noble Dolphin. Of these Dolphins it is thought there be two kindes, one bred in Nilus, the other forrain and coming out of the Sea, both of them professed enemies to the Crocodile: for the first, it hath upon the back of it sharp thorny prickles or fins, as sharp as any spears point, which are well known to the fish that beareth them, as her armour and weapons against all adversaries. In the trust and confidence of these prickles, the Dolphin will allure and draw out the Crocodile from his den or lodging place, into the depth of the River, and there fight with him hand to hand. For the Dolphin as it knoweth his own armour and defence, like other Beasts and Fishes, so doth it know the weakest parts of his adversary, and where his advantage of wounding lyeth. Now, Strabo. Solinus. as we have said already, the belly of the Crocodile is weak, having but a thin skin, and pene∣trable with small force, wherefore when the Dolphin hath the Crocodile in the midst of the deep waters, like one afraid of the fight, underneath him he goeth, and with his sharp fins or prickles on his back, giveth his weak and tender belly mortal wounds, whereby his vital spirits, with his guts and entrails, are quickly evacuated. The other Dolphins of the Sea being greater, are like∣wise armed with these prickles, and of purpose come out of the Sea into Nilus to bid battel to the Crocodiles. 
 When Bibillus (a worthy Roman) was Governor of Egypt, he affirmed that on a season the Dol∣phins Seneca. and the Crocodiles met in the mouth of Nilus, and bade battel the one to the other, as it were for the soveraignty of the waters, and after that sharp combat, it was seen how the Dolphins by diving in the waters, did avoid the biting of the Crocodiles, and the Crocodiles dyed by strokes re∣ceived from the Dolphins upon their bellies. And when many of them were by this means as it were Strabo. cut asunder, the residue betook themselves to flight, and ran away, giving way to the Dolphins. The Crocodiles do also fear to meddle with the Sea-hog, or Hog-fish, because of his bristles all about his head, which hurt him also when he cometh nigh him: or rather I suppose, as it is friend to the Swine of the earth, and holdeth with them a sympathy in nature, so it is unto the Swine of the water, and forbeareth one in the Sea, as it doth the other on the land. 
 There is likewise a certain wilde Ox or Bugil among the Parthians, which is an enemy to the Cro∣codile, for as Albertus writeth, if he finde or meet with a Crocodile out of the water, he is not only not afraid of him, but taketh heart and setteth upon him, and with the weight and violent agita∣tion of his body, treadeth him all to pieces: and no marvail, for all Beasts are enemies to the Cro∣codiles on the land, even as the Crocodile lyeth in wait to destroy all them in the water. Hawks are Orus. Aelianus. also enemies to Crocodiles, and especially the Ibis bird, so that if but a feather of the Ibis come up∣on the Crocodile by chance, or by direction of a mans hand, it maketh it immoveable and cannot stir. For which cause, when the Egyptians will write or decipher a ravening, greedy, idle-fellow, they paint a Crocodile, having an Ibis feather sticking in his head. And thus much for the enmity betwixt the Crocodiles and other living creatures. 
 It hath been seldom seen that Crocodiles were taken, yet it is said that men hunt them in the wa∣ters, for Pliny saith, that there is an assured perswasion, that with the gal &amp; fat of a Water-adder, men are wonderfully holpen, and as it were armed against Crocodiles, and by it enabled to take and destroy them, especially when they carry also about them the herb Potamegeton. There is also a kinde of thorny wilde Bean growing in Egypt, which hath many sharp prickles upon the stalks, this is a great terrour to the Crocodile, for he is in great dread of his eyes, which are very tender and easie to be wounded. Therefore he avoideth their sight, being more unwilling to adventure upon a Crescenst. man that beareth them, or one of them, then he is to adventure upon a man in compleat Armour, and therefore all the people plant great store of these, and also bear them in their hands when they travail. 
 There be many who in the hunting and prosecuting of these Crocodiles, do neither give them∣selves to run away from them, nor once to turn aside out of their common path or road, but in a foolish hardinesse, give themselves to combat with the Beast, when they might very well avoid the danger, but many times it hapneth that they pay dearly for their rashnesse, and repent too late the too much reputation of their own manhood: for whiles with their spears and sharp weapons they think to pierce his sides, they are deceived, for there is no part of him penetrable except his belly, and that he keepeth safe enough from his enemies, blunting upon his scales (no lesse hard then plates of Iron) all the violence of their blows and sharpnesse of weapons, but clubs, beetles, and such like weapons are more irksome to him, when they be set on with strength, battering the scales to his bo∣dy, and giving him such knocks as doth dismay and astonish him. Indeed there is no great use of the Diodorus. taking of this Serpent, nor profit of merchandize cometh thereby, his skin and flesh yeelding no great respect in the world. 
 In ancient time they took them with hooks baited with flesh, or else inclosed them with nets as they do fishes, and now and then with a strong Iron instrument cast out a boat down in the water up∣on the head of the Crocodile. And among all other there is this one worthy to be related. The Hunter would take off the skin from a Swines back, and therewithal cover his hook, whereby he al∣lured Herodotus. and inticed the Serpent into the midst of the River, and there making it fast, he went afterward to the next watering place, and there holding another Hog, did beat and smite him, till he cryed ardently, with which voyce or cry, the Crocodile being moved, goeth presently to the bait and swal∣loweth it up, and maketh after the noise: at last, coming to the land, the Hunter with valiant cou∣rage and diligence, casteth mud and dirt into his eyes, and so blindeth him that he may oppresse and kill him with ease. 
 Leo Afric. relateth also this means or way to take Crocodiles: There be many Trees planted upon the banks of Nilus, unto one of these there is a long and strong rope tyed, and at the end of the same there is fastened a hook of a cubit long, and a finger in quantity: unto this hook for a bait is tyed a Ram or a Goat, which being set close to the River, and tormented with the hook upon which it is fastened, cryeth out amain, by hearing of whose voyce, the hunger-greedy Crocodile is raised out of his den, and invited as he thinketh to a rich prey, so he cometh (although it self of a trecherous nature, yet suspecteth not any other) and swalloweth the bait, in which he findeth a hook not to be digested. Then away he striveth to go, but the strength of the rope stayeth his journey, for as fast as the bait was to the rope and hook, so fast is he also ensnared and tyed unto it, which while he waveth and straineth to unloose and break, he wearyeth himself in vain. And to the intent that all his strength may be spent against the tree and the rope, the Hunters are at one end thereof, and cause it to be cast to and fro, pulling it in, and now letting it go again, now terrifying the Beast with one noise and fear, and anon with another, so long as they perceive in him any spirit of mo∣ving or resistance: so being quieted, to him they come, and with clubs, spears, beetles, staves, and such manner of instruments, pierce through the most tenderest parts of his body and so destroy him. 
 Peter Martyr hath also other means of taking Crocodiles. Their nature is, that when they goe to the land to forrage and seek after a prey, they cannot return back again but by the same footsteps of their own which they left imprinted in the sand: whereupon, when the Countrey people per∣ceive these footsteps, instantly with all the hast they can make, they come with spades and mattocks and make a great ditch, and with boughs cover the same, so as the Serpent may not espy it, and up∣on the boughs they also again lay sand to avoid all occasion of deceit or suspicion of fraud at his return: then when all things are thus prepared, they hunt the Crocodile by the foot untill they finde him, then with noises of bells, pans, kettels, and such like things, they terrifie and make him return as fast as fear can make him run towards the waters again, and they follow him as neer as they can, until he falleth into the ditch, where they come all about him, and kill him with such instruments or weapons as they have prepared for him, and so being slain, they carry him to the great City Cair, where for their reward they receive ten pieces of gold, which amounteth to the value of ten nobles of our English coin. 
 There have been some brought into that City alive, as P. Martyr affirmeth, whereof one was as much as two Oxen and two Camels could bear and draw, and at the same time there was one taken by this devise before expressed, which had entered into a Village in Saetum neer Nilus, and swallowed up alive three young Infants sleeping in one Cradle, the said Infants scarcely dead were taken again out of his belly, and soon after when no more tokens of life appeared, they were all three buryed in a better and more proper grave of the earth. Then also there was another slain, and out of his belly was taken a whole Ram not digested, nor any part of him consumed, and the hand of a woman which was bitten or torn off from her body above the wrist, for there was upon the same a Bracelet of Brasse. 
 We do read that Crocodiles have been taken and brought alive to Rome. The first that ever Pliny. Capitolinus. Lampridius. brought them thither, was Marcus Scaurus, who in the games of his aedility, brought five forth and shewed them to the people in a great pond of water, (which he had provided only for that time) and afterward Heliogabalus and Antoninus Pius. The Indians have a kinde of Crocodile in Ganges, which hath a horn growing out of his nose like a Rhinocerot: unto this Beast they cast condemned men to be devoured, for in all their executions, they want not the help of men, seeing they are provided of Beasts to do the office of Hang-men. 
 Aurelius Festivus writeth, that Firmus a Tyrant of Egypt, being condemned to Nilus to be devoured by Crocodiles, beforehand bought a great quantity of the fat of Crocodiles, and so stripping him∣self stark naked, laid the same over his body, so he went among the Crocodiles and escaped death: for this savage Beast being deceived with the savour of its own nature, spared the man that had but so cunningly carryed it. And this is a wonderful work of Almighty GOD, that so order∣eth Vadianus. his actions in the nature of this Beast, that he beguileth the cruel nature of the living, by the tast and savour of the dead: howbeit some think that the water Crocodile is daunted with the savour of the fat from the land Crocodile, and the land Crocodile by the water again. 
 And some again say, that all venomous Beasts run away from the savour of the fat thereof; and Aetius. therefore no marvail if it also be afraid, being venomous as well as any other. Wherefore the saying of Firmus was not to be attributed to any indulgence of the Crocodile toward their own kinde, but rather to a deadly antipathy reflecting themselves upon themselves, though not in shape and figure as the Cockatrice, yet in sense, savour, and rancknesse of their pestiferous humor. 
 The use of Crocodiles taken, is for their skin, flesh, caul and medicine arising out of it. Their P. Martyr. skin as it is exceeding hard upon their backs while they are alive, so is it also when they are dead, for with that the common people make them better armour then coats of Mail, against Darts, Spear, or Shield, as is well known in all Egypt at this day. For the flesh of Crocodiles, it is also eaten among those people that do not worship it: as namely the people about Elephantina Apollinopolis. Notwithstanding by the Law of God, Levit. 11. it is accounted an unclean Beast, yet the tast there∣of Herodotus. being found pleasant, and the relish good, without respect of GOD or health, the common peo∣ple make use thereof. 
 The medicines arising out of it are also many. The first place belongeth to the caul, which hath moe benefits or vertues in it then can be expressed. The bloud of a Crocodile is held profitable for many things, and among other it is thought to cure the bitings of any Serpent. Also by anointing Dioscorides. the eyes, it cureth both the dregs or spots of bloud in them, and also restoreth soundnesse and clear∣nesse to the sight, taking away all dulnesse or deadnesse from the eyes. And it is said, that if a man Pliny. take the liquor which cometh from a piece of a Crocodile fryed, and anoint there withall his wound or harmed part, that then he shall be presently rid of all pain and torment. The skin both of the Arnoldus. land and water Crocodile dryed into powder, and the same powder with Vinegar or Oyl, laid upon a part or member of the body, to be seared, cut off, or lanced, taketh away all sense and feeling of pain from the instrument in the action. 
 All the Egyptians do with the fat or sewet of a Crocodile anoint all them that be sick of Feavers for it hath the same operation which the fat of a Sea-dog or Dog-fish hath, and if those parts o, men and beasts which are hurt or wounded with Crocodiles teeth, be anointed with this fat, it also cureth them. Being concocted with water and Vinegar, and so rowled up and down in the mouth, Aetius. Rhazes. it cureth the tooth-ach: and also it is outwardly applyed against the biting of Flies, Spiders, Worms, and such like, for this cause, as also because it is thought to cure Wens, bunches in the flesh, and old wounds. It is sold dear, and held pretious in Alcair. Scaliger writeth, that it cureth the Gangren. The canine teeth which are hollow, filled with Frankincense, and tyed to a man or wo∣man which hath the Tooth-ach, cureth them, if the party know not of the carrying them about: And so they write, that if the little stones which are in their belly be taken forth and so used, they work the same effect against Feavers. The dung is profitable against the falling off of the hair, and many such other things. 
 The biting of a Crocodile is very sharp, deep, and deadly, so that wheresoever he layeth his teeth, Aetius. seldom or never followeth any cure. But yet the counsel of Physitians is, that so soon as the pati∣ent is wounded, he must be brought into a close chamber where are no windows, and there be kept without change of air, or admission of light, for the poyson of the Crocodile worketh by cold air and light; and therefore by the want of both is to be cured. But for remedy (if any be) they Arnoldus. prescribe the same which is given for the cure of the biting of a mad Dog, or (as Avicen) the biting of a Dog not mad. But most proper is the dung of a man, the Fish Garum and Mysy pounded toge∣ther, and so applyed, or else the broth of salt sod flesh, and such other things as are vulgarly known to every Physitian: and therefore seeing we live in a countrey far from the annoyance of this Ser∣pent, I shall not need to blot any paper to expresse the cure of this poyson. 
 The Crocodile of Nilus only liveth on land and water, all other are contented with one element: Bellonius. the picture of the Crocodile was wont to be stamped upon coin, and the skin hanged up in many fa∣mous Cities of the world, for the admiration of the people, and there is one at this day at Paris in France. 
 Of the Arabian or Egyptian LAND CROCODILE. 
 THe figure of this Crocodile sheweth evidently the difference betwixt him and the other of Nilus; and beside it is neither so tall or long as is the other, the which proportioned Beast is only particular to Egypt and Arabia, and some because of his scaly head, legs, articles, and claws, have observed another difference in it from the former: yet in his nature, manner of living and preying upon other cattel, it differeth not from that of the water. The tail of this Crocodile is very sharp, and standeth up like the edges of wedges in bunches above the ground, wherewithal when he hath mounted himself up upon the back of a Beast, he beateth and striketh the beast most cruel∣ly, to make him go with his Rider to the place of his most fit execution, free from all rescue of his Heard-man or Pastor, or annoyance of passengers, where in most cruel and savage manner he tear∣eth the limbs and parts one from another till he be devoured. The Apothecaries of Italy have this Beast in their shops to be seen, and they call it Caudiverbera, that is, a Tail-bearer, for the reason aforesaid. And thus there being nothing in this Beasts nature different from the former, besides his figure, and that which I have already expressed, I will not trouble the Reader with any more Nar∣ration about it.
Pliny would have raw flesh, if it be sweet and fresh, to be laid for them to feed upon. Ge∣nerally all sweet things and of pleasant smell they covet, though at a great distance, not so much for the smells sake, but as being their natural food, as Flies feed upon wine. No odorife∣rous and fragrant flowers do they refuse; from whence they are in the Latine called Florilegae, in the Greek, , from the delight they take in them, and their greedinesse in gathering them. 
 The Plants most acceptable to Bees, are the white and red Thyme, Melicor, the Myrtle, the Willow, the Broom, Lavander, Beans, wilde Thyme, Violets, Kexes, Rosemary, sweet Fleabane, Almonds, Heath, the Tamarisk, the Cytisus, Casia, Daffodil, Asphodil, but chiefly Balm▪ con∣cerning which Macer sang these macilent verses: 
 That herb the Greeks call Balm, the Bees approve▪ And above other plants do highly love; No flower or plant doth please them half so much. Also the Ivy, black. Hellebore, Origanum, Savoury, wilde Violets, sweet Marjoram, the Hya∣cynth, the Palm-tree, the wilde Olive-tree, the Flower-de-luce, Saffron, Rose, Lilly, the Ju∣niper-tree, Pear-tree, Peach-tree, Turpentine, Mastick, Cedar, Tiel-tree, the smaller Oak, goldy∣locks, wilde Saffron, Cumila, flowers of Mustard, French Spondilium, Crowfoot, purging Thom, all trees that bear Mast, Apple-trees which have no bitternesse in their blossoms: moreover they feed greedily on the flowers of dead Nettles both white and yellow, whereupon this herb by the Helvetians is called (Biensauge) as if you would say, sucked by Bees. 
 As for their drink, if there be but a river or running water hard by in which there are stones, or pieces of wood cast (upon which they may light conveniently, and bath or wash themselves) Drink. they go no farther to drink, if there be none, they fetch their draught other where and quench their thirst, and when they have done, they carry of the same liquor to their King or Master-Bee, and to those that are at work within (as hath been said before). 
 Whatsoever they eat or drink, must be undefiled, pure, sweet, and without any stench or pu∣trefaction whatsoever. 
 Yea, so cleanly do they live, that if a menstruous woman come near them; they are re∣ported to forsake their food and feed no longer, as also those that use sweet oyls or perfumes about their bodies, and those that are given to overmuch lechery they hate above measure, and can by no means endure: also all things that smell of oyl or smoke, and dung and durt, they are very shie of coming near, nor will they touch any thing that savours of any such matter. All hurtful herbs, all that have any bitter, purgative, unpleasant or poysonous quality in them; they forbear Wormwood, Rhubarb, Senna, Savin, Tithymals, Hellebore, Wood-laurel, Coccus gni∣dius, Thapsia, wilde Cucumers, Yew, Rhododendros, Wolfs-bane, they will not once taste of. 
 When they have laboured hard all the day, and come home weary, a certain signal or token being given, (as is above mentioned) they take their rest. The which oftentimes is many waies disturbed and hindred, and by this means the Swarm being astonished and over wak ' d do die: sometimes the Gad-bee or Horse-fly molests them, sometimes the Bear making a noise wakes them, sometimes the approach of the enemy affrighteth them, viz. the Lizzard, Spider, or the land Toad; in which regard the Comet presently sounds an alarm, and calls them all forth to arms in the night. If it happen to thunder or lighten by night, they are all presently in an uproar or tumult as if there should be a mutiny in the Army, or some fatal battel to be fought. And the reason of it is in regard of the unwontednesse of the light at such a time, as also because they are afraid, and that not without cause, lest their Hives being shaken, the combs should be disordered and displaced, or their little waxen vessels being melted, the Honey should run out. That this is true by experience, no man can better speak then Dr. Penny and my self, who in the moneth of August 1586. whilest we sate up and watched by the Coun∣tesse of Somerset then a widow lying dangerously sick, together with her two noble Daughters Mary and Elizabeth, on a sudden (after a great clap of Thunder) under the next ceiling between the joy ts, we heard a great noise, as it had been an alarm of war, and as we thought the floor did resound with the noise; being altogether ignorant of that (which indeed was the matter) that Bees did harbour between the rafters and the ceiling; where it seems they had remained for 30 years together, and every year to have yeelded two▪ or three Swarms, as we understood afterwards by those which were eye witnesses of the same, and they of the chief Nobility, who affirmed it to be for certain. The next day for want of sleep they flew about making a hoarse noise, trembling, and not knowing what they did; they did touch those things which naturally they could not endure, they did dash themselves poor creatures against the windows, they did not spa e to sting their friends and those that looked to them, even to the admiration of all that stood by and observed them. From whence we conclude without all doubt; that Bees are most patient of labour in the day time, but most impatient of being scared in the night, and of being disturbed of their rest. 
 From whence they seem to have gained the name or Epithet of Solisequae, or Sun-followers, for with it they rise, and with it they rest. None of them take so much as a wink of sleep all the day long, and all of them in the night sleep very soundly. 
 Now their exercise is of two sorts, either they fly abroad for their pleasure, or tarry at home Exercise of Bees. and work for necessity. If that be denied them (the Crocodile, Swallow, Lizzard, Spider, or other strange Bees intercepting them) either by reason of intemperate weather, or long rain they become pursie, unwieldy and nummed in their limbs, grow into diseases, and shortly after die, especially in the summer season, which is the only time they have to exercise themselves abro d in the open air. When they have refreshed themselves with flying about, then they bath and wash themselves clean, and afterwards they lightly rub themselves smooth with leaves. Moreover also sometimes they carry little stones, sometimes they carry water, and as little things as they are, will break through the wind though it sit against them; and they will in a bravado, yea they will venture their very lives also to fight with the greatest of beasts; Horses, Elephants, Dogs, yea and Men too (Archilochus was of this opinion) if they offend them and quarrel with them they wound, and with their stings often and fiercely thrust into their bodies, they kill them. Sometimes they appoint duels one with another, not in earnest, but in jest, for exercise and recreation, not with any intent to hurt one another. They will play together oftentimes, and tickle one another, and like Doves bill and kisse each other, after which without doubt they couple together also, but at what time after, in what place, after what manner, let that all-eyed Argus tell, who alone sits by the Elephants and knowes when they engender, which no man ever yet saw but God. 
 Now as they perform the aforesaid exercises of slying, of fencing, of carrying of stones, &amp;c. for their recreation, so necessity the mistresse of Arts hath inured them to domestick labour, to which they diligently, not lazily apply themselves, no day (if the weather let not) is spent idly; but how long they work, that wholly depends upon the constitution of the Climate, or the air. For in cold Countreys from the setting of the Pleiades or seven-stars, to the Vernal or spring Aequinoctial (or thereabout) they keep close within their Hives; but like Dormice without food, sleeping, and so they continue rouled▪ up together like a ball, in a heap; nor do they stir a jot from the place where they are: for else how should such little creatures as they, be able to endure frost and snow, and the bleak gusts of the north wind? But if the temper of the year be more warm, and so continue for a great while together,  ' tis longer ere they leave their work, and that Aethiopia proves by manifest experience, where through continual heat, and almost no cold that is there, the Bees work almost all the year long. 
 But in Europe they seldom go abroad before the beans begin to bloom or blossom, (as Pliny witnesseth) which they taste of the first of all flowers or herbs whatsoever. Servius dreams that when winter drawes on, they stop their mouths with juice and flowers, and with these keeping in their Hive to sustain themselves. But in summer they never loyter at all, but exercise them∣selves in constant employment; and when they have gotten such a numerous off-spring that one house will not hold them, in the moneth of May they make a solemn expedition, and divide themselves into several Swarms hanging upon the boughs of trees like bunches of Grapes. The elder Bees afterwards making two or three rounds or circles in the air go to their food and return to their Hives: the young smarm or colony thus sent forth and left, unlesse they be entertai∣ned with fresh Hives, wander up and down the woods, untill the publick overseers and hospi∣tary Bees have found a fit place for the Swarm to settle in. 
 Now having spoken of their exercise, in the next place let us enter upon the description of the places or houses where they are to reside, which the Greeks call , &amp;c. The Latines, Alvus, Alveus, Alvearium, &amp;c. 
 Now about these for the conservation of the Bees, three things are requisite or needfull. The fashion or form, preparation, position, and the fitnesse of the place where they are to be set. The best receptacles for them, are made with barks, but especially with cork, which in the heat of Summer doth not scorch them, and in the Winter is very good to keep out the cold. The Ancients were wont to make them of an hollow tree, or of boards artificially joyned together, also they were used to be very handsomely made of Reeds, or of the Holm∣tree wreathed or twisted together. Those of earth are counted the worst of all, as also those that are made of Brick, or Clay, because in Summer they are over hot, and in Winter as ex∣treme cold. And yet (as I hear) in Hungary they have certain thick pots or vessels to hang up from the ground, and these they hang up in Trees, for the Bees to make their Combs in; which when they have done, they at a certain time take away again. Some make them of Mud or▪ dirt, but these likewise have their inconveniences and discommodities. 
 The English use to enclose them in Hives artificially wrought and built of straw; that in Winter they should not be starved, nor in the Summer sweltered with heat. The Ancients were wont to make them of a kinde of transparent Stone, of Horn, and Glasse, to the intent that they might look in upon them and see how they wrought. But the Bees lay a first, second, and third covering over their work withinside (as I said before) whence they perceived they lost their cost and labour in that contrivance, as being never the near by that way to gain their purpose. 
 Let the form of the Hives be after the manner of an Egge, the yolk and the white being clean taken out, as when we eat it, a little of the end being pared off. 
 Moreover the Hives ought to consist of twelve rounds or wreaths of straw woven together after this manner. 
 The 3 first lowermost must be of one size or bignesse, a foot and a half in breadth: The 4 next above them are to be a little bigger and more capacious, that the combs may be the better fastened, and may hang more steady: The other 5 circles or rounds are to be nar∣rowed and made steep up to the top by degrees, in the likenesse of a spire or pyramide; but the whole Hive ought to be of that content and bignesse that it may contain in it in all about 20 l. weight. Let the mouthes or passages into the Hives (by which the Bees are to go out and in) be about three or four; and no bigger than that the Bees when laden with Honey may well go in; for by this means, the Lizzard, or Beetle, venemous Spider, Moths, using to rob their Hives, are barred of their entrance; and the Hive will not be so obnoxious to frost, and the extremi∣ties of the winter season. Above these they use to make 4 doors, also windowes to shut down with bolts, 2 before, and 2 behinde, that they may the better take out the Combs, with lesse disturbance to the Bees in their making Honey. 
 The preparation or seasoning of the Hive after it is made, is reported to be divers. The English do take in new Swarms into new Hives, without perfuming or anointing them at all. The Ancients after they had made them very clean, did use to rub them all over within with Balm, Thyme, Fennel; and did sprinkle them with some sweet thing made of honey sugred, or with sweet wine or metheglin, that so they might the more willingly come into them, and the longer remain in them. Palladius was wont to anoint the insides of the Hive with the dung of the first calf tha the Cow hath; and this he accounted for a chief secret to retain Bees in the Hive. Moreover it is requisite that about the midst of the Hive there should three or four sticks be laid a cros e to hold up the Combs; and then they are not subject with any light shaking of them to fall down; and are more easily if need be, taken away. Take heed also there be no chinks or clifts in them, whereby they may be annoyed with heat, cold, dust, vermine, the Cankerworm. 
 As for the Placing or setting of Bees, it is convenient that the Hives should be mounted on Placing of the Bees. forms, or stools, that they be not dirty or mouldy with standing on the ground, and that they may live more secure from noxious and hurtful beasts. Let their standings be made of stones, chaulk, elm, or oak; three foot high, covered over with slat tile, or pargeting, or whitelime, and that very smooth and sleek, that those Honey and Bee-devouring creatures may not be able to climb up. Let them also be set shelving or casting forwards, lest the rain-water setling upon them should soak and wooze into their Hives: for which cause (as Columella witnesseth) they were wont to be placed in hollowed walls or porches of Cities. Let there be two handfuls di∣stance between every Hive, that one shogging or shaking, the next may stand unmoved, as it is usual when they are set close together. 
 Now as for their Ranks or rowes how many they should be; they are not to be above three at the most; of which, let the younger Bees have the first, the second sort or middle aged, the middlemost, and the elder Bees, the highest or uppermost place. But yet both the Hives and the forms whereon they are set must be conveniently placed for the benefit and advantage of the Swarm; in hot Countreys, towards the North; in cold, towards the South; yea in Aethi∣opia by reason of the excessive heat, and scorching of the Sun, they keep them in their houses, a sufficient gap being made in the wall for them to go in and out at; lest their combs should be melted. Let the place where they are, be open, not over hot in Summer, nor very cold in Winter, quiet from wind, not woody, not inclosed with an over high wall or pale, not against a place where any eccho is given, planted with natural and ordinary food, remote from the company of men or cattel which may crop or shake off the dew from the flowers; near no jakes, privy-houses, dung-hils, common-shores, standing ponds, bogs, gallows or place of exe∣cution, Church-yards, or where bodies use to be buried; and so ordered that it may be in the bottome of a hill or in a valley, to the intent the Bees being laden may with greater ease fly down to their Hives. To conclude, if there be a wind above other that doth infest any coun∣trey, in that, let the Hives be placed where they may suffer the least harm, and in no wise let them have any doors open against it. But this diet is necessary for the tame Bees for to main∣tain their lives; now as for the wilde and wood Bees, they live after another manner, they chuse their places of residence themselves, and furnish them accordingly. n the Countrey of the Abissines under Prester John, the Bees live in the Tradesmens houses, and slying up and down amongst them without fear, hang up their Combs, their hives being made fast to the beams or joyces of the same, without any harm at all to those that work in the place. Moreover in many places in England they have been known to have taken up their harbour▪ of their own accord, and that for a long time together between the rafters and the ceiling of houses, and in the hollow trunks of trees, and from thence the old Bees have sent forth three or four swarms of young ones in one year. And (what is worthy to be noted) they live here longer and more happily, then in their artificial woven Hives, with so great diligence perfumed, so curiously set, ordered, digested and placed. But yet I commend their industry who have freed the Bees from this trou∣ble, and have no lesse ingeniously built them houses to keep them from wind and weather. But they above all the rest deserve commendation who have found out how to cure the diseases of their bodies and mindes, inward and outward, and have had the skill how to apply them accor∣dingly. The passions or distempers of their mindes with which they are most troubled, are An∣ger, Grief, and Fear. For they very hardly digest injuries, and they betray a great deal of cho∣ler and spleen to be in them, by their often fighting, even amongst themselves. For if they over abound with issue, they are all in an uproar about their cells and lodgings, nor can the quarrel be composed, till many are slain on either party; or being divided into faction, they do of their own accord seek other places of habitation. More then this, even the souldiers of the same Co∣lony, when they (for some private grudge or jealousie fall into a rage) they make war, and fall foul one upon the other: the which the wary Bee-master espying, and casting in dust or cold water by squirts in at the vent holes, where they go in and out, or making a terrible and hoarse noise with the palms of his hands, doth before it be too late pacifie. For if he should let them fight on, they would be so mad and cruel one against the other, that they would never be quiet till they were all killed.
First of all, their bodies assoon as they as they are taken out of the Hive, and pounded and drank with some diuretick, or wine and milk; do strongly cure the dropsie, dissolve Their use in Medicine. the stone or gravel, open all the passages of the urine, cure the stopping of the bladder. Bees that die in the honey, cure impostumes, and help the dulnesse of sight or hearing. Also being pounded together they cure the griping or wringing of the belly or guts, being applied to them. If poysoned honey be drank, they themselves being drank down after it, do expell it: they soften hard ulcers in the lips; being bound to a carbuncle or running sore, they heal it; they cure the bloudy flix. Honey being strained with them, helps the crudities of the stomach, or specks or red pimples in the face, as you may see in Hollerius, Alexander Bened. and especially in Pli∣ny. Take Bees dead in the combs, and when they are through dry make them into powder, as Galen in Euporist. writes, mingle them with the Honey in which they died, and annoint the parts of the head that are bald and thin haired, and you shall see them grow again. Pliny in like manner teaches to burn a great company of Bees together, and mingle the ashes with oyl, and anoint the part; only with this caution, that the adjacent parts be not touched therewith; yea, Honey scraped of Bees that are dead, he affirms to be very soveraign in all diseases, and very useful. Erotis in his 61. chap. de Morb. mulieb. tells us that their Ashes beaten with oyl, is good to make the hair white. 
 Moreover, Bees are very profitable and useful in regard they serve for food to other creatures; as to the Bear, Lizzard, Frog, Serpents, Spiders, Wasps, Swallows, Houp, Robin-red-brest, Tit∣mouse or Muskin; as Bellonius hath observed. 
 Palladius saith, that some men are wont to take great delight in hunting after them; and he tells you how you shall finde them out in these words. In the moneth of April, in sunny pla∣ces, if the Bees do frequently resort thither, either for food or water, then certain it is, that their nest or Honey-shop is not far off, but if there come thither but a few in a company, then  ' tis a sign that they harbour farther off. But when they come very thick, by this trick you shall finde out their Swarms, take a little wet Oaker and mark them on the back, and there remain, while those that were mark ' d return back thither again, if they make a speedy return, then they make their abode not far off; but if they tarry more then ordinary, then they reside farther off. Now by this means those that are hard by may easily be found out; but to come at them that are more remote and farther off, do thus; take a piece of a Cane and cut it off at either end at the joynt, and make a hole in the midst of it; there put in a little honey, or sweet wine boyled half away, and lay it by the side of the fountain or water where they resort: when the Bees come thither, and are drawn in by the sent of the honey, hold your thumb close upon the hole, and suffer but one Bee to go out at once, follow that as far as you can well discern him, when that is out of sight let go another, and by this conduct at length you will easily finde the place where the Swarm is. If it be in some hole or cavern of the earth; make but a smoke upon the mouth of it, and all the swarm will hurry out, and when they come forth, being a little scared, with the tinkling of a brass pan, they will hang themselves upon a little bough as it were a bunch of grapes, from whence having a vessel to put them in, you may take them away. If they chance to make their nest in the arm of a tree, then take a sharp saw and saw off the bough above and below them, and cover the middle part where they are, with a clean cover, then carry them where you please, and put them in a Hive. 
 By this Art you may finde their Swarms where they use in woods, dens, or hollow places, sto∣ny or craggy rocks, or any place whatsoever: only see that you begin your sport betime in the morning, lest the night overtake you, and you lose your game. Neither only are they delight∣full sport to them that hunt them in the day time; but also (if Fabritius and Artemidorus do not deceive us) if a man light upon them in his dream when he is a sleep; if he be a poor man, it foretells he shall be rich; if a King or a great man, that his subjects, or those that are under him will be loving and obedient. But he that dreams he had a stock of Bees, but in present hath them not,  ' tis a sign of a decaying estate, and of some imminent approaching dis aster to befall. Of so great use are Bees: and so variously hath dame Nature the contriver of all things, spotted her self, or rather taken great pains indeed in furnishing them with such rare qualities of all forts, as where with you have heard them to be endowed. 
 But to what purpose is (will you say) that sting, against whose poyson and venome Pliny him∣self ew no remedy? I confess, and experience teacheth as much, that Bees stings are some-times venomous; but it is only of those Bees which are raving mad, or burning with some fea∣ver, anger, or hunger. Otherwise they do little or no harm at all: and therefore Dioscorides did not deign so much as to mention the symptomes of the stinging of Bees; supposing it a childish simple thing for any man so much as to complain of the sting of a poor little Bee: later writers observe that the sting is accompanied with redness and tumor, especially if the sting do yet stick fast in the flesh, which if it go in very deep sometimes proves mortal, as Nicander writes in his The iaca. The Ancients (that we may prove the sting of Bees to be converted to some good use) as Suidas reports, were wont to punish cheaters with them on this manner; They strip the malefactor stark naked, and besmeared his body all over with Honey, which done, and his hands and feet being bound, they exposed him to the heat of the scorching Sun, that what with the piercing raies beating upon his body, what with the stinging of the Bees and flies, and their of∣ten stabbing and wounding him, he did at length suffer a death answerable to his life. but if you would indeed resolve to go sting-free, or at least heal your self being stung; expell out of your minde, idleness, impiety, theft, malice; for those that are defil ' d with those vices, they set upon to chuse as it were, and out of natural instinct. Beware also in especial manner, you wear not red garments, which might represent you to them, to be a murtherer or man of bloud; as also that you be not taken by them for an unchaste or unclean person, which it seems they naturally know and abominate (as hath been said before) They which carry the bill of a Wood-pecker in their hands when they come near them, although they do somewhat disturb their Swarms, yet (as Pliny saith) the Bees will not hurt them. Nonnius reports, that if you rub and beat to pow∣der the herb called Balm-mint, or Balm-gentle, their stings will not be able to hurt you. Florentius gives in charge, that he that is to gather the honey should annoint himself with the oyl or juice of Marshmallowes, whereby he may take away the combs without danger. But the juice of any Mallowes whatsoever will do the like; and the better if they be rubbed with oyl; for it doth both preserve from stinging, and is a remedy to those that are stung. But be it granted that dis∣eases be contracted by their stingings; yet  ' tis but taking a few of these Bees that are found dead in the Honey, and let them be carefully applied, and they presently cure them; and take away all the venome and aking of them. 
 What shall I say? God never created a creature lesse chargeable, and more profitable. They are bought for a very little money, they will live in all places whatsoever, even in woody and mountainous Countreys. The poor as well as the rich gain a great return or revenue by keeping of them, and yet need they not put more in the pot, or keep a servant the more for them. Me∣rula reports that Varro rented out his stocks of Bees, for 5000 l. of Honey; and in Spain out of a little Village containing not above an Acre at most, that he gained of the Honey there ga∣thered 10000 Sestercies, i. e. 50 l. of our English money in one year. Besides all this, we have from their shops or store-houses, Wax, Bee-bread, Bee-glew, Rosin, Honey-combs such as no Common wealth can well be without; not to repeat their virtues, which are no less wholsome for the minde, then those are profitable for the body and maintenance of life. And first of all we will treat of Honey, that immortal, nectareal, pleasant, wholsome juice, and principal of all works and operations. 
 CHAP. V. Of the Name, Difference and Ʋse of Honey. AT the first Honey had but one name, called in the Hebrew Dabesch; but since that strange and confused Polyglottology, or speaking with divers tongues it was called of the inhabi∣tants of Arabia, Hel, Han; of the French, Miel; of the Italians, Mele; of the Dutch, Honich∣ em; of the Germans, Honig; of the English, Honey: the Greeks called it, , from the admi∣rable care and industry of the Bee in making of it, as Eustachius notes: from whence comes , Melitellum, of , in Porphiry. This for the Name: But what it is yet after all is much controve sed amongst the learned. Some there are that fondly conceit it to be the spittle of the The Definiti∣on of Honey. Planets, or the gelly falling from the Stars; others, the purging of the Air, or the sweat of the Heavens; but in my judgement it may more properly be termed the Chylus of the Bees, gathered from some sweet matter, but having its perfection and consummation from their ventricles; and afterwards by expuition or vomit cast out into the cells or Honey-combs. Aristotle, Pliny, Avi∣cen, Seneca, would have the Bees not be makers of the Honey, but only gatherers of it: for thus they write; The Bees, (say they) do gather the Honey from the dew of the air, especially at the rising of certain Stars, and from the conjunction of the Rain-bow; for they make no Honey, but Honey-combs only. Galen also lib. 3. de Alim. fac. hath these words: I remember (saith he) upon a time, in Summer we gathered a great quantity of Honey from the leaves of the trees, and then the Countrey in way of sport sang, Jupiter rains Honey. But then the night before had been exceeding cold, as it could be in Summer: by the strength whereof the sweet exhalations, and va∣pours being drawn up by the Sun were congealed together. Now with us this is a very rare ac∣cident; but in Mount Libanus it happens every year: and therefore they spread skins upon the ground under the trees, and shake them, and the Aerial Honey that falls from them, they put up in pots, and earthen vessels. Now Honey, as all other things, do differ in substance or matter, it is either Aerial or Terrestrial; Aerial Hony is one thing, Terrestrial another: For in the moneths of May, June, and July, a kinde of heavenly Ambrosia falls down upon the leaves of plants (which they call honey dew, but I rather mieldew) very sweet in taste, liquid, pure, and as sweet as sugar it self; this being gathered and drank in, the Bees I grant do ripen or bring to maturity, but that they make any real mutation, I constantly deny; unlesse perchance you will say that the refining the dew, is an alteration of the species. Gal. lib. 3. de Alim. fac. affirms that the matter of Ho∣ney is not the very dew it self, but something near of kin to it: the which Bees gathering do cast up again into their cells, but they do not change the species of the juice; as Avicen also saith. But this aerial dew, of which this aerial Honey is gathered is of two sorts; coagulated or thickned Manna; and liquid, of which the best Honey is made; especially if it retain the same vertue it had when it first fell: but falling from such a height, and even with the very sliding of the fall by reason of the impurity of the air contracting defilement, and being infected with the exhalation of the leaves, and juice of the flowers upon which it lights, it looseth much of that heavenly vertue, although some remain, and being so often shifted in the ventricles of the Bees, cells, honey-combs, it hath some strange qualities joyned to it. But in the beginning, Honey is like pure rock-water; and in the first daies it boyls like new wine, in the 20. day it waxeth thick, a while after it is co∣vered over as it were with a thin film or membrane, which with the froth of the heat of it, con∣geals together. Terrestrial or earthy Honey we call that, because the dew going away, it is suckt out of the very sweat of the earth, and the sweeter part of the plant, of a thick substance indeed, and a quality answerable to that from whence it was extracted. And from thence it takes the name of Grasse-honey, Bean-honey, Lilly-honey, Violet-honey, &amp;c. respect being had to those things from which it is collected or gathered. But that Honey is best for substance, which is of a fat oily consistence, partaking of both, which doth of its own accord run out of the combs, (in The best Ho∣ney how known. Greek called ; or rather ) and doth not abound with dregs, and is quickly boyled, and doth cast up very little or no scum; and alwaies so tenaciously sticking together, that if you lift it up a good height on the top of you finger, it falls to the earth still homogeneous, unsevered, no way parted asunder, but remaines in one continued flake, or line. And to conclude, that which if fire be put to it, will soonest arise in flame. Unless there be all these properties or most of them in your Honey, you shall discern the substance not of good Honey indeed, but of base, adulterate, impure trash. 
 The Accidents or accidental properties of honey, are likewise some good, some bad, both of them are taken from the season, place, quality. If you respect the time or season, the newer the Accidental properties of Honey. honey the better it is accounted, and the Spring or Summer honey far beyond that is gathered in Autumn. The first of these is gathered from flowers only, and those very tender and newly budded (thence called Anthinum, or Flower-honey). The second is collected of nothing but herbs, and ripe flowers, thence called , or Summer honey. The third, last and worst, is had after the first Autumnal showres, and that very sandy or gritty and woody, gathered only of Heath or Ivie (which are then the only things green that are left) and from thence is called Ericaeum, Heath-honey or Ivie-honey: all which (as I said before) have their greatest commen∣dation from their freshness or newness, because with long keeping and concocting, they wax bit∣ter; from whence the Proverb, He that will make a good mixture of wine and honey, must min∣gle with new Hymettian Honey, old Falernian Wine. It is also better or worse in regard of the place whether proper or common. If you respect the proper place, or the vessel wherein it is contained; the best honey is still found in the bottome, for the dross which is contracted ei∣ther by soyl of herbs, or by the air whilest it falls from so high a place, is cast up to the top as froth; and in the bottome it is found to be more glutinous, ponderous, luscious, and better com∣pacted. 
 If you would attend the common place or region wherein it is gathered; according to the na∣ture of the Countrey, so is the value of it. In what coun∣treys the best Honey is tobe found. 
 In the first place and above all other, the Attick, Athenian, Hymetick, especially, when made in the silver Mines, hath been hitherto adjudged the best honey, both in regard of the excellent nature of the Bees themselves, as also for that those Countreys do abound with Thyme and other choice plants and herbs, and likewise in regard of the goodnesse of the place where the combs are made. Dioscorides gives the next place, to the Islands of the Cyclades, or the Aegean Islands (which is very luscious and pleasant, and welnigh as good as the Attick) And the third and last place to the Hyblean, and Sicilian. 
 Johan. Bauhinus a very learned Physician, and surpassingly well seen in the knowledge of sim∣ples, saith that he saw of this Attick honey in Verona in an Apothecaries shop, which he found put up in the bladder of an Elephant, very thick, and weighing 21. pounds, of the length of two cu∣bits, of the breadth of a cubit and a half. I suppose it was brought thither out of Africk, for how should an Elephants bladder be had in Athens? In the judgement of Cardanus, that honey which comes from Cephalenia, an Island in the Ionian sea is the best; next to that in Europe, is the Spanish, and that not without reason; in regard the dew for the most part in those hotter regions is better concocted: and (in all Countreys) where the purest air is, there is the virgin Honey (i. e.) pure pale, and is made up as it is, having no need of fire to purge it. The T ∣tine honey is also commended, as Strabo reports. About Tag dast, Melela, Hea, Hascora, the iron Mountain Rhahona, Ech devona; Jo. Leo saith there is very excellent African honey made. Ludovicus Cademustus prefers the honey of Sineg , Andreas Corsalias the Mombaren, Edorades Barbosa the Aethiopick, Thomas Lopius the Cathaian, Fr saus Alvares the Tigremahonen ian, Sebastianus Baro the Samogitick, Euricus the Lituanian, Erasmus Stella the Ru an, Thevet the American, P. Iovius is exceeding much in the commendation of Moscovy honey, but not so advi∣sedly, in as much as our Merchants, and Sebast. Baro a very impartial writer of those things which are seen and done there, do very seriously affirm that in all the Dukedom of Mosco, there are neither Bees nor honey. Albert. Campensis in his history of Mysia which is called Britus, saith that even in the Hercinian woods, there is extraordinary good honey to be found, and that alto∣gether as good as the Cecropian or Attick honey may be. Aelianus affirms that in snowy and icy Scythia, there is Countrey honey very praise-worthy; and that it is carried to Mysia (where it is sold at a very dear rate). But if the heat of the Coutrey doth add to the honey pureness and goodness, how is it possible such excellent honey should be had in Scythia, and Samogithia? Is it because the flowers there growing and receiving the dew are better then in other places, and by that means cause it to be clearer and purer? Or is it because of the North winds which are most frequent in those parts, which do purge the air? Or is it because as well Bees as men there are of more strong constitutions, and therefore are better able and do take more pains to refine and work the honey in their ventricles? which is the more likely, seeing they were not able to live at all in that cold region, nor could not arrive at such an Age (for there they live very long) if they were not very healthy and lusty of body. 
 Now whereas Cardan denies that there is any exquisite honey made in moist Countreys: let England and Ireland challenge him for their right; which being obnoxious to showres and very much rain, a thing fatall to Islands, do yeeld such extraordinary pure honey, that it hath not the least mixture of venome, and doth last a long time before it be corrupted or putrified; that we do not speak of its excellent whiteness, hardness, sweetness, hanging well together, viscosity and ponderousness; and other principal signs of the goodness of it; But let us leave off to commend our own Countrey wherein good is to be found; and set forth those Countreys which are infa∣mous for the badness of it. For the extreme bitterness the Cholchian honey, and next the Corsican, and in some places the Hungarian, and the Sardinian hath an ill name. For in Sardinia Wormwood, What Coun∣treys produce bad honey. in Corsica Rose-lawrel, in Col his the venomous Yew, and all of them in Hungary. Also the ho∣ney is venomous in Heraclea of Pontus, and in the flowers of Goats-bane fading with the wet∣ness of the spring; for then the flowers contract that hurtfull venome; which doth presently infect the honey-dew that falls upon them. There is also another kinde of pernicious honey made, which from the madness that it causeth, is termed Mad-honey; which Pliny conceiveth to be contracted from the flower of a certain shrub, very frequently growing there in the woods. Dioscorides and Aetius do not amiss impute this poyson to be caused of great plenty of the veno∣mous herb called Libbardsbane, or Wolf-wort which groweth there; in that it is cured with the very same remedies as the venome of that herb is. In Carina, Persis, Mauritania and Getulia, bordering to Massesulia, either by reason of vapours of the earth, or by reason of the virulent and poysonous juice of the plants, poysoned honey-combs are produced; but are descried by their duskie or blackish colour. In Trapezuntum in the Countrey of Pontus, Pliny reports of a certain honey that is gathered of the flowers of the Box-tree, which as it doth make those that are well sick with the noysome smell of it, so those that are not well it restores to health. On the trees of the Heptocometanes, a people near unto Cholchis, there growes a kinde of infectious honey. The which poyson being drank makes men stupid, and out of their wits. This was sent by the enemy to the three Legions of Pompey with a token for the desire of peace, they drink∣ing very freely of it, were put both besides their wits, and their lives too (as Strabo saith). Ovid makes mention of the Corsick honey very infamous, being extracted from the flower of Hem∣lock, speaking thus: 
 I think it ' s Corsick Honey, and the Bee From the cold Hemlocks flowers gathered thee. But yet it may seem to be not so much for Dame Nature honour, that she should bring forth a thing so desired of all men, as honey is, and so ordinarily to temper it with poyson. Nay but in so doing she did not amiss, so to permit it to be; that thereby she might make men more cauti∣ous and lesse greedy, and to excite them not only to use that which should be wholesome, but to seek out for Antidotes against the unwholsomeness of it. And for that cause she hath hedged the Rose about with prickles; given the Bees a sting, hath infected the Sage with Toad-spittle; mix∣ed poyson (and that very deadly too) with Honey, Sugar, and Manna. 
 The signs of poysoned honey are these, it staines the honey-comb with a kinde of Lead-colour, The signs of poysoned Ho∣ney, and the remedies a∣gainst it. doth not become thick, it looks of a bright shining glistering hew; sharp or bitter in taste, and hath a strange and th smell, it is far more ponderous, then the other, as soon as it is taken it causeth ne sing, and a loosness of the belly, accompanied with excess of sweating. They which have drunk it d tumble themselves up and down upon the cold earth, very desirous of refrigera∣tion. The poy honey hath the same symptomes with the poyson of Wolf ane, and hath the same way of cure. Galen reports that two Physicians in Rome tasted but a very small quantity of poysoned honey, and fell down dead in the open Market-place. 
 Against madness from eating honey, Dioscorides prescribes Rue to be eaten, and salt fish, and honey and water to be drank, but being taken they must be vomited up again; and he prescribes the same remedie against this disease, as he doth against Wolfs-bane, and Rose-lawrel: and Pli∣ny agrees with him; also he adds one singular antidote, to eat a fish called a Gilt-head, which al∣so wonderfully corrects the loathing of good honey. Gulielmus Placontia bids to cause vomit abundantly, with syrup of Violets, acetosus simplex, and warm water, eating salt fish before vo-miting. Afterwards he gives Theriac with hot vinegar. Christophanus de honest is perswades vo-miting, and to set cold water under the nosthrils, with the flowers of Violets, Water-lillies, and Fleawort. But his Bezoar stone, are Quince kernels bruised, and given with hot water, as Sanctus Ardoinas relates. Avicenna hath prescribed nothing worth speaking of, but what he had from others: for I understand not what he means by his Aumeli. 
 But what if I a youth and an English man, after so many grave and experienced Physicians should asse t this for a certain Antidote, viz. to take nothing down but the Bees themselves. The likelyhood of the conjecture doth perswade, and reason it self doth somewhat seem to favour it: For unless that Dame Nature had given to these Bees, a very marvellous power against poy∣soned honey (as amongst men to the Psilli against Serpents, to Storks and Peacocks amongst the Birds) without all doubt with gathering of it, swallowing of it, and for some time keeping of it in their bodies, yea concocting of it there, they would be grievously pained, and the poyson running and dispersing it self through all the parts would kill them. 
 Now the Terrestrial honey, although it be not alwaies poysonous, yet by reason of the black∣ness and clamminess of it,  ' tis not much to be commended: also it is often found to be subject to be infected by the venomous breath of Serpents, Toads, red Toads, and therefore is carefully to be avoided. 
 Now let us come to the Qualities of Honey; whereof some are first or primary, others deri∣ved from them; some formal, some specifical, which we deservedly call Energetical, or opera∣tive. The temper of Honey. In respect of the first Crasis or temper, Honey is thought to be hot and dry in the second degree, for which cause Galen did forbid those that are in Hectick Feavers, and in all Feavers, young men, or those that have the yellow Jaundies to use it; whereas in cold distempers he doth very much commend it, and did prescribe it to those that were troubled with a raw and watry sto∣mach; whom if you gently anoint therewith, it doth very much nourish, and causeth a good co∣lour and constitution of body. If you desire to know the second qualities of honey, (viz. the smelling, tasting, visible, tactile) the best honey ought not to have the eminent quality of any herb, or other thing whatsoever: and therefore the honey that doth strongly smell of Thyme, Galen rejects; and yet is of it self a most sweet and fragrant smell, and not without a certain spiri∣tuous fragrancy; such is that which in the middle of the spring, is perceived to be in the air about break of day. But if it have an ill savour, it is putrefied not being well kept. If it smell strong, it hath contracted some contagion from Hemlock: if it sting as it were and prick the nose with its sent, it is an argument of some poyson, or too much acrimony couched in it. If it smell not at all, it is stark dead, no spirit in it. If it smell of Thyme, Linden, or Teil-tree, Rosemary, Box, Wormwood, &amp;c. it shewes that it is degenerated into their nature. The like is to be said of the Taste of honey, which is known either by the herbs, age of it, or by the colour of it to be mixt, or adulterate, or natural, that is to say, striking, and filling the tongue with a certain fine and lively sweetness, so that it may seem to some to be a little tart. 
 As for what concerns the colour of the best honey; in the Tigremahonick and Tagodostick Re∣gion, that of a milky colour is preferred in hotter Countreys, that which is white and transpa∣rent, but commonly that which carries away the garland and is esteemed above the rest, is yel∣low, and of the colour of Gold. And in the second rank is that which is white and transparent, which I with Aristotle should put in the first place. For that it is a sign of pure honey and not infected with any tincture of herbs. The bright shining is also by him commended if it be not summer honey, for the honey that is gathered at that season of the year (like wax or butter) ei∣ther by reason of the abundance of yellow flowers, or the scorching heat of the air, it comes to be of a deep and full yellow, yea almost quite red. But if the Erycaean or Anthine appear red∣dish, it is not without cause accounted unwholsome, because it is not in its season. Suspected and of ill name, are the black, duskie, bright red, and above all the lead colours, which whether they ap∣pear in the comb, or in the honey, sometimes are evident signs of corruption and putrefaction, and sometimes of poyson. That honey is best in touch that is fat, clammy, glutinous, heavy, and most like to the clear liquor of Turpentine every where like it self, that is pure without any, or with very few dregs, that is melted with a very soft fire, and with the least cold as it were con∣gealed into little stones. 
 The Energetical or operative qualities of honey are seen in the use of it; the which is of di∣vers sorts, whether you turn you to the Apothecaries shop, or to the Kitchen, for so mightily doth it nourish, and preserve health entire, and men long-lived, that the Greeks thought the Cyrneans by reason of their constant using of it, lived long, being old men, as Herodotus, Athenaus, and Dio∣dorus Siculus testifie. Pollio indeed being asked, how it came to pass that he lived to be so old as he was, made answer, Because from his youth he used Oyl without his body, and Wine mingled with Honey within. More then this all flowers, fruits, simples, and compounded medicaments, or confections by mingling them with honey are preserved entire from putrefaction; in which fa∣culty or virtue it so excells, that even the Babylonians were wont to bury the dead corpses of their noble men in it; as Herodotus witnesseth in Thalia. Vintners also and such as deal in Wines that will play the knaves, when they observe a piece of Wine decaying, and at its last almost, then they put honey to it, to bring it to life again; by which means the sophisticate wine appears pure, and relisheth very well upon the palat, though never so critical and curious. It is not subject to putrefaction. Fruits, and all other bodies are kept in it very long. yet if it be but touched by its enemy, bread, it putrefies. They therefore that sell honey, are very wary, lest children as they pass by should dip their bread in it: for so it will presently corrupt, and turn into Ants or such like creatures; if we will believe Paracelsus, for his natural skill, in the nature of things, a most famous Philosopher. With admixtion of honey also Galen amendeth the naughtiness of sweet meats when they begin to fail. Honey mingled with other things, doth both nourish and cause a good colour; but taken by it self without any other thing, it doth rather make the body lean than nourish it; because it doth cause urine, and purge the belly beyond all measure. Hippocra∣tes saith, if you take the seeds of Cucumers, or the seeds of any other plant, and keep them for some time in honey, and afterwards sow or set them, the fruit that groweth of them will taste the sweeter.
As for the medicinal and Physical vertues of Honey; It causeth heat, cleanseth sores and ul∣cers The medicinal vertues of Ho∣ney. excellently, wears them away, and removes them in what part of the body soever gathered: as Galen, Avicen, Celsus, and Pliny have observed. It perfectly cureth the disease which causeth the hair of the head or beard to come off by the roots, called the Foxes evill, and other filthy ulcers of the head. Plin. To regain hair lost by the disease aforesaid, and for long Agues, it is very effectual, if the party be anointed with it raw as it is; or with the honey-comb newly drei∣ned or emptied. Galen. But above and beyond all, the Oyl of honey distilled doth effect it. The water that droppeth from the honey, doth excellently cleanse the skin, provoke urine, ex∣tinguish the burning heat of Feavers, open the obstructions of the bowels, quench thirst. The chaulk or salt of it, as it is of all corrosives, the least painful, so it is most energetical and opera∣tive, and therefore is very much commended by Chymicks, and Chirurgeons, for to cure that ker∣nell or tumour of flesh which groweth upon the yard. But how many, and how ample virtues that quintessence of Honey (as they call it) hath attained against the strength of all diseases whatsoever, is excellently described by Isaacus Belga, the predecessor of Paracelsus. Nay with∣out doubt, if wilde honey, and raw, was able so to prolong the health and life of Democrates, Pol∣lio, John the Baptist, in a word, of the Pythagoreans, and Cyrneans (as aforementioned) how much more will it do being refined, and heightned to the highest degree of nutrition? The Epicu∣reans who took the best way they could to provide for their health and their pleasure, fed al∣waies upon Ambrosia, as Tzetzes reports, which did consist of a tenth part of honey; as if they meant by the use of it, to stave off all pains and griefs, and live free from all diseases and ma∣ladies. It doth wonderfully help the ulcers in the ears if it be powred warm into them, and espe∣cially if an ill sent be joyned with them. Moreover in their histing, noyses, inflamations, Galen commands to instill Attick Honey, Butter, oyl of Roses, and as much warm water Marcellus Empyricus used to infuse into the ear that was pained. The same also very much commends ho∣ney mingled or kneaded with the ordure of a young Infant, to cure the dulness of the sight, and the white spots in the eye. Vegetius by this means cures the watery eyes and dropping of the eyes caused by rheume or distillation. First of all a little below the eye he drawes bloud and anoints them with the purest honey till it be whole. But yet care must be had (as Columella ve∣ry well hints) that as often as the eyes are anointed with honey, they be besmeared round about with melted pitch and oyl, lest the Wasps and Bees infest and hurt them. Hear also what Mar∣cellus saith, touching the clearing up of the eyes, and he prescribes this: The honey pure and neat wherein the Bees are dead, let that drop into the eyes; or honey mixt with the ashes of the heads of Bees, makes the eyes very clear. And again mingle Attick honey with the first ordure the Infant makes, together with the milk of the Nurse; and with that anoint the eyes that are so dull what ever the cause of it be; but first of all you must binde the patient to a form or ladder; for otherwise such is the strength of the medicine, that he will not be able to endure it. Which is such a present remedy, that in three daies, it will fully restore the sight, and take away every blemish of the eye. The Gall of a Vulture mingled with the juice of Horehound (twice as much in weight as the gall is) and two parts of honey cures the suffusion of the eyes. Gal. in Eu∣porist. Otherwhere, he mingles one part of the gall of the Sea-Tortoise, and four times as much ho∣ney, and anoints the eyes with it. Serenus prescribes such a receipt to cause one to be quick sighted. 
 Mingle Hybl an honey with the gall Of Goats,  ' tis good to make one see withall. Give Infants butter and honey, for nothing is better for their breeding teeth, and for sore mouths. Galen bids us rub their gums with nothing but honey. For it wonderfully helps to their breeding of teeth, preserving, cleansing and beautifying of them. Also against the pain of the jawes. If with Arabian honey you joyn field-poppy, it it. And sometimes pure honey is mingled with clear water: and this, as Serenus and Pliny testifie, doth notably cure the driness of the tongue in Feavers, the Quinsie▪ and the diseases of the Uvula, Throat, Jawes, of the Ton∣sils; against difficulty of breathing, and to cause one to expectorate, either by it self, or mingled with other things, it is highly commended by Hippocrates. And for the convulsion of the laps of the lungs (which useth to be a deadly disease) the drinking of cold water, and of that wherein a honey-comb is steeped is very effectual. Also, if the stomack be not hot, cholerick, bitter, nauseating or feaverish, it makes it strong and vigorous, and nourisheth it much, not suffering milk to curdle in it: it cleanseth the reins, boyled with water and butter it is good against the stone. Avi∣cenna. It easeth the pain of the spleen, but it must be outwardly applyed with the dead Bees; for taken inwardly it hurts both the liver and the spleen, saith Galen. When it is raw it looseneth the belly, but boyled with the Bees, or with new cheese it bindes the belly so much, that Galen holds it to be a secret against the Dysentery and colick passions: so doth Celsus also and Pliny. Hip∣pocrates mingled honey with all Medicaments that were to soften the belly. Honey mingled with rosin, is a cure for the cold Testicles, as Pliny saith, who also affirms that the ashes of Oxe∣leather mingled with honey, cures all running sores, and botches. Nitre with honey and Cowes milk, cures ulcers of the face; and the froth of honey with oyl of Walnuts, amends the bur∣ning of the skin: it is excellent for old people, and such as have cold stomachs; and being boy∣led it discusses wind, and moves urine mightily. Galen. Hollerius reckoneth honey amongst Dia∣phoreticks, because it openeth and maketh the passages clear: Galen placeth it amongst Diure∣ticks. It layeth down its acrimony by being mingled with water, or being boyled; and there∣fore Galen prescribes boyled honey, to close up ulcers that are hollow. Salt with meal and honey takes away the pain of a joynt that is dislocated, discusses the swelling, and makes it more apt to be reduced. I might here set down the plaister of Aetius and Aegineta called Dia∣melleum, the Tapsimel of Arden, and all syrups that were anciently made of honey. In whose place the Neotericks have put sugar, but I know not by what reason. For if honey of Athens, or some as good, be at hand, and doth not want its due preparation, do not use sugar that is earth∣ly, reedy and so full of dregs, not comparable either for use, original, or any way whatsoever with this heavenly dew honey. But to let this pass, let us reckon up the kinds of drinks and meats made of honey. Six kindes of honey-drink the Ancients made principally. Honey and water, honey and wine, honey and vinegar, the washing of the combs, juice of some grapes and honey, sea-water and honey. 
 The first is called by Pollux and Nicander, Hydromel, or . Galen, Pliny, Aegineta and Dioscorides have set down the making of it. Hydromel of Galen. Take sweet pure clean fountain water 8. pounds, the best honey 1. pound, boyle them at a soft fire in an earthen vessel, take off the skim a top oft times, and boyl it to its thickness. If it must be drunk pre∣sently, it must be made thin as water, if it must be setup to keep, boyl it longer, till it be thick, as a julep; if it be kept long it pierceth deeper into the parts far off, and is sooner converted into choler. Also boyling acquires to it many more faculties; for being little boyled it inflates more, it purges more, and nourisheth lesse. Longer boyled, sit dissipates wind, nourisheth more and purges lesse. It is spiced at pleasure, with Ginger, Saffron, Gallia Moschata, Lignum aloes, &amp;c. It is made also another way, of honey 1. pound, water 8. pound, leaven 3. ovnces; put all in a wooden vessel, leaving three or four fingers empty that it may work the better: when it hath done working, stop the vessel and let it be well hoopt, and after three months it will be fit to drink. Hydromel of Pliny, Take of pure rain-water that hath been kept five years, 12 pound, boyl it to thirds, add to it a third part of old honey, and in the dog-daies set it in the sun for 40 daies, and letting it so stand, on the tenth day stop the vessel, this is called Hydromel, that with age will taste like wine, made no where better than in Phrygia. It was given to sick peo∣ple that desired wine, but now it hath been forbidden many years. Hydromel of Aegineta, Take the juice of bruised Quinces 5 pounds, fountain water Sextarii, boyl them till they grow soft, take them from the fire, let them cool, then strain them, and crush out the Quinces and cast them away, add to this water half honey, boyl it, scum it, till an eighth part be consumed: some make it of sweet Apples or Pears the same way. Hydromel of Dyoscorides, is made of two parts of old rain-water, and one part of honey mingled, and set in the Sun. Some call it Hydromel, because it is wont to be made of the washing of the honey combs with water, but it must not be made stronger, because it will hurt sick people by too much matter proceeding from the wax. Hydro∣mel after it hath been long kept, is as strong as small wines, or Lora, being but half so old. Wherefore it is preferred before them in abating inflamations. The use of old Metheglin is con∣demned, for such as are inflamed or costive, but it is good for weak stomacks, and such as loath their meat, or sick people that sweat much, or for those that are thirsty, or after a burning fea∣ver hath wasted a man. Aetius describes a Clyster only of honey and water to move the belly, and with the same he cleanseth hollow ulcers. Galen commends, and uses Melicrate (wherein some Hysop, Origanum, or Thyme, or Peniroyal hath been boyled) to prepare and purge gross humours in an acute disease, but he commends it not for the want of a stomach. Lately the Eng∣lish found out a new composition of Hydromel, (they call it Varii) and serves better for ships than any Wine. The preparation is this, Take Barley torrefied after due sleeping in water, what you please, boyl it long in 5 quarts of fountain water, till it taste well of the malt: I pound of this boyled with 8 pounds of honey, and 20 pounds of water, makes a drink that tasts most sweet, and is most healthful for use. It nourisheth well, is hardly corrupted, and keeps very long. Hydromel of the Moscovites, Take of the decoction with Hops 12 pounds, purified honey scum∣med 1 pound and half, tosted bread strowed with the flour of malt, one piece, put all into a wooden vessel well covered, and place it near a stool, take away the froth that riseth, twice a day, with a wooden skimmer that hath holes in it; after 10 daies set it up in your cellar, af∣ter 14 daies drink it: They make it the same way in summer with fair water, and made this way they drink it in winter, and when they desire to be drunk. In Russ and English they call it Mede. 
 2. Oenomeli, it is called honeyed Wine. Pollux calls it Molicraton; Plautus, honeyed Wine, others call it Mulsum. Aristaeus was the first that brought this into Thrace, being taken with the incredible sweetness of Honey and Wine mingled together. Mulsum made of honey of Hera∣clea, when it growes old ceaseth to be hurtful. Pliny. The new writers describe this potion thus, Take 1 gallon of the best Honey, 6 gallons of old Wine, Salt 2 ounces; it must then be skimmed as it works, then put in the Salt, and season it with Annise-seed, and roots of Elecam∣pane let down into the vessel with a bag. The Egyptians make it otherwise, namely of Raisins and Honey, which they call , because it is of a very sweet taste. Oenomeli spiced, Take Pepper washt and dried, 8 scruples, Athenian Honey 1 sextarius, and 5 sextarii of old white Wine, mingle them. Celsus (as I remember) and Caelius speak of it. Aurelianus in the cure of the Sciatica. Also there is a kinde of Mulsum which the Greeks call , consisting of 36 ingredients. Gorreus. May be it is the same which Athenaeus cals . For is a drink made of Wine and Honey, and divers herbs mingled. Such as our Welch men call Metheglin. The Irish prepare a distilled Oenomeli made with Honey, Wine and some herbs, which they cal Ʋsque∣bach, not unfit for a nation that feeds on flesh raw, or but half sod. Mulsum made of sweet new See Huonymus his Nectar in Wickerus his special Anti∣dote. fol. 191. &amp; 195. Wine the Greeks call Nectar; to new Wine sodden, they add a tenth part of Honey, but this kinde is offensive to the stomach, and causeth windiness; it is given to purge the belly. Hippo∣crates cals it Melihedia, and Melichron, as Galen notes. Atheneus writes that another kinde, which was true Nectar indeed, was wont to be made about Olympus a Mountain of Lydia, of Wine, Bees-combs, and sweet flowers. I take notice that Alexandrida did not think Nectar to be drink, but the meat of the gods. For he saith, I eat Nectar chewing, and ministring to Jupiter, I drink Ambrosia. Yet Homer and the greatest part of the Poets took Nectar for drink. Dioscorides made Oenomeli thus, Take old Wine 2 Sextarius ' s, the best Honey 1 Sextarius. Some that they may drink it the sooner, boyl honey with wine and strain it. Some for profit sake to 6 sextarius ' s of new wine working, add one of honey, and when it hath workt, they put it up in a vessel, for it remains sweet. The use of honied Wine is this: It is given in long Feavers that have weak∣ned the stomach with crudities collected in it. It looseth the▪ belly gently, it provoketh urine, it cleanseth the stomach, it is good for the disease of the joynts, faults of the reins, a weak head, and to women that drink no wine, for it is pleasant in smell, and nourisheth the body. It mo∣veth vomit drunk with oyle, and it is profitably given to them that have drunk poyson; as also for such as are weak, and their pulse is feeble; for such as are troubled with a cough, and a short breath, or Impostume in the Lungs, and those that are wasted with extream sweating. But then it is for to mingle it with Hydromel. Also Galen prescribes to them Melicrate qualified with water, that have had a shaking fit not above a week, and nature being yet strong. Some there are that utterly condemn this in Feavers: but that must be understood of some times in Feavers. Romulus, a certain guest of Caesars, being asked how he had preserved the natural vigor of his body and minde so long, (for he was above a hundred years old) he answered, Without with oyl, within with honey and wine sodden together, as Pollio did: That we may the more wonder at the use of Mulsum, which the Ancients esteemed very much, for that they were perswaded that all acrimony of the minde, was pacified with sweet liquors, and the spirits made peacable, the passages made softer and fitter for transpiration, and that it was also physick for manners. Pli∣nius. 
 3. Oxymeli, or honeyed Vinegar is thus made, as Pliny thinks. Take honey 6 pound, old Vi∣negar 5 Hemina, Sea-salt 1 pound, rain-water (which Galen likes not of) 5 sextarii. It must all be made scalding hot ten times, and then set in the Sun, till it grow stale, and Oxymel is made. But it lasts not above one year. All these, as also all made Wines are condemned by Themison a chief writer. Galen prepares it thus. Let the best honey be clarified, and add so much wine∣vinegar to it, that it may please the sick mans palate, boyl them till they are well mingled; and when you will use it, mingle as much water as you please: it is boyled enough when it sends forth no more scum. Some there are perhaps that deliver these compositions somewhat other∣wise, and Dioscorides he differs from Misues, and Nicolaus from them both. In Misue you shall finde ten several sorts of it; in Nicolaus I have seen seventeen: some simple, some compound with Squills, Thyme, Flower de luce, and other herbs and roots. 
 Also Gesner brought in an Oxymel with Hellebore, which he commends not a little in his Greek Epistle to Adolphus Otto. To make thin, thick and clammy humours, and to root them out; but especially to make way for insensible transpiration, that is to draw forth from the center to the superficies of the body. But you shall finde every where scattered in the Book of his Epistles, what force it hath against Melancholy, Cacheria, Dropsies, Epilepsies, and Fea∣vers, where also you have the Oxymels made with Hellebore, the great and the small. 
 4. Apomeli of Philagrius in Aegineta. Take white combs full of honey 1 pound, fountain∣water 3 pound and half; break the combs and press out the honey, boyl this water and honey together, untill the froth of it, and that which as it were the waxy part swim a top, and be by degrees taken off, when it is cool put it into a vessel. It cools lightly, as Galen saith, where∣fore in Phlegmone, and weariness in a Feaver, it is very good. Avicenna his syrup of Honey, seems to be the same with this. In Nicolaus you shal finde three kinds of Apomeli, and in Aetius, Ori∣basius, Actuarius yet more; for they are changed according to the nature of the disease and the sick patient, that is the reason that we had rather only touch upon them, then to describe them at large. It is drunk all the summer to cool the body, at which time any man may drink of it, (especially when it growes sowrish) it is held to be of a middle nature between a Mulsum and an Oxymel. Galen. It is also useful to expectorate with, to move urine, to purge the belly, and to ut thick humours. Aegineta, Ruelius. 
 5. Omphacomeli, (which Grapoldus did not well translate Bitter honey) it is made of the juice of unripe grapes, 3 saxtarii, and 1 sextarius of honey, boyled together, or set a sunning for 40 daies: when it hath done working, put it in a veslel and stop it close, and keep it for your u e. The same way almost is Melomeli of Quinces made, Rhodomeli of roses, honey of Myrtils, Rhoites, Rhodostacte, &amp;c. you may finde their descriptions and use in Aetius. 
 6. Thalassiomeli, is made of equal parts of sea-water, rain-water, and honey purified and set in the sun in a pitched vessel in the Dog-daies: some to two parts of sea-water add one part of honey, and so tun it up. They both purge, but this hath far the less. Gorraeus. It is pleasant in taste and smell, it purgeth gently, without troubling the stomach at all. Pliny. And thus much of Honied drinks. 
 It would be too long for me, and tedious to the Reader, should I set down all kinde of Meats which the Athenians provided with honey, and other ingredients; therefore it shall not be need∣full to rehearse them; and it may be it is impossible: for divers Nations did variously mingle ho∣ney with other things, as with milk, meat, flour, wheat, cheese, and with Sesama, whence are these meats made of honey called Juncates or honey∣meats, and wafers, they have divers names as the thing is made. Athenaeus. They sacrificed to Ceres this bread of felicity, as the Scholiast upon Nicander sheweth, we call it honey-bread. Also the Scripture teacheth, that the nations offered wafers made with honey to the Sun and Moon, and to the Queen of heaven: wherefore Moses forbad the Israelites to offer honey in their offerings unto God, Leviticus the 2. But it may be that was rather forbid the Jewes because honey hath a power of fermenting. Also they made it with suet, fresh cheese, oyl and raisins; also to cause sleep, the Ancients made a kinde of meat of honey and poppy-seed, very pleasant, which they called Cocetum, as Festus reports. Also Ambrosia which was held to be the meat of the gods, had that exceeding sweetness, whereby it was thought to be so healthful, from honey, to make men immortal; of which Athenaeus and Bellonius write at large. But the Indians have the best and the most wholsome juncates, who were held to be Barbarians, but the truth is, they may for their wit be compared with any in Europe, and for what I can see, to be preferred before them. 
 But before honey be used it must be clarified: which is thus performed: Take honey and foun∣tain water distilled of each 2 pound, or as much as you please, boyl them and skim off all that swims a top, till all the water be consumed. Then clarifie it with 12 whites of Eggs. Abynzoar. But if you make it hard, pure, and fast together, mingle half a pound of the best wine to one pound of honey thus clarified, boyl them, skimming them till they grow hard, put it in a vial, and set it in boyling water, and it will grow clear, and stony like sugar-candy. If honey be but mean, it will grow better by boyling: whether honey be sophisticate or pure, you shall know by b r∣ning it; for what is not sophisticate will burn purely. The Author of the Geoponicon. But if you would separate the quintessence of honey, oyl, salt, water, vinegar, see Isaac Belga, the treasure of Euonymus and other Chymists, we will not venture into this ocean, being already plunged in the harbour. Now I shall shew you its first inventers. 
 Saturn was the first inventer of honey as Macrobius and they of Cyrene boast. Cali s and Pliny say that Aristaeus first invented honey-works. But Diodorus Siculus writes, that the Curetes of Crete first found out the use and way of honey. Some ascribe this to the Thessalians. Others to Melissus the most ancient King of the Greeks. Some to Bacchus, as Ovid testifieth. The Greeks feign, that a Nymph called Melissa first found out honey, and the use of it, and thence she had her Name given her from Bees. Who found it, or when, it is not much matter. It is a heavenly gift, and very profitable for men, if they use it well and warily. 
 CHAP. VI. Concerning Wax, Bee-glew, dregs of Wax, Pissoceros, Bees-bread, and of their Nature and Use. WAx in Hebrew, Donagh; in Arabick, Mum, Examacha, Zamache, Aberan; in Greek, and ; in High Duch, Wachs; in English, Wax; in Brabant, Wass; in French, Cire; in Italian, Cera; in Spanish, Cicrai; it is either natural or artificial. Simple and natural Wax is the thicker part of the combs that contains the honey; and it is either virgins wax, or of a second sort; virgins wax is that the younger swarms of Bees make from the young branches of flowers. (That is the first Swarm put into a new Hive.) For so, as Aristotle and Hol∣lerius testifie, the Bee-masters call it, which they diligently separate from the first and new combs, as being by nature the most perfect of all: the second sort, though they reject not, yet is it short of the other for esteem and worth. The way they make wax, is this: They creep upon the flowers first with their fore-feet, and they touch them but lightly, then they wipe and rub them∣selves in the middle of them; then they nimbly and artificially lay down the tincture of the flowers which they have wrought with their water or moisture, and compacted between the legs of their hinder feet, and having gathered as much in quantity, and in form like a lentil, when they have this burden they carry it home to their houses. That matter is of divers colours for the nature of the flowers, as yellow, red, pale, saffron coloured, white, black: which is the cause that the wax is of so many colours: they make wax, saith Pliny, of all flowers and plants, except sorrel and arrach. Artificial wax, is that to which our labour and art must be used. Divers Authors use divers waies to make wax. Palladius in the month of July, takes out the natural wax which he first prepares softly in a brass vessel full of boyling water, cutting the combs small, and after that in other vessels he makes it up into forms, being melted. Pliny takes another way. The wax is made when the honey is pressed forth, but first they are cleansed with water, (that no reliques of honey remain) and he dries them three daies in the dark or in the shade. The fourth day he melts them at the fire in a new earthen pot, the water covering them, and then he strains them through a basket; again the wax is boyled in the same pot and in the same water, and other cold water is put to it, so often as you see the vessels smeered about with honey. Columella goes this way. After that the remainders of the combs are diligently washed with clear water, the honey having been first well strained out, they are cast into a brasse pan, then he put water to them, and melted them at the fire, then he powred the wax through straw or rushes to strain it, and then he boyled it again as he did before, and then putting water to it, he made it of what form he pleased, and when it grew hard it was easie to take it forth, because the wax hath water under it that will not let the wax stick to the forms. Now wax differs two waies, for goodness and for use. The best wax is collected by the principal Bees, and is so wrought by the best artists, that it may appear white, tender, handsome, all like it self, pure, somewhat fat, well sented, without nerves or skins, hairs or any superfluous matter. Such as Nonius Marcellus describes out of Varro for Tarentine wax made by the Bees or Miletus. Wax is so much the more depraved, the farther it is from these good signs. The use of wax is twofold, for physick, or for other matters what con∣cerns physick: wax is a mean between hot and moist, cold and dry, and emollient. It hath some gross parts, and that stopt, it not only dries, but seems by accident to moisten by hindring transpi∣ration. Hence it is the matter of other medicaments. But by it self it digests lightly, being laid outwardly, for it hath a little discussing hot faculty, of which it partakes as much as honey doth. In drink it cures the dysentery, ten grains of wax swallowed so big as millet seeds, will not suffer milk to clodder in Nurses breasts. Dioscorid. Aetius bids to give it in the bigness of three Tares. A certain Anonymus, prescribes this remedy against pains of the head and malignant hu∣mours arising from a Feaver or any other cause. Take virgins wax what you please, soften it at the fire that you may work it at your pleasure: lay it as a cap on the shorn head of the patient, and upon that put on a linnen cap that it fall not off. After three daies lay it off, or use it so long till you finde the pain gone. Put wax into the hollow tooth that akes, and with a hot probe touch it. Ar∣chigenes. Wax applyed to the nerves and tendons being bare, will cover them with flesh and cure them. Aetius. For the cold pain of the joynts. Take a clout dipt in melted wax, lay it hand∣somely and as closely on as the sick can endure it for one night, and it will cure it. Galenus. More∣over it is good to anoint the ears with Bears grease, and Buls tallow, and melted wax. Marcellus. You may discuss corns in the eyelids with a fomentation of white wax. Gal. ex Archigen. No man that is not an enemy of truth, will deny but that oyl of wax is of principal use to cure pains of the Gout, to soften hard swellings, and to heal wounds and ulcers. Also it is mingled as Galen wit∣nesseth to the medicament of Asclepias against an Ozena, and it is a certain cure for the Jaundies. A certain Lady of most blessed memory, wonderfully recommended these pills to Gesner: Take the yolk of an egge boyled hard, and as much wax, with some grains of saffron and syrup of worm-wood. Make pills to take morning and evening. They cause thirst exceedingly, but being continu∣ed by degrees without drink, they root out the disease. Also a ball is made of wax to keep up the womb subject to fall down; and medicaments made up with it will last the longer. Clodius the follower of Asclepias. The Greeks were wont to give the Cyrenian juice wrapt up in wax, to swal∣low it the better. Celius Aurel. It is also the ground of all Cerats and Plaisters. Myrepsus was the first that made a plaister without wax. It not only preserves the living, but it keeps the dead also from putrefaction, for which cause, as now it is used by us, to wrap up persons of great for∣tunes in wax, (as Strabo reports the Persians were wont to do.) By a waxen probe hollow ulcers are best to be searched. The Carthaginian wax is the best for medicaments, the next is the Pontick, which is very yellow, and smells like honey, being very pure. Pliny. Which thing I wonder at amongst honey that is venomous: the third in esteem is from Crete, which is from abundance of Bee-glew: the last is the Corsick wax, because it is collected from box, it is thought to have a phy∣sical quality. 
 Now followes the use of Wax otherwise. They that are rich, or sick, or great men, desire their candles to be made of it, by reason of the sweet smell. Also the use of wax is not small in stop∣ping the chinks in vessels, for tents in the camp to keep out rain, for bed-ticks that the feathers fly not out, to joyn pipes made of reeds, as Ovid sang concerning the shepherds of old. 
 And with the Reed w ll waxed they play ' d and sang. Also the most excellent Painters painted with wax, as Pliny reports, and they adorned ships with it. This kinde of painting, though it were not hurt by salt, nor by the sun, nor by the wind, yet it was lost we know not how, when Apelles, Protogenes, and Zeuxis died. Also the Ancients were wont to smeer over their writing tables with wax before that paper was invented, as Juvenal describes it. And the younger Pliny in his Epistle to Trajan; I sate by the nets, there was no hunting pole or lance by me, but a style and writing tables, I did meditate and set down some things, that though I should have my hands empty, my writing tables might be full. Hence proceeded those old forms of speaking, In the first, second, third, or last wax. For Suetonius proves that the Romans writ their Testaments in wax; in the life of Caesar in these words. He made Q. Pedius his heir to the last far∣thing, the rest he placed in the bottom of the wax, that is, in the last part of his will. Nor is the use of sealing wax little, whereby we seal letters and instruments. Of this there are four principal kindes, the Punick or white, the red or Indian, the black or American, the yellow or European. The Punick is made thus. The yellow wax is often laid in the open air, then they boyl it in sea-water, adding Nitre to it: then with skimmers they take off the flower of the wax, and they powr t into a vessel that hath a little cold water in it; then they boyl it apart in sea-water, then they cool the vessel. This is done thrice, and they then dry it on a bul-rush hurdle by day and by night in the open air, for this makes it white, the honey being drawn forth by the Sun, and the yellow colour breathed forth: when it is dryed they melt it, when it is melted they cover it with a thin cloth, and set it in the sun, after it hath stood in the sun it becomes exceeding white, being boyled once more. Wax is made white otherwise, but this is the most proper for medicaments. Pliny. I see that the Greeks speak of is no other than which Pliny calls the Punick wax. Aetius speaks of white wax in the Ʋnguent Martiatum, and Paulus speaks of it also. Black wax is either natu∣ral, as in the Molucco Islands, and many parts of America, it is gathered by the Bees themselves (as we read in Thevet and in the Centuries of Navigations) or artificial, adding the ashes of pa∣per. Red wax or like Minium of India, is made with mingling Anchusa or Cinnaber. There is another kinde of red wax, hard like a stone, but easie to break, the Merchants think their letters sealed with this to be very sure: yet there are some knaves so cunning that they will open them and shut them again not hurting them, that no man can possibly discern it; which art, though a chief Impostor shewed to Pennius when he was at Paris, yet he was too honest to reveal it to this mischievous age. The European honey is of the natural colour, that is, yellow. But the colour and variety of things hath so bewitched us, that we are not content with natural colours, but we must imitate the Punick, Indian, American waxes, and above those we must have green, dark light, blew wax, made of Verdigrease and other paints, and some Turpentine. 
 Propolis the Arabians call Kur, the Greeks call it , the Ger∣mans, Vorstotz, neben Wachs, Wachs winden, stop Wachs; the Helvetians, (if I mistake not) Bet, and Bi e trost; the English, Hive-dross; the Spaniards, El vetun de las colmenas. Scribanius takes it for Virgins wax: Sylvatieus falsly takes it for the dregs of the Hives: Andreas Bellunensis calls it the foulness of the walls, and sayes, that some abuse it for Bdellium. Some maintain that Pro∣polis drops from trees, others say it is the first comb. It is indeed a thicker yellowish matter, sweet sented, like to Storax, and dustie like Mastick, like to wax, but not yet made wax, whereby all passages are stopt against cold and rain. The third sort is that black matter, and sharp sented, which Aristotle calls Mitys, Gaza and Pliny call Commosis, the dregs of wax: the second is called Pissoceros, as you would say, a matter made of pitch and wax. The third Propolis is of a middle na∣ture between these two supporters and wax, laid very thick at the mouthes of the Hives, chiefly in summer; and therefore it is called Propolis, as you yould say belonging to the suburbs. Because the Bees build with it at the doors before the Hive. Propolis (saith Cordus out of Pliny) perhaps is some rosin gum, growing upon the budding places of trees, which Bees gather and hang about the entrances of their Hives, to stop all chinks in winter against the cold. There are four sorts of it. The first is collected only out of the black Poppy, which they call Aegyrina, that is, yellow; it is soft to be touched, and sticks like bird-lime, it smels sweet and comfortable to the head, causeth rest, and is like Storax, it tastes like Poplar buds. The second is gathered from the Birch-tre , and is of a colour between a yellow, ash, and green, it is soft and ductil also in handling. The third the Bees make out of the gum of the Poplar tree, called Alpina, but it is but seldom, and only in those places, where no other Poplar tree or Birch abounds, but only that is called Alpina. The fourth or mingled, is gathered and confounded from all these trees, so that it hath a mixt co∣lour, sent, avour, and consistence. Cordus saith almost so much; now let us hear Pliny. Propo∣lis is a kinde of middle substance between honey and wax; rather between wax and Pissoceros; and it seems to be gum collected by the Bees to stop up their hives. Rondoletius saith, it hath a thick substance, and the smell of leaven. Pliny saith, it smels so strong that some use it for Gal∣banum. But in the spring gathering time of honey, this part that shuts their cells may be separa∣ted, of which Politianus writes thus: That the Bee laies a white foundation of his various coloured wax. So that Propolis seems to be a thick foundation for the wax. But it is now out of use, nor can any man finde pure Propolis. For most Bee-masters taking out the Hives, when all the ho∣ney is run forth, whatsoever is in the combs they mingle together, and keep none pure by it self; nor is that wax which Avicen calls black Mum, any thing but the dregs of the combs, or else some sediment that sinks to the bottom of the water after the wax is boyled, and this is now Propo∣lis; but Propolis is not pure, but some mingled matter. The nature of Propolis, is to dissolve in oylas wax, but it is more ponderous and thick, and sinks to the bottome of it being melted, when wax swims on the top. Choose the sweetest, purest, not sophisticate with wax, which you may easily part by powring it into water. The best Propolis is said to be pure, most fragrant, without wax. That of Crete and Passidium is the most effectual, the Bees collect the greatest part of it from the unctuosity of Storax and Labdanum; they collect it questionless out of other plants: for they make Propolis where neither the Poplar tree, nor Birch, nor any of the foresaid plants grow. Great is the vertue of pure Propolis, upon the gross spirits, and it draws faulty mat∣ter out from the depth. Hollerius. It is of the nature of wax, but it powerfully drawes forth. Dio∣scorid. The Use. Celsus placeth it in the number of biting remedies, saying that it digests and moves mat∣ter in ulcers. Aetius sayes that it heats, discusses, ripens, cleanses, attracts. The cleansing force is not very strong, the attracting is strong enough, it is of thin parts, it heats in the second degree complete, or in the beginning of the third: you must first soften it with your hands be∣fore you mingle it with other medicaments, and then taking the rest from the fire, put it in and boyl it, for it will not well endure any boyling at the fire. It drawes out thorns and all splints that are within. Aetius. Varro saith, that for its manifold uses it was sold dearer in the market than honey. May be therefore Propolis was called holy wax, because of viasacra where they sold it at Rome, as Largus writes in the cures of hard swellings. They draw forth thorns and such bodies sticking in the flesh, with runnet, (especially of a Hare) powder of Frankincense, and Pro∣polis. Pliny. It helps an old cough with its smell. It cures the rose with water, and roots out ring-worms by anointing them. Diorscorid. It cures Ozaenas: Serapio. Pliny l. 11. c. 7. tells of more of its Physical uses. 
 Aristotle calls Erithaca Sandaracha, others call it Cerinthum, and Smerion, l. 2. Aristot. de Plant. The learned call it Vernilago; some from the time of the year, Vernix; this Glew, saith Niphus, the countrey Lombards call Carbina, but ours Taram. It is the meat the Bees make, which they lay in the void spaces of their combs; it tasts bitter, it is made of spring dew, the juice of trees, and sometimes of gum. That of Africa smels little; that from the South parts is blacker; from the North is better and redder; there is much from the Grecian Nut-trees. Menecrates saith it is a flower, that shewes the future harvest. Plin. Varro saith, it is not meat, but glew, whereby the Bees fasten their combs at the ends together. It forcibly calls forth the swarms: where they would have the swarms light, they anoint a bough with Erithaw, or any other place, adding balm. Virgil, I think, following Varro, calls it glew. Mytis, commosis, (Stephanus calls it ) and Pisso∣ceros, cures strokes and ulcers. Aristotle. What use it hath in the hives, we said enough before. 
 CHAP. VII. Of Drones and Theeves. THE Drone called in Latine, Fucus, is called in Greek, and , in the Illyrian tongue, ; in English, a Drone, a Dran; in High Dutch, Traen; Low Dutch, Belonder strael; in Spanish, Zangano; in Italian, Ape che non fa mele; In French, Bourdon, and Fullon; in the Hungarian tongue, Here; in the Polonian, Czezew. The word Fucus, a Drone, is derived as some think from fur, which signifies a thief, because privily and by stealth he makes prey upon the honey: although with more probability the word fucus may be so used, because he doth cheat and cousen the Bees, and under colour of keeping the Hives warm, (which is his office to do) he ransacks the combs. And for that reason, some with too much confidence, perhaps, derive the La∣tine word fucus from the Greek word , signifying to eat or devour; others will have it come à fovendo, in regard of their sitting upon, and nursing up the young swarm. 
 Some make the Drone to be a fourth sort of Bees, but not so well as others think, because he neither gathers honey himself, nor doth any way help in the working or making of it up. He is The descripti∣on of the Drone. almost twice as big as the ordinary Bee, and somewhat bigger also then the Thief; he is as big likewise as the King, and somewhat bigger. Although they do not arrive at this corpulency, by the dispensation of nature, but by their course of life that they take. For when the Bee doth set apart cells for the Drones to breed in, they make them lesser then their own. And the little Scha∣dowes or worms whereof they come are far lesse than those of the Bees (who are sprung of the no∣ble race, and of the stock of the Bees) in their first birth; which at length become a great deal bigger than the Bees, both by reason they never take any pains whereby to spend their natural su∣perfluities; and also in regard that they do nothing night and day but (like oxen at the stall) ne∣ver leave glutting and gorging themselves with honey, which afterwards they dearly pay for, when provision happens to be short, and there fals out a dearth. They have a bright shining co∣lour, Arist. l. 5. c. 22. but mixt with more black than that of the Bees; in bulk they exceed them all, but yet with∣out sting and idle. They both breed and live amongst the Bees, and when they go abroad, they presently spread all abroad aloft in the air, as if driven by violence, where for a while they bestir themselves, and afterwards return to the Hives with good stomachs, falling greedily to the ho∣ney. But why the Drone should equalize the chief Bees in bigness, and the Bees also in having stings as well as they; let us hear Aristotles reason. Nature did desire, saith he, to put a difference between them, that they should not be all of one kinde, which is impossible; for so the whole Stock would be either Kings or Drones. The Bees therefore are like unto the Kings or Master-Bees in strength, and in the faculty of generation; and the Drones only in bulk or bignesse of body, to whom if you should give a sting also, they would be nothing inferiour to the Kings themselves, l. 3. de gen. Animal. c. 10. 
 They are called also of the Greeks , because they hide their stings. From hence Hesiod, hath these words, , who lives idly, having strength like the Drone that never sheweth his sting; certainly either they have no sting, or never use it to revenge themselves withall. Pliny saith plainly they have none, and terms them no other then in a manner imperfect Bees, and therefore Virgil calleth them ignavum pecus, a sluggish kinde of creature.
The third sort is so unsavoury, and carries with it such a stinking smell, that from the same it is called of the Greeks ; of the Latines, Faetida Blatta, i. e. the stinking Moth; it hath thighs sharp with prickles, as Pliny describeth it, the which mark of di∣stinction, if he had not expressed, perhaps this kinde of Kricket had not been known, or seen by me. For the black Beetles (especially the hairy ones) they are altogether of the same form, only the tail taken off. It is of a pure black glissening colour, very slow paced, as no crea∣ture the like; the body so framed and ordered, that you would swear it were winged and had sheath wings, nevertheless none of them have any wings, no not the male it self amongst this sort of them, (what ever Pliny dreameth to the contrary) it hath thin slender long shanks; remains in deep cellars, and is a retainer to the Jakes; it creeps very slowly, but at the least glimpse of light, and whisper of talk, she hides her self; a shamefac ' t creature certainly, and most impatient of light, not so much for its ill favouredness, but the guiltiness of its conscience in regard of the stink it leaves behinde it, and of its ill behavi∣our: for it frequents base places, and digs through other mens wals, and doth not only annoy those that stand near it, but offends all the place thereabouts with its filthy savour. The mouth of it is forked, the back covered (as it were) with a sheath wing, so solitary a creature that you shall scarce finde two of them together. Whether it be begotten of putrefaction, or otherwise generated by the commistion of male and female, is not certainly known. 
 About Francford near the River Main they are frequently seen, as also in London in Wine∣cellars, and dark dungeons; the other species are more frequent in Bake-houses, and warm pla∣ces. The stinking Beetle some confound with the Cimex or Wall-louse, a creature of the like quality; but not rightly. The inhabitants of Peru have certain creatures which they call Ara∣ners: Serius thinks them to be Butterflies. They are of the bigness of the Kricket, they go forth a great many of them together in the night time, and all that is in the house almost that is soft they nibble about and eat it. Lib. Navig. Butterflies I cannot say they are, because they gnaw, and do not suck with their Promuscis; I would therefore either make them to be Krickets, or some new kinde of Moth, or some creature mixt and made of both. In an Epistle of a certain learned man sent to Gesner, there is a description of another kind of stinking Moth. There is saith he a certain stin∣king flying Insect in Hungary that stinks beyond measure; I should call it a stinking Grashopper, but that it is more like the Kricket. In Winter it desires the light, in Summer it shuns it; when it flies it makes a kinde of a terrible horrid noise, leaving a most noisome stink behinde it. Some there are when the air is infected, carry this creature about them as some secret remedy, and adore it; nay some of them, which a hog would scarce do, will swallow them, so afraid are they of the Plague, and so desirous to use means against it. They are bred in wals: where they are most frequent there grow as they say the most generous wines, &amp; I have found it to be true by experience. So far Epistle. 
 All the younger Moths are whitish, but at their full growth of a bright red or tawny. The stinking are as black as a coal. 
 Divers Authors do speak of four other sorts of Moths, viz. the Venereal, bred in the genitals of men; the Bee Moth, the Cloth Moth, and the Library or Book Moth, from eating of the Books: but none of these, but the Bee Moth agreeth with the description of the Moth: but that nei∣ther is so stinking as the one called , or so soft as the others befote described; but of a mid∣dle nature, rather pouldred with meal than anointed with oyl. Of the rest of these we shall speak more fully when we come to speak, God willing, of the Lice and Moths called Tineae. 
 Much variety of opinion there is among the learned of the colour of the Blat Moth, or the Blattean colour. For if these Insects (of which we have now treated) are the Blattae truly so cal∣led, why should not the black be the Blat colour, rather than red purple colours? Certain it is, it is that the Bizantine Blatta yeelds a purple colour, as that of the worm Cochineal doth a red or scarlet; either therefore all colours may be called Blattean, or else this last of ours is not one. Indeed I wonder at the boldness of Turnebus and Thylesius, which will have that of the worms to be the Blattaean, when as they are of no Author called Blattae; but rather properly it ought to be counted a Scarlet red. The Blattae an colour therefore, to say the truth, is the Purple, not∣withstanding our Blattae send forth no such kinde of liquor; but are fliers of the light, nasty, cruel, rough, theeving, living of nocturnal depredations after an infamous manner, whence Servius cals them Piratas noctu navigantes, night Pirats. 
 These little creatures, although they are hateful to nature it self, to Men and Bees, yet God Their Use▪ hath endued them with sundry vertues, in which they excell the Blattae Bizantine. For take off his shell or nail, which is there between its head (called papaver) and its neck, what doth the belly contain but the ornament to dye withall, and to delight the eyes with their colour? And be it so that Princes and great men will buy it though never so dear, and by the greatness of the price make it only fit for Kings to wear; yet notwithstanding when you have heard the virtue of these Blattae, otherwise so contemptible, you will say they are far more to be esteemed than purple. For they are wonderful good for the pains in the ears, taken after this manner: Take twelve Blats with their wings cropt off, of old wine and honey ana ℥ j. and half the rind of a Pomegra∣nate, of the juice of an Apple 6 spoonfuls, boyl them well in a new pipkin till the rind of the Pomegranat be made limber and soft; then beat them all together, which done, add unguentum Syriacum ℥ j. of Tarre ℥ j ss. the juyce of 4 Onions pressed out what may suffice; beat all these together and lay them by for use: let this decoction be dropt into the ears, and a lock of new shorn wool stopt in warm. Galen sec. loc. l. 3. Experience witnesseth that the soft Blats boyled in oyl and put upon Warts, are ro good effect. The mill Blat, the head being taken off and the body bruised, doth cure the Leprosie, as Masa and Pithen have left in their Receipts. The fat of the stinking Blat, when the head is oft, beaten with oyl of Roses, Galen out of Archigenes saith is very good for the ears; but the wool in which they put it, must by and by be taken out: for that fat substance will quickly breed worms. Others write that two or three of them boyled in oyl, bruised and put into a little linnen bag and applyed, are very good for the same purpose; their entrails beaten with oyl or warm water are likewise good for the same, being dropped in∣to the ears. Pliny saith, l. 2. c. 36. that from the two first the heads must be pulled oft before they be used in medicine; from the stinking, the feet and wings, or rather that crust or shell like wings on the back, that being more hard, and more poysonous; but it hath no wings. The stinking Blattae moreover mingled with oyl or pitch, are said to cure Ulcers, otherwise in∣curable; as also Wenns and Swellings in the neck, Botches, being layed on for 21. daies toge∣ther: they cure also the Scab and Fellons, bruised and festered Sores, the wings and feet being first taken off. We disdain to hear of these things, yet truly Diodorus (as Pliny saith) reports that they have helped the Kings-evill, and difficulty of breathing, mixed with Ro n and Honey: the most learned thought fit to keep the ashes of them in a horn box for this purpose, or the powder of them to put into the body by way of Clyster. Cardan saith they take away pains; but what pains, or what kinde of Blattae should do it, he tels us not. The Phrygians and Lycaonians, anoint those with them that have a stoppage in the Matrix. Pliny l. 30. c. ult. Last of all they may serve in stead of Castore m for an Antiballomenon; and Galen useth them in stead of the Bu∣prestis. 
 Now if you would have a remedy against themselves, cast but a handfull of Flea-bane (the Greeks Mascula is the Latines Cunilago) and all the Blats will gather together to it. So called Remedies a∣gainst them. in Rome Blattaria or the Blat-herb. Nature hath provided a remedy against them for the Swal∣lowes; they are wont commonly to spoyl the Swallowes eggs, wherefore they use to fence their young with Parsly or Smallage, whereby the Moths are forced away from their nests. The which might be thought to be the figment of Aelian, but that Zoroastes in his Geoponicks doth af∣firm the same. The Ʋpupa or Houpe inclose their nests with earth flax against Moths. The Chough useth the herb Vervin to the same purpose. If they be anointed with the oyl of Spike, it works the like effect, as Joach. Camer. reports. That they may be rid out of Gardens, let us hear Diophanes his advice; Get the Guts of a Ram fresh killed and full of dung, bury it in the earth where many Moths use, and cast the ground lightly upon it; two daies after all the Blats will gather to it; the which at your pleasure you may carry other where, or bury them deep enough in the place, that they shall not be able to rise again. If you would preserve your Bees from them, use sharp fumigations, or set lights near to the Hives, or else anoint the props whereon they stand, that they may not get up. 
 CHAP. XIX. Of the Buprestis or Burncowe, and the Cantharides. MAny of the Naturall Philosophers have made mention of the Buprestis, but so little, that they seem neither to have touched either their form, or qualities, no not so much as their true Name. For Ardoynus cals it Buprestis; Vigelius, veter. l. 3. c. 15. cals it Vulpester or Bulpester; and in the 78. chap. Bustrepis most corruptly. Silvaticus, if any other chief at Barbarism, cals it Bustasaris, Bublistes, Bubestis, so corrupted was the Latine tongue in these blinde times, that Barbarism had wrought a general confusion in all places. 
 Now the true name of it is in Greek, , quia boves rumpit, because it swels Oxen; Nicander in Alex. derives it ab incendendis bobus, from burning or enflaming the bowels of beasts: , &amp;c. 
 When cowes or calves are sick, and bellies swell, They ' ave eat Buprestis keepers know full well. For first of all by their acrimony they enflame the belly of cattle, upon which followes a tu∣mor, and a feaver, and a kinde of a hot tympany, by which in the end the bowels are burst. By other, as by Hesychius in like manner , which is more rightly ascribed to that kinde of red little Spider, found in pasture grounds, which doth use to bite them. In English it is called a Blain-worm, or Troings, which being eaten by cattel doth produce the like sym∣ptomes: the Latines retain the Greek name of Buprestis; of the Germans it is called Geuch, Gach, Knoelster, Gualster, die Grunen, Stinckhenden, Wildenwentde, Renkaefer; of those of Heidelburg, from its swift running, ein Holtzbuck; in Italian, Bupresti; in Spanish, Arebenta busi, if Mathiolus say true. B t I for my part, somewhat boldly, though not improperly, do adventure to call it by a new name in English, Burncow, or Burstcow. 
 Pennius reports that he light upon one about Heidelberg, and a true one indeed, who describes it thus: It appears, saith he, both in shape and quality to be a kinde of Cantharides, both for its force and properties, (if Galene, Aegyneta, Phavorinus, Aetius, Plinius and Avicen are to be believed) but of a longer body, the outer sheath wings of a yellowish green, or rather of a golden yellow; the thighs also are longer and thicker, the eyes globous, and pro∣minent, out of the forehead near the eyes come forth two long horns, joynted; the head smal; the mouth is wide, hard, strong, forked, having teeth with which he doth cruelly wound and bite; the belly not round, but very long; a great foe to the Beetle and the Lizard, aiming at their bel∣lies (as being the softer and more penetrable part) which presently she gnawes through, and when she fears to be overcome or caught, presently she retreats and hides her self▪ somewhat strong of taste (as Actuarius saith) upon the palat. Aetius makes it to have a smatch of Nitre both in taste and smell. Cornarius, Lonicerus, and Cordus being de∣ceived by the strong smell of it, could not forbear to say it was the same with the Cimex or noisome Wood-pews, and called it accordingly Knolster, and Quelster. It feedeth on flies, cankers, worms, and other the like Insects, provided she kill them in fight, for those that dye of themselves or are kill ' d by others, she will not touch: when she hath filled her self with the carkasses of the slain, what she leaves she drawes into her hole, and when she is hungry again feeds on them. Other sa∣vage qualities of this little creature let Peter Turner, and William Brewer (Physicians for learning and integrity of conversation second to none) relate, who together with Pennius at Heidelberg did observe its life and manners. Bellonius in his description of Mount Athos, expresseth the true Buprestis thus: It is (saith he) a little winged flying creature of a most strong sent like to the Cantharides, but greater, of colour yellow or clay coloured; of such exquisite poyson, that the cattle when they have fed there a little while, do die of the grasse infected with its contagion. It hath its abode amongst the herbs cal∣led Succory, Flea-bane, Nettle, called Vouprissis by the inhabitants of Mount Athos. Thus far Bellonius. From whence we may truly collect that both descriptions of them do agree, as concerning their ill savour, their bigness, qualities; only they differ a little in kinde and colour. For we have not seen any of them yellow, unless I may call a greenish gold co∣lour yellow. Neither indeed is it fit to stand so much upon the outward shape or colour; but admit that according to the diversity of the climate, they may both receive some alteration (as it is in men) and yet be the same in species. Another Buprestis of the right sort I have seen, the body a little shorter, and broader about the belly, the tail more piked, the head small, the eyes standing out, the mouth gaping, and forked, the sheath wing for the length of it, chamfered; of a full bright grass and gold colour; the legs but six in number, long, proportionable to the bo∣dy. The Prints of Mathiolus and Grevinus, beyond the nature of the thing, and the experi∣ence of their own eyes, express eight but more slender, (considering the bigness of its body, than the first sort of Buprestis) and blackish, the cornicles also but half so big, and smaller; it equals the first in swiftness of pace, goeth beyond it in noysomness of savour, yea in this it excels the Cimex or stinking wood-lowse her self, and all wilde creatures. It hunts after Flies and Canker-worms, wherewith it is fed; so vehement strong it is, that it will kill the most deadly Spider that may be. Pliny saith, that in Italy this creature is seldome found, but now (as we have reason to believe Marcellus Virgilius) they are more common than the state of the countrey can well bear. 
 But that they are indeed venomous by nature, and very noxious to man and beast, as Aetius wit∣nesseth (for they kill both by their whole substance) doth appear even by this, that those which should give them to any one to drink, were as Budaeus saith in his Pan∣dects, to suffer death. For so the Law runneth: Qui Buprestem, vel pityo∣campen, tanti facinoris conscii, aut mortiferi quid veneni ad n cem a cele∣randam dederit; judicio capitali, &amp; poena Legis Corneliae afficiator. Who∣soever shall give a Buprestis or a Pine-tree Worm to drink, to kill any body, or any mortal poyson, being found guilty of such wickedness, shall suffer death by the Law of Cornelius. I have seen about Heidelberg two Buprestes like Scarabees, the one of a golden green, the other of yellowish black. The one like to the former which we have described, but somewhat bigger; the outer wings all over streaked with golden lines, and sha∣dowed with a little green; between the lines rise up bosses curiously wrought; very swift of pace according to the common nature of that Insect. But that which is of a yellowish black was sent unto me from Vienna by Jacobus Quickelbergius of Antwerp, who hath been a great help to me to enrich this history. The colour excepted, and that it was a little bigger, and had four horns, it altogether resembled the last we described. 
 Although these Insects are such as hath been said, that they fret with their acrimony; that freeting they enflame, and with their poysonous inflamation cause extreme thirst, and a horri∣ble The Use. swelling, insomuch that the very skin is burst; yet hath Dame Nature made them notwith∣standing very wholsome, which Art afterwards hath prepared for medicine, before they be put in use. Plinius and Aegineta dispute whether they should not be prepared as the Cantharides. Dioscorides dries them in a sieve over hot embers, and so layeth them by. Galen steeps them in vi∣negar. Hippocrates commands to take off their wings and feet. And because they fret, exulce∣rate, inflame and swell up, and do strongly attract and heat the parts so fretted. Diosc. l. 2. c. 59. saith, that being mixt advisedly with fitting ingredients, they may be applyed to the Leprone, Cancer, and wilde Tetters. My opinion is, that they may be used in stead of the bigger sort of Cantharides, rather than some kinde of Blattae (by Pauius his leave, if I may say so) not only because they are somewhat like in shape and figure, and in virtue also, as Galen writeth. Pliny saith that the Buprestis by way of corrosive doth take away Ringworms in the face. Hippocra∣tes doth much commend them in divers diseases of the womb. For so he writeth in his Book of the Nature of Women; and in his Book of the Diseases of Women; and in his Book of Barrenness. For the hardness of the womb, to emollient juices and fat add a Buprestis, and use it. To drive out the Monethly Flowers and secondines, prepare half the body of a Buprestis (whether great or smal) with twice as much pulp of a Fig, and apply it; for it purgeth the womb, and inflateth it, and is a special remedy to procure the Flowers when they are past hope. Sometimes he applies only a Buprestis (if it be a great one) sometimes making a soft pessary, he takes ten, and adds to them a little sawcer of oyl, and mingles with it Wine, Aethiopian Cumin, Seseli, and Anniseed, of each a∣like parts, and whilest they are hot he makes a pessary of them and useth them to the Matrix. In the strangling of the womb, when the fit is over, the body first purged, Hippocrates makes a Me∣dicament with a Buprestis, and thrusts it into the Matrix. Also for a Schirrous of the womb he useth a Buprestis, but warily and with diligent consideration; for he puts it in like a Suppository for one day, and when it doth much vex the patient by corroding, he bids to take it forth: more∣over he compounds a Buprestis, Myrrhe, and Elaterium, and puts it in. So he doth also to bring forth a Mola, Gal. l. 1. cap. 1. out of Archigenes, describes a Medicament of Buprestes, with Vinegar, Crowfoot, and Wakerobin root, against falling of the hair, Leprosie, Elephan∣tiasis, &amp;c. the cure whereof you may easily finde there. 
 Now as I have declared hitherto its profitable qualities, so (lest I should transgress the bounds of history) I shall open the terrible effects that this poysonous creature causeth in man and beast; The signs of a Buprestis be∣ing drank. if a man swallow a Buprestis,  ' tis all one as if it had been a Cantharides: the body swelleth, as if it had a tympany, much wind creeps between the skin and flesh, which hapneth no doubt by the flux of humours melted by the poison, and the vapours elevated upwards. The lips are of a strong colour, to wit, of a dead violet. In the mouth there is the like poysonous taste; the stomach, belly, and guts do ake extremely, the urine is stopt, the body is ill all over, as also the head and brain are sensible of it. 
 A remedy of this is Salt-peter, taken in Wine and Oxe gall. Useful to that purpose is womans milk, suckt out abundantly, and in defect, cowes, goats, or sheeps milk. Womans urine drank, The Remedy. and vomited up again; but before a vomit they ought not be given, because by that means the Feaver would be more sharp. Dioscor. First of all therefore of good store of Wine sodden, or with oyl of Myttle Bacon lard, or fat Pork broth, or with good store oyl of Olive, or boyled Wine a Vomit is to be made. New Wine drank freely, is held to be a special remedy against the Bupre∣stis. Galen and Ardoynus. Pliny commends Nitre with water, or Laserwort, Asa dulcis, Wine and 1▪ 2. de Amid, in Alex. Honey, or Bezoin dissolved in warm water; or take red Nitre 4. drams, and in warm wa∣ter or Posca cause Vomit. After vomit there must be means used for purgation, afterwards use dry Figs (as Galen prescribeth) or a decoction of them in old generose Wine when the fit be∣gins to bate. The Thebane date is prescribed to eat alone, or bruised in sweet Wine or wo∣mans Milk: all kinde of Pears, and oyl of blossomes of Apples, are much commended for this use. Nicander commends wood-pears, (for that I think he means by ) and especially Myrtle berries) following the authority of Dioscorides. For that they do refrigerate and bind, and by that means do as wage the hot nature of the Buprestis, and help the weakness of the stomach. But heed must be taken they be not eaten while the body is yet swoln, lest the disease be increased by the poyson being kept in. Some with good reason give 31. berries of bladder Nightshade, and with Almonds the make Almond-milk, together with the decoction of Lettice, Violets, Bo∣rage, Bugloss, garden Nightshade, Plantain, Raisins, and the great cold Seeds. Aetius gives the root of Scorpion—grass in sweet Wine to drink. Many extoll the wings and feet of the Cantha∣rides for an Antidote against the Buprestis, but either it hath an opposite quality by antipathy, which makes good that opinion, or else we may suspect it to be false. 1. 2. 78. C e∣nate. 
 If an Horse or an Oxe eat one of these flies, presently he swels, growes mad, and shortly after bursteth and dieth. So Aelian. 6. de Anim. c. 35. and Hierocles a Greek writer witnesseth it. He bids to binde the horses head, and to open the veins about his nostrils, that the bloud may run forth of his mouth, and to rub it with Coleworts, and give him Fish-pickle and Oyl: and Vege∣tius likewise almost in the same words: If a Horse or an Oxe eat a Buprestis with the grass, his belly will instantly swell, he is inflated all over, he refuseth his meat, and he often and by little and little sends forth his dung. 
 To cure this, Absyrtus and Vigetius prescribe one and the same remedy: presently get upon the Horse and cause him to gallop as fast as he is able, afterwards let him bloud a little in the roof of his mouth, and let him swallow the bloud as it runs forth, chewing it in his mouth; then keep him continually walking; let his diet be wheat steeped in sweet Wine with Leeks given him with a horn in Wine warm well beaten with Raisins. Some, as Praxanus taught them, pour Oyl into the nostrils of the Oxe, l. 17. c. 17. To Goats that are swoln with the Buprestis, apply Bacon-lard, or pour the fat broth of it down their throat, saith the same Author. 
 The Cynoprestis seems to be the same with the Buprestis, for that works the same effects in Dogs as this doth in Cattel: or if it be a different sort of creature from this, I confess ingenuously I have not met with it. 
 CHAP. XX. Of the Cantharides, or Spanish Fly. I Know not what the reason was that the Cantharides above the rest so well known, of so great use in Physick were omitted by Pennius and Gesner. Which task notwithstanding I shal willingly undertake, and thus I begin their History. The word in Greek is the same in Latine; in French, it is Cantaride; in Italian, Catarella; in Spanish, Cubillo; in the German Tongue, Grune, Kefer, Goldkefer; in Low Dutch, Spaensche, Ʋlieghe; in English, Cantharides, or Spanish Fly. 
 
Of the Cantharides two sorts have come to our knowledge, the one greater, the other lesse. Of the greater sort there are some thick and long, taken in wheat; and fat likewise as the Blats are, drawn with variety of golden lines, which in the wings run athwart, and those are accounted of the best use in Physick. Others are lesse and lean, hairy, called the in∣nermost, not so fit for medicine. Of the greater sort also not all are of a glittering green, but some of them of a sad red, but all of them of an inexpressible splendor, and very pleasant to the eye. 
  
 The smaller Cantharides Thomas Decat first of all acquainted me withall, they seem to dif∣fer a little in shape and bigness; but have all the same virtue and original. Of these lesser, the first hath a long forked head, with black eyes standing out, the cornicles long and black, the wings coming forth of the middle of the loins; the which are marked with two silver coloured spots, and a few other white specks. They are commonly found in Kexes, or Asse Parsly in the summer time. It hath feet and thighs very slender and long; of colour virmi∣lion inclining toward a purple. The second is of the same colour with the first, but only that the eyes and cornicles seem to be green. Of the third the head and shoulders are not to be distinguished, of a rusty colour, and the eyes as black as pitch; the wings of like colour with the head, but glittering with golden streaks, the feet black and short. The fourth is like the third, but only it is rather in colour of grass green, not rusty as the other: otherwise, except the bigness (for it is the least of all) it doth not dif∣fer. As well the greater as the lesser of these Cantharides, do not come of living creatures, but of dry and moist putrefaction. The race of Cantharides is bred in wheat and corn fields, and in fig-trees also. : as Aelian hath it word for word out of Arist. in his 9. Book and 39. Chapt. They are bred also of the sponge of a Rose called dens Ca∣ninus, and of the Catterpillars which are found in Fig trees, Poplar, Pear tree, Ash, Olive, Rose trees; for in all these there are worms bred that are the originals of Cantharides, but in the white Rose they are less effectual. The Cantharides couple and generate likewise, but ot a creature of their own species, but a worm only; they feed upon pulse and grain, but especi∣ally of wheat, and those which are so fed are accounted most fit for Medicine: they smell like Tarre, taste like Cedar, as Nicander reporteth. 
 Their virtue consists in burning the body, causing a crust, or (as Dioscorides will have it) to corrode, cause exulceration, and provoke heat; and for that reason are used mingled with me∣dicines that are to heat the Lepry, Tettars, and Cancerous sores. 
 And in being mixt with Cecots or fit plaisters, they do cure deformities of the nails, causing them to fall off. They are used in medicines for Corns on the feet or hands. 
 Some anoint the places where the hair off, with Cantharides bruised and liquid Pitch, the skin being prepared with Nitre: they are good for Cauteries, but care must be had that they do not ulcerate so deep▪ then some command to annoint those ulcers made, with the heads, of with the gall or dung of Mice mixt with Hellebo e and Pepper. Cantharides mixt with quick Lime, cure Botches, as if you should cut them off with a razour. Some use to cast a little of them into Medicaments to provoke urine. But there is a great question of it, because they are poyson drank, in respect of the bladder that they afflict with perpetual toment But these is no que∣stion but in oyntment they may do good with the juyce of wilde Vine, or with Sheeps or Goats suet. Some of my Masters put only their wings and their feet into Medicaments that pro∣voke urine. We, saith Galen, are wont to cast in the Cantharides whole, and we judge those to be the best, that are found in wheat, and have a yellow girdle running athwart their wings to adorn them, L. 3. &amp; l. 11. desimpl. fac. also put under, they mightily provoke the terms, and put to medicaments for the Dropsie, they are a very good antidote against it; as not only Hippocra∣tes, and Dioscorides, but Galen, Avicenna, Rhasis, Pliny, and the best writers do testifie amongst Phy∣sicians. I cannot here praise sufficiently the excellent use of them, with Leven, Salt, and Gum Ammoniac, to divert Catarthes, to cure the Gowt in the feet and hips; by drawing the matter that lies deep, from the centre to the superficies. Also they are good against the venome of the Salamander, as Pliny teacheth l. 29. c. 4. Also in some cases and in some compositions, they are good for such as want erection, and do promote venery very much. But as rightly mixt and ex∣hibited in due proportions, they are good for ones health, so being not rightly mingled and given disorderly, they cause cruel symptomes and sometimes death. When Anno 1579. I staid at Ba∣sil, a certain married man (it was that brazen bearded Apothecary that dwelt in the Apothecaries shop) he fearing that his stopple was too weak to drive forth his wifes chastity the first night, consulted one of the chief Physicians, who was most famous, that he might have some stiffe pre∣valent Medicament, whereby he might the sooner dispatch his journey. But when it was day∣break almost, there followed a continual distending of the yard without any venereous desires, and after that bloudy urine, with inflammation of the bladder, and the new married man almost fainted away, all Antidotes profiting nothing a great while. I remember that the same thing hapned to a Noble man of Francfort in my remembrance, whom when an illiterate Physi∣cian thought to cure him of the Dropsie by giving him Cantharides, one in number inwardly, he killed him with lamentable torments. I have a singular remedy against the weakness of the Genital part, which when I used it indifferently▪ however it did great help to many Noble men, and no hurt, (who generally are more studious in venereous matters) yet it did one amongst the rest so much harm, that after venery (which he was too much addicted to) he pissed bloud continually, and swounded away frequently; truly unless there had been plenty of milk at hand, this Venus bird had died and suffered deservedly for his Lechery and lasciviousness. Thus far for their Physical force, now we shall pass to their deadly and ignominious qualities. They Signs and cure of Canthari∣des drank. are held to be amongst the number of poysons most deadly, not only by reason of their corro∣ding and inflaming, but by reason of a putrefying quality they abound with. Their juyce en∣tring into the veins either from the stomach, or by the skin, destroys a man like to poyson. Therefore Ovid when he wished mischief to his enemy, lib. Trist. wishes that his parents might give him the juyce of Cantharides to drink Cicero ad Pecum l. 9. Epist. famil. Cajus by the accu∣sation of L. Grassus is said to have taken Cantharides: as if by that means he was resolved to kill himself. Gal. l. 3. de Simpl. fac. writ thus: If they be taken inwardly in a very small quantity, mingled with things fitting, they powerfully move , and sometimes corrode the bladder: whence it is manifest, that all things that kill by a cold quality, if they be taken in a small quan∣tity they may nourish the body: but such as kill by putrefying (as Cantharides do) not at all; since they are enemies to mans nature. Cossiles a Roman Knight, well noted for his familia∣rity with Nero, when he was sick of a dangerous Tetter, a Physician was sent for by Caesar to cure him, who gave him Cantharides to drink, and so killed him. Pliny. Also Cantharides were objected against Cato of Ʋtica, (as the same Author saith, l. 29. c. 4.) as if he had sold poy∣son by open sale, because he set them at 60. Sextertia. But when they are drank too largely, or applyed outwardly too long and too deep, they are wont to produce these symptomes. There happens pricking and pain in the bowels; which is extended from the mouth to the secrets, and to the loyns, and haunches, and hypochondres, and they ulcerate the bladder with a painful ulcer, and inflame the yard and the parts adjacent with a vehement Impostume: then they piss bloud, and after that pieces of flesh. Sometimes there followes a Diarrhoea and Dysentery, swounding and dulness, and the minde is perverted, and there is nauseating and heaviness, and a frequent desire to make water and go to stool; but almost it is in vain. They taste a taste of Pitch in their mouthes: all which symptomes are set down in Dioscorides l. 6. c. 1. Gal. lib. de The∣riac. ad Pison. c. 4. and l. 3. de Temper. c. 3. and in Rhasis lib. 8. c. 17. To those that are so infected and affected, Dioscorides first prescribes frequent vomiting, then frequent Glysters made with Nitre to cleanse the guts; then to preserve the bladder, he gives milk inwardly and flea-seed. And he will have their Clysters made of other matter than at first, namely of Barley water, Marsh-mallowes, whites of Eggs, Muscilage, of Linseed, Rice-water, decoction of F greek, Hydromel, fat Broths, Oyl of sweet Almonds, Goose-grease, yelks of Eggs. Also he bids to give inwardly Cowes milk that is sowre, Hydromel, kernels of the Pitch-tree, the great and the small, sweet new Wine, Ducks grease, a decoction with Diuretick seeds, (namely the four great cold seeds) and decoction of figs with syrup of Violets. Oyl of Quinces is commended as the certain Theriack for this disease, as also oyl of Lillies, and Samian clay. Rhasis after that Clysters of fat Broth are cast in, will have incoction made into the yard with Oyl of Roses, and the sick shall be put into a warm bath in a great Var. tit. 8. c. 17. Authors are not agreed in what part the poyson of Cantharides doth lie. Some think it lyeth in he head and feet, and others deny that; yet they all agree that the wings are an Antidote in what part soever the poyson lyeth; and those being taken off it is deadly; so that this venome hath its remedy joyned with it. Plin. l. 11. c. 35. Lyrus of Naples writes that Purslain is an Antidote against Canthari∣des, which Pliny l. 20. c. 13. affirms of white Basil: who also l. 23. c. 2. and 4. l. 28. c. 10. com∣mends very much Vinegar of Squils, Oyl of Dill, Cowes Milk, and Broth of Goats flesh. And thus much shall suffice for the History of Cantharides, which I wonder that the most learned Gesner, and especially Pennius overslipt. 
 CHAP. XXI. Of Beetles. THE Beetle is an Insect that may be called , as if he had his wings in a sheath. The Name. It is bred of putrid things and of dung, and it chiefly feeds and delights in that. The Greeks call it ; the Tyrians, ; the Germans Kaefer; the Italians Escuravaio, Pololere; the French, Escarbot; the Polonians Krewka; the Illyrians Krabak; the English; Beetle, or Bug; the Northern English call it Klock; but the Southern, Starke eken; the Arabians, Kanasis and Their Sex and Description. Kanases by Avicenna. The Greeks all with one consent, hold that all Beetles are males, whence one may easily understand the sense of Ausonius his Epigram upon Marcus that was gelded. Rhodiginus l. 8. c. 5. Antiq. lect. renders it to us. Also the Aegyptians caused a picture of this creature to be made on the statnes of their Heroes, intimating thereby their manhood, that had no mixture of feminine weakness; for men must be valiant and manly, pu∣fillanimity is a great disgrace to them. All Beetles cast their skins, and they have no sting: when you touch them they are afraid, and they leave off to move, and they g ∣tus did vainly ascribe to them four wings hid under a crusty cover, for experience she t two, very tender and frail, wherefore they have them shut up in a hard cover over them that they may take no hurt by hard bodies. For the greatest part of them either un∣der ground, or bites rotten wood with their teeth, and makes houses and nests there: so that if they were not excellent well guarded, they could never keep themselves safe from external injuries. When they fly they make such a humming or noise in the air, that Laertius writ that the gods talk with men by these creatures. Of all plants they cannot away with Rose trees, and they hate them as the destruction of their kinde; for they dye by the smell of them (as we read in Geopas) but on the contrary they take great pleasure in stinking and beastly places. 
 I remember one was wont to cleanse privies, when he came into an Apothecaries shop at Antwerp, and smelt the spices, he presently fell down in a swound, which one of the standers observing, he went and gathered up some horse dung in the street and put it to his nose, and so a man used to stinking smels was recovered by a stinking smell. Therefore it is no wonder if a Beetle (that we said before was bred and fed with dung) being anointed with oyl of Roses, be killed thereby; they are the words of Clemens Alexandrin. 2. Paedagog. which also Plu∣tarch elsewhere, and Aelian also affirm. They abhorre the smoke of Aldud, especially of the leaves as of Pulsamus, Acegi, Cow dung, and Nigella seed, Rhasis 88. The Hemerocallis of Dio∣scorides, is called by some , for the great force it hath to kill Beetles: but as they do extremely shun those plants, so they very much affect Ivy to be under its shade, and they naturally delight to go under it, under which when they are gathered in heaps, it is an easie mat∣ter to catch them, for they will hardly go from it. Beetles are some greater, some less. The great ones, some have horns, others are without horns. Those that have horns, some are like Harts horns, others like Goats horns, others have Buls horns, others have Rams horns: some have horns in their noses: we shall speak of them all in order. The ▪ or Harts horn Beetle is called Lucanus by Nigidius; as Pliny witnesseth. Some call it the Bull, others the flying Stag: Hefychius cals it , because it laies hold on things in its way with thorny horns; the Comedian and Eustathius call it , because it is the greatest of all; Car∣danus cals it , a word compounded of Greek and Latin; Gaza cals it , the Ita∣lians call it C reti, and vulgarly Polupeso; the French, Cerf volant; the English, Stag-fly, or Fly∣ing-fly; the Hollander, V i ghend hert; the Illyrians, Gelin; the Poles and Sclavomans Krewha, Wielka. Amongst all the horned Beetles, for the shape of its body, length and magnitude, it may challenge the first place, and is the most noted. It is blackish, of a dark red, especially about the outward cover and the breast; it hath two whole horns without joynts, and with bran∣ches like a stag as long as ones little finger in such as are grown up, but they are less and shor∣ter in the young ones: or (as Pliny saith) it hath long and movable horns nicked with cloven p ncers, and when it will it can bite or nip with them. For it will close them wonderfully, and useth its hornes for that end for which Crabs and Lobsters do their clawes. The eyes are hard, putting forth and whitish, it hath fore-yards on both sides of them, one pair that are branched between the horns &amp; the eyes, the joynt whereof makes almost, a right angle, and two more breaking forth of the midst of the forehead straight and plain, ending as it were in a little smooth knot; it goes upon six feet, the fore feet are longer and greater than the rest. Lo∣nicerus makes this to be the male: but I (if there be any distinction between the male and the female) shall not doubt to call it the female; both because the other kindes of beetles are less, (for as Aristotle observes the males in Insects are far less than the female) and also in copulation the females receive from the lesser, as experience confirms it. The male is altogether like it, but  ' tis less both for body and horns; which though they be not branched on both sides, yet pressed toge∣ther they do more sharply prick ones. finger, than the female doth. The third is three or four times less than the former: a black colour, with little cloven horns, near to which there arise two fore-yards distinguished with many joynts. It hath eyes a little standing forth, and that are great in respect of its body. The shoul∣ders on both sides end in an acute angle. It feeds for the most part in a clammy fat juyce coming forth of the oak; nor is it easily to be seen but where oakes grow. The fourth kinde is very rare, it hath two little horns, thrice branched inwardly, they seem whitish from black, the back is parted with black and white spots, but the belly with silver coloured and blew. It goes on six feet, which are no less black than the fore-yards: when the head is cut off, the other parts of the body live long, but the head (contrary to the usual custome of Insects) lives longer. This is said to be dedicated to the Moon, and the head and horns of it wax with the Moon, and do wane with the Moon, but it is the opinion of vain Astrologers. The horns are not without their Medicinal vertues; for they cure childrens diseases; for hanged about their necks, if they be great horns and full of branches, they serve for an Amulet. Laid to The use of broad horn Beetles. scrophulous humours and the Gout, they help much, especially if they be applied with the earth they have cast up. Pliny. If horned Beetles they call stags, be boyled in wine, and the arte∣ries of the armes be anointed with it, it cures Agues. Miraldus. But I note by the way, that Guillerinus of shell fish, was not very wise, who writing a Book of the Nature of things, was quite out, when he placed that flying Stag amongst the Grashoppers; sometimes he makes it a Locust, sometimes a Bruchus, sometimes he confounds it with a Glow-worm, conjecturing every way, but teaching nothing. The Philosopher saith that those Stag-flies are bred only from worms growing in rotten wood. But I rather approve of it, that they breed from dung as experience The name and description. testifies. (these are words that are synonymous) in Latine, Capricornus; the Germans call it Holtzback; the English, Goat-chafer; in greatness and colour it resembles broad-horn, it hath a little broad head, great oxe eyes, almost three fingers over-thwart in length; it hath a forked mouth, gaping and terrible, with two very hard crooked teeth; with these whilest he gnaws the wood, I speak by experience) it doth perfectly grunt aloud like a young pig. May be this is the reason why Hesychius hath related that they bound to a tree, will drive away fig-gnats. The shoulders of it are curiously wrought by nature, they seem to be a hilt made of Ebony and polished, it hath six feet, distinguished with three little knees; but they are very weak and faint, and altogether unfit for such a burden. These receive help by two horns that grow above their eyes, and are longer than their whole bodies, they are flexible with nine or ten joynts; not exactly round, but are rough like Goats horns, which although it can move them every way, yet when it flies it holds them only forth directly, and being wearied with flying, she useth them for feet: for knowing that his legs are weak, he twists his horns about the branch of a tree, and so he hangs at ease; as our Bruerus saw in the Countrey about Heidelberg; in that it resembles the Bird of Paradise, which wanting feet, clings about the boughs with those pendulous nerves, and so being tired with labour, takes its ease. They thrust upon us some German fables, as many as say it flies only, and when it is weary it fals to the earth and presently dies. Those that are slaves to tales, render this reason for it: Terambus a Satyrist, did not abstain from quipping of the Muses, whereupon they trans∣formed him into a Beetle called Cerambyx, and that deservedly, to endure a double punishment, for he hath legs weak that he goes lamè, and like a thief he hangs on a tree. Antonius Libealis lib. 1. of his Metamorphosis relates the matter in these words: The Muses in anger transformed Terambus because he reproached them, and he was made a Cerambyx that feeds on wood, he is seen upon wood, and he hath crooked teeth, and he alwaies moves his jawes; he is black and long, having wings on his belly, as the greater Beetles have; he is called the Wood-eater Oxe; but in Thessaly, Cerambyx. The children catch them to play withall, and they pull off its head and carry it, and it shewes with the horns like a harp made of a Tortois-shell. Which words, whilest Xylander strove to put them into English (one otherwise well skill ' d in the Greek tongue) he committed two great errors; first, by taking Cerambyx for a Bird when he called it a Fly; secondly, because he translated it, that the head with the wings are like a Harp, when as the Greek book hath it the horns. But whether this be that kinde of Beetle that runs up and down, and makes a noise like a kid in the leaves of Eriphia; (the Wizards say there is no better remedy to cure the voice) truly I am ignorant of it, but I suppose it is the lesser Beetle, because the stalk of Fennel gigant would scarse contain this when he is grown great. We have seen divers kindes of Cerambyces besides this we now speak of, one that was like to the first of these, but differing in mag∣nitude and colour; the belly thighs and horns were of a waterish blew; the shoul∣ders, tail and cover wings were varied with some Black spots, also the joynts of the horns were black; the hinder legs grew longer than the rest: we received these from Quickelbergins, who sent them from Antwerp; we have one more that is green without, and underneath dun co∣loured; the head, shoulders &amp; cover wings are a dark green, and shining also with gold: it is something a long body, and seems like the other, but it is something less; it hath purple horns, but the feet and the legs are of a violet colour. I first gave to Pennius a third that was of like colour to this, it smelt almost like Nutmeg and Cinamon. But that sweet smell (as good as the oyl of Myrrhe) presently wh it dies evaporates into the air, and leaving the body, doth wholly insinuate it self in∣to the box it was kept in. Cardanus makes mention of this Beetle, but I know no man that found it before me. There is yet one of a shining black, that hath a great belly, thick, with a body and horns shorter than the rest, the joynts of the horns are not round as they are in the rest, but lightly saw ' d on both sides. Pennius saith he is beholding to Carolus Clusius for it. The fifth is altogether like the first for head, mouth and teeth, with very black eyes; a brown colour all over the bo∣dy, a mouth wide open and dented; the head, neck and wings are bespot∣ted with very small black spots; the body of it is almost as great as the se∣cond Cerambyx; it is but seldome seen, it lives in houses and dry wood. The sixth is ash-colour with a very lit∣tle head, they eyes are both white, the horns are somewhat long, joynted, di∣stinguished with white spots; the co∣ver wings, and almost the whole body is various, it is conversant in houses, but whether it dwell in wood also I know not. I saw the se∣venth brought from Russia by Edward Elmer, it was brownish all the body over, it had round joynts on the horns 7 or 8, it is easily known by its form. There is an eighth kinde not far dif∣fering from this in figure and magnitude, but that the head, shoulders and wings are blewish, Joachimus Camerarius sent a ninth to Pennius (he was one that deserved singularly of the Common-wealth of learning) the wings and feet were of a sandy colour; the head, the horns and belly were blackish; he had bowed horns made with many turnings and knots, which he turned to both sides in the twinkling of an eye; it creeps upon plants (especially on Cythisus) I think the Beetle which Johannes de Chaul describes lib. de varia quercus historia, ch. 26. is of this kinde: There dwels a creature in the oake, of the kinds of Beetles, (so far as we can conjecture) it is of a blackish colour with long legs, carrying two prickles in its head a little crooked, where∣with he layes fast hold of what he meets with. Those Carpenters that hew timber of oake, found this little creature alive in the very heart of the oake. The countrey people of Lyons call it Thurro; it lives best and longest in roofs of houses, and it sometimes comes forth and shewes it self making a little noise, in places where stoves are. Gesner, of pious memory, Epist. l. 3. saw such a one, or one like it, voided by an old woman that was sick of a Pleu∣resie, his words are these▪ An old woman that was sick of a Pleuresie, voi∣ded a black Beetle downward, after she had drank a Potion of our Oxy∣mel with a decoction of Fenugreek; it had long feet, horns that were joynted and were flexible; it was full of raw putrefaction▪ and alive; it was as long as two joynts of ones finger. The tenth is all purple colou∣red from black, and hath a forked mouth. The eleventh is all black. The twelfth hath horns tha are not so much joynted, the head and shoulders are blew; all the rest of the body seems a bright red. However you see the horns of all these, some straight, others crooked in their pictures, (for to explain them the better) yet for the most part they wear them with a bending of them backward to their shoulders, as goats do, as you see the first Cerambyx: and upon that account I think it fit to put them into the same rank. And thus much for Cerambyx, or Capricorn, and its kinde. The Use. 
 I have learned no other use of them in Phy∣sick, than that taken in the left hand, they drive away quartain Agues. Plin. l. 30. cap. 11. It may be posterity, by better experience will discover more of their vertues, and will not suffer them∣selves to be perswaded that a creature God hath made so curiously can want rare vertues in Me∣dicaments, which he hath bestowed on far baser things (according to his goodness unto mankinde) Flitter-mice take this for their chief dainties, and prefer it before Gnats, especially if they can catch them and squeeze them alive. 
 , or , Oxe, or Buls horns rather, hath alwaies two horns standing straight and right forth; it is blackish from red, and seems almost without any head; yet it hath a very small head sunk into its short thick shoulders, and a little thorn comes forth of the middle of the forehead, very sharp for defence. We have seen four kindes of Nose-horns, the chiefest and greatest of all lives in In∣dia, it is very black, it hath a nose on its face crooked horn ' d like to the stern of a ship; about the middle whereof there is another horn bent inward, and comes forth of a little knot, and such another comes out of a bunch on the shoulder; the whole body from the end of the horns to the tail is four inches long, and it is about two inches broad. Like to Beetles it hath no female, but it shapes its own form it self. It produceth its young one from the ground by it self, which Joach. Camerarius did elegantly express, when he sent to Pennius the shape of this Insect out of the storehouse of natural things of the Duke of Saxony; with these Verses: 
 A Hee begat me not, nor yet did I proceed From any Female, but my self I breed. For it dies once in a year, and from its own corruption, like a Phoenix, it lives again (as Moninus witnesseth) by heat of the Su 
 A thousand summers heat and winters cold When she hath felt, and that she doth grow old, Her life that seems a burden, in a tomb Of spices laid, comes younger in her room. 
 The second kinde of Nose-horn very rare and wor∣thy to be seen, sacred to Mercury, Carolus Clusius sent painted from Vienna, where it is very frequent, the form is as you see it: it would seem all pitch co∣lour, but that the belly is a full red; that crooked horn in the nose is so sharp, that (what is said of an Ele∣phant going to battle) you would think it had got an edge by rubbing it against a rock. The third Nose-horn, and fourth seem to be alike, but that the for∣mer hath wings growing out longer than the sheath covers, but the others are shorter. You would say they were rub ' d with shining ink, they are so perfectly all over black. The Ram or , hath knotty horns, violet colour, a head greenish from gold colour, the shoulders like vermilion, a purple coloured belly, sheath wings of the colour of the head, it goes forward with legs and feet, of a light red, but the wings shut up in the sheath, do fitly express the small whitish membrane of a Cane. 
 The greater Beetles without horns are many; name∣ly, that is called Pilularius, and another that is called Melolanthes; another purple, one again that is dark coloured; one called Arboreus, and another Fullo. Some call the Pilularius the dunghill Beetle, because it breeds from dung and filth, and also willingly dwels there. The Greeks call it , and , and from its form like a cat, ; the Germans, Ross∣kafer, Kaat, or Mistkafer; in English, Dung-beetle, Sharnbugg; in French, Fouille merde, as you would say Dung-digger; the Latines call it Pilularius, because it turns up round pills from the dung, which it fashions by turning it backwards with its hinder feet. Porphyrie doth thus de∣scribe the nature of it: All your Pilularii have no females, but have their generation from the Sun; they make great balls with their hin∣der feet, and drive them the contrary way, like the Sun it observes a circuit of 28. daies. Aelian saith almost the same. There is no fe∣male Beetle, it puts the seed into a round ball of dung, which it row s and heats in 28. daies, and so produceth its young. They would say thus much: that the Beetle called Pilulari makes a round ball of the roundness of the Hea∣vens, which it turns from East to West so brought it to the figure of the World; afterwards es it up▪ the earth whe up, it lets it remain there fo when that by it self, which being issolved in water, ies it growes up to be a flying For this to Apollo, and adored it for mall god, by lected, that the likeness of the Sun was given to th and so he excused the ustomes of his Countrey, Pliny and Plutarch, Symp▪ gue of their family; but dung, especially of Cow the smell of them a very great way off, they w uddenly to it. . of Smel, But they slowly, yet they labour continually and exceedingly, and delight, most of all to produce the oung ones, for oft times the little bals that they make, by the injury of the winds or of the place, fall aw y, and f ll from a high place to the bottome; but this Bee e de ing a propagation, watcheth with perpe care, and raising this Sisyphian ball to its hold with continual striving, and that tumbling back again, at length she reduceth it. And truly unless it were endued with a kinde of divine soul (as all things are full of Gods wonderfulness) it would aint and be spent in this great contest, and would never take this pains any more. Some say they die being blinded by the Sun; but the most think they are choked by lice (that creep▪ all about them) they hardly hold out one winter. They chiefly delight in the shade of the Ivy-tree, as most healthful for them. Praxanus in Geopon. I have et down the form of it so exactly, and in its colours (for it is all black) that I need say no more. Beetles first breed from dung (saith Johan. Langius) as the Worms b eed out of rotten wood: then their seed being shed into a round ball, and the same being enlivened, breeds their young ones: every one knowe this sufficiently, unlesse they live where no dung is; for in dunghils they are obvious to every Man. 
 Beetles serve for divers uses, for they both profit our mindes, and they cure some infirmities of our bodies. For when this living creature, (and scarce a living creature, for it wants some senses) Their use for our understan∣dings, and by example. being of the basest kinde of Insects, and nothing but a crust, doth excel man in divers faculties; this should teach us modesty, temperance, labour, magnanimity, justice, and prudence. For though its house be but a dunghill, yet it lives contented the ewith, and is busied and delighted in it; nor doth it more willingly drink or eat amongst Roses than in Goats dung, which smels in its senses as sweet as Marjoram. For it lives by the law of Nature, and will-not exceed her or∣ders. The greatest care it takes, is to make the greatest bals it can as it they were sweet bals, which with wonderful labour it rolleth from her; and if it chance to roll its-burden against some heap, that the bals slip away and fall down again, you would imagine that you saw Sisyphus rol∣ling a stone to the top of a mountain, and falling back again upon him, yet is it not weary, nor will it rest, till it hath rolled it to its nest, so earnest it is about its work. But we poor-men do nothing that is worth our labour, or as we have power to do, and we give off in the very steep entrance of vertue, and we spend all our pains and daies in idleness, following ill counsel, till we get a habit of mischief to our own destruction. Who doth not see the courage of the Beetle? if he shall observe him fighting with an Eagle (as  ' tis related of the Beetles in India) I believe that it will come to pass, (as Erasmus said) that some man extremely favouring the Roman Commanders, will lament for the Eagle, that the combate fals out upon so kingly a Bird to fight with so mean and despised enemy, for to conquer it, it is no glory, but to be conque ed by it is the greatest shame, and the Beetle will win praise enough that he strove with an Eagle, though he should be overcome. The Poets say that Ajax was ashamed of so weak an adversary as Ʋlys∣ses was, and valiant Captains disdain to contend with common souldiers▪ Again, a man would wonder whence this mean Insect hath gained so much courage, and boldness, that it dares wage war with the strongest of Birds; also whence it hath means, force, faculties, and patience, that it can contend so many years with the Eagle, without any reconciliation. But if any man will unfold this secret, and view this contemptible creature nearer, and as it were at home, he shall observe so many rare properties of it, that when he hath considered all, he will desire to be a Beetle rather than an Eagle: yet that no man may stop or stay me before he knowes the matter: First of all, it exceeds the Eagle and men too in this respect, that it yearly renews its old age, and growes young again. This is so great a matter, that I think all earthly poten res when they come to that unamiable old age, that they must part with all, would rather with Beetles change and cast off their dregs, than they would receive a seven fold Crown. Again, what huge courage of the minde is there in so small a body? what an heroical magnanimit ? what a force it hath in battel? that Homers Fly is nothing to the Beetle. It hath not a wit so common, but it was of old reputed for it, and commended in all places. Hence was that Greek prove b . Wiser than a Beetle: whereby they ascribe to it, a singular and incomparable wisdome. Nor doth that concern me if any man will cavil and say he dwels ill favouredly in an uncome y house, for I shall rather justly condemn their houshold government, who being ill favoured them∣selves, and of filthy conditions, do build their houses curiously and lostily with so great care, and charges of King Attalus. Moreover, that it useth the excrements of living creatures for its own commodity is no fault, but a commendation of its wit and ingenuity. As though we that are Physicians did not the same things, as often as we apply the bloud, the flesh, the urine, and some-times the and of living to our patients, and sometimes we give them P s. Nor are Alchymists who would be devide men indeed, and not mortal, could they obtain what they draw forth that quintessence. Nor are husband-men (a sort of people that of old were sacred now) ashamed to dung their fields. And it is probable they first learned their Art from the Beetle called Pilu . or why should it chiefly include its sseed in duug, unless God would have that there should be in a great deal of moisture, whereby generation is perfected. it is that wise Farmers dung their fields to make them more , and quered that lea ness, barre ness and poverty of their . But you will say that the Beetles Pi like the smell of so sti king thing. It were a foll ook for a ma a Beetle, for that is peculiar to man to be displeased with the sent of his own dung, and so is it not with any other creatures; therefore the Beetle is more happy than we, but not more ye men are not so much oftended with it, as it is, but a they of . For of old me it did not seem abominable to them it doth to us, for they called it by a lucky word, L , and they thought fit to call Satur the dunghill god; for his honour, i we will believe . or Pliny saith that Sterculus the son of go not only the name, but also immo by it in Italy. Moreover the same thing in Gree procured to two Kings great glory; to who invented it, and Hercules that spread it abroad. Lastly, the memory of that old King will never be abolished, whom Ho (as in Cato) commended to for the ground with his hands, and for no other thing (but that the Beetle is delighted in. A Ro mperor was nothing offended with the smell of urine, if it brought profit with it. Wherefore then should ve be of ended with the Pi rli, who hath so many good properties, for one smal inconvenience? if we call that an inconvenience that is most commodious for the so ring of its young. Lastly, when we are the Beetle, though in the dung, alwaies shell alwaies neat; compare him with men polluted and infected with st w and wdy houses, and I shall ask which of the two is most cleanly? And I think it had its name a Beetle from pure and clearle. If any man thinks these gifts to be and vulgar, yet no ma but will think that a thing worthy of great honour; that of old time the was the chiefest amongst their sacred images and mysteries of their It is the most apt. of a famous . For (as , his Comment of Is in the pictures of the ye was the of a King, being added to it for it signified ght and just administration of things. But he saith, their Images that wanted hands, those represented udges, who ought to be free from , amongst these there was o that his eyes, which represented the chief Judge, because he ought to be all , and to look business, and to hear of mans person. It was (as the proverb is) a Seal amongst the sacred Images. And what did wise The old intimate to us thereby , but and invin ible Captain. saith as much, that no man may suppose I yo common▪ Th use o legories. But some follow may say, what hath a to be compared with Com∣mander in an Army? Truly they agre many things: First you see the all in , and there is of its body but is guarded with plates and hardness, said to be arm in compleat armour, and enced his warlike march with a horrid and terrible humming: what is there sounding of ? wh of that Kings now so much light in the could the of Asle Asse was held abominable amongst (drivin burden, its i ible age, and of life. say o females amongst but they all . What can bes no his camp ( , allow others to have them. this is the that in those o , they exclude their young bring up, and they other place to breed in th they have to is not war can better do it, who know how to their , or on he bare that the Beetle have a face like a Cat, a creature familiar with us, and more useful, is desired for its self, yet in that respect the it, and prefer it before all other Insects by many degrees. . Lastly, i a horse beautiful in his kindes, and a dog in his, why should not the Beetle be so in its kinde? unless we measure tha of all things by our own, that what is not like in must be held to be ugly. No man o a found minde will finde fault with the colour of it, for it sets forth some jewels, and in special the Diamond that is the chie∣fest . Lastly, no man will think the Bettle at all despicable, who shall consider with him∣self, that Magicians and Physitians etch remedies from this for the greatest diseases, for they are not only carried in mens purses, but also hang ' d about their necks, and ofttimes up gold against all childrens diseases. What will you say if in the most effectual and incredible remedies almost, (for Pliny is the Author of it) it hath equal force with ? for that terrible Beetle on an a present remedy against all , and no le s effectual than that M ly which gave Ʋlyss . Nor is it good only against these, but it is also very useful, if any be about to go before the King upon any occasion: o so that such a ring ought especially to be worn by them that intend to beg of Noblemen some jolly preferment, or some rich Province. It keeps away likewise the head , which truly is no small mischief, especially to great drinkers. Who them can despise the Beetle, whose very image engraven upon stones hath so great vertue? The mentioning of precious stones puts me in minds of adding this also: that if the Eagle delight in the precious stone of her name, the , the Beetle comes not behinde her in it a share of the same honour, for the stone Ca ∣rias also owes its name to it, wonderfully resembling the whole of the creature, so that one would say it is not the shape represented, but a living and true beetle inclosed in the stone. Moreover this i pure and filthy creature ( ) boyled with worms in oyl of Roses, doth very well cu the pains of the eats. Pli . A prescribes the Beetles called Pilularii being stamped alone, to be boyled without , which the Author of the Book ad , ap∣proves also, 1 . Sylvatic chap. 94. writer thus out of . The Dung- help the pains of the womb, they provoke urine and monethly termes, they procure Abortion; with they are good to heal the Haemorrhoids, and they help which comes of venomes infused by living creatures; and the oyl in which they are takes away the pains of the ears. The later writers commend th se Beetles among the remedies for the Stone, especially Alex . makes for the the Stone th kinde of powder, which is no ordinary one . Burn the Dung-beetle or any other after the same manner as you do Grash ppe , or Scorpions▪ Take of the of of j. dram, of Pigeons dung j. dram and a half, let them be and a powder made of them. The Dose j. dram with water of the of For this ointment is very much commended. Take of oyntment j. ounce▪ of oyl of Roses in which Beetles and as many have boyled a good while j. ounce and half, of them incorporate and be made into an oyntment reports that he had gotten of his master against the Convulsion, made of Beetles after this manner: Take of Pepper, Pelli∣tory of Spain, each alike, of Beetles to the weight of all the rest▪ them all, being brought to a powder and mixt, together in a bath with juyce of much as of an oyntment, with which let the of the temple with back-bone, be anointed. Moreover, awakening of such as are troubled with the Dead sleep, and rides have done good) two or three Dung put up half a to be made fast about the pe of the well the muscles of the fore of the arms (on every one) , because this doth wonderfully up as are (saith ) awakend done that had been held with a for with this remedy, having tried all others in vain, and him afterward with the his blister it. The Dung- are best for this purpose, which be found under stones, and then they which are found in a . The of using i , which testifie they have confirm by many . Yet the will credit when foolishly rather than truly, they report and that is adorned with golden , ut water with tempest , Pli . . I say of Eagle , the by , in whose nests Beeth (which our first , that they serve for this use also; to feed . Nay living , especially that are in upon the gle, its cruel , do no less rank, to do , it like for out of the est the one ling, and being broken, the young ones while they are yet unshapen, being dasht miserably against the stones, are deprived of life, before they have any sense of it. Neither do I see indeed how she should more torment the Eagle than in her young ones. For some who slight the greatest torments of their own body, cannot endure the least torments of their sons. We see Asses, (those sluggish and almost senseless creatures) run to the help of their foals through fire, if it be in their way, with a strange contempt of their life. So that I cannot but admire and magnifie the Beetles inbred wisdome in the choice of its revenge. But enough of this, lest I should seem to have made (not an Elephant of a fly, but) a Gyant of a Beetle. I will confess indeed, that as I was loath to make a great volume about a small thing, so I accounted it a to bury in silence what I had read. I wonder at Pennius  ' s brevity and emptiness in this argument, since in Lucian, Pliny, Homer, Aristophanes, Theocritus, Al xandrinus, Erasmus, and infinite other Authors, won∣derful things are recorded of the Dung-Beetle, well worth our mentioning. 
 There is another altogether like the Dung-Beetle, but of a darkish bright blew colour, with a notable shining. This in the moneth August is troubled with lice hang∣ing between its legs, and at last kill ' d with them. I should ra∣ther take this for the cat-fashioned Beetle, because an egge is not more like to an egge, than this is to a cat. It is met with every where, but I have more often seen it about Colchester. Let us go forward. 
 That which I should call the Emerald coloured or greenish Beetle, the Greek comick Poets all of them call , the Atticks and . Eustath. Some likewise call it and , but without right. It is taken by some the Tree-Beetle, but its place tels us it is a mistake. The Rustick in Lombardy call them Gallerucas, as much as to say, French Palm ms (as Niphus in∣terprets it) though yet they agree in nothing with Palmer-worms. In Dutch it is called Gruenen, Odor, G uldkafer; in Italian, Mariola; n Polonian, Zielonakroroka; in English, Greenchafer. The opinions of writers are divers about this little creature; both be∣cause this kinde of Beetle is not every where easie to be found, as because it seemeth to be ve∣ry near the Cantharis. Some will have it to be the Cantharis, but for the most part there is want∣ing in it that caustick virtue. The Scholiast upon Aristoph nes calleth it , a little creature of the colour of gold like a Beetle. Eustathius cals it a great Wasp. Pollux affirms it to be a little creature which flies, but sets not down its kinde. Gaza translates it Galleruca, but it hath nothing like it; and they who contend that it is a Tree-Beetle, have ei∣ther lost their eyes, or cannot distinguish varieties of colours. Hesychius makes it a Beetle, but of a golden colour: as the Scholiast upon Aristophanes, yellow: later writers call it the greenish or Emerald coloured Beetle, but shining as it were with gold. Marcellus Empiricus intimates as much in these words: the green Scarabee (the Greeks call it ) is of a li ely emerald co∣lour, by reason of the pleasantness whereof, it is so delightsome and beneficial to the eyes, that they can never be weary of it; for the longer you look upon it, the more you would be in love with it, Pliny also saith the same, l. 30. c. 70. &amp; 29. c. 9. The male is green all over, except the eyes which are ruddy: the sheaths of the females wings (which is the big∣ger) seem to be of a chesnut colour, shining with a delight∣some and beautiful brightness; otherwise it is like the male. The breast of them both stands out with a sharp point, which I have not observed in other Beetles. P. Quickelberg an Apothecary of A twerp, but one who was to be preferred before many Physicians for his studiousness about things natural, sent to Pennius a male and female of them, painted as it were with Apollo  ' s hand. Aristot. l. 9. de Rospirations, ascribes to it a shrill sound, which perhaps gave occasion to some to call this the Tree-Beetle. They are genera∣ted (saith the Philosopher) , that is, of worms which are in cow-dung, and of asse-dung. But Stephanus o of Theophrastus saith otherwise, , &amp;c. The Melolonthe is bred of the blossoms of Apple-trees, or at least it flies to them when they begin to blossom . We are beholding to Charles Clusius for another kinde of this Beetle, whose feet are black, as like∣wise its head and shoulders, but from blewish. It hath horns in appearance, but not so indeed (wherefore we r ck it amongst the , or hornless Beetle) its wings seem to be furrowed: but about the edg they a some-what red. Thilesius tels us of another notable kinde of M l l the (and I have ∣sented to you the figure of it) in these words▪ it is green all over, except the eyes (for those are exceeding black); its belly from golden is a little red, and so its thig s; the middle of its back is beautified with a half Moon of the same colour with its sheath wings; for which reason it is elegantly called by the Latines, Equus Lunae, the Moons Horse. Thilesius writes that Aristotle makes mention of this, but I cannot yet finde where the Philosopher does it. Philesius while he speaks of this among the Dung-Beetles (for which reason also I have added it to them) describeth it thus in verse: 
 Which, rolling bals of dung this potter frames, Some black, like the scorcht Moor are seen, The nobler sort are deckt with green: back hath (to compare great things with small) A mark, you may the half Moon call. The English call ' t the Moons horse, so renown ' d, But had there e ' re so fair been found, Many a Semiramis would love us then, And Centaures had out numbred men. And indeed most of the Beetles are hide -black; yet I make no question, but some of them have their shining with a blacker, others with a more pleasant green. Th re also that shine like gold, and those very great ones, wh dig up the earth, and make their nests there. Some there are which fly about with a little humming; some with a terrible &amp; with a for∣midable noise, so that they would not a little fright one that is not aware of them. There are other differences also of shapes amongst them: but their breeding in dung, their feeding, life, and delight in the same, this is common to them all. Ano∣ther Beetle of a purple colour was brought to us from Con∣stantinople, which (only that its eyes, belly, and feet were like pitch) was all over of a purple and violet colour. The black one, which lives in dry wood, is formed after this manner: It is all over black, or russet rather, as if it were clad in mour∣ning; its mouth is forked, its shoulders almost square, its legs and horns somewhat short; it seldome flies, but goes for the most part, and murmurs while it is going, as lewd servants use to do. The Tree-Beetle is very common, and every where to be met with, especially in the moneths of July and August, after Sun-set: for then it flyeth giddily in mens faces with a great humming and loud noise, and vexeth cattel. These Beetles spoil the leaves of trees, which they do not so much eat as tear in pieces out of an inbred malice; for they feed upon gnats. We call them Dorrs in English; the Dutchmen, Baum∣kafer, Loubkaefer; Jo. Agricola l. de subterr. Anim. Seukaeser; the French, Hannetons. The sheaths of their wings are of a light red colour, and covered as it were with a very fine flower, otherwise they shine but a little; their legs, feet, and prickly tail are of the same colour: its other parts are all over brown: only that the circle about their eyes, and their horns are yellowish, and of the same colour are they a little above the beginning of their joynts of their bellies are whitish. In Normandy they are much more numerous every third year, and therefore they call it L '  an des hannetons. It is recorded in our Chronicles, that in the year of our Lord 1574. on the 24. of February there fell such a multitude of them into the River S vern, that they stopt and clog ' d the wheels of the Water-mils: and indeed, unless together with the industry of men, the Hens, Ducks, Goat-milkers, Castrels, Bats, and other Birds of prey (which seem to make these their dainties) had afforded their help, the Mills had even to this day been choaked with them and stood still. 
  
 There is another taken to be of kin to this, of a colour all ween brown white, its belly gray and as it were hoary. Of what Physick I confess I know not. Fowlers indeed when they hunt bait their hook with two or three Dors or tree Beetles, and tye a ne to their line, which they cover with flags, that their wiles be overed: the Duck for greediness of meat presently swallowes the hook, which sticking fast she is punished for her folly. How Cranes are taken with these wrapped up in a gourd, he that hath a mind to know may read Gesner de Grue.
Uses of this despicable creature are observed to be many; and Nature scarce affords any simple that she hath bestowed more vertues on against diseases. For Earth-worms soften, glew The Use. together, ease pain, and by their earthly and watry moisture together, they duly temper the part affected. Powder of Earth-worms is thus prepared: Wrap up great Earth-worms for some time in earth-moss, that so they may free themselves of that glutinous matter that sticks on their outward parts; then press their hinder parts next the tail, that they may cast forth their excre∣ments and be cleansed. Then cast them into a vessel of white Wine and a little Salt, and gently pressing them with your fingers, cast away that first Wine: pour on more, and after the Worms are washed, take some part of this away also: for it must not all be cast away, as some would have it, till it be perfectly clear, for so that glutinous clammy quality would be lost with it. Thus prepared, they must be gently dried in a furnace, till they will crumble into dust when you touch them. Then the powder being beaten and searced (it will smell like Runnet or Cheese) must be kept something far from the f re in a glass vessel. Otherwise i is best to kill the Worms cut in pieces in Wine and Salt, and when they are dead, to take them out and to cleanse them. This powder with the juice of Marigolds, will cure the Epilepsie; with Mead, the Dropsie; with white Wine and Myrrhe of the Troglodytes, the Jaundies; with boyled Wine, Hydromel, or Wine, the Stone, the Ulcers of the reins and bladder; you may give a dram weight. In three cy∣athi of water they will break inward Impostumes, and bring them forth, if seven or nine of them be brought into powder. They stay also the Dyarrhoea, help Barrenness, bring forth the Secon∣dine that staies behinde, ease the pains of the Hip-gowt, open the Liver, cure Tertian Agues, kill and drive out all Belly-worms, given in liquors or decoctions that are proper for it. Also the decoction of Earth-worms d ank with the juice of Knot-grass or Comfrey, is good against continual pis ing, especially if it be also cast in by a Clyster. Also a Clyster of their decoction easeth the Emrods wonderfully. Some, where they suspect clotted bloud, give the decoction of Earth-worms to drink with great success. For the diseases of the Ears almost past cure, boyl them in Goose-grease and pour that in. Boyled in oyl for the Tooth-ache, and poured into the ear on that side the pain is, as Pliny saith, they give ease, or if you drop them into the contrary ear, as Dioscorides saith. Thus far for Earth-worms given inwardly, from experience and testimony of Dioscorides, Galen, Aetius, Aegineta, Myrepsus, Pliny, Vularis. 
 Also outwardly applied and bruised, they joyn wounds and nerves cut in funder, and heal them in seven daies; wherefore Democritus would have them kept in Honey. Their ashes with old oyl, cleanseth corrupt Ulcers; and as Pliny writes, consumes the hard edges of them, if it be mingled with liquid Pitch and Simblick Honey, Dioscorides saith Sicilian Honey is called Simblick. A certain Chirurgion now in England of good note, makes a liniment of Earth-worms and Ho∣ney, wherewith he anoints the tent, and sprinkles it with fine powdred Allum, and puts it into a Fistula, and so brings forth the core eaten out with no pain, and heals the wound Also their ashes drawes forth things that stick within, and laid on with oyl of Roses cures Kibe-heels. Mar∣cellus. 
 Serenus saith, that when the nerves are cut in sunder, it is good to lay on Earth-worms bruised with Hogs-grease that is old and rank. Marcellus Empiricus adds Groundsel to the Hogs-grease and Earth-worms, with the tender tops of Box with Frankincense, and this he laies on the nerves cut or pain ' d: Pliny saith that the ashes of these and of a wilde Mouse, laid on for a plaister, with oyl of Roses, is excellent for broken bones. 
 For the great pains of Horses in their nerves or joynts, to help them, Russius, Absyrtus, Didy∣mus, collect a great number of Earth-worms: whence Cardan gathers that they will ease all pains. Mundella affirms that contraction of the nerves will be cured if you anoint them with oyl of Ca∣momil that is well replenished with Worms. Marcellus saith that the same is done with Honey and Worms, as before. Aetius saith without doubt they are an excellent remedy for the Gowt boyled in oyl, and a little wax: so saith Marcellus, but he sometimes mingles Honey with them. Vigo, for pains in the joynts, makes a plaister of these and Frogs, to which he adds Vipets-grease. 
 For pains of the joynts: Take ashes of Worms iij. ounces, oyl of Roses, or Foxes, what may suffice, mingle them to an ointment. Another that is singular: Take the marrow of a Calfs leg compleat, and old oyl of Roses iij. ounces, Earth-worms cleansed with Wine and Salt ij. ounces, let them boyl in Balneo to the consistence of a Mucilage; with this anoint the neck, shoulders, and the places where the pain is, for it gives great help, Pliny. Marcellus anoints them with Honey, and then he laies on the Mucilage prepared. When any part is wasted and receives no nutriment, cleansed Worms must be put into a glass very well luted, that nothing may breathe forth, and so set in a warm oven or in Balneo, and they will then resolve into a clammy moisture; an admira∣ble remedy and approved for the Palsie of the limbs: Take the ashes of tender Earth-worms iij. pounds, Ginger, Galanga, of each iij. ounces, with clarified Honey incorporate them for an Un∣guent, with this for three nights together anoint the Patient, binding his arms forcibly over his belly or stomach, then cover him warm, and let him beware of cold. Jacobus de parma To drive away hoary hairs, women use these ashes mingled with oyl whilest they comb their head, as Pliny saith, to whom Serenus subscribes in these verses: 
 Earth-worms and oyl of Olives, free from cares; They will preserve a man from hoary hairs. We said before how they cure the Tooth-ache. But further the powder of them rubb ' d on will preserve the sound teeth, and being injected will make rotten teeth, though it be a grinder, to fall forth; especially, if the tooth be first scarified, and fill ' d with powder well sprinkled on it. Aetius. Gal. 5. sec. loc. bids us do almost the same out of Archigenes. Also they are good with the root of Mulberries boyled in Vinegar of Squils, to wash the teeth. For purulent Ears, poured in with oyl they help much, as Galen thinks, and cure their inflamations, being boyled with oyl of Roses. Aetius. 
 If that your hearing fail, an old disease, Is cur ' d with Earth-worms boyled with Ducks grease. Serenus. Myrepsus bruiseth Worms with some small quantity of the earth from whence they were taken, and works them together, and anoints that upon ears that are bruised. Marcellus bruiseth them with oyl of Roses, Celsus with oyl of Olives. Faventinus for pains of the ears anointeth the out∣ward parts with oyl of Earth-worms, and also pours it into the inward parts. Marcellus bids to bruise Leeks not planted but sowed, odd in number, and as many Worms together, and boyl these in the best Oyl to thirds, and he saith that this oyl put into the ears is very good for their greatest pains and deafness. Abinzoar cures clefts of the hands and feet with oyl of Earth-worms. For an old pain of the head, they are held very excellent bruised with Vinegar, Frankincense, and Castoreum. Galen for the same prepares in his Euporists such a Remedy: Take xv. Earth-worms, as many grains of Pepper, Vinegar what is sufficient, mingle them, smeer them on. Another: Take Earth-worms, Mouse-dung, white Pepper, Myrrhe, each half an ounce, bruise and mingle them with Vinegar, and anoint that part of the head that the pain lies on. Myrepsus will have the Worms to be odd, and to be taken only with the left hand, and so superstitiously anointed. If thou wouldst try, saith Marcellus, whether a swelling in thy neck be the Kings-evill, lay a live Worm upon each swelling: if it be a scrophulous tumour, each Worm will turn to earth; if not, he will be alive and receive no hurt: so saith Pliny also. Earth-worms are a part of that noble Plaister of Arnoldus (2 Breviarii) of a Rams skin, or the bloud of a man that is red, against the Rupture: and Hollerius commends it to cure Enterocele and Epiplocele. They also diminish the Stone, both taken inwardly, as also anointed on the share somewhat thick. Gal. What concerns womens diseases, bound to the neck they retain the birth, but contrarily applied to the hips, they draw the birth out and the secundine, for they draw mightily wheresoever they are applied living. Plin. Inflamations of the breasts, Earth-worms alone laid on will cure, for they concoct, open, draw forth, and heal. Alex. Benedict. So Myrepsus makes a plaister of them bruised. Lay on Earth-worms with Quinces, or with dried Barley flour, upon Breasts hardned or inflamed. Aetius. But if after delivery womens breasts swell, and to use the words of Serenus: 
 If the swoln breasts do feel great pain, Smeer them with Earth-worms  ' twill help them amain. For they will concoct the Impostumes and suppurations of the breasts, and after concoction will heal them and void out the matter. For the Shingles, the Indians, saith Carolus Clusius, make an unguent thus: Take Earth-worms, and feed them some time with leaves, fine flour, or flour and milk, and when they are grown fat, boyl them in an earthen vessel (alwaies scumming them) when they are strained, boyl them again to the consistence almost of a plaister, which well pre∣pared will be almost of a yellow colour; dissolve some part of this in distilled water of Roses, and wash the part affected with it twice a day. A most excellent remedy, saith Clusius, and proved by very long experience. Pliny saith they will do the same in Vinegar, who together with Aetius and Myrepsus, affirms that Worms bruised and laid on the place a Scorpion hath stung, are an admirable remedy, for they presently ease the pain, and correct the malignity of the tumour. 
 O l of Earth-worms is known by all to be good against divers infirmities, and the Ancients made it thus. Take Earth worms half a pound, Oyl of Roses, Omphacine, two pound, the best white wine two ounces, let them boyl in balneo till the wine be consumed. This cures the nerves relaxed, contracted, astonished, cut in sunder, or cooled, it easeth almost all pains, and wasts the stone, being anoynted on the share and loins. But in the preparing of it, every man followes his own opinion. For some before they adde Oyl, wash and purge them with white wine, some neither wash them nor presse out the earth, and perswade to take the best wine, that it may pe∣netrate the sooner: Others use simple Oyl, not Oyl of Roses, others again Oyl of Chamo∣mile. Also they shew us many wayes to boyl them, for one useth a furnace, another Balneum, another doth it in dung, and some mingle of Chamomil flowers, and of Dill, to asswage pains, some of Hypericon flowers to glew wounds together, others Snails without shells, others with shells, every one as he thinks fit. The Author of Bartapalia prepares an admirable water of Worms, fol. 254. that is very good for wounds and diseases both outward and inward. For Worms of Horses and Oxen Pelagonius▪ puts live Earth-worms into their nostrils, yet it were far better with a horn to put them down their throats into their stomacks. Tardinus bids give ashes of Earth-worms bruised with flesh to a Hawk, when she cannot mute. They are also meat for Moles, and when they dig, they will break out of the earth in wonderfull haste. Sows (as Varro writes) will trouble the mud, and dig up the earth with their snouts to feed on them. Albertus saith that Toads, Bellonius Lizards, Tarentinus that Sea Grampets, and experience saith, that Frogs, Eels, Gudgeons, Carps, Roches, Trouts, Darcae, and Tenches will greedily devour Earth-worms. Also that bird Aristotle calls , some call it Vangellus, and Hens, and all Quails will feed on Worms. But those are no wise Fisher-men, that cause Worms to come forth with medicinal juices, for when they are bitter the Fish will not bite, but if they lie a day in Wheat-meal and a little Honey, and then put upon the hooks, they relish better then Ambrosia: And it is no ordinary good we may re∣ceive by them, that they foreshew rain when they suddenly come forth of the earth, but if they lie hid the night before, it is a sign of fair weather. Some do harden Iron like Steel thus. Take Earth-worms two parts, Radish-roots one part, bruise them, and distill the water in a Limbeck. Or take distilled water of Earth-worms three pound, juice of Radishes one pound, mingle them, let Iron hot be often quenched in this water, and lie in it ten dayes, and it will grow very hard. Another. Take Earth-worms two pound, juice of Radish one pound, distill them at an easie fire, and tem∣per your Iron with this distilled water. Also draw forth juice of Sorrel, stinking Hemlock, and of round Aristolochia, of each alike, and temper your steel often. The juice of Sow-bread is thought to do the same. Mr. Fakenham a famous Physitian writes thus. Another. Take Goats bloud, adde to it a little salt, let glased pots be buryed in the earth, well luted for thirty dayes, then distill the bloud in Balneo, and put as much of the distilled water to the same quantity of the water of Worms. Another. Take water of Worms, Rapes, roots of Apple-trees, each alike, di∣stil them apart, and mingle equal quantities together, and quench your Iron in that water, as we said before. A Frenchman namelesse. 
 CHAP. XXX. Of Worms in living Creatures. Isidorus thinks they are called Lumbrici from Lumbi the loins. For the Ancients call the belly The Name. Lumbos and by Hesichius, and Suidas. Some interpret that, those that are sick of Worms. But more rightly from Earth-worms, which they represent in form and nature, doe they borrow that name. Cornelius Celsus calls them Worms, Pliny the living Creatures of the en∣trails. The Greeks call them , and when they are extraor∣dinary great, , as appears out of Aelian, l. 9. c. 33. You must observe, that Latin writers make difference between Vermes and Vermina or Verminationem, that is Worms, and diseases from Worms in the belly; for Vermina and Verminatio, are the pains of the belly from Worms, as Cel∣sus, Serenus, Pliny, and Seneca Epist. 97. testifie. The Arabians call them Emicar, Sylvaticus Elin∣gen, the Germans Spulworm, Bauchworm, the English Gutworm, the Sclavonians S krkawka, a word hard to be pronounced. A belly-worm is a living Insect, without feet, bred in the bodies of living Creatures, hurting their operations diversly. I said a living Creature, that I might exclude those The Descrip∣tion. broad Worms called Taeniae, which though they be of substance that grows to the guts, and are in form like to living Creatures, yet they cannot properly be accounted living Creatures, as Hip∣pocrates 1. de morbis, rightly affirms. I said an Insect, both because they are of a round body, and because the Ancients do not reckon them amongst Serpents, nor have hitherto ranged them into any proper Classis. I said without feet, that I might distinguish them from Worms with feet. I said bred in the bodies of living Creatures, because they are not only bred in the guts of living Creatures, but in all the fleshy parts, and in the heart it self, as it shall appear by the history. And not only men are troubled with them; but also Horses, Calves, Dogs, Hogs, Hawks, and all perfect Crea∣tures. I said that diversly hurts actions, because from them, pains, Consumptions, Convulsions, Epi∣lepsies, Frensies, and divers other mischiefs follow, especially if they be very great, or very many. And all these Worms breed either in parts that are alive or dead. The worms in living Creatures seem to be of three sorts, the round Worms, Gourd-like Worms, and Ascarides, such as are bred of∣ten in the Intestines of living Creatures: And not there only, but in other vessels and bowels; of which matter I finde there was a great controversie amongst the old Authors. For Galen 1. l. de loc. aff. c. 5. assigns certain diseases to certain parts, as worms to the guts, the Stone to the reins and bladder. But I my self with many other persons of the University, saw a stone as great and like a Pigeons Egge, voided by stool, at Cambridge, by Dr. Larkin the Kings professor in physick, who was long tormented with a pain of the Colick, and wasting, and he voided that stone in the same form and magnitude, as a most troublesome birth at his fundament. Montuus and Beniven∣nius write that they saw the like. Also by giving but one Clyster to the choise wife of noble Le∣onardus, I brought forth 35 stones like to Medlar seeds, at one time in the year 1583. Many there are that question the credit of Pedemontanus Arculanus, Guainerius, Trallianus, Benivennius, and Montuus, because (besides the opinion of Galen) they have written that they have more then once seen stones in the head, lungs, greater veins, the gall, bladder, under the tongue, in the joynts, and belly. But since daily experience doth clear them from a lie, we may say that the Greek speak, as Greeks were wont to doe, but that these men speak but the truth. Galen might have remem∣bred, that Hippocrates, Epid. 5. sec. 12. did not rashly affirm, that there was a sharp stone pressed out of a womans matrix, by the hand of the Midwife, as great as the whirle of a Spindle. This I thought fit to premise, lest when I shall report them, the faith of others and my own expe∣rience that worms are bred almost in every part, others should think I relate either a thing very strange, or what is false. Worms seldome appear in the most vehement pain of the Hemicrania, yet Hollerius teacheth that it so comes to passe sometimes, l. 1. c. 1. The Polonians call this disease Stowny Roback, the Germans Hauptwurm, and it was formerly frequent in Germany and Hungary, and all that were taken with it fell into the frenzie, or madnesse, and when they were dead, and their brains were opened, a Worm was found there. Then the Physitians gave Garlick with di∣stilled wine once or twice a day, and all that drank of that recovered, the rest dyed. Philip Shot cured five of his servants that were sick of that disease, with the same remedy, as one writ in a Letter to Gesner. That Worms are often seen in the brain, Thomas a Vega saith, com. in cap. 5. l. de loc. aff. Galeni, and Balthasar Conradinus c. 10. de feb. Hungar. Also Cornelius Gemma, in Appendic. ope∣ris Cosmocritic. disputing of a pestilentiall Semitertian, speaks of a woman in a city neer the river Mosa, that had a long and vehement pain in her head, when she was dead of it her brain was open∣ed, and there was found a great quantity of filth, and abundance of Worms. That disease is known saith Rhasis, by the internall corroding of the forepart of the head, and by the most ve∣hement pain, that almost makes them mad. It is cured by neesings, and juices cast up into the nostrils, that wil kill Worms. Rhasis, l. 1. c. 9. But the Worms that are yearly found in the brains of Stags, and sometimes of Goats, Sheep, Rams, (chiefly those that are fat) that Hunters and Butchers know better, than that I need to tell them. They are as big as the greatest Worms, and of the same form with them, as Alexander Benedictus and Matthiolus report. Theophrastus mentions these Hist. lib. c. 53. and Alexander Trallianus, l. 1. c. 15. It is reported that Democritus of Athens, when he was young was troubled with the Falling sicknesse, and he went to ask counsell of the Oracle of Apollo, and Apollo answered him thus: 
 Take a tame Goat that hath the greatest head, Or else a wilde Goat in the field that ' s bred, And in his forehead a great Worm you ' l finde, This cures all diseases of that kinde. The young man was much troubled at this answer, and he repaired to Theognostus Democratius, that was then ninety yeers old, to tell him the meaning of the Oracle. This Theognostus told him that nothing could be plainer, for he had learned by long experience, that there were Worms in the heads of Sheep and of Goats, that being wrapt in a black Sheeps skin, and hanged about ones neck, would miraculously cure the Falling sicknesse. Some write, as Pliny witnesseth, that two Worms are found in the head of a downy Phalangium, which Worms bound up in a Deers skin, and bound to a woman before the Sun-rising, would hinder conception. Concerning Worms of the Abdomen. A woman, saith Pennius, that I knew very well, told me that she had seen more than once, some round Worms, that crept forth of the belly by the Navel. 
 The Ancients also say, that oft-times Worms will breed in the ears, against which they prescribe these remedies. Take the juice of wilde Cucumbers, and the juice of Garden-sage, or that with broad leaves, mingle them both alike, and pour that into the ears. Gal. l. 3. sec. loc. where recko∣ning up the Compositions of Andromachus for the ears, he highly commends this of Pritanis and Harpalus. Take Opium two oboli, Myrrhe, Spikenard, Saffron, of each three oboli, burnt brasse five oboli, and of round and Sicil Alum, each one dram, black Hellebore two drams, mingle them with sod wine or Oyl of Roses, and apply them to the ears. Lib. Euporist. 2. he writes, that a Locust will destroy Worms in the ears, and he bids apply a sweet Apple to the ear, with a hole in it almost quite through, for the Worm will come forth, enticed by the sweet smell of it. Pliny much commends the root of Cypresse boyled in water, and the urine of a young boy, and the juice of Hemp, Rue, Bramble, and of Capers powred in. Lastly, many remedies may be fetcht from Columella, Vegetius, Marcellus Empiricus, Trallianus, Vigo, Tardinus, and all the Arabians, and there∣fore here I supersede, passing on to other matters. Monardus prescribed to one that had a Poly∣pus in his nose, the juice of Tobacco to be injected; whereby the Ulcer was purged, and many little Worms came forth: Wherefore they breed also in the nostrils, (for all the Arguments that Gabucinus hath alleadged against it) and are not only cast forth of other parts. Cow-heards know that Worms will breed under the tongue, and the Worm under a Dogs tongue (the carrying of which Worm about one, saith Pliny, will drive off the biting of a mad Dog) doth prove that suffi∣ciently: And Valescus saith he hath seen Worms under mens tongues. It is known sufficiently by experience, that the very Breast and Lungs are not free from Worms; Antonius Benevennius, Be∣nedictus Renius, Mundella, Antonius Siculus, are my witnesses, who have seen them cast up, not by vomit or reachiing, but even by coughing. Also Alsaranius, Capite de Tussi, writes, that sometimes a cough is caused from living Creatures bred in the hollow of the lungs, and cavity of the breast, which being no greater than little Lute-strings, yet when they creep from place to place they make one cough, and when they lie still it ceaseth. Also Abenzoar Abhomeron. lib. 1. tract. 11. c. 3. makes mention of them, af∣firming that the old Physitians saw and writ of them. Albertus and Gentilis saw some in the liver and spleen, and Platerus in the gall bladder. Wherefore, whatever Galen or Avicenna may say to overthrow this from the perpetual motion of the Lungs, the neerness of the heart, and other frivo∣lous Arguments, yet there is no man but will say, but that reason must give place to sense, especi∣ally in natural things. There was saith Hieronymus Gabucinus, a certain Noble woman of Fanes (in his Comment of Worms, to which we are indebted for the great part of this history) when she had a long time been tormented with pain of her stomach, at last she cast up a ball of hard flegme, this being dissected, it seemed like a piece of flesh, and in that there was a Worm, and thus the woman recovered, whom the neighbours thought to be bewitched. Of Worms of the Reins and Bladders. When the reins putrefie, or the muscle of the bladder, oft-times little Worms are cast out, concerning which I thought good to write these histories out of Pennius. A woman thirty six years old, had great pain of an Apostume in her reins, and she consumed, at length she cast forth little Worms, a fingers breadth long, which I first saw in the bottome of her urine, Anno 1582. Randulph a London Physician, very learned and pious, when he looked on at the dissection of the body of one that was dead of the Stone in the kidneys, he sound in one of the kidneys that was corrupted, it was wrinkled and putrefied, a Worm of a full length. Timothy Bright, a very skilful Remember the Cook o Q een Mark that cast out a Scolo∣pendra by her nostrils, &amp;c. Mr. Crane. Physician, and to whom we are much indebted for the Epitomie of the Ecclesiastical History, saw a Scholar at Cambridge when he lived there, that pissed out a Worm an inch and half long; but it was not without feet as Worms are, but it had many feet and was very nimble. Aloysius Mundella Medicina Dialog. 4. Argenterius cap. de vesic. morb. Rondeletius lib. de dign. morb. c. 17. Scholiastes Hollerii lib. de morb. int. cap. de vesic. affec. (to say nothing of Levinus Cardan, and my own experience) do suf∣ficiently testifie that such Creatures breed also in the bladder: That Worms come forth of the matrix, like to Ascarides, I did not only see at Frankfurt in a German woman, at eighty years of her age, but Aloysius confirms the same in his Epistle to Gesner, and Hippocrates 2. de m. mulier. and Avenzoar. lib. 1. tract. 2. have said the like. Kiranides writes, that there is a Worm to be found in the matrix of a Mule, which tied to a woman will make her barren. In India and the Countreys above Egypt there are some living Creatures like to Worms in form, (they are commonly called Dragons) they are in the Arms, Legs, Shanks, and other brawny parts, also in young children, they breed in secret places under their skin, and more apparently: When they have stayed there for See de Vera M d nd. some long time, at some end of this Dragon the place comes to supputation, and the skin being opened out comes this Dragons head. Paulus lib. 4. c. 59. Soranus granteth this, but he questions whether they be living creatures. Moreover, in the bloud it self some living creatures breed, like to Worms, that feed on the body, as Pliny writes, Hist. 26. c. 13. Plutarch 8. Sympos: who writes, that a young man of Athens voided Worms with his seed. Aegineta saw them come forth at the groins and buttocks, as he saith lib. 4. to whom Benevennius subscribes c. 100. Also they breed un∣der Sheeps clawes, (saith Columella) and such I have seen under the nails of those that were trou∣bled with a Whit-flaw. And thus farre concerning Worms in the bodies of living Creatures. But such as breed in dead and corrupt bodies, (whether it be from the disease or the Chirurgeons fault) want a Latin name, but the Greeks call them , as appears by Hippocrates. The English call them Maggots. Coelius would also have them called Eulas in Latin, borrowing the word from the Greeks. We will speak of these in order. And first concerning Worms of the guts, the descriptions whereof, the causes, signs, symptomes and cure wil bring much light to the History of the rest. 
 CHAP. XXXI. Of the Description of Worms in the Intestines. VVEE shewed before that there are three sorts of Worms that are bred in the guts. It will be worth our labour to describe what each of them is. The round Worms are the first difference, and that manifest to all men, because these are the most common, and are so called, because they are indeed round and smooth, not unlike to those worms that breed in dunghils and gardens, which we said before are called by the Greeks, the bowels of the earth. These as all other Worms are blinde, without any eyes, and they are a hand length or something more: yet Benivennius c. . affirms that a Smith did vo∣mit up a Worm with grosse flegm, almost a foot and half long, very plain, with a red head that was smooth, and about the bigness of a pease; but the body of it was downy, and the tail crooked like the half-moon. Also at Rome, anno 1543. one that was now upon his youthful years, when as for many daies (as Gabucinns tels the story) he had been in great torments of his belly, at last he voided by stool a great black Worm with black hair, five feet long, as big as a cane. He saw one also that did not exceed the hands length, like to the round Worms, but that the back of it was hairy, and set as it were with red hairs; but this being cast forth by using good reme∣dies, he grew very well. One Antonianus a Canon (as Hieronymus Montuus tels the story) voided a green Worm, but he died shortly after he had voided that. But for the most part they are smooth and not hairy, a hand long and not a foot, at both ends pointed, as it were with a nib. And they differ so far from Earth-worms, that they wear no collar nor girdle: what concerns their co∣lours, I have seen some red, yellow, black, and partly white, or gold colour. Green ones are sel∣dom seen, yet Montuus saw some. Gourd-worms are those quick Worms that are like unto Gourd-seeds; concerning which the question is so great between Gabucinus and Mercurialis; for when he treats of a broad VVorm, that is made of an infinite number of Gourd-seeds shut up in a skin; he saith thus: I, saith he, think a broad Worm to be nothing else but, according to Hippocrates, as it were a white shaving of the guts, that comprehends all the in∣testines, between which some living creatures are bred like unto Gourd-seeds: which may then be seen to be voided when all that shaving is voided, yet oft-times it is voided by parts: which if they break when they are voiding, then you may behold these Worms like to Cucumer-seeds voided by themselves, sometimes many of them being folded together, sometimes but a few. But if any man shall see all that portion, let him know, that that scraping off like a Worm doth not live, but the creatures that are in it, like Cucumer-seeds. I once saw this Worm called a Broad Worm that pants, to have been of a wonderful length, and it crawled, a woman in a Quotidian Feaver voided it by siege, and when I did with▪ admiration much view it, and sought to finde the cause of its motion: that other man, who said he voided a portion of a broad Worm some daies before, which he would shew unto me for a wonder, did shew it me with incredible des▪ I had to see it; for this portion did move it self, whence I was more desirous to know the cause of that. At last searching diligently, I observed through the whole hollow part of it, a rank of living creatures like to Cucumer-seeds, which crept forth of it as out of some bed, some-times one, sometimes two folded together, oft-times four, or more, and that part of the shaving of the guts that was empty of these creatures did not move at all, but sank down: whence it comes to pass that I think a broad Worm is nothing else but snotty matter bred between the guts, or snivelly flegm thickned by the coldness of the guts, covering the inside of the guts like a coat, which women that assist the sick call a bed of Worms. Out of which snotty matter little living creatures like Gourd-seeds proceed, as by way of a conception, which is covered all over by the second membrane in the womb which is first made of the seed. So saith Gabucinus. Avicenna agrees in this opinion, Fen. 16. tract. 5. cap. 2. the Gourd and broad Worms are bred from the clammy matter that is fastned in the superficies of the guts, which is comprehended by a flegma∣tick pannicle covering it as if they were bred from that, and did putrefie within it. Antonius Bene∣vennius a Florentine saith the same, and more clearly, in com. de mirand. morb. causis, c. 87. who writes that in the mineral Baths at Avign n, that are in the Countrey of the Senones, he saw a wo∣man that for seven daies together drinking the water, did void these Gourd-worms in abun∣dance, that stuck so fast together, one being close to the other, that they were in a rank that was above four cubits long, yet you would judge them to be but one body and one Worm. Johan∣nes a Bookbinder at Basil (whilest I studied Physick there in that Academy, under Zuingerus and Platerus my Masters, anno 1579) voided▪ such a Worm ten ells in length without any pain, and not many years before he had voided the like. It consisted of many Gourd Worms; without which it had had no motion nor feeling, and might deservedly have been rejected from the num∣ber of living creatures. Platerus had such a Worm dried that was eighteen ells long, I saw it. Pliny writes of a Worm a sick person voided, was three hundred foot long: wherefore whatso∣ever Mercurialis objects to the contrary, lib. 3. de morb. puer. cap. 7. since experience proves the thing, is without any firm ground. He saith it cannot be that any living creature can produce so many young ones, as there appear like unto Gourd-seeds; then, that the guts are not large enough to receive so many young ones. Thirdly, that this comes to pass by reason of the vio∣lent putting them forth that gives the form, because the young one being broken by coming forth, is divided into those many pieces like Gourd-seeds. And hence we may conclude that those are trifles that the Arabians speak of Gourd-worms, forasmuch as there are none such: What is that I hear, most learned Jerome? that thou being gray headed, and taught by long expe∣rience, shouldst so applaud thy own imagination, that thou shouldst dare to deny a thing ob∣vious to sense, and plain to our eyes, and to Gabucinus Benevennius, and the Arabians? Go to, No living creature can produce so many young ones like Gourd-seeds: why not I pray? when as one maid that took physick to kill Worms, as Gabucinus affirms, voided 177 round Worms? To say nothing of that Benevenius reporteth c. 85. of the incredible multitude of them: and he was a man to be believed. And what thou speakest of the capaciousness of the place, if that be an argument, it is an errour to be laughed at. 
 For the guts will contain not only as many as are in a Gourd, but the Gourd it self prepared. By thy last objection thou dost but mock, but canst not weaken the opinion of Avicennas and the Arobians: for as much as in bodies diffected, Gourd-worms have been seen wrapt up in a roll, wherefore they took not their Gourd-form from the violent voiding them at the fundament, or from the manner of putting them forth, as thou either inventest maliciously, or ignorantly be∣lievest. I conclude therefore with Gabucinus, that there are Gourd-worms, and the broad worm called T nia, is not properly a Worm, nor yet a living creature, but something about the entrails like white shavings, as Hippocrates saith, that is filled with these Gourd-worms put in fashion of a coat of M il. Ascarides have their name from , because they bite and tickle very much, and so exercise the patients that are troubled with them: others derive them from , which signifies to move. The Ancients called them Beasts-worms, because they were seldom sound in men, but often in Horses, Dogs, Hens, and Oxen. And they were so seldom seen in men, that Hippocrates, and Celsus that followed him, either knew them not, or thought them not worth the mentioning, and so they said nothing of them; and yet they writ at large of other Worms. They are like the round Worms, but ten times shorter, (for they are seldom above an inch long) and what length soever they be, they are thicker at the end of the longanum, and the sphincter of the anus they are found, causing a vehement itching in those parts. Galen writes in Lib. de Ling. Hippocratis, that Gous an old man called Ascarides long Worms; which difficulty Mercurialis easily opens, for we should read it, saith he, not , great, but , small. More∣over, though in consideration of their breadth and thickness they seem long; yet compared with round Worms, they may be called short. These and round Worms are of divers colours, as the matter they are bred of is, or in respect of the heat that concocts them; but Gourd-worms are alwaies the same: whence I should conclude that Gourd-worms breed only from flegm, but the rest from all humours and excrements. Ascarides oft-times come forth in great numbers, and before they be voided they prick much. 
 CHAP. XXXII. Of the Original of Worms in the guts. ARistotle lib. 5. Generat. and Hippocrates before him, 4. morb. make the material cause of Worms to be dung. Oribasius l. 3. Aph. 30. and Montanus that followed him being his Ma∣ster, thought that living creatures might breed in the guts from all kindes of humours: and Mercuria∣lis who thought they were deceived, was blinde himself at noon-day. But let us examine his Arguments: It is found, saith he, that they will not breed from bloud, because bloud never pu∣trefies so much, that living creatures may breed from it; Also he affirms from the judgement of Alexander Trallianus, that living creatures cannot breed in the veins. But experience cuts off the nerves of his first argument; and the Authority of Rhasts, Loppius and Pliny, overthrows the second. Also they cannot breed of a melancholy humour, because it is cold and dry; nor of yellow choler, because it is bitter, and such creatures are not fed by bitter things, but destroyed. For which opinion, though he urge Aristotle, Hippocrates, Galen, 4. simpl. med. Aegineta, lib. 4. c. 27. yet what is there more slender than the opinion of them? For Butchers know that in the milts of Sheep, which is the fountain of melancholy humour, and in the gall of Oxen, which is the re∣ceptacle of bitter choler, innumerable worms are oft-times found. And I see no reason why Worms may not breed from yellow choler, as well as in Wormwood; from melancholy as well as in stones, from bloud as well as in sugar. But if they be not bred from them, whence have they matter that they breed of? The Physician of Padua will answer, It remains therefore that they can breed only of raw flegm, which either ariseth from too great quantity of the best meats for want of heat, or quantity of bad meats corrupt by depravation: which opinion, though it well agree with Galen, Aegineta, Aetius, Avenzoar, Avicenna, Colu nella, Celsus, Alexan∣der, and chiefly with our Mercurialis, yet in my judgement Hippocrates is in the right, who thought that living creatures are bred in the little world, as well as they are in the great. Therefore as in the earth there are all kinde of humours, heat and spirit, that it may nourish living crea∣tures that breed, so hath man all kinde of moisture that mourisheth things that breed. Moreover, when as these living creatures do represent perfectly Earth-worms, no man in his wits will deny but that they have both the same original. What flegm is there in the earth? yet it breeds round Worms, and Gourd-fushioned, and Ascarides, and all sorts of Worms, and the best and warmest earth abounds with them, so far is it that they should breed only of raw and corrupt humours. Do we not also daily see that Worms are voided by men that are in health? For I knew a wo∣man of Flanders, that at Francfort on the Main, which from her youth till she was forty years old, did daily void some round Worms, without any impairing of her health, and she was never sick of them. I conclude therefore that from every raw humour of the body Worms may breed; and not only from crude or corrupted flegm. The formal cause depends from internal heat, which is weak, gentle, pleasing, and fit to breed living creatures; wherein that plastick force of Caleodick Nature, (to use the word of Avicennas) doth make the colours by the de∣grees of secret heat, and sporting her self doth make that broad form of Gourd-worms, and some-times of Lizards, Toads, Grass-worms, Catterpillers, Snakes, Eels, as we read in Histories. This doth give them taste, feeling and motion, this gives them that force of attracting, whereby they forcibly draw forth with greediness the juices that slip into the guts. If it were not so, that heat that consumes all things might perhaps dispose the matter that is changed by putrefaction, but it would never give the form and figure of a living creature. For it is not because the guts are round, that round Worms are bred in them, as some men dream; but the external form depends from the internal, and the spirit drawn forth of the bosome of the soul it self, doth frame the shapes without a Carver or Smith. This spirit is the mediate efficient cause: but God himself is the principal cause in this and other things, in whom, as well as we, the Worms are, move and have their being. 
 The final cause shewes their use, which declares Gods omnipotency, Natures majesty, and the Use. singular providence of both for mans good. For there are collected in us some putrefied excre∣mental superfluous parts, which the more bountiful hand of Nature changeth into Worms, and so cleanseth our bodies; as we account it a good sign of health to be full of lice, after a long disease: also they consume much superfluous moisture in mans body, and unless they grow too many (for then they feed on our nutrimental juice) they are a great help to the guts; so far is it that they should be accounted by physitians amongst diseases, or the beginnings of diseases. Amongst the concomitant causes I reckon the place and the countrey. For though they are more common to children than to those that are of years, to women than men, in a pestilential than a healthful time, in Autumn than in the Spring, to such as use an ill diet rather than to those that keep an exact diet: yet they accompany all ages, sexes, conditions, seasons, diets; for no man is priviledged from them, yet some places or climates are free, for according to the nature of them, in some many, in others no Worms will breed: for all kinde of Worms will not breed in each part of the guts, but round Worms only in he small guts, Ascarides in the Longanum, the Gourd-worms only are bred in all. Also, as Theophrastus and Pliny testifie, there are no small dif∣ferences amongst Nations and Countreys. (lib. hist. pl. 9. c. 2. Lib. Nat. hist. 27. cap. 13.) For broad or Gourd-worms are common amongst the Egyptians, Arabians, Syrians, and Cilicians: again they of Thracia and Phrygia know them not. And though the Boeotians and Athenians are under the same Confines, they are frequently full of Worms, and these are by a priviledge as it were freed from them. He only will admire at this, or think it a Fable, who knowes not that the nature of Coun∣treys vary according to the position of the stars, the nature of the winds, and the condition of the earth. There is a River (saith Aristotle, lib. de nat. anim. c. 28.) in Cephalenia that parts an Island, and on one side of it, there is great abundance of Grashoppers, but none on the other. In Prodoselena, there is a way goeth between, and on one side of it a Cat will breed, but not on the other side. In the Lake Orchomenius of Boeotia, there are abundance of Moles; but in Lebadius, that is hard by, there are none, and brought from other parts they will not dig the earth. In the Island Ithaca, Hares cannot live; nor in Sicily, flying Ants; nor in the Countrey of Cyrene, vocal Frogs; nor in Ireland, as we know, any kinde of venomous creature. The reason of all this he can only tell, who hath hanged the earth in the air without a foundation; for it is not my eye that can see so far, nor have I any minde to affect to know things above my un∣derstanding. 
 I leave that work to those that dare aspire To know Gods secrets, let me them admire. CHAP. XXXIII. Of the signs and cure of Worms out of Gabucinus. LEt us therefore shew the signs of Worms, beginning from those that are called round Worms; both because these do more frequently vex children, and because they produce more cruel symptomes: of which Paulus writes thus: they that are troubled with round Worms, are cruelly torn in their bellies and guts; and they have a tickling cough that is troublesome, and somewhat tedious, some have a hickop, others when they sleep leap up, and rise without cause; sometimes they cry out when they rise, and then they fall asleep again; their Arteries beat unequally, and they are sick of disorderly Feavers, which with coldness of the outward parts come thrice or four times in a day or a night without any reason for them. Children will eat in their sleep, and put forth their tongues, gnash their teeth, wink with their eyes, they will be very silent, and are angry with those that rowse them up, the balks of their cheeks, in a short time, are sometimes red, sometimes wan-coloured. If the Worms run up to the sto∣mach, they cause nauseating, gnawing, and want of appetite; and if the sick are forced to eat, they scarse can swallow it, and if they swallow it down, they vomit it up again, they void many corruptions of meat by their bellies, and they are swoln like a drum, the rest of the body growes unreasonable lean, not by reason of hunger, nor immoderate evacuations. These things happen when these creatures creep and gnaw in the belly. A feaverish heat sends up ill vapours to the brain, that arise from putrid moisture collected in the stomach. So writes Paulus. But Aetius out of Herodotus writes thus: Those that are troubled with Worms have a most cruel pain of their stomach and bellies, and they have a little frequent tickling cough, and yet they spit up nothing: i their sleep they shiver, and rise preternaturally; some again put out their tongues and shut their eyes, and are silent, and cannot endure to be rowsed, and cannot watch for weakness: some have their eyes bloudshed, their pulses unequal, obscure, deficient, and recurrent: some want an appetite, children whilest they sleep, bite their tongues, and move their mouthes as if they sucked, or eat meat. But these things are done for a short time, and by circuits. More∣over some children besides reason, rise with crying, and presently fall down again: some crash their teeth, which it seems happens when the Worms suck, and gnaw their bellies and guts. And now it appears that some are come up into the stomach, and cause loathing, and bitings: oft-times also by themselves they are cast upward, but sometimes with some flegmatick humour. Some Infants neglected lose their motion, and are benummed, and like those that are in a swound, they sweat a cold thin humour, and most commonly they are wan-coloured: sometimes the face will be red, especially about the cheeks, but this colour again is changed into more than ordinary paleness. Others again like dotards speak strange words in their sleep, others change their places they y on, still sleeping, and they are vexed, and turn from place to place: but ve∣ry few of those do cry, for most of them are void of reason, and are silent. Also they that are vexed with round Worms, loath their meat, and if they eat any thing, they cast it up again, or oath it so much they can hardly swallow it: for they fall into Feavers with vehement cold in the outward parts: some have their bellies swoln like a drum. So saith Aetius. But these are the marks he reckons from Hippocrates opinion: Worms in the belly are discovered by these marks: If they be sleepy, and the disease will not let them, and their outward parts be cold, and there be gnawing at their hearts, the urine troubled, and the tongue full of moisture; also they that have Worms in their stomach, are full of spittle; and if any little Worm comes forth they spit no more: therefore all those that have Worms in the mouth of their stomach, do commonly cast them up all by vomit, but those that have belly Worms, void them by siege. But they all nauseate, and vomit up what they take in. They are like to those that are pricked, that have contractions all over their bodies, and move suddenly and confusedly, and they have torments and pains of their guts. Vapours carried to the head cause Vertigoes. Moreover the manner of diet that the party used will shew the generation of Worms, and all the rest. These are the signs of round Worms; but all these signs must not be sought for in every one, as Paulus saith; but some and the principal of them. I might joyn here many things out of our new writers, unless what they say, and more also were not to be found in Avicenna, whence they borrowed it. 
 Paulus gives us these notes of broad Worms: sometimes they abound in those that have Fea∣vers, and sometimes in those that have none. In Chronical diseases they breed, gnawing the Signs of broad Worms. stomach, and causing a greedy appetite. They eat the meat so fast, that we need more, and if it be not present, they bite shrewdly; the body growes lean and weak, and unequal. But the most certain sign is, that some bodies like Gourd-seeds come forth with our excrements: so saith Paulus, and Aetius doth not differ from him, but that he saith, that they gnaw the stomach continually, and cause an insatiable appetite, and that the meats eaten soon turn to excrements. They that are affected grow weak of body and sluggish, and are alwaies hungry, for what is living in the guts, when it hath consumed the meat, feeds on the body; but this sign will not fail us, if some things like Gourd-seeds be voided by stool. The signs Hippocrates gives are these: He writes after this fashion: There is another kinde of this, that comes forth like the white shavings of the guts; which hath these marks: The party voids seed like Cucumer-seed, and when he is fasting he is vexed, and spits much, his liver being affected, sometimes not; and sometimes when this vehemently affects his liver, it stops his speech, and he spits much, and after that it stops: and sometimes there is great pains in the guts, sometimes the shoulders ake, and then it stops again. Sometimes these are the signs of the broad Worms. He that is affected with this Worm, is al∣most alwaies in health, but when he growes weak, he can hardly endure it, or be recovered. For this broad Worm takes some part of those things that go down into the stomach, and if care be taken it may be cured, but if not, the Worm will not come forth it self, nor doth it kill a man, but growes old with him, &amp;c. Ascarides are alwaies about the bottome of the belly as we said, and there they cause a great itching almost continually, as Paulus and Aetius have written; and Ascarides. sometimes, as it is reported, they will make one faint. For that is shewed by their name. For they moving alwaies do continually exercise a man and tire him out. They that are troubled with these, feel alwaies a heaviness about their Praecordia and backs. The signs of these are chiefly taken from the filthy smelling of the excrements. They that have Worms their eyes at first shine, their cheeks are wan, in the night they have cold sweats, their mouth is pale, they start in their sleep, in the day they are more feaverish, their tongues and are dry lips, their breath commonly stinks, their face is pale, they nauseate and vomit often, they loath meat, they crash their teeth, especi∣ally in the night, they put forth their tongues (and they seem to eat) they are angry with those that awake them, they speak strange words, sometimes they are in a lethargy, and pick straws, and their heads ake, they cry out in their sleep, as the disease increaseth, their hearts beat exceeding∣ly, their voice is interrupted, their arteries beat weakly, sometimes in the height of their pain, they are extended, and their mouth fomes as in the Epilepsie, their belly is swoln like a Tympany; Sometimes the pains abate, and again there follow torments, and Colique pains, with a henterie flux of the belly, sometimes they are costive, and the excrements are hard. These are the signs of Worms, now follow the Prognosticks. The Prognosticks are very necessary in all diseases to know Prognosticks. what will be the event, and to know the condition of the patient serves much for the cure, as Hippocrates, especially in his Prognosticks, hath abundantly shewed; who in the beginning of his book de prudent. Medico, hath delivered it: Especially foretelling here before the patient, things present, past, and to come, and what the sick have neglected, he is thought to understand the con∣dition of the patient; and hence it is that men wil better dare to trust the Physitian. But because it is difficult to foresee all this, unlesse we use some artificial conjecture (I call that an artificial con∣jecture, that comes very neer the truth) and who can easily attain this, unlesse he have learned the things that belong to the art, and remember them, and hath with all diligence exercised himself in the practice of it? The things wil be thus known. If a man suppose that there is any vital vertue, he must know the disposition of the patient in strength and weaknesse; and when he is perfect in these, he must study further to know all differences of diseases in the greatnesse and manner of them, and then to learn the foreknowledge of the future state. And when he hath learned all these, then he must exercise himself both in comprehending the magnitude of the disease by exact conjecture, and the orce of the patient, and how long they may last. Now practise wil help him much in this; and before he hath diligently learned all these, it wil no whit profit him to see sick people: wherefore they that professe physick, proceeding in this method, shal never undergo any disgrace, neither in curing, nor foretelling of future events, which they report some famous Paysitians have fallen into. Hence it may be collected why some Physitians are more fortunate then others, and what a fraud that is, to call a Physitian more fortunate then another; how absurd that is, Galen and Erasistratus have shewed; saying, that a Physitian must be exercised in all these things in his minde, and he must be diligent, and prudent by nature, that comparing all together, he may get a grosse summe of praedictions, that shal be useful for himself and for his patient. For such is the force of praediction, that alwayes for the most part, what the Physitian foresces wil come to passe, where the Physitian is perfect, and the sick doth not negiect his orders. But because, as it is evident, a Physician by praedictions may get immortality almost, so chiefly from those things that do belong to this affect, he shal win glory to himself, by telling the sick their condition, who for the most part are children, or ignorant what their disease is. Since therefore Prognosticks are chiefly neces∣sary for this disease, I wil not fail to set down what the Ancients have written of this disease. Pau∣lus a great follower of Galen, writes of these things to this purpose. Worms bred at the beginning of Feavers, have their subsistence from the corruption in the body, about the state of the disease, from the malignity of the disease, about the declining, they grow better. For Hippocrates saith, it is good that round Worms come forth, when the disease comes to a Crisis. But Aetius writes thus from the opinion of Herodotus a Physician. Worms breed in Feavers, and without, that differ one from the other in multitude, magnitude, colour, and time. For Worms bred at the beginning of a disease, have their being from the corruption that is in the body, about the vigour of it, from the malignity of the disease, about the declination, from the change to better, and they are soon also voided forth, Nature driving them to the outward parts, as she doth the rest of the excrements. But the greater ones are worse then the lesser, many than few, red than white, living than dead. Our new writers adde to these; if round Worms are cast forth alive at the beginning of acute diseases, they shew pestilent diseases, but if dead ones be cast forth when the diseases decline, they are an ill sign also, however they appear both these times, it is bad. It may be because that Feaver that follows Worms is alwayes naught, because it consumes the matter for Worms. It happens also that the Worms are set on fire and grow hot by reason of a Feaver, and so are wreathed toge∣ther, and moved, that they so much the more affect and trouble those that have these Worms. They adde further, that it is proved by experience, that Worms are in the belly, if in the morning you sprinkle cold water on the mouth of childrens stomachs, for they will all gather to one place. Worms sprinkled with bloud, so voided is ill, for they shew great hurt of the guts, to cast Worms up by vomit is naught, for it shews the stomach to be stuffed with filthy humours. Frequent cold breathing of children, their bodies yet swelling, is deadly, for it shews they will die the next day. If the eyes of the sick are somewhat held together, and cannot be closed by the fingers of those that stand by, death is at hand. Some there are, it may be following the opinion of Alsaravius, that say that those who are troubled with Ascarides, are but short-lived. But there is a great question to be resolved, and that being done, I shal put an end to those things that concern the Prognosticks taken from Worms. Aetius a little before said that live Worms were worse than dead ones. But Rhasis and Avicenna that follows him▪ think the contrary, absolutely preferring the dead ones before the living. In which question, to passe over other men, I shal say what I think, that the strongest affection is taken from those that are dead, because they must needs be driven forth, and cannot come forth of their own accord; yet I follow Hippocrates, who in a certain place useth some words that are difficult, wherein he would have us to consider diligently what symptoms VVorms breed, for if they come forth without any symptoms they foreshew a good sign. But he makes it clearer elsewhere thus. It is necessary that round Worms should come forth with the excrements, when the disease comes to the Crisis. So that by this we may understand, that if they be voided any other time, it is done rather symptomatically than by force of nature, and therefore they shew corruption or malignity, as Paulus and Aetius distinguished. 
 But because we can never rightly undertake the methodicall way of curing Worms, unlesse the belly in which they are be well disposed, nor can this be, unlesse the whole body be so, and this is The cure. excellent well performed by good diet; wherefore that in the first place must be well ordered, for without that all helps are in vain, for the preserving and repairing our health. For this is so fa∣mous, and almost the best part of Physick, that that admirable Cous, Celsus, Galen, Pliny, and al∣most all the old Physicians, could never give it commendations enough. Asclepias formerly esteem∣ed it so much, that he almost took away the method of curing by Physick, and wholly turned all curing upon diet. Now this consists not only in the quantity and quality of meats and drinks, but also in all those things that befall us whether we will or no, as in sleeping and waking, motion and rest, as also in the repletion and emptinesse of the whole body and of every part, and in the affects of the minde, but chiefly in the Air that is about us, which not only sticks fast to us out∣wardly, but continually enters into the inmost parts of our body by the drawing in of our breath. As for what concerns those things that we take, because they are such things that every man knows, I shall say nothing of them. For there is no man ignorant, that divers meats, and of ill and naughty juice, and disorderly taken, will breed crudities, and that gluttony and drunkenness do our bodies great hurt, yet many kinde of meats, that are hurtfull in other diseases, are profi∣table in these. Wherefore we shall as it were besides our purpose, and by the way touch upon these, first adding what Paulus writes. Let the meats of those that have Worms be of good juice, that may easily be dispersed, and passe to the parts, and neither foster the cause, nor weaken our forces. 
 Wherefore we grant them wine mingled with water, and let them eat often both for their need, and that the Worms may not gnaw them. If there be a scowring of the belly, it is a sign that many are bred, the meat being not dispersed; and in that case Pears or Quinces must be mingled with our broths; Wheaten bread is a wonderfull help, having Anniseed mingled with it, or Fennel or Salt; or bread that is between Bran and Wheat, called , because there are joyned together in it, the Bran, the Hulls, and the Flour. Men call also this bread , because all the Wheat, without taking any thing from it, is made into bread. Also the wheat it self that the meal is taken from must be the best, for some of these have much Bran, which is the courser wheat, but the finer wheat is the best. But wine that is mingled with water, because it gently bindes, is held to be very convenient. Mountain birds are fit for their meat, and young wood Pigeons, green Groundsel, and Goats-beard, the broth of black Chiches, and Coleworts, and Capers, and pickled Olives eaten; and if there be no Feaver, let them eat their other meats with Mustard, also sowr and oyly things are commended. Also Panick (which Diocles called the honey of Corn) is most durable, if so be it may be reckoned amongst Corn. Also Spelt in the decoction of Myxie, and a Ptisane with a great quantity of Oyl of unripe Olives, besides these, Lupines, Cresses, Betes, Mints, Smallage, Radish, and sawce eaten are good. Give children before all meat, a decoction of Sebestens with Mints. Milk is very hurtful, as also Fish, and Pulse, and whatsoever is of a cold grosse substance, and hard to be digested. Bread unleavened breeds Worms, for it is good for no man, and so are all moyst meats, that easily turn to corruption within.
For all kinde of Worms it is most convenient to use abstinence from such things as breed them: And when they are bred, it is good to eat often, a little at a time; and that is best, when they leave off gnawing. But those that have Ascarides must eat meats of good juice, and of easie di∣gestion, that the force of them may not reach so farre as the right gut. For the matter fit to breed them is so consumed. Thus far for meats and drinks to be taken. But the other five kindes that are not so manifest, shal be handled by us also with all brevity. And we shal begin from sleep. It must not be too little nor too much, and in the night rather than in the day, at least two hours after meat. Moreover, to be long idle is naught, let exercise precede meats, and rest after meats. Nor is every motion to be taken for exercise, but that which makes us breath more; unlesse it be when we have taken Physick against Worms; for then we must ride or run, to shake our bodies; for they are more easily cast forth by hard exercise or labour: but children will hardly observe these rules. Care also must be had, that the belly may twice be unburdened, and if that will not do of it self, we must use a Suppository or Clyster to provoke it, made of such ingredients that are fit for this purpose. All affections of the minde whatever they be, must be set aside, as quar∣relling, anger, sorrow, great cares, and thoughts, sadnesse, fears, envy, and all such kinde of pertur∣bations, and chiefly after meat. For these change and turn the body from its natural state. Let men beware of cold North windes, and let them not go barefoot. The air because it alwayes is about us, cannot be chosen at our pleasure: for it is sometimes a defence for us, and sometimes the cause that makes Worms, or fosters them: It wil be a defence if it be very hot, and dry, pure, clear, and calm; and it wil chiefly foster the disease, when it is very cosd, or moyst, or moved by the North or South winde, or by too great heat, dissolves our forces, and then by art it must be thus prepared: To burn in our Chambers wood of Juniper tree or of Citrons, or Peach-trees, and such wood as is against Worms. Also to perfume the place with tops of Worm-wood, Peach-tree leaves, Citron pills, roots of Pomegranate-trees, also with Fern, and Ivy. But that is the best that is made with Myrrhe, and Aloes. Another remedy that succours the fainting spirits, by reason of Worms. Amber-greece two penny-weight, Musk one peny weight, Gum Arabick, four peny-weight, Roses, Sanders, Cloves, Privet, Frankincense, of each one peny-weight, Gallia Moschata so called, six peny-weight, Lignum Aloes burnt to a cole twenty peny-weight, the quenched coles of Vine-branches, what is sufficient, make them up with Rose Vinegar. 
 Worms are oft-times exasperated with vehement remedies, that they bring children to Con∣vulsions, A general cure of Worms. swoundings, and death; wherefore they are not rashly to be given, and at all adventures. But because that remedies by reason of their different qualities are thought to be good to kill and bring forth Worms, therefore in general, such remedies as heat, drie, cut, and are sharp, bitter, salt, or sowr, and attenuating, are to be used. For either they kill the Worms by their sharpnesse, or bring them forth by their bitternesse, or they allure them to come forth, or else they are known to be good to bring them forth by the loosenesse that followes. They are brought forth  ' tis likely at once, by such supping means as make the passages slippery, or by some effectual quality, that is namelesse. There are some cool remedies that effectually drive forth Worms, and some by a hidden quality, as shavings of Harts-horn. But those things are best that kill the Worms, for so long as they are alive they are an occasion of mischief. And they are hardly driven forth when they are killed, wherefore they must be drawn forth by Clysters; otherwise they send a filthy virulent va∣pour to the brain, and likewise inflame the body, and hurt the appetite and concoction. But be∣cause Worms happen most to children, who are hard to be dealt withall, I thought it not fit to conceal that wonderful way that Paulus mentions, whereby Aloes, and certain broths are given to them by way of suppings. A certain Cooks Instrument or spoon that is called , is put in∣to their mouths as they lie▪ upon their backs, and by a little Clyster with a strong Pipe, Aloes is forced down their throats, holding their mouths wide open as far as it is possible. Pollux makes mention of this, but doth not tell us what it is. But whatsoever Zomerysis is, we understand two things by it, that it is made descending, that thereby the bitternesse of the Aloes is not tasted. But by that other Instrument that Paulus calls Clysteridion, it is forced in by violence. But force and nature concurring, the motion is most swift, the heavy matter running downwards, and is violently driven in by it. Paulus also describes another Instrument, whereby moyst things are in∣jected into the fundament, it hath many holes quite through it, and these from the matrix are called Metrenchitae: But Aetius speaks clearer thus. To which purpose you must provide a horn Pipe that is full of holes through it, large at the bottome, and convenient for the largenesse of the place, which being thrust in beyond the Sphincter of the Anus, we fill with juice of Cedar, so that the liquor may flie forth every way. But forasmuch as these Instruments are unknown to us, when remedies are given either to kill or drive forth Worms, stop the childes nostrils, and then wash its mouth with some sweet or sharp thing, and when he hath drank down the medicament to kill the Worms, his stomach must be fomented with Acacia or Hypocistis with wine. Those things that kill Worms are best given in sweet milk or honey or Oxymel, or syrup called Acetosus. Some first satisfie the children first with three dayes drinking of them, and then they give the physick afterwards. Also they give Clysters of the same sweet things, that they may entice those Creatures to the lower parts. If the belly scowre, it is of necessity that the Worms must be killed at last, for the motion of the belly will cast them forth. But when the appetite is hurt, and the belly loose, the Worms must be killed with bitter things only, that are somewhat astringent, as with Wormwood amongst hot things, or Southernwood and Worm-seed: Or amongst cold things, with Pomegranate pills, Acacia, juice of Plantain, Purslane and such like. 
 Of hot things the seed of Cresses drives forth all belly-worms, bruised and drank in wine or Vi∣negar, Simple hot medicaments against Worms out of Diosco∣rides, Celsus, Pliny, Sc ibo∣nius, Largus, Galen, Oribasi∣us, Paulus, Aetius. yet more effectually if wilde Mints be added, yet it troubles the belly. The meal of Lu∣pins licked with honey or drank in Posca, and outwardly applyed to the navel with Bulls gall, drives them forth. The same also being infused and eaten with their bitternesse, wil do the like. Also their decoction can do as much, being drank with Rue and Pepper. Sea Worm-wood boyl∣ed by it self, or with Rice, adding Honey to it, kils Worms in the guts, and it wil do it better with Worm-wood. Southernwood doth the same by its bitternesse; Cardamomum kils them. Also the decoction of Hysop drank, or the herb it self licked up with Honey. So Calaminth kills Ascarides, and other VVorms, if it be drank with salt and honey, or if it be eaten raw or boyled, or the juice of it given in a Clyster, or drank. Also the decoction of Thyme, or Rue boyled and drank with Oyl forceth them out. Also wine of Cedar, and the liquor of Cedar it self. Unripe oyl of Olives, if it be drank plentifully, for it is pressed out unripe for children. Juice of Oenanth hath the same operation, as oyl of unripe Olives. But the best thing against VVorms are sweet Apples called St. Johns Apples, for they loosen the belly, and drive out the VVorms; which by what fa∣culty they can do it, (being they are sweet, and of a honey taste, from whence they borrow their name, and since so they should rather feed VVorms) is perhaps, because by this meat the belly is made loose, and the VVorms follow; and the VVorms that otherwise would stay within, by the force of the excrements, as Fishes in a torrent are carried away, when in Summer great rains fall, and so are they carried downward. For Dioscorides lib. 1. cap. de Melimela, saith that those Apples make the belly soluble: Also the seed of Coleworts, especially that which growes in Egypt, drank, drives forth VVorms, namely, because the temper of it is drier, and more wilde. The same is done by Oyl of Falma Christi drank. Myrrhe also by its bitternesse both kills and drives them forth. The decoction of Elecampane, Squils taken with Vinegar and Honey, but the Squils must be first rosted, or otherwise it is held▪ to be most pernicious to the entrails. Also they use to give against all VVorms the decoction of the root of Capers in honey and vinegar. And Dioscorides lib. 4. cap. 1. writes, that the herb called small Turn-foil, drank with the seed, adding thereto Nitre, Hysop, Cresses, and water, wil force out all sorts of VVorms, long and flat. But Paulus, unless there be an error in the Press, reckons Cardamomum for Cresses, lib▪ 7. c. 1. Rocket-seed in wine, wil drive out all living Crea∣tures bred in the body. Also seven or five Earth-worms drank with sweet wine, wil drive out all kinde of VVorms: Bitter Almonds and the Oyl is good. Agarick with Honey, but it purgeth with trouble; for it is hurtful to the stomach, by making it slippery and loose. Storax swallowed with Rosin of Turpentine: Aloes drank in cold water or milk, the same drank in a decoction min∣gled with Honey, brings them forth without trouble. The seed of Tithymal or the juice of it about five drops mingled with Figs or Dates. The leaves▪ of Agnus Castus, Polypode, Chame∣pythe, Centaury the lesse, bruised and drank with Vinegar. Also one peny weight of the root of the same drank in three Cyathi of wine, doth help. Horehound with Wormwood and Lupins, boyled in water and Honey, of each alike, and with wine applyed twice or thrice, kills all Worms in the belly: Costus by its bitternesse, with water kills all Worms. But Dioscorides lib. 1. writes that it drives out only broad VVorms, with water and honey; which place Marcellus interpreting, blots out that word [and honey] as put in amisse, for this reason, because it is contrary, and seems not to agree with the cure for VVorms. For saith he, they are raised and nourished by sweet things, and belly VVorms are not driven forth by them, unlesse perhaps Honey must be therefore added, that they being deceived by the sweetnesse of it, they may take in the bitter Costus in greater quan∣tity, as we use to do in curing children, when we give them bitter or strong potions, we cover them with some sweet savour, or pleasant smell. In which businesse he seems to seek a knot in a Bull-rush (as we read in the Comedy) and yet he confesseth it to be otherwise. For whether the word Honey be read in Dioscorides or not (for I am not yet certain of it, nor hath Ruellius set it down) it is sufficient that bitter Medicaments, (such as Costus are, and such like) were given alwayes almost by Dioscorides, Pliny, Galen, and others, for to cure Worms, with sweet things, and chiefly with Honey, or Mede, or Oxymel, for the same reason that Marcellus mentioneth, lib. 4. cap. 57. which Paulus added in these words. Because some men oft times refuse bitter potions, as having an ill taste, of these thing herein comprehended, they shal not give any that are manifestly bitter, but mingled with some sweet thing, as he said a little before, that all these medicaments must be mingled with Honey or Oxymel, and so given to drink: Oras Lucretius saith, that the improvi∣dent Age of young people may be deceived, or else may be able to take it, being enticed by such a taste. For children most commonly are subject to Worms. Therefore nothing hinders but that the word Honey should be added, as Marcellus himself testifies, if we read him in some old Copies. Likewise a Cantharis bruised, and drank with a Briony root, drives forth Worms, as Galen writes, Cold Simples against Worms. lib. de comp s. Theriaces. Of cold things, the juice of Mouse-ear, with Ale, of each one Cyathus. Groundsel eaten, the juice of Plantain, especially when the belly is loose, given one spoonful or a small measure to drink, and the herb it self bruised, laid to the navel. Coriander seeds with the juice of Pomegranates and Oyl destroy the Worms in the guts, or drank with sweet wine. Hot things, as boyled Beets, taken with raw Garlick, by the Nitrous quality it hath, brings them forth, but the juice is hurtfull. A Pomegranate bruised, and boyled in three Heminae of wine to one He∣mina, drives forth Worms, takes away the pain, and the juice o the root one dram and half weight, will kill them. Sumach of Syria will do the same, and the seed of Orache. Our new writers adde, that it is manifest by experience, that the sharpest Vinegar drank when we go to bed will drive out the Worms. But amongst those things that prevail much is Corallina, so called, which being powred or mingled with Honey or Oxymel, or drank with Honey-wine, doth wonderfully kill Worms, or drive them out half dead. This took its name from the likenesse of Corall, since both of them grow in the water, and for sixty years almost it hath been used to good purpose to drive forth Worms; if I be not mistaken, this is that which Dioscorides lib. 4 and Galen call , that is, Sea-mosse; and if that they did not attribute to it the same force we do to drive forth Worms, as we see in Corallina, as they call it, I shal not therefore think that it is any thing else, besides Dioscorides and Galens : For the Antients did not know the vertues of all Simples, for the true nature of each cannot be found out by any other way than by its effects in physick. A mighty work and secret from God, than which there can be no greater found out. Also many things are found now adayes that were not found out in our forefathers dayes; and no wonder, since these experiments are made by Countrey-men, and such as are ignorant of learning, who commonly live only where they grow, besides the negligence of seeking, when there are so many Physicians at hand every where. Also many things are found out that want nam s: To this we may adde the uncertain way of finding out; for in things that are found, some were found by chance, saith Pliny, lib. 25. cap. 2. others were revealed by God. But the foulest cause of this rarity is, that they who know things will not discover them, as if they should quite lose what they acquaint others with. They are as envious indeed as those are who either suppresse the monuments of Antiquity, or else utterly demolish them; which they for that end, that what is written by the Ancients may be attributed to themselves, or if they have delivered any famous matter, they that write other mens opinions will let that be lost. But if there be any that will contend, and say it cannot be that they should be ignorant that Sea-mosse was good to drive forth Worms, to those I answer, that the Ancients did not commit to writing all the natures of Simples that they knew. For we know many of the precepts of Pythagoras and Socrates; which yet cannot be known out of their Books, because they wrote none. And Plato though he left so many Books in writing, yet besides those he wrote, his followers take many things for his that he never put in writing. Nor hath that growing in every place, as they report, the same faculty, but the Apothecaries in some cer∣tain places of Italy fish for it, and they sell it under the name of Corallina. But let this suffice. This is rather to be enquired into, why, being that Corallina tasts salt, Dioscorides, Pliny, Galen, and others report it to have a cooling faculty, when as it is known that all alt things are hot, and earthly, not unlike to bitter things that are hot? Whether it be, because the sea-water is salt, yet hath in it a great deal of potable water (as Aristotle hath sufficiently demonstrated it) and therefore by that it is the less hot? Or else because it contains in it much earth, and so it is drier and thicker? But such things as grow in the sea, must needs be of the same faculty with it. Because therefore that Sea-mosse growes in the sea, Dioscorides and others attribute to it a thickning quality, but as it contains in it much water fit to drink; and as it is of an earthly quality, by that it cools. Lastly all that are troubled with Worms, are helped with the smell of the hair of Ichneumon (they call it an Indian rat) as Paulus writes. 
 The juyce of Housleek drank in Wine, will drive out of the belly round Worms: Worm-wood Wine drank doth the same. The herb of great Turnfoil drank with its seed, adding there∣unto Simples seve∣rally that bring forth Worms round, Ascarides, and broad Worms. Nitre, Hysop, Cresses, and water, will cast them forth. The root of female Fern, 3 drams drank in Wine, will force out the round and broad Worms of the belly, as Ruellius and Marcellus, who interpreted Dioscorides, do both assert. But Galen saith that it kils not round Worms, but Ascarides and broad Worms, for so he writes, lib. Therapeut. method. cap. 14. But Wormwood can destroy round Worms broad Worms require more strong helps, as Fern is, and so doth that Worm the Greeks call . Theophrastus was of this opinion, who writes that female Fern mingled with Honey is good against broad Worms of the belly, if it be min∣gled with Honey; and for Ascarides, in sweet Wine. For so he sets it down: Female Fern is good against broad Worms and small ones: against broad ones mingled with Honey, but against small ones in sweet Wine. It is certain that Ascarides both are, and are called small Worms. More∣over, Galen lib de simpl. Medic. facult. 8. ascribes the same vertue to the female Fern, that the male hath. Now Pliny writes that the female will kill only broad Worms and not round. Pli . lib. hist. 27. c. 9. And again, that both, (that is, both male and female) will drive forth Worms of the belly, broad Worms with Honey, the rest with sweet Wine drank for three daies, and he excludes neither round Worms nor Ascarides. But Galen in one place excludes both round Worms and Ascarides; and in another place he writes that it will de∣stroy Ascarides with broad Worms. What now shall we say, where Authors are of so many different opinions? shall we say that female Fern will kill all Worms in the belly? For Ga∣len ascribes the same virtue to it he doth to the male, but that especially it kils broad Worms, and in the next place Ascarides, which being at the bottome of the belly, require a stronger remedy, as Fern is, that the force of it may come so far. But since it can drive forth broad Worms and Ascarides, that are more seldome, and the one is in the guts, the other farthest from the stomach, it will far sooner destroy round Worms that lie in the upper guts. Galen therefore will not fight with himself in this, for it sufficeth if it will kill broad VVorms, and if it can destroy them, it can more easily destroy Ascarides, and easiest of all round VVorms. But Pliny, as who best of all knew that, saith it will drive out the rest also, (that is, both round VVorms and Ascarides). But that he saith so is manifest out of Paulus, lib. c. 58. who in his method of curing round and broad VVorms, mentions Fern: which yet all men agree is most properly used to drive forth broad VVorms. Avicenn. 16 Tertii tract. 5. c. 4. shewes this most clearly in these words: The medicins that kill Ascarides are stronger than those that kill long Worms; and those things that kill long Worms and Ascarides will also kill broad Worms. Gith or Nigella not only eaten but laid in a plaister to the belly, or anointed on the navil with water, brings them forth. In which place we must note Marcellus, who saith it will drive forth broad VVorms and not round: but Ruellius interprets this by the contrary. I Marcellus have done right, I leave other men to judge, this is certain that Galen is of Ruellius minde, who hath writ∣ten only that it will kill VVorms; and as I said before, it is taken generally for round VVorms. Paulus and Aetius, agree with Ruellius, who in their curative method for round VVorms, often speak of Gith, but never for broad VVorms. Wormwood called Santonicum, of it self or boyled with Rice, adding Honey to it, will kill Worms. The seeds of Nettles bruised, or of Coleworts or Cummin, with water, or Mints with it, or Hysop with Honey and water or Cresses∣seed bruised with Vinegar, kils them. Celsus l. 4. c. 17. Oribasius lib. ad Enn pium filium, hath written that Calamint, Cardamom, Lupins, and the powder of them in drink, or with Honey by way of Electuary, or given in Posca to drink, are sufficient to kill round Worms. Also the leaves and buds of the Peach-tree bruised, and laid upon the belly can do as much; also Mints in drink and Sorrel. Purslain boyl ' d, the juyce of Succory, or the decoction of Sebestens, or the Sebestens themselves boyl ' d and eaten are very good. Also the ashes of burnt Harts-horn is thought very effectual for this use, especially of that which growes on the right side of the Stags head. It is burnt thus: Break the Harts-horn, and put it into a new earthen Crucible, and lute it well, put it into the furnace and let it burn till it be white. Scribonius Largus, c. 141. gives it thus: Harts-horn, saith he, raspt with a workmans rasp, with water of Sebestens boyled, give 4 or 5 spoonfuls of it, which were soked the day before in 3 cyathi, then bruise and give it, adding the water to it. An Oxe shank burnt, and drank with Milk, drives out round Worms, saith Galen. Costus with water drives forth broad Worms of the belly. Galen de com. Ther. ad Pis. Cardamom, Garlick eaten. The leaves of female Fern taken with Ho∣ney in a Lohock. But the root of the male 3 drams with Honey-water drank, will drive them forth, but better, if it be given with so many oboli of Scammony, or black Hellebore, Al∣so the root of white Chamaeleon, drank a sawcer full, for which use it is drank with sharp Wine and the decoction of Origanum. Walnuts eaten largely, the pill of the Mulberry-root boyled in water and drank; besides that it loosneth the belly, it will force out broad Worms; also the decoction of Pomgranate roots drives them out and kils them. The decoction of Pom∣granate pils can do as much. The root of wilde Bugloss a sawcer sull, with Hysop and Carda∣mom drank, doth the like. Ruellius the Interpreter of Dioscorides, seems to have followed Pau∣lus, who say that with Hysop and Cardamom: but Marcellus▪ saith, with Hysop and Cresses drank, it will drive forth broad Worms, what was said before of Turnsoil. Marcellus seems here to follow Galen lib. 6. de simp. fac. who writes that a sawcer full of it is good drank with Hysop and Cresses. But the juyce of Cedar kils Ascarides, and so doth Calamint, the juyce of it being drank or given in a Clyster. The decoction of Wormwood, mingled with oyl and given Clyster-wise, and the decoction of the lesser Centory given with Salt-peter and Honey, hath the same force, or the decoction of the wilde Gourd, of wilde Saffron, if the right inte∣stine were first emptied with sharp pickle. The root of female Fern drank for three daies in 3 drams of Wine, drives forth Ascarides. Also old Hogs grease put into the Anus, is excellent good. 
 Both Paulus and Aetius testifie that Feavers commonly accompany round Worms, and we found▪ it true by daily experience. When therefore there is a Feaver, sometimes we must take The methodi∣cal Cure of round Worms, chiefly out of Paulus and Aetius. care to curc the Feaver and the Worms, and sometimes taking little care for the Feaver, we must strive to drive the Worms out of the belly. For many that have neglected them have died torn and eaten up by them, and some say they have seen them come forth at the groins. But we must first kill them all, and then drive them forth; they are killed chiefly with bitter things. When therefore the cure is common both to the Feaver and the Worms, the more simple reme∣dies are convenient, and where the disease is uncertain we must use things that are more milde. For the Feaver is exasperated with strong remedies if we should be mistaken; but when we are certain how the matter is, we must wait for the times of the disease. For about the first daies, and the rather if they should appear then, we must use stronger remedies. But those that ap∣pear when the disease declines, are more easily cured, and the better if there be no inflammations or tensions of the bowels. As Hippocrates saith well, lib. Aph. 1. cap. 24. In acute disease but sel∣dome, and that at the beginning we must use purging Medicaments; and this must be done with premeditation, for these swell most, and are agitated as  ' tis often seen, and therefore about the beginning of those diseases, we may use sharper means with profit, but there must be much cau∣tion, and premeditation used therein. First examining whether the patient can endure such re∣medies, and be prepared rightly for them, and whether we may expect a right Crisis by giving them. For there is no small danger in an acute disease, as the sickness of Worms is, to use sharp remedies, because all such meaus are potentially hot. Therefore they that suffer inflamations and extensions, must have Cataplasms of Linseed, with the like quantity of meal of Lupins min∣gled, or else moist fomentations of oyl of Camomil, Wine, tops of Wormwood, and Aloes laid to their Praecordia; but where moderate Feavers molest, give children before all meats, the de∣coction of Myxato-drink, or give them the Sebestens themselves to eat with Mints. For these things wonderfully help those are troubled with Worms, either because, saith Serapion, they stick by reason of their sweetness to them, or else these are so glutinous, that they cannot be parted from them, and so must come forth with them. For Myxa are very clammy, that in Syria the best birdlime is made of them called Damask-birdlime: wherefore because by their clamminess they bring forth Worms, if they trouble the stomach, they must be given by the mouth; but if they be in the belly and guts, by clyster: but to such as are come to ripe years, stronger remedies may be given, as the decoction of Wormwood or Southernwood, or the force of the root of the sowr Pomgranat boyled to thirds, also three scruples of washt Aloes is given, which is the most commendable remedy for those that are strong: also we use unwasht Aloes, and both, if they be feaverish, and but three moneths old. Earth-worms with boyled sweet Wine may be given confidently; but if they will not drink sweet wine, give them with water and honey, or as you think fit, fearing nothing, not despising the meanness of it, give 5 or 7. But if it be not a naked suspicion, but a certain knowledge that there be Worms, and that a proper cure belongs to them, then you must lay on Cataplasms with Lupins meal boyled in sweet Wine, to which also sometime a root of Briony must be added. In the mean time anoint the navil well with Buls gall, or Gith bruised with womans Milk, or with Wormwood, or Southernwood, or Briony mixed with fat old Figs: anoint all the Spina dorsi with Deer-suet, and cover the upper belly with a Cerate made of Wormwood and Cypress oyl. Moreover a Suppositar must be put up where the belly is bound, especially for children, and if it profit not, then give a Clyster, the vigour of the disease abating, made of the decoction of Wormwood, or Southernwood, or Cen∣taury, with Honey and Nitre. And we shall endevour to draw them out by suppings, that make the passages slippery, such are oyl of unripe Olives, supping up by little and little two spoonfuls of it, for as it is bitter it kils Worms, and as it is glib it drawes them forth with the dung. But we must alwaies increase the potions of oyl for they are very commodious. The Worms come forth, some yet alive, but they are giddy, and as we may say half killed, and many come out dead with the excrements. Moreover Worms will breed when there is a scowring of the belly, we must cure them by stopping the flux, and by bettering the concoction with meats and Cataplasms. For the more the flux growes, the more the Worms breed; and when the flux ceaseth, the Worms do the like: wherefore we must diligently endevour that the belly may be stopt and strengthned; we must therefore add to such Cataplasms as serve to stop other fluxes, such things as we said to be good against Worms, and that cause no fluxes, such as are Wormwood, Southern-wood, Santonicum; also Pomgranate pils, Acacia, Hypocistis, Balaustia, and the like, with raw Barley-meal. Also Cerats laid on must be made of these. Also suppings must be used amongst all which the juyce of Plantain is best; and the dry Plantain, for it is good both against the flux and the Worms. Farthermore the VVine of the Pomgranate pressed forth with shell and all helps exceedingly. But for nauseating that ariseth from VVorms, and gnawing of the stomach, a grain of Salt held in the mouth, and melted and swallowed down, profits wonderfully, for it should seem the tartness of it, makes them presently fall down. But if a hickop arise from the same causes, pils are good, that have the juice of Ridder-spin, Wormwood, Santonicum, Water-mints, Scordium, of each four penny weight, boyl them to the thickness of Honey, then add fifty penny weight of powdered Aloes, and make pils of all, and swallow a penny weight, for this will take away the hickop, and kill the Worms. But if from the Feaver or filthy vapours arising from Worms, or the fumes of Medicaments (as most of those are that are given against Worms) rise to the head, so that there be great pain thereof, then anoint the forepart of the head, the forehead and temples with oyl of Roses, or the juice of Acacia, or of Hypocistis mingled with it, for it is most effectual. Others lay on leaven with a little Saffron and Vinegar, on these parts being anointed: for this cures all intemperate sleep, and other perverse affects. But amongst Compound in∣ternal Reme∣dies to kill and sorce out Worms. those men call Syrups, syrup of Wormwood, Calamint or Horehound are commended: or make one thus: Take juyce of Mints, Elecampane root, Wormwood, Rue, purified, for it is taken the sediment being cast away, of each of them haf a hemina in weight; of the juyce of Succo∣ry and Grass, of each of them seven cyathi in weight, infuse in these torrefied Harts-horn, Su∣mach, Purslain seed, and flowers of wilde Pomgranates, strain the decoction and make up all with Sugar, or the purest Honey of Athens. Another: Take Southernwood, Calamint eight penny weight, Horse mints, Elecampane-root fresh, six penny weight, boyl them in water to a third part: this decoction is given with syrup of Wormwood, or Oxymel of Squils. Also Worm-wood-wine is much commended for these uses, but it is made divers waies, for some let down Celtick nard 40 drams bound in a linnen clout, into a measure of new Wine; and after 40 daies they strain it. Others cast a pound of Wormwood into 20 sextarii of sweet Wine, and a sixth part of Pitch, Rosin, and after ten daies they strain it, and lay it up for use. A syrup against Worms, with a Feaver and the symptomes: Take sixteen penny weight of Grass-roots, Purslain-seed, sowr Dock, of each eight penny weight, ten sebestens, boyl all to thirds, to these add the juyce of Pomegranates, and Oranges, or sowr Wine, of each one and half cyathus in weight, as much of juyce of garden Succory, the best Sugar what may suffice, boyl them to a syrup: you may give Infants half an ounce, and young children one ounce without danger. A Julep that shall help those are affected with Worms: Take Dittany of Crete, Gentian Zedoary, Arabian Costus, one penny weight, seeds of Coleworts, Dill, Wormwood, Purslain, of each alike as much; water of Mints, Wormwood, Grass, of each half a hemina weight, boyl them to thirds and strain them, to these add of the best Sugar twenty penny weight. But in a Feaver you may give the decoction in water, or Grass-roots, Wheat, Barley, of each fifteen penny weight, to a large quantity to drink. Another most effectual and very sweet: Distilled water of Sorrel, Roses, Grass, garden Endive, Bugloss, juyce of Pomgranates, of each o e hemina weight, seeds of Purslain, Orach, Sumach, Citrons, of each three penny weight; Coriander-seed, Myrtle-berries, wilde Smallage, of each two penny weight, seeds of sowr Dock, Coleworts, Cummin, of each the same weight: red Roses, Tormentil, Barberies, of each two penny weight, so much weight of Balaustia, five penny weight of the ashes of burnt Harts-horn, white Dittany of Crete eight penny weight; the shels of Mulberry-roots barked, Fern-roots, of each two penny weight, ten Sebestens, one penny weight of red Coral, white Sugar what may suffice, make a Julep. But the most▪ present remedy of all is that the Apothecaries call commonly Diaturpethum, but chiefly with Rhubarb, three drams of it being swallowed down; which being it is proved by long ex∣perience, so it hath also great reason for it, that it should be preferred before all other reme∣dies. For children enticed by the sweetness of the Antidote, will take it down willingly, and the Rhubarb kils▪ the Worms, and the parts are strengthned by it. The Turpeth drives them from their nests, and the rest of the ingredients do not only make it pleasant but harmless, so that it is most sweet, harmless and strong all at once: it is made thus: Take white Sanders and red, Violets, Ginger, of each two penny weight; Anniseed, Cinnamon, Saffron, Mastick of Chius, each one penny weight; Myrthita, which the Apothecaries call Turpeth, eight penny weight; Rhubarb, ten penny weight, Scammony as it is usually prepared, four penny weight, the purest Sugar 190 penny weight, make up all with that and make Troches (as the Greeks call them from the form) each three drams weight, where you have need of them, give one for this disease. Another An∣tidote: Take Rhubarb, Saffron, Scammony, Wormseed, Dittany of Crete, each two penny weight, the best Sugar eighty penny weight, make them up with Grass-water, and make Tro∣ches; one penny weight of this is given to Infants without danger, being dissolved in Grass-water▪ The powder I use is good, and a powder thus prepared: Take Rhubarb, Agarick, Germander, of each two penny weight, Sea-moss four penny weight, Wormseed and Purslain-seed of each two penny weight, unwashed Aloes six penny weight, give a scruple of this or two oboli in Wine to children safely. Sometimes all these are bruised, and sifted and made into pils with the juyce of Wormwood or Mints, and three of them are swallowed down. Another for the same by ano∣ther Author: Take Harts-horn burnt, the less Centory, Mints, Penniroyal, Water-mints, Worm-wood, Santonicum, Germander, Lupins, of each four penny weight, bring all to very fine powder and give it with Milk, Vinegar, or Oxymel, or any way. Another of the new Writers that is approved: Take Rhubarb, Coriander-seed, Basil-seed, Plantain, Pomgranate pils, Carway-seeds, Sumach, of each two penny weight, Carduus Benedictus seed, shavings of Harts-horn, and of Ivory, of each eight penny weight, the bark of the roots of Mulberries pill ' d, Colewort-seeds, Citron Apple∣seeds, bark of Willowes, of each six penny weight, Purslain-seed, Dittany of Crete, four penny weight of each, Pearls, red Coral, of each two penny weight, dry them and bring them to fine powder: one or two drams of this with Wine in winter, and where there is no Feaver, or with Oxycrate in summer or to those that are in a Feaver is safely given. An Antidote that kils Worms, diminisheth a Feaver, and helps against pains of the heart: Take Wormseed, Sea-moss, seed of wilde Smallage, Harts-horn burnt white, of each alike, infuse them all three daies in Vi∣negar, wherein let these things first boyl, Purslain-seed, Sorrel-seed, Sumach, Coriander, Cole∣wort-seed, and a little Myrrhe; then dry them, and add to them Orange-seeds two parts, Citron-seeds one part, make them up with Sugar dissolved in the Wine of Pomgranates, and make morsels, to which you may add some little Cinamon and Musk. But because it hath been seen oft-times that Medicaments outwardly applied have done much good against Worms, it is but reasonable that I should set down the manner of them: For by these we not only defend our bodies, but also we kill the Worms and drive them out dead: wherefore this may suffice Compound ex∣ternal Medica∣ments against Worms. that hath: Lupin-meal, less Centory, leaves of Peach-tree and Horehound, bruise them with Posca and lay them to the belly. Another tryed by our newer Physitians: Take the less Centory boyled in the oyl of Peach-kernels, anoint the Navil with this, and it will drive forth the Worms. Another: Tost Barly-bread, and infuse it in Vinegar, then press it out, and infuse it again in the juyce of Peach-leaves, lay it on warm to the belly with a linnen clout. Others mingle Lupine meal. Southernwood and Buls gall. Again: Take Lupine-meal, Centory the less, of each four penny weight, Aloes, Buls gall, of each 4 oboli, make them up with juice of Wormwood, and laid to children very young. Another: Take Wormwood, Gith, ashes of Harts-horn, of each a like quantity, mingle them with Honey and anoint them. Another good for the stomach, that kils Worms, and is good against the belly flux: Take Wormwood, Mints, Roses, Santonicum, Lupin-meal, of each eight penny weight, tosted bread, infused in the sharpest vinegar four penny weight, Buls gall sixteen penny-weight, Mountain-nard, Water-flag, (Gallia called Moschata) Cloves sweet Cane, Nutmeg, Galanga, Carway-seed, of each twelve penny weight; Hippocystis, Acacia, Sumach, of each four penny weight, oyl of Myrrhe, juyce of Mints, and Wax what suf∣ficeth, make a plaister. If there be no Feaver, the navil and thighs are to be anointed with Ho∣ney, in a hot affect with Milk, and then a little Aloes is strewed on, for it wonderfully kils Worms, also the nostrils are profitably anointed with Theriac and Vinegar. A Cerate against Worms out of Paulus: Take Aloes, VVormwood, Lupin-meal, Seriphium, Gith, of each six scruples, VVax an ounce and half, oyl of Camomel what may suffice, make them up being bruised dry with Buls gall. Another out of Aetius: Lupin-meal, VVormwood in powder, Barley in fine powder, of each seven penny weight; Buls gall, eight penny weight; rasping of Harts-horn, four penny weight; VVax, twenty six penny weight; weak oyl, twelve penny weight. Another approved: Take Aloes half an ounce, Saffron two oboli, juyce of Pomecitrons as many drams, mingle them with sweet white VVine, and apply them to the heart. Another approved: Take Buls gall, 30 pen∣ny weight, choise Frankincense 128 penny weight, Strong-water 2 heminae, distil, all these chy∣mically and in a glass vessel covered with VVax, keep what comes forth, and use it when occa∣sion is. Another very excellent, that kils and casts forth the Worms: Take VVormwood, Gentian, Centory the less, bark of the roots of Mulberies, Bay-berries wit the kernels taken forth, bark of the roots of the Pomgranate-tree, Ash-root pils, of each 16 penny weight; Marjoram 14 penny weight; Southernwood Aloes, Myrrhe, Agarick, of each 12 penny weight, Dittany of Crete, Germander, Savin, of each 8 penny weight; Poly-mountain, Grass-roots, each 10 penny weight; Staechas, Chamaedrys, Chamaepity, Pomecitron-seed, each 6 penny weight; ashes of Harts-horn, Santonicum, 4 penny weight, Coloquintida-seed, 2 penny weight, Buls gall 24 penny weight, the sharpest Vinegar 1 hemina and 3 cyathi, a gallon of bitter oyl of unripe Olives, and 6 heminae; let the dry things be beaten into most fine powder, and mingle them ten daies together, on the eleventh day let them boyl in a double vessel until the Vinegar be consumed; when these are cold, add one hemina of oyl of Bayes, bitter Almonds, and Peach-kernels, of each beaten 24 penny weight; all these, as the former, must be put into a glass ves∣sel, and be distilled. Another most excellent and sure: Take Peach-kernels, Garlick, Earth-worms washed in Vinegar, of each 24 penny weight; Gentian, Dittany of Crete, Grass-roots, and Pio∣ny, pils of Mulberry roots pilled, of each 52 penny weight, Saffron, sweet Cane, Cloves, Aloes, Calbanes, Coloquintida, Ginger, Nutmegs, Cassia, long Pepper, Frankincense, fruit of Balsome, red Coral, of each 8 penny weight; the best Theriack 12 penny weight, Mints, Wormwood, Centory the Less, Peach-tree leaves, headed Leeks, Penniroyal, Calamints, Plantain, Rue, black Horehound, Bay-leaves, Sage, Marjoram, Betony, Scordium, Orange-pils, and bark of Mul∣berry roots, of each 16 penny weight; seeds of wilde Smallage, Purslain, Radish, Coleworts, San∣tonicum, Plantain, headed Leeks, sea Mosse, garden Smallage, (that is, Parsly) each 12 penny weight; the sharpest Vinegar, juyce of Quinces, of each one hemina; oyl of Mastick, Spike, liquid Bitumen, (they call it Petroleum) oyl of Bayes, of each 16 penny weight; the oldest Oyl, or oyl omphacine, 8 heminae; beat the dry things to powder, and mingle them, and in a glased vessel set them under Horse-dung for a moneth, then boyl them in a double vessel to thirds, strain them when they are cold, and straining them out forcibly, keep in a glass, what comes forth for your use. But employ it thus: first anoint the temples, then the nostrils, next that the spondyls of the neck, four of them next the throat, then anoint the pulses of the arms, next to that the stomach, I mean by the stomach the mouth of the ventricle, taking the word stomach improperly, for properly it signifies the throat; wherein I must not passe over the error of our new Physicians, who in affects of the mouth of the stomach, lay their remedies upon the back over against it, which is both contrary to Galen, and also to reason, 3. &amp; 10. de m rb. cur. libro. yet I believe Thomas Linacer did not rightly inter∣pret that place, if I be not mistaken, who was indeed otherwise a very learned man, and most skilful in the interpretation of Authors; but it may be that Greek Book was faulty, or for some other reason. Also it seems agreeing to reason, that for affects of the mouth of the sto∣mach, the remedies should be applied before, immediately under that round gristle, which they call the shield or sword-fashion gristle, for at this place the mouth of the stomach best receives the force of Cataplasms and Cerats, forasmuch as there are no bones to keep it off, but the properly called stomach, that is, the throat is fenced with most strong bones, as un∣der a fence; for it hath the brest bones before, and the back behinde. But this is spoken by the by. Now between the wetting of one place, and of another, we must stay so long as a man might walk about 40 paces; and when these places are wet, we must use more distance of time, when we anoint the reins and the navil. And these three remedies are so certain, that unless a childe be ready to die, he will recover from the point of death only by anointing these parts. That which is called the broad Worm abounds in those that have no Feaver, and breeds The Cure of broad Worms, chiefly out of Celsus, Oribasi∣us, Scribonius, Paulus, and Actius. in long during diseases. The method to cure these is the same as for round Worms. For bitter and sharp potions are most in use, and to eat Garlick or Calamint, Dittany or Penniroyal; we must eat Garlick largely for three daies, and old soft Cheese. Next let a man eat of Mace∣donian Fern dried and powdred and sifted, 8 penny weight, with as much Honey as he please; af∣ter four hours give the patient Aloes, and Scammony, of each one half dram, in Honey-water 4 cyathi, when he begins to rise to stool, set hot water under; Also give water to drink in which Lupins, or the bark of Mulberry-tree is boyled, or to which there is added a sawcer full of Pepper, or bruised Hysop, and a little Scammony: or else after the eating of Garlick we speak of, let him vomit, and the next day let him gather as many Pomgranate roots as he can hold in his hand, and bruise them and boyl them in 3 sextarii of water, to a third part remai∣ning, Victoriatus, is a piece of Mo∣ney of 3 oboli, or half a dram. let him put a little Nitre to this and drink it fasting; three hours then past, let him take two Potions either of water or salt pickle added to it; Then pour forth the hot water into a bason, as I said: also give Earth-worms to drink, for they are exceeding good. But the juyce of mouse-ear is proper for them, drank two cyathi with one cyathus of Ale: for it quickly drives forth the broad Worms. But this remedy following must first be drank; nor is it thought un∣fit for those that have Worms, especially if they have no Feaver. Out of Paulus. It consists of red Nitre, Pepper, Cardamoms, of each equall parts, mingle all these and give of them a spoonfull in Wine or hot Water, for it quickly brings them out. 
 Another, which is an Electuary of Paulus. Take Pepper, Bay-berries cleansed, Aethiopian Cumin, Mastick of Chios, of each alike, Honey what may serve turn, give one spoonfull in the morning, and let them sleep upon it; but if you would do this more effectually, adde Nitre as much as of each. Another of the same. T ke Fern a sawcer-full, Nitre two peny weight, give it with a spoonfull of water, after evacuation, but it is better to adde a little Scammony to it. Another of the same, and of Aetius. Take of the bark of the root of a sowre Pomegranate, scraped from the upper part, Pepper, of each four peny weight, Cardamoms six peny weight, Horehound two penny weight, the best Honey what is sufficient, give one spoonfull of it after eating Garlick or Leeks. But that the disease may be wholly driven away, give some Theriac, for Galen highly commends it for this use. Another out of Oribasius, that he alwayes used by the experience of his masters, and had a long time proved it for good. It contains Scammony one Scruple, Euforbium as much and half as much, the powder of burnt feathers one scruple, Nitre in weight one Siliqua, give this to drink in honey ' d or sweet wine. But it will fall out better if he first eat Garlick or some sharp thing. Also here is a Plaister of another Author, that is good against all Worms, especially broad ones. Take Lupines, Bay-berries cleansed, Bulls gall, lay these on the navel, and binde it on with a swathe∣band for one day and night, or else for two or three dayes. Against broad Worms from another Authour. Take Southern-wood, scraped Harts-horn, Coccus gnidius, and Sesamum, of each one penny weight, Cardamoms three oboli, give this to drink with Oxymel. Another for the same use. Take Gum Arabick, one peny weight, Fern three peny weight, Cardamoms one peny weight, Nitre three peny weight, give it in Hydromel or Ale. Also against the same, is the Antidote called Dia∣phereon. Take Fern eight peny weight, Scammony, Gith, Cardamoms, salt Nitre, of each two peny weight, give it in Oxymel or Ale, but adde Polypode four peny weight. It is reported, that Asca∣rides will trouble children, and such as are come to their full growth. But children are continually provoked to excretion, and after egestion they are the better most commonly, but those that are come to their full growth, observing the trouble of such things that are the cause of them, will thrust their fingers into their fundaments, and pull them forth, and further they will foment and abate these biting pains, with peble-stones that lie in the Sun on the shores, or else with stones put into the fire. But some for fear will admit of none of these helps; yet this disease ought not to be neglected, for Worms will not easily yeeld to remedies, nor are they easily driven forth, but by strong means. Wherefore children must be purged with Suppositars made of Honey and a little salt, or Nitre, or sharp pickle, or with the decoction of Wormwood mingled with Oyl. Also there ought to be a stronger purging, and when they have voided their excrements, the Longanum, which is the place affected, must be anoynted with it. As for Simples, they are Acacia, Hypocistis, the juice of Sumach, with liquid Allome or Nitre, but the Compounds are the Troches of Andron, and those that are called Sphragides polydiae, and with fat Wooll and such like; for the flesh is made stronger by Astringents, and loseth its readinesse to breed living Creatures, and thrusts forth the Ascarides. Andron his Troches are made thus. Take flowers of Garden Pomegranates ten peny weight, Galls eight peny weight, Myrrhe four peny weight, long Birthwort, and as much Vitriol, Saffron, scistil Allum, dregs of the Oyl of Saffron, Mysi, Frankincense, of each two peny weight, they are powdered and mingled with astringent wine, or with Vinegar. But Sphragis polydiae is thus. Take scistil Allum three peny weight, Frankincense four peny weight, Myrrhe as much, or eight peny weight, Vitriol two peny weight, flowers of tame Pomegranates twelve peny weight, Bulls gall six peny weight, Aloes eight peny weight, make them up with sharp wine: But that which is made with fat Wooll is thus made. Take fat Wooll forty peny weight, lead powder, shales of Bi∣tumen, of each ten peny weight, round scissil Allum, Pomegranate shells, Galls, Mysi, Vitriol, Frankincense, of each five peny weight, Myrrhe two peny weight, lees of Oyl eight Heminae. Those that are of riper years must be purged with sharper and hotter remedies, as with Diapicra, and with Oyl mixt with wine, in great quantity, and other things infused, as salt pickle, the decoction of Centaury, with Nitre and Honey, or Coloquintida, Chamaeleon, Anchusa, Lupins; then Oyl of Cedar must be given in Clyster, and after that rest; often repeating the same method of cure, al∣so take salt flesh, scraping away the fat, and cut it long and round, and thrust that into the Anus, and binde it in, to hold it there so long as may be, and then lose it, and in ject again the foresaid things, and let us often repeat the same remedies. 
 CHAP. XXXIV. Of Worms that breed without the Bowels, and chiefly of Maggots. THE living Worms that are bred in the head, the brain, the liver, milt, bladder, reins, muscles, proceed from the same causes Worms in the guts doe, and are destroyed by the same reme∣dies. But those Worms Hippocrates calls Eulas, the English call Maggots or Gentils, they are Worms without feet, not unlike to Ascarides, but that they are shorter a little, and thicker considering their length: There is no man almost that hath not seen these in Carrion and corrupt flesh, and sometimes in limbs that are dead by the negligence of Chirurgions, when as they apply a remedy that putrefies together with the wound or ulcer. Hippocrates calls Eulas Worms bred in dead bo∣dies. Suidas calls them ill beasts, fl sh-eaters. Lucretius calls them cruel Vermin, and Plutarch, Worms from corruption and putrefaction of the excrements boyling forth. Homer in his Iliads, 19 and 24. saith they are Worms arising from putrid matter, that are far smaller in the ears than in other ulcers: And Coelius writes, that they are called Eulae, which Latin writers call improperly Ear∣moths, since they agree with them neither in form nor figure nor in any mark whatsoever. Last∣ly, those small Worms that breed from Flies egges in flesh, in Summer, (the English call them Flie∣blowes, and the Germans Maden) as Camersius observed, are reckoned amongst Eulae or Maggots. But those Eulae or Maggots that breed in Hogs flesh or Bacon, have a proper name given them by Festus and Perottus, who call them Tarni, Maggots. Have either a tayl, or they are without a tayl: Hens feed on both kindes of them, and so it is likely other Birds doe. To make a woman conceive Hippocrates prescribes three or four parts of those that have tayls, bruised with Origanum and Oyl of Roses, to be laid to the mouth of the matrix. In his first de morb. mulier. and in another place of the same book, he bids apply with Wooll the heads of these Worms mingled with the Secondine of a woman, and Allum of Egypt, and goose grease. 
 It is reported that Democrates of Athens, when he was a youth, and was sick of the Falling sick∣nesse, went to Delphos, and enquired of Apollo, what he would advise him to take against this trou∣blesome disease, and that Apollo answered; 
 Take the greatest Maggot you can finde In a wilde Goats head and fast binde That in a sheep-skin, &amp;c▪ Democrates having heard the answer of Apollo, he repaired to Theognostus Democratius, who was then ninety yeers old, and he wondring at the providence of God, expounded this Oracle that was so doubtfull: Saith he, by nature the head of a wilde Goat is full of abundance of Worms, neer to the basis of the brain, and when he neeseth, many Worms fly forth at his nostrils; you must therefore lay a garment under the Goat, that these Worms may not touch the ground, but that you may catch them before, and so taking one or two of them, put it into a black Sheep-skin and binde it to your tender neck, and this saith he, is a natural remedy against this disease. These things are good against Maggots bred in ulcers and wounds in man or beast. First cleanse the parts af∣fected, with the gall of Frogs, the juice of Celandine, Sea water, or brackish water, with the de∣coction of Honey, Worm-wood, Horehound, Peach-leaves, Groundsel, juice of Betes, and Wine; then to kill the Worms, strew on Pepper, Salt Peter, or Allum in powder, Hellebore, Henbane, round Birthwort, Vitriol, or wash the fore-places with the juice of river Calamint, or the decocti∣on of Centaury, or with the juice of Leeks or Horehound. Johannes Agricola prescribes Bugloss, but Pliny preferres Aristolochia with Honey; and Paracelsus commends juice of Celandine. Mon∣tanus commends Nitre before all other things. Vegetius bids to wash the ores early in the morning with cold water, and to drench them throughly, for he affirms, that the Worms by this means will be so contracted with cold that they will soon fall down. Aetius commends Poly, and Worm-wood mingled with Pitch, and he commends the anoynting of the parts with fasting spittle. Hildegardis strews on the pith of Smallage, the shell of a Tortoise, Bees that are dead in the Hive, the leaves and the bark of the Plum-tree, powdered and sprinkled on the ulcers. Bayrus applies quick lime tempered with the sharpest Vinegar. The places where the Worms are being sprinkled with the juice of Hippia, will be presently cured, saith Tardinus; but what this Hippia is, no man hath de∣termined: Some think it is wilde Tansey, some say  ' tis Potentilla; Gesnerus understands it to be Chickweed, which by its sharp and Nitrous faculty (as the Betes have) kills all the Worms. 
 CHAP. XXXV. Of Nits. NIts in the Greek are called Dorcas and Cumidas, the Italians call them Lendine, the Spaniards The Name and Descrip∣tion. Liende, the Germans Niss, the English Nits, the Muscovites call them Guida. These are lit∣tle white living creatures, most like to Syrones, if they had but feet, but they are twice almost as small; and their body is somewhat long, out of which Aristotle saith that nothing else can breed: Crackt between the nails they make a noyse and die, they are not found only in the hair and eye-browes of men, but they abound also in the hair of Oxen and Cattel that are lean, and wanting feet, yet they will stick so fast sometimes, that you may as easily pull off the hair by the roots as pluck them off. Trotul not improperly calls them , hair-eaters, for as Snails live on the juice of herbs, so these live on the moysture of the hairs, and feed thereon. The Philosopher Their Origi∣nall. affirms, that they proceed from the copulation of Lice, and therefore are called their egges. They are like to the flowers of Jesemine that grows with us. For as Jesmine brings flowers without e d, so Lice bring forth egges without young ones in them. They die either for want of nourishment, or Their End. by using a Comb with close teeth, or by the use of such Medicaments as the old and new Phy∣sicians prescribe abundantly. Pliny mingleth Allum with Vinegar, or Vinegar with gall of a Calf, and also aith, they are killed with Goats milk. Also he commends Nitre mingled with Terra Sa∣mia and smeered on, and the powder of Harts-horn drank in wine. Abenzoar prescribes, to anoynt the hair with the lesser Centaury, and Alkitrum. Brimstone in Vinegar takes away Nits, as also Oyl mingled with Lie. Marcellus doth very much commend Hogs dung mingled with wine and juice of Roses; also to anoynt with Honey and Sal Armeniack, but chiefly Oyl of Radishes with a strong lie. Hildegardis provides a lie made of Date-stones, which being mingled with Oyl of Radish roots, will kill the Nits. Ardonus mingles some sublimate of Quick-silver with spirit of wine: And he saith also, that if the head be first wet with a Hens egge, and then with the juice of Sow-bread, or Sea-water, that the will never breed again. Gilbert an English man highly commends the gall of any Creature, as also all bitter things, cleansers, and Aromatical Drugs, with the juice of Marigolds. 
 CHAP. XXXVI. Of Aureliae, and a Wood-worm called Teredo, without feet. THat which the Latins call Aurelia, the Greeks call , the name is borrowed from the gol∣den The Name and Descrip∣tion. colour which appears in most of them. It hath no mouth, nor yet any apparent parts, nor doth it void any excrements, nor yet eat, or move, unlesse it be moved by some body, or hurt. That which Pliny writes, that a Chrysallis hath a hard body, I think that is meant in respect of a Catterpillar. But that which he addes that it will move if a Spider touch it, though I know this to be true by experience, yet I doubt he borrowed those words from the Philosopher, and inter∣preted them amisse. For the sense seems to be thus. They move if they be touched, and they are cove∣red with p es like to Cobwebs. Aristotle speaks nothing here of a Spider passing over them, as Pliny seems to translate it. Aristotle shuts the Aureliae not only out of the number of Insects, but also of living Creatures, and determins them to be as it were the Caterpillars egges. But what agreement is here with an egge? That is laid by another living Creature, and is void both of actual life and motion. The Aurelia is laid by none, but is changed from one to another, for it changeth its former shape into another shape, and retains both life and motion, not in possibi∣lity of being, but actually. But that doth not take away the life of it, because it neither eats, nor increaseth, for Dormice sleep all the Winter and eat nothing. The life of it doth resem∣ble that sleep which is partly waking, wherein men are not properly awake, nor yet asleep; but are alive, and move a little. But I conjecture that the Philosopher wrote this, that he might confirm that Axiome of his to credulous posterity, that all Insects either lay egges or little Worms. His words are these. Insects first breed Worms, but that which is called Chrysallis, is an Egge, and afterwards from this is bred a living Creature, that at the third changing hath the end of its ge∣neration. Yet it is manifest enough by what I said before, that an Aurelia is no Egge, and it ought not to be called a generation, but a transmutation of a Caterpillar into this, and of this into a Butterflie. I say this for that purpose, that such as adore Aristotle for a God, may re∣member that he was but a man, and that he was subject to humane errors. There are two kindes of Aurelias that I have seen, some are downy, and others smooth, both are of divers The kindes. colours, and sometimes they are Gold coloured, which are the true Chrysallides, and others that are but bastard ones, are without any colour of Gold. They have their Original from the death of the Catterpillars, which as they do waste by degrees in certain dayes, so by degrees Their Origi∣nall. their covering grows continually more hard, and changeth into an Aurelia. These again the next Spring or Autumn, by degrees losing their life, a Butterflie comes forth of them that is bred by the like metamorphosis. What use they serve for, for the good of man kinde, I am Their End. wholly ignorant of. I know well enough how much they perplexed Aristotles wit by their won∣derfull Their Use. transmutation; and they set forth to us the boundlesse power of Almighty God. 
 George Agricola only propounds to us the Teredo without feet, which from the brasen colour of it, he call Kupter-worm: It creeps like a Serpent, saith he, because it wants wings and feet. It is as thick as a small Goose quill, and it is as long as a Scolopendra: It is round, and breeds under rotten wood, and sometimes found hard by the Scolopendra, or long Ear-wig. You may easily finde the figure of it placed amongst the Scolopendrae. 
 CHAP. XXXVII. Of Water Insects without feet, and first of the Shrimp or Squilla. WEE said before that all water Insects were with feet or without feet. Some of those that have feet, swim with six feet, as the Lobster, the Shrimp, the lake Scorpion, the Evet, and the Sea-lowse; others with four feet, some with more. We shal treat of them se∣verally. The Squilla an Insect differs but little from the fish Squilla, but that it hath the sail-yards much shorter, and a more red colour, or rather a more earthly colour. Some of these are covered with a thin shell, and some again are smooth and naked. Those with shells live chiefly in small Brooks, and stick to the roots of Reeds or water-flags: They are of a yellowish colour, and sometimes of a white or Ash-colour. They go only with six feet, the rest that are joyned to them, serve in stead of fins. The naked ones are either soft or hard. The soft ones are represented well e∣ ough by this figure, only suppose their heads to be of a bright Bay colour, and their body died with a dark Ash-colour. All those that are covered with a hard crust are made with joynts, but some have round joynts, others o∣ther fashions. The form of the round joynted is exactly represented here, if you sup∣pose him to be easily dyed with a lighter red. And such is the colour of the first and second that are not round joynted. The third kinde is black upon the back, and with a brown belly; but they are all with a forked mouth, and that will hold fast what is applyed to it. The fourth kinde moves it self with the three former feet, and useth the rest that hang by in stead of Oares. The neck of it, and the sailyards, and the nippers are of a watry red colour, the body is brownish or more Ash coloured. The fifth hath a very black head, and the body like to a Pomegranate shell. The sixth seems to be cruel, and in the same form you see it, of an Ash-colour. All of them have ard eyes, and black, covered over with a membrane shining like unto glasse, which move continu∣ally almost, like to the ears of four-footed beasts. They leap quickly one upon the other as the Fishes Squillae doe in coupling, and when they grow bold and have liber∣ty, they fill the Females with young. The time when they are ready for this is signified by a gentle biting: The Female takes hold with her mouth, and what she layes hold on she kills, and gives part of it to her companion; for they couple at the mouth, as Crabs and Lobsters doe. But what use they serve for in physick, I cannot finde either in writers or from Empiricks, who either knew not these Squillae, or thought them not worthy to say any thing of them. Yet this is certain, that in April and May there is no better bait to catch Fish with. 
 CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Locust, Scorpion, Notonectum, the Grashopper, the Wasp, the forked Claw, the Newt, the little Heart, and the Lowse, all Water-Insects. THE Insect-Locust, is like the Lobster, for that cannot be called either flesh or fish: you see the figure of it: it is of a pale green colour: I have seen three kindes of Lake Scor∣pions, and I have them by me: the first is somewhat black, the other two are like to white sand: we call some Insects of the water Noton cta, which do not swim upon their bellies as the rest do, but upon their backs, from whence it is pro∣bable that men learned the art of swimming upon their backs also. Some of these have eyes, shoulders, and bodies all black, some are green, some are fiery coloured, and some pitch co∣loured. For you shall seldom see two of them of the same colour; nature hath so vari∣ously sported her self in ador∣ning them. Water-Grashoppers hold the for h described, but their eyes are extreme black, and their bodies are ash colou∣red. The Wasp hath a brow∣nish body all over, except the black eyes. The Forked Claw hath almost the same colour, but it is more full, it seems to want eyes, but it hath them hid within, whereby it both sees and perceives the object. The Lizard is of divers colours, and delights in catching Fish, it is common about the British shores, where it lyeth in wait to catch Fish. The Corculus hath the just fashion of a heart, the feet and head being taken away; it hath very little black eyes, and six legs of the same colour, &amp; each with two clawes. The Sea-Lowse is an Insect that is an enemy to all kinde of Whales, which by biting and tickling it puts into such a rage, that they are forced to run upon the sand, and hasten to dry land: I know nothing concerning the use of these creatures; but I seriously ex∣hort posterity to search out the use of them. 
 CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Flea or Asellus, and the Scolopendra found in the Sea. THE Flea, or Sea Asellus is like to a soft Squilla, but it hath but four feet (as I may say by Gesners leave) and by often and long leaps it frees it self from having many feet. It is called Asellus from its leaping, Aristotle cals it a Flea; from its bunch∣back it is called a Sow: it is of a wan colour with blackness; the length of those that are in rivers is the breadth of ones finger, and their breadth is not above half a finger broad. But the Sea fleas are larger, which when the tyde flowes are seen also oft-times in fresh waters. It shewes a wonderful deal of agility when men strive to catch it, or do but look upon it. 
 The Sea Scolopendra, sometimes is of a grey colour, and sometimes you shall see others that are more red. These are longer and leaner, that is shorter and thicker. I saw both kindes in the year 1578. in coves of Oysters. For they are not found in the deep sea, as Gesner supposeth, but in the muddy standing waters, where the Oysters are fatted, there they lye hid, are bred, and do live. Numenius warned Fisher-men concerning these, when he said; 
 See therefore that you let not ingender, The stupid Julii or deadly Scolopender. They are as Aristotle writes lesse than the land Scolopendras, but not differing in their form. Nonus the Physitian makes of these a remedy to hinder hair from growing, or a depilatory, and highly commends it in his 34. Chapter. Take Frankincense, Vitriol, of each two ounces, sea Scolopenders three ounces, grinde them all well, and mingle them with the powder of Quick-lime, then pull out the hairs first, and anoynt the places with that. 
 CHAP. XL. Of Water Insects without feet, and first of Oripes. NO Philosopher that understands as he should, will deny but that snow is water turned to froth, by long subliming in the air. In this Worms are bred which the Greeks call . Aristotle writ something concerning these, which History I will briefly touch. In snow there are bred hairy Worms, very sluggish, and that move slowly, wherefore I reckon them amongst Worms without feet, so soon as they are taken out of the snow they die, as the Worms bred in the fire doe, being taken from thence: with snow that is old and begins to look red, they become red also, but those that are found in new snow are white. It is, saith he, a certain thing that snow can no more corrupt than fire can. And indeed they cannot corrupt, yet in both of them are living Creatures bred, and they are nourished in both. I can∣not in any wise consent to Eustathius the Scholiast upon Homer, who affirms, that snow growes red from Minium, because those places are of a Cinnaberous quality, whence he conceives, that from the vapours rising from Cinnaber, the snow becomes red: I will not deny but that it is so in some places. But whether the Interpreter be pleased or not, we must needs grant that in some places the snow grows red, where no Cinnaber is. Strabo makes mention of such places in these words. In Charzena and the Countrey of Cambicium, and in places neer to the moun∣tains of Caucasus, some little beasts are bred in the deep snow, which Apollonides calls , and Theophanes , that is, Mountain little hairy Worms, like unto the greater Teredines. I think their generation as admirable, as of the fire Worms; yet living Creatures are more easi∣ly bred in snow, than in fire, because in snow there is much air, earth and spirit, all which the fire consumes abundantly. And if the heat of the Sun happen to be with these, I shall use Sca∣ligers words, they make dung that smells the sweetest of all ordure. Also they are bred in a∣bundance in Carinthia, as Joach. Vadianus reports. But Strabo in his Comment upon Pompon. Mel. addes a thing that is admirable, saying that these Worms are full of excellent water, which Travailers take, by breaking the bladder or coat it is in, and they drink this pressing it forth gently. For it is very wholsome and seasonable when the fountains are troubled, as it falls out often in great snowes. 
 CHAP. XLI. Of Horsleeches. A Blood-sucker or Horsleech, in Latin Hirudo, in Greek , in Hebrew Halukab, in French Sangsue, in Italian Sansuga, in Spanish Sanguisuella, in High-Dutch Ein agel so das blut sauget, in English a Horsleech. These are water Worms that thirst exceedingly after the bloud of living Creatures, and they will fill themselves with it sometimes till they burst and die. Some of them are without any passage through their belly, some are open behinde; we give you the pictures of them here. Europe hath scarce any open behinde, but in America and India they are common. Those that are not open behinde, are obvious to every man, and when they are filled with bloud, their skin seems checquer ' d with fibres. Some of them are of divers colours, some green, black, brown, yet not venomous, only the bright bay and Chesnut colours, that are like to pills of trees. They breed chiefly in standing pools, where Cattel are wont to be watred, for from their feet earth and foulnesse are washed, and fall to the bot∣tome, to say nothing of the sediment of their dung, out of which, that want not vital heat, living Crea∣tures are bred. Once bred, they most greedily thirst after bloud, and therefore they lie in wait in the very entrance of the pools, that they may light upon Horses, Oxen, Elephants, &amp;c. so soon as they come to drink for thirst of cold water. Pliny writes, that they are so troublesome to the Elephant, that the beast is by their tickling and sucking in his snout, al∣most mad; which doth manifestly shew the wonder∣ful power of Insects: For what is there greater then an Elephant? and what is there more contemptible than a Horsleech? Yet the greatnesse and wit of the Elephant must give way and yeeld to this Worm. They feed most on bloud of beasts, and watry bloudy matter; yet when they want sustenance, they still themselves with the filth that riseth from the water. Pliny saith they vanish in the Spring, l. 9. c. 51. but we see that season to be most fit for the breeding of them. And indeed I can see no reason, that when they have overcome the Winters cold, they should not be able to stand out the Springs mildeness. And this we all know, that Horsleeches will die in the Winter, unlesse they be carefully preserved in warm water, and fed with bloud very plentifully. If any man swallow a Horsleech, some perswade us to drink pickle, others snow-water: But Asclepiades bids us first to wash the mouth, and to put a soft Sponge wet in cold water into the mouth, that the Horsleech stick∣ing to the Sponge may be drawn forth. After this he prescribes the juice of Duck-weed, and to cover the neck with cooling plaisters. But Apollonius, whose surname was Mus, gave the sharpest Vinegar with pickle to drink; but those that gave snow, did first warm it, and used it being dissolved, and they did use meat and drink at fit times to make the belly soluble, that they might drive forth the Horsleech, for they report that so they will oft-times come forth with the excrements. Gal. l. 2 de Antidotis. In the dayes of Pliny, wicked men did privily give Horsleeches to their enemies to do them mischief; but Rue with Vinegar, or only Butter, (as a∣gainst all venoms that did exulcerate) were a present remedy, lib. 20. c. 13. and lib. 28. c. 10. Their use in physick is manifold. For some (I use Galens words, lib. de different. sanguinis detrahen∣di modis, Tract. 10.) take Horsleeches and put them up, and they use them diversly: For when they are made tame they are easily put upon the skin; but those that are taken must be kept one day, and must be fed with a little bloud; and so it will be that whatsoever venome they have in them, they will soon cast forth. But when we have need to use them, that part to which you will apply your Leeches must be first rubbed with Nitre, and must be anoynted, and scratched with your fingers, that by this means they may fasten the more greedily; but you must cast them into warm water that is contained in a large and a clean vessel, then you must lay hold of them with a Sponge, you must cleanse them with your hand from all filth and dirt, and so they will be fit to be applyed. And when you have set them on, lest that part they stick to should grow cold, you must powr on warm Oyl: But if they be to be applyed to your hands or feet, you must thrust them into the warm water that the Leeches are cast into. And if they will not hold ast, you must cut off their tails with a pair of Cizzers; for when the bloud so runs forth they will not leave off sucking until you sprinkle salt or ashes upon their mouth: When they are fallen off, that venemous quality they use to leave behinde must be drawn sorth with a Cupping glasse; and if that may not be done, you must use a Sponge to foment the place. And if yet any bloudy drops run forth, apply meal and Cummin, and then binde on some Wooll wet with a little Oyl. But if yet the bloud will not stop, lay on a linnen clo et in Vinegar, or burnt glasse, or a Sponge first put into liquid pitch, and afterwards burnt. And this also you must ob∣serve, that Leeches draw that bloud that is next the flesh, and not that which is contained in the Centre of the body. Men use them commonly in stead of Cupping glasses. Mark also that you must take them off when they have drawn half the bloud. And you must beware that the bloud run not forth so long, untill it be sufficient: For the part it self will grow cold, both by rea∣son of the Leeches that are naturally cold, and because of the air that compasseth us about. So far Galen. But Cardan bids us not to anoynt the place with Nitre, but with milk, that they may fasten the sooner; and withall to pinch the Leech close, that striving for revenge he may open the vein, lib. 7. de rer. var. c. 28. What help they were to Dionysius the Tyrant of Heracleot we may read in Histories, who representing rather a beast than a man, sor he died with a might great paunch, had been eaten by the Worms long before, unlesse Horsleeches had been applyed to both his sides, and drawn forth daily some quantity of the humours he was charged with. It were too tedious to reckon up all the melancholique and mad people, that have been cured by applying Leeches to the Hemorrods in their fundaments. Yet I may not over-passe the Noble Richard Cavendish, (the most learned Unkle by the fathers side of that famous Navigator through the world Thomas Cavendish) who was perfectly cured of his Gowt that had held him many years, only by applying Horsleeches to the Emrods in Ano every moneth, so that now to the great wonder of all the Court, he walks alone without any help, and being sound and void of all pain, he lives an old man. Also Horsleeches set upon the fundament, will so wonderfully pluck back the humours that run from the whole body to the joynts, that they will presently ease the pains like a Charm. This I proved at Lions upon an excellent Musitian, one Rosolus; who for the great pains he endured, and by continual waking, fell into a burning Feaver, with raving, in the Dog-dayes, at which time Hippocrates saith it is dangerous to purge. It is in this case such a re∣medy, that it is to be preferr ' d before all others, for they draw from the whole body without any trouble or losse of a mans forces. Jac. Aubert. Exercit. 50. progymnasm. Fernel. Abdit. God∣fridus a Cenami, a Venetian, a famous man, and my very great friend, for just and lawfull causes, who told me that he saw one who had the joynt Gowt, who lived many years free of all his pains, only by applying Leeches to the part that was in pain. Math. de Grad. and Savanrola, Ja∣cob Dournet, Apolog. lib. c. 3. perswade the same remedy. Also Gilbertus Anglicus reports, that the Lowsie disease generally is to be cured with the ashes of Horsleeches boyled with Storax: For they are not only usefull for men whilest they are alive, but when they are dead and burnt to ashes. Pliny reports, lib. 32. c. 7. that Horsleeches will black ones hair, if they be corrupted in black wine for sixty dayes: Others bid us take one fextarius of Leeches, and let them lie to cor∣rupt in two sextarii of Vinegar, in a leaden vessel for so many dayes, and then to anoynt with them in the Sun. Sornatius relates, that this medicament is of so great force, that ulesse they hold Oyl in their mouths that die the hair, it will also black their teeth. Meges writes, that live Frogs putrefied in Vinegar, will take off the hair, but the ashes of Leeches anoynted with Vi∣negar will doe the same. 
 CHAP. XLII. Of Water-worms.
