 
 It was high noon before we were got to Dulverton that day, near to which 
 town the river Exe and its big brother Barle have union. My mother had 
 an uncle living there, but we were not to visit his house this time, at 
 which I was somewhat astonished, since we needs must stop for at least 
 two hours, to bait our horses thorough well, before coming to the black 
 bogway. The bogs are very good in frost, except where the hot-springs 
 rise; but as yet there had been no frost this year, save just enough 
 to make the blackbirds look big in the morning. In a hearty black-frost 
 they look small, until the snow falls over them. 
  
 The road from Bampton to Dulverton had not been very delicate, yet 
 nothing to complain of much--no deeper, indeed, than the hocks of a 
 horse, except in the rotten places. The day was inclined to be mild and 
 foggy, and both nags sweated freely; but Peggy carrying little weight 
 (for my wardrobe was upon Smiler, and John Fry grumbling always), we 
 could easily keep in front, as far as you may hear a laugh. 
  
 John had been rather bitter with me, which methought was a mark of ill 
 taste at coming home for the holidays; and yet I made allowance for
John, because he had never been at school, and never would have chance 
 to eat fry upon condition of spelling it; therefore I rode on, thinking 
 that he was hard-set, like a saw, for his dinner, and would soften after 
 tooth-work. And yet at his most hungry times, when his mind was far gone 
 upon bacon, certes he seemed to check himself and look at me as if he 
 were sorry for little things coming over great. 
  
 But now, at Dulverton, we dined upon the rarest and choicest victuals 
 that ever I did taste. Even now, at my time of life, to think of it 
 gives me appetite, as once and awhile to think of my first love makes 
 me love all goodness. Hot mutton pasty was a thing I had often heard 
 of from very wealthy boys and men, who made a dessert of dinner; and to 
 hear them talk of it made my lips smack, and my ribs come inwards. 
  
 And now John Fry strode into the hostel, with the air and grace of a 
 short-legged man, and shouted as loud as if he was calling sheep upon 
 Exmoor,-- 
  
 "Hot mooton pasty for twoo trarv  '  lers, at number vaive, in vaive 
 minnits! Dish un up in the tin with the grahvy, zame as I hardered last
the city-make, and the day in want of air, sate the foreign lady, who 
 had met me at the pump and offered to salute me. By her side was a 
 little girl, dark-haired and very wonderful, with a wealthy softness on 
 her, as if she must have her own way. I could not look at her for two 
 glances, and she did not look at me for one, being such a little child, 
 and busy with the hedges. But in the honourable place sate a handsome 
 lady, very warmly dressed, and sweetly delicate of colour. And close 
 to her was a lively child, two or it may be three years old, bearing a 
 white cockade in his hat, and staring at all and everybody. Now, he saw 
 Peggy, and took such a liking to her, that the lady his mother--if so 
 she were--was forced to look at my pony and me. And, to tell the truth, 
 although I am not of those who adore the high folk, she looked at us 
 very kindly, and with a sweetness rarely found in the women who milk the 
 cows for us. 
  
 Then I took off my cap to the beautiful lady, without asking wherefore; 
 and she put up her hand and kissed it to me, thinking, perhaps, that 
 I looked like a gentle and good little boy; for folk always called me 
 innocent, though God knows I never was that. But now the foreign lady, 
 or lady  '  s maid, as it might be, who had been busy with little dark eyes,
Hereupon I drew up and thought, and reason was much inside me; because 
 the water was bitter cold, and my little toes were aching. So on the 
 bank I rubbed them well with a sprout of young sting-nettle, and having 
 skipped about awhile, was kindly inclined to eat a bit. 
  
 Now all the turn of all my life hung upon that moment. But as I sat 
 there munching a crust of Betty Muxworthy  '  s sweet brown bread, and a bit 
 of cold bacon along with it, and kicking my little red heels against the 
 dry loam to keep them warm, I knew no more than fish under the fork what 
 was going on over me. It seemed a sad business to go back now and tell 
 Annie there were no loaches; and yet it was a frightful thing, knowing 
 what I did of it, to venture, where no grown man durst, up the Bagworthy 
 water. And please to recollect that I was only a boy in those days, fond 
 enough of anything new, but not like a man to meet it. 
  
 However, as I ate more and more, my spirit arose within me, and I 
 thought of what my father had been, and how he had told me a hundred 
 times never to be a coward. And then I grew warm, and my little heart 
 was ashamed of its pit-a-patting, and I said to myself, "now if father 
 looks, he shall see that I obey him." So I put the bag round my back
 
 [Illustration: 062.jpg Illustrated Capital] 
  
 When I came to myself again, my hands were full of 
 young grass and mould, and a little girl kneeling at my side was rubbing 
 my forehead tenderly with a dock-leaf and a handkerchief. 
  
 "Oh, I am so glad," she whispered softly, as I opened my eyes and looked 
 at her; "now you will try to be better, won  '  t you?" 
  
 I had never heard so sweet a sound as came from between her bright red 
 lips, while there she knelt and gazed at me; neither had I ever seen 
 anything so beautiful as the large dark eyes intent upon me, full of 
 pity and wonder. And then, my nature being slow, and perhaps, for that 
 matter, heavy, I wandered with my hazy eyes down the black shower of 
 her hair, as to my jaded gaze it seemed; and where it fell on the turf, 
 among it (like an early star) was the first primrose of the season. And 
 since that day I think of her, through all the rough storms of my life, 
 when I see an early primrose. Perhaps she liked my countenance, and 
 indeed I know she did, because she said so afterwards; although at the
For the toil of the water, and danger of labouring up the long cascade 
 or rapids, and then the surprise of the fair young maid, and terror of 
 the murderers, and desperation of getting away--all these are much to 
 me even now, when I am a stout churchwarden, and sit by the side of my 
 fire, after going through many far worse adventures, which I will tell, 
 God willing. Only the labour of writing is such (especially so as to 
 construe, and challenge a reader on parts of speech, and hope to be even 
 with him); that by this pipe which I hold in my hand I ever expect to be 
 beaten, as in the days when old Doctor Twiggs, if I made a bad stroke 
 in my exercise, shouted aloud with a sour joy, "John Ridd, sirrah, down 
 with your small-clothes!" 
  
 Let that be as it may, I deserved a good beating that night, after 
 making such a fool of myself, and grinding good fustian to pieces. But 
 when I got home, all the supper was in, and the men sitting at the white 
 table, and mother and Annie and Lizzie near by, all eager, and offering 
 to begin (except, indeed, my mother, who was looking out at the 
 doorway), and by the fire was Betty Muxworthy, scolding, and cooking, 
 and tasting her work, all in a breath, as a man would say. I looked 
 through the door from the dark by the wood-stack, and was half of a mind
never bear it, partly because I felt it to be out of place in our good 
 farm-house, partly because I hate frippery, partly because it seemed to 
 me to have nothing to do with father, and partly because I never could 
 tell the reason of my hating it. And yet the poor soul had put them on, 
 not to show her hands off (which were above her station) but simply 
 for her children  '  s sake, because Uncle Ben had given them. But another 
 thing, I never could bear for man or woman to call me, "Johnny," 
 "Jack," or "John," I cared not which; and that was honest enough, and no 
 smallness of me there, I say. 
  
 "Well, mother, what is the matter, then?" 
  
 "I am sure you need not be angry, Johnny. I only hope it is nothing to 
 grieve about, instead of being angry. You are very sweet-tempered, I 
 know, John Ridd, and perhaps a little too sweet at times"--here she 
 meant the Snowe girls, and I hanged my head--"but what would you say if 
 the people there"--she never would call them "Doones"--"had gotten your 
 poor Uncle Reuben, horse, and Sunday coat, and all?" 
  
 "Why, mother, I should be sorry for them. He would set up a shop by the
thing just when I had crossed my legs in the corner after supper, and 
 leaned my head against the oven, to begin to think of Lorna. 
  
 However, in all things there is comfort, if we do not look too hard 
 for it; and now I had much satisfaction, in my uncouth state, from 
 labouring, by the hour together, at the hedging and the ditching, 
 meeting the bitter wind face to face, feeling my strength increase, and 
 hoping that some one would be proud of it. In the rustling rush of 
 every gust, in the graceful bend of every tree, even in the "lords and 
 ladies," clumped in the scoops of the hedgerow, and most of all in the 
 soft primrose, wrung by the wind, but stealing back, and smiling when 
 the wrath was passed--in all of these, and many others there was aching 
 ecstasy, delicious pang of Lorna. 
  
 But however cold the weather was, and however hard the wind blew, one 
 thing (more than all the rest) worried and perplexed me. This was, that 
 I could not settle, turn and twist as I might, how soon I ought to go 
 again upon a visit to Glen Doone. For I liked not at all the falseness 
 of it (albeit against murderers), the creeping out of sight, and hiding, 
 and feeling as a spy might. And even more than this. I feared how Lorna
there with slabs in and out the brambles. On the right hand is an upward 
 crag, called by some the Castle, easy enough to scale, and giving great 
 view of the Channel. Facing this, from the inland side and the elbow of 
 the valley, a queer old pile of rock arises, bold behind one another, 
 and quite enough to affright a man, if it only were ten times larger. 
 This is called the Devil  '  s Cheese-ring, or the Devil  '  s Cheese-knife, 
 which mean the same thing, as our fathers were used to eat their cheese 
 from a scoop; and perhaps in old time the upmost rock (which has fallen 
 away since I knew it) was like to such an implement, if Satan eat cheese 
 untoasted. 
  
 But all the middle of this valley was a place to rest in; to sit and 
 think that troubles were not, if we would not make them. To know the sea 
 outside the hills, but never to behold it; only by the sound of waves to 
 pity sailors labouring. Then to watch the sheltered sun, coming warmly 
 round the turn, like a guest expected, full of gentle glow and gladness, 
 casting shadow far away as a thing to hug itself, and awakening life 
 from dew, and hope from every spreading bud. And then to fall asleep and 
 dream that the fern was all asparagus. 
 
but mother saw any need of encouraging me to eat, I could only manage 
 one true good meal in a day, at the time I speak of. Mother was in 
 despair at this, and tempted me with the whole of the rack, and even 
 talked of sending to Porlock for a druggist who came there twice in 
 a week; and Annie spent all her time in cooking, and even Lizzie sang 
 songs to me; for she could sing very sweetly. But my conscience told me 
 that Betty Muxworthy had some reason upon her side. 
  
 "Latt the young ozebird aloun, zay I. Makk zuch ado about un, wi  '  
 hogs  '  -puddens, and hock-bits, and lambs  '  -mate, and whaten bradd indade, 
 and brewers  '   ale avore dinner-time, and her not to zit wi  '   no winder 
 aupen--draive me mad   '  e doo, the ov  '  ee, zuch a passel of voouls. Do   '  un 
 good to starve a bit; and takk zome on  '  s wackedness out ov un." 
  
 But mother did not see it so; and she even sent for Nicholas Snowe 
 to bring his three daughters with him, and have ale and cake in the 
 parlour, and advise about what the bees were doing, and when a swarm 
 might be looked for. Being vexed about this and having to stop at home 
 nearly half the evening, I lost good manners so much as to ask him (even 
 in our own house!) what he meant by not mending the swing-hurdle where
 
 "Right, right, you are right, my son. I have heard that the flavour 
 is marvellous. Some of them came and scared me so, in the fog of the 
 morning, that I hungered for them ever since. Ha, ha, I saw their 
 haunches. But the young lady will not forget--art sure she will not 
 forget it?" 
  
 "You may trust her to forget nothing, sir, that may tempt a guest to his 
 comfort." 
  
 "In faith, then, I will leave my horse in your hands, and be off for 
 it. Half the pleasure of the mouth is in the nose beforehand. But stay, 
 almost I forgot my business, in the hurry which thy tongue hath spread 
 through my lately despairing belly. Hungry I am, and sore of body, from 
 my heels right upward, and sorest in front of my doublet, yet may I not 
 rest nor bite barley-bread, until I have seen and touched John Ridd. God 
 grant that he be not far away; I must eat my saddle, if it be so." 
  
 "Have no fear, good sir," I answered; "you have seen and touched John 
 Ridd. I am he, and not one likely to go beneath a bushel."
end, with reaping-hooks beneath our arms, and dogs left to mind jackets. 
  
 But now, will you believe me well, or will you only laugh at me? For 
 even in the world of wheat, when deep among the varnished crispness of 
 the jointed stalks, and below the feathered yielding of the graceful 
 heads, even as I gripped the swathes and swept the sickle round them, 
 even as I flung them by to rest on brother stubble, through the whirling 
 yellow world, and eagerness of reaping, came the vision of my love, as 
 with downcast eyes she wondered at my power of passion. And then the 
 sweet remembrance glowed brighter than the sun through wheat, through my 
 very depth of heart, of how she raised those beaming eyes, and ripened 
 in my breast rich hope. Even now I could descry, like high waves in the 
 distance, the rounded heads and folded shadows of the wood of Bagworthy. 
 Perhaps she was walking in the valley, and softly gazing up at them. Oh, 
 to be a bird just there! I could see a bright mist hanging just above 
 the Doone Glen. Perhaps it was shedding its drizzle upon her. Oh, to 
 be a drop of rain! The very breeze which bowed the harvest to my bosom 
 gently, might have come direct from Lorna, with her sweet voice laden. 
 Ah, the flaws of air that wander where they will around her, fan her 
 bright cheek, play with lashes, even revel in her hair and reveal her
(Chorus) 
  
 The corn, oh the corn, and the yellow, mellow corn! 
 Here  '  s to the corn, with the cups upon the board! 
 We  '  ve been reaping all the day, and we  '  ll reap again the morn 
 And fetch it home to mow-yard, and then we  '  ll thank the Lord. 
  
  
 2 
  
 The wheat, oh the wheat,   '  tis the ripening of the wheat! 
 All the day it has been hanging down its heavy head, 
 Bowing over on our bosoms with a beard of red: 
  '  Tis the harvest, and the value makes the labour sweet. 
  
 (Chorus) 
  
 The wheat, oh the wheat, and the golden, golden wheat! 
 Here  '  s to the wheat, with the loaves upon the board! 
 We  '  ve been reaping all the day, and we never will be beat
at the goodness of the smell around them. They had resigned themselves, 
 as even pigs do, to a kind of fast, hoping to break their fast more 
 sweetly on the morrow morning. But now they tumbled out all headlong, 
 pigs below and pigs above, pigs point-blank and pigs across, pigs 
 courant and pigs rampant, but all alike prepared to eat, and all in good 
 cadence squeaking. 
  
 "Tak smarl boocket, and bale un out; wad   '  e waste sich stoof as thic 
 here be?" So Betty set me to feed the pigs, while she held the lanthorn; 
 and knowing what she was, I saw that she would not tell me another word 
 until all the pigs were served. And in truth no man could well look at 
 them, and delay to serve them, they were all expressing appetite in so 
 forcible a manner; some running to and fro, and rubbing, and squealing 
 as if from starvation, some rushing down to the oaken troughs, and 
 poking each other away from them; and the kindest of all putting up 
 their fore-feet on the top-rail on the hog-pound, and blinking their 
 little eyes, and grunting prettily to coax us; as who would say, "I 
 trust you now; you will be kind, I know, and give me the first and the 
 very best of it." 
 
eyes, and flung both arms around my neck, and answered with her heart on 
 mine,-- 
  
 "Darling, you have won it all. I shall never be my own again. I am 
 yours, my own one, for ever and for ever." 
  
 I am sure I know not what I did, or what I said thereafter, being 
 overcome with transport by her words and at her gaze. Only one thing I 
 remember, when she raised her bright lips to me, like a child, for me to 
 kiss, such a smile of sweet temptation met me through her flowing hair, 
 that I almost forgot my manners, giving her no time to breathe. 
  
 "That will do," said Lorna gently, but violently blushing; "for the 
 present that will do, John. And now remember one thing, dear. All the 
 kindness is to be on my side; and you are to be very distant, as behoves 
 to a young maiden; except when I invite you. But you may kiss my hand, 
 John; oh, yes, you may kiss my hand, you know. Ah to be sure! I had 
 forgotten; how very stupid of me!" 
  
 For by this time I had taken one sweet hand and gazed on it, with the
from my own perception of it. John, you are very wise in kissing me; 
 but perhaps you would not be so wise in bringing Lorna for an afternoon, 
 just to see what she thinks of me. There is a good saddle of mutton now; 
 and there are some very good sausages left, on the blue dish with the 
 anchor, Annie, from the last little sow we killed." 
  
 "As if Lorna would eat sausages!" said I, with appearance of high 
 contempt, though rejoicing all the while that mother seemed to have her 
 name so pat; and she pronounced it in a manner which made my heart leap 
 to my ears: "Lorna to eat sausages!" 
  
 "I don  '  t see why she shouldn  '  t," my mother answered smiling, "if she 
 means to be a farmer  '  s wife, she must take to farmer  '  s ways, I think. 
 What do you say, Annie?" 
  
 "She will eat whatever John desires, I should hope," said Annie gravely; 
 "particularly as I made them." 
  
 "Oh that I could only get the chance of trying her!" I answered, "if you 
 could once behold her, mother, you would never let her go again. And she
tender hue flowed back again into her famished cheeks and lips, and a 
 softer brilliance glistened from the depth of her dark eyes. She gave me 
 one little shrunken hand, and I could not help a tear for it. 
  
 "After all, Mistress Lorna," I said, pretending to be gay, for a smile 
 might do her good; "you do not love me as Gwenny does; for she even 
 wanted to eat me." 
  
 "And shall, afore I have done, young man," Gwenny answered laughing; 
 "you come in here with they red chakes, and make us think o  '   sirloin." 
  
 "Eat up your bit of brown bread, Gwenny. It is not good enough for 
 your mistress. Bless her heart, I have something here such as she never 
 tasted the like of, being in such appetite. Look here, Lorna; smell it 
 first. I have had it ever since Twelfth Day, and kept it all the time 
 for you. Annie made it. That is enough to warrant it good cooking." 
  
 And then I showed my great mince-pie in a bag of tissue paper, and I 
 told them how the mince-meat was made of golden pippins finely shred, 
 with the undercut of the sirloin, and spice and fruit accordingly and
far beyond my knowledge. But Lorna would not touch a morsel until she 
 had thanked God for it, and given me the kindest kiss, and put a piece 
 in Gwenny  '  s mouth. 
  
 I have eaten many things myself, with very great enjoyment, and keen 
 perception of their merits, and some thanks to God for them. But I never 
 did enjoy a thing, that had found its way between my own lips, half, or 
 even a quarter as much as I now enjoyed beholding Lorna, sitting 
 proudly upwards (to show that she was faint no more) entering into 
 that mince-pie, and moving all her pearls of teeth (inside her little 
 mouth-place) exactly as I told her. For I was afraid lest she should be 
 too fast in going through it, and cause herself more damage so, than she 
 got of nourishment. But I had no need to fear at all, and Lorna could 
 not help laughing at me for thinking that she had no self-control. 
  
 Some creatures require a deal of food (I myself among the number), and 
 some can do with a very little; making, no doubt, the best of it. And I 
 have often noticed that the plumpest and most perfect women never eat so 
 hard and fast as the skinny and three-cornered ones. These last be often 
 ashamed of it, and eat most when the men be absent. Hence it came to
mother could not do enough; and Annie almost worshipped her; and even 
 Lizzie could not keep her bitterness towards her; especially when she 
 found that Lorna knew as much of books as need be. 
  
 As for John Fry, and Betty, and Molly, they were a perfect plague when 
 Lorna came into the kitchen. For betwixt their curiosity to see a 
 live Doone in the flesh (when certain not to eat them), and their high 
 respect for birth (with or without honesty), and their intense desire to 
 know all about Master John  '  s sweetheart (dropped, as they said, from the 
 snow-clouds), and most of all their admiration of a beauty such as never 
 even their angels could have seen--betwixt and between all this, I say, 
 there was no getting the dinner cooked, with Lorna in the kitchen. 
  
 And the worst of it was that Lorna took the strangest of all strange 
 fancies for this very kitchen; and it was hard to keep her out of it. 
 Not that she had any special bent for cooking, as our Annie had; rather 
 indeed the contrary, for she liked to have her food ready cooked; but 
 that she loved the look of the place, and the cheerful fire burning, and 
 the racks of bacon to be seen, and the richness, and the homeliness, and 
 the pleasant smell of everything. And who knows but what she may have
face, so brilliant with excitement; "and that is, that you come in at 
 once, with that worrisome cough of yours; and sit by the fire, and warm 
 yourself." 
  
 "Oh, no, John! Not for a minute, if you please, good John. I want to see 
 the snow go away, and the green meadows coming forth. And here comes our 
 favourite robin, who has lived in the oven so long, and sang us a song 
 every morning. I must see what he thinks of it!" 
  
 "You will do nothing of the sort," I answered very shortly, being only 
 too glad of a cause for having her in my arms again. So I caught her up, 
 and carried her in; and she looked and smiled so sweetly at me instead 
 of pouting (as I had feared) that I found myself unable to go very fast 
 along the passage. And I set her there in her favourite place, by the 
 sweet-scented wood-fire; and she paid me porterage without my even 
 asking her; and for all the beauty of the rain, I was fain to stay with 
 her; until our Annie came to say that my advice was wanted. 
  
 Now my advice was never much, as everybody knew quite well; but that was 
 the way they always put it, when they wanted me to work for them. And in
 
  
 CHAPTER XLVI 
  
 SQUIRE FAGGUS MAKES SOME LUCKY HITS 
  
 [Illustration: 397.jpg Illustrated Capital] 
  
 Through that season of bitter frost the red deer of the forest, having 
 nothing to feed upon, and no shelter to rest in, had grown accustomed to 
 our ricks of corn, and hay, and clover. There we might see a hundred 
 of them almost any morning, come for warmth, and food, and comfort, and 
 scarce willing to move away. And many of them were so tame, that they 
 quietly presented themselves at our back door, and stood there with 
 their coats quite stiff, and their flanks drawn in and panting, 
 and icicles sometimes on their chins, and their great eyes fastened 
 wistfully upon any merciful person; craving for a bit of food, and a 
 drink of water; I suppose that they had not sense enough to chew the 
 snow and melt it; at any rate, all the springs being frozen, and rivers 
 hidden out of sight, these poor things suffered even more from thirst
vessels, should be the first to begin to fill. And so we always arranged 
 it. 
  
 Now, though our Annie was a graceful maid, and Lizzie a very learned 
 one, you should have seen how differently Lorna managed her dining; she 
 never took more than about a quarter of a mouthful at a time, and she 
 never appeared to be chewing that, although she must have done so. 
 Indeed, she appeared to dine as if it were a matter of no consequence, 
 and as if she could think of other things more than of her business. All 
 this, and her own manner of eating, I described to Eliza once, when I 
 wanted to vex her for something very spiteful that she had said; and 
 I never succeeded so well before, for the girl was quite outrageous, 
 having her own perception of it, which made my observation ten times as 
 bitter to her. And I am not sure but what she ceased to like poor Lorna 
 from that day; and if so, I was quite paid out, as I well deserved, for 
 my bit of satire. 
  
 For it strikes me that of all human dealings, satire is the very lowest, 
 and most mean and common. It is the equivalent in words of what bullying 
 is in deeds; and no more bespeaks a clever man, than the other does a
wrong, this time. Lorna, come with me, my darling." 
  
 "Oh yes, Lorna; go with him," cried Lizzie, dropping her lip, in a way 
 which you must see to know its meaning; "John wants nobody now but you; 
 and none can find fault with his taste, dear." 
  
 "You little fool, I should think not," I answered, very rudely; for, 
 betwixt the lot of them, my Lorna  '  s eyelashes were quivering; "now, 
 dearest angel, come with me; and snap your hands at the whole of them." 
  
 My angel did come, with a sigh, and then with a smile, when we were 
 alone; but without any unangelic attempt at snapping her sweet white 
 fingers. 
  
 These little things are enough to show that while every one so admired 
 Lorna, and so kindly took to her, still there would, just now and then, 
 be petty and paltry flashes of jealousy concerning her; and perhaps 
 it could not be otherwise among so many women. However, we were always 
 doubly kind to her afterwards; and although her mind was so sensitive 
 and quick that she must have suffered, she never allowed us to perceive
cellar. 
  
 As I had but little time to spare (although the days were long and 
 light) we were forced to take our wine with promptitude and rapidity; 
 and whether this loosened my uncle  '  s tongue, or whether he meant 
 beforehand to speak, is now almost uncertain. But true it is that he 
 brought his chair very near to mine, after three or four glasses, and 
 sent Ruth away upon some errand which seemed of small importance. At 
 this I was vexed, for the room always looked so different without her. 
  
 "Come, Jack," he said, "here  '  s your health, young fellow, and a good and 
 obedient wife to you. Not that your wife will ever obey you though; you 
 are much too easy-tempered. Even a bitter and stormy woman might live 
 in peace with you, Jack. But never you give her the chance to try. Marry 
 some sweet little thing, if you can. If not, don  '  t marry any. Ah, we 
 have the maid to suit you, my lad, in this old town of Dulverton." 
  
 "Have you so, sir? But perhaps the maid might have no desire to suit 
 me." 
 
had taken very kindly to my love for Lorna, and being of a proud and 
 slightly upstart nature, could not bear to be eclipsed in bearing, 
 looks, and breeding, and even in clothes, by the stranger. For one thing 
 I will say of the Doones, that whether by purchase or plunder, they had 
 always dressed my darling well, with her own sweet taste to help them. 
 And though Lizzie  '  s natural hate of the maid (as a Doone and burdened 
 with father  '  s death) should have been changed to remorse when she 
 learned of Lorna  '  s real parentage, it was only altered to sullenness, 
 and discontent with herself, for frequent rudeness to an innocent 
 person, and one of such high descent. Moreover, the child had imbibed 
 strange ideas as to our aristocracy, partly perhaps from her own way of 
 thinking, and partly from reading of history. For while, from one point 
 of view she looked up at them very demurely, as commissioned by God for 
 the country  '  s good; from another sight she disliked them, as ready to 
 sacrifice their best and follow their worst members. 
  
 Yet why should this wench dare to judge upon a matter so far beyond her, 
 and form opinions which she knew better than declare before mother? But 
 with me she had no such scruple, for I had no authority over her; and my 
 intellect she looked down upon, because I praised her own so. Thus
so." 
  
 Being grieved at my manner, she led me in where none could interrupt 
 us; and in spite of all my dejection, I could not help noticing how very 
 pretty and even elegant all things were around. For we upon Exmoor have 
 little taste; all we care for is warm comfort, and plenty to eat and to 
 give away, and a hearty smack in everything. But Squire Faggus had seen 
 the world, and kept company with great people; and the taste he had 
 first displayed in the shoeing of farmers  '   horses (which led almost to 
 his ruin, by bringing him into jealousy, and flattery, and dashing ways) 
 had now been cultivated in London, and by moonlight, so that none could 
 help admiring it. 
  
 "Well!" I cried, for the moment dropping care and woe in astonishment: 
 "we have nothing like this at Plover  '  s Barrows; nor even Uncle Reuben. I 
 do hope it is honest, Annie?" 
  
 "Would I sit in a chair that was not my own?" asked Annie, turning 
 crimson, and dropping defiantly, and with a whisk of her dress which 
 I never had seen before, into the very grandest one: "would I lie on a
cookery; but just to have something good and quiet, and then smoke and 
 think about Lorna. 
  
 Nevertheless the time went on, with one change and another; and we 
 gathered all our harvest in; and Parson Bowden thanked God for it, 
 both in church and out of it; for his tithes would be very goodly. The 
 unmatched cold of the previous winter, and general fear of scarcity, and 
 our own talk about our ruin, had sent prices up to a grand high pitch; 
 and we did our best to keep them there. For nine Englishmen out of every 
 ten believe that a bitter winter must breed a sour summer, and explain 
 away topmost prices. While according to my experience, more often it 
 would be otherwise, except for the public thinking so. However, I have 
 said too much; and if any farmer reads my book, he will vow that I wrote 
 it for nothing else except to rob his family. 
  
  
  
  
 CHAPTER LXII 
 
to see, with the rasp of winter bristles rising through and among the 
 soft summer-coat; and when the new straw began to come in, golden 
 with the harvest gloss, and smelling most divinely at those strange 
 livery-stables, where the nags are put quite tail to tail; and when 
 all the London folk themselves are asking about white frost (from 
 recollections of childhood); then, I say, such a yearning seized me for 
 moory crag, and for dewy blade, and even the grunting of our sheep (when 
 the sun goes down), that nothing but the new wisps of Samson could have 
 held me in London town. 
  
 Lorna was moved with equal longing towards the country and country ways; 
 and she spoke quite as much of the glistening dew as she did of the 
 smell of our oven. And here let me mention--although the two are quite 
 distinct and different--that both the dew and the bread of Exmoor may 
 be sought, whether high or low, but never found elsewhere. The dew is so 
 crisp, and pure, and pearly, and in such abundance; and the bread is so 
 sweet, so kind, and homely, you can eat a loaf, and then another. 
  
 Now while I was walking daily in and out great crowds of men (few of 
 whom had any freedom from the cares of money, and many of whom were
himself. 
  
 [Illustration: 652.jpg Siezed poor Margery] 
  
 The other Doones being left behind, and grieved perhaps in some 
 respects, set to with a will to scour the house, and to bring away all 
 that was good to eat. And being a little vexed herein (for the Badcocks 
 were not a rich couple) and finding no more than bacon, and eggs, and 
 cheese, and little items, and nothing to drink but water; in a word, 
 their taste being offended, they came back, to the kitchen, and stamped; 
 and there was the baby lying. 
  
 By evil luck, this child began to squeal about his mother, having been 
 petted hitherto, and wont to get all he wanted, by raising his voice but 
 a little. Now the mark of the floor was upon his head, as the maid (who 
 had stolen to look at him, when the rough men were swearing upstairs) 
 gave evidence. And she put a dish-cloth under his head, and kissed him, 
 and ran away again. Her name was Honour Jose, and she meant what was 
 right by her master and mistress; but could not help being frightened. 
 And many women have blamed her, as I think unduly, for her mode of
slowly came back my former strength, with a darling wife, and good 
 victuals. As for Lorna, she never tired of sitting and watching me eat 
 and eat. And such is her heart that she never tires of being with me 
 here and there, among the beautiful places, and talking with her arm 
 around me--so far at least as it can go, though half of mine may go 
 round her--of the many fears and troubles, dangers and discouragements, 
 and worst of all the bitter partings, which we used to have, somehow. 
  
 There is no need for my farming harder than becomes a man of weight. 
 Lorna has great stores of money, though we never draw it out, except for 
 some poor neighbor; unless I find her a sumptuous dress, out of her own 
 perquisites. And this she always looks upon as a wondrous gift from me; 
 and kisses me much when she puts it on, and walks like the noble woman 
 she is. And yet I may never behold it again; for she gets back to her 
 simple clothes, and I love her the better in them. I believe that she 
 gives half the grandeur away, and keeps the other half for the children. 
  
 As for poor Tom Faggus, every one knows his bitter adventures, when his 
 pardon was recalled, because of his journey to Sedgemoor. Not a child 
 in the country, I doubt, but knows far more than I do of Tom  '  s most
