day by the jackal. Then they made a plan that the next day the mother 
 should take the plough afield, while Anuwa should dress up as an old 
 woman and carry the breakfast. This they did and the jackal met Anuwa 
 as usual and made him put down the breakfast basket, but while the 
 jackal was eating, Anuwa knocked him head over heels with his stick; 
 and the jackal got up and fled, threatening and cursing Anuwa. Among 
 other things the jackal as he ran away, had threatened to eat Anuwa  '  s 
 _malhan_ plants, so Anuwa put a fence of thorns round them and when 
 the jackal came at night and tried to eat the pods he only got his 
 nose pricked. 
  
 Foiled in this the jackal called out "Well, I will eat your fowls 
 to-morrow;" but Anuwa the next night sat by the fowl house with a 
 sickle and when the jackal came and poked in his head, Anuwa gave him a 
 rap on the snout with the sickle, so the jackal made off crying "Well, 
 Anuwa, your fowls have pecked me on the head, you shall die." So the 
 next day Anuwa pretended to be dead and his mother went about crying; 
 she took her way to the jungle and there she met the jackal and she 
 told him that Anuwa had died in consequence of his curse and she 
 invited him to the funeral feast, saying that he used to eat the
"Ho, leopard: Ho, leopard," and the echo used to answer from the hill 
 "Ho, leopard." Now there really was a leopard who lived in the hill 
 and one day he was playing hide and seek with a lizard which also 
 lived there. The lizard hid and the leopard looked every where for 
 it in vain. At last the leopard sat down to rest and it chanced that 
 he sat right on top of the lizard which was hiding in a hole. The 
 lizard thought that the leopard meant to hurt it and in revenge bit 
 him and fastened on to his rump so that he could not get it off, 
 so that day when the boys came calling out "Ho, leopard," he ran 
 towards them to get their help: but when they saw the leopard they 
 all fled for their lives. Ledha however could not run fast because 
 he was lame, and the leopard headed him off and begged him to remove 
 the lizard. This he did after the leopard had sworn not to eat him, 
 and before they parted the leopard made him promise to tell no one 
 that the lizard had bitten him, and said that if he told then he would 
 be carried off and eaten. So Ledha rejoined his companions and told 
 them nothing of what had passed between him and the leopard. But that 
 night when they had all gone to bed, Ledha  '  s sister-in-law began to 
 worry him to tell her what the leopard had said to him, when it had 
 caught him. He told her that the leopard would eat him if he told,
but she coaxed him and said that no one could hear them inside the 
 house; so at last he told her that he had taken off a lizard which 
 was hanging on to its rump. Then they went to sleep; but the leopard 
 was hiding at the back of the house and heard all that they said; 
 and when they were all asleep, he crept in and carried off Ledha  '  s bed 
 with Ledha in it on his head. When Ledha woke up towards morning, he 
 found himself being carried through dense jungle and he quietly pulled 
 himself up into one of the trees which overhung the path. Thus when 
 the leopard put down the bed and was going to eat Ledha, he found it 
 empty. So he went back on his track and by and bye came to the tree 
 in which Ledha was hiding. The leopard begged Ledha to come down, 
 as he had something to say to him, and promised not to eat him; but 
 directly Ledha reached the ground the leopard said "Now I am going to 
 eat you." Ledha was powerless, so he only asked to be allowed to have 
 one chew of tobacco before he died; the leopard assented and Ledha 
 felt in his cloth for his tobacco, but the tobacco did not come out 
 easily and as Ledha felt about for it the dry tobacco leaves crackled; 
 the leopard asked what the crackling sound was, and Ledha said "That 
 is the lizard which bit you yesterday;" then the leopard got into a 
 terrible fright and ran away as hard as he could, calling out "Don  '  t
They both went and enjoyed themselves; and two or three days later 
 the monkey boy said that he would also have a feast of first fruits, 
 so he told his mother to clear the courtyard and invited his brothers 
 and he purified himself and went to his clearing and brought home the 
 biggest pumpkin that had grown there; this he offered to the spirits; 
 he sliced off the top of it as if it were the head of a fowl, and 
 as he did so he saw that the inside was full of rice; he called his 
 mother and they filled a winnowing fan with the rice and there was 
 enough besides to nearly fill a basket; they were delighted at this 
 windfall but kept the matter secret lest they should be robbed. The 
 monkey boy told his mother to be sure and cook enough rice so that 
 his brothers and their wives might have as much as ever they could 
 eat, and not merely a small helping such as they had given him, 
 and if necessary he would go and fetch another pumpkin; so his 
 mother boiled the rice. When the time fixed for the feast came, 
 nothing was to be seen of the brothers because they did not expect 
 that there would really be anything for them to eat; so the monkey 
 boy went and fetched them, and when they came to the feast they 
 were astonished to have as much rice as they could eat. When the 
 crop was quite ripe the monkey boy gathered all the pumpkins and
of land; and their grateful neighbours made a large rice field of the 
 depression which the kites had made in the earth and this was given 
 to Kara and Guja as service land to their great delight. 
  
 Kara and Guja used to spend their time in the forest, living on what 
 they could find there; they slept in a cave and at evening would 
 cook their rice there or roast jungle roots. One day a tiger spied 
 them out as they were roasting tubers and came up to them suddenly 
 and said. "What are you cooking? Give me some or I will eat you." So 
 while they went on eating the roasted tubers, they threw the coals 
 from the fire to the tiger at the mouth of the cave and he crunched 
 them up and every now and then they threw him a bit of something good 
 to eat; the tiger would not go away but lay there expecting to be fed, 
 and Kara and Guja debated how to get rid of him. Then Guja suddenly 
 jumped up and dashed at the tiger and caught him by the tail and began 
 to twist the tail and he went on twisting until he twisted it right 
 off and the tiger ran roaring away. Kara and Guja roasted the tail 
 and ate it, and they found it so nice that they decided to hunt the 
 tiger and eat the rest of him. So the two brothers searched for him 
 everywhere and when they found him they chased him until they ran
him down and killed him; then they lit a fire and singed the hair 
 off and roasted the flesh and made a grand meal: but they did not 
 eat the paunch. Kara wanted to eat it but Guja would not let him, 
 so Kara carried it away on his shoulder. 
  
 Presently they sat down in the shade of a banyan tree by the side of a 
 road and along the road came a Raja  '  s wedding procession; when Kara and 
 Guja saw this they climbed into the tree and took the tiger  '  s paunch up 
 with them. The wedding party came to a halt at the foot of the tree and 
 some of them lay down to eat and the Raja got out of his palki and lay 
 down to sleep in the shade. After a time Kara got tired of holding the 
 tiger  '  s paunch in his arms and whispered to Guja that he could hold it 
 no longer, Guja told him on no account to let it go but at last Kara 
 got so tired that he let it fall right on the top of the Raja; then 
 all the Raja  '  s attendants raised a shout that the Raja  '  s stomach had 
 burst and all ran away in a panic leaving everything they had under 
 the tree; but after they had gone a little distance they thought of 
 the goods they had left behind and how they could not continue the 
 journey without them, so they made their way back to the banyan tree. 
 
first ordered his servants to make a fire in the courtyard and he 
 had all his shoes thrown into the fire and then he got up. 
  
 After this the Raja ordered that great care was to be taken of the 
 bedstead and that anyone who sat on it should be put to death; and he 
 himself used not to sleep in it anymore but he kept it in his bedroom 
 that it might protect him. 
  
  
  
  
 XXXV. The Ghormuhas. 
  
 Ghormuhas have heads like horses and bodies and arms like men and 
 their legs are shaped like men  '  s but they have only one leg each, 
 and they eat human beings. 
  
 One day a young man named Somai was hunting a deer and the deer ran 
 away to the country of the Ghormuhas and Somai pursued it, and the 
 Ghormuhas caught him and took him home to eat. First they smoked him
for two or three days so that all the vermin were driven out of his 
 body and clothes and then they proceeded to fatten him; they fed him 
 well every day on rice cooked with turmeric. 
  
 Somai saw how they dealt with their other victims: they tied them hand 
 and foot and threw them alive into a pot of boiling oil and when they 
 were cooked they hung the bodies up in the doorway and would take a 
 bite as they passed in and out; the liver and heart and brains they 
 cooked separately. They used to eat their own parents also: for when 
 a father or mother grew old they would throw them on to the roof of 
 the house and when they rolled down and were killed they would say to 
 their friends, "The pumpkin growing on our roof has got ripe and fallen 
 off and burst, let us come and eat it;" and then they had a feast. 
  
 Somai saw all this and was very frightened. The Ghormuhas could run 
 very fast and they made Somai run a race with them every day and 
 their plan was that they would eat him when he was strong enough to 
 beat them in the race. In the course of time he came to beat them in 
 running on the road; then they said that they would make him run in 
 the fields and, if he beat them there, they meant to eat him.
Jogi came to the palace begging, and the Raja and his Ranis asked him 
 whether he could say what should be done in order that they might 
 have children; the Jogi asked what they would give him if he told 
 them and they said that they would give him anything that he asked 
 for and gave him a written bond to this effect. Then the Jogi said 
 "I will not take elephants or horses or money, but you shall give me 
 the child which is born first and any born afterwards shall be yours, 
 do you agree?" And the Ranis consulted together and agreed. "Then," 
 said the Jogi, "this is what you must do: you must all go and bathe, 
 and after bathing you must go to a mango orchard and the Raja must 
 choose a bunch of seven mangoes and knock it down with his left 
 hand and catch it in a cloth, without letting it touch the ground; 
 then you must go home and the Ranis must sit in a row according to 
 their seniority and the Raja must give them each one of the mangoes 
 to eat, and he must himself eat the rinds which the Ranis throw away; 
 and then you will have children." And so saying the Jogi went away 
 promising to return the next year. 
  
 A few days later the Raja decided to give a trial to the Jogi  '  s 
 prescription and he and the Ranis did as they had been told; but the
the justice we have learnt from human beings; you enjoy the shade of 
 us trees and in return you lop off our branches and sit on them, and 
 do us all manner of injury; it is right that the snake should eat you." 
  
 Then the prince turned to the cow: "He may eat you," answered the 
 cow: "the tree is right, see how men treat cattle; you drive away our 
 calves from us and take our milk and you beat us and make us work hard; 
 for all this ill treatment the snake shall eat you." 
  
 Then the prince asked the water what it had to say: "I agree with the 
 other two" said the water: "to return evil for good is the justice of 
 mankind, it is by drinking water that your very lives are preserved; 
 yet you spit into it and wash dirty things in it; shall not the snake 
 return you evil for good?" So judgment was delivered, and the snake 
 wanted to eat the prince; but the prince asked the tree and the cow 
 and the water to listen while he made one prayer; he told them how 
 he had been married when he was too young to know anything about it, 
 and how he was going for the first time to see his wife, when this 
 misfortune befell him; so he begged that he might be allowed to go and 
 see his bride and then be eaten on his way back; the banyan tree asked
 
 The next morning came and the prince said that he must return, and 
 his wife said that she was going with him; so they made everything 
 ready and set out on their way. When they came within sight of the 
 banyan tree where the prince was to be killed, he tried to turn his 
 wife back but though he used force she refused to leave him and said 
 that she would first see him killed and then go home; so at last he 
 let her accompany him. 
  
 When they reached the tree she asked to be allowed to go in front and 
 be the first to meet the snake; to this the prince assented. They 
 had not gone far when they saw the snake awaiting them in the path 
 with its crest raised, and when they drew near, the prince  '  s bride 
 begged the snake to eat her first, as she had nowhere to live if she 
 survived her husband. The snake refused and bade her go home to her 
 parents; she said that that was impossible; they had sold her and the 
 prince had bought her, in life and in death, bones and ashes. But 
 the snake would not listen and made for the prince to eat him. His 
 wife however kept in front of the snake and would not let it pass; 
 she called the banyan tree to witness that the snake should not eat
and ran off with her on his back. 
  
 The girl was quite willing to go with him and called out as she was 
 carried away: "Never mind, father and mother, I am going away." The 
 Hanuman took her to a cave in the mountains and they lived on 
 fruit,--mangoes or jack or whatever fruit was in season. The monkey 
 climbed the trees and shook the fruit down; but if the girl saw by 
 the marks of teeth that the monkey had bitten off any fruit, instead 
 of only shaking it down, she would not eat it, and pretended that 
 she had had enough; for she would not eat the leavings of the monkey. 
  
 At last the girl got tired of having only fruit to eat; and demanded 
 rice. So the monkey took her to a bazar, and leaving her on the 
 outskirts of the village under a tree, he went and stole some pots from 
 a potter and rice and salt and turmeric and pulse and sweetmeats from 
 other shops, and brought them to the girl. Then she collected sticks 
 and lit a fire and cooked a meal; and the monkey liked the cooked 
 food, and asked her to cook for him every day. So they stayed there 
 several days. Then the girl asked for more clothes and the monkey 
 tried to steal them too, but the shopkeepers were on the watch and
When the leopard heard the shouting and the drumming, it started to 
 escape to another jungle, and as it was crossing a road it came on 
 a merchant driving a packbullock. The merchant tried to run away, 
 but the leopard stopped him and said "You must hide me or I will eat 
 you." The merchant continued to run, thinking that if he helped the 
 leopard it would surely eat him afterwards, but the leopard swore an 
 oath not to eat him if he would only hide it. So the merchant stopped 
 and took one of his sacks off the bullock and emptied it out and tied 
 up the leopard in it, and put it on the bullock and then drove on. 
  
 When they got out of hearing of the hunters the leopard asked to be 
 let out; but directly the sack was untied it said that it would devour 
 the merchant. The merchant said "You can of course eat me, but let us 
 consult an arbitrator as to whether it is fair." The leopard agreed 
 and as they were near a stream, the man asked the water whether it was 
 fair that he should be killed, after he had saved the leopard  '  s life; 
 the water answered "Yes; you men wash all manner of filthy things 
 in me; let it eat you!" Then the leopard wanted to eat him, but the 
 merchant asked leave to take two more opinions; so he asked a tree; 
 but the tree said "Men cut me down; let the leopard eat you."
 
 CIX. The Coldest Season. 
  
 One winter day a bear and a tiger began to dispute as to which is 
 the coldest season of the year; the bear said July and August, which 
 is the rainy season, and the tiger said December and January, which 
 is the winter season. They argued and argued but could not convince 
 each other; for the bear with his long coat did not feel the cold of 
 winter but when he got soaked through in the rain he felt chilly. 
  
 At last they saw a man coming that way and called on him to 
 decide--"but have a care"--said the tiger--"if you give an opinion 
 favourable to the bear, I will eat you;" and the bear said "If you 
 side with the tiger, _I_ will eat you." At this the man was terror 
 stricken but an idea struck him and he made the tiger and the bear 
 promise not to eat him if he gave a fair decision and then he said 
 "It is not the winter which is the coldest, nor the rainy season which 
 is the coldest, but windy weather; if there is no wind no one feels 
 the cold much either in the winter or in the rainy season." And the 
 tiger and the bear said "You are right, we never thought of that"
they filled the stove with live embers and covered them up with ashes; 
 and went to sleep themselves inside a drum. At night the jackal 
 came and put his paws into the fireplace; but he only scraped the 
 hot embers up against his belly and got burnt; this made him scream 
 and the chickens burst out laughing. The jackal heard them and said 
 "You have got me burnt; now I am going to eat you." They said, "Yes, 
 uncle, but please eat us outside the house; you did not eat our mother 
 in her own house; take us to yonder flat rock." 
  
 So the jackal took up the drum but when he got to the rock he 
 accidentally let it fall and it broke and the chickens ran away in 
 all directions; but the chicken that had been at the bottom of the 
 drum had got covered with the droppings of the others and could not 
 fly away; so the jackal thought "Well it is the will of heaven that 
 I should have only one chicken; it is doubtless for the best!" The 
 chicken said to the jackal, "I see that you will eat me, but you 
 cannot eat me in this state; wash me clean first." 
  
 So the jackal took the chicken to a pool and washed it; then the 
 chicken asked to be allowed to get a little dry; but the jackal said
before he took away the fire-brand. But in order to lap the milk 
 he had to put his feet on the fireplace, and it was so hot that he 
 burnt his feet and had to get down; so then he sat down and waited 
 till the fire went out and the hearth grew cool, and then he lapped 
 up the milk and ran off with a piece of smouldering wood. 
  
 Meanwhile the tigers had got tired of waiting and had eaten the deer 
 raw; and they were very angry at being made to eat raw flesh and swore 
 that they would eat the cat too. When they saw the cat bringing the 
 fire they ran to meet him and abused him and cried out "You have made 
 us eat raw flesh; we will eat you too, dung and all" On hearing this 
 threat the cat ran back to the village in fear of his life; and the 
 tigers followed in pursuit; but when they got near the village, the 
 village dogs all ran out barking and the tigers were frightened and 
 turned back and the cat was saved. From that day tigers and leopards 
 have eaten raw flesh; and cats bury their excrement, because of what 
 the tigers had said. 
  
 Every day the tigers went to the village in search of the cat; but when 
 the dogs barked they slunk away; for the tigers were very frightened
sleep. Then the brothers who did not like a snake brother-in-law 
 took their axes and cut off the head of the snake while he slept, 
 and afterwards their sister lived in their house. 
  
  
  
  
 (2)--The Sons of the Tigress. 
  
 Once upon a time a cow and a tigress lived in a jungle and were great 
 friends, they were never separated. Now in those days tigers did not 
 eat flesh, but grazed like cattle, so the tigress never thought of 
 doing any harm to her friend the cow. The tigress had given birth 
 to two men children who were growing up fine and sturdy lads. One 
 afternoon the cow and the tigress went down to a stream to drink, 
 the cow went into the stream and drank and the tigress drank lower 
 down. The cow fouled the water of the stream and the tigress tasting 
 the water found it sweet and thought if the cow can make the water so 
 sweet how sweet the flesh of the cow must be. So on the way back from 
 the stream the tigress suddenly sprang on the cow and killed her and
their return. 
  
 One day while the brothers were hunting the girl went to cut herbs 
 to cook with the dinner: as she was doing so she chanced to cut her 
 finger and some drops of blood fell on the herbs, which were put in 
 the pot. When the brothers came home to dinner they noticed how very 
 sweet the food was and asked the reason. The girl said that she was 
 afraid that it must be because some drops of her blood had fallen 
 on it. Then the brothers took counsel together and agreed that if 
 a few drops of her blood were so sweet, she must be very nice to 
 eat. So they agreed to murder her and eat her. But the youngest 
 brother named Lita, though he did not dare to oppose his elders, 
 was sorry for the decision. The next day when the brothers came 
 from the jungle they brought with them a beautiful flower of seven 
 colours and gave it to their sister. She was delighted with it: 
 she had never seen so beautiful a flower before and wanted to know 
 where it grew and whether were others like it. They said that if she 
 liked to come with them they would take her to the tree on which the 
 flowers grew and she could pick as many as she liked. So the next 
 morning she gladly went with them and they took her to the tree with
