One can of salmon, from which all bones have been removed, 1 cup of 
cracker crumbs, 1/2 cup of milk, 1 tablespoonful of butter, which had 
been melted; 2 eggs beaten, salt and pepper to season. Mix all 
together, bake in a buttered pudding dish one-half hour or until 
browned on top. Serve hot. 
 
 
CREAMED SALMON 
 
A half cup of canned salmon, a left-over from lunch the preceding day, 
may be added to double the quantity of cream dressing, and when heated 
through and served on crisply-toasted slices of stale bread, make a 
tasty addition to any meal. 
 
Of course, it is not necessary to tell even unexperienced housewives 
never under any circumstances allow food to stand in tins in which it 
was canned; do not ever stand food away in tin; use small agateware 
dishes, in which food, such as small quantities of left-overs, etc, 
may be reheated. Never use for cooking agate stew-pans, from the 
inside of which small parties have been chipped, as food cooked in
such a vessel might become mixed with small particles of glazing, and 
such food when eaten would injure the stomach. 
 
 
OYSTER CANAPES 
 
1 cup cream. 
4 tablespoonfuls of bread crumbs. 
1 tablespoonful of butter. 
3 dozen stewing oysters. 
 
Season with paprika, tiny pinch of nutmeg and salt. Boil the cream, 
add bread crumbs and butter. Chop oysters fine, add seasoning. Serve 
hot in pattie cups or on toast. Serve small pickles or olives. Good 
dish for chafing dish. 
 
 
MEAT 
 
Every young housewife should be taught that simmering is more
effective than violent boiling, which converts water into useless 
steam. Even a tough, undesirable piece of "chuck" or "pot roast" may 
be made more tender and palatable by long-continued simmering than it 
would be if put in rapidly boiling water and kept boiling at that 
rate. Meat may be made more tender also by being marinated; that is, 
allowing the meat to stand for some time in a mixture of olive oil and 
vinegar before cooking it. In stewing most meats a good plan is to put 
a large tablespoonful of finely-minced beef suet in the stew-pan; when 
fried out, add a little butter, and when sizzling hot add the meat, 
turn and sear on both sides to retain the juice in the meat, then add 
a little hot water and let come to a boil; then stand where the meat 
will just simmer but not slop cooking for several hours. The meat then 
should be found quite tender. Cheaper cuts of meat, especially, 
require long, slow cooking or simmering to make them tender, but are 
equally as nutritious as high-priced meats if properly prepared. 
 
To quote from _The Farmers  '   Bulletin_: "The number of appetizing 
dishes which a good cook can make out of the meat   '  left over  '   is 
almost endless. Undoubtedly more time and skill are required in their 
preparation than in the simple cooking of the more expensive cuts. The
baked and served as biscuits, over which the stew is poured. If the 
stew is made with chicken or veal it is termed a fricassee. 
 
This recipe tells of such an economical way of extending the meat 
flavor that I think every young housewife should know it. Mary copied 
it from _The Farmers  '   Bulletin_, an article on the "Economical Use of 
Meat in the Home." The dumplings, as she prepared them from this 
recipe, were regular fluff balls, they were so light and flaky. I 
would add, the cook-pot should be closely covered while cooking or 
steaming these dumplings, and the cover should not be raised for the 
first ten minutes. 
 
A lesser quantity of baking powder might be used with equally good 
results, but these dumplings are certain to be light and flaky. A 
larger quantity of baking powder should be used when dough is steamed 
or boiled than if dough is baked, if one expects good results. 
 
 
EXTENDING THE MEAT FLAVOR 

Mary learned, through reading _The Farmers  '   Bulletin_, different 
methods of extending the meat flavor through a considerable quantity 
of material, which would otherwise be lacking in distinctive taste, 
one way to serve the meat with dumplings, generally in the dish with 
it; to combine the meat with crusts, as in meat pies or meat rolls, or 
to serve the meat on toast or biscuits. Borders of rice, hominy or 
mashed potatoes are examples of the same principles, applied in 
different ways. 
 
By serving some preparation of flour, rice, hominy or other food, rich 
in starch, with the meat, we get a dish which in itself approaches 
nearer to the balanced ration than meat alone, and one in which the 
meat flavor is extended through a large amount of the material. 
 
The measurements given in the above recipes call for a level spoonful 
or a level cup, as the case may be. 
 
In many American families meat is eaten two or three times a day. In 
such cases, the simplest way of reducing the meat bill would be to 
cut down the amount used, either by serving it less often or by using
less at a time. Deficiency of protein need not be feared, when one 
good meat dish a day is served, especially if such nitrogenous 
materials as eggs, milk, cheese and beans are used instead. In 
localities where fish can be obtained fresh and cheap, it might well 
be more frequently substituted for meat for the sake of variety as 
well as economy. Ingenious cooks have many ways of "extending the 
flavor" of meat; that is, of combining a small quantity with other 
materials to make a large dish as in meat pies, stews and similar 
dishes. 
 
The foregoing information may be useful to other young, prospective 
housekeepers who may never have read "the very instructive articles on 
The Economical Use of Meat in the Home,  '   in the _Farmers  '   Bulletin_." 
 
 
PREPARING A POT ROAST 
 
When buying a pot roast, "Aunt Sarah" selected a thick, chunky piece 
of meat, weighing several pounds, and a small piece of beef suet which 
she cut into small bits, placed pan containing them on hot range,
added a small, sliced onion, and when fat was quite hot she added the 
quickly rinsed piece of meat, and quickly seared it to retain the 
juice; added 1 cup of hot water, a sprig of parsley, seasoning of salt 
and pepper; cooked a short time, then allowed it to stand on the range 
closely covered, where it would simmer gently several hours; turning 
the meat frequently, adding a small amount of water occasionally, as 
the broth was absorbed by the meat. An inexperienced cook will be 
surprised to find how tender, palatable, and equally nutritious, an 
inexpensive cut of meat may become by slow simmering. When the pot 
roast has become tender, remove from the broth and place on a _hot 
platter_; this latter is a small item, but dishes may be quickly 
heated in a hot oven and meat and vegetables are more appetizing if 
served hot on warmed plates. "Forgive this digression; I fear the pot 
roast will cool even on a warmed platter." After removing the meat 
from the pan add a large tablespoonful of flour, moistened with a 
small quantity of cold water, to the broth in the pan for gravy; cook 
until thickened, strain sliced onion and parsley from the broth, add 
seasoning of salt and pepper, serve on the platter with the meat; the 
onion added, gives the gravy a fine flavor and causes it to be a dark, 
rich brown in color.
To be tender this meat requires long, slow cooking, when it cooks and 
browns at the same time. Strain the broth and thicken for gravy and 
pour around the meat on platter when serving. 
 
 
"PAPRIKASH" 
 
Two pounds of veal, from leg, cut into small pieces for stewing; 4 
good-sized onions, cut rather fine; measure about 1/2 cup of sweet 
lard, place onions in pan with some of this lard and fry a light 
brown. Add meat and cook meat and onions together about one-half hour, 
adding lard gradually until all is used and the meat is golden brown. 
Then cover with water and stew, closely covered, about two hours or 
longer, until meat is ready to serve; then add more water until meat 
is covered. Season with salt and paprika. Add about three 
tablespoonfuls of vinegar (not too sour; cook must judge this by 
tasting); then add 1/2 pint of sweet cream. Thicken gravy with flour 
mixed smooth with a little water. Place on platter surrounded with 
gravy. With this was always served baked or steamed sweet potatoes. 

 
BEEF STEW 
 
Three pounds of the cheaper cut of beef, cut in pieces a couple inches 
square; brown in a stew-pan, with a sliced onion, a sprig of parsley 
and a coupe tablespoonfuls of sweet drippings or suet; cook a few 
minutes, add a little water, and simmer a couple of hours; add sliced 
turnips and a few medium-sized potatoes. Should there he a larger 
quantity of broth than required to serve with the meat and vegetables, 
a cup or more of the broth may form the basis of a palatable soup for 
lunch the following day. 
 
 
SAVORY BEEF ROLL 
 
Three and one-half pounds raw beef, or a mixture of beef and veal may 
be used, run through a food chopper. A cheap cut of meat may be used 
if, before chopping, all pieces of gristle are trimmed off. Place the 
chopped meat in a bowl, add 8 tablespoonfuls of fine, dried bread 
crumbs, 1 tablespoonful of pepper, 1-1/2 tablespoonfuls of salt. Taste
the meat before adding all the seasoning specified, as tastes differ. 
Add 3 raw eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls of sweet milk or cream, 2 
tablespoonfuls of butter, a little sweet marjoram or minced parsley. 
Mix all together and mold into two long, narrow rolls, similar to 
loaves of bread. Place 1 tablespoonful each of drippings and butter in 
a large fry-pan on the range. When heated, place beef rolls in, and 
when seared on both sides add a small quantity of hot water. Place the 
pan containing meat in a hot oven and bake one hour. Basting the meat 
frequently improves it. When catering to a small family serve one of 
the rolls hot for dinner; serve gravy, made by thickening broth in pan 
with a small quantity of flour. Serve the remaining roll cold, thinly 
sliced for lunch, the day following. 
 
 
VEAL CUTLETS 
 
Use either veal chops or veal cutlets, cut in small pieces the size of 
chops; pound with a small mallet, sprinkle a little finely-minced 
onion on each cutlet, dip in beaten egg and bread crumbs, well 
seasoned with salt and pepper. Place a couple tablespoonfuls of a
salt and pepper. This is an economical way of using small pieces of 
dried beef not sightly enough to be served on the table. Serve with 
baked potatoes for lunch, or pour over slices of toasted bread, or 
over poached eggs for an appetizing breakfast dish. 
 
 
CREAMED SWEETBREADS 
 
Parboil sweetbreads in water 10 minutes. Remove stringy parts and dry 
on a napkin. Separate the sweetbreads into small pieces with a _silver 
knife_, never use _steel_, put in a stewpan with enough cream to 
cover, add butter, pepper and salt to taste. Flour enough to thicken a 
little, let all come to a boil. Fill small pattie shells with the 
mixture and serve hot. 
 
 
MEAT CROQUETTES 
 
2 cups finely chopped meat (beef or veal). 
1 tablespoonful butter.
 
After the rabbit has been skinned, and carefully cleaned, wash quickly 
and let stand over night in cold water to which salt has been added; 
also a pinch of red pepper. Place on the range in the morning (in a 
stew-pan with fresh warm water). When it comes to a boil, drain off, 
add one pint of hot water containing two sliced onions and a little 
ginger. This prevents the flavor of wild game, objectionable to some. 
When the meat has cooked tender, drain, dust pieces with flour, and 
brown quickly in a pan containing a couple tablespoonfuls of hot lard, 
butter, or drippings. 
 
If you wish the meat of the rabbit white, add a thin slice of lemon to 
the water when cooking meat. 
 
 
ROAST LAMB 
 
Select leg or loin, or if a larger roast is wanted, leg and loin 
together. Carefully rinse the piece of meat. Place in pan, dust 
lightly with pepper. Have the oven hot and place pan in without
pieces four good-sized, sweet, red peppers and a half teaspoon of 
finely chopped hot pepper, add to the fat remaining in the pan in 
which the chops were fried, and cook about ten minutes, until peppers 
are tender (stirring them frequently). When sufficiently cooked, add 
one tablespoon of vinegar, pepper and salt to taste, cook one minute 
longer and serve on the same dish with the chops. 
 
 
BOILED HAM 
 
When preparing to cook a ham, scrape, wash and trim it carefully. 
Place ham in a large cook pot or boiler, partly cover with cold water, 
let come to a boil, then move back on range where the water will 
merely simmer, just bubble gently around the edge of the boiler. A 
medium sized ham should be tender in five or six hours. When a fork 
stuck into the ham comes out readily, the ham is cooked. Take from the 
boiler and skin carefully, removing all the discolored portions of the 
smoked end, stick 2 dozen whole cloves into the thick fat, and 
sprinkle a couple tablespoonfuls of brown sugar and fine bread crumbs 
over top. Place in a very hot oven a short time, until the fat turns a
golden brown. Watch carefully to see that it does not scorch. When 
cold, slice thin and serve. Aunt Sarah frequently added a pint of 
cider to the water in which the ham was boiled. She said this improved 
the flavor of the ham. 
 
 
SLICED HAM 
 
When about to fry a slice of uncooked ham, do young housewives know 
how very much it improves the flavor of the ham if it is allowed to 
stand for ten or fifteen minutes in a platter containing a large 
teaspoonful of sugar and a little cold water? Turn several times, then 
wipe quite dry with a clean cloth and fry in a pan containing a little 
hot drippings and a very little butter (one-half teaspoonful) just 
enough to prevent its sticking to the pan. Do not fry as quickly as 
beefsteak. After a slice of ham has been cut from a whole ham, if lard 
be spread over the end of ham from which the slice has been cut, it 
will prevent the cut place from becoming mouldy. 
 

of chops in a perfect manner is the test of a good cook." 
 
 
HOME-MADE SAUSAGE 
 
Nine pounds of fresh pork (lean and fat intermixed as it comes). Cut 
meat in small pieces, run through a meat cutter. Sprinkle over the 
finely chopped meat 3 tablespoonfuls salt, 2 tablespoonfuls of black 
pepper, 4 tablespoonfuls of powdered sage if bought at a chemist  '  s. 
Aunt Sarah used but three tablespoonfuls of her own home-grown sage, 
as the flavor was much stronger than dried sage. Some folks add 2 
tablespoonfuls of summer savory, but Aunt Sarah did not care for the 
flavor. Cloves, mace and nutmeg may also be added if one likes 
highly-spiced food. This is a matter of taste. A good plan is to 
season the small pieces of meat before chopping, as this distributes 
the seasoning through the sausage. Fill well cleaned casings, with the 
finely chopped meat. Or form sausage into small pats, fry brown on 
both sides and serve with home-made buckwheat cakes. 
 

cold water. The water having been squeezed from the bread, it was 
added to the meat, as was also a small quantity of finely-minced onion 
or parsley, and either the yolk or while of 1 egg and a seasoning of 
salt and pepper. Add left-over gravy, to cause the mixture to be soft 
enough to form into small rolls or cakes, and fry in a pan containing 
a couple tablespoonfuls of sweet drippings. Mashed potatoes may be 
substituted for the bread with equally good results. The meat mixture 
may be formed into small cone shapes, dipped in egg, then rolled in 
fine bread crumbs and fried in deep fat. 
 
Very appetizing sandwiches may he made from cold pieces of fried ham, 
run through food chopper. Spread this on thinly-sliced, buttered 
bread, with a dish of prepared mustard, spread over the prepared ham. 
Small bits of boiled ham, which cannot be sliced, may also be used in 
this manner. 
 
The fat was cut from left-over pieces of roast beef (place a couple of 
tablespoonfuls of fat in a pan on the range until the fat has fried 
out), then add a little finely-minced onion and the beef cut in pieces 
the size of a small marble, brown in the fat a few minutes, then add a
small quantity of vinegar and water, and thicken to the consistency of 
cream (with a little flour moistened with cold water, before being 
added). This Aunt Sarah made frequently, being a frugal housewife, and 
called "Salmagundi." 
 
 
FOWL--ROAST CHICKEN OR TURKEY 
 
Singe the fowl, after it has been picked; then with a small vegetable 
brush quickly scrub it well, with luke-warm water. Do not let it lie 
in the water. When perfectly clean rinse in cold water, wipe dry, cut 
out the oil sack, remove craw from neck, draw the fowl, being careful 
not to break the gall in the process, as that would cause the meat, as 
well as giblets, to have a bitter taste. Take out the lungs, the 
spongy red pieces lying in crevices near the bones of the back, and 
pour cold water through the fowl until you have thoroughly rinsed and 
chilled it, and no blood remains inside. I think fowls should be 
rinsed thoroughly inside and outside with cold water (many good cooks 
to the contrary). Wipe the inside of the fowl perfectly dry with a 
clean cloth, and it is ready for the "filling." Separate the liver and
heart from entrails and cut open the piece containing the gizzard; 
wash the outer part, and put the giblets on to cook with a little hot 
water; if wanted to use with the filling. If the fowl is wanted to 
cook or steam the day following, do not cut in pieces and let stand in 
water over night, as I have known some quite good cooks to do, as that 
draws the flavor from the meat and makes it tasteless. If the giblets 
are not to be cooked and added to dressing, place them inside the 
fowl, tie feet together, and hang up in a cool place until wanted. 
When serving a turkey dinner with its accompaniments one finds so many 
things to be attended to in the morning, especially if the fowl is 
cooked on a Sunday. It will be found a great help to the cook to have 
the turkey or chicken stuffed with bread filling the day before it is 
to be roasted, ready to pop in the oven in the morning. 
 
 
BREAD FILLING AS AUNT SARAH PREPARED IT 
 
Chop the cold, cooked liver, heart and gizzard into tiny dice; add 
this to a bowl containing one quart of crumbled stale bread, seasoned 
with 1 teaspoonful of salt, 1/4 teaspoonful pepper, 1/2 of a small,
a couple tablespoonfuls of flour, mixed smooth with a little cold 
water. Let come to a boil, and add one teaspoonful of chopped parsley. 
Pour the chicken gravy over the platter containing the meat, or serve 
it in a separate bowl. Or you may quickly brown the pieces of stewed 
chicken which have been sprinkled with flour in a pan containing a 
little sweet drippings or butter. Should the chicken not be a very fat 
one, add yolk of one egg to the gravy. 
 
Or, instead of stewing the chicken, place in the upper compartment of 
a steamer, and steam until tender and serve. The day following that on 
which stewed or steamed chicken was served, small undesirable 
left-over pieces of the chicken were added (after being picked from 
the bones) to the gravy remaining from the day before, heated 
thoroughly and poured hot over a platter containing small baking 
powder biscuits broken in half or slices of toasted bread, which is 
economical, extending the meat flavor. 
 
 
VEGETABLES--WHITE POTATOES 

Potatoes are one of the most valuable of vegetables. White potatoes, 
after being pared, should be put in a stew-pan over the fire with a 
little boiling water, but not enough to cover them. The water should 
be kept boiling continuously. About thirty minutes from the time they 
commence boiling will be the time required for cooking potatoes of 
ordinary size. It spoils potatoes to have the water stop boiling even 
for a short time. Add half a teaspoonful of salt to the potatoes when 
partly boiled and when cooked sufficiently drain the water from them 
at _once_ and sprinkle a little salt over the dry potatoes. Close the 
lid of the stew-pan tightly, give it a quick shake, when the potatoes 
will he found dry and flaky. Mash fine with a potato masher, adding a 
tablespoonful of butter and a couple tablespoonfuls of milk. Let stand 
a minute on the hot range to heat the milk, then beat all together 
with a fork until creamy. Add more salt if necessary. That is quite 
important, as potatoes require considerable salt. Cover the potatoes 
with a cloth. Never allow to stand with the lid of the stew-pan over 
them, as it will draw moisture. Serve white potatoes as soon as 
possible after being cooked, as they are not appetizing when allowed 
to stand any length of time. 

allowed to steam a short time. 
 
 
BAKED CABBAGE 
 
A half head of cabbage was cut into small pieces and cooked in hot 
salted water until cabbage was tender. The water was drained from the 
boiled cabbage, which was placed in an agate pudding dish alternately 
with cream sauce composed of one cup of milk; one small tablespoonful 
of flour, 2 tablespoonfuls of butter, seasoned with salt and pepper. 
Sprinkle a few crumbs and place bits of the butter over top. Bake in 
oven about 25 minutes and serve hot. This dish is almost equal to 
cauliflower in flavor, especially if after the cabbage has cooked ten 
or fifteen minutes the water is drained from it and fresh substituted. 
And it is said, "Cauliflower is only cabbage with a college 
education." 
 
 
CRIMSON CREAMED BEETS 

tablespoon of butter cut in small pieces, stand in oven just long 
enough for the butter to melt. Or cut the beets in slices one-fourth 
of an inch thick and while still warm place in a bowl and pour over 
them half a cup of hot vinegar and water to which had been added one 
tablespoonful of sugar, a pinch of salt and pepper; serve cold. 
 
 
PICKLED MANGELWURZEL 
 
A vegetable in taste, similar to very sweet, red beets in shape, 
greatly resembling carrots. Wash the mangelwurzel and place in a 
stew-pan with boiling water and cook until tender (allow about an inch 
of top to remain when preparing to cook). Skin the mangelsurzel, slice 
and pour over the following, which has been heated in a stew-pan over 
the fire: One cup of vinegar and water combined, one tablespoonful of 
sugar, one teaspoonful of salt, a dust of pepper. Stand aside until 
cold then serve. Or serve hot like buttered beets. Some "Bucks 
County" farmers raise mangelwurzel simply to feed to their cattle, but 
Aunt Sarah preferred them when young and tender to beets, and always 
raised them for her table.
 
 
GERMAN STEAMED CABBAGE 
 
Cut one-half head of cabbage fine on a slaw cutter. Place in a 
stew-pan over fire, with about four tablespoonfuls of water, one 
tablespoonful of butter, a couple tablespoonfuls of flour, one 
teaspoonful of sugar and a pinch of salt. Cover and steam twenty 
minutes. Then add three tablespoons of vinegar. Stir in one beaten 
egg. Cover and let stand where it will keep hot until ready to serve. 
 
 
BEAN "SNITZEL" 
 
Place in a pan on the range one tablespoon of diced, smoked bacon, fry 
a few minutes, watch closely it does not scorch. Add one tablespoonful 
of sweet lard, when hot, add four thinly sliced, medium-sized onions 
and four chopped tomatoes and 1-1/2 quarts of string beans, cut in 
inch lengths. Season with salt and a pinch of red pepper. Simmer all 
together three hours. After cooking one hour add about one cup of hot
water, stirring occasionally to prevent scorching, add a little more 
water if necessary; when beans are tender and ready to serve there 
should be a small quantity of liquid, resembling tomato sauce, with 
the beans. 
 
 
BOILED SPINACH 
 
Wash one-half peck of spinach thoroughly through a half dozen waters, 
until free from sand. Place in a stew-pan containing a small quantity 
of _boiling_ water and one teaspoon of butter. Cook until tender, 
drain, chop fine. Place a large tablespoonful of butter in stew-pan 
and when hot add chopped spinach, season with salt and pepper; serve 
in a warmed dish, garnished with either chopped or sliced hard boiled 
eggs. A German cook, noted for the fine flavor of her cooked spinach 
and green peas, said her secret consisted in adding a teaspoon of 
butter to the vegetables while cooking. 
 
 
FRIED ONIONS AND POTATOES                    ]	0  	well-scrubbed, heavy stone on the board to weight it down. Stand the 
tub in a warm place several days, to ferment. When fermentation 
begins, the liquor rises over the top of the board. Remove the scrum 
which rises to top, in about six days, and stand in a cool part of the 
cellar after washing stone and cloth with cold water, return to top of 
kraut and in two weeks the sauer kraut will be ready to use. Should 
the sauer kraut require extra liquid at any time, add one quart of 
water in which has been dissolved two teaspoonfuls of salt. Squeeze 
the sauer kraut quite dry when taking it from the brine to cook. Boil 
about two quarts of the sauer kraut several hours with a piece of 
fresh pork and a little water until the pork is thoroughly cooked 
through, when the sauer kraut should be cooked tender. 
 
Some prefer "frankfurters" cooked with the kraut instead of pork, and 
others do not care for the German dish without the accompaniment of 
drop dumplings. Serve mashed potatoes and simple dessert with sauer 
kraut. 
 
Aunt Sarah taught Mary to save the hearts of the cabbage usually 
thrown aside when making sauer kraut. The hearts were trimmed all one
size, like small triangles. She cooked them in salted water until 
tender, drained them and served with a cream dressing, and they had 
much the flavor of a dish of cauliflower. 
 
Frau Schmidt always placed several tart apples among her sauer kraut 
when making it, and thought it improved the flavor of the kraut; gave 
it a "winey" flavor, obtained in no other manner. A sour apple, cored 
and cooked with sauer kraut is considered by some cooks an 
improvement. The apple, of course, is not eatable. Aunt Sarah _never_ 
placed apples with her sauer kraut. 
 
 
DUMPLINGS TO SERVE WITH SAUER KRAUT 
 
For these dumplings, 1 egg was broken into a bowl and well beaten. 
Then a pinch of salt was added and 1/2 cup of sweet milk. Enough flour 
was added to make a soft dough, and one tablespoonful of baking powder 
was sifted with a very little flour into the batter, then a little 
more flour was added to make the dough the right consistency. Form the 
dough into small balls, handling as little as possible. Drop on top of                 ]	0  	 
Squash about 30 minutes. 
 
Parsnips, 30 to 40 minutes. 
 
Sweet potatoes, good size, 40 minutes. 
 
Spinach, 25 minutes. 
 
Tomatoes, 25 minutes. 
 
Salt should be added to the water when boiling potatoes, carrots, 
cabbage, parsnips, turnips and onions, even if liquid in which they 
were boiled is drained from them after being cooked, before being 
seasoned. Add a small pinch of baking soda to the water in which 
string beans are boiled, and they will cook tender in less time. 
Especially should this be done if the beans are not young and tender. 
 
 
COMMON "CREAM SAUCE"
 
Young housekeepers will be surprised to learn of the various 
attractive, appetizing dishes which may be prepared by combining them 
with a "cream sauce." After cooking vegetables until tender in salted 
water, they should be drained and served with a cream sauce poured 
over. The art of making a smooth, creamy sauce of the proper 
consistency is easily acquired. A good rule for "common cream sauce" 
is 1 cup of milk, water, or meat broth, thickened with 1 tablespoonful 
to 1-1/2 tablespoonfuls of flour, or a combination of flour and 
cornstarch. Mix flour, or cornstarch, with a small quantity of cold 
milk or water, to a smooth paste, before adding it to liquid; add, 
usually, one tablespoonful of butter. Place the mixture in a saucepan 
and cook until the consistency of cream, add 1/2 teaspoonful of salt 
just before removing from the fire, and dust pepper over when serving. 
When mixing gravy to serve with roast beef or veal, omit butter. For a 
thick sauce use either 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls of flour and the same 
amount of butter. This thick sauce may be used to mix with meat for 
croquettes in the proportion of 1 cup of sauce to 2 cups of chopped 
cold roast lamb, beef, veal or chicken. Should a richer sauce be 
desired, add 1 or more yolks of eggs to the cream sauce. Some of the
numerous dishes which might be served by the young housewife to vary 
the daily bill of fare by the addition of "cream sauce," are: Small, 
new potatoes, cauliflower, onions, cabbage asparagus tips, thinly 
sliced carrots, celery, mushrooms, fish, oysters, chicken, veal and 
sweetbreads. All of these, when coked, may be served on slices of 
toasted bread, or served in Pattie-cases, with cream sauce, or served 
simply with cream sauce. 
 
 
PREPARATION OF SAVORY GRAVIES 
 
The art of preparing savory gravies and sauces is more important in 
connection with the serving of the cheaper meats than in connection 
with the cooking of the more expensive cuts. 
 
There are a few general principles underlying the making of all sauces 
or gravies, whether the liquid used is water, milk, stock, tomato 
juice or some combination of these. For ordinary gravy, 2 level 
tablespoonfuls of flour or 1-1/2 tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, or 
arrow root, is sufficient to thicken a cup of liquid. This is true
begins to scorch. Overheated fat, as has already been pointed out, 
contains an acrid, irritating substance called   '  Acrolein,  '   which may 
readily be considered to be unwholesome. It is without doubt the 
production of this body by overheating which has given fried food its 
bad name. There are several ways of varying the flavor of gravies and 
sauces. One should be especially mentioned here. The _flavor of 
browned flour_--The good flavor of browned flour is often overlooked. 
If flour is cooked in fat, until it is a dark brown color, a 
distinctive and very agreeable flavor is obtained. 
 
"This flavor combines very well with that of currant jelly, and a 
little jelly added to a brown gravy is a great improvement. The flavor 
of this should not be combined with that of onions or other 
highly-flavored vegetables." 
 
 
BUTTER, CHEESE AND SUET--A SUBSTITUTE FOR BUTTER 
 
This formula for preparing a good, sweet, wholesome substitute for 
butter to be used for baking and frying was given Aunt Sarah by a
thrifty German hausfrau, who prepared and used it in her large family 
many years. Aunt Sarah always kept a supply on hand. It was made as 
follows: 
 
10 pounds of fine solid kidney suet. 
10 pounds of clean pork fat. 
10 pounds of butter. 
 
The suet cut in small pieces was put in a large boiler of water, 
boiled until all was melted, and the fat extracted from the suet. It 
was then all poured through a fine sieve into a vessel containing hot 
water (the larger the quantity of hot water the finer the fat will 
be). Stand aside to become cold and solid. The boiling process 
prevents the peculiar taste which _fried_ lard and suet usually 
possess. Treat the pork fat in a similar manner. Allow the suet and 
pork fat to stand until the following morning, when remove the solid 
fat from the boiler of water, wipe off all moisture and add both pork 
fat and suet fat to the melted butter, which had been prepared in the 
following manner: The butter was melted in a porcelain lined boiler 
and allowed to cook until all salt and other foreign substance had
settlings of butter remaining and go through the same process and you 
will have a small jar of cooking fat for immediate use. A little 
trouble to do this, I admit, but one is well paid by having good, 
sweet, inexpensive cooking fat. I should advise a young housekeeper to 
experiment with one pound each of clarified suet and pork fat after it 
is rendered, and one pound of butter before attempting the preparation 
of a larger quantity. 
 
 
BUTTER--AS IT WAS MADE AT THE FARM, BY "AUNT SARAH" 
 
Aunt Sarah strained fresh, sweet milk into small, brown earthenware 
crocks kept for this purpose, scrupulously clean. The crocks were kept 
in the spring-house or cellar in summer (in cold weather the milk 
should be kept in a warmer place to allow cream to form on the top of 
the milk). When the cream was thick and sour she skimmed the cream 
from off the top of milk every day, stirring the cream well together 
every time she added fresh cream to that on hand. Aunt Sarah churned 
twice a week; sour cream should not be kept a longer time than one 
week. The churn was scalded with boiling water, then rinsed with cold[                    ]	0  	water; this prevented the butter adhering to the churn. The cream 
should be at a temperature of 60 degrees when put in the churn, but 
this would be almost too cold in Winter. In very hot weather the 
temperature of the cream should be 56 degrees. Aunt Sarah tested the 
cream with a small dairy tube thermometer. She churned steadily and 
usually had butter "come" in about 25 minutes, but should the cream he 
too cold or too warm it would be necessary to churn a longer time. If 
the cream is too warm, stand vessel containing cream on ice; if too 
cold, stand in a warm place near the range. When the sour cream had 
been churned a certain length of time and granules of butter had 
formed, she drained off the buttermilk and poured water over the 
granules of butter. Water should be two degrees colder than the 
buttermilk. After churning a few minutes the lump of butter was 
removed from the churn, placed in a bowl, washed thoroughly several 
times in very cold water, until no buttermilk remained. The butter was 
worked thoroughly, with a wooden paddle, until all buttermilk had been 
extracted. One small tablespoonful of salt was added to each pound of 
butter. She worked the butter well, to incorporate the salt, and 
molded it into shape. Aunt Sarah did not knead the butter, but 
smoothed it down, then lifted it up from the large, flat, wooden bowl
equal quantity of other shortening in making cakes in which spices are 
used. The difference in the taste of cake made from this fat, if 
rendered sweet and clean, will not be noticed. Equal parts of ham or 
bacon fat, pork chops or sausage fat, combined with butter, are 
excellent for frying cornmeal mush, eggs, sweet potatoes, egg bread 
and calves  '   liver. Also sliced tomatoes have a particularly fine 
flavor if fried in bacon fat. Should fat removed from top of stock pot 
have a flavor of vegetables, pour boiling water over, strain and stand 
aside to cool; then remove the clean cake of fat on top of the water 
and add to bowl of drippings. This is one of the small economies which 
will, I think, appeal to the frugal young housewife. If possible, 
procure an iron pot for deep frying. After using, strain the fat 
remaining, adding sediment in the bottom of cook-pot to the can of 
soap fat; then return the clean, strained fat to the cook pot. Keep in 
a cool place, closely covered, and if careful not to scorch the fat. 
It may be used over and over again, and croquettes, etc., may be 
prepared in a few moments by simply heating the kettle of fat in which 
to fry them. 
 
Aunt Sarah frequently filled small glass jars with rendered mutton[                    ]	0  	oven until lightly browned on top. The omelette when cooked should be 
light and puffy, and remain so while being served. Double the omelette 
together on a hot platter and sprinkle finely chopped parsley over the 
top. Serve immediately. 
 
 
HARD BOILED EGGS 
 
Eggs to be hard boiled should be carefully placed in boiling water 
and cooked 15 minutes from the time the water commences to boil again. 
If cooked a longer time, the white of egg will look dark and the outer 
part of yolk will not be a clear yellow, as it should, to look 
appetizing when served. 
 
 
SOFT BOILED EGGS 
 
The quicker way to prepare eggs is to drop them in a stew-pan 
containing boiling water, and let boil 3-1/2 to 4 minutes, when the 
white part of the egg should be "set" and the yolk soft, but a soft
boiled egg is said to be more easily digested if dropped into a 
stew-pan of rapidly boiling water; remove the stew-pan of boiling 
water the minute the eggs have been put in from the front part of the 
range to a place where the water will keep hot, but not allow the eggs 
to boil. Let the eggs remain in the hot water from 8 to 10 minutes. On 
breaking the egg open, the yolk will be found soft, and the white of 
the egg a soft, jelly-like consistency. This latter is the way Aunt 
Sarah taught Mary. 
 
 
AN EGG AND TOMATO OMELETTE 
 
Beat the yolks of three eggs until light, then add three 
tablespoonfuls of water. Beat the whites of the eggs separately. Turn 
the stiffly-beaten whites of the eggs into the bowl containing the 
yolks of eggs and water. Stir lightly together and add a pinch of 
salt. Turn all into a small fry-pan containing a generous 
tablespoonful of butter and cook on top of stove until the eggs are 
set, then place the pan containing omelette in a hot oven and finish 
cooking. When cooked, turn out on a hot platter and spread over the
top the following, which was prepared while the omelette was cooking. 
In a small fry-pan place a tablespoonful of finely-chopped bacon. When 
fried brown add half a small tomato, finely chopped, 1/4 of an onion, 
chopped fine, and a little chopped green pepper. Cook all together for 
a short time and season with salt and pepper. After spreading the 
mixture on the omelette, fold over and serve on a hot platter. This 
recipe had been given Frau Schmidt years before by a friend and she 
used no other for making omelette. Always make small omelettes. They 
are more satisfactory. Use a small pan no larger than a small tea 
plate, and, if wished, make two small, rather than one large one. 
Always serve immediately. 
 
 
MUSHROOM OMELETTE 
 
Place the yolks of three eggs in a bowl and beat until light. Add a 
teaspoonful of cream and 1/2 teaspoonful of flour mixed together; 1/2 
cup of chopped mushrooms, salt and pepper and a dust of baking powder. 
Lastly, the stiffly-beaten whites of the eggs. Turn into a pan 
containing two tablespoonfuls of melted butter, stand on range a few
minutes until eggs are set, then finish cooking in a hot oven. Serve 
at once. 
 
A few cold, steamed mushrooms (left-overs), if finely chopped, and 
added to a plain omelette or roast, will improve the flavor. 
 
 
A CLAM OMELETTE 
 
Two eggs beaten separately, 1 scant cup of milk, 1 tablespoonful of 
flour, 6 clams run through a food-chopper. Place in a bowl the 
tablespoon of flour and mix smooth with a little of the milk. Then add 
the two yolks of eggs and beat well together. Add the milk, salt and 
pepper, the chopped clams, and lastly the stiffly-beaten whites of 
eggs, and add a trifle more flour, if necessary. Drop a couple of 
tablespoons at a time in a large fry-pan containing a couple of 
tablespoons of butter or drippings. They spread out about the size of 
a small saucer. Fry as many at a time as the pan will conveniently 
hold without running together. Turn when browned lightly on one side, 
and when the other side has cooked fold together and serve at once.
Garnish with parsley. These are very easily made for luncheon, and are 
very nice served with fried chicken. 
 
 
DEVILED EGGS 
 
Boil half a dozen eggs until hard. Remove shells, cut in halves, mash 
the yolks to a smooth paste with about 1/2 teaspoon mixed mustard, 1 
teaspoon softened butter, pepper and salt to taste. Some like a small 
quantity of cold boiled minced ham added. When ingredients are well 
mixed, press enough of this mixture into the cup-shaped whites of eggs 
to form a rounding top. Serve on a platter of parsley. To boil eggs 
uniformly, they should be placed in a wire basket and plunged into 
boiling water and boiled not longer than 15 to 20 minutes from time 
water commences to boil, then pour cold water over and shell them. 
 
 
EGGS IN CREAM SAUCE 
 
Four eggs, boiled hard, cut in halves lengthwise, then across, each. Dressing" could be used over the chicken, celery, etc. This is a very 
old but an excellent recipe used by Aunt Sarah  '  s mother for many 
years. 
 
 
PEPPER HASH 
 
Chop fine with a knife, but do not shred with a slaw cutter, 1 pint of 
finely chopped cabbage, adding 1 teaspoonful of salt, 2 teaspoonfuls 
of sugar, 1 teaspoonful of whole mustard seed, 1/2 a chopped red, 
sweet pepper, a pinch of red cayenne pepper and 1/2 pint of vinegar. 
Mix all well together and serve with fried oysters, oyster stew and 
deviled oysters. 
 
This "pepper hash" is delicious if a couple tablespoonfuls of thick 
cream be added just before serving. 
 
Should very sour cider vinegar be used in this recipe, the housewife 
will, of course, dilute it with water. 

 
GERMAN BEAN SALAD 
 
Use small green or yellow string-beans, which snap when broken, called 
by some "snap beans." String them carefully. (If quite small and 
tender this should not be necessary.) Rub well with the hands through 
several waters. This removes the strong bean taste. Have your kettle 
half filled with boiling water on the range over a brisk fire. Put a 
tablespoon of butter in the water, add beans by handfuls until all are 
in and cook until tender. Turn the beans in a colander to drain. When 
cool add a chopped onion, salt and pour enough good vinegar over to 
cover, and allow to stand two days, when strain vinegar from beans. 
Boil vinegar, add water if vinegar is quite sour and pour hot over 
the beans. Fill quart glass jars with the beans and pour vinegar over, 
within an inch of top of jar; pour pure olive oil over top of beans, 
screw on jar covers tightly and stand in a cool place until wanted to 
use. In the winter, when fresh salads were scarce, Aunt Sarah opened a 
can of these beans. If they were very sour she poured cold water over, 
allowed to stand an hour, drained and added a little fresh olive oil. 
Every one called her "bean salat," as the Pennsylvania Germans call
it, delicious. The instructions regarding the preparing and cooking of 
string beans for salad will answer for beans used as a vegetable, 
omitting vinegar, of course. There is a great difference in the manner 
of cooking vegetables. Aunt Sarah always added an onion and a sprig of 
parsley when cooking beans to serve as a vegetable. 
 
 
MEAT SALADS 
 
To quote from the _Farmers  '   Bulletin_: "Whether meat salads are 
economical or not depends upon the way in which the materials are 
utilized. If in chicken salad, for example, only the white meat of 
chicken, especially bought for the purpose, and only the expensive 
inside stems of expensive celery are used, it can hardly be cheaper 
than plain chicken. But, if portions of meat left over from a previous 
serving are mixed with celery grown at home, they certainly make an 
economical dish, and one very acceptable to most persons. Cold roast 
pork or tender veal, in fact, any white meat, can be utilized in the 
same way. Apples cut into cubes may be substituted for part of the 
celery. Many cooks consider that with the apple the salad takes the
place in covered cans, then no egg will be needed when preparing 
coffee. As a substitute for cream, use yolk of fresh egg mixed with a 
couple tablespoonfuls of milk. 
 
 
COCOA 
 
Mix four tablespoonfuls of cocoa to a smooth paste with one cup of 
boiling water. Add one more cup boiling water and boil fifteen or 
twenty minutes. Add four tablespoonfuls of sugar, then add 4 cups of 
hot boiled milk. A few drops of essence of vanilla improves the 
flavor. Add a couple tablespoonfuls whipped cream on top of each cup 
when serving, or, instead of cream, place a marshmallow in each cup 
before pouring in cocoa. This quantity is for six cups of cocoa. 
 
 
CHOCOLATE 
 
One square of Baker  '  s unsweetened chocolate shaved thinly or grated, 
mixed to a smooth paste with 1 cup of boiling water. Boil from fifteen
to twenty minutes. Add 1 cup of boiling milk and 2 even tablespoonfuls 
of sugar. Flavor with a few drops of vanilla, if liked, and add 
whipped cream to each cup when serving. This is for 2 cups of 
chocolate. 
 
 
BOILED WATER 
 
It sometimes becomes necessary to boil drinking water, which usually 
has a flat, insipid taste. Do young housewives know it is said that 
after water has been boiled and when quite cool if a bottle be half 
filled and shaken well the water will become aerated, and have the 
taste of fresh spring water? 
 
 
TEA 
 
To make tea always scald the teapot, which should be agate, 
earthenware or china, never metal. Always use water that has been 
_freshly_ boiled, and use it boiling hot. Never, under any
circumstances, boil tea, as tannin is then extracted from the leaves, 
and the tea will have a bitter taste. Do not allow tea to stand any 
length of time unless strained from tea leaves. Use one teaspoon of 
tea for each cup, unless liked stronger, when add one extra teaspoon 
to each three cups of tea. Some contend that tea is better, if at 
first a small quantity of boiling water is poured over the leaves, 
allowing it to steep three minutes--then pour over the remaining 
quantity of boiling water and let stand about four minutes, when it is 
ready to serve with cream and sugar, if liked. Should any tea remain 
after serving do not throw away, but strain at once from tea leaves 
and when cool place in a glass jar in refrigerator to be used as iced 
tea. 
 
 
ICED TEA 
 
For two quarts of delicious iced tea, place in an agate teapot one 
generous tablespoon of good tea (never buy a cheap, inferior grade of 
tea). Pour over the tea leaves one quart of freshly boiled, scalding 
hot water; let stand five minutes, keep hot (not boil), strain from
the leaves into a pitcher, then pour over the tea leaves another quart 
of hot water, allow it to stand a few minutes, then strain as before. 
Add the juice of one lemon and sugar to taste. When cooled stand on 
ice and add chipped ice to tumblers when serving. 
 
 
PUDDINGS 
 
To boil a pudding in a bag, dip the bag, which should be made of thick 
cotton or linen, in hot water, dredge the inside well with flour 
before putting batter into the bag. When the pudding has boiled a long 
enough time, dip the bag quickly in cold water, and the pudding will 
turn out easily. Allow five large eggs to 1 quart of milk usually to 
make custard solid enough to keep its shape when turned from the mold. 
One teaspoonful of extract will flavor one quart. Always stand 
individual cups in a pan partly filled with hot water. Place pan 
containing custard cups in a moderate oven and bake slowly forty 
minutes. Always sift flour over beef suet when chopping it to be used 
in puddings. Pour boiling water over Pecans (nuts), allow to stand 
several hours. When cracked, the shell may be easily removed, leaving
RICE PUDDING 
 
One of the simplest and cheapest of desserts depends partly on the 
quality of the ingredients used, but chiefly on the manner of making 
for its excellence. If prepared according to directions, you will have 
a pudding both rich and creamy. Use 1 quart of good sweet milk (do not 
use either skimmed milk or water), 3 tablespoonfuls of whole uncoated 
rice (no more), 2-1/2 tablespoonfuls of sugar, pinch of salt, vanilla 
or almond flavoring. 
 
Wash the rice well, mix all together in a pudding dish, bake from 
2-1/2 to 3 hours in an oven with a slow, even heat. When a skin forms 
on the top of the pudding, carefully stir through the rice. Do this 
frequently. This gives the pudding a rich, creamy consistency. When 
grains of rice are tender allow pudding to brown over top and serve 
either hot or cold. Raisins may be added, if liked, or raisins may be 
stewed separately and served with the rice, which many think a great 
improvement to the pudding. Many think rice pudding should always be 
flavored with grated nutmeg. Aunt Sarah, while using nutmeg flavoring 
in various other dishes, never used it for her rice pudding.
 
 
AN ECONOMICAL BREAD AND APPLE PUDDING 
 
Into a well-buttered pudding dish put a layer of sliced sour apples. 
On the top of these a layer of stale bread crumbs with small bits of 
butter and sugar sprinkled over them, more sliced apples and bread 
crumbs, having the crumbs for the top layer. To about three apples use 
1 cup of bread crumbs, 1/2 cup sugar, piece of butter size of walnut 
and bake in oven until apples are tender. Serve with cream. 
 
 
CUP CUSTARDS 
 
1 quart of sweet milk. 
5 large eggs. 
3 tablespoons sugar. 
Grated nutmeg or vanilla flavoring. 
 
Scald milk. Beat whites of eggs separately. Add milk when cooled to
the beaten yolks. Add sugar and flavoring. Stir in stiffly beaten 
whites of eggs, pour into custard cups, stand them in a dripping pan 
half filled with boiling water. Stand the pan in a moderate oven about 
twenty minutes, or until custard is "set." This quantity fills about 
eight small custard cups. The water surrounding the custard cups 
should not be allowed to boil, but the custard should cook slowly. 
 
Grate nutmeg thickly over top of each custard before placing in the 
oven. Scalding the milk before using improves the custard. 
 
 
FRAU SCHMIDT  '  S GRAHAM PUDDING 
 
Sift into a bowl 1/4 cup of pastry flour and 1 teaspoonful of baking 
powder. Add 1 cup Graham flour, pinch of salt and 1/2 cup granulated 
sugar. Mix all thoroughly, then add 1/2 cup of finely chopped kidney 
suet. Add 1 cup of seedless raisins mixed with one extra tablespoonful 
of white flour. Mix into a batter with 1 cup of sweet milk, to which 
add yolk of one egg. Lastly, add the stiffly beaten white of egg. 
Flavor with either a little grated nutmeg or essence of vanilla.
 
Make a strong, unbleached muslin bag 7 by 12 inches. Pour the batter 
into the bag, which had been previously dipped in cold water, the 
inside of the bag sifted over with flour, and tie bag at top with a 
string, allowing room for the pudding to swell. Place the bag in the 
perforated compartment of a steamer, over boiling water, and boil 
continuously 1-1/2 hours, or longer, without removing lid of steamer 
oftener than absolutely necessary. 
 
Serve Graham Pudding hot with sauce used for "cottage pudding," or 
serve simply with sugar and cream, or a sauce may be served composed 
of 1/2 cup of pulverized sugar, creamed with 1/4 cup of butter. Add 1 
tablespoonful of lemon juice or flavor with vanilla. Stand sauce in a 
cool place a short time and serve cold on hot pudding. 
 
 
SPONGE BREAD PUDDING 
 
Place 1-3/4 cups of soft stale (either white or graham) bread crumbs 
in a pudding dish. Pour 2 cups of hot milk over the crumbs, cover with
a plate and allow it to stand about thirty minutes, then add yolks of 
2 eggs, 1/2 teaspoonful of salt, 1 tablespoonful of sugar and grated 
yellow rind of orange or lemon for flavoring. Beat the mixture until 
perfectly smooth, add the stiffly beaten whites of two eggs. Bake in a 
moderately hot oven. Serve hot with the following sauce: 
 
SAUCE. 
 
Three large tablespoonfuls of pulverized sugar and 1 tablespoonful of 
butter were beaten together until smooth and creamy, 1 teaspoonful of 
lemon juice was added. The sauce, when quite cold, was served with the 
warm pudding. 
 
 
AUNT SARAH  '  S COTTAGE PUDDING 
 
Cream together 1 cup of sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls of butter, 1 egg, 
white beaten separately, and added last, 1 cup of sweet milk, pinch of 
salt, 2 cups of flour, sifted with 2 heaping teaspoonfuls of Royal 
baking powder, 1/2 cup of dried currants, well floured. Add stiffly
beaten white of egg. Bake in a small oblong bread pan. 
 
 
SAUCE. 
 
One cup of milk, 1/2 cup of water, 1 large teaspoonful of butter, a 
scant tablespoonful of flour moistened with a small quantity of water, 
before adding. Sweeten to taste, add 1/2 teaspoonful of grated nutmeg. 
Cook all together a few minutes, allow the mixture to partly cool, 
then stir in the yolk of one egg; stand on stove to heat, but not to 
cook. Serve hot over freshly baked, warm cottage pudding, cut in 
squares. 
 
 
APPLE "STRUDEL" 
 
Aunt Sarah pared and quartered six medium-sized tart apples, placed in 
the bottom of an agate pudding dish, poured over them one cup of hot 
water and 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar. She allowed this to stand on the 
range and cook while she mixed the following dough.
bake quickly until crust is a light brown. Serve on individual dishes, 
placing over each a couple tablespoonfuls of the following sauce. The 
combined flavor of rhubarb and vanilla is delicious. 
 
 
VANILLA SAUCE FOR RHUBARB PUDDING. 
 
Beat 1 egg very light, add 1 cup of light brown sugar and 1 teaspoon 
of vanilla flavoring. Beat all together until foamy. Serve at once, 
cold, on the hot pudding. 
 
 
RICE CUSTARD 
 
Add 1 cup of cold boiled rice to 2 cups of sweet milk, mix together 
slowly. Add 1/4 cup sugar, the well-beaten yolks of 2 eggs, let all 
cook together a few minutes. Remove custard from the fire and pour 
over the stiffly-beaten whites of two eggs. Beat well with an 
egg-beater. Place in a glass dish and serve cold. 

"BUCKWHEAT MINUTE" PUDDING 
 
Pour three cups of milk in a stew-pan, place on range and let come to 
a boil. Then stir slowly into the boiling milk 1-1/4 cups of buckwheat 
flour and 1/4 teaspoonful of salt. Keep stirring constantly until a 
thick mush. Serve at once with sugar and cream. I have never eaten 
this pudding anywhere except in "Bucks County." It is cheap, quickly 
and easily prepared and well liked by many country folk in Bucks 
County. 
 
 
PEACH TAPIOCA 
 
One cup of tapioca soaked in 1 quart of cold water several hours. 
Place in stew-pan, set on stove and cook until clear. Add sugar to 
taste and 1 pint can of peaches. Boil two or three minutes, remove 
from range and pour into the dish in which it is to be served. Stand 
aside to cool. 
 

AUNT SARAH  '  S PLAIN BOILED PUDDING 
 
One cup of beef suet chopped fine or run through a food-chopper, 1/2 
cup sour milk, 1 egg, 1 teaspoonful soda, pinch of salt. 1/2 cup 
sugar, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon, 1 cup raisins, seeded and floured. 
Flour enough to make as stiff as ordinary cake batter. Boil or steam 
in a muslin bag three hours. This is a very inexpensive and good 
pudding. Dust a small quantity of flour over suet before chopping. 
Serve with the following sauce: 
 
PUDDING SAUCE. 
 
One large tablespoonful of butter, 1 teacup water, 1/2 teacup milk, 
scant tablespoonful of flour, grated nutmeg to flavor. Sweeten to 
taste, add a pinch of salt. Cook and let cool. Beat up yolk of egg, 
add to sauce, stand on back of stove to heat, not cook. Serve hot over 
the pudding. 
 
 
APPLE TAPIOCA
 
Pour 1 pint of cold water over 1/2 cup tapioca. Allow to stand until 
the following morning, when cook until clean. Slice 6 tart apples. 
Place in bottom of pudding dish, strew sugar over, then pour over the 
tapioca; place over this a layer of thinly sliced apples over which 
dust sugar. Place in oven and bake until the apples are cooked. Serve 
with sugar and cream. Several thin slices of lemon added before baking 
impart a fine flavor. 
 
 
STEAMED WALNUT PUDDING 
 
Place in a bowl 1/2 cup butter and 1 cup of granulated sugar. Beat to 
a cream. Add yolks of 2 eggs and 1/2 cup of syrup molasses or maple 
syrup, in which had been dissolved 1 teaspoonful baking soda. Then add 
1 cup sweet milk, alternately, with about 3-1/2 cups flour, 1/2 cup of 
walnut meats, run through food-chopper or crushed with rolling pin, 
3/4 cup of seeded raisins, 1/2 teaspoonful ground cinnamon, 1/2 
teaspoonful grated nutmeg, 1/4 teaspoonful ground cloves, a pinch of 
salt and the stiffly beaten whites of the two eggs.
3 well-beaten eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls of sugar and a pinch of salt. 
Beat all well together. Place in a pan and bake 1 hour in a moderately 
hot oven. Serve hot with whipped cream and sugar or with a sauce made 
by beating to a cream a heaping tablespoonful of butter, 1 cup of 
granulated sugar, 1 egg and a very little vanilla flavoring. 
 
 
MARY  '  S CORN STARCH PUDDING 
 
1-1/2 quarts of milk. 
5 eggs. 
2 heaping tablespoonfuls of corn starch. 
1 scant cup of sugar. 
1 teaspoonful of vanilla. 
 
Pour milk in a double boiler and place on range to cook. Moisten 
cornstarch with a little cold milk and add to remainder of the milk 
when boiling hot. Stir thoroughly, then beat yolk of eggs and sugar 
until light, stir in stiffly beaten whites and when all are mixed stir 
into the scalding milk. Let come to a boil again and add vanilla or
almond flavoring. Pour into individual molds to cool. Serve cold with 
a spoonful of jelly or preserved strawberry with each serving. 
 
 
APPLE JOHNNY CAKE (SERVED AS A PUDDING) 
 
This is a good, cheap, wholesome pudding. 
 
1 cup corn meal. 
2 tablespoonfuls of sugar. 
1 teaspoonful of soda. 
1 tablespoonful of melted butter. 
1/4 teaspoonful of salt. 
2/3 cup flour. 
1 cup sour milk. 
 
Mix batter together as you would for cake, then add 4 pared, thinly 
sliced, tart apples to the batter. Stir all together. Bake in a quick 
oven in a bread pan and serve hot with cold cream and sugar. Raisins 
may be substituted for apples if preferred.[                    ]	0  	 
 
A GOOD AND CHEAP "TAPIOCA PUDDING" 
 
Soak over night in cold water 3 even tablespoonfuls of pearl tapioca. 
In the morning add tapioca to one quart of milk, 3 tablespoonfuls of 
sugar, a pinch of salt. Grate nutmeg over top. Bake in a moderate oven 
about three hours, stirring occasionally. 
 
 
"GOTTERSPEISE" 
 
Partly fill an earthenware pudding dish with pieces of sponge cake or 
small cakes called "Lady Fingers;" cut up with them a few macaroons. 
Place one pint of wine over fire to heat, add to the wine the 
following mixture, composed of 1 spoonful of cornstarch mixed smooth 
with a little water, 3 yolks of eggs and 3 spoonfuls of sugar. Mix all 
together and stir until thickened. Pour the thickened mixture over the 
cake. When cooled cover with the stiffly-beaten whites of the 3 eggs, 
spread sliced almonds thickly over top and brown in oven a few
 
"PENNSYLVANIA" PLUM PUDDING (FOR THANKSGIVING DAY) 
 
One cup milk, 2 eggs, 1 cup molasses, 1/2 teaspoonful nutmeg, 1/2 
teaspoonful salt, 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder, 1 cup bread crumbs, 
1/2 cup corn meal, 1 cup chopped beef suet, 1/4 cup finely minced 
citron, 1 cup seeded raisins, 1/2 cup currants. Flour to make a stiff 
batter. Steam fully three hours, turn from the mold, strew chopped 
almonds over top. Serve pudding hot with sauce for which recipe is 
given. 
 
Aunt Sarah invariably served this pudding on Thanksgiving Day, and all 
preferred it to old-fashioned "English Plum Pudding." 
 
 
SAUCE FOR PUDDING. 
 
Cream together 1 cup of pulverized sugar, scant 1/2 cup of butter, 
beat whites of 2 eggs in, one at a time, and one teaspoonful of lemon 
flavoring; stand on ice a short time before serving. Serve sauce very
cold. 
 
 
"SLICE" BREAD PUDDING 
 
Line the sides of a pudding dish holding two quarts with seven slices 
of stale bread from which crust had been removed. Beat together 3 
eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls of sugar and 3 cups of sweet milk (and add the 
juice and grated rind of one lemon, or half a grated nutmeg). Pour in 
the centre of pudding dish. With a spoon dip some of the custard over 
each slice of bread. Bake about 30 minutes and serve hot with the 
following sauce: 
 
One cup of water, 1/2 cup milk, 1 teaspoonful butter, scant 
tablespoonful of flour mixed smooth with a little water before adding 
it. Sweeten to taste, add grated nutmeg or vanilla to flavor. Cook all 
together, then add the yolk of one egg. Place on stove a minute to 
heat. Add a pinch of salt. Serve hot over the pudding in individual 
dishes. 

boiler to front part of range, and when breakfast is ready (after 
removing top crust formed by standing), turn the oatmeal out on a dish 
and serve with rich cream and sugar, and you will have a good, 
wholesome breakfast dish with the flakes distinct, and a nutty flavor. 
Serve fruit with it, if possible. A good rule for cooking oatmeal is 
in the proportion of 2-1/2 cups of water to 1 cup of oatmeal. 
 
The cereals which come ready prepared are taking the place of the 
old-time standby with which mothers fed their growing boys. If you 
wish your boys to have muscle and brawn, feed them oats. To quote an 
old physician, "If horses thrive on oats, why not boys who resemble 
young colts?" 
 
For example, look at the hardy young Scot who thrives and grows hearty 
and strong on his oatmeal "porritch." Chopped almonds, dates or figs 
may be added to oatmeal to make it more palatable. Use cup measuring 
1/2 pint for measuring cereals as well as every other recipe calling 
for one cup in this book. 
 

remaining may be placed in a small bake dish with an equal quantity of 
milk, a little sugar and flavoring, baked a short time in oven and 
served with a cup of stewed, seeded raisins which have slowly steamed, 
covered with cold water, on the back of the range, until soft and 
plump. 
 
 
CORN MEAL MUSH 
 
Place on the range a cook-pot containing 9 cups of boiling water (good 
measure). Sift in slowly 2 cups of yellow granulated corn meal, 
stirring constantly while adding the meal, until the mixture is smooth 
and free from lumps. Add 1-1/4 level teaspoonfuls of salt and 1/4 
teaspoonful of sugar, and cook a short time, stirring constantly, then 
stand where the mush will simmer, or cook slowly for four or five 
hours. 
 
Serve hot, as a porridge, adding 1/2 teaspoonful of butter to each 
individual bowl of hot mush and serve with it cold milk or cream. 
Should a portion of the mush remain after the meal, turn it at once,
while still hot, in an oblong pan several inches in depth, stand until 
quite cold. Cut in half-inch slices, sift flour over each slice and 
fry a golden brown in a couple tablespoonfuls of sweet drippings and 
butter. Or dip slices of mush in egg and bread crumbs and fry brown in 
the same manner. Some there are who like maple syrup or molasses 
served with fried mush. 
 
This proportion of corn meal and water will make porridge of the 
proper consistency and it will be just right to be sliced for frying 
when cold. Long, slow cooking makes corn meal much more wholesome and 
palatable, and prevents the raw taste of cornmeal noticeable in mush 
cooked too quickly. The small quantity of sugar added is not noticed, 
but improves the flavor of the mush. 
 
 
MACARONI 
 
In early spring, when the family tire of winter foods and it is still 
too early for vegetables from the home garden, and the high price of 
early forced vegetables in the city markets prevent the housewife, of
sterilized and if jars are air-tight these keep indefinitely. 
 
 
MARMALADES, PRESERVES AND CANNED FRUITS 
 
Young housewives, if they would be successful in "doing up fruit," 
should be very particular about sterilizing fruit jars, both tops and 
rubbers, before using. Heat the fruit to destroy all germs, then seal 
in air-tight jars while fruit is scalding hot. Allow jars of canned 
fruit or vegetables to stand until perfectly cold. Then, even should 
you think the tops perfectly tight, you will probably be able to give 
them another turn. Carefully run the dull edge of a knife blade around 
the lower edge of jar cap to cause it to fit tightly. This flattens it 
close to the rubber, making it air-tight. 
 
To sterilize jars and tops, place in a pan of cold water, allow water 
to come to a boil and stand in hot water one hour. 
 
For making jelly, use fruit, under-ripe. It will jell more easily, 
and, not being as sweet as otherwise, will possess a finer flavor. For
jelly use an equal amount of sugar to a pint of juice. The old rule 
holds good--a pound of sugar to a pint of juice. Cook fifteen to 
twenty minutes. Fruit juice will jell more quickly if the sugar is 
heated in the oven before being added. 
 
For preserving fruit, use about 3/4 of a pound of sugar to 1 pound of 
fruit and seal in air-tight glass jars. 
 
For canning fruit, use from 1/3 to 1/2 the quantity of sugar that you 
have of fruit. 
 
When making jelly, too long cooking turns the mixture into a syrup 
that will not jell. Cooking fruit with sugar too long a time causes 
fruit to have a strong, disagreeable flavor. 
 
Apples, pears and peaches were pared, cut in quarters and dried at the 
farm for Winter use. Sour cherries were pitted, dried and placed in 
glass jars, alternately with a sprinkling of granulated sugar. Pieces 
of sassafras root were always placed with dried apples, peaches, etc. 

cranberries, place in a stew-pan with 2 cups of water; cook quickly a 
few moments over a hot fire until berries burst open, then crush with 
a potato-masher. Press through a fine sieve or a fruit press, 
rejecting skin and seeds. Add 1 pound of sugar to the strained pulp in 
the stew-pan. Return to the fire and cook two or three minutes only. 
Long, slow cooking destroys the fine flavor of the berry, as does 
brown sugar. Pour into a bowl, or mold, and place on ice, or stand in 
a cool place to become cold before serving, as an accompaniment to 
roast turkey, chicken or deviled oysters. 
 
 
PRESERVED "YELLOW GROUND CHERRIES" 
 
Remove the gossamer-like covering from small yellow "ground cherries" 
and place on range in a stew-pan with sugar. (Three-fourths of a pound 
of sugar to one pound of fruit.) Cook slowly about 20 minutes, until 
the fruit looks clear and syrup is thick as honey. Seal in pint jars. 
 
These cherries, which grow abundantly in many town and country gardens 
without being cultivated, make a delicious preserve and a very
appetizing pie may be made from them also. 
 
Aunt Sarah said she preferred these preserved cherries to 
strawberries. 
 
Frau Schmidt preferred the larger "purple" ground cherries, which, 
when preserved, greatly resembled "Guava" jelly in flavor. 
 
 
"WUNDERSELDA" MARMALADE 
 
This was composed of 2 quarts of the pulp and juice combined of ripe 
Kieffer pears, which had been pared and cored, (Measured after being 
run through a food chopper.) The grated yellow rind and juice of five 
medium-sized tart oranges, and 6-1/2 cups granulated sugar. Cook all 
together about forty minutes, until a clear amber colored marmalade. 
Watch closely and stir frequently, as the mixture scorches easily. 
This quantity will fill about twenty small jelly tumblers. If the 
marmalade is to be kept some time, it should be put into air-tight 
glass jars.
Rub the fuzz from the peaches. Do not pare them. Stick half a dozen 
whole cloves in each peach. Add spices to taste, stick-cinnamon, whole 
doves and mace. Put spices in a small cheese cloth bag and do not 
remove the bag, containing spices, when putting away the peaches. 
Scald sugar, vinegar and spices together and pour over the peaches. 
Cover closely and stand away. Do this twice, one day between. The 
third time place all together in a preserving kettle. Cook a few 
minutes, then place fruit in jars, about three-quarters filled. Boil 
down the syrup until about one-quarter has boiled away, pour over the 
peaches, hot, and seal in air-tight jars. This is an old and very good 
recipe used by "Aunt Sarah" many years. 
 
 
CURRANT JELLY 
 
Always pick currants for jelly before they are "dead ripe," and never 
directly after a shower of rain. Wash and pick over and stem currants. 
Place in a preserving kettle five pounds of currants and 1/2 cup of 
water; stir until heated through then mash with a potato masher. Turn 
into a jelly bag, allow drip, and to every pint of currant juice add
clear. This is a delicious jam. 
 
 
APPLE SAUCE 
 
When making apple sauce, cut good, tart apples in halves after paring 
them, cut out the cores, then cook, quickly as possible, in half 
enough boiling water to cover them. Cover the stew-pan closely. This 
causes them to cook more quickly, and not change color. Watch 
carefully that they do not scorch. When apples are tender, turn into 
sieve. Should the apples be quite juicy and the water drained from the 
apples measure a half pint, add a half pound of sugar, cook 15 or 20 
minutes, until it jells, and you have a glass of clear, amber-colored 
jelly. Add 1 teaspoonful of butter and sugar to taste to the apple 
sauce, which has been mashed through the sieve. Apple sauce made thus 
should be almost the color of the apples before cooking. If the apple 
sauce is not liked thick, add some of the strained apple juice instead 
of making jelly; as some apples contain more juice than others. 
 

RHUBARB MARMALADE (AS FRAU SCHMIDT MADE IT) 
 
Cut rhubarb into small pieces, put in stew-pan with just enough water 
to prevent sticking fast. When cooked tender, mash fine with potato 
masher, and to three cups of rhubarb, measured before stewing, add 1 
cup of granulated sugar, also 1 dozen almonds which had been blanched 
and cut as fine as possible, and stewed until tender, then added to 
hot rhubarb and sugar. Cook all together a short time. Serve either 
hot or cold. A large quantity may be canned for Winter use. 
 
The addition of almonds gave the marmalade a delicious flavor A good 
marmalade may be made by adding the juice and thinly shaved outside 
peel of several lemons to rhubarb. Put all together in kettle on range 
with sugar. Cook over a slow fire until proper consistency. Turn into 
jars and leave uncovered until day following, when cover and seal 
air-tight. 
 
 
GRAPE FRUIT MARMALADE 

For this marmalade take 1 large grape fruit, 2 large oranges and 1 
lemon. After thoroughly washing the outside of fruit, slice all as 
thinly as possible, rejecting the seeds. Measure and add three times 
as much water as you have fruit. Let all stand over night. The next 
morning boil 15 minutes, stand over night again, in a large bowl or 
agate preserving kettle. The next morning add 1 pound (scant measure) 
of sugar to each pint of the mixture and boil until it jells. This is 
delicious if you do not object to the slightly bitter taste of the 
grape fruit. Put in tumblers, cover closely with paraffin. This 
quantity should fill 22 tumblers, if a large grape fruit is used. 
 
 
ORANGE MARMALADE 
 
Slice whole oranges very thin and cut in short pieces after washing 
them. Save the seeds. To each pound of sliced oranges add 3 pints of 
cold water and let stand 24 hours. Then boil all together until the 
chipped rinds are tender. All the seeds should be put in a muslin bag 
and boiled with the oranges. Allow all to stand together until next 
day, then remove the bag of seeds, and to every pound of boiled fruit
add a half pound of sugar. Boil continuously, stirring all the time, 
until the chips are quite clear and the syrup thick as honey on being 
dropped on a cold dish. The grated rind and juice of 2 lemons will 
improve the taste of marmalade if added at last boiling. When cooked 
sufficiently the marmalade should be clear. Pour at once into glass 
jars and cover closely. 
 
 
CHERRY RELISH 
 
After sour cherries have been pitted, weigh them and cover with 
vinegar and let stand 24 hours. Take from the vinegar and drain well, 
then put into stone crocks in layers, with sugar, allowing 1 pound of 
sugar to 1 pound of cherries. Stir twice each day for ten days, then 
fill air-tight jars and put away for Winter use. These are an 
excellent accompaniment to a roast of meat. 
 
 
CANNED PEACHES 

whole process was quite a lengthy one. Fill the kettle holding the 
cider with apples, which should have been pared and cored the night 
before at what country folks call an "apple bee," the neighbors 
assisting to expedite the work. The apples should be put on to cook as 
early in the morning as possible and cooked slowly over not too hot a 
fire, being stirred constantly with a long-handled "stirrer" with 
small perforated piece of wood on one end. There is great danger of 
the apple butter burning if not carefully watched and constantly 
stirred. An extra pot of boiling cider was kept near, to add to the 
apple butter as the cider boiled away. If cooked slowly, a whole day 
or longer will be consumed in cooking. When the apple butter had 
almost finished cooking, about the last hour, sweeten to taste with 
sugar (brown sugar was frequently used). Spices destroy the true apple 
flavor, although Aunt Sarah used sassafras root, dug from the near-by 
woods, for flavoring her apple butter, and it was unexcelled. The 
apple butter, when cooked sufficiently, should be a dark rich color, 
and thick like marmalade, and the cider should not separate from it 
when a small quantity is tested on a saucer. An old recipe at the farm 
called for 32 gallons of cider to 8 buckets of cider apples, and to 40 
gallons of apple butter 50 pounds of sugar were used. Pour the apple
possesses the flavor of corn freshly cut from the cob. Sarah Landis 
had used this recipe for years and   '  twas seldom she lost a can. 
 
 
DRIED SWEET CORN 
 
In season when ears of sweet corn are at their best for cooking 
purposes, boil double the quantity necessary for one meal, cut off 
kernels and carefully scrape remaining pulp from cob. Spread on agate 
pans, place in a hot oven a short time (watch closely) and allow it to 
remain in a cooled oven over night to dry. When perfectly dry place in 
bags for use later in the season. 
 
When the housewife wishes to prepare dried corn for the table, one cup 
of the dried corn should be covered with cold water and allowed to 
stand until the following day, when place in a stew-pan on the range 
and simmer slowly several hours; add 1/2 teaspoonful of sugar, 1 
tablespoonful of butter, salt and pepper. This corn Aunt Sarah 
considered sweeter and more wholesome than canned corn and she said 
"No preservatives were used in keeping it."[                    ]	0  	 
When chestnuts were gathered in the fall of the year, at the farm, 
they were shelled as soon as gathered, then dried and stored away for 
use in the Winter. Aunt Sarah frequently cooked together an equal 
amount of chestnuts and dried corn; the combination was excellent. The 
chestnuts were soaked in cold water over night. 
 
The brown skin of the chestnuts may be readily removed after being 
covered with boiling water a short time. 
 
 
PRESERVED CHERRIES 
 
Aunt Sarah  '  s preserved cherries were fine, and this was her way of 
preparing them: She used 1 pound of granulated sugar to 1 quart of 
pitted cherries. She placed the pitted cherries on a large platter and 
sprinkled the sugar over them. She allowed them to stand several hours 
until the cherries and sugar formed a syrup on platter. She then put 
cherries, sugar and juice all together in a preserving kettle, set on 
range, and cooked 10 minutes. She then skimmed out the cherries and
boiled the syrup 10 minutes longer, then returned the cherries to 
syrup. Let come to a boil. She then removed the kettle from the fire, 
spread all on a platter and let it stand in the hot sun two successive 
days, then put in glass air-tight jars or in tumblers and covered with 
paraffin. A combination of cherries and strawberries preserved 
together is fine, and, strange to say, the flavor of strawberries 
predominates. 
 
A fine flavored preserve is also made from a combination of cherries 
and pineapple. 
 
 
FROZEN DESSERTS--AUNT SARAH  '  S FROZEN "FRUIT CUSTARD" 
 
One tablespoonful of granulated gelatine soaked in enough milk to 
cover. Place 2 cups of sugar and 3/4 cup of milk in a stew-pan on the 
range and boil until it spins a thread; that is, when a little of the 
syrup is a thread-like consistency when dripped from a spoon. Allow it 
to cool. Add dissolved gelatine and 1 quart of sweet cream. One box of 
strawberries, or the same amount of any fruit liked, may be added to[                    ]	0  	the mixture; freeze as ordinary ice cream. 
 
This dessert as prepared by Aunt Sarah was delicious as any ice cream 
and was used by her more frequently than any other recipe for a frozen 
dessert. 
 
 
SHERBET 
 
Frau Schmidt gave Mary this simple recipe for making any variety of 
sherbet: 
 
2 cups of sugar, 1 tablespoonful of flour, mixed with the sugar and 
boiled with 1 quart of water; when cold, add 1 quart of any variety of 
fruit. 
 
Freeze in same manner as when making ice cream. 
 
 
ICE CREAM--A SIMPLE RECIPE GIVEN MARY
 
When preparing this ice cream Mary used the following: Three cups of 
cream and 1 cup of milk, 1 egg and 1 cup of pulverized sugar (were 
beaten together until light and creamy). This, with 1 teaspoonful of 
vanilla flavoring, was added to the milk and cream. The cream should 
be scalded in warm weather. The egg and sugar should then be added to 
the scalded milk and cream, stirring them well together. When the 
mixture has cooled, strain it into the can of the freezer. Three 
measures of cracked ice to one of salt should be used. The ice and 
salt, well-mixed, were packed around the freezer. The crank was turned 
very slowly the first ten minutes, until the mixture had thickened, 
when it was turned more rapidly until the mixture was frozen. 
 
 
FRAU SCHMIDT  '  S ICE CREAM 
 
This recipe for ice cream is simple and the ice cream is good. A 
boiled custard was prepared, consisting of 1 quart of milk, 4 eggs, 
between 3 and 4 cups of granulated sugar. When the custard coated the 
spoon she considered it cooked sufficiently. Removed from the fire.
When cold she beat into the custard 1 quart of rich cream and 1 
teaspoonful of vanilla, turned the mixture into the freezer, packed 
outside tub with ice and salt. It was frozen in the ordinary manner. 
 
 
MAPLE PARFAIT 
 
For this rich, frozen dessert Mary beat 4 eggs lightly, poured slowly 
over them 1 cup of hot maple syrup, cooked in a double boiler, 
stirring until very thick. She strained it, and when cold added 1 
pint of cream. She beat all together, poured into a mold, packed the 
mold in ice and salt, and allowed it to stand 3 hours. This is a very 
rich frozen dessert, too rich to be served alone. It should be served 
with lemon sherbet or frozen custard with a lemon flavoring, as it is 
better served with a dessert less rich and sweet. 
 
 
ICE CREAM MADE BY BEATING WITH PADDLE 
 
This recipe for a delicious and easily prepared ice cream was given
Mary by a friend living in Philadelphia and is not original. She found 
the ice cream excellent and after having tried the recipe used no 
other. A custard was made of 1 quart of scalded milk, 6 eggs, 3 cups 
of sugar. The eggs were beaten light, then sugar was added, then the 
hot milk was poured over and all beaten together. She put all in a 
double boiler and stirred about ten minutes, until thick and creamy. A 
small pinch of soda was added to prevent curdling. When the custard 
was perfectly cold she stirred in three cups of sweet, cold cream, 
flavored with either vanilla or almond flavoring, and beat all 
together five minutes, then turned the mixture into the freezer, 
packed well with pounded ice and coarse salt. She covered the freezer 
with the ice and salt and threw a heavy piece of old carpet or burlap 
over the freezer to exclude the air. She let it stand one hour, then 
carefully opened the can containing the cream, not allowing any salt 
to get in the can. With a long, thin-handled knife she scraped down 
the frozen custard from the sides of the freezer, and with a thin 
wooden paddle beat it hard and fast for about five minutes. This made 
the cream fine and smooth. Any fruit may now be added, and should be 
mixed in before the cream is covered. The cream should be beaten as 
quickly as possible and covered as soon as the fruit has been added.
This is a delicious dessert, taught Mary by Aunt Sarah. She used 1 
quart sweet cream, 1-1/2 cups sugar, beaten together. It was frozen in 
an ice cream freezer. She then pared and cut the eyes from one ripe 
pineapple and flaked the pineapple into small pieces with a silver 
fork, sprinkled sugar over and let it stand until sugar dissolved. She 
then stirred this into the frozen cream and added also the beaten 
white of one egg. Packed ice and salt around freezer and allowed it to 
stand several hours before using. Mary  '  s Aunt always cooked pineapple 
or used canned pineapple with a rich syrup when adding fruit before 
the cream was frozen. 
 
 
MARY  '  S RECIPE FOR PEACH CREAM 
 
Mary made ice cream when peaches were plentiful; she used 1 quart of 
sweet cream, sweetened to taste (about 2 cups sugar) and 2 quarts of 
ripe peaches mashed and sweetened before adding to cream. Freeze in 
ordinary manner. If peaches were not fine flavored, she added a little 
almond flavoring. 

kettle and add 3/4 of a pound of sugar. Allow the juice to just 
commence to boil, as cooking too long a time spoils the flavor of the 
juice. Bottle at once, while juice is hot. Bottles must be sterilized 
and air-tight if you expect grape juice to keep. Cover corks with 
sealing wax. 
 
 
VINEGAR MADE FROM STRAWBERRIES 
 
"Aunt Sarah" Landis possessed the very finest flavored vinegar for 
cooking purposes, and this is the way it was made. She having a very 
plentiful crop of fine strawberries one season, put 6 quarts of very 
ripe, mashed strawberries in a five-gallon crock, filled the crock 
with water, covered the top with cheese-cloth and allowed it to stand 
in a warm place about one week, when it was strained, poured into jugs 
and placed in the cellar, where it remained six months, perhaps 
longer, when it became very sharp and sour, and had very much the 
appearance of white wine with a particularly fine flavor. This was not 
used as a beverage, but as a substitute for cider i