Take as much of the middle bark of an Elder tree, growing on the water side, as will fill a new earthen pot of a mean size, putting thereunto as much clear water as a pot will hold, and let it boyl until one half be consumed, and then to be filled up again with fresh water, continuing so to do three times one after another, and at the last time that the one half is consumed, take it from the fire, and strain it through a linnen cloth. Then take two parts of that decoction, and one part of Hogs grease, or Butter, and being warmed again together, give the Horse to drink thereof one hornful, and powre another hornful into his Nostril that casteth; and whensoever you give him this medicine, let the Horse be empty and fasting, and keep him without meat also two or three hours after, for this is a very good drink for any sickness that cometh of cold. Moreover, open the skin of his forehead, and of his temples, and also of his tail with a sharp hot iron, that the cor∣rupt humors may issue outward. That done, take hot brickes, or else a pan of fresh burning coles, and hold it nigh unto his belly and flanks, to the intent that they may be throughly warmed, and being so warmed, anoint them all over with Oyl-de-bay, or Dialthea, to defend his body from the cold, and let his head be well covered, and all his belly kept warm. Yea, and it were good to bathe his head sometime, as Russius saith, with a bath made of Rew, Wormwood, Sage, Ju iper, Bay leaves, and Hysop. And let his drink be warm water mingled with Wheat meal; yea, and to make it the more comfortable, it were good, as Russius saith, to put thereunto some Cinamon, Ginger, Galingale, and such hot pieces. And his meat in Winter season would be no other but sodden Corn, or warm Mashes, made of ground Malt and Wheat bran: in Summer season, if he went to grasse, I think it would do him most good, so that he go in a dry warm ground, for by feeding alwayes downward, he shall purge his head the better, as Russius saith. Thus much of the Glanders, and mourning of the Chine. Now we will speak somewhat of the Strangul∣lion, according to the opinion of the Authors, though not to the satisfaction perhaps of our English Farriars. 
 Of the Strangullion or Squinancy. THe Strangullion, called of the Latines, Anginae, according to the Physitians, is an inflama∣tion of the inward parts of the throat, and as I said before, is called of the Greeks, Cynanche, which is as much to say in English as Strangling, whereof this name Strangullion as I think is deri∣ved, for this disease doth strangle every Man or Beast, and therefore is numbred amongst the perillous and sharp diseases, called of the Latines, Morbi acuti; of which strangling, the Physi∣ ians in Mans body make four differences; The first and worst is, when no part within the mouth nor without, appeareth manifestly to be inflamed, and yet the patient is in great peril of strangling. The second is, when the inward parts of the throat only be inflamed. The third is, when the inward and outward parts of the throat be both inflamed. The fourth is, when the muscles of the neck are inflamed, or the inward joynts thereof so loosened, as they straiten thereby both the throat, or wesand, or wind-pipe; for short breath is incident to all the four kinds before recited, and they proceed all of one cause; that is to say, of some cholerick or bloudy fluxion, which comes out of the branches of the throat veins into those parts, and there breedeth some hot inflamation. But now to prove that a Horse is subject to this disease, you shall hear what Absyrtus, Hierocles. Vegetius, and others do say, Absyrtus writing to his friend a certain Farriar or Horse-leach, called A storicus, speaketh in this manner, When a Horse hath the Strangullion it quickly killeth him; the signes whereof be these; His temples will be hollow, his tongue will swell and hang out of his mouth, his eyes also will be swollen, and the passage of his throat stopt so as he can neither eat nor drink. All these signes be also confirmed by Hi rocles. 
 Of the inward and wet Cough. OF inward Coughs, some be wet, and some be dry. The wet Cough is that cometh of cold, taken after some great heat given to the Horse, dissolving humors, which being afterward congea∣led, do cause obstruction and stopping in the Lungs. And I call it the wet Cough, because the Horse in his coughing will void moist matter at his mouth after that it is once broken. The signes be these; The Horse will be heavie, and his eyes will run with water, and he will forsake his meat; and when he cougheth, he thrusteth out his head, and reacheth with great pain at the first, as though he had a dry Cough, untill the fleam be broken, and then he will cough more hollow, which is a signe of amendment. And therefore, according to Martins experience, to the intent the fleam may break the sooner, it shall be necessary to keep him warm, by clothing him with a double cloth, and by littering him up to the belly with fresh straw, and then to give him this drink; Take of Barley one peck, and boyl it in two or three gallons of fair water, untill the Barley begin to burst, and boyl therewith of bruised Licoras, of Anise seeds or Raisins, of each one pound, then strain it, and to that liquor put of Hony a pinte, and a quartern of Sugarcandy, and keep it close in a pot to serve the Horse therewith four several mornings, and cast not away the sodden Barley with the rest of the strainings, but make it hot every day to perfume the Horse withal, being put in a bag and ied to his head, and if the Horse will eat of it, it shall do him the more good. And this perfuming in Winter season would be used about ten of the clock in the morning, when the Sun is of some height, to the intent the Horse may be walked abroad, if the Sun shine, to exercise him moderately. And untill his Cough wear away, fail not to give him warm water, with a little ground Mault. And as his Cough breaketh more and more, so let his every day be lesse warmed then other. 
 Of the Fretized, broken and rotten Lungs. THis proceedeth, as Absyrtus and Theomnestus saith, either of an extreme Cough, or of vehement running, or leaping, or of over greedy drinking after great thirst, for the Lungs be inclosed in a very thin film or skin, and therefore easie to be broken, which if it be not cured in time, doth grow to Apostumation, and to corruption, oppressing all the Lungs, which of old Authors is called Vomic , and Suppuratio. But Theomnestus saith, that broken Lungs, and rotten Lungs, be two divers diseases, and have divers signes, and divers cures. The signes of broken Lungs be these; the Horse draweth his wind short, and by little at once, he will turn his head often toward the place grieved, and groaneth in his breathing, he is afraid to cough, and yet cougheth as though he had eaten small bones. The same Theomnestus healed a friends Horse of his, whose Lungs were st , or rather broken as he saith, by continual eating of Salt, with this manner of cure here following▪ Let the Horse have quiet and rest, and then let him bloud in the hanches, where the veins appear most: and give him to drink the space of seven dayes, Barley▪ or rather Oates sodden in Goats milk▪ o if you can get no milk, boil it in water, and put therein some thick collops of Lard and of , and let him drink that: and let his common drink in Winter season e the decoction of Wheat meal; and in the Summer time, the decoction of Barley▪ and this as he saith will bind his ngs again together. Vegetius utterly disalloweth letting of bloud in any such disease as this is and all manner of sharp medicines, for fear of provoking the Cough, by means whereof the broken places can never heal perfectly. And therefore neither his medicines nor meat would be harsh, but smooth, gentle and cooling. The best medicine that may be given him at all times is this; Take of F k, and of Linseed, of each half a pound, of Gum dragant, of Mastick, of Myrrhe, of Sugar, of Fitch flowre, of each one ounce. Let all these things be beaten into fine powder, and then o whole night in a sufficient quantity of warm water, and the next day give him a quart of this luke-warm, putting thereunto two or three ounces of Oyl of Roses, continuing so to do many dayes together, and if the disease be new, this will heal him; yea, and it will ease him very much, although the disease be old, which is thought uncurable. And in Winter season so long as he standeth in the stable, let him drink no cold water, and let his meat be clean without dust, but in Summer season it were best to let him run to grasse; for so long as he eateth grasse, a man shall scantly perceive this disease. Thus much of broken lungs. 
 Of putrified and rotten lungs. THe signes to know whether a Horses lungs be putrified or rotten, according to Theomnestus are these▪ The Horse will eat and drink greedilye then he was wont to do▪ he shall be oftner vexed with a Cough, and in coughing he will cast little lumps of matter out of his mouth. The cure whereof, according to Theomnestus, is thus; Give him to drink every morning, the space of seven dayes, the juyce of Purslain mingled with Oil of Roses, and add thereunto a little Tragagantum that hath been layed before in steep in Goats milk, or else in Barley or Oaten milk, strained out of the Corn. When the Apostume is broken, then a very strong vile and evill avour will come out of his Nostrils, for remedy whereof it shall be good to give him the space o seven dayes this drink here following; Take of the root called Costus two ounces, and of Gasia or else of Cinnamon three ounces into fine powder, and a few Raisins, and give it him to drink with wine. But Vegetius would have him to be cured in this sort, and with lesse cost I assure you; Take of Frankincense and Aristoloch, of each two ounces, beaten into fine powder, and give him that with wine; or else take of unburnt Brimstone two ounces, and of Aristoloch one ounce and a half beaten into powder, and give him that with wine. And he would have you also to draw his beast with a hot iron, to the intent the hu∣mors may issue forth outwardly. 
 Of shortness of breath. A Horse may have shortness of breath, by hasty running after drinking, or upon a full stomach, or by the descending of humors unto his throat or lungs after some extreme heat dissolving the said humors, which so long as there is nothing broken, may in the beginning be easily holpen. The signes be these; The Horse will continually pant, and fetch his breath short, which will come very hot out at his nose, and in his breathing he will quise in the nose, and his flanks will beat thick: yea and some cannot fetch their breath unlesse they hold their necks right out and straight, which disease is called of the old writers by the Greek name Orthopnoea. The cure; Let him bloud in the neck, and give him this drink; Take of Wine and Oil, of each a pinte, of Frankincense half an ounce, and of the juice of Horehound half a pinte. It is good also to powre into his throat Hony, Butter and Hogs grease moulten together, and made lukewarm▪ Tiberius saith, it is good to give him whole Egges, shels and all, steeped and made soft in Vinegar; that is to say; the first day three, the second day five, and the third day seven, and to powre Wine and oil into his nostrils. I for my part would take nothing but Annis seeds, Licoras and Sugarcandy, beaten all into fine powder, give him that to drink, with Wine and Oil mingled together. 
 Of a Consumption. A Consumption is no other thing but an exulceration of the lungs, proceeding of some fretting or gnawing humor, descending out of the head into the lungs And I take it to be that disease which the old Writers are wont to call the dry Malady; which perhaps some would rather interpret to be the mourning of the chine▪ with whom I intend not to strive. But thus much I must needs say, that every Horse having the mourning of the Chine, doth continually cast at the nose, but in the dry Malady it is contrary. For all the Authors that write thereof affirm, that the Horse avoideth nothing at the nose. And the signes to know the dry Malady, according to their doctrine, be these: His flesh doth clean consume away, his belly is gaunt, and the skin thereof so hard stretched, or rather shrunk up, as if you strike on him with your hand it will sound like a Taber, and he will be hollow backt, and forsake his meat, and though he eateth i , (as Absyrtus saith) yet he doth not digest it, nor prospereth not withal, he would cough and cannot but hicking∣ly, as though he had eaten small bones. And this disease is judged of all the Authors to be in∣curable. Notwithstanding they say, that it is good to purge his head with such perfumes as have been shewed you before in the Chapter of the Glanders, and also to give him always Coleworts, chopt small with his provender. Some would have him to drink the warm bloud of sucking Pigs new slain; and some the juyce of Leeks, with Oyl and Wine mingled together. Others praise Wine and Frankincense; some, Oyl and Rue; some would have his body to be purged and set to grass. 
 Of the Consumption of the Flesh, and how to make a lean Horse fat. MArtin aith, that if a Horse take a great cold after a heat, it will cause his flesh to wast, and his skin to wax hard and dry, and to cleave fast to his sides, and he shall have no appetite unto his meat, and the fillets of his back will fall away, and all the flesh of his buttocks, and of his shoul∣ders will be consumed. The cure whereof is thus: Take two Sheeps heads unflead, boyl them in three gallons of Ale, or fair running water, until the flesh be consumed from the bones, that done, strain it through a fine cloth, and then put thereunto of Sugar one pound, of Cinamon two ounces, of Conserve of Roses, of Barberries, of Cherries, of each two ounces; and mingle them together, and give the Horse every day in the morning a quart thereof luke warm, untill all be spent: and after every time he drinketh, let him be walked up and down in the stable, or else abroad if the weather be warm, and not windy, and let him neither eat nor drink in two hours after, and let him drink no cold water, but luke-warm, the space of fifteen days, and let him be fed by little and little, with such meat as the Horse hath most appetite unto. But if the Horse he nesh and tender, and so wax lean without any apparent grief or disease, then the old Writers would have him to be fed now and then with parched Wheat, and also to drink Wine with his water, and eat continually Wheat-bran mingled with his provender, untill he wax strong; and he must be often dressed and trimmed, and ly soft, without the which things his meat will do him but little good. And his meat must be fine and clean, and given often and by little at once. Russius saith, that if a Horse eating his meat with good appetite, doth not for all that prosper, but is still lean: then it is good to give him Sage, Savin, Bay-berries, Earth-nuts, and Boares-grease, to drink with Wine: or to give him the intrails of a Barbel or Tench, with white Wine. He saith also that sodden Beans mingled with Bran and Salt, will make a lean Horse fat in very short space. 
 Of grief in the Breast. LAurentius Russius writeth of a disease called in Italian, Gravezza di petto, which hath not been in experience amongst our Farriers, that I can learn. It comes, as Russius saith, of the super∣fluity Blundevile. of bloud, or other humors dissolved by some extream heat, and resorting down the breast, paining the Horse, so as he cannot well go. The cure whereof according to Russius is thus: Let him bloud on both sides of the breast in the accustomed veins, and rowel him under the breast, and twice a day turn the rowels with your hand, to move the humors that they may issue forth, and let him go so roweled the space of fifteen days. 
 Of tired Horses. BEcause we are in hand here with the vital parts, and that when the Horses be tired with over-much labour, their vital spirits wax feeble, I think it best to speak of them even here, not with long discoursing, as Vegetius useth; but briefly to shew you how to refresh the poor Horse, having need thereof, which is done chiefly by giving him rest, warmth and good feeding as with warm mashes and plenty of provender. And to quicken his spirits, it shall be g od to pour a little Oyl and Vinegar into his nostrils, and to give him the drink of Sheeps heads recited before in the Chapter of Consumption of the flesh; yea, and also to bath his legs with this bath: Take of Mallows, of Sage, of each two or three handfuls, and of a Rose-cake; boil these things together, and being boyled, then put unto it a good quantity of Butter, or of Sallet-oyl. Or else make him this charge: Take of Bole Armony, and of Wheat-flowre, of each half a pound, and a little Rozen beaten into powder, and a quart of strong Vinegar, and mingle them together, and cover all his legs there∣with; and if it be Summer turn him to grass. 
 Of the diseased parts under the Midriff, and first of the Stomach. THe old Authors make mention of many di eases incident to a Horses stomach, as loathing of meat, spewing up his drink, surfeting of provender, the hungry evil, and such like, which few of our Farriers have observed: and therefore I will briefly speak of as many as I think necessary Blundevile. to be known; and first of the loathing of meat. 
 Of the loathing of Meat. A Horse may loath his meat through the intemperature of his stomach, as for that it is too hot or too cold. If his stomach be too hot, then most commonly it will either inflame his mouth and make it to break out in blisters, yea and perhaps cause some Cancker to breed there. The cure of all which things hath been taught before. But if he forsake his meat only for very heat, which you shall perceive by the hotness of his breath and mouth, then cool his stomach by giving him cold water, mingled with a little Vinegar and Oyl to drink, or else give him this drink: Take of Milk, and of Wine, of each one pinte, and put thereunto three ounces of Mel Rosatum, and wash all his mouth with Vinegar and Salt. If his stomach be too cold, then his hair will stare and stand right up, which Absyrtus and others were wont to cure, by giving the Horse good Wine and Oyl to drink, and some would seethe in Wine Rew, or Sage; some would adde thereunto white Pepper and Myrrhe; some would give him Onyons and Rocket-seed to drink with Wine: Again, there be other some which pre∣scribe the bloud of a young Sow with old Wine. Absyrtus would have the Horse to eat the green blades of Wheat, if the time of the year will serve for it. Columella saith, that if a Horse, or any other Beast, do loath his meat, it is good to give him Wine, and the seed of Gith; or else Wine and stampt Garlick. 
 Of casting out his Drink. VEgetius saith, that the Horse may have such a Palsie proceeding of cold in his stomach, as he is not able to keep his drink, but many times to cast it out again at his mouth. The remedy where∣of is to let him bloud in the neck, and to give him Cordial drinks, that is to say, made of hot and comfortable Spices; and also to anoint all his breast, and under his shoulders with hot Oyls, and to purge his head, by blowing up into his nostrils, powders that provoke neezing, such as have been taught you before. 
 Of Surfeting with glut of Provender. THe glut of provender or other meat not digested, doth cause a Horse to have great pain in his body, so as he is not able to stand on his feet, but lyeth down, and waltereth as though he had the Bots. The cure whereof according to Martins experience, is in this sort: Let him bloud in the neck, then trot him up and down for the space of an hour; and if he cannot stale, draw out his vard, and wash it with a little white Wine luke-warm, and thrust into his yard either a bruised clove of Garlick, or else a little oyl of Camomile, with a wax Candle. If he cannot dung, then rake his funda∣ment, and give him this Glyster: Take of Mallows two or three handfuls, and boil them in a pottle of fair running water; and when the Mallows be sodden, then strain it, and put thereunto a quart of fresh Butter, and half a pinte of Oyl Olive; and having received this Glyster, lead him up and down, untill he hath emptyed his belly, then set him up, and keep him hungry the space of three or four days, and the Hay that he eateth, let it be sprinkled with water, and let him drink water, where∣in should be put a little Bran, and when he hath drunk, give him the Bran to eat, and give him little or no provender at all, for the space of eight or ten days. 
 Of another kinde of Surfeting with meat or drink, called of us, Foundering in the body. THis disease is alled of the old Writers in Greek; Crithiasis; in Latine, Hordeatio; it cometh as they say, by eating of much provender suddenly after labour, whilest the Horse is hot and pant∣ing, Blundevile. whereby his meat not being digested, breedeth evill humors, which by little and little do spread throughout his members, and at length do oppress all his body, and do clean take away his strength, and make him in such a case, as he can neither go, nor bow his joynts, nor being laid, he is not able to rise again; neither can he stale, but with great pain. It may come also, as they say, of drinking too much in travelling by the way when the Horse is hot, but then it is not so dangerous, as when it cometh of eating too much.
For all kinde of Worms it is most convenient to use abstinence from such things as breed them: And when they are bred, it is good to eat often, a little at a time; and that is best, when they leave off gnawing. But those that have Ascarides must eat meats of good juice, and of easie di∣gestion, that the force of them may not reach so farre as the right gut. For the matter fit to breed them is so consumed. Thus far for meats and drinks to be taken. But the other five kindes that are not so manifest, shal be handled by us also with all brevity. And we shal begin from sleep. It must not be too little nor too much, and in the night rather than in the day, at least two hours after meat. Moreover, to be long idle is naught, let exercise precede meats, and rest after meats. Nor is every motion to be taken for exercise, but that which makes us breath more; unlesse it be when we have taken Physick against Worms; for then we must ride or run, to shake our bodies; for they are more easily cast forth by hard exercise or labour: but children will hardly observe these rules. Care also must be had, that the belly may twice be unburdened, and if that will not do of it self, we must use a Suppository or Clyster to provoke it, made of such ingredients that are fit for this purpose. All affections of the minde whatever they be, must be set aside, as quar∣relling, anger, sorrow, great cares, and thoughts, sadnesse, fears, envy, and all such kinde of pertur∣bations, and chiefly after meat. For these change and turn the body from its natural state. Let men beware of cold North windes, and let them not go barefoot. The air because it alwayes is about us, cannot be chosen at our pleasure: for it is sometimes a defence for us, and sometimes the cause that makes Worms, or fosters them: It wil be a defence if it be very hot, and dry, pure, clear, and calm; and it wil chiefly foster the disease, when it is very cosd, or moyst, or moved by the North or South winde, or by too great heat, dissolves our forces, and then by art it must be thus prepared: To burn in our Chambers wood of Juniper tree or of Citrons, or Peach-trees, and such wood as is against Worms. Also to perfume the place with tops of Worm-wood, Peach-tree leaves, Citron pills, roots of Pomegranate-trees, also with Fern, and Ivy. But that is the best that is made with Myrrhe, and Aloes. Another remedy that succours the fainting spirits, by reason of Worms. Amber-greece two penny-weight, Musk one peny weight, Gum Arabick, four peny-weight, Roses, Sanders, Cloves, Privet, Frankincense, of each one peny-weight, Gallia Moschata so called, six peny-weight, Lignum Aloes burnt to a cole twenty peny-weight, the quenched coles of Vine-branches, what is sufficient, make them up with Rose Vinegar. 
 The juyce of Housleek drank in Wine, will drive out of the belly round Worms: Worm-wood Wine drank doth the same. The herb of great Turnfoil drank with its seed, adding there∣unto Simples seve∣rally that bring forth Worms round, Ascarides, and broad Worms. Nitre, Hysop, Cresses, and water, will cast them forth. The root of female Fern, 3 drams drank in Wine, will force out the round and broad Worms of the belly, as Ruellius and Marcellus, who interpreted Dioscorides, do both assert. But Galen saith that it kils not round Worms, but Ascarides and broad Worms, for so he writes, lib. Therapeut. method. cap. 14. But Wormwood can destroy round Worms broad Worms require more strong helps, as Fern is, and so doth that Worm the Greeks call . Theophrastus was of this opinion, who writes that female Fern mingled with Honey is good against broad Worms of the belly, if it be min∣gled with Honey; and for Ascarides, in sweet Wine. For so he sets it down: Female Fern is good against broad Worms and small ones: against broad ones mingled with Honey, but against small ones in sweet Wine. It is certain that Ascarides both are, and are called small Worms. More∣over, Galen lib de simpl. Medic. facult. 8. ascribes the same vertue to the female Fern, that the male hath. Now Pliny writes that the female will kill only broad Worms and not round. Pli . lib. hist. 27. c. 9. And again, that both, (that is, both male and female) will drive forth Worms of the belly, broad Worms with Honey, the rest with sweet Wine drank for three daies, and he excludes neither round Worms nor Ascarides. But Galen in one place excludes both round Worms and Ascarides; and in another place he writes that it will de∣stroy Ascarides with broad Worms. What now shall we say, where Authors are of so many different opinions? shall we say that female Fern will kill all Worms in the belly? For Ga∣len ascribes the same virtue to it he doth to the male, but that especially it kils broad Worms, and in the next place Ascarides, which being at the bottome of the belly, require a stronger remedy, as Fern is, that the force of it may come so far. But since it can drive forth broad Worms and Ascarides, that are more seldome, and the one is in the guts, the other farthest from the stomach, it will far sooner destroy round Worms that lie in the upper guts. Galen therefore will not fight with himself in this, for it sufficeth if it will kill broad VVorms, and if it can destroy them, it can more easily destroy Ascarides, and easiest of all round VVorms. But Pliny, as who best of all knew that, saith it will drive out the rest also, (that is, both round VVorms and Ascarides). But that he saith so is manifest out of Paulus, lib. c. 58. who in his method of curing round and broad VVorms, mentions Fern: which yet all men agree is most properly used to drive forth broad VVorms. Avicenn. 16 Tertii tract. 5. c. 4. shewes this most clearly in these words: The medicins that kill Ascarides are stronger than those that kill long Worms; and those things that kill long Worms and Ascarides will also kill broad Worms. Gith or Nigella not only eaten but laid in a plaister to the belly, or anointed on the navil with water, brings them forth. In which place we must note Marcellus, who saith it will drive forth broad VVorms and not round: but Ruellius interprets this by the contrary. I Marcellus have done right, I leave other men to judge, this is certain that Galen is of Ruellius minde, who hath writ∣ten only that it will kill VVorms; and as I said before, it is taken generally for round VVorms. Paulus and Aetius, agree with Ruellius, who in their curative method for round VVorms, often speak of Gith, but never for broad VVorms. Wormwood called Santonicum, of it self or boyled with Rice, adding Honey to it, will kill Worms. The seeds of Nettles bruised, or of Coleworts or Cummin, with water, or Mints with it, or Hysop with Honey and water or Cresses∣seed bruised with Vinegar, kils them. Celsus l. 4. c. 17. Oribasius lib. ad Enn pium filium, hath written that Calamint, Cardamom, Lupins, and the powder of them in drink, or with Honey by way of Electuary, or given in Posca to drink, are sufficient to kill round Worms. Also the leaves and buds of the Peach-tree bruised, and laid upon the belly can do as much; also Mints in drink and Sorrel. Purslain boyl ' d, the juyce of Succory, or the decoction of Sebestens, or the Sebestens themselves boyl ' d and eaten are very good. Also the ashes of burnt Harts-horn is thought very effectual for this use, especially of that which growes on the right side of the Stags head. It is burnt thus: Break the Harts-horn, and put it into a new earthen Crucible, and lute it well, put it into the furnace and let it burn till it be white. Scribonius Largus, c. 141. gives it thus: Harts-horn, saith he, raspt with a workmans rasp, with water of Sebestens boyled, give 4 or 5 spoonfuls of it, which were soked the day before in 3 cyathi, then bruise and give it, adding the water to it. 
 Another, which is an Electuary of Paulus. Take Pepper, Bay-berries cleansed, Aethiopian Cumin, Mastick of Chios, of each alike, Honey what may serve turn, give one spoonfull in the morning, and let them sleep upon it; but if you would do this more effectually, adde Nitre as much as of each. Another of the same. T ke Fern a sawcer-full, Nitre two peny weight, give it with a spoonfull of water, after evacuation, but it is better to adde a little Scammony to it. Another of the same, and of Aetius. Take of the bark of the root of a sowre Pomegranate, scraped from the upper part, Pepper, of each four peny weight, Cardamoms six peny weight, Horehound two penny weight, the best Honey what is sufficient, give one spoonfull of it after eating Garlick or Leeks. But that the disease may be wholly driven away, give some Theriac, for Galen highly commends it for this use. Another out of Oribasius, that he alwayes used by the experience of his masters, and had a long time proved it for good. It contains Scammony one Scruple, Euforbium as much and half as much, the powder of burnt feathers one scruple, Nitre in weight one Siliqua, give this to drink in honey ' d or sweet wine. But it will fall out better if he first eat Garlick or some sharp thing. Also here is a Plaister of another Author, that is good against all Worms, especially broad ones. Take Lupines, Bay-berries cleansed, Bulls gall, lay these on the navel, and binde it on with a swathe∣band for one day and night, or else for two or three dayes. Against broad Worms from another Authour. Take Southern-wood, scraped Harts-horn, Coccus gnidius, and Sesamum, of each one penny weight, Cardamoms three oboli, give this to drink with Oxymel. Another for the same use. Take Gum Arabick, one peny weight, Fern three peny weight, Cardamoms one peny weight, Nitre three peny weight, give it in Hydromel or Ale. Also against the same, is the Antidote called Dia∣phereon. Take Fern eight peny weight, Scammony, Gith, Cardamoms, salt Nitre, of each two peny weight, give it in Oxymel or Ale, but adde Polypode four peny weight. It is reported, that Asca∣rides will trouble children, and such as are come to their full growth. But children are continually provoked to excretion, and after egestion they are the better most commonly, but those that are come to their full growth, observing the trouble of such things that are the cause of them, will thrust their fingers into their fundaments, and pull them forth, and further they will foment and abate these biting pains, with peble-stones that lie in the Sun on the shores, or else with stones put into the fire.  
 It is reported that Democrates of Athens, when he was a youth, and was sick of the Falling sick∣nesse, went to Delphos, and enquired of Apollo, what he would advise him to take against this trou∣blesome disease, and that Apollo answered; 
 George Agricola only propounds to us the Teredo without feet, which from the brasen colour of it, he call Kupter-worm: It creeps like a Serpent, saith he, because it wants wings and feet. It is as thick as a small Goose quill, and it is as long as a Scolopendra: It is round, and breeds under rotten wood, and sometimes found hard by the Scolopendra, or long Ear-wig. You may easily finde the figure of it placed amongst the Scolopendrae. 
 CHAP. XXXVII. Of Water Insects without feet, and first of the Shrimp or Squilla. WEE said before that all water Insects were with feet or without feet. Some of those that have feet, swim with six feet, as the Lobster, the Shrimp, the lake Scorpion, the Evet, and the Sea-lowse; others with four feet, some with more. We shal treat of them se∣verally. The Squilla an Insect differs but little from the fish Squilla, but that it hath the sail-yards much shorter, and a more red colour, or rather a more earthly colour. Some of these are covered with a thin shell, and some again are smooth and naked. Those with shells live chiefly in small Brooks, and stick to the roots of Reeds or water-flags: They are of a yellowish colour, and sometimes of a white or Ash-colour. They go only with six feet, the rest that are joyned to them, serve in stead of fins. The naked ones are either soft or hard. The soft ones are represented well e∣ ough by this figure, only suppose their heads to be of a bright Bay colour, and their body died with a dark Ash-colour. All those that are covered with a hard crust are made with joynts, but some have round joynts, others o∣ther fashions. The form of the round joynted is exactly represented here, if you sup∣pose him to be easily dyed with a lighter red. And such is the colour of the first and second that are not round joynted. The third kinde is black upon the back, and with a brown belly; but they are all with a forked mouth, and that will hold fast what is applyed to it. The fourth kinde moves it self with the three former feet, and useth the rest that hang by in stead of Oares. The neck of it, and the sailyards, and the nippers are of a watry red colour, the body is brownish or more Ash coloured. The fifth hath a very black head, and the body like to a Pomegranate shell. The sixth seems to be cruel, and in the same form you see it, of an Ash-colour. All of them have ard eyes, and black, covered over with a membrane shining like unto glasse, which move continu∣ally almost, like to the ears of four-footed beasts. They leap quickly one upon the other as the Fishes Squillae doe in coupling, and when they grow bold and have liber∣ty, they fill the Females with young. The time when they are ready for this is signified by a gentle biting: The Female takes hold with her mouth, and what she layes hold on she kills, and gives part of it to her companion; for they couple at the mouth, as Crabs and Lobsters doe. But what use they serve for in physick, I cannot finde either in writers or from Empiricks, who either knew not these Squillae, or thought them not worthy to say any thing of them. Yet this is certain, that in April and May there is no better bait to catch Fish with. 
 CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Locust, Scorpion, Notonectum, the Grashopper, the Wasp, the forked Claw, the Newt, the little Heart, and the Lowse, all Water-Insects. THE Insect-Locust, is like the Lobster, for that cannot be called either flesh or fish: you see the figure of it: it is of a pale green colour: I have seen three kindes of Lake Scor∣pions, and I have them by me: the first is somewhat black, the other two are like to white sand: we call some Insects of the water Noton cta, which do not swim upon their bellies as the rest do, but upon their backs, from whence it is pro∣bable that men learned the art of swimming upon their backs also. Some of these have eyes, shoulders, and bodies all black, some are green, some are fiery coloured, and some pitch co∣loured. For you shall seldom see two of them of the same colour; nature hath so vari∣ously sported her self in ador∣ning them. Water-Grashoppers hold the for h described, but their eyes are extreme black, and their bodies are ash colou∣red. The Wasp hath a brow∣nish body all over, except the black eyes. The Forked Claw hath almost the same colour, but it is more full, it seems to want eyes, but it hath them hid within, whereby it both sees and perceives the object. The Lizard is of divers colours, and delights in catching Fish, it is common about the British shores, where it lyeth in wait to catch Fish. The Corculus hath the just fashion of a heart, the feet and head being taken away; it hath very little black eyes, and six legs of the same colour, &amp; each with two clawes. The Sea-Lowse is an Insect that is an enemy to all kinde of Whales, which by biting and tickling it puts into such a rage, that they are forced to run upon the sand, and hasten to dry land: I know nothing concerning the use of these creatures; but I seriously ex∣hort posterity to search out the use of them. 
 CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Flea or Asellus, and the Scolopendra found in the Sea. THE Flea, or Sea Asellus is like to a soft Squilla, but it hath but four feet (as I may say by Gesners leave) and by often and long leaps it frees it self from having many feet. It is called Asellus from its leaping, Aristotle cals it a Flea; from its bunch∣back it is called a Sow: it is of a wan colour with blackness; the length of those that are in rivers is the breadth of ones finger, and their breadth is not above half a finger broad. But the Sea fleas are larger, which when the tyde flowes are seen also oft-times in fresh waters. It shewes a wonderful deal of agility when men strive to catch it, or do but look upon it. 
 The Sea Scolopendra, sometimes is of a grey colour, and sometimes you shall see others that are more red. These are longer and leaner, that is shorter and thicker. I saw both kindes in the year 1578. in coves of Oysters. For they are not found in the deep sea, as Gesner supposeth, but in the muddy standing waters, where the Oysters are fatted, there they lye hid, are bred, and do live. Numenius warned Fisher-men concerning these, when he said; 
 CHAP. XLII. Of Water-worms.
