Page  731 
  
 forests stand in a dead flat,* which extends some miles beyond them, and is intersected in many directions by rivers, and more still by canals, which are navigable for small vessels. Nor is this the worst, for the fence of every field and garden is a ditch; and interspersed among the cultivated ground there are many filthy fens, bogs, and morasses, as well fresh as salt. 
  
 It is not strange that the inhabitants of such a country should be familiar with disease and death: preventive medi|cines are taken almost as regularly as food; and every body expects the returns of sickness, as we do the seasons of the year. We did not see a single face in Batavia that indicated perfect health, for there is not the least tint of colour in the cheeks either of man or woman: the women indeed are most delicately fair; but with the appearance of disease there never can be perfect beauty. People talk of death with as much indifference as they do in a camp; and when an acquaintance is said to be dead, the common reply is, "Well, he owed me nothing;" or, 
  
 I must get my money of his executors. 
 To this description of the environs of Batavia there are but two exceptions. The Governor ' s country house is situated upon a rising ground; but its ascent is so inconsiderable, that it is known to be above the common level only by the ca|nals being left behind, and the appearance of a few bad hedges: his Excellency, however, who is a native of this place, has, with some trouble and expence, contrived to in|close his own garden with a ditch; such is the influence of habit both upon the taste and the understanding. A famous market also, called Passar Tanabank, is held upon an emi|nence that rises perpendicularly about thirty feet above the plain; and except these situations, the ground, for an extent 
 Page  732 
  
 of between thirty and forty miles round Batavia,* is exactly parallel to the horizon. At the distance of about forty miles inland there are hills of a considerable height, where, as we were informed, the air is healthy, and comparatively cool. Here the vegetables of Europe flourish in great perfection, particularly strawberries, which can but ill bear heat; and the inhabitants are vigorous and ruddy. Upon these hills some of the principal people have country houses, which they visit once a-year; and one was begun for the Governor, upon the plan of Blenheim, the famous seat of the Duke of Marlborough in Oxfordshire, but it has never been finished. To these hills also people are sent by the physicians, for the recovery of their health, and the effects of the air are said to be almost miraculous: the patient grows well in a short time, but constantly relapses soon after his return to Batavia. 
  
 But the same situation and circumstances which render Batavia and the country round it unwholesome, render it the best gardener ' s ground in the world. The soil is fruitful be|yond imagination, and the conveniences and luxuries of life that it produces are almost without number. 
  
 Rice, which is well known to be the corn of these coun|tries, and to serve the inhabitants instead of bread, grows in great plenty: and I must here observe, that in the hilly parts of Java, and in many of the eastern islands, a species of this grain is planted, which in the western parts of India is intirely unknown. It is called by the natives Paddy Gunning, or Moun|tain rice; this, contrary to the other sort which must be un|der water three parts in four of the time of its growth, is planted upon the sides of hills where no water but rain can come: it is however planted at the beginning of the rainy sea|son, and reaped in the beginning of the dry. How far this kind of rice might be useful in our West Indian islands, where no 
 Page  733 
  
 bread corn is grown,* it may perhaps be worth while to en|quire. 
  
 Indian corn, or maize, is also produced here; which the inhabitants gather when young, and toast in the ear. Here is also a great variety of kidney beans, and lentiles, which they call Cadjang, and which make a considerable part of the food of the common people; besides millet, yams both wet and dry, sweet potatoes, and European potatoes, which are very good, but not cultivated in great plenty. In the gar|dens, there are cabbages, lettuces, cucumbers, rhadishes, the white rhadishes of China, which boil almost as well as a turnep; carrots, parsley, celery, pigeon peas, the egg plant, which broiled, and eaten with pepper and salt, is very deli|cious; a kind of greens resembling spinage; onions, very small, but excellent; and asparagus: besides some European plants of a strong ? smell ? , particularly sage, hysop, and rue. Sugar is also produced here in immense quantities: very great crops of the finest and largest canes that can be ima|gined are produced with very little care, and yield a much larger proportion of sugar than the canes of the West Indies. White sugar is sold here at two pence half-penny a pound; and the molasses makes the arrack, of which, as of rum, it is the chief ingredient; a small quantity of rice, and some cocoa-nut wine, being added, chiefly, I suppose, to give it flavour. A small quantity of indigo is also produced here, not as an article of trade, but merely for home consumption.
 
 7. Bananes. Of these also there are innumerable sorts, but three only are good; the Pissang Mas, the Pissang Radja, and the Pissang Ambou: all these have a pleasant vinous taste, and the rest are useful in different ways; some are fried in batter, and others are boiled and eaten as bread. There is one which deserves the particular notice of the botanist, be|cause, contrary to the nature of its tribe, it is full of seeds, and is therefore called Pissang Batu, or Pissang Bidjie; it has however no excellence to recommend it to the taste, but the Malays use it as a remedy for the flux. 
  
 8. Grapes. These are not in great perfection, but they are very dear; for we could not buy a moderate bunch for less than a shilling or eighteen pence. 
  
 9. Tamarinds. These are in great plenty, and very cheap: the people however do not put them up in the manner prac|tised by the West Indians, but cure them with salt, by which means they become a black mass, so disagreeable to the sight and taste, that few Europeans chuse to meddle with them. 
  
 10. Water melons. These are in great plenty, and very good. 
  
 Page  736 
 *11. Pumpkins. These are beyond comparison the most useful fruit that can be carried to sea; for they will keep without any care several months, and with sugar and lemon-juice, make a pye that can scarcely be distinguished from one made of the best apples; and with pepper and salt, they are a substitute for turneps, not to be despised. 
  
 12. Papaws. This fruit when it is ripe is full of seeds, and almost without flavour; but if when it is green it is pared, and the core taken out, it is better than the best turnep. 
  
 13. Guava. This fruit is much commended by the inha|bitants of our islands in the West Indies, who probably have a better sort than we met with here, where the ? smell ? of them was so disagreeably strong that it made some of us sick; those who tasted them, said, that the flavour was equally rank. 
  
 14. Sweet sop. The Annona squammosa of Linnaeus. This is also a West Indian fruit; it consists only of a mass of large kernels, from which a small proportion of pulp may be sucked, which is very sweet, but has little flavour. 
  
 15. Custard apple. The Annona reticulata of Linnaeus. The quality of this fruit is well expressed by its English name, which it acquired in the West Indies; for it is as like a cus|tard, and a good one too, as can be imagined. 
 
16. The cashew apple. This is seldom eaten on account of its astringency. The nut that grows upon the top of it is well known in Europe. 
  
 17. The cocoa-nut. This is also well known in Europe; there are several sorts, but the best of those we found here is called Calappi Edjou, and is easily known by the redness of the flesh between the skin and the shell. 
  
 Page  737 
 18. Mangostan. The Garcinia Mangostana of Linnaeus.* This fruit, which is peculiar to the East Indies, is about the size of the crab apple, and of a deep red-wine colour: on the top of it is the figure of five or six small triangles joined in a circle, and at the bottom several hollow green leaves, which are re|mains of the blossom. When they are to be eaten, the skin, or rather flesh, must be taken off, under which are found six or seven white kernels, placed in a circular order, and the pulp with which these are inveloped, is the fruit, than which nothing can be more delicious: it is a happy mixture of the tart and the sweet, which is no less wholesome than plea|sant; and with the sweet orange, this fruit is allowed in any quantity to those who are afflicted with fevers, either of the putrid or inflammatory kind. 
  
 19. The jamboo. The Eugenia Mallaccensis of Linnaeus. This fruit is of a deep red colour, and an oval shape; the largest, which are always the best, are not bigger than a small apple; they are pleasant and cooling, though they have not much flavour. 
  
 20. The jambu-eyer. A species of the Eugenia of Linnaeus. Of this fruit there are two sorts of a similar shape, resem|bling a bell, but differing in colour; one being red, the other white. They somewhat exceed a large cherry in size, and in taste have neither flavour nor even sweetness, con|taining nothing but a watry juice, slightly acidulated; yet their coolness recommends them in this hot country. 
  
 21. Jambu-eyer mauwar. The Eugenia jambos of Linnaeus. This is more grateful to the ? smell ? than the taste; in taste it resembles the conserve of roses, and in ? smell ? the fresh scent of those flowers. 
  
 22. The pomgranate. This is the same fruit that is known by the same name all over Europe. 
  
 Page  738 
 *23. Durion. A fruit that in shape resembles a small melon, but the skin is covered with sharp conical spines, whence its name; for dure, in the Malay language, signifies prickle. When it is ripe, it divides longitudinally into seven or eight compartments, each of which contains six or seven nuts, not quite so large as chesnuts, which are covered with a sub|stance that in colour and consistence very much resembles thick cream: this is the part that is eaten, and the natives are fond of it to excess. To Europeans it is generally disa|greeable at first; for in taste, it somewhat resembles a mix|ture of cream, sugar, and onions; and in the ? smell ? , the onions predominate. 
  
 24. Nanca. This fruit, which in some parts of India is called Jack, has, like the Durion, a ? smell ? very disagreeable to stran|gers, and somewhat resembling that of mellow apples mixed with garlic: the flavour is not more adapted to the general taste. In some countries that are favourable to it, it is said to grow to an immense size. Rumphius relates, that it is sometimes so large that a man cannot easily lift it; and we were told by a Malay, that at Madura it is sometimes so large as not to be carried but by the united efforts of two men. At Batavia, however, they never exceed the size of a large melon, which in shape they very much resemble: they are covered with angular prickles, like the shootings of some chrystals, which however are not hard enough to wound those who handle them. 
 
25. Champada. This differs from the Nanca in little ex|cept size, it not being so big. 
  
 26. Rambutan. This is a fruit little known to Europeans; in appearance it very much resembles a chesnut with the husk on, and like that, is covered with small points, which are soft and of a deep red colour: under this skin is the 
 Page  739 
  
 fruit, and within the fruit a stone;* the eatable part there|fore is small in quantity, but its acid is perhaps more agree|able than any other in the whole vegetable kingdom. 
  
 27. Jambolan. This in size and appearance is not unlike a damascene; but in taste is still more astringent, and there|fore less agreeable. 
  
 28. The Boa Bidarra; or Rhamnus Jujuba of Linnaeus. This is a round yellow fruit, about the size of a gooseberry; its flavour is like that of an apple, but it has the astringency of a crab. 
  
 29. Nam nam. The Cynometra Cauliflora of Linnaeus. This fruit in shape somewhat resembles a kidney; it is about three inches long, and the outside is very rough: it is sel|dom eaten raw, but fried with batter it makes a good fritter. 
  
 30, 31. The Catappa, or Terminalia Catappa; and the Canare, the Canarium commune of Linnaeus; are both nuts, with kernels somewhat resembling an almond; but the difficulty of breaking the shell is so great, that they are no where pub|licly sold. Those which we tasted were gathered for curio|sity by Mr. Banks, from the tree upon which they grew. 
  
 32. The Madja; or Limonia of Linnaeus; contains, under a hard brittle shell, a lightly acid pulp, which cannot be eaten without sugar; and with it, is not generally thought plea|sant. 
  
 33. Suntul. The Trichilia of Linnaeus. This is the worst of all the fruits that I shall particularly mention: in size and shape it resembles the Madja; and within a thick skin con|tains kernels like those of the Mangostan, the taste of which is both acid and astringent, and so disagreeable that we were surprised to see it exposed upon the fruit-stalls. 
  
 Page  740
*34, 35, 36. The Blimbing, or Averrhoa Belimbi; the Blim|bing Besse, or Averrhoa Carambola; and the Cherrema, or Averrhoa acida of Linnaeus, are three species of one genus; and though they differ in shape, are nearly of the same taste. The Blimbing Besse is the sweetest: the other two are so austerely acid, that they cannot be used without dressing; they make however excellent pickles and sour sauce. 
  
 37. The Salack; or Calamus Rotang Zalacca of Linnaeus. This is the fruit of a prickly bush; it is about as big as a walnut, and covered with scales, like those of a lizard: below the scales are two or three yellow kernels, in flavour somewhat resembling a strawberry. 
  
 Besides these, the island of Java, and particularly the coun|try round Batavia, produces many kinds of fruit which were not in season during our stay; we were also told that apples, strawberries, and many other fruits from Europe, had been planted up in the mountains, and flourished there in great luxuriance. We saw several fruits preserved in sugar, that we did not see recent from the tree, one of which is called Kimkit, and another Boa Atap: and here are several others which are eaten only by the natives, particularly the Kellor, the Guilindina, the Moringa, and the Soccum. The Soccum is of the same kind with the bread-fruit in the South Sea islands, but so much inferior, that if it had not been for the simili|tude in the outward appearance both of the fruit and the tree, we should not have referred it to that class. These and some others do not merit to be particularly mentioned. 
  
 The quantity of fruit that is consumed at Batavia is incre|dible; but that which is publicly exposed to sale is generally over-ripe. A stranger however may get good fruit in a street called Passar Pissang, which lies north from the great church, 
 Page  741 
  
 and very near it.* This street is inhabited by none but Chinese fruit-sellers, who are supplied from the gardens of Gentle|men in the neighbourhood of the town, with such as is fresh, and excellent in its kind, for which however they must be paid more than four times the market price. 
  
 The town in general is supplied from a considerable dis|tance, where great quantities of land are cultivated merely for the production of fruit. The country people, to whom these lands belong, meet the people of the town at two great markets; one on Monday, called Passar Sineen; and the other on Saturday, called Passar Tanabank. These fairs are held at places considerably distant from each other, for the convenience of different districts; neither of them how|ever are more than five miles distant from Batavia. At these fairs, the best fruit may be bought at the cheapest rate; and the sight of them to a European is very entertaining. The quantity of fruit is astonishing; forty or fifty cart loads of the finest pine apples, packed as carelessly as turneps in England, are common, and other fruit in the same profu|sion. The days however on which these markets are held are ill contrived; the time between Saturday and Monday is too short, and that between Monday and Saturday too long: great part of what is bought on Monday is always much the worse for keeping before a new stock can be bought, either by the retailer or consumer; so that for seve|ral days in every week there is no good fruit in the hands of any people but the Chinese in Passar Pissang. 
  
 The inhabitants of this part of India practise a luxury which seems to be but little attended to in other countries; they are continually burning aromatic woods and resins, and scatter odours round them in a profusion of flowers, possibly as an antidote to the noisome effluvia of their ditches 
 Page  742 
  
 and canals.* Of sweet ? smelling ? flowers they have a great va|riety, altogether unknown in Europe, the chief of which I shall briefly describe. 
  
 1. The Champacka, or Michelia Champacca. This grows upon a tree as large as an apple tree, and consists of fifteen long narrow petala, which give it the appearance of being double, though in reality it is not so: its colour is yellow, and much deeper than that of a jonquil, to which it has some resem|blance in ? smell ? . 
 
 
 Wild fowl in general is scarce. We once saw a wild duck in the fields, but never any that were to be sold. We fre|quently saw snipes of two kinds, one of them exactly the same as that in Europe, and a kind of thrush was always to be had in great plenty of the Portuguese, who, for I know not what reason, seem to have monopolized the wild fowl and game. Of snipes, it is remarkable that they are found in more parts of the world than any other bird, being com|mon almost all over Europe, Asia, Africa, and America. 
  
 With respect to drink, Nature has not been quite so liberal to the inhabitants of Java as to some whom she has placed in the less fruitful regions of the north. The native Javanese, and most of the other Indians who inhabit this island, are indeed Mahometans, and therefore have no reason to regret the want of wine; but, as if the prohibition of their law respected only the manner of becoming drunk, and not drunkenness itself, they chew opium, to the total subversion not only of their understanding but their health. 
  
 The arrack that is made here, is too well known to need a description: besides which, the palm yields a wine of the same kind with that which has already been described in the account of the island of Savu; it is procured from the same tree, in the same manner, and is sold in three states. The first, in which it is called Tuac manise, differs little from that in which it comes from the tree; yet even this has received 
 Page  746 
 ?1 page duplicate? 
 Page  747 
 ?1 page duplicate? 
 Page  748 
  
 some preparation altogether unknown to us,* in consequence of which it will keep eight and forty hours, though other|wise it would spoil in twelve: in this state it has an agreeable sweetness, and will not intoxicate. In the other two states it has undergone a fermentation, and received an infusion of cer|tain herbs and roots, by which it loses its sweetness, and ac|quires a taste very austere and disagreeable. In one of these states it is called Tuac cras, and in the other Tuac cuning, but the specific difference I do not know; in both, however, it intoxicates very powerfully. A liquor called Tuac is also made from the cocoa-nut tree, but this is used chiefly to put into the arrack, for in that which is good it is an essential in|gredient. 
  
 Page  749 
 CHAP. XIV. Some Account of the Inhabitants of Batavia, and the ad|jacent Country, their Manners, Customs, and Manner of Life. 
 THE town of Batavia, although,* as I have already ob|served, it is the capital of die Dutch dominions in India, is so far from being peopled with Dutchmen, that not one fifth part, even of the European inhabitants of the town, and its environs, are natives of Holland, or of Dutch extraction: the greater part are Portuguese, and besides Europeans, there are Indians of various nations, and Chinese, besides a great number of negro slaves. In the troops, there are natives of almost every country in Europe, but the Germans are more than all the rest put together; there are some English and French, but the Dutch, though other Europeans are per|mitted to get money here, keep all the power in their own hands, and consequently possess all public employments. No man, of whatever nation, can come hither to settle, in any other character than that of a soldier in the Company ' s ser|vice, in which, before they are accepted, they must covenant to remain five years. As soon however as this form has been complied with, they are allowed, upon application to the council, to absent themselves from their corps, and enter immediately into any branch of trade, which their money or credit will enable them to carry on; and by this means it is that all the white inhabitants of the place are soldiers. 
  
 Women, however, of all nations, are permitted to settle here, without coming under any restrictions; yet we were 
 Page  750
 
 The principal solemnity among them is a wedding, upon which occasion both the families borrow as many ornaments of gold and silver as they can, to adorn the bride and bride-groom, so that their dresses are very showy and magnificent. The feasts that are given upon these occasions among the rich, last sometimes a fortnight, and sometimes longer; and during this time, the man, although married on the first day, is, by the women, kept from his wife. 
  
 The language that is spoken among all these people, from what place soever they originally came, is the Malay; at least it is a language so called, and probably it is a very 
 Page  753 
  
 corrupt dialect of that spoken at Malacca.* Every little island indeed has a language of its own, and Java has two or three, but this lingua franca is the only language that is now spoken here, and, as I am told, it prevails over a great part of the East Indies. A dictionary of Malay and English was pub|lished in London by Thomas Bowrey, in the year 1701. 
  
 Their women wear as much hair as can grow upon the head, and to increase the quantity, they use oils, and other preparations of various kinds. Of this ornament Nature has been very liberal; it is universally black, and is formed into a kind of circular wreath upon the top of the head, where it is fastened with a bodkin, in a taste which we thought inex|pressibly elegant: the wreath of hair is surrounded by an|other of flowers, in which the Arabian jessamine is beautifully intermixed with the golden stars of the Bonger Tanjong. 
  
 Both sexes constantly bathe themselves in the river at least once a day, a practice which, in this hot country, is equally necessary both to personal delicacy and health. The teeth of these people also, whatever they may suffer in their co|lour by chewing beetle, are an object of great attention: the ends of them, both in the upper and under jaw, are rubbed with a kind of whetstone, by a very troublesome and painful operation, till they are perfectly even and slat, so that they cannot lose less than half a line in their length. A deep grove is then made cross the teeth of the upper jaw, parallel with the gums, and in the middle between them and the extremity of the teeth; the depth of this groove is at least equal to one-fourth of the thickness of the teeth, so that it penetrates far beyond what is called the enamel, the least injury to which, according to the dentists of Europe, is fatal; yet among these people, where the practice of thus wounding the enamel is universal, we never saw a rotten 
 Page  750 
  
 told that there were not,* when we were at Batavia, twenty women in the place that were born in Europe, but that the white women, who were by no means scarce, were descen|dants from European parents of the third or fourth genera|tion, the gleanings of many families who had successively come hither, and in the male line become extinct; for it is certain that, whatever be the cause, this climate is not so fatal to the ladies as to the other sex. 
  
 These women imitate the Indians in every particular; their dress is made of the same materials, their hair is worn in the same manner, and they are equally enslaved by the habit of chewing betel. 
  
 The merchants carry on their business here with less trouble perhaps than in any other part of the world: every manufacture is managed by the Chinese, who sell the pro|duce of their labour to the merchant, resident here, for they are permitted to sell it to no one else; so that when a ship comes in, and bespeaks perhaps a hundred leagers of arrack, or any quantity of other commodities, the merchant has no|thing to do but to send orders to his Chinese to see them de|livered on board: he obeys the command, brings a receipt signed by the master of the ship for the goods to his employer, who receives the money, and having deducted his profit, pays the Chinese his demand. With goods that are im|ported, however, the merchant has a little more trouble, for these he must examine, receive, and lay up in his warehouse, according to the practice of other countries. 
  
 The Portuguese are called by the natives Oranserane, or Nazareen men, (Oran, being Man in the language of the country,) to distinguish them from other Europeans; yet they are included in the general appellation of Caper, or Cafir, an opprobrious term, applied by Mahometans to all who do not
Their women wear as much hair as can grow upon the head, and to increase the quantity, they use oils, and other preparations of various kinds. Of this ornament Nature has been very liberal; it is universally black, and is formed into a kind of circular wreath upon the top of the head, where it is fastened with a bodkin, in a taste which we thought inex|pressibly elegant: the wreath of hair is surrounded by an|other of flowers, in which the Arabian jessamine is beautifully intermixed with the golden stars of the Bonger Tanjong. 
  
 Both sexes constantly bathe themselves in the river at least once a day, a practice which, in this hot country, is equally necessary both to personal delicacy and health. The teeth of these people also, whatever they may suffer in their co|lour by chewing beetle, are an object of great attention: the ends of them, both in the upper and under jaw, are rubbed with a kind of whetstone, by a very troublesome and painful operation, till they are perfectly even and slat, so that they cannot lose less than half a line in their length. A deep grove is then made cross the teeth of the upper jaw, parallel with the gums, and in the middle between them and the extremity of the teeth; the depth of this groove is at least equal to one-fourth of the thickness of the teeth, so that it penetrates far beyond what is called the enamel, the least injury to which, according to the dentists of Europe, is fatal; yet among these people, where the practice of thus wounding the enamel is universal, we never saw a rotten 
 Page  754 
  
 tooth;* nor is the blackness a stain, but a covering, which may be washed off at pleasure, and the teeth then appear as white as ivory, which however is not an excellence in the estimation of the belles and beaus of these nations. 
  
 These are the people among whom the practice that is called a mock, or running a muck, has prevailed for time im|memorial. It is well known, that to run a muck in the original sense of the word, is to get intoxicated with opium, and then rush into the street with a drawn weapon, and kill whoever comes in the way, till the party is himself either killed or taken prisoner; of this several instances happened while we were at Batavia, and one of the officers, whose bu|siness it is, among other things, to apprehend such people, told us, that there was scarcely a week in which he, or some of his brethren, were not called upon to take one of them into custody. In one of the instances that came to our know|lege, the party had been severely injured by the perfidy of women, and was mad with jealousy before he made himself drunk with opium; and we were told, that the Indian who runs a muck is always first driven to desperation by some out|rage, and always first revenges himself upon those who have done him wrong: we were also told, that though these un|happy wretches afterwards run into the street with a weapon in their hand, frantic and foaming at the mouth, yet they never kill any but those who attempt to apprehend them, or those whom they suspect of such an intention, and that who|ever gives them way is safe. They are generally slaves, who indeed are most subject to insults, and least able to obtain legal redress: freemen, however, are sometimes provoked into this extravagance, and one of the persons who run a muck while we were at Batavia, was free and in easy circum|stances. He was jealous of his own brother, whom he first killed, and afterwards two others, who attempted to oppose 
 Page  755 
  
 him: he did not, however, come out of his house,* but en|deavoured to defend himself in it, though the opium had so far deprived him of his senses, that of three muskets, which he attempted to use against the officers of justice, not one was either loaded or primed. If the officer takes one of these amocks, or mohawks, as they have been called by an easy corruption, alive, his reward is very considerable, but if he kills them, nothing is added to his usual pay; yet such is the fury of their desperation, that three out of four are of necessity destroyed in the attempt to secure them, though the officers are provided with instruments like large tongs, or pincers, to lay hold of them without coming with|in the reach of their weapon. Those who happen to be taken alive are generally wounded, but they are always broken alive upon the wheel, and if the physician who is ap|pointed to examine their wounds, thinks them likely to be mortal, the punishment is inflicted immediately, and the place of execution is generally the spot where the first mur|der was committed. 
  
 Among these people, there are many absurd practices and opinions which they derive from their Pagan ancestors: they believe that the devil, whom they call Satan, is the cause of all sickness and adversity, and for this reason, when they are sick, or in distress, they consecrate meat, money, and other things to him as a propitiation. If any one among them is restless, and dreams for two or three nights succes|sively, he concludes that Satan has taken that method of laying his commands upon him, which if he neglects to fulfil, he will certainly suffer sickness or death, though they are not revealed with sufficient perspicuity to ascertain their meaning: to interpret his dream, therefore, he taxes his wits to the uttermost, and if, by taking it literally or figu|ratively, directly or by contraries, he can put no explanation 
 Page  756 
  
 upon it that perfectly satisfies him,* he has recourse to the cawin or priest, who assists him with a comment and illus|trations, and perfectly reveals the mysterious suggestions of the night. It generally appears that the devil wants victuals or money, which are always allotted him, and being placed on a little plate of cocoa-nut leaves, are hung upon the branch of a tree near the river, so that it seems not to be the opinion of these people, that in prowling the earth the devil "walketh through dry places." Mr. Banks once asked, whether they thought Satan spent the money, or eat the vic|tuals; he was answered, that as to the money it was considered rather as a mulct upon an offender, than a gift to him who had enjoined it, and that therefore if it was devoted by the dreamer, it mattered not into whose hands it came, and they supposed that it was generally the prize of some stranger who wandered that way; but as to the meat they were clearly of opinion that, although the devil did not eat the gross parts, yet, by bringing his mouth near it, he sucked out all its savour without changing its position, so that after|wards it was as tasteless as water. 
  
 But they have another superstitious opinion that is still more unaccountable. They believe that women, when they are delivered of children, are frequently at the same time delivered of a young crocodile, as a twin to the infant: they believe that these creatures are received most carefully by the midwife, and immediately carried down to the river, and put into the water. The family in which such a birth is supposed to have happened, constantly put victuals into the river for their amphibious relation, and especially the twin, who, as long as he lives, goes down to the river at stated seasons, to fulfil this fraternal duty, for the neglect of which it is the universal opinion that he will be visited with sickness or death. What could at first produce a notion so 
 Page  757 
 
