XII. The Nature of the Graff be∣comes changed in process of time. By this Art of Graffing, not only Trees of the same Nature are mingled, as it were, and united; as Apple-trees with Apple-trees, Pear-trees with Pear-trees, &amp;c. but also any other Trees, tho '  never so different in Nature. Yet they who would have their Graffs to thrive, had best set them on a stock of the same kind; because the strings of Plants that are of a like Nature, do better agree together, and have their pores and passages dispos ' d in one and the same manner. However it is observ ' d, that in process of time the Seed of the Graff doth very much degenerate: The Reason whereof is, be∣cause the Seed proceeds from the Matrix or Pith of the Tree, which being the product of the wild Stock, by degrees affects the Seed, and makes it to degenerate. 
 XIII. What Pores of the Stock cor∣respond or agree with the Pores of the Graff. Some, it may be, will question how it comes to pass, that the Scion unites with the Stock, seeing that their pores do not answer to one another, but differ in their situation and figure. To which I Answer, That it is not necessary that all the pores of the Stock should agree with those of the Graff, or that every one of both their strings should be united; it being sufficient if the greatest part of them answer to each other, and give way to the passage of the Alimental Juice. As we see that 2 pieces of Glass laid upon one another, tho '  all the pores do not exactly agree, do notwithstanding transmit the Light. For we must not imagine, that the Graff is joyned to the Stock, into which it is graffed with the same firmness and evenness, as its own connatural Parts are; since it hath often been found, that in an Old tree, the Part that hath been graffed on it, hath been torn off by a strong Wind, tho '  for many years together, it had been united to it no otherwise, than as if it had been a Connatural part of it. For in order to the con∣veyance of the Juice from the Root to all the parts of the Tree, it is not necessary that all the Pores should exactly agree; because we find that the Earth affords Nourishment to Plants, not∣withstanding that their Pores do not every way agree with those of the Earth. And tho '  we should grant, that such a conformity of Pores should be necessary for the common Nourishment of the Stock and the Graff; yet I see no reason, but that the same conformation may be wrought in process of time, because the Sap that comes from the Root hath power of making to it self Channels and Passages, as hath been hinted before: For the Fire, by the motion whereof it is driven upwards, thrusting it forwards, helps it to make these Passages and Channels for it self. 
 XIV. In Graffing, many things are to be ob∣served To the end that Graffing may be duly perform∣ed, we must take heed, First, That the Scion to be Graffed, be not too soft or tender; for then, because of the tender texture of its strings, it will not be able to bear the hardness of the Stock into which it is Graffed. Neither on the other hand must it be too dry; for in that case it will not unite and grow into one with the Stock. Secondly, That the Graff be taken from a fruitful and good Tree, and, as near as may be, of the same kind; as the Graff of an Apple-tree, upon the Stock of an Apple-tree. For if they be of different kinds, the Fruit thereby becomes spoiled; as if one should graff an Apple-tree upon a Willow or an Ash, the Apples will be found like to a Crab or Wilding. Thirdly, That the Scion be without any delay graffed, lest the Air entring into the Pores, should hinder their growing into one. Fourthly, That the Stock be duly slit, lest the slit being made too deep, should hinder the closing of it up again. Fifthly, That the Graff be so cut, as that the Woody part of it may joyn with the Wood, and the Bark of it with the Bark of the Stock. Sixthly, That the Stock on which we intend to graff, have stood in the ground for some Months, lest in case it should not be well rooted, it might not furnish Sap enough to feed its young Nursling. Seventhly, The top of the Scion is to be cut off, that by beating back the Juice it may swell and grow bigger. Eighthly, That when the Graff is put into the slit, the place must be pasted about with Wax and Gum, or with Clay and Moss, to keep out all external Moisture Ninthly, That a fit Season of the Year be observed; which is, after the Winter Solstice, and after the Blowing of the West Wind; that is▪ from the 7 th of February to the Spring Solstice. Tenthly, It is also to be noted, that some Trees are altogether unfit for Graffing; as the Oak, the Fir-tree, and other Resiniferous-trees; because the Oak, by rea∣son of its hardness, will not be slit; and when slit will not grow together again: And Resiniferous-trees, because of their clammy Liquor, have their pores so obstructed, that the Juice cannot be readilyconveyed to the Graff. And, Eleventhly, That the parts of the Scion may retain the same situa∣tion when graffed on the Stock, as it had before it was cut off from its own Tree: As by Example, If the Graff, before it was cut off from the Tree did lean towards the South, in Graffing it must likewise be turned that way. See the Natural History concerning Plants. 
 CHAP. XIII. Of the Colours of Plants. I. What Co∣lour is. AS to our present purpose, it is sufficient for us to know, that Colours are nothing else, but certain modificatious of Light, caused in Bodies by the different disposition of their Surfaces. Whereof we have a manifest proof in cutting of an Apple, the inner parts whereof appear white at first; but soon after turn yellow, and lastly become of a brown Colour, according as its outward parts are more dried. Such a modification of Light does especially belong to Plants, since that all their parts are ting ' d with some Colour or other, and are remarkable for their whiteness, yellow, red Colour, &amp;c. yea, and sometimes are successively green, yellow, red or white, according as the Tex∣ture of the little particles, whereof they are com∣pounded, is changed, and the disposition of the surface alter ' d. The Matter therefore in question is, What that is in Plants that makes the Light reflected from them to acquire such and such Modi∣fications, which impress these Sensations on the Eye. 
 II. Why the Roots of Plants are commonly White. The Roots of Plants are generally white; be∣cause they contain much Spermatick matter, which being comprest by the Earth that lies round it, and bindred from flying up into the Air, is forced to return into the substance of the Plant; where, by the warmth of the inner part of the Earth, it is concocted anew, and being coagulated into a kind of frothy Substance, doth reflect the Light on all sides, and so produce a white Colour. For the Reason why Snow and Froth are white, is, because they consist of little round Bodies, which from every point reflect the Sun-beams. For the smaller these Bubbles are, the more white doth the Subject appear; for seeing that every one of them, from all their parts reflect the Light, it must needs fol∣low, that the more there are of these, within that determinate Space, the more Rays will be reflected; that being a white Colour, which comes nearest to the Nature of Light. Hence it is that Liquor, tho '  it be of never so black a Colour, turns white as soon as it is turned to Froth; as appears in the froth of Ink; and therefore it is no wonder that the Root of a Plant being cover ' d with Earth, ap∣pears white, because it consists of clammy Humours, which by the warmth of the Earth is easily turned into little round Pellets. 
 III. For the same Rea∣son a Lilly is White. And it is for the same Reason that a Lilly is white; because the surface of it riseth into Bub∣bles, from all the several parts whereof it reflects the Light. For in a Lilly, the Alimental Juice is very exactly percolated, and its substance being well concocted, turns to round pellets or bubbles. In like manner as we see, that our food becomes turned into Chyle, when after digestion in the Sto∣mach, it is resolved into little round Bodies; which Chyle afterwards in the Breasts becomes turned into Milk. The Reason therefore of the whiteness of a Lilly is, because the little Skin wherewith its Substance is covered, consists of round Pellets, as is manifest to those that look upon it through a Mi∣croscope. 
 IV. Whence the Red Colour that is in Flowers proceeds. Some Flowers are Red as Roses, and Tulips, because their parts are so disposed that the Globuli of the Second Element, which constitute Light, are by them more swiftly whirl ' d about than they move to right lines. Wherefore whensoever the light in any Body is so modified, that its Aethereal Globuli are more swiftly turned round, than they move right forwards, than the surface of those bo∣dies from whence the Light is reflected appears Red. Thus a white Flame, when smoke comes to it, turns Red. The Sun through a Mist, the Planet Mars by night, the Moon in the Clouds, a glowing Coal, and many other things are Red. Some Fruits therefore as Cherries, Grapes, Mul∣berries, &amp;c. are of a Red Colour, because the Juice whereof they consist, having never been exactly strained, and therefore containing several Particles that are not sufficiently digested, makes those Fruits to appear of that colour, by reflecting the Light accordingly. 
 V. The Cause of the Yel∣low Colour that ap∣pears in the Leaves of Plants. A Yellow Colour is peculiar to the Leaves of Trees and Fruits, whilst they are ripening; be∣cause having lost the moisture, which gave them their Greeness, they now contain nothing but such a Juice, as is well strain ' d and prepar ' d; which makes their outside to rise into greater Bubbles or round Bodies, which because they leave great intervals between them, must needs cause a great variation in the Reflexion of Light. For if you look upon Yellow Bodies with a Microscope, you will find them wholly rough and uneven, and full of innumerable protuberances; by which means the Light reflected from them becomes so modified, that the whirling about of the Globuli is somewhat more rapid than their motion to right lines. For the Yellow Colour mediates betwixt White and Red; which may be demonstrated to the Eye from the mingling of Liquors; for if you mix any White and Red Liquor together, the result will be Yellow. And the same will be if we twist a Lace or Girdle of the smallest White and Red Threads. 
 VI. The Blue Colour is peculiar to some Flow∣ers. Blue is the peculiar Colour of some Flowers, be∣cause the Juice that nourisheth them, is in such a manner concocted and percolated, that from thence such a degree of Darkness and Transparency re∣sults, as produceth such a Reflexion of the Rays, that the Globuli of them, have more of a straight, than of a circular motion. For a Blue Colour comes between a Black and Red; as appears in the Air, which in the day-time looks Blue, by reason of the Bodies that are tost up and down in it, and reflect the Rays to us. And forasmuch as these Rays are but few in number, and the Shades many, therefore it is necessary that the Heaven should appear of a middle colour between Black and Red, that is of a Blue, in the day-time. This will be made manifest to us by mixing a very fine Red Powder, with another that is Black, or by laying a black Glass upon a red Glass, and look∣ing through them, for by either of these ways we shall find a Blue Colour produced. 
 VII. The Gene∣ral Colour of Plants is the Green Colour. The most common colour belonging to Plants is the Green, which is observed in all of them aswell at their springing out of the ground, as in their growth. The cause of this Colour is the abundance of moisture that is in Plants, when it is but slightly strained and elaborated. Hence it is that those Herbs and Leaves have more of this Greeness by how much the more they abound with moisture, and less of it, as the moisture is less, and better digested. This Green Colour is mixed of Yellow and Blue; which may be made out by se∣veral experiments; for if we look upon the Sky, which is Blue, through a Yellow Glass, it will ap∣pear Green; so likewise if we lay a Blue Glass upon a Yellow, and look through it upon any Ob∣ject, it will appear Green: and so we shall find that by mixing a Blue and Yellow Colour ' d Liquor together, the mixture will be Green. 
 VIII. What is the Cause of that varie∣ty of Co∣lours that is in Tulips. There be many Flowers that are of divers co∣lours, as Tulips; which cannot proceed from any other cause, but the different concoction of the Alimental Juice; because the matter is better pre∣served and purified in the great Bulbous Roots of Tulips; and better strained through their long and thick Stalks, wherein also it is the better concocted and distributed. But yet it cannot be expected that Tulips every year should retain the same colours; for the temper of the weather chang∣ing considerably every year, it cannot be other∣wise but that thereupon a different concoction, pre∣paration and distribution of the Alimental Juice must follow, and consequently the colour also be changed. Yea, we find sometimes that Tulips, in one and the same year do change their colours, and that such as before were White, turn Red, and the Red, White. When streaks of a Purple Colour ap∣pear in a white Tulip, it is a sign that the thicker parts of the Juice do cause an obstruction, where∣by the free motion thereof to the utmost parts of the Flower is hindred. 
 IX. Why Leaves and Flow∣ers change their Co∣lours. And the same may be said of the Leaves and Fruits of Trees changing their colours. For the Leaves are Green at first, by reason of the plenty of Moisture, and the Juice that is not throughly ela∣borated or prepared; and from this Green Colour they are changed into a Reddish, and lastly from that to a Yellow; because the Moisture, which at first was the cause of the Green Colour, being di∣minished gives way for the Red Colour to succeed, and afterwards flying all away, they are thereby changed into a Yellow Colour, till at last extream driness turns them White. In like manner Fruit, as it comes to be ripe, quits its Green Colour; which becomes changed into some other; because the Juice, which before was raw, as wanting due preparation, when the Fruit grows ripe, becomes depurated and percolated to perfection: so that the contexture of parts being by this means changed, it is no wonder that the Fruit loseth its green Co∣lour, and becomes Red, or Yellow, or of a Colour mixt of both. 
 CHAP. XIV. Of the several Tasts of Plants. I. What Tast or Savor is, and wherein consists. BY the word Tast or Savor, we understand that virtue in Bodies, whereby they are able to produce in us the sense of Tast. Which vir∣tue consists in the Particles of Bodies, inasmuch as they are sufficiently diluted, subtil and agitated to enter the pores of our Tongue, and to move those Nerves, wherewith the Instrument of Tasting is is furnish ' d. For tho '  Taste be properly in the Mouth, and that the Tongue or Palat is formally that which tastes; yet it may be said, that the things themselves, which are taken into our Mouths, are the Causes of the said Taste, and according to their several magnitude, figure and motion, do produce different tastes or savours. So that things savoury, or endued with taste, are said to be such, only because they move the Filaments of the Nerves of our Tongue in such a manner, as is necessary to produce in them the sense of Tasting. And forasmuch as sensible Objects cannot affect those Nerves, except they be endued with a cer∣tain motion, figure, and magnitude; therefore to these three we must assign all the diversity of Tastes or Savours we meet with in any Ob∣jects. 
 II. Why some Fruits are insipid. This is evident from the Insipidness we some∣times find in Plants, and their several parts. For if we enquire into the Reason why some of them are Insipid, and do not affect the Tongue or Palat, we shall find the Reason to be, because they do not furnish such Particles, as by the assistance of Moisture can enter the Tongue, and strike its Nerves. Thus we find, that when Grapes are first knotted, they impress no affection upon the Tongue, and do only touch the outside of it, without entring its pores; because the particles of Juice, which come up from the Root to compose them, do stick close together, and are not easily separated. Daily Experience also teacheth us, that Water is in a manner wholly insipid, because its Particles are so thin and subtil, that they can affect the Organ of Taste very little or nothing. In like manner Air is void of all Taste, because it floats only upon the Spittle, and the Parts of it, by rea∣son of their extream lightness and subtilty, can make no impression upon the Tongue. 
 III. What is required to make a thing sapid or savoury. That a thing be savoury, it is necessary for its Parts to be separated from each other, that so joyning themselves to the Spittle in our Mouths, they may variously affect the Nerves of our Tongue. Now this is done by means of Heat, the Property whereof is, to resolve Bodies, open their pores, and to make a ready way for the Moisture to enter. Whence it is, that when Fruits tend to Maturity, by means of the heat of the Sun, recon∣ciling their driness and moisture together, various Tastes are imprest upon them, according to their different degrees of Maturity: First, an Astringent taste, then a Harsh taste, afterwards a Sowr, and last of all, a Sweet taste; and if the Heat be too great a smart or biting, and bitter Taste. 
 IV. Why Sloes have an Astringent taste. An Astringent taste we find in all unripe Fruit, and more especially in Sloes, which with great harshness and astringence affect the Tongue, as if they prick ' d it with Pins and Thorns; because they consist of keen and stiff Parts. For the Juice whereof they consist being not well strained, con∣tains many stiff and inflexible little Bodies, such as are the particles that compose Salt; so that it is no wonder that they exasperate the Tongue, and astringe or contract the same. 
 V. Onions and Pepper have a smart and biting Taste. In Onions, Ginger, Pepper, Mustard-seed, &amp;c. we perceive a smart and biting Taste; because the particles of these Objects do prick the Tongue, and cause the same Division in it, which Fire would, if applied to it. The Reason is, because they consist of long, thin, and stiff particles, which make the Bodies whereto they belong dry and stiff. But being boil ' d in Water, they lose their Acrimony; for that the Moisture penetrating them, dissolves their Salt and other smart little Bodies, and opening their pores, carries them away. Yea, some of these may be so macerated or soaked, as that by quitting all their Biting and Harsh par∣ticles, they may become sweet, and at last in∣sipid. 
 VI. How Sweet∣ness is pro∣duc ' d in Ripe fruits. We meet with a Sweet taste, almost in all Ripe Fruits, which with great smoothness and evenness affect the Tongue. For in Ripe Fruits, by the continual heat of the Sun, the Alimental Juice is very exactly and throughly strained, and the par∣ticles that before were entangled, are resolved, by which means they readily enter the pores of the Tongue, and affect it with a pleasing Titillation. This Taste is most pleasant and grateful to young Children, the small strings of whose Nerves are more fine, small and subtil; but is not so accepta∣ble to those who have a thicker Texture of Nerves, being affected by what is acrimonious, and there∣fore look upon a sweet Taste, to be unpleasant. 
 VII. A Sowr taste proper to Limons. A Sowr taste is found in Limons, Sorrel, and the like, which do prick and cut the Tongue. It is felt somewhat in the same manner, as a smart or biting Taste, saving only that Sowr things are accompanied with a sense of constringent Cold. The Reason is, because this Savour consists in subtil and sharp Particles, which do easily penetrate the Organ of Taste, and pierce it like so many Thorns. And therefore we must conclude, that these Bodies consist of longish and stiff particles, somewhat like Needles: Which we shall readily admit, if we consider that all Fruits, before that they come to their full Ripeness, are of a Sowr taste; which could not be, if that Taste did not include something that is common to them all. Now we can meet with nothing that is common to them all, except that Disposition of Parts, seeing they consist of an Earthy Juice, which did cleave to the long and thin pores of the small Twigs, whence these Fruits do grow. 
 VIII. Whence that Bit∣terness that is observed in Rotten Apples, doth pro∣ceed. A Bitter Taste is perceived in some rotten Pears and Apples, &amp;c. in the eating whereof the strings of the Nerves are unduly affected, and unplea∣santly vellicated. For Pears and Apples, when they begin to putrifie, get rough, uneven, and prickly particles; because then the more subtil and refined particles fly away, leaving none but the grosser and thicker behind them. For Putrefaction is such a Resolution of Parts, by which things be∣come worse than they were before. Hence it is that they who drink Wine, immediately after they have eaten a tainted Apple, and tending to putre∣faction, do perceive a Bitter taste; because the Wine mingling it self with those putrid particles, conveighs them to the inmost pores of the Tongue. This Bitterness is sometimes occasion ' d by too great Heat, when it is continual, and acts for a long time together upon Fruit. So that if Fruits, after their full Maturity, should continue long upon the Trees, it is not to be question ' d, but that by being too long expos ' d to the Heat of the Sun, their particles would become so rugged and twisted, that none would be left in them, to affect the Tongue with a Sweet taste, but would all ex∣asperate and bite it. A confirmation whereof we have in Flesh, which by too great heat of the Fire becomes scorched and burnt, and by this means acquires a Bitter taste, as doth also the Crust of Bread that is burnt, by being baked in an over∣heated Oven.
IX. Mint Tastes are found in some Fruits and Plants. Neither are these simple Savours or Tastes only found in Plants and Fruits, but also compound Savours; as the sweet and sowr Taste which is commonly found in Fruits, that are not yet arrived to the utmost degree of Maturity: As when some of their parts are longish and stiff, which prick the Tongue; whereas others, more smooth and pleasant, softly flowing over the Nerves of the Tongue, do only produce a kind of pleasant Titillation on the Tongue. Another Taste is that which is Harsh and Sowr, which is that we perceive in those we call rough Wines. Another, Sowr and Astringent, which taste is found in the Juice of unripe Grapes, called Verjuice; the Cause whereof is this, that the particles which constitute the Grapes, are by the Heat of the Air separated from each other, and so acting independently, they produce both a sowr and astringent Taste. 
 CHAP. XV. Of the Odour or Scent of Plants. I. Wherein Taste and Scent do agree. ODours, or Scents, have some affinity with Tastes, as being much deriv ' d from the same Principles. For as Taste consists in those little Bodies which penetrate the Tongue and Palat, and diversly affect them, according to their various Magnitude, Figure and Motion; so Odour consists in those particles which, flying in the Air, do enter our Nostrils, and variously affect the same. There is also another Resemblance between them, in that they are in a manner denominated alike, and are distinguish ' d by the same Differences. For as Tastes or Savours are chiefly distinguish ' d into Astringent, Smart or Biting, and Sweet: So of Odours or Scents, some are sweet; as in Musk, Roses, Orris, &amp;c. Others smart and stinging; as in Brimstone: Others, stinking or nasty; as in Bugs, and some Excrements: Others, sharp, as the Scent of Spike, &amp;c. 
 II. How Sa∣vours and Odours differ. But yet Scents and Tastes differ in this, that they do not consist in the same parts, nor affect the Organs after one and the same manner. For the particles that are productive of the sense of Taste, are moist; whereas those that cause Odours, are very dry and subtil. They differ also, in that a savoury Object cannot move the sense, except it touch the Organ; whereas a scented Object strikes the Organ at a distance: So that the Tongue, by its Moisture, takes out the Taste from the Object; whereas the Nostrils only admit the Odour transmitted to them from the Object. 
 III. The Nature of Odours consists in the efflux of Particles. Whence we may conclude, that the Nature of Odours consists in the Efflux of certain particles; which being diffus ' d in the Air, enter the inmost parts of the Nostrils, and there affect some Nerves derived from the Brain. This we perceive in Frankincense cast upon Coals, and any other Per∣fume, which evaporates in the Air, and is disperst into innumerable particles. Whence it is that Hard Bodies, which in their compact Nature affordno scent, when put to the fire yield an Odour; because, by the forceable motion thereof, some of those particles are set at liberty, and diffused through the Air.  ' Tis for this Reason, that Spanish Wax, which we make use of to seal Let∣ters, doth yield a sweet Scent, when put to the fire; as also that one Stone rubbed against another; and Iron violently struck by another Iron do send forth a smell, which before this motion was not perceptible. From which Instances it may appear also, that the Odours of Flowers consists in an Exhalation or Evaporation of some of the parts of them, which is the more evident, because when that is gone, they remain void of all smell. 
 IV. Why som Bodies have no Scent at all. Neither must we conclude from hence, that all manner of Effluvia that proceed from Bodies, must impress the sensation of Odour; for besides the emanation of particles, it is required that they move the Organ, and that in such a manner as is fit to produce this sense. For the particles of some Bodies may be so very fine and small, that they can∣not sufficiently move the Organ: Thus we find, that neither the Air we draw in, nor the Vapours that arise from the Water, do excite any sense of Smelling in us. And on the contrary, some Effluvia are so gross, that they cannot reach the Organ of Smelling; or if they do, are more apt to spoil it, than to produce any sense of Smelling in it. 
 V. The diffe∣rence of Odours de∣pends on the variety of Parts, that flow from a Body. The Diversity of Odours, for the most part, de∣pends on the same Principle, whence the variety of Savours doth proceed; that is, from that difference there is in the magnitude, motion and figure, of those particles that breath out from Odorous Bodies. Which we shall more readily assent to, if we con∣sider that there is some Analogy or Resemblance between savoury and odorous Objects; and that those which agree in taste, do generally agree in smell also. Thus all smart and biting Things to the taste, are also observ ' d to have a sharp and stinging Smell; and bitter Things, to have a scent that partakes something of Bitterness. The Reason whereof is, because the same Particles, which being mingled with Moisture, produce Taste or Savour▪ when exhal ' d into the Air, and entring our Nostrils create the sense of Smelling. In like manner Bo∣dies that are insipid, are commonly also destitute of scent. Thus Unripe Fruits, which have no more than an imperfect Taste (and the same may be said of Flowers) yield little or no Odour. I said, that it is so for the most part, because it sometimes happens, that there is not this agreement between the Taste and Scent in Objects; as appears in Roses and Myrrh, which tho '  they yield a pleasant smell to the Nostrils, yet have a bitter and unplea∣sant Taste. 
 VI. Why Odou are more perceives in Hot Seasons and Cli∣mat. Nothing more conduceth to the production of Odours, than Heat; because it readily opens and resolves Bodies. For as we see that Smoak is excited by Fire, and that the more subtil parts of the Wood are carried up into the Air: In like mannner Heat divides the parts of Bodies, dissolves their Texture, and makes way for them to fly abroad. For we observe that fruits and flowers smell by so much the more, as their Juice is better prepared by Heat, and more throughly digested. A Lilly, the more it hath been concocted with a lasting heat, the more odorous it is. Sweet Woods and Spices, the hotter the Countries are they grow in, the more strongly Sweet-scented they are; as ap∣pears in Frankinsence, Storax, Myrrh, Balm of Gilead, &amp;c. Because the Juice of Plants in those Countries being exceeding well digested, is the more easily resolv ' d into an Odoriferous breath or steam. Wherefore it is not to be wondred at, that the Plants that grow with us are not so odorous, as those that grow in Arabia, and other hot and dry Countries; because the Concoction cannot be per∣fected for want of Heat, the superfluous moisture hindring the more dry particles from exhaling into the Air. Hence it is that most things, when dried, do acquire a stronger Odour; and for the same Reason, Ripe Fruits are more and better scented, than those which are unripe. This proves all Odo∣rous things to be hot, and that they suffer a con∣tinual efflux of their parts. And therefore those who would preserve the Sweet-scentedness of Musk, do wrap it in Cotton, which doth entangle its Effluvia, and hinder it from exhaling too fast. Accordingly also we find, that in Colder weather scents are dull and weak, because Cold stops the Pores of Bodies, and by keeping their parts at rest, hinder them from breathing out in Exhala∣tions. 
 VII. Flowers smell more sweetly at a distance. Flowers are observ ' d not to smell so sweet near at hand, as at a distance, if it be not too great. The Reason is, because they who put the flowers to their Nostrils, do take in many Heterogenous parts of Herbs, which are mingled or entangled with those of the flower, but are not able to ac∣company them at any distance, but are soon scat∣ter ' d in the Air, or fall down, because of their Thickness. Hence it is that a small quantity of Civet smells sweet, whereas a greater quantity of it rather stinks, and offends the smell. To which we may add, that the Odorous Exhalations scatter ' d in the Air, become there strained and defoecated of their more gross and impure parts; as we see that Water mingled with Wine, doth dull and weaken the smell, as well as the strength of it; and there∣fore it is no wonder, that an Odorous Exhalation, that hath been diffused through the Air, is more grateful, than that which we draw from the Body it self, apply ' d to our Nostrils. 
 VIII. Perfumes waste con∣tinually. Forasmuch as Bodies continually send forth some of their Particles, we must conclude they cannot but waste by degrees. So we find, that those Sweet-scents that are excited by Heat, do waste by degrees, and at last lose all their Odour. But those Perfumes which do not stand in need of this Excitation by fire, as Musk and Civet, do not so soon consume, but continue their scent for a long time, without any sensible diminution; because the agitation of their particles is very moderate, and consequently but a few of them are dispersed or lost in the Air. 
 CHAP. XVI. Of the Diseases and Death of Plants. I. What is the Death of Plants. FOrasmuch as Contraries discover each others Nature, and that Life and Death are Con∣traries, it will not be difficult to find out why Plants do perish; and what the Cause is, why they cease to be nourished; to grow and increase; and to express it in one word, why they die. Forseeing that the Alimentary Juice is the immediate Principle of Motion in Plants, and that their Life doth consist in the due distribution thereof by Heat; it evidently follows, that the death or perishing of Plants must consist in the defect of this Alimentary distribution. 
 II. How many several ways Death may hap∣pen to Plants. But because this Defect may proceed from many Causes, we will first speak of the Distempers to which they are subject, and shew how many several ways their Vital functions may be perverted. For besides the undue disposition of their Parts; as when the Top of them is too much bended down towards the Earth; when they are full of knots, and when the distribution of their Aliment is in∣terrupted by callous Bumps; when their parts are separated; or when they exceed, or are defective: I say, besides these, there are many other ways whereby they may be brought to their end; as by an undue Temperature, when they are either choaked with too much Moisture, or consumed by too much Heat; when they are shut up and grow stiff, by extream Cold; or wither and pine away, by too much Drought. The Ancients reckon up those Distempers of Plants, which are described as followeth. 
 III. The effect of Rubigo or Mildew, upon Pulse and Corn. The Disease called Rubigo, or Mildew, in Pulse and Corn, is caused by a Dewy Moisture, which falling upon them, and continuing there, for want of sufficient Heat of the Sun to draw it up, doth by its biting sharpness, or Acrimony, scorch and corrupt the inmost substance of the Seed. This Disease also seizeth Vines; but may easily be prevented by cutting them later in the year; for the late pruning of them, makes them to flower so much the later, which generally prevents this Evil, because it seldom happens towards the latter end of the Spring. Moist and Dewy places are most subject to this Damage; as Vallies and shut up places, where the Winds have not their free Course; High ground being not subject to it. 
 IV. What Ro∣ration is. Roration; which is a distemper of kin to that of Mildew, is, when by too much Rain or Dew, Vines are blasted in their flowering, and bring forth only small and dwindling Grapes. And after the same manner other Plants are also spoiled, whilst they are yet young and tender, and not sufficiently rooted. 
 V. Uredo. Uredo, happens either when the Sun with too great heat scorcheth the Leaves and Clusters of Grapes, before that the Rainy or Dewy Moisture is shak ' d off from them; or when Rain or Snow, lying upon the Tendrils or Buds of the Vine, is by Cold congealed to Ice. 
 VI. Carbuncu∣lation. Carbunculation, is the blasting of the new sprouted Buds of the Vine, in the Spring time; because then the Vines are in danger to be smitten, either by the excessive Heat or Cold. For by too much Heat, the Texture of the strings or fibres of the Vine become so dissolved, as that thereby the Native disposition of the pores becomes wholly changed; and again by Cold it is so com∣prest, that the pores thereby are shut up, and leave no passage for the Alimentary Juice. 
 VII. Vermicu∣lation. Vermiculation is nothig else, but the Infestation of Plants by Worms; which Evil is very incident to Apple-trees, Pear-trees, and Fig-trees. For as Men, and other Animals, are subject to breed Worms, so Plants are obnoxious to the same distem∣per, especially such as bear sweet Fruits, for such as bear bitter or sharp Fruits (excepting only the Olive-tree) are never troubled therewith. The manner of these Insects infesting Plants is decla∣red to us by MALPIGHIUS; It is yet more wonderful, saith he, that commonly, by means of one or two Eggs of a Flie left upon the Leaf of a Vine, Oak, or other like, the whole Leaf be∣comes drawn together like a Purse about the said Egg, and so withers; yea such is the strange force of one of these Eggs, that not only the Leaf on which it is laid, suffers thus, but the infection being communicated to the Stalk of the Leaf, and from thence to the sprig that sticks to it, and the Leaves that are on it, the whole Branch is twisted and writhed together, and so withers and dies. 
 VIII. Defluvium. Defluvium, is a distemper whereby Trees, in the Spring-time especially, lose their Barks, by reason of some sharp humour, that dissolves the Glew whereby the Bark was fastned to the Wood, where∣upon they wither and die, being deprived of their Barks; except this Decortication be not round, but long-wise only, for then it is no prejudice to the Plants, unless it be very great indeed, especially in Resiniferous-trees whilst they are budding. This Distemper also proceeds sometimes from too much Drought, which young and tender Trees not being able to bear, they do easily shed their Leaves and Fruit. 
 IX. A Wound. A deep wound made in any Tree kills it, except the Firr, Pine and the Turpentine-tree, which de∣light in being wounded, and by this means become fruitful, whereas they were Barren before: for they abounding with a Fat and Clammy Humour, do void part of it by the wound, and thus being unloaden of some of their superabundant moisture, are afterwards better nourished, and advance more in growth. 
 X. How Plants Perish by a Natural Death. Plants, as Animals, perish two several ways, viz. by a Natural or Violent Death. Plants die naturally when Aliment is no longer transmitted to them from the Root; or when the Heat, that drives it upwards, and distributes it into all parts, vanisheth. For Heat, as is before mentioned, is the Principle of all motion in Plants, and therefore when that ceaseth, all the Functions of Germinati∣on and Nutrition must needs cease with it. 
 XI. How many ways Plants may d a vio∣l nt Death. Plants, may divers ways die violently; as first by a wound received; whereby we are not only to understand Cutting, Slitting, Pulling off the Bark, Boring or Lopping off the Top, but also Bruising, half Breaking, Tearing, &amp;c. For tho '  a Plant, whilst it is pluckt up out of the Ground, doth not suffer any wound, yet because the Passa∣ges whereby it drew in its Aliment, are stopt up, the parts that are towards the top must needs wi∣ther, and those that are near the Root must be choaked with the too great abundance of it.
XV. Some De∣ceptions of the Touch, instanced. The sense of Feeling is sometimes deceived, as when Women that are subject to the Fits of the Mother, complain of an extream cold in their Heads. And thus also places under ground, ap∣pear to us very cold in the Summer time, and in the Winter warm; when as indeed upon making a tryal with a Weather-glass, we shall find that there is no such change in the Temperature of the Place. 
 CHAP. XIII. Of the Sense of Tasting. I. What the Tast is. THE Tast is an External Sense, whereby an Animal, with the help of his Tongue and Palat, which are furnisht with the Nerves sub∣servient to this Sense, perceives the several diffe∣rences of Tasts and Savours. Or according to others, the Tast is a sensation, by means whereof, after that the Savoury Object hath made a due im∣pression of it self upon the prominent and porous little Nipples of the Tongue, the Soul residing in the Brain, perceives and judges of the difference of the Savour or Rellish. For according to the sentiment of our Modern Anatomists the Organs of Tast are the foresaid prominent and porous Nipples of the Tongue, or small Strings which proceed from its inmost membran. 
 II. Wherein the Touch and Taste do agree and differ. The Tast, hath some affinity with the Touch; and if we will believe ARISTOTLE, it is but a species of it. For whereas in the other Senses, the Organs are affected by their Objects at a di∣stance, and are agitated by little Bodies flowing from them, the Organ of the Tast, requires an intimate contact with its Object, and cannot be moved by it at a distance. Yet there is this diffe∣rence betwixt these Senses, that the Organ of the Tast is more intimately penetrated by the savoury Object, which more deeply insinuates its self into the Fibres thereof, than Tangible Objects enter the Skin. Hence it is that we see that persons who are over-tired, or that are fallen into a swoon, do presently revive, upon the drinking of a Draught of Wine; and Men that are like to die, are strangely recovered by taking some of the Cordial that is called the Imperial Water: which strange effects are only to be attributed to this, because the Particles of Wine and the Imperial Water dive deep into the Pores of the Tongue, and mingling with the Spirits do greatly revive them. 
 III. Two othe ways whereby these Sen∣ses do differ. Moreover these Senses differ also, First by rea∣son of their several Organs: For the Organ of Taste, is not like that of the Touch, diffused thoughout all the Fibrous parts of the Body, but throughout one part only, viz. the Tongue; which alone is affected by Savoury Objects. Secondly, According to the Disposition that may be found in the said Organ: Thus a Tongue that is dry and without Moisture, toucheth dry things, but per∣ceives no manner of Tast in them. Thirdly, Thick and whole Bodies affect the Organ of Feeling; whereas that of the Tast cannot be imprest upon but by thin and liquid Bodies, or such as are divi∣ded into small parts: and for this Reason Pills that are swallowed whole communicate no Tast to the Tongue or Palate, or very little, and that only be∣cause some of the particles, in gliding over the Tongue, are dissolved. 
 Book. 1. Part. 8. Chap. 13 
 Lens. Inv. I. Kip Sculp. 
 IV. The Tongue is the Or∣gan of Tasting. The Organ of the Tast is the Tongue, as well as the Inward and Spungy part of the Palate, be∣cause the surface of them both is full of those in∣numerable Nipples before mentioned. As con∣cerning the Tongue it is evident, that being of a soft, loose and spungy substance, it is most pro∣per to receive Savoury Bodies, mixed with some moisture. And accordingly we experience that if we touch any Savoury Matter with the tip of our Tongue only, we perceive the Tast of it: for the Nerves of the fifth and seventh Conjugation termi∣nate in the Tongue, which being inserted into 9 or 10 Muscles, become the Instruments of various Mo∣tions. For besides the Functions of Speaking and Singing, this Organ of the Tongue is of great use towards the moistning, mixing and swallowing of the Meat. All these Muscles divide the Tongue longwise into 2 parts, by means of a certain Ten∣dinous String, so as that this Organ, as well as those of the other senses, seems to be Double. Now that not only the Tongue, but also the upper part of the Throat or Palate is the Instrument of Tast∣ing, is very manifest, for when any savoury meat passeth towards the Gullet in order to its being swallowed, we perceive the Tast thereof, tho '  it never touched our Tongue in the inward part of our Palate (which some call the swallow) for∣asmuch as its Flesh is Spungy, and very proper to admit the Particles of Savoury Bodies. 
 V. That the Particles of any Savou∣ry Body may enter the Tongue, Moisture is required to dilute or mingle with the said matter Now to the end that these Particles may pene∣trate the Pores of the Tongue, and pass through the Texture of the Fibres, some moisture is requi∣red for to steep, resolve, melt and conveigh them. Hence Nature hath so provided, that the Mouth where the Food is chewed, hath a continual moi∣sture attending it, by means whereof, as a Men∣struum, the Particles of Sapid Bodies are melted, and conveighed into the Organ. For as we find that an Herb being bruised with a Pestle, or any other Instrument in a Wooden Dish or Bowl, doth with its Liquor penetrate the Wood, and insinuate it self into its Pores; as is evident from the Smell and Savour of the Herb that remains in the Bowl: in like manner our Food being minced in our Mouths, by the help of our Teeth into small pieces, and steept in our Spittle, doth easily affect the little Nerves of our Tongue, and is conveigh∣ed to the inmost parts thereof. And therefore Salt before it can affect the Tongue and be tasted, must be melted with some moisture; neither can Pepper be tasted except it be first steeped in, or mingled with the Spittle that is in the Mouth: for dry Bodies, without the Vehicle of moisture, cannot be conveighed to the inmost Recesses of this Organ. 
 VI. How the Sense of Tasting is performed in the Tongue. From what hath been said, it may easily be un∣derstood, how the sense of Tasting is performed, viz. when any savoury matter, being, as it were macerated with the Spittle, is conveighed into the spungy substance of the Tongue, and in its passage doth after divers manners affect the Nerves insert∣ed into the Tongue, by vellicating, biting, striking, tickling, wringing and stirring the same. Which different Affections are carried from the Organ to the Brain, where they make a different impression on the Mind, according to the diversity of the motion of the Fibres of the Organ. So that now it remains onlv to be explained whence the great va∣riety of Tastes and Savours doth proceed. 
 VII. Whence the Diversity of Savours and Re∣lishes doth arise. Which will easily be done, if we remember that the Faculty of perceiving Tastes in us, is not un∣like to that whereby we are sensible of Pain; that is, to the actuating of this Power nothing else is required, but that the savoury Bodies do move the slender filaments of the Nerves of the Tongue, or the prominent Nipples before mentioned, in such a manner, as Nature hath ordained for the effect∣ing of the sense of Tasting. In like manner as to the production of the sense of Pain it is suffi∣cient, that the Nerves subservient to the Touch be moved after such a particular manner: So that all the difference of savoury Bodies doth depend on the Thickness, Figure and Motion of their Parts. This may be evidenced by some instances; for let us suppose the foresaid Fibres of the Tongue to be agitated 4 several ways, viz. by Salt, Vinegar, or any other sour Liquor, Common Water and Brandy, so as that the Soul thence is stirred up to perceive 4 distinct Tastes. We shall easily conceive that Salt doth therefore prick, and as it were cut the Organ, because it consists of long, stiff and various corner ' d Particles, which with their points prick the small Fibres of the Tongue, and enter the same without the least bending or plying. Vinegar applied to the Organ, doth as it were slash and cut it, and by compression somewhat contract it, be∣cause the particles thereof by entring obliquely in∣to the Nerves, do slash the thin particles thereof, and dashing against the thicker parts they become bended, and so enter the pores slantingly. Com∣mon Water doth not enter the pores of the Tongue at all, and therefore doth neither prick nor pierce it, because its particles do only softly flow upon the Tongue, and lying sideways, because of their easie pliableness and bending, are scarcely percepti∣ble by the Taste, and therefore Water is lookt up∣on as insipid. Brandy doth bite and vellicate the Tongue, because the particles thereof penetrate most deeply, and are most swiftly moved. And the like account may be given of all other savoury Bodies, which according to the different disposition of their parts, can make different impressions upon the Organ of Tasting. 
 VIII. The Diffe∣rence of Tastes may proceed also from the Variety of the Organ. The difference of Tastes may also be caused by the Organ; for the various Texture and Disposition of the Tongue, may occasion a difference in the Taste of things. Thus persons that have a more fine and tender Organ, take delight in delicate Sa∣vours and Tasts; whereas those whose Instrument of Tasting is more gross, delight in more course viands and less exquisit Tasts. Thus Country People gene∣rally delight in course and Salt Meats; whereas Children are pleased with Sugar and sweet things. The reason is, because the Fibres of the Nerves are more fine and subtil in Children, and therefore are easily moved with a sweet Taste: whereas those of Rusticks are more gross and stiff, upon which nothing but strong and sharp things can make any impression. Wherefore it is no wonder to see that the Food which pleaseth the Palate of one Man, doth disgust another; because of the different disposition of the Organ in them both. 
 Yea it frequently happens that the same person, who at one time is pleased with some kind of Meats, may at another have an aversion against them; and we commonly experience, that those things which are most grateful to our Palates when we are Hungry and Thirsty, become un∣pleasant to us when we are full and satiated, and this because of some change in the Texture of the Organ, the Savoury particles not affecting the Tongue and Palat in the same manner, when the Pores of it are more straitned, than when they are dilated and more open. 
 IX. Why some loath those Viands which be∣fore they desired. Hence it is that Old men do loath some sorts of Meat, which they most delighted in when they were Youths; and that some Persons, after having accustom ' d themselves to some sort of Food, are greatly delighted therewith, tho '  before they loathed and could not endure it: Even because either the Organ in process of time grows dryer; or else, for that by Custom, and the frequent use of some sorts of Diet, some folds are formed in the Organ, which easily admit the particles of the Meat, which before they could not receive. The said variety of Taste may also proceed from the Tongue, being ting ' d with the Savour of some Salt, Bitter, or Sowr matter, which hath not been effac ' d by the eating of some Sweet thing, or by the drinking of a large draught of Liquor; for the Eating of Sweet-meats, and especially Drink∣ing, doth so resolve the hard and longish particles of Salt, the crooked particles of Bitter things, and the cutting particles of Sowr things, as to carry them along with it: And therefore it is that Drink tastes more grateful after the eating of Sowr things, and more delightfully affects the Tongue. 
 X. Deceptions of the Taste, and the Causes of them. Sometimes the Taste happens to be mistaken, not about the Affection imprest upon the Organ, but about the Cause from whence it proceeds. Thus they who are sick of the Jaundies, are not mistaken in that they suppose themselves to per∣ceive a bitter taste; for they do so, because the Gall is mingled with their Spittle; but they are deceived in attributing that bitter Taste to the Food they eat: In the same manner as they suppose the Objects they behold to be yellow, when indeed it is the Gall that depraves their Organ, and makes all the Objects they behold to appear of that Colour. And in like manner, sometimes our Meat seems to taste bitter to us, whereas indeed the said sense of Bitterness proceeds either from some Hu∣mour, wherewith the Tongue or Palat is tinged; or from the Vitiating of the Nerves, that are assistant to the Fibres of the Tongue. Yea, it happens sometimes, that we seem to perceive a Taste, without receiving any food, which cannot proceed from any other Cause, but from the de∣fluxion of some Humour that hath such a kind of taste, or from some fault in the Blood, that is conveyed to the Organ of Tasting; as may be demonstrated by many Examples. 
 CHAP. XIV. Of the Sense of Smelling. I. Why Beasts excel Men in the Sense of Smelling. IT is certain, that Man is Inferiour to many Beasts, as to the exquisitness of the Sense of Smelling: For Beasts, when they light upon any unknown food, do presently, by the Quickness of their Scent, discover the Qualities thereof, Nature thereby preventing those Mischiefs which otherwise might be the effect of their Voracity, by their too greedily devouring things hurtful to them, if they were not assisted with such an Ex∣quisit Scent, which discovers to them the Suit∣ableness or Unsuitableness of the Food to theirseveral Natures. By this Quickness of their Sense of Smelling they hunt out their Prey, tho '  at a considerable distance from them, and tho '  never so cunningly hid; according to the Relations we have in Story of Ravens, Vulturs, and Apes. Thus Dogs, by the Vivacity of this Sense pursue their Game, and follow the Steps of their Masters, tho '  far out of their sight. Tigers, by the help of their quick Scent, pursue those that have robb ' d them of their Whelps; and Cats find their way home, from whence they have been carried many Miles in a close shut-up Basket. 
 II. Why the Sense of Smelling is more dull in Man. than other Animals. Now this Sense is more dull in Man; not only, as some suppose, because he abuseth this Faculty, and fills himself with the Vapours of too great variety of Meats: But either, because his Organ is not of such an Exact Texture; or because his Brain is too moist, and so dulls and clogs the force of the Odorous Steams, by entangling the parti∣cles thereof, and hindring them from entring the Pores of the Nostrils. And for the same reason it is that we can smell nothing under Water, be∣cause the Nostrils being stopt with Water, cannot admit the Air that conveys the Odorous Exhala∣tions. Hence it is that they that have their Heads stuffed with a Cold, in a great measure lose their Sense of Smelling for that time; because the Pores that should admit the Odorous Exhalations are filled with the Rheum. 
 III. What the Sense of Smelling is. The Scent, or Smelling, is an External Sense, whereby an Animal, with the help of his Nostrils, which are furnish ' d with very subtil Fibres, re∣ceives all manner of Smells. In all Smelling there is first a Collection of Odours, the Instrument whereof is the double Cavity of the Nostrils: In the Next place, the Sensation of the collected Odour, is propagated by means of some most Subtil Fibres: And, Lastly, this Sense is terminated and compleated by the agitation of the Nerves and Spirits, in the Conarion or Pine Apple-like Kernel. 
 IV. What is the Organ or Instru∣ment of Smelling. The Anatomists differ in their Opinions about the Organ of this Sense: For some of them make the Processus Mammillares, so called, to discharge this Function, which others attribute to the No∣strils. The Processus Mammillares, are 2 little bunches or protuberances of the Brain, in which 2 Conduits or Passages of the same Substance are terminated. However, these do not seem to be the Organ of Smelling; because both these Mam∣millary Processus are a portion of the Brain it self, consisting of the Pith or Marrow of it: Now, no Physicians ever owned the Brain to be the Organ of the External Senses. Besides, according to what we have before declared, the Nerves and Fibres are the Organs of the External Senses; but these Processus are too soft to be accounted Nerves; neither did ever any, that I know of, account them so. Moreover, if we place the Smelling Faculty in both these Processus, why do not we always perceive some smell or other, seeing that the Air continually flows to the Brain, with which the Odorous steams are always mingled; but this contradicts Experience. It remains there∣fore, that we place the Organ of this Sense in the Nostrils, that is, in some very subtil Fibres, de∣rived from the bottom of the Brain to the Nerves, which are not distinct from the Nerves that assist the Sense of Tasting, save only in this, that they Book. 1. Part. 8. Chap. 1 
 Lens Inv. I. Kip Sculp. To the Right Worship∣full S r . Comport Fitch of Eltham and Mount-Mascall in Kent Baronet, Son and heyre of S r . Thomas Fitch of the said places Knight &amp; Baronet Deceased, by Ann his Lady Daughter &amp; Heyress of Richard Comport of Eltham aforesaid Gen∣tleman, deceased. 
 This Plate is humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome.
III. The Causes of VVaking or VVatch∣ing. Watching may be effected by many Causes. First, By those things which thin the Blood, or which over-heat it, and by agitating it too much, increase the Animal Spirits. Secondly, By things which open the Plexus Choroides of the Arteries, and so make way for the Spirits to enter into the Nerves. Thirdly, By things that stir and agitate the Body over-much, and by making the motion of the Blood more swift, occasion a greater Briskness and Liveliness in the Body. Fourthly, By Mode∣rate Sleep or Rest, which recruit the strength of the Body, and make it with more agility and chear∣fulness to perform its Task. 
 IV. VVherein the State of Sleep consists. Sleep being the State that is opposite to Watch∣ing, and wherein the outward Senses are bound up, and cease from their Functions, we shall easily understand how it is effected, by assigning a diffe∣rent disposition to the Brain, from that which Watching doth produce. Forasmuch therefore as the State of Waking doth consist in the great abun∣dance of the Animal Spirits, which replenish the Ventricles of the Brain, and the Pores of the Nerves: Sleep on the contrary must consist in a deficiency and want of the said Spirits, which causeth the Pores, through which the Animal Spirits are wont to flow into the Nerves, to grow limber and cling together, and being no longer distended by the copious afflux of the Spirits, to be shut up. For where this Obstruction happens, the Animal Spirits, which before were contained in the Nerves, are dissipated; and there being no other in a readiness to supply their places, the Filaments of the Nerves cling together: So that if in this State an Object should act upon any part of our Body, yet can it not transmit that Impression to the Brain, and consequently no Sensation can result from thence. Besides, the Muscles being then empty and void of Spirits, become limber and flagging, and so cannot be of any use for the motion of the Members to which they belong, nor keep the Body in an upright posture, any more than if they were quite vanish ' d. And accordingly in Sleep, the Body lies along, the Eye∣brows fall, the Head nods, the Knees fail, and and all the Senses cease from their Actions. And therefore Sleep is nothing else, but a relaxation of the Ventricles of the Brain, and a flagging of the Nerves, proceeding from the want of Animal Spirits, whereby the Organs of Sense are at a stand, and unfit to convey the motions of the Objects to the Brain, and to the Common Sense. 
 V. The Opini∣on of the Peripate∣ticks con∣cerning Sleep. But whence this Effect doth proceed, and what that Band is, whereby the Actions, as well of the Inward as Outward Senses, are supprest and bound up, is not so easie to determine.  ' Tis a common Opinion amongst Philosophers, especially those that follow Aristotle, That Sleep is caused by the Vapours proceeding from the Chyle and other Hu∣mours working in the Stomach; which being after∣wards condensed, cloud the Brain, and cause Drow∣ziness and Dulness. 
 VI. This Opi∣nion reje∣cted by those that hold the Circulation of the Blood. But this Opinion is not approv ' d of by them, who hold the Circulation of Blood. For these cannot discover, by what ways these Vapours ele∣vated from the Stomach, should through so many of the Inward parts and Bony prisons, as through so many Obstacles, be carried up to the Brain; forasmuch as their Opinion is, that the most part of those Humours that moisten the Brain, is trans∣mitted through the Arteries, and immediately communicated to it from the Mass of Blood. Besides, if Sleep be owing to the Vapours that arise from the Stomach, why is it not always conse∣quent to the taking in of Food; and why is not Watching always the Effect of our abstaining from Meat? When yet we frequently experi∣ence the contrary, that many times with an Empty Stomach we fall into a Deep Sleep; and when we have eaten freely are inclin ' d to be watchful. Moreover, Children are apt to fall asleep, by Weariness, Singing, Darkness, and the Rocking in a Cradle; and yet none of these con∣tain any thing of these Vapours, that are suppos ' d so necessary for the causing of Sleep. To which may be added, that if a Ligature be put upon the Inward Jugular Arteries or Veins of any person, he will presently fall asleep; which is the Reason that those who are hanged, seem to themselves, as it were, to fall asleep, as soon as they are turn ' d off. 
 VII. The true Cause of Sleep. Wherefore the Cause of Sleep is not to be attributed, to the Fumes and Vapours that arise from the Stomach; but rather to the deficiency of the Animal Spirits, or the diminution of their motion. For Opium, Poppy, Mandrakes, and other such like Sleep▪provoking▪ Medicaments, do not praduce their Effects by raising copious Exhala∣tions from the Chyle to the Brain; but because they hinder the motion of the Spirits that way, and by their Fuliginous Humour stop the Spirits that are contained in the Brain, from being con∣veyed to the outward Membrans. And accord∣ingly gross Meats, and hard of Digestion, which oppress the Stomach, commonly cause Sleep and Drowziness; because they do fix and dull the Spirits contained in the Stomach, and by the con∣sent and correspondence there is between that part and the Brain, make the Spirits there more dull and heavy. 
 VIII. During Sleep, our Blood is hotter than when we are awake. But yet forasmuch as the Spirits can never be without a considerable degree of Agitation, and can never be so far dulled, as to be destitute of all motion, it must follow that not being now employ ' d to keep the Body awake, they must needs increase the motion of the Blood wherewith they are mingled; and therefore we find, that the Body is much hotter whilst asleep, than when awake: For we find, that in the Coldest Weather in the Winter, our Bodies are very hot when asleep, but are nosooner awake, but we need Fire, or some strong and violent Exercise to preserve us from being sensible of extream Cold, and the rigour of the Weather. 
 IX. How Sleep comes to cease. Sleep is discust either by force, or of it self: The former way is, when the Organ of any of the Senses is so struck, that the imprest motion arrives at the Brain; because by this means the Spirits that are in the Brain may be so agitated, that joyning themselves with others that are car∣ried that way, they may produce Waking. And Sleep ends of it self, when the Animal Spirits, which the Blood doth produce whilst we are asleep, are in such abundance conveyed to the Brain, that opening the Passages of the Nerves, and rushing into them, they distend the Filaments thereof, and by this means give the Soul occasion to perceive the several Objects that touch and affect the Body. 
 X. VVhat a Dream is, and what the Cause of it. The Imaginations of those who are asleep, are called Dreams, when the Soul, while the Body is asleep, apprehends things, and discourseth of them, as if it were awake. Now this happens, when during Sleep the Animal Spirits enter these Foot∣steps, that were before imprest on the Brain, moving some Parts thereof in the same manner, as they are wont to be moved by the presence of an Object, acting upon the Organ of the Senses. 
 XI. How Dreams are pro∣duc ' d. For notwithstanding that in Sleep, the greatest part of the Pores or Passages of the Brain, are stopt up by a thick Vapour, or rather Humour; and that the Fibres, by reason of this Obstruction, become less active, especially those by which the affection, or imprest motion, is conveyed from the outward Sense to the inward, and from the Plexus Choroides, to the bottom of the Brain, and Origi∣nal of the Nerves; yet the rest may notwith∣standing this discharge their Function, at least in part; which is the Cause why Imaginations are easily excited in us whilst we are asleep, by the least motion or impression from the Blood, Gall, or Phlegm, or of those Vapours that are the Cause of the foresaid Obstructions, which make the Fibres so torpid and unactive. And this is the reason why things are but confusedly represented to us, whilst we are asleep. 
 XII. The Cause of the difference of Dreams. The difference and great variety of Dreams, proceeds first from the variety of the Foot-steps of former motions imprest upon the Brain. Thus we find frequently, that the things wherewith we have mostly entertained our Thoughts in the Day∣time, are apt to be represented to us in Dreams by Night. Secondly, From the peculiar tempera∣ment and complexion of the Body, and the diffe∣rence of Meat and Drink, whence the Spirits are generated. Thus Persons of a Cholerick Tempera∣ment dream of Quarrels, Fightings, Fires, &amp;c. Phlegmatick Persons, of Water-floods, Drowning, &amp;c. Thirdly, From Custom; which being a kind of second Nature, hath its effect upon us even during Sleep. 
 XIII. Dreams are formed from things that are seen. Forasmuch as the Parts of the Brain, which have been before moved by the outward Action of the Object, are more easily moved than those that have been in continual Rest: Therefore it com∣monly happens that the Animal Spirits push against them; so that we seldom dream of any other things, but such as we have perceived by some Sense or other whilst we were awake. And accord∣ingly we find but little difference, between the things we behold waking, and those which appear to us in Dreams; and that there is much the same suc∣cession of our Imaginations in our Dreams, as when we are awake, which tho '  they seem some∣times incoherent, yet is there commonly some hid∣den connexion between them. 
 XIV. How it comes to pass that our Dreams are some∣times strange and irregular. But because the Objects that are represented to us whilst we are awake, are in great number, and may variously affect the same parts of the Brain, it would be strange, if in the interval that is be∣tween Sleeping and Waking, the Spirits that are continually ranging through the Pores of the Brain should not promiscuously move some of the parts of it, that is, partly as they were moved at the presence of one Object, and partly as they were at the presence of another: and by this means it may come to pass that the Soul may perceive a monstrous representation, as of a Goat with a Li∣ons Head, or the like; so that we have no reason to look for any Connexion or Order in our Dreams. 
 CHAP. XXI. Of the Appetite of Hunger and Thirst. I. Why Hun∣ger and Thirst are called Na∣tural Appe∣tites or Desires. SEeing that Hunger and Thirst are perceived after the same manner, as the other Senses, viz. by the Ministry of the Nerves, which like so ma∣ny fine Threads proceed from the Brain to the Sto∣mach and Gullet; it seems convenient that having spoken of the Senses, we should now proceed to explain what Hunger and Thirst is. Which 2 af∣fections, are commonly called Natural Appetites, because they suppose a Compound of Soul and Bo∣dy, and are generally accompanied with a desire to Eat and Drink. 
 II. Aristotle  ' s Opinion concerning Hunger and Thirst. ARISTOTLE defines Hunger to be a de∣sire of that which is hot and dry; but does not take notice whence this Appetite doth arise, nor how it comes to be stirred up; nor do I believe that any of his Qualities will be able to explicate the nature thereof. For we find that Infants and other new born Animals desire Milk; but who will say that the Appetite to Milk is only the de∣sire of that which is dry? Or shall we say that Animals when they desire Herbs and Fruits, are carried out with an Appetite to that which is Hot and Dry, when a moisture can be separated from them, which far surpasseth their dry substance in quantity? Again, how can Hunger be said to be the Appetite of that which is hot and Dry, seeing that Herbs and Fruits, according to all that we can perceive by them, have more cold than heat in them? 
 III. What Hun∣ger is, and how it is caused. Hunger therefore is nothing else but a Sense ari∣sing in the Ventricle, from an Acid Juice twitch∣ing the Nerves thereof. For as the various mo∣tions of the Optick Nerve, makes the Soul to per∣ceive and discern all the varieties of Light and Co∣lours; so there is nothing that can produce the sense of Hunger, but the motion of some Nerves in∣serted into the bottom of the Stomach. For the better understanding how this is done, we are to take notice that when the Stomach is empty of Food, the Juice or Liquor which is wont to flow out of the Arteries into the Stomach, and there tomingle with the Food, finding no matter to work upon, twitcheth the Nerves of the Stomach, which motion being conveyed to the Brain, stirs up the Sense of Hunger. 
 IV. No Liquor is conveyed out of the Spleen into the Sto∣mach. Some Physicians are of opinion, that this Li∣quor is conveyed into the Stomach by Veins from the Spleen: But that they are mistaken herein, is evident by this Experiment, that when a Ligature is made on the Vas Breve, the Vessel that lies be∣tween the Spleen and the Stomach, that part of it which is betwixt the Ligature and the Stomach swells, whereas the other part grows flag and em∣pty; which is a plain evidence that some liquor is conveyed by the said Vessel from the Stomach to the Spleen, and not from the Spleen to the Sto∣mach. Moreover, the Valvulae that are in the Vas Breve venosum, do oppose the transmission of any liquor from the Spleen to the Stomach, because all of them lead towards the Spleen. Whence it is manifest that something is transmitted from the Stomach to the Spleen, but not the contrary way. 
 V. The Nature of the Li∣quor that flows out of the Arte∣ries. Now this Liquor which causeth the sense of Hunger is sowre and sharp, as being the off-spring of Choler and Melancholy, and which therefore lighting on the bottom of the Stomach, cannot but twitch and prick the membrans whereof it doth consist. Hence it is commonly observed, that Melancholy Persons are great Eaters, because this Juice is more sowre in them, than in others, by which means the Food is soon consumed there∣by, as Metals are in Aqua Fortis, and other acid Spirits, and the Guts egg ' d on to a ready Evacuation. 
 VI. Why some Persons are very sel∣dom sensible of Hunger. And on the contrary it sometimes happens, that persons who have not eaten of a good while, yet have no sense of Hunger, nor any desire to Eat, as it is frequently so with Phlegmatick Persons. Because this Juice by some obstruction or other is hindred from entring into the Stomach, or be∣cause it is too thin and weak, so that the Stomach is not sensible of the weak impression it makes up∣on it; or because its force is blunted by some cold and clammy Humour, or because there is but lit∣tle of this sharp Humour conveyed to the Stomach. For it is always one or other of these causes that occasions the want of Appetite to Food, and more especially in Sick People. 
 VII. Of Persons that are troubled with a Dogs hunger, as  ' tis called. And on the other hand there are some persons that are troubled with continual Hunger, and who like Dogs are ever Ravenous, and never satisfied; because so great quantity of this sharp Humour is conveyed to their Stomachs, that all their Food thereby is made sowre, so that their Stomach is continually twitched, and sollicited to desire more Food, the former being readily evacuated down∣wards, or else cast up by Vomit. And thus it comes to pass, that some of this Humour is some∣times transmitted to the Venae Lacteae, and conti∣nually bes egeth the Stomach. 
 VIII. The Irregu∣lar Appe∣tite of Wo∣men with Child. But if this sharp Humour, lodging in the bot∣tom of the Stomach, be of such a Temperament, as to have a peculiar force to dissolve some Food sooner than other, then it will be apt to stir up the Appetite of one sort of Meat rather than another. Hence some Women eat Coals, Chalk, Quick-lime and the like. Now the cause of this variety of this sowre Humour may be, because in the first Months of Conception, the Mouth of the Womb being stopt, that the Superfluous Blood cannot be evacuated as formerly, by this means the Humours of the Body are corrupted, and being conveyed to the Stomach, produce an irregular Appetite. And therefore some Physicians are of opinion, that when the Melancholy Humour is deprav ' d in Wo∣men, they long for Quick-lime, Coals, &amp;c. when sowre Phlegm abounds in them they desire sowre things; and when Gall predominates, Bacon, Suet and such like. And it is from the same Cause that young Girls that are troubled with the Green-Sickness, as we commonlv call it, do take a liking to strange and unnatural sorts of Food, such as Coals, Chalk, Leather, &amp;c. because their Blood for want of due evacuations grows sharper than ordinary, and consequently the Humour, which is derived out of the Blood into the Stomach, partaking of the same Quality, more violently twitches the Nerves thereof, and that after a pecu∣liar manner, according to the various constitution of the Blood in every Individual.
IX. It is not Heat that digests the meat in our Stomach. This discovers to us the mistake of the Peripate∣ticks, who suppose the Stomach to be like a Kitchin, where the Food is concocted and digested by heat only: whereas we find that there is but a moderate heat in the Stomach, and yet that even Bones are consumed and digested in it, as in the Stomach of a Dog, which if they should be boild for some Months together in a Pot with a very strong Fire, would never undergo any such change, as we find they do in the Stomach. Besides, Historians, and particularly P. Bressano in his Relation of New France, tell us of most ravenous and devour∣ing Fishes, which do readily digest the hardest Bodies and turn them into Liquor, whose Stomachs notwithstanding are so cold, that one can scarce∣ly endure to touch them; which is an incontesta∣ble Argument, that the dissolution of Food in the Stomach is not to be attributed to heat, but to the foresaid acid Juice in the Stomach, which dis∣solves our Food, as some acid Spirits do Me∣tals. 
 X. What Thirst and what Drink is. Thirst is a Desire of Drink, caused by the dry∣ness of the Throat and Gullet, or the Heat of the Stomach, commonly called Heart-burning, or a Salt Savour sticking to the Tongue. By the name of Drink we understand every sort of liquor, that is not Salt, Fat or too bitter, for Salt, Fat and Bitter Liquours do rather inflame the Thirst than allay it. 
 XI. What is the Cause of Thirst. To be informed of the Cause of Thirst, and that Driness which is sometimes in the Mouth, Tongue and Palate, we are to consider that the moisture which continually ascends from the Sto∣mach to the Gullet, in the form of a thick and moist Vapor, for the moistning of those parts, when at any time it is over agitated or heated, it doth so dry the Swallow, and at the same time so affect the Nerves, as to excite in the Soul the Ap∣petite of Thirst. So that there is a greater diffe∣rence between the Vapor which provokes Thirst, and that Liquor which produceth Hunger, than there is between Sweat, and that which exhales from the whole Body by insensible Transpira∣tion. 
 XII. Thirst is not an appetite of some∣thing that is cold. ARISTOTLE was of opinion that Natu∣ral Thirst was the Appetite or desire of something that is moist and cold. But this doth not seem probable; for tho '  Thirst seem to be a desire of something that is moist, in order to dissolve, di∣luteand macerate the Food we have taken, and turn it into Juice; yet there is no need it should be cold rather than Hot; forasmuch as any moi∣sture doth extinguish Fire be it hot or cold. But whether it be more conducing to health to use Cold or Hot Drink is not so easily determinable, be∣cause of the different Temperaments of Bodies. Only we find by Experience, that the drinking of some extream cold liquor is very hurtful to the Body, whereas it is seldom known that any hurt accrues to us, by the using of hot drink. 
 XIII. Of the Dif∣ferent Causes of Thirst. Thirst is caused several ways, as either present∣ly after we have eaten, because of the driness of our Food, which like a Spung, drinks up the moi∣sture of our Stomach; or when our Throat is heated by the effusion of Gall, eating of high sea∣soned Meats, &amp;c. or from some Salt Humour con∣veyed to that part, whence not only the imagina∣tion of drinking is awakened, but also an inordi∣nate desire thereof, by which means some persons long for Vinegar, Urin, Stinking Water, &amp;c. 
 CHAP. XXII. Of the Common Sense, Imagination, and Memory. I. The Soul is not really distinguisht from its Faculties. THE Common Sense, Imagination and Me∣mory, are called the Inferiour Faculties of the Soul, as being attributed to it, because of its intimate union with the Body; whereas the Under∣standing and Will are stiled its Superiour Faculties, because they appertain to the Soul, simply consi∣dered, and without any respect had to its Relati∣on with the Body. But as these latter are not Be∣ings distinct from the Soul it self, but only Modes of it: So neither are the former any thing else but different modifications thereof, arising from its intimate union with the Body. Thus the Soul, for∣asmuch as it perceives all the motions imparted to the Brain from the outward Organs of the Senses, is called the Common Sense; with respect to its long retaining and preserving the same perceptions, it is called Memory; and forasmuch as it variously compounds and divides the same, it is called Ima∣gination. In like manner, with respect to its de∣siring or having an aversion by reason of the Ob∣jects that are represented by those perceptions, it is called the Sensitive Appetite; as the Locomotive or moving Faculty is attributed to it forasmuch as it commands the Animal Spirits, and by their means variously moves the Members of the Body according to its pleasure. So that these Faculties are indeed nothing else, but outward modificati∣ons, or ways of our considering the Soul, which makes it no more to differ from it self, than Number and Duration makes those things to differ that are numbred or do endure; and consequently the difference there is betwixt the Soul and its Fa∣culties, is only a Distinction of Reason, that is, a notional distinction. 
 II. What the Common Sense is and how the same it exerted. Seeing therefore that our Bodily Members are devoid of Sense, and that the Soul alone is endu∣ed with that Faculty, it remains for us to exa∣min, what inward instrument the Soul makes use of for the perception of things, and how the Spe∣cies or representations of Objects are conveyed to it. For the motion of the outward Organ, is on∣ly performed in the Brain, because there the Soul exerciseth its Functions. Wherefore this Sense is called the Common Sense, because it receives all the Species of the outward Senses, and so reacheth their Objects. For when we represent to our selves any Object, as for Example, a Man, we do not only seem to behold the colour of his Face, and stature of his Body; but also to smell the Odours he is us ' d to have about him, to hear him speak, to taste the Food he eats, and to feel the Softness or Rough∣ness of the Cloaths he wears. For from what hath been said already, it cannot be question ' d, but that the Brain is the Organ of the inward Sense, foras∣much as the Nerves proceed from it, as Threads from a Distaff, whereby the motions of the outward Senses are transmitted. 
 III. The Glan∣dula Pine∣alis, or Pine-Apple-like Kernel, is the Seat of the Inward Sense. Yet is not the whole Brain the Seat of this Inward Sense, but only some part of it; for otherwise the Optick Nerves, and the Pith of the Back-bone, as being of the same Substance with the Brain, would be the Residence of the Inward Sense. Now this peculiar place of the Souls Resi∣dence, is the Conarion, or Glandula Pinealis, a certain Kernel, resembling a Pine-Apple, placed in the midst of the Ventricles of the Brain, and sur∣rounded with the Arteries of the Plexus Choroides. The Reason why we take this Kernel to be the peculiar Seat of the Soul is, because this part of the Brain is single, and one only. For whereas all the Organs of the Senses are double; there can be no Reason given, why we should not perceive two Objects instead of one; but only because both these Impressions are transmitted to a certain part of the Brain, which is single and one only, wherein both are conjoyn ' d. Furthermore, it is also requi∣site that that part should be moveable, to the end that the Soul by agitating of it immediately, might be able to send the Animal Spirits into some certain Muscles, rather than into others. And forasmuch as this Kernel is only supported by very small Arteries that encompass it, it is certain that the least thing will be sufficient to put it into motion. And therefore we conclude, that this in∣most part of the Brain is the Seat of the Soul, in which it exerts its operations of Understanding and Willing of whatsoever proceeds from the Body, or tends towards it. 
 IV. What the Common Sense is. Accordingly the Common Sense may be de∣scribed to be an Internal Sense, whereby all the Objects of the External Senses are perceived and united in the midst of the Brain, as the common Center of all Impressions. Or the Common Sense is nothing else, but the concurrence of all motions made by the Objects upon the Nerves, in the Co∣narion, happening at the same time that the Objects move the Senses. 
 V. The Little∣ness of this Kernel is no hin∣drance to its being the Instru∣ment of the Common Sense. Neither doth the Smalness of this Kernel hinder its being the Instrument of the Common Sense; but on the contrary, those Persons are the most stupid in whom this Kernel, because of its bigness, is not so readily moved; and those the most witty and apprehensive in whom this Kernel is less, because it is so much the more easily moved: And tho '  it were much less than it is, yet would it be big enough with respect to the several Points of the Ventricles, and to the Pipes of the Nerves. 
 VI. What Spe∣cies and Phantasms are. The Foot-steps of absent Objects, which are laid up in that simple and pliable Substance, by the assistance of the Nerves, are called Species and Phantasms, by Philosophers. They preserve the memory of things before perceived by us, and represent them to us, as oft as we think of them. 
 VII. What Ima∣gination is. Phantasie or Imagination, is nothing else▪ but a certain application of the Knowing Faculty to the Body (viz. the Brain) which is intimately present to it. Or it is an Internal Sense, whereby the absent Objects of the External Senses are represented present to the Brain, by reason of the Foot-steps of former Impressions. For the Species of the Imagination make us to conceive the Image of these things as present to the Eye of our Mind. For when we do imagine any Object, the Soul turns it self to the Body, there to behold the Image or Representation which it apprehends, as intimately present to its Thoughts. 
 VIII. The strength of the Imagina∣tion. But here ariseth a Difficulty. For if it be so that the Imagination be performed in the Brain, how comes it to act upon distant Bodies? as it happens in some White-Women that bring forth Blacks, and Blacks that bring forth White Children? And in those spots or marks which Longing-Women impress upon their Children; or that an Adulterous Woman brings forth Children, that are like her absent Husband? 
 This Difficulty will be easily resolved, if we suppose that the Imagination hath not only a great force over the Brain, but also over the whole Body; for seeing that the Nerves, as so many Strings, are extended throughout the whole Body, they readily convey the Animal Spirits from the Brain to the Muscles, together with the Affection imprest on the Brain. And by the same means the Imagination moves the Humours of the Body, and by this differerent agitation of the Humours, the Blood becomes alter ' d, and consequently the Skin and colour of the Hairs also become changed. Yea, without this change or alteration of the Blood, some Impression may be conveyed through the Arteries of the Woman that is with Child, to some certain part of the Birth in the Womb, and leave a Mark there. See my Natural History, con∣cerning Man, Chap. VI. 
 IX. Wherein the Nature of the Memory doth con∣sist. Memory is that Faculty of the Soul, which re∣peats things perceived by former Sensations; or it is the calling to mind of known and past things. And differs from the Imagination only in this, that from the Foot-steps of former Impressions on the Brain, it doth represent as present to it self, Objects that were formerly offer ' d to it: Whereas Memory consists in this, that the Pores of the Brain, through which the Spirits, determin ' d by the Pine-Apple-like Kernel, have passed, are thereby become di∣lated, and consequently more fit to admit the same Spirits, repassing that way another time. 
 X. Memory is either In∣tellectual or Animal▪ And accordingly Memory is twofold, viz. Intel∣lectual and Animal. Intellectual is that which be∣longs to Angels and Souls, by means whereof they can represent to themselves, the Thoughts they formerly have had concerning Spiritual things; and this kind of Memory doth not stand in need of any Bodily assistance. The Animal Memory is that which is common to us with Brutes, and is per∣formed by means of the Brain, and the Foot-steps imprest upon it. For Sensual or Corporeal Memory imports nothing else, but a certain facility remain∣ing in the Pores of the Ventricles of the Brain, to open themselves again, by reason of their having been before opened by the Animal Spirits. Or, to speak more clearly, the Foot-steps of the Animal Memory are those, which the passage of the Ani∣mal Spirits hath left betwixt the Fibres of the Brain, through which they have passed before, so as to go out by the said Pores again, as they at first enter ' d in by them; by which means it comes to pass, that these Spirits do more easily enter these Pores, than others; as Paper that hath been once folded, is more apt to run into the same Folds that hath been formerly made in it. 
 XI. How the Foot-steps of Memory are formed in the Brain. To understand how this is done, we are to imagine, that after that the Spirits that go forth from the Glandula Pinealis H, have left some im∣pression of a Species, or some particular Foot-steps of their passage, they do pass from thence through the Points 2, 4, 6, 8, and into the like Pores and Intervals as are found betwixt the Fila∣ments, whereof the portion of the Brain EE Figure 75. doth consist. Which Spirits have the power of dilating the said Intervals in some sort; as likewise of folding and diversly disposing of the Filaments, against which they push in their passage, accord∣ing to their different motions, and the various openings of the Pipes through which they pass; that there also they may impress Figures like to those of the Objects. 
 XII. How they are trans∣mitted to the Brain. We are to conceive therefore, that the Figure imprest by the Object AB, CD, upon the Fibres of the Optick Nerve, which it moves or agitates in the Surface of the Retina 1, 3, 5, 7, must de∣lineate another Figure like it self, in the inward Surface of the Ventricles of the Brain 2, 4, 6, 8, where the said Fibres are terminated: Whence it comes to pass, that the Animal Spirits, which re∣side in the Kernel H, must more swiftly pass out of the Pores, that answer to them, than they did be∣fore; and that too in the same form or figure of the opening. And thus their Course produceth another like to it upon the Glandula H, which is that Form to which the Thoughts of the Soul, which depend on the Body, are immediately linked. 
 XIII. How these Foot-steps of the Memory are pro∣duced. But yet the Spirits, which make their way through the Passage 2, 4, 6, 8, though they may be of some force to dilate the passages of the Fibres a little; yet they have not power enough at the first stroak, to impress their figures upon the Fibres, which are in the Substance of the Brain, with so much facility or perfection, but by de∣grees perform the same more acurately, according as the Action of the Spirits is either stronger, more lasting, or more frequently repeated. Whence it follows also, that these Figures are not so easily obliterated, but do abide there: So that by means of them, Species, that at any other time have been imprest upon this Kernel, may a long while after be again represented or formed there, even tho '  the Objects be absent. And tho '  these Passages should afterwards chance to be shut up again, yet they still retain a greater facility or readiness to be open ' d, than other Neighbouring passages that were never yet opened. As if many Needles should pierce Figure 76. the stretched piece of Linnen A, the Holes which the said Needles had made in it, would remain open, even after that the Needles be taken away: Or, if they should be closed, yet there would some signs thereof remain in the Cloth, which might very easily be opened again. And it is to be noted, that if only some of these Holes should be open ' dagain: As for Example a, and b, this would be sufficient to make others of them, such as c, and d, to be dilated again at the same moment of time; especially if all the foresaid Holes had been often open ' d, and that all of them had been usu∣ally opened together. Yea, there is a greater faci∣lity or readiness in the Pores of the inward Sub∣stance of the Ventricles of the Brain, of opening themselves upon the like Action, than there can be in the Linnen Cloth; for that whilst the Spirits do again open some of those Passages, the said Spirits, because they are diffused every way, do in some sort follow the same Track (in the same manner as we see that the Sound or Wind follows the motion of Running-Waters) and by this means do open the Passages again that are about them, because of the easiness they find to enter in by them. 
 XIV. How we can remem∣ber two Objects at one and the same time. Moreover, we are to take notice, that in case only some Passages were opened, after the same manner others would also be opened at the same time; especially if they had been frequently open∣ed before, and all of them together. Thus when 2 Objects have delineated their Species, and that the 2 Ranges of the Spirits, that have framed them, be somewhere joyned in the Substance of the Brain, it is sufficent if one of them only be brought to the Pine-Apple-like Kernel, for the stirring up again of the said Actions, which had their rise from them both. As when we have seen the Nose and Eyes of any Face, we readily appre∣hend the Mouth, Forehead, and other parts of it, and imagine them as present to us, because we are never us ' d to see any of these Parts by it self, but all of them together.
V. The Inter∣nal causes are the Blood and motion of the Spirits. The Internal Causes of this Passion are the Blood, and motion of the Spirits, not so much in the Nerves of the Stomach and Intestines, as in Love, or of the Milt and Liver, as in Hatred, as in those which are spread through the rest of Body, those especially which are about the little Mouths of the Heart. In regard they by open∣ing and inlarging afford a way to the Blood, which other Nerves propel from the Veins to the Heart, that it may go in and out in greater plenty than usually; but because the Blood having many times before entred the Heart, and so flowing out of the Arteries into the Veins, is thereby more sub∣tilized, it thereupon becomes the more easily rare∣fied and creates Spirits, which by reason of their equality are adapted for the forming and corro∣borating impressions of the Brain, which supply the Heart with joyful and serene Cogitations; whence it happens that so long as the Soul is affected with Joy, the Pulse of the Arteries is equal, and more quick than usual; moreover a certain grateful Heat is felt, not only in the Breast, but also in the Ex∣ternal part of the Body, into which together with the Blood it is copiously transmitted. 
 VI. The vari∣ous effects of Joy. The most noted instance of Joy, and which is commonly observed in those that are therewith affected, is a Lively Colour, and generally ruddy, which it paints in the Countenance, and which hence proceeds, namely, that Joy dilating the Fi∣bres of the Heart, causeth the Blood more copiously to enter into the Heart; and being there more in∣tensely warmed to be distributed the sooner into the Veins; and by this means excites a grateful and lively Colour in the whole Body, especially in the Face: Moreover, in the same affection of Joy, the Spirits happen to be so disposed; as that those which flow into the Muscles of the Face and Breast, make such a concussion of them, as to cause Cachinnation or bursting into a strain of Laugh∣ter, which sometimes is so great, that by the force thereof, the passages of the Eyes being opened, Tears thereupon gush out: For Tears are nothing else but Vapours, which in their passage out of the Eyes, are turn ' d to Water in the superficies of them, after the same manner, as was before declared, con∣cerning the Original of Fountains. 
 VII. Of Joy the e are divers Spe∣cies. There are divers species of Joy, according as we consider the Good hapning to our selves, or the Evil to others. The first which offers it self is Derision, which hence hath its Original, viz. that we find some Light Evil in one, who is thought to deserve it. In which Passion there is mingled something of Hatred. As when we have an aver∣sion to the said Evil; and yet nevertheless rejoyce to see it inflicted on him whom we think it but just it should fall upon. Those that are remarka∣ble for any kind of deformity or defect of Body, are chiefly obnoxious to this Passion, as the Gib∣bous or Bunch-backt, Goggle-Ey ' d, Lame, who, in regard they are not ignorant of their being an Ob∣ject of contempt and derision from others, rejoyce to find others in as bad circumstances as them∣semselves; it being to them a solace of that Grief, which they suffer from the Contumely objected against them; so that they take the least occasion given to insult over them, and sport themselves with their defects. 
 VIII. What Sa∣tisfaction is. Satisfaction or Acquiescence in ones self, is a Joy of all the most grateful, which proceeds from the Opinion of something done by us which we judge to be Good. Whence they who give them∣selves to Vertue and Honest Actions, feel, I know not what Tranquillity, of Soul, and Quiet of Con∣science, which is the most pure and sincere of all satisfactions, because they depend upon those things which are in our power. 
 IX. What Fa∣vour. Favour is a Joy wherewith we are affected to∣ward those that do well, and use their Free-will according to Reason. Since by a Natural Impulse, we are apt to Love those whom we judge to be Well-doers, tho '  nothing of profit accrue to us thereby. 
 X. What Gra∣titude. Gratitude is a certain joyful desire of doing well to those who have deserved well of us. This Af∣fection is peculiar to Generous Souls, who are ne∣ver insensible of Kindnesses, but strive always to be requiters of Benefits receiv ' d. 
 XI. What Glo∣ry. Glory is a Joy arising from Opinion or Hope, conceiv ' d of obtaining praise among others. This Passion is founded upon Self-love, as when we va∣lue our selves according to the esteem we see set upon us by others. 
 CHAP. XIII. Of Sadness. I. Sadness on Enemy to Man. GRIEF brings up the Rear of the Passions, the most common affection among Mortals, the Companion and Enemy of Joy. It seems to have been allotted by Nature for the Persecutor of Man∣kind, and lier in wait as well for Soul as Body. There is scarce any Sadness which does not transfer its force from the Soul upon the Body, and with one stroak hit two different things at once. 
 II. The Defini∣tion of Sad∣ness. For Sadness is no other than a certain un∣grateful Languor, or the Inconvenience which happens to the Soul, from the Evil or Defect which the Impressions of the Brain represent to it as its own. Which Definition extends only to Sensual Pains, as they differ from Intellectual. For no doubt, but sometimes, there may be Sadness in the Soul, tho '  all Cause be removed which excites Corporal Pain, as appears in those who have a Limb cut off, who are not only affected with Sadness upon the loss of the said Member, but also long after when they look upon themselves as maim ' d persons, and depriv ' d of a part which con∣duceth to the gaining of a Livelihood. But in re∣gard these sorts of Pain are seldom found, which are produc ' d by an Action of pure Intellect; and whatsoever happens to the Soul, so long at it is united to the Body, is depainted forth by Imagi∣nation in the Brain, We only here treat of Sadness, as it is a Passion. 
 III. Whence Grief ari∣seth. And it arises from from an Opinion of an ad∣herence of some Evil or Default; for the Body cannot be hurt, but the Soul must immediately be disturbed, and be sensible of a certain bitterness thereby. Tho '  it sometimes happens, that we find our selves sad or dejected, when ignorant of any causes of the said dejection. As when the Body languishes, and is not able to perform its functi∣ons, when the Heaven is all over covered with Clouds, as it often happens in the Winter-time; because then the Nerves of the Body are not, as they us ' d to be, agitated, and so remain, in a sort, immoveable. 
 IV. The Inter∣nal Causes of Sadness. Sadness arises when the Animal Spirits are so dispos ' d by the Glandule to the presence of an Object of Sadness, that they streighten and con∣tract the Orifices of the Heart by the Nervule wherewith they are encompassed, and hinder the Blood from its copious entrance into it, and egress out of it. Whence it happens that the Heart hath very little of Ardour and Inflammation, the passages in the mean time remaining open, through which the Chyle is conveyed from the Stomach and Entrails into the common Ocean, which is the cause of Appetites being diminisht, unless Hatred supervening Sadness, which is oftentimes joyned to this Passion, closes and shuts them up. 
 V. Various Ef∣fects of Sadness. Thereupon in persons affected with Sadness, the Pulse becomes weak and slow, and they seem to feel, as it were, Fetters about the Heart, which bind and restrain it like Icicles. Which frigidity being disperst through the rest of the Body, causes it to remain sluggish and unactive, and does also make those that labour under Sadness to grow pale, because by compressing the vessels of the Heart, it causes the Blood to flow the more slowly into the Veins; and so having less agitation than usual, it requires a less place to possess; so that betaking Book. 1. Part. 9. Chap. 13. 
 G. Freman. Inv. I. Kip Scul it self into larger Veins which are nearer to the Heart, it leaves the more remote; whereof those that are diffus ' d through the Face are more conspicuous; and upon that occasion they are ren∣dred more pallid. Nor is the cause very different of those Tremours which are incident to persons affected with sadness, in regard when the Blood, as hath been said, is languidly deduc ' d through the whole Body, it must needs be but slowly convey ' d to the Muscles of the Arms and Legs, so that the Valvulae are not straightly enough closed, which is the reason that the Spirits, swiftly taking their course through the Connivent Ostioles of the Muscles, produce tremours in the said members of the Body. 
 VI. How Tears are atten∣dant upon Sadness. Tears, as they accompany Joy, so also some∣times Sadness, and are produc ' d, when upon the Blood being refrigerated by Sadness, the Pores of the Eyes are contracted, by reason of which com∣pression the Vapours proceeding from them are con∣verted into Water; that is to say, because their moti∣on being retarded, their parts meet, and are so united one with another, that they end in Tears. 
 VII. Evil, ac∣cording as it is appre∣hended, ex∣cites vari∣ous effects in us. As Evil is an Object of Sadness, so it produces various effects in us, according as we refer it to our selves or others. For an Evil offered by us under the notion of an Evil, when we consider that we have committed it, excites repentance, which is so much the more bitter, in re∣gard it depends upon our Free Will, and was in our power of committing or not com∣mitting that which so much aggrieves us. The Remorse of Conscience is a Sadness arising from a scruple or doubt, whether what we have done be good or not. In this Passion, Dubitation ought to be necessarily included; forasmuch as if what we commit should be manifestly known to be Evil, we should refrain from committing it, since our Will is never carried on, but to those things which are represented to us under some ap∣pearance of Good. And if that Evil which we commit, should plainly appear to be an Evil, we should then be toucht, not with a simple remorse, but with downright Repentance, which is the severest of all Passions. We are therefore toucht with re∣morse, because we attempted a work before we made any doubt of it, or shook off the scruple of Mind which attended it. 
 VIII. What En∣vy produces. Envy is a species of Sadness, not simple, but mixt with Hatred; which proceeds from hence, namely, that we see a Good to befall others which we judge them unworthy of. This Passion ex∣tends not it self to all sorts of Good, but only those which we call the Goods of Fortune. For those things which are granted to us by Nature, seem to be above Envy. The Envious are for the most part of a Livid Colour, in regard Sadness ope∣rates upon the Body the same way as Hatred, causing Choler, which proceeds from the lower∣most part of the Liver; as likewise Melancholy from the Spleen, to flow to the Heart, from whence diffus ' d through the Arteries and Veins, they cause the parts of the Blood which is in the Veins to be less agitated; and this is sufficient to induce a Livid Colour upon the Countenance, pro∣vided it be copious and intense enough. 
 IX. What Fa∣stidie is. Fastidie or Loathing, is another sort of Sadness arising from the same cause from which Joy for∣merlyarose; for we are of that Humour, that al∣most all things we possess, are valued by us as good, only for the time being, and are afterwards lookt upon as incommodious, which especially ap∣pears in Eating and Drinking, which never please but so long as the Appetite prevails, and are distast∣ful when the Appetite ceaseth, and because they then cease to be grateful to the Taste. 
 X. The Eeffect of Commi∣seration. Commiseration is a Sadness mixt with Benevo∣lence or Love, proceeding from the consideration of some Evil which befalls those persons whom we think unworthy of it: And is in some so vehe∣ment, that it draws Tears from their Eyes, by reason that at that time, through the Affection of Love, a great quantity of Blood is propelled to the Heart, from whence many Vapours being emitted to the Eyes, and having their motion re∣tarded with cold, are, as hath been several times already intimated, changed into Tears. 
 XI. The Ef∣fects of In∣dignation. Indignation hath a great affinity with Hatred or Aversion, wherewith we are naturally stirr ' d up against those that do ill. It is very often join ' d with Envy and Commiseration, and the difference lies chiefly in the Object. Forasmuch as we envy those to whom any thing of good happens, and are fellow▪sufferers with those that suffer ill unde∣servingly. But our Indignation is against those only who do good turns to those that are unwor∣thy of them. 
 XII. Of Anger. Anger, which may be referred to Indignation, is the Aversion against those who have offered any Ill, or at least have design ' d any Injury to us. This Anger is always attended by a desire of Re∣venge, which is the most impetuous of all Affecti∣ons; in regard the Hatred which is found in it, causes the Bilious Blood, which flows from the Milt, and from the little Veins of the Liver to undergo a very great Agitation; which Blood en∣tring the Heart, stirs up an extraordinary Heat, which is far more rigid and vehement than that which proceeds from Love or Sadness.
Or else we may say, that the motion of Heavy things is accelerated; for that Bodies in their de∣scent do acquire a new Force. For tho '  they pass but slowly at the first moment of their motion; yet at the second they must move more swiftly, because they retain their former motion, and receive an augmentation of it from the Action of the most subtil Matter. 
 XXV. A Bullet driven through a Pipe or Bore, moves unequally. Thus when a Bullet or Pellet is by the blast of our breath driven through a Pipe, the Breath that proceeds from our Lungs, doth with repeated Onsets strike against it, whereby the first impulse imprest upon it is increased, and new degrees of Swiftness added thereto, whereby it becomes more vehement than it was at first. 
 XXVI. Why Water falls down unequally through Pipes. Hence it is also, that the water which by Ex∣ample is fallen down 3 Foot and an half, hath its Force once and half as much increased, more than that water which hath made a descent of one Foot only; and that consequently the water which gusheth out of a Pipe fill ' d to the height of 3 Foot and an half, must run twice and an half faster, than when it runs from a Pipe that is only full to the height of one Foot; for that by that time it is come to the end of the Pipe, it will have acquir ' d in its descent twice and an half more Swiftness, an it would have got, if it had only made a descent to the 4 th parth of the Pipe. 
 XXVII. The accele∣ration of motion is performed by the ac∣quiring of a new de∣gree there∣of. Nevertheless, we must not imagin that the motion of Heavy Bodies doth increase conti∣nually, so as to have no bounds of its augmen∣tation: For the Air resists the motion of Bodies, and blunts their force. Hence it is that a Bullet discharged from a Canon at a great distance, doth less hurt, than if it were shot nearer. And so like∣wise we see in the Pneumatick Engin, that when all the Air is pumpt out of it, heavy Bodies do fall with a great force at the first, and do exert the entire force of their Gravity: Like as Bodies cast up into the Air, in the beginning of their motion, do exert the whole Swiftness they have received. 
 XXVIII. Why a Pail is not heavy in the water. A Pail full of Water, in a Well or Pool, loseth all its Gravity; seeing that with the least force it may be removed, this way or that way, upwards or downwards, without almost any perception of ponderosity. 
 The Reason is, because the parts of water, whilst they are mingled and hang together, do do not press one another; for being all of them equally solid, they are all equally prest towards the Center by the Celestial matter; and therefore the Pail, because of their equal pressure, is with the least force moved any way. In like manner a man that is sunk under water, is not sensible of any ponderosity; because the Waters which lie upon him, are less pressed by the Heavenly Globuli that run between them, than the man himself, who is a more solid Body, and consequently less pervious to the subtil matter. 
 Which is the Reason why Divers cannot come to the bottom of the Sea, without Weights hung upon them; because they are equally pressed by the water that surrounds them, and as much born up by that which is beneath them, as they are thrust down by that which is above them. So that if a Diver being at the bottom of the water, could apply and fasten to his Arm or Thigh, the lower part of a long Pipe, the other end thereof standing out above the water; so that the water could not come in between them, that part of his Body would presently begin to swell, it being free from the pressure of the water, and the Blood would run thither from the other parts of the Body. 
 XXIX. A Body is more hin∣dred in its descent, by Running-water. Hence it is also that a Body is more born up by Running-water. For the force of swiftly Running-water, doth make the ponderosity of the Body almost insignificant; as we see in things that are thrown or cast upwards. Wherefore we find, that a Body doth more easily swim on the top of Run∣ning-water; because there are many more parts of the water that resist its sinking, since conti∣nually other new parts succeed to support and keep it up. And this is the foundation of the Art of Swimming. 
 CHAP. V. Of Taste. I. Hard Bo∣dies, as Stone, Iron, and the like, are insipid. HArd Bodies, such as Stone, Iron, Lime, Harts∣horn, &amp;c. are insipid, and do not at all affect the Tongue. 
 Because the particles of Hard Bodies cannot be separated from each other, and consequently be mingled with the Spittle in our Mouths. For when Bodies are so compact that they cannot dis∣solve and furnish those particles, which by the Vehicle of Moisture, may be conveyed into the pores of our Tongue, no wonder if they be insipid. For tho '  Sugar, when melted, affords a sweet taste; yet when the same is brought into solid and compact pieces, it affords no taste at all, because its parts cannot readily be separated, to impress any taste upon the Organ. So for the same Reason Pills, when they are swallowed whole, are scarcely per∣ceived, because they do not stay long enough to have their outward parts dissolved, without which they cannot affect the Organ of Taste. 
 Thus Turpentine boiled, and made into Pow∣der, is lookt upon to be insipid; because the more subtil parts of it cannot be diffused or mingled with the Spittle: Whereas in its Liquid form, it exhibits a bitter taste. So that Experience teach∣eth us, that nothing else is wanting in these Bodies, to make them Savoury, but only the division of their parts; seeing that the Salts which enter the Composition of Glass, were savoury before they were compacted into that hard consistence, and that Metals reduc ' d into very small powder, tho '  before they were insipid, do now yield a most strong and intolerable taste. 
 II. VVhy Bo∣dies are distinguisht by Taste. Almost all Bodies are distinguishable by their tastes; as Honey is sweet, Wormwood bitter, &amp;c. 
 The general Cause of all Tastes and Savours depends on the greatness and figures of the parts of savoury Bodies, which are capable of being diversified after an infinite manner of ways: And forasmuch as Bodies are in a manner all of them composed of parts that are of a different bigness and figure, it must not seem strange to us, that we meet with so great a variety of Tastes. 
 III. Hot Meat is more savoury than cold Meat. This difference of Tastes, is sometimes caused by the various agitation of the parts of Bodies; for we experience that hot Meat is more savoury than cold, because heat increaseth the motion ofthe parts of the Body; and besides, it is certain, that the more any Body is moved, the more fit it is to move another Body that toucheth it: And there∣fore it connot seem strange, that Meats, when hot, are a great deal more savoury to us, than when they are cold. This is the Reason also why dressed Meats are far more savoury than raw, because the heat of the fire that dresseth them, divides them into lesser parts, whereby their figures are changed, and so make them to be of a very different Taste from what they were, when Raw. 
 IV. Sweet things do sooner cloy the Sto∣mach, than Meat of a sharp taste. Sweet things do sooner fill than sharp. Thus we find that Milk-meats, Sweet-meats, Butter, Honey, &amp;c. do sooner satisfie our Appetite, than sowre and sharp things. 
 Some suppose the Cause hereof to be, because Sharp things do afford little Nourishment, and much Excrement; but this Reason seems of no force, because Digestion does not immediately follow upon the taking down of our food: But the Cause why Sweet things do sooner glut the Appetite, than sharp and sowre things is, because these latter are made up of parts whose surface is very rough and rugged, that is, which have many Angles or Inequalities, which make them fit to twitch and vellicate the Bodies they touch or apply to; and by this their vellicating of the Stomach, do stir up the Appetite: Whereas Sweet things consisting of smooth Bodies, and such as gently affect the Stomach, without exciting of the Appetite, do presently fill and satiate. 
 V. The Fire excites a sharp taste in Meat drest by it. Fire procures a sharp Taste to Meat; for we find that Rost-meat doth with more sharpness strike the Tongue, and affords a more grateful taste. 
 For it is evident that there is no food, but con∣tains some Salt, which is in a manner equally diffused throughout the whole Mass of it. Whence it is, that when Meat is agitated by the heat of fire, some part of this Salt is carried to the outside, and exhales with the other Liquid parts, and constitutes that Smoak which we see proceeds from Meat that is a Roasting. But whereas they are only the insipid particles that fly into the Air, those of the Salts can scarcely rise 2 or 3 fingers high; but that by their weight they are forced down again to the surface of the Meat, and there produce that sharp taste which we experience in Roast-meat. 
 VI. Sowre and Harsh things set the Teeth on edge. Things harsh and sowre, set the Teeth on edge; as unripe Fruits, harsh Wines, Verjuice, and the like. 
 The Reason is, because the fixt Salts that are in these Bodies, being entangled in a gross Sul∣phur, compose together with it parts, whose Surface is bristled with many Hairs variously bent, which entring into the pores of the Tongue, shut up the parts thereof.
VII. VVhy Bit∣ter things do heat, and Sowre, cool. Bitter things, as Orange-Peel, Venice-Treacle, and many purging Medicins do heat; but Sowre things, such as Juice of Orange, Sowre Grapes, &amp;c. do cool. 
 Because Bitter things consist of sharp Salts, and gross Oils, which being agitated together, do excite and preserve heat; whereas the parts of Sowre things are long, stiff and pointed, and rather stop the motion of the fiery particles, than promote it, and for that Reason are esteemed of a Cooling Nature. 
 VIII. Why un∣ripe Grapes and Fruits are harsh. Unripe Fruits seem very harsh at the first taste, and cause a Roughness on the Tongue; but after∣wards they turn sweet, and acquire a pleasant relish. 
 The Reason is, for that Fruits, before that they are ripe, do consist of longish parts, which by their motion do, as it were, cut the fibres of the Tongue, and contract them; and afterwards they grow ripe by means of the fire or the heat of the Sun, which digests their raw Juice, and by ex∣haling the Heterogeneous parts, reduceth it to sweetness. For it is evident, that there is a con∣tinual resolution and division of parts in Fruits that tend to maturity, by means whereof they lay aside their hardness and harshness, and after perfect Concoction become soft and pleasant. 
 IX. A Tongue that is either too dry, or too moist, can taste nothing. A Tongue that is parch ' d and over-dry, hath little or no taste; and so likewise when it abounds with over-much moisture. 
 The Reason is, because Taste doth not only consist in moisture or driness apart, but in a mixture of them both. And therefore it is no wonder, if a too dry and parched Tongue, cannot perceive the taste of solid food, seeing that the same cannot be macerated or dissolved without moisture, which is necessary in order to the Sense of Tasting. For the Tongue being a spongy and porous part, stands in need of moisture, which is the vehicle of Savours. Moreover, in a dry Tongue the fibres are too much contracted, an thereby are made unfit to receive that affection, which the savour of things doth impress on it. And on the other hand, a Tongue too moist, i not fit for the reception of Tastes, forasmuch as the Tongue, which is loose and spongy, having its pores already filled with Humour, cannot well admit that which conveys the Savoury particles of the food, and by this means cannot perceive the taste of it. And it is for this very Reason, that we cannot relish Wine after having eaten some sweet thing, and that in order to recove our taste we eat salt meat, that may open the pores of our Tongue. 
 X. Why we find no relish in those things which we eat often. Some find that they lose the relish of those things, which they feed too frequently upon, and that either because these common Aliments do leave some of their particles in the Tongue, which render the little Nipples of it immoveable; or, because the Soul gives less heed to those motions that are ordinary and common, than to those which are new and unfiequent. 
 XI. Why we can better discern Tastes in the Morn∣ing. Tastes are better discerned in the Morning, especially before we have eaten or drank any thing, that can byass the Tongue to a mistaken Verdict. 
 Because at that time the Tongue is like fair Paper, and as yet unting ' d by any Savours. For that which receives, must be free from a Taint of the thing received. Which is true not only in the Taste, but also in Hearing, Smelling, and all the other Senses: For by right, the Sense of Hearing is sharpest, and Blind men do better retain things than others. 
 XII. Persons sick of the Jaundise, cannot rightly discern the taste of things. Men sick of the Jaundise, suppose all things to taste bitter. 
 The Reason is, because the Gall is diffused through their Tongues, which infects their Spittle; for the Gall consisting of sharp particles, doth so corrupt the Spittle, that it communicates a bit∣ternessand an ungrateful taste to all the Food that is eaten, as if something of Soot were mixt with it. The Cause of which Depravation is, because the Raw humour, which runs through the Veins and Arteries, betakes it self to the Tongue, because of its loose and spongy Flesh, and filling the pores of it, vitiate the taste of all received Aliments. Which is the Reason why Physicians commonly order their Patients to put out their Tongues, that they may view the colour and disposition of it; for seeing that that Member, proportionable to its bulk, contains abundance of Blood, it accordingly also admits a considerable deal of the morbifick Matter, which there discovers it self by its Colour, and consequently also the Sickness which disturbs the Body. 
 XIII. Whence the Harsh taste of Verjuice doth pro∣ceed. The Juice of unripe Grapes constitutes that which is called Verjuice, which is of a sowre and somewhat harsh taste; whereas the Juice of ripe Grapes is sweet, and with a pleasant briskness accosts the Palat. 
 The harshness of Verjuyce proceeds from the Roughness and Inequality of its parts; for be∣cause the Juice of unripe Grapes is not sufficiently concocted, they retain a great deal of Crudity, which is owing to their long and inflexible par∣ticles. 
 Hence it is that the Verjuice which is made of Crabs, is a good Medicine to help the weakness of the Eyes; because its particles being like so many little grains of Sand, do wipe off the filth of the Eyes, and by this means restore the Visive faculty to its former clearness. And the same Reason may be given of the Water of some particular Fountains, which by reason of their Acrimony do not only purge the Eyes, but also the Optick Nerves, that so the Rays of Light may be the more freely transmitted. 
 XIV. Why New Wine is sweet. But New Wine is sweet, because it hath been sufficiently decocted by Heat, and all its parts are smooth and even. And as to its muddiness, that is only caused by those Heterogeneous parts, which are not yet separated from it; which as soon as they are either precipitated to the bottom, or raised up to the top, by fermentation, the Wine becomes elear, by admitting the Heavenly Glo∣buli. 
 XV. What is the Cause of that variety of Tastes which is in Fruits. All Fruits are distinguishable by their taste, some of them having a harsh bitter taste, others a harsh sowre, other a sowre, and all of them a sweet taste after they attain to their full ma∣turity. 
 This difference of Tastes in Fruits, proceeds from the various Texture of the particles, and the different structure of the Plants that bear them. For grafted Trees bear more delicate Fruits than others, because the Alimentary Juice is more ex∣actly strained through the double twisting and weaving of their fibres. The Harsh-sowre taste therefore of Fruits proceeds from this, that their Parts are not yet sufficiently straitned and digested; and because the surface of them, as was said, is bristled with many little Hairs, diversly bending this way and that way, which entring into the pores of the Tongue, do shut them up. As we find in the taste of Quinces, Medlars, and generally of all unripe Fruits. Other Fruits afford a smart or sharp taste to the Palat, because their particles are long, stiff, and very subtil; by which means they Book. 2. Part. 2. Chap. 6▪ 
 G. Freman. Inv. I. Kip▪ prick and divide the Tongue, and dilate the same with some kind of sense of heat. Ripe Fruits do generally afford a sweet taste, because the Juice of the Plant whence they proceed hath been well strained, and lost all its Crudity by the agitation of the heat of the Sun. Wherefore also such Fruits as these do pleasingly smooth and stroak the Tongue, and with a grateful softness enter the pores of it. 
 XVI. VVhence it that the same Food is not equally grateful to all. Nothing is of more obvious Experience, than that the same food is not alike grateful to all; and that frequently what is very pleasing to some, is very distasteful to others. 
 Which proceeds from the different disposition of the Organ. For they whose Tongues are fur∣nisht with stiff and less plyant fibres, will be less exact in discerning the Taste of things, because they stand in need of a greater Force to move them: Whereas those whose fibres are more deli∣cate and tender, do more exactly distinguish them, because the least Vellication is sufficient to affect them. Somewhat like that which is found in the hands of those that are grown hard by much labour, which without any sense of Pain do handle Briars and Thorns, when those that have tender Hands cannot, without great pain, so much as touch them.
XVII. VVhy the same thing seems some∣times to have a different Taste. Hence it is that sometimes the same person, upon some alteration in the Organ of his Taste, caused by Age or Sickness finds a different Taste in the same Objects from what he formerly per∣ceived in them: For the Texture of his Organ being changed, the particles of the Bodies do no longer accord with it, but cause a kind of rout and confusion in it. And it is for the same Rea∣son that young Women, and such as are with Child, do sometimes take delight in some Meats which they formerly abhorred. 
 XVIII. VVhy dif∣ferent men, affect dif∣ferent Sawces. Whence it is that different men are pleased with different Sawces, and that there must be different Sawces to please the same person at different times and seasons. For one loves sweet Sawces, others sowr; one man delights in the taste of Wine, another abhors it; and the same person that is greatly pleased with the taste of it, when he is in Health, doth loath it when he is sick of an Ague or Fever, because the fibres of his Tongue are otherwise disposed than they were before. This is visible in Girls, and Women big with Child, especially in the first Months after Impregnation, who frequently delight in, and long for those things which before they abhorred, or at least had no inclination to, forasmuch as the particles of those things enter more smoothly, into the pores of their Tongues than before. 
 XIX. The Mi∣stake of some Peri∣pateticks. From what hath been said, we have reason to conclude, that it is a great Errour to place the taste or savour of things in the savoury Objects, as some Peripateticks do: For besides that in so doing they ascribe to an Inanimate Body, a way of Existence which doth not agree with them, the consequence of this Opinion is, that 2 Men would never be able to find a different Taste in the same Object, which is contrary to Experience. So that we must conclude, that the Power of perceiving Tastes belongs to the Soul, as well as that of feeling Pleasure or Pain; and consequently, that Taste is nothing else, but a certain perception or sensation, which is exerted by the Soul, by themotions which Meats produce in the Nerves of the Tongue. 
 CHAP. VI. Of Smelling. I. Animals▪ by their Sense of Smelling, discover what is good or hurtful to them. SO great is the Affinity between Taste and Smelling, that they are produced and affect the Organs almost in the very same manner. For we find that Animals hunt out their Prey by their Scent, and by the same distinguish what is good, from what is hurtful to them. Thus the Smell of Catmint allures Cats; Fennel, Serpents; Bazil, Scorpions; Rue, Weezels, &amp;c. As on the contrary, they avoid what is harmful to them by the help of the said Organ. Thus Serpents flee from the Scent of Galbanum, Scorpions abhor Wolves-bane; Flies, Brimstone; Goats, Bazil; and Ants, Organy. 
 The Cause of this Sympathy, or Antipathy, must be derived from the Organ of Smelling; which receives the diversity of Odours, according to the different affection and disposition of its fibres. For if the Steam that proceeds from an odoriferous Object, be delicate, and doth smoothly affect the Nerves of the Nostrils, it will cause a grateful Odour; but if the said Nerves be more rudely shaken or vellicated, this gives an unpleasing Scent. For Odour is nothing else, but the thin and insensible parts of Bodies, which being separate from each other, fly up and down in the Air, and being by the drawing in of our Breath re∣ceived into our Nostrils, do excite a motion in the Extremities of the Nerves. So that the diversity of Motions, produceth difference of Odours; and as the fibres of the Organ are more softly or roughly struck upon, accordingly are they diver∣sified. For this Reason we find, that Roses, Musk, Ambergris, and such like, afford a sweet Smell; because the Steam that proceeds from them, consists of subtil and flexible Filaments, which easily enter the Organ, and without any roughness are communicated to the Nerves. But Brimstone affords a strong and unpleasant Smell, because of the Ruggedness and Unevenness of its filaments. For Brimstone being very easily inflammable, we must suppose it to consist of many fat Steams, which being mingled with a sharp Matter, do make the filaments rough and prickly, which can∣not but affect the fibres of the Organ unpleasantly and painfully. 
 II. How sweet Scents may be produ∣ced from strong and unpleasant things. And on the contrary, when the strong Scent of Brimstone, is dulled by the joyning of some other Body with it, a grateful Odour is produced. Thus tho '  Civet in a bulk, and by it self, have a very strong Scent; yet if 3 Grains be mixed with 10 Grains of Ambergris, and one Drop of the Juice of Lemons, and ground together, it will produce a most rich and grateful Perfume. In like manner, Musk, when it is by it self, yields a strong and overcoming Scent; but being mixt with some of the Spirit of Roses, it affords a most pleasing and delightful Smell. And they who bring Musk from the Indies, after that the Smell of it is in great part exhaled, do wrap it up in the Skin of the Animal from whence it is taken, or in Bladders, and hang it up for some days in some stinking place, having first made several Holes in the said Skins or Bladders; and by this means re∣cover the Musk to its former fragrancy. Foras∣much as by this Fermentation, its parts are so se∣parated and attenuated, that they cannot but grate∣fully tickle the Organs of Smelling. 
 III. How some Bodies that have little or no scent, may be made odo∣rous. And it is for the same Reason, that the Oyl of Roses, drawn by distillation, being put into wa∣ter in a considerable Quantity, hath almost no odour at all, but being mingled with the Salt of Tartar, it makes a fluid composition, whereof some part being put into water, yields a very great and sweet perfume; the reason whereof is, to be a ascribed to the Salt of Tartar, which being a very powerful Alkali, exalts the Oyl, and renders it more volatile, and consequently more proper to be attracted together with the Air in Respira∣tion. 
 IV. To the per∣ception of Odours, some di∣stance is required. When a Man is too near to odoriferous Bodies, he cannot so well perceive their Effluvia. And therefore it is that Flowers do smell more sweet∣ly when they are at some distance from the Organ, than when they are too near it. 
 The Cause is, because the smell or odour of Ob∣jects doth not consist in their more gross and moist, as before hath been said of Taste, but in their thin and dry parts; and therefore he who is too near to the odorous Object, doth not only take in the steams that proceed from it, but also those that come forth from the Earth. But if he be some∣what further at a distance from it, he receives no∣thing but the more vivid and subtil steams, be∣cause the Grosser cannot go far off, but soon fall down to the Earth again. Wherefore some di∣stance is necessary, that the more brisk particles of the odorous Object, may freely and purely exert its power, and excite a grateful smell. 
 V. Perfumes are least perceived when too near. Hence it is that Perfumes cannot be so power∣fully perceived when we are too near to them; for they consisting of nothing else but a steam, flow∣ing from the odoriferous Body, by passing through some interval it becomes more purified and dis∣charged from its more thick and terrene particles, which dull and allay the sweetness of the odour. As we find that Wine mixed with Water is less tasted, because water doth break and allay its force. 
 VI. Plants in Syria and Arabia do far excel ours in smell. Plants in hot Countries shed a far more fra∣grant odour than in cold. Thus it is known that in, Syria, Arabia, the East-Indies, &amp;c. many Spices are produced, and that the Fruits of the Trees that grow there, have more lasting and pungent odours. 
 The Reason is, the heat of the Sun in those Countries, which conduceth very much to the briskness and sweetness of odours: For by means thereof the Alimentary Juice of Plants becomes exalted and depurated in the highest degree; and thereby prepared to yield copious matter for those odoriferous steams proceeding from the Leaves, Fruits, and Flowers of them. For it is certain that odours consist of Sulphur or Salt, and that those Bodies which abound with these, do shed more abundant odours. Because heat is a great strengthner and exalter of the Sulphureous Parts, causing them to exert their force with greater ef∣ficacy; for after that the watry Humour is sepa∣rated, the remaining substance is more throughly concocted, and consequently yields a more fragrant odour. And therefore in order to the preservingof this Fragrancy, we make use of Oyl wherewith to cover them, or else shut them up in Boxes, to hinder the vapour from exhaling continually. For we find that all odorous Bodies do smell more strongly when they are hot, than when cold; in the Day time, than in the Night; in the Spring, than in Winter; and in Summer, than in the Spring, because then their parts are in greater mo∣tion. 
 VII. Heat con∣duceth ve∣ry much to the sweet∣ness of Odours. For the same Reason it is, that Fruits attain a more grateful scent by being prepared with fire; and that all things smell sweeter during the heat of the Summer, than when they are congealed with cold; because then their Sulphureous Parts are lockt up: whereas in hot Seasons the same is agi∣tated and diffused through the Air. And therefore we find that there are very few Seeds that afford any sent from them: for being of a very com∣pact substance, and consisting of a clammy sub∣stance, they do not easily send forth any Effluvia. And on the contrary, we find that Contusion or Bruising is a great means to excite that sweetness of odour which is found in dry things. Thus the pricking of the Rinds of Citrons or Oranges, ren∣ders them much more odorous. And Spanish Wax, which is without odour before it be put to the Fire, becomes very odoriferous, by the resolution of some of its parts into Smoak. The same may be said of Incense, Myrrh, and many other odo∣riferous Gums and Drugs, which do not exert their fragrancy till they be dissipated into Air. 
 VIII. What is the Cause of that sweet or strong smel which pro∣ceeds from some per∣sons. All Men do not smell alike, for some yield a very fragrant and pleasing odour, which Histori∣ans relate concerning Alexander the Great, whose Sweat was very pleasing and grateful to all that smelt it. Whereas others stink, or scent very strongly; which is observed of Flat-nos ' d Persons, who are commonly tainted with loathsom steams proceeding from them. 
 A Sweet Odour proceeds from those persons, whose Alimentary Juice is exactly and throughly concocted; which then happens, when by the agita∣tion of the Body, the Pores are opened, to let out the particles of any crude Humours. The same may also be an effect of the Temperament of Men, as when Heat is greatly predominant in them; for if the said Heat be free, and is disintan∣gled from any superfluous Humour, it cannot fail of producing a sweet odour. Now that such was the Temperament of Alexander the Great, is evi∣dent from his inclination to the excess of Anger, the continual exercise of his Body, and the smooth∣ness and thinness of his Skin. But when on the contrary, the Alimentary Juice is not well digest∣ed, or by some means or other becomes depraved, this must needs produce an abominable and loath∣som smell; such as we perceive commonly in Flat∣nos ' d Persons, whose steams are observed to be very nauseous; and that because the Pores, through which the Snot or Snivel is conveyed from the Brain, is too much straitned, and by reason there∣of putrifies and corrupts there. For Corruption is the most genuine cause of Stinks. 
 IX. Of the va∣rious Ver∣tue and Nature of Odours. And accordingly some smells are very refresh∣ing, and conducing to Health, whereas other are very inimical to Nature, and our Vital Spirits. Thus we are told that there is a People in the most remote Borders of the East Indies, about the Springs of the River Ganges, called Astomi or Mouthless, who (if we may give credit to some Historians) live only by the odours they take in from Flowers and Fruits. So likewise it is notori∣ous, that there be many Scents which recall Per∣sons that are in a Swoond; and more particularly the smell of Vinegar: And every body knows how much Cats are delighted with the Herb Nepota, or Catmint; which acceptableness and congruity proceeds only from the odour of these things. And on the contrary, some smells are the cause of distraction, as it is related of the Sabaeans, that they used to be stupified by odours: And of Cats, that they became mad by the smell of some Oint∣ments: because these exhalations cause so violent an agitation in the Organ, that thereby the na∣tural Temperament of the Brain is destroyed, whence proceeds that tumultuary confusion of the Spirits. 
 X. Why distil∣led Waters lose their fragrancy, when the Flowers from whence they are drawn, are in their Prime. Rose and Orange-flower Water, with other such like Waters distilled from Flowers, keep their sweet smell all the year, except only when the Flowers, from whence they are drawn, are most fragrant, for then they lose their Scent. 
 The Cause whereof is, not because those Wa∣ters are indeed destitute of all Odour at that time: but the Earth then abounding with Flowers, which diffuse their steams throughout the whole Air, the Organ of Smelling is so much charged with them, that it cannot be affected with the smell that proceeds from those waters; and upon this account they are supposed destitute of all smell. 
 XI. The Fra∣grancy of things may be separa∣ted from their gross Body. Tinctures, Essences, &amp;c. of Roses, Cinamon, and such like odoriferous Bodies, retain the same smell, which the things themselves had before. 
 The Reason is, because the nature of Odour consists in a certain texture of Sulphur and Salt. By Sulphur, the Chymists understand a Fat and Oily Substance, which according to its various mixture in various Bodies is different. Now since this Substance may by Chymical Art be extracted from Bodies, it must not be thought strange that it retains the same Odour, which the Bodies them∣selves before did.
X. Of the use of Styptick or Adstrin∣gent Herbs. Thus Marsh mallows, Wheat, the Root of White Lillies and Camomile do asswage pain; and St. Johns Wort, Mastick, Barley-flower and Birth∣wort do restore the Flesh in a Wound or Ulcer. Thus Plantan, Pomgranate-shells, &amp;c. have a Glu∣tinating Virtue, because they are Styptick or Ad∣stringent, and consist of such particles which en∣tangle one another, and pressing upon the part that lies under them, do as it were squeeze the superflu∣ous moisture of it. 
 XI. Poppies and Quinces are endued with a vir∣tue te stop fluxes of Blood. Poppies, Quinces, the Juice of Pomegranates, and other such like, stop fluxes of blood. 
 The Reason is, because the particles of these Bo∣dies insinuating themselves into the Pores, do di∣vide the agitated particles of the blood, and by in∣terposing themselves, make a separation between them: So as by this means they are no longer so much agitated as they were, and by this means come closer together. Or else the cause of this effect may be, because the Juice of Pomegranates, for instance, lying upon the mouths of the Veins and Arteries, obstructs their narrow passages, and doth not suffer the Blood to come forth. For we find by experience, that the efflux of blood is stopt by cold; as when in the bleeding of the Nose we apply cold water to our Temples or Nostrils, or a plate of Iron or a Key to the Nape of our Necks. 
 XII. Of Styptick or Adstrin∣gent Plants Horsetail is a powerful Adstringent, and is ac∣cordingly used with great success in spitting or vo∣miting of Blood, stops excessive blood-fluxes, and all othes fluxes of the Belly: For which purpose either the Herb it self may be taken in powder to the weight of one Dram, or of the decoction of it in Wine four Ounces, Morning and Evening, or if three Spoonfuls of the distilled water be drunk for two or three days together. Much the same virtue is also found to be in the Herb call ' d Great-water-dock, all the parts whereof, Stalks, Leaves, Flowers, Seeds, but more especially the Roots, do very powerfully adstringe, harden and conglutinate. And therefore this Herb succesfully puts a stop to, and heals all putrefying spreading Sores, as the Rose, whether whole or ulcerated, Ringworms, Fretting, Evils, Gangrenes, &amp;c. And stops all manner of Fluxes of Blood whether of Emrods, or of Womens Courses. 
 XIII. VVhy some H rbs en∣crease Milk. Some Herbs conduce much to the encrease of Milk, as Fennel, Poly-mountain, Milkwort, &amp;c. Others encrease Seed, as Sparagus, Pine-nuts, Rice, &amp;c. 
 The former of these help to encrease Milk, be∣cause they nourish much; and therefore being mingled with the Alimental Juice, they open the pores, and remove the obstructions of those passa∣ges through which the Chyle is conveyed to the Breasts. For it is certain, that by a slight strain∣ing only, the Chyle becomes changed into Milk. And the Reason is much the same as to those Herbs which promote the generation of Seed; save only in this one thing wherein they differ from the for∣mer, viz. that they abound with more Salt, and diffuse a greater heat through the Body. By which means the Organs appointed by nature for the ge∣neration of Seed, are more opened, and consequent∣ly give a more free passage to the matter. 
 XIV. VVhy VVorm∣wood, Bit∣ter Al∣monds, &amp;c. destroy VVorms. Wormwood, Bitter Almonds, Hartshorn Philoso∣phically calcin ' d, &amp;c. kill Worms and expel them out of the Body of Men. 
 The Reason is, because these Simples are bitter: For Worms delight only in things that are of a sweet taste, and with which they are nourished, as well as they were generated at first from them. For bitter things consist of rough particles, and which on all sides are surrounded with prickles, and consequently entring into the soft and spungy Bodies of Worms, they rend and tear their inwards. And by this means the Worms are killed, or avoid∣ing the said bitter things, are expell ' d by Stool, or sometimes tending upwards, are voided at the Mouth or Nostrils. Corallina or the Sea-moss that grows upon Coral is very famous for its efficacy in destroying Worms and expelling them, being gi∣ven in Powder mixt with Wine, Milk, or the ex∣tract of Cassia, to the quantity of half a dram to Children under 14 years of age, and to those who are elder to the quantity of a whole dram. 
 XV. How the qualities of the Herbs that Ani∣mals eed upon, come to be com∣municated to their Milk. Nurses Milk oft partakes of the Odor and Taste of the Herbs they have eaten: And it is notorious that Cows according to the difference of the Herbs they feed upon, do give a different Smell, Taste and Colour to the Butter that is made of their Milk. 
 The Reason is, because the Milk is made imme∣diately of the Chyle, and not out of the Blood, which hath been formerly the common opinion. For the Chyle is carried from the Stomach to the Breasts, and by some particular passages is carried from the Guts to the Receptacles of Milk. This is confirmed by the daily practice of Physicians, who give Purges to Nurses, when their Nurslings stand in need of being purged, because the purging quality of the Medicin is communicated from the Chyle to the Milk; but not to the Blood, which takes a much longer circuit through the windings of the Heart and Arteries, and undergoing several changes, cannot possibly retain the Cathartick Vir∣tue of the Medicines. For how can it be that, when a Nurse drinks Milk ting ' d with Saffron, within half an hour after the Milk in her Breasts should be of the same colour, smell, and Taste, if Milk were made of the Blood, and not of the Chyle, which by some secret and short passages, is conveyed to the Breasts? All which is further confirm ' d by that Leaf of Succory which a Surge∣on took out of the Breast of a Roman Matron, and which she had eaten the night before. 
 CHAP. III. Of the obvious, or known Qulities of Plants. I. VVhy Vege∣tables are commonly Green. GREEN is the common colour belonging to Plants, not only to them that are yet young and flourishing, but also to some when they are old and withered. 
 It is evident from what hath been said before, that the nature of Colours depends on the various Reflexion of Light, and the various disposition of the surfaces of those visible Bodies upon which it falls. So that those Bodies are of different Co∣lours, whose outward particles are variously posi∣ted, and reflect the Beams of Light to the Eye. Thus the Green Colour we find in growing Plants, proceeds from the copious moisture wherewith they abound, the particles whereof are so mixed with other foreign particles, that they reflect and refract the Light in the same manner as those Bodies do, which in Rivers or standing waters are turned into Moss. And thus according to the various mixture of this moisture with the External matter, a diffe∣rent degree of Greeness is observed in Vegetables. For some of them are of a most deep Green, and such as these abound most with moisture, but their juice is not so exactly percolated as that of some others. Others are of a more pale Green, that is, such whose Leaves are of longer standing, or whose Fruits are come to their full maturity. Be∣cause in process of time a great part of the moi∣sture flies away, and the crude or raw Juice being digested by heat, arrives at perfect Ripeness and Concoction. Hence it is that the Leaves of Plants sometimes put on other colours, and become Yellow or Red. 
 II. VVhy the Fruits of Plants are of various colours. And whereas Fruits do very much differ in their colours, Pears and Apples being whitish, Plums yellow, Blue or Purple, Cherries Red or Black; this proceeds only from the various percolation of their Juices, and the different texture of their parts. For it is apparent that the Juice in an Apple or Pear is first coagulated into Froth, which after∣wards becomes a hard Flesh; whereas in Apricocks, Figs, Cherries and Grapes, the same Juice is turn∣ed into a much softer substance. And therefore no wonder if from this different disposition of their particles, such different colours are produced in them. 
 III. Why the Roots of most Plants are white. The Root which lies hid in the ground, is com∣monly more tender than the other parts of the Plant, and for the most part of a white colour. 
 The Reason is, because the particles of the Juice, which by heat are agitated within the pores of the Roots, endeavour to get out, and accord∣ingly in effect many of them do break their Pri∣son and fly away. But being hindred by the Earth, that lies about them, from going further, they return to the Root again, where undergoing a 2 d Concoction, they make the Root the more tender. And forasmuch as that moisture which imparts a Greenness to the Leaves, is by the warmth of the Earth changed into froth, this makes the Root to look white, because according to the mul∣tipliciy of its surfaces, it reflects various parts of Light. Hence it is common with Gardners to co∣ver some Plants with Mould or Sand, as Succory Endive, Cabbage, Leeks, &amp;c. to make them ten∣der, and to give them a white colour. 
 IV. Whence the Odours of Herbs do proceed. Some Vegetables are much more odorous than others: For such as grow in Arabia, and other hot Climates, are of a stronger fragrancy than others; as appears in Cinnamon, whick keeps its odour for many years. 
 The Reason is, because the odoriferous Steams that proceed from Bodies, do consist of sulphurous or fat matter, which being attenuated by Heat, and reaching the mamillary processes of the Nostrils, doth affect them either softly and pleasantly, or harshly. And forasmuch as those Vegetables which grow in hotter Countries, are more exposed to the Rays of the Sun, which exhale the watry humours, the fat and sulphurous humour only remains, which furnisheth the matt r of all Odours, and is the more readily conveyed to our Nostrils, as being disentangled from the encumbrances of the watry particles. Now that this fat and sulphurous mat∣ter, is that wherein the Odours of Bodies doth con∣sist is evident from hence, because when this sul∣phurous matter is taken away by distillation, the odour or fragrancy that is in that Body is taken away together with it, as appears in the Caput Mortuum, or remaining Dregs that are left in the Alembick after distillation which hath no scent at all. And therefore it is no wonder, that those Plants are of a stronger scent, whose fat and oleous particles are resolved by heat; and that those are of a weaker scent, and do less affect our Organs, which grow in moist and wet places. Because their Juice is not throughly digested for want of heat, and the abundance of moisture hinders the due concoction of the sulphurous matter, and keeps it from being dilated and rarefied. Hence it is that such Plants as these do smell more strong∣ly when they are dry, than when moist and green, because then the odorous particles breath forth more freely, as being no longer drowned or entangled in moisture. 
 V. Why Fruits in their progress to maturity change their smell. Fruits have not always the same smell, but change the same according to their several stations: For such as are near their perfect Ripeness, do smell more sweetly than those that are green and un∣ripe. 
 The Reason is, because since odour consists in the dry and thin parts of Bodies, the same is madethe more pleasant, and doth more softly affect the Organ of smelling, by how much the matter of the said odorous Steams is more thin and better di∣gested: Which certainly is then, when Fruits are arrived to the pitch of perfect maturity, and ready to be gathered. For then by reason of a long de∣coction the Juice is more purified, the parts di∣gested, and their perfect percolation advanced. And when this happens, no wonder if copious steams proceed from Fruit at this time, and more pleasant smells than when they are only in their first tendency to maturity. 
 VI. The ca use of the dif∣ferent Taste that is in Fruits. Almost all Fruits are distinguish ' d by their Taste, as affecting the Tongue and Palat after a peculiar manner. Some are of a harsh taste, as Sloes; o∣ther of a smart or sharp taste, as Onions, Mustard, &amp;c. some sweet, as Wheat; some sower, as Sorrel; some bitter, as Wormwood, Aloes, &amp;c.
This difference of Taste in Vegetables, proceeds from the different texture of their particles where∣of the Fruit consists, and which entring the Organ of the Taste, do affect the same. For these little Bodies, when they are mixed with the Spittle, have the power of moving the Tongue, and impres∣sing several affections upon it. Wherefore the particles of such Bodies which draw the Tongue to∣gether, and make it rough and harsh, are said to be of a harsh or sower and adstringent taste as un∣ripe Fruit. And such whose particles prick the Tongue, and divide it with the sense of a kind of dilating heat, are said to be of a sharp, smart and biting taste, as Pepper, Mustard, Arsmart, &amp;c. Those which smooth the Tongue, and pleasantly affect, are called sweet, as Licorish, &amp;c. Those which prick the Tongue, and affect it with a con∣stringent sensation of cold, are called sharp and styptick, as Cypress Nuts, the Rind of Pomegra∣nates. Such as impress a kind of dryness upon the Tongue, are called bitter, as Aloes, Coloquintida, the Lesser Centaury, Wormwood, &amp;c. So that the whole difference of these Bodies consists only in this, that their particles are of a different magni∣tude, and vary also in their Figure, Motion, Hard∣ness, Lightness and several other ways. 
 VII. Why the smoak of Tobacco seems sweet after the tasting of Vitriol. Thus we find by daily Experience, that when a Man hath tasted Vitriol before his taking a Pipe of Tobacco, the smoak will seem as sweet to him as Hony, and with a pleasant tickling will affect his Organ of Taste; because the styptick or ad∣stringent saline particles that are in the Vitriol, being impregnated with the sulphureous particles evaporated from the Tobacco, do produce a sweet Taste. 
 VIII. Why Gar∣lick and Onions lose their bit∣terness by boyling. Some Fruits do change their Tastes, so as that those which before were biting and bitter, become sweet and grateful; thus Garlick and Onions, being boiled in water, lose their Acri∣mony. 
 The Reason is, because the Taste of Fruits con∣sists in their stiff and pricking saline particles. And therefore Garlick and Onions become sweet and pleasant when they are boil ' d, because the fire opening their pores, makes way for the saline par∣ticles to exhale. Hence it is also, that all Fruits, as they ripen, grow sweeter; forasmuch as upon the evaporating of their moisture, their salt Ar∣moniack and other volatil saline particles fly away, leaving these only behind them that procure a sweet Taste to the Fruits. And it is for the same reason that Garlick and Onions, being soaked in boiling water, acquire a milder Taste, viz. be∣cause the particles of Salt that were in them are dissolved by the water, and being intangled with it, do evaporate into the Air. Thus the Root of Arum, when new took up out of the Ground, is of an extream smart, biting and pungent Taste, but being dried, and especially being long kept so, becomes insipid, and consequently inefficacious and of little or no virtue. 
 CHAP. IV. Of the Ocoult Qualities of Plants. I. Wherein the Purga∣tive Virtue of Plants doth consist. THE Occult Qualities of Plants, are gene∣rally such as belong to Medicin, and are di ernible by Reason, rather than by the Senses. Amongst these we will first speak of the Purga∣tive Virtue or Quality wherewith several Plants are endued, and by means whereof they expel ex∣crementitious and corrupt humours out of the Body by siege. Thus Rhubarb and Scammony purge Choler; Sena, Polypody of the Oak, Dodder of Thyme, Hellebor, &amp;c. Black Choler or Melan∣choly; Carthamus or Wild Saffron, Agarick, Herb Mercury, Spurge, and the several sorts of it, Phlegm and watry Humours; Fumitory, Cassia Fistula, Prunes, Bugloss, purge and cleanse the Blood from its dregginess. 
 The Opinion of the Antient Physicians was, that Medicins that are endued with a purgative virtue, exert the same by a likeness of substance to those Humours they attract and expel out of the Body. And therefore GALEN who made the purging virtue of Simples to consist in attraction, Simpl. Lib. 3. asserts a similitude between the substance that purgeth, and that which is purged: So that Purging Medicins, according to his Opi∣nion, do pick out some particular humour, which they expel out of the Body, viz. some, Choler; others, Phlegm; some, Melancholy; &amp;c. But I cannot be induced to comply with this opinion, seeing that daily experience teacheth that the Me∣lancholy Humour which is tough and clammy, is expelled by Cassia and Coloquintida, which have no affinity at all, or likeness of substance with that Humour. So likewise the watry or se∣rous humours of Persons afflicted with the Dropsie, are evacuated by Aloes and Rhubarb, when yet there is no similitude between their substance and that of the Moisture they expel. 
 II. There is no need of this similitude between the Medicins and Hu∣mours they evacuate. But if we examin this point more narrowly, we shall find that contraries are rather cured by con∣traries. For what Physician doth not know that the detersive quality that is in Wormwood con∣sists in its sulphurous Spirit; that the Roots of Plantan and Bugloss do thicken thin Choler by the clammy consistence of their Juices; that all the Sorrels, Juice of Limons, and all Acids do thin and cool the Blood, and allay its Fury, not with adust Sulphur, but with their acid and cold Spirits? Besides infinite other Simples, which ei∣ther by softning or asswaging do purge those Hu∣mours with which they have no similitude at all. 
 III. Purgative Plants ex∣ert their efficiency by fermenta∣tion. Conclude we therefore, that Purging Me∣d cins expel corrupt humours by fermentation in this manner: The Medicament as soon as it istaken into the Stomach, doth there meet with a sharp humour, which flows from the Heart through the Arteries, whereby, as with an Aqua-Fortis it is dissolved: But forasmuch as it is of a different substance from the said Juice, and therefore doth not mingle with it without difficulty, the Juice by means of the Medicin, begins to swell and ferment; as we see that Wine doth, by reason of its Sulphureous Lees, or by the mixture of some Heterogeneous Substance with it. Afterwards this Medicament is carried to the Lacteal Veins, and from thence to the common Receptacle detected by Pecquet, and thence to the Ductus Thoracicus or Breast-passage, and so is conveyed into the left Axillary Vein where it is confounded with the Blood. But because by reason of the Heterogeneous∣ness of its Parts it cannot be united with the Blood, therefore it joins it self with the Choler, Phlegm, or other Humour lurking in the Blood. And forasmuch as it is carried with the Blood throughout the whole Body, it doth in its passage twitch and prick the parts, whereupon they be∣come contracted, and squeez out the humours that were lodged in the Vessels belonging to the said parts. Now while all the parts of the Body do thus successively expel these humours, and they find no refuge for themselves in the Veins, they are driven towards the Stomach and Guts, which they irritate to expulsion, and so are evacuated with the common excrements of the Food. Thus according to the difference of the Plants, different Humours are expelled; as Choler by Scammony, Phlegm by Coloquintida, Melancholy by Black Hel∣lebor; Black Choler, so called, by Dodder of Thyme, Sweat by Sarsaparilla, &amp;c. 
 IV. VVhat is the cause of the Vomi∣tive Virtue of some Plants. Some Vegetables excite Vomiting, and evacuate Humours by the Mouth; as the middle Bark of Wallnut-trees, Coloquintida, Broom Leaves, Nux∣vomica, &amp;c. 
 The virtue of these Vegetables is not much un∣like that of Purging Medicaments, save only in this, that their operation is more swift, by exci∣ting a quicker Fermentation. Corrupt Humours therefore are expelled by Vomit, when the Sto∣mach being vellicated or twitched by the particles of the Medicament, becomes so contracted and drawn together, that it can no longer contain the matter that is in it, and consequently drives forth the Humours that oppress it. And therefore it is dangerous to exhibit Vomiting Medicaments to those who are troubled with the Pthisick or Con∣sumption, or that have strait Chests, lest the Sto∣mach should not have room enough to display it self in vomiting, or by a too violent compression of its Fibres should occasion a dangerous Convul∣sion. This vomitive virtue is found in the Herb Groundsel; the Juice whereof being taken in Beer, or the decoction of it in Water with Cur∣rans or Hony, affords a gentle Vomit. So the Wa∣ter of a certain Thistle called Silybum, being drunk causeth vomiting: And the Root of the Herb Thapsia, as well as the Juice or Decoction thereof, doth purge upwards and downwards with great violence, and therefore is not safe to be given inwardly. 
 V. Of the dif∣ferent vir∣tues that are in Plants. Some Plants cure the Diseases and Griefs of some parts: Thus Betony, Hysop, Maiden-hair, &amp;c. are good for the Head; and particularly Sweet Marjerom do help the cold affections of the Head and Brain, which way soever it be taken; the Powder of the dried Herb snuft up, provokes Sneezing, evacuates Phlegm and stregthens the Brain; and the same effect is caused by the Juice of the Herb snuft up. Borrage, Angelica, Bug∣loss and Balm, strengthen the Heart, and remove the Distempers of it: Wormwood, Sage and An∣niseed are good for the Stomach. Thus Endive and Succory are appropriated to the Liver, and af∣ford a most excellent Remedy to remove the Heat of the Liver or its obstructions, which way soe∣ver it be taken, whether the Leaves of them be eaten raw or boyled, or the Juice, distilled Water or Decoction of them; and therefore greatly com∣mended in Fevers. 
 The Reason of all these manifold virtues is to be lookt for in the different texture of their parts. For seeing that the disposition of the parts of the Head, Heart, Stomach and Liver is different, they must consequently be cured by different Remedies. Now Bodies, according to their various Figures, produce also various effects. Thus subtil and thin Bodies are aperitive or opening; thick Bodies, incrassate; sharp and biting are abstersive, and cut∣ting or inciding. 
 VI. VVhy the Odour of Herbs some∣times per∣forms the same effect which the substance of the Herb taken doth produce. There are some, who with the smell of Herbs or Drugs, are purged, much after the same man∣ner as if they had taken a purging Medicament in∣wardly. Thus I knew an English Gentleman in Flanders, who when ever he passed by an Apothe∣caries Shop, was moved to go to Stool, as if he had taken a Purge. 
 The Reason of this was, because the particles flowing from the Purgative Drugs or Medicins, did so agitate the Brain, and consequently the Nerves of this Person, that thereby they put the Humours in the same motion, as might have been expected from a purging Medicin; viz. by the rushing of the Spirits against the Fibres of the Stomach and Guts. 
 VII. VVhy Cats are so much delighted with Cat∣mint. Cats take a very particular pleasure in Catmint, tumble themselves over it, and seem wonderfully pleased with the touching of it. 
 The Reason is, because Catmint consists of such particles as have a great sympathy and agreement with the Brains of Cats: For seeing that Beasts are not led by Reason or Judgment, but by a meer impulse of Nature, or rather by the disposition or make of their Organs, they cannot but be allured by those objects that present themselves to them; which could not be, except some steams did pro∣ceed from them, with the scent whereof they are affected. Wherefore we may conclude that in Catmint there is such a Texture of Fibres, as hath a great agreement and correspondence with that of the Brains of Cats. 
 VIII. VVhy a piece of Pompion being put into a Pot wherein Flesh is boyling, makes the same ten∣der. A piece of Pompion put into a Pot in which Flesh is boyling, doth make the same more tender than ordinary. 
 The Reason is, because the Pompion abounds with strong Spirits, and a sowrish Juice: Now it is manifest that all sowr things are endued with a resolving virtue, which daily experience shews us concerning Vinegar. And PLINY assures the same concerning sharp pointed Docks, viz. that being boyld with Flesh, it makes it more soft and tender; because its sharp and corroding quality doth dissolve the Texture of the Fibres. 
 IX. The same virtue is also found in the Herb Patience. The same virtue is by Botanists attributed to Hippolapathum or Patience, which renders the old∣est and toughest Flesh, when boyl ' d with it, ten∣der and fit to be eaten. For this Herb being of a slippery and moist nature, it makes the oldest and toughest Beef, or any other Meat, soft and tender. And for this reason the use of it was very frequent amongst the Antients, because it renders the Meats boyl ' d with it, easie to be concocted, and besides, makes the Body soluble. 
 X. VVhy some Plants are of a dele∣terious quality, and kill li∣ving Crea∣tures. Some Plants are endued with a pernicious power of killing Animals. Thus the Herb Napellus, which is a kind of Wolfsbane, doth by its extream heat burn the Body, and scorch and consume the firmer parts of it.
VIII. How it comes that Animals have each their set season of bringing forth from the time of Copulation. Animals observe each of them, their certain and determinate time in bringing forth. Elephants go go 2 years, Mares 11 Months, Camels 12 Months, Cows 10, Sheep 5, Bitches 9 Weeks. Birds also lay their Eggs at a set time from the Seed received. Women also have their ninth or tenth Month for their delivery, which if they exceed, the Birth is accounted either not Natural, or not Legiti∣mate. 
 There is one common Cause of all these different Seasons, namely, for that the Birth as it grows bigger and bigger, being more and more unsatis∣fied with its nourishment, makes a stir and eager∣ly indeavours to enlarge its Commons, and provide it self with a more plentiful subsistence; as also for that being shut up in too narrow a compass, and streightned by the Membrans wherein it is wrapt, it shakes the Walls of its Prison to get free. And this is to be observed, not only in Animals of the bigger sort, and viviparous or live-bearing, but also in the Oviparous or Egg-bearing. For a Chicken shut up in its Egg, as soon as the Yolk upon which it hath lived is consumed, with the help of its Dam, the Hen, breaks the Shell and gets its liberty. Thus the Egg, after formation compleated, becomes so burdensom to the Womb, that being in a sort exasperated, indeavours to expel the said Egg, and to free it self from so troublesom a burthen. 
 IX. Why Ani∣mals are born with their Head downward. All Creatures, if they are brought forth ac¦cording to Nature, are carried inverse, and prone upon the Head, open the Mouth of the Womb. 
 The Reason is, because that part of the Body, from the Navel upwards, to the Head, is more ponderous than that which from the Navel reachesdownward; and since heavy things tend to the lower parts, the Head of the Infant must of ne∣cessity be carried first to the Orifice of the Womb. As of two Skales of a Ballance, the heavier tends downward, and the other upward. And if at any time it happens otherwise, that Birth is said to be not Natural, but as it were perverting the course of Nature; as when it comes out with its Feet forward, or with one Foot stretcht out, ano∣ther tending to one side; or when with one or both Hands it offers it self to the Mouth of the Womb. 
 X. Why In∣fants born in the 7 th Month▪live, and not those born in the 8 th. Ancient Physitians are of opinion, that a Septi∣mestrian-Birth, or a Child born in the seventh Month may live, but that an Octimestrian or Eight-month Birth is for the most part fatal. 
 The Cause hereof HIPPOCATES at∣tributes to the order of the seven Planets, that preside over Human Affairs, and have their domi∣nation or Government over them, each in their turn. So that according to his assertion, the first Month belongs to Saturn, the second to Jupiter, and so of the rest, till the dominion comes to Mercury, who is the lowest of the Planets; which Circuit being finish ' d, it returns again to Saturn. But how comes Hippocrates to understand so well this power of the wandring Stars? Wherein is it that this great force of theirs consists? What In∣struments guide them to the Infant wrapt up in his Membrans? But looking upon these things as the Dreams of a wise or rather industrious Person, I choose to adhere to PLINY, who affirms the contrary to have hapned in Aegypt, in which Country he saith, there is nothing more frequent than for Octomestrian Births to live, and brings for example, Caesonia, the Wife of the Emperor Caius, who came into World in the eighth Month. This account is confirmed by CARDANUS, bringing an instance of Cardinal S ondano and o∣thers, who being born in the eighth Month, ne∣vertheless lived to a very considerable Age. And what should hinder us from asserting, that Per∣sons born in the eighth Month are more long liv ' d than others; since it is a great Argument of vigor that they anticipate the ordinary course of Na∣ture, and as it were take it in dudgeon to be shut up longer in a Prison, unless the blame be laid upon the Mothers weakness, and the Birth be ac∣celerated by an overmuch irritation of the Womb. 
 XI. How In∣fants are said to be born in the 12 th or 13 th Month. It is delivered by some Physitians, as well An∣cient as Modern, that there are Births of eleven Months: PLINY makes relation in his seventh Book, Chap. 5. of a Woman who was brought to Bed in her thirteenth Month; and AVICEN writes of another that was delivered in her tenth Month. 
 This Computation may possibly have hapned from the roguery of some Women, and the sim∣plicity of others in misreckning their time: Ro∣guery when a Woman having no Children at her Husbands death, may for enjoyment of his Inhe∣ritance, and Personal Estate, accompany with ano∣ther Person, and have a Child by him within 11, 12, 13, or 14 Months, and so lay the getting of it to her deceased Husband; which kind of Villa∣ny is so common, that all the World over in all Judicial Courts ring of it. And this is the rea∣son that these late kind of Births are seldom heard of except in such sort of Widows, but very rarely in those Women whose Husbands live, and constantly Bed with them. But as to the misreckning, VVomen generally compute the beginning of their Concepti∣on from the first stoppage of their Courses, whereas it may possibly fall out, that for some other cause they may stop two or three Months before Conce∣ption; so that if a VVoman begins the computation of her being with Child, the very first time of their stoppage, she must needs be in an error, and by reason thereof it will be thought that the Infant came into the World on the 11 th or 12 Month, when indeed it was born after the wonted manner at the end of the 9 th Month. 
 XII. Why In∣fants kick a little be∣fore their Birth. A Great Birth, when Mature, for the most part kicks, and gathering it self up in a heap, breaks the Membrans in which  ' tis wrapt. 
 This Kicking proceeds from a necessity of re∣freshment or respiration; for the heat of the Em∣brio is small at the beginning, and setting it self at first to shoot out like a small sparkle, it hath then no need of refreshment, but augmentation; but as the bulk encreases by little and little, so also the Actions and Motions of the Birth encrease. But at length the heat is so encreased, that then it chiefly wants▪ ventilation and refrigeration, which not being found, the Birth begins by little and little to be more and more disturbed, and by rea∣son of that disturbance and anxiety, to stir and kick at length so much the more strongly, and by that strong motion to incite the Uterine Vapors to a violent Effervescence or boiling, and thereby to endeavour to make its passage out into a freer Air. 
 XIII. Why the Milk en∣creases in the Breasts the fourth Child∣bearing. Womens Breasts immediately after their delivery, swell and abound with Milk, but especially on the 3 d, 4 th or 5 th day. 
 That is, because Childbed Women the three or four first days after delivery, seldom bend their Minds intently upon any business, or serious affairs, and thereupon having but very little appetite, they eat and drink less than usual, and breed less Chyle; but in the following days they eat more, and the Infant begins to cry more, and then they presently begin to think of Nutriment for the Child, and desire to quiet it from crying. From which affection the passages being loosned by a determinate influx of Animal Spirits, which before were carried to the VVomb, the Chylie Juice is then converted to the Breasts. 
 XIV. Imaginati∣on impells the Chyle to the Breasts. And this their strong intent and frequent rumi∣nation about their Milk, and the suckling of their Young Ones, may possibly cause the Chyle to be the better conveyed to the Breasts: Which most evi∣dently appears from what SANTORELLUS relates of a Man, who after the death of his VVife, not being able to hire a Nurse, one time above the rest, to still the Child, when it cryed, took it to his Breast, and gave it the Dug, doubt∣less with great desire of satisfying its Appetite with Milk: and by this iterated application, together with an earnest intention of Mind, and the Childs sucking of the Teat from time to time, the Chylife∣rous Passages were opened, and the Paps afford∣ed plenty enough of Milk for the Childs nourish∣ment. Thus Imagination, and great apprehensi∣on of Danger, sometimes causes a Man to tremble, to be in a cold sweat, to fall into a swoon and the like. 
 XV. Children sucking the Breasts of a Woman with Child, contract Diseases. Infants that suck the Milk of a VVoman with Child, become sick and weakly, and many times contract dangerous Diseases, as we see in too ma∣ny, who by reason of the Nurses avarice, get a sickly habit, which shortens their days, and never ends but with their Lives. 
 The Reason is, because the sweetest and grossest portion of the Alimentary Liquor is attracted by the Birth, and nothing but what is serous, and taint∣ed with excrementitious depravity is carried up to the Paps. For tho '  the said Paps, as HIPPO∣CRATES affirms, are rendred so much the larger, by how much they attract any thing of Fat from the Belly; yet in regard before Child∣birth, the passages are too narrow for the fatter and sweeter parts of the Milk to pass through; therefore nothing but what is serous and most hurt∣ful to the Infant, can get up to the Paps. 
 XVI. The occasi∣on of a Wo∣mans bringing forth a dead Child. A VVoman, within the verge of our memory, upon the sight of the Naked Arm of a lusty well∣flesh ' d Man, longed to eat some of it, and the Honest Man in pity to her Condition, and to sa∣tisfie her extravagant Appetite, permitted her to bite thereof: But upon her second longing he thought it too much to sacrifice his Arm to her ill∣govern ' d Appetite, and made bold to deny her; whereupon the unhappy VVoman, who doubtless could not help her irregular desire, overcome with trouble, fell in Labour. 
 Of this there can be no other Reason, than for that the VVomans Heart, having contracted a deep sorrow, the vital Spirits were diminish ' d, and the Humours design ' d for the nourishment of the Child, averted another way, and not conveyed as at other times to the Womb. So that the Infant destitute of that Aliment, wherewith the Mother would have had it satisfied, languish ' d and at length died. For the Passages and Conveyances by which sustenance used to be conducted into the Womb, being shut, the Infant must be destitute of Nutriment, and so deprived of Life. 
 XVII. How the marks of a Woman stabb ' d with a Dag∣ger were imprest upon the Child in the Womb. A certain VVoman in France, being stabb ' d with a Dagger, an Embrio was taken out of her Body, mark ' d with as many livid spots as she had re∣ceived stabs, and in the very same parts of the Body. 
 The Reason is, because the Embrio, carried in the Mothers VVomb, makes up but one Body with the Mother; and as it is nourish ' d with the same sort of Aliment, so it is vegetated with the same Spirits according to all its parts. Wherefore no wonder if so tender a Body as that of the Embrio is subject to the same accidents as the Body of the Mother is subject; and any Mark or Brand what∣soever is the more easily imprest upon it, in re∣gard the Animal Spirits, which convey the con∣ceived Image, are directed by the Mother, whilst she touches any part of the Childs Body, and as it were marks it out. 
 CHAP. V. Of Hunger and Thirst. I. How all Animals at one time or other come to be afflict∣ed with hunger and thirst. ALL sorts of Animals are some way or other, or at some time or other pinch ' d with hun∣ger; and if we should except the Chamelion, which is said neither to eat nor drink, there are at least none besides which feel not a vellication of the Stomach, and have not sometimes dry and juiceless Jaws.
II. That the Chamelion lives not upon the Air alone. Before we come to discuss the Reason of this Affection in Animals, it will not be amiss to pre∣mise something concerning the falsity of this Old Tradition, viz. that Chamelions live only by the Air, since it is well known by experience, that they greedily receive as for a great delicacy a sort of little Worms pick ' d out of Meal-troughs, and that they make use of a Probose instead of a Tongue, which they manage like a Dart, with such incredible speed, as not to be discerned by the Eye of Man. 
 III. Whence Hunger in Animals proceeds. The Reason of that trouble and pain caused by Hunger, is the great plenty of a certain Acid Li∣quor flowing into the Stomach, which Liquor be∣ing conveyed from the Heart through the Arteries, insinuates it self among the particles of the chew ' d Meats, and by diluting them, composes the Chyle. But when this humour finds nothing of Meat in the Stomach to be diluted, it exerts all its force into the Membranules, whereof the Stomach con∣sists, and agitates the Nerves, whose Extremities adhere to the said Membranules, in such sort as is required to the causing of the sense of Hunger: Whence no wonder if the Stomach being empty, and the Meats consumed by the Native Heat, Hunger succeeds with a gnawing of the Belly which attends it. In like manner, all Creatures are af∣fected with a desire of quenching their Thirst by Drink, whilst the serous part of the Blood, which is accustomed to take its course to the Stomach and Throat, under the species of water, thereby to moisten those parts, sometimes also repairs thither in Vapor, and so dries the Throat and the VVind∣pipe, and at the same time moves the Nerves in such a manner as is required to excite a desire of drinking. 
 IV. Why great drinkers of Wine and Strong Li∣quors are little Ea∣ters. Hence those that are great Drinkers of VVine, Brandy, or any kind of Strong Liquors, more or less lose their Appetite to Meat; in regard the said VVine or Brandy, being full of Volatile Salt, cause the ferment of the Stomach to be either too vola∣tile, so as that over-running the most subtle pores thereof, it leaves the Stomach destitute of all In∣citement or Provocation, which produces Hunger, or at least takes away that correspondence that ought to be between the Salt and that Acid Fer∣ment which is required in the Stomach to excite Appetite. 
 V. How Spar∣rows come to-be so voracious. VAN HELMONT is of opinion, that Sparrows are therefore so very voracious and desi∣rous of Meat, as having much of acidity in the Throat, and the Stomach irritated with some pun∣gent Liqnor. Hence the most dry and juiceless Meats are commonly eaten with some or other Acid Liquor or Pungent Sauce, as Vinegar, Limon∣juice, Pepper, Olives, Capers, Mustard, &amp;c. to stir up an Appetite, so far as they are capable of helping the foresaid vellication of the Acid Juice by their own proper acidity. But all kind of Fat Meats, Broths, or Fat Soops soon satisfie hunger, by glut∣ting the Stomach, in regard the foresaid acidity of the Vellicant Juice, being as it were drowned in those sort of Glutinous Bodies, gives not that provocation before-mentioned to the Stomach. 
 VI. Not the heat of the Stomach, but the Acid Juice per∣forms the Concoction of Meats. By this we may easily see into the error of An∣cient Physitians, who attribute the Concoction of Meats to the heat of the Stomach; and imaginedthat the alteration of them was the effect of some extraordinary aestuation. Forasmuch as if we should take some certain Bones of a Sheep or other Animal, and cast some of them into a Kettle of water seething over a great Fire, and throw the rest to a Dog to be devoured; it will appear plainly to the Eye, that those in the water, tho '  boyling never so fiercely for some hours, have suffered no diminution, but those eaten by the Dog will be found upon the dissection of his Sto∣mach three or four hours after, allmost wholly converted into Chyle; whereas it would happen quite contrary, were the Concoction of Meats per∣formed by heat alone, since no Man can make any doubt, but that the heat of the Kettle vastly ex∣ceeds that of the Dogs Stomach. 
 VII. How it is that Meat received into the Stomach, turns white. Meat conveyed into the Stomach, and convert∣ed into Chyle, turns white like Milk. 
 This whiteness of the Chyle is effected, not by any assimilating faculty, as Physitians have all a∣long, and still do commonly fancy, but by an action wholly mechanick; for as we see in an A∣pothecaries Shop, that many times Fat and Oily Ingredients, mixt with Watry, turn of a whitish Colour: So likewise in our Stomach, the Essence of the Aliments extracted, seems to us of an Oily or Fatty Substance, as the drink resembles water. So that no wonder, if from the mixture of these two, there ariseth a whitish and Milk-like Colour, which is the reason that the Chyle is always white. And as in the mixture of Oil and Water, a little Sugar, which is a species of Salt, is required to make them mix the more easily; so also in what we generally take in for sustenance, a great deal of Salt is supposed to be. 
 Or to speak more like a Chymist, it may be said that this Colour proceeds from a Sulphureous Mat∣ter: That is, it arises from Sulphureous dissolved together with Saline Particles, mixt with an Acid Ferment; for we find by daily experience, that if an Acid Humour be infused into a liquor im∣pregnated with Salt or Sulphur, a white Colour is hereby immediately produc ' d. As appears in the Spirit of Harts-horn, or Soot, imbibing a sufficient quantity of Volatil Salt, which being incorporated with an Acid Liquor, obtains a whitish Colour, and very near resemblance of Milk. 
 VIII. Persons sick of a Fever are the more diffi∣cultly cu∣red if great Eaters. Of Persons that lie sick of a Fever, those are most difficulty cured who are great Eaters, espe∣cially those, who by virtue of their distemper, be∣come more voratious than before. Hence Physiti∣ans observe, that those Fevers are more lasting, by which Mens Appetites are increased, but those which excite Thirst, shorter. 
 The Reason is, because thirsty people are more easily satisfied by the taking down of Liquor, which breathing out of the Body by Sweat, leaves nothing behind to nourish the Fever: But th e whose Fever is inflamed by an Acid and Salt Humour, as being over-greedy of Meat, load and surcharge the Stomach, and so nourish the Disease. The appetite of Meats is irregular, and affects us not always in the same manner. 
 IX. How it comes that some are tormented with un∣quenchable Thirst. Some are so excessively opprest with Thirst, that all they can drink is not able to quench it. 
 The Cause of this excessive Thirst in the Mouth of Sick Persons is obvious; namely, when the Salival Vessels are so obstructed, that they cannot discharge their moisture into the Mouth; whereupon the Mouth being excessively dry, and parch ' d, excessive thirst must needs follow. Nor can it be removed, how much Liquor soever is pour ' d in, so long as that obstruction of the vessels lasts. 
 Another Cause of Thirst is, when Moisture on∣ly is wanting in the Blood; but this Thirst may easily be expelled by a large draught of Drink, by reason that in this case the vessels are open enough. Now when the vessels are obstructed, to remove that obstruction, opening Gargarisms are to be used, that is, such as are composed of Lapis Pru∣nella, and other Nitrous Medicaments. 
 X. How it comes that sometimes Persons, well in health, have little or no appe∣tite to their Meat. It oft happens that persons who are very well in health, eat indifferently, and with little or no appetite, and can remain a long time fasting with∣out any pain or trouble. Roger Bacon makes men∣tion of a certain Maid that eat nothing for the space of twenty years; as also of a French Priest, who in the time of Pope Nicolas the 5 th, lived two years without any manner of Meat or Drink. 
 The want of Appetite may proceed from seve∣ral Causes, sometimes from Obstructions, that is, when the Acid Liquor that provokes Hunger, is obstructed, and denied all access to the Ventricle or Stomach: Sometimes from cold and glutinous Humours, by which its vigor is weakned and hin∣dred from exercising any power upon the Mem∣branules: Sometimes from the corrupt tempera∣ment of the Blood, whereby the foresaid Juice impelled from the Arteries into the Stomach, de∣generates and becomes of a different nature from what it uses to be; or because the Juice or Fer∣ment of the Stomach hath been thrown out by purgatives; whence the Nervous Fibrils are no longer provoked; or because the Heat or Flame (as Physitians call it) of the Heart, is agitated but with a gentle motion, and thereupon consumes but a small quantity of Blood; as we see common∣ly in Maids troubled with the Green Sickness, who being taken with an Anorexie or want of Appetite, have wholly abstained from all sorts of Meats for a considerable time, and without much falling away of the Body. 
 XI. Hunger proceeds not from any liquor in the Milt. For I cannot assent to those who will have it, that Hunger proceeds from a Liquor flowing out of the Milt, since there is a short Ligature of the Venous Vessel between the Stomach and the Milt, which by its intumescence or rising up in a living Animal, hinders any thing from passing out of the Milt into the Stomach, as appears from those Val∣vulae which are in the said Venous Vessel; being so disposed, that tho '  any thing may have a passage from the Stomach into the Milt, yet from the Milt through any Veins into the Stomach it cannot pass. 
 XII. How a Maid could live seve∣ral years without Meat or Drink. As to that English Girl, mentioned by Roger Bacon, who eat nothing for the space of twenty years, it will prove a very difficult task to make out clearly the Cause of so long and continued an abstinence from Meat and Drink, unless it be al∣lowed, that from an extraordinary moistness of the Brain, a certain thin and pituitous matter flow ' d down from the Head into the Stomach, which might possibly turn to Nourishment in the Body, as we see in Dormice and several other Animals, namely, Bears and Brocks, that pass whole Win∣ters, and receive no sustenance from without, butare nourish ' d only by their inward Fat. It may also be asserted, that the Vital Flame, and as Phi∣losophers vulgarly call it, inmate heat in the afore∣said Green Sickness Girl, moved slowly, and con∣sumed but a small quantity of that Blood which turns to Nourishment in the Body. 
 XIII. Hunger ex∣pelled by the taking of Tobacco. Hunger and Appetite is many times abated, and sometimes expelled by the taking of Tobacco, as we see frequently among Soldiers and Seamen, who upon the taking of a Pipe of Tobacco, are often very well refresh ' d, and their Hunger satisfied. 
 The Reason hereof seems to be, that in the com∣mon sort of Tobacco, being strong and full body ' d, there is much Opium, which keeps the Blood from being over Acid, and restrains the Spirits from flying away in too great a quantity: For herein Hunger and Appetite chiefly consist, that the Acid Humours vellicate the Nerves of the Stomach; which Acidity, if it be drown ' d and stifl ' d in the Viscosity of the Tobacco, the appetite and desire of Meat must of necessity cease; and if by reason of the said Viscosity, the Acidity of the whole mass of Blood be blunted and impair ' d, consequently the fewer Volatil Spirits must be left; the loss where∣of will be attended by debility of Body, and at length by death it self. 
 XIV. Some are always hungry. Some there are who are scarce ever satisfied with Eating, but are still ravening after more Meat; and such are they who are said to be affected with a Canine Hunger or Appetite. FRISCUS Lib. Cap. 7. makes mention of a Woman of a great Age, who was not able to live a moment longer than she was eating. The Emperour Maximus, surnamed the Thracian, who succeeded Alexander the Son of Mammaea, had for his daily allowance a prodigious quantity of Meat and Drink.
VIII. How it is that the Skin being pulled off, Objects are felt more acutely. The Skin being pulled off from any part of the Body, Objects are the more acutely felt. 
 This happens, because, tho '  the Cuticle or up∣per Skin be intersperc ' d with Filaments, by which the affection is transmitted to the Brain, yet it contains many insensible Fibres, which like Dead Flesh are not affected by any Object. In so much that they may be taken off with a Penknife with∣out any Pain or Sense: Or at least it may be made out that they are harder than to admit of any Im∣pression. For the Interiour Fibres which compose the Flesh, being more tender and nervous, are therefore the more apt to admit even of the least affection, and consequently are the more sharply prick ' d with the asperity of a Body. 
 IX. How it is than any part of the Body be∣comes numb ' d, or as they call it, asleep. He who leans or puts a stress long upon any part of the Body, makes it stupid and numb ' d, or, according to the vulgar expression, asleep; as hath been already intimated. 
 The Reason is, because by the said compression the Spirits are stopp ' d, and all access to them ob∣structed; whence it comes to pass that when that part of the Body is relax ' d, there is felt a little pricking, trouble or pain, by reason of the Spirits being at length agitated afresh, and repeating their interrupted motion. 
 X. That Males in Winter, and Fe∣males in Summer are m st de∣sirous of Co∣pulation. It is vulgarly affirmed, that Females in the Sum∣mer, and Males in the Winter are most desirous of Copulation. 
 The Reason is, because the Bodies of the Males being more hot and dry, the Summer hath more power by exhalation to dissipate the Animal Spi∣rits; whereas the Winters Frost condenses more, and preserves them intire: For in cold and moist Bodies, such as are those of Females, the Summers heat cherishes, and calls forth the Spirits, when as Winters cold blunts and repels them. 
 XI. Man excels other Ani∣mals in Feeling. Of all Animals whatsoever, Man excels in the faculty of Feeling, and more distinctly perceives the first qualities of things, and other qualities re∣lating to Touch in general, as Humidity, Siccity, Hardness, Gravity, and the like. 
 This Prerogative we commonly attribute to the Spider, who (as the Boar surpasses in Hearing, the Ape in Tasting, the Vultur in Smelling) is generally believed to be the more quick and vigo∣rous in the faculty of Feeling; but this vigorous sense of Touch is upon no other account ascribed to the Spider than upon its quick perception of motion, when sitting in the midst of its Web, it per∣ceives the Fly lighting upon the most remote part thereof, which is not in the least to be wondred at, since all the Lines are equal which are derived from the Center; so that lying in ambush in the middle, and holding the extremities of the Threds with its Feet, it easily deprehends all things which are transacted about it: But Man surmounts in the Prerogative of Feeling above all Creatures, by reason of the excelleent temperament of his Skin, and the subtile contexture of Fibres in which he excels all other Animals. His most excellent Fa∣culty of Touching, is most chiefly discerned in the hollow of his Hand, and the extremities of his Toes, because that in those parts the Filaments of the Nerves are very slender, and moved with small ado. Whence it happens, that, as it were by instinct of Nature, when we go about to grope out any thing by Feeling, we reach out our Hand, but chiefly make use of the extremities of our Fingers. 
 XII. The Sense of Touch is sometimes augmented by the fai∣lure of the Sense of ight. The Sense of Touching in some Men is so admi∣rable, that it mightily helps the want of Sight in them, as appears most evidently in that renown∣ed Organist of Falcembourg, who by his Touch alone, not only knew how to play most elegantly, but also could distinguish Coins and Colours of all sorts from each other; nay, and to very great advan∣tage plaid at Cards with other persons, especially if he dealt the Cards, since he could easily under∣stand by the Pulps of his Fingers what sort of Cards they were which he dealt to his Part∣ners. 
 Of this thing there can be no other cause assign∣ed, than because all persons, like the said Organist, deprived of their Sight, are by consequence no longer distracted by the multiplicity of external Objects, which hinder us from keeping our thoughts fixt upon any particular thing, so that by daily exercise, and a most accurate attention of all cir∣cumstances, it must needs of necessity be that Blind Men must in the Sense of Touching, for ex∣amples sake, as in the rest of the Senses, of which they are not deprived, excel all other Men. 
 XIII. How it is that in touching, the Object seems to be double. Touching sometimes causes the Object to seem to be felt double, when as indeed it is but single: For the Globe G, being touch ' d with the two Fin∣gers laid a cross D and A, feels like two. 
 The Reason is, because while these Fingers keep themselves thus crossed, the Muscles indeavour to deduce A into C, and D into F: Whence it hap∣pens that the parts of the Brain, out of which Figure 28. the Nerves, inservient to these Muscles, derive their original, are disposed in such a manner as is requisite for the said Fingers to be, viz. A into B, and D into E, and consequently that the two Globules H and I, must seem to touch each other. For when we lay the Middle Finger A, for ex∣ample sake, upon the Fore Finger B, then the part of the said Fore Finger B, which being next to the Thumb F, is disposed together with the said Thumb, to lay hold upon any thing, and the part of the Middle Finger A, which joined to the Ring Finger H, is apt, together with the said Ring Finger, to catch hold on any thing, are not very capable, both at the same time, to grasp the said Globe. And the Mind then seated in the Glan∣dule, perceives the Globe, not as single but double, and as it were placed in two places; and from the different Motion of the Nerves hath an apprehen∣sion of two Globes, not one. 
 XIV. How things appear double. By the same Reason, or not much unlike, when we hold up one Eye with our Finger, and behold any thing with dissevered Rays, we cannot but perceive it as double: Forasmuch as the superior Rays of one Eye, are ever wont to act with the superior Rays of the other; as likewise the Mid∣dle with the Middle, the Inferior with the Inferior, and to conspire together to the percept on of oneand the same thing, as it were to make a report that it is indeed but one and the same. But if the Eyes chance by any means whatsoever, to be so distorted, that the Right Rays of one Eye agree not with the Left Rays of the other; or the Superior Rays of one with the Inferior of the other, all single Objects whatsoever are look ' d upon as divers. As in a Concave Glass, the Flame of a Candle ap∣pears double, by reason that from the Left Side of the said Glass, the Rays are reflected into the Right Eye, and from the Right Side into the Left Eye. 
 CHAP. II. Of Taste. I. Why the same sort of Meat is not always alike grate∣ful to us. THE same sort of Meat doth not always please. For that which is gratefully receiv ' d by the Hungry Stomach, becomes unpleasant and unsavoury to the same Stomach well satisfied; and the same Drink which delights the Thirsty, be∣comes loathsom to those that are fill ' d with Drink. 
 The Reason is, because all Savoury Things im∣press an affection in the Organ of Taste, accord∣ing to the Contexture and disposition wherewith it is imbued: So the Tongue over-dry, or void of Moisture, perceives little or no taste in any thing; and so on the contrary, a Tongue which is turgid or swelling with too much Moisture, and hath its pores stopt up with liquid Bodies, cannot be affect∣ed with any Savour. Since therefore the dispositi∣on of the Tongue, in a person fasting, and in a Person full, is quite different; hence it comes to pass, that the same sort of Meat or Drink is not always in the same manner received in its little chinks and small pores, and consequently induces a different affection therein. This may possibly arise from a Mutation of Temperament, whilst the Spittle, proceeding from the Stomach, according to the qualities of the Humour wherewith the Stomach is repleated, mingles it self with the particles of the Meat in the Mouth, and promotes their acting. 
 II. The Gross Error of the Peripa∣teticks about Sa∣vors. This very Experiment alone is sufficient plainly to discover how grosly the Peripateticks are de∣ceived when they affirm, that the savor in savo∣ry Bodies does every way agree with the senti∣ment we have thereof. Since were it according to their opinion, it would follow, that the same Man could not at several times have a different taste of the same sort of Meat, which is contrary to experience. 
 It may also happen, that from the various situa∣tion of the Nerves conducing to Taste, all sense of Taste may be taken away, according to the mention made by REALDUS COLUM∣BUS, of one Lazarus, vulgarly Sirnamed the Glass-devourer, who not distinguishing in any thing bitter from sweet, fresh from salt, used to devour Stones, Glass, Charcoals, Fish drawn alive out of a Fish-pond. Of which Monster of Nature, when after his death, a Dissection was appointed by a Person of Curiosity inquisitive into the Cause of so uncouth a thing: It was found that the sixth Conjugation of the Nerves, which was ordained by Nature, for Tastes sake in other Men, in this Glass-devourer reached neither to the Palate, nor to the Tongue, but turned back to the hinder part of the Head. 
 IV. They that are troubl ' d with the Jaundise, think all things they taste to be bitter. They that are troubled with the Jaundise, think all sorts of Meat they taste to be bitter, and im∣bued with a quality noxious to them. 
 This mistake proceeds from the Choler which is diffused through the Tongue, for such a sort of hu∣mour, mingled with the Spittle, infects the Meats, and imbues and depraves the Organ of Taste with its bitterness: So that these l terick Persons are not so much deceived about the Affection imprest (for they do really taste that which is bitter, and the Organ is certainly ill affected) as about its Cause, since they look upon the said Savor as received from the Meat, when as indeed it is to be impu∣ted to the humour only. For some without any Meat, seem to themselves to taste a certain Sa∣vor, in regard this humour sliding into the Tongue or Jaws, vitiates and corrupts their Temperament. The same thing happens in the Touch, as when any one fancies he feels the force of heat, and thinks Fire to be applied to his Body, when in∣deed Fire is far enough off from it, and only a de∣fluent humour, either a tension of parts alone, or a tumor with it impresses such an affection, as Flame the Instrument of Pain, were it present, would impress. 
 V. How it is that the Tongue dis∣covers any disease. The Tongue is the chief Indicator of any Dis∣ease, and by whatsoever Infirmity we are opprest,  ' tis thither we have recourse for all the Signs and Discoveries thereof. In so much, that it hath been always the custom of all Physitians, the first thing they do, to bid the Patient hold out his Tongue.
The Reason is, because the Tongue being the tenderest of all parts of the Body, is most easily wrought upon; for since it is of a Spongeous Na∣ture, and abounding with Blood, it is soon seiz ' d with the force of a Disease, or infected by vitia∣ted Blood, by both which being ill-affected, no wonder if it soon discover the alterations of the Body, and reveal with what infirmities it is assault∣ed; sometimes it looks Red, sometimes Yellow; and when its plexure is singular, it is subject only to a singular affection. 
 VI. They that eat Bread in a Morn∣ing, have a vellica∣tion at the root of the Tongue. They that take a Crust of Bread with a draught of Wine, for Breakfast, seem in a manner to feel certain prickles in the innermost recess of the Tongue. 
 Because the Meal of which the Bread is made, is for the most part kneaded with Ferment and Salt, the latter whereof still imparts something of Acrimony: For the parts immingled are rendred more sharp, than those that are more solute and loose, and adhere to it with a lesser tie. Whence New Bread pleases more, and is more grateful to the Organ of Taste, in regard the particles there∣of being less interwoven, are better chewed by the Spittle, and more gently move and affect the in∣nermost tract of the Palate. 
 VII. Why it is that those who have no savor of Meats, seem also not to have any smell. They that have not the faculty of perceiving Savors, must in all likelihood be deprived also of the sense of Smelling, as is many times observed in a Distemper called the Pose, where the sense of Smelling being taken away, that of Taste also fails. 
 The Cause of this Consequence depends upon the Corpuscles which are inservient to both Senses; forasmuch as they are the same, and differ in no∣thing but their various Expansion. For the senseof Smelling proceeds from particles of Emanations flying in the Air, which being mixt with the Air we breathe, are conveyed to the Nose. But the particles which conduce to Taste are indeed less subtile, and are to be imbibed by some humour, that they may smite the Organ of the Tongue; yet they are really the same, and are only distin∣guish ' d in this, viz. that being diluted with hu∣mour, they cause Savor, and being exhaled and transmitted through the Air, they cause Odour. 
 VIII. When Nau∣seation comes, or a vomiting up of cer¦tain Meats. Many who have an aversion to certain sorts of Meats; for example, to Old Cheese, or the like, when they happen to taste of the same unawares, certainly contract a great loathing, and immedi∣ately, if possibly, vomit it up; but if they cannot, presently fall sick, or find themselves very much indisposed. 
 The Reason is no other than that the said Meats, either by their Odor or Vapor inflict damage upon those Fibrels or pores of the Nerves: For while they ill affect the Nerves inserted into the Ventri∣cle, they first cause a tremour of the Lips or Nau∣seation; and if the said Vellication of the Nerves continue, there will at length follow a Vomiting, which Nauseation ever precedes; nor is the said Nausea any thing else than the tremulous Motion of the innermost Membran investing the Mouth, which proceeds even from the vellication of the Ventricle, as to which Tunicles, that of the Mouth is continuous. 
 IX. Why upon defect of Taste, defect of Smell should fol∣low. It may also be otherwise said, that the privati∣on of Taste induces the failure of another Sense, viz. Smell; by reason that both Sensories being planted near each other, are apt to be both toge∣ther overwhelmed and glutted by the same serous matter squeesed out of the Blood: In as much as the tubulated Membrans of the Nostrils, and the structure of the Tongue it self consist of a very rare, and as it were spongious composure: Where∣fore the pores of either Organ, and the passages from the Serous floating matter are apt to be over∣flowed, and the sensile Fibres in both at the same time to be obstructed; to which may be added, that whereas the Nostrils and Tongue ought to b supplied with a continual moisture; both of them as they most grievously, and more than other parts, undergo a deflux of superabundant Serum, so both are equally obnoxious to the same mischief upon any slight cause. 
 X. Why sick Persons have an aversion to Meats that are sweet. Sick Persons, and those that are of a Crasie Bo∣dy, reject all sweet things, and are only delighted with what is acid and sharp. 
 The Reason why these sickly people have such an aversion to all Meats that are sweet, is because of the vitiated Blood, and the malignant quality of the Morbifick Humour, which being for the most part Choler, breaks into the Tongue, as being a very tender place, and causes innumerable ob∣structions, hindring a just perception of the Meats that are presented. Hence it is that sharp Meats please the Sick, in regard the Tongue is covered with a certain Uliginous tegument, so that sweet things cannot enter and pass through it; whereas Acids affect in another manner, as consisting of long and inflexible parts. Nor is it for any other cause that Beasts covet Salt, and are very much taken with the eating thereof, because their Tongue is scabrous and rough, and overlaid with a certain Crust. 
 XI. Sweet Meats hin∣der others from being relish ' d. Who ever hath a relish of sweet things, hath not a right relish of other Meats of a more accu∣rate taste. 
 Because all Esculent or Eatable Things are no otherwise tasted, but so far as the Tongue induces and insinuates within the pores certain Savoury Corpuscles reduced and made small by manduca∣tion or Chewing. But whereas sweet things are viscous or clammy, and for the most part obstruct the passages of the Tongue, they hinder the su∣pervenient savoury particles from being carried into, and affecting the Sensorium. Wherefore the better to restore again the faculty of Tasting, we use to feed upon sharp or salt things, to the end that they may loosen the passages of the Tongue, and wear away, and take off the inherent Viscosities. 
 XII. How it is hat Spittle is excited at the sight of things grateful to the Pa a e. Spittle at the sight of things grateful, and with which we are chiefly delighted, increases and fills the Mouth. 
 This happens by reason those sorts of Meat, which before are apprehended to be grateful to us, now again excite an Appetite in the Soul to receive them: Whence it comes to pass, that the Soul being intent upon this alone, sends more co∣pious Spirits into the Glandules of the Mouth, so that they being so much the more compressed, the Spittle at the sight of those grateful appearances is squeesed out in greater abundance. 
 CHAP. III. Of the Sense of Smelling. I. Man is the dullest of all Animals in the sense of Smelling. OF all Animals, Man is thought to be that of the grossest Smell, and who the most slowly takes in the Emanations flowing from Bodies. 
 The Reason is fetch ' d from the Constitution of the Brain it self, which being spongy, and abound∣ing with much moisture, blunts the edge of smell, and is the less affected by the said Emanations. Hence those that are troubled with a Catarrh or excessive deflux of Humour, many times have no smell, in regard the pituitous Humour blocks up the Nostrils and the Cribriformous or Sive∣formed Bone, to which the Emanations flowing, clot together, and are in a manner choak ' d up: So likewise little or no smell is perceived under water, in regard the moisture takes in the exhaled Corpuscles, and obstructs their diffusion. 
 II. They who have large Nostrils smell best. They who have broad and open Nostrils, and in whom the spongy passages of the said Bone are from their Birth dilated, admit more easily and strongly all Odours or Smells. 
 The Reason is, because a greater abundance of Emanations is conveyed through those Cavities to the Brain, which being gathered therein, and with mutual application aiming at the Nerves of the Brain, impress the greater affection. In a manner not much different from that whereby the Air in∣spired through a broad and well purged Ear, en∣ters more copiously the Auditory Passage, or whereby the smoak ascends more easily through a wide Chimney than through a narrower. 
 III. The Ox, Goat, and the like, excel other Creatures in smell. Hence in dissections, we see in a Goat, Ox, Sheep, and other such like Animals, that feed up∣on Grass and Herbs, that the Mammillary Pro∣cesses are larger than in Carnivorous or Flesh-eat∣ing Animals, because they have more need of an exquisite Organ of Smell to distinguish divers sorts of Herbs, and to select the more agreeable from the more noxious. For the same reason Brute Ani∣mals are indued with far larger Olfactory Nerves than Man, by reason that they discern their food by no other guide than smell alone; whereas Man, as one indued with Reason, knows many things by Reason and discourse, and is led not so much by smell as by seeing and tasting, to the choice of his Diet. 
 IV. Those things which are grateful in smell to one, are very ungrateful to another. Those things which are grateful in smell to some, are to others ungrateful.
LXVI. It is con¦cluded that Animals are meer Automata. From this similitude of the Vectis with the Ma∣chin of an Animal, and from the manner by which we have above made out, that the functions of the Body are performed; it is clear enough evinc ' d, that there is no necessity of a Soul in Beasts, for the producing of a Pulse of the Heart or Arteries, the Concoction of Meats, Nutrition, Respiration and Procreation of Spirits; but that they are produc ' d without any Cogitation, and consequently that the parts of the Body in Animals are moved from place to place, in the nature of Pneumatick or Hydraulic Automata. 
 LXVII. Whence the diversity of motions in Animals, if they have no Soul. This hinders not but that the motions which are performed by the help of the Muscles, and influx of Animal Spirits are various, and not always ex∣cited in Animals; for example, that Beasts walk sometimes with a swift, sometimes with a slow pace, that they turn this way or that way, &amp;c. Since this diversity of motions argues not any Cog∣nition in them, as if they had any design in what they did or understood, what to Fly from, or what to Follow after, but because they are of such a Con∣stitution and Fabrick that the Pores in their Brain are opened sometimes one way, sometime another, and their Spirits have a different influx into vari∣ous Fibres, Nerves and Muscles, according as the Organs are moved by the Objects, and suggest manifold Species to them: For example, if a Dog be benum ' d, or seis ' d by Cold, or any bad Weather, seeing a Fire a far off, he makes haste to come to it, not induc ' d by any other reason, but because such an Object as that opens the passages of the Brain which terminate in the Muscles of the Legs, and so the Animal Spirits are transmitted to them, which causes him to approach near the said Fire; and being thus arrived, and finding the kind and grateful heat thereof; there ariseth thereupon such a commotion of Spirits in the Brain, that imme∣diately they direct their course into those Muscles, which is the cause that he makes his stay there and lays him down to repose and cherish his be∣nummed Members; but if it chance that when he is thus laid, and inclining to Sleep, the Fire should be over-hot and scorching, or a Spark should shoot out from a burning Coal, and leap upon his Skin and burn him, this agitation of the singeing heat immediately opens those Pores of the Brain which draw down to the Muscles of the Neck, Eyes and Feet, and attend their motions; so as that he pre∣sently rouses himself, looks upon the Fire, and with a swift pace retires from it. Or if the Master of the House by chance, from abroad comes home, and comes in view of the Dog, immediately upon sight of him, the passages of his Brain are open ' d, as by custom so disposed, in so much that he di∣rects his course to his said Master, and testifying his joy by wagging his Tail, fawns upon him. But if a Stranger enters, whose Countenance and Ha∣bit of Body are unknown to him, his Aspect and unwonted Scent he brings along with him, stir up the Dog to a contrary motion, by opening those Muscles which attend upon his Barking-fit, and conduce to the warfare of his Teeth, and stirring up of his Anger; so that all the motions which are per∣formed by a Dog, are excited by Objects, which being received into the Sensories, dispose the Spi∣rits to an Influx into several parts of the Body, which are adapted and conducible to move them, 
 LXVIII. In Man al∣so many motions are effected without the concur∣rence nay, against the consent of the Soul. The Peripateticks ought not to be troubled, that we attribute the motions of Animals to the disposition of their Organs only, and make out all their sensible actions without any help of the Soul, when as if they would seriously inspect into them∣selves, and consider well what is done within them, they would find the same thing altogether in them∣selves: For who is there that is not taught by experience, that various motions daily arise in his Body without any concurrence; nay, oftentimes against the Will, and with the reluctance of the Soul? In Convulsions or the Colick Passion some part of the Abdomen are twitch ' d, whence an acute Pain arises, the Bellows are contracted, and the Navil is drawn in: Often-times the Intestines by an inverse motion of the Fibres, are pulled up∣wards, the Ureters and Urinary Vessels are so im∣pelled one against the other, that in the whole Fit, Urin is either totally supprest, or is voided very sparingly and by drops: All this while no Man certainly will maintain, that the Soul connives at these motions, when he that suffers such grievous Maladies, cannot but most earnestly wish himself free; and there is no Man but must vehemently complain of Pain during the Contraction, Infla∣tion or Astriction. The same might be demonstra∣ted in a world of other Examples, but let these few suffice, that we may not seem to dwell too long upon a thing perspicuous enough of it self. They that fall down from any high place, fall so that their Hands come first to the Earth, so as thereby to save the Head; and this they do not any way consulting, but because the sight of the impendent fall, reaching to the Brain, directs the Animal Spirits into the Nerves in such a man∣ner as is necessary to produce this motion, as it were in a Machin. Likewise if any one unex∣pectedly should hold up his Hand towards our Eyes, as it were offering to strike us, tho '  we were sure of his Friendship, and well satisfied that he did it but in Jest, and designed nothing less than to do us a mischief, yet we should hardly refrain from shutting our Eyes: Which evidently shews, that this shutting of them is not any work or de∣sign of the Soul, since it is done against our Will, and our Will is the only, or at least principal acti∣on, but because the Machin of our Body is so compos ' d, that the motion of the said Hand to our Eyes, excites another motion in our Brain, which draws down the Animal Spirits into those Muscles that let down and depress the Eye-lids. The same thing is to be supposed of other moiions of the Body, for upon the sight of any delicate or inticing Meat, not only the innermost Jaws are moved with a desire thereof; but the Tongue and Palate being moistned with Spittle, cause a certain, as it were praemansion or fore▪chewing, as we may so call it: So that this sort of Meat is the occasion that the Spirits direct their course towards those Muscles which are inservient to the Jaws, Tongue and Palate, and contribute motion to them. The same is to be said of Itching and the Venereal Mo∣tions, which upon the sight of any Venereal Object, are excited in those parts that conduce to the per∣formance of this Scene. 
 LXIX. I all the motions of the Body depended upon our Will there would be no Para∣lyticks. For doubtless if all the motions of our Body de∣pended upon our Will, and we could govern our Members at pleasure, there would certainly be found no Paralyticks, or Persons troubled with a Palsie; none deprived of motion all the Body over, or in any of its parts. Forasmuch as there is no Man, in whom there is not a Will to move his own Members, and free himself from that resolu∣tion or untying of the Nervous Parts which takes away Sense and Motion from him. Who would suffer the use of any of the parts of the Body to be taken from him, if it were in his power to open the Ob∣structed Passages, and make way for the Animal Spirits, by which they may be transmitted, and may influence, plump up and actuate with vigour the Nervous Parts? 
 LXX. There are also certain spontaneous Motions without De∣sign or Will. Now there are not only Natural Motions which are performed in us without the help of our Know∣ledge or our Will; but there are also a world of those which they call voluntary or spontaneous Motions, which are effected by the disposition on∣ly of the Machin of the Body, without any thought or design contributed thereunto by our Soul: For if, while we think upon any other thing, a spark of Fire chances to light upon our Hand, we pre∣sently start back with all imaginable swiftness, there needs no deliberation for so doing, our Will not being concerned in this motion, our Hand is drawn back before we can have so much as a thought thus to snatch it away. 
 LXXI. Of motions made to hinder us from fall∣ing. If we have a mind to stoop for the taking up of any thing upon the Ground, we draw back one Leg, so to give us the better advantage to coun∣terpoise the rest of the Body, which hereupon leans forward: If walking upon a dangerous path, we chance to slip, we immediately lift up that Arm which is opposite to the lace where our Body just before inclin ' d upon its fall, and by this means we give a stop to the force of the fall, and sustain our selves the better, in regard the Arm, thus lift∣ed up, keeps off its whole weight from the middle of the Body where the center is; and by this en∣lightment gains sufficient force to counterpoise the rest of the Body which inclined on the other side; as we see that in a Ballance, a small weight hung at a distance from the Center thereof, holds an aequilibrium against another far greater which is nearer the Center. 
 LXXII. That moti∣ons proceed not from any Cogni∣tion or Knowledge▪ And this we learn ' d when we were but Infants, that weights far distant from the Center, have al∣ways so much the more force, and that the Arm lifted up hath the more power to sustain the weight of the Body when it begins to fall, and that the Center of gravity must be always under our Feet. But tho '  we practise all these Rules with the same exactness as the most able Philosophers, all the re∣flexions we make upon the Laws of Motion and of Aequilibrium are useless and unprofitable in the Practick, and so far are these Sciences from being able to serve us upon any occasion, that they would be rather very prejudicial, were we minded to make use of them; since certain it is, that we perform better all these motions when we think not on them, than when we are intent upon them. We must therefore of necessity acknowledge, that whatever is acted in us, is without our Knowledge; at least that knowledge we have sometimes by re∣flexion, is not at all the cause, since these motions prevent us in our thoughts; and these thoughts imployed about them, rather hinder than help us. If then these motions so regular, so proportioned to their performances, so conformable to the Laws and Rules of the most refined Philosophy, can be per∣formed so effectually and to the purpose in Man with∣out any Cognition or Knowledge, how comes it that Brutes act by Knowledge? And why should it not rather be generally allowed what we maintain, that they are able to act by the disposition of the Machin of the Body only, according as we act by the like disposition of ours? 
 LXXIII. How impro∣perly some Physitians speak, who attribute certain Pas∣sions to Na∣ture. How unaptly and improperly do some Philoso∣phers and Physitians speak, tho '  seeming to utter great things, when with a Magisterial Counte∣nance they pronounce that Nature abhors a Vacu∣um, and shews an aversion to what is disagreeable to her; that a Medicin chooses what Humours to attract, and passes by and leaves untoucht others; Nature disposes her self to a Crisis, as to a Com∣bat; that she indeavours to subdue or throw off the Hostile Matter of the Distemper, that being vanquish ' d, she is reduc ' d as it were to desperati∣on, and as it were throws away, or lays down her Arms. By which ways of speaking, they do but fly to a pretty handsome way of concealing their ignorance; and that they may not seem to be put to a nonplus, and have nothing to say, they attribute to occult Effects, some, tho '  no less Cause. Because, since Appetite, Election, Will, Hatred, proceed from our Mind, and are no other than various modes of thinking; we could not but be conscious of them, if they were found in us. But since we neither have a Will or Aversion to any of those things aforesaid, to which these motions tend, nay, are ignorant after what manner they are effected; they must maintain that these sort of motions are not found in us, or if they are found, that they have the Body only, that is, the dispo ition of the Organs, and influx of Animal Spirits for a Principle. Which how absurd it is to assert, no Man in his Senses can be ignorant, who knows that the Mind is distinguish ' d from the Body, and that the ways of each are different one from the other. Otherwise what have we to do but to agree with the most Illustrious Verulam, That to all Bodies, of whatsoever quality, desti∣tute of Sense, there is inherent a certain faculty of perception, if it be true, that when Body is applied to Body, there may be deprehended in them something very Analogous and Cognate to Election, in admitting things agreeable, and exclu∣ding or rejecting things ungrateful. What should we do, but allow Cognition to Plants, if some of them contract a friendship with others, and covet some parts of the Earth to harbour in more thanothers, and make choice to themselves of what Aliment is most agreable to them? And if others on the contrary fly so much as the touch of Neigh∣bouring Plants, are pleased with a sandy or a plashy Soil, one more than the other; and several of them have an abhorrence, some of Cold, some of over∣much Heat? What should hinder us from believing that the Stomach is indued with Understanding, if it discerns what is hurtful, from what is whole∣some, and hath an Appetite to things only agreea∣ble to it, and having taken Poison, is provoked to Vomit? For these actions belong to the Soul, and that thing must needs be indued with Cogita∣tion, which loves and makes choice, which hath an aversion, which hath an abhorrence, which is de∣lighted with one thing more than another, and hath an Appetite: So that I can by no means agree with the most Famous Harvey in his Opinion, that all parts of the Body, which by their own motion strive against provocation and injuries, in∣joy a certain sense by which they are impelled to motion, and consequently that the motions and actions which the Physitians call Natural, are not performed without Sense; and that there is a cer∣tain Latent Sense, by which they are excited, pro∣vok ' d and altered; for were it so, we must conse∣quently acknowledge that the palpitation of the Heart, trembling, fainting fits, swooning fits and alterations of the Pulse in Magnitude, Celerity, Or∣der or Harmony which proceed from Morbifick Causes, altering and hurting the Sense, are indued with Sense. 
 LXXIV. Nor less improperly they who attribute Sense to Brutes. Nor am I more inclinable to the Opinion of the Peripateticks, who attribute Sense to Brute Ani∣mals, and are perswaded that they See, Hear, Smell, &amp;c. in the same manner as we do; which certainly no Man will allow, who forms to himself a true Idea of Sense, and hath attain ' d so much Judgment as to understand what is included in the Notion or Conception of it; forasmuch as Sense is not distinguished from Cogitation, and is applicable to a thing Spiritual only and Incorporeal, from which it cannot be separated. Hence Hippocrates in his Sixth Aphorism, and Second Section, They, who being agrieved in any part of the Body, yet feel no pain, their Mind is certainly sick. If therefore they are not sensible when the Mind is sick, so as not to be intent upon the Organs of the Senses, much less can any other Creature be sensi∣ble of those things which beat upon the Sense less violently, unless the Mina be present; as we also find by experience in our selves. For it very often happens, that we run over with our Eyes the Let∣ters of any Writing, and that our Ears are smitten with the sound of Words, tho '  we neither under∣stand nor perceive either the one or the other, be∣cause our Mind is set upon certain things, each of which nevertheless afterwards returns, and is repre∣sented to our Cogitation: If therefore Men who are indued with Mind, when they attend not, but are imployed elsewhere, are not sensible, much less can Animals be sensible, who are Senseless and destitute of Mind. So that Plutarch rightly con∣cludes in his Book De Sagacitate Animalium, Men∣tem tantum videre &amp; intelligere, &amp;c. That the Mind only sees and understands, and that all things else are surd and blind, in regard the passion of the Eyes and Ears, when they are smitten by Objects, stirs up no Sense, if the Cogitation of the Mind be absent. 
 LXXV. Aristotle  ' s Opinion, that Mind only is sen∣sible. Nor do Aristotles own words, Section II. Pro∣blem 33. make less for our business; for the Philo∣sopher having made an inquiry, why Night is more accommodated for hearing than Day, after he had quoted Anaxagoras his Opinion, who judged the reason to be because the Air in the Day time, heat∣ed by the Sun, hisses and makes a Noise, but by Night is silent and at rest, the heat being then gon; goes on with his Discourse in these words, Quonians Corpora interdiu, &amp;c. because Bodies by Day, variously divide and disperse the force of Un∣derstanding, and put it upon divers operations, so that the sense of hearing plain is taken away; and by reason we act and manage all things more by Day than by Night, the Intelligence it self is hin∣dred and interrupted by the affairs of the Body: But Sense when it is separated from Intelligence, is upon, as it were, an insensible work; whence that saying, Mens videt, Mens audit, the Mind sees, the Mind hears; that is, perceives Objects which smite the Organs of the Body, for no other things are thus perceived by the Mind; whence it follows necessarily, that those things which are void of Mind, are also destitute of Sense. 
 LXXVI. The Vulgar Objection to shew that there is Sense in Animals. But some will start up, and cry out against this Opinion as Cruel, and will call it the utter extirpation of Animals. What, will they say, will you de∣prive all Animals, not only of Intelligence, but also of all Sense? O Barbarity! What can be more oppugnant to Experience, and the common Opini∣on of all Men? Do we not daily behold Beasts coming nearer and nearer to perfection, looking se∣riously upon visible Objects, and receiving sounds in at their Ears, by which sounds they are excited to Labour, to the running of Races, to Meat, to Drink, and other such like actions? who knows not that a Cat, Dog or Ape distinguish their Food by smelling, and hunt after that which is agreeable and grateful, and fly and eschew that which is ungrateful and noxious? How can it be that a Spider, sitting in the midst of his Web, can feel when a Fly is intangled in the remotest part, and yet be destitute of the Sense of Touching? 
 LXXVI. Sense is to be distin∣guished by three de∣grees. Our business therefore is to shew, for what rea∣son we exclude Sense from Beasts; and how it comes to pass, that they have Eyes, yet see not; are provided with Ears, yet perceive no sounds; are not without a Nose, yet smell not; have the use of a Tongue, yet discern nothing by any diffe∣rent relish or Savour; which the better to effect, we propose a thing Note-worthy; that our Sense is to be distinguish ' d into three degrees. The first degree contains that simple motion which the Ob∣ject impresses upon the Nerves, or that whereby the Organ of the Body is immediately affected by external Objects, which can be nothing else but the agitation of the particles of the said Organ, the change of Figure and situation proceeding from this agitation: For Sense consists in Motion, and as Aristotle asserts in his Third Book, De Anima∣libus, Chap. 13. no motion can be had without contact. So that a Corporeal Organ must needs be touch ' d after a Corporeal manner, and motton must needs be imprest upon sensible things. When, I say, that the motion of an Object is imprest up∣on a Corporeal Organ, I would not have it under∣stood that the motion, for example, of the Eye, is only made there, but that it passes up to the Brain, from whence the Fibres of the Nerves, like Lutestrings in a Lute, are stretcht out to other Members. The Second Degree contains Perception, which is tied to that motion, whenever this impres∣sion is carried to the Pineal Glandule, or seat of the Soul. Such are the perceptions of Pain, Ti∣tillation, Thirst, Hunger, Heat, Sound, Savour, and the like; which, we say, arise from the sub∣stantial Union of the Soul with the Body. The Third contains all those Judgments which attend those Perceptions, that is to say, those Judgments which, from the very first we have ever used to make of things without us upon occasion of the motions of a Corporeal Organ. Or to comprehend these three Degrees of Sense in fewer words. The first Degree is the affection or motion of a Corpore∣al Organ: The second the perception of that im∣pression which is proper to a Corporeal Organ: The third the determination of Judgment to af∣firm, or deny any thing. And still to render the matter a little more plain, when any one beholds, for example, the Moon, the Corporeal Organ, that is to say, the Eye is moved, or affected by the Light which is reflected by the Lunar Body; and herein consists the first Degree: The Mind present∣ly perceives the Light or Colour, and this is the effect of the second Degree. Moreover the Mind assigns Colour to the Moon, that is, delivers its Judgment, as asserting that the Moon is coloured, and this is the result of the third Degree. 
 LXXVIII. How Sense may be ap∣plied to Brutes. These things thus premised, it manifestly follows, that Animals are void of Sense, properly so call ' d, unless we admit for Sense, that Corporeal Motion which preceeds Perception, and hath reference to it, as to something begun and imperfect. For it is of Corporeal Motion only that Animals are ca∣pable; nor do we deprehend any thing to be in them, which can persuade us that they are sensible, if the word Sense be taken for any other than the impression of the external Object upon the Organ of the Senses: So that those persons that think the motion of a Corporeal Organ deserves the name of Sense, are no less absurdly persuaded, than they who maintain that the Optick Cubicle sees while it receives the Species of external Objects, and repre∣sents things done without. That the Eye of a slain Ox sees wherein all things are distinctly deli∣neated, no less in than the Retin or Network Tunicle of a surviving Ox. That Men see, who, like Hares sleep with their Eyes open; and cannot be discern ' d to be awake, any otherwise than by the loosning of their Eyelids. When as the Optick Chamber, the Eye of the dead Ox, the Retin Tunicle of a sleeping Person, receive the Species of external things; and in the same manner as they represent the Picture of Objects: So that if Corporeal Moti∣on be allowed to injoy the name of Sense; by the same force of Reason it may be inferr ' d, that it may be attributed to Inanimate Things. 
 LXXIX. Sense con∣sists not in the motion of a Corpo∣real Organ, but in Per∣ception. But I can easily imagin what may be objected against this Ratiocination; namely, that a Body is the Instrument of Sense, whose action must needs intervene to our Sensations, and consequently that for producing of Sense, there is required an Or∣gan disposed after a certain manner; that is to say, into which the Animal Spirits may flow, and whose motion may reach up to the Brain, which without motion cannot be done. All these Condi∣tions I willingly grant, and I confess it is requisite for the making of us sensible, that an Organ be modified by certain dispositions; but I only in∣sist, that neither the action of an external Object, by which the Organ is moved and disposed; nor the mutation of Figure and Situation, which pro∣motes that Action; nor that transmission which is made to the Brain, are Senses or Apprehensions; but that which immediately results in the Mind, which is joined to the Corporeal Organ, so dispo∣sed: For how can that saying of the Prophet Isaiah be understood, In hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not discern: Unless the first degree be supposed to be distinguished from the Second, and that Corporeal Motion may be disjoined from Per∣ception, or attention of Mind. 
 LXXX. Corporeal Motion may be had without Sense. But what need is there to have recourse to Holy Scripture, to prove Perception to belong to the essence of Sense; and that the work of the Mind is required to be concerned, when we are said to hear, see, smell, &amp;c. since we find it not seldom by experience in us, as namely when the Mind being very much taken up in contemplating other things, a Man may pass by us, and not be taken notice of, tho '  our Eyes be open, and directed to∣wards him, there being no obstacle in the way to hinder; and so likewise not observe his Speech, tho '  our Ears be open, and immediately take in sound; We may also not taste the relish of Meat, tho '  the Fibres of the Tongue be smitten by the Corpuscles of the Meat; and the whole plexure of the Organ be never so clean, and void of all clog or impediment: Lastly, we may be exempted from the pain of Cold, tho '  in a rigid Climat, and the Air ready to freez, through the bitterness of the weather. All which things sufficiently prove, that not the Members or Organs, but the Mind only do see, hear, taste and feel. 
 LXXXI. How those are mista∣ken, who from exter∣nal actions judge Brutes to be sensible as we are. Whence it is apparent how foolishly those per∣sons reason, who because they observe Brute Ani∣mals to be mov ' d by the Species of external things, and to feed as Men do on Meats offer ' d them, to be affected with sounds, to be taken with the aspect of some Objects, and frighted with that of others, presently infer that Beasts also are sensible; that is, that they think and give attention to any thing that is offered; whereas indeed all those motions in Ani∣mals are performed without any concurrence of the Soul, and only effected by a blind impulse of Organs and Animal Spirits. This error hath grown up with us from our Infancy, as Clauber∣gius observes in his Prolegomena Logicae, by rea∣son that at that time, and in that very moment, in which our Corporeal Organs were moved by external things, the Mind joined to the Body had still a perception of some thing, and so we taking both for one, attribute perception to the Corporeal Organs of the Senses; which the Wise attribute only to the Intellect or Understanding. Hence we say generally by way of familiar speech, that the Eye sees, that the Ear hears, that the Tongue tastes, that the Nose smells, that the Hand feels; nay, which is more because whilst the Bo∣dy was affected with external things, the Mind also perceived something, and thereupon presently made a judgment of something; hence we ascribe estimation and judgment to Corporeal Organs, to which nevertheless the Philosopher knew well enough that Body is not desired, but that besides the apprehension of the Intellect, the assent of the Will is also required. For just as it often hap∣pens in other things, so doth it also in these Acts of Understanding, Imagination, Perception and Judgment, namely that they are often taken one for the other, and confounded together, and only for this reason, because they exist together at the same time. So because whilst the Eye is moved by the Light, the Mind also joined to the Body perceives something, and at the same time judges; therefore these three different things, viz. the motion of the Body, the perception of the Mind, and the judgment, are all taken by the Vulgar for one and the same thing, and are all exprest by that one term of Seeing, as when they say I see the Sun. But the Wise are far above this manner of speaking, as well knowing the diffe∣rence between that which, in our sensations be∣longs to Body, and that which belongs to Mind; for the motion which an external Object impresseth, and the mutation of Organ belongs indeed to Body; but it comprehends no Perception or Cogitation which is proper to the Mind, and from which it cannot be separated. 
 LXXXII. According to Plato there is no Sense but from the Soul. This Opinion Divine Plato maintains in Mar∣silius Ficinus, in his Argument against Thetaetus: We must note, saith FICINUS, that Plato allows no Cognition to Body, as likewise no Life: That which lives, is sensible; the Soul lives, and the Soul is sensible; but in the Body there is nei∣ther Life nor Sense; yet the works of Life and Sense are visible in it. So that those which some call the Five Senses, he will have to be called the Five Organs of Sense, and asserts that nothing hath any sensibility by these Instruments, but that through these, as it were, passages, each part of Sense is performed by one certain force of the Soul, which operation he calls the Common Sense; into which various passions have influx as Lines from the circumference to the Centre of a Circle. Co∣lours, through the Eyes; Sounds, through the Ears; Odours, through the Nose; Savours, through the Tongue: Lastly, heat, cold, moist, dry, grave, light, soft, hard, smooth, rough, rare, dense, acute and obtuse, through the whole Body. That this Soul is sensible, not by many, but by one power, is apparent, since when we feel heat, we do not give this Sense the appellation of Voice; nor when we perceive any thing of a Savour, do we call it Odour. He cannot distinguish one thing from ano∣ther, who knows not both. No one Organ per∣forms the same things as another doth; or if the same things, not in the same manner; so that the distinction of those things which are perceived is not in the Organs, but in one certain power of the Soul, perceiving each thing, and distinguishing all things one from another. All which, since the Soul alone is able to effect, as the Peripateticks themselves cannot deny, what need is there of ma∣ny Senses. 
 LXXXIII. Corporeal Organs perceive nothing. From which words of Plato, we may thus ar∣gue: If Sense resided in a Corporeal Organ, it might be said the Eye sees, or the Ear hears; but according to Plato  ' s Opinion, neither the Ear hears, nor the Eye sees; nay in the Body, there is neither Life nor Sense; only by it the works of Life and Sense are made to appear: And it is the Soul as Marsilius saith in another place, which is in pain or rejoiceth, not the bulk of the Body; consequently there is no Sense in a Corporeal Organ. From hence also it is clearly to be deduc ' d, that Brutes, since they are void of Mind, and have nothing but Corporeal Motion, do not, for exam∣ple, see like us, that is, as being sensible, or ta∣king notice that they see, but only as we do when our Mind is elsewhere imployed, or called aside, tho '  the Images of external Objects are painted in our Retin Tunicle, and perhaps also their impressi∣ons being made in the Optick Nerves, dispose our Members to different motions; yet nevertheless we perceive nothing of them: In which case it appears also, that we are moved no otherwise than as Au∣tomata, as hath been already declared by several Examples. 
 LXXXIV. For what reason Ani∣mals are said to have five Senses. Wherefore if all the Freaks of the Brain, and all the motions of the Animal Spirits, which are caused by the Nerves, must needs be called Senses; it may be said that Animals have five exterior Senses, because there are five sorts of Nerves which convey the impressions of Objects to the Brain, and which dispose the Animal Spirits to insinuate divers ways into the Muscles, for the mo∣ving of the Members: Hence it is, for example, that Animals are said to see, when the Light en∣lightens the Optick Nerves, and by them the parts of the Brain, from whence they have their Origi∣nal; that they hear when the Air which hath been smitten by any resounding Body, strikes up∣on the Nerves, which terminate in the Ears: That they taste when the particles of the Viands which they chewed, have force enough to enter the pores of the Tongue, and so excite the Nerves: That they smell when the most subtile parts of the Body which they inviron, being mingled with the Air, which causes Respiration, hit against the Nerves that terminate in the Nose; and that there is simply a Sense of Feeling, when any exteriour object is immediately applied to some part of their Body, and have force enough to agitate the Nerves which there terminate. It is said likewise that they have Sense of Pain when the agitation of the Nerves is very violent, and that they have relaxa∣tion of Pain, when this agitation is indifferent; but all these sentiments are nothing else but the power which the Animal Spirits have to be dis∣posed by the presence of Objects, to pass through the Brain, and through the Nerves into some cer∣tain Muscles rather than others; and by conse∣quence that there are no Senses but according to the first degree, that is to say, that they have none but Corporeal Motions. 
 LXXXV. Dr. Willis his Opinion about the Cognition of Brutes. The Famous Dr. WILLIS in his Exercitati∣on concerning the Soul of Brutes, where he ac∣knowledges a Corporeal Soul in Brute Animals, and fancies it to be of an igneous or fiery Nature, and of kin to flame, thinks it no absurd thing that there should be allowed in Animals, a power to speculate and discern the Images of sensible things delineated in the Brain, and to draw forth, accord∣ing to the impressions there conceived, Appetites and respective Acts of other Faculties. In regard tho '  the Soul and Body, taken apart may not have the same power; yet this hinders not, but that from a certain Law of the Creation, as he calls it, or Institution of Almighty GOD, an animated Body may be so disposed, that from Soul and Body joined together, there may result a confluence of such sort of faculties, as shall be needful for eve∣ry Animal, for the ends and uses designed it. Inmany things framed by Human Art, the Work∣manship hath exceeded the Materials, as who would think that of Iron and Brass, the most fixt and unactive of Metals, an Instrument should be composed, whose Orbs imitating the Coelestial Orbs, should observe motions little differing from perpe∣tual, whose periods renewed by a constant vicissi∣tude should most certainly measure the spaces of Times? No wonder that from a Wind blown into a Pipe, a rude and simple Sound should be pro∣duc ' d, but that from a Breath infused into Musical Organs, and so variously transmitted through ma∣nifold apertures of Valves, or stops into such and such Pipes, a most grateful harmony should arise; this, I say, we cannot but admire, and confess withall, that this effect far exceeds, as well the matter of the Instrument, as the Hand of the Mu∣sitian playing, tho '  the Musical Organ require for the most part the skill of the said Artist, by whose direction the Breath admitted, now into some, now into other Pipes, performs manifold Harmonies, and almost an infinite variety of Moods. So in some Brutes of the more perfect kind, whose Acti∣ons are ordained for many and more noble uses, there ought to be attributed a certain faculty, that is, the Brutal Soul it self, naturally so endowed, as to be rendred knowing and active about some things necessary for it, by various accidents with which it uses daily to be affected, and afterwards is taught to know other things, and to exert far more, and more difficult Actions,
