 Diverse Tastes are compounded of a Sim∣ple Taste, and a Compound: As, 
 1. Acrid is compounded of a little Oyl, and a great deal of Salt; being Hot, Pun∣gent, and Burning. 
 2. Acerbs are compounded of Acid and Astringent; being partly of Angular, and partly of a rough Figure. 
 Tastes arising from Compounded Tastes mixed, are, 
 1. Nauseous, which is compounded of Bitter-sweet, or Bitter-slimy; and of a Tex∣ture deterging and smoothing. 
 2. Austeres are compounded of Bitterish and Astringent; and are of a very rough Texture. 
 3. Nitrose is compounded of Cool and Bitter: Plants of this Taste are Watry, Slimy, and Bitterish; as Beets. 
 Tastes compounded of other Compound Tastes, and a particular Smell, are, 
 1. Aromaticks, which are compounded of Acrids, Bitterish or Sweet, with a Fra∣grant Smell. 
 2. Fetid Tastes are compounded of Bit∣ter, Acrid or Mucilaginous Tastes; with a Fetid Smell. 
 3. Cress-Tastes are compounded of a Bit∣terish and Acrid Taste, and a quick Pun∣gent Smell, which flies from the Tongue into the Nose; as Mustard-seed, &amp;c. And we find many Plants Tasting as they Smell. 
 To describe the different Affections of the Organ by Taste, I think unnecessary: For the Eyes know particular Colours, without discerning and distinguishing the manner of their Impression; and by the Feeling, we know many Things, though we distinguish not all the Qualities we feel: So the Taste, whose Sense is like the touch∣ing of an Object, knows (Watry, Earthy, Acid, Greety, Astringent, Mucilaginous, Oyly, Bitter, Sweet, Resinous, Gummy, Te∣rebinthinate, Aromatick, Abominable, Pun∣gent, Corrosive, Hot and Cool, Crude, Mel∣lowy, Nauseous Tastes, and Pea-Tastes ) im∣mediately, without considering the parti∣cular Mode by which they affect. And because these are the common known Tastes, out of which other Tastes are made; therefore these respectively may be call ' d Simple Tastes, because the Compound Tastes of Plants are produc ' d by a Mixture of these. And these Compound Tastes are ob∣servable, either in the same Liquor; as in Turpentine, Bitter, Slimy and Acrid may be Tasted; and in many Milks of Plants, Bitter, Acrid and Gumminess: Or else the Compounded Tastes are lodg▪d in different Vessels and Liquors; as in the Lympha∣ticks, is a sweet Lympha; in the Muciducts, a Mucilage; in the Lactiferous Vessels, a Milk, which is either Bitter-Acrid, or Bit∣ter-Smoaky, or Sweet; in the Balsam Ves∣sels, a Turpentine; in the Parenchymous Parts of Plants, a crude Juyce; in the Ligneous Parts, a Lympha; in the Skins of Fruits, and the Stones and Seed, a different Taste from the Juyce of the Pulpy Part. The Roots, Stalks, Leaves, and Fruit of some Plants, have their different Tastes from the different Digestion, Mixture, Texture and Colature of the Juyces of those Plants▪ in their several Parts.
Acids do also excite the Appetite, by stimulating, and hinder the over-quick Fermentation of the Chyle, and separation of its Spirituous parts, in Windy Exhala∣tions: And for that reason we mix Vine∣gar with Hot Meats and Herbs, and eat cool Fruits after Meat. Vinegar is the best Antidote against any Poyson, from Acrid Herbs. 
 CHAP. VI. Concerning Bitterness in Plants. THe Fourth Principle our Senses dis∣cover in Plants, is Oyl, which produces Bitterness, and Aromatick Tastes, plain Turpentine, and Fetid Smells, with a Taste contrary to an Aromatick. 
 The most crude state of Oyl Vegetable, is in Mucilages and Sweetness; the next is in Bitters, which have their Taste from a Turpentine mixed with much Earth, and fixed by an Acid; as the following Instan∣ces will convince. 
 Hypericon Leaves, the Roots of Valeri∣an, Herb Robert, and especially the Leaves of Chamaepitys, or Groundpine, taste Bitter, and smell of Turpentine: The Taste of Turpentine it self, is Bitter; and so is the Taste of most Gums, which are the product of Turpentine Trees, and Plants; as Myrrh, Ammoniacum, &amp;c. 
 If we consider how many Plants are A∣romatick, arising from Turpentine, how many are Resinous, and the constant Greenness of many Trees and Plants, which depends on Turpentine (which did not Freeze in the hard Winters); It will seem more probable that Bitterness depends on Turpentine, which is Compounded of Oyl, Acid and Gumminess. 
 Bitters yield a great deal of Oyl by Di∣stillation, as Wormwood, Centaury, Bitter Almonds; Olives have also a Bitterness. 
 The Milk of Bitter Plants, as Sonchus, Jacea, and Celandine, is exceeding Bitter; and it must needs be allowed, that the Milk is Oyl, diluted by much Water. Bit∣ters have generally some Fetid Smell, or Aromatick Odour: which shews us, that Bitter Plants abound in Oyl, from whence Odors chiefly arise. The Flowers of O∣range and Elders, are Bitter; and so are the Fragrant Flowers of other Trees, as Sloe-Trees, Jessamy, Roses, Hawthorne, Lilies of the Valley. 
 The Turpentine in Bitters, is fixed by an Acid, which readily coagulates the Oleous Parts, if it be a strong Acid; but a mild Acid only detains Oleous Particles in their mixture with Water; as it appears by Milk; for in the making of Butter, the Oyl is visibly separated in the form of But∣ter; and the Acid, which kept it fluid, is apparently in the Butter-milk. This Acid by dividing the viscous Oleous parts of the Butter, rendred it fluid in the Milk; and from thence its Whiteness depends. 
 In Distillation of Fats and Oyls, an Acid appears; as also in the Distillation of Gums, which may artificially be produced, by the mixing of Oyl and Acid. 
 On this Acid in Bitters, joyn ' d with much Earth, an Astringent Faculty de∣pends, which is eminent in many Bit∣ters. That much of Earth concurs to the production of Bitters, and fixing of Tur∣pentine, appears, in that all Bitters produce much Salt, which we call Fixed (this being nothing probably, but the Union of Acid and Earth by calcination) but the Oyl in which the Bitterness resides, is easily dri∣ven away by the Fire, and remains not in the Salt or Earth; whence it is also proved to be an Oyl, fixed by its crude Associates, Acid and Earth. 
 I distilled half a pound of Gentian Roots, in an Earthen Retort, in an open Fire; from it was  ' stilled an Acid Liquor, with the Water, and a Bitter Oyl, without any Vola∣tile Salt; which confirms my Hypothesis, of Bitterness being an Oyl fixed by Acid: and the Caput Mortuum exceeded all the Liquor in the Receiver. 
 CHAP. VII. The Table of the Varieties of Bitter Tastes, Compounded, and their Vertue. They are either, 
 §. I. Cool Bitters. BItterish Astringent in the Dock kind, Hydro-Lapathum, Sorrel, Tormen∣til, &amp;c.
 Strong Bitters only, or pure Bitters, with∣out any Aromatick or Fetid Odor, or Pun∣gency; such is the Bitterness in Bitter Al∣monds, and Centaury, their parts are more fixed than any of the other Strong Bitters: These cleanse the Stomach from Acid Phlegm; open the Liver, by correcting the coagulating Acids in the Blood; they mix with Acids, and pass by Ʋrine; they pre∣serve the Blood from coagulation, and help the office of the crude Bile in Hydropical Cachexies; they have an Astriction by their Acid and Earthy Parts, which abounding in Bitters, help the Oyl in correcting Acids. The Principles of Bitters united by the Fire, produce fixt Salts, which correct Acids better than Bitters; which also act as fixt Salts in all their effects. 
 Elder-Bitters and Smells, as in Scorphu∣laria; these have a discussing Faculty out∣wardly, by their Fetidness and Bitterness. 
 Nauseous Tastes, which are, 
 1. Nauseous-Bitter, which depends on a composition of Mucilage and Bitter, as in Bryony-Roots, Squills, Berries of Spina Cer∣vina, and Fox-Gloves; the Mucilage in the Stomach relaxes the Fibres, and causes the Bitter to stick longer on them; and so to act more strongly in Vomiting and Purg∣ing; the same Taste is in Polygala and Sena. 
 2. A Nauseous Taste depends on a sweet Bitter, mixed with Mucilage and Pungency, as in Aloes, Agarick, Rubarb: And Docks want only the Sweetness; but have Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid Astringency. 
 3. Too much Sweetness is Nauseous; so is Manna, Honey, Polypody-Root; a Sliminess or Gumminess is in Honey and Manna. 
 4. Too much Bitter is Nauseous: Thus, in sweet Gall, the over-much Sweet or Bit∣ter, over-impregnates the Papillae in the Mouth and Stomach, and cause an aversion in the Stomach; as too much Light offends the Eyes, and makes them Water. 
 5. An ill Smell gives a Nauseousness; as in Aron Pouches, whose Smell will make any one vomit: And such have been the Smells of many Herbs which I bottled with warm Water, as Henbane and Spurge. 
 In Tastes depending on a Volatile Oyl of Vegetables, (with which is mixed a Pun∣gent Volatile Salt ) this Oyly Salt produces either an Aromatick or Fetid Smell, and a pleasant Aromatick or Offensive Taste. The Taste is Aromatick, when the Sense is briskly affected, and a pleasing Agitation of Spirits produced. 
 Aromaticks affect both the Smell and Taste gratefully; they have a motion of Particles and Texture, agreeable to the Motion and Texture of Spirits: Spirits of Vegetables differ nothing from their Oyly Salts▪ but by their being largely diffused in a Vehicle; and an Oyly Salt is a Spirit contracted, and without a Vehicle.
 Fetids are 1. Bitter. 2. Acrid. 3. Mucilaginous, which are generally Narcoticks. From the afore-mention ' d it may be in∣ferr ' d, that Fetids inwardly are of a very hot Nature, discussing Tumors outwardly, and opening the Pores. Inwardly, Fetids, by their Volatile Parts, do pierce the Chan∣nels of the Nerves, mend the Crudity of their Nervous Juyce; and by their Faetor, they excite a different Motion from that in Hysterick Fits, and in Convulsions; and do remove the Cause of that tumultuous Mo∣tion in the Spirits, by correcting Acidities, and Stagnation in the Succus Nervosus, which is disposed to them, as all other Glan∣dulous Liquors be. 
 Narcoticks have all of them an heavy offensive Smell, like Poppies, or Solanum; or have a sweet heady Smell, like Roots of Bears-Ears. 
 Milky-Narcoticks taste Mucilaginous, Bit∣ter, and Acrid; as Poppies, and Lettice: The Milky Juyce is an Argument of an Oyl, and the Acrid of a Volatile Salt ad∣joyned. Opium is a Bitter-Acrid, has a Re∣sin, and Gum inflammable: Though it ' s ea∣sily extracted by the Spirit of Wine, yet the Bitterness and Acrid, in which its Ver∣tue is founded, is most corrected by Spi∣rit of Vinegar, Juyce of Lemons, Juyce of Quinces, or any other Acid, as well as by drying it, and evaporating some Part of the Narcotick Fume. 
 The Second Class may be of Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Mucilaginous Narcoticks; as So∣lanum Lethale, Bacciferum, Stramonium, Cy∣noglossum: Besides the Pungency, Solanum Lignosum has a Bitterness: The Roots of Cynogloss boyl ' d, smell like Spirit of Harts-Horn. 
 Fresh Tabaco smells Narcotick about the Flowers, and is Bitter, Mucilaginous, and Acrid: It much resembles Henbane by its Figure, Oyl and Clamminess to the Touch; but by its Bitterness and Pungency, Sola∣num Lignosum. 
 The Third Class of Opiates, is Sweetish, Acrid, and Fetid, differing from Poppy smell, as Cicutaria, Napellus. The Roots of Hen∣bane are very sweet. 
 These produce Giddiness, with a stupor; and their best Antidote are Acids, as Vi∣negar. 
 The Fourth Class has a Bitterish Acrid Taste, as Cowslips; and these have also a Fragrancy very heady, being of a low de∣gree amongst Opiates: The Roots of Cow∣slips are very Acrid and Bitterish. 
 By the afore-mentioned Instances it ap∣pears, that Opiates have very hot Effluvi∣ums, which offend the Smell. By the same, Opiates inwardly produce Sweat in so small a quantity as one or two grains; and are very Fetid by their Oyly Acrid Salt, which runs through all the Classes of Opiates. The Bitterness and Sweetness in some Opi∣ates, no way conduce to encrease their So∣porifick quality, but are different in many Opiates.
Acids become Corrosive in the Fire, by their separation from Earthy Parts; as in Salt-Peter Spirit; Oyl of Vitriol, Aqua Fortis, and Spirit of Vinegar; but this way I know no Plants Corrosive: The Acid of Plants cannot be so attenuated by Digesti∣on in the Plant, as that of Minerals is in the Fire. 
 Fixt Salts in Soap-Ashes, by being uni∣ted in a solid form, act all together, and so corrode. So a Vesicatory is made out of Ashes of Ash-Tree; but this way cannot happen in Plants, because there is naturally no fixt Salt in them, but what is made by Fire. 
 Oyls of themselves cannot be Corrosive; they pierce by their tenuity, but cannot corrode; their Pungency is from the Salt only, though their Heat and Smell is from the Oyl; but generally the Corrosives have no Smell, or inconsiderable; where it would not happen, if the Oyl were Corrosive: whence I conclude, that such a Taste de∣pends on the Volatile Salt diluted with Water, or sharpned by the addition of Oyl, though crude, as in Tithymalus; but espe∣cially by a Volatile Oyl, as in Euphorbium. 
 That Plants have Compounded Tastes, by which they act; as Rubarb purgeth by a Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid Astringent Taste. St. John  ' s wort is a Vulnerary, by being Bitterish, Astringent, and having a Turpen∣tine Smell. Liver-wort is Hepatick and Diuretick, by being Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Mucilaginous, and having a Turpentine Smell, (as in the Second part of the Book, you will find all the Plants after this manner de∣scribed.) And therefore I infer, That though each particular Taste hath a Vertue, as considered by it self; yet divers Tastes be∣ing Compounded in one Plant, every Plant hath a particular Effect depending on the Action of all the Qualities together; from all which the Vertue of a Plant is deduced, and not from one only Taste: But we shall better apprehend the Effects of Vegetables produced on Animals, if we consider 
 That every Animal contains divers Humors, separated by particular Parts into distinct Vessels; and that these Humors have different Tastes, Natures, Digestions, and particular Motions given them by the Mechanical Structure of an Animal Body; and that the Organical Parts have such an agreeable contrivance, as by the acting on One Part, the Whole may be di∣sturbed and variously moved; which ap∣pears in Smells that are offensive to Hy∣sterick Persons. 
 CHAP. XIII. Of Specificks. THat Notion of Specificks, I think most rational, differs much from what is usually describ ' d by Au∣thors, by whom Medicines are call ' d Spe∣cificks; because they act principally upon the account of some Property or peculiar Virtue, which is unknown, and not by any manifest Qualities of Bitter, Acrid, Acid, &amp;c. But I will not dispute those Au∣thor ' s Notions, but propose my own to the Ingenuous and Candid, to be examin ' d by them. I therefore define a Specifick Me∣dicine to have a particular Taste, or Com∣position of Tastes or Smells, whereby it acts on some Humors of an Animal, more peculiarly and effectually than other Me∣dicines. 
 There are three sorts of Specificks; First, Specifick Purgers. Secondly, Specifick Al∣terers, which are of a contrary Taste to the Humors corrected. Thirdly, Specifick Alterers, which are of the same Nature, and of the same Taste, as the Humors they correct. 
 First, Specifick Purgers: Purgers are called Specifick, because they evacuate a particular Humor; and if they be consi∣dered as Alterers, they have the same Taste as the Humors they Purge; by which Taste they dispose that Humor to a separation from the Blood: And Purgers are also most peculiarly suited to the nature of the Hu∣mor they Purge, by the different degree of Acrimony, which irritates. So Cholagogues, as Dock-Roots, and Rubarb, are Bitter and Slimy, like Choler; and also Sub-acrid, which is the lowest Degree of Irritation. Phleg∣magogues are also Cholagogues; as Aloes, and Agarick, which have a Bitter-sweet, like Cho∣ler; and have a Mucilage or Gumminess, like Phlegm; and also a greater Degree of Acrimony than the former Cholagogues; which seems necessary for Phlegmatick Hu∣mors, the Choler being more fluid. Hydro∣gogues are also Phlegmagogues; for Phlegm is but an inspissate Glandulous Lympha; and the Resinous Purgers have the Gumminess of Phlegm, and a greater Degree of Acri∣mony to mix with the Serum of the Blood, and also to stimulate the Glandules of the Guts and Stomach: This strong Acrimony in Resins, resembles the Saltness in the Blood, it being also a Salt. Melanagogues differ not from Phlegmagogues, and the mild Hy∣drogogues; as Sena, which is Bitterish, Slimy, Sub-acrid. 
 Note, That black Hellebore is very A∣crid, by which it is of a contrary Taste to Melancholick Humors; and corrects Acids, as well as purges Phlegm and Choler. 
 Secondly, Specificks, which are of a con∣trary Taste to the quality of the Humors, to be corrected. So Acid-Medicines are contrary to Bitter Choler, and Acrid Salts, and destroy their Tastes. Earthy-Salt and Bitter Medicines, are contrary to Acidity and Acerbity in the Lympha, Serum, and Chyle: as also Sulphurs and Oyls are. Watry Muci∣lages, and Crude Juyces, are contrary to the inspissate Serum of the Blood, by diluting it. Astringents are contrary to the Laxity of the Fibres, and Oyly Medicines are contra∣ry to their roughness and dryness. These Contrarieties of Qualities, and also the Spe∣cifick Purgers, are mentioned in the Speci∣fick Class, to which I refer the Reader. 
 Thirdly, Specifick Alterers (which are appropriated, and call ' d Friendly to some part) by being of the same Taste and Na∣ture, as the Humors that are prepared and separated by that particular Part; the Na∣ture of which will more plainly appear by the following Comparison, betwixt the Tastes of Animal Humors, and the Tastes of those Medicines which respect particular Parts. 
 The Natural Taste of Choler, is Sweet, Bitter, Slimy; in Birds Acrid: from this Taste of Choler, it is natural for us to argue, That a Medicine of the same Taste, will act like Choler in the Body, and supply the defect of it when wanting, and restore it to its natural Taste and state, when wea∣kened, dull ' d, or coagulated by Acids; or wants a perfect Digestion and Separation from the Blood: Therefore, by reason of a Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid Taste, in Choler; Gentian-Root, which hath that Taste, is ac∣counted an Hepatick; and also Carduus, with all others of the same Taste; upon the account of a Bitter Sub-acrid in Choler, Celandine and Turmerick-Roots are Hepa∣ticks also. Upon the account of Bitterness only, all Bitters are Hepatick, as Succory. Upon the account of Sub-acrid only in Choler, all Acrids may be accounted Hepa∣ticks, on the account that Choler hath a sweet Oyliness in the Taste, and that Sweets become easily Bitter. Therefore all sweet Spices and Aromaticks, are Hepatick: Choler is also Fetid; and therefore the Fetid Gums, which are Bitter, Acrid, and Fetid, are good Hepaticks: And all Plants abounding with an Oyly Pungency, and their distill ' d Oyls, are Hepatick, because the same Prin∣ciples are in Choler. 
 Sweat and Ʋrine have the same Salt Taste; and therefore the same Salt Medicines are both Diuretick and Diaphoretick. This Salt in the Serum of the Blood, is of the nature of Sal-Ammoniack; therefore mixt Salts are the best Diureticks and Diapho∣reticks. All Medicines of a Salt Taste, as fixt Salts, pure Volatile Salts, or Vegetable Oyly Salts, in Aromaticks, Fetids, and A∣crids, and many Salso-Acids, promote both Sweat and Ʋrine; and all Volatile Salts smell Ʋrinous. 
 Note, That Testaceous Medicines be∣come Diuretick, by getting a Salt Taste in the Stomach, by reason of the mixing of its Acid with them. 
 The Saltness of the Blood preserves its Mixture, and prevents Putrefaction; and so do all the Salts above-mentioned; and therefore they are Antifebrifick, and Alexi∣pharmliick. 
 The Lympha of the Conglobate Glandules, is also Salt, like the Serum of the Blood; and therefore in Arthritick pains, requires the same Salt Medicines, which move Sweat and Ʋrine, with a cool Watry Vehi∣cle: for the use of this Lympha is not only to mix the Chyle and Blood, but to dilute both; the defect of which Lympha is best supply ' d from the Watry Sub-acrid Plants. 
 The Lympha of the Conglomerate Glan∣dules, is Watry, Slimy, Sub-acid; this con∣stitutes the Ferment of the Stomach, and is separated into the primae viae, not only by the Salival Glandules, but by these also of the Stomach, Pancreas, and Guts. This Lympha is supply ' d by spirituous Acids, and Slimy, Watry Sub-acids, as Lemmons, Oranges, and dulcified Spirit of Salt; these excite Appetite, and help the Fermentation of Meats. So Leaven, which ferments Dough, is Sub-acid and Salt. Salt Tastes are also pleasing to the Stomach, because they are Sub-acids. 
 The Lympha, which moistens the Cavity of the Lungs and Wind-pipe, is Slimy, Sweet, and Milky; in Hecticks this is deficient, and is therefore supplyed with Milks, and Watry Sweet Mucilages. 
 The use of the Spleen is yet unknown, but it certainly separates a Glandulous Hu∣mor, whose Taste is probably Sub-acid; and therefore many Astringents, which are produced from Acids, as Vitriolum Martis, and the Fern-Astringents, help the prepa∣ration, and supply the defect of the Sple∣netick Liquor: All Medicines altering the Depravation of it, must be contrary to Acids.
Bitters are unpleasant to the Taste, and inclining to an Acrimony; whence they are accounted hot: Their other Affections of the Palat are not very evident; but be∣cause they deterge Ʋlcers outwardly, they are esteem ' d of a deterging Taste: For Ga∣len says, Bitters are the same as Nitrose Tastes, but stronger; and from the clean∣sing Nature of Nitre, Bitters are said to de∣terge the Palat, and cleanse the Stomach and Liver. 
 Because an Astringent Taste is joyn ' d with Bitter, therefore Bitters are of an Ex∣asperating Taste; and by this Roughness, strengthen the Viscera and Fibres. 
 The Vertues of Bitters in killing Worms, preventing Putrefaction in Fevers and Ʋl∣cers, their Diuretick and Sudorifick Ver∣tue, and their Contrariety to Acids, are the Consequences of known Experiments, and not deducible from the Modes of Taste. 
 Nauseous Tastes immediately indicate a Purging or Vomiting Quality; and are ge∣nerally Bitter-Sweet or Bitter-Slimy, by which we perceive when the Tongue is con∣trarily affected; and by the same Object an unpleasant Taste is produced. 
 Acrid Tastes are Penetrant and Pungent, and bite and heat the Mouth: They there∣fore heat and rarefie thick Humors, and the Blood and Chyle, and open Obstructions; outwardly they discuss Tumors, and draw in Plasters. 
 By Experience these are known to cor∣rect Acids, and coagulate with them into a Mixt Salt, which is Diuretick and Su∣dorifick; and, by correcting the Acids of the Spleen and Nerves, become Antiscor∣butick and Cephalick. 
 Caustick Tastes vesicate both the Tongue, and outward Skin, and Vomit and Purge. 
 Sweet Tastes have a grateful Oyly Smoothness, by which they lenifie Coughs; and are outwardly digesting, by their Mo∣derate Heat. They are no less grateful to the Stomach, than pleasing to the Palat. 
 That Sweet will become Bitter, we know only by Experiment; and by the same we know, that all very Sweet Things are hot, and that they are Laxative. 
 Aromatick Tastes are Acrid, and Pleasing to the Taste and Smell; therefore by their Acrimony they rarefie the Blood, open Ob∣structions, please the Stomach and Spirits; and therefore are Cordial, Stomachick, and Cephalick; and, also, outwardly comfort and strengthen Weak Parts, by their agreeable Heat. 
 I have set down these known Modes of each Taste; and shewn, that by their means we know, that Earthy, Watry, Acid, and Mucilaginous, are cool Tastes, and cool the Animal Humors; and have also other Ef∣fects, which depend not on Coolness: And I have also demonstrated, that Bit∣ters, Aromaticks, Acrids, and Causticks, are hot Tastes, and have hot Effects on Ani∣mals. 
 From the same Modes of Tastes, and from Experiments made on Particular Tastes, we may examine all Compound Tastes: But we must consider; as Colours mixt are a different Colour from the Sim∣ple Colours; so it is in Tastes Compound, as appears in Bitter-Sweet, and Bitter-Sli∣my; neither of which, alone, are Nau∣seous. 
 CHAP. XV. Of the Degrees of Taste. GALEN makes Four Degrees of the Vertues of Plants, reducing them to Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry. 
 1. That is Hot in the First Degree, which does not evidently heat, but we find it by some Reason about the Nature of it. 2. Those that manifestly heat, are of the Second Order. 3. Those which vehemently heat, are of the Third Order. 4. Those which burn, or induce an E∣schar, are of the Fourth Degree. But seeing the Vertues of Plants are so evidently deduced from their Tastes, and those Tastes so well experimented by ma∣ny Chymical Distillations and Mixtures; and since the Nature of the Humors of the Body, and all Diseases, have been better observ ' d than in Galen  ' s Time; I have not confin ' d my self, in describing the Natures of Plants to Hot, Cold, Dry, or Moist; but have added all the Compositions of Tastes, and sensible Effects of their Modes; whereby I might particularly express the Nature of each Plant: And according to the experimented Vertues of Tastes, I have added those which belong to each Parti∣cular; and, I think, I need add no more, but the several Degrees of Taste; which may most easily be understood, and which may have a different Degree of Vertue. I therefore have observ ' d Three Degrees in Tastes: As for Instance; 
 In Bitters the First Degree is a little Bit∣ter or Bitterish; which does but just sen∣sibly affect the Taste; and therefore have the lowest Degree of Vertue, as Bitter. 
 The Second Degree is Bitter absolutely; which considerably affects the Taste, and is of a Moderate Bitterness. 
 The Third Degree is very Bitter; which much offends the Taste, and has the high∣est Degree of Bitters. 
 The same Degrees are observable in A∣cid, Sweet, Mucilaginous, Acrid, Aromatick, Watry, and Earthy Tastes. 
 By these Degrees of Tastes, we express that a little of a Taste, or a moderate De∣gree of Taste, or else a greater Quantity of each Taste, is to be found in each par∣ticular Compound Taste of a Plant. 
 Note, That Acrid is the Cause of Biting and Heat; and therefore, I have us ' d them in the SECOND PART, as Aequiva∣lent Terms.
 The Sycomore-Tree: The Bark is a Acer ma∣jus, Syca∣morus. little Mucilaginous, Bitter, and Rough; the Juyce which runs upon Tapping, is Sweet, Nauseous, and Astringent; the Leaves taste very Rough; the Vertue lies in the Astringency, with a little Bit∣terness. 
 Common Maple: Its Bark is very Rough Acer mi∣nus. and Bitterish; the Vertue depends upon the Astringency. 
 Common Sorrel: Its Leaves are Acid Acetosa vulgaris. and Astringent; by which it cools in Fevers, excites Appetite, and is Diu∣retick. 
 The Root is Bitter, Astringent, and Nauseous: There is an Anti-febrile Ver∣tue in it, by purging Choler from the Blood. The Root is Yellow without, and has a Dock-Bitterness; to which I refer it. 
 Wood-Sorrel is the same: If the Juyce Acetosella. be thicken ' d, the Crystals that settle in the Bottom, taste like Cream of Tartar, Gritty and Sowre. 
 The Sheep-Sorrel, and Acetosa Rotundi∣folia, Acetosa Lanceolata have the same Taste and Vertue. 
 Wild Basil tastes Bitterish and Sub∣acrid, Acinos. with an Aromatick Smell: It is a Cephalick, by that Taste and Smell. 
 The Aromatick Reed: The Root tastes Acorus ve∣rus, seu Ca∣lamus Aro∣maticus. Bitterish, with an Aromatick Taste and Smell, by which it discusses Wind. It is Cordial, and provokes Ʋrine, and works as an Aromatick. It savours something of a Balsamick Turpentine. 
 Wall-Rue is Sweet-Astringent, like the Adianthum album. Ferns; by which it is a Splenetick, check∣ing the Fermentation of the Blood; and it ' s a Vulnerary for the Lungs and Kid∣neys. 
 Golden Maiden-Hair is Astringent, like Adianthum aureum minus. the Ferns; with an Earthy Smell, by which Mosses and Ferns differ most, being of a very like Nature. 
 Holly-Tree: The Bark tastes Mucila∣ginous, Agrifolium a little Biting, and Bitterish: The Leaves are Bitterish; by which it doth good in the Colick, if boyl ' d in Posset-Drink. Holly hath an Acrid in it, joyn ' d with Bitterish, and a Mucilage; therefore, the distill ' d Water may help the Stone. 
 Red Berries of Holly-Tree taste Sweet, Agrifolii Baccae. Bitterish, Acrid, and Mucilaginous; by which they are Purgative. 
 Agrimony is moderately Bitter, Sub∣acrid, Agrimonia vulgar. and Astringent, with an Aromatick Smell: By its Bitterness, it ' s good for the Stomach, and Obstructions of the Liver; by its Astringency, it is Vulnerary; and by its Aromatick Smell, is Cordial: Its Astringency makes it good for stopping involuntary Pissing; and its Bitterness corrects the Acidity of the Ʋrine, which stimulates too much. 
 Vervain-Mallow is Mucilaginous, like Alcea vul∣gar. Common Mallows, and of the same Vertues.
Wild-Smallage is like the Garden sort, Apium. in Taste and Vertue; Bitterish, Sweet, Hot, and Aromatick in the Root, Seeds and Leaves: It is therefore Carminative, Diuretick, and a good Aperitive. Smal∣lage has a Bitterishness in the Leaves and Roots, which makes it ungrateful. 
 Columbines: The Leaves and Flowers Aquilegia Sylvestris. taste Bitterish-Sweet; the Roots are Wa∣terish, and a little Bitter, and Sub-acrid. It is therefore a temperate Plant, rather Hot than Cold. The Roots are Diure∣tick; the Leaves are used in Gargles for Sore-Mouths. Columbine is of the Pea-Tribe. 
 Bastard-Poppy is of an Opiate Smell; in Argemone. Taste, Mucilaginous: It is Opiate, as Pa∣paver Rhoeas. 
 Wild-Tansie: The Leaves are Rough-Astringent, Argentina. and dry; the Roots Bitter-A∣stringent, like Cinquefoyl. It stops Fluxes, and Hemorrhages; and is Vulnerary and Antifebrile, by the Bitterish Roughness. 
 Deptford-Pink: If rubbed, it smells Armeria Sylvestris. Sweet, tastes Sweet-Bitter, and is nause∣ously Bitter-Astringent, like Garden-Pinks in Taste. 
 Meadow-Pink, or Wild-Williams, is Armerius Pratensis. Waterish and crude like the Lychnis. 
 Mugwort tastes Bitterish and Aroma∣tick, Artemisia Vulg. with an Aromatick Smell: It is Ce∣phalick and Uterine. It is inwardly used in Syrup of the Juyce, in Water for Fits of the Mother, and driving out the Menses, but it doth that weakly. Outwardly it is used in warm Baths: The Smell resembles Wormwood, and is of that kind. 
 Wake-Robin: It is strongly Acrid, Pun∣gent, Arum vul∣gare. and Vesicating the Palate and Tongue, by its Volatile Salt; it is not perceived till after some time. By that Salt, it is good for the Scurvy; it is Diu∣retick, Antisplenetick, Pectoral, and Cepha∣lick; the Salt flies away being long Pow∣dered. The Red-Berries are Biting and Slimy. The Leaves rubbed have no con∣siderable Smell, in respect of their Acri∣mony: Vinegar corrects the Acrimony, and therefore the Acrimony is Saline, and not Oleous: But the Pouches stink ve∣ry nauseously, which stink depends upon an Oyl and Salt. 
 St. Peters-wort smells and tastes (like Ascyrum vulgare. St. Johns-wort ) of Turpentine, and is Bitter∣ish and Astringent; and therefore is Vul∣nerary. 
 Asparagus: The Roots have a Pea-taste, Asparagus. Bitterish, Watry, and Acrid; which, as in other Diureticks, affects the Throat, and therefore it is a great Diuretick, and Opener of Obstructions. The Grassie Leaves of Asparagus, have a Pea-taste, and if rub∣bed, they smell like Peascods: The Faetor they give to the Ʋrine, proceeds from an Oyliness; which is observable in many of the Pea-tastes: to which Faetor also the Acrid hot parts of the Asparagus, which are perceptible in eating of green Sparagrass, by burning the Throat, do much conduce: The Berries have a sweet Taste. 
 Woodroof is Bitter and Acrid, with a Asperula. Fragrant Smell: It ' s therefore a good opening Hepatick; and by its Taste and Smell, appears to be a Madder. The Fra∣grancy of it argues a Cordial Vertue. It is usually infused in Beer, or distilled. 
 Ceterach is sweet and rough like other Asplenium. Ferns, good against Fluxes, and Bleeding, and Splenetick Fermentations of the Blood, by its rough Astringency. There is an obscure Acrimony in all Ferns, by which they are Aperitive. 
 Wild Orach: The Root, Leaves, and Atriplex Sylvestris. Seeds are Mucilaginous, and of a crude Fetid Scent. Outwardly in Fomentations and in Clysters, it ' s Emollient, Cooling, and Anodyne: It seems not proper for inward use by its ungrateful Smell, and nauseous Mucilage. 
 Stinking Orach tastes Mucilaginous, Atriplex Olida. and is Fetid in Smell, by which it is An∣tihysterical. 
 Oats: The Green-Corn tastes sweet and Avena. crude; the Oats are Mucilaginous-sweet. 
 Mouse-Ear is Bitterish and Astringent, Auricula Muris seu Pilosella. therefore good in Fits of Agues, and in Fluxes; and is a Vulnerary: It may be re∣ferred to the Hawk-weeds. Outwardly, by the Astringency, it cures the Herpes. It Tastes of an ill Fusty Taste towards Winter, by lying near the Ground. 
 B. STinking Horehound is of a Dead-Nettle, Ballote. strong, stinking Smell, and very Bitter in Taste; by which it is Antihysterick, and Antihypocon∣driack; and outwardly cleansing in Ʋl∣cers. It is a little Acrid, and belongs to the Lamium-Class. 
 Winter-Cresses is of a Cress-Taste and Barbarea lutea Lati∣folia. Vertue: It cleanses Ʋlcers outwardly, by its Cress-Pungency. 
 Great Burdock: The Root tastes Watry, Bardana major. Slimy, Bitterish, and Smoaky; by which it is Diuretick, and good in the Gout, Stone, and Cough. The Seed is Bitter, and of the same Vertue with the Root: The Leaves are very Bitter, like Carduus Benedictus, and may be used for Sweating and Vomiting, instead of it. This Plant, by its Prickly head, and Purple Flower, is like to the Carduus kind, as well as by the smoaky Taste, and Bitterish Slime. 
 Spatling Poppy has a crude Taste and Behen Al∣bum. Smell, like other Lychnis  ' s; and is of the same Vertue.
Great Dasie: The whole Plant is sweet Bellis ma∣jor. like Liquorish, and therefore of the same Vertue in Coughs; it is also a little Pun∣gent (discernible most in the Stalk.) This Acrid makes it useful in an Ortho∣pnoea. I use it as Thea, and sweeten it with Syrup of the Juice of Horehound. The sweet Smell of it is Fragrant, like Erigerum, and the Leaves resemble it; but in Taste it is most like Rampions. 
 Little Dasie: The Leaves and Roots Bellis mi∣nor. are Acid; and therefore are Cooling and Diuretick, when boyl ' d in Broth for Children. I took three spoonfuls of the Juyce of the Leaves, for divers Mornings, and found no Purging quality in it. I judge it is of the Sorrel-Species and Ver∣tue; and I think the Juyce is proper for Spitting of Blood; but do not think it properly Vulnerary, tho '  Authors call it Consolida minor. The taste of the Root is Bitterish and Pungent-acid; wherefore the Acidity in Dasies is like the Pungent Acidity of Vinegar; and then it may be accounted a Sorrel: Or else it hath an A∣crimony joyned with the Acid, like Rosa Solis; for it doth a little blister, though without Heat. 
 Water-Betony is nauseously Bitter, and Betonica Aquatica. of an Elder. Smell; it has the Taste and Vertues of Scrophularia: It is most used in Oyntments, for Tumors, Burns, and Ʋlcers. 
 Wood-Betony is Bitterish, and a little Betonica vulgaris. Hot, with an Aromatick Smell, but some∣what resembling the Lamiums. By the Taste and Smell it is Cephalick, Diuretick, Pectoral and Vulnerary. It is used in Powder, Juyce, and Conserve of the Flowers. The Roots are very Bitter, like Peach-Kernels, and may cause Vomiting or Purging. It seems to belong to the Lamium-Class, the Root tasting like Veravin-Root. 
 The Birch-Tree: The Bark is very Betula. Rough and Bitter, and so may be Vulne∣rary; and as such, will act inwardly: It will make a good Extract. The Leaves are Mealy, Mucilaginous, and a little Bit∣ter, and so may be good in Baths for the Itch. They smell a little Sweet; the fresh Juyce of the wounded Tree is Sweet, which will turn Sowre: It will make a good Wine for the Stone with Spices. The crude Juyce is too raw for the Sto∣mach: If it be Distilled or Brewed with Malt, it may be good for Hecticks. 
 Tway-Blade: The Taste is Sweet, Mu∣cilaginous, Bisolium Slyvestre. and a little Acrid or Biting. It is probably of the Orchis kind: Its Vertue lyes in the Mucilage, or Acrid Biting; by both which it may be out∣wardly Emollient, and inwardly Diuretick. 
 Bistort: The Root is rough, and bit∣terish Bistorta vulgaris. like Sorrel; and therefore stops Fluxes, abates Praeternatural Fermentati∣ons, and so is Alexipharmack, and not Su∣dorifick; but it abates too much Sweat∣ing, as well as Acids: The Leaves are Crude and Mucilaginous. It seems a kind of Sorrel. 
 Blite is Mucilaginous, and Crude in Blitum mi∣nus album. Taste; therefore its Vertue is Cooling and Mucilaginous; of the nature of Beets or Atriplex. 
 English Mercury: It ' s Sorrel- tasted in Bonus Henricus. the Roots, Leaves and Seeds, exasperating or corroding the Throat: The Leaves are also Mucilaginous, and of a Grassy Smell: It is therefore accounted Emolli∣ent; and its Acid outwardly cools Inflam∣mations. It has Sandy, Globular parts on the backside of the Leaves; which may work as Testaceous Powders, and be Diuretick. The exasperating Quality may irritate in a Pessus, and make it Laxa∣tive in Clysters, as well as its Mucilage; from the same also is its Diuretick Quali∣ty. I think it like Atriplex or Beets: It is good for Warts outwardly; and dis∣cusses in Cataplasms, as appears by the burning Quality in the Throat. 
 Mr. Ray says, The Root is Acrid and Bitter. 
 White-Bryony: The Root tastes Sub∣acrid, Bryonia Alba. very Bitter, and Mucilaginous; and therefore Vomits and Purges, as other Bit∣ter Mucilages do. Outwardly, by the same Qualities, it cures Warts, Struma  ' s, Pains of the Hips, Bruises, Pains of the Sides, and Gout-Pains; and is laid to the Feet in Cataplasms, for Distempers of the Head. 
 If the Root be dryed, and the Muci∣lage afterwards drawn out by Infusing in Wine, and then again dryed, it Purges and Vomits much less. Mr. Ray. 
 The Leaves of Bryony have the same Taste and Vertue; and some have used the Decoction of them for the Stone; but ten spoonfuls thereof Purged and Vomited a Dogg strongly. The Red Berries have a most abominable Taste and Smell; Country-men give them for the Hoost to the Cows. The Faeculae of the Root are Purgative; and, as Fetids and Bitters, they work in Hysterick Cases. The Sprouts boyl ' d like young Asparagus, I found most nauseous, and not fit to Eat. 
 The Roots are pounded into a Con∣serve for Fits; but I cannot believe any Stomach can hold them. 
 Black-Bryony: The Leaves are Muci∣laginous, Bryonia Nigra. Bitterish, and a little Biting, and therefore Diuretick; the Root is A∣crid, and (as a Physician told me) bli∣sters the Hands. It is as Diuretick, but not so Purgative as the White-Bryony. 
 Small Wild-Bugloss: The Leaves and Buglossum Sylvestre minus. Roots are Cool, Watry, and Mucilagi∣nous; in Juyce and in Decoction it cools Hecticks, Inflammations, Heats, and Thirst, and stops Rheums: The Flowers have a little Cordial Heat in them, besides their Watry Mucilage. 
 Bugle is Bitter and Rough in Taste, Bugula Cae∣rulea. and therefore Vulnerary: I suppose it may be a Veronica or Lamium. Bugle, Scabiose, and Sanicle, make a good Oynt∣ment, with Bores-grease, for Wounds. 
 Earth-Nuts are Sweet, Hot, and Aro∣matick, Bulbo ca∣stanum. and belong to the Fenil-kind, by Taste and Vertue: The Roots are Sweet and Mucilaginous; the sweet A∣crimony and Mucilage makes them Di∣uretick and Venereal. 
 Shepherds-Purse is of a Cress- Smell and Bursa Pa∣storis. Taste, tho '  in a low degree: The Astrin∣gency is but small, and deserves not the Character of an excellent Astringent. 
 Box-Tree: The Leaves and Bark are Buxus. very Bitter and Rough, therein resembling Guaiacum by its Taste; and therefore used in its stead, in drying Decoctions. I can∣not perceive any Narcotick quality in it. It is given to Horses for the Botts. Some account it Antiscorbutick.
C. CALAMINT is of a Bitterish and Calamin∣tha vulga∣ris. very Acrid, Aromatick Taste, and of a strong Aromatick Mint Smell; and therefore is an hot Cephalick, Uterine, Pectoral, and Stomachick, by its Bitter∣ness and Acrimony; thereby giving a quick motion to the Spirits, and also heat∣ing the Nervous Fibres. 
 Marsh-Marigold: The Flowers smell Caltha Pa∣lustris. like Lilies; the Leaves are Mucilaginous, and a little warm or pungent. By its Acrimony it is a Marigold, or rather a Crow-foot. 
 Bell-flowers; The Leaves are Biting, Campanu∣la rotundi∣folia. and sweet like Rampions. 
 Bastard-Hemp is Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Cannabis spuria. and of an Aromatick smell: It is accoun∣ted a Lamium. 
 Hemp is Bitter and Acrid, of a sweet Cannabis Sativa. Aromatick Smell, like Agrimony, but more strong: It is not fit to be taken inwardly; for by that Smell it produces Giddiness; and probably kills Fish: It has a more offensive Smell after it is gathered and dryed. By its bitter Acrimony it is most fit for outward use in discussing and dis∣solving Kernels, and easing Pains. The Seeds have a Mucilage, and are used in Emulsions, as Diureticks and Openers in the Jaundice, by the bitter Acrimony and strong Smell. No Diuretick can be an Antivenereal, as Hemp has been accoun∣ted; unless it destroys the Animalcula in Semine, as it does Worms, and other In∣sects, and Fishes in the River. 
 An Oyl may be expressed from the Seed for Burns. 
 Ladies Smock is a Biting-Acrid, like Cardamine the Nasturtiums, and of a Cress- Smell and Vertue. 
 Mother-wort is very Biting and Bitter, Cardiaca. therefore good in Hypochondriack Faintings, and Fits of the Mother, to provoke Ʋrine, and the Menses, and to Expectorate: And it is also a Cephalick in Convulsions and Palsies; but is chiefly an Hepatick, as Bitter-Acrids are. 
 The Smell of it is like Dead-Nettle, and belongs to that Tribe. It is also rec∣koned amongst Bezoardicks, for its Bitter-Acrimony. 
 Thistles: They taste Watry, Mucila∣ginous, Carduus vulgaris Lanceola∣tus. Bitterish, and Smoaky, by which they are Diureticks; but also very nau∣seous. 
 Ladies-Thistle: The Leaves are Bit∣terish Carduus Mariae. and Slimy, and may be Eaten boil ' d. The Root is Bitter, Mucilaginous, and Smoaky; by which it is Diuretick, but very offensive; as any other Carduus is to the Stomach; and therefore may be Vomitory, as Carduus Benedictus is. 
 Carline-Thistle: The Roots taste Bit∣terish, Carlina. and a little Acrid, of a Mithridate flavor. It may be therefore used as an Alexipharmack, and Hepatick, and Diu∣retick, because of its Bitterish Acrimony. It is Sub-acrid, and a little Aromatick, mixt with an unpleasant Smell. 
 Avens: The Leaves are Astringent, Caryophyl∣lata vulga∣ris. nd therefore given before the Fits of a ertian Ague. The Roots smell and taste ke Cloves; and are therefore Cordial, Ce∣ alick, Stomachick, and Alexipharmack. The Root has also an Astringent Taste; nd therefore good in Fluxes of the Belly, nd Weakness of the Stomach; given in owder, or Infusion in Wine: the Vertue es in being an Aromatick Astringent, itterish and Acrid. By the Taste and mell it is a Clove-Gilliflower. 
 Chesnut-Tree: The Bark is very Rough, Castanea. nd a little Bitter. The Leaves are a lit∣ e Sowre, Slimy, and Hot; they smell moaky. The Bark is used as an Astrin∣ ent in Loosenesses, and the Whites. The ruit is Sweet-tasted, fit for Food, with n Astringency, which lyes in the Skin s the Fruit. 
 Hedge-Parsley: The Leaves, Root, and Caucalis. owers are Hot, Sweet, and Aromatick nd its Taste and Smell is like Daucus nd therefore is Diuretick and Carmina∣ ve. 
 Lesser-Centaury has a very strong Bit∣ter Centauri∣um minus. Taste, like a Peach-Kernel, with an evident Astringency, but no Acrimony or Pungent Heat; therefore it may be used as a good Hepatick, Ʋterine, and Anti∣febrifick, in Extract, Decoction, or Pow∣der, in the Jaundice, Gout, and Fevers. Outwardly, it is a cleansing Vulnerary and Cicatrises. It is not unlike a Bitter Lychnis. Quaere, Whether there be any Sweetness in Centaury, besides the Bitter? 
 Birds-Cherry: The Bark is nauseously Cerasus A∣vium race∣mosa. Bitter and Astringent, and of a Peach-Kernel-Taste. The Leaves are of the same Taste and Smell, resembling the Leaf of a Cherry-Tree. The Flowers smell very Fragrant. 
 Cherry-Tree: The Bark is very Bitter Cerasus vulgaris. and Astringent; but it makes a whiter Powder than Jesuits Powder: The Bark may be given for the Fits of Convulsion, as well as Black-Cherry-Water, which has the Virtue from its Bitterishness. 
 Acid-Cherries cool and excite Appetite. 
 The Sweet nourish, and may loosen the Belly.
D. WIld Carrot tastes Sweet, Hot, and Daucus. Aromatick in the Seeds, Leaves, and Roots: Therefore it is of the Sweet-Aromatick Fennel-Class; and has the same Vertues, being Diuretick in the Stone and Strangury, in the Carmina∣tive Colick externally and internally; good in Hysterick Fits: All which Ef∣fects it has from its Aromatick Oyl, and Sweet Tastes. 
 Dandelyon: The Roots, Leaves, and Dens Leo∣nis. Milk taste Waterish, Bitter, and Smoaky. It is good in great Quantities of Choler in the Blood, and in putrid Fevers: By its Bitterishness it cleanses Choler, by Ʋrine and the Choleduct; by its Waterishness it cools the Blood. It is for the same rea∣son good in Consumptions. 
 Fox-Gloves: The Flowers, Seeds, and Digitalis Purpurea. Green-Leaves are Mucilaginous and Bit∣ter, with Astringency; the Roots are Rough, and Nauseously Bitter; the Seeds are Bitter-slimy and Astringent. It Vo∣mits and Purges strongly: The Green-Leaves or Roots are boyl ' d in Ale, for the Falling-Sickness. The Flowers are good in the King ' s-Evil Sores: They are A∣nodyne, by their Slime; and Cleansing and Healing, by their Bitter-Astringency. The Green-Leaves have a strong Smell, like Elder; which intimates their Purg∣ing Faculty. 
 Teasle is Bitter and Smoaky, like other Dipsacus. Thistles, both in Leaves and Roots. The Flowery Heads of it shew it to be a Car∣duus. 
 Oak-Fern is of the Taste and Vertue of Dryopte∣ris. Common Male-Fern; Sweetish, Bitterish, Sub-acrid, and Astringent. 
 E. DWarf-Elder: The Leaves are ve∣ry Bitter and Slimy, and of a strong Elder- Smell; the Roots are Bitter, Rough, and Roapy, and of an Elder- Smell. It is of the same Vertue and Taste as Common Elder. The Bark and Seeds are great Water-Purgers in the Dropsie and Gout. The Juyce of the Root makes a good purging Syrup, and works as Buck-thorn Syrup: The Leaves are us ' d in Diet-Drink for the Dropsie; and outward∣ly in Fomentations and Oyntments, for Tumors, Scalds, Burns, Gout, and Ʋlcers. 
 Vipers-Bugloss is Cool and Mucilagi∣nous, Echium vulgare. with a little Waterish Bitterness, like Bugloss. It is equal in Goodness with Bugloss, in Inflammations of the Blood, and may be profitable against the Bitings of Serpents. 
 Quaere, Whether it has any warm Parts in it, which may be Cordial and Alexi∣pharmack, as Bugloss. It causes Milk by tempering the hot Blood, and by its Wa∣terishness: 
 Sweet Gaul is very Nauseously Bitter, Elaeagnus Cordi. and a little Astringent, with a strong A∣romatick Smell. In Baths it is good for the Itch, and for Worms in Oyntments. It will Vomit by its Nauseous Bitterness, as Carduus, being Bitter like Gall. 
 Wild-Parsnip differs but little from the Elapho∣boscum. Garden-Parsnip in Taste and Vertue. 
 Fluellin is Bitter, Sub-acrid, and A∣stringent: Elatine Fo∣lio subro∣tundo. Therefore a good Vulnerary. 
 Elecampane-Roots and Leaves are ve∣ry Enula Campana. Acrid and Bitterish, and smell some∣what like Angelica. The Roots are good in Oyntments, and Baths for the Itch; as also for the Lungs, Stomach, and Liver, as a Bitterish Acrid. It is a good Cepha∣lick, Ʋterine, and Diuretick, by its Vola∣tile Salt; and by the same, it is outward∣ly useful for the Sciatica and Palsie; and is a good Antidote against Infectious Air. This by its Taste, strong Smell, and Shape of the Flowers, is referible to the same Class as Flos Solis and Marygolds; but is more Aromatick. 
 Horse-Tail is a little Astringent; and Equisetum. therefore good in all Fluxes. Galen says, It is Bitterish. It seems referible to the Grasses, or else to Polygonum. 
 Common-Heath is very Rough, and Bit∣terish; Erica vul∣garis. the Flowers have a Sweet Honey-Suckle Smell; by which they are discus∣sing in Oyls, and Diuretick; and by the Astringency, repelling in Inflamed Eyes, and the Herpes. Boyl ' d in Drink, it is good for all Fluxes, and over-fermented Blood. It is like Tamarisk. 
 Water-Rocket is of a Cress- Taste and Eruca A∣quatica vulgaris. Vertue; and is Bitterish and Acrid. 
 Hedge-Mustard is of a Cress- Taste and Erysimum vulgare. Vertue. In Syrup it is good for the Asthma and Hoarseness, by its Bitterish and Acrid Taste. 
 Common-Sea-Holly, or Eryngo: The Eryngium vulgare. Leaves taste Sweet, Aromatick, and Hot; and smell something like Chervil: There∣fore it is Diuretick, Pectoral, Carmina∣tive, and Venereal. 
 Spurge is of a burning and exulcera∣ting Esula. Taste and Vertue, like Tithymals; and is inwardly Vomitory, and Purgative of Watry Humors by the Acrid Salt. 
 Prickwood: The Seeds are Nauseously Euonymus vulgaris. Bitter and Astringent; therefore may Purge. The Bark is Slimy and Bitterish. My Dogg eat Ten of the Seeds in Butter, and drank the Decoction of the Leaves in Broth after them; and yet was bound Two Days after. It has an Elder- Smell in the Leaves; and the Wood is like El∣der: The Leaves are Sub-acid, of a Bit∣ter Elder- Taste. The Leaves and Berries look Red, as many Acid Plants do. 
 Common Hemp-Agrimony: The Flow∣ers Eupato∣rium Can∣nabinum. and Leaves are very Bitter, and a little Acrid. The Roots taste like Hemp: The Flowers and Leaves smell Strong and Aromatick. The Roots may Vomit by their Bitter and Acrid Sliminess. The Leaves are Hepatick.
Eye-Bright is Bitterish-Astringent, a Euphrasia vulgaris. good Vulnerary, and Eye-Medicine. 
 F. BEANS: The Leaves have a Bitter-Sweet Faba vul∣garis. Pea-Taste. The Bean has the same Taste; but the Skin of it is Astringent. The Flowers smell Sweet, and the distill ' d Water takes away Frec∣kles. Old Beans in Flowre or Meal are ve∣ry discussing in Tumors of the Breasts, and Testicles. A Water is distill ' d from Bean-Stalks for the Stone, which, by its Sweetness and Bitterness, lenifies and clean∣ses the Kidneys. 
 The Beach-Tree: The Bark which I ta∣sted Fagus. in September, was Bitterish-Astringent, and the Leaves Rough. The Vertue of it is the same with the Oak, viz. Astringent. The Fruit I could not find this Year; but I am told, That it is Sweet and Rough. 
 Buck-Wheat: The Seeds taste Mealy, Fegopy∣rum. and the Leaves Mucilaginous. It ' s good for Food, and Pultisses. 
 Common-Dropwort: The Root is Bitte∣rish, Filipendu∣la. ( Quaere, Whether Sweetish?) Astrin∣gent, Warm, and very Aromatick; of a Burnet-Smell, or like Meadow-Sweet. It is good in all Fluxes, and in the Stone, by its Bitterish and Sub-acrid Astrin∣gency. 
 Female-Fern: The Root and Leaves Filix Faemi∣na. are Bitterish, and Mucilaginous; and good for Burns, by their Mucilage: And there∣fore, are of a different Nature from the Male, and other Ferns. 
 Male-Fern: The Leaves taste Rough, Filix Mas &amp; Osmun∣da. the Roots Bitterish and Rough; and smell like Orris. The Leaves of all Ferns rubb ' d, smell like Tallow. The Roots, by their Bitterish-Roughness, are Splenetick, and good Vulneraries, and Openers of Ob∣structions by their Aromatick Bitterness, in Rickets, Worms, and in the Stone. 
 Strawberries: The Leaves are Muci∣laginous, Fragaria. and very little Bitter; the Roots are Bitterish, Sub-acrid, and Astringent. The Leaves are good in Mouth-Waters, and in the Stone: The Roots are also Vulnerary, like Cinquefoyl; and of the same Class. The Fruit is Sweet, Sub∣acid-Vinous, and Fragrant in its Flavor; therefore Cooling and Cordial: and a distill ' d Water is made of it. 
 Note, That the Leaves of Astringent Plants, which bear a Pulpy Fruit, have a Slime in them. 
 The Ash-Tree: The Bark is Bitter, A∣stringent, Fraxinus. and of a Laurel- Bitter Taste: The Seeds are Bitter, Astringent, and A∣crid; and so are the Flowers and Buds, when made into Conserve for opening the Spleen and Liver, and for the Scurvy and Dropsie. 
 The Bark is a good Vulnerary, and Antifebrifick by its Bitter Astringency. The Seeds are a good Diuretick in the Stone; and I think, they much resemble the Taste of Jesuits Powder. They sweat in Quartanes, in which I have us ' d them. The Wood of Ash, by its Taste, may be us ' d instead of Guaiacum; it has a Bitter and Acrid, to cause Sweat. 
 Fumitory is Bitterish, Watry, and Smoa∣ky: Fumaria vulgaris. It is good against Cholerick Blood in Juyce and Syrup; is Diuretick; and in distill ' d Water cleanses the Face. It be∣longs to the Pea-Tribe. It is good for the Itch in Oyntments. 
 Climbing-Fumitory: This has a Wa∣try Fumaria cum Ca∣preolis. Bitterness, and is also Acrid. This is of the same Tribe and Vertue with com∣mon Fumitory; but more manifestly A∣crid. 
 The Common-Mushrome: The whole Fungus E∣sculentus. Substance is Mucilaginous. The Smell is very Earthy; therefore outwardly a very cooling Anodyne. 
 Quaere, Whether Mushromes do not spring from the putrefied Mucilaginous Paren∣chyma of other Plants, and the Fibrous Parts growing into Length? 
 The noxious Mushromes cause a Stran∣gulation in the Throat, for which Oyl and Vomiting are necessary; or else a Cholera Morbus, in which case Hens- Dung may be good. 
 Wood-Mushrome: This smells like Rot∣ten Fungus Ar∣borum pu∣trescenti∣um. Wood, and is Slimy and Mucilagi∣nous; and evidently arises from Rotten Wood, whose putrefied Bladders, with some Fibrous Parts, spring into a Mush∣rome. 
 Jews-Ears are very Mucilaginous; by Fungus Sambuci∣nus. which they relax and cool Inflammations in the Throat; and they have a strong Earthy-Smell; by which they may dis∣cuss Glandulous Tumors. It is not good to swallow any of the Decoction of them. 
 G. HEdge-Nettle: The Taste of the Galeopsis. Leaves is Bitterish and Aroma∣tick. It stinks at first like Dead-Nettle, in the Leaves; but has an Aroma∣tick Turpentine in the Flowers; by which it is a Vulnerary, as well as by its Bitter∣ish-Astringency. It is a great Discusser, by its strong Smell. It is good in the Scrophula, and other Tumors. Inwardly it is an excellent Vulnerary; and outwardly good in Oyntments. By the Smell it is a Dead-Nettle or Lamium. 
 Common Ladies-Bedstraw: The Taste Gallium Luteum. is Bitterish and Astringent: The Flowers are of a Fragrant Sweetish Smell. It is plainly, by the yellow Root, a Madder; being Bitter, Acrid, and a little Astringent: and therefore it is an error to think it can coagulate Milk; but it is rather mixt with the Rennet, to preserve the Cheese from Corruption, or to give it a Flavor. Gentian yields an Acid, as well as Gallium, in Distillation: and yet none will think it fit to coagulate Milk: Which Mr. Ray intimates to be the effect of Gallium.
I. The Mucilaginous sweet Pea-Taste: 
 Pisum arvense, Cicer, Lathyrus, Glycyrrhiza, City∣sus pedicularis, rubra, Herba viva. 
 II. Mucilaginous, Sweet, inclining to Bitter, or Bean-Taste: 
 Faba, Phaseolus, Lupinus, Orobus, Anthyllis le∣guminosa. 
 Trifolium Palustre tastes Sweet and Bitter, like a Bean, inclining to the Laurel- Bitters; by its Bitter Astringency it cures Putrid Gums, and Ʋlcers in the Scurvy, if it be used in Decoction or Syrup. 
 Trifolium Fibrinum, in Bonetus, is said by Tilin∣gius, ipsam aloen resipere; but by Ettmuller it is described, Saporis acris instar Piperitidis; therefore these Authors mean different Plants by Trifolium Fibrinum. 
 III. The Rough Pea-Taste : Hepatica nobilis, Barba Jovis, Vicia vulgaris, Arachus, Ornithopodium, Trifolium lupulinum, Trifolium hirsutum, Lagopoides, Lagopus, Tri∣folium foliis purpureis, Trifolium siliquosum, Trifolium pratense, Fl. albo &amp; luteo. Herba humilis, Acacia is a leguminous Astringent. 
 IV. With a Bitterish, Sweet, Sub-acrid Pea-Taste in the Roots and Leaves. Aquilegia, the Leaves have a Roughness. Consolida Regalis, Fumaria, Thalictrum. 
 Meadow-Rue smells Fetid, something like Rue; in the Root it is not unlike a Dock-Bitter; in the Leaves it is Sweet and Rough. 
 V. With Sweet, Bitter, Acrid Roots and Berries, of a Sweet Slimy Pea-Taste, as Asparagus and Ruscus. 
 VI. Sweet, Slimy, Bitterish, Sub-acrid Roots, with Berries of a Sweet, Slimy, Acrid Pea-Taste. 
 Polygonatum, whose Berries are Sweet and Slimy, like the Pea-Taste, and Sweet Sub-acrid in the Seeds, the Leaves are Rough, the Roots taste Sweet, Acrid and Slimy: This is therefore of the Pea-Class, as well as the following: Ʋnifolium. 
 Lilium Convallium, whose Flowers are Fragrant; but the green Leaves of the Taste and Smell of the Pea-Class. 
 VII. The strong Bitter Sweet Pea-Taste, with a manifest Linseed Oyly Smell in the Flowers, as Genista vulgaris &amp; spinosa, Spartium, Genista acule∣ata, Anonis, which has a Goatish Smell in the Leaves, &amp;c. and the Roots taste like Brome. 
 These are the Brome Pea-Tastes. 
 VIII. Bitter Sub-acrid Pea-Taste, Fetid. 
 IX. The strong Acrid Pea-Taste. 
 1. Of a Pea-Smell: Melilotus, Trifolium luteum, Galega, Pedicularis fl. flavo &amp; Palustris rubro.
Persicaria siliquosa is of the Pea-Class, Sweet and Acrid. 
 Trifolium odoratum has a mixt Smell. 
 Trifolium Bituminosum smells like Bitumen. 
 Juncus vulgaris. 
 Equisetum which is sweetish and brackish in the Stalk, and Astringent in the Leaves; by which it seems a Rush, which has the same brackish Sweetness. 
 Gramen Leucanthemum is Sweet and Rough. 
 Arundo, Typha. 
 Sparganium tastes Sweet and Rough, like a Rush. 
 2. Corn Sweets, which are also Slimy Seeds, with the green Leaves of a crude Smell. 
 Avena, Hordeum, Triticum, Maza, Oriza, Fegopy∣rum, Phalangium, Lachryma Jobi. 
 Gramen Caninum has Sweet Slimy Roots. Galen mentions the Acrimony of Gramen Parnassi, and attributes a little Acrid to all Grass; by which it is opening and Diuretick. Lolium is very Acrid and Sweet, affecting the Head. Aegylops and Pha∣laris are described as Acrid. Blasted Corn stinks like Carrion, and contains a black Dust. 
 3. Sweet Sub-acrid Milky Plants: 
 Rapunculus, Campanula rotundifolia, Rapunculus Scabiosae capitulo. 
 Trachelium has a thick bitterish Milk. 
 Speculum Veneris seems of this Class. 
 4. Sweet Sub-acrid Astringent, and a little Aro∣matick, like Parsnep. 
 Plantago aquatica, the Flowers and Seeds taste Sweet, Hot, Aromatick, like Parsnep: The Leaf is Sweet, Sub-acrid, of a crude Smell. Plantago aqua∣tica habet sal Causticum. Etmuller. 
 Juncus floridus, the Stalk tastes Sweet, as Rushes; the Flowers smell Fragrant, and taste Sweet and Acrid.
Polygonum Germanicum is Sweet and Sub-acrid. 
 Sagittaria is of this Class. 
 5. Sweet Fernes being Astringent and Bitterish, Sub-acrid in the Roots: The green Leaves smell like Tallow.  
 7. Sweet Bitterishes of a burning Orris-Taste, or Fragrant Sweets, with a Fragrant Smell and Bitterish Acrid Taste. Iris, Costus dulcis &amp; amarus, Iris palustris, Zinziber, Zedoaria, Galanga, Contrayerva, which is said to be Aromatick and Acrid, like Orris. 
 Cardamomum is a Reed. 
 8. Acrid Sweets of a Fetid Smell; as, 
 1. Spatula foetida, which smells like Roast-Beef. 2. Poeonia, which is Bitterish, Sweet, Fetid, and Sub-acrid. These are the Fetid Sweets. Quaere, Whether some of this Class may not be referred to the Bitters, because they have more Bitter than Sweet? and some a high Acrid Aroma∣tick, and seem to belong to that Class; as Zinziber, Galanga, Zedoaria? 
 The Sweetness in many of this Class, is evident only in the fresh Plants. 
 The Fourth CLASS. Of Plants of a Bitter Taste. BItter Plants, if they be Austeres, have their crude Tartareous Lympha digested in the Plant-Bladders; and from thence is separa∣ted some little Oyl, Gum, or Milk into the Speci∣fick Vessels, which gives the Bitterness; and the re∣maining Juice in the Bladders is Acerb, which being tasted with the mentioned Bitterness, they produce an Austere Taste.
Malpighius mentions some of the Ʋtriculi, con∣taining a Tartareous Stony Matter, of the shape of a Die in Oak and Poplar, &amp;c. from whence I may infer, That an Acerb Liquor is contained naturally in the Bladders. Malpighius calls the proper Speci∣fick Juice of the Oak, a Shining Gluten, which preserves its Fibres, and makes it durable. Dr. Grew supposes it to be a Resin; but it is most probable that this Bit∣terness is a Gum: for Resins have less Bitter than Gums; and the Oak Sap is too crude to be digested into a Resin. 
 There is some Muciducts in Hasle and Oak, be∣cause the one bears Nuts, and the other Acorns, which have a Slimy Milk from the Oyly parts of the Plant: And the same Mucilage is observable in all Plants which bear Fruit. 
 In Plumb-Tree, which is an Austere, there are Muciducts, besides the Milky Gum Vessels. 
 Because the Oyl and Acid in Vegetables can ne∣ver be perfectly separated, therefore there is no Astringent Plant without some Bitterness; for as the Acid fixes on the Earth, the Oyl appears and gives a Bitterness, which is separated into the Tur∣pentine Vessels. 
 The number of Vessels in Bitters may be con∣firmed by the Vessels in Carduus, which is Bitter, from Milk Vessels; and Slimy, from Muciducts. 
 Burdock has the same Milk Vessels, and is Bitter and Slimy. 
 These are the Bitter Smoaky. The Smoaky taste is a sign of an imperfect Acrid; such as is in the Oyly Acid of Soot and Smoak. 
 All Bitters are of a higher Digestion than Sweets, because these are digested into Bitters. 
 The Bitter-Sweet, as in Apple-Tree Bark, seems in a middle state betwixt Sweet and Bitters: for Sweets are not made Bitters immediately, but the Juice must pass a gradual alteration; therefore in the Spring we taste a Sweetness in many Bitter Barks. The Bitter-sweet may be in the same Ves∣sels, as we find Choler tasting of both: or else the Sweet is in the Bladders, and the Bitter in the Gum Vessels; there are also Muciducts in these, because they bear Fruit. 
 In the Laurel- Bitters the Oyl is less coagulate, and the Bitterness is greater than in Austeres (where it is most coagulate by the Acerb Juice) and the Astringency is much tempered by the Bitterness in the Laurel- Bitters; and from the Muciducts in these, the Bark sweats a clear Watry Gum, which is a thickned Mucilage: their Leaves are Slimy, as in most Fruit Trees, as Peaches, Cherries, Almonds, &amp;c. and in most Bacciferous Trees, as Mulberries, Haw∣thorne, Barberries; and in the Nuciferous, as Beach, Chesnut, &amp;c. which have Oyly Slimy Nuts. 
 Malpighius (Anat. Plant. p. 69.) mentions in the Pericarpium of Almonds, Turpentine Vessels, quae secta copiosum fundunt hujusmodi succum. 
 In Ash there is a Laurel- Bitter, and therefore both Bitter, Gum, and Mucilage; though these Vessels are but obscurely described by Dr. Grew, as two Rings of round parcels of proper Vessels. 
 In Mulberry-Tree, Malpighius observes the Bitter Milk Vessels. 
 In Cherry-Tree he mentions a Red Liquor in the Fibres of the Bark. 
 In the Laurel-Bitter-Acrid, as Walnut, there are two Rings of special Sap Vessels described by Dr. Grew, which are like the two Rings in Ash. 
 Sumach, which is a Bitterish Acrid, has Milk-Ves∣sels, and the Milk gives the Bitterness, and it dries into a Gum. 
 From these Instances it appears, That Bitterness depends on a Milky Gum, like that in Cichory. 
 The Bitter Acrid Taste in Holly must depend on some Milk Vessels. Dr. Grew has only described the Muciducts and Lymphaticks: He observes the Milk Vessels in Dandelion to stand in a Ring; in Figgs they stand in arched parcels, and these some∣what represent Rings; therefore I may suppose that the Rings he mentions in Oak, Hazle, Barberry-Bark, and the arched parcels in Apples and Pear- Tree are Milk Vessels. 
 The Muciducts in Mallow and Elm, stand in round parcels; and therefore it is probable that the same round parcels in Oak, Walnut, and Ash, are Muci∣ducts: but in some Plants, as in Holly, the Muci∣ducts and Lymphaticks are so mixt as to be obscure, and are less observed by the Plant-Anatomists. 
 I could wish we had a Cut of some Plant in each Taste; and that the several Juices of Plants were tasted, before they observed the varieties of Vessels; for by the Taste they might know what Juices and Vessels are to be observed in each Plant.
Barberry is a Bitter Slimy Acrid, having a yellow Gum of that Taste, contained in Vessels which stand in a Ring; and from that Gum, is its Purgative Vertue; but by the Juice in the Bladders is its Astringency. 
 Turpentine-Bitters have large Turpentine- Vessels; the Juice in the Bladders is Acerb, very considerably. 
 In Turpentines, the Oyly part being separated, it leaves this Acerbity; from whence comes the A∣stringency in Terebinthinate Plants. 
 The taste of Turpentine, is Bitter, Acrid, Gummy, or Slimy: the Acid is loosely mixt with the Oyl; and therefore it sends forth strong Effluviums for Smells. 
 The Bitter-Acrid seem in a middle state betwixt Bitter and Acrids; all Acrids arise out of Bitters. 
 In Wormwood Dr. Grew observes Turpentine- Vessels, which, I believe, give the sweet Aromatick Taste to the Roots of Wormwood, and also Sap Vessels in par∣cels, which are arched as the Bitter Gum-Vessels; and these give the Bitter Taste to Wormwood Leaves: the Astringency in Wormwood is from the Juice in the Bladders. 
 Plants of a Bitter-Taste are either Bitterish, or of a strong Bitter Taste; and these Tastes are observable in Herbs, or in the Barks of Trees. 
 I. The first Species of Bitters are the Austeres, which are Bitterish Astringents in the Roots of Herbs. 
 First, Bitterish Astringent Roots, with Crude, A∣stringent, and Sub-acrid Leaves: 
 1. Plantago vulgaris, Quinquenervia, Coronopus vul∣garis, Myosuros. 2. Polygonum vulgare, Persicaria maculosa, Pota∣mogeiton, and these have knobbed Stalks. 3. Sempervivum majus, Vermicularis, Bedum arbo∣rescens, Vermicularis frutex. Sempervivum-Leaves are of an Acerb Taste; and the Roots taste and look like Sorrel, and therefore may be of the same Class. There is an Acid in Vermicularis, and it is used in Sauce, like Sorrel. 
 Anagallis flore luteo, and Nummularia are of the same Class, being Acerb in Leaves; but more crude and indigested than Sorrel. 
 I have used the Juice of Sempervivum in Hecticks, to cool the Salts, and Volatile Oyl of the Blood. 
 Secondly, Sub-acrid Austeres. 
 1. With Acerb Leaves: 
 Saxifragia fl. albo, aurea, Polygonum Germanicum, Herniaria. 
 2. With Slimy Leaves: 
 Portulaca, whose Roots taste Bitterish, Sub-acrid, and Astringent, and turn Reddish, and colour the Spittle; the Stalks taste Saltish, like Sal Prunellae; and by this Taste it it is probable they were first chose for Pickle. 
 Purstain-stalks taste Saltish from the mixture of two Tastes, Bitter in the Roots, and the Acid in the Leaves. Chamomile- Flowers, and other Bit∣ters, are said to make a Salt Diuretick Infusion. Herba Kali is described Saporis salsi instar urinae: but I never tasted any but the Saltness in Purslain. 
 Purslain is good for Spitting of Blood, both by the Slime, and the Astringency of the Leaves; but the Root seems to be of a contrary Vertue. 
 Orpin is Slimy in the Leaves, and Bitterish Sub∣acrid in the Roots, but these are white Roots; yet is of the same Class as Purslain.
11. With a very hard, acerb, fragrant Fruit: 
 Malus Cotonea. 
 The fresh Buds of Quince-Tree taste Acrid, and smell like the Laurel- Bitters; which, with the Fra∣grancy, may refer them to that Class. 
 12. With slimy Leaves, and fetid, sweet, slimy, fub-acid Berries. 
 Morus, whose Bark is Acrid, and it is Juliferous. 
 Plants of a stronger Bitter Taste, whose Species are, 
 1. Laurel-Bitters. 2. Smoaky-Bitters. 3. Bitter-Acrids Aromatick. 4. Bitter-Acrid of a milder Taste. 5. Elder- Bitters, or Bitter Slimy. 6. Dock-Bitters. 7. Hemp-Bitters. 8. Turpentine-Bitters. 9. Dead-Nettle-Bitters. 10. Bitter-sweet Barks and Herbs. The Species of Bitters I have mentioned, are all Austeres; as,
I suppose our Ingenious Herbalists will consider the easiness and shortness of this Method, which contains only Eight summa genera, and those obvi∣ous to our Senses; and they will observe that the description of the Taste and Smell of a Plant will give a better distinction of one Plant from another, than a whole Page of external accidents; and it will be more satisfactory than the Picture of the Plant it self. It seems impossible to remember all the external accidents, unless a Man reads nothing but Herbals all his Life; and Galen says, There were more writ in his days than any Person could ever read; but the general Tastes are but few, and the particular Tastes are obvious in every Plant I meet with, and desire to know. 
 I find a common Objection against this Method, That Plants have different Tastes in divers parts; but this I have answered already, by intimating, That the Oyly Juice does give the chief Taste, by which Plants ought to be distinguished; but the Juice in the Bladders is altered in the Fruit and Leaves only. 
 The taste of the Oyly Juice is always the most prevailing Taste in Plants, as the Taste of the Barks of Trees is the most general Taste in the Tree, but the Leaves and Fruit may differ, after a long di∣gestion, but before it they had the same Taste, while unripe, as the Bark and the Skin of the Fruit; and the Seed retains usually much of the Taste of the Bark, as in Peach- Kernels and the Peel of Oranges is most evident; and in their Seeds the same Taste is usually found in all the parts of Sweet Aromatick Plants, and in Acrids, and the Corrosive; but more strong in the Seeds than other parts. The Bitters are most inclined to alter their Tastes from Austere to Acerb, or Sub-acid, Slimy, and Sweet Tastes, and Acrid. 
 Therefore in distinguishing of Plants by the Taste, we must first observe the most prevailing Taste in all the parts of the Plant, which is the Oyly Juice: Secondly, We must describe the Juice in the Bladders, and the alteration it receives in the Leaves and Fruit; for Astringent Roots bear Acerb Leaves, which obscure the Taste of the Oyly Juice in the Leaves; as in Sorrel. 
 Some sweet Roots have bitter Leaves; as Worm∣wood. Sweet and Bitter differ not in Principles, but in their Texture; which is altered, from a smooth one to an unequal rough Texture in Bitters, by a farther Digestion. 
 In Wormwood, Dr. Grew observes Turpentine- Ves∣sels, which give the Sweet Aromatick Taste to the Roots. And he also observes Sap-Vessels in parcels, which are arched like the Bitter Gum-Vessels: And these may give the Bitter Taste to Wormwood- leaves: The Astringency is in the Bladders. 
 Where Two Specifick Vessels happen in a Plant, the highest Taste is to be considered; and that which prevails most in the Plant, is to be esteemed the highest Oyly Juice for the distinguishing the Plant. 
 If the Juices in the Bladders of the Root, become Bitter in the Bladders of the Leaves; yet the same Aromatick Acrid appears in the Specifick Vessels, in both Roots and Leaves. 
 The Seeds of the Cresses are more Bitter than the Leaves, because of the abundance of the Oyly Juice in them. And the Stalk is Bitter also, be∣cause the Juice of the Bladder is higher Digested, than in the Roots; where it tastes more Sweet and Acrid; as in Horse-radish: So that we may allow the Juice in the Bladders of the Leaves, to be higher digested into a Bitterness, when they are only Sweet in the Root: But notwithstanding this change of Taste, the Specifick Juice in Cresses, is the Milky Acrid Gum; and in Wormwood, the Aromatick Acrid Balsam. 
 The Second Objection is, That Plants have diffe∣rent Vertues in their several Parts; and so, by the Taste, we cannot reduce them of the same kind of Vertue, into the same Classes. 
 To this I Answer, That we usually allow many Vertues to the same Taste; and the Juices of Ve∣getables may have different degrees, of the same Taste, in their several Parts; and to that difference, several Effects are to be attributed: So in the Bark of Elder, and in the Leaves, there is the same kind of Taste; but of a different degree of strength, to Purge and Vomit: The Flowers, and Pulp of the Berries purge not so much; but they both purge a little: One handful of the Flowers boyled, purge: The Seed has more of the Elder Taste and Vertue, to vomit and purge; and all Purgers are also Diu∣retick; and if it be given in a great Dose, it vomits. 
 I could wish, That a few proper Vertues were allowed to each Plant, which it most eminently and constantly produces, by its peculiar Taste; and that other Vertues were rejected, which are more certainly produced by Plants of a more Spe∣cifick Taste. 
 The Third Objection may be, That the same Plant growing in the Garden, differs in Taste, from the same growing in the Field, and its native Soyl; as in Scurvy-Grass, Wormwood, and all the Poysonous Plants, is most evident. 
 To this I Answer, That the Tastes differ in the Wild and Field Plants only in Degree, and not in the Kind, or Species of Taste; so Sea and Garden Scurvy-Grass have the same Cress- Acrid, but the Sea is strongest: The Wild Hemlock poysons in a higher degree than the Garden; but both have the same Fetid Acrimony. 
 The fat Soyl in the Garden gives a greater Mag∣nitude, and alters the crude Juices, towards a sweet∣ness in the Bladders; as appears in Carrots. 
 In some Plants, the Smells do plainly Characte∣rize the Class or Species; as in Aromaticks, Fetids, and Narcoticks, there is a Bitter Smell also, though Galen denies it; for we may plainly smell a Peach- Bitter, or Laurel- Bitter, in the rubbing of the Flow∣ers of Peaches and Cherries: And in the green Leaves of Laurel and Walnut, we smell a Bitterness, which may be a note of the Laurel-Class; but the Species of Plants is not to be multiplyed, where they have the same Taste, though some alteration happen in the Smell; for we may observe various Smells, in the different parts of Plants; and in some Plants, a compounded Smell. 
 I have not excluded the external Figure, from any consideration in the Classing of Plants, but al∣low it no farther, than as marks of distinction of the several Individuals, under the same Taste; and a great help, for the better sorting of Plants, where the Taste is obscure. I observed, That many Plants had Leaves of other Plants, which agree with one another in Tast; as, Pulsatilla Anemones facie, Quin∣quefolium Tormentillae facie; and by such similitudes of parts, I was directed to compare their Tastes and Vertues. 
 I have Classed all the Plants I have mentioned, according to such Tastes as I have observed my self, or borrowed from Galen, Mr. Ray, and others. I hope the Reader will not expect any exact Methodizing of Plants, but will correct all those Mistakes I am guilty of in this Design; in which, all I pretend to, is, To have proposed a useful and rational Method for distinguishing Plants; but this I shall leave to be perfected by Time, and those who have a bet∣ter Skill in the general Botanicks, than I can pretend to, who live so far distant from any of our Famous Gardens; where I might, upon any doubt of a Taste or Smell, consult the Plant it self. And I cannot desert the Imployment of Physick, to pro∣secute throughly this pleasing Study, of the Tastes and Smells of the Juices in Plants, which renders Botanicks very useful to a Physician. 
 The End of the Sixth Part. AN APPENDIX TO THE Second Part OF THE : Containing Two Parts; 
 I. A TABLE of the Tastes of Animal Humors, in their Natural States: With many Observations omitted in the Second Part.
II. The Tastes and Smells of many Minerals, in their several Classes; which were not fully described in the Second Part. 
 A TABLE of Animal Tastes. I. Animal Humors of a Sweet Milky Taste; these are Chyle, Milk, and the Milky Lympha  ' s. II. Animal Humors of a Slimy Sub-acid Tartareous Taste; as the Slimes of the Stomach and Guts. III. Animal Humors of a Sweet Vitrio∣lick Taste; as Blood and Spleen- Juice. IV. Of a Fetid Animal Taste, as Spirits. V. Of a Fat, Greasie, or Unctuous Taste; as Suet, Fat, Marrow. VI. Of a Bitter, Acrid, Slimy Taste; as Choler. VII. Of a Salso- acid Taste, like com∣mon Sal-Ammoniack; as the Serum of the Blood, and Salt Lympha  ' s, and Sweat and Ʋrine. An APPENDIX to the Second Part, &amp;c. I. Animal Humors of a Sweet Milky Taste, are either, First, Of a Milky Smell, or of no considerable Smell. Secondly, Of a Fetid Smell. First, THE Humors of a Milky Smell, and Milky Taste, without any Smell considerable. 
 1. The Milk of the Breasts, which is not different from Chyle, but by its being depu∣rated from Saltness, by the Glandules of the Breasts. Milk has the Smell of the Animal from whom it is drawn; and therefore the stronger the Blood, and Smell of each Animal is, the more offensive is the Milk: that Animal Savor of Milk, is the Vola∣tile Oyly part, and may be called the Spirit of Milk, which is more Fetid in Goats, Asses, and Mares, than in Cows; but that of Women has the most agree∣able Animal Smell, being most like the natural Temper of those of the same kind. 
 The Sweetness of Milk shews, that it is very ca∣pable of Fermentation in the Stomach of Animals. And Rennet curdles it by Fermentation, and not by its Acidity. 
 In Milk we distinguish Four Parts. 
 1. The Serose Whey. 2. The Buttery, or Oyly Part. 3. The Cheesie, or Viscid Part. 4. The Acidity, evident in Butter-Milk. These several Parts of Milk have their uses in Physick. 
 The Serose or Whey Parts are useful in diluting of Animal Humors; but especially the distilled Milk Waters. 
 The Buttery Part of Milk, by its Oyliness, allays the Acid sharpness of Humors; and, by its Viscidity and Sliminess, it tempers the Acrids; whence Milk is Anodyne in Clysters, Eye-Medicines, and all In∣jections. Butter is emollient by its Oyliness, and is something Hot or Discussing: The Oyl of Ani∣mals being the Matter of Heat. 
 The Cheesie Part in Milk, which Hippocrates calls , is very nourishing; and, by rea∣son of its Gummy Viscidity, it conglutinates Wounds. 
 The Acidity in Butter-Milk is cooling, as all Tartar- Acids be; and it is like the Sowreness of Vegetables. 
 2. The Chyle in the Thoracick-Vessels, tastes of a Milky Sweetness, with a manifest Saltness, and a strong savor of that particular Animal; which I call the Animal Taste and Smell. 
 Tho '  Dr. Glisson affirms, That Chyle has neither the Bitterness, nor the Savor of the Guts, nor the Saltness; yet I find the Judicious Dr. Lower affirms its Saltness. I tasted the Chyle of a Dog, Fed with Flesh, before it came to the Receptacle, by cutting one of the Lacteals near the Guts, and I found the Chyle Sweet and Saltish, and of an Animal Savor: The same was the Taste of the Chyle, in the Tho∣racick ductus. 
 There is the same Parts in Chyle, as in Milk. 
 1. A Buttery Oyl. 2. A Serose Whey. 3. A Cheesie Viscid. 4. A Saltish-Acid, and Tartar- Acid. The Slimy Sweetness of Chyle, shews it to agree with Milk, as well in Nature, as in Taste: This Sweetness of Chyle is tasted in the Urine, in a Di∣abetes; where Chyle either wants its Sanguification, or else is diverted by some unknown Lymphaeductus to the Kidnies, from the Glands of the Mesentery. 
 This Sweetness of Chyle is evident in the Blood, which is spit from a broken Vein in the Lungs; and from hence is the Sweet Taste of Blood. 
 This Sweetness is tasted in the Saliva, and the Milk of the Breasts; and therefore these, and all other Sweet Slimes arise from the Chyle. 
 The colour of the Chyle was White and Reddish, or Rosie, in the Chyliduct of the Buttery Oyl of Chyle, becoming Red by the mixture of the Acrid of Choler, which produces the Saltness: So Salt of Tartar, by digestion with Milk, turns it Red: And a mixture of Crabs-Eyes, Vinegar, and White-Wine, looks Reddish. Hence I infer, That the Acrid of Choler helps Sanguification, by turning the Chyle of a colour mixt of Red and White, it becoming wholly Red upon a perfect Sanguification. 
 From the different parts of Chyle, all the several parts of Blood, and other Humors, are prepared; and therefore all the parts of Animals have the principles of Chyle only altered by a higher Dige∣stion, and new Mixtures, and different Textures: And therefore I think it very impertinent for Phy∣sicians to look after any other Principles of Animal Bodies, than what occur to our Senses, in Chyle and Milk; for these are sufficient to explain all the Phaenomena observable in Animal Humors, without any Supposition of the Mathematical qualities of Atoms, or the Products of the Fire, by Chymistry; these are the curious Thoughts and Experiments of Philosophers; but the Physician needs none o∣ther Notion, but what occurs by an obvious de∣duction from sensible objects: neither need we assert any other Principle, than a Serose, a Viscid, an Oyly, and an Acid Principle in Animal Humors. These are easily understood, and we need not consi∣der the farther Resolution of these Integral Parts, (which I call sensible Principles) what sort of A∣toms compose them; And what their insensible Mo∣tion is: Nor whether all these may be resolved in∣to one Principle. For in these particulars, every Philosopher has a different Hypothesis, and asserts what he pleases. 
 3. The Saliva resembles thin Milk, well diluted, and tastes Sweetish, like Milk. Milk is most like Chyle, and thicker and sweeter than the Saliva: therefore it is the first Humor separated from Chyle; for the Nourishment of Nurses, after Eating, immediately goes to the Breasts.
All Ferments are Slimy, as Barme, and Rennet; they have also hot, strong, or fetid Particles, lodged in the Slime, and preserved by it. These Fetids are the active Principles of Fermentation in Rennet, and likewise in all Animal Ferments, as in the Semen, and the Slimy Lympha  ' s of the Stomach and Guts, which ferment the Nourishment received into the Stomach. This Fetid, in the Slimy Lympha of the Stomach, is communicated from the Nerves; and is that I call the Animal Fetid. The Sub-acid helps the Oyly-Fetid in its Fermentation; as Nitre helps Sulphureous Minerals in their Conflagration, and Explosions. 
 I could not coagulate this Slimy Lympha, by the Acid of Spirit of Salt, or by the Fire. I gathered it by two Ligatures, made in the Guts of a Rabbet; and emptied the space betwixt them, for the recep∣tion of the Slime. 
 3. The Slimy Sub-acid Humor, separated by the Spleen, which helps the separation of Choler by the Liver. This is the Vitriolick Acid of the Blood, which, joyning with the Bitterness of Choler, pro∣duces the Acrid observable in it: So, by the mix∣ture of Bitter and Acid in Plants, a Salt taste is pro∣duced: And from Acrid Plants, as Horse-radish, I have distilled an Acid Liquor. 
 Note, That all the Conglomerating Glands look white like their Milky Slimes: And though some of their Lympha  ' s be Sweet, yet these last mentioned are less Sweet, and are either naturally Sub-acid, or else turn so immediately upon Stagnation in the Stomach. 
 All the Slimy Sweet Lympha  ' s are properly sup∣plyed by sweetish Slimes, or Milk Diet, when they are deficient. These Slimes being naturally produ∣ced from Chyle, which is Sweetish, and like Milk. 
 The Slimy Sub-acid Humors are best supplied by Tartar- Acids, which quicken the Appetite, and help Digestion, especially the well digested Acids of ripe Fruits, and Wine it self, which is Sub-acid. 
 There is a Volatile Acidity in the Contents of the Stomach; for all digested Vegetables smell and taste Acid, with a mixture of Fetid; such is the Smell of the same Vegetable, if it be artificially di∣gested: And the Acidity is generally more evident to the Smell, than the Taste, which is a sign of its being fermented. 
 When the Spirituous Oyly Particles of Chyle are carried off into the Lacteals; the remaining con∣tents have the Acidity of Vineger in the Colo ; and therefore the Ascarides are bred there, which resemble the Eels in Vineger: This Acid has a putrid Savor joyned with it, which is produced by a precedent Fermentation. This Acid is produced from the Tartar of Vegetables; which being Fer∣mented or Distilled, it appears Acid Oleose. 
 The Contents of the Jejunum are Bitter, from Choler; of the Duodenum Salt; the Choler being turned to Salt, by the mixture of the Acid Contents of the Stomach; and the Excrements have the Colour, but not the Bit∣ter of Choler. 
 III. Animal Humors of a Sweet Vitriolick Taste. THE Blood of all Animals taste naturally Sweet Vitriolick, with a Saltness, and a savor of the Animal Fetid. I observed this Vitriolick Taste in the Blood of a Carp, and in that of a Chicken, and in the Blood of a healthful Woman: And I have often found this Observation confirmed, by the Tryals made by divers other Persons, to whom I communicated it, both Physicians and Chirurgeons, who agree with me, in asserting the Steel Taste of Blood. 
 This Vitriolick Stypticity in Blood, probably a∣rises from the Tartar- Acid of Chyle, fixing on the Terreous or Osseous parts of the Succus nutritius, swimming in the Blood after its full digestion; for all Stypticity arises from the mixture of an Earthy part, and an Acid. If we mix common Tartar, and Steel Filings, a strong Vitriolick Salt is produced, like the Taste of Blood. 
 I did not perceive any Steel Taste in Chyle, nei∣ther will Chyle turn Syrup of Violets green, as the Serum of the Blood does; and therefore I believe the Vitriolick Taste is produced in the Blood; but the sweetness in the Blood is from the Chyle mixt with it. 
 The use of this Vitriolick Stypticity is very evi∣dent, and necessary to the Blood.  
 Spirit of Verdigriese has a strong Acid pungent Taste, by which it is a great dissolvent, and smells of a quick Acid. 
 Sal Vitrioli vomits, by its Brass-savored nauseous Vitriol- Taste. 
 White Vitriol will not coagulate the Serum of the Blood, neither will burnt Vitriol; I mixed both with it: but Roman Vitriol curdles it. 
 Aes ustum must be drying, and Astringent in Taste. 
 Sulphur Vitrioli narcoticum tastes Vitriolick. The Sulphur in all Vitriols, when it is precipitated from the Acid, smells Fetid, as in Oyl of Vitriol; and thereby it becomes Narcotick, or Anodyne. 
 Copper has a very strong Sulphur, whereby it be∣comes inflammable, and very prejudicial to the Miners.
Fourthly, The Tastes or Smells of the Bitumens. 1. Bitumens taste Bitter, like Turpentines, as Petroleum, and smell like it, with addition of some Earthy Fetid. Asphaltum tastes like Pitch, as I am informed, and it burns into a Cinder. 
 2. Some are Bitter and Fetid, as Succinum; the Tin∣cture of Amber tastes Bitterish, and is Antiepileptick like other Fetids. 
 3. It is not improbable that Amber-griese is a Bitu∣men, and of a fragrant Smell, very Cordial. It yields the same Principles as Amber by distillation, both Oyl and Salt. If the consistence of the Bitumens be con∣sidered, they are like Oyls, Turpentines, or Resins. 
 Ebenum fossile is said to be of a sweet scent &amp; Cordial. 
 An Account of the Tar-Bitumen in Shropshire. 
 A Bitumen is called by the Famous Kircher, Sulphur liquidum, and Sulphur Bitumen fixum: This is plainly proved by some Bitumens which smell plainly of Brim∣stone, as the Tar-Bitumen or Pici-Bitumen, and have also a Tar Smell; for by both these Smells a Sulphur, and a Turpentine Bitumen are evidently known to be nearly related or compounded. I received this Bitu∣men from my Worthy and Ingenious Friend, Mr. G. Plaxton of Sheriff-Hales in Shropshire: And these following Observations were made at Aston, in War∣wick-shire, in the Laboratory of my ever Honoured and Learned Friend, Sir Charles Holt, Baronet. 
 The smell of the Bitumen was like a mixture of Tar and Brimstone, which shews the middle state Bi∣tumens have betwixt Minerals and Vegetables. 
 This Bitumen tastes Bitterish and Smoaky, &amp; swims on a Spring, which rises about the middle of a Hill in a Wood, near to Rowton, in the Parish of Brosely, in Shropshire. We mixed this Tar- like Bitumen with Sand, and distilled it in a Sand Furnace, out of a Retort. At first a Phlegmatick Water came over, then a black Oyl, which we rectified with Water, and then it ap∣peared like a yellow Oyl; in Colour, Smell, and Taste like Oyl of Amber, and therefore I believe it to be of the same nature. 
 By this Experiment it appears, That Amber is no Vegetable product, as a Gum -Resin, but truly a Mi∣neral Bitumen, which is in some places dug out of the Earth, and that this Tar is a Petroleum or liquid Amber. 
 It seems probable to me, That this Tar is the Oyl of Coal, for such an Oyly substance sweats from our Pit-Coal, in burning, and also comes from it by di∣stillation; and also the Sulphur- smell in this Tar ap∣pears to be like Coal smoke. Many other Bitumens have a mixt smell of a Terebinthinate and Smoaky, or Sulphureous Smell. 
 The taste of Petroleum is Bitterish, and it smells of a mixt smell of Turpentine, and Fetid Sulphur, by which it discusses Tumors; and the Country People cure Ʋlcers and Swellings in their Cattle by this Tar. All Bitumens are discussing by their Fetid Smell, Con∣glutinative by their Gumminess, and Detergent by their Bitter Taste. 
 North-hall Water tastes Bitterish, and smells of a Sulphureous Smell, upon keeping; it seems therefore to have something Bituminous. The Sediment after Evaporation, tasted very burning and hot, and that Taste continued long on my Tongue: By this Acri∣mony it is Purgative and Diuretick. Spirit of Harts-Horn precipitated the Water white, like Alum- water; and it curdles Milk like that. As an alterative it has the Vertue of Alum in curing Itch, Scab, and all Fer∣mentations, and fixes the Volatile Salts and Oyls, and coagulates the Lympha  ' s, and Serum of the Blood, which may sometimes occasion Rheumatick Pains, as I have observed it in some Persons. 
 Of the Tastes of Salts. I. SAlts properly so called, of a salt, hot, pungent Taste, and a Lixivial Smell, as all fixt Salts; these feel Unctuous to the Fingers, from some Oyl adhering to them; and these are strong Diu∣reticks and Sudorificks. II. Volatile Alkalies; these are of a burning pun∣gent, salt Taste, with a smoaky urinous Smell; the smoakiness and burning is from the Oyly Particles in Salts: By the addition of an Acid the Heat and Burning and Fetids are abated, for Acids correct all Oyls, and fix them. III. An Acid sulphureous Salt, for so we impro∣perly call all Figured Bodies, though they have no salt Taste; and Acids are the principal Ingredients of all other Salts: This sulphureous Acid is the aeri∣al Salt, which mixes with all Fluids, and then fixes in the Earthy Particles, by which it is made evident to the Taste: It cannot be tasted in Snow or Ice, for want of an Alkali: All Acids we taste have a rough∣ness; and therefore an Earthy part to make them act on our Taste is necessary. This aerial sulphureous Acid rises from the sulphureous Fumes of the Earth, or the sulphureous lucid matter of the Sun. IV. Mixt Salts tasting Salso- acid. 1. Urinous Salso- acids, made of a Volatile and A∣cid, mixt as Sal Ammoniack, which most resembles the salt of the Blood, being Diuretick and Sudorifick. 2. Vitriolated Salts, consisting of a Fixt and an Acid. 3. Nitrous Salts, consisting of a sulphureous Acid, and a Volatile Salt, tasting Cool and Saltish. Arcanum duplicatum is esteemed as a mixt Salt; and Ettmuller says, It is Bitterish, it is Diuretick, a Digestive, and a Febrifuge. Spirit of Nitre ferments with the Sand in the Ʋrine, and is esteemed the best Lithontriptick by Dr. Grew. V. Salts compounded from some Acid and Mineral. 1. Aluminous Tastes, tasting Acerb or Acid-rough. Burnt-Alum tastes Sweetish, Sub-acid, Hot, and very Styptick, whereby it coagulated the Serum of the Blood, and stops its extravasation in Ʋlcers, but it did not change the florid of the Blood, as Vineger does. 2. Vitriolick Salts, so called from their shooting into particular edged Figures, like Salts, and they have a Styptick Taste. 3. Marine Salts, as Sea-Salt, Sal-Gem, are Salso- acid. Sal Anaticum is of a Salso- acid Taste, and is used for Eye-Medicines to supply the saltness of the Tears to cleanse the viscid Lympha in the corrosive Acidity. We use Tutty and Calaminary Stone to absorb the Acid, for they ferment with them. VI. Of a burning, corrosive, salt Taste, as in the Lixivium of Soap- ashes: It tastes burning, and smells of Lime. I put some of it into the Serum of Blood, and it turned it higher coloured, but did not coagulate it. Alumen scissile urit instar urticarum, Ettmuller. FINIS.
