 Last of all, the Archeus of Mineralls is plainly materiall, liquid, covering a hidden and drowsie brightness under thickness, which is more growing, and liquid in Plants: but in the four-footed Beast it openly flo teth and shineth; so that the living Creature dying, a fail∣ing splendor may be presently seen in his eyes. For feign an Oxe of 800 pound weight, which the light of life being extinguished, is straightway cold: Therefore that hot light must needes be of so much moment, that it may preserve so many pounds rushing into cold, by its continual nourishment, from cold. 
 Therefore the light of four-footed Beasts, and Birds is Sunny, no otherwise than that of Fishes doth prove it a Splendor of the Moon: For there is no seldom example of the cold light of Fishes: by night I say, in shrubs or tamarisks, Earths, and combustible things: For there is a light, and that a kindled one, a shining exhalation without fire and heat: For now and then, I under the thickest darkness of the night, clearly distinguish lines under the aforesaid light. Suppose also after the same manner, Vegetables to obtain a twofold light, from the nature of light, but not of an Element, because all things do consist of one onely Element. See∣ing therefore the Schooles have been ignorant of the properties of Lights, it is no wonder that they have stumbled in the degrees of Simples. 
 And so, another judgement is hereafter to be given concerning the degrees of Simples, ac∣cording to their participation of more or lesse light from their governing light. That which the art of the fire declareth, by the separation or withdrawing of the lightsome Being from the other part of the composed Body: which thing is scan y or difficult enough to many; but to the Ade tists very easie: For by the fire of Hell, which is the Liquor Alkahest of Para∣celsus, it may be known, how great a part of either light a Vegetable (even unknown, bruis∣ed, and covered in its Scituation) may possess, no lesse than with what shape or figure it was adorned: And that, not by the perswasion of Quercetanus, who when he had seen a weak Lixivium or Lye to be congealed, thought the seminall Being of a nettle after its turning to ashes, to have emained in the Salt of the ashes; because the Ice beginning, doth contract its drops point-wise. 
 Paracelsus also is deceived, because he writeth that all Vegetables cannot exceed a heat of the first degree. Indeed the great Lights have wonderfully shone in Simples, and their seeds do ascend for the grace of the Universe, to a largeness of degrees, and therefore all Forms have a light of essentificall thingliness, reduced to the conjunction of either light. Yet the lights of the Luminaries are not the constitutive Forms of Simples; for that, the light of the Sun is combustive or burning up, even in its simplicity. Therefore it is a shamefull thing, that a man and the Sun doth generate a man: Because it is that which is stuffed with the Idio∣tisme or proper form of speech of Heathenisme. In the next place, the seeds of Birds, and four-footed Beasts are at first muckie or snivelly, because they are perfected by a very small help of the light of the Sun: But they are contracted and thickned by little and little, that they may be sufficient for the consistence of their generated young. In the mean time, the Eggs of Fishes are at first more hard, and straightway the light of the Moon assisting, they wax tender into a snivelliness. Therefore there are two great Lights, and those sufficient, as there are so many primitive Elements. The Sun is chief over the Air, as the Moon over the wombs, or Motherly Waters. Wherefore a living Creature brought forth by the light of the Sun, hath need of a continual sucking of Air; as also Fishes are constrained uncessantly to draw waters for the sustaining of themselves, and the refreshment of their light. 
 I have known indeed, the light of the Sun to betake it self into a Flint (to wit, onely by the preparation of the Flint) that without the presence of the Sun, that attained light may re∣main for some space under the thickest darkness; and again, the light is drawn out by a new exposing of the Flint to the Sun in the day-time, although clowded. Therefore this was the necessity of inspiration, not to be despised by us; to wit, as a restauration of the lights contained by a certain consanguinity in seeds, doth happen; but not onely a desired tempe∣rature of cold alone; as the Fish witnesseth. It sufficeth therefore, that no form of naturall things is produced by the Heaven, by the Sun, out of the dreamed appetite of the matter, or whatsoever disposition of the seeds; because that all these things are included in the race of accidents: neither have they known the way to a creating of nothing: For nature is not a∣ble of it self, ever to ascend to the procreation of a vitall light: but Christ the Lord of the Universe, is alone the life and parent of all things; neither will he give this honour to any Creature. Therefore God alone is the Father of Lights. But he is not so called, because he made the Stars: For as he is not called the Father of Stones, or of things not living; so nei∣ther of the S ars. Yea, neither is he therefore called the Father of Vegetables, although they have a certain vitall light in them. Therefore the Father of all lights, is he alone to whom one∣ly the name of Father belongs: And who is onely to be called Father, and is in the Heavens. For although a fleshly Father doth give of his own, whence the name of Paternity or father∣liness is given unto him: yet because he is not the giver of vitall lights, or the Creator of Forms, he name of vital Fatherliness is forbidden to be given to the Creature. Therefore God is the Father of Lights, or of vitall Forms. And there are as many of those diverse lights, as there are of vitall forms: For because Souls are not known by a notion from something before them, or of a precedent thing: therefore, are they by a general Etymologie, called Lights, with a Son-like property, whose correlative is a Father: Yet so, as that paternity is by way of pro∣portion or similitude: For although he truly createth all living Souls, yet Beasts do not as∣sume the Sonship of a proper name; because, neither the likeness of that their father: For their souls do perish with their life, in manner of the flame of a Candle: Therefore the mind of men onely is an immortall substance, shewing forth the Image of the Father of Lights: and therefore power is given to him of becoming the Son of God. Which things, seeing we believe by faith, I am angry that even still to this day it is taught by Christians, that the forms of things, and souls of bruit Beasts are true and spiritual substances; by con∣sequence, that they are not vitall lights, nor created by the Father of Universal Lights, but are given and made by the Sun, and likewise raised up out of the power of the seed. As though a spiritual substance could be created by the power of a matter. For I esteem that thing to be retained in the Schooles among the sweepings or drosse of Heathenisme; but not without wronging the Divine Majesty: To whom all Filial or Son-like love is due. 
 CHAP. XXII. Magnum Oportet, that is, it is a thing of great necessity, or concernment. 1. The unconstancy of Paracelsus. 2. The birth of voluntary things by their generall kinds. 3. The disagreement of Archeusses. 4. Very many accidents do remain in a new generated thing. 5. Species are to be added to, or diminished by Oportet or necessity, contrary to Aristotle. 6. The errour of Paracelsus in Oportet it self. 7. Accidents do change their own proper formall objects. 8. A contrary perswasion hath hitherto overthrown natural Philosophy. 9. How the same accident doth wan∣der with the middle life of a thing. 10. From whence there are so many diversities of natures in a man. 11. That feigned whorish appetite of the matter. 12. A demonstration of the errour. 13. Whence the ne∣cessity of things, really, and principiatively, is. 14. The Schooles have not taught true Beginnings. 15. Some things are corrupted in the Air, but other things are preserved. 16. Whence the corruption of things is. 17. Corruption is onely of the matter. 18. What corruption is. 19. Cor∣ruption is not from privative things, contrary to Aristotle. 20. Car∣ruption and generation do not reciprocally succeed. 21. The unadvi∣sedness of the Schooles. 22. What Magnum Oportet may be. 23. The Earth, but not the Water shall bring forth Thistles and Briars. 24. What kinde of digestion there was before sin. 25. What is the misery of Thistles. 26. Odours and Savours are fundamentall Ferments. 27. The errour concerning the eight tasts. 28. The three lives, their flowings and eb∣bings thorow the three Monarchies of things. 29. Why Warts do pe∣rish through the touching of an Apple. 30. The foundation or ground of Sympathy. 31. The going backwards of life. 32. A threefold life of Mineralls. 33. Properties are in a place, and in the thing placed. 34. What the double nothing is, in the words; The Earth was empty, or without form, and void. 35. It is proved by the Handicraft-opera∣tion of a Flint, that Light is a Being without a shining light. 36. Per∣ceivings are in the Instruments of the Senses. 37. Which way the Mag∣nall is serviceable. 38. Who are the immediate Citizens of places. 39. The originall, and progress of Metalls. 40. A more manifest pro∣gress of life in Metals. 41. Whence Mineralls are of so great effi∣cacy. 42. The dignity of the Archeus before sin. 43. Which are the ambulatory or walking qualities. 44. That which the Schooles cry out to be impossible, is necessary in nature. 45. Whence that errour is. 46. Some absurdities following from thence. 47. A frivolous Maxim. 48. The blindnesses of the Schooles are to be pitied. 49. Why the ob∣jects of sight do more work in one that is with young. 50. Adeptists do walk through the objects of sight. 51. Some Speculations in the po∣sition of the appearances of Spirits. 52. The distinctions of qualities by modern Writers or Philosophers. 53. The occasions of Diseases. 54. The manner whereby a Hydrophobiaor a Disease causing the fear of water is made. 55. The same concerning other poysons. 56. The successive alterations of poysons. 57. The manner whereby poysons do work. 58. Considerations about the activity of poysons. 59. The blowing out or extinguishing of life, in what manner it happeneth. 
 SUrely I have thus at unawares fallen from the Elements into the birth of Forms, and there I have distinguished of a fourfold Form, diverse in kinde from each other. 
 1. To wit, an Essentiall Form. 
 2. A Vitall Form. 
 3. Next a substantiall Form. 
 4. And at length, the excellency of a formall Substance, I have added for the end or top of nature. For when I had explained my Doctrine concerning the Elements, I fell by degrees into the History of vitall things, and consequently also I perceived my self devol∣ved into the necessities of Diseases and death; indeed, that I might apply the beginnings of naturall Philosophy to the end of humane appointment: Therefore have I come to Mag∣num Oportet: To wit, I have come down to the flowings and ebbings of life, and so to the hidden calamity of death. Wherefore all our consideration of nature shall hereafter be∣come Medicinall. For truly, Paracelsus being not constant enough to himself, stumbled in the finding out of the cause of a Disease, in the mean and manner whereby every thing tends to a declining: (To the clearing up whereof, I have already taught before, that the fruits which antiquity hath believed to be a heap of Elements, are the off-springs of the one Ele∣ment of water, begotten with childe by the seed, which disposeth the water to generate in places, as it were in wombs: For wheresoever the water obtains an Odour, it straightway also conceiveth in that very moment, a Ferment, and after that a seed, in the begun disposition of the matter disposed by the Ferment: For truly most things are made for the sake of the Odour alone. For oft-times, the Root, stalk, pith, leaves, and History of a whole Plant, is born by reason of the flour of the Odour, or Odour of the flour, and the Odour is the ulti∣mate end of many particular kindes, as well in Plants that are for Sauces, as in those for Me∣dicines. Because out of Sand, or simple Earth, and Water, doth grow nothing at first, but a moyst filthiness or mouldiness, they contract a putrefaction through continuance, or Odours. For nothing putrifieth by continnance far under the Earth, neither doth a Plant grow in the Sand. But almost nigh the light or day, the Odour is putrified by continuance, and Leff as brings forth its Plants. If one part of mud or dung do putrifie in the Earth, it may beget the water with childe in a five fold weight of it self, and send forth fruit: For the water being void of all Odour, unless it shall conceive the Ferment of an Odour in its Sulphur, surely it remains in its antient simplicity, as Rain-water, without fruit. Therefore in the deep Pave∣ments of the Earth, where there is a departure far from filthiness, putrifying, and corruption, although there be no Leff as, yet the waters are got with Childe by a hidden Odour of the place; first of all, by an unconceivable contagion of a certain Salt, straightway they do hasten to the more wealthy Colonies of Fruits, and do break out. Indeed its own strange fermen∣taceous Odour dwells every where, which may get the Sulphur of the water with child, and sleeping within it, may at length grow together; As in Mineralls: Or being grown toge∣ther, and even over-spread with a thicker Air, may grow, as in Plants, and Creatures that bring for h Eggs: or wholly from the beginning, the form of the Air doth glister; Even as in things that bring forth a living off-spring. Therefore the Archeus being now conceived, remains every where the keeper of life, and the promoter of transmutations, and by and by, a change of his life doth follow the change thereof, to wit, from his first life and matter, into his last. For the Archeusses of things do agree in this; as being vitall, they do possess a cer∣tain Splendor: yet they differ, as they are unlike fore-runners, and Stewards of the Form. Yet they do not mutually receive each other, least their government be disturbed; but for order sake (which they do badly explain by the Title of self-love) he remains Master, who shall be the stronger: which way indeed they liberally dispense the Impressions of their Ferment, that one may restrain the forreign disquietnesses of his fellow Archeus, and may subdue him: For even as under the immortall minde, the subordinate forms of a bone, membrane, &amp;c. do not perish: So also it happens in the transmutations of things. Indeed, although the food doth by an every way transmutation, obtain the form of bloud; Yet this keeps no obscure accidents of the former food, which do therefore walk from one matter into ano∣ther. Surely this is a hard and Paradoxall saying in the Schooles: which I will presently prove by an example of the deed: Nigh the Mountain at Zome, a Hog, the Sea departing, is fed with Sea-Onions, shell-fishes, &amp;c. His flesh savours of the grease of a Fish, yet it is Hogs∣flesh, forbidden to the Hebrews. 
 Therefore it is vain, that the Species of things, are as it were the species of numbers, whereto, not a unite is added, or substracted, but the species it self is continually changed. For one onely flesh of a living Creature, doth receive strange savours through the variety of meats. Irish Oak doth so retain the properties of an Antidote, that it chaseth Spiders from our Buildings: which property, our Countrey Oak wanteth: For the passings over of accidents do not happen in meats, through want of a perfect and essential transmutation: Neither also doth Urine smell of Terpentine, Mace, or Asparagus, as some excrementitious part of the meat may remain with the bloud in the flesh: For that lesse resisteth a perfect transmutation, separation, and election in things due to the Archeus, in whom, to wit, there is perfectly a transmutative, dispositive power of the matter into figures, Odours, Colours, and every pro∣perty of accidents. 
 For Paracelsus hath now and then made mention of a middle life, and matter; but he hath not owned himself in the greatest necessity, whereby he dreamed of Tartarous hu∣mours: For he had seemed to secure the matter to himself by the example of living Tartar, if he had obliquely or by the way immingled a co-like Tartar in meates and drinks, to the finding out of the matter, and originall of Diseases, not yet discovered before. For neither hath he explained, from whence it is, that notable favours do survive after the true transmutations of meates. 
 Wherefore it must needs be, that the same accident in number doth passe from its subject, that it is (I say) in the formall transchanged thing, which was first in the thing to be trans∣changed, although the form of the subject of inherency shall fully perish. Because although the matter doth not remain, yet the middle life remains, of which nothing hath hitherto been heard in the Schooles. Indeed the middle life remains in the transchanged Archeus, no other∣wise than the form of a bone, a man being dead. 
 For although there be a fermentall virtue in the stomach which resolveth things carried into it, and afterwards, the same things be perfectly transchanged in the other shops or places of digestion: yet so, that nothing can be so perfectly transchanged in us by assimilating or making like, through the immediate flowing of digestions, as that there do not remain for the future, the more dull qualities of the middle life of the former composed Body. 
 By which necessity indeed, the accustomed nourishment of divers Climates doth im∣print into the sound parts, very strange or forreign contagions of properties. Whence do happen, so many unlikenesses of deformities of one humane nature: the which surely, I could never dedicate to the vain complexions of qualities. Indeed Swines flesh is Swines flesh, al∣though the horrid taste of Fish-grease shall remain in its middle life. Which thing being ne∣ver before considered, hath made the whole contemplation of nature, barren. For truly this hinge hath been neglected in the Schooles. For Oportet is a thing altogether necessary, where∣by the qualities of the middle life do remain in things that are transchanged: For unless that be granted, there shall be no power of Medicines, as neither occasion of Diseases: For no∣thing doth more prosperously operate to heal, than that which hath most fully entred by the transmutation of it self, and is neerest united to that which ought to be healed. So a grain dies in the Earth, that by its middle life, it may stir up new off-springs for usury. Also in meats, although the former forms of meates have wholly perished; yet the operative pro∣perties of the former middle life have remained; and that into the second, and now and then the third transmutation of the thing generated. For the native property of the middle life sailing by degrees, under the dominion of the Archeus ascending, to wit, of whose Fer∣ment it is the subdued matter: 
 That indeed is Magnum Oportet in this Valley of successive changes; but it is not the whorish appetite of an impossible matter: For Aristotle feigned a matter deprived of e∣very accident, as also of all essential Forms, and he appointed this Chymera to himself for the Beginning of nature: And so he constituted for a material principle, not indeed a natu∣rall Being existing in act, or possible in power; but a Mathematicall corporality or bodili∣ness; but not [this something] or a principiating Beginning: For he thought that nature was at an imaginary pleasure, to hearken to figures, and measures. In the mean time, that that matter might be principiating, he feigned that a certain motive principle did agree or belong to it, to wit, a universall appetite unto any forms unknown to it self: Which Dreams, al∣though they are ridiculous, agreeable to no end, use, or necessity, and bringing forth many absurdities from them; yet are they at this day adored by the Schooles, who have made themselves ridiculous thereby: Seeing there can be no appetite of that corporiety, breath∣ing to any perfection which it had not before in it self: To wit, that it may be capable of forms, and figures. 
 For otherwise, in the consideration of nature, and indeed in a principiating Being, every appetite of a Being is carried to perfection; not any one, but that of the seed fore-existing in the disposition of the ferments, and so also operating: But a seed doth not aspire but to the limitation delineated or represented in the disposition of the Archeus. For truly as learning by demonstration doth propose to it self a Body capable of all figures without any accident; So Aristotle hath brought this Speculation according to his pleasure, into nature, unknown to him, and hath introduced an appetite into this matter, the lover, and one onely cause of suc∣cessive change: Even so that he reckoned the first matter to be void of all quality and form; but endowed or given up to all and any forms, onely by a whorish appetite: Not knowing in the first place, that successive change doth proceed not from the appetite of the matter, but from the instruction of the seeds. Neither have the Schooles once looked back, that the desire of remaining is more antient, strong, and naturall than the desire of permutability or much changeableness; and that the Schooles themselves do contradict their own Aristotle, who will have every Being to desire to remain from the proper endeavour of nature: Seeing it is of necessity a Being, before it can think of a change, or wish for it. Therefore the matter ought to have obtained to be perfect, before it should disdain to be old, and should desire a successive change. For to be, is before, to please; and to please, is before, to displease; and nothing can displease, or wish for a successive change, but as a pleasure being gotten and known, something more perfect, possibly also better, is shewen. For in the more crude seeds which nave conceived their first ferments by Odours, the Odour goes before the compla∣cency or good pleasure; but this doth generate a desire of it self, and of a thing remaining: But in things possible, desire causeth the same appetite of remaining, but not of perishing, by the changing of its Being. But if indeed by reason of the hidden impediments of death, a permanency is not granted; there is made a dissolution in Bodies, but thence a weariness: but from weariness there is a proceeding to a remove or change through the ruling virtue by degrees declining, from whence at length destruction is not intended, but following after through necessities. It belonged to the Schooles to have known, that to be, doth alwayes go before a wearisomness unto a non-being: because this wearisomness is not of the intent of nature, but rather an imaginary Metaphor or translation succeeding upon the defects of things: At least, that this wearisomness ought to precede the desire to a non-being: And much more a desire to a new Being, and unknown to it self; Seeing a new Being is not granted before the death of the present Being. In brief, because also the wearinesses of the displacency of the appetite do but dreamingly agree to a non-being: And at length, because from dreaming principles so absurd, nothing is to be exspected besides errours full of con∣fusion. 
 Therefore successive change in nature, is not from the desire of the matter, but from the power of the efficient Vulcan: Wherein the Odour and Savour of the middle life: do gene∣rate a seminall Image, the beginning of transmutation: For neither are the Schooles as yet constant enough to themselves in that appetite of the matter; yea the Schooles do not seem to have taught the speculative principles of nature for the service of the truth. For truly, when they descend to the things themselves, they do no more blame the appetite of the matter for the corruption of a thing; but they blame the Air as the effecter of all corruptions whatsoe∣ver: But I know that many things are dried under Air, which otherwise, under the Earth, or water, do putrifie presently. 
 For truly, Glasse the last of things putrefiable, doth in the Air: main as it were for ever: But being buried, after some years it admits of a putrifying through continuance, is covered or enrowled with a Crust; its Salt being dissolved, it decayes, and its constitutive Sand re∣maineth. The Air is a Case, in whose porosities some things do dispose themselves into suc∣cessive alterations, some things under the water, and many things also under the Earth, ac∣cording to the dispositions of the seeds.
For truly, those things which do spinkle from themselves an Odour, do loose the same by the flowing and snatching wind; or the Vessel being close shut, they do retain the same with∣in: For if the former, the pores of Bodies being afterwards empty, they do receive Air; which being there enclosed, doth putrifie through continuance, with the odourable thing, whence the residue of the Odour doth receive a ferment, doth draw a warerish filthiness from the said putrefaction by continuance, and becomes rank, or muckie: But if the latter comes to passe, then the Air there detained doth cause the composed Body, to putrifie by continu∣ance, and brings it to corruption, unless the odourable Body hath the properties of a Balsam: because a new ferment thinks of a successive change. Volatile, or exhalable and swift flying things do easily decay (because for the most part, they have a diversity of kindes, through want whereof, distilled things are scarce corrupted) one whereof doth ferment or leaven an∣other, from their true Element they are even choaked, and do putrifie through continuance, or do conceive an air as before. Therefore the ferment changeth the thing, as it alters its Odour according to the essence of the matter imprinting of the Vessel of the place, or of the thing adjoyned: which things I prove by this Handicraft-operation: For truly, I do pre∣serve the broaths of fleshes, of Fruits, even as also any boyled things, (otherwise soon subject to corrupt) for years, from corruption, so that I shall poure a balsamicall ferment into the Air, and that ferment being continued, I shall restrain it. 
 With me therefore, corruption is thus, as I have said: Forms are never corrupted: they die indeed, onely the minde of man departeth safe, but all other forms do perish: But matter neither departeth nor dieth; but is corrupted: And so, corruption is onely of the matter. Therefore corruption is a certain disposition of the matter, left behinde by the ru∣ling Vulcan decaying. 
 For as the Body saileth its Ruler or Pilots being in good health, it being safe doth not hearken unto strange ferments. 
 Neither is corruption therefore to be numbred among privative things, if it consist of po∣sitive causes: Wherefore another Beginning of Aristotle in nature falls to the ground: For truly the Archeus is not of his own accord taken away, dispersed, changed, or estranged, un∣less by a new one troubling him under another ferment. Therefore strange ferments are chief over all corruptions, and by the interchangeable courses of ferments all corruption begins, doth by little and little ascend unto a degree and pitch, and at length having obtained its period, is terminated: For there are some things in whom the proper lust of their seeds is wanton, and calls them away from the tenour of constancy, to undergo the transmutations of successive changes, not indeed by reason of a desire to another form; but because the im∣planted Balsam of nature is easily blown away, and perisheth; as are fleshes, and Fishes: But others do change their Wedlock, not without a putrifying being first stirred up, and do put on the careful governments of new seeds: As are Woods, Stones, and Glasse which is most constant in fire: Among which, they do interpose in a middle degree, for whom the touchings of the place do cover their Superficies with a hoary putrefaction or mouldiness: From whence Odours being dispersed, they do disjoyn the Wedlocks of the antient seeds, and meditate of a new Generation by dissolving. It is a mark naturall or proper to the Air, uncessantly to seperate the waters from the waters; and there are many things which do not endure such a successive alteration without a spot or corruption; hence therefore they do most immedi∣ately slide into a sudden disorder: Therefore corruption, as it includes an extinguishing of the naturall Balsam; so the constancy of a thing desires its continuance: for in such things whose Balsam doth voluntarily flow forth or expire, it being joyned to fixed things, they are seasoned therewith, it sticks fast, is restrained by the bolts of dryness, or at leastwise is nourish∣ed by a predominating ferment that is no stranger to the disposition of a Balsam: For so, sweet things, smoak, Salt, Pepper, Aqua vitae, Vinegar, distilled Oils, do preserve fleshes. But at leastwise about the end of life, there is on every side a great confusion of the thing, and a large losse of strength: So that seeds serving to the lower conjunction, do oft-times die to∣gether, from whence the chief assisting Vulcans of things being as it were sore affrighted with fear, and as mercenaries, do first run away. 
 Therefore although corruption doth induce a transmutation, with the death of another thing, it is not a privation, neither doth it therefore necessarily follow generation, as neither this, it: Even as those things which exclude each other by a succeeding presence, as other∣wise, light and darkness do. First of all, our death subsisteth without the failing of the form, without a necessitated destruction of the matter, if the Mummy doth continue; although it in∣cludes a seperation of the life or form: For that doth not shew corruption to be present, al∣though it doth straightway follow of its own accord, and be preserved by art: At leastwise it sufficeth, that corruption is not made the immediate heir of the thing constituted, nor that it necessarily succeeds from its dying without a will. So neither, when a thing proceeds out of a seed, not any corruption of the seeds doth go before, or accompany it: For it is an incon∣gruity in word and deed, that the promotions, perfections, and maturities of seeds have re∣garded corruption. An errour of rashness is maintained in the Schooles, through ignorance of naturall principles: As that those things which are the works of nature, are thought to be non-beings, to be banished into the abstracted considerations of Learning by demon∣stration. 
 Truly when Aristotle was connived at, to put (by a large word) Privation between a Being and a Being, he began by taking a liberty, to substitute corruption in the room of privation. For that privation, as it was not a Being, and so a dreamed Being of reason, it was yielded to by a liberty transumptive or of taking one thing for another, without taking heed. But the Schooles had understood that the same right ought not therefore to agree to corruption, if their sluggishness of assenting could have suffered them to be distinct. Wherefore the whole Stage of nature hath stood neglected through the thoughts of the Gentiles: For truly, the ferments, Vulcans, and flowings of seeds being neglected, all the efficacy of Nature hath through the undeserved orders of privations, been wrung aside into the fables of heats and colds, their discords, hatreds, skirmishings, and contrarieties, and have made the searching into naturall Philosophy ridiculous. 
 Moreover, I have called Magnum Oportet, A necessary remaining of the properties of the middle life, in the thing nourished and constituted. From whence it followes, that the same remainder of the middle life, from meats and drinks, are the Thistles and Thorns which the Earth was to bring forth after the fall, or departure out of the right way: otherwise, Thistles &amp; Thorns, as they are Plants, are Creatures, made for the use and adorning of the World before the fall. I have also sometimes vainly thought, that the tartarous humours of meats and drinks were those Thistles and Thorns: Because the middle life subsisting (but it subsisteth by a reall and true act) it was in vain, to feign forreign Tartarers, as shall be shewen in its place. 
 But observingly, it is not included, that the water shall bring forth Thistles and Thorns, al∣though it may bring forth its discommodities: For the fleshes of men, and bruits living on the Earth, do shew forth the aforesaid Thistles. But Fishes are nourished within and with∣out, and are washed thorowly with Salt, yet are their fleshes sweet: But those which inha∣bit in mud, do express the Thistles in the savour of their fleshes, not from Water, but from Earth. Before sin, our Archeus had not only perfectly transchanged meats after a daily manner; but had supt up the whole properties of the middle life into his own rule or jurisdiction, as if he were their Master. For truly, the immortall minde being then as yet, without the mean of the sensitive life, was the very immortall life it self unto, and not capable of suffer∣ing by its own Body: Even as touching long life, in its place: For Paradise, in this respect, had excluded death, because it had excluded a successive change of us: But the Tree of knowledge of good and evill alone, had retained a property to it self, that it could imprint, to wit, the dualities or double properties drawn out of things on our Archeus; because the Companions of the middle life do easily adhere to each other: Whence a Gate was laid open to duplicities, interchangeable courses, successive change, and disorder. At length jarring, the breaker of agreement, thus brought in the apple of discord. 
 For we afterwards feel the perpetuall Tyranny and multiplicity of Thistles and Thorns. For as many specifical Savours and Odours as there are in things: so many forreign proper∣ties of the middle life are suggested daily by nourishments: For these are the strange fer∣ments, by whose interchangeable course we are wearied or much troubled: For truly no ge∣neration doth any where happen, which a foregoing disposition in the matter hath not stirred up: therefore such a ferment alters the inbred Savour and Smell of things, whence the Ar∣cheusses are by little and little withdrawn from the obedience of the seeds, and do hearken to the mockeries or enticements of a forreign ferment. In brief, the remainders of the powers of the middle life, as well in nourishments, as excrements, are almost the occasionall Begin∣ning of all sicknesses, and in this respect to us, of the Thistle and Thorn. 
 For Odours and Savours do bring forth a desire, a dislike, or a neutrality in the Bodies of seeds: But an appetite being thus moved, doth paint an Image in the Archeus, no other∣wise than in the Young of one with childe: which Image is the invisible essence of seeds, stirring up to embrace, or abhorre: But the neutrall Odour serveth for station and rest. 
 If therefore in the middle life, Savours do as yet remain in things transchanged: it is fri∣volous, that things shall weigh their vertues, and essences by eight material, and not specifical tasts. Furthermore, seeing it is called the middle life, in respect of two extreames: 
 The first shall be of the received and working seed seated in the Archeus, he being en∣dowed with a power of managing things: Which, when it hath obtained some maturity, as when the seed is a Body, having flesh, and tender bones, according to the requirance of the Species; then is the middle life of a thing present: For it is meet to measure the life it self by the Archeus, as it were the Mediator, the Instrument of life. Therefore the first life doth glister in the seeds, but in the Embryo or imperfect young, the middle life: But the last life is, when the total perfection of the constituted thing is present: which indeed, although it be the last life of the thing, yet is it the middle life of the Archeus, if the first life of the thing doth begin with the last life of the seeds: For in Herbs, although seeds may seem to begin their life when they swell, and chap; yet they do then rather die in the last life of them∣selves, that they may bud in the first life of the thing that is to be constituted. 
 Therefore the first life of the fruit is the last of the seed. In the middle life, Herbs, Roots, and stalks do grow or increase: but Floures, and Fruits do threaten a period to the last life: To wit, this life must needs die in things, if profit be to be hoped for from nourishment, and Medicine. Medicines hanged about the neck, or head, and what things do act by the force of rule or government (of which sometimes) I except. Indeed the last lives of things ought to go backwards, that the thing in the juyce, which the Archeus from the beginning, married, may unfold its vertues, to wit, by laying aside the Title and property of the last life, that it may rise again to a middle one: Which death, is not an exstinguishing, and a true death of the thing; but rather a transmutation: which shall presently appear in an Apple. For grain is eaten: Truly at that very moment, the last life of the grain dieth within, is reduced into its own life, the which our Archeus coming upon, over-shadoweth, and bringeth the middle life into its first life, by transumption or translating it, but the remaining properties of the for∣mer grain being dulled. In the death of the grain, or the last life of the seed, the first life of a new Creature ariseth together with it. To be brief: as oft as the Archeus of a thing is trans∣planted under a strange guide, so oft is there a changing of life made from the last to the first Being: which first Being is translated into a new life of the thing, and a middle life of the Ar∣cheus the Conquerour, onely the blunted property of the middle life remaining, whereby the going backward is made. 
 Let an Apple be cut asunder, whose inward pulp let it be rubbed on Warts untill it shall be luke-warm, and the half pieces being tied fast by a thred, untill the Apple shall putrifie: for then thou shalt see that the touched Warts have dispersed: For as soon as the last life of the Apple perisheth, unto which the impression of the Warts was glewed, the last life of the Warts perisheth, by going backward through the middle life: For here words, faith or con∣fidence are not required: because, if that Apple be eaten by a Sow, or a Mouse, the Warts perish not: For that, the Stomach doth as it were preserve the last life of the Apple, in the going backwards of the middle life, which the Archeus taketh to himself: But in the death, and extinguishing of the last life of the Apple by putrefaction, there is not a preserving, nor a going backwards into the middle life: And so with the death and extinguishing of the last life of the Apple, the absent Warts do perish together with it, by a Sympatheticall action of government: for the resembling mark of Sympathy is seated in this thing; Because the pulp of the Apple which cloathes the Kernel, is as it were the Mushrome of its own branch, no otherwise than as Warts are the Mushromes of their own flesh. Therefore the impression of the Warts being translated into, and sealed on the co-resembling fruit, together with the death of the last life of the Apple, the Seal dieth, and that whereof it is the Seal: For by no lesse reason, doth an eflux bear a co-resemblance with its own body from whence it was ta∣ken, than a Tune or note doth with its own musicall Instrument, not so nigh at hand placed: For in a Unisone or one and the same sound, it manifestly leaps and triumphs for joy on a ring being hanged or laid on the string of the Instrument; but in other notes, although far greater, and otherwise higher ones, it is quiet: For where the sense of a little leaping is be∣held, there is also a possible sense or feeling both of gladness, and of sorrow, and of death. Therefore it hath seemed to me to be void of Superstition, if the Wart consume through a natural sense of sorrow, a sense of its own Eflux being imprinted in the death of its last life; And so much the rather, because the Apple is as it were the Mushrome of the primary inten∣tion of nature, and of a more strong effect; but the Wart is not of a primary intention, nei∣ther hath it a Root in the whole Archeus: For the death of the Apple doth not intervene, if it be eaten by a Dormouse, as neither a death of the added impression; because the middle life is preserved, being transplanted under the preserved Archeus of the Apple, into the Archeus of the living Creature. Wherefore, although the Schooles have made mention of one onely corruption in generall; yet there are divers destructions: For some things do return from the last life into the first; but others there are, which go back unto the middle life: but those things which go not back unto any life, do expect the last resolution of themselves, that they may passe over into a new seminall generation; but they rise again by their first life, at the coming of a new seed out of a Ferment putrifying by continuance. Of this sort, are those things which perish by the poyson of life, or by the death of the fire: For so, an Apple putri∣fied of its own accord, and any dead Carcases, do either wax Herby with the juyce Leffas, or do first breed worms. 
 At length, Mineralls also do shew three lives by a distinct order. It is thus: Mineralls in∣deed, have not a seed, with the Image of their Predecessor, after the manner of soulified things; which thing notwithstanding, hath deceived many, a proportionable or resembling flux of seeds being not rightly well weighed: For Mineralls are tied to their constitutive causes no lesse than other things; and so do proceed from a necessity and flowing of their own seeds: And therefore they cannot want a threefold difference of a seminall life: For whatsoever doth proceed without a Father, unto [this something] (as do Mineralls) it findes its seed in the Inne of places: Wherefore some things are immediately in place, but other things in the Body placed. 
 The winde indeed doth uncessantly flow in a place; yet its property is in some places sta∣ble: there are certain windes, and stated Tempests in Provinces: which things I attribute to the place, not to the Air, or the unstable waters. Therefore God hath endowed, not one∣ly Bodies with Virtues; but also places he hath immediately replenished with an incom∣prehensible Treasure of seeds, to endure to the end of the World: For he hath loaden pla∣ces with riches, to come forth to light in a set maturity of dayes, and to put on the garment of water: For the Earth was at first without form or empty, and void; to wit, after a two∣fold manner without form; because it was spoiled of naturall endowed vertues, as well in its own body, as in the places of its retirances: which thou shalt thus behold. For although the Air do flow under the Blas of the windes; yet light (because it is immediately in place, and mediately in the Air) remaineth stable: For if light may be thought to flow together with the Air, even at every instant in the flowing of the Air, light should be generated anew. 
 Thou mayst know that the light is in very deed, a Being without a shining light: For I keep a Flint in my possession, which if I shall expose to the Air (the Sun existing above the Hori∣zon) for the space of three or four pauses at least (neither also is it materiall, whether the day shall be clear or clowdy) and from thence shall bring it into a dark place, it keepeth the conceived light of the Sun, perhaps for some such like space: And that is done as oft as the aforesaid enlightning is repeated: And so from hence it is manifest, that light is a Being sub∣sisting immediately in place, nor having another Being of inherency (besides the placed es∣sence of it self) seperable from a shining Creature: And so, if it depart from the Air into a stone, that it might also passe from the Air into the next Air, if its immediate existence were in the Air, and not in place: For truly it is alike to light, to wander out of place (its im∣mediate subject) into the Air, or into the Flint: in that is only the difference; that the essence of light doth not subsist in the Air besides the continuall warmth or nourishing of shining, as neither doth the flame without a combustible smoak: But if it hath the Flint a fit retaining place for it self (as it comes to passe when fire possesseth Iron) it remaineth therein for some time. For hence it comes to passe, that the sight doth at one instant perceive its object, because as well light, as colour is immediately in place; but in the Body of the Mean, as it were by accident, and secondarily. 
 For seeing place is its subject, it findes not resistance in transparent placed Bodies, but in one onely moment light is shaken from the eight Sphear, even on the Earth: But Sound, or the object of hearing, is immediately in the Case of the Mean, and walketh without the flow∣ing of the Air, from subject into subject: Although the Schooles in this thing are made half deaf. But an Odour or smell is not dispersed without that which is odourable, which is the Gas of a thing, which is dispersed thorow the emptinesses or Magnall of the Air. 
 And the Magnall is a Case or Sheath, wherein every Gas is reduced into its first matter of water. Therefore, not onely lights and colours do inhabit in places, as it were immediate guests: but Ferments, Reasons; and therefore they are placed by the Creator the Word, that they may be the Roots of successive seeds even to the end of the VVorld. Therefore Mi∣neralls are not promiscuous every where; but certain Mineralls in set years, and places: For Suevia is as rich in Copper, as Cyprus in times past could be: Therefore cold is guilt∣less, as heat is vain, to the constitutions of their seeds: For places which have wanted Mines in times past, will at sometime in their day, their seed being ripe, restore Usuries not unlike to the more rich ones; because the Roots or Ferments of Mineralls, do sit immediately in place, and do breath without disdain, for fulness of dayes: The which, when it hath com∣pleated a seed, then the Gas environing the water in the same place, receiveth a seed from the place, which afterwards begets the Sulphur of the water with childe, condenseth the wa∣ter, and by degrees transplants it into a Minerall water. For it oft-times happeneth, that a digger of Metalls in Mines breaking great Stones asunder, the Wall cleaves or gapes, and af∣fords a chink, from whence a small quantity of water of a whitish-green colour hath sprung, which hath presently grown together like to liquid Sope, (I call it Bur) and afterwards its greenish paleness being changed, it waxeth yellow, or growes white, or becomes more fully green: For thus that is seen, which else without the wound of the stone, comes to passe within: because that juyce is perfected by an inward efficient. Therefore the first life of a metallick seed, is in the Buttery or Cellar of the place, plainly unknown to man. But when as the seed comes forth to light cloathed with a Liquor, and Gas hath begun to defile the Sulphur of the water, there is the middle life of the seed: But the last life is when it now waxeth hard: But the last life of the metallick seed, is the first life of the Metalls, or at least∣wise very nearly conjoyned to it. But while that Masse doth breath Sulphur, and shuts up its Mercury within; then I say, is the middle life of Metalls: But their last life is, when it hath attained a fixedness, and the proper stability of a vein. 
 Wherefore there is a more manifest progress of a life, and seed in Metallick Bodies, than in the two fellow Monarchies: For that Metalls do not require a figure, nor their whole Bo∣dy so exquisite or exact: yea if the Image of seeds in things that have life, do flow forth from their own Father or begetter; surely the typicall Images of Mineralls are to be fetched from the Cellers or Store-houses of divine Bounty.
Hence also the seeds of Mineralls are not defiled with the filthiness and wantonness of their begetters; nor therefore do they offer themselves as monstrous: But because they are undefiled, therefore they are of famous power in healing. Mineralls therefore are to be spoil∣ed of the possession of their last life, no more than other things, if we do expect obedience from them in healing: Else they will bring a feeble help, and will bewail that they have come in vain, because they have attained the ends of their appointments; but are directed for the leaders of whoredoms and Riots. I will repeat what I have said above in Eden: our Archeus was able fully to subdue all the Archeusses as well of poysons as nourishments, into his own in∣crease, without any weariness of himself, or re-acting of the same poysons, or nourishments: To wit, he could take away every impression of the middle life, and overcome it without difficulty: For the Archeus was immediately governed by the immortall Soul, and so also therefore was not capable of suffering: For God not onely made not death in Paradise; but moreover, neither was there created a Medicine of destruction (that is a poyson) for man, in the Earth: But man being straightway cast out into the Earth, this Earth clasped Thistles and Thorns: that is, although our Archeus being Conquerour, doth subdue the Archeusses of meats to himself; yet the surviving Reliques of strange properties do remain. For the last life indeed of meates, departeth, the middle life surviving: Wherefore the more weak stomach, feels a greater load or grief about the end of digestion, than presently after food; as if the Archeus were mindefull of his antient lost dignity. Therefore I call these surviving qualities of the middle life, ambulatory or walking ones. And so that which the Schooles do cry out of as impossible, is a common and necessary journey in nature: as though it should be necessary for the matter of generation to be wholly stripped of every accident of its former essence, nor that it could overcome fore-going dispositions; and as if corruption or privation should precede every generation: And so that it should be of necessity for a first matter, or summary hyle, to be actually underlaid, and immediately to go before generation, which notwithstanding, they will have to happen in an instant: For unless previous dispositions, and the ferments of those to be generated, should fore-exist in being made, any thing might in∣differently be generated of any thing: when as the authority of principles being badly un∣derstood, hath forced the Schooles against this Rock, they thinking that all accidents do im∣mediately and originally depend on the totall Form of a thing: As though the form coming to it in the point of generation, should have all the characters of its seed in it self, and had in∣fused them before it were: But if the dispositive properties are sent into the Archeus by the form of the generater, at leastwise they differ in the whole individual of the thing supposed, neither shall they have respect unto the form of the thing generated. The Schooles have neglected the perfect act of the seeds, and the Archeus; as also the actualities of subordi∣nate forms: And they have not known, that from the beginning of generation, even unto the voluntary end of the thing generated, there is not but the flux of one seed, not at all reach∣ing to the forms of things generated. Therefore the powers of seeds arising unto vitality or liveliness, and the lives or forms of the living thing underlaid, are concealed in the middle life of the Archeus: Therefore the properties of the middle life do passe with the trans∣changing Archeus of meats, and are transplanted into the jurisdiction of the humane Archeus, yet much more dull than themselves. Therefore it is frivolous, that there is no accident in the ing begotten, which was first in the seed (which they do badly call corrupt.) Like∣wise also, that from the form of a thing is all the off-spring of accidents: For so, from the univocall, simple, and homogeneall immortall minde, should so many properties and inclina∣tions of men badly be fetched: But if thou shalt adjoyn the Stars to the minde, these will soon forsake thee: And the far-fetcht aid doth faint in the journey, and faileth before its striking upon it. It should also go ill with the seeds, if from the form of a vitall thing, which onely comes to it afterwards, every property and efficacy of seeds were to be borrowed. Therefore the opinion of the Schooles brings a disagreement; that generation doth presup∣pose corruption, and this likewise, it. Otherwise, if the middle power consisteth in the totall form, and last life of the thing; Surely Physitians deceive or blinde the eyes of the sick, when as the vitall form being withdrawn out of Plants and living Creatures, they make use of these for the refreshment of the diseased. They see indeed, that oft-times in the Urine of a suck∣ing Childe, the Odours of the things which the Nurse hath taken, do subsist: to wit, Oil of Anniseed, Mace, &amp;c. That which the Nurse hath took, casts a smell in the Urine of the suck∣ing Childe; and so they are drunk down by the Nurse to that end: yet they forbid the same accidents to remain safe in the thing born or begotten, which was before in the thing corrupt∣ed: Notwithstanding, that rather in every naturall point of motion and alteration, or between one and another instant, all accidents are renewed. Indeed the Schooles had rather that the light from the Firmament even to the Earth, should in every instant of places, and motions, actually produce infinite kindes of light, propagating each other by a continuall thred in eve∣ry Mathematicall point of a Mean, than to grant that light is immediately brought through a place by the shaking of its beam: They had rather I say, that the smell of Asparagus should spring from the specificall form of the Urine, than from the middle life: For they have not known any Being but a Substance and an accident, nor a light subsisting, but immediately within the substance of a mean. Neither do they observe that they acknowledge an equivo∣call or double generation of accidents, while they acknowledge one to be sprung from an ac∣cident, but another from the specificall form. 
 But there are Reasons, why the objects of sight do more strongly move the Imagination of Women with young, then the objects of the other Senses that are more corporeal. The first is, because a visible object is in place immediately, and so doth more affect, and reach∣eth nearer, and pierceth the Soul, by reason of the alike manner of existing: To wit, they reach to one another by an intimate touching. 2. The other Senses do readily serve the sight: To wit, a Woman with childe seeing a Salmon, is carried into a desire of eating: For then what∣soever she shall take, affords her indeed actually the taste of Salmon, and the taste serves the sight as its Master: but it falling down into the stomach, nor she having Salmon really in a visible object, she perceiveth her deceit which her appetite causeth unto her; and therefore she hath a loathing, and the Woman is weakened, trembling or panting at the heart: For the appetite feigneth the taste of Salmon, but the womb is angry at the deceit; but it cannot trans∣form the meat into Salmon, Yea, although she shall eat of another Fish, and there is an ea∣sie passage in things that have a co-resemblance; yet she cannot thereby form the longed for Salmon, because it is the object of taste, but not of sight: Whereas otherwise, suddenly by the object Salmon, or Duck, she easily transchangeth her Young into such a Monster: For the objects of taste sitting immediately in some body, cannot by reason of their corporeal thick∣ness, form a tranchangeative Image. 
 Therefore they who study in Adepticall things, do strive to promote their labour of wis∣dom by the objects of sight, and indeed by the light of the Moon; That indeed the Soul may be touched by a formall light, and night unto night may shew knowledge. As touching the Young, surely I consider it as a forreign branch implanted in the stock of a Tree, which although it be nourished by its Mothers Liquor, yet it liveth presently within, in its own proper quarter: For neither is it within as an entire part; but as it were an entertained Soul∣dier, it snatcheth all things into its pleasure or desire, and enlargeth the Vessel it self for its own command or government. But I consider the Womb as an empty house, posses∣sed and enlarged by a stranger: whereinto therefore, Pictures do more easily fall, than into it being exactly shut. 3. The object of sight is more spiritual, and therefore its Image more na∣ked, spirituall, and more active. A fourth reason is; the Father of Lights in this thing, doth by a similitude manifest, that in thinking only of the light, he created all things of nothing: I say, he brought forth the particular kindes of things into a created essence, which he from eternity comprehended in himself, onely by cogitation or thinking. So also the imagination of the lust of Souls, by the object of sight, poures forth its own Image into seeds, that so they might be fruit∣full from the command of God. 
 It might here be said, how may the apparitions of Spirits be made immediately in place, colour, figure, and light, but not in a Body; and by consequence, why may they be seen by one, and not by another that is nearer. By what way may Lights and Colours cut thorow each other in place, the existence of every one being nevertheless unchanged; after what sort may they pierce each other, and deceive the Rules of the Optick Science: that is, how may a be∣witching or charm be made: How may a Colour have a dark splendor, invisible in the middle or Mean, visible in the repercussing or re-bounding bound: although that brightness be no less in the mean, than in the said bound or terme, nor in any beam, but in a direct one onely. But these things I leave to others, under the positions by me framed I rather treat of naturall Sci∣ence. Modern Writers have distinguished of qualities by their Ranks or Orders: to wit, that the first might shew forth the Elementary countenance of heat, cold, moysture and dryness, (of which two latter I have demonstrated my judgement elsewhere:) But that the second qualities might contain light, heavy, soft, hard, rough, smooth, brickle, tough, white, black: And likewise Odours, and Savours, as sweet, bitter, salt, sharp, breachy, soure; because they think they are those which do most nearly rebound from the mixture of the Elements: which is false, seeing the Elements were never mixed: therefore the aforesaid qualities do follow as it were the formall Beginnings of seeds, their own gifts, and have themselves by way of a fermentall putrefaction by continuance: as appeares in the particular kindes of Mushromes. And then, the third qualities, they call specificall and formall ones, and they have as yet ad∣ded to those, fourth qualities, as the more abstracted ones. Therefore the third quality is a special aromaticall savour in Cinamon, Saffron, Cloves, &amp;c. keeping every one to its own Species. The fourth therefore are more formall, and more remote from the Body; such as is a poysonous quality in poysons, a solutive one in laxative or loosening things, an attractive one of Iron in the Loadstone, a productive quality of milk in Fennel, &amp;c. The three former sorts at least, do operate corporeally by vertue of the seeds, as they have espoused the mat∣ter to themselves: But the two latter are plainly formall ones, and do act by a lightsome, and an abstracted power tied fast to their composed Body, and therefore they have a power to imprint their actions on vitall forms. Indeed the three former do scarce pierce other Bo∣dies, and much lesse are they co-mingled with them radically: And therefore they are trans∣changed by our Archeus; So that although they may as yet carry with them from their be∣ing transchanged, an obscure property of their middle life; yet they are subdued into our protection, and are made our Citizens: Although many things at the time of their transchang∣ing, do remarkably disagree with the Archeus, because they have an untamed valour, and o∣ther incapacities, I say, dregs and impediments: To with, they are incorporated in us with a mark of their own middle life, which they difficultly put off; yet are they subdued: But if not, they are rejected, after their own Contagion is left in us: And therefore they degenerate into dregs or filths, the occasions of Diseases: whereby the Archeus being divers wayes troubled, and wroth, doth afterwards form Diseases. But formall, and wholly abstracted pro∣perties do spring out of the forms, and are lightsome, and therefore also being sparks of the form it self, have a force of piercing the Archeus throughout the whole light thereof, likewise the life, and forms of the parts. 
 Therefore I long agoe thought, whether the biting of a mad Dog might bring down a cer∣tain Signall phantasie which might convert ours being as it were its patient or sufferer, into it self, and might form unto it self a proper lightsome property, the effectress of an Hydro∣phobia or a disease wherein water is exceedingly feared; or whether our Archeus might frame a poysonsome Image of his own proper accord? But at length, that dispute seemed to me to be onely about a name: Because I found in these kinde of lightsome acti∣ons, a co-knitting of unity in a point, to wit, of the occasionall cause, and of our efficient Ar∣cheus; for that they do pierce each other after the manner of lights, and do radically unite without any other distinction than that of relative termes. 
 That which is now judged concerning the outward poyson of a mad Dog, let the same judgement be of a Cancer, and other things: For a formall poysonsome light being budded in our life, is it self living; and so, even as the Archeus being mad, doth fermentally receive an externall infection; so also in a Cancer, he wandring, transplants himself into suries, where∣by he locally troubleth or vexeth the flesh: For whether they are carried inwards by an ex∣ternall chance, or indeed be raised up within, and so thus far, do in some sort differ as to their principiative Beginning; yet in the mean time (notwithstanding) it is the same, by ap∣plication of the poysonsome light, the manner of propagating and piercing being kept ac∣cording to the properties of the seeds, and also, the Sphere of activity proper to every poy∣son being kept: For some poysons do suddenly propagate themselves into the whole Body, and do straightway bring on death; but others do exercise a locall poyson, because the pro∣perty of these is, that although from the nature of poyson, it pierceth; yet it enlargeth it self onely according to the prescription of its own poyson. This is indeed an immediate acting of Forms into Forms, by the penetration of a fermentall uniting, with the transmutation of our Archeus. Therefore a new poyson is not properly stirred up in the Archeus, that it may form a poyson to it self: Even as otherwise elsewhere (as in a Fever) an occasional matter stirs up the Archeus into futy; not indeed to frame other occasionall Feverish matters; but naked Idea ' s of fury, to expell the addicted ones which he decyphers in the very substance of himself. But the formall lights of poysons do pierce the vitall light, by changing it effici∣ently and powerfully, by reason of the occasionall poyson implanted in them, being present, and radically piercing our middle life, and it disposeth it into the last life, by the first life of the poyson: For they are formall sparks, soulified, or not soulified, be it all as one: Because they do not act by a formall leave and liberty, whereby they pierce in a point, and insinuate in an instant: And they do act that which they are commanded by the Lord to act. And then, we must consider after what manner they so easily prostrate or destroy our life. 1. To wit, whether they do transchange ours their own. 2. Or indeed do drive the Archeus into a fury, that being mad, he may destroy himself, and diffuse himself throughout the whole Bo∣dy. 3. Or whether indeed they do mortifie by a depriving of light, to wit, by blowing out the light of our spark in the Archeus. 4. Or at length, do press together the Archeus under them by a poysonsome exaltation of themselves? First of all, it is certain, that this is not done by contrariety, the which is demonstrated elsewhere, never to have entred into nature. 2. It is certain, that it is done by gifts conferred by God on the poyson, which are called properties. 3. And it is certain, that poysons do divers wayes act into us, and that their dif∣ferences have appointed a fourfold manner of poysons. 4. And at length it is certain, that God hath not created death, as neither poysons as the destruction of men, whom he endow∣ed with immortality: notwithstanding, his integrity being corrupted, things became to him deadly, which before were not poysons unto him. In the mean time, some poysons are fermen∣tall, which do not destroy us so much by the force of a lightsome spark, and by a formall property, as by a certain ferment almost odourable; and so one onely life doth on every side fear many enemies unto it: For such sort of ferments do more approach to the nature of Bodies. Thou seest that thing in a sulphurated Torch or Link, the which being lighted, and hung up in a Glassen Vessel, will burn indeed, and will fill the Vessel with the sublimed smoak of the Sulphur: the which, although thou shalt cause to exspire, and again shalt put into the Vessel a burning Torchor Link, in the very moment that it entreth, it is extinguished: Not indeed, by the Sulphurous smoak (the which seeing it self is as yet Sulphur, ought ra∣ther to be enflamed) but by a wild Gas, the onely Odour whereof extinguisheth the new flame: not indeed by a materiall blast, but by its Odour: Yea, it not onely extinguisheth a sulphurated Torch, but also the flame of a Candle: and that is proved: Because if thou shalt send the flame into a spatious Hogs-head, so long as the Vessel casts the smell of a hoary pu∣trefaction, or otherwise doth contain any small quantity of dregs putrified by continuance, it blowes out the flame of the Link or Candle. Understand thou therefore the same thing pro∣portionably in vitall formall sparks: For so indeed in Vaults and Mines, men are easily killed by the Odours and Gas of the place. So also a pestilent poyson doth oft-times without de∣lay, slay the vitall light: Because such kinde of poysons are positive, and blowing out, mor∣tall, but not privative ones: For neither can they be endowed with any other Etymologie, than that they do efficiently blow out by their poysonsome Gas, the formall light, sensitive Soul or substantial Form of our life. And therefore they have place among reall Beings, and indeed among the most mighty or potent Beings. 
 CHAP. XXIII. Nature is ignorant of contraries. 1. The bruit Beasts were not in Paradise, that man might not see a brutall coupling, but that he might remain innocent of shame. 2. The bruit Beasts were brought from elsewhere to our first Parent, in Eden, that he might name them, might thereby praise God, and acknowledge himself. 3. What kinde of Trees were there. 4. Many individuals were created in every particular kinde, but not in man. 5. Man alwayes ate fleshes, and of the Sacrifices themselves, besides the Turks, and Calvinists. 6. The first contemplative Philosophy of weeping Adam. 7. Tillage, the first of Arts. 8. Zoosophie or the wisdom of keeping living Creatures, the second. 9. Meteoricall Astrologie, the Chamber-maid of Tillage. 10. The entrance of Medicine was the last. 11. They stand as yet, in the first Principles. Galen hath brought in a Method too easie, and therefore suspected. 12. Galen hath feigned one onely naturall indica∣tion; to wit, by contraries. 13. The deceipt of that Maxim is disco∣vered. 14. Paracelsus being badly constant to himself, scoffed at Galen: 15. He badly judged, that all healing is made by like things. 16. That Seeds do not operate by contrariety; but by a Command known from a former cause to the onely Lord of things. 17. They know not which way the necessities of Seeds may be directed. 18. The blindness of Hea∣thenisme is hidden in the Maxim of contrarieties. 19. The foolishness of Aristotle concerning the first matter, is noted. 20. The Argument out of Aristotle is retorted upon Galen. 21. Some Arguments conclu∣ding the same thing. 22. The Schooles are deceived by a metaphoricall, and hyperbolicall or excessive introduced nature. 23. That in the E∣lements contraries are not to be granted. 24. That the greatest cold doth peaceably combine with the greatest heat, in the same point of Air, and that without contrariety. 25. What a Relolleum is. 26. Water doth not wax hot by fire by reason of an introduced contrariety. 27. Water doth not quench fire by reason of contrariety. 28. It is proved from the Elements, that fire is not a substance. 29. Moysture and dryness are scarce qualities to be understood in the abstract. 30. Neither are they Relolleum ' s, after the manner of heat and cold. 31. That there is not a radicall co-mixture of moyst with dry. 32. One onely Question of the Authour propounded to all the Learned, who believe a tempera∣ture of the Elements in a mixt Body. 33. That the Elements are not con∣trary to each other. 34. That the Elements do not waste or consume each other. 35. That the Elements do not fight. 36. That things with∣out life, have not contrariety. 37. It is proved from Faith, and then by some Arguments, that the action of nature is void of contrariety. 38. The same thing is shewen in other things. 39. What Nature may be. 40. The name of a Crisis is impertinent. 41. Paracelsus is no∣ted, because he will have a remedy to work by reason of likenesse. 42. In what the vertue of a Medicine may be seated. 43. Why hun∣ger kills. 44. What things are required for healing. 45. The Doctrine of Paracelsus is refuted. 46. A foolish Objection. 47. Sin is not op∣posed to virtue, simply, in a privative manner. 48. That the poy∣son of a mad Dog, of Serpents, of a Bull, &amp;c. have not at all a contrariety of causes, from whence they are made. 49. A Declara∣tion of what went before. 
 I Having already sufficiently contemplated of the integrity of nature, afterwards, by little and little, I descended into the defects, and successive alterations of the same, while I reach or aim at Medicine: To wit, I have shewen that there are not four Elements in nature, and especially that the fire hath not the thingliness of an accident, yea neither of a substance, much lesse, the nature of an Element: Wherefore, the quaternary of Elements and Com∣plexions being broken asunder and made void; therefore also the constrained knot of four humours. So that although from hence it be sufficiently manifest, that the causes and essence of Diseases have been untouched in the Schooles; yet I would elsewhere demonstrate that very thing from their own positions, in a peculiar Chapter. But in this place, I will demon∣strate, that nature is ignorant of, and likewise, that she doth not admit of contraries in desire. 
 In the beginning, God created the Heaven and the Earth, and whatsoever is contained in the Universe. But he placed the man in Paradise, after he was created: For neither had he a Lion, Sheep, with him, or Tyger contrary to him, or Wolf his Companion: Nor last∣ly, any other Creature, which might lay in wait for him, or for the Fruits of Eden: Yea nei∣ther would the Almighty, that man should behold the bruitish copulation of the Sexes, whom he withed to live in the purity of innocency (as elsewhere concerning long life.) But God brought even one at least of all living Creatures of every Species, to Adam, even from the remotest Coasts of the Earth (for truly the Ranging Creature remains not long alive but in his own Climate) that Adam might give them their proper names: But it was not of so great moment, to give a name to the bruit Beasts, that God should without a further end, lay these before Adam for to name them. 
 But that was done, that he might know the knowledge of all things to be freely given him from God, and that the Judgement or Umpire of so great an heap, might constantly worship or adore in Spirit, for so many benefits: For from that whereby he named all Bruits accor∣ding to the proper nature of every one, his own knowledge of himself was included; which is the top of Wisdom. For he had known himself to be wholly (not indeed himself to be a Fruit) not a disagreeable, and the immortall Image of the Divinity. Therefore the bruit Creatures were brought to him from every part, chiefly for the honour of God; and next for his own profit, that by an utter denyall or renouncing of the Bruits which he had not seen before, he might extract the knowledge of his own self, and so might depart from the mocke∣ries of the Tempter. The Bruits might want Sir-names, when as especially they ought not to name each other; also it was not required for one to know another, or judge of the nighness of their kin, by a name. Therefore, after their naming, all of them were again restored to their naturall places: For man wanted a bloudy Banquet by slain living Creatures; but he bare the good pleasure of his Creator, in granting him the fruits of the Trees. 
 There then, every Tree did look fresh and green, with a perpetual leaf, did bear a suc∣cessive flower: Lastly, a perpetual fruit, not wormy, nor falling before ripeness; as neither brought it forth a barren or untimely Flower. Such was the daily race or increase, pleasure, abundance and happy plentifulness in Paradise: For even as Herbs fit for meats, are to us for Corns, Pulses, Pot-herbs, and Spices; there the Trees also, did bring forth one of these, if not the four, or some of them connexed at once: For truly the manifold Acorn did there re∣present the divers Corns: Olives, and Nuts did note out as many Pulses; Even as the Apples also, so many Pot-herbs. The Trees also, the Mother of Spices, did present Herbs fit for Sawces. And last of all, many things stood connexed, under one onely particular kinde, even as now also, the Apple doth now and then consist of an Oily Kernel. Indeed, all things did flatter mans Senses. But after that the majesty of man became of no value, by reason of his departure from the right way or Fall, and his nature was now polluted, he ought to die the same day; and the vigour or force of the declared sentence had stood, unless he by whom all things were made, had impledged himself a Surety before him who made all things, that he would die for man in the fulness of times, that love might kisse his Justice: whence there was peace. Man is to be cast out of Paradise into the earth, where the more barren Trees offer∣ed themselves, nor those sufficient for the continual necessities of foods. But before that he was driven away, when as now himself was ashamed of his own nakedness, God cloathed them both in Coats of skin. Indeed that great Priest and Lamb, was offered up an unspotted Sa∣crifice, from the beginning of his loving promise, who for a Mistery, therefore sacrificed two Lambs, without spot to his eternall Father, before man: one indeed for the Burnt-offering of his future passion: Another also, without the breaking of its bones, to be sacrificed, and partly to be eaten, for a Peace-offering; he gave both to the Man and Woman that from the foundation of the World, the Lamb might be one and the same, for a continuall Sacrifice, oblation, and food: with the Skins of which Lambs, our Parents were covered: Which first Tenor or right of sacrificing, Heathenisme afterwards imitated. 
 Although two Sexes onely of every particular kinde, entred as Companions into the Ark; yet the Lion fasted not for a year, that he might divide the first hope of the Flock together with the Leopard, and Wolf; and he had afterwards again abstained for a year: For the Lord replenished the Earth with a sufficient number, which before was empty and void: For nei∣ther would he have any thing to be wanting: Even as he enriched the Sea with a multitude of individualls, so also the Earth with a plurality of individual bruit Beasts: For although onely two living Creatures of a sort, entred voluntarily, yet Noah by the Command of God, took food for himself, and necessary foods for the other Creatures. Therefore it is a vain and foolish question; why at this day there are more Sheep than Wolves? 
 Man therefore had fleshes from the beginning, wherewith he might be fed, and might sa∣crifice; and the rite of sacrificing was even from the beginning of the World, that the Sa∣crificers might eat of the thing sacrificed. And at this day, onely the Mahometans, and Cal∣vinists do fail, being as it were destitute of a Sacrifice. Let them therefore give place, who write, that mortall men before the Floud were not wont to eat flesh; because it was written, Fleshes shall henceforward be like unto Pot-herbs: For otherwise Abel had in vain led Flock and Herds; neither had another been slain in the hunting of wilde Beasts, and Nimrod should have a vain name. Therefore I may believe, that Mortalls used as well tame as wild Beasts; yet scarce Fishes before the Floud: Because then, one onely Fountain did water the whole Earth, and the Sea stood on the other part of the Globe, whose other half was calf∣ed dry Land: And so Fishes were onely of the Sea, while the whole World was an undivi∣ded Continent: in the middle or heart whereof, one onely Fountain being divided into four Rivers, did water the whole Earth: Therefore Cock-boats or Skiffs, had not as yet been made known: so fishing in the Sea, was unaccustomed. Neither also did the Habitation of men occupie the shoares: For one onely, and vast Continent of the Earth gave pleasures e∣nough to the Husband-men, that they detested the barren Sea, made frightfull by a thousand Tempests. Gen. chap. 1. v. 28. It is read, that first of all, the Dominion of the Sea was given to man, and then, over the Fowls of Heaven; and thirdly, over all living Creatures which move upon the Earth: yet when as the speech is of meats, Chap. 1. v. 29. Every Herb and Tree is given for meat. And Chap. 1. v. 30. All living Creatures of the Earth, and Birds of Heaven, and whatsoever is moved upon the Earth, having a living Soul, is given to men, that they might have that which they might eat: Yet the Fishes are no where read to have been granted, as neither the Fishes of the Sea to have been brought over to Adam, that they might obtain their names. From which particulars, it is presently plain to be seen, that no Herbs, Trees, or any creeping things, were contrary to man, or for a Medicine of destruction unto him. Likewise the restriction, for Birds, and what things do move themselves upon the Earth, doth exclude the Fishes. Wherefore, as soon as after the Floud, by the dividing of the one Continent, the Springs and Floud-gates diffused themselves from the lowest bottom, Fishes being allured by the sweetness of the down-sliding waters, some remained in Rivers, and Fens: others in the mean time through a new thorow-mingling, and liberty of the Floud, ascending out of the Sea: Therefore let Fishes be fleshes, although before, not used by man: Fleshes I say which after the Floud should be like unto Pot-herbs: otherwise, the flesh of flying Fouls, did nor repay or supply the Rooms of Pot-herbs; but Corns, as four-footed Beasts, had now long since from the beginning, supplied the place of pulses. 
 Therefore our first Parent being banished into the Earth, and being full of miseries, wea∣riness, and repentance, through the leasure of most ample Ages, perceived his nature now to be defiled with corruption, and wanting preservation. Lastly, as necessity is the Mother of Wits and Inventions, he began to meditate, by what reason or meanes he might prevent the inward Calamities of life, and especially the injuries of a Meteor. In which labour, the el∣dest of his Sons began thorowly to weigh the Nativities of fruits, their prosperous, and un∣fortunate increases. 
 whence Agriculture or Tillage was the first Philosophy. The other Son also, noted the pro∣perties and Societies of living Creatures; whence by the undoubted hope of a Flock, a quiet life is led: This indeed, was Zoosophie or the wisdom of keeping living Creatures to∣gether. 
 But their successors making afterwards, a more plentifull progress, joyning the decrees of the Stars with the observations of their Predecessors, observed the denounced successive changes of things, with a profitable, and pleasant observation. 
 Therefore Astrologie, the Chambermaid of Tillage thus arose. Notwithstanding, the dis∣pensations of naturall things have remained altogether obscure; even as also, among all men, the knowledge of ones self is the last and hardest of all things. But the generations or births of Diseases, their Remedies and Curings (which as yet then were most rare or seldom) were far more obscure: For at first, every one brought the Remedies which had profited him, into open view, without envy: But Hypocrates first laid up his Observations into a written style or method: in which labour, he felt the divine assistance, which he had not known: But Galen (as it were the North winde) having seemed to himself to have dispersed the vain Clouds of desires, &amp; having filched many things from every place, boasted that he had raised up the Speculations of the Elements, first qualities, Complexions, and humours: And dedica∣ted all the works, and fortunes, as well of found, as invalid nature, to these: which things afterwards, the Greek Nation plentifully increased: By which suppositions, the Moores stri∣ving for the Victory, built loose experiments upon them. 
 This therefore was the Originall, and condition of bringing forth Medicine; and these were its inventers. At length, in these it was at a stand, neither afterwards made it a progress. Galen being instructed by his Elders, observing that fire was quenched by water, and that wa∣ter being heated by fire, did vanish away, supposing that he held the Hare by the Eares, bold∣ly constituted almost all Diseases, and their Remedies in those first Bodies, and their quali∣ties: For he said, The fire was at enmity with the water, and this with it: whence he esta∣blished it by a generall decree, that there is in us the combate of four Elements, fighting in us by a continuall Warre: And that there doth skirmish in us a continuall and unexcusable strife of contraries: Wherefore, although nothing should weary us from without, yet it would come to passe, that sometimes a distemper, or Disease, and ruine should happen of their own accord: That death I say, should break out of the composition of the Elements. This in∣deed was to be winked at in Galen: But not in Christians, if they do not teach, that in Adam, there was a like necessity of composition before, as there was after sin: To wit, if the composi∣tion of Adam, stood connexed unto four encountring Elements: Therefore all the Schooles do determine, that onely contraries should be the remedies of contraries: To wit, whereby e∣very excess (being notably marked with the name of a Disease) might be reduced into a me∣diocrity or mean. That plausible and stupid Doctrine easily pleased all that were inclined to a sluggishness of subscribing: Because it was that which might easily be conceived by a rusticall sense, a great compendium, and in all places by any one; and, hence therefore it was most greedily drunk in. Galen (the while) although he knew that cutting off or resection was privately opposite to a Being that is born, yet he doubted not to reduce the withdrawing of parts, or humours, in respect of the members, unto the order of contraries: And he neg∣lected the Family of privations, as born by an adulterous congress: Hence all things uni∣versally, which should disagree in number, scituation, magnitude, proportion, afflux, or eflux, he took from their due order, as though they were contraries, that he might make an esta∣blishment of his own foolish Rule: As if Medicine did not work naturally, but stood by learn∣ing by demonstration alone. 
 Hence at length, by a most generall absurdity, he dictated the naturall indications or be∣tokenings of Diseases, to be made onely by the oppositions of contraries: For he would have necessities to be subservient to his own Maxims; but he erected not Maxims conformable to necessities: which fictions therefore are commanded to work ruine, as many of them as are handed forth at the pleasure of so great ignorance: Therefore that Maxim hitherto remains adored by the Schooles, and common people, (as it were the top of healing) which by con∣trarieties, that is, by brawlings, strifes, Wars, fighting, and Crises or judicial periods, do mark out the beaten path of healing: For it hath so been credited, so wrote, and feigned hitherto, and that, so without controversie; that nothing is thought to be alike plausible, and fit for subscribing, and doth through its own facility of understanding deceive, by delighting, and captivating every unwary person. 
 But the knowledge of the Causes and Roots of healing, do grow from a far more hidden stock, than that the vulgar by a rusticall perceivance can crop the flowers of the same: Neither hath Galen considered, that one contrary ought so often to be predicated of (according to Aristotle) as oft as another, because both of them stood under the same generall kinde, and did rejoyce in an equall priviledge: wherefore neither hath he at any time diligently searched, what that generall kinde should be, under which, positive coldness, or cold, might stand contrary to so manifold a putrified heat as he seigned particular kindes of Fevers: To wit, where he might finde cold contrary to a Malignant, putrified, and hectick or habituall heat; And resisting heat in so many excesses of spaces: Or what might be that singular and individuall action of cold; of so diverse Degrees and Species, whereby as many heats being brought under the yoak, they should be compelled to a due proportion: which thing surely, so long as it hath been neglected by the Galenists; also a just remedy for every Fever hath remained unknown, and Remedies have been administred, being prescribed by guess and chance: For through Galenical scantinesses, they on both sides prostrate their lies, conspiring for the death of mortalls.
I not sloathfully noted, that all particular parts have obtained particular ferments, seeing there is an unexcusable necessity of these, in transchanging. And so I also from hence fur∣ther concluded, that all particular ferments do abhorre strange ones to be their Compani∣ons, and the commands of strange patrons, as if they were forreign thieves, and such as thrust their Sickle into another mans Corn: And that indeed through no vice of jealousie, as though they did envie the activities of others: But from an endeavour of executing the office; which was enjoyned them by the Lord of things. It is a wonder to be spoken, that a sour cream in the Duodenum, doth straightway attain the savour of Salt, and doth so willingly ex∣change its own sharp Salt, into a salt Salt. 
 No otherwise almost, than as the Vinegar which is most sharp, hath forthwith (through red Lead) put off its former sharpness, and doth presently change into an aluminous sweet∣ness; Even as also the sharpness of Sulphur, is forthwith changed in the Salt of Tartar, But by a far more excellent vigour of transmutation, that sour Cream is presently made Salt in us. 
 For truly, that is made without any co-mixture of any Body, even as when Vinegar waxing sweet, it is constrained by the addition of the Lead, or a sharp distillation is drunk up in an Alcali-Salt: Because in very deed, nothing is any where found, which can fully answer to the force of a ferment; seeing Ferments are the primitive causes of transmutations, and that indeed from a former cause: and therefore it must needs be, that the similitudes of those, drawn onely from a latter effect: do very much halt. 
 Therefore our sour Cream is made salt, only by a fermental, and unchangeable disposition: wherefore also, the volatile sharpness of that Cream doth remain in its antient volatility, while it exchangeth its own first obtained soureness with saltness: For the volatile stillatiti∣ous sharpness of Vinegar, doth not thus remain volatile as before, while it dissolveth Litharge, Minium, or Ceruse: because in dissolving, it is coagulated, and doth assume the form of a more fixed Salt, now separable from the liquid distillation of the Vinegar, which it had lately married; but in dissolving it is coagulated, and doth assume the form of a more fixed Salt: because it is the action of a thing dissolving, and dissolved, but not of a trans∣changing Ferment, which doth continually tend to a new Form on either side. 
 For indeed, the Stomachs of some do more easily digest Potherbs, Pulses, or bread-Corns; but those of others do more succesfully digest Fishes, abhorre Cheese, prefer water before Wine; whereas in the mean time, the stomach of others, is a devourer of flesh, or addicted to Apple; to wit, by reason of a specifical, yea and also an appropriated property of that Fer∣ment: yea neither is it sufficient to have said, that the sour Ferment of the first digestion, and totall cause of the melting of the harder meats doth freely inhabit in the stomach, un∣less that very thing be more plainly explained. 
 First of all, the stomach hath not this Ferment in it self, or from its own self: For the digestion of the appetite, and Family-government of the stomach do sometimes depart, and return without extinguishing; because they are not of the stomach it self. Wherefore I have said, that the membrane of the stomach hath all the efficacy of its digestion, and go∣vernment thereof, from the Spleen: For surely, the Spleen together with the stomach, doth therefore make in us one onely Duumvirate or Sheriffdom, from whence indeed, the Poets have erected the Golden and prosperous Kingdoms of Saturn, and in pride, the liberal Feasts of Saturn. The Antients have smelled out some History of antient truth: To wit, that whatsoever things, meats being digested, are cast out by vomit, are of a soure taste, and smell; yea although they were seasoned with much Sugar: For soure belchings coming upon adust ones in Diseases, are reckoned to presage good, according to Hypocrates. 
 Hence indeed, all saltnesses or seasonings, and Sauces of meats for sharpening of the Ap∣petite, are sharp; as the juyce of Citron, Orange, Pomegranate, the unripe Olive, Tartar, Vine∣gar, Berbery, Vine-branch, Mustard, and likewise Salt of the Sea, as it containeth a sharp Spirit in it: in which respect, also the Liquors of Sulphur, Vitriol, Salt, Sal Niter, &amp;c. are commended: For I will not that the sharpness of any of those be consumed into increase of a specifical and appropriated ferment dwelling in the Spleen: Far be it; for ferments have nothing besides, or out of themselves in nature, which may worthily be assimilated to them∣selves; seeing they are specifical gifts of a vital nature: For therefore a ferment, in what respect it is a ferment, is a vital and free Secret, yoaked to no other quality: for it is suffi∣cient for Sawces, that sharp things do prepare meats for a more easie entrance of the fer∣ment of the Spleen. 
 In the next place, although the ferment of the stomach hath a specifical tartness, yet that tartness is not the vital ferment it self; but onely the Instrument thereof: For the ferment of the stomach hath a sharpness, as a singular companion unto it self, it being also divided by properties, by general kindes, and Species: but digestion in it self, is the work of the life it self, whereof, sharpness is in this Shop, the attaching or guarding Instrument: But in the other Shops which are afterwards, the life associates to it self a secondary quality on either side, as a Minister of its intention to the fermental quality, and suited to the vital scope. 
 For from hence, there is no seldom offence of the stomach, it having arisen from a degree of a forreign sharpness: wherefore, an Orexis or inordinate appetite to meat, and such like perplexities or the stomach, do offend in an adulterous tartness: For from hence, are prick∣ings in the stomach, difficult concoctions; lastly, very soure belchings, and vomitings: wherefore, if a ferment should consist in soureness; Vinegar, Oyl of Vitriol, and the like, should ferment the lump of bread, and should digest our meats by a perfect transmutation: but they do neither of these; Therefore the ferment is a free Secret, and vital, and there∣fore it every where co-fitteth to it self a retaining quality in its own Borders: Because, see∣ing ferments are of the rank of formal and seminal things, therefore they have also severed themselves plainly from the society of material qualities: But if they have associated unto them a corporeal ministring quality, whereby they may the more easily disperse their own vital strength; account that to be done for a help; and so it cannot but contain a duality with the Ferment: And therefore also, that quality may offend, as well in its excessive, as in its diminished degree. 
 For in that thing I greatly differ from the Schooles: Because first of all, they teach, that the Gaul is not a vital bowel. 
 2. That it is not a noble member. 3. That it is nothing, but a very unprofitable superfluity it self, and banished from the masse of venal bloud; to wit, least it should infect the venal bloud. 4. That it is therefore a product besides the intention of nature. 5. Being onely profitable for the expelling of Dung, and Urine. 6. And therefore that the little bag of the Gaul, is not of the substance of a Bowel, but a sack or sink of dregs and superfluities. 7. That at length, Sanguification or the making of bloud doth begin, and is compleated in the Liver: which things indeed seem to me, dreams. For first of all, seeing Choler is not required to the constitution of venal bloud, that bitter Gaul or Choler should not of necessity be procreated of all kinde of meats, unless it be pro∣pagated by a proper Agent, and in a particular Shop of its own, for a profitable, vital, and necessary end: For much lesse hath the Gaul seemed to me, to be an excrement, than the wa∣ter of the Pericardium or Case of the heart. 
 It is a wonder at least; why Fishes, of water, and Cattel, of Grasse, do nevertheless alwayes daily make so bitter a Liquor. Truly that simple identity or sameliness of the Gaul, through so many particular kindes, seemed to me to prove some necessity in the Workmanship of life: And so, the Gaul not to have the necessity of an excrement produced by any nourishments whatsoever, but rather the constitution of a necessary Bowel: For I ceased to admire, by con∣sidering, how great Tragedies of rule, the paunch (which is nothing but a Sack and Skin) might stir up; and that it obtained the room of a principal bowel; by considering I say, how great a prerogative the membrane of the stomach might challenge to it self; so that it hath snatched to it self, the name and properties of the heart before the other bowels: Whence surely I ceased to admire, that the name of a bowel should be given to the little bag of the Gaul, and to the Gaul it self: especially, because the wrathful power is believed by most to be bred in the same. 
 Surely I have found in the Family-administration of mans digestion, Bodies, and Ferments connexed of two bowels (the Gaul and the Liver) for Sanguification. To wit, the Gaul to precede in the work of Sanguification, and for this cause to be nearer to the Stomach and En∣trails, than the Liver: For the Gaul is nourished in the Bosom and lap of the Liver, as it were in its Mothers Bosom; for it is the Balsam of the Liver and Bloud. 
 For seeing Sanguification is not a transmutation, which may be introduced by a momenta∣ry disposition; and since the Liver is deprived of a remarkable hollowness, whereby it may be able to contain within it, the juyce that is to be made bloud, for the leisure or terme of digestion; That is, the Liver in it self, is a solid Body, having few and slender veins, and so the whole Cream being accompanied with so great a heap of Urine; it ought to passe thorow the Liver with a swift passage; but the crude Cream, cannot by so swift a passage onely, be straightway changed into venal blond. Wherefore a perfect Sanguification could in no wise be made in the Liver; Because the Liver was not a Kitchin, but a family Governour by its own Sanguificative ferment, whereby as it were by a Command, it chiefly by successive dispositions, executes the office enjoyned it from its creation. Therefore the plurality of the Mesentery veins is the stomack of the Liver it self, and the preparative Shop of the venal bloud: And the perfection thereof, the Liver doth breath into the venal bloud, as yet naked, after that it is laid up into the hollow vein. Truly, as Sanguification is a certain more ex∣quisite digestion, and a more manifest transmutation of a thing, than is the melting of the meat into Chyle, it could not fitly or profitably happen in any large vessel, but in many the more straight ones, which together, may equalize some notable capacity; whereby indeed that fermental Archeus may most strictly, narrowly, and neerly touch, and comprehend them all, and his Liver may communicate a ferment in changing, and may inspire a vital faculty. Forthe Spleen doth inspire its Ferment into the Stomack, a large vessel; for neither doth the Spleen touch the meats immediately: So also doth the Liver inspire the act of Sanguifica∣tion by the breathing, or ferment of its own life into the veins subjected under it. And even as the meat slides from the Mouth into the Stomack, and there expecteth the end of digestion: 
 So from the Entrails the Cream is immediately snatched into the stomack of the Liver: But seeing that Cream is much, and for a great part of it excrementitious (for as yet it con∣taineth the Urine in it) it ought first to be unloaded of its excrement, that it may the more conveniently be made bloud: Because that Cream is as yet wholly undistinct; neither therefore doth it acknowledge an excrement: what therefore shall the Liver act by a single action of Sanguification? For shall the severing of the excrement, the degeneration of the Cream, and Sanguification of the Cream, be made and finished by one and the same work? Nay, Surely the Cream had need of a Ferment its transchanger, distinct from the Sanguifica∣tive ferment, whereby indeed that part of it that is less fit, is changed into a meer excrement; for the action of Sanguification could not make an excrement of that which is not an excre∣ment: For both those do differ too much from each other: For the action which prepares an excrement out of the greatest part of the Cream, is not made by the coagulation of the venal bloud, and separation of the more wheyie part: 
 Seeing the venal bloud in the Meseraick Veins is not onely not coagulated, but neither in∣deed is it as yet coagulable, as long as it is conversant in that stomack: As is manifest in the bloody flux. Therefore there is made a seperation of the wheyie excrement from the venal bloud, in the Meseraick veins themselves, and indeed from a far other acting ferment, and bowel, than that which is employed about Sanguification or making of bloud: For it is a cer∣tain act which condemns a part of the Cream into an excrement; But it preserveth the venal bloud, and leaveth it untouched: therefore a production, and seperation of the excrement goes before Sanguification. 
 And so the womb of the Urine beginneth before the Meseraick veins: Yet the womb of the stone is not as yet in the same place, because the ferment of the Rein or Kidney changeth the spirit of the Urine in the Liver, and round about it. 
 Therefore whatsoever was soure in the Cream is changed by the ferment of the Gaul, into the salt of the Urine: But the stomack of the Gaul is the Duodenum, and the following Reed of the neighbour Bowels, and it ends in the beginnings of the Veins of the Mesentery. But be∣cause this use of the parts and ferments is hitherto unheard of in the Schools, it is therefore to be dilated by a large discourse. 
 First of all, The Doctrine of the Schools standing; That the venal bloud is made in the Liver, and that together with the venal bloud, the Gaul is also made: Therefore of necessity also, the seperation of the Gaul shall in motion, and nature be after Sanguification: Where∣fore the Chest of the Gaul ought to be above the Liver, and not beneath it, nigh the port vein. For by way of supposition, I now grant the fictions of four humors; at least it had far more commodiously purged the matter, bloud, from superfluous Choler, than the Chest of the Gaul (seeing indeed the Choler should as yet be mingled immediately with the Urine) and especially because they teach, That the Urine ought to be tinged by the Gaul, and there∣fore in vain. For why should the Gaul be so precisely separated from the Urine, if it ought again straight-way to be added unto it? I conjecture the Liver to be loaded for every event, with a vain and importunate baggage, by the little bag of the Gaul hanging on it; by the lit∣tle bag I say, onely of cast-out dung, dedicated to the provoking of Urines. And being by so much more unhappy than the bladder, because seeing it is that which is a membrane of the first, and Spermatick constitution, yet that it ought to be nourished by the Gaul alone; See∣ing it wants a vein propagated by running through its little bladder. For since we are nour∣ished by the same things whereof we consist; where shall that little bag find a spermatical nourishment from the Gaul? which in it self should be nothing but an excrement? But if the Gaul be said to be collected into the Chest under the Liver, for the wiping away the dregs of the paunch; at least, the Agent which procreateth in the Urine a Salt of not Salts, had more commodiously left a part of its own Urine for the washing and cleansing of the Entrails, and disturbing the superfluities of these, as it had freed the Liver of the stinking; and edious bur∣den and consociation of the Gaul. Neverthelesse it is of Faith, that our body is so (workman-like) framed by God, that nothing therein is in vain, and nothing therein diminished: Be∣cause that, it is far more artificially and commodiously made, than our understanding can comprehend. Therefore, if the ends of the Gaul granted by the Schools, should be true, verily the Reins had far more commodiously satisfied those ends (as I have said) than that the work∣man of things had therefore loaded; the Liver with that unprofitable weight: But the con∣sequence convinceth its antecedent of falsehood. Therefore the whole doctrineis false. If Birds do want Reins a Bladder and Urine, whereby they may the more fitly fly, but the Gaule should serve onely for the wiping or cleansing of the blood, at least the bloud had more willingly wanted the refining of the Gaul, than the refining of the Urine; that is, if nature be able to se∣perate drink in a Bird, without Urine, and therefore likewise to want Reins, and Bladder, would it not bemuch more easie for it to have severed some small quantity of the Gaule with the Urine, and superfluities of the paunch, than to have loaded a noble bowel with a Chest, and so by the unprofitable baggage of an excrement, to have troubled Sanguification? even in Birds? Certainly nature at least reckoned to be more indulgent to Choler, than to Phlegme, because she hath framed for it a peculiar little Bladder or Bag: For it is a foolish or unsavoury thing, that nature had placed the Gaul in the lap of the Liver, for the dregs of the paunch, and blad∣der; when as otherwise she had dissembled Choler to be abundantly thorow mixed with the venal bloud. Wherefore I more fully looking into the matter, have obser∣ved, that the Chest of the Gaul is as it were the Kernel of the Liver, curiously kept in its hol∣low part from injuries; but the Liver to be as the rhine or bark of the Gaul: And then, that the Gaul is so much the nearer tied to the Duodenum, because its digestion, and ferment should go before the digestion of the Liver, or Sanguification. 
 Indeed the wheyie superfluous part ought to be seperated from the lively Cream, which seperation therefore is not to be compared to whey and milk, which are not severed from each other, but with the corruption of the milk: For truly, in the Cream a separation of the whey happeneth, together with the rectifying and preserving of the venal bloud: That is, the fer∣ment of the Gaul is the perfective one of the Cream, the preservative one of the bloud, and the cor uptive one of the whey: which three things do together concur in one point, whereby the Gaul doth convert the sharp salt of the stomack (except that which is hurtful &amp; corruptive in the stomack) into a salt Salt. Moreover, although I have said, that Sanguification is the latter in respect of the seperation of the Urine, and transmutation of the sour into salt:
Yet both ferments, as well indeed of the Gaul as of the Liver, do begin at once, because neither of them keeps Holy-day or is idle: For as the ferment of the Liver is of a greater work and perfection; So it doth more slowly perform its charge, than the Ferment of the Gaul: For the aforesaid transmutation of the Cream ought to proceed, that the Liver being somewhat eased of an unprofitable burden, might the more commodiously employ it self in Sanguification. Therefore the second digestion or that of the Gaul, is distinct from the first and third, in the ferment, bowel, womb, taste, effect and end: All which the Schools are hi∣therto ignorant of, because erring in the use of the Gaul. 
 For in the first digestion, the stomack is the receptacle, but the Spleen doth inspire from it self, a sour ferment into the meats, and a sour Cream is thereby made: But in the other, the slender entrails are the stomack, but the ferment is inspired from the gaul, for the corruption and seperation of the watery part, and a sharp volatile salt is changed into a Salt volatile one: But that this might be done by a speedy touch, I shall at sometime shew by some Handicraft operations: To wit, that the Oyl of Vitriol is by the only touching of Mercury, converted into a meer Alum, Vinegar, and Salt, &amp;c. Also straightway after drink, there is oft-times a watery pissing made, yet Salt, and the mark of the first digestion is scarce conceived, but that a notable part of the drink slides forth under an errour of the Pylorus, and by conse∣quence, there was not made a seperation of the Urine from the bloud in the Liver: Be∣cause the venal bloud is not as yet made in the Liver, if the Chyle it self be as yet made or concocted out of meats in the stomack: To wit, when drinkers do very often make water after meat: Therefore also Urine is made of watery drink, yea out of drink from whence ve∣nal bloud was not made; and so the generating of Urine doth there go before Sanguification. At length, the very veins of the Mesentery, are the stomack of the third digestion, which way the Liver inspires a bloudy ferment, and a very red or ruddy salt venal bloud is the effect thereof. 
 For the wounds of the Gaul are presently mortal, but those of the Liver not so. If the e∣ ore the Gaul were likewise Choler, death would of necessity follow every effusion of the Gaul. Nevertheless, the yellow Jaundise is not mortal, although the Gaul (as the same Schooles do teach) is not onely diffused over the entrails, but throughout the whole Body, equally, longly, largely, deeply, and throughout its least part: Therefore either a wound of the Gaul doth import more than the effusion of Choler, or the Jaundise is not effused Choler, or both is necessary. Wounds of the Bladder also, being inflicted above the share (as successful Wurtz is witness, in my judgement the Standard-defender of the more modern Chyrurgio s) are cured, although the Urine, together with its Gaul (as they will have it) cannot but be powred forth at that very time or moment. 
 Therefore the Chest of the Gaul hath a necessity, and Integrity, fast tied to the life by rea∣son of sudden death: Neither is it the effusion of that gawly superfluity, which doth neces∣sitate that speedy death. Again, Birds do live prosperously without Kidneys, or a Bladd r, yet not without a Gaul: wherefore there is a more conjoyned necessity of the Gaul, than of Kidneys: Because that the Kidneys being rockie and putrified, the life is safe. And then, Fishes (according to the Doctrine of the Schools) do abound with very much phlegme, and are destitute of actual heat: they are onely nourished with cold bloud, and watery food. 
 At length, their excrements easily glistering, they had no need of a spur, the Gaul. Wherefore, seeing the ends, matter, and efficient cause of the Gaul attributed by the Schools, should fail in a Fish; surely we shall believe that the Liver is vainly, deceitfully, and by the errour of nature, yea and of the Creator, wearied, unless we had rather acknowledge perpe∣tual errours in the Schools, and to contemplate some greater moment of a necessary bowel to be in the Gaul. 
 From hence therefore, I determine the Gaul to be a vital Bowel, and its very Body to be a bitter Liquor prepared of the best venal bloud, containing the Balsam of the Liver, and Ar∣terial bloud: But whatsoever it by chance casts back of it self, into the bowel Duodenum, is the excrement of it self, and a Liquor now despised of the Gaul. 
 But that these things have themselves after this manner, I have at sometime shewen under the impostures of Choler, by the example of a Calf, who e motherly, and sweet milk waxeth sour, and is coagulated in the stomach, and therefore affords Runnet for Cheeses: For milk is made a watery Cream, but little of coagulated milk: But that Cream contains Urine and venal bloud; but another coagulated Body, which of pale, begins to wax yellow, is made dung: But that baggage straightway falling into the Duodenum doth proceed unto the Ileos, being coagulated, and waxeth of a Citron colour, the more, by how much it hath departed farther from the stomach; and at length it waxeth green; yet there is not bitterness in the yellow, but a nitrous taste: But in the green, the smell of Dung doth now plainly appear: But the wheyie Cream is presently drawn and supped up with greediness by the meseraick veins, for the use of sanguification. Likewise Milk is stirred in Infants, whence also those that are the more young ones do cackie all yellow, not from the plenty of Choler, neither by reason of the domination of the Chest of the Gaul; but surely, because the ferment of their Dung is feeble. Therefore the ferment of the Gaul doth not change the sourness of the stomach into bitter, but into Salt, for the reasons explained concerning the Spirit of life. Spare me ye more ten∣der eares, because I ought to treat of Dungs. I will therefore shew, that the savour of Dung excludes the Gaul, that it befools the use of the Gaul invented by the Schools, and convin∣ceth Choler of a fiction. 
 A Boy of four years old had fowled in Bed; but being much afraid of whipping, he ate his own Dung, yet e could not blot the sign out of the sheets: wherefore being asked by threat∣nings, he at length tells the chance. But being asked of its savour, he said it was of a stink∣ing, and somewhat sweet one: For among other things, he had eat Pease-pottage; but he complained, that the undigested husks or brans of the Pease were notably soure: for there is not an equal vigilancy of the ferment of the Gaul, over thick, and undigested Dungs, as there is over transparent things, and those things which are to be prepared into the dignity of venal bloud. I came by chance unlooked for, the same day, and I diligently enquired, a price being also added, whether those things which he had eaten, were bitter. He answered negatively, and the same as before. Likewise Nuns did Board noble Maids sufficiently so∣ber, at their Table: but they continually preached, that they who did eat dainty fare, should have their parts with the rich Glutton; but that they onely should be saved, who by the eve∣ry way denyal of mortification, did eat any the most vile things. Therefore a noble little Virgin being very desirous of her Salvation, and much moved by the aforesaid perswasion, eats her own Dung, and was weak or sick. But she was called home again by her Parents, and at length told the chance: She was asked thereupon, of what savour it was, and she an∣swered, it was of a stinking, and waterishly sweet one. Thirdly, a Painter of Bruxels, being mad between whiles; about the beginning of his madness, escapes into a Wood near by, and was there found far from the sight of men, to have lived 23 dayes by his own Dung. He was straightway brought home; I went to see him, and the Lord healed him. But he was per∣fectly mindeful of all things past at the time of his madness. I asked him, whether he re∣membred of what savour his Dung was: He said, it savours as it smells: And being after∣wards examined by me through the Capital tasts, he answered, it was not sour, not bitten, sharp, salt, but waterishly sweet: Yea, he said, that by how much the oftner he had re-earen it, by so much it had alway been the sweeter. But being asked, for what cause he had ra∣ther eat Dung, than return home? He said, that he throughout his whole madness abhorred men, being perswaded by his own fury, that men sought to destroy him by a snare. There∣fore it is manifest, that there is not even the least drop of Gaul in the Dung: for the Gaul being once burst, however a Fish may afterwards be most exactly washed, yet the bitterness of the Gaul conceived by the least touching, is never laid aside. 
 For if yellowness should bewray the Gaul, the dung of Infants should be especially gawly, which notwithstanding is licked by Dogs, because it hath as yet retained some kinde of savour of the milk: But whatsoever hath not been fully subdued in the stomach, nor hath assumed the beauty of a transparency, may not hope to be digested in the bowels by the ferment of the Gaul, although it be tinged with a yellow colour; Because it goes not to the second, or third, but thorow the absolute first. Whatsoever therefore is thick, and tinged with heat in the Ileos, that is wholly banished into an excrement, and under a certain sweetness, doth attain the savour of putrefaction; No otherwise than as soure fruits wax sweet by a little heat: But whatsoever was before sour in the stomach, that is made salt in the Duodenum, and is severed from the Dung: but if any thing do persevere sour, which may resist the fer∣ment of the Gaul, wringings of the bowels, &amp;c. do presently follow: But the excrement of man doth putrifie, because the ferment of the dung is chief over that place: But that which slides out of the stomach undigested, also is not digested in the bowels; It is cast out whole, but it keeps, and now and then increaseth the part of sournesses which it assumed in the sto∣mach: For from hence do the brans in bread, provoke the stool, by reason of sharpness; but other things do wax more sharp, and stir up wringings of the guts: Therefore from the Duo∣denum, the Chyle doth forthwith begin to exchange its own sharp volatile Salt into an equall saltness, it being resolved in the Cream: But the remaining, and more corporal substance of the Cream doth expect a sanguification in the veins of the mesentery, from the inspired fer∣ment of the Liver: The salt Liquor in the mean time being attracted by the Reins thorow the Liver, is it self committed to the Reins and Bladder for expulsion. Therefore the third digestion begins in the veins of the mesentery, which is terminated in the Liver: For the ve∣nal bloud as long as it is in the mesentery, is not yet digested, not yet thredded, or perfect: For the venal bloud of the mesentery, doth therefore not grow together in the Bloudy flux: But otherwise, a vein of the stomach being burst, the venal bloud doth forthwith wax clotty in the stomach. 
 For the ferment of the Liver is so much inclined to sanguification (for it is its univocal and one onely office) that the veins do even by the right of league retain or hold that from the Liver, and its proper implanted Archeus thereupon confirming it; So that the bloud in the veins of a dead Carcase is not coagulated a long while after death, which being elsewhere powred forth, doth presently wax clotty: For the Cream running down afterwards thorow the Bowels, becomes the dryer, and also the liquid matter thereof being sucked upwards into the veins: But thereby, the rest doth more and more putrifie, so that, when it is almost brought down to the ends of the Ileos, now not a little of a more liquid Dung is generated; because before it hath fully putrified, it is snatched to the mesentery, that it may be thorowly mingled with the Urine, profitable for its ends: Even as elsewhere concerning Fevers, and likewise concerning the Stone. 
 Which yellow Dung, the Schooles have believed to be Choler and Gaul; and so out of the Dung, they have founded their demonstration for one of the four humours, and a Gate hath thereby layen open to miserable errours, and wicked slaughters: For it was of little re∣gard for them hitherto, to have built up their false significative knowledge by the unknown substance of the tincture of the Urine; but to have made Choler and Gaul the constitutive humours of us, the causers of all Diseases; to wit, to have feigned yellow Choler, and that a little the more digested, to be adust, and like the cankering of Brasse, and from thence, to be dry, and scorched melancholy or black Choler; but the gaul it self to be the sink of su∣perfluous Choler; but the venal bloud to be nothing but an artificial Body, connexed of many things or humours, which being again seperated, they should be the same after their death, as before in their life; but that a Body is not born of Mother nature, by a true trans∣mutation of the Chyle into univocal or simple venal bloud; and at length, to have instituted healings about the removing of accomplished causes, which never will be, or were in nature. Surely that thing doth exceed gross ignorance, and renders the Snorters of the Schooles un∣excusable. 
 But perhaps they will object to me; Thou sayest that the veins do suck the Cream, being slidden out of the stomach, into the intestines: therefore the same office belongs to the veins of the stomach, that they may draw that sour Cream into themselves, without the interce∣ding of the Ferment of the Gaul; that is, without changing of the Sour into Salt: And by consequence, thy ferment of the Gaul is a dreamed and invented thing: yea meat broath injected by a Clyster, shall be able to pierce to the Liver, without the knowledge of the Gaul (touching the right of a Clyster, I have finished this question in the Book of Fevers.) I answer, that it is an antient abuse of the Schooles, who have equally attributed the same use to all the veins: As if the veins seperated in the arms, should busie themselves in drawing of the Cream? First of all, I have already shewen, that the bloud in the veins is coagulable, the bloud of the Mesentery not so. And then, we must know that all sour Cream is an enemy to the veins, but that these do draw no hostile thing unto them: from whence it followes, that the veins of the stomach do not allure any thing of the Cream under them; and that all bloud, before it be attracted by the veins of the Mesentery, hath boren the hand of the ferment of the Gaul, in its own stomach of the bowels: yea, although the Arteries being dispersed throughout the stomach, do suck the Spirit of Wine, yet they draw no juyce: For which way should the Arteries draw juyce, seeing they can never do any good thereby? seeing sanguification doth not belong to the heart, but to the Liver? Seeing the juyce being attracted in the Artery, should of necessity be a hinderance, and ought to be corrupted? If therefore the Arteries have a natural endowment of avoyding things hurtful, and likewise of drawing vital things unto them, and things appointed for them by the Lord of things; shall that discretion be denied to the veins in the stomach? For nature should have dealt ill with Horses, who being con∣tent with one onely draught in the morning, are fed all the day after, with Straw, Hay, Chaffe, Oats, or Barley: For truly dry or unjucie things, should straightway contract thirst in the stomach; if the veins of the stomach should draw drink unto them, Horses should be thir∣sty all the day: Therefore the drink ought of necessity to remain in the stomach so long, as that it may expect there an end of future digestion, least the sour Liquor be drawn into the veins, which is plainly hostile, or least the Cream being half cocted, be supped up by the veins, before the appointed time. Therefore there is another use of the veins of the sto∣mach, than that which is of the meseraick veins: And therefore the Argument objected falls to the ground: because the meseraick veins are the stomach of the Liver, and there is not ano∣ther besides those: the veins of the stomach are not likewise that which are onely dedicated to the nourishing of the stomach. Again, whensoever the Pylorus is not exactly shut, it hap∣pens (as in long drinkings) that the stomach doth almost with a continual thred, as it were make water downwards, by dropping into the bowel: but in those that have Fevers, whose Pylorus doth erre through too much straightness, the drink doth sometimes remain a full three dayes space, and at length, more is cast back by one onely vomit, than was taken in two dayes; which thing surely doth oppose that, that the veins of the stomach do attract juyce. It hath oft-times befallen me lying in a Coach with my face upwards, that I should hear through the jogging of the wayes, my stomach to contain a Chyle floating in me like to a Bottle half full: but that I have often gone to bed after that, without a Supper, or drink; yea that I felt my stomach in the morning, as I did the day before: Wherefore I being somewhat curious, have provoked my self to vomit, and I vomited up Cream somewhat sour, plenteous, transpa∣rent, so that my teeth were astonished by reason of the sourness; and although I felt no bur∣den before vomiting, yet after vomiting, I perceived an easement or lightning: whence I observed, 
 First of all, that if the veins of the stomach had now sucked the Chyle 20 hours, I had not been as yet able to have cast back so much, from a moderate yesterdayes dinner. 
 2. That the sour Cream is not allured by the veins. 3. That that sourish Cream was not as yet dismissed from the stomach, not indeed through the vice of digestion, but through the errour of the Pylorus. 4. That digestion differs from the expulsive faculty, if one be perfected, the other being absent, or failing. 5. That now and then, the digestion beares the unguilty fault of the expulsive saculty, and this of it. 6. That as I did offend by too much shutting of the Pylorus, so drinkers do offend-by a too much negligent bolting of the Pylorus. 7. Moreover, at the beginnings of Diseases things are often cast back, which were taken three dayes before. 8. That it belongs not to the veins of the stomach to attract the Cream. 9. That nevertheless the Doctrine remaineth, which hath made it a foolish thing for a Clyster to be injected by the fundament, for nourishing of the sick. 10. That the upper orifice of the stomach in Fevers, offends by too much opening and thirst; but that the Pylorus errs through a strict closure of himself. 11. That in Fevers, both digestion, and also expulsion do offend. 12. That the Key of the Orifice or upper mouth of the stomach is in the Spleen, and that of the Pylorus, in the Gaul, by reason of the divers seats of a twofold ferment. 13. That the reason of Scituation for the Spleen, and Gaul, is from the reason of their office. For indeed, the Schools do extend the first Region of the Body from one extream, from the mouth even into the fundament; and from the other extream, even into the hollow of the Liver: But I do describe the Regions by digestions, seeing otherwise, without these, a Region it self is a Being of Reason: For what doth it belong to a digestion, that there is the utterance of an excrement? what doth it pertain to the stomach, that its drosse departs tho∣row the fundament? For the Dung of the intestine is no more the excrement of the stomach, than sweat is: therefore if the fundament belongs to the first Region, by reason of the excre∣ment of the stomach; therefore also, the Skin shall belong to the first Region by Reason of sweat, and the Bladder by reason of Urine. Therefore not an excrement; Lastly, not the departure hereof, but digestion alone, doth prescribe a limit unto a Region; and therefore, there are as many Regions, as digestions. 
 In the next place, the shop of sanguification is not the Liver it self in its own substance: because even the Liver of Fishes should also make their venal bloud: but yet seeing every thing generates the like to it self, it should of necessity be, that either the Liver of Fishes should be red, or their bloud to be white; both whereof are false: whence we learn, that san∣guification it self is made in the Liver its own stomach, which is the manifold vessel it self of the Mesentery: Otherwise, the Liver hath too few and slender veins for the due perfect∣ing of the juyce of so great a heap: For out of them, the last perfection of sanguification is inspired into the hollow vein on the venal bloud, by the ferment of the Liver. 
 And the Schools do think, that sanguification is made by an actual nourishing warmth of the Liver, and Cream; because they are ignorant of any other actions, than those which hap∣pen through a daily touching or comprehending. 
 And therefore also, that every Agent ought necessarily to suffer, by reason of a resistance, are-acting of the Patient; and that is the unexcusable containing cause of our death, because the radical heat (For they hold it a firm thing, that they have attributed all things to heats, and colds) being by degrees wearied by the re-acting of Patients, should be extinguished: which two Maxims of Aristotle, having more place in the Mathematicks, than in nature, have deceived the Schools: which thing I shall elsewhere abundantly prove. 
 In returning to our purpose, I conclude, that the Gaul, and the Liver do perfect their own offices, not indeed by a corporeal co-touching, congress, or co-mingling of themselves; nor lastly, by embracing, or receiving within their own bosom: But the Gaul dismisseth its own Fermental Blas into the bowels, and the Liver his into the veins of the Mesentery: which actions, although unaccustomed in the Schools, I will demonstrate in its place. 
 Furthermore, the Schools stand amazed, why windes cannot passe thorow the Coats of the intestines, in wringings of the Bowels, while notwithstanding so great a glut of Liquor is e∣very day, abundantly snatched into the meseraick veins, and yet Pores are not seen in the in∣testine, thorow which so much Liquor may daily hasten into the veins: yea neither indeed, although after death, the Bowel being swollen with winde, is strongly, and even unto its bur∣sture, pressed together. Truly as oft as by heats, and colds, figures, and similitudes of arti∣ficial things, (which are of the Schools Instruments, and sacred Anchor) they do not attain the thing, they presently fly to miracles, or at least to the hidden Mysteries of things: being frighted away by the greatness, or unwontedness of the astonished matter, they with the sloath of a narrow search, acquiesce in the admiring of hidden properties. 
 Paracelsus for the framing of Medicinal Vitriol out of Brasse, bids old or decayed Salt to be hanged up in a Brasse Kettle of hot water, in the bladder of a Swine, and so that the whole Salt will presently be dissolved: wherewith he dids the Plates of Brasse to be anointed, and promiseth that Vitriol will be bred in the Air. I was indeed as yet in my young begin∣nings, yet I knew from Phylosophy, that Salt could not be resolved into Water in its own weight, without its substantial transmutation: yet on the other hand, the authority of Para∣celsus perswaded the contrary; to wit, That without the adjoyning of water (for else the Blad∣der should be in vain) the salt should melt into water. Wherefore I being a young Beginner, decreed to try the rash monstrous assertion of so great a man: But presently by a slow or gentle heat, I found the water in the Kettle to be not much less salt than that which was in the Blad∣der, whose neck was tied fast to the handle of the Kettle appearing above the water; from whence I knew, that the water did pierce within and without the Bladder; to wit, That the Bladder was passable by Salt, and hot water, but not by air: For seventy seven parts of rain water do resolve twenty three parts of dryed salt: But whereas one of the seventy seven parts of the water flies away, a crust of salt swims on the brine. Therefore Paracelsus doth vainly command by a Bladder, those things which are commodiously done without it: And that, be∣sides the supposition of a falshood hitherto. Therefore I observed that a Bladder is Porie in a degree of heat, but not in the heat of our family-administration: Hence therefore I gathered, that throughout the Conduit of the Veins, the Bowels do abound with more, and very small Pores, than elsewhere, to which Pores others should answer being passable throughout the Conduit of the veins. Therefore the Cream doth pass thorow the bowels, partly by its imbibing of them, even as Salt water doth a Bladder, and partly by a proper sucking of Sympathy thorow the aforesaid Pores, open indeed in our life time (even as also in heat, waters do pierce a Bladder) but shut in the time of death. But wind is not imbibed by the Bowels by moistening, neither is it sucked by the Veins, and therefore neither doth it for this cause pierce the Bow∣els: And that especially, because it wanteth the drawings of agreement, and a motive Blas, whereby the wind the severer of things to be drawn, may be drawn, and doth resist. The Veins therefore that are dispersed between the double Coat of the stomack, do want the afore∣said Pores: but the porous ones, with which outer Coat they being encompassed, do sweat thorow them the elementary venal bloud: And so the proper Kitchin or Digestion of the stomack is from without to within; But the Kitchin which is made universal in its hollowness, is there also wholly composed and enclosed; And that, least the digestion of them both should breed confusion. Indeed, there is a twofold Cook in the Stomack; one from the Spleen; and the other being proper to it self sends forth divers digestions. Moreover, the sharp ferment in the Stomack dissolves the meats into juice; but the ferment of the Gaul, by saleing the sour Chyle, doth seperate the juice for venal bloud, and from thence doth with-draw the Liquor Latex, Urine, Sweat, Dung, being yellow and liquid, and the parts of a thicker Ballast. Nei∣ther therefore is Digestion in the Stomack, a formal transmutation of meats:
Nature therefore, hath with me, constituted six vital digestions; But in the seventh num∣ber she her self resteth. 
 CHAP. XXIX. Pylorus the Governour. 1. The use of the Pylorus delivered by the Antients. 2. The chief Dis∣eases of the Pylorus. 3. He is the Moderator of the first digestion. 4. Of what sort the closure of the Pylorus is. 5. The Command or Go∣vernment of the Pylorus. 6. How vomiting happeneth. 7. The Blas of the Pylorus. 8. The Stern of the first digestion. 9. The Eccen tricities of the Pylorus. 10. Some Originalls of Diseases neglected by the Schools. 11. Some Positions. 12. Whence the diversity of matter vomited up, is. 13. What that gauly thing may be, which is cast forth by vomit. 14. The sluggishness of the Schools. 15. Their ridiculous admonition. 16. The shutting and opening of the Pylorus. 17. The reason of the Scituation of the Gaul. 18. Whence Fluxes, wringings of the Bowels, Bloudy Fluxes, the Hemorrhoids or Piles, &amp;c: are. 19. An errour about hunger and thirst. 20. Some absurd consequences upon the positions of the Schools. 21. A sense of appetites in the Pylorus is de∣monstrated. 22. The remedy of the Bloudy Flux or Dysentery, and Flux, hath opened the office of the Pylorus. 23. Giddinesses of the Head, whence they are. 24. An example in a Cock. 25. The leekie Liquor of the stomach, is not that of the Gaul. 26. Thirst doth not shew a necessary defect of moysture. 27. Whence there is a yellow and bitter vomiting at the beginning of a Tertian Ague. 28. The use of the Pylorus is confirmed by four Histories. 29. Thirteen notable things resulting from thence. 
 IN what part the Stomach layeth open at top, and being conjoyned to the throat, doth lay under it, that by the figure Autonomasia, is called its Orifice or mouth: But its utte∣rance beneath, is named the Pylorus or Porter: For in those that are well in health, the Py∣lorus is shut, while the Stomach hath received the meats, or drinks, untill that the digestion of the stomach being finished, the Chyle or Cream be made. 
 For then, not before, the Pylorus openeth himself: but the orifice of the stomach is shut, at least, fulness being present (if there be not sufficient cast in) when the stomach begins to give it self up to the performance of its office. These are all things that I have hitherto found delivered by the Schools concerning the Pylorus: But I have apprehended a great hinge of health, and sickness, to be involved in the Pylorus. 
 For first of all, I have seen now and then, in Fevers, that as to day, undigested things have been vomited up, which were the third day agoe cast in: But on the contrary, in the Caeliack or belly passion, the Pylorus is never shut: Yea some, after that they have been filled with dainty fare, they do not desist from rioting all the night, and therefore they do pisse conti∣nually: Therefore it must needs be, that their Pylorus being notably passable, doth not onely distil drop by drop, but by a continual thred; neither that it doth expect any bound of coction: For straightway even from the beginning, that it was not suitably or exactly shut, or at leastwise, that it doth somewhat lay open in divided wrinckles, after that the stomach was not sufficient for the entring drink: For that happens in healthy persons, when there hath been a defect of the closure of the Pylorus. There are others also, whose Pylorus is a more stubborn keeper, they vomit drinks after they are half digested: because the digestive facul∣ty being not equivalent to the drinks received, being provoked, doth cast forth the whole. Indeed there is too much obstinacy of the Pylorus, where three dayes meats are cast forth. 
 Which things surely do convince, that the Pylorus is not onely the Porter, but also that it doth govern the first and most evident digestion; and so that in this respect, there is a drowsie carelesness of the Schools: For that I may give enough to their insufficiency, I say, that first of all, the Pylorus is shut, not indeed by a muscle, after the manner of the fundament, or Bladder; for it is not the Client of a voluntary motion. Neither in the next place is it shut by contracted fibers or threds, like the Cramp, or wringings of the bowels: For it per∣forms its office of a Porter without feeling, and trouble. But no otherwise than as the womb after conception, doth the Pylorus shut his neather mouth on every side, by his own proper Blas: thus I consider both the Orifices of the stomach to be shut: yet so, as that the upper Orifice, being in a healthy person once shut after meat, doth easily open it self wholly, at e∣very importunity of a morsel, or pertinacy of a draught; seeing it can scarce endure that any thing should hang above over it in the throat: Although in sick folks, and those that have suf∣fered hunger or want, its opening doth happen with pain and great anguish; because in the same persons, that closure of the Orifice doth depend on an inordinacy. Therefore the clo∣sure of the Pylorus is more obstinate, and exact, than that of the Orifice. Again, it is not to be doubted, that the motive faculty of either part doth not obey the will, and so that it is natu∣rall, or diseasie. 
 The Pylorus is said in the Schools, to be subject to the retentive faculty: But certainly, it sheweth an absolute power, when as the expulsive faculty being against it, the digestive fail∣ing, the attractive loathing, and so others being trodden underfoot, the Pylorus is oft-times stubborn, as well in its closure (as I have said above to happen in Fevers) as in its opening (as in Caeliack passions.) 
 For vomiting is made while the Pylorus being shut, it doth contract it self upwards, not indeed by the co-wrinckling of the stomach, but by a totall motion of the stomach upwards to the throat; and so the Pylorus doth command vomiting, and hearkeneth not unto the reten∣tive faculty. Seeing therefore the power of the Pylorus is not the Chamber-maid of other faculties, nor subjected to fibers, but Monarchal, and so that the fibers ought to yield obedi∣ence to its very pleasure; It must needs be, that this power is absolutely vital, and that it hath a proper motive Blas, like the womb, independent on the will of man: And that so much the more potent a one, by how much the Duumvirate of the stomach shall now come to light. And although the Pylorus be wearied oft-times by external and occasional causes (to wit from Me∣dicines, Poysons, or Dregs; yet its Blas is free unto its self, which is implanted in its part, or Archeus. 
 Wherein notwithstanding, I admire a certain power from above, like unto the influences of the Stars: For the Blas of the Pylorus doth as near as may be, express the Blas of a free will: for truly an external inciter rushing on it, it can nevertheless at pleasure oppose as to shutting, or opening, that as long as the Pylorus is well in health or able, it may be moved for lawful ends, or at leastwise those that appear so to it, for the straightning, or loosening of the passage. 
 Yet when a man being inordinate, doth transgress against those ends, the Pylorus as the Governour or orderer of digestion, doth oftentimes constrain the man to expiate his o∣fence by punishing him: But seeing there may be defects in that Blas (in some sort, as it were an arbitrall one) not onely from occasional causes, but also in its own motive mad princi∣ple, so that through fury it doth preposterously open or shut it self freely, like the womb; Sure∣ly, it is a wonder, that these things, with the other beginnings of healing, have stood neglected by the Schools. Every power, and especially the motive, doth easily wander abroad, being stirred up as well by contingent causes, as by a proper beck of madness, seeing they are free, and as it were independent; in the errour of which motive power, the Pylorus doth for the most part, and easily stumble: Even as the womb not being shaken from elsewhere, doth rush it self headlong, ascend, or being furious, doth writhe it self on the sides, doth alienate, straighten, enlarge, contract the throat, weasand, yea and the sinews readily serving the will, against their office, and doth now and then exhibite cruel motions, scarce unlike to magical ones, as the motive Blas is excentrical in stirring up divers Tragedies of Tempests. And these things are diligently to be attended by Physitians, that as oft as through occasion of the provoking cause, the Pylorus doth wander from its aims, he may straightway study a re∣moving of the cause. But if the Pylorus be exorbitant through the errour as it were the fury of its own proper Blas, let him think that he must fight with excentrical powers, and not with matter; and least of all, that evacuations must be trusted to. For we may think that in a tem∣perate state, a man having eaten moderately, his Pylorus is suitably shut, least any thing do drop down out of his chinks; and that at length digestion being finished, the Pylorus doth open it self: Surely neither doth this come to passe from a forreign pricking quality of the Chyle; but because the Pylorus is expert of things to be done in the stomach, and therefore is to be reckoned the moderator of digestion, by whom indeed are the bounds of Govern∣ment, and the Keyes are kept: For otherwise, if the Pylorus be shut longer than is meer, see∣ing that which was sufficiently digested doth not therefore cease to undergoe a further force of the digestive ferment, therefore also it is cocted more than is meet: Not indeed, that the Chyle is therefore more excellently cocted like Glasse in the Furnace, by how much the longer; but through too much delay it is alienated and corrupted, which afterwards must needs bring forth very many difficulties, as well in the stomach, as in its own neighbouring parts. Notwithstanding, if the Pylorus be lesse exactly shut, surely the new drink cannot but be (together with its former crudities) carried into the Bowels; about which surely since the digestion of the stomach is not employed, a ferment of the Gaul being received, it is changed into a strange substance, and at length doth procreate divers Infirmities in the veins; be∣cause the first digestion being omitted, it is come to the second: For so inspired tremblings and shakings of the hands, beatings of the heart, faintings, sharp Fevers, Tumors, and joynt∣sicknesses do break out: So the tartness of Wine being not yet corrected by the first maturity of digestion, being a stranger to the veins, with the Aqua vitae inbred in it, doth cause the proper nourishment of the veins to degenerate with it self; and an unnamed and unknown guest doth bring forth unwonted and unknown infirmities: Even as for the most part, if the Chyle being well ripened, doth slide down into the Duodenum, and at the same instant, new food be injected from above, be sure, that the Pylorus being well appointed, is presently shut, the former baggage being not yet plainly dismissed: Therefore the detained part of the Chyle is corrupted, doth wax sour more than is meet, and defileth the new food with a fore∣ripe ferment; And the whole Chyle is made a forreigner, unless that before an exact coction it be banished by the Pylorus, which is by exciting divers appetites, wringings, and Fluxes. Therefore the errour of Pylorus, whether it be proper, or stirred up from inordinacy, doth cause many difficulties. But that new food sliding in, the Pylorus is presently closed, it is manifest; for else, the new and raw food should slide forth together with the Chyle which should appear in the excrement, as if it were bred from the affect of the passion of the belly, which is sometimes otherwise seen in devouring Children, their Pylorus being not yet suffici∣ently able to obtain its own ends. Therefore weaker stomacks do complain that great sournesses do arise in them, which in the morning they do cast up with their yesterdays food, or at night, with the Chyle of the precedent Noon, and the Reliques of their last meats. 
 Furthermore, for a more full knowledge of these things, we must repeat, that it belongs not to the veins of the stomach to suck to them the Chyle detained in the stomach: likewise, that vomiting is made by the Pylorus being shut, and that the whole length of the stomach is contracted from the neather parts, upwards to the Orifice. Lastly, that this motion is made by the Pylorus, which if he should be opened, he should certainly unload the stomach of a lesse trouble; but seeing he openeth not himself, he judgeth it to be inconvenient for health, to have those dregs dismissed beneath: And so he hath seemed to me, to be the Rector or governour of digestion. But that vomiting doth happen two manner of wayes; To wit, by the proper Blas of the Pylorus; but then it is without pain: But the other is made by pro∣vokers; and that, although it be made also by the Pylorus, yet not by its own proper will. 
 Therefore also it is troublesome, and grievous: at leastwise, vomiting is not made, unless by the shutting of the Pylorus: Else that should fall down into the Duodenum, which is ex∣pelled by vomiting: For when vomiting is made by the proper motion of the Pylorus, all of whatsoever it judgeth to be hurtful to it self, parteth at the first vomit: But if the Pylorus be provoked by a repeated vomit, other things are ejected, than those which bewrayed them∣selves in the first vomit: To wit, yellow, yolkie things, and then those things do follow, which are of a more transparent yellowness like the Oyl of Rape-seeds, and which are be∣lieved to be gaulie, by reason of their bitterness: and at length, now and then, things Skie-coloured and green, which by taking of the more cruel purging Medicines, do happen straightway after the beginning. 
 Here the Pylorus was opened between the first, and following vomits, so that whatsoever doth lay hid in the empty or fasting gut, and in neighbouring places, the Pylorus may pull up∣wards unto himself, whereby he may wash off as it were the mark imprinted by the Medi∣cine: But those things are for the most part bitter, both because they have again and again undergone the ferment of the Gaul, and that an exorbitant and angry one; then also because they are besides their Custom, snatched up into anothers Harvest, where they are corrupted into an excrement, made notable by the quality of the ferment which it hath immediately drawn: therefore the Chyle in the same place becomes gawly and bitter. 
 But in this place I do behold the Schools with admiration, that they should prescribe meats of an easier digestion to be sent into the stomach, before those which are of a harder cocture; being unmindful of their own Doctrine, which sheweth, that all Contents of the stomach are turned into a single or simple Chyle; but the Pylorus to be so shut from the beginning, that it suffers nothing, even so much as a drop, to slide forth before digestion be finished. Next, that coction is made by the un-cessant heat of the stomach, and so for this cause also, the di∣gestion continued from the beginning, to begin, neither ever to keep holiday, as long as its Valcan heat doth remain: But that all particular things contained, do receive that digestive heat after the manner of the receiver: which Doctrine indeed standing, seeing all things are reduced into a liquid Chyle, and are thorowly mingled exquisitely in the one onely pot of the stomach; it followes, that in feeding, those things are first to be sent in which are of a har∣der digestion, because they are cooked by so much the longer space of heat. 
 Suppings (say the Schools) and things of a more ready coction, if they are taken last, would putrifie, if they expect the ultimate bound of the more hard assumed things: As if the dige∣stive faculty were the parent of putrefaction! neither that there should be made a co-mix∣ing of things eaten! or a conversion into a fluid Chyle! but that those things which are ta∣ken by morsels, should lay secret by Soils or Grounds: As if I say, the Pylorus should open it self by set periods or turns, that the order may be kept in dismissing the Chyle, which there was in receiving of the meats: which things, if the Schools shall believe to be possible, the Pylorus at leastwise, should have a greater power of discretion in observing the priorities of meats, than that the Schools should so sloathfully neglect its office. But the closure of the Orifice doth not conduce unto digestion, neither doth it govern the appetite: But the Pylorus doth command both; because a sufficient satiety is indeed for the most part present; yet moreover, we as yet do eat and drink from vice: Therefore the closure of the Orifice is not from an appetite, as neither from fulness: But weariness, loathings, and aversion from fleshes, do begin presently after Fevers, and the rise of Diseases of the stomach, and they have the Orifice shut. 
 Therefore the Orifice is neither shut from fulness, nor for the necessity of concoction; as neither is it continently or sparingly opened by reason of appetite; to wit, if it be shut with∣out appetite, fulness, and concoction, and doth remain open after fulness in time of coction: For belchings are uttered in the morning, the stomach being fasting, empty, and desiring; yet belching doth denounce a closure of the Orifice. In the next place, the Orifice is shut in those, who being pressed with long hunger, do languish, and who have been infirm through a long continuing abstinence from food; To whom the unstopping of the Orifice is very dif∣ficult, grievous, and painful. If therefore the Orifice be not necessarily shut from hunger, appetite, fulness, and coction, therefore the closing or opening of the Orifice doth not re∣spect necessities in the coction of the serving faculties; but the Orifice doth especially serve for this, least to him that layes down, the Chyle should re-gorge into the jawes: whence first of all it is manifest, that the service of the Pylorus is more famous than that of the Orifice. 
 For truly he is the Ruler of the whole Family-administration of the stomach, even unto the last Circle of the Intestines or greater bowels: wherein, because seeing the operation of the Gaul is perfected, therefore also the Gaul ought to be superstructed and incumbent on the Pylorus. 
 Of both which, if there be not a full consent, Fluxes, wringings of the Bowels, Dysenteries, the Hemorrhoids or Piles, and divers miseries of the Abdomen or bottom of the belly do arise. 
 It is also an erroneous thing in Galen, and his modern Schools, that we do hunger and thirst onely through the penury of venal bloud, and so that as many ounces of venal bloud ought to be filled up, as are unfilled. First of all, if that be perpetual, therefore let the Schools choose, to wit, either whether they will make the manglings in cutting of a vein, to be vain, or the ap∣petite not to be stirred up from the sucking of the veins, accusing the defect of venal bloud: which thing first of all, is not to be doubted of in time of health: for if there be hunger by reason of want of venal bloud, therefore Phlebotomy is badly instituted in the penury of venal bloud: But if that be considered in Diseases, suppose in a Fever, where there is no appetite, there also shall be no defect of venal bloud: But if as many ounces of bloud are supplyed, as are consumed, of which Consumption, hunger should be the token: therefore in a Fever, either there is not a consuming of venal bloud, or hunger is not the sense of venal bloud consumed. 
 But if the venal bloud be also wasted in a Fever, Phlebotomy shall be in vain. Likewise for every event, after two or three dayes, as much bloud, shall be now consumed by the Fever (seeing a Fever doth consume and extenuate more than right health) as a Plethora or the abounding of humours (the one onely betokener of bloud-letting) should command to be emptied out: And by consequence, the positions of hunger being supposed, Phlebotomy shall every where be made vain: For the Schools suppose that the bloud is dispensed into the les∣ser veins out of the hollow vein (as if a vein were a dispenser, and there were not a diffe∣rence between the Vessel it self, and the dispenser, or the power proportionally dispensing) and at length into the small little branches, whereby in the last place, it may be dispersed into the habit of the Body: And therefore onely from the sense of hunger, that the last small branches of the veins do suck the greater Trunk; but that this doth afterwards suck the veins of the stomach and mesentery, from whence at length that hunger and thirst are felt. Which thing being supposed, first of all, those whose veins do swell, should be pressed with no hun∣ger, or thirst; and then, there should not be a sucking of that sense, unless the greater veins were first emptied: Likewise in the third place, this position doth resist the Doctrine of the Schools, who teach, that the stomach doth cook onely for it self in the first place; but se∣condarily, or by accident, for the whole body, as the stomach doth undergo a common self-love: For that being granted, the stomach shall neither cook, nor desire, and hunger for the Body, but onely for it self; therefore neither shall it feel, that it may supply the penury of the veins: But the veins shall primarily thirst and hunger, the stomach onely by acci∣dent; neither for it self, but for the veins: For the ignorance of the truth, hath made the Schools every where rash: They have not known I say, that hunger is inspired from the Spleen into the Stomach; to wit, that the Spleen hath known the scope of things to be done, as the chief Bowel for the governing of decoctions; and therefore, it is effectively the chief governour of the appetites, to whom notwithstanding, the Pylorus, the ruler, and executer, is an assistant: For the Pylorus for all that, hath a free Blas of opening or shutting it self at plea∣sure, which in time of health is moved by reason of its knowledge of the ends known to the stomach, for which, coction, and appetite are created by the Spleen, as if the Pylorus were conscious of the secret ends of the Spleen: But in sickness, the Pylorus openeth and shuts it self preposterously, and with an invented order being as it were stricken with a symptomatical fury. For I being about to buy a Village, I did walk with a notable appetite, then by chance I wrung my foot awry, I slid down, rigour presently came on me, with a loathing, vomiting, and the former appetite to eat, being suppressed; but I straightway reposed my writhed foot, and that, half put out of its place; and at the same instant, my former appetite was restored unto me, and the nauseousness of my stomach was ceased.
Indeed my Orifice was open, as well in appetite, as in nauseousness; but I had my Pylorus shut in my appetite, and straightway opened in my nauseousness, and again shut in my vomi∣ting: For as I said, vomiting is not made but by the shutting and inverting of the Pylorus up∣wards: but in the hicket or sobbing, there is made an inversion of the stomach it self up∣wards, which therefore is far different from the inversion of the Pylorus beginning to vomit. But that those things were after this manner, is apparent: because seeing my stomach under notable hunger, had not wherewith to vomit, being greedy of meat, the Pylorus by his own consent, presently closed himself: who again, even from the distortion or writhing of the li∣gaments of my foot, being as it were mad with fury, opened himself, and called unto him the filths from the Duodenum: For at the time of my vomiting, that the Pylorus might expel the conceived ballast, he shut himself, and again had opened himself for a new accumulation or heaping up of filths, unless by the restored small dislocation, the fury of the Pylorus had been appeased. Therefore if with the closure of the Pylorus, my withdrawn appetite straight∣way returned, who seeth not that the appetite afforded by the Spleen, is governed by the Pylorus? I have said, that the Pylorus doth snatch the filths out of the Duodenum upwards into the stomach; that he who before being the Porter, was thought to be dedicated onely to detaining and expelling, may think of attracting hurtful things: which things, although they do happen by a common sorce, whereby all things being once banished, do put on a ho∣stile character, and are thereby presently made worse; yet they are in an inverted order drawn unto the stomach, by a raging Blas of the Pylorus. I have likewise herein discerned, that the Pylorus is not onely the cause of appetite, nauseousness, and vomiting; but also, to be the one onely causer of the Disease called Choler of the Dysentery, or Bloudy Flux, and Flux; and I have experienced, that oft times, a small Remedy being administred, the furies of the Pylorus were appeased, and the aforesaid hurts corrected. Surely it is a thing to be grieved at, that nothing hath hitherto been weighed by the Schools touching these things; and that their whole aid is placed in a Clister, neither that they have come unto the nest of the evil. They have onely converted themselves unto the thorow pas∣sage of the thing produced, like the Dog that bites the stone that is cast at him. For I have seen a young man exceeding well in health, and enjoying a notable appetite, in the morning to have eaten some fresh ripe Mulberries well washed, with bread buttered, and straightway to have felt a sweet delight of cooling refreshment in his stomack thereby: And then his ap∣petite being by chance half an hour after sore troubled or destroyed, he fell with the pain of the Colick into a Flux, and he had daily perhaps seventy stools of a Milkie colour: But presently restringent Cordials were administred as well within as without: To wit, the juice of Quin∣ces, with Confection of Alkermes, of Diarrhodon of Spodium, De hyacintho, and the like exhil∣erating things. In the mean time, very many Clisters of Whey steelified, and the like sweep∣ings were injected, and all in vain: At length also Opiates were annexed to other things, and nature laughed at the learned ignorance, and sporting experiments; but the sick man grieved at the vain remedies: And at length at the utmost danger of Life that was appointed, the Lord healed him. 
 For I administred two hard yolks of Eggs, tempered with Rose-Vinegar: his dejected appe∣tite, and the restoring of his appetite by the yolks taken, do testifie that the Flux arose from the vice of the Pylorus: For he perceived a manifest ease, the medicine being as yet detain∣ed within his stomack. I remember also that by Horse-hoofs fryed in Buttel, and the same being afterwards powdered, the fury of the Pylorus hath been oft appeased, that dysenteries and fluxes have stopped, and felt the bounty of healing, that strong smelling remedy being as yet detain∣ed within the stomack. But if the hoof be the superfluity of a wanton Colt, it is said To bring certain destruction on those that have the Dysentery or bloudy Flux. Therefore the Pylorus being the Ruler of the closure of Digestion, and appetite in the stomack, it doth also through a long journey of the Intestines, govern as well the contents, as the exorbitances of the neighbour-Veins: for the undigestions of meats, and excrements, their corruptions, and quick passages do testifie, that the indignation of the Pylorus only is to be confirmed by remedies. 
 For so yesterdayes gluttony doth stir up giddinesses of the head, not so much over night, as in the morning, the stomack being void of meats, and those do for the most part cease, the break-fast being taken; Because then the Pylorus doth open, and is beset with filth, and af∣terwards he closed himself at the coming of the break-fast, and doth as it were forget the for∣mer discommodity. 
 A Cock of ours, of two years of age, eats Bran and Oats in the morning, according to his custom: but a little before evening he refuseth to Roost on his accustomed staffs; he layes on the ground, and the morning following is averse to meat: Being giddy-headed, he runs down side-wayes, and doth oft-times fall backwards: At length, he shakes or smites his Comb and Fore-head harder on the ground, and dyes before noon: But by Dissection were found some lesser flints, not indeed in the first sack or stomack, but in the more inward and true stomack. But a greater Flint had shut the Pylorus, which being lesse than a Flint, had cut of the hope of passage: For neither was there any other cause found of so great giddiness, and unwonted death, but that the Pylorus because it was by force and against its will, shut in the place of Coction, it had confected or made a Leeky liquor above the greater Flint: Which surely, could not have come thither out of the Gaul, seeing the Flint had stopt up the passage from Gaul its coming within the stomack, out of the Gaul, thorow the Duode∣num: Therefore that green and leeky liquor was bred in the stomack, through the Vice of the stopped Pylorus. 
 Likewise concerning thirst, I have often observed that those that are thirsty in Fevers, have again vomited up the drink, with a fourfold quantity. Therefore thirst is not of necessity, by reason of the defect of moisture, nor also through the penury of bloud, as that for the same cause the same veins may sometimes be the cause of hunger, and sometimes of thirst, and the messengers of a defect of venal bloud; yea now and then of both together, as well of hunger, as of thirst: But the Bowel inspiring a ferment on the stomack, doth stir up hunger and thirst: For in Fevers, the cause of the Fever is an Alcali abounding; hence neither doth the thirst cease, although the stomack doth abound with its own drink: for neither doth the drink come unto that Alcali: For so salt and peppered things do prepare thirst, no otherwise than as putrified Alcalies or Lixivial salts do; because they exclude the sour Ferment out of the stomack. As salt doth hinder the resolving and transchanging of the food, that is, the entrance of the digestive ferment breathed from the Spleen; So a quantity of the more pure drink, things peppered, hard, and undigestible, are causers of thirst: but not because they are hot and dry things in the middle waters detained in the stomack; but because they do resist the aforesaid Ferment of the Spleen. But sour things on the contrary, as they are neer to the Ferment of the Spleen, they do refresh thirst. Therefore thirst in the like cases, is not through defect of nutritive moisture, but by reason of the Ferment of the Spleen being hindred, which at length overcomming (by a longer time of sleep) the aforesaid difficulties, therefore sleep takes away thirst. Also thirst ariseth in Fevers by reason of burntish putrefactions, and coagulated things; but not because nutritive, and cooling refreshing moisture is desired (as they think) but a resolver of that which hu ts: And so it doth not so much shew and require a nourishment, as a Remedy. And therefore neither doth thirst cease by drink, unless this hath brought a co-resembling mean for the receiving of the Ferment. Seeing therefore the Pylorus is the Go∣vernour of Coction, and no less the Moderator of thirst, than of appetite, as well meats as drinks shall be also the perceivances of the same Ruler, distinguishing the bounds or ends of digestion. 
 For in the Beginnings of Tertians, a plenteous vomiting of a yellow excrement, together with much thirst, doth molest; and those two do concur with the shutting of the mad Pylorus, and for this cause he doth instead of a sour Cream, frame that yellow or cankered excrement or liquor, which being detained in the stomack of the Cock, caused his death. Moreover I will adde four Histories which will confirm the efficacy of the Pylorus in the action of Government. My Wives Brother was by chance ill at ease for the space of eight dayes, at Mecheline, from a solemn and gl ttonous Feast: But a Physitian of the City offers him a vomitory potion, whereby he vomited twice every day: And so he had written the day before, that he the next day would come from Mecheline to Bruxels unto us: Therefore being Boored, and now fitted for his journey, the day following before noon, he dyed, after that in the foregoing night he had been ill, and had vomited often as before, somewhat black Liquor, or venal bloud there corrupted. But his dead carkass being dissected, shewed no vice, except that in his stomack a blackish Liquor floated on the shut Pylorus. 
 2. A Girle of three yeers old, and noble, takes a vomit to drive away an Ague, of a boasting Italian Physitian, being a few Grains of a certain Powder. 
 Also another Noble young Daughter, not yet exceeding the second yeer of her age, took the same: Both of them indeed straightway after the taking of it, vomited; but both of them had their right eye wrung or wrested aside, and their whole side as it were beset with the Palsie; their arm indeed wholly, but their leg not altogether so: For the elder being wholly given to tattle, yet her sorely annoyed; but the younger, slumber and vomiting now and then interrupting each other, both of them dye. I am called unto both, and I attempted some things in vain: Perhaps indeed because late, and life failing. But both their carkasses are o∣pened: And the same stinking Liquor detained in the stomack (the Pylorus being exactly shut) the cause of the murder, comes to hand. 
 3. A Hen, when she would pick grain on the ground, she retorted her neck to one side, and in picking was rowled into a Circle on her left side, and her legs fayling, at the taking of every Barley Corn, or Crum of bread, she slid on her hinder part upon her tail: And that had remained thus perhaps for eight dayes space, before it might be declared to me, I ran unto the unwonted Spectacle, I unfeathered her most lean breast, and a certain old woman o∣pened her former or memb anous stomack with a Razor. But I found that she had swallowed a small gobbet of rocky Chrystal: but that woman sowed up her stomack again with a thred, and afterwards she survived in perfect health. 
 4. One of my house-hold servants forming some Vessels about Distillation, with a most sharp fire of pit-Coals, melted a Glasse by sporting: the Fragments and Vessels themselves were dark and white, from green Glasse, and the sweepings of my distillations, But the Frag∣ments of his new Vessels being cast into a corner of the floor, the Hens devoured them, being deceived in the whiteness of glasse: They were well in health: but it happened that the fif∣teenth day after, the two fatter were killed for the Table: But that there were found in their first Stomack some of the aforesaid Fragments, which were easily conjectured to have stuck in the same place many dayes: But they were diminished (so that when as glasse is not broken, but Point-wise) as well side-wayes, as corner-wise: Those Fragments were on every side obtuse or blunted. But I have hence collected to my self things worthy of note. 
 1. That the Pylorus being shut, my Brother did alwayes vomit: For truly, also after death, that stinking Liquor was found in his closed stomack, which else had been in the Bowels with∣out any notable dammage. 2. That that shutting of the Pylorus was furious, otherwise it had opened it self, and had not so hurt. 3. That the motions of the Pylorus are of another Re-publick, than all others are: For all contractures do cease with death, those of the Pylorus not so. 4. That in the vomitory medicine, its poysonous faculty had stirred up the indignation and contracture of the Pylorus: For he was not only contracted or drawn together, but he drew forth or allured a bloody juice out of the veins of the stomack, which was forth-with made black, and stinking. 5. That the same things happened in the two little Girls. 6. That the indignation of the Pylorus doth also produce Palsies. 7. But an Ae uginous or cankery Liquor, death. 8. That in the Cock, the only stubborn stoppage, from the Even-tide, caused his giddines∣ses. 9. The Hen which had swallowed the Chrystal, doth more strongly prove this, besides which, no other thing was found in her fore-stomack. 10. That the detaining of Glasse in the stomack did remain with health, because the Pylo∣rus was not thereby stopped up. 11. That glasse is of easier Digestion than rocky Chrystal. 12. That an Aeruginous, or black Liquor was made from the indignation and shutting of the Pylorus, but not from the detaining of a Body, or Glasse besides nature. 13. That Glass was consumed by little and little in the stomack of the Hens. CHAP. XXX. A History of Tartar. 1. That a Treatise of the four feigned humors, is to be joyned in this place, for the integrity of the work. 2. After the rejecting of a quality, being an elementary distemper, we must then also treat of Tartar, and the three first things or principles of the Chymists. 3. The Birth and Life of Paracel∣sus. 4. He first brought Tartar into a disease. 5. Strife unhappily fell out between the Humorists and Paracelsus. 6. They afterwards made use of Remedies borrowed from our fugitive servants. 7. Humours were long ago silenced, which I at length have demonstrated in a particular Book, never to have been in nature. 8. An Epitome or Summary of those things which Paracelsus hath here and there written concerning Tartar. 
 IT hath seemed to me a meet thing to premise natural things in order to the matter of Medicine, because I am he who have alwayes thought the knowledge of the whole of na∣ture to have no respect but unto the health or welfare of man: Therefore have I treated of the Elements alone, whereby I may drive away the fictions, of the Schools, touching the composition of four Elements in every single body, which hitherto is reckoned to be mixt: That I might shew I say, that there are no mixtures; nor strifes, nor distempers, or complex∣ions of the same, even as neither that the Catologue of diseases of the feigned temperatures of Elementary qualities can stand with truth: That is, that the Schools have not hitherto known the causes of diseases, all which almost they have ascribed to those qualities. Moreover, now the same labour remains to me concerning the four feigned and false humours, and the wandring corruptions of these; it was to be written &amp; shewn, that such humours were never in nature; therefore also that they have alike perniciously erred hitherto, as well in the Doctrine, knowledge, subscription of d seasifying causes, as consequently in wandring Remedies, and the universal directions and applications of these: And seeing that thing is already perfor∣med by me in a peculiar book printed in the yeer 1644. at Colonia, by Jodoc Calchove, dire∣cted for a fore-runner of this work: and nigh the same yeer I set forth two other Books, to wit, concerning the disease of the Stone, and the Plague-grave wherein I have shewn , that hitherto the causes of those diseases are unknown in the Schools: Therefore it is enough here to have attested it: Although those books are to be ansferred hither for the integrity or en ireness of the work. Therefore the causes and essences of diseases, have even unto this day stood neglected by the Schools, and they being neglected, therefore the more weak have been destitute of right Remedies. 
 Now at length, because Paracelsus hath lately dared to remove the general cause of almost all diseases into Tartar: And although Paracelsus first, hath rashly made that sufficient; yet he hath remained uncertain and unconstant, whether he might rather determine the three things (which by his own Authority he called The three Principles of all corporall things) to wit, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, for the general cause of all diseases, than his own brought in Tartar: And therefore he hath left both of the aforesaid assertions to strive: Neverthelesse the more famous Physitians have at this day yielded themselves unto Tartar. Wherefore, seeing there is not in either, at this day, the truth of the Causes, and Remedies of Diseases, I have held it worth my labour, and for the good of my neighbour, to brush and sweep away both those er∣rours of Paracelsus out of the Schools; That Physitians, who while they do now incline unto the Doctrine of Tartar, all errours being at length removed, they may betake themselves to the true knowledge of diseases and remedies: And that from thence my neighbour (which thing I onely have wished) may receive profit. For the knowledge of things according to the Principles by me delivered, is drawn by the definition: But a definition is to be taken from a knowledge of the causes: And therefore in so great darkness on every side, and ignorances of Medicine, I will endeavour to bring those that shall succeed; yea and likewise modern young Beginners, into the true knowledge of diseases and remedies. For I have long since lost my hope of the Seniours, who will refuse to learn, being brought to that pass, as well by reason of sluggishness of assenting to the inventions of Pagans already drunk up, and converted into nourishment, and of labouring about Furnaces, as through a bashfulness of learning of me a poor man of lit∣tle esteem, the last of Phylosophers. 
 The father of Paracelsus being a Bastard of the master of the Teutonick Knights, went for a trivial Physitian, rich in a famous Library; who committed his son Aureolus Philippus Theo∣phrastus of Bombast to Tritemius of Sphanheime: Whence he being rich in the substance of Secrets, went unto Spagyrick or Alchymistical works under Sigismund Fugger: For he was not there given to Venus (indeed a Sow in a place where three wayes met, had gelded him.) Secondly, not to sloath, nor spent he his life in flattery, being earnestly desirous of knowledge: For he, about the twentieth yeer of his age, searching into the divers Mines of the Minerals of Germany, at length came into Muscovy, in whose borders he being taken by the Tartars, our gelded Physitian is brought to the Cham: from thence, with the Prince the Chams son, he is sent away to Constantinople. At length about the 28th yeer of his age, he obtained the Stone that makes Gold, it being given unto him; for which things sake, he took up his Inn in Basil, where when he now became famous through many cures of diseases, he obtained the Chair of Medicinal Phylosophy, that he might give himself wholly up to Spagyrical labours. Indeed as the stone that makes gold lifted up his mind, and he saw the narrow substance of Physiti∣ans, and wandring errours of the same, he had long since aspired unto the chief-dome of healing: Indeed he taught at Basil full three yeers space, and expounded a Book concern∣ing Tartar, and likewise of degrees, and compositions; surely Both, the work of his ownin∣vention, and burdened with many Anxieties. In the mean time, as every ones own pleasure draws him, he indulging drinkings more than was meet, began to despise the Chair; yea and the Latine, whence, he had almost forgotten it, and he supposed that he ought to speak truth only in the Germane Tongue. Therefore although he was born with a rare wit, yet he was more happy in the gift of the Azoth or Practick, than in the searching out of the Theory. 
 He I say, first obtruded Tartar on us, into the cause almost of all diseases, and accused us, when he perceived that neither in the Schools of the Antients, as neither in his own three first things, he was sufficiently credited: To which Patron, the Schools at this day have subscri∣bed. I also at sometime thought my self wholly gratified as it were with a found Treasure, till the Lord otherwise instructed me. 
 First of all, the pages of Galen, and Paracelsus have disputed, whether the matters of a Tartarous humour and phlegm were not the same, and onely pure Sunonymal things: But at length, being amazed at coagulations,, or neither daring to ascribe so great a Troop of Disea∣ses unto one onely phlegme, the more learned Galenists admitted of a tartarous humour, and began to use Remedies which they begged from fugitive Servants. 
 Which things, although they were all poysonous, base, and adulterate, and are at this day as yet more; nevertheless, they have invented a knowledge with pots or Boxes, that they may be daily drawn forth for uses. Likewise Tartar rising up, the humours have almost failed among the more refined wits. 
 Therefore the disgrace or reproach of Physitians from the ill success of curing, hath per∣swaded them to look back unto Chymical Remedies, and the grounds of their own Art being neglected, they began promiscuously to use as well those Chymical Remedies, and most mi∣serable poysons, indifferently, as those which their Dispensatories do describe, as well to abo∣lish heats, as to shave off the phlegms of the stomach; so that the sloath of the Remedies, and speculations of Galen being well perceived, the Galenists do by degrees decline unto Tartarous humours: Therefore what things I have read out of many Books, which Paracelsus writeth concerning Tartarers, I will contract into a brief tract. 
 Nature being at first a beautiful Virgin, was defiled by sin; not indeed by her own, neither therefore for a punishment to her self; but seeing she was created for the use of ungrateful man, she was as it were defiled with the fault of her inhabitant, that even by the defect of na∣ture, he might in some sort purge the guilt. It after some sort repented the Creator, that he had commanded nature to obey the disobedient: Therefore he appointed; that the Earth should hence-forward bring forth Thistles and Thorns: under the allegory whereof, the curse and rise of Tartarers are designed unto us; To wit, their matter which should exceeding sharply prick us: For the words do shew the progeny of the Earth, by the use whereof they do signifie, that Diseases should at length be incorporated in us: For first of all, the hostile Tartarers do trayterously enter with meats and drinks, they pierce into the bottom, are ra∣dically co-mingled, and shut up with a hidden Seal: Therefore some of them do even pre∣sently separate themselves within, from the pure noutishment; but others do remain together with the nourishment, which being wasted away, the surviving Tartarers are coagulated under the form of a Muscilage, Clay or Bole, next, of Sand, or a Stone, which then, are not onely uncapable of receiving the breath of life; but moreover, they keeping their wild Thorn, have become as the most inward immediate causes of all Diseases, the daily Nurses of the ca∣lamity of mortals: For as soon as the bloud is converted into the substance of the thing nou∣rished, and afterwards consumed, this off-spring of Thorns doth often remain, surely inconve∣nient through a forreign coagulation, if not also through acrimonies or sharpnesses: For it wax∣eth more hard daily, and bespotteth its own Inn with a 1000 Hostilities: But a Tarterer or tar∣tarous humour, differs from the humane excrements of meats in that, because these do putrifie, but that is coagulated: Therefore that stomach, and Liver is onely happy, which have known how to banish the sweepings of Tartar from the stinking excrements, in the beginning. As these Thorns are procured unto us by our antient Tartarous enemy; So the Stone that adhe∣reth to the Joynts or Ribs of the Wine-Hogs-heads, giving by reason of its manifest Prero∣gative, a name to the other Ranks of coagulable vices, is called Tartar: For truly the Wine in the Vessel is on every side incrusted with a Stony bark, which is Tartar, diverse from the Lees: For this falls down to the bottom, knowing no coagulation; but that being extend∣ed round about, doth arm the Vessel, and preserve it within, for ever from corruption: But that guest being through nourishments, a stranger, is called a forreign Tartar, to distinguish it from that which groweth together within us, with a fatall Spectacle, by a Microcosmical Law: For whereby any violent thing doth rush into us, for that very cause the nourishable humours being destitute of life do appear hostile, are coagulated, and called the Tartar of the venal bloud: whence are Apostemes, stoppages, and other Calamities, according to the delighted property, and pleasure of every Tartarer: And so Tartar insinuating it self from the mouth, even into the ultimate Coasts of the Pipes, is also the principal cause of all Disea∣ses. These are the things which I could collect out of Paracelsus here and there, into one, concerning Tartar. 
 CHAP. XXX. A History of Tartar of Wine. 1. A fishing for the Whale. 2. The Spirit of Wine is depressed unto the Center of the Vessel, by reason of cold. 3. How Vinegar differs from Wine. 4. Why the Wine in the Superficies of the Vessel, is lesse good. 5. The manner of making Tartar in Hogs-heads. 6. Why it affixeth it self on the Vessels. 7. It is coagulated in affixing or cleaving on them. 8. The things foregoing are proved. 9. The errour of a Chymical Maxim. 10. The History of Wine coagulated in Tartar, is not a like to that of the excrements coagulated in us. 11. The difference of Tartar, and Duelech or the Stone in man. 12. Tartar is not wholly, or truly the superfluity of Wine. 13. The first errour of Paracelsus. 14. The Tartar of Wine doth wholly differ from a coagulated superfluity in Dis∣eases. 15. Another rashness of the same man. 16. Why Tartar is not incrusted upon the Lees of the bottom. 17. Wines are distinguished by their Tartar. 18. Tartar is neither Wine, nor the Lee thereof. 19. Why an Alcali or lixivial Salt out of Wine, or Tartar, doth dissolve Tartar. 20. The Wine-Lee, as to a part of it, is matter for Tartar. 21. How badly Tartar doth square to our coagulations. 22. Tartar is among coa∣gulated Salts, not among Stones, as neither among excrements.
And moreover, because that seat of the sensitive soul doth not only govern the digestive faculty of the Stomach, and doth stir up an unnamed sou ness of the ferment of the Stomach unto this purpose, and suffers it to be clean taken away from it self, according to the vigour of the laws of nature, and to be cut short of its bound: But the very life of the Stomach is chief over all the digestions of the whole body, however dispersed into hidden, or also remote d ns: Indeed, that is proper to the soul, by a singular radiation or in-beaming, and as it were partici∣pating of its own life, as though by an only and naked beck, and command of the Du mvirate, it did constrain obedience from on every side, and that it were due unto it from every one: whence it likewise follows, that the same vital vigour is every way dilated, and by an errone∣ous guidance, that the exorbitances of the same are also diseasedly transplanted even to the fingers ends. 
 So indeed, that hostile sourness, the which, although it be acceptable to the Stomach, yea and very meetly requisi e; yet now, in strange soyls, it becomes an enemy: For neither is the proof of that hostility to be borrowed from far: for truly in the dog-dayes it is plain enough to be seen, that fleshes, presently after they have entred the threshold of their begun corrup∣tion, they afford sour broths, and those tinged with an unwonted colour. 
 Therefore a forreign guest of the Stomach being brought by a vital Beginning, unto a strange field, some strange defect doth for that very cause presently follow, which doth for the most part also, presently bewray its presence. Indeed, it is a disease, which if it be brought into the Veins, through the errour of the Du mvirate badly enraged or enflamed, it brings forth Fevers: But if the hostile sourness or sharpness be brought into the habite of the body, or joynts, divers Apostems, and errours of the joynt sickness are straightway present: Apostems I say, which, with the least matter, do bite, no otherwise than as thorns, or an enforced D do at length hasten into corrupt Pus, a weeping liquor, and thin corrupt sanies. 
 This indeed is the deceitful snare of Catarrhes or Rheumes, which hath ensnated the Schools even unto late dayes, through the various descendings, defluxions, falls, and slidings of humours not existing: And it was easie for Satan to have driven readily inclined minds, se∣duced by Paganisme, headlong, hitherto; no otherwise than as Astrologers have intentively noted the undeclarable scituation of the Moon and Planers, have feigned excentricall ones re∣latively, and simply, the which indeed they knew to be vain, and feigned for the necessitie of scituatioins found by measuring. But in healing that was nearer for Satan, thus to have deceived his own, that is, Pagans; because sense, an industrious and importunate perswader was at hand, whom to prevent, it hath been neglected, while Art began in hast to be drawn unto lucre. For truly, from those things which are alleadged in the Treatise of Catarrhs, concluded demon∣stratively and necessarily, that is obvious to any one, that there is no matter for Rheums, like∣wise not a kitchin, place, wherein, or where they should be pr pared, as neither a channel through which they should so diversly flow down even unto the most distant Coasts of the Body. 
 But that it is a far more easie and nigh thing (but only the hand being once delivered to Gentilism, hindereth, and that by a credulity they have stopt up their own way of enquiring into the truth) to meditate that the life is to be on every side continued from the Principle of life: next also, that from a vital errour, errours are spread throughout the whole body, also into the whole body, even into the part as well containing, as the part contained. Again, It hath been rashly and frivolously devised, that this foundation being once passed by, any kind of remedy would be made oyd by successors, thenceforth deceived by Satanical craft: which thing, I would those that come after, might with me sufficiently contemplate: for from thenceforth they should also easily with tears, discern the great blindness of mortal men, as well in Physitians, as in all places, in medicinable things. 
 For gowty persons are first ushered in, and they should accuse the Stomach, and that they do there feel the first motions, and as it were feverish disturbances, as the fore- unners of a fit: For the tar ness conceived and bred in the same place, only by the aspect and in-beaming of the vital light, is erroneously translated into a seminal glew; which they now call Sunovia, and it is the transparent nourishable seed of the joynts, and it is there the more plentifully laid up, by reason of the frequency of motions, and a strong com-pressing of the bones: For truly otherwise, the bones should very shortly rage with heat, and be dryed by a mutual rubbing together. But although these things are much more fully described in the Chapter of the Gout, yet it is profitable for me more plainly to enlarge them. 
 Surely, divers diseases are met withal, which draw their original centrally from the Sto∣mach, whose rise and remedy are hitherto by an unhappy guesse, unknown: For there are in the Concave or hollownesse of the Stomach, sharp or sour, bitter, salt, burntish or stinking, poy∣sonsom, unsavoury, &amp;c. savours, &amp; especially the sour, fermental, &amp; digestive or trans-changeative savour is not proper or natural to the Stomach; but it is prepared and inspired into it, by the Kitchin of the spleen, being a neighbour unto it for this end; which ferment indeed failing, for that very cause there is an un-concoction in the house, a difficult or slow coction, a dejected appetite, a loathing of meats; which things are presently beheld to be proper to, and stamped on fevers. Wherefore the old man hath said, That sowr belchings coming upon burntish or stink∣ing ones, is a good sign. Also it somtimes happens that a sparing ferment doth flow unto the Stomach: From thence also that an unnourishing or wasting of flesh is stirred up, and that meats do become hard to be cocted: Yea, the Stomach which seemeth to be deprived of its ordinary feeling, neither which feels any things but those which are hurtful, and that as oft as it is unworthily affected by forreign things contained within it; it presently under the smal∣nesse of the ferment, brings forth a watery liquor, and is busie in thrusting it out with a loathing. But I call that watery, which now and then is nothing but a meer water, likewise a slimy mus∣cilage, also oft-times, unsavoury, and not seldome seasoned with a forreign tartness, which doth as far differ from a vital ferment, as a dead man doth from a living one; so that, although they do participate in tast, yet they very far differ from each other; which may be seen in the bitterness of Wormwood, and of asses or wild cucumber, or Coloquintida. For while the drink, &amp; also the nourishment to be adjoyned in the Stomach, do offend through the penury of a lively ferment, they presently decay into a yellow liquour, which the Schools have hitherto falsly called the bowel Gaul, yea also one of the four constitutive humours of the venal bloud; being ignorant the while, by what authour and guider, choler should be seperated unmixt from the venal bloud, nigh akin to, and intimately well mixed with it, and that (surely much changed from choler swimming on the bloud) should be all alone brought unto the Stomach; Seeing there is not a passage from the Liver unto the Stomach, but by so many windings, which may worthily accuse this invention of the Schools of blockishness. But when the nourishment approacheth to the Stomach, that it may be made like unto it, and nourish it, and it faileth through the penury of the ferment, or a storm otherwise arisen in the Stomach, it presently pu∣ rifies and becomes infamous with a burnt savour: For that being detained in a lukewarm place, which hath now entred the threshold of life, and hath been received into the number of things by an by vital, it presently also putrifies, is made burntish, yea if delay shall have accesse, it becomes cadaverous: Whence are the disease of choler, lienteries or smoothnesses of the bowels, belly passions, &amp;c. Also now and then the Archeus of the Stomach, being even un∣willing to supply the smalness of a sour ferment, is wroth, and brings forth a sharp, sour, cruel one; from thence are inordinate appetites, and likewise wringings as well in the Stomach, as in the bowels themselves, for the most part cruel ones. But if the plenty or harshness of food, doth flow unto, and overflow a moderate sour ferment, then the whole food waxeth bitter, that excrement by such a degeneration grows yellow, and gross, and a various Troop of evils being thereby kindled, it riseth up into a Flux, unless the whole be at once presently cast forth by stool. Somtimes also the Archeus of the Stomach doth conceive a fury, &amp; is enflamed of his own free accord, so as the tartnesse doth not strike into the meats, but doth wandringly infect the Archeus himself: Then indeed the joynt sicknesse or Gout is conceived, and the Archeus be∣ing diffused throughout the whole body, doth notwithstanding immediately affect with its sharpness, the Sunovia or raw seed immediately adjudged for the fashioning of the Bones, and therefore laid up within the joynts: But he defiles the Sunovia or raw Seed of the more weak part in the strength of nature: Therefore the joynt sickness is reckoned to choose at pleasure, the part which it apprehendeth. And because that tartness being received in the center of the Stomach, is dispersed by the Archeus unto remote places; therefore it is false that defluxions are propagated from the head, through the sinews and veins. So indeed, great wringings of the belly, by a conserving or consent of parts, do stir up a hurtful sharpnesse in the Stomach, which afterwards do oft-times wondrously shake the hands, and feet with a convulsion, and likewise straightway after, doth also resolve them with a Palsie. Therefore an undue tartnesse of the Stomach, if it lay hold of the dewy nourishment, and the spermatick nourishable juice thereof, how slenderly soever it be, it stirs up giddinesses of the head, and by so much the more troublesome ones, by how much these do the more behold or respect its hinder part. But an Apoplexy ariseth, while as an unsavoury Muscilage, plainly by a strange motion and enter∣tainment, doth enter from the hollow of the Stomach into the veins thereof, about the Ori∣fice, and doth keep the rightness of its own side, and distinguisheth a great one from a lesse, by theabsence or presence of poysonsomnesse. But there is for the most part in such chronical diseases, a certain sealing Character: So indeed the Gout doth oft-times issue from the Begin∣ning of the Parents into the off-spring, and doth there patiently wait very many years, before that the proper fruit thereof doth obtain its own ripeness. Therefore in the vital Beginnings and radical Organs of the Stomach (which are the local, or implanted Archeus it self) that post-bume and translated gouty character or impression, doth stick fast by a hereditary right; and consequently, likewise also, that entired character which is gotten by an inordinary of living, that sits in the Archeus of the orifice of the Stomach; the which, while it is wearied by the insolency of a strange guest, doth sharpen it self for an expulsion of the same, and from thence also the fruit of an Apoplexy issues: For neither is that silent gouty Character mate∣rially laid up in a certain nest within, and received in a separated Stable, in the folds and wrin∣ckles of the Stomach, as it were some forreign Tartar adhering to it; But it is a committed cha∣racter in the very Archeus of life. For let us feign a unity of the thing supposed, and of the pro∣perty whereby that character doth lay intombed for the Gout, Apoplexy, or Falling evil, and is stirred up at the set stations of its own ripeness, or is much stirred by certain meats taken, or smels. And then let us consider the natural sharpness of the stomach, now degenerate, and likewise the tenderness of its orifice, stirring up swoonings and falling sicknesses (which testi∣fies nothing besides an easie feeling, hurting, suffering, disturbance of the life, and so an enemy present, tumulting from very many things) therefore if the sharpness which is co-mingled with the Archeus, be stirred up besides nature, and seeing this is chief over all the particular digestions, that sharpness is beamingly brought down unto strange cottages, whereto is wholly an enemy; and from thence doth the Gout or joynt sickness issue forth. But if it be co-knit to the meat, or drink, pains of the Colick, wringings of the Guts, and other exorbitances of the parts occasionally are present. But if that the sharpness of the Stomach doth degenerate, and associate it self with an opiate or drowsie poyson, with a piercing toward the seat of the Soul, the falling evil is straightway present. But if a stinking muscilage inclining to bitterness doth arise, there is a giddiness of the head; and that more strongly insulting, doth stir up an Apo∣plexy. For neither is it meet to distinguish those precisely from each other, while it is better to have the matter or occasion exhausted. 
 Likewise some external Medicines bound about the head, do preserve from an Epileptical fall and fit, which is for a signe, that either the fruit of the Character is hindered, or the apply∣ing of the occasion to the Archeus: Indeed in either manner the hurtfull matter is to be letted or prevented, to be extinguished or annihilated, that it be not co-mingled with the Archeus. And moreover, as vegetables are wont for the most part, to sleep in Winter, and to be as it were awakened at Spring, that they may send forth a bud, leaves, flowers, or fruits; So a Gouty, Epileptical, &amp;c. Character, is also stirred up into a ripeness at a fet period, unlesse the impor∣tunity of provoking things do forestal it: At leastwise, the giddiness of the head, and Apo∣plexy, &amp;c. although they are brought back within occasional causes; yet they do sit immedi∣ately within the very nest of life, in the Archeus, which indeed is implanted in the orifice or upper mouth of the Stomach. For in how easie a breviary, by things hanged on the neck or bo∣dy, is the falling-evil suspended and detained? Because an entrance of the hurtful cause into the sensitive soul, is hindered; for there is a piercing of the hurtful cause lurking in the Arche∣us, to within, and the which doth therefore wholly take away the mind: Indeed it leaves a pulse, to wit, of the heart, but it so tramples on the sense, imagination, and every principal pow∣er of the soul, that for that space of time, they seem to be plainly withdrawn. From whence also we must note with a pen of iron, that the Soul so trampled upon, doth not dwell in the heart, which never a whit stumbleth. 
 But the Gout, as it tends to without, so the Character thereof doth not so much affect the secret chamber, or seat of the soul, as the Archeus the President or chief Ruler of the dige∣stions: which things do therefore happen, because an hereditary character of the Gout is stamped on the Young, from the beginning of Generation, and long before its quicking: And therefore, it respecteth only the Archeus (but not the soul) which then alone bare the whole burden on himself. But he that hath gotten the Character of the Gout by the exorbi∣tances of his life, although it shall come to him being a man in years, yet it keeps the nature of its own property: whence it is made manifest, that the stamp or character of every disease is promiscuously to be admitted into the lap of the sensitive soul. 
 So that as great fear hath made many persons Epileptical or to have the falling sickness for their life time; so a co-like fear hath afterwards rendred many free from the Gout. In∣deed in the one, the fear generated in the conjunction of the life and sensitive soul, an Epilep∣tical character; which fear being more slack by one or two degrees, and more outwardly, kil∣led the character of the Gout, and rendred it either congealed by the fear, or even oppressed the Root thereof. Black choler according to Hippocrates (which seeing it hath no where ever existed, is to be taken for the effect attributed to that choler) subsisting in the Midriffs (for he hath had respect unto the seat of the soul or the Duumvirate, not yet known) if it he dis∣persed into the body, provoketh the falling sickness; but if into the soul, madness. For such was the plainness of the first age, which indeed did candidly fift things; but for want of light from above, it came not unto the grounds of the matter. There are some simples which are without a valuable abhorrency, which by eating of them, do produce true madness; but others cause sleep: some also produce madmen for term of life, but others do bring forth doatages only, as it were certain drunkennesses; according also to the equalities whereof, I will have the characters of diseases to be judged: Because not only such hostile things being taken, health, the mind, or life is alienated; but hurtful matters being conceived, bred, and procured with∣in, or also characters only, divers properties are introduced into the life, or into the Archeus the instrument of life: And not only those good inclinations of fathers, or grandfathers, are propagated into the Seed; but also, certain diseasie seedinesses, such as are in simples, are co∣bred, being as it were hardly threatned on us: The which indeed, as they do deserve a seri∣ous observation; so much the more, as oft as that hostile and diseasie poyson is divers wayes coupled, somtimes to the ferment of the Stomach, somtimes to the implanted Archeus, then next unto the arterial spirit, also oft-times beamingly to the life it self, which indeed is no∣thing but a central light, capable also to be pierced by any radial or beamy light: So indeed the vital light of the sensitive soul is pierced by a forreign light, being coupled with it, no o∣therwise then as light thorow coloured glasse, doth tinge a simple light in the wall. Truly in the Monarchy belonging to life, and the which descendeth from the father of lights, are those living lights, which otherwise do shine in a simple Sunnie light, or in a coloured light, being attributed wholly to a fraile or mortal light: And there is a combination of living lights, not only capable of bearing each other, but also active on each other: so that from hence it is plain, that the Father of lights doth restrain the Bridles of life, and of whole nature. Therefore in the Arteries of the spleen, or in the very substance of that Bowel, is now a property stamped (which I call the characteristical one of a disease) or next in the very coat, veins, sinews of the Stomach, or also in the vital Archeus of the same; which property doth propagate it self by intervals or spaces, into the sensitive soul; or it shineth thorough it with a continual fewel, and compels that soul to be its Chamber-maid; so that the soul it self, or the life or vital Ar∣cheus thereof, being vexed or troubled by turns, they are carried headlong into some motion of fury, madness, swooning, giddiness of the head, falling evil, apoplexy, palsie, convulsion, &amp;c. 
 I know well enough, that the adverse party that is not desirous to learn, will accuse the mist which I spread, while I wrest these sublunary things aside unto the life, unto vital lights, or unto the invisible world, where the Father of lights is President: But I pray, let them remem∣ber, that this is the right way, which else, cannot be searched into from a former cause: And let them know, that vital motions are not disturbed by, and doe not depend on the life; Whe∣ther the while we contemplate of our life, or in the next place, of the life and vital properties, which do appear to us diseasie, mortal, and hateful. 
 Truly I every where behold it to be nothing but the common good of my neighbour, for to open the windows, whereby the light of nature, hitherto obscured, may come into the Schools, and wits more successful than my self: Wherefore I have withdrawn the Complexions of ele∣mentary qualities, and likewise the humours, tartars, and these kind of dreams of Writers: I could wish, that in the room of them, a true knowledge of nature, and diligent search of our selves were introduced. Lastly, I have taken away Catarrhs or Rheums out of the midst of them, as vain fictions, and broken staffs, wherewith mortals have been hitherto supported: And se, whatsoever hath deceived these, through the fraud and deceit of a humour flowing down, as the cause making a disease, all that is to be referred into the fruit and product of a vital cause: and that which is thought by the Schools materially to flow down out of the head, that is darted, shot, forth and propagated from the vital seat of the soul, by a common guidance of the Archeus, or is in stilled by a participation of life.* Good God, how far do I dissent from the tradition of the Antients? I would there may be such, or at least I would thou mayest make them such, who may comprehend me, and nourish the hope of the sick with a richer talent! But thou, O God, wilt do in these things, according to thy own good plea∣sure, to whom I totally refer and offer all things, and every thing, which I have, know, see, and am able to do. I return therefore unto my path. 
 First of all, I have elsewhere shewn, that vulnetary or wound-herbs do operate, by virtue of a certain in-bred Alcali or Lixivial Salt. Indeed I have taught, that vulnetary Mercury, as well the praecipitate, as sublimate, are easily to be revived, a clarified juyce being imbibed by boiling: Whence it follows, that those herbs are the more excellent in this degree, that juyce of whom, being boiled with the praecipitate, and afterwards washed away, shall the more easily and plentifully revive the Mercury. Wherefore also in healing, the stone of Crabs doth excell, if it be drunk with wine, more than if in water; because that stone, in wine, doth most easily put on the virtue and savour of a Lixivium or Lye. Neither I pray, therefore, let the Physitian abhor the use of wine in a wound, or fever, &amp;c. For at that very time that it savours of an Alcali, it loseth the virtues &amp; property of wine: For so, the Lixivial Salt of the Teil-tree is successfully given to drink, no otherwise than that powder of Crabs. For the goodnesse of God hath invited us, that by reason of the rarenesse whereby that stone doth subsist in a little space, mortals may be drawn into an admiration thereof, and thereby also may learn its vir∣tues, and may sift out its property alike wonderful, whereby it profiteth wounded, bruised people, and those that have fallen head-long from an high place. 
 And here presently a wonder not yet declared, comes to light; to wit, that a wound in the foot, and also in the leg, or in the most remote parts from the mouth, is healed; whither notwithstanding no Alcali hath ever obtained accesse; to wit, as the Lixivial Salt of this Stone doth correct the sharpnesse, which is kindled in the utmost members, or habit of the body, and which is prepared to be kindled. For neither doth the force of the Alcali passe from the Stomach thorow the Veins, even into the Toes: But neither is it admitted thither: and although it should be admitted, yet it could not proceed free and unbroken, thorow the foregoing questions and examinations of digestions: For there is no man, which may be ig∣norant of this, and not grant me what I have said. 
 Therefore from thence it is altogether manifest, that that Alcali, although it go not ma∣terially even unto the habit of the body; yet it is sufficient, that it doth disperse its proper∣ty even thitherto, beamingly onely, that it shall forbid a sournesse or sharpnesse in the sto∣mach, the Fountain of Digestions, and the chief Court-house of life; wherein is manifested the power of the Stomach over all the families of digestions. Wherefore from a contrary sense, they have sometime perceived, that wine, because it easily waxeth sour within us, it en∣flames, and perverts wounds, unlesse by a vulnerary Lixivial fixed Salt being administred, that sharp faculty of the wine become mild: For truly the hurt or dammage of a wound is onely an inward fermental sharpnesse, which being absent, the lips of that which was continued, do hasten to run together. Wherefore the Schools being deceived, have universally forbidden wine to those that are wounded; which thing the use of a vulnerary remedy at this day hath disallowed, to the disgrace of the Schools: For neither doth an Alcali go materially unto places far off, to restrain sharpnesse; seeing neither indeed is it able to pierce unto the Spleen, the seat of a Quartan Ague. Therefore it sufficeth, that it restraineth sharpnesse in the Stomach, the ruler of all the digestions: Not indeed that it destroyeth the sour fer∣ment of the Stomach, but as it is corrected, and the translation of the ferment unto remote places, is hindered: which thing also the aforesaid Paradox it self confirmeth, to wit, that the digestion of the Stomach is chief over the particular digestions of a thousand kitchins. 
 And then, that there is not made a wandring of Lixivial Salts, materially; &amp; that it is better to drink the Alcalies of these stones, than calcined Shell-fishes: Because that although they do help, and the Alcali in calcined things is far more powerful; yet it hath under an actu∣al vigour, vitiated the ferment of the Stomach, or at least doth incline it: Whereas the Stone of Crabsis carried not so much into the ferment, as into the product of the ferment. Also there is a plain reason, why that Stone, and herbs like unto it, do heal great and remote wounds, yet that they do not any thing help small ulcers in the throat, wind-pipe, or blad∣der. 
 For it is also hence confirmed; because every Wound doth sharpen its state, if the sour∣nesse beaming forth out of the Stomach unto the wound from the vital digestion, be also hin∣dered to be in the remedy: But because an ulcer doth not arise out of the sharpnesse of the Stomach,; but from the proper vice and received contagion of the Archeus of the parts: The which also therefore, is not appeased by the taking of an Alcali, and there is need of Se∣crets piercing every way. For meats, drinks, and medicines do lose their own virtue or strength about the first digestion of the stomach; neither do they go; or are carried deeper; because they onely nourish simply, and therefore do there put off, and plainly detest every mask horrid to nourishment, or are otherwise changed into excrements: And so also they are made unprofitable for the conceived curing. 
 But if indeed the Stone of Crabs be a provoker of urine, it is not that therefore the com∣ing thereof even into the bladder is to be hoped for, or that its virtue remains untouched, and unbroken; Far be it: For let it be sufficient, if that Stone do spoil the whole drink of a souring faculty; because it is that which onely, how little soever of it be brought down in the urine, belongs to the breeding of the Strangury or pissing by drops, Dysury or difficulty of pissing, and heats familiar in the disease of the Stone: For the sharpnesse, although it be most excellently subdued by a sound gaul; yet the least quantity of it may be hostile in the urine, and to the parts subservient unto it, and no lesse unto the whole remaining family of digestions. Now at length I return unto the Authority of the Duumvirate, that it may be manifest in what sort the soul doth divers ways exercise its own commands in its own body, and doth act by way of a command, government, rule, as also of cruelty, fury, and tyranny; neither that to this end, it stands in need of pipes, winds, vapours, smoaks, and least of all, of the help of heats, colds, and defluxions. The Schools beholding the ef∣fects of the Duumvirate, and thinking to knit causes to them all, have transferred all things into heats, or humours, and the declinings or cessations of these; as if those things which na∣turally happen in us, should happen only through an urgent necessity of weights, heats, and imaginary humours. 
 And seeing they have gone back from the Soul, from living strength, unto the artificial, or dead examples of learning by demonstration; at length they have quieted themselves, that they wrought in vain, with the admiration, unwilling experience, and wonted obseruation of the vulgar, that many diseases being among the catalogue of incurable ones, or the number of wonted diseases, are of their own accord cured under the care of the Kitchin; so that they had but forsaken the vein, and the paunch, oft-times unto the death, or voluntary wearinesse of rhe sick. And at last, for the most part, a Jugler or Fortune-teller, or an aged old woman cu∣reth them, whom the very experiences of Physitians had deserted. 
 CHAP. XXXIX. The Authority or Priviledge of the Duumvirate. 1. An Aphorism of the old man is illustrated. 2. The falling-evil and madnesse are proved to proceed from the Duumvirate. 3. That sleep is from the Duumvirate. 4. An argument against the prerogative of the head. 5. The same thing is confirmed from Galen against his will. 6. A privy shift of the Schools for the head. 7. What all parti∣cular Senses can attribute unto the thing generated. 8. The vegetative power is in and from the Dunmvirate. 9. The Young lives divers wayes. 10. The phantasie of the Brain doth presently die, unlesse it be nourished by the lower parts. 11. Why the soul is said to be in the blood. 12. Conceipts ascending from the parts about the short ribs, are presently seen in the countenance. 13. The first conceptions are proved to be formed in the seat of the soul. 14. Sleep and dreams to be from the Duumvirate. 15. The Mare is in the stomach; therefore sleep and dreams are from thence. 16. But the Gumm-ich before the comming of teeth, from the sensitive soul onely. 17. The opinion of the Schools about the Mare. 18. It is noted for an absurdity. 19. Balaams Asse spake not the word of the Angel. 20. An history of my own steep fall. 21. Some digni∣ties of the Pylorus are reckoned up, and astonishing remedies, by reason of their easinesse. 22. Concerning the seat of the soul for the Duum∣virate. 23. An history of madnesse from a medicine as yet existing in the stomach. 24. The same by fainting or swooning. 25. From a Maxim of the Schools. 26. From the suffering of hunger. 27. That troublous passions of the mind have respect unto the Duumvirate, not the head. 28. Too much study brings forth madnesse to be felt or perceived first in the stomach. 29. An errour of the Schools. 30. By the Max∣im of the Schools it is contended against the Schools. 31. Sleep is from the Midriffs. 32. A remedy of Opiates. 33. Vesalius carps at Galen. 34. Of what sort the state of innocency was. 35. That the first concep∣tions are badly said to be those out of our power. 36. A power of re∣membring in the Scull, and others elswhere. 37. The memory of the mind is divers from that of the imagination or phantasie. 38. The lustful, and wrathful seat of the Schools. 39. The leasures of the Spleen. 40. The Head follows the Midriffs. 41. A stupefactive virtue. 42. The Stone-vessels or Cods. 43. Tickling or provocation to leachery is not to be attributed to the kidney, or reins, but to the stomach. 44. That a frail or mortal life hath entered, and is established, where the soul also is. 45. The mouth of the stomach is the center of the whole trunck of the bo∣dy. 46. What it may be to have carried the Messiah in his loynes. 47. A remedy for a woman in travel. 48. Judiciary Astrology fals to the ground. 49. An external Spleen, what virtue it may have. 50. Why a woman at the time of her going with Young, is troubled with wondrous conceipts. 51. The mind doth not become mad. 52. Splenetick con∣ceipts. 53. Curable, and desperate diseases, which they may be. 54. The natural endowments of Simples. 55. Conclusions deduced from an igno∣rance of the foregoing things. 56. Sleepifying remedies do not heal madnesses. 57. The Lydian Whet-stone for a Physitian, in madnesses. 58. An objection of those that are ignorant or skillful. 59. Fatness limited. 60. The Majesty of the Duumvirate is to be admired. 61. Risi∣bility or a capableness of laughter, what it is, and whence it happens to man alone. 62. The dominion of the Duumvirate over the Lungs. 63. The original of Spittles. 64. The virtue of Sulphur is determined. 65. Why the Stomach commands the Lungs.
Let the Schools therefore, take heed what they teach, while they deliver the curing of an Ulcer to consist in the taking away of the latter product: yea corrupt Pus doth not carry the disposition of an excrement, neither doth it proceed as an excrement of nature from the Ul∣cer; but it is a fruit of the Ulcer, to wit, of a forreign corrupter, fermentally depraved with a malignity: therefore it degenerates, eats up, gnawes and consumes. And indeed, the greater Ulcers do want grosse matter, they weep out continual liquid or thin matter onely, and now and then a tenfold greater quantity, than otherwise a just distribution of bloud doth require, and the transchanged Liquor flowes abroad into sharp and devouring waters, which the Galenists do never dry up with their driers, although they do moreover super-add all their cleansing Medicines, and however the Catagenians and Catatopian do boastingly glo∣rie of their own experiments. 
 For corrupt Pus is not procreated but in the flesh being closed, and opened, and those not yet altogether ill-affected: whereas in the mean time, the gristles, bones, membranes, veins, sinews, and bowels, do not wax moyst and are melted, but with a Liquor, if they should un∣dergoe an Ulcer. Therefore the corruption, and tempest of an Ulcer of these, should be far more mild and gentle, than those which do otherwise tumult in the flesh: Because the di∣versity of a Remedy distinguisheth the end for which it is appointed: and therefore a drying Medicine doth denounce a milder affect, than that which moreover should also be astrictive. 
 Therefore Galen and his followers, because they have been hitherto ignorant of the causes, fewel, Womb, subject, efficient, of the manner of making, of the seed and ferment of Ul∣cers, they have delivered none but ridiculous Curings, Remedies, Maxims, and Doctrine. Wherefore, neither is it a wonder that difficult or malignant, and furious eating Ulcers are not wont to be cured by the Remedies of the Schools: and the which, for that cause especially, have withdrawn themselves from the works of Chyrurgery, with the great disgrace of Galen, and his own Greeks who lived in the same Age, and the Arabians their followers, even as I have profesly touched in the Book of the Plague-grave. 
 For the milder Ulcers, and in those whose malignity is taken away, and while they hasten unto an incarnating and restoring of the hollowness left, they drop down with thick matter onely, and so are reckoned, according to the Rules of Galen, more difficult than while they flow with Liquor: But Ulcers already mitigated, are provoked by cleansing things; So far is it, that they are healed by the same. Surely, if things that drie up, and cleanse or wipe off, should satisfie all Ulcers, the curing of any Ulcers whatsoever would be easie: For why is the Galenical School so carefully troubled about the choosing of Medicines, when as they do abundantly satisfie both betokenings, with a dry Towel or linnen Cloth? To wit, one onely Towel dries up, and together with it, cleanseth likewise. Let it shame them therefore, and seriously shame them, to diffuse such trifles out of their Chaires, out of their presses, and out of their mouth, for Youth, and Chyrurgions, instead of a maxim of healing; and to dismiss thereupon, these men so instructed, as provided, with the specious Title of a Physitian and a Doctor, to the death of mortals, and the torture of those that trust in them. Therefore it is not sufficient to have wiped away, and dried up the thick or snotty, and liquid matter; but the hostile framer, and corrupter sitting on the part, is to be blotted out; because he is that which doth nothing slacken or wax mild by drying, and cleansing. 
 Indeed the quality of the seminal mortal poyson, and the poysonous forreign Impression of the Archeal part which perverteth the good venal bloud dispensed unto it, doth naturally shew a withdrawing of it self onely. Therefore the poyson is a certain Ferment and Conta∣gion, implanted in the bottom, the corrupter of the venal bloud and flesh. 
 Therefore the Schools may see, whether a Rheume being lifted up in manner of a vapour, out of the stomach, into the plain of the Head, be able to give a beginning and fewel to the same; and whether Cauteries or fearing Medicines inflicted at pleasure, are able to satis∣fie or be sufficient for the same accustomed Catarrhe, instead of Remedies, not onely those that dry up, and cleanse, but also instead of revulsions or repellings, by reason of the conti∣nuation of co-knitting, proportion, application, agreement, yea and depending Harmony of the same Remedies in the Root. Truly, as many as are ignorant of the activity, and variety of Ferments, must needs in a blind manner, try, and grope at all things credulously. 
 There are indeed as many Ferments of Ulcers, as there are diverse corruptions of Ulcers, and distances of corruptions: To which end, the testimony of one bread will very much con∣duce; because it is that which may be even the Index or Touch-stone of this disputation: To wit, the which hath received as many limitations or disposures in a Man, a Dog, a Cat, a Horse, a Cow, a Hen, a Goose, a Duck, a Sheep, &amp;c. as their differences do issue forth Ferments of blouds, and Dungs, specifically, yea and generically: So also one onely venal bloud in the particular kinde, doth support many Ulcers in the particular kinde, their transchanged corruptions, according to the interchangeable course of strange Ferments: And although one onely Archeus be sufficient for generation; yet there are divers means of life, and manners of corruptions; to wit, as many as there are Families of corrupting things. Therefore the full and exact curing of Ulcers, is a taking away of their own Ferment; but not a cooling refreshment of the Liver; not the cleansing away of dreamed Choler, or liquid corrupt matter: In the next place, neither are Ulcers cured by an application of abstersive or cleansing things, so that by reason of their ma∣lignity, their increase may desire degrees of corroding abstersives. 
 For Arsenick being fixed by Salt-peter, and dulcisied or mitigated into an astringent Sul∣phur, doth not extinguish, perhaps sixty diversities of Ulcers; because it gnaweth and eats up (for so it should not require a dulcifying of it self with the repeated Spirit of Wine) but because it hath now a mild poyson, which is for killing the very workman of the Vlcer, and the corrupter of venal bloud: The which indeed being once wholly dead, the flesh afterwards ceaseth not of its own accord, to grow up from the bottom: therefore the hollowness of an Vlcer doth betoken a growing up of the flesh, and healing up of the Skin into a skarre, to wit, that it being taken away, a restitution may be made: And the which therefore, have the relation of an effect, in respect of the death of the corrupter. 
 Furthermore, what Vlcers I refer unto a seminal, and poysonous Ferment, Paracelsus after his manner, hath transferred on the minie and saltish minerals of the microcosme or little World: For as Vlcers are for the most part made odious by Salt, he according to his own Idiotism, thought that Vlcers were to be registred in the Progeny of minerals, and in the di∣stinct Families of the same: For I do not give my self to brawlings, as I know, that neither was I born to that end: wherefore I am sorry for the vanity of the man, and for his uncircum∣spect forgetfulness; As he saith, that man (whom elsewhere by an Etymologie or Zodiack, he boasts to be a drawn Epitome of the whole Vniverse, and feigneth that he is more glorious by the dignity of that extraction, than by the Image of the Creator) is a most miserable monster, every way formed by minerals alone: He I say, in another place being unmindful of these things, calls the Body of man Cagastrical or badly Planet-struck throughout its whole, not in∣deed, consisting any longer of divers composures of Salts; but to be proud of the structure of the one onely Salt-peter; whence, men are born a hard generation, therefore the hatches of the Earth: For he would, that all Salts, Stones, Minerals, Herbs, &amp;c. should lurk in man, as it were in their own Seminaries or Seed-plots: But that they break forth into act, not indeed by the warmth of confused seeds lurking in a Chaos; but only that by a separation of the vital Liquor, that they return from those things which were co-bred with themselves, into their antient Minerals: Not heeding, that it is an absurd thing, seeing he will have the Ma∣crocosme or great World, to consist no lesse of Stars and Plants, than of minerals, that it should resolve it self, rather into Salts, than into Plants and four-footed Beasts. Therefore in this matter hath not Paracelsus onely forgotten Seeds, Vegetables, Stars, and soulified crea∣tures; but his own self also? That it should be the property of a Seed, from whence that heap of venal bloud is separated by mans vital Beginnings, to return rather into this, than into another mineral? For as Galen, endowing all things with heats, and feverishly doating, drew for some Ages, the chiefdom of healing into himself, So Paracelsus reducing all things into an under-earth off-spring, being proud of his pretious houshold-stuffe, grew mad a while, and thereupon aspired into the same Principality. But I pray, who is that separater, which with∣draws and plucks away a part of himself from the Balsam of life? in the next place, who is that corrupter, which had changed the part plucked off from a vital condition, also into a mineral Salt (which knowes not how to putrifie in it self) or into a hidden metal, credible onely by belief? Dost thou not, concerning long life, call death the dominion of the Balsam? How is it therefore, that thou now callest death the separation of the Balsam? Or who is the seminal distinguishes, in the Zodiack of man, which may wrest the one onely, and the same Liquor from the Balsam of life, sometimes into Alume, and at length sometimes into Arsenick? Truly Paracelsus, after that by a laboursome and ridiculous diligent search, thou hast heaped up great Fables, because thou hast been ignorant of Ferments (whereunto not∣withstanding, thou shouldest have come, as to the active, and seminal principles) thou hast past by the Beginnings of Nature; and sporting with the Zodiack or compass of the micro∣cosm at thy own pleasure, hast made thy self ridiculous to Posterity: For a full knowledge of the ferments doth finde out an easie way to know, take away, overcome, and separate the poysons of any Ulcers whatsoever: For whatsoever is made in the course of Nature, that is made by the necessity and guidance of the seeds, and is moved unto the last period of them: But not from the lot or condition of a resolved dead Carcase, or the naked will of a slain or grove ng part; The which indeed, should hasten from a privation, by rising again into its for∣mer Being. Away with thy trifles: For we have no fountains of Salt, no reducements of venal bloud into feigned and lurking mettals. Neither are there minerals in us, which by wan∣tonizing, do withdraw themselves from the vital Beginnings, or which do exspect the with∣drawing of these: to wit, that they should return from mans essence, into their antient and appointed minerals, that so they may become the wombs and springs of Ulcers: Neither also, are there microcosmical Lawes in us, any more than the humors of four Elements mutually agreeing in us, and the fights or grudges of these: For with Nazianzen, I cannot tie up man unto the sporting Rules of a Microcosme: For I had infinitely rather to be the Image of God, than the Image of the corruptible and torturing World: for although man doth grow and in∣crease with Beasts, and Plants; yet Beasts shall not therefore be the Image of Plants: So although man do feel or perceive, and be moved, yea discourseth, together with Beasts; yet nothing speaks but a man; Because an Angel neither stands in need of speech, as neither of the Instruments of Seed: But if a Bird seem to speak, he imitates onely the tone, and di∣stinctions or significations of speech: for there are not in us Hails, Snowes, Rocks, Stones, Metals, Marbles, Flints, Gems; as neither that Center of a World whereunto all weighty Bodies do incline: Neither is there in us a Stone, by Creation, neither are there particular kindes of the red or purple Marble, Jasper-stone, &amp;c. and the stone in a man differs from a true stone, no lesse than a Peare doth from a Cow: for a Peare is indeed changed into the flesh of a Cow, sooner than the stone in a man can decline into a Mineral Rock or stone. The name therefore of Microcosm or little World is Poetical, heathenish, and metaphorical, but not natural, or true. It is likewise a phantastical, hypochondriacal, and mad thing, to have brought all the properties, and species of the Universe into man, and the art of healing: But the life of man is too serious, and also the medicine thereof, that they should play their own part of a Parable or Similitude, and metaphor with us. 
 Last of all, Paracelsus is wholly ridiculous, who teacheth that an Ulcer, and a wound are nourished by Herbs, Balsam, and Oyntments; So that these defects are nourished by Reme∣dies, with a true nourishment, and severing of excrements, and that thereby the lost flesh of them, is truly, actually, and immediately restored; and that, he hath seemed seriously to have written: which thing surely, I willingly grant unto his own Idiorisme or propriety of speech. At length, for the curing of Ulcers, there is use for Colcotar or calcined Vitriol, being diversly applied according to the difference of the Ulcer: For oft-times the Wine wherein it is steeped, doth by its washing, do that; or else the Powder thereof, after an ex∣act separation of its Salt; and sometimes being boyled in the Oil of Line-seeds, even unto a blackness, which is for the foundation of the Oyntment of successful VVurtz, in wounds. But I say enough to the curious: To wit, that Colcotar doth kill every corrupter of wounds. Finally, for a wound, know thou, that the very separation of that which held toge∣ther, is indeed the immediate, and sufficient occasional cause, to wit, as it openeth, beats in pieces, or bruiseth, &amp;c. Every separation also wants a confirming closure, and is presently glewed together by glew dissolved in Wine, because it is prepared of the Skins of living crea∣tures; Especially if the Glew be of the hide of a man dying a violent death, that is, he being slain in his full strehgth: But the alterations of the Archeus from venal bloud largely poured forth, and a conceived Idea of another revenge or indignation being bred, which by a pro∣per name, I call our wounds, and not anothers; or those wounds which are inflicted from without, do not onely stand in need of a co-glewing of that which is discontinued or separa∣ted; but an appeasing of the altered Archeus: For hitherto have Oils, Balsams, emplaisters respect, which may procure the peace of the implanted, and local Archeus being injured: To which end, the Balsams of Rosins, flowres, and herbs have arisen, and likewise those which are prepared of Minium or Red Lead, Cerusse, or Colcotar: Hitherto also doth the Salt of artar tend, being rectified by the Spirit of Wine, until it obtains an astringent taste: For it is the Balsam Samech or of Tartar, of Paracelsus even as out of Arsenick for Ulcers, whereof, moreover, there is its Balsam of smoak; because that Arsenick is by skilful men accounted the fume of Metals: Not indeed, that it is not simple, born, and subsisting by it self; but from a Similitude, for that metallick smoaks do imitate an Arsenical malignity. And so I close up the Doctrine of external Diseases. 
 CHAP. XLII. An unknown action of Government. 1. The Maxim is opposed, That of Contraries the Remedies are contrary. 2. The foundation of that Maxim. 3. The Maxim concerning the re∣acting of the Patient, or of its defence in time of fight, is examined. 4. Ar∣guments on the opposite part. 5. The same, by moving strengths, by things generative, and irregular. 6. There is no re-acting of weight. 7. Are∣bounding action neglected by the Antients. 8. Bright burning Iron act∣eth, and doth not re-act. 9. The swiftness of a mover is not the action; but the measuring of the action. 10. Altering Agents do not properly re-suffer. 11. Another Maxim is noted of falshood. 12. From whence the falseness thereof hath issued. 13. What Agents of a different in∣clination and irregular, are. 14. He proceeds to prove what he hath undertaken to prove. 15. Wherein the opinion of Aristotle may be pre∣served. 16. An explaining of action in the slowness of the fire. 17. Acti∣ons on an object separated from the thing supposed. 18. A Fermental and radial or beaming action. 19. That these kinde of actions are not to be referred unto the fault of vapours. 20. The Blas of Government hath been hitherto unknown. 21. The falshood of a Maxim. 22. The fire suffers nothing by a burnable object. 23. To determine or limit an action, and to re-act, do differ. 24. New actions. 25. The dimness or giddiness of the Schools. 26. Their staggering. 27. Likewise some neglects of the same. 28. The unknown action of Government is not that which they call an action by consent. 29. The Errour, whence it is. 30. Why Anatomy hath arisen into so great curiosity. 31. How much may be re∣quired from Anatomy. 32. A neglect of the chiefest part of natural Phi∣losophy. 33. The Schools deluded by thinking. 34. Many things hap∣pen in us by the action of Government, without conveighing Pipes or Channels. 35. Blindness hath brought blinde persons unto blinde va∣pours, the action of Government being unknown. 36. Things admitted by the Author. 37. The action of Government is abstracted from a co∣binding mean. 38. A natural action in incorporeal Spirits. 39. Which is a jugling action. 40. Luxury takes away the Remedy of the Horse∣hoof. 41. An Example of Government. 42. The government of the Womb is wholly over the whole Body. 43. Government acteth into its own marks, the middle spaces being untouched. 44. The faculties of the acti∣ons of the Womb. 45. The furies of the Womb. 46. The manner of ma∣king in the birth of a Disease, from the action of Government. 47. Why the fore-head is not bearded. 48. That Capital Diseases do not arise through Fumes out of the Stomach. 
 FRom the first time wherein the Schools placed contraries in Nature, they presently uni∣versally established, that nothing acted without strifes, war, and discords: Even so that also chidings, hatreds, emulations, have been reckoned the Foundations or Principles of Na∣ture, no lesse than self-love. And moreover also, they being credulous of hatred, by the per∣swasion of Astronomers, have introduced the same things into the courses or dances of the Stars. 
 Likewise they have determined, that in the whole sublunary frame or stage, nothing is done, or generated, but by a Relation of the Superiority of an Agent unto a Patient; So indeed, that the Patient is with violence compelled, tamed, altered, destroyed, and is wholly transla∣ted into the Nature of the Agent, onely by the relation of a stronger on a weaker. But when the Schools saw, that Agents did by degrees languish away, either through space of time, or wearinesse of acting; they likewise decreed from thence, that that indeed, did not so much happen through a tiring out of the seeds, and powers, but by a re-acting of the patient: Therefore they confirmed it, that every patient or sufferer doth likewise of necessity re-act, and for that cause likewise every agent or acter doth re-suffer; neither also that it is any o∣ther way weakened: Whence by consequence, I guessed with my self, that sometimes the seeds of things shall at sometime be naturally, wholly, undoubtedly extinguished, unless they are miraculously preserved: Notwithstanding, I do even contemplate, that there is on both sides a perpetual rudenesse, and continued sloath of a diligent search, in the doctrines of the Schools: And that one onely thing hath repelled from me the former fear: For truly, af∣ter that I with-drew contraries out of Nature, I could not afterwards, in sound judgment, find out any re-acting in the patient, as neither could I admit of hostilities in nature, elswhere than among soulified or living creatures: For contrariety is in those things alone, wherein there is an actual defence in the will of the patient against the injuries brought on it, and felt from the Agent: Wherefore there is never a re-acting of the patient on the agent, un∣lesse where there is a contrariety conceived in the soul. But that this is thus ordinary, and ordained in nature, I will forthwith demonstrate: For first of all, the Universe should re∣main still, even as it now subsisteth, by the infinite power of the Word, if it should be so com∣manded; I say, things should be infinite in their own successions, and duration, but they should not be infinite by an actual virtue of the unity of a creature: And that thing, because it is of faith, it wants no proof. Therefore there is no infinite of sublunary things by their own power. Hence it follows, that at length every particular Agent doth by degrees also of its own free accord, at some time decay, and having finished its offices, dies by a dissolution of its strength circumscribed in space of place, and in the power of continuance, &amp; strength, unlesse perhaps the appointed day of its proper and limited period or conclusion, be shifted off by a preventing of the term, or the impediments of the object. But of natural Agents, some are those which have a motive force, which I have called a motive Blas; but the A∣gents themselves I call moving strengths. But other moving Agents, I call an alterative Blas, to wit, those which do operate by the seminal force of a ferment: And such Agents do for the most part generate their like. Lastly, in the third place, some Agents are irregular, or of a different inclination. I will speak of those three in order. Indeed acting strengths do act on their objects; First, by a prevailing weight, Secondly, by a round, angular, sharp, hollow, &amp;c. figure. Thirdly, by the hardnesse, softnesse, &amp;c. of a Body. Fourthly, by an impressive Blas by the hand, a mallet or hammer, needle, &amp;c. Fifthly, by swiftnesse; for unlesse a ram or Engine be swiftly smitten against a wall, or a hammer against a nail, although the impressive force may be strong, yet the Blas or motive power thereof shall be slow or slug∣gish. Sixthly, By the hinderance of a Vacuum or emptinesse. Seventhly and lastly, By the fear of piercing of Dimensions. But that moving strengths do re-suffer nothing by their objects, it is manifest: for first of all, in the sixth and seventh of the aforesaid Particulars, the nature of the Universe doth rather operate, that things may not be, than that they may o∣perate while they should be, and much lesse do they re-suffer; because an Agent doth not re-suffer by an Object, which as yet is not; seeing that which as yet is not, cannot as yet act, or suffer again by action. But in respect of the first particular, to wit, that the greater weight cannot re-suffer by the lesse, by any action of the lesser weight, is manifest: Because the les∣ser weight being oppositely applied, doth not argue any re-action on the Agent; but that is made by reason of a limitation made, either by the space of place, as in a far removing from the Axle or Diameter of the world; or by reason of the measured action of the greater weight; which, that it is not a true re-acting, I thus prove: The lesser weight suffers nothing simply and absolutely by the greater whereby it is elevated; therefore neither doth the les∣ser weight re-act any thing, although it be lifted up, and yield or give place: Because the lesse weight doth onely limit the action and heavinesse of the far stronger weight, as every Agent is of a finite and limitable action: But that such a limitation is not a re-acting of the les∣ser weight, is manifest; for the same lesser weight, remaining as much as it is, is made grea∣ter, while it is estranged or far removed from the Axle. 
 Therefore, if there shuuld be any action, or re-acting in weights, in the case aforesaid, it were to be attributed to the space of place, and not to the heavinesse of weight; seeing that one and the same weight is various, and manifold at the will of the Artificer, onely by the space of place: But the space of place, or of far removing, is a certain external thing as to the essence of weight, and plainly accidental by accident: And so, neither can it give a true and proper action, or re-action in weights: Therefore the limitation of actions in weights, is not the essential and proper action, or re-action of weight on weight: Even as also space, or distance of place, hath not any internal force, or essential Blas of local motion, on a bullet sent out of a Gun; but it onely limits the finite force of the imprinted motion; so as that, through distance, the attained Blas of the bullet doth by degrees necessarily languish: For it is certain, that the bullet doth operate into the middle distance, the which I understand, that the bullet hath no activity on the middle space of the place it self, although this notwithstanding doth so limit the Blas, or motive power of the bullet, that at length it may perish, because it is of a finite power: Likewise also in weights, the greater weight is indeed limited unto a certain measure, and power, by the les∣ser weight, but that limitation is not the true action of a certain Agent, if local motion be limited by place it self (which is wholly external and accidental to motion) without re-acting, or if it doth voluntarily languish by a continuance of motion: But if place, and continuance do not suffer by the motion which is made in them, that is, that the motion doth re-act on the place, and duration; therefore neither shall there be any true action of the place and du∣ration on the motion, although the motion being finite, doth voluntarily cease in place, and time. It belongs nothing therefore unto a re-acting, although the lesser weight doth limit the greater unto its own certain and designed bound. Therefore, it from hence is clearly e∣nough manifest, that very many things are reckoned to be agents, and re-agents on each o∣ther, by reason of the hidden frailty of us in understanding, which in very deed do neither act on, nor suffer by each other, and likewise do neither re-act, nor re-suffer reciprocally: For truly the action whereby the greater weight doth lift up the lesse, and this gives place to the greater, and likewise whereby the greater is limited, and lessened by the lesse weight being opposed, the which otherwise, being opposite to the greater, doth increase this, is not a true natural action, or power of seminal properties, but relative respects of learning by de∣monstration or Science Mathematical, according to place, duration, greatnesse, &amp;c. which things are plainly external unto natural Agents, and by accident: But actions and re-suffer∣ings in nature are considered in a true and intimate conjoying of forces; which in the things abovesaid have no place. But that I may shew, that those respects of Science Mathematical, have not an action issuing from the powers of things, but onely the relation of Science Ma∣thematical (every meer action whereof, although it be made by bodies, yet it is not the acti∣on of the body it self, as such) it is sufficient to have shewn by the aforesaid particulars, that the limitation of motions do far differ from the inward activity of motions, according to which, things are judged by the Antients, to re-suffer, and re-act in every action: For so there are many impediments in nature, which although they do limit, yea and also plainly take away the force of the Agent, yet they are not to be judged to re-act: And so, we must speak most properly, when as the essence of things concerning the properties, and actions of those things, is to be distinguished by a natural Philosopher, especially when he treats of the necessities of life: For the lesser weight doth not refist, and much lesse doth it re-act on the greater. But every thing weigheth freely as much as it doth weigh, without respect of one weight unto another: But if man opposeth one weight to another, that is a humane thing; nei∣ther hath the action of weight a mutual respect: For from hence, what things I have demon∣strated above, against the contrarieties of active Bodies, do more clearly appear: For truly, every Agent, in manner of a greater weight, acteth freely, and without respect to contrari∣ety; but it acteth that which it is commanded to act in nature, and as much as is permitted unto it to act: Therefore weight, or rather a ponderous matter, weigheth in it self, as much as it doth weigh, absolutely and without respect unto another greater, lesse, equal, propor∣tioned, &amp;c. weight. For such respects are of humane industry, which by reason of co-hand∣lings ot commerce, findeth out measures, as well according to extent in length, breadth, depth, &amp;c. as in the division of weights; to wit, it hath appointed Axles or Diametrical distances, and far removings; so that all the consideration from thence is artisicial, and therefore also changeable in the samelinesse and unity of one body: And therefore weights as such, do never act, or re-act on each other naturally, or by a co-mixture of their own pro∣perties, although they seem to act something artificially: For so the light suffers nothing, al∣though the continuation of light be hindered by a suffering wall: For otherwise, if the lesse weight should in very deed re-act on that which out-weigheth it, the weight it self should be rather lessened in the thing weighing, for a continuance, and actually, and not only with respect to the ballance; so that a pound thenceforth should not any longer weigh a pound, as before: And seeing nothing is changed, or taken away from the weights on either side, it is manifest, that there are onely artificial relations of moving strengths, but not a true re-action of the lighter weight: For as long as a pound doth weigh a pound, nothing is attained, or hath suffered in that pound by another opposite weight; but on both sides, one is external, forreign, by accident, to the other, and limitable by a relative foundation, that it may be rea∣dily serviceable to humane considerations: And whatsoever thus acteth in our power, or see∣meth to re-act, acteth in very deed, nothing. But as to that which pertaineth unto other mo∣ving strengths; If an impressive force of strength doth act indeed by it self, but in the mean time be limited by space of place, duration, or be weakned by impediments, or last∣ly, if it act measuringly, by reason of figure, and hardnesse; at leastwise, there is never in these, any re-acting of the patient, or re-suffering of the Agent. For example, If any one smite on an Anvil with his fist, and thereby receives a wound, or bruise, there is not in that stroak any re-acting of the Anvil, or operation of hardnesse, or of a corner in the Iron; For although the hardnesse doth resist, repulsing the smiting fist, and the bounds of resistance or repulse may seem necessarily to include some kind of force of re-acting; yet it is an im∣proper speech, proceeding from the popular errour of the Antients: For that is not the re∣action of the Anvil, but it is the very action of the fist it self, which I call a resulting or re∣bounding one: For if the Anvil should truly re-act by hardnesse, seeing there is no reason why the Anvil should impart, act on the fist, and should expect a stroak, that it might act; for it ought by its whole hardnesse, and weight together, to act also on a quiet hand, and from that very deed done, plainly to fret or tear it; Neither should the action of the Anvil be limited by the strength of the stroak, if there should be a re-acting of the Anvil it self: For truly the same thing should happen to the fist, whether it had smitten it strong∣ly, or in the next place, modestly, or if at length the opposite fist should rest on it onely; because that in either act there was the same hardnesse of the Anvil: Wherefore, that hard∣nesse of the Iron acteth, or re-acteth nothing by a proper power of acting: For there should be a force in the Anvil, which in re-acting should be seated throughout its hardnesse, and in any stroak should act alike equally, and according to its full power, but not according to the measuring of the striking fist, which is altogether a stranger to the Anvil. Therefore in truth, the fist doth act simply on the Anvil, and the Anvil suffers simply, although it took no offence thereby; but the fist suffers by accident, if it do the more strongly strike: the Agent of which suffering is notwithstanding, not the Anvil, but the fist it self: Because there is one only and single action of the stroak, and hurt, which I therefore call a rebounding one: And so the fist suffers, and is hurt by it self, from its own self; but by accident from the strength of the stroak, and occasionally from the hardness or figure of the Iron: which three things are to be noted in one only stroak: For truly, that which by accident, and occasionally acteth exter∣nally only, doth not in very deed act by an action of its own; and therefore neither is there any re-action, as neither action of the Anvil: But the smiting, and hardness are the occasio∣nal means of the wound; one whereof (to wit, hardnesse) is a proper, occasional, and in∣ternal thing; the other (to wit, the smiting) is accidental by accident. In the next place, there is another action of a moving strength, which hath deceived many with the title of re∣acting, as while a hand layeth hold of bright burning Iron: for the hand in laying hold, doth in very deed act, and that by it self, and the apprehended Iron it self doth suffer in the laying hold: but this doth likewise act by a new action indeed, but by a far different action in burning the hand: for neither is that the scorching of the Iron, as being comprehended (although that touching be an immediate occasion and cause, without which it is not done; but it is the proper action of the Iron, as being burning bright: for so, touching, and scorching are Beings wholly distinct, and separable in the root; and so also both their actions differ in their objects, though in time of acting they do now and then co-unite: Therefore the searing is not a re-acting of the Iron, as being laid hold of, or it is not the re-acting of comprehen∣sion: Although in both the sorts of action, the acting hand becomes a sufferer, because two actions wholly unlike, do concur; to wit, one of the hand laying hold, and the other of the Iron burning. Again, swiftnesse, while a Ram or Engine is sore smitten against a wall, is not the proper activity of the Agent, but it is a measuring of strength imprintingly moving, and so is external and by accident. Now, as in respect of Agents by an altering Blas, those do un∣dergo not any thing of re-acting from their own objects, because they generate by an abso∣lute dispositive power of their objects; which power, seeing it is conferred on Nature by God, it also acteth without a re-acting. For example; If the whole Globe of the earth, and water should be of meal, all that heap would at length be leavened by a leaven of bread be∣ing once put into it, which verily could not be done, if there were but the least re-action of the fermentable body: For the small quantity of ferment or leaven should be presently choaked by the more big heap of the Object; even as also the seminal spirits do dispose the subjected lump, by reason of a faculty conferred on them, and in-bred in them, and do by a famous prerogative alter it, and that without the re-acting of the subjected heap: Neither doth that hinder, because the stomach cocting the more hard meats, is felt as it were to re∣suffer, and to undergo a re-acting of digestible things; because also, that speech of Physiti∣ans is too rustical; because, unlesse that which is to be digested be perfectly cocted, and at a set term of time, the digestion of the same is in vain expected: for it tarrying longer in the stomach, is corrupted, and so then a new Agent ariseth; neither is the former any longer digestible, when it is corrupted; neither also doth that new Agent re-act in manner of bright burning Iron, because there are in that digestible matter, parts uncapable of digestion, in respect of that stomach: Neither also doth the leaven or ferment of bread leaven the powder of glasse, or the sand of a flint, because it is a strange and uncapable object, and not to be subdued by it: For so the digesting ferment of the stomach doth ferment the flour of meal, but not the brans: In the mean time, the ferment of the meal suffers nothing by the powder of glass; as neither doth that powder re-act, resist, or truly repel: For truly, alte∣ring ferments do never act, but on things that have a co-resemblance; but they are quiet, do cease, and sleep, if they have not an object proper for themselves: Therefore the hinderan∣ces of Agents by an alterative Blas, are uncapacities, hardnesses, impurities, unequalities, and the requisite movers of space: Therefore the action of these is terminated on a proper object, and disposeth that object unto periods or ends, and manners decreed for it. But in∣terposing hinderances are not the re-actions of the patient, but the incapacities of the same: For neither doth silver re-act, while it is solved by Aqua fortis with so great a heat, although this in the mean time, decayeth in acting, and loseth its own force and virtue: but there is an in-bred property of Spirits, and a natural endowment, which do operate in act∣ing, that by reaching unto their appointed mark, they may perfect themselves, and bring down their own objects unto bounds naturally enjoyned them; which thing distilled Vinegar doth sufficiently teach, while it dissolves the stone of Crabs, Snails, Co∣rals, &amp;c: for the sharp spirit of the Vinegar doth coagulate it self in acting, and that which else was volatile, and liquid, is not onely strained together, but also changeth its savour; for it collects and constrains it self in a tangible form, as if it did more rejoyce to remain in the shape of a more solid body, than of a liquor: But that such a coagulation, and change of savour doth happen by the proper motion of the spirit of Vinegar, but not through a re-acting of Bodies standing in the act of dissolution, is manifest; because there is not made a dimi∣nishing of those Bodies, even in one grain at least, in weight; while as in the mean time, some measures of stilled Vinegar do undergo the aforesaid change: and so it doth not seem consonant to reason, for that thing to be done, by reason of the bruising or breaking of the stones onely, but by reason of a proper natural gift-like unfolding of the Spirits. The same thing almost comes to pass, while the Spirit of Vitriol waxeth very hot with Mercury: For the Mercury remaineth, being unchanged in the essence and matter of Mercury, onely that it assumes the countenance of snow; losing in the mean time nothing of its own substance, yet the Spirit of Vitriol passeth over into a true Alume; but if the Spirit of Aqua fortis (which for the other half of it, is also the Spirit of Vitriol) be combined with the Mercury, that snow of Mercury is not made, as neither doth the liquor it self pass over into an Alume: And so from hence it appeareth, that the action is not proper to the Mercury, but to the Spi∣rit of Vitriol diversly disposing it self of its own free accord; and according to an in-bred inclination unto divers objects, differently changing it self: Wherefore the Spirit of Vitri∣ol which is in the Aqua fortis, through a strong heat of bubbles stirred up, and a tempestu∣ous boiling up, dissolveth the Mercury, and far otherwise, than while it is the naked and simple Spirit of Vitriol; which variety indeed, in acting, doth manifest the various virtues of the acting Spirit, rather than those of the Mercury it self; because in the one action the Mercury is made invisible, which in the other becomes white like snow: For the Spirit of Sea-salt, although it be most sharp, yet it is never changed by the fellowship of Mercury, as neither also doth it act into the Mercury: And so the effects of actions are seen, and not of re-actings: So Aqua fortis acts into all metals, except gold; but with Sal armoniack it acts only into gold, but no longer into silver; And so there are particular properties of Spi∣rits, but not re-actions of a suffering body; because it is that which in its own substance and weight, sustaineth nothing but a meer and one onely division of it self: Therefore Spirits being tossed with divers passions in acting, undergo divers transformations; but if they remain drowsie and sleeping, and do not act on their object, they also remain in their antient quali∣ties: For that thing appeared at first to happen, by reason of the touching of the Mercury, because it is that which is also a certain Spirit, but afterwards in the silver and gold, that was wholly silent. But moreover I remember, that the Calx or lime of Silver hath drunk into it the liquor of Sulphur, which they call a distillation, which presently in the Silver laid aside all harshnesse and tartnesse, and it changed this liquor into a gauly bitternesse, by distilling: for the silver remained the same which it was before, in substance, weight, and powder: there∣fore that bitternesse could not be afforded from the silver; and for that cause, in no wise, from a re-acting of the silver; but of its own free accord it was made by the property of the Spirit of the Sulphur: for neither is there a lesse reason, why the same Spirit of Vitriol, in diversly acting, doth also change it self after a diverse manner, than that the same silver should under the boyling up of diverse Spirits, wax cruel, by a various manner of re-acting on these; Especi∣ally while that in a Spirit, there is made a various transmutation in acting; but there is no suc∣cessive alteration made of the substance of the silver, in suffering, or diminishing of its weight: which things may be far more clearly demonstrated by Adeptists, unto whom, to wit, the one onely and same Liquour Alkahest, doth perfectly reduce all tangible Bodies of the whole Uni∣verse into the first life of the same, without any changing of it self, and diminishing of its vir∣tues; But it is drawn under the yoak, and thorowly changed by its own compeere or co-equal onely: For from hence there appeareth a certain sense to be in all particular things, the which mediating, they do sometimes one way, and sometimes another, move and unfold themselves about divers objects; but not that the period of motions, and of those unfoldings, and the va∣riety of Agents, is therefore to be attributed to a re-acting of the Patients; To wit, even as, while an external luke-warmth bringing up Eggs unto a Chick; for neither of them doth re∣suffer reciprocally: For neither doth the vital Spirit in an Egg any way re-suffer any thing by the luke-warmth, as neither that luke-warmth by the vital Spirit of the Egg. Hitherto tend∣eth that which I have proved before; To wit, that altering things do not act by contrariety: Therefore their Patients do not fight in defending themselves, nor re-act by contrariety. 
 That maxim also is false, That every Agent doth of necessity, act in an instant; and that its action is retarded or fore-slowed onely, by a resistance and re-acting of the Patient: Because in all particular seeds, their own, and certain period of continuances and dispositions is essen∣tially included. For the falshood of that maxim hath flowed from hence, that the Schools being deluded by Aristotle, have thought that the fire is to be compared unto other Agents: the which, when they saw to be any where, almost in a moment, they believed that the same thing was likewise to be wrested unto other Agents: Through occasion whereof, I must now speak of irregular and differently inclined Agents. 
 In the first place it is manifest, that the fire doth suffer or undergoe nothing at all by the re-acting of a combustible object: For otherwise, a small quantity of fire should be sufficient for the burning of the whole Universe, if it were capable of burning: which could not be done, if the combustible matter should re-act even but never so little. Truly a River suffers nothing, if a staffe shall swim on the same, and as yet lesse doth the fire suffer, if it burn Saguntum, or if Gun-powder be fired. In Nature also, no seminal Beginning suffereth by the matter into which it works; Because it disposeth of the same without re-acting, even as it hath begun plain∣ly to appear in denied contraries. 
 Moreover, that the falshood of the aforesaid maxim may be the more beheld, take notice, that all particular seeds have their own periods and moments appointed by the Creator, where∣in they do promote their course unto a ripeness: For Conies, Dogs, Birds, Men, Horses, Ele∣phants, do nourish within, perfect, and bring forth their own Young, at their appointed termes of time: Not indeed, that the seminal matter in a man, is rawer, colder, and more rebelli∣ous than the seed of a Cat: But God hath set the bounds of every one of them, according to his own good pleasure, the reason whereof to enquire into, belongs not unto mans judgement: For if the disposition of a seminal matter be of a longer labour. that proceeds not by reason of its resistance or strugling strength, as neither from the weakness, wearisomness, idleness, or di∣sturbance of passions of the Agent: For truly, every Being in Nature operates without la∣bour and passion, and therefore without cessation, rest, intermittency, and trouble; Seeing in∣deed, all particular things are made by reason of the communicating of a Ferment, and limita∣tion of appointment: For all particular things do purely operate by a reflexion of their own ap∣pointment, according to the ordaining will of their Creator: For so Christians were to philo∣sophize. But in local motion, motive virtues, and so also in the exercise of Science Mathema∣tical, the maxims of Aristotle are indeed serviceable, the which, by a violent Command, and unfitly, the Schools have introduced into nature: For if moyst or wet Wood be not so obedi∣ently burnt up, as dry; that doth not therefore come to passe through a re-acting of the wood, or with a suffering of the fire: For although the wood should cease from all combustion, the fire should not therefore suffer more by the wood, than by Gold, which is not to be burnt: yea if in wet wood, as such, there should be a certain operative resistance, to wit, a re-acting; sure∣ly, water should also longer, and more strongly resist fire, than the Rosin of Wood, or of a coal: But the consequence is false: For the water doth most swiftly, and first of all fly away out of wet Wood, before the fire enflames the Rosin of the Wood: Therefore the slowness in wet Wood doth not argue a re-action of the matter, or strength of the suffering Wood; But the fire follows its own laws of appointments, whereby it separates first the more volatile things, and next in order, things lesse swift of flight: For so, although the fire be subdued by wet Ro∣sin, which by it self otherwise, had presently been in a flame with the same fire; yet by reason of the aforesaid lawes, it patiently expects the torture of the fire, and a departure of that water. 
 Iron also being placed between stubble and fire, hinders indeed the enflaming or burning up of the stubble; but there is not therefore any re-action of the Iron on the fire, or suffering of the fire by the Iron: which thing surely hath not been narrowly enough searched into by the Schools: For although these their maxims have place in corporeal actions, wherein the Agent of necessity, cherisheth and toucheth its own object, and thus far inspireth its own virtue into the same; yet that is altogether impertinent in Agents which do act on things placed under them, which are far separated in place: For truly, besides the actions of the Heavens (which are carried by in∣fluence, in-beaming, and motion, without the touching of an Agent; but by a Blas onely do dis∣perse the Seminaries of their own virtues) Sublunary things are not properly deprived of a Blas: Because fermental Odours, do produce most active, and seminal effects, and do transchange, in nature, their object, by their own perfume, and do draw it after them into their protection. Likewise also a radial or beaming action doth concur into nature: For the Elks hoof is thus said by its touching, to preserve the heart, and head from danger; yet the Seat of the evil is not in the finger, as neither is there a passing from bound to bound; Neither is the Hoof therefore diminished of its strength by acting; but rather is confirmed, as also the Load-stone is com∣forted by the communication of Iron; For a clear sign, that an Agent suffers not a whit by re∣action, in seminal, or beaming actions, and by consequence, that neither doth the Patient there∣fore re-act. Therefore Medicines against the pain of the Head, or Amulets or preserving Po∣manders, have a Blas, whereby they do constrain objects to obey them, like the Heavens, and they act onely by their own, and not on a strange and nearer object: And they draw out their deserts or worthy virtues, without all corporal eflux, motion, passion, or weakening. I know indeed, that the Schools do not bear these things; but that they refer these effects into vapours lifted up from the womb, or the least toe; because they are such, who have sunk themselves in the Clay of a dreggy Minerva or wit. But if a Maid which hath the Mother, doth perfectly see all things, at least but on one side, or on the other half onely, she also seeth onely half the Nee∣dle which she holdeth or presseth with her fingers, however she may turn her eyes and head: She may see I say, many folks being collected into a Company, but even to her Girdle, or half-sided ones onely: shall perhaps then the vapours be divided in halfes, the Apple of the Eye neverthe∣less, appearing entire? can these vapours I say, permit her to see and discern many things to∣gether; but all things apart, in the one, or other half onely? But an incorporeal Blas of govern∣ment hath been neglected by the Schools, which acteth without a corporeal eflux, even as the Moon makes the Sea to swell: For in the strangling of the womb, they complain as long as they are partakers or Mistresses of talk, of the stretching out of the spaces between their Ribs, and they think that the Girdle they are girt with, is tied to their Ribs, or that a staffe is extend∣ed from their neather parts, unto their Throat, &amp;c. Consider I pray, with me, oh ye Schools that there is in us a double motive power, and decline from this your thred-bare maxim; To wi , That the action of the same power is hurt, whereby the sound one is exercised: For truly there is in us a voluntary Blas, and the Blas it self of the parts (as elsewhere concerning Convulsions). Take ye notice; That at least, in this place, if voluntary motion be natural, the will also suf∣fers nothing from the muscles moved by it self, yea, neither from the muscles refusing to be moved: Nor in the next place, therefore, that there is a weariness of the faculty; but onely of the Body, or Organs: Lastly, that the muscles being moved by an importunate Blas of the parts, there is not a wearisomness of the parts, although the pain be heightned, and they do not feel their own weariness; because convulsive motions being stirred up by the Blas of the parts, are made by a faculty which becomes mad, and for this cause they are scarce felt or perceived. 
 For neither doth that prove, because moysture in Wood, or an interposing of a coal between the flame, and Ro n of the intrinsecal Wood, do foreslow the action of the fire, that it may not the more swiftly consume the Wood with its devouring: For truly Impediments do not act properly, as neither do they re-act; but they do purely and simply suffer. 
 They do indeed some way limit the very action of the fire, or do seclude the same, as it were uncapable partitions, and no more: For it is proper and natural to fire, first to consume water, and the more light discussable things, into vapours, before it in burning, do enflame Oily things; At length, after Oily things, to consume the fat which hath more fixedly remained in the coal: But neither doth the water re-act against the fire, or doth the fire suffer: For whether water be in the Wood, or not, the fire doth alwayes act univocally or singly, and according to the ap∣pointment of its own nature, acteth freely, and in such a manner, as that it convin∣ceth the aforesaid maxim of falshood. Also Gold, Talck, Marble, &amp;c. do not re-act on the fire, although they are not consumed or wasted by the fire: For the manifest incapacity of these, hinders it, by reason whereof, the fire doth not act on those by an ordinary burning or enflaming: For truly, the fire intends to enlighten those Bodies, in themselves dark, so as that they may be after some sort, made clear or shining bright: the which, at length it obtains in making them fiery: Because the fire endeavours to pierce all things with its own form: The which, while inflameable things do not sustain, without their own ruine; therefore, in burning, they are enflamed, and being consumed, do depart: Neither also doth the fire pretend to enlighten stones and mettals in a moment, according (as otherwise) to the aforesaid Maxim; but the fire suits it self in its own nature of acting, according to the limi∣tation of every object: And so it is perpetually true, that every natural Agent acteth, and is received after the manner of its own object receiving. Therefore the primary action of the fire is to produce in its object, a fire like it self; wherein some objects do burn under the in∣tention of fire; but others do persist, and expect the last intent of the fire: So that, if some things are not combustible; at leastwise, the fire acteth into them as much as it can, to make them fiery. In like manner also, the light suffers not any thing, although at one onely instant, it dart it self from the Sun, from far, on the Earth, or although it be not sent thorow, through a thick mean hindering it: Truly the light suffers nothing by a thick or dark Body, whether it shall passe thorow that Body, or not: For it alwayes attaineth its own intent, which is to enlighten, whe∣ther in the mean time, an Impediment doth interpose or not: for the resistance, or repelling of ob∣jected Impediments, are not in manner of a re-acting (because Agents re-suffer nothing) but they are of a meer incapacity: Therefore it is plainly indifferent, and by accident unto those Agents, whether fixed Bodies are enlightned only, by the fire, and are pierced by the light, or not: For these things are even after the same manner, as the Leaven of Meal in respect of the powder of Glass: For the Leaven suffers nothing, although the incapacity of the Glass doth hinder whereby the Leaven doth work the lesse: For at least there is no re-acting where there is no action. These things about the denial of re-acting, strife, hatred, and war, between the Agent or doer, and patient or sufferer; to wit, which kinde of action alone, the Schools have acknowledged.
I will add also, other new ones. I have said in the Book of Fevers, that a poysonous excre∣ment in Fevers, is included in the Midriffs, producing drowsie sleeps, doatages, &amp;c. There∣fore it is an anodynous or sleepifying, and mad poyson. Likewise in Falling-sicknesses, that there is an unsensitive befooling, and mad poyson, afflicting for a space, being enstalled in the Midriffs. In hypochondrial madnesses, that there is a furious poyson, or that which doates with jesting or merriment. In giddiness of the Head, a whirling poyson. In the Apoplexie, that which takes away sense and motion. 
 Lastly, in swooning, a stupefactive or sleepy poyson, a dispersive of the Spirits: And hence, pre∣sently taking away sense and motion. But seeing the Schools do not extend themselves beyond a rudeness, they have thought that the occasional matters of these Diseases, is the matter [where∣of] of Diseases, and that it is brought thorow the Veins and Arteries, from beneath, upwards unto the Brain: which thing nevertheless, I have refuted, for the exposition of that Aphorisme: If in a continual Fever, after yellow Vrines, watery ones shall presently succeed, they denote dota∣ges to come; by reason (as Galen will have it) of Choler snatched into the Brain: But the Schools elsewhere, when they noted that from yesterdayes gluttony, giddinesses of the Head have arisen in the morning, they had rather to have the matter of Diseases to be conveighed into the Brain, in a right line, out of the stomach, in the likeness of vapours, through unnamed Trunks, and the throat: And so, black Choler, according to Hippocrates, to be brought sometimes into the body of the Brain, and to bring forth the falling-Evil; or else into the Soul it self, and then to cause the passion of hypochondrial madness: And that by uncertain passages, conveighers, and unto certain scopes or objects. But seeing one onely melancholy humour, should be unfit for so great evils, it was doubted in the Schools afterwards (not indeed in a Quaternary of humours now antiently established) in the malice of humours, as yet not searched out; but undiscerned: For least they should be pressed with the straight∣nosses and samelinesses of passages, not satisfying so great a variety, they fled unto fumes and vapours, that the various fumes of one black Choler should pierce into the bosom of the Brain, and stir up diverse cruelties: And they have safely covered these toyes from credulous young beginners; they being secure that they were never to be compelled unto a designing and beholding of those fumes. In the mean time, the Schools are worthy of compassion, that in so great a sluggishness of narrowly searching into the truth hitherto, they are compelled unto so miserable straights: but surely, the sick are more worthy of pity, who have suffered such help∣ers, hired for much money unto the dest uction of their life: Because such Patients be more in∣feriour, and miserable than such Agents. 
 Therefore the Schools have neglected the matter of so diverse poysons besieging the Head, and life: But they being heedless, have passed over the application of that matter unto the life to wit, that a diseasie occasional cause should stir up a diseasie Agent; and the immediate, and whole mentioning of this History, no lesse than the consideration thereof. Likewise also, they have therefore dis-esteemed, the manner of making a Disease, and of deriving the poysonous acti∣vity unto the vital object; To wit, because they have been wholly ignorant of the sink from whence those poysons should be derived, and have passed it by as a thing altogether unheard of; Because they have neglected the proper action of the Family-government of man; without the knowledge of which, notwithstanding, nothing of those things which do befall us within, can be known: For onely the action of the Agent on the Patient, hath been known in the Schools, the which indeed they would have to be made with a certain circumventing or invasion, with a strife and reacting of the Patient, and with a weakening and re-suffering of the Agent. 
 But there is a certain action far different from the former, whereof Predecessours have never made mention, which I call the Action of Government: which indeed, is not onely made with∣out suspition of re-acting; but also without a bodily co-touching, and therefore it hath its sup∣posed object at a distance and separated. It is called magnetical and sympathetical, or attractive and co-passionate (being derided by the modern Schools) when it consisteth between objects at a distance in place; but when it is circumscribed in our Body, as a difference from a Magne∣tisme or an attractive virtue, I call it the action of a meer government; wherein the Agent di∣sposeth of his proper patient, or object of his own Sphere, as of an Client of a hereditary right, ac∣cording to an ordination of Laws inbred in him, subjected by a Symbole or mark of resemblance. Indeed, let the Agent be the Tutor here, and the Patient be in his minority. And there is a co-like action of the Stars in the Universe, as well on each other, as on sublunary bodies: The which, seeing without controversie, it is there influential, yet in sublunary things it hath been undeservedly suspected, and so hitherto barren and neglected. 
 But our present action of government, is not the action which the Schools have acknowledg∣ed to be a consent of parts, or by a conspiracy of offices and necessities: For truly, govern∣ment doth not require a consent. It is therefore first of all, a deceiptful name, and therefore it either contains a mask, or besides, a deceit or juggle, a Fable, that is, it containeth nothing: For in very deed, they will have this consent to be stirred up, required, wrested back, by Fumes, Channels, Conduits, or threddy fibers; which, as they are not in nature, nor are there requi∣red; So also, they have nothing common with the action of government: For the Schools do no where admit of the action of an Agent, unless it be applied to the Patient by a mean, in a con∣tinued channel, as it were by a Chain. They deny I say, a continuation of virtue, extended by the sameliness of a mean, unless it be brought or conveighed unto its proper suffering object by a certain Trunk: And especially in the Body of man, they decree nothing to be done without a communication of passages: And this hath been that continued, yet ridiculous necessity of re∣vulsions and derivations amongst them. 
 Truly by this inducement, Anatomy hath been garnished for the Body of man, as if it were the undoubted betokener, and healer of all Diseases: For hitherto they have taken so great pains therein, that the Schools having forgotten their own Galen, do measure him to be a true Physi∣tian, who shall point out most in the filths of dead Carcases, and who shall certainly finde by his own knife, those things which are published by Predecessors in this respect, even unto supersti∣tion: And the errour of so superfluous a curiosity, and pride of unsound Doctrine, praysed by the ignorance of the Schools, is to be judged to have been brought in by the spirits of giddiness, and the Authour of dark dimness: for unto whom it is acceptable, under what Title soever, we loose our time unfruitfully. For it was sufficient for Anatomy, to have known the scituati∣on; co-knitting, and uses of the parts; but not to have exercised a butchery on dead Carkases all ones life-time, to finde out the passages or conduits of the least vein: For truly they have re∣gard unto a vain and sordid boasting, wherein the most pretious race of our life is unfruitfully consumed. For in truth, the knowing and Phylosophical preparation of Simples, require al∣most the whole life of the whole man to themselves: 
 For indeed, seeing one muscle ought to be moved, another being in the mean time, quiet, the chief Judge or Arbitrator of things hath appointed interchangeable courses of Organs, so that the command of our will should be declared in the muscles by deputed sinews onely, but that by the muscles and bones it should be put in execution: From hence the Schools have thought, that therefore all our actions are made by nothing but a co-chained thred of Organs or Instruments, through the far-of sequestred and divided Families of the members: neither have they heeded, that an Insect, by one onely Liquor extended throughout his length, doth supply the promiscuous offices of Veins, Arteries, Sinews, and Bowels; so as that a Flie, as yet flies away, his Head being cut off; and I have seen the Head of a horned Hornet (which they call a flying Stag) which was cut off; to live and be moved six dayes after. Therefore varieties do not depend on a necessity of powers and Organs; but onely, because it hath well pleased the Crea∣tor to distinguish some offices, and ends or bounds in the more perfect living Creatures, by a blinde, and mutual dependance of Organs or Instruments. In the mean time, the action of go∣vernment doth not cease in man by reason of this dependance, and reciprocal successive course of members; the which I have already accused in an Insect: but not a few offices are admini∣stred in the Family-government of the same, without all connexion of deriving Channels: which thing, because it hath stood doubtful, therefore the Schools have assigned the greatest glory of life, and studies unto Anatomy: And when as the bond or conjunction was to them unknown, they therefore with the amazement of the unwonted matter, presently fled unto blinde ascend∣ing vapours, or humours prostrating themselves without order, for a sacred Anchor of igno∣rance: For as much as, after that they had dissected at pleasure, those that were strangled by the womb, those that were cut off by swooning, or those who died by fits of the Falling-sickness, or tremblings of the heart, and had found no destroyer of life in the passages, to whom the guilt of the murder might be imputed, they betook themselves unto blind vapours, and filthy or de∣filed exhalations derived into the heart, and head: However, they then at leastwise ought to admit those deadly vapours to be carried about on every side, by no continued commerce of pas∣sages. I willingly admit of corporeal actions, whereby heat doth afterwards make that hot which is brought unto it, also of a passage whereby belching doth ascend out of the stomach thorow the Weasand into the throat and nostrils: in the next place, that excrements do covet their own Conduits, and from which, that which is grievous is exorbitant, or stumbleth: also that the vi∣tal Spirits are ordinarily dispersed into the Body by the vassally Channels or Pipes of their own Bowels: I may be accounted out of my wits, unless I confess these things. Again, I admit of an action, whereby the Ferments of the Bowels do issue into the Kitchins of the digestions, as it were by certain beames, nor are they carried by an oblique or crooked motion: 
 But I do not passe by a third action in mans Body, which is called Influential, or that of go∣vernment: The which although it cannot ordinarily wander without the Body; yet it is ab∣stracted from a co-binding mean: For neither doth it act by a direct and Sun-like beam onely; but also by another, to wit, by that which doth unsensibly pierce the whole juncture of the parts, and in manner of the Moon, whatsoever it also obliquely beholdeth, that it affecteth or moveth, even as already before, in our new Meteors. This is I say, the action of government or of dependance, shining or beaming, and piercing every way, without the bawdery of co∣binding, or conjoyning; yet not but unto a proper object. Note here, that I have elsewhere said that the Beard is generated by the stones, in a man, whom they distinguish from a gelded person. But besides this action of government, I acknowledge moreover two natural ones, but prodigious or monstrous ones: Therefore there is a third action, proper to incorporeal Spirits, which for action, do not require a direct beam, nor a beholding of the object, nor a nearness, disposition or co-binding of the same; but they act, onely by a powerful beck (for indeed they want extreamities or outmost parts, whereby they may touch as well the Bodies which they pretend to move, as also the meanes themselves, whereby they may move Bodies) with a far more efficacious influential force or virtue: That action is nigh akin to that where∣by the Soul doth signifie its will or beck unto its own Organs whereunto it is tied: For thou hast made him (O Lord) a little lesse than the Angels, by the obligatory bond of a Body: other∣wise he is more worthy, whom thou more esteemest of, who art not deceived in thy estimati∣on: Thou wert incarnate for the redemption of men, not for the redemption of Angels. 
 There is also a certain lying action, usual with wicked Spirits; to wit, a jugling and bewitch∣ing one. The which, although it contain in it a true action; yet it doth not manifest a true ef∣fect: But the bewitcher befools the sight, while the same things appear to one, which are not, or which are not to another, or not in the same manner: He befools the eyes, that he may re∣present false things unto them, and mock them with his beck or at his pleasure: It is almost just as in Fevers, doatages are naturally objected, which are not before the eyes, and of -times also without doatage, a feverish matter seemeth to be brought thorow the back-bone, unto the pla∣ces affected: For they are impostures, the participation of a blemish, the dispersing of a strange tincture, from a contagion of the inflowing Spirit; but not a puffie dispersing of corporeal va∣pours. That is government, whereby one part obeyeth another: In the joynt-sickness or Gout, that doth clearly appear: Because a certain indisposition of the stomach, with a small Fever, goes before, before that any sign doth manifestly appear in the joynts: So in swooning, sudden death, the Falling-sickness, giddiness of the Head, Apoplexie, &amp;c. the part is played about the mouth of the stomach, so that for this cause it hath deserved the name of the heart; and sto∣mach-remedies being suddenly offered, they are for the most part restored: And so like, juggles, they are made elsewhere, and seem to be carried to some other place: For whatsoever is writ∣ten concerning vapours lifted up out of the stomach, and womb, they do spread forth bewitch∣ing darkness, as well about the matter, conveyances of passages, and meanes, as the government of life it self. After another manner, there are true actions, and true effects; Even as else∣where I have distinguished in the Treatise of Catarrhs or Rheumes. I must now more deeply enquire into the Paradox of the action of government: For indeed, in the first place it is com∣monly, well observed, that anger, fear, and other passions of the minde, do not onely with speed diversly affect the Spirit carried in the Arteries and Sinews with the very stroak of the eye, that the Cheeks do fall, the Appetite perisheth, the hairs stand upright, the voyce sticks, the Spittle foams, sweats and the other excrements themselves do defile, through the storm of disturban∣ces: But a Horse-beast affords the fragments of his hoof, which being fried, and taken, cures the Bloudy-flux: but if the Beast be a wanton Colt, then his hoof is mortal to those that have the Bloudy-flux. The spittle of a Dog cures wounds by licking them; but if he be corrupt∣ed with madness, he propagates the deadly poyson of his own madness on other Species, yea on general kindes: we have Houshold examples: 
 Eunuchs are beardless, of a straighter neck, their knees being writhed inwards, &amp;c. There∣fore the Beard at least doth efficiently depend on the stones being come to maturity; yea the whole habit of the Body, and inclinations of the Soul in gelded persons, do differ from entire individuals: which thing is evident and daily seen in an Oxe, a Bull, a Capon, and a Cock: But yet the stones have not their Pipes, Fibers, Guards, or Vapours on the skin of the Chin, on the feathers of a Cock, or on the horns of a Bull, as neither on the animosity or sturdiness of the minde, or on the haires: But there is an unsensible influx of the stones, as it were another of the Moon, beginning even from an Infant, before the ripeness of age, also at the time of ripe years, changing the voyce: Therefore the action of government of the stones is no otherwise than as the Moon begetteth the Marrows with child: So the Brain is the chief over growth, which the straining of the turning joynts in crook-backed folks, or putting bones out of joynt, do suffici∣ently shew: Which thing also in the womb doth not sluggishly offer it self: by reason of the womb alone, a Woman is that which she is; she wants a beard; and although she be of a moy∣ster habit of Body, yet she growes sooner to a perfect state: She suffers other disturbances and animosities, and makes another flesh and bloud, diverse from a man: And so that also, for the wombs sake, the Sex assumes a devotion to it self, by a certain Prerogative: The ruler of these actions sits in the womb, who being sore smitten or disturbed in his own Circle, is for the pro∣ducing of all Diseases universally: And therefore the Jaundise, Apoplexie, Strangling, Asthma, &amp;c. are not from things retained; But they draw their original from a more sublime Monar∣chy: For oft-times, the womb straineth one onely tendon in the foot, or throat, or it plainly presseth together the whole Weasand, as if the disease were local; when as in the mean time, no exhalation is sent, directed, or received unto that sinew or place: For by an Aspect onely, it contracts the Lungs, that it may wholly deprive them of breathing. They are trifles, which are brought hither concerning a hurtful vapour: Because it is that which should more neigh∣bouringly pull the Intestines, Stomach, and Midriff together, than that it should come unto the Lungs onely. Elsewhere also, the Throat ariseth unto the heighth of the Chin, and setleth again; neither is that the reward of vapours: But the dominion, government, aspect, and influx, and command of the womb causeth it so to be: For it affecteth that part which it will, and some∣times destroyes the whole Body because it is subjected: For as long as it is not shaken by the disturbances of the Soul, it stands with a straight foot; yea the womb sleepeth or slumbereth; but being once enforced by disturbances, for the future it brings forth its own inundations throughout the whole Body, and now and then, those durable till death: Because if the womb by its own Monarchy, wholly distinguisheth a Woman from a man, and it be the promiscuous parent of that distinction, it is no wonder also, that it doth by the same government, disquiet all, even the most remote parts, no otherwise than as the nearest, when, or where it will. And it is certain to him that makes a full search, that the operations of the sensitive Soul are of a co-like order, and of co-like progresses in operating, that if the womb by a spiritual governmen: snites the health, this is indulged to the Soul, by a like priviledge of acting on the womb: For if a Woman great with Child, being stirred with a desire (as elsewhere I have repeated) doth be∣hold a Cherry, and shall touch her self on the fore-head, he Young presently receives the Cher∣ry: Not indeed the naked spot of a Cherry; but a Cherry which waxeth green, white, yellow, and looks of a ruddy colour every year, together with the fruits of the Trees: yea which is far more wonderful: For that which happens to the Young in Brabant, that happens far sooner to the same in Spain, to wit, where Cherries do sooner come forth: Therefore the thought or cogitation reacheth the Young in a direct passage: not indeed by the directions of fibers, or straight beams, and the conveyance of aptness of readiness, as neither by the conceit of the Brain and Womb; but onely by a reciprocal or recoursary action of government. But besides, if there be no Young present, the Idea ' s of Imagination do not therefore cease to be decipher∣ed in the sides of the womb: The which, seeing they are strangers to the womb, it becomes easily furious, as being impatient of forreign Tables. There is therefore a passable way from the sensitive Soul, into the womb, and from this to it: which thing, Hippocrates first took no∣tice of; To wit, that the whole Body was exspirable, and conspirable: From whence it comes to passe, that some Symptomes of the womb, are scarce discerned from enchantments: For it so straightly strains the Coat of the Lungs, that it sends no Air at all thorow it into the breast: Here is no communication, passage, access, scope, or manner of a vapour, and much lesse is there an affinity with Rheums in this respect, seeing it begins and is bounded or finished without a material aflux, or eflux. It is therefore onely the action of government, whereby the mad womb doth disturb all things: But a co-knitting, nighness, aptness, or consent are not to be regard∣ed; but a superiority of Monarchal power, and a vital dependance of parts: For the ruling parts do act by an absolute power (not being bound to the nearness or nice scituations of pla∣ces) in every scituation of the Body, alike cruelly: And that which is far more famous, the ru∣ling power or virtue, reacheth undefiled, unto its bound or mark without a defilement of meanes: The womb doth oft-times live, and tumulteth after the death of a Woman, which it hath brought on her: And so it enjoyes a singular Monarchy, which that duplicity declareth; neither doth it obey the Body, unto which then it prescribeth Lawes: For neither otherwise, is it violently shaken but by the disturbances of the Soul: wherefore, besides the singular perceiv∣ances of smelling, tasting, and touching, it is powerful also in a certain bruital understanding, whence it is mad and rageth, if all things shall not answer its own will or desires: It rageth I say, by writhing it self upwards, downwards, before, behinde, or on the sides, with an undeclarable torment of pain: But as long as that fury is restrained in its own Inn, it indeed stirs up local griefs: For the parts which it forcibly snatcheth, or beholdeth at a distance, it doth as it were strain and strangle with a Cramp, no otherwise than as being stirred with fury on them. I re∣member, that I once saw those that were strangled by their womb, whose dead Carcasses looked black and blew, being black in those parts wherein they had been pained before death: Neither also doth it largely poure forth its Issues, unless it should open its own Veins by an inordinate madness, to overthrow the guiltless treasure of life: So neither doth it contract the sinewes and muscles, make the joynts lame, displace the tendons, resolve the muscles, and crisp and co∣wrinckle the coats or membranes, but onely by the action of government, and unless it being stir∣red with fury, it should keep a duality with the Womans life; otherwise, as long as every thing keeps unity, it desires to remain in its Essence or Being. When therefore a fury acts out of the womb alone, it is the lesse evil: But when it flies thorow into the sensitive Soul (with which I have shewen that it hath an agreeing co-resemblance) it pours forth the true madness of its own fury out of the hypochondrial part. In young Maids at their first being enflamed or swollen with a lesse pleasure, it withholds, suppresseth, discoloureth their courses, and brings forth inor∣dinate ones: Then at length, it produceth Palsies, Cramps, beatings of the heart, tremblings, and swoonings, and contracteth the sinews: which distempers, by the volatile tincture of Coral, Oyl, of Amber, Salt of Steel, and such like Medicines, I daily cure. The same distempers being of the milder sort, do obey stupefactive things. Also, the more cruel ones, require greater Secrets of Chymistry. What things I have already spoken touching the government of the Stones, and Womb, I have demonstrated by many Arguments, in the Treatise of Catarrhs, and likewise of the Duumvirate, not by a more dull privi∣ledge to belong unto the Stomach, neither that fumes, as neither that vapours do ascend out of the Stomach unto the Head; and so that in this respect, an impossible Fable is taught in the Schools. Likewise in the Treatise of Fevers, and elsewhere, I have shewen, by what sume drunkenness is made, and by what way, fumes are derived into the more formerly bosoms of the Brain. Now I will teach the manner of making in an Apoplexie, the Falling-sickness, drowsie Evil, &amp;c. that when I shall have denied them to be made by a co-knit Chain of va∣pours, they may at least be understood to undergoe the action of Government. 
 To which end I must repeat what I before spake by the way; To wit, that the Beard is bred by the stones, and that the distinctions, ages, varieties, and colours hereof do depend thereupon: which thing, seeing it is commonly known, I at leastwise admonish, that it ought to be understood, that a Vapour is not made, which is brought forward by the Ministery of particular Organs; but that a power is to be considered, which in man∣ner of light, doth affect and dispose the whole Body, or at leastwise its own objects, according to the gift, and ends seminally implanted in them by the Creator: therefore a certain power or virtue beames forth from the Stones throughout the Body, into the Archeus, and so also, into the sensitive Soul; seeing the Church commends the femall Sex for a natural devotion. Why therefore doth the Beard grow on the Chin, and not on the Fore-head, or on some other place? seeing that eflux of the light of the Stones throughout the whole Body is universal? This matter carries in it a most hidden Root of Philosophy, demonstrated in the Trea∣tise of the entrance of death into man: For we must know, that Souls do act on their own Body by the power of their own certain vital light, the which, seeing it is by the life (in which the Soul it self is every where present) every way extended, the Soul in that its light, deciphers the Idea ' s of its own conceipt and command, that afterwards, it may by the administring Spirits be wholly committed into the Organs, for execution: But those soulified lights, or lightsome Souls themselves, cannot be comprehended by us by a direct conceipt; Seeing they are as it were, the immediate clients of another, and that an intelligi∣ble World: wherefore the most High calls himself the Father of Lights: For the Senses do bring nothing unto us from without, w ch may decipher a conception of the soul in the phantasie: wherefore in the Treatise of forms, I have according to my slenderness, touched at this matter as largely as I could, in the newness of so great a Paradox, which is as yet more strongly to be considered elswhere; therefore lest repetition should tire, it is suf∣ficient here, to have said by the way, that substantial Souls and Forms, even as likewise also, a formal substance (which I elsewhere distinguish from the former) are certain unnamed Lights, immediately framed by the Fa∣ther of Lights. Therefore the powers depending on Souls, and certain ministring guarding Lights, are also thus far lightsome. I have shewen therefore by Science Mathematical, that those very Lights do pierce each other, yet that they reserve the Essence and properties of their former Lights: But in inferiour things, where∣in Forms do inhabite, and also formal Powers, that these have their light even actually capable of being stir∣red up by our Archeus, no otherwise than as in an Egg, the power of the seed is actuated by a nourishing warmth. Therefore there is in the roots of the hairs in the chin, a power of growth, duration, and other dispositions, although the masculine ruling power thereof, be of one stone: which power of the stones in∣deed, although it be absolute, yet it is not but diversly received in places, to wit, according to the manner and capacity of every receiver. But as much as this speculation conduceth unto Medicine, I will translate poysonous powers into the place of vital ones; Because they are not lesse lightsome than those which are o∣therwise, wholsom, if poysons do immediately issue from their own forms: For they are the gifts, either of the more outward or forreign Simples of the first Creation, or in the next place, are begotten afterwards in us through errour of living. By the same priviledge also, the natural powers of the parts, to wit, of the Womb, Stomach, Stones, &amp;c.) do beam forth their own lights throughout the whole Body, and do pierce the light of the Archeus, also by the action of government depending on their light: whence indeed, this Ar∣cheus is comforted, weakened, estranged, prostrated, yea perisheth: Therefore poysons in the Midriffs, or those bred elsewhere, do act by virtue of their own formal and lightsom powers, according to the natural endowed Idea imprinted on them, and they do affect the vital light planted in the sensitive Soul, in the Ar∣cheus, and so in the parts, and they mutually pierce each other by a radical union, and that either by a con∣tagion of poyson remaining, and transplanting the in-bred, formal and vital light of the parts; or onely for a little space, as in those that have the Falling-sickness, with a liberty of returning or not, according to the requirance of their root: Therefore the Head is not onely chief over the lower Organs, but also these are likewise chief over the Head, the which I have elsewhere declared in a manifest example by hanging: For truly, the thorny marrow being encompassed in the middle of the turning Joynts, cannot be strained by the Rope, that it should deny the passage of breathing to the Spirit the mover; nevertheless, the understanding, sense, and memory, perish at the same instant, by reason of the stopping or shutting up of the Arteries of the throat, even before an every way stopping of Air: whence it is sufficiently manifest, that some intellectual light doth continually spring from the lower parts unto the Head, by the intercepting whereof, presently in hanging, and drowning (although the Brain, thorny marrow, and sinews be not hurt) every virtue, power, and light of the Soul doth nevertheless perish: As also in a Feverish doatage raised up from the lower parts, the discourse of Reason perisheth. There is therefore a reciprocal government of the lower parts. I wil∣lingly confess also, that dimnesses, giddinesses of the Head, deasnesses, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, and other evils of that sort, do arise from the lower parts; yet not to be derived by vapours, unto the Head: For if they should ascend by the way of the Throat or Weasand, they should at least∣wise afford nothing but a distillatory and unsavoury water. But I have shewen elswhere, that watery vapours or exhalations cannot be carried so much as to the plain of the brain, and much lesse into the bosoms of the same: Therefore let the fault and guilt of vapours in the aforesaid Diseases be vain. And then, neither are vapours carried out of the Stomach, unto the heart, and head, through Arteries and Sinewes encompassing the mouth of the stomach; Seeing the Schools themselves confess, that it is not the office of the sinewes to draw from forreign parts. Indeed, they will have the Arteries to draw Air for the cooling re∣freshment of the heart, and the pressing out of smoaks; Neither of which I have shewen to be true: But at leastwise, that hath not place here, in the Arteries ending into the stomach: seeing they do never hope to inspire cold air, likewise that not loaded with a smoakie vapour, out of the stomach, nor out of the bottom of the belly; as neither fresh air, yea, neither in the next place, should it be convenient to expel their smoake vapours thither, where they should be much more hurtful to the stomach, than being detained in their proper seats: For the mouth of the stomach hath not undeservedly received its name, as to be the mouth of the heart: Because more powerful tokens, signes of life, and more horrible storms of disturbances do arise up out of the stomach, than from any other place: therefore neither was air to be drawn out of the stomach, and much lesse a vapour, the fewel and beginning of so many evils, or smoakinesses, to be expelled into the stomach by the ar∣teries; that is, giddyish, Epyleptical, Apoplectical vapours, &amp;c. are not drawn, neither do they voluntarily ascend thorow the Arteries: For truly, the unutterable Creator hath directed all the aims of things unto the necessities and requirances of uses. Lastly therefore, if the aforesaid Reeds do not draw hurtful and diseasify∣ing vapours, surely much lesse shall the stomach send or expel those, thorow the arteries, or a sinew; Seeing that it could after another manner, most speedily free it self by belching: For neither is the stomach a pair of bellowes, that it ought against the will of the Pipes, to derive hurtful vapours conceived for it, into the chest of life. And moreover, the stomach hath but few veins; and it is a strange thing for these to beg any thing out of the stomach (as hath been proved in its own place): wherefore vapours are not carried thorow the veins: For which way should they allure and receive that which is besides the appointment of nature? How should the stomach snuff up its vapours into most straight or narrow vessels which are filled with bloud, especially those which are not strong in drawing? For I consider the stomach, not indeed after the manner of Galen, that it is a sack or naked Kettle dedicated to the cooking of meats; but as a vital bowel, which is prevalent in tast∣ing, smells out a thing, and which is driven with divers appetites, as if it were a living Creature: and now and then it so loatheth some things, that a man had rather die, than to swallow one morsel which goes against his stomach. Indeed the stomach is of necessity serviceable to the whole Body, also for the vile Houshold-ser∣vice of the Kettle: But thus far other things do diversly obey it, and unless they give serious heed, they are cruelly beaten; According to that saying, He that will be the greatest among you, let him be the least. Surely the stomach is diligently busied in a low service; yet the family-service of the stomach is not therefore vile or base, no more than for the High-Priest of the Jewes to have played the butcher; but be∣ing compared with the stomach, he was a certain counterfeit or personage of life, with a famous majesty. If a Sinew, Artery, and Vein are seen implanted in the stomach, indeed they are rather signes of Clientship, and recompences whereby they confess themselves bowels tied or obliged to the stomach, than that they were added unto it for Government, Mast, and Sails. But neither indeed will I have this Principality to be so con∣serred on the stomach, as if the Government of that Common-wealth doth wholly belong to that membrane it self: For of the Spleen and Stomach, I make one onely Wedlock, and one Marriage-Bed: Wherein I attri∣bute to the Spleen, the offices of a Husband in the first motions, and to the Stomach, in the first sense or feeling; Therefore the Stomach is the compleating of the Spleen, and the Spleen of the Stomach; under the one only Bride-bed of them both, is the Principality of one Duumvirate. Yet I do never, cease to contemplate of that which is sufficiently admirable, what the Lord of things hath fore-seen; I say, in the naked coats of the Brain, Womb, Stomach, Pericardium, &amp;c. I say in the Membranes; but that, in things which are abject in the sight of men, God hath wont to constitute his wonders: whose name be sanctified for ever. 
 CHAP. XLIII. The Duumvirate or Sheriffdome. 1. Sleep is from a Sleepifying or somnoriferous power, and not from a defect. 2. The Opinion of the Schools concerning Sleep. 3. The Opinion of the Antients is opposed. 4. Contradictions. 5. The thingliness of Opiates. 6. The immpossiblity is shewn from the Scituation of the Sinews. 7. That Sleep happens, the Opiate remaining within the Stomack. 8. From the effect of Opium. 9. The Sulphur of Vitriol is taught. 10. Some absurdities accom∣panying the position of the Schools. 11. A ridiculous privy shift. 12. When Dreams are made. 13. Why the Headach ariseth from over-eating or drink∣ing. 4. Paine ariseth from a contraction of the Coats of the Brain, with∣out a Vapour. 15. A Position for the Duumvirate. 16. The Conclusion. 
 THe Heathen Poet doth morally, yet from a homely judgement, call Sleep, the Image of Frozen Death. But I, seeing that I know Sleep to be a natural power, dismis∣sed from the principality of the Stomack into the Brain, and to be committed to the charge of the Power of Government, that it might be put in execution; being a Christi∣an, do believe that God (alwaies to be sanctified) When he intended to frame Woman of the rib, he cast a Sleep upon Adam: Not indeed as a privative Being, but as an actual real faculty, and meerly positive: And therefore that the Power of Sleeping is vital, necessary, and consequently natural: For I may not believe, that God made Death in man, or the image thereof: Neither was it meet, that the image of Death should go before sin, and the occasion of Death. 
 The Schools indeed teach, that Sleep is caused by vapours lifted up out of the Stomack into the Brain, stopping or intercepting the passages of the Senses, Motion, Speech, Judgement, &amp;c. which things surely, I being as yet a young man, judged to be ridiculous: For in very deed, so a disease had been before sin; because sleep should be a disease; to wit, there had been a flatulent and vapoury Palsie, and Temporary madness, both in a body then as yet, not capable of suffering, and in a life immortal. Its a shamefull thing therefore, that the blockishness of Paganisme should as yet be seriously taught in the Schools, especially by Christians, better instructed. Yea the Schools do erre in their own position proposed. 
 For those that sleep do move, and turn themselves up and down, some do walls about, do feel the stings of a gnat or flie, so as that they do thereby awake: others also do speak, and oft-times aptly answer. At length, as the Schools do badly accord with themselves, while they confound sleep, and waking Catarrhs, with the same root, causes, and manner of making; so I, after that the toyes of a Catarrhe were hissed our, rejected also the assigned causes of sleep, as vain fables. Last of all the Schools also lay hands on themselves, while they teach, that from Opiates, things (as they say) most cold, and rather things powerfully restraining every evapouration (at least wise they are feigned to restrain, &amp;c. Vapours for Catarrhs, more than Coriander) from their own nature; Sleep, the Drowsie evil, yea and death are most readily brought on a man: and so much the more speedily, by how much the Opiate shall be of a more gradual cold in quality and quantity: And that by how much the more of sincere Opium shall be taken, and the more inward cooling made, by so much the more plentiful, and more continued vapours should be brought from the stomack into the head, also although the mouth of the stomack be shut. But surely it is a stupid devise, that sleep should be made by cold. Neither is it to be understood, how one onely grain of Opium can cause a sufficiency of cold in the Stomack, and had actually driven a sufficient quantity of vapours into the Head? How likewise, it shall belong to cold, to stir up vapours, rather than to re∣strain them. But these things we may suppose to be granted by the rule of false∣hood. 
 And that Sleepifying vapours are derived upwards from the meats: also that the Sinews, the authours of the senses and motions, are stopped by these vapours. But I would they had first considered, that the roots or first extremities of the Sinews, are continual to the Brain and thornie marrow: and that the other extremities or out∣most ends of the Sinews do end into the more outward muscles, or into the very Or∣gans of the Senses: and so, that therefore sleepie vapours first ought materially to pierce, and plainly to be imbibed into the substance of the brain and thornie marrow, and to obstruct both, before that they should according to the position of the Schools, cause sleep. And which way should these vapours incline from the Stomack, and pierce thorow the whole Substance of the Brain, by what meanes should they reach even unto the very innermost, and altogether continued root of the Sinews it self, which is unseperably connexed to the Brain? In the next place, how could he that is awake∣ned at the will of the awakener, be so speedily loosed and freed from those impediments? Or what may detain those vapours there for so many hours, without their co-binding, or co-thickning into water? for truly those vapours being once constrained, a passage should lay open to the Spirits, which should presently shake of the sleep: Or what at length may hinder, that new vapours should not continually make towards the same beginnings of the Sinews, and being there Coagulated, should not bring forth of necessi∣ty, daily Catarrhes or rheums; and undoubted palseys? Surely if an Anatomist, or a man in his right mind doth but once at least, rudely contemplate of these things, he ought of necessity to admire with amazement at these fables of heathens, especially be∣cause they have no affinity or connexion with the principles of our constitution. It also happens that some one is many times awakened in one only night, that he ariseth, and goes to sleep again; and so almost at his pleasure, there should be so many ob∣structions of the Sinews in one night, yea in one hour. I passe by in the mean time, that sleep is stirred up, an Opiate being as yet materially within the Stomack; even as unvoluntary experience hath often taught. Therefore either so small a quantity, and onely the Odour of the Opium, ought to fume up into the Brain, or it self being there detained, should send away sleepy Vapours its Vicars: 
 But not the first, because before that the Opium could strike the sense of Tasting, or Smelling, the Opium should be continually percieved in the Tongue, Palate, No∣strills, and Jawes, and that before Sleep, which is not done. Moreover, the Sulphur of Vitriol, which is an exceeding Sleepifier, seeing it is fixed, cannot shake its Vapours into the Head, as neither dismisse from it, its Vicary partakers. Truly I conjecture that the Greek Authors of Sleep, or those that were riotous, when they perceived that themselves being drunk, were given to Sleep, judged that they were to derive all Sleep from no other thing, neither that Sleep could any longer creep on us, (not so much as late in the Morning, and the Meats being now digested) but only from Meat and Drink. I find also in the Schools, the material causes of Giddiness of the Head, not a whit to differ from the causes of natural Sleep: All which things, I have else∣where concerning Rheums, proved to be meer ignorances, and unsavoury consents, having arisen from a sluggishness of diligent searching, and a readiness of subscribing. But I pray, what is that which is so cold in Opium, which causeth Sleep against my will, and I being sufficiently heated: If the coldness of vapours, why do Wines after Din∣ner provoke Sleep? Is there therefore one only identity or samliness of disposition of that which is cold, and hot, to procure Sleep? Why therefore is cold singularly adjudged to Opium? Why are not hot things judged to be alike Stupefactive and Dormitive or Sleepifying? Why have not deadly Poppies much praised by Poets for Sleep, perswad∣ed them to remember another vertue besides cold? Why doth Opium taste bitter? And why is bitterness reckoned in the Schools, to be heat predominant? Therefore the Schools must needs chuse one of these two; To wit, either that cold in Opium is not exceeding, and by consequence, that Opium doth not cause Sleep through cold; or that bitterness is a deceitfull token of heat in the Schools. For why is not Purslain which is cold by reason of its third degree, Sleepifying? Why is not a handful of Purslain equivalent to two Grains of Opium, seeing there is more plentiful cold in it, and it doth more powerfully coole in such a small parcell, than in so exceeding small a quantity of Opium? Why doth Nightshade make one mad, but doth not by its cold produce Sleep? But I do find in Opium a sharp Sudoriferous or sweat provoking Salt, and a bitter oyl, far differing from the smell of Opium, yet provoking Sleep. 
 But the Sulphur of Vitriol is sweet like hony, with the smell, vapour, and fury of Opium: because it being fixed in the torture of the fire, is exceeding hot, and Sleepifying. For there are some, who do wash off a powder from Colcotar or Calcined Vitriol, in de∣priving it of its saltness: But it is almost unefficacious, how ever the writers of young beginnings by vain promises may boast of it: For the right, and that which they call, that of the Philosophers, is made of the Spirit of Green Vitriol; which by a repeated Cohobating or injection of its own extracted liquor in distillation, being pressed out and made notably volatile in the last torture of the fire, is coagulated and fixed: which thing the common Sal Armoniack performeth, which ought afterwards to be taken from thence by the repeated distillations of the Spirit of wine. That Sulphur is commendable among Secrets for long life, and for chasing away a troop of some diseases. 
 Sleep therefore possesseth many as yet speaking, after the whispering of three mo∣ments. How therefore shall a stopping up of all the Sinews be in these, so suddenly at hand? Wherefore in the next place, doth Sleep sooner creep on those that lay along, than on those which sit, when as otherwise, the motion of Vapours from the lower Parts, ought to be far more easie in a body raised upright, than in one laying side∣wayes? Moreover, although it should be granted, that all the Sinews are equally stopped up, and that before sleep (which is as unsavoury as ridiculous) yet from whence are the mental powers stupifyed by Sleep? Unless thou hast given the Soul a charge of necessity to have placed her Inn in the Chest of the Brain, and nigh the Si∣news? And thereupon the Bosomes of the Brain, all the interval of Sleep to be filled, not indeed with Animal Spirit; but with forraign, crude, grosse, and diseasie va∣pours, and the Authors of discourses themselves, the while, to keep holiday, sleep, or to wander far abroad? But all the Organs to be straightway after set at liberty, at the sound, or pleasure of the awakener? 
 But I have heard Sleep to be excused by the Title of an Ordinary Effect, and the which should otherwise be diseasie, unlesse it were daily and accustomed. I have laughed at that old wives invention; That even the first Sleep, or punishment of sin, should be sent into man before excesse of Riot. And then, because an evill, which in it self is a disease or an evil, is never the less an evil, because it is ordinary: And that being granted, Sleep should never bring refreshment to languishing strength, but a perpetual pain or labour. But I, after that I once saw or perceived the light of a cer∣tain Soul, by some kind of representation, understood that Sleep is made while the Spleen doth properly labour about, or apply it self to nourishment with recreation and delight: Then indeed it giving a leave unto its own serious imaginations, by de∣lighting, it wholly sinks it self into a ful rest of enjoyment, to wit, from a perceived sweetness of its own fullness; and the liberty of a stomatichal ferment being restored unto it, it employeth it self in a thorow enjoyment of delights: and therefore also the digestion in the Stomack is more unsuccessful in time of Sleep, because then slower: wherefore enjoyment, and cessation from labour, hath alwaies been the first or chief wish in the whole sensitive nature: vain therefore and full of mockery are the Cogitations in ones first Sleep, while the phantasie of the Spleen or Stomack is with drawn from thinking, from a growing necessity: which things shall presently be more cleerly manifested in this treatise.
A Humorist being asked by a riotous Person, why his Head aketh in the morning on the left-side above his forehead, perhaps unto the largeness of a greater dollar? He readily answerd, that it was manifest by Anatomy, that the Orifice of the Stomack was inclined toward the left-side: that it was also taught now for many ages, that painfull Vapours are carried out of the Stomack into the Head; but that they cause pain, be∣cause they being lest of the wine, are sharp, tart, &amp; biting; &amp; likewise that they keep the perpendicular line of the same side, neither that they are suffered to be extravagant. The which being said, the Galenist lifts up his Eyelids, joggs or cocks his Cap, and gra∣tifies his own Soul, because the other being credulous, thinks he had given him Satis∣faction by so lying a Fable: For in that the pain of the fore-head obtaineth a straight∣ness of the side from the Stomack, it secretly implyeth some remarkable thing for the action of Government, and the Duumvirate: But none hath thought that that can be done without an actuall commerce of vapours. For first of all, no Va∣pour out of the Stomack, strikes the Head; as neither also is there any sharp, salt, bitter, or brackish vapour; even as elsewhere concerning Rheums: Because the pain of which we now speak, is continual, as well to him that layes along, as to him that stands, or sits, and that without a necessity of belching: But if this doth sometimes ac∣company it, yet the pain doth never, the less, or more molest: neither also is there therefore, any sharpness, saltness, bitterness of vapours, unless that in inordinate appetite the belching be sour &amp; then especially, there is scarce a pain ever present in the Head. And Morover, a Vapour being supposed according to the Schools, the Wea∣sand at leastwise, holds every where the middle of the Neck and Jaws. For that cause therefore, the Vapours, if there were any, should strike the middle, bottom or root of the Brain with a straight line; but not the forehead, and much less the left-side thereof: neither could they ascend in one that lays down, but should be blown out though the Mouth and Nostrils: Because although they were granted to ascend even into the plain (which there is none) beneath the Brain, yet they should not pierce unto its bosomes, without a mortall confusion of the Spirits: And least of all, should Vapours reach uncessantly unto the coats of the Brain; whereof notwithstand∣ing, a painful feeling is judged to be, but not of the Brain it self: Yea a pain and savour of the smitting Vapour, should presently be felt, rather above the Palate (where the plain of the Brain is falsly supposed to be) than in the forehead, or under the Scull: Which thing notwithstanding, as many as ever have undergon these pains, will reprove of falshood. 
 The Schools indeed have been ignorant, that the action of Government doth con∣tract the coats of the Brain without vapours, in what part it hath pleased the Du∣umvirate of the Soul (as in the Book of the Disease of the Stone, in the Chapter of the act of feeling): therefore should not the top of the Crown, rather pain a man, than the one side of the forehead? even as in the Megrim? For the Crown is perpendicu∣lar to the Throat; from whence it is clearly manifest, that the Head is no more pie∣rced by watery vapours from the Stomack, than the Chin by vapours of the Stones, in Bearded persons, but not in those that are Gelded. In the next place, the bot∣tom of the Brain should especially be pained, the which the vapour should first touch at, and not the coats or membranes of the Brain. And then, the back-run∣ning Sinews of the Palate, Tongue, &amp;c. should be cruelly affected, before the left wing of the Forehead under the Scull. Neither at length, should those vapours enclose themselves under the Pericranium, or above either of the membranes of the Brain in the circle of one Doller: Neither also should they ever cause a Megrim for one half of the Head, and much less, sometimes for the right side; but rather they should a∣scend in a straight line, and likewise, should alwaies, out of the Throat, equally affect the whole Head; seeing passages are wanting, which may as it were through Trunks, conveigh those vapours, sometimes hither, sometimes thither: for why, according to Hippocrates, doth milk bring the head-ach to him that is Feverish, if the vapours of whey ought rather to asswage these griefs? Why doth new food appease the head-ach, seeing that from new meat (especially Wine accompanying it) sharp vapours, rather than mild ones, like Milk, ought to exhale? Therefore the pain being once now setled, food should not appease the pain, but rather should stir it up, and make a new one. All which things, seeing they resist the position, and ex∣perience, they convince also, that the aforesaid pain, doth without vapours proseed from the Duumvirate, by a naked action of Government. I have many times admi∣red, that it was alwaies subscribed, by all altogether, and throughout all particulars unto the traditional fables of the Antients. But I have shewn in the Treatise of the Toyes of a Catarrhe, that these races of vapours out of the Stomack, are triflours, and therefore also the causes of vapours dedicated to Sleep. Lastly, I have already pro∣ved above, that there is an action of Government on the superiour or upper parts, no less than the actions of the superiour parts have been hitherto thought to be, on the inferiour or lower ones. Then also, I have shewn by the way, that out of the Mid∣riffs doth issue the most powerful temper or constitutive temperature of acting in Diseases, which Antiquity hath hitherto dedicated only to the Head. 
 Now I lay it down for a position, that the Duumvirate the president of the action of Government, doth inhabite in the Hypochondrial part, to wit, in the Spleen, and the Stomach: in parts I say, which the Schools have esteemed the sink of the very worst Humor, and the Sack of the more impure meats. Four things therefore in so great a Paradox come to be proved; to wit, 
 That the Duumvirate commands the whole Body. 
 That the Phantasie or imagination, Venus, &amp;c. is to be attributed to, or belongs to the Spleen and Stomack, 
 That unto this very Duumvirate, belongs Sleep, watching, &amp;c. 
 That in the same place, is the Inn or Seat of the Soul: 
 Which four particulars do meet as it were in one only point. The Phylosophers, together with Astrologers, have dedicated the Spleen to Saturn, the parent of the Starry gods, as to the inchoative or original principle of Life: But the Galenists, who are wont in most things to contradict themselves, have made the Spleen partly the Sink of the most stubborn Excrementous and feigned black Choler, and partly the receptacle of madness, not indeed by reason of a Melancholy matter in it, but rather, by reason of a certain conceptual, irrational and bestial disturbance; therefore they sometimes name it the Hypochondrial passion. But seeing according to their maxime; There is a sound function of the same part, and power, whereof there is a vitiated one, and on the contrary: I will conclude from thence, even against the will of the Schools, that a certain sound and entire imagination is due to the Spleen, if vitiated, and pre∣cordial or Midriffie Melancholy doth proceed from thence: for many do understand that they are mad, and as it were ignorant Idiots, and they grieve that they cannot bridle those phansies which are importunate night and day: And so, they are vexed at it were with a double mental conceit. For so those whom a mad Dog hath bitten, and are slidden into the fear of waters, (which Disease they have therefore called an Hydrophobia) do accuse their unvoluntary madness, which they forefeel, foretel, and do warn the standers by to beware of them. They answer, that that happens, not indeed because any imagining power is there entertained, but because a fume of black Choler is from thence carried up into the Head, the Sheath of the imaginative pow∣er. Which particulars surely, seeing they are of great moment, it is meet they should be examined in a peculiar Treatise of the Soul, and of the Seat, Throne, and Inn thereof. 
 CHAP. XLIIII. A Treatise of the Soul: 1. The Treatise of the Soul is Commended. 2. What hath diverted Schollers from this Meditation. 3. The knowledge of the Soul is not to be delivered for a Conclusion. 4. The suppositionary difficulties of the Schools. 5. Why the knowledge of things is to be put after. 6. By an example fetched from Water. 7. The actions of the mind in the Body. 8. What hath deceived Predecessours. 9. The Author hath desisted from his enterprize. 10. Con∣siderable things concerning the mind. 
 SEeing therefore, the entire command of the Duumvirate doth flourish or bear sway from the vital Soul; truly the three aforesaid positions may be abundantly pro∣ved by the fourth: for if so be it may appear, that the very Seat of the Soul is in the Duumvirate; The principality also of this over the other Members, and stations of the Bowels, will come to hand: wherefore I will ere by the way, treat of the Soul, although by other writers before me, the Treatise of the Soul hath been banished out of natural Phylosophy, especially in order to the knowledge of the Theory or specula∣tive part of healing. And although so many sharp discourses of madnesses, do on e∣very side molest us; Yet verily, seeing I have perceived no aid from Predecessours, but labour and grief have pierced my most inward parts, before that I could lay aside those things which I had drawn from Heathenisme; Therefore I have altogether judged my self not to be tyed up unto their Method, in whose possession I have not yet found any thing which may or ought to be snatched into the Beginnings and properties of na∣ture. 
 By looking therefore into my own Liberty, I considered, that among knowable things, nothing is alike noble, as is the knowing of the Soul it self; from which, as all other knowledge doth obtain its brightness; So also all terms their own distinct bound: for whosoever he be that is un-apt at the beginning, to comprehend themo∣tions, exercises, effects, and thingliness or essence of the immortal mind, shall al∣so be unfit to understand the secrets of nature, which are more remote from the mind than it self is from it self, and therefore he shall scarce be able to proceed unto those things which he shall behold to be the more fit for him. But he that shall first draw forth the essayes of the Soul, and afterwards drink down the juyces of nature, in his return he shall be of a larger capacity than he was in his former rea∣ding by the way or besides the purpose. Yet lest I may seem like a lawless Body, to have wrested my pen into the mind, before the explaining of Diseases, I will de∣clare what things have moved me hereunto. For first of all (even for the conside∣ration of nature) I meditated that the mind is the top of humane nature, and the perfection of constituted humanity, and that therefore it was more meet for him to know his Soul, that is, his own self by his Soul, than to enquire by a harmony of cor∣poreal properties, and from a notion of these, to be willing to know the mind it self: for truly, it hath seemed to me, that the Soul being once, even but slenderly known, other inferiour things, and those that are placed under our feet, may be added unto us: And that they may be comprehended as it were by no trouble, at leastwise, by a sober labour, which before, at every step, did stir up suspitions, or moove despair concerning that which was true, lawful, like, just, proportioned, the Agent, suf∣fering, priority, that which is appropriated, change, or interchangeable course, or which at length did through too much consent, lead their own followers, their eyes being shut, into fallacy or deceit: whence they were affrighted from the labour of di∣ligent searching, not so much through sluggishness, as through fear of a suspended or stopped progress, and therefore they locked up the bar of the Gate of knowledge as to further things: for it is a clear and undoubted thing, that man cannot know himself, unless he shall first exhaust the knowledge of his Soul. Therefore also the very know∣ing of the Soul it self; as it Seals the fear of God in the Soul; So also it brings the be∣ginning of Wisdom. If therefore the beginning of Wisdom be awakened by the knowing of the Soul, there is not any kind of Doctrine of the Soul to be delivered for a conclusion of natural Phylosophy, according to the custom observed in times past: For it is false, that the knowing of frail things doth make the understanding of our mind easie unto us: But rather, those that are experienced, do know, that the know∣ledge of the mind, although it shall far depart from a conceiving of sublunary Bodies, yet that it extolleth or lifts up it self, as oft as it shall apply it self unto any humane Sciences or Arts: for he which but once, and by the way only, hath had experience of a turning inward, or Extasie of his Soul, hath known afterwards, unto what things he shall apply his Soul with desire; not on the contrary: Because, although any one hath obtained a knowledge of many things, yet he shall not therefore be fit for the in∣troversions or turnings in of his mind. Therefore by the leave of all before me, I say, and do meditate, that it is plainly necessary, that a Man do first know himself, and af∣terwards learn the fear of the Lord, which will raise him up unto the true Wisdom, whereunto the knowledge of mortal or frail things, and the defects of these, shall be added as a consequent to the premises, or as an adjacent unto the principal thing. Our predecessours, after the essences of things, have then chiefly looked back unto the Soul after a rash manner, and that for two reasons especially. 
 The first whereof is, because the knowing of the Soul hath seemed unto them far more difficult than that of any other things whatsoever. 
 The second is, because the knowledge of the mind, might be hoped for, and had, from a diligent search of external things, and an examining of corporeal properties. But although the first of these is true, yet the second can in no wise be so, for if the knowledge of the mind be of an abstracted and spiritual Being, it likewise cannot be derived on us by any speculation of corporeal things. 
 Because God alone is the immediate workman, and prince of the mind, and the ve∣ry life of life. Therefore the knowing of our selves cannot be hoped for from any o∣ther thing than from its Fountain and Governour: For truly the knowing of abstra∣cted Spirits, differs in the whole Heaven, from the speculation of frail things, seeing they do not partake in any common co-resemblance of Principles, or properties. There∣fore the thingliness or essence of Bodies containeth not a whit of Knowledge or Light, that the Soul may know or acknowledge, or behold it self, but only by a renouncing, which is a certain despairing and banishment of knowledge, whence also it gets no light unto it self from that which is above, or from that which is contrary to it self, nor also doth it strike a light of understanding for it self, as it were out of a Steel and Flint: Because the manner of knowing the Soul is to be begged from the Father of Lights, and not from else-where: Because it was the good pleasure of the Divine will, that Man should not fetch the knowledge of himself from any other thing, than from the Beginning and Fountain, himself, who is the Beginning Mean, End, Scope, and highest vertical point of all Phylosophy, unto which all knowledge is to be as an addition. But further, the essential knowledges (and those from a former thing or cause) of Sublunary things, are quite as darksome, covered, and difficult, as is the very conceiving of the immortal mind, if the essences of things from a former thing, &amp; their causes, be known only to God. Therefore it is simply false, that the knowing of the mind is more difficult, than the naked knowing of things, or therefore to be put after them: Because all things are alike unknown to us, because the essence of all Be∣ings whatsoever, is their precise Truth, shut up to us-ward, and laying open unto that which is infinite. Therefore the knowledge of things is to be measured at the bal∣lance; all corporeal things are primarily strangers, and forreigners to our mind, and therefore more remote from the mind, than the mind from it self. 
 And moreover, other things, are not to be known but by the mind, and first in the mind: for therefore the knowledge of any things whatsoever, is only a certain observation, from whence we frame discourses according to every ones capacity. Wherefore also, every such observation, and discourse fetched from hence, how po∣lished soever, is only from a latter thing or the effect, &amp; far less illustrated than is the ob∣servation which is had from the mind. For who ever of mortals, knew what the water may be? The which notwithstanding, is the most obvious, manifest, visible, and transparent of created things: for a Country-man, or Idiot, knows as much of it as a Phylosopher: For they do equally conceive of it by the observation of the senses, that it is a Body, weighty, liquid, moist, giving place to ones finger, fluid, and re∣closing it self upon the removing of the finger, a receiver of Heat, and extenuable in∣to a vapour; yet none hath known the internal thingliness of the Water, or why it is liquid or moist: even as indeed, we know the circumstances both vital and intelle∣ctual: of the mind, and what things do dispose this its own prison unto various altera∣tions, and which do oft-times produce something seminally, out of its concrete or composed Body: So as when the appetite of a Woman with Child doth produce a Cherry on her young, which flourisheth every Year. Also in that we do moreover, know more of the Soul than of the Water, it is that which is known by the Revelation of Faith: 
 To wit, That the mind is a Spiritual substance, also subsisting by it self without a Bo∣dy, Immortal, Living, made after the Image or likeness of God, immediately by God himself, giving Sense, as also motion to the Organs, and the which being sepe∣rated from the Body, doth perceive without Organs at its beck or pleasure, being a∣ble also to move out of it self, and the Body being bridled or restrained, is able to produce a Being out of it self (as hath been already shewn concerning a Woman with Child) it understanding, also willing, and remembring, &amp;c. 
 The Observations of which Properties and Functions, are far more strong than is the knowledge of the Water: otherwise, all things and every of things, by an in∣trinsecal understanding, are equally unknown and unpassable to us. 
 But that which hath Seduced Predecessours, by thinking that the knowing of the Water was easier than that of the mind, hath proceeded from an Opinion, That a visible thing is of necessity more known than an invisible thing: But they have not distinguished the Knowledge of Observation, from the Internal Knowledge of essence or thingliness, according to which, all things are equally unknown unto us. 
 They have not known I say, that the knowledge of Observation, doth not intro∣duce an understanding into the essential thingliness of a thing, but erecteth only a thinkative knowledge: For otherwise, the understanding should perceive causes that are before in essence. Then also they have been deceived by the simplicity of the Water, which simpleness they have confounded with the unity of knowledge to us unknown. In the mean time seeing the observations of the mind are many, and the more plentiful, the property of every one whereof, denyeth a knowing from a former thing: therefore they have thought that they did undergo more impossibilities in the knowing of the mind, than in that of a simple Body: And so as well the num∣ber only in the mind, as a visual frequency of Bodies hath brought forth in them that difficulty: when as notwithstanding, after another manner, in the Beingness of a Being that which is visible is as well unknown intellectually, as that which is invisible. For I intended to deliver an intellective Doctrine of the mind, that man might origi∣nally, as much as he can, know or acknowledge his own self, and that afterwards he might learn, from the Image of the Divinity, to contemplate of things more in∣feriour than himself. 
 But when I endeavoured to explain that by the mental acts of Prayer, I had not free∣dom in that thing: because they were judged to exceed the Square of my own con∣tempt or meanness, I willingly omitted that Treatise.
But I do not see that these plagues of Aegypt had been brought into the utter darkness of the Schools, but that, they being ill seasoned, oft-times found affects whereto they might apparently, and without narrow search, attribute the Tragedy of Catarrhes. Be∣cause some one having a pain in his Head, hath forthwith felt his neck to pain him, a difficult motion, a restlesse night; presently the pain hath manifested it self in the loynes, being from thence propagated unto the thighs, and then, it hath seemed to descend to the calves of the legs, and feet. 
 Hence arose the decree, that pain, seeing it is an accident of inherency, doth not wan∣der from one subject into another, unless some material thing shall depart in dregs out of the brain, by the muscles of the turning joynts, through the readinesse of a sliding Rheume, and doth square to the received Etymology of a Catarrhe. This perswasion of a Catarrhe, its mask being discovered by Anatomy, ought to be known. For truly if the painful matter doth successively drop down out of the brain through the neck: surely that shall be brought down thither, either through the bosomes of the brain, or through the brain and its coats, or between both coats, or between the hard coat or Dura mater, and scull, or at length, between the scull and skin. For the consequence is of force, from a sufficient enumeration of parts. But not in the first place, through the bottles or vessels of the brain; because that could not subsist without an Apoplexy, and an undoubted Palsey of the whole body: if so be that the supposed doctrine of the Schools concerning these Diseases, standeth. For if it be successively expelled from the former bosomes, unto the fourth bosome: the matter of the Rheume cannot but shut up that forreign and sharp excrement into the thorny marrow, and henceforth breed the Apoplexy and Palsey. 
 Secondly, that matter of a Catarrhe, cannot, by sweating thorow the brain, be heaped up, and slide down between the brain and thin coat, so that both coats may keep a con∣tinual separation from the very marrow of the thorny sinew: because the sliding Rheume should bring forth a renting, and solution of that which held together, in the marrowy root of the sinews, throughout its length. Which doth not want very many absurdities. In like manner, if the Catarrhe should rain down between both the coats: first of all, both the little membranes should be double, which might defend the thorny marrow as with a coat of Mail: which thing, the eye hath not yet viewed hitherto. And that being supposed, it could not at least wise, disturbe the motion of the muscles, or know pain. And so, there is an error in the Position; Because a sinew is indeed a deriving or con∣veying instrument of the command of the will, but not therefore, an executive instru∣ment of a voluntary motion. Especially, because a small Nerve, doth now and then, scarce exceed the grosseness of a doubled thread: and it being externally implanted into the muscle, the Rheumy humour could not be cast into it, but by a bringing of a Palsey on the part, but not cruel pains of the moved muscle. 
 In the next place, if a Rheume should flow down between the Dura mater, and the scull, Anatomy teacheth, that the egress of the sinews side-wayes, thorow the little holes of the turning joynts, is so suitable and narrow, that a passage for a Catarrhe is in no respect granted from the thorny marrow unto the muscles. 
 Lastly, if room should be granted for that device, at least wise, what should be the cause of its succession, that the humour having once slidden between the little sinew of the two turning joynts, should re-hasten unto other successive Nerves? doth perhaps, the Rheume being affected with a weariness of one muscle, henceforward wish for other Cli∣ents of delights? For how shall the Catarrhy humour flow down through the small little vein, without an astonying or stupifying of the member? Shall it enter into the muscle, even unto its tail, by a strange implanting? but shall it again from thence depart unto other muscles, which henceforward are of a more steep or inclinable scituation? or if a new Catarrhe be feigned, to flow down with a like success, unto other, and inferiour parts; how therefore do the upper parts, seem to be free from evil? for seeing it should proceed from the same fountain the brain, and through the same channel of the marrow of the thorn of the back; why doth it not rather follow the path already opened? doth it more largely fall down unto a weakened, inclinable, and affected part, and commit new adulte∣ries? why doth it shake and seek new Innes? Is that perhaps the delight of nature, that through a whorish appetite, it doth molest and divide new parts successively? Finally, that there is no place of refuge for a Catarrhe running down between the scull and the skin, and the muscles cloathed with their own membrane, hath been already before dis∣cussed. Therefore there is no way, manner, mean, connexion, or dependance, whereby a Rheume may in truth subsist. And seeing no material thing runs down in those affects, for which the Schools have rashly feigned Catarrhs: therefore, let the lovers of truth, know, that as oft as a strange or forreign Air, odour, ferment, or forreign seed is received into the Spirit which makes violent assaults; so often that spirit being defiled by the Ar∣cheus, is excluded from the Communion of life. But the genius or disposition of that conceived Seed, hath no less parts, whereby also the Spirit defiled by a strange ferment, is sent unto remote, rather than to nigh places: As shall be said in its place concerning the joynt-sickness or Gout, in the Duumvirate, and elsewhere. For so Mercury, being even outwardly anointed, doth affect the jawes, tongue, &amp; teeth. Moreover, when this defiled spirit shall come down unto the place of its sending, it presently seasons the nou∣rishment of the part with its own ferment, transplanteth and translateth it according to the idea or likeness of the Seed, and that Seed doth there interrupt the offices of dige∣stions (by successive blasts being drawn) with strange dispositions. Whence it at length stirs up a plentiful houshold-stuffe, and doth oft-times characterize the impression there made on the implanted spirit, with a brand durable for life. These things the Schools beg for primary feigned humours, and for the fallings down of defluxions from the one only brain. I therefore am far from a Catarrhe, who deny the matter, shops, efficient cause, manner of making, and defluxing thereof; and therefore I also seperate the cau∣ses, effect, as also the cure, far from the fictions of a Catarrhe. Therefore salt, soure, sharp, phlegmatick, and cholerick humours do not fall down: but as often as the defiled spirit hath passed thorow unto the places, the first which shall come thither from a com∣mon endeavour and study of washing it off, is the liquour or humour latex: For the spi∣rit being depraved by a forreign contagion, is carried through the Nerves, Arteries, yea and through the very habite of the Body. From whence the brain hath bore the blame, and the sick do feel as it were the falling down of a defluxing humour: and because the latex is designed thither by the veins, not as a primitive cause of the evil (although by accident, it doth oftentimes nourish the evil the longer) but for an easment, and wash∣ing off: therefore the Schools have as yet remained doubtful, whether Rheumes should be dismissed from the Head through the sinews, or between the skin; or indeed through the veins out of the Liver, at least wise in Gouty persons. Therefore the Phlegme and Cho∣ler of the Schools, do not flow from a Fountain or Flood-gate, as if the Head were the one only sink of these: And then, neither do they fall down by reason of a steeper scituation, or by reason of an easiness of passages. For truly, as in a dead Carcass there are no such defects, but in live creatures only: so, whatsoever of these defects doth come to pass, it proceedeth from a spirit which maketh a violent assault, and from a vital beginning: In whose family administration, an ascending upwards, is no more difficult than a descend∣ing downwards: Seeing nothing of these in living creatures, floweth by its own motion of weight: but indeed is directed, being sent unto its own certain bounds. It also often comes to pass, that the latex being defiled with a strange salt, doth thenceforth infect the spirit, so that the spirit is not therefore alwayes estranged by an external injury of Air, or from a proper Air of contagion bred within: but rather being stirred up by the latex (because that is less lively) it takes on it an animosity or angry heat. And the latex accompanies it, being troublesome as well through its aforesaid sharpness, as through quantity; and it enters as an importunate Souldier against the will of his Host. Where∣fore natural and artificial Baths, do reconcile many of these sort of defects and over∣flowings: to wit, by consuming the latex, they restore health, rather than the loosen∣ing and drying Medicines of the Schools. 
 Vain therefore is the History and matter of a Catarrhe lifted up out of the stomack unto the Head: vain also is the defluxing and falling down thereof between the muscles and the skin, and deplorable Remedies from unknown causes. Vain also are cauteries or searing Remedies to pull back and consume feigned humours. 
 Lastly, vain are the Medicines of drying drinks, seeing the evil or Malady is by the latex and a larger quantity of drink, only occasionally bred. Therefore it is manifest, how wholesom, sober drinking is: for the liquor latex, in respect of its appointment ought to be without savour; but it waxeth sharp through the much drinking of pure and more sharp wine. But the History and necessity of the latex is due in its own Chapter. Thou shalt remember, that all the fruits of composed Bodies do materially spring from water. Let us therefore also suppose the un-savoury latex, through a little help of a Seed, presently to wax sharp. For example. For at the Spring-time, a plentiful liquor drops out of a Vine or Birch-tree. To wit, if the bark near the earth be hurt, it poures out an un-savoury liquour of the earth. But if the wound be made in the stem or branches; now the same juice is sharpish. So it comes to pass in the latex, being of its own nature without savour, which through the contagion of things receiving, doth at length wax sharp, or becomes the heir of a strange quality. For the Schools have neglected the latex, because they have confounded the urine with the latex. But it is a blockish argument, to have co-melted the thing generated with the matter [whereof] as if the snivel, spittle, water between the skin and flesh, and urine, were drinks. The Liver therefore being badly affected, if it recal the latex unto it self; truly it doth not thereby prepare urine, but Oedemaes, or the Dropsie Anasarca: therefore I am not such a man, as to call the Pleurisie, Tooth-ach, and other madness of furies, non-beings. For I know and grieve for their too much se∣rious commands over us. I do indeed admit of those very Diseases: but the causes, man∣ner, means, passages, end or appointments of a Rheume, I deny. I deny those causes, and I diligently search into those, in the removal whereof, health consisteth. I acknow∣ledge indeed, that a corrupt mattery Imposthume of the Lungs being broken, any one doth presently dye: yet I deny, that the mattery Imposthume is a Rheume, or that death is to be imputed to a Catarrhe: And much more vehemently do I deny that the corrupt mattery Imposthume is bred of a vapour of the stomack. So I name a Consumption, not a defluxion into the Lungs; but I know it arose from an inward error of the Lungs. I grant that the Gout is fore-felt as it were a hot defluxing drop: yet I do not admit of a Catarrhe, in its matter, manner, means, and bound of making. Even as in its own Chapter, more cleerly. The latex also being dedicated to the sweeping or cleansing of the Kitchins, is in it self, indeed, guiltless: but it, in the way, admitting of a coupling of dissolved salts, doth constitute divers Colonies of Imposthumes, Ulcers and itchings. I deny therefore, that vapours are carried into the Head, which may pierce through the brain and coats. Neither in the next place, do I endure, that the breath, is carried from the breast unto the stomack, and the bowels, in a direct passage (as it hath otherwise, pleased Paracelsus) but that a very small quantity thereof, doth breath thorow the pores of the Diaphragma. For neither, when the breath is pressed together, doth any thing worthy of note, go forth under the Midriffe, neither doth the breath smell of the places which are under the Diaphragma. In like manner, neither are vapours carried from the stomack into the Head, but by the Arteries, if men are made drunk. But whatsoever cau∣seth the giddiness of the Head, faintings, and other distempers of like sort, is the re∣tainer of another Common-wealth than that of vapours. So neither from the womb are vapours derived into the Head, however bruitish symptomes of the Head may thereby be said to be bred: for that is not the obligation of transpiration, which is the single duel of another Monarchy, and that whereby the throat ariseth unto the height of the chin, is not to be called the action of vapours: indeed it is an action unknown to the Schools, which I shall some times explain to be that of government, whereunto all parts in the Body do owe a Clientship. For there is no other command of the womb over the whole Body, than that whereby the stones do distinguish a Cock from a Capon, a Bull from an Oxe, and a Man from an Eunuch, in figure, blood, flesh, hide, and courage. But because in supposed Rheumie affects, the liquor latex being defiled, doth obtain its own dominion of water: hence as many Diseases as are ascribed unto Catarrhes, are for the most part exasperated in the night time: indeed the Blas of the Moon doth work the operations of successive changes in us: The which, do most especially boast themselves over the weak or defective brain, and likewise over the sinews and membranes; and these operations do oft-times fore-feel and fore-divine future tempests; and therefore, I also call them, the torture of the Night. And I wish this knowledge of presaging, were not sold to us at so dear a rate, that they ought to be thorowly paid by pains and anguishes. For a short-winded Gouty person, yea he that carrieth a callous matter or corn under his foot, being often awaked out of his sleep in the bed or chimny, doth fore-feel the future storms of times or seasons, a black cloud to be by degrees spread over the Heaven, and the hin∣ges of winds to be shortly changed. 
 But Paracelsus would have Mercury to be President or chief over the liquour of nou∣rishment throughout the whole Body, and therefore he elsewhere (concerning Minerall Diseases) confounds that in name and thing, with an earthly Moon: Yet I know, that the humour follows the commands of the seminal or seedy part, whereunto it is most neerly resembled: for therefore, neither do liquid Bodies as yet rejoyce in the conferences of the Stars, as long as they are not radically implanted in the Spirit of Life. For from hence it is manifest, that the marrow is a homogeneal or simple part of the Body, but not the liquor thereof: Because it manifestly answers to the Moon and brain, whereunto the bones are obedient. For so, whatsoever things do tyrannize under the name of de∣fluxions, and likewise the foul Disease, Convulsion, wringings of the bowels, do return under the torture of the Night, because they hearken to the latex, through the Domi∣nion of our Moon, they being offensive affects, which hearken unto the motion of the Stars. 
 CHAP. LVIII. A Reason or Consideration of Food or Diet. 1. They prescribe a Diet for Diseases, who are ignorant of Diseases. 2. The die∣tary part of Medicine is suspected. 3. Some errors about the rules of Food or Diet. 4. Curing is not subject to the dietary part of Medicine. 5. The Au∣thors opinion. 6. The object of the dietary part. 7. A proof from a common event. 8. Crooked ends. 9. From a numbring up of parts. 10. A diet doth privily accuse of the ignorance of a Remedy. 11. A just complaint of the poor. 12. Observances of the Author. 13. The mockeries of the dietary part. 14. Bread is not so much a meat, as a universal victual. 15. Why bread is mixt with meats. 16. The chief hinge of the dietary part. 17. A certain rule. 18. Why the commands of the dietary part of Medicine are not to be trusted to. 19. Ten Positions of the Author. 20. How far the force of a sparing Diet may extend it self. 21. The necessity of chewing, 22. Whence the varieties of things dige∣sted are. 23. An examining of Barley water or Cream. 24. Some preventions or fore-cautions accustomed to the Author. 25. A Question concerning the Ferment of the Stomack. 26. The digestions do prescribe the Rules of Diet. 
 AFter that I had finished the Treatise of Digestions, I had willingly brought Diseases on the Stage: but the action of Government being too scanty in the Schools, was left behind as yet maimed, and the Majesty of the Duumvirate it self, and plainly the spiritu∣al radiation or beaming influence of spirit, according to its whole. Wherefore I inter∣weaved the Treatise of the Soul, as it yeelds up its full right to the Duumvirate. But I could not as yet, moreover, depart out of the Stomack, but I presently added upon the Duumvirate, some examinations of my opinion concerning Diet. Truly I have promi∣sed to demonstrate, that the Schooles have passed by those things, the profession whereof they chiefly boast of: to wit, that they have not as yet known a Disease in the general kind, or have diligently searched into it by its particular kindes or species, or to have handled it by its causes, or by meet remedies. And therefore it consequently followes, that if through the aide of Physitians, by conjectures, there hath been successe in any thing, it hath been from the proper goodnesse of Nature. 
 For as soon as might be, after the universal Succours (for so they name cutting of a Vein and Purging) they presently yeelded a half part of curing unto the government and orderance of food and Life, which for the most part, through Heats, Colds, and the tem∣perance of these, they esteemed for a consideration of good Juice. They shall finely in∣deed, prescribe the consideration of diet, for the obtaining of an end unknown unto them∣selves, while they wallow in the heats and colds of Elements. 
 For truly besides their grosse Ignorance, the consideration or respect of food was even long since suspected by me, and a certain wretched juggle of Physitians was seen, and the Slavery of the sick, prescribed under the pain of a Capital punishment, bringing forth a rash belief and confidence in the sick. 
 For first of all, whatsoever is sold at a dear rate, that is presently commended as most healthful: And in Medicines, leaf Gold, Pearls, bruised or poudered, Scarlet dying grain, the worm Cuchineale, Raw-silk, &amp;c. (for perhaps Spiders webs, if they were brought a great way off, should be sold at a great price, as is Crocodiles dung) but in meats, whatsoever hucksterry is therefore grateful to the tongue, nor very difficult to the stomack, that uni∣versally and presently is published to be of good juyce, healthful and wholsome: insomuch as those things which do chiefly please the palate, ought to be most acceptable and whole∣some: And therefore these do vary according to the palate of Physitians. For that which is by one, praised to be healthy; by another, whom that thing less pleaseth, is dispraised. For by this means, Pheasants, Partridges, Starlings, Black-birds, and fatted Capons, are preferred before four-footed Beasts: although these together with us, do bring forth a live Young, and in this respect, are they more familiar with us, than Birds, Fishes, and Insects, that is, living creatures bringing forth Eggs. So also, Fishes in stonie waters are prefer∣red before sea-fishes, and Bread of the finest of the corn, before that which is branny. For those Physitians which are somewhat delicate, do study the huckstery of the Kitchin, and that they may please the sick, who being destitute of remedies and knowledge, have other∣wayes enslaved themselves to a barren profession; for they are those who become teachers of Cooks. How leisurely do they view all things, that they may exercise their commands in Kitchins and Parlours; and that they may seem to have foreseen all things diligently, they are ready to exercise their tyranny on the sick. As if meats and drinks should be the Medicines of the more grievous diseases. 
 Truly it hath alwayes notably shamed me of this part of Medicine. For even from a young man, I did already inwardly foresee, that cures were the Effects of Medicines, but not of meats: wherefore as I said, suspect the feeble endeavour of meats: So also I con∣jectured, that a strict obedience of diet, as well in the commander as obeyer, did savour of an implicite ignorance of a true and suitable remedy, or of a juggle. 
 But on the contrarie, he that hath fire, he can burn; and he hath a knife, he can cut; So also he that hath a secret, fit for curing, he may cure, despise the rules of diet, and passe by the needlesse industrie or flattery of the Schooles in this respect. For otherwise, an error which may unexpectedly happen from the choice of food, is by the prevailing goodness of the remedy easily prevented. For if Hypocrates preferreth things ac∣customed, although less wholsome in themselves, before things unaccustomed, neither that the diet is easily, nor safely, nor speedily to be changed from things accustomed: what therefore is not to be thought of chosen, wished for, and desired meats and drinks, which have been accustomed to be used? Because they are those, (which nature dictating to them within) have, to the great shame of Physitians, been found to have oftentimes ex∣celled a remedy, especially, where they had before forbidden them. 
 Diet in the first place, doth not treat of things apparently hurtful: for it is not dispu∣ted whether it be healthful to eat poysonous things, or the sheards of earthen pots, &amp;c. yea, neither indeed, if it be wholsome for a sick person to be filled with much meat and drink, although of good juyce; or whether gluttony, drunkenness, and an inordinate life, are healthy acts, and fit helps to preserve or recover health. But the whole of diet is busi∣ed onely in the choice of meats and drinks: The which, notwithstanding, being as it were indifferent nourishments, do consist within the limits of goodness, and differ onely in the latitude of neutrality. And so therefore, I have alwayes beheld the dietary part, to be as it were a be wrayer of the ignorance of the causes of true Medicine, and of a prevailing remedy. 
 How many indeed soever they are, who refusing the rules prescribed to them, have often times not recovered: Doth the Physitian in the mean time, laughing between his teeth, at the disobedient sick, arrogate the praise of curing to his Rules? For from hence that art of healing is drawn into all Tragedies, because the Rules of the dietary part of Medicine do testifie a poverty of judgement, as well in the Physitian as in the sick. 
 Whence Physitians do oftentimes hope to get occasion of excusing death; by the dis∣obedience of the sick, about the rules of diet not being strictly observed. Alas for grief, how great absurdities are committed through this deceit, which do not yet sufficiently ap∣pear unto the world! Because while they know nothing, or have nothing whereby they may drive away the Disease, and constrain it to obey them; are they at leastwise reckon∣ed, that they will take away through the flatteries of the Kitchin, and much carefulness, the impediments of its increase? 
 If the observance of a diet should be profitable, it should be serviceable in the disease or in recovery of health; But in the disease, how unseasonable, troublesome and impertinent is it? while as the appetite doth for the most part, lye prostrated, and the which perswades a complacency to its self, that it may not wholly perish: and the preservation thereof is of as great moment, as the betokening of life is! For in the state of a staggering or feeble appetite, nature doth for the most part suggest unto it self, some convenient food, and that oftentimes, then especially, while it is most in need of help. Then do Physitians strive with this pleasure of nature, by their own rules of food, whereby the sick may abstain, if he will not be imputed the whole cause of his own death, by the unfaithful helper. For then the Archeus doth sumptomatically rage, because he perceives the wished for, and perhaps his familiar food to be denied him; and so in strife they stir up new strife. Verily, even as a horse which passeth through a water, and not drinking sufficiently according to his desire, doth thereby retain in himself an anxious difficulty of breathing for his life time. 
 But a diet after a Disease, or in time of recovery, is also wonderful troublesome, if not also in vain; seeing now; nature shall have enough to do of her own accord. For truly, the prescription of a diet cannot but accuse a defect of a sufficient remedy, and so of an implicite confession of an unfaithful cure. For let a Physitian cure as he ought, and Na∣ture promiseth for a sure performance of Restauration. Truly the Almighty hath seen and judged, that whatsoever things he had made, were good. That is, whatsoever, he had appointed for food, was good; or whatsoever he had ordained for poyson, was a good poyson. For else, the poor man might from much right complain, that God had dealt lesse fatherly with him, because he had denied means, whereby a poor man, by answering the dainty rules of diet, might be able to recover his health: but unto the rich, together with wealth, that he had also bestowed health: because bestowing meanes upon him, whereby he might pay the price of his diet.
For I have now experience with my self, for fifty years space, that I cured more, even those not seen, and the rules of diet being despised, than many Physitians together, who wander to and fro in our City. I have experience, I say, that I do cure all continued and intermitting Fevers, in few dayes, yea and for the most part, in few houres, blood-letting being not admitted of; but wine being permitted. 
 For truly, the chief part of the diet of Physitians is sumptuous, in the flattery of the sick, being gotten at the favourable pleasure of the Physitian, except wine for the most part: Also every Physitian declareth those things to be healthful, which are the most pleasing un∣to themselves: But least that should be understood to be a kind of assenting, they enjoyn a strict obedience, that by that way of severity of Lawes, they may be thought to restrain the Bridles of Life. 
 Bread in the first place, is accounted the primary or chief food; but other nourish∣ments are onely co-meats, or victuals in general. But I on the opposite part, call other nourishments, true meats; but bread alone, the Universal victual: For many are found to have lived long, with milk onely. The Irish also, being men swift, and of a most ready strength, do in some place, use Chambroch or three leaved-grass, only for bread. And some Northern people do live a long time only with fish, without bread, and do remain stubborn, against colds and diseases. A filling with bread (in the Proverb) is worst of all: not onely because it is a token of poverty; but in very deed, because it is the most bur∣thensome in a weak stomack. 
 For why, bread, by reason of the received leaven (for else it is nothing but paste or dough) melting into a cream, constraines the hearbs and meats, with which it is chewed, to co-melt (which thing we daily experience in the digestion of dung) and this is rather onely to be called by the name of [Apsonium] or general victual, then [Cibus] or meat. But I may not long be conversant in Nominals, for it is sufficient for me, after whatsoever manner it be called, so that the use and necessity of bread be known to prevail most espe∣cially unto the melting or dissolving of meats. 
 Furthermore, I have alwayes had Sobriety in great esteem, as it were the hinge of all Diet. Then also, if the Appetite was carried about any Object, I have willingly admitted it, yet with the moderation of a mean. 
 Yet I am not he, who am ignorant, that one meal is better, is more convenient for a sick person than another: But I am little troubled or grieved, whether of them both the sick might take, if so be that he had also obtained some good remedy. 
 I supposing if a Remedy, be not able to withstand a Maladie or Evil, by a less con∣venient food; far less also shall it be able to overcome or expell diseases. Therefore I have held those Remedies, which are hoped for from the prescription of Diet, to be un∣constant and feeble. Because, as is wont to be said, it is easier not to admit of, than to ex∣pel a Guest. And from a Correlative; Whosoever presumeth to overcome a Disease by virtue of a Remedy, let him be sure, that he shall by the same Remedy, far more easily vanquish things accidentally happening from the disagreements of meats. I have there∣fore reckoned it a sign of weakness and distrust in a Physitian, as oft as he is disquieted with the shameful care of the Kitchin; for he wanting a meet Medicine, that in the mean time, he may seem to do something, or least he should take his Fee in vain, layes up his hope against a Critical day, and prescribeth a choice of meats. For by this my perswasion, I have learned, 
 1. First, That Nature in us, is wiser than any Physitian, and more skilful of her own profit and loss, than all the Wits of all the Schooles. 
 2. That Nature doth therefore choose to her self, and wish for the most convenient things. 
 3. That Cattel have never died, because they had satisfied their thirst, unless perhaps they had swallowed Poyson, and did faint through too much devouring; because drink in Feavers doth sub∣vert very many discommodities of Dryness. 
 4. That to drink in thirst, should be no less natural, than for one that hath need to piss, to have made water. 
 5. And therefore, seeing this doth not require the consent of a Physitian, that also should not want Consultation. 
 6. That I did administer some drops together with the drink, with the which, easily piercing, especially in thirst, I have many times quenched most Feavers together with the thirst, with a delightful pleasure of the sick. 
 7. That a great appetite towards a thing apparently hurtful in the Rules of Diet, is for the most part dictated by nature it selfe, to whom her own Remedy hath been made known, but not to the Books of the Schooles. 
 8. That therefore we ought to be little careful about things desired, which are but little hurtful, and less accustomed. 
 9. That if a Remedy ought to prevail over a Disease, Meats and Drinks cannot in their own latitude, contain the strength of a Medicinal Being. 
 10. That Meats, if they do not contain a Remedy, therefore also scarce hurt; in speaking of meats as such, that is, of indifferent things. 
 I have thus perswaded my self of these things, thus have I prescribed these things to others: To wit, That abstinence and sparingness, are the best meanes in the Dietary part: And the rather, where any thing is eaten for pleasure and delight, according to the Pro∣verb; That which Savoureth, Nourisheth. 
 1. For it sufficeth the Appetite by quality, but not by quantity. Otherwise, if fullness grieves or burdens healthy persons, much more sick and weak folks. 
 2. To wit, Let them eat, not indeed to the filling up of the hollowness of the stomack, neither at the dictate of pleasure and taste; but as much as easily sufficeth for the defend∣ing of a healthy life. And if that be difficult to him that at first accustomes himself; at leastwise, it shall not be to him that hath accustomed himself. For how foolish a thing is it for him that groaneth or sigheth through a Disease, to wish for his long since denied ingor∣gings? Yet I will not, that any man perswade himself, that this sobriety of living, and light fardle of Food, doth prevent any man from having the Plague, a Fall or Bruise, a Wound, Thunder-bolt or Stone. For external incidencies or accidents, do despise the Fa∣mily administration of the digestions, because they overcome them. Indeed I reject the Stone even among external things, because it is made by a Ferment that is now a stranger.
3. Seing all food ought to be changed into a Cream, and an exquisite chewing is that which makes the digestions easie; hence I most strictly commend chewing at all times. For truly one onely morsel, being not rightly chewed, makes more adoe in the body, than three which are well bruised in eating. For therefore birds, because they want teeth have need of a double stomack, however most powerful otherwise, they were in digesting. Eve∣ry Beast also which cheweth the cud, as it was greatly esteemed in the Law, so it seriously insinuates unto us, that the necessity of chewing is not to be despised. Yea for that cause, a bruit which chewes the cud, is in the holy Scriptures chosen for a clean Beast. 
 4. In the next place, whatsoever things are taken in gluttony, beyond the power of the Ferment of the Stomack, are indeed made hot within, and do putrifie, neither also, are they for that cause digested; as in Feavers is most plentifully to be seen. But as much of the more tender meats as is taken under gluttony, is indeed digested, and slides out of the Stomack: but it carries headlong with it, a great heap of that which is undigested, as well by reason of the extension of the vessel, as the negligence of nature being loaded, and forsaking the raines. But if that which is most exceeding tender, shall be digested, and that stayeth in the Stomack longer than is meet, that retained food doth also of ne∣cessity wax too sharp, or plainly putrifie, is brought over into a bitter excrement in the morning, being oft-times rejected by Vomit: And the which, the Schooles have falsly called Choller. For Diers do by one onely Kettle of Dye, change above a hundred diverse colours, if the Cloaths be first diversly affected: So also one only wandering ferment of the Stomack, doth diversly dispose and determine of the cream, by reason of the diversity of its parts (else single or simple) if it containeth in it, diversities not as yet plainly digest∣ed. So that, although it ordinarily tingeth nothing but the digested part of the cream with its ferment; yet it ceaseth not to affect the undigested part, and wrongfully to sea∣son it, by reason of the defect of the receiver. Wherefore most things do thus grow to an exorbitancy in the kitchin of the first digestion. 
 5. Whatsoever accustomed thing is not taken as malignant, but desired; that also, fulnesse being absent, is the more easily digested, and in Diseases, is safely admitted, if it be soberly and moderately taken. Because the ferments do easily subdue those things which are accustomed, and especially if they are desired. For Hippocrates perswades us to use a most slender food, in sharp Diseases, to wit, until an appetite doth arise again. For I praise the more thin Ales or Beers, as much as I (trusting to the words of Galen) do despise sweet Drinks and Barley-broths. 
 Barley (saith he) being a little boyled, causeth Ventosities or windinesses; but stoppages, if it shall be somewhat better boyled. Wherefore, our Ancestors believing that Barley is not unhurtful, being any way boyled, do constrain that to bud (which they then call Malt) by which work, they prevent, aswell windinesses, as stoppages. But of Malt and Hop, they make Beers or Ales. 
 6. I also urge none with Broths compleated with beaten Eggs, &amp;c. if a sharp Feaver be present; being mindful of that Precept, Impure Bodies, by how much the more thou nou∣rishest them, by so much the more thou hurtest them. For although in sharp Diseases, people live without meat, and onely by drink; yet a peril of their life doth not thereupon invade them. Yea thus do they the sooner recover, and the strength and appetite do renew with much less difficulty: As oft indeed as a putrifiable or mortifiable thing, is cast into the Sto∣mack wanting its own digestive ferment, it putrifies that which is digested, &amp; not digested. And that is the true explication of that Aphorism. For I never wished, that those who were sick of sharp Diseases, might return fat, or fatted; but I did well intend that one only thing, to wit, that they might recover, and indeed not much curtaild, in their strength. The great∣est part of Diet therefore, in Diseases of the Stomack, I have drawn out of the Aphorism: That a sower Belching (of a repaired ferment) coming upon burnt ones, is good. For burntish Belchings, voluntary loathings, an averseness to Fleshes, Fishes and Eggs, yea and loadings of the Stomack, have commanded the sick to be nourished with things that are to be drunk onely: For else, by things subject so stink or mortifie, I had learned, that strange accidents were to be expected, defects of the mind, and other discommodities of that sort. Then because drinks do moisten, do comfort thirst, and satisfie heat, do drive away drinesses, and weaknesses following thereupon. But by drink, I do not here under∣stand, the suppings of Broths which do abundantly nourish, to wit, of those, which in a hot stomack, without a digestive ferment, are of their own accord mortified: but altogether of those, which do least of all putrifie: such as are Ponadoes, and likewise Beer or Ale tin∣ged with wine, wherewith crums of bread also are co-mixed, that they may be meat and also drink. Hither I recal what I have elsewhere taught at large; To wit, That digesti∣on is made by a propper ferment, but not by heat. As oft therefore, as there is an avers∣ness to flesh, and burntish belchings, heat is signified to be present, and a sharp ferment to be wanting. Give heed to this, how easily, new flesh, being fast tied to a hot foot or head, doth putrifie, and presently stink. Therefore in a Feverish Stomack, being very hot; wise Nature fears least a dead or stinking carcass should be made in it, and therefore she is presently averse to fleshes. But whither then hath the ferment of the Stomack in a Fever∣ish man, departed? Hath it wandred to some other place? or was it extinct? For whi∣ther had the Ferment departed, which is no where acceptable but in its own dens? nei∣ther also hath it perished, because it is a vital thing; but whatsoever vital thing hath once perished, doth not return again after privation. But a ferment is that which returns afresh. That therefore happens. For either sometimes the dismissing of the ferment doth not reach out of the Spleen unto the Stomack, by reason of some defect of either of the two: of the duumvirate, or at leastwise, the ferment received into the Stomack, is covered over with a strange and Feverish odour: The which, thus understand thou: Any one being an hungry, and in most perfect health, staying too long in the importunate fumes of Coales, doth presently perceive a loathing or nauseousness to arise upon him, and an averseness to meats, and then also a pain in the fore part of his head; and at length a Vo∣miting. Therefore the ferment of the Stomack, as it is covered with the hurtful odour of the Coales; So likewise, through a poysonsome odour and burntish contagion of the mo∣ved Fevers, it happens, that an averseness to fleshes is straightway bred, as the ferment proper to the Stomack is overspred with that burntish odour or contagion. 
 These things, I had thus concluded with my self concerning Diet, and the consideration of Food, within those few common rules abovesaid; I did measure according to the course of Nature, before I had obtained the greater Remedies. Yet knowing, whatso∣ever is converted in the Stomack, in the likeness of a transparent cream, by virtue of its ferment, that that hath received the beginnings of a vital juyce, although not yet life; and for that cause, not so readily or voluntarily to putrifie. But whatsoever, is either not dissolved, or if in it self it be dissolved, neither yet hath received a ferment, as the la∣tex, the brine of Salt; that very thing, is either an excrement, or is easily made such, or is obvious or ready for corruption. Therefore in the consideration of Diet we must especi∣ally give heed unto the Diseases, and Meats, which by reason of the Disease, the sick par∣ty is averse to, or desireth. For we must be hand-maides to Nature, but never command her; To wit, the ferment, which ought to concoct the meats, prescribeth those, but not the Physitian according to his own appetite or desire; neither may he take out of Authors one form for every shooe. As if the various nature of men, should not have it self by way of relation unto some particular thing. 
 Finally, Exercises, Labours, Works, Rests, Sleeps, and Aire, do depend on the Rules which the moments or requirances of other Digestions do dictate unto us; To wit, that the juyces generated of the Cream, may the more succesfully attain unto their own ends or come unto their bounds. This is the truth of Diet, which Nature doth of her own ac∣cord shew and teach; and let that thing be one and perpetual; That whosoever hath ob∣tained the best Remedies of Secrets, as he presently restoreth the sick, and vindicates them from any Disease whatsoever; So also he prescribeth no other Diet for sick, than for healthy folk. For to the healthy all things are accounted healthy; because the digestive ferments do powerfully draw and restrain all things into their own jurisdiction: And so digestions do prescribe the rules of Diet. 
 CHAP. LIX. A Modern Pharmacapolion and Dispensatory. 1. The Art of Healing hath crept into Fables. 2. The Barbarians excel the Eu∣ropeans in Herbarism. 3. The custome of Galen, of filching the Inventions of others. 4. A Tragedial sex of Herbs. 5. The signate or thing signified in Herbs, was ridiculously translated into Palmestry. 6. The Rashnesse of Para∣celsus. 7. It was a vain Invention, to have brought back Herbs into the Zodi∣ack. 8. How little that is regarded, which is very much to be weighed. 9. It is a shameful thing ta measure the natural endowed gifts of Simples by their de∣gree of heat. 10. The stumblings of Herbarists. 11. The true refining of Simples hath been hitherto scanty. 12. The venal Blood, and arterial Blood, do differ even in Plants. 13. Ice hath deceived Quercetanus. 14. The Father of Lights, is the alone giver of infused knowledge, without the observance of effects. 15. Vain means to know the virtues of Simples. 16. A specifical savour. 17. Things desired in the knowledge of Simples. 18. The art of the Fire opens the way. 19. The diversity of Agents in Nature. 20. A diverse activity of Spagyrical or Alchymical remedies. 21. A Balsame preserving all the juices of Herbs from putrifaction, without an alteration of their properties. 22. A cen∣sure or valuation of Extracts and Magisteries. 23. A horrid confusion and plura∣lity of Simples. 24. Dispensatories prevail onely for expedition, but not for ap∣propriation. 25. A deceiving of Clients or Patients, obtained by the autho∣rity of Magistrates. 26. God composeth some things, which man may not sepa∣rate, nor over-add a third thing unto them. 27. When a conjoyning is to be ad∣mitted. 28. A sentence concerning the prevalency of Dispensatories. 29. The virtues of many things are blunted by sweet things. 30. An Answer to things Objected in behalf of sweet things. 31. The vanity of Syrupes. 32. Chymistry is preserred before other professions. 33. The use of things from beyond the Seas. 34. The Crasis or constitutive temperature is the kernel of Remedies. 35. Vices in Decoctions. 36. A defect in Electuaries, Pills, and Con∣fections. 37. Against the confoundings of Simples. 38. An examining of loosening Medicines. 39. What kind of preparation of Simples is to be despised. 40. The dammageable boyling of Odoriferous things. 41. The ridiculous burning of Harts-horne. 42. The Correction of many things is fatal. 43. The Offences of Simples. 44. Absurd Miscelanies, or Hotch∣potch mixtures. 45. The whole Earth hath, and brings forth Poyson. 46. Under Poysons do lurk the most powerful Secrets. 47. An Errour concerning the gelding of Asarum. 48. An errour concerning its Crudi∣ty. 49. No true Poyson in its first Being. 50. The Death of the Mar∣quess Spinellus, by the folly of Hellebore. 51. The examination of the Vi∣per. 52. Arsenical things, by what right they are the Remedies of Ul∣cers. 53. How Poysons may be made Remedies. 54. The Chymical Re∣medies of the Shops. 55. An examining of Gold and Pearles in healing. 56. The use of Oylie things. 57. What hath departed from clarified Su∣gar. 58. The manner of applying of external things. 59. The Collection or gathering of Simples. 
 THe Art of Healing is every where drawn into the Tragedies and scorn of the vul∣gar. Because Physitians will not be wise, but according to the custom of the Schools. For what they read, they believe, and what they believe, they deliver to the trust of the Apothecary, his Wife, and Servant or Family, to be put in execution. For thereby every maker or seller of Oyles or Ointments, and old Women, do thrust themselves into Medi∣cine, scoffe at Physitians, because also, they oft-times excel them in many things. For they were wont in antient time to reserve some things to themselves for a pledge of fame and family. But afterwards, sloath overcame, and gain disposed of Medicine as a plough, and by the just judgement of God, all things grew orse. 
 Before my entry of the Shop, I cannot but be angry at the describers of simples: For although there be no field more spacious, plentiful, and delightful in the face of the whole earth, and where the mind is more delighted, than in Herbarism; yet there hath scarce been a less progress made in any other thing. For truly the Arabians, Greeks or Gentiles, Barbarians, wild country People, and Indians, have observed their own Simples much more diligently than all the Europeans. For even from the dayes of Plato (wherein Dias∣corides a man of War, lived) nothing almost hath been added to Herbarism: but much diminished. 
 Galen, from a desire of robbery, wrote this study of another, his name being suppressed. He being plainly a non-Diascorian, snatched up the words of Diascorides. The which, in the mean time, Pliny hath besprinkled with many trifles: Because, as its very likely, he being of a mean judgement, not being able to distinguish between truth and falshood, scraping many things together, on every side, hath described them, that he might equalize his name unto the greatness of his Section. But even unto this day, the more learned part of Physitians do as yet carefully dispute only about the faces and names of Herbs: As if the vertues could not speak before their countenance were known; the virtues I say, being first delivered by Diascorides: As if the power of Medicine had attained unto its end, in the first Author. But the more modern Herbarists, began to distinguish Herbs into Sexes, and supposing that they understood many things from thence, complain∣ed, that these things had remained hidden or vailed: As if nature, did labour in jest and not in earnest, had been careful of a Sex, where it was content with a promiscuous and Hermophroditical Being or Body. For a sex doth respect only generation, but not opera∣tion, or the relation of like or equal objects. Therefore, that she might not frame, even the least tittle, in vain, who hath wholly referred her self unto the certain ends known to her Creator, wheresoever there was not need of the marks of Sexes to generate, she hath also disesteemed them in operating. But if of two Simples, one be stronger or rougher than another, surely that doth not denote the Sex, but the degree. For while the same Simple putrifieth, and is changed into small living creatures, these indeed, are not of one, but of both Sexes. The which surely could never be, if those Simples, should now have a Sex, or sexual virtues within them. For the same Herbs in number, are in Sex as well Masculines as Feminines, promiscuously bred. 
 There were also afterwards, others, who would observe signatures in Herbs, as it were a Palmestry: and this Meditation, the root of Satyrion or dog-stones, hath notably promoted. And therefore through the desert hereof especially, they have introduced a sealed knowledge, or essayed Anatomy, that is, new names, and great swelling Titles, embroidered with their own boldnesses. I believe by Faith, that man was not of nature, and therefore likewise, that nature is not the Image, likeness, or engravement of man. God out of the eternal providence of his goodness and wisdom, hath abundantly pro∣vided for future necessities. He himself hath made and endowed Simples for the appoin∣ted ends of all necessities. Therefore, I believe, that the Simples, in their own simpli∣city, are sufficient for the healing of all Diseases. Therefore we must more study about the searching into the virtues, than about disputing any hard questions: Seeing that in Sim∣ples there is a perfect cure, and healing of all Diseases: And by consequence, that Dis∣pensatories, which will us to compound and joyn most things together, do destroy the whole, and through a hidden blasphemy, do as it were strive to supply divine insuf∣ficiency. 
 Hence Paracelsus rightly writeth to Chyrurgions: To what end do ye over-adde unto Sym∣phytum or the root of greater Comfrey, Vinegar, Bole, and such like wan additaments? when as God hath composed this Simple as altogether sufficient against the ruptures of bones? finally, whatsoever thou shalt adde unto it, thou makest, as if thou wouldest by thy correction, supply the place of God. Thou dost grievously erre. 
 In like manner, I also think, that God hath perfectly, and sufficiently composed in Simples, compleat Remedies of any Diseases whatsoever. 
 In the next place, I infallibly know, that there is in the Archeus of vegetables, no anatomical alliance or affinity with us, whether we regard the whole, or at length, their parts. For the endowments of Simples, are by creation: but not from an usurpation of possession: for properties were already in their-own Herbes, before sin, death, and ne∣cessity. 
 Lastly, I believe, that God doth give the knowledge of Simples, to whom he will, from a supernatural grace: but not by the signes of nature! For what Palmestrical affinity hath the Boars tooth, the Goats blood, the peisle of a Bull, the dung of a Horse, or the Herbe Daysie, with a Pleurisie? or what signature have those Simples with each other? Truly, I praise my Lord, who before Diseases were, created all things primarily for his own glory; neither marked he Simples for Diseases that were to come by accident: but for the grace of the universe, from whence indeed the Lord hath honour. Therefore I have laughed at Paracelsus, because he hath erected serious trifles into the principles of healing. There have not been those wanting also, who have brought the huge Catalogue of Diseases, into the signes of the Zodiack: whose number, seeing it was too narrow, they have enlarged every one of the signes into a threefold Section: To wit, that they might divide all the virtues of Herbes into 36, and gather them into a narrow fold. But the earth hath of it self, a seminal virtue of producing Herbes, the which, therefore, it doth not beg from the Heavens. For the whole property of Herbes, is from their Seed, and the seminative power is drawn from the earth, according to the holy Scriptures: but not from the faces of the lights of Heaven. For 16 or 20 Stars, may be put to make a constellation, or one of the 12 Houses, and to be extended into 30 Degrees. But in what sort could so few Stars, contain the essences, seeds, faces, and properties perhaps of five hundred plants, differing in their species and internal properties? Moreover, be∣sides a thousand vain attributions of so many things, as well humane as politick? Away with these trifles! The properties of Herbes are in the Seeds, but not in the Heaven or Stars. The powers of the Stars, are grown out of date, the which by an old Fable, have stood feigned unto heats, colds, and complexions. For the Stars, in whatsoever manner they are taken, do differ from Plants, much more, than Herbs do from mists and frests, or fishes from precious stones. Let it therefore be a faulty argument, to have attributed effects to causes, which do contain nothing at all like a cause in them. That is even as for a watch-man to dream, if he shall believe such a thing, or wholly to go out of his wits by his own thought. Mathiolus, Tabernomontanus, Brasavolus, Ruellius, Fuchsius, Tra∣gus d ' Allichampius, and other observers of Herbes, are hitherto busied, only about the faces, and visual knowledge of Plants: but their virtues, they all as one, describe out of Diascorides: they also tye them up unto the degrees of heat and cold, as though they did demonstrate something from the foundation: A shameful thing indeed it is, to have drawn the Crasis or constitutive temperature of Simples out of heat, but not from the fountains of the Seeds. Dodonaeus Friso, being now become a Dutch-man, Tabernomon∣tanus, with a few others, although they did insist on the same steps of Degrees, yet they have subjoyned some additions, from their own, or the gathered experiences of others: but as yet, plainly confused, uncertain, and badly distinct: because that they have not written from knowledge, but either from the noted revelation of the vulgar, or they being things drawn from a casual experiment. There is none amongst them all, who hath knowingly described the properties of Simples, even as he, who had described all things, from the Hyssop, even unto the Cedar of Libanus. As a sure token, that true knowledges or Sciences are not elsewhere to be fetched, than from the Father of Lights: even as I have elsewhere touched at by the way, concerning the hunting or searching out of Scien∣ces. A living creature that is entire, and alive, cannot be bruised without its dung. It is therefore to be lamented, that it hath not been yet weighed, that Herbs have much dung, which have never cast forth any out of them, and so that they are to be refined with the greater wariness. 
 In the next place, we distinguish the arterial blood in a man, from his venal blood, by divers marks: But in plants, it hath seemed sufficient to have said it. That plant, in one only subject, consisteth of divers and opposite properties: they have acquiesced, nei∣ther hath there been a deeper entrance, than by some common savours, and uncertain events. For out of the stalk or hollowness of Poppy being hurt, Opium distilleth. Celen∣dine or Swallow-wort weeps a golden, and Tithymal or Spurge, a milky juice; out of the bur∣dock, gums, out of the Herbe Chamelion, a Bird-lime, &amp;c. whose Simples, if thou shalt bruise, they shall give forth another and a far more inferiour juice, to wit, a dung and ve∣nal blood, well mixt with arterial blood, however they are clarified. For let young begin∣ners learn to distinguish and separate an arterial blood from the venal blood and substance of Plants, if they do ever minde to have performed any thing worthy of praise, by Sim∣ples: for from hence it comes to pass, that how stoutly soever thou hast operated in extract∣ing, (the manner thereof being taught by those of late time) yet one dram of crude Rhu∣barb doth effect more being administred in pouder, than whatsoever thou shalt extract out of a dram and a half. For the stomack resolves more by its ferment, than whatsoever the mediating or middling juices of extractions can take away; because they resolve with∣out distinction, liquor of the substance which is like unto a dreg, and despised. For Quercetanus, when as he had taken notice, that the innermost powers of things were not to be sufficiently examined by Palmestry, and Anatomy, which they call, Sealed; calls di∣vination by the fire unto his help, but he failed in the way; to wit, he had drawn out of the ashes of a nettle, a Lixivium or Lye, the which by chance of fortune, an Ice in his galley pot, had a little constrained or bound together (for if the Lye had been the stron∣ger, it could not have been frozen) he wondring in the morning, cryes out; Behold, oh what a figure of the nettle, do I behold in the glass! And rejoycing, he established a Maxim: To wit, That a seminal figurative Being of Herbs, doth remain in the ashes, unconquered by the fire. 
 That good man declareth his ignorance of Principles, not knowing, first of all, that eve∣ry Ice, beginning, maketh dented or tooth-like points, like the shape of the leaf of a net∣tle: And then, that the Archeus is the figurer of the thing to be generated, which is burnt up by the fire, long before a coal or ashes is made. 
 Thirdly, if a Lixivium should express the seminal Being of Herbes, surely it ought to resemble, not the leafes; but the root, stalk, flowers and fruits. But the figurative power of the Seeds, lurketh in the Archeus, the Vulcan of herbs and things capable of genera∣tion, which cannot subsist with fleshly eyes. It is to be begged only of God, that he may vouchsafe to open the eyes of the mind, who to Adam, and who to Salomon, demonstrated the properties of things at the first sight. St. Theresa, having once, mentally seen a Crucifix, perceived it to be the eyes of her soul; the which she thenceforth kept open for her life-time, and the flesh hath shut them up in us, through the corruption of nature. For neither for the future, do we else, know natures from a former cause; neither do we now know the interchangeable courses of the Archeus, but by a naked observation. Many Simples are indeed assigned us; but for the most part, false and disagreeable. Neither doth the reading of Books make us to be knowers of the properties, but by observation: No otherwise than as a Boy who sounds or sings the Musick, doth notwithstanding, not compose it, as neither hath he known the first grounds of harmony, by means whereof, the tunes or notes were so to be disposed. If this thing thus happen in sensible things which are to be known by sence, the reason whereof, the hearing measureth: what shall not be done in Medicinal affairs, wherein the virtues of Simples are not penetrable by any sense? But the descriptions of all kind of Medicines, are read, being delivered in the Shops, with a defect of the knowledge of properties and agreements. For I speak concerning a knowledge of vision, such a one, as the soul hath, being separated from the Body, and such a one, as God bestoweth in this life, on whom he will, and hitherto hath he removed this knowledge from the company of those who ascribe all reverence unto heathenish Books. The Father of Lights therefore is to be intreated, that he may vouchsafe to give us knowledge, such as once he did unto Bezaleel and Aholiab, for the glory of his own Name, and the naked charity towards our Neighbours: For so, the Art of Medicine should stand aright in us, under every weight. But it is to be feared, lest he who hath suffered the Books of Salomon to perish, may reserve this knowledge of Sim∣ples for the age of Elias the Artist. For the Schools have by savours or tastes, promised an entrance unto the knowledge of Simples: That as it were the crafts-men of all proper∣ties, they by sharp, bitter, salt, sweet, astringent, soure, and un-savoury, heats and colds, would measure them. But proud boastings are made ridiculous by the effect. For truly, also Opium being very bitter, the which in this respect, they will have to be hot; yet they teach it to be exceeding cold. So sharp or tart Camphor, according to their Rules, ought to be hot; yet they declare it to be (without controversie) cold. 
 In like manner also Aqua fortis, oyle of Vitriol, Sulphur, &amp;c. being soure things, ac∣cording to the Rules of tastes, ought to be exceeding cold. But I am to shew, at some∣time, in its place, that the Schools have not yet beheld the faculties of things, as to the outward bark or shell of them; and therefore that they have passed by the fountains of their seminal properties. Finally, there is in every thing, a specifical savour, which ought to teach their property, if there be any other external signates: To wit, there is in Cinnamon, besides a quick sharpness, a peculiar grace or acceptableness in savour, the which thou canst scarce find in any Simple besides. So Gentian, Elecampane, &amp;c. have besides common bitterness, a specifical savour, which (by reason of a singularity proper to any kinde of Simples) cannot be reduced under Rules, and is the alone accuser, as al∣so distinguisher of all properties.
Furthermore, that Simples are to be chosen or gathered in the station wherein they are in their vigour, this is common to the Schools, country people, and my self: To wit, Seeds, while they are almost dry: but stalks and leafs, while being juicy, they are moist through a full quantity of venal blood: roots also, while they swell with strength, and are not as yet worn out with generating and cocting: but being now filled through much rest, their Archeus being awakened, they meditate of budding. Others perswade the Autumn; I for the most part, love the Spring: the which I have learned by experience in Poli∣podium, Briony, &amp;c. For the juice of Herbes, is their venal blood, the which being more and more ripened, is either gathered into them, or ends into the nature of fibers, or at least wise doth slackly perform its office, whilst the vital power meditates of propa∣gating a Seed. 
 Therefore, in searching into, and gathering Simples, nothing hath remained more neg∣lected, than that which was most desired, and wherein, even from the beginning hitherto, there hath been no progress. Indeed the powers of Simples, and their immediate sub∣jects, have remained unknown. For those, besides a cleer and visual knowledge of them, do require a desired preparation and appropriation. First of all, the knowledge of Scien∣ces: but that doth not presuppose traditions declared at pleasure, and transcribed one to another. But preparation doth not only require the boylings and bruisings of the shop: but the whole Art of the fire. At length a fitting or suiting, applying or appropriating, requires a speculation founded in the light of nature, of man, Diseases, and affects, and then their dependencies, changes, and interchangeable courses. Its no wonder there∣fore, that the Doctrine of Simples, hath remained barren. In the mean time, under so great sloath of mortals, the Almighty hath vouchsafed to raise up Alchymists, who might worthily think of the transmutation, ripening, tincture, and promoting of virtues, as of things chiefly necessary: And so they having proceeded by degrees unto the harmonious unity of Medicine, have become the obtaining followers of their own desire. For they have not gone unto the unequal tempering or mixture of feigned humours, their strise, and defluxions; yea, nor indeed, unto the products, or fruits of Diseases (to wit, for the avertings whereof, they had known that they followed only the relapsing cloakings of Diseases) but they converted their study unto the more formerly, or first causes: know∣ing that the impowering foundation of many defects, was stamped or imprinted in the Archeus of Life. Wherefore, by the purity, simplicity, and subtility of Remedies which have a mark of resemblance, they have attempted an entrance unto the middle Life. That if any of them do not pierce unto the first Constitutives of us; at least wise, they may unfold their natural endowment in the entrance of these, by stirring up our pow∣ers, by their acceptable talk or communication. For truly, nature doth not only acknow∣ledge the actions of agents, which do wholly enter into the jurisdictions of Patients (in∣deed there is only a corporeal action of such, and an obedience of the nourishing facul∣ty) but there is also another authority of agents, not to be despised, which is an unfolding of their native endowment, into the very middle Life of the Archeus, by reason of the sequestrings of mortality, dregginess, and turbulency. By which superiority, such agents, do suffer not any thing from their Patients, and much less are they altered, by resistance or re-acting. For some Remidies being thus prepared, do by their deaf wedlock, so re∣fresh our faculties, that they do the more assure us, that they came into the world for this purpose. For some things do even refresh us by their fragrancy: Also, there are other things, which being shut up, are hindered from shewing their good will unto us; as gold, and gems or precious stones. Others in the next place, (their shakles being loosed) are brought up into a degree, being as it were happy through the favour of an increase, and the liberty &amp; authority of their powers or virtues being obtained, they raise us up from a fall, and comfort us: Surely not more sluggishly, than (after another manner) deadly poysons do prostrate our strength: To wit, they drive away a corporal, yea and fermental poyson: but not that any Medicine is able to renew again the powers implan∣ted in the parts, they being extinguished, abolished, and worn out. 
 But it hath been the error of the Schools, not first to subdue the juices of Herbs, toge∣ther with their substance, and their ferment, before that a choice or separation of the best parts be possible to be made. Then also, they have neglected diligently to search, that the juice of things being pressed forth with a press, doth afterwards, only through the odour of a certain sulphureous fire, remain uncorrupted, without sugar, or any other ad∣ditament: by favour whereof it attains a certain Balsamical Being, and translates the airy draughts incorporated with it, unto a great act of perfection. Moreover I now de∣scend unto the labours of the shops. For first of all, although Extracts may seem to ease a weak or dull stomack of pains: yet I have those in no great esteem, for their errors al∣ready before noted. But Magisteries, I willingly lay up in the place of extracts, where∣by the whole substance of a thing is reduced into its primitive juice. Which manner of preparation, shall remain for ever unknown to the common sort of Physitians. In which regression or return of solution, juices differing in kind, are voluntarily separated, swimming upon each other, for the most part, with divers grounds, and one Ruler, famous in diversity, containing the seminal Being, settles to the bottom. 
 In the second place, I pitty the so many connexions, and confused hotch-potch mixtures in the shops, the bewrayers of ignorance, and uncertainty. For the Schooles hope, that if one thing help not, another will help: and so (through the preachment of Herbarists) they joyn many things together with each other, they being extolled by them, for the same purpose. The sisters of huckstery, seething and tempering or seasoning, are adjoyned: Therefore the Dispensatories described by the Schools, and used by Physitians, are commen∣ded, for expedition, and promptitude or readiness (indeed for this cause, Promptuaries or store-houses have their name) but not for property and necessity: To wit, they having on∣ly general and universal intentions, with a substituting and dispensing one thing for ano∣ther. Whence they are called Dispensatories. In all and every one whereof, the con∣course and confounding of crude Simples, do afford a conjectural event. For the sick man is on every side (for his money) deceived; indeed, as well through the belief and deceit of the Apothecary, as by the oath of Doctorship. He thinking, that he cannot erre, de∣ceive, or be deceived, who swears that he is admitted as a skilful and sufficient Physitian. Ah, I wish that Magistrates, may prevent so great deceiving of Patients, and fraud of Physitians. I, in the first place, do greatly admire a sincere composition in Simples, which is made by Gods compounding. For, I find in the greater Comfrey, a full Remedie of a broken bone, it having all things whereof that hath need. Whereto, if thou shalt admix Bole, Vinegar, or any other forreign things, even as I have admonished above out of Paracelsus; thou hast now corrupted the mixture ordained of God. Yet, as oft as any particular things have not there intent, I do forthwith admit of adjoynings, if the things do couplingly attain that by their conjoyning, which they had not in their singularity: Which is hereafter to be confirmed by a teaching experiment. An example whereof, is most evident in Ink, and Tinctures or Dies. For indeed, at the time of repenting me of my studies, I often considered, that seeing there was in nature, a certain proportion of mat∣ter unto matter, and of form unto form, the same proportion of properties unto proper∣ties, and by consequence, of effects unto effects was also kept. But the composition of Simples, presently taught me the defect of these, where their interchangeable courses do presently enter after the co-mixt beginning of the Seed, and do for the most part, de∣molish themselves, no otherwise than as the Seeds of many things being bruised and con∣founded together, do exclude a seminal hope. 
 I afterwards knew, by many labours, and expences, that the mattes of Remedies be∣ing advanced to a more noble dignity only by their preparation, did ascend unto a degree of perfection, liberty, subtility, and purity, and did far excel the Decoctions, Syrupes, and Pouders of the Shops co-heaped under Honey. For whosoever is well instructed in the ex∣ercises of the fire, doth cleerly behold with me, that there is no Medicine to be found in dispensatories, which may not contain more hurt than profit. For the Schooles which profess Hippocrates, if they acknowledge that Diseases do proceed from sharp, bitter, salt, or soure; may see, that they do wholly mask and season all things with one honey, and one only sugar, and do blunt the properties of Remedies (otherwise weak enough in them∣selves): as though the one and alone Medicine, and top of all Diseases, did stand in sweet. For they answer, That laxative Medicines do operate nothing the more unsuccessfully, although sugared; as also, because they are the more acceptable to the palate; and third∣ly, because they are thus preserved from rottenness and corruption. As to that which con∣cerns the first; I grant indeed, that poysons have an equal effect, whether they are ac∣companied with sugar, or are swallowed alone. For truly the power of laxative things, is wholly sealed in the melting of the Body, as also in the putrifying of that which is mel∣ted, and so that it ought to be of no credit or esteem with poyson. Therefore the answer of the Schools by poysons, is impertinent unto the question concerning the Remedies of Diseases, as bitter, sharp, &amp;c. Unto the second I say, that it is a frivolous answer, while there is not satisfaction given unto the first. They know not therefore as yet, that the vir∣tues of Remedies are changed and blunted by sugar. That to many, the taste of Aloes is more grateful, than that of honey. 
 In the next place, that those who desire to flatter the tongue; yet, cannot the stomack, which only by the beholding, abhorreth Medicines covered over with the deceit of sugar. That a thing is more easily taken in some liquor, in a few drops, and is more freely dige∣sted or concocted within, than being seasoned with plenty of sugar. Again, that things being immingled with a convenient liquor, do the more fully or piercingly enter, than being overwhelmed with much sugar. That sugar, although it be grateful to healthy per∣sons, yet it presently becomes horried unto sick folkes, being hostile in most Diseases of the stomack and womb: but that in other Diseases, it oft-times makes the help of the adjoyned Medicine, ridiculous or vain. For sugar is diametrically opposite to the soure ferment of the stomack, and therefore it causeth the more difficult digestions. For sugar is clarified with the Lixivium of Calx vive, and Potters earth. For if the Schooles had known the sharpness of the spirit of honey, and the stinking dregginess of sugar, they had been content with a more sparing use of them among the sick. 
 Lastly, unto the third, I say, that the Schooles herein confess their ignorance, that they know not how to preserve Medicines from corruption, without a pickling, and geld∣ing of their virtues. The deceit therefore of Syrupes, is sufficiently discovered, which are made onley by boyled Simples, honey or sugar being added. Hitherto at length, that tendeth; that Vegetables do only lay aside their juice and musci∣lage, by boyling in waters: Which crude and impure things, do impose their troubles on the stomack, before that they being digested with the honey, do appoint us to be heirs of their virtues. Especially, because the gumminess of herbes, is fryed with the honey and sugar, becomes ungrateful and troublesome to the stomack, and by boyling, a nota∣ble waste is made of its virtues. 
 I praise my bountiful God, who hath called me into the Art of the fire, out of the dregs of other professions. For truly, Chymistry, hath its principles not gotten by discour∣ses, but those which are known by nature, and evident by the fire: and it prepares the un∣derstanding to pierce the secrets of nature, and causeth a further searching out in nature, than all other Sciences being put together: and it pierceth even unto the utmost depths of real truth: Because it sends or lets in the Operator unto the first roots of those things, with a pointing out the operations of nature, and powers of Art; together also, with the ripening of seminal virtues. For the thrice glorious Highest, is also to be praised, who hath freely given this knowledge unto little ones. I also, seldom use Remedies fetcht from beyond the Seas, or from the utmost part of the East; as knowing, that the Almigh∣ty hath made all Nations of the earth capable of curing; neither that he would, that wares should be expected to be brought from the Indian shore, as neither, that God was less favourable unto mortals, before the Indies were known. Therefore the Divine Good∣ness hath perswaded me, that for Diseases Inhabiting us, their own Remedies are to be found at home. And Alchymical speculations have taught me, that a small liquor may be prepared, which keeps the Crasis of Simples uncorrupted, without a forreign or hurtful seasoning. Therefore, they boyle Herbs in water, wine, or a distilled liquor, unto a third part, half, also co-heaped in a double vessel (as they say) and under a Diploma. Wherein, the chief virtues, if they do not perish; at least wise, none but the burdensome and un∣grateful muck of the Herbes (to be digested by the stomack) is drawn out, however the decoctions and juices may be refined with whites of egges, and may be masked with su∣gar: Because they are drunk without a separation of the pure from the invalid or weak part, without an unlocking of the shut-up virtues, without the root, and participation of life, an amending of defects, crudities, excrements, and violent powers, whose activi∣ties our nature cannot bear without a grievous dammage. And then, Electuaries, Con∣fections, or Pills, whether to comfort, or to loosen the Body, do as yet abound with greater miseries than Syrupes: for they are ridiculously, ignorantly, and unconsiderately co∣knit of many Simples, without boyling, only by bruising or poudering; the which, are for the most part, cross to each other, do hurt one another, and themselves are hindered from joyning in a mutual endeavour for us, as they ought. For that is not in nature, which the Schools have expected in numbers, wherein forces do agree together in one, because they consent by unities. For truly, in nature, every thing is singular, lives in its own Family-administration, nor rejoyceth it in Wedlock. Thus far also, the operation of healing proceeds into the middle life of the Archeus, the which, by connexions and con∣foundings, if it doth not plainly perish: at leastwise, it is manifestly weakened. For the vain successes by the mutual embracing of many seeds, ought to have admonished the Schools, to abstain from the confounding of so many and so divers Simples. By how much the ra∣ther, because under that multitude, many supposites or things put in the place of others, opposites, vain things, but besides most of them ponderous, impertinent, unfit, impro∣per, and therefore, weak, barren, evil and dead things, do run together, or at least wise, are made. For although the worthinesses, and adulteries of Simples, belong more to the Merchants, than Apothecaries: yet not to have distinguished of those Simples, is the part only of a sluggish, ignorant, or covetous Apothecary. 
 In the mean time, it is certain, that for the most part, all things are at length, taken crude, hard, unripe, shut up, poysonsom, impure, bound, and unfit for the communicating of their virtues, and to be the more depraved by co-mingling. And because the sto∣mack of sick folks is in the entry of the House, and therefore also first offended, because it is weak, and unfit to extract the middle life, being beset with so many difficulties: Therefore it was by all manner of labours and singular care to be prevented, that we may prepare all things for a weak stomack, if we hope sweetly to reach unto our conceived and desired ends. The use therefore of all Confections, is horride, nauseous, and tire∣som. And therefore, from hence is the Proverb: Take away that; for the Shops have a smell. Also, if thou takest way from loosening Medicines, Scammony and Coloquintida, the whole fabrick of the Shops in loosening Medicines, will fall to the ground. For pur∣gative Medicines, besides Scammony, Coloquintida, Euphorbium, Elaterium, Esula, and so manifest poysons, and those moreover adulterated, sorbid, and horrid (the heads of di∣minishing of our faculties and strength) do contain plainly nothing: unless we suppose the same poysons to be mitigated in Aloes, Rhubarbe, Senna, Agarick, Manna, and the like, and to be so much the more obvious or easie for deceit. Therefore I have hated the preparations of Simples, as oft as washing, boyling, burning or scorching, adjoyning, or calcining, makes havock of their faculties. For Aloes looseth its juice by washing, and the residue remaines a meer Rosin, the which, by its adhering unto the bowels is a stirrer up of wringings, and the piles. 
 In the next place, seeing the proper and chief virtue of Spices is in that which is odour∣able, if this doth of its own accord vanish away, and voluntarily cease from the Body perfumed, what shall at length be done by boyling and roasting, especially where a degree shall happen thereunto? which thing, our distillings of odoriferous things do teach. At length, what can be said to be more foolish in the Schools, than to have reduced Harts∣horn into an un-savoury ashes (and that deprived of all virtue) for great uses? and to have substituted a gelding or rather a privation, in the stead of preparation? For I have, learned, that that or most Remedies, do by their odour &amp; savour, as well within as without, help our infirmities: and therefore I have detested the co-mixtures of many Simples, be∣cause, if unto a healing odour, thou shalt moreover adjoyn another, which may suppress, cloak, convert the former into its self, or also raise up a neutrality from them both; I have known, that from thenceforth, the specifical healing virtue would be abolished, and the effect desired by the sick, made void. Therefore, the joyning of Spicy odours, and sweet tasted savours are suspected by me. 
 Furthermore, I have hated many other Confections of the Shops, because foolish ones: whereby they endeavour to cloak and blunt the supereminent and violent power of things, by some ridiculous things. Yea, in the mean time, they declare abroad, that the in-bred savour of such a Medicine, is by so much promoted, by how much they do withdraw its powers by virtues adjoyned thereunto. For in most of them, they admix some grains of Cinnamon, or other fopperies, that they may subdue the furies of the more violent things; as if the furies of laxative Medicines, are tamed by some grains of Spices! For who that is but even slenderly instructed in Chymical preparations, knows not, that in Spicy Con∣fections, there is in the first place, the offence of plurality? and then, that most of those things also do vainly offend in the crudity, hardness, shuting up or closness, choice, and substituting of Simples. 
 In the next place, that those Simples do moreover, flow thither in an uncertain Dose? whence indeed, the hoped for effect is prevented? And indeed, by the error of every one of them? And that I may resolve this thing by one example: what is there I pray you, in Lithontribon, or the Confection for wasting or breaking of the Stone, which may satisfie the promises of its Etymology. For to what end is there in it, Cinnamon, Cloves, the three Peppers, Acorns, or Galengal, Costus, Rhubarb, Cassia, Bdellium, Mastick, Amo∣mum, Peucedanum or Dog-fennel, Spikenard, Ginger, the wood and juyce of Balsame, Gumme-dragon, Germander, Euphorbium, also the Oyles of Nard and Muske? Do every one of these conspire for the scope proposed in the Etymologie? Or whether from those being co-mixt together, and perfuming the intentions of each other, a new virtue shall arise, which may compleat its Promises? To wit, Can it powerfully break the stone in the Reins and Bladder? and can it presently loosen all the defects of Urine? should not Opobalsamum, rather perish in other excrements and sweepings? But in Opiate con∣fections, there is the same deafness, as in spicie ones, every where easie to be seen. The which, that I may resolve by one onely example also. For whither in Aurea Alexandri∣na Nicolai, doth the confounding together of sixty five Ingrediences tend? Of which Simples, there is no affinity with Opium and Mandrake, the pillars of the Confection? Truly the congresses of Simples made at the pleasure of an ignorant man, have befooled the Schooles, and killed the sick: they have frustrated them of their hope put into them, and by uncertaine conjectures have exposed them to sale, and made them to passe by the occasions of healing, which are unstable every moment. Therefore the compositi∣ons of the shops, if thou dost examine them without prejudice of mind, thou shalt on eve∣ry side, with a profitable admiration be astonished, that in Syrupes, Electuaries, Pills, Ec∣ligmaes, Trochies, and other things, the World hath been deluded by the prate of Phy∣sitians, the foolish blockishnesses of the Schooles, and their hurtful presumptions. 
 For we being Christians, do believe with the Stoicks, that the World was composed for Mans use. And when as I in times past, earnestly contemplated of that thing with my self, it presently seemed to me, that humane use might commodiously want so great, or so many Poysons: For our more cold climates, I have found, at least, in this, to be the more happy, that they want creeping, poysonsome, and deadly Monsters, wherewith other∣wise, the hotter Zone doth abound. Surely, we have not much necessity, familiarity, a∣bundance of poysons, neither shall their use, in any respect recompense so many calami∣ties arising from thence: Yea if the earth doth bring forth Thornes and Thistles, as a curse of Sin; truly it brings far greater calamities unto us, on its back, as well in the order of living creatures, as vegetables, which are importunate of the life of Mortals: where∣fore, the Text threatens some very small matter by the Thistles and Thornes, which man had now bewailed as the greatest, in the craftiness of the Serpent his Enemy. Surely if it be well searched into, Nature hath scarce any thing free, which hath not its own Ve∣nom secretly admixed with it. For we have not Roses or Violets, which do not assault us; as that under so great a fragrancy, they do not hide the contagions of Poyson: to wit, nota∣ble markes of Putrifaction, a co-melting of our body, and filching away of our strength or faculties. 
 Therefore we entring into an account of simples, shall find but few guiltless: Yea if thou shalt cast an eye on the fields, the whole globe of the Earth, is nought but one onely and conjoyning spiders-web. Moreover by a more full heeding of the matter, there seemeth to be at this day, the same face of things, which there was before one only sin. And so perhaps, that there were from the beginning, more hurtful and guilty. Poysons, than there were good Medicines in the earth; yet there was not a Medicine of destruction for man: Because Paradise wanted those Poysons, although Serpents were present; or perhaps, Poysons were to be of no hurt to man in Eden, by reason of his immortality. But on the contrary, the Almighty saw, that whatsoever things, (even in the World, out of Paradise) he had made, were good in themselves, and for their ends. Wherefore I long agoe was deceived in my self, as thinking how unworthy Poysons were; both because the Honour of God did not require their existence; and also because man had willingly want∣ed many Poysons, and so I supposed that Poysons were made neither for the glory of God, nor for the use of man. There are indeed a few things which are guiltless, in the use whereof, without a caution, there is safety; but most things do fight against us with a horrid Tyranny. Other things also do gnaw us by scorching us with their sharpnesse; very ma∣ny other things do every where, under a shew of friendship mock us, and carry a secret de∣structive enemy within them. But there is nothing (universally) which doth not abound with dreggs, and is not horrid through impurities: In the next place, which doth not con∣sist with crudities, an unequal tempering, and an unvanquished stubbornness of perverse∣ness. For although man was brought into Paradise, yet the Creator of things worthy to be praised, foreknew from Eternity, that the World should be a Mansion for Man; and as he gave the Earth to the Sons of Men, so also he made the same for Man, with all things contained therein. 
 At length, I by Chymistry, beholding all things more clearly, it repented me of my former rashness, and blockish ignorance; For truly, I did on every side, humbly adore, with admiration, the vast Clemency and Wisdom of the Master-Builder. For he would not have Poysons, to be Poysons, or hurtful unto us: For he neither made Death, nor a Medicine of Destruction in the Earth; but rather that by a little labour of ours, they might be changed into the great pledges of his Love, for the use of Mortals, against the cruelty of future Diseases. For in them lies hid an aid or succour, which the more kind and famili∣ar Simples do (otherwise) refuse. So, horrid Poysons, are kept for the more great and heroick uses of Physitians. For bruit Beasts are scarce fed with them; whether it be that they do beholdingly know a Poyson, which else by odour and savour, is not bewrayed; or that a certain Spirit, the Ruler of Bruits, doth preserve those Poysons for greater uses, as heirs of the greatest virtues: At least-wise, it is sufficient, that bruit Beasts do leave the most powerful Remedies for us, as it were by the command of the most High, who hath more care of us, than of Beasts. For crude Asarum or Asarabacca, with how great anguish doth it provoke Vomit, and the Stomack testifieth that a Poyson is present with it? and how easily doth it depart through boyling, and the Poyson is changed into an opening, Urine∣provoking remedy of lingring Fevers, the which, the occult or hidden spiciness therein, doth discover? So, Aron or Wake-robbin, being boyled in Vinegar, waxeth milde, and be∣comes a healing Medicine of great falls. 
 Wherefore the Schooles have appointed corrections; but I wish they were not ridicu∣lous ones, not rather geldings, not withdrawings of their faculties! Indeed they think that the laxative part flies away out of Asarum by boylings, even as every thing doth (through its own rottenness) in languishing years, consume. 
 But at leastwise the root of Asarum, doth not wax mild being boyled in Wine, even so as it doth if it boyle in Water: Yet in an equal degree of the fire, its laxative part would in like manner fly away. 
 Therefore others think, that the crudity in Asarum, is the effector of its loosening; but these do neglect pot-herbs, which are more crude than Asarum: But that Hellebore is not to be ripened by boyling, if Vomiting be to arise from crudity. They boyl Scammony in soure things, that they may mittigate it; but the common sort of Physitians have already known that Scammony is thus gelded; so as, that if it be exposed unto the sharp vapor of Sul∣phur, it is plainly deprived of its virtue; and so much of the Scammony doth depart, as it shall draw of the sharpness. But I being willing from a fatherly affection, to correct the furious force of Medicines, do understand, that the ancient faculties or virtues of things ought to remain, and to be turned inward in their root, or to be transchanged under their own simplicity into other endowments or qualities privily lurking in the same place, un∣der the Poyson their keeper; or to be bred a new, by reason of an added perfection: Af∣ter which manner, Coloquintida, turns its laxative and destructive quality inwards; and a resolving faculty springs up from the bottom, being a greater or singular curer of Croni∣cal or long continuing Diseases. 
 For Paracelsus laudably attempted that thing in his tincture of the Lile of Antimony; yet was he silent, or knew not that the same thing was to be done in all Poysons of living Creatures and Vegetables whatsoever, by their own circulated Salt: For truly all the Poyson of those perisheth, if they shall return into their first Beings. 
 This Hinge, not the Schooles, but Physitians chosen of God, whom the Almighty hath chosen from their Mothers Womb, in time to come, shall know; and he shall make a dif∣ference of the Sheep from the Goats. Simples therefore of great powers or virtues, are not to be gelded, nor mortified, but to be bettered by Art; by reason of the extracting of hidden faculties, or by a suspension or setting aside of the poysonsomeness, or by a substi∣tuting of one endowment in the roome of another, by commanding specifical adjuncts. These things are for those, to whom it hath not been granted to taste the power of the greater circulated Salt. For some things do by adjuncts wax milde, their cruelty being laid aside, do become neutral; to wit, through virtues being partakingly assumed on both sides. Neither therefore may we borrow these adjuncts from the received Dispensato∣ries of the Shops, which do not teach a bettering, or even corrections; but a destruction of things, or surely they afford nothing but correctingmockeries. For Example; Mar∣quess Charles Spinelli, late General of the Genoans, when as he had walked late on foot about the City, having thorowly viewed all the Walls, commanded the Physitians to be called, and said unto them, that he had sometimes laboured with the Falling-sickness, and was cu∣red by me, and that now and then he as yet felt a giddiness in his Head, since he had come out of Aquitane into Liguria or Genoa, by crossing the Sea.
A circle of Physitians, next morning, gives him a scruple of white Hellebore to drink, and for a correction thereof, added as much of Annise-seed; presently after half an hour, he Vomiteth, and afterwards he invokes the aid of me, being absent, and accuseth his Murderers, saying, Helmonti mio, voi me lo dicesti, gli Medici t ' ucciderano. Oh my friend Helmont, thou toldst me this; that these Physitians will kill thee. He was silent, and after two hours, his Stomack being first contracted, and then having a convulsion through∣out his whole body, he dies: the Physitians seek excuses, and the Earth covered their fault. For so the Confections of the Schooles throughout their Dispensatories, do carry many foolish correctives into the fardle with them, Opiates have not things (especially) adjoyned unto them; but laxatives, for the most part, Ginger, Mace, Annise, and what∣soever things might cure wringings of the bowels, from a later effect of loosening Medi∣cines. Fie, with how unpunished a liberty, doth ignorance rage on mortals! How little do they understand their own Hippocrates: If those things are taken away, which is meet, (that is, which hurt and burden) the sick feels himself better, and doth easily bear it. For seeing those things which hurt within, do now and then, scarce weigh a dram, every purge which is directed for health, ought to be an evacuation, either unperceivable, or at least∣wise, exceeding moderate, and that with a restoring of the strength or faculties. For this is that which the sick do easily bear, with profit or help. The Correctories therefore of Medicines, are unprofitable patcheries, and a weight described by the Schooles, without the knowledge of things, and so destructive at least, to the Medicines, if not together al∣so, to the sick. This part of Medicine requires a diligent and expert Secretary of Nature; Because in that part, the most ample riches of Medicines, and guilded houshold-stuffe of Glaura, is found. The Schooles had in times past, learned of our Philosophers, that most excellent virtues do inhabite in Simples, over which destructive poysons were ap∣pointed chief Keepers: thereupon, their rashnesse succeded, which co-mingled express Poysons, and manifest Corrosives, with Antidotes; hoping, that by the goodness and quantity of adjuncts, the malignity of the Poyson was to be overcome; as if it were con∣venient for health, for a pestilentious Glove, to be brought unto guests into a chamber fil∣led with healthy aire. 
 For I do not here accuse the Viper in Triacle, without which, to wit, this hotch-potch of Simples is as it were dead; For the flesh of Vipers is in it self unhurtful, and without Poyson; yea, an Antidote against Poyson: But little balls prepared thereof, in the boyl∣ing do leave all their state in the Pottage, which the raw flesh did keep. I complain in this place of Arsenical things, which are Magistrally (as they call it) put into an Anti∣dote. For the Schooles by reason of the rashness of boldness, or self-confidence, presume to deserve credit, and to have placed the glory of Studies, in the Authority of their possession. Neither is it alwayes, that even the most excellent virtues do abide or dwell about destructive Poysons, in the same subject, so as that these are covered over by Poysons. 
 For Arsenick and Orpiment, &amp;c. How much soever they may be fixed, and dulcified or made sweet; yet they are never to be taken inwardly, however others shall otherwise perswade. They onely prevaile without, and do kill and tame other Poysons of Ulcers, if they themselves have been first subdued. The corrections therefore of Medicines, are without the knowledge of properties, parts, and agreements. For what doth a spice Bal∣lance, in respect of a Poyson? If the whole body of man being strong and full of life, doth presently faint or fall down at the stroke of the tooth of a Viper? Shall Wolfes-bane wax mild through the admixing of the clove? Shall Coloquintida cease to putrifie, together with its gripings, if it be joyned with Gumme-dragon? The Corrections therefore, in Dispensatories, are burdens, and blockish addittaments, which do not cause the modera∣tings of poysonous qualities: but wastings of their faculties. 
 For even as Poysons, have a fermental readinesse of acting, so we were to have laboured, that we might reserve the strength and aptness of Medicines, but withal that we might di∣rect them through the in-graftings of Art, unto the necessities of Chronical and far scitu∣ated Diseases. This one onely thing remains in this business, that we do infringe and tame the chief or greatest violence of the thing, with the propagation of its ferment. 
 Wherefore as I do (in general) pity the Compositions and Corrections of the Shops; so I do as yet more detest the precipitatings, glassifyings, and preparations of Mercury, Antimony, Tuttie, Sulphur, &amp;c. And likewise, the adulterations of Spirits out of Spices, hot Seeds, Vitriol, Sulphur, &amp;c. For they are prepared for gain, by our fugitive servants, and purchased by the Shops, rather to the disgrace of the Art of the Fire, than for the de∣fect of the sick. 
 I likewise bewail the shameful simplicity of those, who give men, leaf-gold, and bruised or poudered precious stones, to drink, with great hope, selling their ignorance, if not de∣ceit, at a great rate. As if the stomack may expect even the least succour thereby. And therefore the more subtile error of those, is more to be bewailed, who corrode Gold, Sil∣ver, Corals, Pearls, and the like, by sharp liquors, and seem to dissolve them, and think that by this means, they are to be admitted within the veins, and truly to communicate their properties with us. For they know not, alas, they know not, that that which is sou , is an enemy to the veins; and therefore that the forreign sharpness of the dissolving liquors being conquered and transchanged, those Mettals and Stones are a pouder, as before: The which, into howsoever the finest pouder it may be re∣duced, yet nothing of it is digested by the stomack, or bestows on us, its virtues. Which thing that thou mayest see before thine eyes: For pour thou the salt of Tartar on things that are dissolved in some brackish corrosive liquor, and presently, that which was dissol∣ved, will fall to the bottom in form of a pouder: For if strong waters or aquae fortes ' s, do not change mettals in their substance (although those are made transparent, which were before thick or dark) but that Silver is thence, safely recovered; with what blindness therefore, do they give Stones and Pearls to drink, as if through the corrosives, they should lead the antient essence of Stones or a Mettal behind? For it was the invention of a subtile deceiver, that he might have his Medicines in great esteem with the sick: Because ignorant deceivers think, that if the thing dissolving be not distinguished by the sight, from the thing dissolved, that the very thing also dissolved, is truly transchanged in its substance. 
 In the next place, Oyles and fatnesses are not of value for Balsams, Oyntments, and Emplaisters, unless perhaps, as they may give a consistence to the Medicine. 
 For first, a great part of men do not suffer Oyntments in their skin, because they stir up itchings and wheales, with swelling. And then, because the aforesaid Oyles, are for the most part prepared out of Herbes, the virtue whereof, lurketh in a muscilaginous and gummy juice: but that juice is drawn by boylings, into the broaths, or is pressed forth with a press, the which is not truly married to Oyles, but being fixed, doth at length, wax hard. But I do more rightly constrain or gather the Balsams of flow∣ers, in Honey: Yet, I more admit of the simplicities of simple Oyles, than of com∣pound ones: Therefore I do most especially expel the disconsonant and deaf composi∣tions of the Oyntments and Emplaisters of the Shops: because nothing is more blockish, than for the Pouder of Vegetables, in fixing, to be scorched, and so made unfit under various fatnesses, and those ignorantly co-mixed: The which, if it shall be Mineral, it doth not admix it self with fat; but rather, is so covered and imprisoned within the Oyntments, that it becomes of none effect, and is for weight only. For nothing is to be mixed with Oyles, Oyntments, or Emplaisters, which cannot be Homogeneally resolved in them, throughout their whole Body. 
 It is also worthy of loud laughter, that Loaf, or the whitest Sugar, is commended, not because it is more sweet, and more worthy in its virtue; but because it is dearer, and hath often boyled with the Lixivium of Calx vive: Whereas the name of puri∣ty, hath caused a juggle. Flowers, Herbes, &amp;c. being bruised, and Loaf-sugar admixed therewith, do fall asleep; those which are mixt with the more sweet Sugar, do snatch up a ferment, and in waxing hot, do unfold the virtues of a simple: But presently after, through a close digestion of heat, the ferment is restrained, and they become far more powerful. But the diversity of the Ferment depends on the Lixivium, wherewith one of the Sugars doth abound, but the other wanteth that Lixivium. 
 I am wont also, to apply Unguents outwardly, with choice or judgement: To wit, in affects, wherein the Cure is abroad or far from the Center, as in a wound, bruise, burn, &amp;c. I perswade them to be applyed luke-warm. But where an inward affect requires an outward succour, as the Bloody-flux, Collick, Convulsions in the Stone of the Reins, a Schirrhus, &amp;c. I bid that the Oyntments be cherished from without, with a heated stone, or hot sand: And that thing, I learned, by beholding Chaff walking upwards and downwards in a kettle of luke-warm water, as it were from heat under-kindled: and therefore first I conjectured, that through a potent heat, Oyntments being applyed, are quickened, and do joyn their Spirit to our venal blood: and then, I certainly found, that thus, the evil or Malady is drawn or allured forth, and that symptomatical on-sets are stayed: And that whatsoever things Baths do perform in the whole Body; this same thing, heated and kept-warm Oyntments, do finish in a part thereof, without the decay of the whole body. For a cherishing Tile or Brick, doth drive the odour of the Emplaister in∣wards, and doth attract outward, those things, which being the more slow, do else stick fast: and likewise the spirit making the assaults, is attracted together with the blood, is dispersed by the heat, and another succeedeth in its place, draweth the force of the Medi∣cine, and as it were boyling up within, is driven back. 
 Concerning the gathering of Simples also, men are not every where, sufficiently groun∣ded. They determine, that roots are to be gathered in time of Autumn: But for the most part, many things do afford the more effectual roots in the Spring-time. Polipodium flourisheth chiefly at Spring; but in Autumn, it affordeth a grey and black root: indeed barren and oldish. I judge, that all things are to be gathered immediately before their state of maturity: for a full ripeness is a beginning of declining. Therefore let all Fruits, Flowers, Roots, Leafs, Barks, &amp;c. have their own determined spaces of ripenesses. For also, the juice in Plants doth first abound, the which in many doth forthwith after wax dry, or is consumed into Leafs. Therefore, the variety of maturities, doth bring forth a variety of Collections. For so, some Leafs are more lively after their Flowers, but others are more juicy before their Leafs. Then also, there are some things which are stronger before the increase of their Fruit. Some remain with a perpetual countenance. Wherefore, they do the more rightly determine, who measure Simples according to the requirance of their aim. 
 CHAP. LX. The Power of Medicines. 1. The Authors comfort in his persecutions. 2. The Author decyphers his Ad∣versaries. 3. A dream of the Author. 4. He felt or perceived the Elementary qualities. 5. He perceived Coagulations. 6. He perceived Atrophiaes or Consumptions of the flesh. 7. He perceived drynesses in us. 8. He perceived drynesses in other things. 9. An Error of the Schooles. 10. Whence the heat of the Liver is, and in what manner it subsisteth. 11. He perceived the adulteries of Merchants. 12. He perceived two savours of things. 13. Notable things touching the taste and savour. 14. He perceived the Causes of Healing. 15. And likewise, a twofold manner. 16. He perceived the hope of immortality to be ta∣ken away. 17. He perceived a certain goodness in nature. 18. He perceived the digestive Ferments. 19. He perceived true diureticks or provokers of Urine. 20. He perceived the changing properties of Salts. 21. He perceived the spi∣rit of Salt to be changed by the co-touching of things connexed. 22. He per∣ceived the nigh or ready, or slow obediences of Salts. 23. He perceived Salts to be the Authors of wringings of the Bowels. 24. The top or perfection of Salts is seen in their first Being. 25. He perceived specifical Savours. 26. The defini∣tion of a Savour. 27. Things without savour are tasted by the stomack, which are not judged of, or discerned by the tongue. 28. He perceived the occult pro∣perty, and the boastings of the Schooles. 29. The searching after hidden or se∣cret things, is not [for what] but by the way [of because] from the effect to the cause, according to the Gospel. 30. He perceived unstopping or opening things. 31. He perceived the activities of Salts. 32. He perceived the spirits of Minerals. 33. He perceived the loosening poyson of purging things. 34. A threefold sign of a laudable Laxative. 35. The error of Paracelsus. 36. Chymistry. 37. Di∣stilled things are not to be judged suitable, or equal to their concrete Bodies 38. He perceived many things to be transchanged by adjuncts. 39. He percei∣ved the sanguine glassie colour of a Mettal. 40. He perceived the distillation of Lead, whereof Paracelsus above. 41. He cured divers Diseases. 42. He perceived that the planetary faculties of Mettals were to be drawn forth by a high∣er or deeper resolving, than that which hath been before. 43. He perceived the divers virtues of dissolved Gold. 44. He perceived the virtues of the Alkahest. 45. He perceived the virtues of Mercurius vitae, in its synonimal or fellow name of Lile. 46. He perceived the action of renewing things. 47. He perceived the root of a bewitching Sorcerie. 48. He perceived Poysons. 49. He per∣ceived the actions of things, according to the applications of the receiver. 50. An Idiotism of Paracelsus, about the nourishing of a Wound. 51. The use of Salt. 52. The variety of Oyles. 53. The use of the water, and salt of artificiated things. 54. The Elixir of a Spice. 55. The praise of Magisteries. 56. Meats sea∣soned, why unwholesome. 57. A censure of some Minerals. 58. He perceived a sixfold digestion. 59. He perceived when the venal blood is quickned. 60. What the inward and anointed grease may suffer. 61. He perceived the action of Can∣tharides and Caustick Remedies. 62. He perceived the virtue of an Amulet. 63. The virtue of Stones. 64. He perceived whence the diversity of effects in acting, is. 65. He perceived the necessities of death. 66. The order of Chy∣mical operations. 
 VExation brings forth understanding, as too much pressure stifles it. Although in my sharpest adversities, I might make use of Job, and Paul; yet the Lord Jesus, the Son of God, so over-mightily helped me by his exemplary straits or griefs, that he did not only ease my labours; but as it were bear them in himself. Let his name be alwayes honourable in my sight. For I perceived the examples of Saints, to be indeed inductives or motives, but not to confer any grace, by themselves. For my mind in my greatest pressures, for the most part, grieved, that I was comforted after a certain humane man∣ner, and through the sloath of unsensibleness: that I did rather resemble an arrogant Stoi∣cism, than that I did with the joy of concentricity or a mutual centredness, purely resign up my tribulations unto my most bountiful Jesus. For I feared that rest of my soul which innocency raised up, lest it might proceed from a despising and arrogancy, and so lest my tribulations should be fruitless: That I, (I say) being immingled with the common lot and fellowship of the good men of the age prophesied of, had become evil and unprofita∣ble. For I feared every hour, that I was unsensible of grief, neither that I did in the least, feel those persecutions brought on me by a certain Clergy-man, and those great ones which joyned with that Clergy-man, and at length, by the better part of the peo∣ple, otherwise, in a man which was but in the least judicious, very sensible ones. For I feared, lest that unbroken rest of my mind, might happen from a despite toward my ene∣mies. I intreat therefore, that God, the fountain of all good, may judge with Clemen∣cy: At least wise, I often considered, by largely running through the foregoing ages, and future persecutions of the Christians; that the first persecution of the Church, was violent, and that of Tyrants: Afterwards, that there was another which followed, that was fraudulent, and that of Hereticks: But ours hath indeed, arose from Hypocrites; but that it should be composed of deceit and force. For there are those (as saith the Pro∣phetess St. Hildegard) who shall first deceive the potent Prelates, and their subjects or substitutes, under a shew of Piety: and at length, as many as will not favour them, they shall oppress by the power of great men. 
 Good God, what have not I felt, and how much could not I witness? But the whole revenge, have I referred to thee alone, and I intreat thee out of Charity, that thou wouldst spare them, or that thou wouldst not damn them for my sake: Because I receive all things from thy hand, and they know not what they do. 
 At length, I thought of a means whereby I might meditate, that all my tribulations were transferred on the head of Nero and Tiberius. Therefore I being at once, wearied and refreshed, and suddenly with great consolation, sliding as it were into a dream, I saw my self in a certain Kingly Pallace, excelling humane artifices. But there was a high Throne, encompassed with an unaccessable light of Spirits. But he who sate in the Seat of the Throne, is called [He is] And the foot-stool of his feet [Nature] The Porter of the Court, was called [Understanding] who without speech, reached unto me a little Book, a choice out of darkness, the name whereof was [The bud of a Rose not yet opened] And al∣though the Porter uttered no voice, yet I knew, that little Book was to be devoured by me. I stretched forth my hand, and ate it up. And it was of an harsh and earthy taste, as if it would stop up my winde-pipe; so as I swallowed it with a great slowness of la∣bour. From whence, afterwards, my whole head, seemed to be transparent. Then, af∣terwards, another spirit of a superiour order, gave me a bottle, wherein was [Fire-water] as being in one word: A name altogether simple, singular, undeclinable, unseparable, un∣changeable, and immortal. But I knew not what my business was with it: Neither, heard I any thing more of it; and by reason of the fear of its greatness, my jawes were shut up, and my voice clave to my jawes. At length, having performed due worship before the Throne, I endeavoured diversly to experience, what the bottle might contain. Behold, be∣fore the doors of the Court, there was the Art of the Fire, a cheerful old Woman being the Turn-key, who did not open the locks without, unless the Porter had first withdrawn the bolt within; the which he did not attempt, unless, from a sign given him by the light of the Throne. But unto those that knocked at the doors, the Porter answered, the Key-keeper holding her peace: I know you not. But they who tryed to look in thorow the lattices of the windows, being smitten with darkness, forthwith fell down mad, many wandred up and down, promising great things without a foundation. I stood a good while silent; and then afterwards, a hand (the rest of whose Body I saw not) led me aside unto a pleasant Garden: where on a sudden, all Simples worshipped me, as though every one had been singular by themselves. In which assault, I felt or perceived all the Simples of the world, not indeed, as if their qualities did act in me (for I being but one, had not been sufficient for the bearing of them all) as it were, their object: but they all were seen, as on a Thea∣tre, to represent in me their Tragedies. And I wish, I may well declare them with my pen! 
 I perceived in the first place, that all heats, colds, moistures, and dryths, were as it were momentary qualities, happening on things constituted, like colours: But those things which do heat, cool, moisten, or dry us up, I perceived, that that did not happen indeed, by reason of an excess of those qualities, whose names they did obtain: but in respect of an appropriation of the object. For in this respect, the dead carcass of a man, who dyed of a languishing death, although being nigh the fire, it violently waxed luke-warm; yet, unto our touching, it seemeth to be most cold; so that the hand can scarce recover its heat a long while after it. And surely, that comes not to pass, through a quality generated in us, which is named cold: the which indeed in contemplating of it, doth so many points ex∣ceed our heat, that it imprints an excess of so great cold: but rather because the vital spirit being greatly afraid of the dead carcass, doth depart or retire from the hand. For in like manner, Camphor, resembling the savour of Pepper, and bitter Opium, are said to cool, as they subdue or chase the Archeus: After which manner also, a Feverish Blas, being the same in number, doth stir up, first cold, and afterwards heat, in the Archeus. I perceived therefore, that hot things, from the moment of their first degree, even unto the degree of an Eschar, do not brand our temperature with an excess of heat: To wit, by producing in us an excelling of their heat: but by the ministry of sharp salts, they do so inflame our Archeus, that they do more and more exasperate the same; and at length, do by burning, assume a fiery violence, through the motion of their own Blas: Such as is the Prune and Persian fire. And therefore, none of those hot things do heat dead carcasses. 
 In the next place, I perceived, that nothing doth properly moisten us, but by appropria∣tion, and therefore that neither doth water properly moisten us through a defect of appro∣priation, which is the cause of approximating or the nearest approaching, and assimilating. But those things which do besmear, stuffe up, resolve, and make the substance of our bo∣dy (as it were by small points) salt, without the sense of burning heat and sharpness: those things I say, do moisten. And that only occasionally, and as it were, by accident. Therefore I have perceived, that whatsoever things do dissolve, resolve, and co-melt glu∣tinous things, do moisten: To wit, as they do withdraw the impediments of coagulation and drying. And therefore the Mallow, Marsh-mallow, and those things which are be∣lieved to be moistening, and so do stop transpiration, have produced an error in the Schools. For truly, such a moistening, was nothing but a diseasie detaining of excrements, but not a dewie moistening of the parts. I perceived also, that no other things do dry up in us, but those which by extenuating, do dispose to exhalation. For so sweat, although it moisten the skin, and make the habit of the Body swollen, yet it meerly dryes us. 
 Furthermore, whatsoever things do coagulate, I perceived rather to harden and make clotty, than to dry up; and therefore resolving is opposite unto coagulating, but not moistening. 
 But those things which do induce an Atrophia or Consumption for lack of nourish∣ment, and do make lean, I perceived that was not done by a drying quality; but be∣cause the Liquor, otherwise nourishable, is theevishly withdrawn elsewhere: by occa∣sion whereof, the Ferments connexed to heat, do perfect a true drying. 
 I perceived therefore, that there was no other drying in us, than that which was made by the resolving of the Ferments, and the diflation or pussing away of heat. I perceived, I say, that Coagulation it self, or hardening, did proceed from its own curd, or property of a seed, promoting the Liquors into a more solid Fruit.
I perceived also, that dry things, which drink up liquors into them, although they are actually dry, yet that they are quickly satiated or filled with moistures, do cease from combibing, neither that they do at length enter into the root of the mixture of dry things: And therefore I perceived, that thirst is not an introduced quality of driness; but that natural thirst is a sense of the Latex being diminished, but not so plainly failing, that it may even accuse of a principiating driness. So I perceive, that a thirst besides nature was not a token of drying; for such do drink and extend the bottome of their belly, their thirst remaining safe. For that thirst doth proceed, as a forraign excrement doth cause the nourishable juice of the stomack to melt. For truly, while I describe my feelings or per∣ceivances, I am not so much besides my self, as that I shall deny the excess of an exter∣nal heat, to burn, and cause a wound or ulcer; or that cold excelling, doth mortifie as if it did burn. But in the Dream proposed, I onely perceived them as they are service∣able to the speculation of healing. Therefore the examples of excessive heat and cold, are like a sword, but not to be referred among the occasional and internal causes of di∣seases, to be considered by a Physitian; If indeed, according to the speculations of Me∣dicine, health is expected by the removal of those: wherefore the speculation of exter∣nal and antecedent Causes, is not curative, but onely now and then, significative and directive. For a wound being once inflicted, although the sword be taken away, the wound is not healed; neither is the fire to be taken from the hearth, although it hath at sometime burnt or scorched some-body in the same place. For truly, the causes of Di∣seases are inward, as they are connexed occasions; therefore the consideration and re∣moval of those, is truly medicinal. 
 But the Schools, when they saw the fire to burn its objects, likewise also, cold to mor∣tifie and destroy; and so the body of man, by those external qualities excelling, to be diversly disturbed; they for that cause thought, that Effects which should have heat ad∣joyned unto them, were raised up by fire; and in this respect, that in Feavers, two Ele∣ments did strive in us, whereof the Water should alwaies obtain the former part of the victory; but the Fire the latter part thereof; to wit, that the Fire did cause Erisipelas ' s, the Prune or burning coal, the accute or Persian fire, the burning Feaver, &amp;c. That it did likewise harden by drying or exsiccation of Schirrus ' s, Stones, Bones, and Knots. They have also decreed Remedies beseeming such rules, by contrarieties, not knowing after what sort the spirit of life may stir up heats and colds, without fire, or icy cold; be∣cause neither from the Elements of our body, or from feigned humours: But they have on both sides neglected the [ ] or violent assailant of Hippocrates: Even as I have sometime by one example of a thorn thrust into the finger, demonstrated; wherein the Heat, Pain, Inflamation, Feaver, do not efficiently proceed from the fire of the thorn, but because the sensitive Spirit doth grievously bear the forreign thorn: So indeed, heat and cold are accidents, impertinent to the nature of a Feaver; even as in the Liver are felt its heats, because in the same place there are its thorns; and the heat is not the cause, but the effect of the thorn. And therefore the alterations which do happen in the vital Family-admistration, and do cease in dead carcases, do not depend on the fire or icyness of the body or humours, but on the Beginnings of life. Yea, if the Schools had touched at the matter as it is, they had found, that natural, artificial Baths, &amp;c. do not dry and burn us up, but rather moisten us, unless their heats are inordinate, and of daily continu∣ance; yea, neither then indeed, otherwise than because more is consumed than is recei∣ved, doth the body accidentally wither. 
 At length, I presently after the first qualities, perceived the theevish adulteries of Mer∣chants, wherewith they load, defile, estrange, and substitutively dissemble foreign Me∣dicines or Drugs; who have no need of my Doctrine, because they are such as are not moved with the fear of Hell. 
 I presently after perceived two distinct Savours at least, of things, if not sometimes three or four; one to wit, whereby things are sharp, bitter, salt, &amp;c. but the other, which is called specifical, being appropriated to the seed. The first therefore I perceived to be the dignities and offices of Salts; not indeed of Salts separated from the three first things, or (as they say) drawn from corporeal Beginnings, but of Salts glistening in their composed bo∣dy: But the other of the savours, I perceived to be the seminal nature of Odours, per∣forming, or at least unfolding the office of Forms in concrete bodies: for Salts, as being most sensible, do first offer themselves to the taste; whereunto therefore Hippocrates hath attributed the knowledges of diseases; to wit, bitter, salt, sharp, and brackish, pointing forth diseases. But heats and colds he rather understood to be subsequent affects or passi∣ons, than diseases. But I do ascribe their judgement to the taste, by reason of the afore∣said tastable qualities, wherein for the most part a more profound power or faculty sits, and containing the seminal and efficient cause. But not that therefore the judgement con∣cerning diseases doth belong to the tongue and the pallate; but I name it the taste, by rea∣son of the tastable qualities: Otherwise, it is the feeling wherewithal the Instruments are strongly endowed, whose sensitive force, by an approximation of touching, makes the signs of friendship, or enmity about the hidden thing perceiveable. After this manner therefore, I perceived that it is the offices of the salts exceeding in force, which do un∣fold the vertues of the subordinate forms of their concrete body, and carry them unto the Archeus, as it were their object whereon they act. Therefore I perceived that Cures, as well by Mediciues as by Nature, are made by an appeasing of the disturbed Archeus, and the removal of the seminal and diseasie character produced by the Archeus. This indeed I have perceived to be the nearest, safest, and highest or chiefest curing: But that which succeedeth by the help of secrets, is busied about the taking away of the product. And therefore I have perceived, that Arcanum ' s do operate as Salts. Indeed such cures do happen, by removing of that which is hurtfull, and by adding that which is defectuous: for else, those things which do hinder increases or appropriations, have rather a regard unto prevention, than unto curing it self; but hurtfull things are taken away by resolving, cleansing, exhaling, or expelling; which properties are agreeable unto Salts. But the re∣movals of that which is hurtfull are not duly wrought by poisonous, melting, and putri∣factive things; as neither by the withdrawings of the venal blood and life. But the ad∣ding of that which is deficient, I have perceived not to be done by a proper means; and therefore that we go back or decline by little and little, through great want of the Tree of Life; the which be it spoken of the vital faculties, but not of the want of the venal blood, which is restored by the kitchins. But I have perceived, that Nature doth volun∣tarily rise again, and repair some of her defects, if she shall be made to sit up after her prostrating: To which end also, balsamical and tinging things do help. I perceived also, that in the stomack is bred a soure salt, partly volatile, and partly fixed. But that both are afterwards changed by their ferments of the bowels, which being enslaved by snatch∣ed ferments, do often and successively measure their Original: To wit, of a mummial ferment, is made the salt of the venal blood, which is to rectifie or govern our family-administration: but if in the kidney it be made diuretical, it is now made an Urinary salt. I perceived therefore, that those things are onely and truly provokers sf urine, which have a faculty of increasing the urinary salt, and which do make it an easie client unto themselves. 
 In the next place I perceived, that not onely in the dispositive ferments of the organs, but besides, by reason of Magnum Oportet, or the necessary remainder of the middle life, in Simples themselves, that there are their properties of propagating and changing salts. For some things have more gross salts, and those unfit for receiving the ferment of the stomack, and therefore they remain unconquered. Others, in the next place there are, which by a hostile property, are contrary to the vital powers, and so they enter not but for troublesome ends, into the Inns of Life. I perceived, that the volatile salt of the spirit of Vitriol, did from a ready obedience in the first action of dissolution, pass into a meer Alume. For if the body of Mercury shall coagulate into a white powder, although it re∣serve nothing of the matter or vertues of Mercury (for that declareth the former weight of Mercury) yet it passeth into a meer Alume. But if the sharpness of Vitriol shall finde in the stomack a muscilage meeting with it, it melts the same; neither yet therefore doth it become Aluminous: So that I perceived one and the same salt to be diversly transchan∣ged by the thing connexed with it. I perceived therefore, that there were some salts which would cleanse away the filths in the stomack, before they were subdued by its fer∣ment: but others which did slowly open their saltnesses, and that not but after another digestion; and seeing they did now manifest that thing, that they were diuretical, and diaphoretical or sudoriferous salts; so also, that then they would successfully free the veins of their obstructers. 
 I moreover perceived, that there are salts which do not finde their disposition but at the time of dunging; and they are sharp and colical, or those which are opposite to these, and are connexed in oily essences. But the chiefest and most successfull of salts, is that which reacheth unto the utmost bound and subtility in Nature, which passeth thorow all things, and in acting doth alone remain immutable, and the which doth at pleasure through a ready obedience, resolve other things, and melts and makes volatile all rebel∣lious matter, even as hot water doth snow. 
 I by and by perceived, specifical savours, (to wit, of Mace, Saffron, &amp;c.) to be as properties, or as the shop of the ultimate forms, uttered by salts excelling in strength. Not indeed that these savours were the proper vertue of that form, but rather the fer∣mental putrifaction of that seed, proceeding unto that ultimate form. For truly, a savour, as such, is a solitary quality, unprofitable for healing, a witness of the putrify∣ing of its ferment by continuance, a co-operator of curing, as it disposeth the Archeus, as a messenger, that it may descend into the knowledge of a hidden property: For unless, things shall smile on the Archeus by savour and odour, they are not admitted within. Yea, purging Medicines being in their first look without savour (as are Turbith, Hermodactiles, Jallop, Mercury, Stibium, &amp;c.) as being masked with much Sugar; yet if they are taken again, they cause horrour and abomination. There is therefore one taste of the tongue, and another in the stomack, as it were the utmost part of the Archeus. Therefore stomatical savours which are acceptable, do denote, that there is in the thing, a bountiful life a-kin to ours: Wherefore a Cat is more delighted with the smell of putrified and stinking fish, than of Cinnamon. So indeed, we do oft-times well perceive, that poysons are occult or hidden, by reason of their specifical savour and odour, horrid to our Midriffs. 
 In like manner, as oft as a pleasing taste appears in a poyson, I have perceived, that un∣der the same Simple, there lurketh a great secret; the which, the poyson being repelled, is born and ordained for difficult effects. I afterwards perceived, that besides specifical sa∣vours, and the gratefulness, benevolence, or horrors of these, there was a certain formal property issuing forth; yet unperceivable by the tongue, and to be comprehended by the Archeus alone. The Schools are amazed, when they come unto occult qualities, as they do therefore call them: For when they cannot ascribe their trifles to heats, colds, and the begged complexions of these, Writers indeed do lay aside their pen, and Physitians do lift up their shoulder and eye-browes, because they accuse that property to be known to them in the effect, but unknown in the cause: and they excuse themselves of this igno∣rance, because the searching into those properties is impossible for mans understanding, the which, they else, had already long since enquired into: As if they should say; We Schools are able to determine of as much as the mind of man can search: We therefore decree, that no powers of things can be understood, or searched into by man, but those which are the first qualities of the Elements, or to arise from these: We confess there∣fore, that the formal faculties are occult, because unpossible to be known. Certainly, the Schools are exceeding clayie or earthy, watery, airy, cloudy and fiery! how ignorant do they shew themselves of their own objects, and how unlike to the exercise or practice which they profess! For they have enslaved their wits to sluggishness, that nothing may be more acceptable unto them, than to have inclined to excuse their excuses in the igno∣rance and impossibility of nature, wherewith every one vails his own in particular. For at first, when the Antients saw any Disease to be cured by a specifical and appropriated Remedy, they were amazed as it were, at the miracle of an unwonted thing: But after∣wards the Schools thought it satisfaction enough, to have banished their blockishnesses into a general ignorance. For neither, although they had distinguished causes from the elementary qualities, unto them known, had they therefore spoken any thing undefiled, and without suffusion of the sight. For whoever hath more searched out the cause of moist∣ness in the water, or of heat in the fire, by a reason from a former cause, than of drawing Iron in the Load-stone? The elementary qualities therefore, are as hidden as any other. Truly in this were the Schools blinded, because they have proceeded against the Doctrine of the Gospel: For primitive Truth willeth, that we know the Tree by its Fruits; but the Schools will, that the Fruit ought to be known by the Tree. I will therefore shew by the Fruits, in what manner we must come unto the knowledge of the Tree. 
 First of all therefore, for the knowing of occult causes, a certain effect is supposed, and likewise a cause thereof; neither is it doubted, what that effect, or what the cause thereof may be; but the knitting of them both, is only sought for: To wit, after what sort, the effect proceeds from the cause; or on the other hand, after what manner, and by what means, such a cause may produce its effect. The knowledge I say, of the Tree and its Fruit, is presupposed: The which, if we compose them for healing (for if the whole world be for man, also the whole physical knowledge of nature, shall therefore be subser∣vient to man) the knowledges of ones self shall be first to be presupposed: To wit, that a true Physitian, doth know the Tree of the whole nature of man, and the fruit thereof; to wit, health. Likewise also the tree of vitiated health, and the very rank or order of health depraved, as the Fruit of that. Which proper knowledges of the thingliness or essence, together with its adjacents, are required. Therefore, that we may know the Tree in its root and properties, that ought to be done by the Fruits: wherefore also, the Fruits are first to be known. But the Fruits as well of entire, as of vitiated health, seeing they are the Scopes whereunto the properties of occult Remedies are referred, have them∣selves in manner of a Tree and Trunk, whereinto the young budding slips, and seeds of things ought to be ingrafted, as it were the Fruits of the same. This indeed the ordi∣nation of Medicine requireth, that Remedies, although they have themselves, in manner of a cause; yet that they become fruits or effects in us, as they do fructifie in our Tree: and so, they are not only the Fruits of their own native Tree, whence in the nature of things they are derived; but rather, they are new Fruits, from an ingrafting of a product, and so are plainly promiscuous, of a branch, or Fruit of the Tree implanted, and of the vital power of the stock, whereinto it is ingrafted. Such fruits indeed, do bewray their own Tree: And so, as in every progress of nature, a duality of Sex is required for the production of every Fruit; it was no wonder that the rank, and applications of occult Qualities, or Remedies, hath remained unknown, if it hath hitherto stood neglected, that a healthy, and diseasie state is bred by the same Parent: and so also they have referred the whole essence of a Disease, into external, occasional, efficient, and warring causes; but not into the true and inward Tree of sicknesses. Let us suppose therefore the Archeus to be provoked, and almost furious, the which being provoked by occasional causes, doth pour forth its own blood, and causeth the Bloody-Flux: or likewise, let us feign the Ar∣cheus, grievously bearing the mark of pain, conceived in some part serving to the last di∣gestion, and being as it were stung with fury, to stir up an Erisipelas. The question is, of finding out a Remedy, by the occult or hidden property. The Schools therefore have con∣sidered to apply cooling things to the Erisipelas, as to the fruit, and they would not ap∣ply a Remedy to the vitiated tree. But the Secretaries of natural things, have attended to the aforesaid furies, to be restrained by fear; so that the fear is not to be incurred on the man, but on the Archeus. Therefore they have killed the most fearful creature; to wit, a Hare: Not indeed with a weapon, that he might dye by an unexpected death; but by hunting, that he might perish by the biting of Dogs: whereby a doubled force of fear may be imprinted on his whole Body. Therefore they have tinged a bloody Towel in the blood of the Hare, and kept it being dryed: And that they have administred by pieces in Wine, and the Dysentery was cured. And likewise, they have put it dry on the Erisipe∣las, and it was cured. Yea, the Germane Souldiers, do give an Hare dryed in the smoak, in drink, and the Bloody-Flux or Dysentery is cured with an undeceiveable event. From whence they have learned, that cuttings of veins and purgings are vain, whether thou re∣spectest feigned humours, or in the next place, a diminishing of heat and strength, toge∣ther with the blood: likewise, that coolings are ridiculous; because they are those things which endeavour to heal from the effect, do never touch at the roots, and for that cause, do for the most part provoke nature into greater furies. The Erisipelas therefore, and Bloody-Flux, have obtained some common point wherein they might agree: And that is a certain Ideal poyson bred by the Archeus: For truly in the Tree of man, every exorbi∣tant passion of the Archeus, doth tinge its own Idea or likeness on the blood, yea and on the excrements, no less than in the Tree of a Dog, through the exorbitancy of madness, Fruits are bred in his spittle, which do afterwards produce in us, the Fruit of the trans∣planted madness. Therefore the knowledge of hidden Remedies, is badly sought into from the Fruit. For I have known, that whatsoever things are made in the world, are made from the necessity of the Seeds of every Archeus, and so by means of an incorpo∣real and invisible Being. But I have known, that seminal Beings do arise from an imagi∣native sorce of soulified things, or the Archeus of the same, by a co-like perturbation: And so, that by a certain invisible Principle, this visible world is continued: But in things subjected, or not soulified, I have observed, that they after a co-like manner, have themselves by the same certain Analogical proportion: But that every disjoynting or ir∣regularity of the Archeus, doth by its Idea ' s, frame the Seeds to be poysons unto its own Body, and so a sound Tree rusheth into a vitiated one. I have considered, that the poy∣sons of some things which are bred with us, do bear Seeds, not those which by the exor∣bitancy of their of own Archeus; but in respect of our Archeus, might produce vitiated Idea ' s, and to themselves natural, to us mortal Idea ' s. Whence indeed, if Fruits or Bran∣ches be implanted into the Tree of our entire health; it happens, that from both, as it were from a promiscuous Sex, vitiated or poysonous Fruits do arise in us. But the poysons are on both sides, among the number of occult properties. Let therefore, suitable helps or Remedies, have Idea ' s which are chiefly the extinguishers of the poysoned Idea ' s: or those which by an eminent goodness, may transchange as well the Archeus, the producer of the poyson, as the poyson it self produced: whence I have very clearly learned, that almost every poyson, and its Antidote, and so also the whole race of occult or formal pro∣perties, do seminally descend from the activity of a vital light. For so the poysons of soulified creatures do arise from disturbances: the which, by how much the sharper they shall be, by so much also, the more cruel poysons they bring forth. For so the poysons of Serpents, are bred from anger, envy, sury, pride, and those being variously mixed with fear. But the corrosive and putrifactive poysons of Minerals, are bred of Salts, Sulphurs, and Mercuries, whereby their fury is propagated by a Seed Analogical or agreeable in pro∣portion. But how evident is that thing in the company of Vegetables? where those se∣minal perturbations, and therefore also co-natural ones, are by Seeds, transplanted with a continued course. For we may well know any kind of poysons which are reduced by the ranks of perturbations, by distinguishing of them. Consequently also the knowledge of specifical properties is drawn [per quia] or from the Effect of the Cause, if they are re∣duced unto the certain orders of perturbations or disturbances, and affections: Even as more largely elsewhere concerning the Plague: So indeed, many things are searched in∣to, and found out; we thereby, by the Effects come to the Causes, and being led by the hand from one knowledge to another, the poysons of an Erisipelas and Dysentery, being in their Tearms, from the wroth of the Archeus, their cure is in a Hare, wherein is fear, meekesse, flight, and an harmless life. Neither is the argument of contrariety of value: For, first of all, I have admitted of contrarieties in living Creatures; and I say, that the properties of those being as it were sealed in the Idea ' s of living Creatures, are in some sort contrary in the priority of the efficient tree; as the Seals of Passions do end in to this Idea. And so the fruits of this tree, do act no more by way of contrary Passions; but from the force of a received and inbred seminal Character, wherein every thing acteth accord∣ing to the Talent received, even as it is in it self; but not by reason of a repugnant du∣ality, or disagreeing contrariety. Therefore the blood, wherein is the seminal product, and the effecter of the fearful meekness, doth mortifie the poyson which is bred from a poysonous wrothfulness. For I have noted in things, loves, hatreds, terrors, and the semi∣nal products, seals, Idea ' s, and characters of these: Whence I have found out the imme∣diate Causes of many hidden Remedies: But I have interpreted them to be found out and suggested by me, with the truth of possible and appearing consequences. 
 These things I have spoken concerning occult or hidden properties, out of the Dream, that we may cease to be occult Philosophers, and may follow the manifest Doctrine of the more tractable ones. Now I will prosecute my Dream. 
 I perceived, I say, that Smallage, Asparagus, and whatsoever things are taken to open Obstructions, have indeed a Salt of a specifical savour; the which, being with their middle life made the Cream of the Stomack, remaineth surviving, although enfeebled; yet that they do obtain weak Remedies for the opening of Obstructions. For truly, those things which do keep the Savour of their own concrete Body, under the ferment of the Stomack, as Onion, Garlick, Mace, Turpentine, Asparagus, &amp;c. Those I perceived even to slide along with the Superfluities, because they wax soure with their specifical Savour; and then do take (under the Gawl) the nature of a Salt, and at length under the dungy fer∣ment of the Reines, do put on a Urine-provoking or diuretical faculty. But whose spe∣cifical Savours, do putrifie by continuance, and perish with the sourness of the Cream: those things, I perceived to be indifferent meats; but whose Savours do not plainly yeild themselves into the sourness of the Cream, and do after some sort remain in their medio∣crity (for the Cream, if it should alike on every side receive a ferment, and wax soure, it should easily be sharper than Vinegar) those things indeed-do through the force of the Gawl, easily perish in the Meseraick Veines; that together with a third, or mumial fer∣ment, they may be changed into Venal Blood. Therefore I perceived those to reach forth feeble aides, for dissolving or opening of Obstructions. 
 At length, I perceived, that all simple Salts, (of the Sea, Sal gemmae, Fountaines, Salt Peter, &amp;c.) as such, do depart through the Urine and Intestines, and in the mean time resolve the filths or dregs in those passages, and render the expulsive faculty mindful of its duty. But I perceive that Salts which carry a Mineral fruit in them, are Strangers to our Nature, and therefore are scarce to be inwardly admitted. But Salts which are a part of the composed Body, as Lixivium ' s, and Alkalies; I perceived to be de∣prived of Seminal Virtues, and to have onely an abstersive or cleansing, Soapie or resol∣ving property, unless they are volatile; wherein I perceived the radical Beginnings, and seminal Balsams of the concrete Body to be. I perceived, I say, that these are easily transchanged into a new fruit, because they do associate themselves with, and act in all things, according to their inbred endowments. 
 In the next place, I have perceived the corrosive spirits of Minerals, to differ far from themselves, being crude; to resolve the Excrements adhering to the sides of the first Ves∣sels: Yet not to be altogether destitute of Dammages, by reason of an occult infection of Arsenick admixed with them, from their original. Therefore I perceived that occult properties, as they call them, being seminally traduced into the Archeus by the genera∣ter or efficient, do unfold the presence of their Object, and a sympathetical knowledge, as they are immediately entertained in the bosom of the Formes; Some, to wit, by a mo∣tive local Blas, as the Load-stone, Amber, Gummes, Lacca, the herb Turne-sole, Diamond, (for this also even as Carabe or Amber, doth attract chaffes) &amp;c. do bewray themselves but other things are terminated into an alteration, as poysons; likewise laxatives, medi∣cines tied about the Head or Body, Antidotes, &amp;c. 
 Laxatives, I have peculiarly perceived, to operate onely by reason of a poyson lurking within them, which being once admitted inwardly nigh the entrance, whatsoever they touch, they do ferment, do afterwards resolve the things fermented, and for that very cause do putrifie the things resolved. I perceived therefore, that Laxatives do putrifie the vital juyces, but seldom the excrements, the occasional causes of Diseases. For seeing they are Poysons in respect of us, and not of excrements; hence they rise up rather against us, than against Diseases; And most speedily, indeed, do putrifie the more crude juyce, or the not yet vital blood of the Veines, or the yesterdays Cream. But because they scarce suppress the excrements, neither do these in like manner obey them, seeing every action or Blas in us, doth proceed from the Spirit which maketh the assault, whereof excrements are deprived; hence no Physitian, dareth by taking Laxatives, to promise a cure. But true Solutives, do neither cause Putrifaction, nor selectively draw forth feigned Humours, neither therefore do they resolve our vitial parts or things; and the which Solutives, I have perceived to bewray themselves by a three fold Sign. 
 First, That they draw nothing from a healthy Body, neither do they move after or weaken that Body. 
 Secondly, That they do not fetch any thing forth, but what is offensive, and therefore they do not aggra∣vate, but ease of the burden; and presently the sick doth thereby feel himself well. 
 Lastly, In the Third place, That they do not draw out the Disease by Sweat, Vomit, or Stool; but do unsensibly resolve, in whatsoever part the Disease is entertained; Nature being busied about the rest. 
 I have perceived also, That such Laxatives, do not electively bring forth Humours, which are in themselves feigned; but (seeing we are nourished by none but one onely juyce, the blood; therefore also we intend the driving forth, not of the blood but of Dis∣easie excrements) do resolve whatsoever forreign thing is implanted within the Inne of Life, but not vital things, unless they are taken in an undiscreet dose, or frequency. Otherwise they onely have respect to excrements; Nature affording her aid within, to this end. And chiefly, seeing they are from God, as well by Creation, as the endowment of knowledge; they have received the ends of their Ordination, onely for a good pur∣pose. 
 Therefore I perceived that Paracelsus had erred, who teacheth; That Laxatives do not otherwise operate, but as the Laxative Medicine by calcination, and a supervening moisture, should be resolved together with the Humours, like Calx vive. 
 For first of all, he that proclaimed War against the Humorists, now again acknowledg∣eth Humours. Then also, his assertion is wholly ridicvlous; Yet the lesse, if either Laxa∣tives should be taken being first calcined, or might have been calcined within; or the eje∣ctions should ascend onely unto a treble of the things taken. For what of calcination have the leaves of Sena in them? Doth not Asarum, by boyling, cease from making Laxa∣tive? And thus far is ignorant of a Calx.
Nature hath also produced in the Sub-terranean, or mineral Monarchy, a certain Mineral, the which for its singularity, is called by Paracelsus, the first or masculine Mettallus. The which from its Metallick disposition, is of necessity cloathed with Metallick Mercurie and Sulphur; to wit, of a liquid Mercurie not adhering to the fingers, and of a Sulphur burnable with a skie-coloured flame: But this Sulphur is distilled with its corrosive, and so often cohobated or imbibed by pouring on it its own liquor, until it pass thorow the Alembick in the forme of a red Oyl; which Oyle is then at length most exactly cleansed from every whit of its corrosive, not indeed prepared by a separation of its salt, and Mercurie; but anatically or unhurtfully reduced wholly into the form of an Oyl: For that thing or matter, as it is as yet oylie, is not to be altered by the whole power of the sensitive Soul, or to be applyed to the Life: Wherefore it ought to be transchanged into a Mercurial juice, which Paracelsus teacheth, and calleth the Wine of Life; because it doth not cure Diseases after the manner of other Arcanum ' s, by a cleansing away and banish∣ment of every hurtful matter; besides it renewes the strength being lost in the Body in general, and restoreth the inequalities of the strength: And therefore neither is it in vain called by Paracelsus, the Essence of the Members; indeed the whole Spire and top of hope for long Life. But how much Light I have brought unto the Writings of Paracel∣sus, he alone hath known who understands Paracelsus with me: But seeing that Sulphur is not translated, that it may be turned into arterial Blood, yea and restore and renew the implanted Spirit of the Members, although it be in it self the top of the Wonders of Na∣ture; yet then it doth only as it were pass thorow the two former digestions, and doth not satisfie its calling, for which it shineth with so famous Endowments: And so even from hence it is easie to be seen, that long Life is not but for choise or chosen Men, nor indeed for all of them, not so much because the youth of Princes doth shorten the thred of their Life in fleshly lust, and pleasures, and so that a remedy for long Life is received, and applyed to the Life after the manner of the receiver: But especially, because Adeptists are wanting, to whom alone it is given to unmask these kind of Secrets from their husks. I suppose indeed that this is a masculine Mettal, because it doth easily suffer its Sulphur to be sequestred from it; and this separated Sulphur is dissolved in the Oyl of Cinnamon or Mutmeg, or in the Oyl, which drops out of Turpentine, till that by boyling it is coagu∣lated into the best Rosin: But at least-wise, although the Sulphur thus dissolved, hath no∣table virtues; yet because it draws a stinking Odour, and reserveth a resistence of the dissolved Sulphur; neither can it pass thorow unto the inmost parts, but can only act as it were in passing thorow, and by its touching stir up by the way a superficial remembrance of its gift: Therefore it more differs from the wine of Life, than a Carbuncle doth from a flint: Yet if that melted Sulphur be so united in the Oyl of the Spice, that (how∣ever stinking) it shall pass through an Alembick, and afterwards be after a due manner circulated with its Alcaly or fixed Salt, and at length doth pass into a volatile Elixir of Salt, it doth after some sort imitate the faculties and virtues of the wine of Life, and Essence of the Members: For truly, that Elixir being rectified into the best Spirit of Wine, doth loose all its stink, and resume something of its natural or proper endowment; that it at leastwise takes away difficult and Chronical Diseases; yet it doth not ascend unto the highest perfect act of the Bowels, that it may be the renewed Essence of the Members. 
 CHAP. LXXVIII. In Words, Herbs, and Stones there is great Virtue. THere is a place in the holy Scriptures which taketh Stones for mineral Bodies: Words indeed so far as commanding from a supernatural Power, they do command Crea∣tures; the which because they are subject, they do also obey: And then the virtue of Herbs is that of Medicines, but it doth not comprehend Herbie Meats. There is there∣fore, a medicinal faculty of Plants, Simple indeed; but most excelling; so that for the most part it ascends into a degree of Poysonsomness, Because it exceeds the ampleness of our Nature, and therefore also is troublesome or offensive unto us: For Pot-herbs, Pulses, and corny Plants, ought to be wholly subdued and dissolved in the Stomach, that is, in the seat of the Soul, into which while they light with unbroken virtues, they do also by their new Hospitality, oppress the same with their Laws: For so the seat it self doth as yet labour about rude Simples, and in operating doth undergo the Crudities, Damages, and Troubles of entertained Vegetables: For in this respect, whatsoever is not rightly subdued in the Stomach, after its aforesaid troubles, is commanded out by the Bowels as an unprofitable and hurtful excrement: Wherefore the more cruel Plants while they do not promise nourishment, nor are directly drawn into meats or foods; if they shall not notably hurt, at least-wise they are totally sequestred, and are driven forth with labour, and anguishes; the which hath hitherto plainly appeared in a Quartane Ague, which hath notably deluded the promised help of Physitians, and hope of Medicines: For al∣though the occasional matter of a Quartane, doth stick only about the Spleen, and in the neighbouring places of the Stomack: Yet the Medicines of Vegetables have not yet come unto the threshold of a Quartane: In the mean time, the more stronger Vegetables, seeing they have obtained degrees beyond the strength of our Nature, they are for the most part for that cause, Despised, or Gelded; and so by corrective means are plainly alienated, and do degenerate, and so pass over into a forreign Family: Many also have in vain attempted, to seperate the Poysonous Power from the appropriated ones, lurking under them. However it is at this day accustomed to be, those Medicines are the more strong, horrid, troublesome, neither are they admitted into our more inward parts; because they rise up against, and weaken or defile our vital Faculties, and do every way bring with them Anguishes as Companions: For although they depart, not into nourishments in us, nor are the more inwardly admitted than to enter the threshold it self; yet by their only touching, and naked passage, yea and as it were by a deaf defilement of aspect, they al∣ter the Archeus, and subject and snatch away this Archeus into their own client-ship: This is the cause why the more strong remedies of Vegetables are for the most part sus∣pected of cruelty, and poysonsomness: Which things are as yet more clearly beheld in mineral secrets, and the more profound Medicines: Because they are those which per∣form their Offices, and attain the scopes of their Endowments, by no co-mixture of them, but as it were by aspect alone. For so Mothers do dip a piece of wollen cloath in a co∣mixture of Argent-vive or Quick-silver, and patch it up between the girdle or circle of Garments, knowing that although Quick-silver doth not evaporate any thing out of it self (for it is a thing so homogeneal, that it is not to be divided into a heterogeneal part, and that which is unlike to it self) yet that it doth hinder the presence, and generation of Lice throughout the whole Body. I have also described, after what manner common Argent∣vive may be reduced into a most white or Snowie lump, if the spirit of Vitriol be distilled from it: The which Spirit indeed, is coagulated upon Mercury, and is transchanged into an Alume, but separable, by washing or cleansing, from the Argent-vive: To wit, which Argent-vive becomes a yellow Powder, which easily returns into its antient Quick-silver, and of equal weight with it self: So indeed, the whole spirit of Vitriol being in it self most sharp, is by a bare touching of the Mercury, and without any radical co-mixture of them both, converted into an aluminous Salt; and that shall be done a thousand times, yet it looseth nothing of the weight, and nature of Argent-vive: For Argent-vive, doth with∣out any participation of it self, or from it self; yea and without any radical co-mixture from it self, change whatsoever of a Sulphurous Spirit it shall touch; which radical or beaming co-mixture of Argent-vive, is as yet more to be admired: To wit, if Argent-vive be steeped in a great quantity of common Water; for this Water, although it doth not sup up any the least quantity of the Quick-silver into it self, or is not able to convert it unto its own Nature, Yet it borrows a property, not likewise a substance, from the Quick-silver, so as that such Water being drunk, doth kill all Wormes and Ascarides, also those which exist where that Drink never comes; Because it is that which is soon wholly snatched into urin; and that Water becomes stronger against Worms, if it shall once boyle with the Quick-silver or Argent-vive: So one only ounce of Quick-silver shall be able a thousand times to infect a measure of Water, and yet remain in its antient weight, and property. For so the Schools also do do against their wills, perfectly learn, that some Agents do freely, alwayes, and with unwearied forces, act without a passion, or re-action of their Patients, and the same weight of themselves alwayes remaining: For Argent-vive doth act on the Water, and imprints its own Character in it; yet it doth not likewise re-suffer any thing from the Water. It is manifest therefore, that a certain Medi∣cinal virtue is transferred, and doth change its natural subject, and departeth into a for∣reign object, as it were only by its Beam or Aspect: Yet so, that although the forreign object doth attain a forreign faculty or virtue for it self, yet the acting and in-spiring principle, doth not loose or slacken any thing of its former strength, or weight: Indeed that is done without any Suffering, Diminishing, Changing, Weakening, or Interchang∣able course of the Argent-vive: Surely the example produced in this place, serves for the celebration of an argument, concerning almost an infinite virtue of Remedies for the future: which thing, after that it had been often and diversly drawn under experience in Minerals, it at length perfectly taught me, that perhaps no Mortals heretofore, had as yet clearly and inwardly beheld, in what manner the more abstruse or secret Remedies might operate, and that indeed without their dissolution, or destruction, without their penetration, inward admission, co-mixture, and changing, they do also freely act a∣loof of on the stupified, or enraged Archeus, as if it were only by their aspect, in beaming or darting forth of their virtues produced in a mean; their former weight and properties being as yet retained, and unchanged: And so those Arcanums do testifie, that they are akin to the infinite Goodness, while as they do by degrees disperse their almost, and as it were infinite virtues. Wherefore Physitians shall not remain unpunished, while as the poor shall at some time mournfully complain, at the last Judgement, that they were neglected, who might easily and by the way have been cured without any charges. There∣fore Arcanums can never depart into nourishment, because they keep their own ends, as those things which were not ordained for Meats, but for Medicines, and which do re∣main Medicines, although taken within the Body: For they begin in the Stomack (the which I have profesly elsewhere demonstrated to be the seat of the Soul) to unfold or ex∣pose the direct Beam of their own Faculties, and their endowed Virtue, and to which end they were ordained of God: Whence at length, the bedewed beaming virtue being drawn in by the Archeus, is dispersed into the whole Body, and health thereupon suc∣ceeding is greedily received. So indeed these more universal Remedies being admi∣nistred, cures do happen, such as I have delivered to happen in the Fountain of Nature, and to be due to the same, and such as Paracelsus hath promised, and afterwards Butler put in execution, I being a beholder, to wit, with the least application of a co-ferment∣ing. Surely, after that this speculation attracted me under it self by a more piercing or inward contemplation, I as it were knew most clearly and visually, that in occasional Causes, and in excrementitious Products, filths indeed did stick, they being the awaken∣ers of peculiar Diseases: Yet I consider the whole Disease it self, and its Remedies to be in the Archeus, to wit, altered, or appeased: And so that with the least touching at, sha∣king, darting, yea only by radiation or beaming, or illumination (so that they shall in the seat of the Soul touch at the sensitive Life) Cures are perfected and compleated, no regard being had unto occasional Causes: And that thing I do more powerfully behold in the Sulphurous Remedies of Minerals, to wit, in the Sulphur of Venus or Copper, of Stibium, and especially in the Sulphur of Glaura Augurellus; which Nymph doth hitherto want any other proper name. For these sort of Sulphurs, because they are at a farther distance from mans Nature than the whole band of Vegetables, and do in the mean time obtain famous natural Endowments from the Giver: So also they do most fully and stubbornly resist, that they may not decline by the digestive Faculty, into the Common-wealth of nourishments, and therefore they keep their natural Powers free and unbroken; to wit, the Crasis or constitutive temperature of Minerals remaineth entire, and is the more fit to disperse its own Beam into the Duumvirate the seat of the Soul. For so Mercurius Diaphoreticus, doth attain the ultimate scope of its perfect act, by the redness of an as∣cending Sulphur, whereunto the Sulphur of the Mercury is joined by an undissolvable Union: For in this respect, the Sulphurs of Minerals do under the Vulcan, obtain the ut∣most compleating of the intent of Physitians. I therefore exhort Young Beginners, that they perfectly learn to spoile Sulphurs, of their forreign and poysonous Faculty: To wit, under the custody whereof a vital fire is hidden, most pleasingly bringing the Archeus into the desired aims. Indeed there are some Sulphurs, unto whom, they being corrected and perfected, the whole band of Diseases doth hearken, because they are those, whose Plu∣rality is contracted into the unity of the Archeus, as it were into a fighting, or clutched Fist: By this means we have seen Madnesses, Apoplexies, Falling-sicknesses, Palseys, giddi∣nesses of the Head, Asthma ' s, Dropsies, Atrophia ' s, and cruel Defects, to be annihilated in the very seat of the Soul, and combined Duumvirate; indeed to the amazement of Nature her self. In Stones therefore, a great virtue is declared to be by the holy Scrip∣tures, which is hitherto hidden as well in the University, as in the Chymical Schools, until that Kings and Common-wealths shall look into the reformation of Schools: it re∣penteth them of their labour, who hope craftily to get gain by an abuse: They know not, nor desire not, nor will not labour, who deride those that are studious of Virtues; for if ever heretofore, now at least-wise, the whole World being placed in malignity, hath deterred my Pen least I should scatter Pearls before Swine. I will shew to our Sons, as the Lyon by his Paw: Extract thou the Sulphur of Antimony, which scarce differs from the common sight, but that it inclines a little unto greenness: Make this Cinnabar as yet six times, thou shalt sublime it by it self, that the sublimation may serve for the re∣verbery of Life: Take half an ounce of this Cinnabar, being bruised or beaten, hang it up for twenty four hours in a hogs head of Wine, whereof one only spoonful being taken, for some dayes, thou shalt admire at the effect; and the same Cinnabar is sufficient for many hundred hogs heads, being again equivalent in virtue, if it be repeatedly re-sub∣limed. 
 I have Ingeniously spoken some things concerning the great virtue of Words, the which I more admire, than apply. The use of Herbs indeed is very well known, yet their valour or virtue is not sufficiently known, as neither suitably circumcised: And that not only by reason of an ignorance of their Powers, but especially by reason of an un-harmonius suiting of Diseasie Causes, the defects of the knowledge of Causes unto their effect, and the ridiculous Lessons of Complexions and Degrees, and fabulous Di∣mensions, which others before me have sufficiently hissed out: For I do not here call to mind the thousand confusions of Simples, and wastings or ruines, and the every way ex∣tinguishments of their Faculties: But especially, I bewail the defect of the knowledge of the applying of Causes unto their Effects, or of suiting the thing applicable, and of the thing to be applyed unto it. For before all things we must know, that as the Nativities, and Promotions of some things are slow: So proportionally also, they have the great∣ness of Virtues to be expected, and the Varieties of esteems: For even as it is in the Proverb; That which is soon made, doth also soon perish: So neither is a thing able to be protracted into a long hope of Maturity, which hath not intimate occasions of its own constancy: For truly it should be in vain expected by a delay of eight hundred years, that some one Mettal should be rightly changed into humane uses, if any Vegetable through the course of some Months, be to be equalized unto it. But indeed under the account of Herbs, I also understand Trees and Fruits, and I could willingly add living Creatures, if happily I did not read by the text of the Law, that many or most living Creatures, and the parts of these were resigned and abominated among impure Bodies: For the whole stock of Insects being directed for Medicines, and the Comodities of great Powers, rather than for the services of Men, was banished out of uses, and every resigned Remedy begg∣ed from thence: And therefore there was only a commendation made of Words, Herbs, and Stones: For it is certain that Herbs may be digested and subdued by our Stomack, unless they have a Malignity their companion. Small indeed is the number of Pot-herbs and Corns in the rank of Herbs; which scanitness doth certainly accuse them of a certain maglignity, which being rightly sequestred, they then first, and not before, shall bewray their Powers as the scopes of their sending, which the poysonous Keepers did cover un∣der them. Truly Vegetables do act on us, only so long as the Stomack doth operate a∣bout them: Neither do they proceed further, but that they do first lay aside almost all strength of a Remedy; for else it should go ill with us, if the Stomack as not being able to tame the received Vegetable, cannot subdue it under the rules of its Archeus: For otherwise, if a Vegetable should proceed with its faculties entire, it should also be made the consort of excrements, or else should disturb the family-administration of sanguifica∣tion or making of Blood: For otherwise how could that which had resisted the action of the Stomack, already accustomed unto crude Simples, be transchanged and subdued in the second digestion which is unaccustomed to crude Meats. The effects of such Re∣medies should likewise be of greater difficulty, and of a more labourious work, than the Fruit from thence to be expected. In the next place, that being granted, an undistinction, confusion, and perpetual turbulency of our family-administration were to be granted, if any thing being not first rightly subdued in the Stomack, and the Excrement being not first separated thereby, should inwardly proceed unto the vital parts: For truly every thing should from thence without repulse, indifferently proceed inwards either of its own accord, or should gratiously be admitted without choice: Therefore a Vegetable ought of necessity to suffer the digestions, and the formal transmutations of these, and the diges∣tive faculties themselves do also in operating, ordinarily suffer by the forreign (that is not the food-like) faculties of Vegetal things. A thing surely for the most part dangerous, of a difficult experiment and judgment. Then again, besides all things being weighed at the Ballance, all the virtue of Vegetables is tyed up and limited unto its degree, to wit, after that it hath bowed it self as being prostrated, under the digestion: Neither doth it exceed those limits, and in the mean time hath difficulties, to wit, the commands of Poysonous and Vitious Tyrannies: The which surely, whether they were added for a preservation or cover of their faculties, or indeed for their defence, denyal, and impedi∣ment or hinderance; at least it is sufficient that most of them have their own annexed cruelty, infamie, immaturities, or crudities, scabbedness, rottenness, exhaustings of strength, besides moreover, manifold Dregs and Impurities; because, seeing they are deprived of emunctories dedicated to the evacuation of an excrement, their whole nou∣rishment must needs be full of excrement; and it is a most exceeding cruel thing, that no Remedy hath been devised in the Schools against these defects, besides a simple Decocti∣on. 
 Lastly, without the reckoning up of these things, and the injuries of Plants being seperated (whose burdens nevertheless, our Nature cannot bear without great dammage) besides their unwonted frowardness, so great is their weakness, that scarce any thing worthy of praise is to be hoped for from the bosome of Vegetables: Seeing they are not only constrained to separate or lay aside their cruelty in their entrance, if they are to be admitted more fully within; but also, to be altogether formally stripped of all their bounty, before they can become Citizens of our Common-wealth: For the single scope of our Nature intends only a sanguification of things cast into the Body, for nourish∣ment sake: The which seeing they ought not to proceed from every thing promiscuously, but only from things truly transchanged into seminal Beings, and from things agreeable to our Species; Surely whatsoever of the Vegetable race is handed forth for the more in∣ward families of Digestions, is vain, so as that it should be thought to retain the antient Power of its Parents: Which thing in the first place, a Quartane Ague, and all Diseases occasionally procured by Excrements, which have hitherto disgraced the Schools, do sufficiently confirm; because they are those, who have not meditated beyond Lettices, and boyled Herbs. There are indeed Vegetables plainly to be seen, answering unto the Diseases of their first Ages: But for chronical Diseases, which are for the most part in∣creased by the infamous cruelty of Vegetals, and having obtained their privy chambers of the Body and Spirit, far from the Mouth, as that their dissolutions by Vegetable are difficult, they promise full Hospitals, wherein the continual mournings or waylings of the unfortunate Sick do dolefully sound. Wherefore from hence also, every one doth almost dayly behold in his own House, a stubborn and uncessant Disease amongst those of his Family, and Physitians are made the Comedy of stages, because they have scarce done any thing worthy of thanks: For some of them confess their own and their Authors weak∣nesses, and many do unwillingly flee unto Chymical unknown Remedies, most of them abounding with their adultery and ravishment; they fly back to Books, not likewise to Furnaces, for their unexperiences do promise most ample Fruits, and they boast of all il∣legitimate and ridiculous Remedies: The which, while University Men do not under∣stand, and on the other side, they do behold their withered Galen so destitute, they as full of doubt, flee over unto Cauteries, sharpish Fountains and Baths: Alas for grief, what an unhappiness to the Sick, and a vain refuge to themselves, hath so great a stumb∣ling of darkness in the Schools, produced! I will therefore shew, that the text, and that great boasted of virtue, doth by the name of Stones, understand all Minerals wholly, and mettals the Marrow of these, before the rest: Because they are those things, which do scarce shew themselves in any other Image, than that of small Stones, or great Stones: For indeed, this is the most rich, and constant off-spring, and chief treasure of Nature: So that therein the conjunctions of the Stars are laid up or hidden: and moreover in speaking properly, and out of the profound Idiotisme of the Gentiles, the Stars do ex∣cel or are chief over Meteours, only causally; but Mettals in their Excellencies or Re∣medies, do far exceed the Stars. For truly, I have taught according to the text of the holy Scriptures, That the Stars are not unto us for Causes, but only for Signs, Seasons, Dayes, and Years. Neither is it lawful for Man, to extend the Offices of the Stars any further: Wherefore I have never in my desire, married the number of the Stars unto the wan∣dring Stars or Planets; as neither have I enclosed both their Offices and Dignities in a like equality, or resemblance: For as they are at a far distance from each other, so also they have unlike Offices, and ends of Offices divided from each other. But this one thing I willingly admit of; to wit, that Mettals do exceed Plants and Minerals in healing, by long stades or distances: And therefore that Mettals are certain clear or shining glasses, not indeed by reason of their brightness, but rather because that as oft as their virtues are opened and set at liberty, they do act by an endowed light, and a vital co-touching: Met∣tals therefore do operate after the manner attributed to the Stars, to wit, by an Aspect, and the touching of an alterative Blas; which things will by handicraft-operation more clearly appear: For Mettals themselves are Glasses, the most excellent off-spring I say, of the inferiour Globe, to wit, upon which the whole central virtue hath for some Ages before, prodigally poured forth its treasure, that it might most rightly espouse this li∣quor of the Earth, this duggy nourishment, and this off-spring of divine providence unto the ends which the weakness of Nature did require. Therefore the Glasses of Gold, Silver, Mercury, Lead, Copper, Iron, and Tin, and the fire-stones of these, are not yet shut up or closed, &amp;c. But I call those shining Glasses, which have such a force of pier∣cing and enlightning the Archeus from his errours, furies, and defects, that they restore him into a brightness, through the tincture of an endowed perfection. For although these Minerals are not for food, or of the condition of the Body of Man; Yet they have the internal faculty of a Glass, and a Power most chiefly efficacious, co-touching with or very near to the Archeus of man being entire, and appeased; such as was the Archeus before the mind was conceived, the which mind indeed was afterwards estranged from its right path, after that the sensitive Soul (wherein the mind sits) drew the government of the Body on it self; the which indeed was wholly frail and brutal in it self. But in shining Glasses (for a distinction to wit of Vegetables which do not shine,) a certain figure of our former immortality hath as yet remained resident, and in this respect, those Glasses are not only communicated, but are willingly received by our Archeus: Yea, and which more is, the restauration of the Archeus should the longer continue, if the Glasses themselves were not presently banished: which thing is manifest in the preparation of Copper, Iron, &amp;c. These things concerning the Tree of Life, I do prosecute in the Book of long Life, that there may be a stable Remedy transchangeable into mans Nature, to be taken from ones childhood, especially as long as the growing faculty doth flourish: This Remedy I say, doth exceed the force of a shining Glass for long Life, but not likewise for a healthy Life. Furthermore, whatsoever is further to be spoken concerning Stones, that was either so far as they do partake of a certain Metallick Sulphurous Tincture, or of a Mineral Salt: But as a mineral Being is neither for food nor nourishment, neither could it be Vital or for Life: but before that I shall pass over unto Arcanums (which is called the great vir∣tue of Stones in this place,) surely it is profitable to enter into the very seat of the Body, and inwardly to view how much any Remedy can there operate: To which end, that which I have already said above, comes first in our way: To wit, that the Stomack doth not coct any thing, but as from a single aime it doth from thence at length frame a nou∣rishment for its whole Body, and for that very cause it hath an intention to make there∣of a nourishable Liquor, to wit, venal Blood; and afterwards a spermatick Humour fit for the nourishing of the chief constituting parts; So that it may be turned into a substance fit for the nourishment and increase of the parts: To wit, as long as they are appointed within the bound designed for growth or increasing: From whence it necessarily also fol∣lows, that none but fit and foody matters concocted and digested by the Stomack, are transmitted into the more remote shops of the digestions. Wherefore I have first of all withdrawn every Plant, by whatsoever cruelty being infamous, from the border of the Mesentery; because every thing that is unfit for these borders, is for that very cause driven downwards by the Stomack, and adjoyned unto the excrements. But whatsoever hath now passed over into Chyle, hath presently laid aside every strange quality, where∣by it may act as it were by choice: But if from Magnum Oportet, any kinde of quality of its antient concrete Body shall as yet remain; surely that is drowsie, feeble, sluggish, loose, and vain, and therefore it doth for the most part, deceive Physitians in chronical Diseases, and in Diseases lurking far off, through the crookednesses of the veins; which truth that a Quartane may defend in my behalf, it readily offers it self. Indeed the School of Alchymy, admiring, and trusting in the feeble help of Remedies, hath long since indeed observed a noble treasure of healing to lay hid in Minerals, but it long doubt∣ed in what respect they might most fully derive themselves unto the inward Buttery of the similar parts. 
 First of all, The former sort hoped in vain and to no purpose, to descend unto our con∣stituting parts by their Remedies: And seeing they despaired in the Vegetable Kingdom, they also vainly roasted or wracked the order of Minerals; because they were those things which can never by our will be transchanged into foods; seeing the Artificer cannot at his pleasure induce an esential Form: Yea neither doth Nature by one only leap of Di∣gestion, and by its immediate beck, ever attain that thing: For some being seduced by a deceivable hope of Mettals, and much less also tasting or knowing how much essicacy is seated in shining Glasses, and in the manifest liquors of Mettals: Therefore some have pro∣mised almost a certain immortality from their Labours; and Paracelsus as ridiculous, doth extend them sometimes into an Aniadan year, into the year of the Fire, and afterwards at least into the year of Mathusalem: afterwards others of his followers slid down unto six hundred years. Whereas after that, the later sort promised that they should attain onely unto a renewing of the strength or faculties: Others being content onely with a cropped or defective Cure; To wit, they rested in the cleansing of the pure from the impure. And although a Body was now and then granted to be renewed according to its Nails, Teeth, and Hairs; Yet they have not fitly understood that the Pear Tree is never recalled from its old age, although it might renew its Leaves every Year. 
 In the mean time, a rashness of these things, and ignorance of our Family-Administrati∣on, hath stirred up the vain boastings of the things aforesaid, and every one hath proceeded in the darkness of vain hope, according to his own touching without a seen Knowledge. Therefore while every one hoped most fully or piercingly to introduce his own Remedies, neither yet would they afterwards be admitted within, because they were those things which the more grievous Diseases, and a want of nourishment, and refreshment of the Faculties did exclude; they afterwards thought to mask some Arcanums of a lighter weight, into the seigned shew of a Salt, that at least-wise they might not be separated from the Latex; yea that in this respect they might attain a Liberty of wandering throughout the whole Province of the Veins: And although they have so suited some Remedies, that they were not altogether strange or detestable to the agreement of Nature; however it is, they could not at least-wise so far descend, as to be admitted altogether within: But if through the Error of Separation a very small quantity of them had but pierced inwards; that thing straightway induced a benummedness in the more inward Kitchings of the Bowels, as also a repentance of the Archeus. 
 Likewise they who have made tryal of Treey Remedies, have presently refrained from them; because that they were more hard and difficult than Herby ones, and less fit for penetration: For truly the Flesh and Blood are not fat things, but Treey things are fat, Ro iny, and unbroken by our Powers. 
 First of all, Paracelsus supposed, that seeing fixed Bodies did resist the fire, also that they should delude the unwasted or unwearied Labours of the Digestions by the same endeavour; and therefore he established it by an universal Decree, that no fixed Mine∣ral would be taken in at the mouth; because the Salts which should render that thing po∣table, being wasted through Digestion, that same fixed Body should be toughly affixed un∣to the inward wals and pipes of the Members, wherein those Salts are changed, and should afterwards by an unexpected annexion, continue for tearm of Life. Therefore he would that not onely all Mineral Remedies should not onely be made potable, but also more∣over volatile: Which admonition, although it be not altogether vain (Crocus Martis, and very many prepared Powders of Stones taken into the Body, being excepted) yet those same Minerals do not therefore assume a Foody nature, neither also consequently are they digested, or do they come more fully inwards, unto the intrinsecal seats of Diseas∣es. Neither also hath he sufficiently considered, that volatile Minerals have in them a force or faculty altogether Active, (even as I have elsewhere demonstrated concerning the affect of the Stone) and for the most part, so strange a one, that they cannot be pro∣miscuously admitted within, without a notable Errour; unless we shall say that there is no longer any election or choice in Nature, whereby those things are refused by the Archeus, which do less agree with his Borders. But not every potable thing undistinctly, is admit∣ted within, yea nor any thing which was not Foody and Digested in the Stomack, and transchanged into a humane Chyle: Neither doth any thing pass thorow the Liver, which in the Mesentery Veins (because they are those which are the Stomack of the Liver it self) hath not been through an obedient disposition first subdued. And let there be the same Judgement concerning the more utmost Bowels. But seeing as well Vegetables as Minerals being received into the Body, do presently exercise their tyranny, which thing Solutives themselves through a ready obedience do testifie, and so also that it is hence ma∣nifest, that any kind of Poysons do powerfully the more piercingly enter, to wit, if they do tyrannize on places at a distance. 
 Therefore two Opinions are to be reconciled; To wit, 
 On the one hand, That nothing which is not foody doth climb inwards, before that it be ela∣borated by the Digestions. 
 And on the other hand, That as well Simples as Remedies elaborated by Art, however for∣reign or bruitish they are, do exercise their operation even far from the mouth, and aloof off. 
 Unto which Controversie, the famous Action of Government hath regard, and also the suparlative excelling Force or Authority of the Duumvirate: For neither doth Cardiog∣mus or a Griping of the Heart, and Cardialgia or a pain of the Stomack, in vain (of old) note the Heart, and have denoted the Stomack it self, by an Etymology of the Heart and Life: For in very deed, the sensitive Soul, and the Archeus himself do inhabite in the very Membrane of the Stomack, distinguishing of the Conveniencies or Agreements, Propor∣tions, Likenesses, and Suitings of all things: Whereof, while the sensitive Soul it self doth draw Apprehensions, it communicates the same also, by dispersing them throughout the whole Body, to wit, to every part according to the requirance of necessity: For Solu∣tive things do Purge and cruelly molest, as long as they are detained in the Stomack, and more formerly Intestines: And therefore that they may quickly and speedily finish their task, Broths are given to drink, whereby indeed they may be the more readily washed out of the Stomack. For truly Mineral Secrets (for in Stones there is great virtue) do indeed most powerfully operate; but they do not therefore materially enter into the Bowels at all, that they may be made the co-partaking Citizens of our Life: For neither do things go unto the Third, or more Ultimate shop of the Digestions, unless they first proceed through the First. 
 Wherefore I have first of all diligently considered, that all Remedies do operate ac∣cording to a natural endowment which the Almighty hath conferred on them, whether they shall be Vegetables, or Minerals. But seeing the most powerful Virtues of Reme∣dies are not of a foody Substance, and belonging to venal Blood, and much less of an Ex∣crementous substance (for truly the Intestines are onely a Sack and Sink) neither is there granted a fit medium or middle thing between that which is foody, and excrementi∣tious: Therefore it is required that a Remedy which hath so famous endowments, be not indeed foody (because I have already taught before, that that which is for Food ought to be feeble) yet a Remedy as long as it sticks between, not an excrement and an excrement; That is, as long as it is in its passage unto, or in its being made for an excrement, it is detained in the Stomack: To wit, that seeing there is not granted a final mean between a foody Being, &amp; an excrement, there may at least-wise be a mediative mean in the Essence of a Remedy: To wit, as long as the determination is undecided, whether the Remedy taken into the Body, be to be put to flight together with the excrements: For this is as long as it is detained in the Stomack it self, wherein the Archeus the distinguisher, doth most powerfully shine and command. And moreover some Remedies do in this Inne attain faculties which were not before in their kernel; which thing I have elsewhere shewn by the Latex running down out of the branch of a Birch-tree, being indeed the more powerful when it now wanders between the nourishment of its Tree, and the begin∣nings of corruption presently begun. Therefore now from hence the truth of Remedies hitherto abstruse, doth clearly appear: To wit, that every Remedy doth immediately and principally act only into the Archeus of the Stomack (the which is therefore also cal∣led the Heart) but this Archeus afterwards acts according to a disposition, drawn and ge∣nerated to himself from the endowed gift of the Remedies. 
 It also further followes, that every Remedy exceeding the limits of Food, doth act by its touching in manner of a Glass: For truly it acts onely by touching at the Archeus, without a material co-mixture of it self. Indeed the Archeus himself doth first feel the endowment drawn from the Remedy; but in that act of perceivance he fashions to him∣self an Idea of things to be done by him, by following the Dispositions of that endowment: from whence he consequently stirring up Peace, Rest, or Anger to himself, and assuming the gotten Idea ' s of these, doth presently sealingly disperse the same into the Bowels, hearkening to the Action of Government, performing prosperous or opposite Offices, ac∣cording to the Command of the vital Archeus. 
 Any kind of Remedies therefore are Glasses, and some are shining ones, others onely through their co-touching, Odour, Taste, and Power: But all and every of Remedies do in respect of the Life, remain external; in this respect also, they do wash off and drive away the inbred, or conceived stain or blemish from the Archeus. But they are never able therefore to detain the Life from a continual defluxion, or to suggest new Faculties, and to create or raise up new Powers for Immortality: Because the Virtues of Remedies can∣not together with their Substance, pierce or be transchanged into the vital matter of us, so that it may be admixed by increase with our first constituting parts: For whatsoever they act, all that is busied about the Archeus of the Stomack, and Prince of Life, and Go∣vernour of the Stern: To wit, on which Ruler of the Stern, the Center of Life and Pilot of the Duumvirate, all Diseases also do primarily tyrannize, or by a secondary Passion or affect. For, for this cause, neither doth an antient Gout which is pithily rooted within, break forth out of the bosomes of the implanted vital Spirit wherein it is sealed, but that also it doth before its accesse or fit, molest about the mouth of the Stomack, and thereby violate and disturb the whole disposition of the whole: The which Gout apprcaching, a certain precedent small Fever doth for the most part bewray: Wherefore in this respect also do a Remedy and a Disease co-touch, yea and also pierce each other. 
 For who hath not observed that the Odours of Spices being onely tasted, do straight∣way refresh fainting Persons, not indeed because those Odours being co-mixed with air, are an addittament of the vital air, that they can substitute as it were a new vital Spirit in the place of that which was lost: Because the very restoring of the vital Spirit by a Spice or sweet Smell, should be of a more laboursome attempt than the restoring of it by the Arterial Blood: Neither is the Odour of a Spice pleasing, as it is like unto the vital Spirit, bred by Arterial Blood: But by reason of the natural endowments inbred in a Remedy. 
 In like manner, neither do the Oyles of Cynamon, Cloves, &amp;c. refresh the vital Spi∣rit of the parts by their material joyning; (for neither is the Spirit of Life nourished by Oyle) but those things which are grateful in their Odour and Savour, so many are look∣ing-Glasses, which by a touch of their aspiration or reflexion, do refresh and comfort the Spirit of Life (being burdened) as it were with an endowed gift. For as the sights or be∣holdings of some things do move Nauseousness, Vomiting, loss of Appetite, Anger, In∣dignation, &amp;c. as they are visual Looking-Glasses: So there are dotal or endowed Glas∣ses, stirring up the Archeus into Peace, Tranquility, Sleepiness, Joy, cessation from Sor∣row, Contracture, Grief, &amp;c. Those are endowed Glasses which do stirre up and occasi∣onally move unto a right and orderly solicitation, or careful performance of their Offices in the Archeus: Even as on the other hand, those are Poysons, destructive Things, and the exalted Powers of things which stir up a Blemish, or Contagion, and Consumption, and every sore shaking in the Archeus: And Poysons do exceed any kind of Remedies in this: That these cannot be so connexed unto the Life, that this may indeed be thereby raised up again, or increase into a more perfect disposition. Whereas Poysons do in the mean time kill the parts, do wholly deprive of the inbred strength, and altogether draw into their own likeness, and do therefore truly transchange their vital parts; which thing is granted to no Remedies, that they can renew the defects of the parts into their antient youth, and bring forth an Immortality: Because the most piercing Remedies are not Identified or Samified in Union with the Archeus, or a Member which is ill affected. And so neither is it able to perform a stable Effect from a Union of the Agent with the Sufferer, the which otherwise is granted unto Poysons. 
 Those therefore are touching Glasses, which disperse the natural endowment which the Almighty glorieth in, that he bestowed it on things cropped from, and pulled out of the Earth, the concrete body of that Glass remaining entire: For as some things being hanged on the Body, and born without the Body, or more strictly tied to the Body, do plainly take away very many sicknesses, or at least-wise suspend them: So some famous Remedies are stable, and do produce a stable effect from themselves. 
 There are also others, which not so much through the force of a touching and nourishing Glass, as of an Odour easily passing thorow, do prostrate great Diseases; to wit, those a∣rising and cherished onely by an Indignation of the Archeus: For there are also many Remedies which have a certain notable Taste, whereby, although they are not Digested by the Stomack by a passive transmutation; yet they separate the pure from the impure, although it be the farther remote from them, as they draw the Archeus (being as it were bound and obliged unto their endowments) to cause such Effects. 
 Yet the Glasses which I name touching ones, are therefore for the most part fixed with∣out Odour and Taste, and do move the Archeus, not so much by cleansing and sequestring Impurities, as by appeasing his Griefs, Disturbances, and a continual and successive sub∣stituting of Nourishing Idea ' s. For Paracelsus dispraising all fixed Metallick and Mine∣ral Remedies, yet as being unmindful of himself, commends Mercurius Diaphoreticus, being very sweet, yet fixed, and not mutable in the Fire: And the which notwithstand∣ing is a contemner of every labour of the Digestions; yet it doth in Diseases, as much as a Physitian and Chyrurgion will of right wish or desire: For the sweetness of its Sul∣phur, sports in the Superficies; but the Mercurial part being covered over by an ex∣ternal Sulphur, lies hid, neither doth it operate unless by a Glass shining thorow the Sul∣phur, and so affecting the Archeus at its own pleasure. Otherwise, that sweetness of the Diaphoretick, is of the Sulphur being drawn out of the fire of Venus, which is of the same savour with the Diaphoretick.
Lastly, the Milk undergoes diverse Impressions every hour, from all the disturbances of the Mind; from whence it not only waxeth clotty, and putrifies or stinks: but also by an unsensible quality it puts on Deformities, which the guiltless Infant drinks, and is held to pay the punishment of: For the Nurse doth not alwayes bridle her Mind with one te∣nor; but she failes, being sore smitten with a thousand Apprehensions of Anger, Sorrow, Agony, Envy, Wantonness, Theft, Covetousness, &amp;c. all whereof, there is no doubt, but that they badly dispose the Milk, as well in respect of the Body, as the Soul: For they are most of them unavoidable, yet dangerous. 
 Whosoever therefore would study long Life from the Birth, let him not expose his Children unto this sort of voluntary, unthought of, and certain Dangers. By how much the rather, because a Medicine for Long Life, as it is dayly (from the Cradle) extend∣ed for a long and healthy Life, by drops, cannot be digested, as neither Penetrate, if it be burred within the gross clots of Milk: Because so also, Poysons in the Milk, do well nigh become unhurtful, and being as it were gelded, become barren. 
 I therefore have hated the oft extended nourishing of an Infant by Milk: For this Cause, I am not wont to eat milk, unless it be meer or unmixt, alone, without o∣ther Meat and Drink, until that it being fully digested, hath slidden out of the Sto∣mack. 
 I praise, for our Child, Nourishments which are made of Bread boyled so long in thin Ale, with clarified Honey, if not, with Sugar, until they shall come together into the likeness of a Museilage, or Glew or Jelly: Then as much thin Ale is mingled with, and washed on this Jelly, as is sufficient for it to serve instead of Drink. 
 Nevertheless, he must abstain from Rye-bread, if he be nourished with Honey, be∣cause it breedeth Wormes: Yea, a piece of that Bread being cast into a Vessel of Honey, it passeth into Ants. 
 After this manner, I bad (among others) the Son of an Earle to he nourished from his Birth, who far exceeded his three Brethren in Strength, Health, Stature, Wit, and all Valour, and so that, if he had not died in war, as being pierced thorow with a Bullet by a warlick Hand, he had been of great hope. For indeed, as the aforesaid Meat and Drink is harmless, not putrifying, not coagulable, not stubborn against Digestion (for whatso∣ever things are fetch ' d from living Creatures, do easily putrifie in the more tender Sto∣macks) as neither a partaker of Malignity, or of a forreign unstable Disturbance, or the Heir of an induced vitious Impression: So it is alwayes equal, like, and constant to it self, becomes most familiar to Nature, not wormy, not sharp, not stinking, or of a burntish Savour; in the next place, not tart, acute, feverish, yea, nor ever hurtful, although it shall exceed in quantity, for more, or less, may be washed off: So also, the Infant growes and waxeth of ripe Years without Diseases, and is made capable of a Remedy for a Life of long continuance. 
 Therefore also according to the Letter, it is not badly read concerning the thrice glori∣ous Messias being incarnated, That he shall eat Butter, and Honey: For truly, the one con∣tains the Glory of a Dew, together with the extraction of Flowers: But the other is the Magistery almost of all Herbs: Therefore he shall eat Butter, but not Milk: From whence the discerning of the Good from the Evil, and the sharpness of Judgment is promised. But the strength of dayes increasing, let our Child accustom himself to the more vigorous and hard Meats; yet I fitly praise a Mean or Moderation. But let him take twice every day, four Drops of the Tree of Life. 
 CHAP. CXV. The Arcanums or Secrets of Paracelsus. BUt moreover, we believe by Faith, that the Life of men was by the divine Will, shortned; but that the Sins of mortal Men gave an occasion hereunto. The Will or Command of the Lord hath entred into Nature, and the Reasons of Death, which it found not, it made before the Floud, as it were in a successive order, the Life was continually changed by Off-springs, at length it was extended unto the hundred and twen∣tieth Year. 
 And last of all, the Dayes of a Man were seventy Years; which moreover, is a Mise∣ry; except in the Powers which he would should attain unto eighty Years: This therefore is a short Life, an ordinary Life, unto which, Man (necessary supplies being brought unto him) doth by the free will of Nature, flow and come, the which, was (by a divine Testimony out of the holy Scriptures) appointed. The Roots therefore of short Life, have henceforward a place in Nature. 
 First of all, the Mind, which knowes not how to die, waxeth not old. 
 But the sensitive Soul, although it be at length extinguished like Light; yet the Light it self doth not wax old, because it cometh not unto it by Parts or Degrees: For if the sensitive Soul, or the vital Light it self should wax old, seeing nothing can be added unto this, perishing, which may be of the Disposition thereof, I should meditate of long Life in vain. 
 Therefore the vital Powers only, wax old, which are implanted in every Organ under the Beginnings of Generation: The which, I do not contemplate of, as naked Quali∣ties; but I behold them as Governours failing by degrees, in an aiery Body; and therefore also, that the Powers of the Spirits do follow the Nature of that Body which is worn out by little and little: For Sorrow gnawes the Life, no otherwise than as the Moath doth a Garment: So also, the Inordinacies of Living, do violently overthrow the Life. 
 In the next place, Man is a Wolfe to Man: Which things surely, do mow down the Life in many, being as yet in its flourishing estate: Neverthelese, these are not the na∣tural Reasons of a short Life; as neither the necessities of a connexed Species, or of an inbred shortness. 
 Surely, besides accidentary Contingences, we do bear about with us the Cause of short Life, in the middle of our delights. 
 For first of all, the memory decays; and then, the sight, taste, hearing, and walking, wax dull: For to savour, doth not undeservedly signifie, as well tasting, as a judgment of the Mind without distinction; because they oftentimes die together: but the Taste, first fails in the Stomack, by reason of the Spleen: Wherefore I have elsewhere sufficiently distin∣guished the tasting of the Tongue, and the tasting of the Stomack. 
 Presently, by reason of the unequal strength of the Parts, the inbred Ferments of the Shops, do here and there, by degrees, fail: but the Ferment of the Spleen being astonied, the Power of the first Conceptions goes to decay; And old Men are said to become Children. 
 For the Schools grant a lively Memory to be in Children, by reason of the tenderness of their Brain, easily receiving any kinde of Seales: but that the Brain being the harder through dryness, the Impressions of the Seals should be by so much the harder, by how much the more stubborn they are from dryness, to retain the marks of Conceptions. But the Comparison of the Schools is frivolous, that the Brain should have it self after the manner of Wax; as neither do the cogitations express the interchanges of a Seal. 
 For first of all, there should scarce be a fit place for ten Seals: For if those kind of Seals should be so corporeal, as that they ought to follow the disposition and alterations of the Brain, they shall of necessity square themselves unto the extension of the place; because Place is more difficulty sequestred from a Body, than to be hard, or moist: And therefore let the Schools shew, how great an extension all particular Seals of Concepti∣ons in the Brain, may require. Doth the Memory for the seal of a Conception, require a bigger place in the Brain of an Horse, than that which is of a Mouse, or Flie? Therefore also consequently, the extension of place in the Brain for a Horse, should be also ten thousand times bigger, than for a Mouse; and so the whole Brain should scarce suffice for the remembring of two Horses: That since place should fail, I should rather remember the good things of the middle half, than of the whole; Yea, I should far better remember things past for one Year agoe, than those things which at sometimes happened unto me in my Childhood: For I have seen a Boy, who at the second time, had learned the Aeneides of Virgil by way of Memory, who scarce understood the hundredth Verse: And so every par∣ticular Word did require as many Seales, and Places of these: But if the Seals of Concepti∣ons should require no place, nor do occupy an Extension of themselves in the Brain; Therefore nothing is sealed, and there is no Seal; and also the Comparison of the Schools is dull: For the Schools are too muddy, who ascribe the Offices of the vital and principal Powers, unto the first, or second Qualities. 
 But what will the miserable Schools do, if they scarce dare to withdraw their Finger from these accidents of Bodies. 
 Therefore Scholastical Respects of hardness, dryness, and tenderness, being neglected, I descend unto the Cause of short Life. I have said indeed, that from a decaying Vigour of the vital Powers, the Life is of necessity and proportionably diminished:
His Liquor Alkahest is more eminent, being an immortal, unchangeable, and loosening or sol∣ving Water, and his circulated Salt, which reduceth every tangible Body into the Liquor of its concrete or composed Body. 
 The Element of Fire of Copper succeedeth, and the Element or Milk of Pearls. But the Es∣sences of Gems and Herbs, are far less Arcanums than those aforesaid. 
 Lastly, the volatile Salts of Herbs, and Stones, do shew forth a precise particularity; neither do they reach unto the efficacy of Universal Medicines. 
 But his Corollate, the which one alone, is purgative by Stool, cures the Ulcers of the Lungs, Bladder, Wind-pipe, Kidneys, by purging; so that it also utterly roots out the Gowt. 
 Indeed it is the Mercury of the Vulgar, from which, the Liquor Alkahest hath been once distilled, and it resides in the bottom, coagulated and powderable, being not any thing in reased, or diminished in its weight: From which Powder, the Water of the Whites of Eggs is to be co∣hobated, until it hath attained the colour of oral. 
 I praise the Lord of things, in an Abject or lowly Spirit; because he reveals his Secrets unto the little Ones of this World, and doth alwayes govern the Stern, least these his benefits should fall into the hands of the unworthy. 
 I have therefore discerned, that the Secrets of Paracelsus do take away Diseases; but that they reach not unto the Root of long Life. 
 I have also discerned, that Mineral Remedies, unto whatsoever the highest degree they are brought, yet that they are unfit for yielding Nourishment unto the first constitutive Parts; because they reserve the middle Life of the concrete Bodies from whence they were extracted: For, for that cause, they never wholly lay aside a mineral Disposition; Yea, and therefore they depart from the tenour of long Life. 
 Yea, neither shall I ever be easily induced to believe, that the Phylosophers Stone can vitally be united with us, by reason of its exceeding immutable substance, which is in∣credibly fixed against the tortures of the Fire, being undissolvably homogeneal or simple in kind; that is, by reason of its every way impossibility of separation, destruction, and digestion; so far is it from conducing to long Life: Histories subscribe unto me, that none who obtained that Stone, enjoyed a long Life; but that a short Life hath befalle many, by reason of the dangers undergone in labouring. 
 But moreover, neither let Hucksters hope, that Meats which do mightily nourish, will perform long Life: For although they may afford strength unto those that are upon recove∣ry; yet they afterwards weaken them, being nourished: The which, Caesar also testifies: For the more tender Meats are easily consumed, breed tender Flesh, and suffumigate or smoaki e the vital Powers through their more greatly adust savour. But the Studies of Phy∣sitians, are buisied about the delights of the Kitch , which they name the Dietary Part: for they have been misled into errour, by thinking; that if Food of good Juice, and tender, being administred in a due dose, doth profit those upon recovery; they have thought also, that the more strong Persons, being manifoldly nourished with the same Food, shall be raised up into the highest increase of strength: For there is not a process made in seeding, as in Arithmetick, where ten Pounds lift up nine; and by donsequence, a hundred Pounds, ninety: But he that eats very much, and drinks abundantly, shall not therefore become stronger than he that shall live more moderately: For truly, Nature keeps no so much the proportions of Numbers, as the proportions of the Powers of things alterable accord∣ing to the Power of their own Blas. However it is, at least-wise, it succeeds with Physiti∣ans according to their desire: Because plenty of venal Blood breeds Excrements, Phy∣sitians are called for, and so they command the rules of Food at least-wise to profit them∣selves, and they shorten the Life in those that live medicinally, and miserably. 
 CHAP. CXVI. The Mountain of the Lord. VVHo shall ascend into the Mountain of the Lord? Or who shall stand in his holy Place? He that is innocent in his Hands, and of a clean Heart, who hath not be∣taken his Soul to Vanity, nor hath sworn in deceit to his Neighbour: this Man shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and mercy from God his Saviour: The Words sound, Eternal blessedness. It is so. Notwithstanding, nothing hinders, but that that figural and typical Speech, may also unfold its Truth according to the Letter; seeing it must needs be, that the Type doth co-answer to the thing signified by the Type. 
 Truly, I have alwayes observed, that almost all the Mysteries of God were celebrated in mountains: For Abraham was commanded to ascend a Mountain, and there to sacrifice his only begotten Son, for a Figure of the Sacrifice that was to be offered in Mount Calvary. God commanded Moses to ascend up into a Mountain, that he might talk with him; and he gave him the Law: And Moses talked with him face to face, for the space of forty dayes and nights. In Mount Horeb, the Lord was transfigured, &amp;c. All which things might have been done in the Desart, and the God of Armies could have encompassed Moses with Lightning and Fire, as well in a Plain, as in a Mountain, that no Mortal might have approached thereunto: but a Mountain was alwayes chosen from a pri∣viledge: And the blessing from the Lord is promised, in ascending unto the Mountain of the Lord: For the Lord could have signified his Precepts unto Moses in a shorter space; neither was there need of forty continual Dayes and Nights, but that also, delay, might by its weight (for delay in natural things, is required for a just or due Efficacy of the matu∣rities of things) denote some hidden Mystery: For naturally, I understand that in Moun∣taines wanting an endemical malignity, there is, not only a most pure Air, far remote from Dreg and Corruption, commonly seperated from Errours, and Defects, and by rea∣son of Colds, most refined from all defilement: but also that there is the Place, from whence, through the continuation of its Magnal, there is a most dispatched in-beaming of the heavenly Bodies, or Influences; because a drinking in of a most pure Skie: For I re∣membred, that one Morning, I being fasting, felt in the Alpes, the sweetness of an in∣breathed Air, the which I never before nor after, felt in all my Life: For it is certain, that the Almighty hath not framed so great a Bunch in Nature, in vain: And it is cer∣tain, that all the Riches of the World are issued out of Mountains: And then, the best Fountains, and most famous Rivers are conversant with us out of Mountains, by reason of their steepness. 
 In the next place, all Nations which are the inhabitants of Mountains, are of an hardier Body, and of a more vigorous or flourishing Life, than those who inhabit pleasant Fields: Which Effects do manifest their Causes, because a more sweet, and purer Air is there in-breathed, and every Gas being deprived of its Filths, returns into the pure matter of Wa∣ter. But that God lifts up so great an Earth, or the very face of the Earth into an heap, or hath built so many great or rocky Stones upon the same, or hath conjoyned it into one rocky Stone, nor yet hath enriched it with any Mineral, in which respect he might seem to have collected so great an heap; neither doth he rain down Fountains, nor lastly hath poured forth Fruits worthy of so great Borders; but that he hath exalted it above all Tur∣bulences of Air and Clouds, whirlings of Windes, and monstrous omens of Thunder-bolts, into a most pleasing rest of Air; Surely, that thing seems to me, to be dedicated unto a famous Mystery: For the promised blessing did of old, for the most part, respect long Life, and the Commodities thereof, and the fruitfulness of off-springs (that thou mayest be long lived upon the Earth, &amp;c.) Blessing therefore, unto those that ascend into the Mountain of the Lord, according to the Letter, seems in Nature, to have respect unto the Endowments of long Life: For he, who is alone, and wholly the Life, and Prince of Life, doth likewise, give long Life unto none, not so much as by natural Means, who hath betaken his Soul to Vanity. Therefore the blessing of ascending into the Mountain of the Lord, seemes to contain a long continuance of Life. 
 Therefore those most high Mountains, which are read to be endowed by Nature for no Fruits sake, and the which pertain unto the sweetness of a not much disturbed Air, seem to promise a singular or Likeness of the Mountain of the Lord and of a long Life: And that thing is from a certain singular prerogative before other Mountains, and that they may as it were by that right, have the surname of the Mountain of the Lord: for if it reach beyond all the incidencies of inferiour things, it after a singular manner, promiseth unto me, that God is there after a peculiar manner. For he that was not in the Whirle-wind, but in the sweet Air, was perceived by Elias: He, he I say, hath his Mansion in the same place; that is, the Prince of Life doth there give his blessing: Not indeed, that which may be communicated in a few houres; but being signified to Moses in Mount Sinai, in the revolution of forty dayes (to wit, by two full Moons:) For he who could every year continually stay for forty dayes in the Mountain of Rest, about the Feast of the building of Tabernacles, the Commodities of living being called unto him from else∣where, I divine that he might much profit himself for long Life, especially if he were there daily refreshed with a Medicine prepared of the Tree of Life; because that in such a Moun∣tain, by reason of a notable Purity of the Air, there is a greater co-mixture of the Nou∣rishment with the Body nourished, and a more piercing access unto the first constitutive parts. Lastly, although the highest Mountains do bear before them the priviledge of long Life; Yet those that are less high, promise some singular thing, from the sense perceived in the Alpes. Nevertheless, I alwayes reject Mountains, which breath forth some Mine∣ral Gas: For therefore, in Chymical things, Arsenick hath obtained the name of the fume of Mettals. But unto whom the Commidity of living in a healthy Mountain, should be granted, and that not great with Child with the Fruits of Minerals, they certainly should rejoyce in the benefit of long Life, so far as the Nature of the place hath bestowed. 
 CHAP. CXVI. The Tree of Life. I Am constrained to believe that there is the Stone which makes Gold, and which makes Silver; because I have at distinct turns, made projection with my hand, of one grain of the Powder, upon some thousand grains of hot Quick-silver; and the buisiness succeed∣ed in the Fire, even as Books do promise; a Circle of many People standing by, together with a tickling Admiration of us all. But it was not a thing extracted out of Gold, because it should change as many weights of Quick-silver, as there were of Gold from whence it had been extracted. First of all, that being granted, as yet, at least-wise, a true transmu∣tation of one thing into another, and that indeed, a manifold one, should stand. Secondly, those that work on Gold, and Money-makers, have known, that nothing which is not Mer∣curial, can enter (by flowing) into Mettals, or be co-melted with them; but swims a-top in the flowing. Therefore thirdly, that Extraction should be fatter than any Mettal is, if it ought to tinge so many thousand Parts. Fourthly, that Extraction should be no longer a Mettal, seeing it should exceed the perfection of the purest Mettal, so many thousand times: For a Mettal doth not suffer so many degrees of largeness in its perfection, by how many times the Powder which maketh Gold, converts an inferiour Mettal into true Gold. Fifthly, He who first gave me the Gold-making Powder, had likewise also, at least as much of it, as might be sufficient for changing two hundred thousand Pounds of Gold: But there is none who may have more than a tenfold quantity of Gold; and if he should have it, he should destroy it, that he might at length, make as much Gold from thence: For he gave me perhaps half a grain of that Powder, and nine ounces and three quarters of Quick-sil∣ver were thereby transchanged: But that Gold, a strange Man, being a Friend of one even∣ings acquaintance, gave me. However therefore the Phylosophers Stone be in the Na∣ture of things; yet I have alwayes supposed for the reasons aforesaid, that no Metallick Remedy contains the blessing of the Tree of Life. I willingly confess in the mean time, that that Stone is in its Beginnings, partaker of the Life of a Zoophyte or Plant-animal, and that it hath that Life, distinct from a vegetative, and sensitive Life; the which, for this Cause, is an un-named Life: For according to the unanimous Writings of wise Men; The Principles of the Stone being once conjoyned to a glassen Egg, if through the Vice of in∣terrupted Warmth, it once happen, that they are even but a little while plainly cooled, they so die, that there is no remaining hope of a future Stone: the which likewise happens also in the nourishing warmth of Eggs: And therefore I have judged, that it is to be belie∣ved, that these do live also in a like Life, with the Beginnings of the Stone: And that is a true Life, which a true Death testifies; because that that errour is never to be corrected by any Paines; it being thus once dead, there is no hope of restitution left for the future. I know in the next place, that the Tree of Life is in vain to be ought from Animals, how long lived soever: In all which, I have found a voluntary Death, a frail Body, and slide∣able every hour, or the way of all Flesh: For how shall they give a long Life, the which they contain not in themselves? Seeing, if they are long lived, at least-wise, they have put off their own Life, while they are taken into use. I have sometimes beheld Stones, that they did contain sometimes live Creatures within them, that they live for the space of five Years, and are preserved from Death without Nourishments. Paracelsus thinks that the whole heap of Stones, and the whole World, was at sometime, one only Stone, or at least∣wise a single stony Liquor, the which being by degrees distinguished into Mettals, the fire-Stone, great or rocky Stones, small Stones, and Salts, afforded the beginnings of Vitality by many creeping things; and so that, if they detain Toads, and Salamanders alive, per∣haps for an Age, without Food, and as it were snorting with a deep drowsiness; I doubted, whether the Stones, the Sheaths and Wombs of those living Creatures might be the par∣takers of long life. But the Scripture perswaded me, that the life of creeping things is hor∣rid and hateful unto us: Wherefore I lookt back unto the more pretious Gems: Notwith∣standing, neither have I found in those, the Foot-steps of long Life, whether they were Essences, or next, the magisteries of those; because they cannot be immediately assimila∣ted, or adjoyned unto our first constitutive Parts: or if at length, they are after some sort adjoyned unto them, and as long as we grow; at least-wise, they are spoyled of their for∣mer length of Life, after the manner of other Nourishments, they nourishingly put on the Nature of Flesh, and are constrained to follow it. I have learned therefore, that Gems or pretious Stones, however they might be endowed with a medicinal Power, to make for long Life; Yet that they never wholly put off a mineral disposition; and so that neither are they co-mixable with the first constituting Parts: Yea, although they should be co-mingled with them, yet they should not be serviceable for a long Life: Because, whatsoever re∣fresheth not the vital Powers, doth not also withstand the intestine necessities of Death, and much less, if it resist the Wedlock of our solid Members. But Aromatical or spicie Herbs, should snatch away this victory from their Companions, if the Tree of Life should be her∣by; as they are the more grateful, and spiritual: But that which is the most refined Liquor, and whatsoever contains the whole Crasis of the Herb, doth notwithstanding, respect on∣ly Singularities, and Healing, for that the composed Body from whence it issued, is not it self, partaker in it self, of long Life: For the Liquor which knowes not how to preserve its concrete Body, the which, it from the Beginning, married through its least parts, from destruction; after what sort shall it be able, being spoyled of its Virtues or Faculties, to defend our Flesh, which is soon flowing abroad with a hastening Corruption, from Death: And so from hence, the Tree of Life began to be accounted immortal with me, not subject to Old Age, not to the discommodities of Ages, and the which should contain, or admit of no Excrements, and much less should propagate the same: But rather, should by a cer∣tain excellency, if any had once, at sometime lighted on it, brush them off, by reason of the Virtue of its expelling and repulsing: But seeing it is the property of Poyson, by cor∣rupting, to convert Good into Evil; it hath seemed meet to me to search diligently into the Tree of Life, wherein the Poysons themselves might die, being overcome by the goodness of the Tree: Wherefore also, it should refuse them being not yet admitted, and which should correct and overcome those Poysons which were once admitted: For if it ought not to ad∣mit of Excrements, which are certain Poysons of the lowest degree; much more shall it divert, drive back, and weaken those which are of a more profound, and manifest hostility or enmity: For unless it shall do that, it shall assume the name of the Tree of Life to it self, in vain. I have observed, that the Colts which were generated of a labouring Beast, and an old Horse, were soon enfeebled or barren, weak in the vigour of their Life, and that they had deeper Pits above their Eyes, than he which had sprang from a younger Horse: But that an old Willow, yields new Sprouts, nothing more barren if they are planted, than the Sprouts of a new stem: Therefore I have found, that together with the Seed of living Creatures, Old Age departs into their off-springs, but that thing is not so easily manifest in the Young of a Tree: Yea, if there be a Long Life in some Beasts, yet it is so enclosed, that it doth not depart from a singularity, and is not communicable out of the Species. In the next place, I have examined Dew, by a resolution of its Parts: For it afforded a suga∣ry Salt, helping great Diseases, but surely not any thing profitable for long Life: For by reason of the unlimited generality of its goodness, it contained not so much Life, as the Properties of Nourishment. At length, I concluded with my self, that whatsoever it were that should supply the Place of the Tree of Life, it was the Young or Off-spring of a Tree: And then, that this Medicine was to be fetched out of a most wholesom, odorife∣rous, balsamical, and almost immortal Shrub: And the which, should be of the subtilest and purest Parts, from a proper Endowment, and native constitution of its composed Body; and the which, should every way resist any kind of Corruptions, bred, or obtained through the Errour of Art, or Nature. At length, that by Art and labour, it should obtain the ut∣most bound of perfection, and a liberty of co-mixing with us: wherefore, it was chiefly necessary, that that manifold natural Endowment should not any thing be broken in time of its preparation, or be changed by the Fire; and so that there is need of a not burning Fire, for the exaltation of its Faculties, and sequestration of Impediments; to wit, that it may make any Mortals, partakers for the compleating of uncorruptibleness, or for the long continuance of Life, to take us by the hand (so far as might be possible for the receiver, cor∣rupted Nature) by a communicating of its Faculties or Virtues: Surely, it cannot there∣fore feel any singular Property of passion of a Member, or obey partialities: But it is of necessity, that it be an entire Balsam of Life, reduced unto a seminal Being, remaining in its natural Endowments, grateful in its Odour, throughout all the diligent examinations of its middle Life, and Magnum Oportet: So that, when as the Nourishments, at length tho∣rowly mingled therewith, are dead to their Office; at least-wise, the smoakiness of the same, may by their fumigation, no longer batter and extenuate the implanted Spirits; but rather, may refresh them; and thus far it emulates a certain permanency of uncorrupti∣bleness, and keeps it continued and propagated in the nourishable Humour, under our mid∣dle Life: The favour therefore, of its native Endowment, procures its Love with the sealed Powers of the implanted Spirits: its preparation therefore, refuseth an alteration of its native Virtue, and performeth a more full entrance, and application of Virtue; So that, as it were an Out-law, and besides an accustomed wont, it is admited as conscious; within the secret Chambers of Life, that it may there undergo an Information: For in some Climates, all things are produced more strong and excellent, by reason of the nobili∣ties of a nourishable Juice; and the which therefore, it is certain, do very much excel as for long Life: For so the Sweat of some Persons smells of the Goat or Rank; but that of others, doth not far differ from a Fragrancy. That one thing, I say, in long Life, is only to be procured, least the nourishable Humor, after that it hath ceased from its Offices, being dismissed by transpiration, looseth its Grace, through defect whereof, I have des∣cribed a short Life: For I have taught elsewhere, that a Sow, or a Goose being nourished only by Fishes, do yield Fleshes, which tastingly resemble the detestable Grease of Fishes. Wherefore, let the Medicine of the Tree of Life, be an odoriferous Balsam, Spicie, grate∣ful to Nature, seasoning the Blood with an excelling goodness, and a nourishment now applyed after the manner of a Dew: Even so that, through the vigour of its uncor∣ruptibleness, its balsamical Faculty may be continued even unto the utmost Limits of its exhalation out of the Body. Wherefore we must beware of this one only thing, that the fire do not alter this Fruit by a seperating distillation; but that a proper division of that which is heterogeneal, be appointed, as being sequestred into its bottoms, for a greater subtilizing of Purity and Simplicity, and sealing of its Virtues: For in Eden, the Stomack subdued the Food from a proper vigour or force; for all things willingly obeyed the Stomack, with∣out the strife of a middle Life; it being that, which they through the decision of the Sto∣mack, kept after some sort sase, even until the deluge of Waters, till that, through a succession of Years and Propagations, all things by degrees, went to ruine: Then the se∣minal Being was no longer drawn out of Meats, after that the term of Life was restrained unto 120, and afterwards, unto 80 Years: For the Being of Essence, which before, was fetcht out of Meats, bewrayed it self no longer; because the Stomack had enough to do, on∣ly to draw forth the Being of Nourishment. From hence it is manifest, that although the Tree of Life was present with us from Eden, yet that it will not profit us as it did the first of the Fathers: By consequence also, that the Balsam of our vital Tree, is not so profitable unto Persons of ripe years, as unto Children: For he that hath almost run out the stage of Life, every such one perceives an help according to a Model, or after a small manner; See∣ing all things in Nature, are received after the manner of the Persons, and place receiving, and of circumstances: For the Friends of Job wept with him seven dayes and nights, without eating, drinking, and difference of health: The which, is now at this day, scarce possible for any mortal Man to do: Therefore the strengths of such a life, should more profit by our Tree, than I, an old Man, who almost worn out with the offences, and la∣bours of Chymistry, and the injuries of Tribulations and Persecutions: So we Bees do not provide Honey for our selves. Whereunto is added, that Eden was of it self a preserver of Long Life, through the wholesomness of the place; but that, but a few Paces from thence, there was the command of Death, Corruption, and Infirmities: For if Credit be to be given to Histories, there are also places at this day, whereunto a Life of three hindred years is ordinary: For where long-lived Persons are born, they are also nourished: But there are other places near at hand, where a renewed tyranny of interchanges, shortens the Life; for so, some Provincial Diseases are accustomed. Therefore mountainous Places which have not the Gas of Minerals (as the Forrest of Arden, Asturia, or the Pyre∣nean Mountains, &amp;c.) nor those subjected unto the natural Moisture of Lakes; because the bountiful Communications of the Stars do reflect and breath a pure Air, and do make for Long Life: Even as also, a plain Field which knowes not the Incitements of the Throat, adds as much to long Life, as fulness is an enemy to long Life: for the stuffings of Meats do weary the miserable Powers, to wit, that they being as it were worn out with labour, die or go to ruine before their time: which things being thus revolved with my self for full three dayes space, from whence a Medicine for long Life was to be fetched; Opo∣balsamum notably smiled on me; not indeed that of Peru, or the Gums of Capaida of Bra∣sile; But the true Aegyptian opobalsamum noted in the Scriptures, and primitive, it being the Queen-tear of a low Shrub, scarce saleable to Kings: For I confess I have worthily attribu∣ted very much perfection to this Being: And although there were enough of it to be found; yet it doth as yet decline from the perfection of the Tree of Life, because that Shrub is so frail or mortal. And while I variously wandred in Nature, that I might view the Tree of Life; at length, without the day, and beyond the beginning of the night, I saw in a dream, the whole Face of the Earth, even as it stood forsaken, and empty or void at the beginning of the Creation; then afterwards, how it was, while as it being fresh, waxed on every side green with its Plants: Again also, as it lay hid under the Floud: For I saw all the Species of Plants to be kept under the Waters; Yet presently after the Floud, that they all did enter into the way of interchanges enjoyned to them, which was to be conti∣nued by their Species and Seeds: I saw, I say, in the top of Mount Libanus, the Cedars to have remained whole under the Deluge, by the Word of the most Glorious God, and that they, in a certain number, did as yet there remain: And presently afterwards, I re∣turned to my self. But I afterwards considered at leisure, that the Ark which ought to save Mankind from destruction, was commanded to be framed of the incorrupitble Wood Ce∣tim: For the World had endured, perhaps 1652 Years: but Noah proceeded slowly in its building, for an hundred solary years: And therefore he took Wood, and Rafters which were not to undergo any dammage in all that time. A leprous Person being separated from the People, coming to the Priest, bare the Wood Cetim in his hand, that he might be cleansed. In the feast of the building of Tabernacles, every Hebrew carried Cedar, and Branches of Myrrh, that God might be mindful in the rain of the whole Earth, that he appointed the manners of the Times, and the Stars: I therefore understood by the Cedar, long Life, likewise the blessings of the Times or Seasons, and of the Stars, and also, that in a mystical sense, cleansing was denoted; but that in this Age it was also to be obtained: For other vital things, do soon wither with Old Age; but the one only Cedar in number, by a famous mistery, through the uncorrupted substance of its Wood, and its vegetative Faculty surviving, promiseth long Life, because it containeth it: For the folding Doors of the Temple of Salomon, were commanded to be framed of the Wood Cetim, with Gold, as it were a more vile covering or involvement. Moreover, it is without controversie in the Church of God, that the Cedar in Libanus, in the Temple, in the Figure of the Ark, in the cleansing of the Leprosie, and in the feast of the building of Tabernacles, did represent the Mother of God, the Virgin Queen of Heaven, an incorruptible Vessel, a Tree which brought forth for us, Eternal Life in the Flesh: the Patroness I say, of the Poor, and Mine: But the place of the Cedar in Libanus, exceeding the coldest folding door of the Air, covered with Snowes, denotes the unspotted Integrity of the God-bearing Virgin: And so, if the Tree denotes the holy Virgin, especially, conjoyntly with so many myste∣ries, its no wonder that the Cedar doth signifie the Tree of this Life also in the world: For indeed, there was in the dayes of David, an aged Cedar in Libanus, because it was that, which by reason of its excellent taleness, was from that time, worthy of a mystical sense: Wherefore, either it being there planted after the Floud, doth as yet hitherto continue the same in number, safe: or a good while before, and perhaps from the cradles of the World, according to the Vision of the Dream: Which thing, after what manner soever it may be taken; at least-wise, it shews that the Cedar despiseth the discommodities of Old Age: But he is not from a Cedar his Parent, planted after the Floud; because that Pa∣rent also of the Cedar, was preserved under the Deluge; and much more easily afterwards, than that which remains from the daies of David, even until this time. Let those laugh that will, at that age of the Cedar in Libanus, and let them say, that Modern ones were raised up by a new Branch, or by Seed falling down: But that being supposed, at this day also, new ones had dayly come forth into a great Wood, where notwithstanding, no new Cedar growes. But moreover, from thence I gather, that the same Cedar in number doth now persist, which was even before the Floud, yea even from the Creation of the World: Because it was given for a Mark of resemblance to the blessed Virgin. 
 But moreover, for our Magistery, the Fruit of the Cedar is not to be taken; for that, the end thereof is not for a simple Being in the appointment of the Properties of the Cedar; but only for a propagation of the Species, which contradicteth long Life from the Founda∣tion: The Wood Cetim it self therefore, is to be taken, which is so much exalted in the holy Scripture: Therefore not the Bark, not the Fruit, not the Root, nor the Leaves, are the ultimate end whither Nature hath had respect for long Life: And so that the Cedar, perhaps also is herein distinct from the Tree of Life in Eden. A matter therefore, of a Tree which knowes not how to die, is found, whose unputrifiable Wood (and by reason of its many Properties being in a mystical Sense designed to the holy Virgin) is that which brings forth Life to the World, that it may redeem Death. But the preparation thereof, is the most exceeding difficult of all those things which fall under the Labour of Wisdom: For this Cause indeed, Monarchs want a long Life; because there is none which hath known how to prepare it: For none who is truly a Phylosopher, is a Minstrel, neither doth he follow Princes, and flatter them; for because he stands in need of nothing, he de∣spiseth whatsoever a Prince can give. The Tree of Life therefore alone, refresheth the decayed Faculties, and for some time, detaineth the Life in its flowing: But the difficul∣ty of preparing it, consisteth in this, that the Wood ought to be resolved without a dissolu∣tion of its Faculties, by a luke-warmth, such as is that of the Sun in March, even unto its first Being: In which Being only, is granted unto it, a fermental Power of preserving and seasoning, with an ingress unto the first constitutives of us, and of insinuaring it self into the familiarity of the Spirits implanted throughout all the Organs. But there is in the Juice of this kind of resolving, the entire Virtue of the Cedar; to wit, a vital one, together with every seminal and formal Property of long Life: For the whole lump of the Wood is dissolved into a Juice, which being otherwise, distilled, is transchanged, and made a cer∣tain new Creature; the which Aqua Vitae being distilled out of Graines, or Ales, doth al∣so prove; likewise the Oyl that is distilled out of Woods, yea out of the very Oyl of Olives it self. The practise thereof, is this; Resolve the pieces of the Wood Cetim, with a like weight of the Liquor Alkahest, in a sealed Glass, under a nourishing luke-warmth; and within seven dayes, thou shalt see the whole Wood to have passed over into a milky Liquor: But presently, about the fifteenth day, a twofold Oyl distinctly swims a top, the which, is increased even for a Month, and is more clearly separated: But then, let the Oyl be separated from the Water by manual Operation: Then distil thou the Water in a Bath, and the Liquor Alkahest remains in the bottom in its own original weight: but let the Oyl be nourished with the Water for full three months space, with a slow luke-warmth, and the whole Oyl assumes the Nature of a Salt, and shall thorowly mingle it self with the Water: and it is the first Being of the Cedar. But as yet, a few things concerning the length of Life; because I being an old Man do pursue these things, and I my self am a∣bout to die. My Mind breathed some unheard of thing within: but I, as unprofitable for this Life, shall be buried: Because the Spirit the Porter, withdrew the Bottle by the com∣mand of him, before whom, the whole World is as a Mushrom. Let the praise be to him, who hath given, and who hath taken away that which was his own. The Schools therefore, may deservedly upbraid me: Thou miserable Man, a Man of small note, a Man of great ambition, an old Man, hast paradoxally come to late, that with thy Song in the com∣mendation of Cedar, thou shouldst over-spread the World with mists: The Histories and Virtues of Plants are known to our Herbarists: But thou, that thou maiest vaunt of an unheard of devise concerning long Life, as a Paradoxal Man, proceedest to be mad with thy Cedar: Go to, if there be so great Power in the Cedar, for Life, why are not all Kings long-lived? From whence dost thou as a new guest, come? produce thy Learning, and ex∣perience whereby thou wilt be believed: For as a Lawier blusheth to speak without Law, so doth a Physitian without Experience: For thou canst not deny, but that the decoctions of the Leaves, Kernels, Wood, Bark, Root, or Rosin of Cedar, had long since produced a continued Life: But nothing of these things is manifest by our Herbarists: Thou there fore dost deter or fright us away, through an hidden manner of preparation, and by a crab∣bed Style of a smoak-selling Art, desirest to involve a feigned mistery of Cedar: Which thing (the Alkahestical Mask being laid aside, it being taken up, only to hide thy impro∣vident rashness) almost all the learned will laugh at, who suffer not themselves to be led aside into new precepts, by Dreams, or feigned Exstasies. This Argument springs partly from an inv terate hatred towards us, and partly from an antient Simplicity: For how much soever it concerns my person, of writing unwonted rashnesses; God hath known that I write those things which I know to be true. I give him thanks, that when as he had conferred on me five Talents, and I had made my self unworthy, and for this Cause, had made a divorce before him, it pleased his divine goodness, to take from me three, and to leave me as yet two; that so he might expect me for better Fruit: He had rather I say, impoverish me, and suffer me not to be profitable to very many, so he might but save me from the Perils of this World: Let eternal Sanctification be unto him. But as the argu∣ment of the Schools is supported with the appearances of Decoctions and Broaths, surely that had proceeded from a simple rudeness: For truly none hath hitherto, in acting, plow∣ed up the Faculties of things: Therefore it is supposed, that although many things are made more acute by distilling, and so the more active; yet by that very thing, that they depart and are estranged from the genuine Property of the Seeds; because the Fire is an artificial Death, the which, if there be made an open Flame, happens through an extin∣guishment of the Seeds and the Archeus: But a natural Death of things, presupposeth a weariness of the Seeds: But an artificial Death, which is not made by a consuming of the Flame, separates indeed things volatile from things fixed, together with a dissolution and death of the last Life of the composed Body: But therefore also the former Faculties are altered and estranged by the Fire, and a new Creature riseth again out of the fire, from a material Disposition, from the antient Properties of the Being, through an inversion or turning in and out, which is easie to be seen in the artificial Death: So indeed, most vola∣tile Salts, which by a co-melting, do make a conjunction with the Oyl of the thing, are fixed into a Coal, the which, at length, the fatness being burnt up, returns into ashes. 
 There are also fugitive Salts, which do act by lurking within the fatnesses of Oyls, do at∣tempt a new product: So that Oyls, otherwise sufficiently slowing, are changed through the combination of Salts: Some things therefore become soapy, some things lay up smoaki∣nesses; at least-wise, all adust things contract a Corruption of Matter, and are throughly changed into another thing; for nothing of the old remaineth: Because that is the pro∣perty of Fire, not indeed, simply to separate; but by its own authority, to alter and change under it self. Therefore it is not lawful to weigh the Faculties or Virtues of distilled things, by the composed Body from whence they issue: neither is it lawful to believe, that although the Virtues of things are not abolished, not extinguished, or plainly killed by the fire, therefore the antient Virtues of things are not renewed within, by Adustion: But those things which are made new by the fire, are oftentimes made worse, but also they are oft-times, so distinct from themselves as they were before, that they are made an hundred-fold better. 
 In the next place, there are Simples, which by seething, do melt their Muscilage or Gum, and in this respect, do transmit their Virtues into the Broath of the Decoction. 
 First of all, they do not therefore notwithstanding, retain the same Faculty which they had in their entire composed Body; but their Action is alwayes feeble. 
 For first of all, they ought to be concocted in the Stomack, after the manner of Meats: Most of whom, although from the property of Magnum Oportet, they do in savour shew forth some thing of their former Virtues, yet these are either cast forth of doors together with Excrements, or being rashly concocted, and appropriated, do stir up nothing but the brawlings of an unaccustomed heterogeniety or diversity of kind, instead of a Remedy: Or at leastwise, if they affect the Blood and Flesh with their Odour, they promise nothing but a feeble help; So that also, from hence, a Quartane the inhabitant of the Spleen, doth hitherto remain untouched, to the mockery of Physitians. But that something may be admitted into the Family-administration of the Spirits, and Family of the solid constitu∣ting Parts, it is not that that may any way be hoped for by Decoctions, as neither by Distillation, which through the intervening of an artificial Death, wholly puts off every perfect Act of long Life, which the Wood encloseth in it self. But the Juice, Powder, or Conserves fetched from the Cedar, are such strangers unto us, that unless it be subdued by the method of its first Being, it promiseth not any thing of Familiarity with us: Far off surely, that it should overcome our Nature, and endow it with its uncorruptibleness. Distilled things therefore, have nothing of moment, and crude Simples nothing of moment (with whatever noble Faculty they may shine) for long Life: For it behoves, that the uncorruptibleness of the Cedar being exactly preserved, as ignorant of Death, nor the bounty thereof toward us being in the least worsted or diminished, every forreign impedi∣ment be separated from it, the which, else through the much strife of our Archeus, is re∣flected into the Being of Nourishment, but not into the Being of Essence; Yet so that a Penetration, Communication, and Conspiracy with the first constituting Parts of u e and refreshment of the in-existing Faculties, be over and above added thereunto the Schools of Galen be in the mean time, amazed at the unwonted manner of prepa and describing it, and let them laugh at my promises, let them believe them to be eer Dreams, let every Bird sing according to his own beak; be it lawful for me to be vile∣ly esteemed by them: For truly, I have long since covered my Ears with a thick cover∣ing, against aged Obloquies expressed for the sake of Gain alone.
Afterwards, I observed that the spirit of Sulphurs, or of Salts, being sharp, would with an Alcalized body, be made earthly. For so, with Iron, is made drosse, rust, a cankered rust, Ceruss, &amp;c. And these Paracelsus rashly judgeth to be Tartars, or the separated impurities of things over-covered with their own, and that an inward Runnet: when as o∣therwise, they are nothing else, but the astonishment of two mutual Agents: to wit, when both their strengths are spent. 
 Afterwards, I long examined Salts, throughout every of their Analysis or Re-solution: and I discerned, that the spirits of all salts were sharp, except Alcalized ones, and those of essential Sulphurs in Vegetables. Whose saltish tartnesses indeed, are fat and sulphur∣ous, neither readily reducible into a salt, unlesse by a tedious inversion or turning in and out of the principles; which salts, being then, as it were elixirated, do represent the true and highest Crasis or constitutive temperature of the seeds of their composed Bo∣dies. But the spirit of mans urine, is neither sharp, nor Alcalized: but meerly salt, even as also that of Horses is. And that, for this cause; because the Volatile sharp matter of the Chyle of the stomach, is by vertue of another ferment, transchanged into a Volatile salt. Even as elsewhere, concerning the digestions of Animals. I here give thee to ob∣serve by the way, that in things transchanged, there is not an immediate regresse or return unto that from whence they were transchanged, no more than from a privati∣on to a habit: For that, in transchanging, the last life of the thing perisheth, because the whole disposition of the middle life of the former Being, is at once taken away, by reason of the extinguishment of its former seed: For therefore things transchanged do keep the essence of a new Being, with a neglect of their former composed Body. Therefore have I found any Remedy whatsoever, unprofitable, which I otherwise had believed to be very likely a dissolver of the Stone, from its former composed Body. Yet that is a truth, that the spirit of Urine, in the fundamental point of its nativity, is salt: and that by reason of that salt, it doth more readily coagulate other Spirits, than any sour or sharp spirit doth Milk. Neverthelesse, the spirit of urine doth not coagulate milk, or the ve∣nal Blood: Because the spirit of the venal blood; yea, and our vital Spirit, is salt, after the manner of Urines. From hence indeed, the spirit of the urine, hath it self after the manner of an excrementitious spirit, cut off from the blood; and so by reason of a co∣resemblance, it is its Chamber-fellow; neither do they act on each other. And then al∣so, I observed, that the spirit of Urine, doth not more strongly coagulate those things which were already before coagulated. For Bole, Clay, or the rocky or Chalk-stone, do by degrees degenerate by the spirit of urine, into a nitrous Salt, and are rather dissolved. Since therefore, the spirit of Urine doth not coagulate Bodies already coagulated; such as are Bole, Clay, &amp;c. As neither Bodies coagulable, such as are Milk and the venal blood: but it coagulates the spirit of Wine, or the like thing which is entertained with it in the urine (for as was shewn above: after the fermenting of urine that urine con∣taines, also a spirit of Wine, or Aqua vitae) I desisted not seriously to enquire, after what manner, the stone is coagulated in us, and in our urine. 
 1. First of all, it is an undoubted truth, that Duelech is not of a calcinous or limy con∣dition, however Paracelsus may be carried on the contrary. 1. Because a calcining de∣gree of heat is wanting in us. 2. And then, because every Alcali, is rather that which is destructive to a rocky stone, than a Coagulater thereof. 3. Because a Calx or Lime pre∣supposeth a Chalky-stone, and therefore Duelech should be calcined before it were a stone, 4. From the composing parts of Duelech it shall by and by be made manifest, that it is not possible for Lime to be in it; yea, nor that Duelech himself is calcined, or doth send forth a Lixivium or Lye. Likewise, neither is Duelech of the nature of a gowty Chalk: because he growes together in the midst of the urine: but that Chalk is coagula∣ted from the Sunovia. But the Sunovie is a living seedy muscilage, which degenerated in the journey of nourishment, and from a transparent and Crystaline matter, hath passed over into a thick, white, and slimy matter (as of Gouty persons elsewhere) from a mat∣ter without savour, I say, it is transplanted into a sharp one, though the tartnesse where∣of indeed, it hath attained a thickness or grossness: For then also it is unfit for a total diflation or transpirative dispersing of it self: To wit, whereby the nourishable Li∣quor is wholly consumed without any remainder: But the Sunovie being once infected with a tartness, its watery parts are pufft away; but the gross remainder waxeth dry by de∣grees, into the utmost dryth and hardnesse of a Sand-stone. But Duelech attaines to the utmost hardness of it self in one onely instant of time. The Gouty Chalk therefore, differs from Duelech in its whole matter and efficient cause. For therefore such a Chalk is hardned out of the water, because indeed by drying. Neither for that cause doth it imitate the hardness of a rocky stone: but onely of a sandy stone. I have spoken these things to that end, that it may be manifested, that Duelech differs from any other coagu∣ted Bodies whatsoever, in its different kind of Agent and matter. And seeing notwith∣standing, I as yet knew not the manner or process of the birth of Duelech; but I knew in the mean time, that Bodies do nor receive the limitation of their hardning, but by the actions, appointments, and properties of their own seeds. 
 Lastly, Since I knew, that whatsoever things do act corporally, are altogether sluggish, slow, and idle, as for the coagulation of Duelech: therefore I enquired into fermental sa∣vours and Odours, as the Authors of many seeds. Therefore I found the savours and acti∣ons of Salts, to be indeed famous ones: but not any thing reaching the vertue of the salt of Urine. 
 And then also, I beheld the more weak or feeble Salts, which might follow the Race of Sulphurs. But Mercury, although it alone according to Paracelsus, did contain the whole perfection of the thing, yet I found it to be slow and feeble. For as oft as I di∣stinguished Salts and Sulphurs from their Mercuries, I admired at their sluggishnesse, and indeed at the dignities of these two Principles. Wherefore, I stuck in Salts, for the searching out of the nativity of Duelech. I confess indeed, that Mercury being a flow∣ing mettal, in its nature and properties, is never sufficiently known. But that body hath deceived Paracelsus through a similitude of proportion: he thinking, because his De∣vice had pleased him, because he had endowed the watery matter of things with the name of Mercury; that therefore the properties of Quick-silver, and its natures, with∣out a peere, being never to be sufficiently searcht into, did agree as suitable to all Liquors which may be drawn out of Simples. For all the Philosophers of former Ages, confess, that nothing in the Universe, is not so much as by far, to be likened to Argent Vive: Yet it hath not been hitherto sufficiently unfolded, that Argent-Vive or Quick-silver is a Simple, actually existing body: but not a constitutive part of things: And so, that there hath been nothing but a meer abusive passing over of a Name. For this cause, I as yet perswaded my self, that seeing a non-Duelech was made of Duelech, that ought to be done by the action of an Agent on a disposed matter. And although I knew these and many the like things: yet I discerned, that I therefore, knew nothing the more. Where∣fore I as yet more detested a wording or discursive Philosophy: because it was that, which stayed me before the Threshold of Nature, and together with it self my Condu∣ctress, I was shut out of doors. I again returned to my self, and after a homely man∣ner I considered, that Duelech was not bred but out of the principles of the Urine: and since I knew the urine to be salt, I again had recourse to the varieties of Salts. 
 And I stood amazed, that the use of Salt should every where be forbidden, as well by the Schooles as by Physitians, to those that have the stone. Yet I discerned, that the foun∣dation of that prohibition was unknown amongst them. Especially, because the use of Sea-salt, though much and often, never from real experience, hurt any one that had the stone: But rather, I have exactly noted that many, who by the plentiful use of salt, have cut off the relapse of a new and growing stone from them. For I had seen the Rocks, as also the rocky stones of the Sea to be gnawn or wasted in the Haven. In the mean time it had alwayes a recourse unto my mind with admiration, that the spirit of Urine had at one instant, coagulated the spirit of Wine, together with a separation of its watery part. Therefore I consulted first, to anatomize the salt of urine unto the utmost veines there∣of. Wherefore, in the strong smelling or stinking body of my urine, after its putrefacti∣on under dung, I began that dissection: and presently by distilling it, I found in it, besides the aforesaid spirit of urine, two the more fixed salts also, and no more: How∣ever Turnheisser doth variously triflle at pleasure, of as many species of Salts found by him in Urine, as there are, almost, of Simples in the Vniverse: He being willing, that man should not onely be a Microcosme or little World: but also, that his urine should re∣joyce in the same prerogative. For on this distillatory Vessel, he according to his own boldnesse, distinguisheth it into 24 parts, and marks it outwardly with his Lines, and divides the body of man into as many soyles. At length, he will have it, that the vapors lifted up from the urine in distilling, ought to strike especially, the Region of the Glass, and in that part, to grow together into drops, whereby, the businesse of a Disease in man, whose urine it is, is finished. He likewise feigneth as many diversities of vapours to arise out of the urine as there can be diversities of a disease on the whole body: That we may thereby visibly, perfectly learn, not onely the places affected: but the diseasie matter; for as he thus excuseth his urine Inspections, suspected of the wickedness and vanity of Ma∣gick; he hath busied himself by his water-divining distillatories, to deceive the World. That is, in sportings, he would seem to be altogether serious: but I have never distil∣led that I might befool others, with my self. The unprofitable invention therefore, of Turnehisser, is at least of a trifling value: if not also wickedly introduced into Medicine. 
 Therefore in the lee of my urine, I distinguished of two salts: one indeed a Sea-ee salt; being not so long agoe assumed, and as yet remaining safe, and unchanged (as else∣where I have shewn concerning the boyling of Salt-peter). But the other is of the U∣rine it self, being bred in our digestion, and from not a salt, transchanged into one: but it differs from the Sea-ee salt. 
 1. If for some days there shall be no use or need of any Sea-ee-salt; yet the urine failes not of its own salt. 2. The Sea-salt coagulates it self into graines of a point-like sharp∣nesse: but the salt of urine growes together into Gemmie Dyes and square Cubes. 3. The Sea-salt alwayes shewes forth its antient tast, even when it is digested out of Jakes ' s with Salt-peter; but the salt of urine, savours alwayes of urine. 4. The Sea-salt in its cool∣ing, adheres to a wooden Vessel, even as while it is separated from Salt-peter; But the salt of urine growes together in the bottome of the Liquor. 
 Furthermore, the fixed salt of urine distinguisheth it self from the Volatile salt there∣of. 1. By fire and flight. For the one flyes away, the other remaining. 2. The fixed salt, is separated from the lees, by an extraction, in moisture: but the Volatile salt, is se∣questred by fire. For although meats and drinks wax universally alike sowr in the stomach: yet the salts sprung from thence, are not alike volatile; Because that ferment of the stomach is received after the manner of the Receiver; and so it varies. Even as neither is Chrysulca dissolving the whole and homogeneal mettall, therefore made totally alike volatile. And this diversity doth not break forth from essential properties; but by rea∣son of a partic pation of the properties of the middle life of things. 
 Neither finally, is that ferment of the stomach, a naked sharpness or sowrness; but a vital and specifical Endowment; whose end indeed is for transchanging of the food into the Chyle of mans digestion. For truly many the more fixed Beings are received with the meats: which notwithstanding, ought to undergoe the like condition with vo∣latile Juyces, if they ought the more fully to passe unto the root of Life. In which point especially, the efficacy of Nature shines forth: the which, of a lump that is altoge∣ther similar or alike, frameth bones and the fibers of flesh, &amp;c. In the next place, it re∣duceth bones in the stomach of a Dog, unto Chyle, that blood may again from thence be made. 
 The two aforesaid Salts therefore, are the more fixed. But one is exceeding volatile in urine; but an Alcali, or any thing like to a Lixivium ot Lye, never appeared unto me from urine. For if but any Lixivial matter shall be received inwardly; that is presently fil∣led with sharpnesses, so that it layes aside its Lixivial disposition. 
 For I have seen a Country-man, who cured great Wounds, with the drink of a Lixivium prepared out of the Teile-tree: Yet the urine of those so cured shewed nothing at all of a Lixivium. Therefore have I taught elsewhere, that every Alcali lixivial, is made by a dissolvative expression of the fire; Neither that it was before in the composed Bodies. 
 But if indeed any volatile spirit doth shew forth the property of an Alcali; (such as is the vulnerary matter of any Herbs whatsoever) that indeed is abstersive or cleansing, and a provoker of urine: yet of its own faculty, under the second digestion, it puts on the nature of the salt of urine, restraines sour corruptions which would otherwise volunta∣tarily afterwards arise in the wounded. Since therefore there is no Alcali in the urine, I have held it an errour, to give an Alcali to drink for breaking of the Stone; seeing it cannot reach to the places of the urine. For neither doth the Ludus of Paracelsus or his Medicine for dissolving of the stone, prepare a Lixivium: but a bitter salt of a sharp one. Wherefore he calls his Ludus, the Gall of the Earth. For it is a flinty stone, yet the more tender one; and the which, almost wholly flyes away through a continual fire of two dayes. But with Salt-peter, much more speedily. Moreover, Stones, Gemmes, Sands, Marbles, Flints, &amp;c. through an Alcali being joyned unto them, are glassified: but if they are boyled with the more Alcali, they are indeed resolved into moisture: and being resolved, they by an easie labour of their acide spirits, are separated from the Alcali, in the weight of their former powder of stones. But these never come to the urine; as neither are they profitable for breaking of the stone. But Rocky or Chalky stones which have an inflamed Sulphur in them, are calcined indeed, but are not easily made Glass; for that the residing and sharp salt of the Sulphur, consumes the Glassifying Alcali. Mettals also, by reason of the every way and unconquered simplicity of their Mercury, and unpossible penetration, either as being unchanged, they delude the work of the fire, or wholly flye away: yet so, as that although they flye away in manner of a smoak: yet that fume may be reduced into the nature of its antient Mettal, Where∣fore Mettals never yielded any Alcali: and much less, do they reach unto the Innes of the urine. But Fire-stones, though they have a burnable sulphur, which is a devourer of Alcalies: yet their mercuries do resist; whereby they the lesse come down unto the Innes of the urine. The blood also, although it hath an admirable salt for healing, as well fu∣gitive as fixed: yet I have observed it not to be profitable in the Disease of the Stone: But moreover, the shells of Snailes, of Animals of the Earth, or of shell-fishes of the water, as to that part wherein they carry an acide and Limy-salt, they profit indeed, per∣sons having the stone, that want cleansing; but they contain a resistance in respect of their Lixivium, to wit, as they never reach to the urine. The burnt bones of living Creatures, retain no fixed salt in them: but onely a residing Earth without sauour. It is therefore a part of notable Blockishnesse, for Ivory and Harts-horn to be calcined for succours against Diseases; because they bid the powder thereof being deprived of its vertues, to be sold: and so also they deceive the Purse and hope of the sick; they passe by the occasion of well-doing, and make themselves ridiculous. But Quiners do freely pro∣mise for me. For truly their Prooving-pots (which they call Cap lls) ought to consist of ashes, deprived of all salt: Wherefore those are the best that are made of the ashes of Bones, and do far excel those that consist of Ivory, and Harts-horn. 
 For indeed, in my first yeares, the Traditions of the Schooles, were as so many Oracles in my account: But I being perfectly instructed by the fire, all the Speculations of the Schooles were blotted out with the fire. They had perswaded me (amongst other things) that the salt of the Sea was hurtfull for those that were diseased with the Stone; as well in regard, that it afforded matter for the salt of urine; as that, it hurryed down a muckie phlegme for Duelech. The examination of salt by the fire, taught me otherwise. First of all, I preserved a man of sixty yeares old (belonging to my Distillations) sixteen yeares free from the stone of the Kidneys (whereunto otherwise, he had been subject) through a large use of Sea-salt. The which, afterwards, I confirmed in many. For the Schooles, when they saw, that in the sharp brine of salt being cooled, every salt was coa∣gulated after its own manner; and that, that brine was not made pure without mixture, but by an exhalation of the watery part: they presently thought, that the stone was coa∣gulated from a salt and drying heat: and so they supposed, that indeed neither were salts corned in the said brine, but by the heat of the inbred salt: the which therefore is not able to unfold it self into effect, as long as there is very much water present with it. Therefore when they tasted their own snivel to be salt: and that indeed, with the savour of a Sea-salt, but not with the saltnesse of Urine: and they would connex the efficient cause in the matter; they supposed that in the same snivel, there was a slimy and tough matter joyned to the salt: and that, the salt also, was of it self salt: at length they e∣stablishd by a perpetual Decree, that the stone was generated from a salt phlegme, and therefore also being actually hot: and by consequence, that salt things were hurtfull for those that were troubled with the stone. Yea and that phlegme remaining such, its qua∣lities and proper passions being changed, did passe over into a stone, through heat and a slimy dryth; just even as Glew and solder, their watery part by degrees departing, do in∣duce a thick toughnesse of themselves. Good God, how unsavoury are the Schooles, and how unsavoury do they bid us to be? as if thou that dost every where bear a care over Mor∣tals, and art provident for salts; hadst invented by thy study, that they might become stony. How great is their sluggishnesse: that they have never attempted to sprinkle one on∣ly pugill or small handfull of salt upon the Urinal of those that have the stone, that they might try whether Sea-salt would coagulate the future sands, which otherwise would stick fast to the urinals; Whether I say, there be so great a saltnesse of the urine, that it cannot dis∣solve any more of salt in it. For the Urine, if it be for the dissolving of salt: now that salt shall not be the cause of Corning. In the next place, they had easily found, that Sea-salt being cast into the urine, doth hinder its coagulation; but not likewise cause it. That Sea-salt, Isay, doth resolve the prepared matter of the Coagulum or Runnet, and doth not it self receive a curd∣ling. But whatsoever meditates on the destruction of that Runnet, shall of necessity also di∣sturbe the coagulation proceeding from thence. For as the Schooles do deride our Coagu∣lum ' s in things: so likewise I deride their unsavoury Follies; that they think the pebble-stone or flint to grow together, or wax dry in the bottom of the water, through heat. For Foun∣taines and Rivers do contend for a stony curdling, whose bottome hisseth out heat and the Rules of dryth. 
 In the next place, for the curdling of Liquors, our flesh, and likewise the blood; milk, and snivel promiseth: For if it were supposed, that phlegme be the matter [whereof] of the stone, and that the recocted brine of salt, shaved off, and with it self dissolved the mucky filths of salted fleshes: and at length by boyling up, rejected them being thickned, into a froth; verily they had known that the use of Salt is in no wise to be avoided or forbidden. But so great a sluggishnesse of searching, hath beset the Schooles, that they being content with a little infamous Gain, have neglected all things where they might profit their Neighbour, if not also themselves. For if the stone were dissolved in the urine, although being boyled therein, or that, urine were not for dis∣solving of salt cast into it: they might indeed (at the sight of that) have wholly ba∣nished salt out of the use of men. But the common people deride the Schooles, and the use of Salt hath grown frequent, in despight of their Rules: So that the Authority of the Schooles being despised, Food is not onely unpleasant, but also unwholsome, with∣out salt: But if the seasoning of salt smile on the Palate; that is not any otherwise fa∣voured, than as salt resolves the Excrements which burden the stomach with their muc∣kinesse. For if salt be put into the mouth of those that are Catechised or instructed in the Principles of Religion, in the first houres of their Nativity, as a resembling token of Wisdome; But the Schooles have with much endeavour, forbidden all eating of salt; Truly what other thing is to be presaged from thence, but that the Heathenish Schooles do not admit of Wisdome; to wit, the resembling Mark whereof they advise to be ex∣cluded? And that the Church doth from the Beginning, intend the destruction of In∣fants? For salt is sequestred out of Jakes ' s, by the Boylers of Salt-peter; such as was once received into the Body together with the meats. Therefore it ought likewise, to remain in Duelech it self. But there is not so much as the least of Sea-salt, found to pro∣ceed from Duelech by Art. And that thing the Schooles might have learned with no charge, if any earnest desire of learning, and Charity towards their Neighbour had acted them. At leastwise, the Boylers of Salt-peter have been more curious or carefull than so many ten thousands of Phisitians. The reproach therefore re-bounds on themselves, as every one of the vulgar sort, doth now know, how unpolished the Decrees of the Schooles are: Since they know not in the Dietary part of Medicine, to what end they forbid salted things. Nor indeed, had it been to be feared, if not salt it self, but onely the spirit thereof should hurt the Diseased with the stone. 1. Because salt is forbidden by the Schooles; Ages and the Schooles being hitherto ignorant, whether there be any spirit to be found in salt, or of what condition it might be, 2. That power in acting, is in vain, which is never brought forth into act. For it is sufficiently manifest, that out of Sea-salt received into the Body, there is never any possible drawing forth of its spirit in us. For it is most sharp, neither hath it a Remedy like unto it self, for extinguishing of the burning heats of the urine, even while the stone is present in the Bladder; also, in the Stranguries of old people, it hinders putrefactions, dissolveth mucky filths, and expelleth sands. Therefore salt is profitable for those that have the stone, as well in its body, as in its spirit. For indeed, Fountain-salt, was given by the providence of divine Bounty, for the necessities of mortal men: That where the Continent departs from the Sea, by a long Tract of Land, saltish Springs or Fountaines might supply that defect of the Sea. But the Schooles are so far from repaying thanks to God for his Benefit; that they accuse God to have given salt, not onely in vain, but also for the destruction of men: It is to be noted in the mean time, that salt flowes down into the Sea from many and plentifull Fountaines; yet that the saltnesse of the Sea is not increased thereby; be∣cause something of salt ascends by degrees from the Sea, in manner of a vapour: and however it may be converted into its first matter of water, at leastwise in the Clouds it hath some kind of constancy or perseverance in it. From whence, it is no wonder, that Rain-water by it self, is not to be corrupted in any Ages. But in the more hot Zone, that salt doth exhale even out of the Sea, is manifest: for there is none but smells out whether fleshes are boyled in a pot, with salt, or without it. But the Sea-salt, seeing it makes for the preservation of the Element, doth difficultly exhale. 
 Therefore the Spanish Sea well nigh wants a vapoury salt, is stronger, and the more expels putrefaction, and Duelech. On the contrary, the Seas of Lorraine, abound with a vapoury salt, and it in part, waxeth sower in the stomach. Also, that vapoury spirit of salt (which is sublimed, being as it were the flowre of salt) differs from the distilled spirit of salt; just even as Oyl of Olives doth from Oyl of Bricks. For the spirit of Oyl of Olives which departs in its first moity, with me doth at length dissolve a silver thred in a Bottle: But Oyl of Olives preserves Iron from rust. And far more powerfully, doth that re∣maind of Oyl, from whence the aforesaid half or moity was withdrawn, preserve rustinesse. Therefore it is to be noted, that there is not a more pure and , than that which is re-cocted or re-boyled from the brine of Swines-flesh. For seasoning, or operating on the Swines-flesh its object, it lost its more vapoury spirit by coagulation. And so the residing salt being almost fixed and freed from its earth∣linesse, is found to be clear and most fit for Sawces. It being also cast into an Hogs∣head of sowring Ale or Beer, preserves the same, which other salt doth not so do. Where∣fore it drinks up into its self, and transchangeth the superfluous sharp spirits in us, which are the Authours of all Corruption, if they shall be out of the shops of the first digesti∣on. It being thus re-boyled with Spanish-salt, it is almost equal in goodnesse, with that which was at first dissolved in the bright burning-pot: Since therefore Sea-salt is not of the composition of urine, but is wholly a forreigner unto it, and so remaines: yea, since Sea-salt being detained in the urine, keeps its nature unmixed and unchanged, even until the last extraction of things, and separation of the Salt-peter; it is certain, that it hath not any businesse with Duelech. And therefore, that neither is the least of Sea-salt ever found in the composition hereof; seeing it more destroyes the native birth of Duelech, than it doth promote it. Therefore Sea-salt is forbidden by the Schooles unto those that have the stone without a foundation. Thus much of Salts. 
 But I had hitherto learned, that Duelech was an irregular coagulated matter, bred from the salt of Urine, which had not its peere in the whole Universe: for that Mans urine is never found, out of man; For therefore it irked me not, many times to distill Urine. 
 Therefore I decreed to putrifie my own urine for full 40 days in a Horses belly, that by a foregoing ferment of putrefaction, the unlike parts thereof might dis-unite. Then I distilled abovt a half part thereof: But being called away from the work by reason of business of my Family, and afterwards being letted through the Feasts of Pentecost, I ceased from it for fifteen dayes. But the Vessel receiving it, was exceeding great, clear, Crystal∣line, and precious: the which I had now sequestred from the long snout of an Alembick, all that interval of time: when as therefore I returned to the Work; first I powred forth that which had been distilled, into another Bottle: because I saw that the distilled Liquor of the Urine had on every side touched the receiving Vessel (otherwise easily ca∣pable of containing three Gallons) it being over-covered with a duskish whitenesse. I was grieved that a Glass so precious, was stained about so sordid a matter. And then I was the more angry, when I saw that the blemish contracted was not to be taken away by any ashes. For it repented me of my wastfull, and so often repeated curiosity. There∣fore I powred that that was distilled, out of doores. But presently I had this prick of sloath and unwonted indignation, suspected by me. I admired within my self, that man who before spared no paines and Costs, should now be wroth at the destruction of one Vessel. Therefore I well weighed with my self, that receiving Vessel, whether its blemish were of a forreign tincture, or whether any thing had perished from its conca∣vous superficies being corroded. At length, I certainly knew, that out of the most clear watery distillation,, a true dusky Duelech was adjoyned to the Vessel. But then, I being full of admiration, praised the Lord, who had undertook the care of me: for those things which I judged I had committed through my own carelesnesse, I knew had come to pass by divine Goodnesse so disposing it. For unto whom he will, he converts all things into good. Indeed, I had already long since beheld in my urine, a Coagulater of so great a moment, to inhabite. And now at length, I had also learned; that that most clear Liquor that was separated from the urine, putrified in the Vat, did containe a true Duelech, which it had applyed to the receiving Vessel. From whence, first of all, it became an undoubted truth unto me, that there did in no wise concur a slimy mat∣ter unto the Composition of Duelech. That Vessel therefore, although pretious, and now condemned for its blemish, was dear unto me, because it had paid a Reward of Teach∣ing to its Master. Therefore I again put it in the place of a Receiver, as thinking, that I should at sometime shave of that Duelech by Aqua Regis. Therefore I proceed∣ed in distilling the residue that had remained unto me after the fifteen dayes respite. And behold, I being astonished through a new favour of divine Bounty, saw all the par∣ticular drops to dissolve the adhering duskish Duelech, where they ran down, and the Vessel presently restored to its former brightnesse. Also, that this second Liquor, although it had the odour of the former, yet being poured on Aqua vitae, did not likewise, coagulate this any longer. And so I being led by a divine beck (which others suppose to be an E∣vent by Chance) found part of that, which with care or anguish I had long since sought with many charges, Therefore I praised the Lord, that he had given understanding to the little one and poor. For if he had not commanded me to be called away from my work; and if those Feasts had not detained me untill Duelech had grown together in the Receiver, and unless the Vessel had been so clear and pretious; And moreover, if I had finished the operation with one thred: Surely I had wrought and attempted all things in vain. The Lord therefore had respect unto the necessities of mortals; neither de∣spised he the prayers of the dejected in spirit. Wherefore, he gave me knowledge of the divers parts of a healthy Urine: that is, my own. One indeed was after some sort the lighter and more swift, part having Duelech hidden under a clear distillatory Liquor, without a dreg, snivel, and sediment; But in a most clear distillation, and cold of the en∣compassing Ayr. But the other part, was alike admirable, which in cold also, again dissol∣ved Duelech that took its rise in cold, and supt it up into its self. For I seriously admired so opposite faculties in one onely volatile salt of urine: afterwards indeed, I considered, that whose urine had more of the former spirit, he was subject to the stone: and the other was free, whose urine contained more of the other spirit; and that first conception smi∣led on me: but that discursive knowledge was vain, and especially unprofitable for the managing of Affaires: For truly, the urine doth not undergoe in us those foregoing marks of putrefaction; without which notwithstanding, those Beings would sleep for ever. And then, neither was there a mean made manifest from that Speculation, where∣by more of that latter spirit should alwayes be made, or by what method a composure of the former spirit might be restrained. And much lesse, after what manner, Duelech being now composed, there might be given a relief against him. Notwithstanding, least that Speculation should depart without fruit; I considered, whether that latter spirit (the U∣rine being first evacuated) might be granted to be cast into a stony Bladder, by a Syringe. Therefore the knowledge of mortals offers it self to me as barren; which rejoycing in Speculation alone, withdrawes their hand from the Art of the fire. For urine being duly putrified, yields spirit a Coagulater, which coagulates Aqua vitae: And likewise after∣wards such a spirit, which being wholly transparent and volatile, containes a Duelech [potential] or in possibility, because it brings him forth, and at length such a spirit, which presently sups up Duelech (being once bred) into it self: Notwithstanding, the Devil straightway disswading me, I as doubtfull, began to stagger, and considered, that those things were vain, which being found by me, I so greatly esteemed. Especially, seeing the urine putrifies not in us unto that limit or degree, whereby it had afforded these spirits. There∣fore I detested my own Curiosities: For although they after some sort suggested a Reme∣dy, yet they left the former ignorance behind them, concerning the causes and manner of making Duelech. Wherefore I began to neglect all things lately seen, as if they had not been done, and I left a sleepy drowsinesse to be stir ' d up in me; From whence I was confirmed (the which, I have explained in many particulars in my Preface) that no la∣bour is more tedious or wearisome, and no kind of knowledge (through the disswasion of the Devil) more to be disregarded, than that, from whence mankind may at some∣time receive fruit. Therefore it becomes a Christian, to be of a constant mind in a good work. 
 At length therefore, my distillations being repeated, and that with a more exact de∣lay, I by prayer attained the causes, manner of making, and dissolving of Duelech. Good God, I admire thy great Bounty, which hath led the most unmeet of Physitians unto the disclosing of so great a thing, which hath been neglected for so many Ages, and by so many great Wits. I therefore return thanks unto thy infinitely Glorious Name; not because thou hast led me on unto these Secrets before others (for can the Earth boast it self, and say to the other small Vessels [Vah] or [Fie] as a note of disdaining? be∣cause it is brought under the Potters-Wheel, into a Vessel of a more choyce form?) But because thou hast done thy will, which alone is good: I therefore ascribe unto thee all the Glory, who hast in this Age, disclosed this knowledge by the basest and little Ones of this World: For that is according to thy accustomed manner; and that, for the grea∣ter Glory of thy Name. For I knew, that the one onely sluggishnesse of those, who being deceived by the sweetnesse of the Odour of Gain, have despised to distill a matter so stinking and base, hath hindred both the Antient and Modern Physitians. For Wis∣dom despiseth those, who have refused perfectly to learn the matter [whereof] Dispo∣sitions, Contents, Properties, Progress, and Significations of the Urine, by the Fire. For neither have they lesse stumbled in the matter, Content, and Judgements of Urines, than hitherto they have done in the stonifying of the same: wherefore both the diagnostical or discernable Knowledge, and also the judicial fore-knowledge of urines hath remained hidden: even as we have from a Foundiation, demonstrated in our Ʋronoscopia or Inspe∣ction of the Ʋrine: the which, I heartily wish, that the more fervent Judgements would hereafter practise. For truly, I prepare my self for my Grave, under hope, that my La∣bours will not be unprofitable for humane miseries. 
 I will now proceed to reckon up my blockishnesses, and the wearinesses of ex∣periences. For first of all, from Duelech being dissected, and distilled all alone by him∣self: and also from the shavings of the Urinal: Thirdly also, from the urine be∣ing distilled unto the thicknesse of an Ecligma or Lohoch, altogether the same Oyl, and the same Crystals of liquid dung do arise: For from Duelech there is left an earthy Lee, being black, brickle, and burnt, no longer rocky, and scarce reserving any thing of the more fixed salt of urine: Because the volatile Spirit is wholly throughout its whole, changed into Duelech, and at length into an earth, with other parts of the composition being adjoyned unto it. Verily, for a sure signe, that the fixed salt of Urine hath not the faculty of an active Runnet: but is onely coagulated pas∣sively.
But since the remedies of Nature are subject unto so many Courts of digestions, and bodies of so eminent an excellency, do possess a violence and strength of acting, and likewise have filths admixed with them, or difficult bolts; truly, the art of the fire is ne∣ver sufficiently esteemed, which now and then graduates one Simple to that height, that it persecutes with revenge all the excrementitious filths of the digestions, even into the uttermost coasts of the body: otherwise, in the last digestion, very many griefs do offer themselves, they being referred by the Schools, among incurable ones, by reason of one only fault of a remedy alone, which accompanies, and accuseth the defect; no o∣therwise than as they are destitute of curing, in the work of witches, because remedies are neglected, which may go into the root of the malady: For truly, those devilish dis∣commodities do not lay hold so much on the body, or the filths thereof, as on the Ar∣cheus himself; the which, since he is as it were the clear image of the man, it follows, that while that Spirit is wrested, aside in any Organ of its body, the same member suffers the sumptoms of the Archeus: And so, whatsoever the Spirit suffers, which is the Ruler of life and sense, it must needs be, that the body suffers; but not on the contrary: For neither doth he that is maimed in one leg, therefore generate a maimed off-spring, be∣cause the spirit is not defectuous: For whatsoever the body suffers, although the Spirit feels this same thing; yet this is not drawn together, unless the passion incline unto ex∣tremity; that is, that it is co-fermented within the root of life, or implanted spirit; e∣ven as I have elsewhere shewn concerning the convulsion in the Colick. Its no wonder therefore, if a Tartar of the blood be stirred up by the state, or insisting urgency of the Archeus: For who is he that knows not, that indignation, confusion, a sorrowful mes∣sage, affrightful fear, &amp;c. do presently take away an appetite of eating, do stir-up sighs, or tears, and extend an unwonted fardle under the Midriffs; to wit, as the nourishment of the sixth digestion degenerates in the stomach, namely, where such passions are imme∣diately framed. This Tartar of the blood therefore, being once become degenerate, doth presently molest in manner of an Enemy. And even as a dog being once mad, pays the punishment of his madness with his own death; So that Tartar being once banished, and referred into the number of excrementitious filths, doth never afterwards return into favour; because, whatsoever the Archeus once forsaketh, straightway dieth, and that which is dead doth no more revive, nor strike a peace with the Enemy: Therefore an earnest desire of revenge, and indignation of self-love, are radically co-bred in the first Fountain of Nature: They do also more manifestly rise up in the more perfect subject, and so in sensitive creatures, do challenge to themselves the animosity and glory of a wrathful power. Wherefore that Tartar of the blood, being subdued by the plague, doth no longer obey the Laws of Life, but repenting of its former obedience, arrogates to it self an unbridled liberty of fury, and by so much the more cruelly molesteth us, by how much the more confidently it hath once received the hidden counsels of the Archeus within; which thing, the Schools name, to symbolize or co-resemble: For then it is an houshold-Thief, unto which the ways to the treasure, and privy store-houses are known: For how speedily do a few drops of corrupt matter under the scull, kill? and what cruelty doth not the blood chased out of the veins, threaten? how cruel, is even but one only thorn in an Aposteme? Its no wonder therefore, that the Pest, the most fierce of diseases, doth presently bring forth its own product, and if it shall not find sea , that it present∣ly makes one for it self: notwithstanding, a hope of curing the plagu remaineth, because that Tartar, and the Pest its own Inn, may be puf away or dis ssed by a due banishment of swea : The which understand thou, as long as it shall remain in the shape of dissol∣vable Tartar: For otherwise, if it shall catch hold of a solid part, the hope of life fails, unless the part it self which is catcht hold of can forthwith be sequestred: But Wheals, black strakes, or black and blew spo s or tokens, denote the Archeus to be affected; for they are the superficial tinctures of the skin, the which, if they shall the more deeply lay hold of, they do also cauterixe it: and since they do immediately pierce the Archeus be∣fore others, they stand in need of a most speedy remedy. 
 It is also worthy to be noted, th t an unsensible transpiration in the plague, differs from sweat; because Diaphaeresis or unsensible transpiration is the matter of the nourish∣ment, and so also of the Tartar of the blood, being defiled; but sweat is of the substance of the Latex: But transpiration, seeing it is continual, it is also without sweat. Hence it comes to pass, that sweat doth most especially wash off, and for that cause, a dry tran∣spiration is seldom sufficient for curing of the plague: and therefore a plentiful rincing sweat is to be provoked; that while the Pestilent Tartar breatheth the naughtiness of its poyson thorow the pores, it may be partly washed off by the sweat, and the delay of its departure be partly speedied. Here a difficulty is manifest to be noted, and not deci∣ded by the Schools; to wit, why some defects of the stomach are cured not by vomiting, or stool, but only by sweat; because they consist in the Retents of the stomach being transchanged in the sixth digestion, but not in the remainders of the Cream. The Plague therefore, for the most part begins in the stomach, and there begets and infects the Tartar, whereon, as soon as the perturbations of the Archeus have made their assaults: For every imagination of the desirable faculty hath its seat in the same place, and there frames its Idea; and chiefly, about the orifice of the stomach, the vital powers are concealed, as I have elsewhere many times profe ly demonstrated. But because the Tartar of the blood is in the form of a mucky sliminess; Hence the Idea of the Pest willingly buds forth into Glandules: for the stomach, and the Archeus thereof, because it sends a continual society of imagining into the brain; hence are Parotides or tumors behind the ears: But it pierceth thorow the Diaphragma into the lungs, and arm-pits, and a perplexity of breathing doth arise. But pestiferous odours being prepared in the stomach, frequent vomitings do accompany them, together with a pain in the head, the which, we having often experienced from the odours of burning coals, to have vomited with headach, and a dejected appetite: But if they proceed unto the Liver; Now there is a Bubo in the groyn. 
 CHAP. IX. Minerals and herbs do imagine after their ownirregular manner. VVHatsoever subsisteth by a real essence, doth after some sort love it self: Where∣fore also, it hath the sense of a friend, or enemies; that is, of its own commo∣dities, and troubles: wherefore, a self-love resteth in the bosome of Nature: But things do scarce ever remain in the same state, without interchange: Therefore they undergo somewhat: but if they suffer, and walk in the way of destruction, verily it must needs be, that they have a cause from whence they are grieved: Wherefore, sympathy and antipa∣thy are observed to be even in stones; but in the Load-stone, most manifestly; the which notwithstanding cannot consist without a sense or feeling: But wheresoever that sense is, although it be dull, it happens also, that some shew of imagination agreeable to its sub∣ject, doth accompany it: For otherwise, it is altogether impossible for any thing to love; desire, attract, and apply that which is consonant to it self, or to shun any thing adverse to it self, unless a certain sense, knowledge, desire of, and aver eness from the object are reciprocally present. 
 All which things do enclose in them an obscure act of feeling, imagination, and certain image of choice: For else, by what means shall a thing be moved, or altered at the presence of its object, unlesse it feel or percieve that very object to be present with it self: If it perceive, how shall it be altered, except under a conception of the passion felt by it self? And unlesse that felt conception doth include some certain imagination in it self? Take notice Reader, that in this corner, all the abstruse knowledge of oc∣cult or hidden properties layeth, which the Schools have banished from their diligent search: they desisting from whence they were to begin, according to that Maxim; A Phylosopher must begin where nature ends: I have therefore deliberated more exactly to demonstrate, that in inanimate things here inhabiteth a kind of sense, phantasie, yea, and of choice, yet in a proportionable respect, according to the capacity and degree of every one. 
 I do not in the mean time make mention of Zoophytes or Plant-Animals, which re∣mote absence of proving, might unto many seem to be ridiculous: But our paradox will offend none who moderatly understands it. 
 First of all, it is not to be doubted, but that some flowers do accompany the Sun, as well in cleer days, in those wherein the Sun doth not shine, as in nights themselves; they attesting that they have a motion, sense, and love of the Sun: because, without which it is impossible for them to accompany the hidden Sun. For even as late in the even∣ing they loose the Sun in the West (the which, while he hastens towards the East, doth not operate amongst us who abide in the shadow of the earth) yet in the mean time, whether the night be hot, be cold, be cleer, or rainy., the flowers notwithstanding do not cease equally to bend themselves towards the east: Which thing first of all, poynts out that there is in them a knowledge of the rising, and circuite of the Sun, in what part he is to set, and in what to rise; cal thou it the instinct of nature, or as it listeth thee: For names will not change the matter: the matter it self is of a deed done, but the deed hath its cause in the flower: But that these things do thus happen in plants vegetatively enlivened, it is the lesse wonder: But that they have place also in Minerals, I thus prove: There is al∣most nothing made in nature, without a proper motion: and nothing is moved volunta∣rily or by it self, but by reason of the property put into it by the Creator, which proper∣ty, the Antients name a proper love, and for this cause they will have self-love to be the first born daughter of nature, given unto it, and bred in it for its own preservation: And when this is present, there is of necessity, also a Sympathy, and Antipathy, in re∣spect of the diversity of objects: For so the feathers of other birds are said to undergo rottennesse by the feathers or wings of an Eagle: and cloath made of the wools of sheep that died of their own accord, is soon of its own accord, in the holes which are beaten thorow it, resolved as it were with rottennesse, in what places the threds of the dead wool run down: So a drum made of a sheep and asses skin, is dumb, if a neighbouring drum made of the hide of a wolf, be beaten. 
 The skin of a Gulo (it is a most devouring creature in Swethland) stirs up in a man, however sober he be, and not a hunter, the ordinary sleeps from hunting and eating: if the party sleeping be covered with the same. But what are these things to miner∣als? Truly I proceed from the vegetable kingdom, through dead things, by degrees, un∣to stones, whereunto the holy Scriptures attribute great virtue: For indeed, stones could neither move, nor alter, if they had not an act of feeling of their own object: For nei∣ther could red Coral wax pale, if being born about, it shall touch the flesh of a men∣struous woman, unlesse it self felt the defects thereof: For the Load-stone bewrays it self, as the most manifest of stones, which by a proper local motion inclines it self to the North, as if it were vital: But not that it is drawn by the north: Because if a Load-stone be placed toward the north in a woodden box, in the averse part of it, upon the face of a standing pool of water, the box, with the other and opposite corner of the stone, speedily as may be, rowls it self to the North: Therefore, if that should be done, by a drawing of the north, and not by a voluntary impulsive motion of the Load-stone it self; the box should in like manner, presently also, by the same attraction, yield it self unto the north bank: The which notwithstanding, comes not to passe: but the box, together with its stone, remains unmoved, after that the stone together with the box, hath retorted it self on the requisite side, and by a requisite motion. It is clear therefore, that the Load-stone doth of its own free accord, rowl it self to the North: From whence afterwards it followes, that there is in it a sense, knowledge, and desire unto the north, and also the beginning of a conformable motion. 
 Furthermore, if any one doth hold a polished piece of steel nigh the aforesaid box, toward the South-side, the Load-stone then forthwith neglects the north, and turns it self to the steel; so that the box not only turns it self to the steel, but that it wholly also, swims toward the north: whence also it is plain to be seen, that the Load-stone is carried with a stronger appetite to the iron, than to the North; and that the steel hath lesse of a successive alteration in it, than the North: Consequently also it is manifest, that it is strong in a manifest choice of objects. Some have moved a frivolous doubt a∣bout this matter; To wit, whether the Load stone draws the iron, or indeed the iron drawes the Load-stone it self? As not knowing that there is a mutual attraction on both sides, which comes not by little and little, by reason of much familiarity, neither doth it keep respects, not observe the ends of its own gain, fruition, circumstances, or conse∣quence: 
 Neither is that drawing subject to a flatterer, o defamer: out it is a gift originally in∣bred by nature, in the Archeusses on either part, and marked with a proprietary character by him who made all things; so that indeed, if the steel be lighter than the Load-stone, it is drawn to the Loadstone; but otherwise, if the stone be lighter than the steel: Be∣cause the drawing is not in the one, and the obedience of the drawing in the other; but there is one only mutual inclinative drawing, and not of the drawer with a skirmishing of the resister: And so, from hence it is manifest, that a desire is in nature before the drawing, and that the drawing followes the desire as some latter thing, as the effect doth its cause. If therefore, according to the testimony of truth, all things are to be discerned by their works, and the fruits do bewray their own tree; truly such attractive inclinations cannot subsist without the testimony of a certain co-participated life, sensati∣on, knowledge, and election. 
 Moreover, neither is the life of minerals lesse than the life of vegetables, distinguish∣ed from the animal life, by their own life, and their generations among themselves: Because that which is vegetable, and that which is mineral, do not operate but one, or a few proper things; and the same things as yet, with a precisenesse, interchangeable course, property, inclination, and necessity, as oft as a proper object is present with them: but a living creature operates many things, and those neither constrainedly, as neither by accident of the object; but altogether by desire, well pleasing, appetite, will, and choice of some certain deliberation; Seeing the first operation of the same is life; but the second, a proper appetite, desire or love, or delight. At length, thirdly, there is a deliberative and distinctive choice of objects: So I have seen a Bull that was filled with lust, to have d spised an old Cow; but an heifer being offered him, to have again presently after, want nized. 
 But the first operation of things obscurely living, is a power unto a seminal essenti∣alnesse. 
 Next, the second, is an exercise of powers, and properties. 
 At length, the third operation, is a greater, and lesse inclination, motion, and know∣ledge: The which indeed, flow not from a deliberative election or choice; but from a potestative interchangeable course, strangenesse, likenesse, appropriation, purity, or unaptnesse of objects: wherefore it was a right opinion of the Antients, that all things are in all after the manner of the receiver: But those powers by reason of their undiscerned obscurity, and the sloath of diligent searchers, have been scarce believed; but by pre∣decessours, and moderns, were not considered: and by reason of the difficulties of ac∣cesse, they have circumvented the world with a wandring despaire, and with the name of occult properties have hood-winkt themselves by their own sluggishnesse: But my scope in this place hath been; that if in Herbs and Minerals, there are such kind of no∣tions, the Authoresses and moderatresses of hidden properties; the same, by a far more potent reason, and after a more plentiful manner do inhabite in flesh and blood; To wit, excellently, with a particular and affected notion, motion, inclination, appe∣tite, love, interchangeable course, hostility and resistance; as with that which occurs in us through the service of the five senses: Even so that in flesh and blood, there is a certain seminal notion, distinction, imagination, of love, conveniency, likenesse, and also of fear, terror, sorrow, resistance, &amp;c. with a beholding of gain, and losse, offence, and complacency, of superiority I say, and inferiority, and so of the agent, and the pa∣tient. 
 Because those necessary dependances of a consequent necessity, do flow from, and accompany the aforesaid sensations or acts of feeling: The which surely in the vital blood are characterized in a higher degree, by reason of the inbred Archeus the Author and workman of any of these passions whatsoever, than otherwise, in the whole kind that is not soulified or quickned: For a tooth from a dead carcase, that dyed by the extinguish∣ment of its powers, constraineth any tooth of a living man to wither and fall out, only by its touching, because it compels it to be despised by the life: The which, a tooth from a dead carcase slain by a violent death, or presently extinguished by a sharp disease, doth not likewise perform. In like manner, the hair of a dead carcass whose life was taken away by degrees, by a voluntary death, makes persons bauld only by its touching: Watts, and brands brought on the Young by the perturbation of a woman great with child, through the touching of a dead carcase that died of its own accord, and by degrees, untill part of the branded mark shall wax more inwardly cold; the mark also doth by de∣grees, voluntarily vanish away. Observe well with me, whether these are not the testimonies of another act of feeling than that of cold. 
 Moreover, whether in that same sensation, there be not a natural knowledge, and fear of death connexed, which things are as yet also in the dead carcass: For truly a Tetanus or straight extension of a dead carcase, or stiffnesse thereof, is not a certain congelation of cold; But a mear convulsion of the muscles, abhorring death, and living even after the departure of the soul: For from hence the dead carcases of those who die by a violent death, because they die, the faculties of their flesh being not altogether extinguished, they feel not the aforesaid Tetanus but a good while after. 
 CHAP. X. A living creature imaginative. I Have said that Herbs and Minerals do imagine by a certain instinct of nature, that is, after their own manner: so in the next place, that the blood and mummie have certain na∣tive conceptions, in order, and likenesse unto man: which things, that they may be directed unto our purpose concerning the Plague; thou mayest remember, after what sort the perturbations of a woman great with child, her hand being applied unto some cer∣tain member, although unadvisedly, rashly, and without a concurrence of the will, do de∣cipher the member in the Young co-agreeing in co-touching, with the image of the object of that perturbation: with the image I say, but not with an idle signature. But suppose thou that her desire was to a cherry; verily a cherry is deciphered in the young, and in a co-like member, such as the child-bearing woman shall touch with her hand, which cherry waxeth green, yellow, and red every year, at the same stations wherein the cher∣ries of a tree do attain those interchanges of colours: And which is far more wonder∣ful, it hath happened that the Young so marked, hath suffered these signatures of co∣lours in the Low-countries, in [the moneths called] May and June; which after∣wards expressed the same in Spain, in [those called] March and April. And at length the Young returning into his countrie, shewed them again in a bravery, in [those cal∣led] May and June: Also under a strong impression of a woman great with child, not onely a new generation of a cherry is brought in thereupon; but it also happens that the old one is to be changed, and it constrains a seminal generation to give place; yea, and the image of God being now lively or in the readinesse its coming, not to come, and that a strange-born creature and monster is substituted in its place: Of the contin∣gencies whereof, daily, and unvoluntary experiences are full: which power is granted to be given to a woman great with child: yet not that therefore in other women, the i∣mages of conceipts are not likewise brought unto the womb wherein an embryo doth not inhabite: For I have taught in a particular treatise, that the disturbances of men are framed in the midriffs, about the mouth of the stomach, to wit, that in men, they from thence ascend unto the heart; but in a woman that they are more readily sent unto the womb: because a woman doth naturally appoint vital inspirations for her Young: And so, every commotion of the midriffs in a woman, hath continually respect unto the womb, whether a Young be present or not. Whosoever therefore much disturbs a woman with grief, &amp;c. from a deliberate minde: he willingly sends into her, a disease: And he that molests a woman great with young, let him know that he hurts the mother, and off-spring: Hence maides, about the years of maturity, if they are vexed with the conceipts of difficulties, they are wont continually to decypher the sides of their womb with the vain Idea ' s of conceptions, and for the most part they are made unto them∣selves the A horesses of various sumptoms, for inordinate lusting: Because the womb doth not suffer its tranquility to be taken away by forreign images, without punishment. But a man formes his images in his mid iffs, as well those of the desirable, as of the wrothful faculty, so that madnesse is therefore not undeservedly called, hypochondri∣al; and that thing happens no otherwise than as in a woman: but he transmitts the Idea ' s of conceipts, more freely unto the heart, and brain: For a certain man exspecting that on the morrow morning, a Major would be sent for his houshold goods, sitting sorrow∣ful all the night with his head leaned on the palm of his hand, in the morning had that side of his head grey, in what part his temples had touched his hand: And so the hand of a woman with child translates her own exorbitances unto her womb, and the hand of a man his feares, even into the skin of his head. 
 At leastwise, from hence it is manifest that there is a true growth and nourishment of the haires, and not a vain signature of colours; but that they are not in-bred by an ap∣plication expelling from behind: and then, that the perturbation in men, is much ak to that of a woman, although far more infirme. I have taught also elsewhere, that the efficacy of disturbances consisteth in the spleen: Wherefore antiquity hath accounted Saturn the principle and parent of the starry gods, also the highest of the wandring stars, to wit, the which should cast his influence downwards on the rest, but that the rest should in no wise reflect upwards, because the stars are believed to conspire for the commodi∣ties of sublunary things, but not upwards: Therefore they called Saturn the origina of life, and the beginning of conceptions, or generations; yea and they named him the de∣vourer of a young child; poynting out hereby, that the images framed by the desirable faculty, do make seeds fruitful, and also the Inns of digestions in us; even as when they are exorbitant they consume the new or tender blood, and enforce very many di∣seases on us. 
 Therefore the imagination of the spleen hath the first violent assaults, which are g a t∣ted not to be in our power: Saturn therefore was feigned to be as it were without a be∣ginning: but Jupiter the chief off-spring thereof, casting down his father from his seat, signified the brightnesse of reason subduing the first assault of imagination: But an image formed by imagination, is presently in the spleen, cloathed with the vital spirit, and assumeth it, whence an Idea is fortified for the execution of works: for what per∣son is he who hath not sometimes felt disturbances, anguishes, and the occasions of sigh∣ing about the orifice of his stomach, in which part the spleen is most sensitive, even as also the touching in the fingers ends? Is not the appetite taken away from an hungry man, by a sorrowful message? Be it observeable in this place, that although the essential disposition of things aprehended in time of the perturbation, be plainly unknown unto the woman with child, yet she wholly formeth and figureth the same in her young, while as without the trunk of the trees, she frameth a cherry in the flesh, in an instant, contein∣ing the internal essence, and the knowledges of a seminal cherry. Its no wonder there∣fore, if that a terrour from the plague, frameth an Idea of the plague, from whence the plague it self doth presently bud, although the sensitive soul of man be ignorant of the es∣sence of the plague. 
 Heer an open field is made manifest, to prove that the knowledges or Idea ' s of all things, are formed in us by the power of the sensitive soul; yet that they lay obscured in the immortal mind, which we believe to have been present with Adam, while as he put right names on the bruit beasts: For if the conceipt of a woman being allured by the over∣flowing of some certain perturbation, can decypher the inward dispositions of plants, or animals (yea sometimes, with a total transmutation of her young) it must needs be, that in the mind it self, as in the essential engravement of the divine image, an essential notion at least of sublunary things doth inhabite, only being depressed and deformed in the impurity of nature, and spot of original sin: otherwise, the sensitive soul can∣not do strange things which it knows not, and hath not; and so there is need for the immortal mind to have a conflux hereunto, it being stirred up by perturbations: It is a very obscure and difficult way, whereby Adeptists, by no help of books, do strive by seeking to obtain some former light of sciences: And therefore also, they call it the labour of wisdom: and Paracelsus esteems it to be ten-fold easier than to have learn∣ed Grammer: 
 Yet Picus is of opinion, that unlesse the operater makes use of a mean, he will soon die of a Binsica, or drynesse of the brain: That the spirit of life will be diminish∣ed by reason of a daily continuance of speculations. Whatsoever that may be, at leastwise, the ignorance of causes hath neglected most things, and the helpings of the sick have been exspected in vain. But I have discussed in this place of images or likenesses bred in the imagination, whereby it may be manifest, after what man∣ner every corporeal body proceeds from an invisible and incorporeal Beginning (the which, they of old affirmed to be fetcht from the intelligible world) by the imagination of the foregoing parent, in imitating after a certain similitude, the creation of the world, being from the command of the incomprehensible word, [Fiat] once made of the infinitenesse of a nothing: The which afterwards, ob∣tained its continuation from the gift of the word; Let seeds be brought forth; To wit, by a fore deduced imagination as well of plants, as of animals: Nature there∣fore, in following the power infused into her, brings forth every seed by the image of a certain conception. There is indeed, as well in living creatures, as in plants, yea and in minerals themselves, every one their own imagination, after their own improper manner; yet on both sides the productresse of the fruitfullnesse of seeds, as well for a natural Being, as for that of super-incidents and monstrous ones:
Because the imagination frames an image of the thing conceived, which by its gifts given it of God, it converts into a Mean, which is called a seed; To wit, with∣out which image, every seed is only an empty husk: No otherwise, than as the blossom of a pippin, not having a promised pippin behind it, is a vain braggery: That image, and seminal one, even as it bears in it self a perfect similitude of its own image to be conceived; so also, a free and uncorrupted knowledg of things to be done by it self under the race of generation: Yet this is remarkeable in generati∣ons; that as a woman with Child doth not operate the wonders proposed, unlesse she be sore smitten with perturbations, and the flint be struck against the steel; so the seeds of living creatures cease to be fruitful, unlesse a disturbance of ust be con∣joyned, making the soul to descend into the seed, that it may enlighten that seed: Wherefore herbs languish presently after their product, the scope of their imagina∣tion or property being compleated: But minerals, because they are not ordained to stir up a race out of their own bodies, by so much also they have the ends of their own imagination far more obscure. 
 Since therefore, all generation presupposeth an image, according to which it ex∣ecutes its own dispositions: Hence it cannot come to passe, that an imagination of terrour should generate an Idea of love, nor that a phantasy of fear from an enemy, should produce a phant sie of terrour from the plague. Also places infected with the Pest, are not undeservedly to be avoided; and not only by reason of the air being already vi iated and defiled; but also, that objects may be avoyded, which conduce unto the imagination of terrour. Now the shoare whither we f l appears afar of, and after what sort terrour may be the Father of the plague. It al o happens that children do most speedily imagine, and are disturbed; yet their perturbations do not carry seeds in their images, or cause the plague unto themselves by terror: For it is with these even so as with a young musitian, who in his first lessons, doth not transmit his cogitation conceived unto his fingers, but with difficulty: But after that he is skil∣ful in his art, and fingers are now accustomed unto the images of tunes, and motions; they undoubtfully perform the command of the phantasie, and perfectly sound out the whole hymn, although now and then, through an attentive discourse, he shall divert his minde from the musick: For neither do his fingers cease to proceed unto the end of the well apprehended song. 
 CHAP. XI. Things requisite for the Idea of an imagined Plague. EXperience hath oft-times caused a belief, that some one hath prepared the ab∣sent Plague in himself and his, through terrour alone: which truth sheweth, that the image of the phantasie, doth from the incorporeal essence of its own nakednesse and simplicity of cogitation, cloath it self by little and little, and put on the Spirit of Life, and leaves therein its own seminal product: a Being surely, most ready for great and terrible enterprizes. But moreover, that it is not yet sufficient for the execution of its appointment (for it is found, that the Image arriving at the Bowels, doth never∣thelesse oft-times wax feeble) Therefore, I have declared, that in a Woman great with Child, the hand is moreover required, it being the Instrument of Instruments, as an ex∣ternal Instrument and sign of the determined member whereon the Image is to be en∣graven: For the Soul alwayes useth meanes, upon which the Image is carried, for Being and Operation. But I therefore ought to delinea e after what manner the Soul after the example of a Musitian dismisseth the operative Images of its own conceptions unto the hand, but in no wise unto the foot: and after what sort, through custom, that presently transmitteth its Images, which otherwise, besides custom, would most trouble∣somly reach thither. Wherefore it is to be noted, that if the Woman with Child shall be right-handed, and yet shall, under the onset of disturbance, touch some one of her members with her left-hand, nothing will be marked upon her Young thereby: Whence it appeareth, that that hand, which is the common ordinary and daily executress of cogitati∣ons, is also the Directtress of Images unto places, and operations. Therefore a man doth not operate alike strongly by imagination, as doth a Woman: nor any other Wo∣man alike strongly, as doth a Woman with Child: neither also doth every terrour gene∣rate the Plague: For the affrightment by a Wolf, Snake, or mad Dog, doth not pro∣duce in us the operative Images of a Wolfe, or Snake: yea, nor indeed, where the Wolfe is visibly present: even as notwithstanding, the Plague is bred in us by an Image of ter∣rour. A doubt therefore subsisteth, whether an affrightful imagination of the Soul from the Plague, or the Image thereof, be a sufficient and suitable cause of the Plague? First of all, it is seriously to be heeded, that the imagination is sufficient of it self for to ope∣rate, unlesse other things beside do concur. For first of all, wholly in ordinary and ac∣customed works proceeding from a deliberation of the elective Soul, the will must needs be present: For a Baker shall vainly, and that intentively imagine many things about ma∣king of Bread, unlesse his will shall move his hand, not indeed to some member, but unto the Dough. I in like manner, writing of the Plague without terour, in a full will, and conceipt of the thinking Soul, do meditate many things concerning the Plague; Yet I do not therefore contract this Plague to my self. No man also, unlesse happily he be foolishly des era e, intends a generating of the Pestilence in the consent of his will. An unfolded will therefore, is required, in a daily and natural course of operative actions, wherein the will draws forth conceived Images in deliberating, for the execution of the work: But there is in no wise required a consent of the will, for the generation of a Be∣ing, or the transmutation of one Being into another: For truly, every transmutation, al∣though it be monstrous, yet it attempts the priviledges of a true Generation; Since there is a re-ideaing in the Archeus, from the Victory of the new Image, translated upon the seminal one, which was first conceived in the Archeus. Therefore the consideration of transmutation doth not consider a consent of the will. Again, neither a naked imagina∣tion, or production of an Image, nor a touch of the hands, do suffice together for trans∣changing: But (mark well) every work of imagination, which of necessity produceth in us a new generation, or transmutation of one thing into another, requireth the con∣currence of a certain faith, co-bound in the same point of the Subject, the phantasie it self: For truly, an affrightment from a hurtful Animal, doth not produce in us that hurt∣ful Animal, nor even the poyson thereof; Even so also, as my attentive imagination, me∣ditating of the wonderful poyson of the Plague, doth not therefore generate the Plague in me. The reason therefore, why a terrour from the Plague, doth rather cause the Plague, than a terrour from living Creatures, causeth the poyson of the same; consisteth in this; that the poyson of the Pest is made not only from an apprehension, and con∣ceipt of terrible effects; but because there concurreth together with those, a certain unseperable belief whereby any one being affrighted, and fore affraid, in fearing, doth imagine, and slenderly believe that he hath now contracted something of the pestilen∣tial poyson: From whence (but not before) the Image of the Plague being conceived by this kind of terrour, becomes operative and fruitful. For that terrour, with a credulous suspition, applyeth the Soul thus affrighted, unto the Archeus, that it may cloath this Archeus with the Image of the conceived Terrour: Through want also of which Be∣lief, although Animals should conceive great terrour, yet they never snatch to them the humane Pestilence, although they sometimes draw in their own consumption, as also na∣tural poyson, from whence also they dye. For it is a fermental poyson, the which, how speedily soever it may dispatch them; yet it is not the true Psague. But whosoever shall see a mad Dog leaping on him, and how much soever affrighted he shall be from thence; yea, though he conceive a Fever and dye; yet no man doth ever even slenderly believe that he drew the poyson of the mad Dog, without biting: Wherefore also, all his sore fear is onely least he should be bitten; which rather includes a prevention of a poyson to come, than a belief of a poyson bred. The terrour therefore, the occasion of the plague, carries a certain belief and fear in the Imagination, that he hath actually drawn some∣thing of contagion vnder-such an uncertainty and Agony: Because the poyson of the Plague is onely visible, but not the biting of a mad Dog: which particle of faith, together with the disturbance of Terrour, perfecteth an actual Image in the Archeus, the seed of the Plague that is to be generated: Because that which is imagined, apprehended with perturbation, and believed, doth stand actually in the same point of the phantasie, which brings forth an Image on the Archeus, as it were a seminal Being. Otherwise also, neither is any faith sufficient for this thing; because, there is none who doth not firmly believe the Plague can-kill, infect, happen unto one, &amp;c. But such a belief as that, is feeble, and as it were dead; neither therefore is it operative, that is, not hurtful; unlesse that in the same point of Identity, it be essentially connexed unto terrour apprehended with disturbance, from a drawing in of the actual poyson. Eor Camps and Castles do very often snatch to them a panick fear and deadly terrour, assoon as with the fear of pertur∣bations, they believe that the Enemy hath treacherously, or privily crept in, or obtained an unexpected aid, &amp;c. All which things do rather prevail under a dark night, wherein all things are made invisible, and more horrid and fearful. Pollutions in Dreams, although they have a strong Imagination without the motion or enticements of fornications, which is sufficient for expulsion; yet for want of that belief, they cast forth onely barren seed: For although the Imagination operates in sleeping; yet a Faith or Belief doth not operate in Dreaming; because it is that which is not the Daughter of the Imagination, but of the will alone: For indeed, sleep peculiarly conduceth to this, that the liquor of nourish∣ment being transchanged by the application and information of the mind, may be alto∣gether assimilated: wherefore, in youthfull yeares, people sleep more, and more soundly than in those succeeding. And since vital matters have their own natural Imaginations, even those which are not intellectual Imaginations; Surely, the Imagination of the blood it self, shall most powerfully operate under sleep. But Faith or Belief, seeing it is a seperated power fast tyed to the Soul and Will, it is of necessity also stupifyed in time of sleep. There is therefore, well nigh, an unshaken and uncessant act of the Imagina∣tion of the Spleen: But the Soul once believing some one thing, afterwards ceaseth and is at rest from the consideration of believing o confiding, untill that an Object be again rub ' d on it anew. Neither do I speak in this place concerning Christian faith, and a supernatural Gift of God; but I behold a confidence, to wit, as well aa delusion in believing, as the supposing of a true thing. For a certain young Bitch, and not yet lascivi∣ous, having gotten a whelp of fifteen dayes old, licks it, loves it, and puts it to her dugs; and then being befooled, believed that it was her own Young; who was a yet uncor∣rupted, her dugs presently swell, and I saw them to have po red forth plenty of milk. Also, if thou desirest Chicken in the midst of Winter, make the Eggs lukewarm with a hot Towel, and in the mean time unfeather the breast of a Capon, put him upon the Eggs that he may cherish them, and there shut him up: who in rising up, feeling the lukewarmth of the Eggs, and the unwonted coldnesse of his breast, begins to cherish the Eggs: But in sitting on them, he conceiveth a false belief, and believes that he is the mother of the Eggs, he brings forth all the Chickens, even unto the last, and cals them together by Clucking like a cherishing Hen, and fighting for the Chickens; chaseth the Cock; and at length being forsaken by the Chicken, is very sorrowful. If therefore a false belief operates so much; what shall not any the more grounded one do, that is conjoyned with the terrour of the Plague. There is therefore, a certain native Imagi∣nation in the blood, in the parts of an Animal; yea and in the diseasie excrements; so that, magnetical or attractive Remedies have already begun with benefit to be applyed unto the blood let out of the veines. Let us consider also, the excrementitious musci∣lage of the sixth digestion to stick fast within the Reeds or Pipes (I thus by one onely Etymology, call the Veines, Atteries, Bowels, and any kind of Channels) to be at first in its owne quality, guiltlesse, but violating the right of its nne, as it is undirectly a stranger; And therefore by it self, laying in wait for the part. Presently after, a desire of expelling that excrementitious muscilage, is conceived by the Archeus implanted in the part: the Idea of which conception, is imprinted on the hated muscilage; The which, seeing it is seminal, it obtains a form, being a certain life; and likewise for hence also, a power of acting, and afterwards it governs its own matter for the Ends proposed and obtained by it self. But the member not being able to subdue the guest, connexed unto it against its will, burns with a greater endeavour and appetite of expelling; For, neither is that desire any longer a Being of Reason, or imagined Being; but it hath arisen into a certain seminal Being, by reason of the Idea conceived by the Archeus being imprinted on himself, and it transforms the forreign matter into every perfection of a diseasie Seed: no otherwise than as in the spittle of a mad Dog, there is a seminal madnesse it self: and the conceipt of a Woman great with child, in the deciphered cherry of her young. For so the matter being enriched with a power of acting, according to the Image of the passion put on, begins to act on the entertaining member. There is indeed now in it, a disease it self, having obtained an efficient Seed; the which, at length, being more stub∣bornly connexed, and oftentimes the Conquerer, subdues the vital faculty of that mem¦ber, into its own jurisdiction. To wit, it mortifies, and renders the part wherein it sits, conformable unto its own contagion. But the part; seeing it is subject unto wearinesse, and the bound hereof: but on the contrary, the Character or Seminal Idea now con∣ceived, is unwearied; it must needs be, that the forces of the Archeus, being as it were collected, that disease is banished by a Crisis, or the strength of the disease being volun∣tarily worn out, that it be deprived of the power of acting, and that stoppages and Schirrhus  ' s are made: or that being overcome, it be driven from the place, and an Imposthume be made: or that it be expelled by the strong prevailing force of a Medi∣cine. For otherwise, Nature forsaking the Raines, delivers its hands bound to the dis∣ease, To wit, as the part containing, being conquered by the Enemy contained, makes all the rest like unto its self, no otherwise, than as small Gangrene soon mortifies the whole Body: So also, the matter of a disease sticking fast and infecting the part whereto it adheres, presently infects the whole intire Body. For, neither are the Seeds of a diseasie matter alwayes inbred from the beginning: the which therefore, in the mean time, is onely the occasional matter. And moreover, for the most part, a foolish and unhurtful race of qualities do dissemble the innocency of a diseasie Thorn. Otherwise, hurtful things should never be admitted within, because they are wont before their ad∣mission, to be intimately and finely examined by the Archeus. For, whatsoever things are uncapable of the necessity of life, are presently prostrated in their entrance. If therefore excrementitious filths being inwardly admitted through a treacherous er∣rour, or having arisen through degeneration, do receive enmities within, and exercise them on us, while as they shall by an Idea received, be qualified with a strength of acting: it is no wonder also, if they do now and then attain the ferment of a poyson, and that Ferment being obtained, that they lay ready hands upon us. This is the brief original, progresse, and History of the Tatrar of the blood, and of diseasie Images. Furthermore, the Images of poyson, are on this wise: for in poysonous Beasts, that a poyson is made from the Image of Anger, we are taught by the Proverbe; Morta La bestia, morto il veleno. The deadly Beast hath his deadly poyson. The which hath place onely in the proper poysons of a Species, but not in the dead Carcasses of those that dyed of the Plague; which thing we daily experience, as well in men as in the Falcon: Because the Plague is not bred from anger after the manner of poysonous Serpents: For a sporting Dog, if he shall smite with his Tooth, he inflicts a wound that is quickly healable: but if he shall bite with an angry Tooth, although not more deeply than the foregoing Dog, now he hath made a wound partaking of the poyson of anger. But if he shall be mad, he now communicates a poyson, not exceeding that of anger, but such a one as is a Com∣peere of his deadly and senslesse madnesse. For a will of hurting, being through wrath or anger kindled, the Beast otherwise harmlesse, produceth a poysonous Image, and by his Tooth transmits or communicates the same. That thing is much more apparent in hurtfull wild Beasts. Therefore Sorcerers are careful, that they may borrow a deadly poy∣son from Serpents, being first enraged and provoked. A wantonizing young Bitch, if she lick the hand of a Child, she embladders the same; But a wantonizing Mare, seasons the hornes of her feet or hoofes with a poyson: to wit, so that they are for a present poyson to those that have the bloody flux: the which otherwise, of one that is not wan∣ton or lustful, if they being powdred, are fryed with Butter, they forthwith cure the bloody flux: But things proper to the poyson of plants, are not from anger or dread: but a corruptive ferment is by the Creatour of the World, put into a Seminal native I∣magination, for the continuing of their Seeds. For neither is there an enmity in plants, or a will of hurting of us. And so, neither doth the poyson dye away together with plants, being dryed: For there is a poysonous ferment, co-fermented with plants, from the beginning of the World, for a seminal propagation, for ends known to the thrice glorious Creatour alone. But a mad Dog, communicates a poyson by his spittle, and so by his Tooth. For the Tooth serves to a mad Dog, as much as the hand to a Woman great with Child. Lastly, The Imagination of plants; although it be the Formatresse of their owne seeds: yet it self is not free, or arbitrary, but rather a seminal Endowment; for propagating its like: and that with the total property of it self, wherein it resteth, not being alterable by forraign disturbances or enticements. Wherefore, in it self it conceiveth not a monster, nor doth ever make it of its own accord, unlesse it be provoked from without. Such therefore is the diffe∣rence, original, progresse, product, and manner of the hurting, of poysons. And these things I have drawn out for that end: to wit, that it may be understood, that if a mortal poyson be forthwith made from the anger of poysonsome wild Beasts, the terri∣fying poyson of the Plague, may also be made through terrour in the Archeus of man. For, if sorrow begets a foolish madnesse, the Dropsie, or Falling-sicknesse; but anger the Colick, Apoplexy, Convulsion: and a plenteous anguish, or a lesse intense cogitation, a Furious or Lunatick person: Neither is it derogatory from Reason, that the Image of the Pest is framed within from a perturbation of that Vulcan, wherein the first assaults are made. The fits whereof, as those of mad persons, are oft-times taken away by succours for the Spleen. There is a small living Creature like unto a Spider, and is called by Solin , Solifuga, because he shuns the day being frequent in the Silver-Mines of Sardinia; and it creeps in secret, and through imprudency, causeth the Plague to those that sit upon it; which poyson indeed is not the true Pestilence, but a poysonous pustule or wheal: for he subjoyneth, that there are hot Fountains near, which presently abolish the poyson implanted by the Solifuga; So indeed, the deadly vapours of Mines, are oftentimes called Pestilent ones, because they kill the Diggers that arry the longer therein. But they are wont to make tryal of this danger: if a burning Candle being let down into the burrowes of the Mines, it be forthwith extinguished; neither is it a wonder, if besides their poyson they also choak the light of Life, if they do extinguish the fiery light of a Candle. 
 CHAP. XI. The Ferment of the Pestilence. COnsider thou how sorrowful a Dog walketh, how he refuseth meat, and abhorreth drink; how many spurs of hatred, and conceptions of envy he nourisheth before madnesse. Again, how that a full force of his conceipt being translated not only into his spittle, but into his tooth, which is cleanly wiped thorow the garments, as it were by its odour alone, and by the simple suffumigation of one smell or odour, is sufficient to stir up a late and serious madnesse in him that is bitten, for the least touch of the tooth, in what part the skin layes open, and gapeth only in the Epidermis or upper skin, howe∣ver clean the blood leaping forth, be washed off: neverthelesse, it so deriveth the I∣mage of its own madnesse, that as the hand of a Woman with Child paints the mem∣ber of her young; so a Dog by the touch of his tooth, within the fortieth day will bring madnesse. But neither doth it proceed for death onely, however the wound be onely in the Epidermis: but before death, the chief faculties of the mind perish, and as Lackeys, do presently follow whither they are led aside by the imaginative poyson. For that odour of the tooth, is as it were a m er nothing, an incorporeal Being: no other∣wise than as the smell of an hoary putrifyed Hogshead, or the smell of a foot put into a new shooe, that makes a foots-step. For a Dog hath known his master a good while by his imprinted footstep, and distinguisheth that he passed that way. So the odour of a garment, or paper, being infamous through a pestilential corrupt matter, defiles us with a most subtile, unperceiv able, and most thin poyson: And it not onely seasons and kils us with a deadly poyson; but it also casts down the mind from its seat, no otherwise than as the touching of the tooth of a mad Dog under the skin, thrusts down the Reason from its majesty, and constrains it to follow according to the determined Rule of its own madnesse. For the party bitten, at a set period of time, is sore afraid at the be∣holding of all liquid things,: he conceiveth a dog-like envy, and wisheth that he could destroy all living, and multiply his own madnesse. Writers declare, that wormes do grow in a Wound in the hea of a Dog. At leastwise, I deny no , but that a Ferment is to be supposed to be in this poyson, respecting and affecting the spirits of Imagi∣nations: into which, the least co-participation of an odour, introduceth the Idea of its own Image, whereunto our phantasie is constrained to yield, yea, rather is fully trans∣changed into that horrid apparition. For it is a wonder, that a hunting Dog, which is the first-born of all the whelps of his D m, doth alone assault and overcome a mad Dog. There is in him the natural endowment of an unconquered Imagination; even so, that if he be bitten by a mad Dog, yet he doth not become mad: whereas, in the mean time, all the rest, do by biting contract madnesse, do fle from a mad Dog, neither dare they to defend themselves against this Dog. That poyson therefore, is the Inne of the mad∣nesse, also, the forreign guest of Imagination, which is overcome by the Imagina∣tion of an opposing Soul. Therefore, from hence we have known that all poysons are in themselves, fermental; for, some destroy the matter onely, and together with it the Imaginative Spirit, from whence are diseases that have a foolish madnesse connexed unto them; but others affect the Spirit onely; Such as are those, which bring a dog-like madnesse, and which bring on foolish madnesses and Catalepses  ' s or sudden st pefactive congelations: to wit, The which do not notably melt, or alter the body: but they draw only the sensitive Spirit into destruction: for indeed the Taran ta is scarce ever at rest, and therefore also he disturbs the man whom he hath stung, with a restlesse trouble. dFor behold, with what an horrid effigies he transpl nteth his Imaginations into the man whose skin he hath pierced, but even with a slender sting. For, the vile, small, and weak creeping Animal, by an unperceivable quantity of his poyson, infects the whole an, and presently snatcheth the powers of his mind under his own protection. Also, surely the odour of a footstep doth fitly square with the Plague, being likened unto it: For although the Houses are opened in a high place, and that well-fa ned with the Wind, and the infected Ayr of the House doth yield to the Winds: yet the Plague doth not therefore cease the third day after, but that it is sufficient for taking away the wholecommon people; for neither doth the odour of a footstep in the way being exposed to the Winds cease (though nothing in quantity) unlesse it be washed with Rain, or covered with earth: for it alwayes represents unto the Dog his own master. I remember also, that in the Plague at Ostend, the very pestilent hoary putrefaction it self, is wont a little to smell of the soales of shooes burnt, and I was wont by that odour, to bewray one to be infected with the Plague. Furthermore: before the Fall, every living Creature was subject to man, as to its master, and its middle life melted, and perished in eating, before the sight of our Archeus. But now, even a Whelp hath a predominacy over our life, and constrains the free powers of the Soul of mortals, under his own infirmities of madnesse. For, it is a miserable thing, for the Image of God thenceforth to be subject to the biting of Insects, and that it ought to follow the various Images of the poysonous Ferment of e∣very one: And it is a degenerate thing, for servile Bruits to season their biting with the I∣mage of Anger, with a mad and deadly poyson. Alas, how piercingly and strongly is the Image of anger sealed? And with what a snatching speedinesse doth it passe over unto the spittle? Unto how great infirmities is a Woman subject, from the hidden O∣dour of her Womb? For, with what Exorbitances not to be spoken of, is her under∣standing vexed? For truly, oftentimes a hoary putrified Odour being communicated from the soales of the feet, casteth down our lofty Stature, and deprives those that have the Falling-sicknesse, of sence, memory and understanding. For, how readily doth the contagion of an Hypochondriacal excrement under the Midriff, alienate the mind, and seduce it with sorrow, horrour, fury, madnesse, feverish dotages, and the differences of a Lethargye, while as they estrange us according to the Image bred in their owne Fe ∣ment? For, how terrible a poyson of terrour, is at one onely moment, imprinted by a stroak of Thunder, on a Beast which it hath smitten, so that with the eating of his flesh the Plague is swallowed? Which thing at least, is for a sign, that a Thunderbolt is darted from a monstrous sign full of terrour; to wit, from whence the Archeus being extin∣guished in a moment, in discovering the Image of his Terrour, perisheth almost in a moment. For sleep, yea, a deep dr wsie evil is oftentimes in a man, where there is a great disturbance of the Pest in his Archeus. Oft-times: on the other hand, the Ar∣cheus lives free and safe from perturbations: when as the man is in a mi erable conflict with his owne disturbances. In Wars, and out of Wars, there are now more cruel Plagues than in Ages past: Because Wars are more cruel in dreadful fear, and have more of great dread, and lesse of angers: when man being moved against man with the vio∣lence of Wrath, studyed Revenge: Neither is it a Wonder therefore, that the drinking of ones own Urine should restrain the Plague before the accesse thereof; not as an An tidote: but because it contained a hope and perswasion, before it was taken. For I remember, that in the Year 1635. while the French men besieged our Neighbour City Lovain, a very great Plague, rom thence, soon after invaded the fearfull Bruxellians, and the poor Women who were terrified with fear; and the which, being dispersed into all the Villages, brought every where a great destruction. For a co-participation of life in meats also, causeth, that they are soon made vital: and they presently snatch hold of our Archeus, being otherwise lyable to indignation, fury, and a manifold misery or dammage of Symptomes: so, in Magnum oportet, a necessity and transplantation of much contagion is inclosed in us. But if the properties of the middle life of things eaten, ought after some sort to remain in the blood: and for that cause also, the fleshes of the Eaters do vary their savour according to the diversity of the meats: it must needs be, that we are affected by those things which leave their mark of resem∣blance in us. Indeed savours, the witnesses of properties, have stricken a covenant, as well with the external, as internal fellowships of putrefactions, which therefore, are easily made the partakers of injuries in us. For the middle life of mears remaineth in our fleshes: hence it is, that Fish-devouring Nations, and Carthusians are not trou∣bled with flyes of wormes. For fleshes that are not well preserved, from the co-resem∣blance of the middle life residing in us, do easily stamp any putrefaction on us. From whence also, formal corruptions do arise in us, from an unthought of Beginning. And then, fleshes and fishes, although they are seasonably killed, yet they conteined in them the purulent matters of diseases, wherewith, when we are ed (especially if they have before contracted a burntish odour) we readily yield unto the fellowships of their symbolizing mark, and they presently stir up in us, adustodours, and mumial putrefactions by con∣tinuance, in us. For, neither do Oxen or Sheep eat men, nor contract our Plague into themselves: but we at Oxen, and draw a brutal Pest, like as also our own; Because the pestilences of many bruit Beasts do play their part in man alone. Wherefore, neither are meats, no being rightly concocted, guiltlesse, while they scorn at the Ferment of the stomach, because they easily passe over into the forreign colonies and various cor∣ruptions of their own con agion. Truly, this successive alteration of new calamities in the Plague, shall at sometime, be a future betokening cause of the last times: At least∣wise, the Ferments of poy ons and venomes, have never been throughly weighed in the Schooles. But the action of these hath therefore been supposed to be equivocal or of doubtful interpretation, and prepared by an impression of the Heaven. For alwayes, when as they slide into Ignorance, they implore the too far distant aid of the deaf Hea∣vens, and blame guiltlesse Saturn. For they call that an equivocal action, while the A∣gent doth not generate its like. As happens in Celestial Impressions and Meteours. But how improperly they have recourse unto the Heavens and their equivocal actions, for poysons, every one shall easily know, who hath beheld poysons as Agents meerly natu∣ral and domestical, they being not onely alterative after the manner of Meteours; but transchanging, and spermatical or seedy ones. For, what can be more like to a seminal generation, than if the slender poyson of a Scorpion kills the whole man, and propagates the property of its own seed into the whole body? For neither do Ferments any where operate Equivocally or doubly, but plainly Univocally or singly: Because, if the Pest should bud forth by an equivocal action: verily it should not be contagious, seeing it should not produce its like. Therefore it is manifest, that the diligent search of Fer∣ments being neglected (in the commerce whereof notwithstanding, every transmutati∣on of things to be generated, is enrowled) Poysons have been hitherto unknown, as well in their making as in their Being and operation: Especially, because the property of a poyson, is, by the destruct on of the Archeus of man, to imprint its own seminal Image in the room of the other: Wherefore also, the Organ of this poyson is the Ferment it self. But u derstand thou this thing concerning poysons which attempt a transmutation by way of a seminal Image, but not of meer Corrosives: because they are those which do not fermentally corrupt the Archeus, or his Image; but they stir up the same Archeus into fury, who afterwards destroyes his own matter, or Inne: under the alteration or de∣struction whereof, the Archeus himself also gives place, together with the integrity and retainment of his Image: For the greatnesse, vehemency, strength, and swiftnesse o poysons have deceived the Schools, who, the consideration of ferments being neglected, have passed by the one only dispositive instrument of generations, which goes before the introducement of a seminal Image: For the Schools are wont to measure the works of nature according to the square of artificial things; and so, if at any time there ere any thing which would not seem to them, to square with this measure, they by a verbal ex∣cuse, have had recourse unto the heavens, and hidden causes, that they might cover their sluggishnesse and ignorances with an impossibility of sifting it out. 
 CHAP. XIII. The form, and matter of the Pest. SInce a disease ought to perfect its own title, and misfortune in us, as it were in its own mansion, and its own proper essential causes do remain in its product; it must needs be, as long as any thing wanders in the air, water, or earth, that that can neither be a disease in it self, nor the containing cause thereof: Yea, whatsoever is marked with the name of antecedent causes, is nothing but the occasional cause, causing nothing by it self, but by accident, nor any thing without an appropriation received in us. Wherefore they neither betoken nor desire, nor prescribe a cure, but only a caution or flight. The occasions therefore of the Plague, are to be considered, as the occasions of diseases being sometime entertained, do passe into the order of causes. First of all therefore, I have already sufficiently taught that the Pest is not sent down from the Hea∣vens: And seeing every effect is the fruit or product of its own, and not of an∣others tree; therefore every cause produceth its own, and not anothers effect: therefore the Pest hath a specifical, proper, and not a forreign cause: For neither may we distinguish of Plagues by their accidents, concomitants, or signates; because they are those which flow immediately from the diversity of subjects, because they diversly vary af∣ter the manner and nature of the receiver, according to the custom of the Beings of nature. 
 Wherefore also the Pest consisting of matter, form, essence, a seed, and properties, requires also to have its own, and one onely species; seeing the very essence it self of things or defects is most near to individuals: But if it either happen from without, or be generated within, that is all one, seeing from thence the Plague is now constituted. Again, if it do the more swiftly, or slowly defile, its issue be the more violent and speedy, do in∣vade diverse parts, or diversly disquiet the body; yet that doth not therefore change the species of the poyson. 
 For they are only the signs of quantiry, co-mixture of a ferment, appropriation, and incidency on the parts receiving. Otherwise, the internal and formal poyson of the Pest, and that which conteins the thingliness thereof, is ys singular in every individual: Because the essence or Being of things consisteth in the simplicity of their own species; as there is the same essence of fire on both sides, whether it be great, or little, whether quiet, or driven with the bellows; or lastly, whether the flame shall be red, yellow, green, or sky-coloured. Therefore the remote, crude, and first occasional matter of the pesti∣lence, is an air putrified through continuance, or rather a hoary putrified Gas; which putrefaction of the air, according to the experience of the fire which Adeptists promise, hath not as yet the 8200. part of its own seminal body: The which thou shalt the more easily comprehend, if thou considerest a hoary putrified vessel and hogs-head of wine now exhausted, without any weight of it self, to corrupt new, and old wines infused in the hogs-head: For I have treated in my discourses of natural Phylosophy, concerning the na∣ture of a ferment putrifying by contmuance, and after what sort vegetables do arise from an incorporeal and putrified seed, that from hence the progeny of the Pest may be the more distinctly made manifest. 
 Moreover, I have shewn that the earth is the mother of putrefaction through continu∣ance; that we may know, that popular Plagues do draw their first occasional matter from an earthquake, and from the consequences of camps and siedges: For therefore, as much as the earth differs from the heaven, so much also is the occasional matter of the P st, remote from the Heaven. But I call this first matter, that incorporeal hoary pu∣ rified poyson existing in the Gas of the earth: And so I substitute this poyson as there∣mo e matter, under another more near poyson, which disposeth the matter of the Archeus, whereby he may the more easily assent, and conceive in himself a pestilent terrour, that at length a formal pestilential essence may suddenly come upon the previous dispositions hereof. 
 But besides, if I must duely Phylosophize concerning the infections of the Air; I ought of necessity, to repeate the Anatomy thereof, from the fore assayed doctrine of the ele∣ments, in my treatise of natural of Phylosophy. The air therefore in it self is one of the first-born elements, being transparent, and void as well of lightnesse, as weight, un∣changeable, and perpetual, being endowed with natural cold, unlesse it be hindered by the strength of scituations, and things co mixed with it: but being every where filled with pores; and for this cause suffering an extension, or pressing together of it self: The po∣rosities whereof, are either filled with vapours, and forreign exhalations; or remayning in their integrity, they plainly gape, being void of a body (the which I have elsewhere demonstrated in the treatise of a necessary Vacuum): For in very deed, if the air were without pores that are empty of every body, vapours could not be lifted up without a penetration of bodies: But since a most manifest enlargement and com-pression of the air is granted (as I have elsewhere fully demonstrated) an emptinesse also, is of neces∣sity granted: For such porosities in the air, are as it were wombs wherein the vapours the fruits of the water, are again resolved into the last simplicity of waters from whence they proceeded, and are spoyled of any signatures of their former seeds whatsoever: But those effluxes in the air are forreign, y accident, and various, according to the disposition of the concrete body from whence they exhaled. 
 First of all, they are the vapours of pure and simple water; and then of the waters of the salt sea, which season the rain with their vaporous brine, and for that cause preser e it from corruption: For otherwise, by reason of the societies of diverse exhalations being admixed with it, rain waters would of necessity putrifie and stink, no lesse than clouds in mountains, and most mi s. 
 The poysons therefore, of the air being drawn in, are partly entertained in manner of a vapour, in its porosities, and do partly defile the very body of the air, without a cor∣poreal mixture, even as glasse conceiveth odours: which defilement hath of right, the name of an impression. I have an house in a plain field, being rich on its South-side; in a wood of oakes: but on the north it respecteth pleasant meadows: moreover, toward both the mansions of the Sun, it hath hils that are fruitful in corn: But linnen cloaths being there washed and nced in the fountain, being hung up in the loft, look most neatly white while the North wind blows, and here and there also, from east to west, or on the other hand from west to east: But the south-winde only blowing, and the sou∣therly windowes being opened, they are notably yellow with a clayie colour: For from the numerous oakes, a tinging vapour is belched forth into the air, and I have learned that this vapour is breathed in by us, as also drunk up by the linnen: And also, thus from Groves of oakes, after the Summer solstice, an hidden vapour doth exhale, which in ecteth an unwonted countenance and neck, with a frequent itching pustule or wheale, and afterwards they beco plainly visible in the legs and elsewhere: For there are somethings in the air which are perceived by the smelling of the nostrils: in the next place, there are other things, which are distinguished by dogs only: And lastly there are also other things, which are voyd of all odour, although not void of con∣tagion. 
 For truly the serment of a poyson, as such, may be free from smel: Therefore every country produceth and suffereth its own sicknesses: For why, nature is subject to the soile, neither doth every Land bring-forth all things; Because diverse vapours are brought forth in the air, according to the variety of the soile: Which things I more fully sifting with my self, have often admired, that our life is extended unto so many years: since we are environed on every side, with so manifold a guard of most potent enemies, since we admit the same so deeply within us, and are constrained to attract them against our will: And that not only by breathing; but also by a magnet or attraction, which sports aftes its own manner through the habit of the flesh. For I who have been often and long present without-fear, among the fumes of live coals, and the odours of other things, have rea ly felt those odours and fumes not only to be derived in a straight line into my breast: but also from thence into my stomach, and therefore that our belchings do express those smoaky fumes conceived: For so the breath blown out of the lungs, re∣sembleth the smells of Garlick and Onyons that are eaten, although collected thorow the Nostrils; but the plague is drawn in on both sides: But a voluntary Pest, which is be∣gotten not from without, but within, bewrays it self in the arm-pits, and groyn, but sel∣dom behind the ears: For this Pest for the most part, issues forth from drawn-in odours: But that which is infamous in spots, proceeds from an internal poyson, being first smo∣thered within, and therefore the worst of all, as it is for the most part intended or in∣creased with the fermental putrefaction of suffocation: But that which shews forth Car∣buncles, is either a strong expulsion which casteth farther than into the next munctory, or which ariseth from the touch of a contagious matter, or from an in-breathed poyson of the plague. 
 For that Pest which hath invaded from a co-touching, although it be more slow than that which otherwise insulteth from an universal cause; yet for the most part it is more deadly: Because the Archeus implanted in the member, is slain by this plague; and from thence the part draws a pestilential Gangren; for succouring whereof, the whole Archeus is the more negligent; he meditating of defending the bowels, as fleeing, be∣takes himself inwards, and that mortal Gangren proceeds to creep. Also, remedies and their intention are for the most part idle for escharring of the outward parts, and that af∣terwards the Escharre may quickly fall off: For in this respect, all Emplaisters, and at∣tracting things are administred; but they are seldom administred, as that they overcome the poyson it self: But a plague from without, as it is chiefly to be feared in the joynts; so on the other hand, that which is darted from within to without, involveth the less danger. 
 And indeed, that which is bred within, doth primarily terrifie the Archeus; and therefore it is sudden, and very powerful: But the poyson of a plague that is caught by touching, after it hath insinuated it self into the Archeus (because he is that which is the first living, and the last dying) and the only Ruler of things inwardly to be done) being at length confirmed, after the manner of poyson, it easily infecteth the rest: For truly, the Archeus himself being once infected, presently conceiveth a pestife∣rous image of terrour, and the raines of governing the body being forsaken, he communi∣cates it to his Associates. 
 In the next place, although sweat be profitable in every plague; yet less in that which hath privily entred by an external co-touching; at least, it is in no wise therefore to be neglected. Moreover, in the plague of a particular individual person (by whom the whole people in common are now and then afflicted) there a fermental putrefaction doth for the most part begin within, which being once suddenly laid hold of, the poyson∣ous image of an Archeal terrour is from thence the more easily committed. That Pest is the more swift, which is drawn inwards from the external putrefaction of an odour; be∣cause it presently associates unto it two degrees, to wit, a putrefaction through continu∣ance, and a mumial and co-marriageable ferment: But there is no need, that that hoary putrefaction should be perceiveable by the nostrils, with an aversness: For if dogs, which exceed us in smelling, do sent an hoary putrefaction, or the foot-step of their Master in the way; our Archeus himself doth as yet far more easily smell out-those things which are within, and therefore, a putrified odour cannot hurt, unless it shall find a mumial serment within, whereunto it may couple it self: Then indeed there is now forthwith a forreign matter, nevertheless, as yet wanting a contagion: Therefore it be∣hoveth, that the matter be furnished with full conditions, and with a formality of acting: For these two are as yet, as it were the occasional and provoking causes. Again, as con∣cerning the Tartar of the blood, there hath been enough spoken, that it is a product of the Pest, and that it waits for this, or is made out of hand at the coming of the plague. The first term therefore of making the Pest, is an hoary putrified Gas, the which, seeing it cannot infect without a co-resemblance of appropriation, it requires another correla∣tive term, which is a mumial ferment (without which there is not an appropriation) to wit, the Archeus the receiver of the Pest: For truly the poysonous matter of the plague being by contagion derived into us, defiles not any one, unless the Archeus shall lay hold of it, and appropriate it to himself; wherein surely, the Archeus labours impro∣vidently: For from thenceforth, the Pest conceiveth a terrour, by his own phantasie, but not from the sore fear of the man; to wit, in which phantasie of Archeal terrour, the Archeus brings forth a pestilential poyson, which is the very Idea of the conceived ter∣rour, being cloathed with the proper coat of the Archeus: Alas, then the Pest is present within, and doth soon easily disturb the whole man. The image of the Pestilence there∣fore, consisteth of an Archeal air, as of the matter containing, whereon the poyson of the terrour of the Archeus is imprinted, as the immediate efficient cause: For nei∣ther therefore doth the poyson of the plague, always defile any one whatsoever, al∣though it shall presently find an odour in us agreeable to it self; because the mumial ferment, although it be internal, yet nevertheless, it is only an occasional mean, in re∣spect of the contagious application, or of the infection applied; which appropriation immediately consisteth in a real and actual congress of the image bred by terrour, which the Archeus conceiveth from the aforesaid application, as thinking in this respect, that now there is a potent Enemy entertained within the Cottages of his own house; which panick fear of the Archeus, is the immediate cause of the image bred by imagination: (therefore I have proved, that there is an imagination in the Archeus, besides that which is decyphered by the conceptions of the mind, as well in the Midriffs, as in the Heart, and Brain) which image is the suitable cause of the Pest; I say, the veriest Pest it self, no otherwise than as a Chick is nothing besides the Egg it self ripened by a cherishing warmth: For Purple or spotted Fevers have therefore indeed, a poyson and contagi∣on, besides putrefaction, and a fermenr of appropriation (to wit, from whence they defile men alone, not likewise beasts) yet they want an Idea of terrour, whereby the Archeus being full of confusion and desperation, neglects his government, and frames the deadly and seminal image of a pestilent poyson. 
 In the next place, he easily insinuates this his confusion into his own transchanged nourishable liquours, over which before he carefully watched, and now degenerates them into the hostile Tartar of the blood: For the Archeus forsaking the Stern of Go∣vernment, like a man that is sore afraid, rashly turns all things upside down, and himself being a run-away, proclaims that an Enemy is received within, darknesses are made, the the appetite is prostrated, and every digestion of the shops begun, ceaseth, and that which is almost, or half digested, is corrupted, because it abhorreth the sorrowful image of a mortal poyson. There is therefore a sedition and noise within throughout the mem∣bers, because the implanted spirits of these, do well perceive the confusion of the in∣flowing spirit, but are not able to restrain it: For if the nourishment being half dig sted, were fresh and mild in the stomach, a drowsie evil ariseth, and likewise vomiting and loathing; but if it be now dry or stiff through digesting, the headach possesseth the man: But if it be well nigh digested, it putrifies with a stinking burntish savour, from whence there are continual vomitings: For all things go astray, and do putrifie under the image of the poyson, and the nourishment of the stomach it self, degenerates into a filthy muckiness, the which also, doth oft-times put on a caustical or burning sharpness, and there is for the most part, a murmuring noyse about the stomach: For why, where the first and inordinate conceipts and violent assaults of men are, in the same place also of necessity, the first confusion of the terrour of the Archeus ariseth, and there is made a most filthy image of the plague. For I have noted, that the Pest hath for the most part, placed its first seats about the stomach. For a certain man being dejected with a continu∣al vomiting, felt a great pain of his head, and by and by a doating delusion; and then he also having suffered a deep drowsiness by intervals, died in sixteen hours space, many fainting fits having gone before. 
 But I desired to know, from whence he had so speedily died, and with so great a fury of sumptoms; neither did a Chyrurgion desire to be present: at length, I began the dis∣fection with a knife, and I found his Stomach now pierced with a three-fold perfect Es∣charre, in such a manner as I had once seen the stomach of a Servant-Maid to be pierced, who had willingly drunk Arsenick. In the mean time, in every Plague, a Fever ariseth from the beginning, because also a sore threatned corruption hath begun in the Archeus: Surely all vital things are affrighted in the natural directions of images scattered through a dreadful discord, confusion, and desperation. The Tartar of the blood also, being now freed from its Laws, in so great a confusion of the whole body, snatcheth to it a fury, it struggles in the conceived borders of its own part whereunto it adhereth, and through the confusion of terrour, increaseth all the tumult. 
 This is the Tragedy of the Pest, which I at sometime through divine clemency saw in an intellectual dream: But the great fear, flight, desperation, &amp;c. of the Archeus, is not the poyson it self; even as neither is the wrath of a living creature the poyson thereof: But the poyson of the plague, is a Being produced from the image of dread, and cloathed with the substance of the Archeus; as the anger of a Serpent, lays aside the image of his anger in a part of the Archeus, and lays up that image in his Spittle, &amp;c. at the exe∣cutive Organs of anger. 
 But the poyson of the Pest is in it self horrid, and far more cruel than the mortal con∣tagion of Serpents; to wit, that which is produced in beasts by a vital perturbation, such as is the anger of Serpents: For the contagion of the Pest creeps into the standers by; neither doth it perish with the life of the Animal, as otherwise, the poysons of beasts are wont to do: For that the poyson of the Pest doth not inhere in the life, but there is an image in the air effuming from thence, and that indeed cloathed with the infected Ar∣cheus; as thin sanies, blood, corrupt pus, vitriol being sprinkled on them, have as yet re∣tained a life and vital actions on the whole body from whence they issued, the which, the magnetick curing of wounds, ulcers, and broken bones at this day hath taught us. 
 But moreover, the Pest rather drives from it the fugitive life, the fearful and fleeing Archeus; and as the madness of a Dog assumes his product in his spittle, so the poyson of terrour is sealed in the Tartar of the blood, even as also it is dispersed into the air, and an odour departing afar off: For therefore beasts are the free beholders of our calamity, because they want the defect of an univocal or self-same Archeus, and therefore also an appropriation: Yet any subject whatsoever, whether it shall be air, a garment, or any o∣ther more solid body (although ignorant of dread) which may be seasoned with an o∣dour, may in like manner be the subject on which the product of a dreadful imagination may be imprinted, no otherwise than as the earth resembles the odour of a swift foot∣step.
Furthermore, although the Pest or Plague be only one in the species, yet it invades af∣ter divers manners: For at one time, a popular plague assaults, which ariseth from a di∣vulged hoary putrefaction, after an Earth-quake, out of Caves, Clefts, Pools, Mines, and dead carkasses, as wel those of beasts as of men, which belch forth a poyson putrified through continuance: The which notwithstanding, is not as yet pestilential, until that it being re∣ceived within, shall then at length be app opriated to a ferment: From whence indeed, the Archeus being affrighted, creates that cruel image of his own confusion and terrour. It invades also, only by a pestilent odour drawn in from a sick person, or from a dead car∣kass, or from a place, or from an infected matter; the which odour, by how much the more subtil subject of its inherency it shall have, by so much also the more speedily it in∣fecteth, and the more speedily approacheth to the Archeus, by reason of a mark of resemblance: For neither therefore doth the exhalation of sweat so speedily infect, as a pestilential Gas that is not perceiveable in its odour: For just even as the Gas of coals disturbs the stomach, provokes vomit, headachs, yea and also, swooning; so I have noted plagues, which by a subtil exhalation, do infect the immediate nourishment of the sto∣mach, that they brought on continual vomitings, hicketings, frequent swoonings, and doating delusions, and most speedy death: and that vomiting refuseth remedies to be swallowed down, the Swooning-fits do cast down the strength, as also the doatage is averse to food, and remedies. But the matter that is now infected, if it be to be taken away by sweat, in passing thorow, it defiles the whole house even to the skin, unless the malig∣nity thereof be restrained by remedies: For although a remedy may readily touch at that infected matter, yet it doth not easily bring forth that matter which doth not willingly follow: For truly, any Antidote, doth never restore the party that is once infected, into his former state; and therefore all the care of an Antidote is only about the preservati∣on of those that are not yet infected, and the mitigation and speedy expulsion of these. Also the occasion of a popular plague is difficult, because infected places and bodies can∣not be avoided; which thing, in Camps, and besieged Cities, clearly appeareth: For we read, that in the East, a plague began from three Souldiers who violated a Sepulchre, that it defiled the Roman Camps, and killed a third part of mortal men, throughout the known Coasts of the world: For such a plague is most swift, and most cruel; the which indeed brings into the body along with it, almost all concomitants needful for it self: For since the poysonous matter hath already obtained a ferment, it ought not to parley with out Archeus concerning its reception, the which it easily obtains by request, from the disturbed Host: for truly, it brings with it an Idea already in it self, from a former cause, and attains from the Archeus a new Idea within, co-like to it, for its compa∣nion. 
 But the Pest which begins, and perfects the whole generation of it self in us, without an external help, is made from a fore-existing fermentally putrified Tartar of the blood, which doth soon of its own accord, most readily put on the odour of a dead carkass: From whence, the Archeus being sore terrified, stirs up an Idea of the conceived terrour, and so a pesti∣lent poyson is stirred up, and the seminal, and hurtful image hereof is incorporated in that excrement, the which therefore proceeds in raging and infecting: For the Plague is communicated unto us by an unsensible air, which Flies, Pies, Ravens, Crows, Eagles, Dogs, Wolves, &amp;c. do for the most part distinguish: For it is very well known, that the houshold Animal a dog, discerneth every one by his odour, or that he doth even a good while after distinguish the footsteps of any one thereby, however lightly imprinted; and a pestilential Gas is alike subtil, and odourable: Therefore there are different man∣ners of attaining the plague; to which end, it is meet to repeat, that a pestilent poyson is only of one particular kind, nor that there be many parents of the same thing, distinct in their species and seed; that is, that its seeds cannot be divers: So that a Scorpion bred from the herb Bazil, and from a Parent, differs not in kind; as neither doth a Louse which proceedeth from Nits, and which sprang immediately from a man, lay aside a∣specifical identity: for Nits, or the Eggs of Lice, are in the sameliness of the Archeus, with the matter from whence a man doth immediately generate Lice: Because if two eeds divided in species, should constitute one and the same thing in the species, specifical dispositions in the matter for the generation of things, should be in vain, but all things from all, and every thing from every thing, should promiscuously proceed: Agents therefore that are divers in kind, although they may constitute something under a specifi∣cal sameliness; yet the same seed, and that of the same Archeus, must be understood to be formed from them both: So a man maketh a vital excrement, from whence pro∣ceeds a Louse, a Worm, &amp;c. and he so disposeth that matter by his cherishing warmth, that it attaineth a co-like Archeus, which the Louse generating, originally implanted in his Eggs: and so the Louse that generateth, is the univocal agent, which extendeth from himself sufficient matter for Generation: But the man is the equivocal agent, which afforded from himself an excrementitious matter, which matter sliding on, doth at length, in the cherishing warmth, attain a co-like Archeus: So a dead carkass generates into worms, and these do again sexually generate: and so Mice are generated of excrementi∣tious filths, and again by parents; and that wholly in Insects, whose seeds are issued from bodies purifying as it were of their own accord: at leastwise, the immediate matter of these, and agent of these Generations, is on both sides simple, uniform, and of a specifical ident ty or sameliness: Therefore also, both constituted bodies are of the same species, generating afterwards their own like, without choice: So that Lice which proceed from our exhalations, do admit of copulations with those which through a cherishing warmth, came forth out of Nits. 
 The immediate matter therefore, and immediate agent in the Pest, are on both sides of the same seminal Archeus, and specifical identity: For whether the matter be made within by degrees, or on a sudden, or being drawn in from without, be actuated in us; at leastwise the poyson of the plague is never made, but a terrour of the Archeus hath brought forth that poysonous image. But I call terrour, as well that of a man fore smit∣ten by the first assault, as that of the Archeus of man it self, and of the blood, received from an antipathy. 
 After this sort, a bold and stout man is oft-times before or in presence of the plague, fearful; yea, he who scarce fears the plague, hath his Archeus within, subject to aff ight∣ments. For so, an Infant that is uncapable of fear, and ignorant of apprehension, is not more slowly laid hold of by the plague, than a poor timorous woman: For although a sturdiness of mind may prevail as to prevention, yet it doth not kill the poyson already conceived. And there are divers boldnesses of Magnanimity: for some one man is un∣daunted in a single combate, who in the conflicts of war, is fearful: another is not affright∣ed in fighting, who is notably afraid of Hobgoblin Furies: Lastly, a third feareth not E∣nemies, but he is afraid of armed Countrymen, &amp;c. Galen thinks that a good complexion ad pondus or according to an equal weight of the Elements, would give strength to resist the plàgue: He I say, who would have all particular parts and bowels in man, to differ only in the unequality of the temperament of the Elements, now granteth an equali∣ty of the Elements flowing together according to an equal weight, in the one humane kind: when as otherwise, if the heart were the most temperate part, now the whole man ought, according to any of his parts, of necessity, to have the consistence and hardness of the heart. But I as the first, have rejected the opinion of Elements, co-mixtures, and temperaments, as foolish and totally false, by firm demonstrations, in the Volume set forth concerning the original of medicine. This co-mixture of Elements therefore, I willingly yield to the Galenists, and am willingly ignorant, after what manner air, or fire can be weighed, that being weighed together according to the weight of water, and earth, they may compose from themselves, flesh, sinews, bones, brain, heart, marrows, &amp;c. Ah, vain fiction, cruel wickednesse, hissing it self forth against our neighbours. More∣over, the animosity or stoutnesse of mind which I praise, is not affrighted by death, or the plague, it adorns the Archeus, that he may resist the poyson, and expel that poyson re∣ceived by accident (but otherwise, he cannot overcome or kill it) no otherwise then as terrour shuts the pores by the motion of nature being obedient unto it: Wherefore they who have recovered from the plague, are scarce alike easily infected with the plague the same year: The contrary is seen in other diseases and poysons: For truly these do not onely leave behind them weaknesses from whence there is a more easie relapse; but also other poysons do operate, by changing the parts wherein they are entertained. But a pestilent terrifying poyson primarily invades the Archeus alone, and sorely affrights him: The which, when he hath once known, and overcome his enemy, he afterwards presumeth and is made more confidently bold, that he shall not so easily fail under him: neither is he thenceforth so easily affrighted through occasion of the poyson brought unto him: neither doth the weaknesse which the Pest leaves on him, hinder; because it is sufficient that he is not alike easily terrified, and that he doth not decypher the pestilent image of terrour in his own proper substance: And therefore other poysons of diseases are far more grosse than the image of a drawn-in terrour: For some hurt not, but under on open skin; but others require to be eaten, or drunk. 
 But the most rare poyson of the Basilisk or beholding Cockatrice, is sent forth by ima∣gination directing the sight: But a pestilential poyson is framed within, by the proper con∣ception of the Archeus. Other poysons are bewrayed by some sensible signe: But the Pest alone is communicated by an unsensible contagion, even so as the foot-step of a man keeps its odour. Behold how the image of sudden sorrow prostrates the appetite, how the image of a nauseous matter c eates vomiting, the image of condolency produceth tears, the image of slow sorrow or lingting grief stirs up sighs, the image of fear gene∣rates the Falling Sicknesse, and now and then the Palsie: Therefore I elsewhere writing of Diseases, have not in vain demonstrated that joy, fear, anger, hatred, and other passi∣ons and perturbations, do generate in us, their own proper and singular actual image, no otherwise than as terrour doth the Plague: But the generations of these are the domestical and more ordinary off-springs in us. But the image of a pestilent terrour, brings forth a poyson immediately existing in the Archeus, and draws its own matter from the same: And therefore the Senses cannot conceive that image. The Archeus therefore, having beheld a mortal enemy nigh at hand, being bred within, or brought to him from far, admits this enemy through his own terrour, and an image decyphered anew, and confirms him with his own character and substance: For our hand being moved to a Carcass that died of its own accord, soon waxeth so cold through the flight of the Archeus, that it at length scarce waxeth hot again at a long fire: Yet Dogs perceive not that cold, while they devour such a dead Carcass, even as the dead Carcass of a Beast doth not much cool us: Therefore the cold of an humane dead Carcase is fraudulent and accidental, and doth more cool, than it hath of cold: And the Carcass that died by little and little doth more cool us than the Carcass of a person that died of the Gowt, or of a sharp Fever. Yet since we discern by an engine whereby we measure the degrees of the encompassing air, that the cold of both these Carcasses are equal; To wit, the Archeus being sorely affraid of death (which the hand applyed to the dead Carcass extinct by a long infirmity, per∣ceiveth) flieth, forsaketh the hand, neither (because mindful thereof) doth he easily re∣turn: Therefore it is manifest, that the Archeus doth perceive and shun death, even that which is before and out of himself. And as yet more, the ferments of putrefaction (as in the cold fit of an Ague) being conceived or bred within; And most especially those, which being received within his family-administration in manner of an image, do tend unto a formal transmutation of his own essence: Because the poyson bred through an Idea of terrour, is of the highest actual power: And the image of fear and also of dread, differs from the image of terrour, by reason of the formal activity of faith con∣curring, even as before I have noted. And moreover, although the Archeus doth well perceive death, and poysons, yet he doth not well perceive the poysonous terrour, because he thinks it to be his own terrour, and a vain passion, until that by the fore-gone fer∣ment of appropriation, he hath certainly known that that poyson was a forreigner unto him, which he had lain up in a part of himself, while he formed that forreign Idea; and so, with a certain destruction of himself, he presently expels the poyson from him: And I wish, that the power now inbred in him, were not communicated throughout the whole body, by what way it proceedeth. For so the poyson of a mad dog is in no wise through∣ly perceived by a man, as neither by his Archeus, except after that it hath established a ferment for it self in the Archeus: In the which then image of doglike madnesse, sin there is presently an estrangement of the mind connexed; Hence the Archeus concei∣veth no terrour to himself in fury: For the stumbling in imagination, rather shakes off terrour, is rashly mad, and by the poyson of the mad dog is directed into an Hydrophohia for the disease causing a fear of water. 
 Lastly therefore, the one onely poyson of the Pest hath also the one onely beholding of terrour, and one way unto the grave, or unto recovery, by good, or unfit remedies. But whatsoever things I have hitherto spoken concerning the pestilent Idea of terrour, I will not have to be interpreted at liberty: For a fear from enemies, from a thief, from a disease, from an hurtful Animal, from a Sword, do indeed generate an image of dread, but not a pestilent one: which image I have therefore denoted with the name of terrour, as distinct from an image of conceived fear, whereby a living creature is affraid. A pe∣stilent terrour therefore, doth not here denote any terrour, or the dread of any calamity; but onely a pestilent horrid poyson conceived in terrour, as well by the man, as by the Archeus of the same. In this Idea therefore, is scituated the essence of the Pest, and the thinglinesse of this whole Book. I confesse indeed that the images of any fear are easily changed into the Idea of a pestilent terrour, even so as a woman great with child, deri∣veth the image of a mouse on the undefiled flesh of her Young, yea hath sometimes transplanted the whole Embryo into an horrid animal or monster: Because, as I have elsewhere taught concerning formes, formal images do mutually pierce each other, and the latter doth readily draw the former into the obedience of it self, which Hipocrates calls a leading of seeds whither they would not. Truly to convocate a diversity of ele∣ments, and a combating assembly thereof for a mixt body, and likewise of complexions, humors, and conditions, inclinations, and studies sprung from thence: Lastly, the divi∣sions of climates, angles or quarters, ages, proportions, strengths, bignesse, and inter∣changeable courses, for a succour of ignorance, that hereby we may make the more, greater, and more difficult calamities, may increase uncertainties, may rule ignorances, may beget doubts, may patronize impostures, and promote despairs of life, is nothing else but to have laboured in vain. For the perfect light of Sciences, is like fire, which burns up every combustible matter without exception. Such a Science Hipocrates had in times past obtained. 
 CHAP. XIV. The property of the Pest. I Have demonstrated that the passions of the mind do destroy the appe i e, as also pro∣strate digestion: In the next place, that the first motions of cogitations do obtain their own assemblies in the midriffs: Therefore also I have dedicated the mouth of the stomach unto Mercury, whereunto the Heathens have attributed the sharpnesse of wit, as also the sleepifying white wand of truce: I have also said that the plague is originally conceived from the terrour of man, and that the air which being brought out of a pestiferous body, is carried into us, doth at its first assault rush into the spleen, which presently shakes out the same, and delivers it as it were by hand, unto the O ifice of the Stomach: From hence are dejection of appetite, vomiting, head-ach, dotages, faintings, thirst, the drowsie evil, &amp;c. But the Plague which is made in us, even as that which is drawn in from without, have their own Inns wherein every one begins to rage: But as long as the Idea of sorrow and fear do besiedge the Tartar of the bloud in the Stomach, and as long as the image of the terrour of the Archeus is absent, the Plague is not yet present. In the mean time indeed, it comes to passe, if they shall keep themselves the lesse exactly, that the Tartar of the bloud being more and more malicious, doth at length terrifie the Ar∣cheus; and he stamps a pestilent poyson on himself. 
 For Plagues which are bred onely through terrour, are more swift, and much more terri∣ble than those which proceed from an infected air: for this perhaps strikes many to the heart; because the stomach, seeing at least it is a membrane; yet I have placed the per∣turbations and first assaults, even in the Orifice thereof, or in the spleen, at least wise, in that extream or utmost part of it self which lays on the orifice or upper mouth of the stomach; and from hence a ferment is bestowed that is requisite for the necessities of digestion: But the Schools themselves call the mouth of the stomach by the Ftymology of the heart; For a wound of that place, and a wound o the heart, do kill with the same sumptom, and alike speedily: For I have seen many, whose head a strong Apoplexie had made plainly unsensible and dead; yet that were hot in the midriffs many hours after: For a Bride in a Coach nigh Scalds, is saluted by Country Musqueteers, and the bullet or a Musquet smites thorow the temples of her head, not a little of her brain is dashed out, and her head presently dies: But she being being brought to Vilvord four leagues distant from thence, her pulse as yet afforded testimonies of li e. Is not also the vital spirit, be∣ing a certain ruler of the whole body, in the womb? and the which is onely a membrane, after the manner of the stomach? and the seat of far greater disturbances than the liver, lungs, and kidneys. Truly the members in themselves are nothing but dead Carcasses, but the spirit is the Governour which quickens those members; which spirit, and after what sort, God hath planted where he would. Indeed I remember that I have often seen, that those who had the Tartar of their bloud corrupted by some kind of fear of the Plague, but without belief, or presumption of a contracted infection, di undergoe an uncessant anguish and combating day and night, yea although they were wise, and laughed at their own perplexities; yet they were not able, but that as restlesse, they would present the image of fear conceived, before their eyes: For they were like unto those who were bit∣ten by a mad dog, who will they, nill they, have their imagination readily p yable at the pleasure of the poyson. At length, in the very Tartar of the bloud sticking about the midriffs, I have found a proper natural phantasie, which the image of fear conceived in the spleen, had feigned to it self: So, lascivious dreams do not always follow from the imagination of the fore-past day; but for the most part also, from the matter it self pre∣dominating in the Testicles; no otherwise also, than as one that hath a desire o make water, dreameth that he doth continually make water: Therefore the terrour of the man is the occasion of the Pest, and the terrour of the Archeus is the efficient cause of the pestiferous image and poyson: For it is as it were the Father of the Plague, the which, the poysonous image being once bred, although it may cease, at least wise, the Plague con∣ceived is in its own image: For if the terrour of the man were a sufficient cause of the Plague, of necessity also the Plague should always follow a pestilential terrour, which is false: even as also, in an in ant, who is void of all terrour, the Plague is received at pleasure: From whence it is sufficiently manifest, that the Archeus himself being af∣frighted, is the primitive efficient cause of the image of the pestilence. The plague therefore consisteth of a defilement, to wit, of a contagion, in the swiftnesse of its course, in the singula ity of its poyson, in the terribleness of its concomitants, lastly, in a difficulty of preservation, and curing. 
 But indeed, I leave behind me the inquisition of that plague which is sent for a pu∣nishment by reason of the hidden judgments of God: The which although it be plainly above nature, yet in the mean time, the matter thereof is not a creature lately made of nothing: because it after some sort, enters the borders of nature: For the smiting An∣gel stood not on a mountain, which the continual water of the air flowing over it, well washeth by licking thereof: Neither stood he also on an high Tower, and where not∣withstanding, the sin of David in the lust of concupiscence, had took its beginning: but he stood on the hoary putrified threshing floor of Araunah. So the Angels in the Reve∣lation, pour out their Vials, from whence the third part of men shall at sometime pe∣rish. The word, yea the beck of the Lord can do all things, without a floor, a scabbard, a sword, Vials, the effusion of Poyson, &amp;c. But such is the bounty of his piety, that he inflicts not such punishments nakedly by his word; perhaps by reason of the perpetual constancy and irrevocable firmnesse of his word, nor also by evil spirits doth he send a supernatural plague, lest he should deliver the living into the hands of their enemies. At length, the plague produced by enchantments (if there be any) follows nature: For tru∣ly, the Devil is not able of himself even to make one gnat, unlesse he assume the seminal Beginnings thereof; even as his magicians could not make gnats, the off-springs of the waters, of dust: wherefore also, they confessing the impotency of the Devil, then cryed out, truly here is the singer of God! If therefore it shall at sometime be granted to the Devil to form the plague, surely he drew that from the principles of nature: 
 And the diabolical plague should differ from the natural ordinary one, in its applica∣tion and appropriation: For he should more toughly apply the actuation and impression of the poyson, no otherwise, than as the bellowes doth at leastwise promote and heighten the fire which it made not: but he should appropriate it with a fore-going preparation, by the image of terrour drawn in and borrowed from his ond-slaves: And although such plagues should be more cruel, yet they should yield unto the same natural remedies. But I call them more cruel ones, by reason of their swiftness, to wit, the image of cruel en∣vy had from witches, being over added: notwithstanding, such permissions should as yet be limited unto persons and number; yea should be more easily expiated by prayer and alms-deeds, than ordinary plagues: To wit, whereby God taking pity on mankind, may the rather hate diabolical arts, and make the Devil grieve at div ne mercy soon shewn. But that good spirits are the framers of the Pest, surely that is from great com∣passion, that we may not be beaten but under the command of obedience, by the rod of the Lord, and not of Angels: For God every where keeps a Decorum: He takes Sergeants and Guardians, who have a native goodness, who keep friendship, nor can aslume a divellish disposition, for which they know there is no place in Heaven. But before he would deliver Sodom to the Devil, he first deprived it of a few innocent persons. 
 But the plague which ariseth from a curse, by reason of the extream anguish of mad poverty, by reason of a teeming woman that is forsaken, by reason of a wounded per∣son, &amp;c. is a plague of divine punishment, which surely is scarce supported by the Begin∣nings of nature, and is easily discerned; because it invadeth onely such places and per∣sons cursed: And likewise the rich who sit in Ivory Seats, who drink out of guilded plate, who eat the Calf from the Herd, and the fat Sheep from the Flock, and do not remem∣ber their imprisoned brother Jos ph: Because the Lord adjures or earnestly swears the de∣struction of these, that others may as it were in a looking-glass behold, what it is to have pleased, and displeased God. 
 But Plagues which follow Camps, and rage for the most part some moneths after a siedge, are not to be ascribed to the slovenliness of the Souldiers; especially if they shall begin a good while after the City is taken, as for the most part it comes to pass: For Camps had also in times past their own, and the same impurities of Souldiers; but the oc∣casion is that of the smell of dead Carcasses putrified through continuance, which is infected with a mumial ferment: because that at this day, the slain are not buried as in times past, nor deep enough in the earth: In the next place, because they are hurt by an invisible bullet from far, which moves a greater terrour in the Archeus than while spear to spear, and sword to sword were stoutly opposed: For neither was it in vain comman∣ded in the Law: That whosoever should touch a dead Carcasse, should be impure, and that he was to be clean washed, together with his garment: And that the Sun was not to go down upon the bodies of hanged persons: Which things surely in a literal sence, are thus prescri∣bed by God for the good of a Common-wealth, least the mumial ferment should putri∣fie by continuance. Therefore it is the part of blindness and rashness to be bewailed, for the bodies of those that are hanged to be shewn in a bravery for a spectacle, until they fall off of their own accord (indeed a small profit accrues from thence for so great evils) and it is all one as if the Judge should say; God indeed hath so appointed it; but the Magi∣strate hath corrected for the better: As if it had been unknown to God that the Spectacle of an hanged person would be more affrightful to evil persons or offenders: Therefore if God hath known this, and neverthelesse hath given an express command for burial, it it no wonder that punishment follows transgression as a Companion: 
 But God follows the guilty eternally as a revenger behind, and I wish the punishment were turned onely upon the transgressours: for to bury is a work of mercy; but to shew the guilty hanged in a bravery is not that work; according to which it shall at sometime be pronounced, Go ye Cursed, or Come ye Blessed. For truly, to bury the dead Carcass of a condemned person, is a work of no less mercy, than to bury a Prince: And this mercy is not so much exercised toward the dead party, as toward our neighbours, least the follow∣ing stink should infect them: For neither to be buryed, doth profit him that is buryed, but the living: Therefore the Scope of Divine Goodness consisteth not onely in burying, but in inhuming deep enough: which particulars will be made more cleer by an exam∣ple: For a dead Falcon being cast behind the hedges, and half putrified, is devoured by a live one; but presently he is taken with a most contagious plague of his own kind; Be∣cause the poyson of terrour being received within, smites on his Archeus, by reason of a mumial co-resemblance infected with a putrified fermental hoariness. And the Pest of the Falcon is so great, that the pestilent Falcon being brought through a Street, insect∣eth all other Falcons which are brought that way for three dayes after: Whence thou shalt conjecture, what the dead Carcasses of men, as well of those that are hanged, as of those that are carelessely buryed, may do by their odour? For a Dog eats not a Dog, unless he be dried in the smoak, to wit, while the mummy hath lost the horror of death, through the estrangement of its tast, in preserving from corruption: but a Wolf eats a Wolf newly killed, but not a putrified Wolf: Whence there is a suspition, that there is something in a Wolf which is superiour to a mumial appropriation: Perhaps Paracelsus supposed, that that was it, wherein the first act of feeling of an applyed object sitteth: Peradventure also, for that cause, they have thought the Tongue of a Wolf hung up, to be adverse to the plague. 
 And moreover, the dead carkasses of souldiers, are at this day to be buried deeper than in times past; because the Bullet of a great Gun, or Musquet makes a contusion, and then, it takes away some part with it; wherefore, it produceth an open hole, and at length al∣so, it begets a poysonous impression of smoak; from whence, the flesh round about, pre∣sently looks black with a certain Gangren, and it readily receives a poyson into it, if not in life, as leastwise soon after death; to wit, while as through a speedy putrefaction of the flesh being combibed into the earth, a cadaverous, hoary or fermental putrefaction doth arise; unto all which is joyned in the Archeus of the dying-souldier, an Idea of re∣venge, which is prone to putrefaction: 
 From thence into the air, a monstrous Gas, I say, is pouted out into the air, which smires the Archeusses of the living with terrour: For it is with a dead carkass, just even as with horse-dung, which doth not putrifie so long as it is hot: But when it grows dry, and the Salt-Peter thereof hath departed from thence, the dung also inclines to be trans∣changed into the liquor of the earth: For otherwise, if the dung be restrained from putre∣faction, through the be-sprinkling and stirring of horse-piss on it, and into it, it produceth much Salt-Peter. For behold thou how powerful a nourishment the mushrome of one night is (for indeed a Mushrome is the fruit of the juice Leffas or of plants being coagulated, and near to its first Being; the which I have elsewhere shewn) but after it hath assumed the putrefaction of the earth through continuance, how cruel a poyson for choaking doth it bring forth: We must therefore have a diligent care, that a fermental pu∣trefaction doth not arise in the reliques of the last digestion: For indeed, the plague pri∣vily entred my own house, through a Chamber-Maid; she forthwith recovered: Both my Eldest Sons being sore troubled in their mind, shew an undaunted courage, and conceal∣ed, that they were vexed with a continual combat of sighing at the mouth of their sto∣mach: and when as through the wiles and framed deceits of my prevalent Enemies, I was detained at my own house under prevention of an Arrest; both my Sons also, would not by forsaking me, go into the Country: and since they had observed at other times, that they were refreshed by swimming, in the midst of Summer, they swam thrice with∣out my knowledge; whence transpiration through the po es being stopped up, both of them being forthwith devolved into a Fever, together with a dejected appetite, pain of the head, and a Catochus or unsensible detainment of the Soul, with a pricking of the whole body, they died among the Nuns, swearing that they would admit of my remedies: but after that they had received my Sons, they refused forraign remedies: The Eldest in∣deed, perished without any mark or signal token, even after death; because his skin be∣ing cooled by swimming, nothing outwardly appeared: But the other shewed only a small black and blew Pustule in his loyns: and the loss of these my Sons, I frequently be∣hold, as if it were present; and thou mayest suppose that it gave a beginning unto this Treatise. I leave vengeance unto my Lord, whom I humbly beseech, that he would spare my Enemies, and bestow upon them the light of Repentance. 
 CHAP. XV. The Signs. I Have hitherto written unwonted Paradoxes: my understanding being without the Moon, was drowned in tribulations: there was a matter most full of terrour, horrour, and of difficulties present; a great Reader uncapable of the best things, a darksom bre∣vity of beginning, and a hateful novelty, although a very necessary one. But that which chiefly blinds us in the Pest, is the want of an exquisite and unseparable sign; to wit, through the admonition whereof, we may be able timely enough to prevent or withstand it by remedies. Nevertheless, whatsoever created thing is in any place, it hath its own discernable signs, by which it may be fitly distinguished from other things: and these, those which do precede the plague, do accompany it, or soon follow after it. But those signs which go before it, do make for its prevention: but whatsoever signs do after∣wards follow, serve more for others, than for the miserable sick: But the accompanying signs alone, do discern of the cure. 
 And moreover, the signs of a plague to come, are decyphered in the heavens, if the Fir∣mament sheweth the handy-works of the Lord in the earth. That the signs thereof are badly referred by Astrologers, unto twelve divisions of causes, I have already before suf∣ficiently manifested: But Gaffarel hath lately described an Hebrew Alphabet, from the scituation of the stars, and authority of the Rabbins, by an argument ridiculous enough, whereby the Hebrews devise such wan signs: as if God had now, the Rabbins only as his servants, unto whom he may communicate his secret counsels: For Christians do not consider the shamefulness of those positions, who suffer such kind of books to be printed: For neither do the fixed stars change their places, that they may sometime describe these, and sometime other things to come; the which, in the first place, is contrary to all Astro∣logy. Comets also, the Meteors Trabes, Dragons, Darts, and other monstrous signs of that sort, being oft-times popular, have foreshewn popular plagues; but not by a rational discourse, or Theories of the Planets, and much less by the Alphabet of the Hebrews: for irregular lights do not obey set rules: For the Astrologers of Jerusalem, although most skilful in their art, yet they were altogether ignorant of the signification, as also of the apparition of the star of Bethlehem. For the Lord will not do a word, which he will not reveal to his Servants and Prophets. Amos 3. But of these things Artificers have no knowledge; because new lights have been oftentimes mortal, and oft-times have directly signified prosperous things: For monstrous signs do in the hand of the Lord, make mani∣fest his secret judgements, neither doth he manifest those but to whom he will: For truly, the Conjunctions, Oppositions, and Quadrants of the Stars; likewise their Eclip∣ses, Retrogradations, Banishments, Combustions, Receptions, and other impediments, are supposed to be so regular, that they are sometimes described in Ephemeres ' s for an age: But the Pest is of things extraordinarily increasing, and those not necessary: But a regular mean is not a meetly suitable sign for an effect from a contingency by chance: Neither therefore could the Ephemeres ' s or Planetary daies-books of Brabu, foretel the plague in Lumbardy, of the year 1632. which was conceived from an unjust war, and the fear of horrour: Wherefore, I attribute extraordinary contingencies or accidents, unto extraordinary contingent causes. I believe indeed, that the fore-shewing signs of the same are decyphered in the Firmament, but not in the directions of the courses of the Planets: Wherefore I account those signs to be irregular, nor to be subject to Astro∣logy; because the significations of those signs are granted by an extraordinary privi∣ledge: Therefore the signs of such a plague, are for the most part declared only to the servants of God; as is read concerning Jonas: But the signs that went before the destru∣ction of Jerusalem, were messages of the Word long before prophesied of; and so nei∣ther could the fore-told destruction be hindered, and they were directed only to the meer glory of God, the admonishment of the godly, and the flight of these. And more∣over, Israel ought to die, and to be renewed by Generation in the Wilderness, except Joshuah and Cal b: neither could that thing be any way prevented: for the Word of the Lord stands unchangeable, with whom there is no changeableness, because he is not like unto man herein. Monstrous signs therefore, if they do not prescribe a condition in decla∣ring (unless Niniveh be converted) they by nature promise an unavoidable effect. It hath also pleased others, to draw the births of Monsters into the fore-shewing signs of the plague; even as Cornelius Gemma, concerning his Cosmocriticks or Divine Chara∣cters, doth by trifling, patch them together without a foundation. But who is he, who shall either know, or interpret the denoted fore-tokens of Monsters? For the plague be∣ing present, then indeed, and too late, every one draws significations at his own pleasure. And there are some who therefore abhor the coming of unwonted Birds: but that sign either ceaseth to be natural, or that of the Quails fore-going the plague of Israel in the Wilderness, shall cease to be a Miracle: And let this be impious and blasphemous; but the other impertinent to my purpose. Others interpret this sign for flesh-devouring Birds, for a future plague; as if they were sent to devour the dead carkasses that were to be inhu∣med; according to that saying, Where the carkasses are, thither are the Eagles gathered to∣gether. 
 But the Text is not read to be for future dead carkasses, neither to have swallowed them down, seeing they are wont to be most carefully buried before others: For the River Rhoan at sometime carried away the dead carkasses of the plague at Lyons; but it infect∣ed the Citizens beneath them: at leastwise, the Clergy of Lyons declared hereby, that the burial of the dead was to be observed, not so much for the health of the soul, as for the purse. 
 The coming of Birds therefore, living by prey, denotes rather a future defect of their prey in their own Native Provinces, and they should rather denounce by a mon∣strous sign, a destruction of war, than an imminent plague. But others divine the plague to be from the meeting with unwonted fishes; to wit, they suppose the waters to be in∣fected with a corrupt defilement, and for this cause, that Sea-monsters do ascend into the waves: surely a ridiculous thing: For if the Sea putrifieth through continuance in its saltness; what water at length, shall wash away the defilement of the Sea? or why shall one only Whale wandring out of his road, feel the hurtful poyson of the Sea? not all in a Shoal, or many together? Truly, I know that the Sea is not subject to a natural conta∣gion of the Pest, and that the monstrous signs of the Heaven, and Sea, are directed by the same finger, of whose unsearchable judgement they are the Preachers, being declared unto his servants only: For the same Lord is present, as well in the center of the earth, and in the bottom of the Sea, as in the highest top of heaven. Indeed all things do a∣like equally obey him, except the most ungrateful sinner. But surely, I do rather fear the unwonted raines of blood, of spots, or sparks, and likewise Funerals brought down through the Clouds, mournful sounds heard in the air, as also noises in burying places, &amp;c. which things, seeing they are the admonitions of Divine goodness; therefore they are to be re∣ferred out of Nature, that every one may seasonably look to the Oyl in their own Lamps: For neither therefore do I esteem those monstrous signs to be the works of the Evil Spi∣rit, but against his will. Truly they are freely given, and above Nature; neither there∣fore do they belong to my purpose. 
 But Paracelsus, as he had known a singular remedy of the Plague to be in the Toad, and Frogs; so also he writes, that this is presaged as oft as a great heap of Frogs ariseth in∣to a heap, which is to choak some weak or infirm one; which being killed, it afterwards assaulteth another, until the number being thus diminished by degrees, every one at length particularly runs away: which things, if they thus naturally happen; as they pre∣pare a remedy for the plague to come, so also they denote it: For out of a Gaul, even as also from an apple drawn out of Oaken leaves, they write, that for the most part, three small living creatures are drawn; to wit, if it contain a Spider, th will have it portend the Pest; if a Fly, War: but if a creeping Animal, that it fore-sheweth Famine. But seeing one of the three at least, is found every year enclosed therein, if not two, or all of them and yet, one of those punishments doth not continually follow; therefore I re∣fer such predictions among old Wives Fables. I therefore judge, that these kind of Insects do denounce the difference of the Leffas in the Oak (Leffas is the nourishable juice of plants) so as that a worm denotes the aforesaid nourishment to be putrified through con∣tinuance; but a Spider, a poyson to be moreover adjoyned to that putrefaction: and therefore, as it were a connexed and co-touching Spider is every where almost in the whole compass of the earth; the which being in the Oak, portends not any thing out of the tree; especially because in the neighbouring and co-planted trees, nor also seldom in the fruits of the same Oak, those divers Insects are beheld at once, in the same Sum∣mer: Yet I do not remember that I have found a Spider and also a Fly, at once, in the same Oak: although a Fly indeed, and a Worm, also a Worm and a Spider: But far be it from a Christian to prophesie from Oak, and Terpentine, for that is read to be forbid∣den by the Lo d, with cruel threatnings. But as oft as a new and rare stink of Caves ac∣companies an Earthquake, or an unaccustomed stink happens in L kes, then endemi al signs have occasional powers. These things of a future plague. But as to what concerns a plague being present, truly I could never by the pulse or urine, even although it were distilled, know the plague to be present. Paracelsus indeed, ridiculously enough, num∣bers it among the diseases of the Liver, and among Tartarous ones, even as elsewhere in a Treatise, and in overthrowing the fiction of Tartars, I have profesly prosecuted. This man attributes an unnamed pulse to the Pest, which he calls a fourth: But I, although I have seriously and often heeded; yet I acknowledge my own unaptness, that I never found such a pulse: But I have well noted about the end of life, an unequally inordinate creeping, and at length, an intermitting pulse: But I have never found a fourth, or a sixth pulse diverse from the rest, from a peculiar bewraying of the plague, but a pestilent pulse different from continual malignant Fevers, hath never offered it self unto me.
Secondly, And then, that the same image of terrour should be able only by its beck, to stamp products so different from each other: Such as are Carbuncles, Buboes, Escha s, little bladders, Pustu es, Tumours, Tokens, &amp;c. 
 Thirdly, in that the one only Idea of terrour should invade and besiege, not only the external parts, but also the stomach, and likewise the head, &amp;c. 
 Fourthly, that a unity of that Idea, should sometimes produce a most sharp disease; at another time, a disease that is slow, and twinkling by degrees; elsewhere, a disease by de∣grees decaying of its own accord; since such effects may seem to accuse, rather a diversity of the poyson, than an identity or sameliness thereof. 
 Fifthly, that the Archeus of man being sore afraid of the poysonous Idea of terrour, and as it were, a run-away, should have the power and courage of producing an Eschar in the skin, like unto a bright-burning iron. 
 Sixthly, because doatage, I say, and watching, seem not to bud from the same Beginning, with a deep sleepy drowsiness. But one only answer, easily blots out every such kind of perplexity: For indeed, every first conception, and the first assaults or violent motions of conceptions, do happen beneath the Di phrag a or midriff-partition, which there∣fore are denied to be subject to reason, or to be in our power: Wherefore that Hypo∣chondriacal passions do grow in the same place, every age hath already granted: and then, that the pest or plague is oftentimes immediately introduced from a pestilent ter∣rour, none doubteth; which terrour, as it is framed by the imagination of that place; So also, the image of terrour is stamped, from whence the imagination hath drawn an Ety∣mology to it self: But such an image is not idle, or without a faculty of operating; see∣ing none is ignorant, that most diseases have took their beginning from naked perturbati∣ons or disturbances. 
 In the next place, terrour is not only the dread of the Soul of man, and of Reason a∣lone; but also the Archeus himself is terrified, and wroth, with a certain natural ferven∣cy, and the illurements of passions. Furthermore, terrour stamps indeed an image, the Ef∣fectress of the plague, the Mother of confusion and terrour; but that image assumes not a poyson from an undistinct confusion of terrour, from a confused terrour, and from the fear or flight of the forsaking Archeus: But as every Serpent, and mad dog, produceth a poyson, by the conception of a furious anger; So also, the terrour of the Archeus is not sufficient for the producement of a pestilent image, unless the fury of the Archeus shall bring forth a poysonous image, which also pi rceth and is married to the image of ter∣rour. 
 Hence indeed it comes to pass, that the Pest is for the most part bred about the sto∣mach, and doth there manifest it self by loathings, vomiting, lack of appetite, pain of the head, a Fever, drowsie evils, and at length Deliriums or doating delusions: For truly, I have amply enough demonstrated elsewhere, concerning Fevers, and in the Treatise of the Duumvirate, that this houshold-stuff is conversant about the stomach: For an Eschar is not made in a dead body, but only in live ones; and so, from the life, and Archeus himself (even as concerning sensations elsewhere) who being wroth, brings forth the i∣mage of fury, which was bred to change its self, and the whole spirit of the Archeus, and the inflowing spirit of the Arterial blood it self, into a corroding Alcali: For the vi∣tal spirit, which in its first rise, was in the digestion of the stomach, materially sharp, and which in the succeeding digestions, is made salt, and volatile, doth formally degenerate, and is made a corrosive salt, and a volatile Alcali, the efficient of the Corrosion and Eschar: For, for the madness of so strange and forreign a transmutation (to wit, produ∣ced from a strange and forreign image) whatsoever is vital in the very solid substance of the parts it self, all that, through the wrothful vital principle being angry and enra∣ged, is enflamed, and brings forth divers diseases (which are plain to be seen in the burn∣ing coal, in the Persick fire, in a Gangren, in an Erisipelas, &amp;c.) It is manifest therefore, that from the same Beginning of the Archeus being sore affrighted, and enraged into a dog-like madness, it happens, that the plague is iversly stirred up, sometimes in the sto∣mach, sometimes in the skin, Glandules, Emunctory places, and also, now and then, in the very solid family it self, of e similar parts, or bowels; from whence mortal spots, Es∣chars, and combustions do happen, according to the diversity of the parts, whereunto the Archeus being full of fury; and full of terrour, shall divert himself: But that the Archeus being terrified, and a run-away, and returning as half in a rage, is made so ho∣stile unto the parts his Clients, over which he alone is president, the confirmation thereof is not elsewhere to be fetched, than that a thorn is thrust into the finger, which by the fat or grease of an Ha e, is safely expelled without discommodities, as that remedy as∣swageth the fury of the Archeus: which thorn doth otherwise, stir up a great Tragedy of fury: For the Archeus brings forth a poyson in his Clients, by his own fury, the which otherwise, a simple small wound would willingly be ignorant of. Conceive thou, how unlike is the wound of phlebotomy, and the sting of a Bee: And likewise the stroak of phlebotomy that is clean, how far doth it differ from the prick of unclean phlebotomy. Its no wonder therefore that the seat where the image of the conceived terrour, and piercing of the combined image of fury shall first happen, is hostilely disturbed, is furi∣ously scorched; yet oftentimes poysonous, tempests, are transmitted and chased unto the more outward habit of the body, by the implanted spirit of life, unto places I say, whi∣ther the Latex or liquor of the veins tendeth of its own free accord, in time of health, or they are dismissed unto the external habit of the body: And therefore, whatsoever is to be done in the Pest, that is to be cured with speed: For sometimes the image of the Pest, is cloathed only with the inflowing spirit, and then medicines that provoke sweat do readily succour: But where the inhering and in-bred Archeus conceiveth the image of his terrour, and fury in the solid parts, unless he presently resign up and lay aside the con∣ceived image, unto and in the spermatick nourishment (I have called that corrupt nou∣rishment the Tartar of the blood) and produce a tumour, there is danger least it pre∣sently pass over into the very substance of the solid parts, which contains an unexcusable detriment of death: And therefore, that the plague may not take up for it self a tough Inn within the body, we must procure, that the pestilent image do not long float within; but that the whole houshold-stuff be allured forth, and fall out by sweat: For the Carline Thistle, is said to have been in times past, shewn unto an Emperour, by an Angel, for the plague of his Army (perhaps therefore called Angel-Thistle) because the first rise of the image of the Pest, stirs up drowsie evils, loathings, a Fever, vomiting, and head-aches a∣bout the stomach; but the herb Ixia or Chamilion, drives away sleep, and much more deep drowsinesses against Nature; and therefore they hope, that the extraction of fresh Carline Thistle, should not be unfruitful for the plague that is newly begun. 
 The End. A TABLE Of many of the Chief things contained in this Book: The rest being referred to the Contents of the CHAPTERS. A. WHat Accidents properly are, &amp; to what ser∣ving, &amp;c. 131, 9. &amp;c. Acheldamah consumes a d ad carcasse in one day. 671. 54. Adam not cursed. 654. A demonstration of his fall. 659. What he generated after sin. 663. 17. Why he and his posterity Bearded. 666. Adam ' s lust arose from a natural property of the apple. 668. No motion of lust in Adam before his fall. 682. 85. Of Adam ' s understanding. 711. The Praise of Agnus Castus. 707. 52. What kind of knowledge in the apple. 665. Air not reducible into water. 60. 12, 76, 41. Air the reducer of bodies into water. 68. 26. Air the seperater of the waters. 71. 4, 152, 19. Air is exceeding cold and dry. Ibid. 76. 40. 1120. Air acts on the water without a reaction. 76. 41. A vacuity in the air, proved by a manual. 82. 4, 7, 1126. Its magnal or sheath. 85. 20, 692, 12. It is imprinted with the seal of formes. &amp;c. 133, 18. &amp;c. What office it bears in minerals. Ibid. 20. How it joyns to the vital spirit. 183. 37. Air seperates sulphurs. 184. 45. It Vola izeth the blood. 186. 187, 56. Air not capable of a vital light. 189. It doth not nourish the vital spirit. 190. 9. How the Alkahest of Paracelsus operates on bodies. 65, 7, 105, 6, 104, 27, 479, 43, 787. it is compared to the fire mentioned in Mac∣chabes. 108. 28. Its operation on a Coal. Ibid. Its Aenigmatical description. 115, 28. The Revealer of the proportion of light &amp;c. 146. 89. The operation of the liquor Alkahest one the Cedar. 811. Aloes hurt by washing. 463. 39. Alcalies reduced into a meer simple water. 106. 12. How alcalies are made. 183. 38. The Common-wealth of Alcalies. 184. 40. Alcalies why fit for wound drinkes. 186. 53 294, 21. Amber drawes the virtue from vitriol with∣out touching it. 764. 22. Amber becomes a Zenexton against the Plague. 767. 37, 787, 1146. Amulets act by influence. 330, 19. 481 An Amulet against the Plague. 767. 37. Antimony in its form better than in its princi∣ples. 788. 153 Antimony observes an Influence. 773. 63. How a sweet Anodine workes. 918. No Animal spirit in nature. 187. 58. A good Angel never appears Bearded. 661. 37. Anasarcha by what produced. 513. Its cure. 521. The Apoplexy hitherto unknown. 906, 998 Its rise. 917 Its seat. 915 Apple takes away warts. 154 Apostemes how made. 186. 52, 290, 6 Aqua Fortis, &amp;c. 96. 14 Aqua Vitae, see spirit of wine.   How Arcanum ' s do operate. 473. 15, 164, 15 Arcanum '  cure all Diseases. 524 Arcanum ' s never go into nourishment. 577 Arcanum ' s i some sort exceed the powers of nature. 753 Arsenick though never so well prepar is not to be inwardly administred. 466. 52. It is fixed by co-melting with salt-peter. 105. 10 The Arterial spirit of life is of the nature of a Gas. 110. 40 Arterial blood exhales without a Cap t mor∣tuum. 182. 34 By what. 185. 40 How an Arterie becomes hard. 185. 48 The Arteries do not atract air. 190 Arteries attract spirit of wine, but no juicy things. 203. 41 The Archeus its constitutive parts. 35. 4   110, 41 Its seat. 430 287, 28 What it is in the beginning of Generation. 133   18, 142, 60 The manner of its operating. 142, 61 &amp;c. Its defects. 549 Archeus sensible of death. 553 Archeus receiving of evils the cause of our hurt. 1127 Archeus hath an imagin tion of its own differ∣ing from the mind. 1128 Aroph of Paracelsus. 709. 53, 878, 879 Aristotles four constitutive causes of things condemned. 18. 3 Astrology natural why preferred before the stellar astrology. 26. 9 Its supports or props vain. 126. 46 &amp;c. Condemned by an experiment. 127. 48 By a review of the attributes they give to the Planets. Ibid. 50 Astronomy slighted. 12. 5 Ascites what. 508. 524 Asarum by boyling lays down its vomitive force. 172. 45 The difference of Ascarides from worms. 221   83 Its cure. Ibid. Asthmawhat. 260. 40, 356 What the Asthma consists of. 360. 27 Fro whence the Ashma ariseth. 261. 42 twofold Asthma. 357. 9, 358. 368. 68 The Asthma is a falling sicknesse of the lungs. 361. 29, 368. Common Remedies for the Asthma vain. 3623637. The seat of the Asthma in the Duumvirate 361. 28 The Asthma not cured but by an Arcanu . 362. 40 A moist Asthma from Endemical things drawn in. 363. 45 The reasons of the Schools concerning the Asthma rejected. 364, 53 The grounds thereof. 365, 366, 367, 58 A dry Asthma is the Falling-sickness of the Lungs. 368. 60 Remedies for Coughs vain in the dry Asthma. ibid. VVhat remedies are fit for both kind of Asthma ' s. ibid. 370, 68 The ume of Sulphur profitable in drinks for the Asthma. 372, 77 The Authours intent to have burnt this book. 10. 13 His breeding. 11. 1078 He Read about 600 Physical Authors. 13. 15 How stird up to be a Physitian. 14. 20 The way he took to attain knowledg: 22. 43 Why he brake down the old received doctrines. 37. 3, 433, 18. His persecution. 470. 2 His dream. Ibid. 3. 1073 His challenge. 526 The Authors observations on his stomach being loaded. 123. 41. His visions. 265. 13, 716 His vision of generation. 736 His medicines never Exhausted though he cu∣red thousands yearly. 1080 What happened to the Author upon the rasting of Wolfsbane. 274. 12 The Author understood wholly in his heart, but not at all in his head. 275. 13 The Authors search into the cause of Mad∣nesses. 277. 25 The Authors di inctions of the office of a Physitian and a Chyrurgion. 1080 How the Author was hurt with the smoak of Char-coale. 300. 20 How two of the Authors sons died of the Plague. 1135 Of the search of the Author after the Tree of life. 808. Of his dream. 810 How the Author cured himself of a Pleuri ie. 399. 35, 400 B. BAlsams &amp;c. made with hony. 467. 56 Barrenness from what. 630 The Beard bred from the stones. 333, 38, 334, 41, 335, 47. Concerning Bezoar. 991 The great vertue of its milkie juice. 992 Be s generated from a strangled calf and dew. 478. 1026, 65 Of the virtues of the Birch tree. 892 The Blas of the heart the fewel of the vita spirit. 180 Blas of Government hitherto unknown. 330. 19, 20, 21, 22. The Binsica of the Rabbins. 24. 51. The Blas of man vo∣luntary. 177. Blas twofold. Ibid. What Blas is. 78. 1. Defluxions of the Blad∣der Ridiculus. 856 The venal blood exhales without any dead head. 404. 21, 112, 5, 182, 34. Its salt made by a mumial ferment. 473. 19. What oper∣ation precedes blood-making. 479. 49. How it nourisheth. 112. 4. Out-chased blood the occasional cause of the dropsie. 517. Blood never putrifies in the veins. 941. Blood-mak∣ing not hindred in the dropsie. 517. Blood of the hemeroyds not putrified. 943. Blood of a Bull why poysonable. 174 49, 783. 19. Of the difference between Arterial and venal blood. 179. The spirit of the blood not in the liver. 181. 32. The Arterial blood exhales without any Caput mortuum. 182. 34. By what. 185. 40. The making of venal and Arterial blood are different. 732 In what time the Bloud of man is renewed. 640 The best part of the Bloud the Schools cal Phlegm. 1050, 23 An e statial power in the Bloud. 777, 75 Bloudy Flux cured by Horse-hoof fried. 334, 41 Of things cast into the Body. 597 With the manner thereof. 604 Of things breathed into the Body. 617 A solid B dy not changed into another Body, without reducement into its first matter. 241, 6 Bones broken cured by Comfry. 457, 5 461, 26 Of the Stone for broken bones. 564 Bone of the Head profitable against the Fall∣ing-sickness. 770, 51 The Emunctories of the Brain. 435, 13 The defects of the Brain ise from the Mid∣riff. 276, 19 Of Bread. 451, 14 White Briony resolves congealed bloud, and profits in the Dropsie. 519 Butler. 557 His wonderful Stone. 558 Butler cured the Plague. 1149 And by what. 1151 Buboes and Glandules terminated by sweat. 1104 Burial of Malefactors why n cessary. 1134 Why slain Souldiers ought to be buried deeper than usually they are. 1135 C. IN what respect Camphor is said to cool. 471, 4 The Cabal first manifest in sleep. 781, 98, 99 What each mans Calling properly is. 124, 36 A new Catheter. 886 Of the operation of Cantharides in th living and the dead. 480, 60 The original of a Cancer. 544. its progress and Cure. 545. 546. 158 A Canker in the Stomach cured by a fragrant Emplaister. 115, 22 A Cancer curable by a reduced Frog. 141   56, &amp;c. Of a Country mans curing the Cancer. 546 Catarrhs or rheums proved ridiculous. 429 430. &amp;c. Cauteries what. 380. 1 The promises of a Cautery childish. 381. 6 Nine conclusions against the appointment of Cauteries. 382, 10 A Cautery prevents not a Catarrhe. 384   14 The benefit of Cauteries accidental. 384, 20 Whom a Cautery may profit. 383, 28, 29 Causticks act not on the dead as on the living. 499, 170 No nutriment from Clysters. 479, 49 Cli ers unprofitable. 969 The prayse due to Chastity. 682 Why Cheese loathsom to many. 115, 25 Chewing food well, necessary. 4 3, 1 Child-birth hastened by a Potion. 127, 49 Black Choler according to Hippocrates sub∣sisting in the Midriff, if dispersed thorow the Body, begetteth the Falling-Evil; if into the Soul madnesses. 29 , 15 What the Choler of the Schools is. 454, 22 How it is made. 1045 Choler wholly an Excrement. 1048, 16 The bitterness of the mouth not from Choler: 1060 The Seat of Choler not be found. 1053 No Choler in Nature. 1054 The Incarnation of Christ not according to the order of Nature. 665 Chymistry commended. 462, 32 It creates things which not before were, &amp;c.   477. 36, 486 What one of its chiefest endeavours is. 115. 17 It prepares a universal Dissolver. 482 Chymical Medicines adulterated by the ca∣vetous. 990 The degrees of Chymical heat. 202, 35 Of that Cinnabar whereof half an ounce Impregnates a Barrel of Wine. 578 Whence the yellowish Spittle of Consumptive Persons proceeds. 440, 39 What a Consumption is. 449, 63 The remedies thereof. 441. 43 Of diseasie Conceptions. 608 Thirteen conclusions from fire, pepper, and cau∣sticks proved by Handicraft-operation, 500 The power of Cold as to reduction of Bodies into water. 108, 29, 109, 38 Coughs whence. 430, 5, 259, 3 Purging in Coughs condemned. 431, 9 No true Remedies found for Coughs. 260   37 Pose the fore-runner of a Cough. 569, 67 Remedies for a Cough the same with a Pleuri∣si . 570, 68 Concerning Coral. 991, 719 The virtue of its Tincture 605 Coral by what it changeth its colour, and is restored by. 1143 Coraline Secret what. 390, 25, 805 Its preparation. Ibid Crabs Eyes. 991 Their milkie juyce. 992 Observations on Crabs. 886 Their virtues in wounded persons. 294, 295 The ashes of burnt Crabs against the madness occasioned by a Dog. 297, 15 Cramps cured by mans fat. 480, 58 What the Crasis of a thing is. 415, 82 The right way of curing. 473, 14 D. THe virtues of Daucus. 837 Of desperate Diseases. 307, 53 A description of desire. 270 Contemplation of Diseases. 530 Difference between death and a disease. 537 Death began from carnal lust. 550, 676 In divine things the Senses are to be cast off. 310, 13 What a Disease is. 452 The difficulty of curing Diseases concluded from the Seat of the Soul. 455 Of Diseases according to their occasional cause. 565 Their division. 566 How Diseases enter the Body. 567 Most Diseases are centrally in the Stomach. 261, 10 Diseases concentred in the vital Spirit proved by dissection. 485. Of the essence of Diseases. 488, 558 Hitherto unknown. 489, 171, 145 A Disease is a real Being. 947 Hunger no Disease. 494 Diseases pierce the formal Light. 496 A Disease begins from the matter of the Ar∣cheus. 502 The product of a Disease differs from a Symptom: 999 How a diseasie occasion augmenteth it self. 521 Cure of Diseases not furthered by Anatomy. 524 Diseases varie in respect of a six-fold digesti∣on. 620 What the ground of Diseases is. 404, 15, 407, 40, &amp;c. 430, 3: 448, 60, 238, 21, 269 Lunar Diseases their Symptoms. 140, 148 Diseases Produced by concupiscence. 524 Cure of Diseases. 446 The roots of Diseases from the beginning. 1092 What the Dew is. 68, 23. What it abounds with. 117, 33 Decoctions censured. 970 Defluxions of the Bladder ridiculous. 856 Distilling without any Caput Mortuum re∣maining. 404, 18 Distilled waters of small force. 970 Distillation of Vitriol. 891 Distillation of Urine. 847 Observations thereon. ibid. Distillation unfolds natural Philosophy. 692   8 Of Diet, its uselesness as to curing. 451, 9 &amp;c. Of the nature of Diuretick . 862, 863 Of the dispensatories of the Schools. 461, 24 Th ir hurtfulness. ibid. 28 Illustrated by two Examples. 464, 43 Things externally applyed, operate under the sixth digestion. 479, 48 A six fold Digeston. 480, 57: 206 What a depraved digestion produceth. 1104 Of the Retents of digestions, 625, 626, 1003 The digestive Ferment what. 201, 206 What things help digestion. ibid Of the threefold digestion of the Schools. 203, 703, 16 There is as many suitable Ferments as dige∣stions. 206, 2. From whence the force of digestion springs 207, 21 Wh t helps it. 703, 17. The first digestion. 207 The second digestion. 209, 21, 22 The second and third digestion are begun at once. 210, 28 The third digestion where it begins. 212 Digestion in the stomach not a formal trans∣mutation of meats. 215, 48 When digestion may be said to be finished. ibid. The fourth digestion its Seat. 218, 60 The fifth digestion. ibid. The sixth digestion. 219, 67 Our digestions why attributed to the Pla∣nets. 748 Supream of all digestions in the stomach. 290, 4 Death how it comes to e. 649, 8 After what sort death entred the Apple. 657, 41 Death followed sin. 664, 19 Death comes not from a dry habit of the Body. 729 Death is from a decay of vital powers. 730 Several occasions of Death. 752, 753 Drif what it is, and what required thereto. 595 Manner of making it. 596 D atages observed. 278, 33 What drinks best in sharp sicknesses. 454, 22, 24 The actions of the phansie from the Duumvi∣rate. 303, 31 The power of desire in the Duumvirate. 304, 37 The Harmony of life from the Duumvirate, 306, 52 Fatness from the Duumvirate. 308, 59 The Duumvirate. 337 Its Power, Seat, and Works. 340, 341, 364, 49 Ʋnderstanding is formed in the Duumvirate. 275 Why the Spleen and Stomach are called the Duumvirate. 287, 26 Authority of the Duumvirate. 296 The Dropsie Anasarcha, whence. 449, 62 Its seat. 515 Dropsie unknown. 507 Not seated in the Liver. 509 How stirred up. 512 What the efficient matter thereof is. 513 The Cure. 521 A Bastard Dropsie. ibid What abstinence from drink may effect in the Dropsie. 519 Of Dungs and Toads in the Dropsie. 519, 520 Why drowned Bodies swim after a season. 427, 73 Drowsiness as well artificial as natural helped by Lixiviums. 303, 31 The vanity of drying up superfluities, 440, 42 Of drunkenness. 449, 63 Of being drunk with new Wine. 122, 23 Duelech of Paracelsus. 833 Duelech is made of the Urine. 836, 837 Three Spirits concur for the nativity of Due∣lech. 850 Its manner of making with an observation of the Fountains of the Spaw. 851 What may be found in Duelech. 861 Of the savour of Dungs. 212, 26 VVhere the Forment of Dung resideth. 221, 811 E. EArth, why not reckoned among the prima∣ry Elements. 49, 16, 11 , 44 What the Oxiginal Earth is. 0, 3.  ' Tis Called the foundation of nature. 4. ibid. It breaks forth to light in some places. 51, 5 The Earth is a fruit of the water. 66, 23 The various distinct Pavements of the Earth. 94, 5 The diversity of Soils in the Earth. 688, 3 In the last Soil the wa ers live. 689 Of Earth-quakes. 93, 2, &amp;c. It is alwayes a threatner of punishments. 102, 33 Ear-wax good for pricking of the sinews. 247 Eels bred by Honey and Dew, &amp;c. 478, 37, 1026, 65 Of the virtue of the Liver and Gaul of an Eele. 304, 46 An informative Simil of an Eg. 45, 12, 113, 10 The prayse of Elecampane. 703, 10 Of the Elements. 48 The two Elements Water and Air untransmu∣table. 65, 7, 69, 1 Their co-mixture no constitutive principles of bodies. 134, 24 Elements do not fight nor have contrariety. 168 They Cannot destroy each other. 1048, 16 Electrum of Paracelsus against Inchant∣ments. 65 Elixir proprietatis and its pr paration. 574. Elixir proprietatis not made without the Li∣quor Alkahest. 813 Of the Embrio of a Bull-Calf its use. 883 Of Endemicks. 188 Endemical things are drawn in by breathing. 189, 7 The Progress of Endemical things. 191, 13 The Epitaph of an Emperour. 528 Of the Ephialtes or night-Mare from what stirred up. 299, 15 Epilepsie whence stirred up. 114, 17 Erisipelas its Cure. 475, 29, 114, 17 Essence what it is. 414, 76, 81 And in some things not so effectual when sepa∣rated. ibid. 78 Eve not cursed. 654, 13 Eve not appointed to bring forth in pain. 654, 14 Eve destowred in Paradice. 666, 33 Excrementitiousness whence caused. 430, 4 Extracts their invalidity. 459, 12 F. OF the infection of a dead Falcon. 1134 Fasting when easily brooked. 24, 51 Fever not cured by Phlebotomy. 953 A Fever hitherto unknown. 935 Thirst in Fevers examined. 936, Drink allowed in Fevers. 453, 9, 902 Caution about their food. 454, 24 Flesh to be shun ' d. ibid. Whence Cold and then hot. 471, 4: 973 VVhat the Sunochus Diary and Hectick Fever are. 978 Seat of a p trid Fever. 978 The occassional cause of Fevers twofold. 979, 980, 986 The Cure. 987 A Diary and Hectick affect onely the vital Spirit. 973 Essence of Fevers discovered. 1002 Feverish matter swims not in the Blood. 956 The essence of Fevers not from heat. 940 The seat of intermitting Fevers. 948 The original of Camp-Fevers. 1096 The poysonous Excrement in Fevers included in the Midriff. 331, 25 VVhat a Ferment is. 31, 24, &amp;c. By what continued. 1124 Ferments being different, do cause different operations. 479, 48, 115, 26 No transmutation without it. 111, 1207, 2 Why commanded not to be used. 111, 1 Its properties, &amp;c. 112, 3, &amp;c. The Ferment of the Plague. 11, 22 There are double Ferments in nature. 112, 8 Ferments the causes of transmutation. 207, 8 The Ferment of the Stomach not from it self. ibid. Ferment of th Spleen turns the Spirit of wine wholly into a Salt. 733 Fishes made of water proved. 115, 29 Fishes helpful to Chastity. 667, 38 Fishes why long lived. 684, 93 Fishes bring forth without pain. 685, 95 Fire no Element. 48, 9, 50, 1, 134, 24, 138, 35 It receives not its nourishment from the Air. 84, 16, 134, 24 It generates nothing. 109, 34 VVhat its appointed ends are. 129, 26 Its divers Inclinations taught by Positions. 136, 31 Its being no substantial Body, proved by de∣monstration. 137, 33 It is the Vulcan of Arts. 138, 38 Actual fire cannot subsist in a mixt Body without consuming it. 1049, 18 What a Flatus is, and its kind, 421, 34. &amp;c. Two irregular ones in us. 424. 50 Whence they arise. 425 61 Where made. 428. 78 A Flint capable of retaining the solar light. 147, 95, 155, 35 The Bloody Flux how cured. 475, 29 The quality of food doth not hurt, except where medicines are wanting. 702 What a Fog is. 68, 24 VVhat a Form is, and whence. 130, 2 3, &amp;c. The distinction  ' twixt an Essential and sub∣stantial form. 130, 7, 133, 22, 143, 67 A four-fold form. 143, 67 Fox lungs censured. 260, 38 Of the original of Fountains. 6 Fountains dispense the seeds of Minerals and Metals. 690, 19 Fountains not thickned by the air. 691 From whence the best fountains do arise. 694 Of the Keeper of Fountains. ibid VVhy they are called sharp. ibid VVhat the sharpness of Fountains proceeds from. 695, 22 Of the fountains of the Spaw. 696, 1 VVhat they contain. 697, 5 VVhy a vein of Iron is invisible in fountains. 698, 8. VVhy fountains are different in strength. 698, 14 Of the virtues of the hungry salt of the Fountains, and how far they act. 699. VVhom they do not h lp. ibid How they profit in the stone. 700, 12 The qualities of fountains are Relolleous and Cherionial. 01, 19 Advice to those that drink of Spaw waters. 702 How the waters may pass to the midriff quickly. ibid How much he ought to drink, and what he is to take with it. 703, 10 A Frog how reducible to its first matter. 141, 56 G. GAs, what it is. 69, 29, 71, 10, 106, 14 VVhat it retains. 109, 34 Galen ignorant of the causes of Ulcers, 321, 25 Galen no Anatomist. 423, 43, 303, 3 Galen never knew Rose-water, Aqua vitae, nor Quick-silver. 10 Galens errors about Ulcers. 319, 14, 1 Galen ignorant of the Latax. 378, 33 VVhat the Ga l ' s use is in the body. 427, 74 The Gaul a vital Bowel. 211, 34, 1061 It performs its digestion by a fermental Blas. 214, 46 The Gaul hath the nature of a Balsam. 216, 53 It is taken so in Scripture. ibid. 1041, 24 From what the Gaul receives a ferment. 1048, 14 The Generation of Fauns, Satyrs, Nymphs, &amp;c. 681, 81 Generation of Tro ts. 684, 91 Generation of man described. 736, 737, 738. Ginger produceth sweat. 250, . Glas turns into water under the earth, &amp;c. 116, 33, 151, 15 The Globe is Oval. 35, 2 The best manner of drawing forth Goats blood. 210, 75 Its wonderful virtue. ibid God made not Death. 337, 572, 157, 58, 649 How it came to be. 649, , 650, 651 The Essential Image of God is in the mind. 718 Gold distilled over the Helm. 64, 6 Its ponderosity is from its seminality compres∣sing the water. 67, 18 Though reduced into the form of Butter, R ∣zin, or vitriol yet useless. 478, 42 VVhat it is rendred efficacious by. ibid Gold and precious stones examined. 970 Purging medicines hurtful in the Go errhea. Of the original of the Gout. 291, 9, 842, 292 The Gout sometimes driven away by fear. 293, 15 Gout not from a defluxing Catarrh, nor help∣ed by Cauteries. 385, 23, 386, 1 Gout distinguished not by heat or cold, but by a seminal Essence. 87, 8 The original of the Gout and its progress. 388, 13 The Seat of the Gout. 389 Of the curt, with an Epitom of the Gout. 390, 25 Ca teries and drying drinks ain in the Gout. 391, 32, 35 The action of Government unknown produceth many errours. 333, 36 Grapes immediately eaten hurtful. 107, 16 Grass roots cannot cool the Liver. 319, 1 Of Gunpowder. 107, 21 H. HAres fat puls out a horn. 521. 1160 Being dryed cures the bloody flux 4 3 To what end the motion of the heart is. 179 24 Herbs and rbarists why disesteemed. 1 10 The Schoolmen ' s way of judging of the ele∣mentary degrees of herbs, erroneous. 69. 28, 459, 1 Their sloath and errour in the search of their virtues. 15 . 3. &amp;c. Why their preparation requirs much wariness. 458. 11, 1 . &amp;c. Their properties distinguishable by their spe∣cifick savour. 460. 17, 472 12 Their time of gathering when. 460. 17 468 19, 142, 60 The Heaven gives neither life nor form 129 1, 132, 14, 108 It doth not cause diseases. 1084, 1086, 1087 1091 What is required for healing. 17 , 44 Heat not the first of life. 196. 26 Heat not the proper of diges ion. 199. 2 Heat consumes not radic at moisture. 17 Heat is not the life. 718 Heat fails not for want of moisture. 744 H rhoids. 943 Their cure. 944 From whence the pain in the head may arise. 339. 1 What ought to be minded in applying remedies to the head. 276. 20 Of the effect of Remedies applied to the head. 292. 12 Hellebor commended for the heal. 368. 63 Also for madnesse. 302. 26 The defects that manifest themselves in the head cured by stomack Remedies. 302. 26 Memory placed in the head. 304. 3 A History of a woman infected with the pox. 34 40 Of Count Destaires being opened. 509 Of Cardinal Ferdinand. 951 Of a Hydropical man. 406. 33, 510, 520 Of a boy troubled with the Iliack passion. 422 38 Of a Gas stird up by Sal Armoniack and A∣qua ortis. 426, 62. Of a bursten man. 428. 75 Of a noble woman strangled by affects of the womb, 428. 76 Of a Sonatours wife in child birth. 443. Of a merchant ' s ascending the high mountain of the Canaries. 73. Of an earth-quake at Fa agusts. 79. 13 Of thunder. 91. 20 Of an earth-quak . 93. 3 Of predictions deciphered in the Stars. 122. 27 Of the Authors Chamber-fellows walking by night. 141. 53 Of Butler. 563 Of several wonderful things. 597 Of the Author. 958 Of a man with a Quart an Ague. 91 History of Crabs. 886 Of a preacher in England. 846 Of a Duke being diffected. 627 Of a woman whose Liver weighed 21. pounds. Ibid. Of a boy that a e this own dung. 211. 36 Of a Printer of Bru els that lived 23. days of his own dung. 212 Of a Chymist that made vi gar yearly by the odour of the vessel. 217 Several Histories of the distasted . 228, 28 History of Paracel us his Birth and life. 230 28 History of Groynland fishing. 232 History of a speaking Satyr. 683. 685, 88 Of the bignesse and long life of Fishes. 684 93 History of a young that cat much and ded litle. 243.15 Of the Egyptians dead bodies. 245.20, 802 Two Histories of children troubled with the stone. 251 History of a Toad. 730 History of an old man dying of the strangury. 1060 History of a man that lost his nose. 764.22 History of the Authors examining of poysons. 274.12 Severall Histories of drowned persons. 281.47 48, 49, 50 Several Histories of Asthmatick persons. 359.360 History of amatron that could not swallow. 361.31 History of an Elder whose lungs were like a stone. 362.42 History of a man suddenly strangled by an Asthma. 363.46 History of a man of sixty years of age troubled with an asthma, withdivers observati∣ons thereon. 364.50, 365, 366, 367 History of a Maid cured of the Leprosie and how it budded again. 1091 History of a Bursten man. 301.21 Of a Lawyer that took Henban seeds for dill. 302.21 History of the Authors getting the Itch. 317 2 History of a snorting old man. 370.70 History of one dying of the Plague. 1157 Hony yields no ashes. 404.18, 583, 38 They that eate Hony must abstain from Rye bread. 798 A quaternary of humors why suspected. 945 Of the weights of Humours in diseased bodies. 946 Of the deceits of Humours. 1041, 1042, 1045 It is rashness to suppose separation of Humours the ground of health. 133 Hippocrates distinction of diseases. 530 Hippocrates described in a Letter to Artax∣erxes. 1081 Artaxerxes Lievtenants Letter to Hipocra∣tes, with his Answer thereto. 1081 His Letter to the men of Coo , and their Answer thereunto. ibid Hippocrates compared with Galen. 1083 Hippocrates potion commended 1143 Hippocrates revived. Of his remedies against the Plague. 1154 The several kinds thereof. 1155, 1156 I. OF the occasional matter of the Jaundice. 217 The Jaundice not from yellow choler. 1057 Jaundice demonstrated by Anatomy. 1058 A double vice in the Jaundice. 1059, The Jaundice i not from the Gaul being stop∣ped. 1060 The efficient cause of the Jaundice and the cure. ibid There is an unnamed poyson in the Jaundice. 1062, 33 The se of the Jaundice. 1063, 35 The Jaundice by a venom proper to it, produ∣ceth a dry Asthma.   I e, how caused. 72, 13, 75, 33 It is lighter then when resolved into water. ibid. 35 Of the Idea ' s of diseases. 539 Their piercing. 541 Eight Propositions concerning Idea ' s of the Archeus. ibid Silent Idea ' s do prove an Archeal Idea. 550 Regular Idea ' s are planted in the seed by the corruption of the Generater. 548 The birth and original of a diseasie Image. 552 Idea ' s brought into the venal blood. 554 The powerful Idea ' s of diseases are framed in the Duumvirate. 563 Of Soulifi ' d Idea ' s. 607 Exorbitancies imprint lasting Idea ' s: 608 The original of diseasie Idea ' s. 1004 The necessity of Idea ' s in a fever proved. 1005 Of the different effect of Idea ' s. 608, 12, 1121 Idea ' s of the soul pierce the womb. 609, 18 The progress of Idea ' s. 611 Of several Idea ' s the cure. 612 Archeal Idea ' s cured by Opiates. 621 What Idea ' s are most lasting. ibid Of a mad Idea. 278, 35 The force of mad Idea ' s is from the spirit of the midriff. 279, 37 The extinction of mad Idea ' s. 280, 45, 46, 281 Of the Iliack passion. 421, 30 Cured. 31 The Illiad of Paracelsus what. 690, 20, 695, 22 The Image of terrour sifted. 1159 The Image of the mind. 262 The Image of God. 714 Of the immortality of Adam. 745 Imagination how it comes to be. 270 To what to be attributed. 341 And where seated. ibid The distinction of Incli ations. 124, 36, &amp;c. Remedies against Inchantmens. 605 The Intellect is a formal light. 269.34 The nourishing of an Infant for long life. 797 799 The property of Irish Oak. 150.5. The faculties of a vein of Iron and what it performs. 700.7 How it profits in the stone. 701.12 Issues how they sometimes profit. 372.74 How the Author got the Itch with his prac∣tise on himself. 317.3, 319, 9 Thirteen conclusions from the same. 318.7 Iuyces how preserved uncorrupt. 461.21, 15 172, 45 K. OF the wandring Keeper. 254 Why so called. 257.10 What he performs. 256.6, 258, 24 259.27 How he Erreth. 260 His Restoring di icult. 261.43 How the Kings-evil is bred 251.24 A Remedy for the same. 252.26 Kidney Judge of the Dropsie. 512 It conceives the dropsie. 514 Kidneys differ the urine from the Latex, alone. 558 What it is brings peace to the Kidneys. 709 52 Kermes Examined. 972 L. LAtex is not the urine. 509 Latex seperated from the venal blood Re∣ceives the disposition of an excrement. 512 Its ordination. 518 Latex what it is. 373, 2 The distinction of the Latex from urine and sweat. 374.5 The absurdities that follow the Ignorance of the Latex. bid. 9, 370 Of the several uses of the Latex. 375.12, 14 18 The necessity of the Latex. 377.28 The vices of the Latex. Ibid. 31 Latex easily receives a Forreign guest. 378 36 Diseases arising sometimes from the Latex, how cured. 448.61 Laudanum without Opium cures several dis∣tempers. 543 Why the Land of promise hot. 86, 27 Lead, how reducible into Gas. 102.23 Leprosie what. 895 What the L prosie infects by. 900 Difficulty of its cure. 901 Of the bu ding of the Leprosie after curation. 1091 What Leff as is. 116.31 Of the manifold life of man. 735 Of the middle life of things, &amp;c. 150.8. &amp;c. Impediments of life. 754 How the life of things is changed. 154.28 The middle life of things abides with us. 150 158.53, 379, 43, 1124 Of the spirit of life. 191 What life is. 740 What Resembles life. 752 Of light, &amp;c. 135.24 Its beams being united is true and actual fire, Ibid. 26 Tis to be understood of the Suns light. 139, 40, 130, 36 It is No element. Ibid. 37 The difference  ' twixt it and the formal light. 144.73 Of its being retained in a flint. 147.95, 155 35 Of the extinction of life. 159.59 What places most conduce to long life. 723.806 810 Light in us is hot in fishes cold. 734.747 Of short Life. 747 What may occasion it. 754 Harmony of life from the Duumvirate. 306 52 The Liver never hotter than needfull. 438.27 Liver not the seat of the Dropsie. 510 The shop of sanguification is not in the Liver. 214.42 It performs its digestion by a fermental Blas. Ibid. Of the different operation of the Loadstone. 762 The Medicinal faculty of the Loadstone. 763.19 Loadstone dir cts it self but is not drawn. 773 64, 774, 67, 775, 68 The properties of the Loadstone laid asleep by Garlick. 774 67 The same performed by Mercury. Ibid Why glassmakers use the Loadstone. 787 143 Logick deciphered and Condemned. 32.5, &amp;c. 67 Long life Impeded by Milk. 797 What Love is. 719, 722 Love is before desire. 720 The excellency of love-desire. 314.19, 21, 23 A Lunar Tribute. 7 0 Ludus its preparation and where to be found. 881, 882 The original of the Lues venerea. 1092. 1903 1094 Lues venerea consists not of matter but of a ferm ntal odour. 1094 Carnal Lust not from the Reines. 305.42 But from the stomach. Ibid. 43 The diseases of the Lungs whence they a rise. 440.39 With what their Ulcers are cured. 441, 43 Why they disburden themselves by spitting. ibid. 45 They are unmoveable. ibid. 442. &amp;c. Their use. 444, 49 The vanity of Ecligmaes in these distempers 445, 54. Burdened by perfumes. 446, 55 A corrupt Imposthume in them broken at∣tended on by death. 449, 63 Their difficulty of cure. 260, 41 Remedies applyed to the head for the Diseases of the lungs unprofitable. 357. 3, 4 M. Sign of madness. 297, 1054, 11 Concerning madnesses. 966, 287 The first and second degrees of madness. 278, 30, 279, 38 The occasion of madness in the Midriff. 981, 273, 5, 276, 287, 29, 297, 2, 307 Madness not cured by Opiates. 629, 307, 56 Madness difficult to be understood. 277, 24 VVhy a mad man feels no cold. 280, 43 How madness is propagated by biting, &amp;c. 144   76  ' Tis not proper to the mind. 145, 70 Of the cure. 281, 47, 48, 49, 282, 52 Maiden hair good against Inchantments. 605 VVhere the Magical power in man is seat∣ed. 780 The Magick of man when most powerful. 781 The first degree of power dwelleth Magi∣cally in the forms of the three principles 788, 152 Of the Magick of Bruits. 789, 155 Humane imagination the foundation of Na∣tural Magick. 791, 168 Magisteries commended. 480, 54 Of the Magnetick faculty. 614 Marrow more in old creatures then young. 748 VVhat Magnum Oportet is. 153 The power of Magnetism. 762, 11, 763, 21 Magnetism not superstitious. ibid. 14 VVhat diseases have been cured by Magne∣tism. 763, 20 Vitriol dies through Magnetism. 764, 21 The Magnetism of Mummy proved to reach from Italy to Bruxels. ibid. 23 Of the Magnetism of the line Thistle ibid. 24 The Magnetism of Philtrous Mummies. 27 The magnetick force of Arsmart, Comfrey, &amp;c. in curing Ʋlcers. 765, 29 Asarabacca and Elder are magnetical. ibid. 30 Of the Mumial magnetism impressed on a Chair. ibid. 33 The Saphir an Imitater of the magnetick Un∣guent. 766, 34 Magnetism is a heavenly quality. 768, 40 God approves of the Magnetism of the un∣guent by Reliques. 769, 47 How glass becomes magnetical. 774, 65 Rosin magnetical. ibid. 66 The cause of Magnetism in the Unguent. 776, 71 VVhen the Magnetick Unguent is brought in∣to action. 777, 78 The Magnetism of the Eagle. 778, 82 By what the power of the Magnetick unguent becomes efficacious. 784, 121 Magnetism not exercised by Satan. ibid. Spirits the Patrons of Magnetism. 786, 138, 788, 150 The Magnetism of things are made by a na∣tural sensation. 787 How Magnetism differs from other proper∣ties. 789, 159 The virtue of the Magnetick unguent from the composition, not the phansie of the Com∣poser. 792, 172 The Magnetism of Red Coral. 1147 The definition of a Man. 21 Man in his whole substance the Image of God. 718 How he hath a likeness of the Heavens. 749 The medicines of the shops vain. 431, 10 The property of a true one. 451, 5 Its extent. 460, 20 Medicine the most ccult and intricate of Sci∣ences. 538 Purging deceives the unwary. 556 Force of medicines in their odour. 593 In what the virtue of a medicine is seated. 177, 42 Metals, why hard to be reduced, &amp;c. 49, 12 VVhen reduced, they have in them Planetary virtues. 478, 41 Of the internal Mercury of metals, and its pro∣perty, &amp;c. 65, 8 Mercury ' s wonderful property the outward Sulphur being severed from it. 66, 14, 410, 58 It hath an internal preservative sulphur. 67, 17 The simplicity of the Mercury of a Metal. 410, 53, &amp;c. Why Mercury is immortal. 410, 59, 60 The mouth of the stomach dedicated to Mer∣cury. 1132 Of Mercurius vitae. 479, 44 Memory why placed in the head. 304, 35 Memory what. 718 Menstrues their description, use, &amp;c. 740, 741, 742, 743 What the material cause of a Meteor is. 74, 27 Mettallus massculus described. 514 Metals exceed plants and minerals in healing. 579 Metals have the Internal faculty of glasse. 580 Metalline glasses appease the Archeus. 583 The original and progresse of Metals. 155   156 Mercurius Diaphoreticus though undigested by the stomach stirs up the Duumvirate to the expelling diseases. 884 Its description. 987 The dignity of Mercury. 991. 576 It cures somethings by glance. Ibid. The first conceits of disturbance in the midriff 299. 13, 302, 23, 304, 34 The veins of the midriff the s eath of sangui∣fication. 299. 13 Sleep stirred up in the midriff. 304. 39 Of the corrosive spirits of minerals. 476. 32 The property of minerals when changed into a Saline nature. 478. 39 They contain in themselves seminal begin∣nings. 142. 63 They proceed from water. 149. 2 Mineral Electrum of Paracelsus exptls sorce∣ries. 05 Of the stifling in the mine-pits. &amp;c. 84. 17 The mind is conjoyned to the sensitive soul. 352. 353, 11, 354, 13 Sharpnesse of wit not an operation of the mind. 311. 4 Milk of asses why the best. 220. 761 The defects of Milk. 797 The mind not seated in the heart nor head. 277   27 But in the Duumvirate proved. Ibid. 28 The mind knowes nothing by imagination. 714   263. 4 Passions are not from the mind but the sensi∣tive soul. 264. 6 The mind differs from Angels. 265 12 The mind not sick. 306. 51 What the mind is. 270. 38 A Ternary in the mind unfolded. 269. 36 Why Monarchs want a long life. 811 What the trival Line and flinty. Mountaine is. 830 Of the purity of Air on mountains. 806 How a mola comes to be. 739 Of the cure of Moals and markes made by a woman with child on her young. 1117 Of the stink of the mouth how it comes to be. 246. 22 Mosse of dead mens skuls how it comes to be so vertnous. 768, 41 How it answers to the back of the Loadstone. Ibid. 45 The seed of mosse distills from Heaven. 770   51 The light of the Moon cold. 139. 40 She hath a Light of her own. Ibid. 44 Capable of changing the hot light into a Con∣trary property. 140. 46. &amp;c. Her office. Ibid. 47 A caus r of putrefaction. 141. 54 A reducer to a first matter. 142. 58 The difference between generating creatures subject to its light and the Solar light. 146. 93 Of moistnesse and drying. 471. 4 Radical moisture of the Schools. 726 What muck or snivel is and how generated. 255. 256, 6 Not made of venal blood. 257 Nor by a natural digestion. 258. 21 What it serves for. 260 N. NAtivities no discov rers of mans inclina∣tions. 125, 43 Its point uncertain. 126, 48 Nature ignorant of contraries. 161, 164, 165, 19 How she acts. 169, 37, 170, 38 What Nature is. 171, 39 Nature not every where circular demonstra∣ted. 738 Nature solicitous of Generation. 784, 749 Nature understood chiefly by the Alchymist. 761, 8 God in miracles follows Nature. 769, 46 What the torture of the Night is. 449, 64 By what property some creatures see in the night, &amp;c. 140, 49 What the running at the Nose is. 439, 37 The running at the Nose not healthful. 259, 32 The best nourishment for children. 798 Nurses communicate their vices to children that suck them. 7 8 O. OF the insect found in the ake apple. 1137 For obstructions.   What property opening remedies must have. 476, 31 Fermental odours produce seminal effects. 330   19, The great power of odours in healing. 110, 44, 114, 16, 19, &amp;c, 593 Odours of Spices refresh fainting spirits by aspect. 85 The odour of Quick-silver turns oyl of Vi∣triol into Alum. 576, 1002 Odours beget ferments. 149 Odours work on the Archeus. 1 3 Putrid odours do not hurt, unless married to a mumial ferment. 1127, 1129 Old age only from a decay of vital powers 799, 800. How Opium is said to cool. 471, 4 Of its operation. 218. 170, 337, 338, 309 In what Opium may profit. 308. 62 A true preparing of Opium of great benefit to the sick. 309. 64 The drowsie evil, sleep, watching, all made in one and the same organ. 297. 3 Orifice of the stomach the centre of the body. 305. 4 Oyle easily redu ible into water. 408. 49, 105, 3, 109, 31 Why Chymical oyles are such weak h lpers. 415. 83, 480, 51 Reducible into volatile salts. 415. 84 Their operativeness wh n so. 480, 53 By what ferment oylinesses are made volatile. 423, 46 Oyl, though of Spices, nourish not. 583 Oyl olive preserves iron from rust. 846 A twofold oyl separable in oyl olive. 193, 6, 732 Oyl of Sulphur per Campanam commended for preservation of health. 813 P. Palsey what it is. 918 Pain where seated. 895 Pain of the head from what. 339, 340, 14 Paracelsus his doctrine of separation of Ele∣ments rejected. 69, 403, 13 His life. 230, 3 His cures. 802, 771 The nature and use of his Arcanums. 803 Their names. 804 His diligent search commended. 402, 2 His errour about the salt in man. 405, 30. 413, 74 His errours concerning Tartar. 234, 236 Paracelsus his doctrine of Tartar sum ' d up. 231, 8 Paracelsus the Monarch of secrets. 770, 51 His Epitaph. 771, 53 His errours concerning the plague. 1089 The secrets of Paracelsus takes away diseases, but reach not the root of life. 805 Objections against the solving of Pearls. 992, 971 The Milk of Pearls; its efficacy. 479, 4 Pepper degenerates into Iuy. 770, 51 What meant by a Perolede. 74, 24 Their division, &amp;c. 75, 31 Physitians reproved. 7, 3. 431, 10. 439. 35 What his property is, or ought to be. 430, 1. 455, 26 Their success imputed to natures goodness. 450, 1 Their vanity as to prescriptions of diet. 450, 2, &amp;c. 455, 26 Wherein deridable. 457, 1 The signs of a true Physitian. 107, 1076 The Author grieved that he learned Phy∣sick. 1078 Plague begins always about the stomack. 600, 262 Of what kind the Plague is. 1073 The Plague an Infant. 1081 The true curing the Plague died with Hippo∣crates. 1082, 1083 How the Plague in Egypt varies every se∣venth year. ibid. The Heavens do not produce the Plague. 1084 Some Symptomes of the Plague not seen till after death. 1089 Plague not Endemieal. 1090 Plague not helped by Diaphoreticks. 1089 A Plague sent from God despiseth the help of natural remedies. 1090, 1099 1133 Of a forreign new Plague. 1091 Plague collected into two causes. 1097 The division of the Plague. 1098, 1099 The conjoyned causes of the Antients. ibid Putrefaction of humours not the cause of the Plague. 1100 Triacle, and other Antidotes that resist poyson, profit little in the Plague. 1101 The matter of the Plague what, with its pro∣gress. 1102, 1132 The seat of the Plague. 1103 Why the Plague is frequent in signes. 783, 114, 1134 Excrements do not cause the Plague. ibid. Sweating is profitable in the Plague. 1113, 1127 Things requisite for the Idea of an imagined Plague. 1119 What the fear of the Plague carries with it. 1120 The ferment of the Plague. 1122 Plague sometime discerned by an O uor. 1123 Of the form and matter of the Plague. 1125 The first matter of the Plague, a hoary pu∣trified poyson, existing in the Gas of the earth. 1126, 1127 Plague sometimes riseth from within; some∣times from without. 1127, 1138, 1140 The image of the Plague consists in an Arche∣al air. 1128 Why the Symptomes of the Plague are dif∣ferent. ibid. The poyson of the Plague more cruel than that of Serpents. 1129 What Antidotes against the Plague serve for. 1129 The matter and agent of the Plague have the same specifical I entity. 1130 The Plague comunicated by an unsensible con∣tagion. 1131 The property of the Plague. 1132 The signs of the Plague. 1136 Doubtful signs of the Plague removed. 1139 The quality of a preservative against the Plague. 1141, 114 Amulets attain preheminence as well in the cure, as preserving from the Plague. 1142. Toad profitable against the Plague. 1149 Toad a Zenexton against the Plague. 1150 How he comes to cure the Plague. 1152, 1153 Hippocrates his manner of curing the Plague. 1155, 1156 Hippocrates his remedy against the Plague, recovered one in six hours. 1157 Several observations about the Plague. 1158 Carline T stle profitable in the Plague. 1160 Phlegm made of the Latex. 1042 Phlegm not in the blood. 1043 Phlegm not at all rightly distinguished by the Schools. 1050 Pimples and swellings in the face, their cure. 252, 16 Pleurisie its seat. 437, 25 Specificks for it. 458, 5 Phlebotomy hurtful in a Pleurisie. 956, 394, 8. 396, 16 Pleuri ie suddenly cured by sweat. 378, 39 A definition of a Pleurisie according to the Schools. 392, 1 The Schools defects in the Pleurisie. 393 Of the Original and progress of a Pleurisie. 395, 13 A Remedy for a Pleuri ie how it ought to be gifted. 396, 17 Peripneumonia and Pleuri ie differ neither in their occasional cause, nor remedy. 397, 27 The Thorn in the Pleurisie chiefly to be mind∣ed. 398, 31 The Cure. 399, 32 Poisons. Why the body swells when poisoned. 427, 72 Their great vertue when pr pared. 465, 46 What poisons chiefest for medicine when pre∣pared. 474. 28 The variety of poisons as to their preperty and operativeness. 475, 30 What they operate by. 479, 47. 158, 159, 1123 Of the poison of the Meazels. 742 The Ferments of poisons never duly weighed by the Schools. 1124, 1125 The Snake a Remedy against poison. 1157 Prayer of silence what it demonstrates. 311, 6. 313, 1 The preparation of the Praecipiolum of Para∣celsus. 521 Two Principles and no more. 31, 23 What the Principles of nature, and the prin∣ciples of bodies of are. 44, 7. 409, 51 The first rise of the Doctrine of three prin∣ciples. 403, 6 A principle of the Schools cond mned. 45, 8 152, 20 Of the different properties of places. 724 Measuring of pulses. 178, 13, 16 The framer of pulses. 179, 23 Pulsation how made. 180, 28 The ends of the pulses. 181, 29, 185 The necessity of pulses hitherto unknown. 182, 33 What a h rdened pulse doth betoken. 185, 50 What the use of pulses are. 187, 57 Purges condemned. 3, 9. 961 What property they op rate by. 477, 33 What the property of a true one is. 466, 50. 477. 33, 525 Putrefaction promotes the odours of some things. 414, 18 It destroyes others. 161, 16 Why all things soon putrifie under the Equi∣noctial. 141, 54 What preserves against putrefaction. 152 16, 19 What solely promotes it. 152, 192 Pyrotechny commended. 45. 11 What the Pylorus is. 222 Of his Government. 223 Of his Blas. ibid. Of the diseases he stirs up. 224, 10 Of his shu ting and opening. 225, 16 A sense of appetite in the Pylorus demonstra∣ted. 226, 20 His rage and restauration. ibid. The use of the Pylorus. 228 With observations thereon. ibid. The vice of the Pylorus cured. 227, 22 The four hot seeds usually pacifie the Pylorus. 301, 21 Q QƲartans cured by odorous oyntments. 114, 17 By an Emplaister. 988, 1011 Seat of a Quartane: 778 Examination of a Quartane. 963 Quartane not cured by Physitians. 307, 57, 812 Quick-silver truly prepared, cures the Pox. 1094 What the Quellem is. And where. 94, 5689, 6 Its greatness. 690, 14 A Question propounded to all the learned. 167,32 No such thing as a Quint-Essence. 407, 44. 414, 79 R. WHat rain is. 71, 10, 73, 21, 79, 12 Of the Rain-bow. 87, 1. &amp;c. Of the radical moisture of the Schools. 726 Radical moisture explained. 729 Reason condemned. 15. &amp;c. It is in bruit beasts. 20, 34 It makes a man unstable. 21, 40 VVhen reason faileth. 715 Reason not t he Image of God. 268, 30, 79 The Rel llum of Paracelsus. 75, 36 What it is. 66, 25 Powerful remedies are not of a foody substance 582 Remedies against Inchantments. 605 The Reins do not stir up lust. 305, 42 How the Reins change the colour of the stone. 248, 28 Of the Revelation of several persons. 1092 The Reins do not cause fatness. 308, 59 The errours of Physitians as touching rheums. 432, 15 Rie meal makes durable morter. 247 Roses preserve their fragrant putrefaction. 414, 79 S. SAlt of Tartar volatilized perfects dissolu∣tions. 1002, 1011 It absterg th. 1032 From whence is the first beginning of Salts. 694 The vital Being is Salt. 193, 19 The various properties of Salts. 473, 22 Salt of venal blood cures the Falling Sickness. 195, 16 What the chiefest of all is. 473, 24 How Salt ariseth in Urine. 842 The operations of Simple Salts, 476 31. 480, The Gas of Salts is nothing but water. 109, 37 Volatile Salts, their vertues. 991 Hermaphroditical Salt of Metals, 694 Sand not transmutable, save only by the artifi∣cial hellish fire. 52, 14 The Sea less than the boyling Sand, 690, 14 What the true Sea is. ibid It hath its motion in it self. ibid. Saphire, its power in the Plague. 765, 34 Why Church-men wear Saphirs. 766, 36 Why Saturns kingdoms are wished for. 303, 32 The Mercury of Saturn, &amp;c. 478, 40 Its distillation. ibid. Against the Contemners of Science. 989 The Schools ignorant of the diseases that arise in the sixth digestion. 219 The Schools condemned of ignorance and sloath. 474, 28, &amp;c. Of blasphemy. 145, 78 The errour of the Schools about the first Mover. 176 Scorpions produced from Bazil. 13, 113 Scurvy unknown to the Antients. 109 When it first appeared. 1092 How seeds issue from the invisible world. 935 Seminal beginnings are from an Idea. 436 Seeds act as appointed. 164, 16 No seminal disposition in the soul of man b ∣fore the fall. 662, 11 The four lesser hot seeds commended. 427, 75 The proportion of seed in a body is the 8200. th. part. 106, 12, 1125 How seeds are made. 13, 12 The difference betwixt a seed and ferment. ibid. Hot seeds are of an easie conception. 143, 66 Seeds in their Original void of savour and colour. 693. 2 Of Sense and Sensation. 895 The Sensitive soul not generated by the mind. 662, 10 It differs from the mind. 334 The knitting of the sensitive soul with the mind. 251 The seat of the sensitive soul. 283, 284, 285 It remains always in the vital Archeus of the stomack. 286, 18. 288, 32 The sensitive soul is a vital light. ibid. 20 Of the power of the sensitive soul when im∣pregnated with the mind. 354, 13, 14 In simples there is a perfect cure of all disea∣ses. 467, 5 The natural power of some simples 307, 54 The quality of the first sin. 654, 8 Sin hath n immediately caused death. 655   656 Whence the continuation of original sin. ibid. 28 Of the difference between actual and original sin. 658, 47 Why sleep was sent in before sin. 563 Sleep not from a defect. 337, 1 When sleep is made. 339, 12 Snow on the mountains melts not. 73, 15 Soul of man not generated from his parent, 662, 12 Soul created by God. 663 Its retreat in our first parents. 664 A Treatise of the soul. 342 Of the immortality of the soul. 346 The seat of the soul not in the heart. 292, 13 Some defects of the stomack cured by sweat. 1113 The ferment of the stomack to be regarded. 453, 22, &amp;c. Why though still moist, yet putrifies not. 479   48 Twelve properties of the stomack. 560 Some diseases inhabit in the life of the sto∣mack. 561 The stomack hath not its ferment in it self. 267, 11 Sharpness not the vital Ferment of the sto∣stomack 208, 131 What it is. 210, 29 The stomach doth not coct first for it self. 216, 52 The stomach first sensible of any defect. 285; 13, 14, 287, 26 The stomach of the liver. 20 , 20 The stomach of the gaul. ibid Sobriety commended. 452, 16 Seat of diseases in the sensitive soul confirm∣ed. 559 The seat of the sensitive soul. 555 Of specifical savours. 473, 25 Two savours, one of the tongue, the other of the stomach. 474, 27 Spleen the maker of seed. 305, 42 The scituation of the Spleen. 540 It is the fountain of Idea ' s. 606 Against black choler in the spleen. 964, 1056 The defect of the spleen is the cause of the Strangury in old people. 1061 A double ferment in the spleen. 1055 The spleen inspires a digestive ferment into the stomack. 298 The spleen most enriched with Arteries. ibid. Of the stomack of the spleen. 299, 13 Of the external spleen of an Infant. 306, 49 How the soul thinks intellectualy. 23, 48 It is substantial. 144, 70 Its power when freed from corporeal contagi∣on. 144, 75 What the sensitive soul is. 145, 82 Soul acts in the body per nutum, 780, 97, 784, The soul generates Entities. 785, 131 Soul sits in the Duumvirate. 301, 22 Sharpness is the specifical mean in the sto∣mack. 115, 34 It d ffers from all other sharpnesses. 193, 10 Stones and Rocks reducible into their equal weight of Salt. 411, 65 Whence the Strangury in old people is. 855, 624 What the Stars shew forth, &amp;c. 122, 21 How they operate. 121, 14 How they necessitate. 123, 30 The difference betwixt the Planets and the fixed Stars. 125, 40 How a wise man rules over them. 126, 46 The Stone in man not made by the intention of nature. 250, 5 Of the causes of the stone, according to the Antients. 705, 1 Of their Intentions to cure, and by what. ibid. Their despair. ibid. Why they have erred in the cure. 706, 12, 708 Heat of the reins, not the cause of the stone. 707 An example. ibid How the Antients remedies may profit, though not cure the stone. 708 Why an expulsion of the stone is not to be in∣tended. 709 The quality of a remedy resolving the stone. 710, 56 Why stones are sometimes white. 248, 28 Whence a three-fold stone is made. 249, 3 Of the Stone. 828 The flux of seeds for a stone. 829, 706, 20 After what manner a man is made a stone. 833 Of the Coagulum and Runnet of the stone by handicraft operation. 840 Salt profitable in the stone. 843 Of the occasion of the stone. 857 Of the womb of the stone. 866 Its Scituation. 867 The pain of the stone from a contracture▪ 86 Of the intention to cure the stone. 701, 15, 874 Its cure. 878, 879 With testimonies thereof. ibid. Of the manner of ministring a remedy for the stone. 883 Of the stone that maketh gold, &amp; its projection. 674, 58, 751, 807 The stone that maketh gold, hath not the blessings of the tree of life. 807 Sulphur only resists a fermental poyson. 1158 In Sulphur is the life and death of bodies. 66, 14 Sulphur boiled in Linseed oyl. 427, 70 In oyl of Turpentine. 515 The whole band of diseases hearken to some Sulphurs. 577, 260, 39 The Sulphur of Copper, hot, stupefactive, yet sweeter then honey. 304, 39 How floures of Sulphur profit those that have a Cough. 309, 94 Sulphur commended against the Plague. 1154 Of the Gas of Sulphur. 1155 The Sun scorcheth without pain. 72, 14 Is hot. 74, 23, 139, 41, 794 The gifts of the Almighty are placed in the Sun. 796 Sugar hurtful in most diseases. 462, 30 Loaf-Sugar not so good as the common. 467, 57 Swooning from the Stomack. 302, 303, 27 What that Sweat is that accompanies death and Swoonings. 42 What the Synovia is. 842, 389, 20 Of Sympathetical Mediums. 616 The cause of Sympathy. 775, 68 Of the Sympathy and Antipathy of things. 1114 T. TAst in the midriff. 909 Tartar, its distillation. 412, 68, 427, 68, 183, 39 Why salt of Tartar dissolves crude Tartar. 234, 19 How Tartar is made. 233 No disease ariseth from Tartar. 235, 1 Tartar not in foods. 241, 8 Tartar af digestion in the stomach ceaseth to be a Tartar. 242, 243 Tartar not in drinks. 250, 7 Of the Tartar of the blood. 1103 Of the original of the Tarantual. 1509 The poyson of the Tarantula. 787, 148 What thirst is, and whence. 471, 8 Thorn in the flesh how cured. 521 Of thunder. 90, 17 A preservation against its effects on Beer, &amp;c. 91, 21 The seat of the Timpany and by what it is made. 520 Why Tin is lighter than other Metals. 107, 20 The Toad commended against the Plague. 1149 How prepared for that use. 1150 How it kils the Ferment of the Plague. 1151 How quickly he dies with fear. Ibid. The Toad given by God as a Remedy for the poor against the Plague. 1152 The bone of a Toad cures the tooth ach Tooth-ach whence caused. 438. 30, 247 Of the original of the tooth-stone. 246 Of the flourishing and decaying of teeth. 247 25 How the Transmutation of bodies is effected. 115. 23 The tree of good and evil why forbidden. 656 664, 665, 666, 680 Of the tree of life. 745, 753, 754, 755 Tree of life what qualities it ought to have. 808 The Cedar tree doth signifie the tree of life in this world. 810 Of the preparation of the Cedar tree. 811 V. VAlerian good against Inchantments. 605 All Vegetables not woody, contain a winie spirit. 413. 73 Their Archeus hath no anatomical affinity with man. 458, 5 Their whole property from their seed, and not from the heaven. Ibid. 7 Their degrees whence different. 146, 88 Why vegetables unprofitable to the sick. 578 Vervain commended. 605 Venal blood wholly turned into nourishment. 257, 13 Venal blood never putrifies in its place. 941 The natural endowment of the veins. 942 An example. Ibid. Ʋesicatories more hurtful then Phlebotomy. 968 Vital spirit is salt. 195. 19, 733, 734 Made of Arterial blood. 196 24, 732 By the ferment of the heart. 733 Actuated by a vital light. 734 The virgin earth. 689 The Author instructed by visions. 22, 42 His vision of the soul. 726 A vision of a Layick concerning the Lues venerea. 1904 The spirit of vitriol reduced into an Alum by its dissolution of Mercury. 473. 21 The dignity of the sulphur of venus and the nativity of vitriol. 889 The best vitriol where to be had. 891. 695, 15 How vitriol may be made. Ibid. The preparation of the Sulphur of vitriol. 339. 9 Unguents how applicable. 47, 58 Ulcers their principal vice where seated. 18, 21, 23 Of the Difference of Ulcers. 321. 29 The cure of Ulcers. 322. 31, 323, 35 Volatile things fixed by fixed things.   Volatiolation caused by ferments. 117. 33 To provoke Urine in lingring fevers. 465. 46 VVhat true provokers are. 473. 19, 476, 31 Urinary salt made by the kidnyes. 473. 19 Observations on distilled urine. 847 Of the various actions of the spirit of urine. 864 Urine-vessels not enlarged by drink, but by the stone. 708. 41, 42 Urine not an excrement of the Kidneys. 257 11 Of the division of vrines. 1051. 1 Of the errours in the circle of urine. 1052. 4 What the circle in the urine is, demonstrated. 1052. 5 What the yellownesse in urine may signifie. 1053. 9 Watery urines after yellow ones signifie dotages. 1054 VVhat a troubled urine signifies. 1056. 26 VVhat the litle cloud in the urine may signifie. 1054. 20 Of the several sediments of urine. 1056 Examinations of urine by weight. Ibid W. WArts how cured. 141 55, 154 VVater the material cause of things. 32. 31, 105, 3. Proved so by an experiment. 48. 11, 109, 30 Likened to the internal Mercury of Metals. 65. 8 Never radically conjoyned with the earth. 10 &amp;c. The parts of the water. 71, 8, 410, 54 What its unrestable appointment is. 74. 28 Easily putrefiable under the Equinoctial. 116 30 All bodies thereinto reducible. 116. 33 The great use of that which comes from the Quellem. 117, 33 Water doth not always fal in a circular Fi∣gure. 684. 50 When waters loose their life. 689. 9 Waters the womb of seeds. 693. 1 Why some waters hurt those that have the stone. 251 Wheat changed into mice. &amp;c. 113. 9 Winds whence generated. 730, 18, 80, 14, 771, 59 What the wind is. 78, 4 The vanity of the Schools defining it. 85. 23 Violent ones how allayed. 79. 13 Remedies for windinesse. 4 0. 28 What causeth it. 422. 41 Only in defective persons. 424. 54 Some wind in the Ilcon, &amp;c. Natural and necessary. &amp;c. 428. 76 Spirit of Wine how reducible into water. 69, 27 105, 9, 106, 11 VVines hurt by keeping in their Gas. 107. 16 Wines profitable to our natures. 966 Spirit of wine passeth into the Arteries with∣out digestion. 194. 12, 731 Cold preserveth wines. 232 VVhy wines wax soure. 234 15, 21 How wines become troubled. 773 62 The labor of wisdome. 184. 45 Of witches and witchcraft: 568 The Devil how concerned therein. 569. 1 Of the power of witches. 779. 86 Of the nature and extent thereof. 780 How a witch may be bound up in the heart of a horse. 782, 109, 110 Witchcraft, Simpathy, and Magnetism do differ. 759. 1 VVomen why monthly purged. 405 24 VVomen are subject to double disieases. 609 358. 17 VVomen consume not so much Blood as men. 740 Yet they make more. Ibid. VVhy they have so many conceits when with child. 306, 50 VVomb its overslowings cured by odorus oint∣ments. 114. 17 Remedy for a woman in travel. 306. 46 VVomb a peculiar monarchy. 575 A Twofold monarchy of a woman. 609. 15 VVomb governs its self. Ibid. 334. 43 VVomb brings forth an alterative Blas. Ibid. Disseases of the womb differ from products. 610. 19 The progresse of the wombs defects. 612. 358 Its cure. 612. 325, 48 Sugar stirs up the sleeping fury of the womb. 612 Wherein the fruitfulness of the womb consists. 630 Where the womb of the urine beginneth. 209 23 Womb warreth under its own banners. 306. 52 Of the force of Imagination in women with Child 1117. 1118 The monarchy of the womb distingisheth a woman from a man. 335. 48 In words herbs and stones there is great ver∣tue. 575 Silk-worms figure out a shadow of the Resur∣rection. 684. 94 VVounds asswaged by odours, &amp;c. 114, 17 Hurt by the Moon-beams: 141. 55 Z. ZEnexton against the plague. 1144 Of the uselessness of some Zenextons. 1145 Pretious stones not true Zenextons. 1146 Amber a Zenexton and how so made. Ibid. The qualities a Zenexton ought to have. 1148 1149. Toad a Zenexton. Ibid How the Toad is prepared for a Zenexton. 1150 VVhy he is a true Zenexton. 1152 
 A Poetical Soliloquie of the Translatour, Harmonizing and Sympathizing with the Author ' s Genius. WHen first my Friend did ask me to translate, Van Helmonts Works wrapt up in hidden state, Of Roman dialect; that  ' twas a Book Of Med ' cine and Phylosophy, I took It in good part enough, and did not doubt But to perform what I should set about, By Gods asistance; for I willing stood Much pains to take about a publick good. I forth with entred on it and did see, More than my friend, thereof, could tel to me: For why, since something was begot within My inward parts which loved truth, but sin And selfish errour hated, I began To feel and love the spirit of the man, Whom I perceived like a gratious Son, To build his knowledg on the Corner Stone; And out of self to sink in humble wise, As his Confession in me testifies. The light of understanding was his guide, From heath ' nish Books and Authors he did slide, And cast them of, that so he might be free, Singly to stand, O Lord, and wait on thee, And in the pray ' r of silence on thee call; Because he knew thee to be All in All. And thou didst teach him that which will conduce To th '  profit of his Neighbour, be of use, Both unto soul and body, as inclin ' d To read with lowly and impartial mind: But as for lofty and and self-seeking ones, Thou scatter wilt their wisdom, wealth, and bones: Because thou art not honour ' d in a lye Whether of Nature or Divinity: But in the truth of knowledge of thy Life, And of thy wondrous works which men of strife, And alienated, can no whit attain, Till from the fall they do return again. Helmont, that thou returned ' st I believe, Thy testimony of it thou dost give, When by the light thou saist (entring thy dore) Thou changed wast from what thou wert before: And cause thou suffredst by a wicked sort For being good, and once wast poyson ' d for ' t: That  ' twas unjustly, I am doubting past,  ' Cause th '  Enemies conscience prickt him at the last. And truely ' n many places of thy Ream Words slow forth from thee like a silver stream; And so, that I at sundry times have found, Sweet op ' nings from the un ' ty in the ground. But did thy life in words alone consist, Or art thou to be enrowl ' d among the list Of Stoical Notionists, which only spend Their time in contemplation, and so end Their days; or were good actions wrought by thee, Which (as the fruits discover do the tree) Did shew that healing virtue forth did start From thy fire-furnace, as love from thy hart. If not, how is it that thou dost us tel Thou ceased ' st not Annually to heal Some Myriades or ten thousands, yed Thy medicines were not diminished: Or that thou wert so tender of the poor, (What if I say that bagd from door to door That thou retiredly didst live at home, And cure them out of Charity, not ro And gape for gain for visits as do most Physitians who unto rich houses post; Floating about even as in a floud, Of poysoned purged filths and venal blood; And so the peoples wealth, health, life do soa , Through the s ay vi ard of a Doctors cloak: But Helmonts hand-pen asit plain appears: Their false-paint coverings a funder tears: In room whereof, such Practic , Theory, It doth insert, that they as standers by, (Like Bibels Merchants) will ven, we p and wa When they shall see their trade begin to fail, And upright Artists held up by the an Of him who owns the good Samaritan. Yet such School-Doctors shall not thus relent, Whom Grace and goodnesse shall move to repent. This is not utter ' d out of spleen but pity, Unto the sick in Country and in City: No just cause given by these words to hate; But to be owned by the Magistrate. And I my self in former silly times, Through School-tradition, and Galenick lines, Have wrong ' d my body, weaken ' d my nature, Clipping my vitals in their strength and Stature? And though, through Grace, to soul and body to, T ' was turned to good, yet that ' s no thank to you. Help Chymists help to pul their Babel down, Builtby the pride of Academicks Gown; Let Theophrastus Azoth, Helmonts Lore, Erect an Engine such as ne ' re before. Hark Chymists, hark, attend Baptista ' s law, He speaks to h ' s Sons, as th '  Lyon by the Paw; And why as th ' eye is opened to look, May y '  not discern Hercules by his foot? Be it sufficient that he gives a tast, Least pretious peat is he unto swine should east. Be ' t no dishonour to the Ghymick School, That some mistakes thereof he doth contro : Rather a praise unto the Masters eye, Houshold disorders for to rectifie. Strike Chymists strike, strike fire out of your , And force the fire unto the highest stint Of a Reverb ' ratory, such a heat, As Galen back out of the field may beat; And fetch th '  Archeal Crasis Seminum, To keep the field gainst a Rololleum. Srrive not not by reason if you ' d win the day, P ice your Athanar, as he, another way: Aime not at lucre in what ye undertake, Your motive love, the spirit your guider make: That day to day in you the Word may preach, And night to night unto you knowledge teach: That so Elias th '  Artist, if he come, Ye as prepar ' d, may bid him welcome home. And all well-wishers unto Science, true, Unto whose hands ' t shall come this Book to view: See that your hearts are simple to the pure, No filthinesse true wisdom can endure: The milky way must be the paper here, And th ' Inke Nectar from th '  Olympick sphere: And then  ' t may open unto you a path, For finding that which long been hiden hath: For there ' s a way by Simples for to cure, Unto Simplicity the nearest sure; If not Antiquity, at Scriptures note; Solomon for  ' n example may be brought. The Author opes a gate in that Divine Chapter, that treats  ' th power of medicine. And not a little of Moses C lism He hinteth at that in of Magnetism: So truly doth the Saviour report, That to the carkas Eagles do resort. In former time, thy younger learning years, Thou as a tender heart, yet void of fears; People that had the plagues infection, Didst visit, and by them wert spew ' d upon: Some breathing forth their life within thy arms, Unto thy grief, because thou then their harms Wert not so able to repair, untill Thou hadst attain ' d a great Adeptist skill: For thou by Revelation dost show, What Co-us us ' d two thousand years ago. All which supposed, I can freely wink, At some mistakes whereby thine eye did blink, As to Religion, because thou wert Honest, upright, sincere, and sound in heart: For if the folly of them thou hadst seen, As other things de y ' d by thee, they ' d been. And if in Nature thou art ought mistaken, Thy many truths are not to be forsaken; For why ye Schools, ye cannot, neither dare ye Deny, but that humanum est errare, Until the minds perfection in the Light, Which he believ ' d, yet would not claim it quite: And so his candour is to be commended, In not assuming what God had not ended. Yet know that where one truth is you among, In Helmonts breast there lodged ten for one; And that not taken up by hear-say trust, As ye are wont, but stamped by the Iust: For Reason Dialectical, he saith, Must vail the Bonnet unto light in faith; Sith Reason savours of an earthly soil, Dies with the sense, our Parents did beguil: And therefore Logick may no longer center Within mens minds as Sciences Inventer. And Nat ' ralists must needs go to the wall, As those of Ath s in the daies of Paul; Since that four El ' ments, Humors, and Complexions, Are proved plain to be but childish fictions: Which Ethnicans by phansie blind misled, Have rashly plac ' d in seeds and ferments sted. This is some liquor pour ' d out of his bottle, A deadly draught for those of Aristotle. Astrol ' gers also will be soon undon, Since Herm ' s and Venus circle with the Sun: And since the Planets common Ordination, Was to stir up a Blas for seasons station: And since the Heavens can no forms bestow, To th '  Prince of life all creatures do them owe. Ye Theologians, look what will befal ye, Since man is not defin ' d by [Rationale] But by a Spirit and Intellectual light: Now every one may see by his own sight; And living waters out ' s own Cistern drink, Need not ew Cisterns that do leak and chink: Nor tug with pains to dig for earthly Wells, The Spring ' s within him as Christ in him dwells: Nor run to Temples that are made with hands, Himself ' s the Temple, if he contrite stands. And cause a New-birth is requir ' d of all, Since brutal coupling entred by the fall; And so your follow ' rs can ' t be reputed Christians by birth, nay, but must be transmuted. And since the mind of man may be comp eated In this lifes time, as sin and self ' s defeated. Since Char ' ty not to dwell, by many ' s known, In those that with the letter up are blown: For as from mud or dung ascends a stink, So Pride from Leathing sents up like a sink. He did refuse to be a Canon great, Least (as saith Bernard. B.) he peoples sins should eat. What will protracting crafty Lawyers doe, Since Christ against them hath denounc ' d a woe He would not b a Professor of the Law, Enough for man to keep ' s own self in awe: And what will come of Atheists, since  ' tis true, That there ' s a Power Eternal (who in e Of fallen Angels) did mans Soul ereate (In mortal body an immortal state,) To live in h ' s hand in weal or woe, as they His call of Grace shall or shall not obey. What of curst Hypocrites who in deceit, Take up Profession for a Cloak and Cheat; Better for Sodom and Gomorrah than For such, when Christ doth come the world to fan. But stop my Genius, run not out too far, Although thy shackles much unloosed are, And vitals subtil, while thou tell ' st the story, Of what concerns mans good and God his glory; Least Prince of th '  Air like Poets Pegasus, Prevail to make thy wit ridiculous, By mounting thee too high upon his wing Of fleshly pride, and Aeolus thee fling Down from the quiet Region of his skie, In the Icarian waters for to die, Or whirl thee higher in his stormy hail, And sting thy conscience with the Dragons tail: For if an inch be given (so they tell) It is not safe for one to take an ell. Wherefore retreat in time of thy accord, Least thou incur the anger of the Lord: And throw thy self along down at his feet, After the Author thou shalt once more greet. I b ' lieve thou wert a Medel-master made, By the Creator of the Root and Blade Of healing virt ' s, the Father of lights (I sing) Whence every good gift doth descend and spring. Thou livedst well, and in the Belgick Nation, Wert a tall Cedar in thy Generation: A good memorial thou hast left behind, Of what in daies now coming, men shall find Writ in Christ ' s Bosom, and in Natures spread, As they are worthy in those books to read. Thou diedst in peace in Anno forty four, I doubt not but thou liv ' st for evermore. My friend is also gone, yet I survive, Lord grant that to thine honour I may live: And as my life thou gay st me for a prey, When in a gloomy and despairing day, I thought I should have died without the fight Of thy Love-tokens, and thy face so bright; So I intre r upon my prostrare knee, That I thy way and Cross may never flee: Than turn a new unto Apostasie. Or thee dishonour, ra ker let me die. Than to depart again out of thy fear, Better wild horses me in pieces tear: If the remembrance dwell not in me rife, Of thy great goodness, pity of my life. But as large mercy is to me extended; So what is faulty may be fully mended; That perfect righteousness may cloath my back; And I to sound thy praises will not slack, In life, or death, or suffering by the world, Who in transgression up and down are hurl ' d; And Tophe s pit shall surely help to fill, If they in time repent not of their ill. But as he did for ' s en ' mies pardon cry. So do all Chrictian hearts, and so do I. O holy, holy, holy, holy, God! Whose Name ' s exalted in th '  Ascendant Jod; My self doth tremble, and my flesh doth quake, While I the King of Saints my Subject make: I dread thee Lord, I dread thy Sov ' raign fame; I love thee so, I can ' t express the same; My Spirit ' s on site, and my heart doth flame, With a desire to sanctifie thy Name: My Soul is melted, and my heart is broke, In feeling of the force of thy Love-stroke. Father I thank thee that thou didst enable Me to convey the dish from Helmont Table: And if some crums or drops have fell beside,  ' Twas what a careful servant might be tide: It being weighty, full of divers fare, If none should over-fall or flow  ' twere rare. A Corydon I h ' d rather some me deem, Than t '  use dark-phrases that would not be-seem Rather a Tautologian be dained, Than to the meanest, leave words unexplained: Rather a home-spun Patcher wanting Art, Than th '  Authors meaning willingly pervert: And if his tongue could speak out of the dust, Hee ' d justifie this Translate all almost: For though his learned Art I don ' t comprize, Yet in the Root our Spirits harmonize. The Dish lest somewhat of its crums and drops, As it was carried through the Printing Shops; Yet what the Press hath nipt off by the way, It here returns again by this survey. ERRATA. IN the Authors Dedication to the Word. Pag. 2 lin. 6 read except. In the Translators premonition. P 2 l 35 r and is. p 3 l 19 dele other. In the Preface to the Reader. P 11 l 46 r Eternally. p 12 l 28 r the work. p 13 l 35 r world. In the Poeticall Prophesie. P 1 l 4 r spiting. P 14 of the Book l 10 r knowingly. ibid. l 28 r vain. ibid. r give. p 17 l 37 r it with. p 7 l 32 r Nuns. p 34 l 55 r first . p 57 l 25 as r is. p 295 l 2 r . p 298 l 60 r Watchman. p 407 l 28 r whereof they are said to have been the: p 477 l 26 r vital. p 504 l 31 r it is. p 518 l 50 r this [is] oheaped. p 535 l 41 r efficacy. p 537 l 38 r Plato p 519 l 28 r p 575 l 5 r [But] be sides. p 577 l 61 r Lile. p 515 l 18 r anothers cherry. p 621 l 53 r 710 l 30 r the God. p 739. l 28 r Mols. p 741 l 22 for any r and. p 825 in the Title of the disease of the Stone, r root. p 838 l 55 r by p. 1073 l 13 r voice. p 1150 l 12 r worms. ibid. l 44 after terrible, dele and. p 1157 l 1 r the plague. 
 
