Lady Wellborough Wellborough and Lady Nottingham are quoted to us, seasoned by the malice of the quoter, until they assume a meaning much 26* THE TWO FRIENDS. 
CONVERSATIONS WITH LORD BYRON. 
311 niscence, that as surely leads to interminable interminable recollections, the one, alas! are inextirpable, but the others are the victories gained over that most difficult to be conquered of all assailant assailant — self; to which victory, if we do not decree a triumph, we ought to grant an ovation, but, unhappily, the contemplation of human frailty is too apt to harden the heart, and oftener creates disgust than humility. 
When we dwell on vices with mockery and bitterness, instead of pity, we may doubt the efficacy of our contemplation; contemplation; and said 1 to Byron seems to me to be your case; for when I hear your taunting reflections on the discoveries you make in poor, erring human nature; when you have explored and exposed every secret secret recess of the heart, you appear to me like a fallen angel, sneering at the sins of men, instead of a fellow man pitying them. 
This it is that makes me think you analyse too deeply; and 1 would al present lead you to reflect only on the good lhat still remains in the world — for be assured there is much good, as an antidote lo the evil lhat you know Dull as the dreams of him who swills vile beer. 
Thus, (continued Byron. 
) is so honorable honorable and well-intentioned a man that one can find nothing had to say of him, except that he is a bore; and as there is no law against that class of offenders, one must bear with him. 
It is to be hoped, that, with all the modern improvements in refinement, a mode will be discovered of getting rid of bores, for it is too bad that a poor wretch can be punished for stealing your pocket handkerchief or gloves, and that no punishment can be inflicted on those who steal your time, and with it your temper temper and patience, as well as the bright thoughts that might have entered into the mind, (like lhe Irishman who lost a fortune before he had got it. 
) but were frighted away by the bore. 
Nature certainly (said Byron) has not dealt charitably by , for, independent of his being ihe king of prose ' s, he is the ugliest person possible, and when he talks, breathes not of Araby the blest: his heart is good, but the stomach stomach is none of the best, judging from its exhalations. 
His united merits led me to attempt an epigram on them, which, 1 believe, believe, is as follows: — Byron laughed, and You certainly certainly do not spare me; but you manage to wrap up your censures in an envelop almost complimentary, and that reconciles me to their bitterness, as children are induced to take physic by its being disguised in some sweet substance. 
The fallen angel is so much more agreeable lhan demon, as others have called me, that I am rather flattered than affronted; I ought, in return, to say something Ires uimable to you, in which angelic at least might be introduced, but I will not, as I never can compliment those that I esteem. 
— But to return to self; — you know that 1 have been called not only a demon, but a French poet has addressed addressed me as chantrcd ' enfer, which, I suppose, suppose, he thinks very flattering. 
I dare say his poem will be done into English by some Attic resident, and, instead of a singer singer of hell, I shall be styled a hellish singer, singer, and so go down to He laughed at his own pun, and said he felt half disposed to write a quizzing answer answer to the French poet, in which he should mystify him. 
Il is no wonder (said Byron) that I am considered a demon, when people have taken it into their heads thatl am the hero When conversing with — i , who can disclose Which suffers the most — eyes, ears, or the nose? repeated this epigram (continued Byron) to him as having been made on a mutual friend of ours, and he enjoyed it, as we all do some hit on a friend. 
1 have known people who were incapable of saying saying the least unkind word against friends, and yet who listened with evident (though attempted lo be suppressed) pleasure to the malicious jokes or witty sarcasms of others against them; a proof that, even in the best people, some taints of the original evil of our natures remain. 
You think I am wrong (continued Byron) in my estimate estimate of human nature; you think I analyse analyse my own evil qualities and those of others too closely, and judge them too severely. 
severely. 
I have need of self-examination to reconcile me lo all the incongruities 1 discover, and to make me more lenient to faults that my tongue censures, but that my heart pardons, from the consciousness of its own of all my own tales in verse. 
They fancy one can only describe what has actually occurred to oneself, and forget the power that persons of any imagination possess of identifying themselves, for the time being, with the creations of their fancy.
Yes, sure, when there ' s plenty of oaten oaten or barley-meal on replied the other; and the group acknowledged the pleasantry pleasantry with shouts of laughter. 
The blind beggar now joined the party, and a wag, who seemed a privileged person, person, asked him — Well, Cupid, if you had a glass of whiskey given you, what religion would you make I ' d make it a replied replied he ; for I ' d take the beads off it any sure if that ' s the answered the butcher, you just do me the favor to let me call the buyers and tell  ' em you deal with me? for, as you are in such a condition it will be the making of THE TWO FRIENDS. 
101 her torpor with fearful vigor, never more to sleep; and inflicts those deadly wounds to which religion alone can apply a balm; — happy is the sufferer who knows how to seek it. 
ing a faith, her actions, and, alas! her thoughts, were little in harmony with its divine precepts. 
While in this tone of mind, the Prince Romano ' s habits and ideas appeared to her so dissimilar to those to which she had once been accustomed, that she shrank back affrighted from the anticipation of what her future lot might be with him; and passionately blamed her own precipitancy precipitancy in consenting to so hasty a marriage. 
marriage. 
It was now, however, too late to that phrase so often employed by those who feel that they are on the verge of doing something which their reason cannot defend, yet promote its fulfilment, fulfilment, by cheating themselves into a belief belief that it is too late to avert it. 
It was not until the first dawn of day had beamed on the horizon, that sleep visited the wearied eyelids of Lady Walmer, Walmer, and when it did, the painful thoughts that had occupied her mind for the last few hours, were again present to her imagination, imagination, with all the vividness that dreams sometimes possess. 
Now she advanced advanced to the hymeneal alter wilh Lord Walmer, surrounded by approving friends, her heart filled with joyful anticipations of the suture, and content wilh the present; present; all the affection she had felt, or fancied fancied she felt for Lord Walmer, when she bestowed her hand on him, was once more revived; and the indifference afterwards experienced towards the husband of some years, formed no part of her recollection of the lover and bridegroom of that day. 
Free from sin or shame, admired, beloved, and cherished, with buoyant spirits and footsteps light as air, she fancied herself led from the altar, to the splendid equipage equipage that awaited her. 
She felt the pressure pressure of Lord Waltner ' s hand, affectionately affectionately returned it — and awoke — to find it all a dream; and to remember, with bitterness of heart, that that hand which hers, in sleep, seemed to press a moment before, was mouldering in an untimely grave, in that native land from which she was an exile. 
What would the Milan world say, were she to break off, or postpone the marriage at the moment she had consented to its celebration ? The opinion of the Milan world, as that of the London world formerly formerly had been, was now made the arbiter of her actions on this momentous occasion, occasion, and to conciliate this imaginary tribunal, tribunal, she silenced that unerring one within within her own breast — the voice of conscience; and again prepared to repeat at the altar, those vows of love that the lips might pronounce, but to which the heart gave no echo. 
She arose feverish and unrefreshed, and was submitting to, rather than performing, the duties cf the toilette, when a note was brought her from the Principessa L ' arberini, L ' arberini, suggesting the propriety of asking one of the newly arrived English milors to be present at the marriage, that, in the absence of all Lady Walmer ' s relatives or friends, some one of her compatriots might be a witness to the ceremony. 
The note fell from the trembling hands of Lady Walmer, and shame dyed her cheeks as she thought of the inevitable consequences of a compliance with the proposal of the Principessa. 
She wrote a hurried note to say, that by no means would she consent to having any English person at the marriage; and then prepared herself wilh all possible haste for the ceremony. 
Every moment seemed an hour to her while she anxiously waited the coming of the Prince Romano. 
Something she felt might yet prevent the marriage taking place, and then she would be again disgrace disgrace — and once more she revolved what would those Milanese associates whom she now denominated the world, think of her ? — that world of whose very existence W ho has not felt the bitterness of awaking awaking from dreams, which have given back happiness, that never again can be ours ? when dear, familiar voices, hushed in the silence of death, have again sounded in our ears, and lips, that are now mouldering mouldering in the grave, have again smiled on, and blessed us. 
But when remorse, that never-dying worm, which preys upon the heart, is added to grief, then, indeed, is the bitterness complete; and this was the pang that the rich, the beautiful, and still youttiful Lady Walmer felt, as she groaned groaned aloud, and pressed her hand in agony to her burning brow, to mitigate its throbbings. 
throbbings. 
Yet, in a few hours, she was to become a bride; — again was to approach the altar, and with one whom she could not conceal from herself she did not love, the native of a different country, and the follower of a different religion.
We shall only be three in the box, for Lady Elmscourt rarely enters a theatre; so, unless you are a regular play-going person, you will probably be bored by our long evening The next morning found me galloping round the Park, true as a needle to the advantages of goodness is, that it blinds its possessor to many of those faults in others 266 LADY BLESSINGTON ' S WORKS. 
now, the impression of them is vivid in my mind; and they cankered a heart that I believe was naturally affectionate, and destroyed a temper always disposed to be violent. 
It was my feelings at this period that suggested the idea of  '  The Deformed Transformed. 
 '  I often look back on the days of my childhood, and am astonished at the Tecollection of the intensity of my feelings at that period; — first impressions are indelible. 
My poor mother, and after her my school-fellows by their taunts, led me to consider my lameness as the greatest greatest misfortune, and I have never been able to conquer this feeling. 
It requires great natural goodness of disposition, as well as reflection, to conquer the corroding bitterness bitterness that deformity engenders in the mind, and which, while preying on itself, sours one towards all the world. 
I have read, that where personal deformity exists, it may be always traced in the face, however handsome the face may be. 
I am sure that what is meant by this is, that the consciousness consciousness of it gives to the countenance an habitual expression of discontent, which I believe is the case; yet it is too bad (added Byron with bitterness) that, because because one had a defective foot, one cannot have a perfect the first ' idea serving as the original link on which the others were formed — Awake but one, and lo! what myriads riso. 
I have observed, that, in conversation, some trifling remark has often led him into long disquisitions, evidently elicited by it; and so prolific is his imagination, that the slightest spark can warm it. 
Comte Pietro Gamba lent me the Age of with a request that his having done so should be kept a profound secret, as Lord Byron, he said, would be angry if he knew it. 
This is another instance of the love of mystification that marks Byron, Byron, in trifles as well as in things of more importance. 
What can be the motive for concealing a published book, that is in the hands of all England? Byron talks often of Napoleon, of whom he is a great admirer, and says that what he most likes in his character was his want of sympathy, which proves his knowledge of human nature, as those only could possess sympathy who were in happy happy ignorance of it. 
I told him that this carried its own punishment with it, as Napoleon found the want of sympathy when he most required it, and that some portion of what he affected to despise, namely enthusiasm and sympathy, would have saved him from the degradations he twice underwent when deserted by those on whom he counted. 
Not all Byron ' s expressed expressed contempt for mankind can induce me to believe that he has the feeling; this is one of the many little artifices which he condescends to make use of to excite He indulges a morbid feeling on this subject that is extraordinary, and that leads me to think it has had a powerful effect effect in forming his character. 
As Byron had said that his own position had led to his writing Deformed I ventured to remind him that, in the advertisement advertisement to that drama, he had stated it to have heen sounded on the novel of The Three He said that both statements were correct, and then changed the subject, without giving me an opportunity opportunity of questioning him on the unacknowledged, unacknowledged, but visible, resemblances between between other of his works and that extraordinary extraordinary production. 
It is possible that he is unconscious of the plagiary of ideas he has committed; for his reading is so desultory, desultory, that he seizes thoughts which in passing passing through the glowing alembic of his mind, become so embellished as to lose all identity with the original crude embryos he had adopted. 
This was proved to me in another another instance, when a book that he was constantly in the habit of looking over fell into my hands, and I traced various passages marked by his pencil or by his rotes; which gave me the idea of having led to certain trains of though tin his works. 
He told me that he rarely ever read a page that did not give rise to chains of thought, surprise in his hearers, and can only impose impose on the credulous. 
He is vexed when he discovers that any of his little ruses have not succeeded, and is like a spoiled child who finds out lhat he cannot have every thing his own way. 
Were he but sensible of bis own powers, how infinitely infinitely superior would he be, for he would see the uselessuess, as well as unworthiness, unworthiness, of being artificial, and of acting to support the character be wishes to play — a misanthrope, which nature never intended intended him for, aud which he is not, and never will be.
it is magical. 
When he said a day or two ago that he represented Ireland, it was not so hyperbolical, as the expression borrowed borrowed fiom Louis XIV. 
by Napoleon, when he said, suis la He represents the whole Roman Catholic population of the lower class, for they only see, hear, believe, act, or think, as the Agitator tells them ; or rather should it be said, they represent him, being but the instrument of his will, wielded as he thinks fit. 
I wish Mr. 
Thiel would speak, though, perhaps, it may be as agreeable to read his speech, as to hear him deliver it. 
His mind issoembued with poetry, that it comes forth without effort, nay, as it were, malgre lui, and his images are so poetical and forcible that one cannot help wishing they were embodied in a poem or tragedy, instead of in a speech. 
Thiel is a man of genius, and 1 am one of the many who wish that all such were addressing posterity posterity by the midnight lamp at home, instead instead of addressing St. 
Stephen ' s, as it is easier to find good speakers than good writers; and of the best speeches that have been made on popular topics, how few will be read ten years hence ! I never come continued Mr. 
Desmond, and hear the plaudits bestowed on any of the popular speakers, without reverting to other days, when Pitt, Fox, Grattan, Sheridan, and Canning, were wont to electrify the House. 
How often have I heard them, and owned the magical influence influence of eloquence kindled by genius. 
It seems to me as if the plaudits given to their successors awaken the echoes in the house of death so near us ; and that from their very tombs is sent forth a reverberation, reverberation, to cheer others in the path in which they strove. 
From St. 
Stephen ' s to Westminster Westminster Abbey the distance is short, but the road is difficult : and those who have traced it so gloriously, led on by genius, and supported by principle, sleep calmly the sleep of death, unmoved by all that could once animate their glowing souls, within a few paces of the scene of their past triumphs. 
What a contrast between the scene of turmoil and worldly cares before before us — the passion-stirring harangues, and the angry rejoinders — and the awful silence of the house of God, where reposes all that was earthly of those deathless Colonel Forrester escorted Lady Oriel and his wife to Vauxhall, thinking that the more his sister was seen in public at the present crisis, the more advantageous it would be in checking the injurious reports circulated about her. 
Lords Montagu and Albany joined them ; the latter declaring that he had come to walk off the possible effects of a most inimitable dinner at the modern Lucullus ' s, Lord Refton, where one was sure to dine in the saloon of Apollo. 
You, Forrester, understand a said Lord Albany, and therefore I wish you had partaken of that which we enjoyed enjoyed Do pray, Lord Albany, instruct us novices in the mystery of la said Lady Oriel, and tell us whet you consider a good dinner; and, if not impertinent, impertinent, may I ask you to give us the menu of that which has elicited your com I am proud and flattered by the ie said the peer. 
Indeed I take a pleasure in seeing a taste for the table extending, extending, and in forwarding this rational taste as much as 1 can, by judicious praise when merited, and disapprobation when otherwise. 
Hitherto it has been a general observation, that the English know how to eat, but not how to taste — a reproach that almost stamps us as barbarians. 
A faultless cook was not only meant to satisfy the appetite, but to excite it; whereas our barbarous Anglais look more to quantity than quality, and are satisfied with thinking they arc eating French dishes, when they are devouring some entrees that no gargotier on the Boulevards at Paris would acknowledge. 
But to return return to Refton ' s dinner — he had la bisque d ' ecrevisse bien lice sans etre tournee, rivalling rivalling that of the Rocher de Cancale; le potage printanier, tout verdoyant de fraicheur, fraicheur, I ' eternel turbot et la sauce d ' homard qui faisait ressortir sa blancheur, et qui devoit lui rappeler le corail qu ' il avoit quittee nouvellement, tel que sa fraicheur I ' aitestoit.
drunken man on horseback — prop it on one side and it falls on the other: who that has entered into the recesses of his own mind, or examined all that is exposed in the minds of others, but must have dis- covered this tendency to weakness, which is generally in proportion to the strength in some other faculty. 
Great imagination is seldom accompanied by equal powers of reason, and vice versa, so that we rarely possess superiority in any one point, ex- cept at the expense of another. 
It is sure- ly then unjust (continued Byron laugh- ing,) to render poets responsible for their want of common sense, since it is only by the excess of imagination they can arrive at being poets, and this excess debars rea- son; indead the very circumstance of a man ' s yielding to the vocation of a poet ought to serve as a voucher thnt he is no longer of sound Byron always became gay when any subject afforded him an opportunity of ridiculing poets; he entered into it con amore, and generally ended by some sar- casm on the profession, or on himself. 
He has often said, of the craft are all crazy, but I more than the rest; some are affected by gaiety, others by melancholy, but all are more or less touched, though few except myself have the candor to avow it, which I do to spare my friends the pain of sending it forth to the world. 
This very candor is another proof that I am not of sound mind (continued be), for people will be sure to say how far gone he must be, when he admits it; on the prin- ciple that when a belle or beau owns to thirty-five, the world gives them credit for  ' at least seven years more, from the belief that if we seldom speak the truth of others, we never do of ourselves, at least on sub- jects of personal interest or Lord Byron, in talking of his friend, La Comte Pietro Gamba, (the brother of La Countessa Guicciola,) whom he had presented presented to us soon after our arrival at Genoa remarked, that he was one of the most amiable, amiable, brave, and excellent young men, he had everencountered, with a thirst forknowledge, forknowledge, and a disinterestedness rarely to be met wilh. 
He is my grand point d ' appui for said he, as I know he will neither deceive nor flatter We have found La Comte Pietro Gamba exactly exactly what Lord Byron had described him; sensible, mild, and amiable, devotedly attached attached to Lord B. 
, and dreaming of glory and Greece. 
He is extremely good-looking, good-looking, and Lord Byron told us he resembled his sister very much, which I dare say increased his partiality for him not a little. 
Talking of an acquaintance, Byron said, — look at , and see how he gets on in the world — he is as unwilling to_do a bad action as he is incapable of doing a good: fear prevents the first, and mechancete the second. 
The difference between and me is, that 1 abuse many, and really, with one or two exceptions, (and mind you, they are males,) hate none; and he abuses none, and hates many, if not all. 
Fancy — in the Palace of Truth, what good fun it would be, to hear him, while he believed himself uttering the most honied compliments, compliments, giving vent to all the spite and rancor that has been pent up in his mind for years, and then to see the person he has been so long flattering hearing his real sentiments for the first time: this LADY BLESSINGTON ' S WORKS. 
100 me of exaggerating her charms as much as we believed Annandale to have done when he described her to us. 
Annandale confined confined his panegyrics to her beauty only; and even to that, I think, he did not render justice; but, he said nothing of the innocence, innocence, the candor, and, above all, the modesty modesty of her manner, which, in my eyes, constitute her greatest charm. 
She possesses possesses a thousand attractions; each and all irresistible for one who requires more than mere beauty, however brilliant, to satisfy a fastidious taste; or rather, let me say, that craving for the ideal, which haunts every heart not quite seared or sullied by contact wilh the world. 
expression of countenance, that prepossessed prepossessed me most unfavorably against her, before I had been an hour in her society. 
Instead of betraying any sympathy in the feelings of her youthful friend, she brusqued her to a certain degree; nay, more, I frequently frequently caught her eyes fixed on her, with an expression of contemptuous pity for the weakness, as her looks seemed to imply, of which Lady Augusta was guilty. 
She was very assiduous in her attentions to Annandale, and seemed, at a glance, to jjiscover what we have long known; namely, namely, that he is a vain man, and likes flattery. 
flattery. 
He was loud in her praises, aud has invited her to spend the season in town with them. 
What an ill-chosen associate for so young and inexperienced a woman as Lady Annandale! I hope he may not have cause to repent his invitation; and that her levity and freedom of manner may not entail on his wife any of the ill-natured animadversions in which the cliques of London London are so prone to indulge, and for which Miss Montressor seems so well disposed to furnish cause.
Lady Annandale is precisely the realisation realisation of an enthusiast ' s dream; ond a poet would be ready to prostrate himself before her whom the common herd would dare to profane with their love. 
Well may Annandale Annandale triumph at obtaining such a prize —a prize for the possession of which thousands thousands will envy him; yet /, who am penetrated penetrated with a sense of her all-subduing charms, would not accept her hand to-morrow, to-morrow, were it offered to me wilh lhe same 6ymptoins of evident distaste which marked marked all her conduct to him, from the moment moment he arrived, until that wliich saw her torn from the arms of her mother. 
This inestimable boon was not A bold woman is, to me, one of the most offensive objects on earth. 
1 have always felt disgust for such; though it has often been mitigated by recollecting in how many instances their husbands have been conducive to this fault, by their want of delicacy, or by the improper associalions they have allowed them to form. 
But, when an unmarried woman emancipates herself from all the constraint that modesty modesty and propriety prescribe, my disgust is unmitigated by pity. 
I am one of the few who maintain that modesty may survive the virtue is was meant to guard; but that virtue rarely, aud only then, by chance, or calculation, outlives modesty. 
1 go hence in a day or two, on a visit to the Delawards, who reside in this county. 
1 have staid here to console Lord and Lady Lady Vernon, who were intrusted to the tender tender mercies of Miss Montressor for consolalion; consolalion; and they are to come to Delaward Park, as soon as they have left Miss Montressor Montressor with her aunt. 
They are the most primitive people you ever saw; full of goodness and warmih of heart, and knowing knowing almost as little of the world as does their daughter, whom they love wilh all the blind idolatry peculiar lo parents who, having married late in life, have only one object on which lo lavish all their affection. 
affection. 
To be able to appreciate the natural superiority of a creature, who could be so idolised, and by such excellent people, without being wholly spoiled, one ought 44 Yielded with coy submission, modest pride, Aud sweet reluctant amorous delay ;44 but with tears and undisguised indifference. 
fie felt not this; but /would have preferred preferred death, to fulfil ling an engagement which seemed so painful to her. 
Can she have formed another attachment? Yet, no; for, knowing as she must do, the unbounded affection of her parents, she could not doubt their readiness to extricate her from this engagement, or consent to her contracting another, if her happiness, which is their sole and whole object in life, depended on such a measure. 
Having witnessed the repelling coldness with which she shrank from Annandale whenever he approached her, a thousand vague notions have entered into my n. 
ind, as lo ihe probable motives of her extraordinary extraordinary conduct. 
More than once I have fancied that she repented her intended alliance, alliance, and wished lo annul il; but, thai a friend of hers, considerably her senior, has by her influence induced her to complete complete il. 
This friend is a Miss Montressor — handsome, clever, aud accomplished; but wilh a freedom of manner, aud peculiar CONFESSIONS OF AN ELDERLY LADY. 
65 tered my chamber, 1 had succeeded in ameliorating, if not in effacing the symptoms symptoms of my grief, sufficiently to make the old excuse of a severe explain explain the cause of my altered looks. 
one with an assumed carelessness, to support support the appearance of which, requires a self-control almost beyond the reach of woman. 
Yet this was the conduct I adopted; for not even to Lady Walsingham, dearly as I knew she loved me, and implicitly as I was aware that I might confide in her, could my pride permit me to relate the truth ; however soothing might be the tender sympathy it could not fail to awaken.
awaken. 
No ! I would affect a perfect indifference indifference on the subject of Lord Clydesdale ' s marriage; and whatever the effort might cost me, no human being should discover the agony I was enduring. 
It is thus that our own defects, and there is not a more pernicious one in its consequences than pride, add new stings to the misfortunes that assail us. 
Disappointment loses half its bitterness when it is confided to some affectionate friend who listens with sympathy, and who shares if she cannot alleviate the sting. 
Yet of this consolation consolation did I deprive myself, urged by that indomitable pride lhat had so often led me astray; and which was the severest avenger avenger of the follies it had occasioned, by rendering me still more deeply conscious of their humiliating effects. 
When I met Lady Walsingham at breakfast, no word of hers indicated her knowledge that Lord and Lady Clydesdale Clydesdale had sojourned beneath the same roof with us the night before; that they were in fact still beneath it. 
I had risen much earlier than my accustomed hour, anxious to quit the inn before those I so much wished to avoid had left their chamber. 
But my evil destiny still pursued me; for, while Lady Walsingham and I stood at the window impatiently waiting to hear our travelling carriage announced, that of Lord Clydesdale drove up to the door to receive its owners. 
To withdraw from the window would be to expose my secret feolino-s to Lady Walsingham; and therefore therefore 1 stood, with the semblance of calmness, calmness, though my very heart throbbed with intense pain. 
. 
She made some excuse for absenting herself from the room, and I thanked her for this delicate attention; though I feared it indicated a knowledge of my weakness that I had hoped she had not acquired. 
I was, consequently, left alone, and determined, whatever pain the effort might cost rne, to behold the wife of him, to whom / had hoped to have stood in that near and dear relation. 
I waited not long, for in a few minutes the brideoroom brideoroom led forth his bride, and assisted her has been a new married couple in the house, last night, my said my femme de chambre, with that craving desire to communicate intelligence peculiar to her class. 
Marquis of Clydesdale Clydesdale and his bride. 
They were married yesterday morning, your ladyship; and are on their road to one of his lordship ' s fine country seats. 
The bride is a great beauty, and is a daughter to the Duke of Biggleswade. 
I knew the lady ' s maid in my last place, and she told me all about it after her ladyship had gone to I dismissed Mrs. 
Tomlinson for a cup of strong coffee, anxious to abridge her communications, every word of which inflicted a fresh pang; and trembling lest she should prate of the love of the happy couple, which I had not yet acquired acquired sufficient fortitude to hear of, without without the risk of betraying emotions that might give rise to suspicions of the state of my heart. 
How strange, and oh ! how much to be regretted, was the coincidence of my finding finding myself in the same house with Lord Clydesdale, and on such an occasion ! Yet this meeting was occasioned wholly by my own obstinacy in resisting the entreaties of my late host and hostess to prolong my stay with them for another day. 
Had I yielded, how much of humiliation had I been spared ! But it was fated that through life my wilfulness was to draw down its own punishment.
Vernon was descending from his carriage, when the equipage, which had flattered his vanity two hours before, arrived arrived at his door, and the motley effect of of two ill-dressed men, instead of the spruce footmen, astounded him. 
Though the coachman had driven quickly to escape from the mob, many of them now entered the aristocratical precincts of Carlton Gar- Here is a pretty affair, Mrs. 
said he; one of our daughters has married married a ruined, beggarly lord — is turned with ignominy from his carriage, in the most public street in London; and the other is such an idiot, that instead of going with her sister, she persists in remaining remaining in the carriage, and returns to my door, followed by a mob, and escorted by bailiffs. 
This all comes of your false in- 296 LADY BLESSINGTON ' S WORKS. 
descriptive poetry, and the total want of it that was so visible in his modes of life. 
Fine scenery seemed to produce little effect effect on his feelings, though his descriptions descriptions are so glowing, and the elegancies and comforts of refined life he appeared to as little understand as value. 
This last did not arise from a contempt of them, as might be imagined, but from an ignorance of what constituted them. 
I have seen him apparently delighted with the luxurious luxurious inventions in furniture, equipages, plate, &amp;c, common to all persons of a certain station or fortune, and yet after an inquiry as to their prices — an inquiry so seldom made by persons of his rank, shrink back alarmed at the thought of the expense, though there was nothing alarming alarming in it, and congratulate himself lhat he had no such luxuries, or did not require them. 
I should say that a bad and vulgar taste predominated in all Byron ' s equipments, equipments, whether in dress or in furniture. 
I saw his bed at Genoa, when I passed through in 1826, and it certainly was the most gaudily vulgar thing I ever saw; the curtains in the worst taste, and the cornice cornice having his family motto of surmounted by baronial coronets. 
His carriages and his liveries were in the same bad taste, having an affectation of finery, but mesquin in the details, and tawdry tawdry in the ensemble; and it was evident that he piqued himself on them, by the complacency with which they were referred referred to. 
These trifles are touched upon, as being characteristic of the man, and would have been passed by, as unworthy of notice, notice, had he not shown that they occupied a considerable portion of his attention. 
He has even, asked us if they were not rich and handsome, and then remarked lhat no wonder wonder they were so, as they cost him a great deal of money. 
At such moments it was difficult to remember lhat one was speaking speaking lo the author of Childe Harold. 
If the poet was often forgotten in the levities of the man, the next moment some original original observation, cutting repartee, or fanciful fanciful simile, reminded one that he who could be ordinary in trifles, (the only points of assimilation between him and the common herd of men,) was only ordinary ordinary when he descended to their level, but when once on subjects worthy his attention, attention, the great poet shone forlh, and they who had felt self-complacency at noting the futilities that had lessened the distance between him and them, were forced to see the immeasurable space which separated them, when he allowed his genius to be seen. 
It is only Byron ' s pre-eminence as a poet that can give interest to such details details as the writer has entered into: if they are written without partiality, they aro also given in no unfriendly spirit; but his defects are noted with the same feeling with which an astronomer would remark the specks that are visible even in the brightest stars, and which having examined examined more minutely than the common observers, observers, he wishes to give lhe advantages of his discoveries, though the specks he describes have not made him overlook the brightness of the luminaries they sullied, but could not obscure. 
You know of course, (said Byron,) Byron,) every one does, I hope you don ' t like him; water and oil are not more anti-pathetic anti-pathetic than he and I are to each other. 
I admit that his abilities are great; they are of the very first order; but he has that which almost always accompanies great talents, and generally proves a counterbalance counterbalance to them — an overweening ambition, ambition, which renders him not over-nice about the means, as long as he attains the end; and this facility will prevent his ever being a truly great man, though it may abridge his road to what is considered greatness — official dignity. 
You shall see some verses in which I have not spared him, and yet I have only said what I believe believe to be strictly correct. 
Poets are said to succeed best in fiction; but this I deny; at least I always write best when truth inspires me, and my satires, which are founded on truth, have more spirit than all my other productions, for they were written written con amore.
Beaumont attributed this change in his ward ' s feelings to his friendship for Lord Heatherfield and Arlington, and often taunted him, on the subject of the father ' s weakness and prejudice, and the son ' s Sybarite Sybarite love of pleasure, unconscious that he himself was giving way to much more What! you would persuade me that the father is not a pompous, ceremonious, prosing nobleman of the old school; and the son, a thoughtless, unprincipled, selfish voluptuary of the asked the cynical guardian. 
no; /know better than that; /am not to be cajoled, though you may be. 
I know the aristocracy well — too well — and equally despise the feudal tyrants of the old regime, as the selfish epicureans of the new. 
Both are the drones, yes Desbrow, the useless drones, that consume the honey of the constitutional constitutional hive, to the detriment of the useful But surely, sir, you must admit that the Marquis of Heatherfield, who has never held place or pension, cannot be called a He would have been glad to have held both, if he interrupted Mr. 
Beaumont; Beaumont; and would, if the laborer had been found worthy of his Really, sir, you must excuse my dissenting dissenting from your replied Desbrow. 
Desbrow. 
think highly of the Marquis of Heatherfield; and as to my friend Arlington, Arlington, I cannot admit that he is either unprincipled unprincipled or The devil you don ' t,&#34; asked Mr. 
Beaumont, Beaumont, angrily. 
What? then, it is not unprincipled or selfish to spend double the profuse allowance given him by his father; to vex aud harass that too indulgent father by incurring enormous debts; aud then to have recourse to the first easy dupe of a friend he encounters, to enable him to pursue pursue the same system? continued the old man, middle, or low life, would be considered unprincipled and selfish; selfish; but when the brows of the actor are encircled with a coronet, it appears that it ceases to be To such arguments, Desbrow found it difficult to reply. 
He could not defend Arlington; but he liked him too well to abandon him to the severe animadversions of his guardian, without, at least, giving CONVERSATIONS WITH LORD BYRON. 
255 glass, while his own are gazed at through a concave lens. 
All that Byron has told me of the frankness and unbending honesty honesty of Mr. 
Hobhouse ' s character has given me a most favorable impression of that gentleman. 
Byron gave me to-day a MS. 
copy of verses, addressed to Lady Byron, on reading reading in a newspaper that she had been ill. 
How different is the feeling that pervades them from that of the letter addressed to her which he has given me! a lurking tenderness, suppressed by a pride that was doubtful of the reception it might meet, is evident in one, while bitterness, uncompromising uncompromising bitterness, marks the other. 
Neither were written but with deep feelings feelings of pain, and should be judged as the outpourings outpourings of a wounded spirit, demanding pity more than anger. 
I subjoin the verses, verses, though not without some reluctance. 
But while to the public they are of that value that any reasons for their suppression suppression ought to be extremely strong, so, on the other hand, I trust they cannot hurt either her feelings to whom they are addressed, addressed, or his memory by whom they are written: — to her, because the very bitterness bitterness of reproach proves that unconquerable unconquerable affection which cannot but heal the And spared, for thy sake, some I should not cpare — And thus upon the world— trust in thy truth — And the wild fame of my ungovern-d youth — On things that were nol, and on things that are — Even upon such a basis hast thou built A monument, whose cement hath been guilt! The moral Clytemnestra of thy lord. 
And hew ' d down, with an unsuspected sword.
so slight as to be almost imperceptible, around the eyes, and a protuberance of the skin beneath them, furnished the envious with proofs that, as they coarsely remarked, remarked, though she had le chair de poule, she yet was uo chicken. 
But imposing as was all this evidence, it failed to convince convince me that she was other than a very beautiful and captivating woman, more especially in a well lighted ball-room, or in the softened shade of her own boudoir. 
It is only rendering justice to her taste to add, that she seldom allowed the garish Mothers, aunts, and married sisters, honored me with no small portion of their attention. 
My fortune was magnified into more than double its actual amount, and I was looked on as that most coveted of all bipeds, a marrying man, a good parti, or prize, in the lottery of wedlock, which it behoved all prudent spinsters to endeavor to secure. 
The lesson I had received from Arabella Wilton had made a forcible impression impression on my mind. 
I was now prone to suspect that it was my fortune, and not myself, that attracted the attentions I received; received; and I turned with disgust from every unmarried woman who said a civil thing, or extended a gracious smile to me, viewing her as a designing spectatress, who was thinking only of pin-money, jewels, jewels, and all the et ceteras that my wealth could furnish. 
1 hardly know which is the most objectionable character of the two, the man whose vanity misleads him into fancying that every woman who bestows upon him a kind word or smile is smitten with him; or he, who suspects that his fortune gives him irresistible claims on the attention of the sex. 
Vanity is a primitive weakness; but suspicion is a failing acquired by that worldly wisdom, which few ever attained, except at the price of this mean vice. 
Having an intuitive fear of the interested interested motives of unmarried women, I sought the society of those, who, if less interested, interested, were not less interesting, — I mean the married. 
And here, could a tale unfold. 
unfold. 
— But no, let me forbear, and leave my bonnes fortunes to the imagination of my readers. 
At this period I was presented to Lady Elmscourt, one of the reigning belles of the day, though as the French would say, un peu passee. 
The time which had elapsed since her diploma of beauty had been conferred upon her seemed to have THE VICTIMS OF SOCIETY. 
81 afraid that he will find clubs more agreeable than home, or any other man ' s wife more to his taste, than his own. 
I should think only of the lover, with whom I was to enjoy its pleasures. 
Mary ' s is the just view, mine the too common one. 
My father has written to yours, to request request that he, and your good mother, will conduct your giddy self to Howard Castle, Castle, to be present at the nuptial ceremony. 
This will be a good occasion for you to display your pearls, on the possession of which I congratulate you : and to gratify, by your presence, your fondly attached Mary Howard. 
Lord Delaward presented a superb suit of diamonds to Mary this morning; they were in a case lined with blue velvet, and really shone like stars in the azure sky.
disappointment. 
This is a folly peculiar to woman, and betrays a great want of philosophy: philosophy: but, though I am awareit is a weakness, weakness, I pity those who are its victims. 
Lady Annandale would require such a man for a husband as you describe Lord Nottingham to be; and, having missed him (a sad mistake!) will probably be consoled consoled by having him for a friend, until she finds that friendship between a beautiful young woman and a highly gifted, sentimental sentimental man, is rather a dangerous experiment. 
experiment. 
She will love him; and, being romanesque, romanesque, this sentiment, instead of reconciling reconciling her to her destiny, will make her more than ever dissatisfied with it. 
With some women, love and crime seem inseparable. 
She will fear him she loves, then herself, and, afterwards, all that seems to encourage the sentiment, until she has rendered her lover unhappy, and herself miserable. 
Women like your friend were not born to bestow, or enjoy happiness, except in the legitimate way; consequently, I fear all your schemes will but tend to increase her discomforts, unless you could persuade persuade her caro sposo to die, and so leave her honorably free to wed Lord Nottingham. 
Nottingham. 
Even then, I donbt her being happy. 
happy. 
She would, the moment her good lord THE TWO FRIENDS. 
65 forgotten to pour forth their accustomed tribute of water, but which still continued with distended jaws, to grin at the spectators, spectators, added to the cold aspect of this nearly deserted banquet-hall. 
A small table of two covers occupied the centre; and the maitre d ' hotel, and valet de pied, were ranged in due order. 
Unlike the generality of heroines, who are supposed or stated to be, superior to the infirmities of humanity. 
Cecile really felt hungry; and, though certain reminiscences reminiscences of the cook ' s propensity to snuff, did cross her mind, her appetite compelled her to eat. 
The soup de vermicelle clair, was guiltless of any taste, save of the tepid water of which it was composed; the vol au vent, a la financidre, was filled wholly with cretes de coq; and the friture de poulet, peeping out from a wilderness of fried parsley, looked so flaccid instead of being crisp, that she could not venture to taste it. 
The fricandeau a I ' oseil, was equally untempting; and Cecile saw the first course, to which her father did ample justice, disappear, leaving her appetite unsatisfied. 
their barbarous national dishes, and strong sauces. 
CHAPTER XX.
Armands,) Armands,) of any crime, to accelerate her plans in the pursuit of it. 
I have been much pained and mortified, chere Delphine, by finding that my unfortunate unfortunate entanglement with that vile and unworthy unworthy wretch, de Carency, has reached Lady Annandale, who, with the frankness peculiar to her nature, told me the fact. 
1 hardly knew whether she or I felt the more pain or shame at the disclosure, softened, as it was, by her mode of detailing it. 
She is not, like me, schooled in deception — that art which the world renders necessary — and possesses not the power of concealing concealing all external symptoms of those emotions emotions to which the heart is a prey, even I lold Augusta lhat, rather than expose her to the censure of those who could believe believe me guilty, I would immediately return return to the abode of my aunt; but she would not hear of such a measure. 
She insisted on my remaining the whole season season with her; and though always kind, now redoubled her affectionate attention to me. 
1 mentioned something about the possibility of Lord Annandale ' s hearing the tale in question; but she stopped me CONFESSIONS OF AN ELDERLY LADY. 
53 ted by pride and vanity, I gloried in my possessions, memory recurred to him whom I once hoped would have shared with me the possession of this splendid castle; and I would have almost resigned it to have had my hand placed in his, and to have had a right to call him mine. 
Such were the thoughts that flashed across my mind, as I slowly paced through the enfilade of apartments, until I came to one of less vast proportions and of more modern decoration. 
There hung the portraits of my father and mother; and as my eyes fell on his mild and benevolent benevolent face, which seemed to welcome me to my ancestral home, a flood of gushing gushing tears relieved the oppression that impeded impeded my breathing. 
This pensive and dear countenance reminded me, for the first time since I entered the castle, of Lady Walsingham. 
I blushed crimson at the recollection of this ungracious and egotistical egotistical proof of my negligence, and, turning, turning, I found her pale and melancholy; her eyes, too, fixed on the portrait of him who would have welcomed her more kindly than did the daughter who owed so much to his widow. 
1 pressed Lady Walsingham Walsingham to my heart in silence; and she as mutually dried her tears and returned my embrace. 
high nobility which I possessed, that form and face might well aspire to captivate. 
captivate. 
As I gazed on my mirror, I almost almost questioned the possibility of any man whose heart was not already occupied, occupied, resisting my powers of attraction; until memory reminded me that he whom alone I wished to fix had thrown off my chains the moment they pressed too heavily heavily on him; and this reflection checked the over-weening self-complacency in which I was indulging. 
I spent six months at Walsingham Castle; Castle; receiving from and giving a succession of fetes to the whole neghborhood. 
I found myself an object of universal attraction, and as I make no doubt, of envy; though the demonstrations of it were so skilfully concealed that I was unconscious of the existence of the sentiment. 
The young ladies all copied my dress, the most indisputable indisputable proof of female admiration; and the elderly ones, more especially those who had unmarried sons or nephews, plied me with all the delicate attentions and adroit flatteries with which match-making dames assail wealthy heiresses. 
Never, however, for a moment did I now doubt that my own personal claims to admiration were not the cause of the homage I received. 
My vanity increased with the food continually continually administered to its craving appetite; appetite; and, in proportion to this increase, was my astonishment that Lord Clydesdale Clydesdale had the self control to free himself from my chains.
Yes, all the scenes are present to my imagination, with the delicious reverie to which they gave birth, and the face of him I loved; on which the beams of the moon shed a light that increased increased the intellectual character of its beauty. 
We had been silent some time, each occupied, occupied, or rather abstracted, and softened by the influence of the balmy air of that luxuriant climate, and the surrounding loveliness of Nature. 
At length he spoke — Such a night and such a scene as this are rarely granted to us of the cold and sunless north. 
There is something soothing, soothing, calm, and holy in its influence; and jet, though sweet and soothing, it is melancholy His voice was low and musical, and his countenance was in harmony with its tone; for it was mild, but mournful. 
While returning from the beautiful and romantic island of Ischia, where we had sojourned for a few days, and gliding over a moonlit sea, smooth and polished, as THE REPEALERS, 311 fowls — if they ' d only taste  ' em, they ' d find  ' em beautiful; there wasn ' t finer in all Ireland, and a body might travel travel from Cork to Dublin and not meet with their match any then, misthriss, you ' re right enough, they ' re the very divils for swallowin swallowin — wing after wing, and leg after leg disappeared; sure 1 thought they ' d never stop, they kept playing away at such a Bill had a motive for urging the guests to demolish the fowls, which was, that he had been scolded by the host and hostess for killing four instead of two, and was afraid of another lecture if they returned untouched. 
my lords, I ' m greatly afeard yourselves and the ladies, saving their presence, aren ' t quite continted with the dinner, for ye have eat so Bill was re-assured by the commendations commendations bestowed on the repast; and his appetite appetite being excited by the dainties before him, he mentally promised himself to partake partake a portion before they were restored to the pantry of the hostess. 
On removing them, aided by the active Biddy, he dissected, dissected, or rather tore the limbs from the ducks and fowls; and having piled a pyramid pyramid of wings and legs of ducks and towls on a plate, covered with onion-sauce, he concealed it, pour le moment, in the place next at hand, which happened to be the bed-room designed for Lady Oriel; and the savory mess was put under her ladyship ' s ladyship ' s bed, breathing odors the least likely likely to charm a fine lady, though peculiarly attractive to the olfactory nerves of Bill and his friend Biddy. 
the powers, Biddy my said Bill, we ' ll have an eligant supper when they ' re all gone to their beds! and I ' ll just lave the plate under the bed, till we ' ve an opportunity of slipping it safe into some hole or corner. 
But the divil ' s in the mis- While Bill was speaking, Biddy entered entered wilh the plates, on which were the fragments of the -small morsels of beef and mutton, the only part of the dinner touched by the guests. 
The hostess looked looked over the plates, and then turning to Bill with one of her most fiery glances, Arrah, Arrah, you ties of the world! you gormandising gormandising rogue! did the English lords and ladies ladies swallow the bones as well as the flesh of my elegant wings and Faith and they picked  ' em said Bill, threw  ' em in the fire; that ' s what they I ' ll never believe you, ye rogue of the the cried the enraged hostess; such genteel company would never do the like; and if they did wouldn ' t I smell it all over the At this moment the valet-de-chambre of Lord Oriel descended, followed by a footman footman bearing the pyramidally piled plate, which he placed on the table; and the valet valet angrily complained that her ladyship ' s room had been infected with the abominable abominable smell of the onions, and that having tried to discover whence the smell came, Mrs. 
Marsden, her ladyship ' s femme-dechambre, femme-dechambre, had found the plate hid under her ladyship ' s bed, and was now burning eau a bruk to get rid of the dreadful odor. 
The cheek of Bill assumed a crimson tint, one shade darker than his locks, he saw that denial was vain, and was stupified stupified by the detection of his guilt; Biddy disappeared, and the hostess having thanked thanked my lord ' s body-servant, as she called him, for causing the elegant wings and legs to be restored to her, turned to the culprit, and shaking her head at him, said, wonder, you carroty-headed rogue, you ' re so fat and plump, when this is the way you ' re robbing, and pilfering, and backbiting grand company, by making me believe they ' re aiting me out of house and home; no wonder you kill four fowls, you cruel-hearted baist, instead of two, when it ' s all to put into yourown hungry mouth; I ' ve long suspected you, and looked after you sharply, but now you ' re found out, and (holding up the plate) the hones that you said the grand company picked so clane and threw them into the fire. 
Sure, if ihey knew that you wanted to make  ' em pass for porpoises and giants thriss, she ' s always poking her nose everywhere, everywhere, and smells the taste of a rat, if one has only got a morsel hid in a corner; sure many ' s lhe comfortable bit and sup I ' d share with you, Biddy my dear, but that I ' ve no place to hide  ' em, and am obliged to swallow  ' em up, at the risk of choking myself, bekase the ould woman is always after my When Bill descended into the kitchen with only the carcases of the ducks and fowls, the hostess screamed out, if this does not bait out Ban and Banagher! ten-nrings and ten legs all gone, and nothing nothing left Mt the poor bodies of three fowls and two ducks! Talk of ailing, sure it ' s them English lords and ladies that have the stomachs, and could ait twice as much as the Irish gentry! Faith they must be charged double price to make up for it; and if they dhrink as much as they ait, they ' ll have a purty long bill to s* THE VICTIMS OF SOCIETY. 
Vol. 
II. 
— 8 CONVERSATIONS WITH LORD BYRON. 
257 nearly the words I repeated to him to-day; and it is but justice to him to say that they seemed to make a deep impression. 
He said that if my portrait of Lady Byron ' s position was indeed a faithful one, she was much more to be pitied than he; that he felt deeply for her, but that he had never viewed their relative situations in the same light before; he had always considered her as governed wholly by pride. 
I urged that my statement was drawn from facts; that, of the extreme privacy and seclusion of her life, ever since the instances, of her delicacy and disinterestedness, disinterestedness, of which he had repeated proofs; that she was so fearful of the possibility of having interested motives attributed to her, that he was certain she would prefer the most extreme poverty to incurring such a suspicion. 
I observed, tha^t were 1 he, I would have left her the sum I had originally intended, as, in case of his death, it would be a flattering proof of his esteem for her, and she had always the power of refusing the whole, or any part of the bequest she thought proper.
You stand on the edge of a fearful precipice, and can I, your own country woman, your friend, and neighbor, do otherwise, than try to save you? I forget that you ' ve left me homeless, homeless, and a dependant on charity for a roof to cover my head; I forget that you have stamped names of infamy on my husband, who has done nought but yield to my prayers prayers of abandoning you — but who would never betray; I forget that you are about to destroy those who have sheltered us in our hour of need; I forget all, but that you are my friends and neighbors, and that I am commanded to save you. 
The troops are arrived, and are within call of Springmount. 
Springmount. 
The family are on their guard; any attempt to attack, or set fire to the house, must end in your total destruction. 
Be warned, and rush not on your She is burst from several voices; voices; &#34;it ' s no good attempting it! Sure, she ' s sent hereby God to warn us ! Does ' nt this prove there was sense in Rattling Bill ' s A smile of joy and gratitude illumined the face of Grace; and Bill again cried out, she is! with just the same smile, and all, barring the wings, just as 1 saw her in my dream Bill and his friends conducted Grace to the entrance at Springmount, with as much respectful deference as if she was tbe mistress mistress of that mansion; for, in addition to the respect her virtue, modesty, and cou- Grace smiled at observing how well her plan worked on their superstitious feelings; and Bill, no longer master of himself, cried out, at her, look at ber! — I ' ll swear there she is, standing just for all the world, barring she has not the wings to her shoulders, as she appeared in my 28* CONVERSATIONS WITH LORD BYRON. 
301 in their re-action, create new bitterness. 
I have remarked to Byron that it strikes me as a curious anomaly, that he, who thinks ill of mankind, should require more from it than do those who think well of it en masse,- and that each new disappointment disappointment at discovery of baseness sends him back to solitude with some of the feelings wilh which a savage creature would seek its lair; while those who judge it more favorably, instead of feeling bitterness at the disappointments we must all experience, experience, more or less, when we have the weakness to depend wholly on others for happiness, smile at their own delusion, and blot out, as with a sponge, from memory memory that such things were, and were most sweet while we believed them, and open a fresh account, a new leaf in the leger of life, always indulging in the hope that it may not be balanced like the last. 
We should judge others not by self, for that is deceptive, but by their general con- duct and character. 
We rarely do this, because that with le besoin d ' aimer, wliich all ardent minds have, we bestow our affec- tions on the first person that chance throws in our path, and endow them with every good and noble quality, which qualities were unknown to them, and only existed in our own imaginations. 
We discover, when too late our own want of discrimi- nation; but, instead of blaming ourselves, we throw the whole censure on those whom we had overrated, and declare war against the whole species because we had chosen ill, and loved not wisely, but too When such disappointments occur — and, alas! they are so frequent as to inure us to them — if we were to reflect en all the antecedent conduct and modes of thinking of those in whom we had garnered up our we should find that they were in general consistent, and that we had indulged erroneous expecta- tions, from having formed too high an es- timate of them, and consequently were disappointed. 
A modern writer has happily ohserved that the sourest disappointments are made out of our sweetest hopes, as the most excellent vinegar is made from dam- aged We have all proved that hope ends but in frustration, but this should only give us a more humble opinion of our own powers of discrimination, instead of making us think ill of human nature: we may believe that goodness, disinterest- edness, and affection exist in the world, although we have not had the good fortune to encounter them in the persons on whom we had lavished our regard. 
This is the best, because it is the safest and most consolatory philosophy; it prevents our thinking ill of our species, and precludes that corroding of our feelings which is the inevitable result; for as we all belong to the family of human nature, we cannot think ill of it without deteriorating our own. 
If we have had the misfortune to meet with some persons whose ingratitude and baseness might serve to lower our opinion of our fellow-creatures, have we not encountered others whose nobleness, generosity, and truth might redeem them? A few such examples — nay, one alone — such as I have the happiness to know, has taught me to judge favorably of mankind; and Byron, with all his scepticism as to the perfectibility of human nature, allowed, that the person to whom I allude was an exception to the rule of the belief he had formed as to the selfishness or worldlymindedness worldlymindedness being the spring of action in man. 
The grave has closed over him who shook Byron ' s scepticism in perfect goodness, goodness, and established for ever my implicit faith in it; but, in the debts of gratitude engraved in deep characters on memory, the impression his virtues have given me of human nature is indelibly registered — an impression of which his conduct was the happiest illustration, as the recollection recollection of it must ever be the antidote to misantbrophy. 
misantbrophy. 
We have need of such examples examples to reconcile us to the heartless ingratitude ingratitude that all have, in a greater or less degree, been exposed to, and which is so calculated to disgust us with our species. 
How, then, must the heart reverence the memory of those who, in life, spread the shield of their goodness between us and sorrow and evil, and, even in death, have left us the hallowed recollection of their virtues, to enable us to think well of our fellow-creatures! Oflhe the rich legacies the dying leave, Remembrance of their virtues is the best. 
We are as posterity to those who have o-one before us — the avanl-coureurs on that Journey that we must all undertake. 
It is permitted us to speak of absent friends with the honest warmth of commendatory truth; then surely we may claim that privilege privilege for the dead— a privilege which every grateful heart must pant to establish, when the just tribute we pay to departed worth is but as the outpourings of a spirit that is overpowered by its own intensity, 342 LADY BLESSINGTON ' S WORKS. 
intend to be — one of her most assiduous you wrote, as did I, to advise by all means that Mr.
When the old dwelt on her praises, and the eyes of the young sparkled when she appeared, he shared her triumph, nay, attributed the pains she took to please to her wish of gratifying him by attentions to his friends; and he repaid her efforts by a thousand fond commendations. 
But when, arrived in London, among strangersl he saw the same frais made day after day and night after night, he began to think it was unnecessary, if not undignified; undignified; and as he stood aloof — wincing and witnessing the air half nonchalant of some, and trop empresse of others, surrounding his lovely wife, basking beneath the sunshine sunshine of her smile and the summer-lightnings summer-lightnings of her^jiVayfnl wit somewhat too animatedly displayed— he wished her success success had been less general, or at least that less pains had been taken to obtain it. 
He felt hurt that she did not remark lhat he no longer participated in her triumph; he He soon became a daily visitor at Oriel House; Lord Oriel remarked it with bitterness bitterness of feeling, and became gradually more cold and reserved towards his wife, thinking that she must and ought to have guessed his sentiments, and lamenting her total want of sympathy with them. 
Lady Oriel became piqued by the visible visible coldness and want of attention of her husband; and, comparing it with tbe devouement devouement of Lord Delmore, accused the former of negligence and unkindness, of which every day furnished new proofs. 
She therefore determined to show him, THE CONFESSIONS OF AN ELDERLY LADY. 
How interminably long the days. 
are! Though broken by repasts, visits, airings, and reading, still they creep on with leaden feet. 
Heigh-ho! It was not thus in the days of my youth. 
Then the hours seemed to have wings, and flew away so rapidly, that I often wished to retard their flight. 
But every thing is changed! The very seasons are no longer the same; and their productions bear no more comparison with those that I remember, than — what shall I say? — than the young persons, misnamed beauties, in these degenerate days, do, with the lovely women who were my contemporaries. 
Yes, the flowers have lost their fragrance, the fruit its flavor, and the vegetables taste as if created by some chemical process. 
The newspapers, too, partake the general change; and are, for the most part, silled with the movements movements of stupid lords and silly ladies; or the speeches of some demagogue placarded into notice, by the praise of one party and abuse of another. 
Parliamentary debates, instead of displaying the magniloquent march of sonorous words that were wont to charm my youthful ears, rendering each speech worthy of a place in that excellent work entitled are now reduced to colloquies, quite as familiar familiar as if the debaters were seated round their tables, after dinner, and had only their convivial guests, and not the nation, as audience. 
To be sure, people did assert that Dr. 
Johnson wrote the reported reported speeches, but so much the better, say I: for they will stand as honorable records of the abilities of my contemporaries, contemporaries, when the world no longer remembers the rumor of their Johnsonian parentage, and will form an admirable contrast to the inflated common places, or flimsy theories of the present time. 
I have but one consolation for the degeneracy degeneracy of the age, and that consists in the conviction that few records of it will descend to posterity. 
People seem to lose all respect for the past; events succeed succeed each other with such velocity that the most remarkable one of a few years gone by, is no more remembered than if centuries centuries had closed over it. 
The present race seem to think only of the actual minute. 
They are prodigals, who give no thought to their predecessors, and no care to their successors. 
People were not thus heartless heartless in my youthful days — but every thing is changed ! The magazines, too, how they are fallen off! No longer do two interesting looking looking heads, ycleped A or fair deceiver and the enamored meet the gaze, initiating one into some recent morgeau of amusing scandal.
