In most Mechanical things, or those made by humane Art, the Workmanship Excels the matter: who would think there could be an Instrument made out of Iron or Brass, being most fixed and sluggish Mettals, whose Orbs like to those of the Celestial, with∣out As in mechani∣cal things, so much more in an animated body the work is more excellent than the matter. any external Mover, should observe almost continual motions, the Periods of which being renewed at a constant turn or change, should certainly shew the spaces of Time? No Body admires that a rude and simple sound is given by wind, blown into a Pipe; but indeed, by Wind sent into musical Organs, and that being carryed variously thorow manifold openings of Doors, into these or those pipes, that it should create a most grate∣ful Harmony, and Composed Measures of every Kind; this I say deservedly amazes us, and we acknowledg this Effect, far to Excel both the matter of the Instrument, and of the hand of the Musitian striking it. Further, altho the Musical Organ very much re∣quires the labour of him playing on it, by whose direction, the spirit or wind being admitted, now into these, anon into those, and into other Pipes, causes the manifold harmony, and almost infinite Varieties of Tunes; yet sometimes I have seen such an Instrument so prepared, that without any Musitian directing, the little doors being shut up, by a certain law and order, by the mere Course of a Water, almost the same A self moving musical Organ. harmony is made, and the same tunes, equal with those Composed by Art. And indeed Man, seems like to the former, in which the rational Soul, sustains the part of the Mu∣sitian playing on it, which governing and directing the animal spirits, disposes and or∣ders at its pleasure, the Faculties of the Inferior Soul: But the Soul of the Brute, be∣ing scarce moderatrix of its self, or of its Faculties, Institutes, for Ends necessary for it To which the soul of the Brute is like. self, many series of Actions, but those (as it were tunes of harmony produced by a wa∣ter Organ, of another Kind) regularly prescribed by a certain Rule or Law, and almost always determinated to the same thing. 
 This indeed holds good, concerning the more imperfect Brutes, in whose Souls or Natures are inscribed the types or ways of the Actions to be performed by them, which they rarely or never transgress or go beyond; and that according to the vulgar saying in the Schools, They do not so much act, as are acted: yet in some more perfect Brutes, whose Actions are ordained to many and more noble Uses, there are far more Original Types, and to their Souls there ought to be attributed a certain faculty of Varying their Types, and of Composing them in themselves; for the Brutal Soul it self, being so gifted naturally, as she is Knowing and Active, concerning some things necessary for it; she is taught through Various Accidents, by which she is wont to be daily affected, to know afterwards other things, and to perform many other, and more intricate Acti∣ons: The more per∣fect Brutes are indued with knowledge. But how all this may be done, (without calling an immaterial Soul into play) to wit, by what helps, whether innate or adventitious, or acquired, the Science of the Brutes is gotten or pollish ' d, will be worth our Labour to shew a little more fully: that it may appear at length, what is the utmost thing that living Brutes can know or do, and how far that is below the power of the Rational Soul. 
 Therefore, that we may seek out as it were the several footsteps, by which all brute Animals are imbued with the Knowledg of things; we ought first to distinguish here, that some of their Knowledg is born with them, as we but now hinted, to wit, for some Uses needful for the lengthning of Life, being infused by the most high Creator, and impressed like a Character, from their first formation, on the beginnings, or on their That is either inbred. very Natures themselves, which is wont commonly to be called Natural Instinct: But others acquired, to wit, which by degrees is learned, by the incursion of sensible things, Imitation, humane Institution, and other ways, and is carryed to a greater degree of Or acquired. Perfection in some than in others; yet in some, this acquired Knowledg, as also Cun∣ing, depend wholly on the natural Instinct, and being polished by frequent use and ha∣bit, and Carried a little further, seem to be certain additions only. 
 First, As to what regards natural Instincts, it is a great and most ancient Notion, That there is in all Living Creatures, an innate Conservation of themselves, to wit, that What natural instinct is. every Individual might preserve it self as long as it can: This is a Law of Divine Pro∣vidence, inbred in all Creatures, which gathers together the Principles of Life like a Bond, otherways apt to be dissipated and to depart one from another, and on which, as the Basis, the Duration or Continuance of the whole World stands. 
 This being supposed, it necessarily follows, that all Animals ordained for this end, are furnished also with certain fit means, for following the same, wherefore they ought to What it brings to the Brutes. know by Natural Instinct, whatsoever things are Congruous and benign, and what are incongruous or hurtful to them, and that they should follow these with hatred and aversion; and those with Love and delight. Hence it is, that every one of them are able to choose Food proper for themselves, and to seek it being absent, and remote from their Eyes; And from an implanted disposition of their Nature, are skilful to know and oppose Enemies, to love their Friends, to get a female fit for themselves, and to make ready whatever may conduce to the Procreating and Cherishing their Young; besides many other Kinds of powers and habits, granted to us not without Learning and Study, are originally fixed on the Praecordia of the Beast. 
 And truly, if we look upon the Ingenuity and Proprieties of all Animals, we shall find these Kind of Effects after a manner in all: For many of them are no sooner Some examples and instances of it. brought to light, but they seek and greedily embrace remedies against hunger and Cold, without any guide or shower; then being somewhat grown up, tho Carefully Kept from all their Companions, yet without any one to shew them, or any example, they of their own accord perform the peculiar Actions of their Kind. A Lamb just brought forth, and scarcely out of the after-birth, presently snatches at and sucks the Duggs of its Dam. A Chicken, as soon as out of the shell, will pick up grains of Corn, hides it self under the wings of the Hen, and flyes from the approach of the Kite. Cattel feeding in the Pastures, are more Skilful than Men, about the Virtues of Herbs; for they easily discern at the first tast, what are for food, what for Natural In∣stinct dictates to Brutes, what is wholesome and what un∣wholesome. Medicine, yea, what is to be shun ' d, being imbued with poyson and death; when we in the mean time, unless taught by experience, are wholy ignorant of their Virtues or poysonous force: so that Pliny Complain d, that it was a shame, that all Animals Knew what was healthful for themselves, besides Man. 
 Neither does what some object otherways determinate this matter, that the means of these Kind of effects, depend only upon the similitude or the dissimilitude of Patricles, which are in the sensible and the Sensory, without any intention of the Beasts, or End of their Acting; because we have observed, that Brute living Creatures, by the Virtue of natural Instinct, perform not only simple actions, stirred up by one Impression of the External agent, as when the heat of the Sun invites to take the Cool of that shade, but they perform and do manifold works, and Continued by a long Series. Birds by reason of the Influence of the Spring, being instigated to the begetting others apply themselves to that business, without any Leads not only to simple Acti∣ons but a so to very Complicate Actions. other provoker or director, as it were Consultingly and premeditated; for they enter into wedlock, as it were by a solemn manner of Espousals, they choose a fit place for the building their nest or habitation, where they make it most artificially beyond the skill of humane Architecture; then they lay Eggs, and by sitting on them bring forth young ones, and then carefully nourish them with food which they get for them. We might here also take notice of the most admirable Republiques of Bees and Ants, in which, without any written Laws or promulged Right, the most perfect ways of Government are exercised. But as in all these without any Variety, one thing is al∣ways and wholy after the same manner administred, it is a sign, that these Kind of prin∣ciples or beginnings of the Brutes, are nor stirred up either by external objects, whose Impulse is still various and divers, nor from an i ternal proposition of the Mind, which is more mutable than the wind; But excited from a more fixed and Certain principle, determinate always to one thing, which can be only Natural Instincts: The World is full of Examples of this sort, which testifie the native indowments and implanted Ingeny But yet those always, and in all, of one Kind only. of Brutes: For in all Animals, there are by Nature a Certain Ingeny and habit born with them, by which they are instigated through a secret impulse and blind power to the performing of Actions, which respect both the Conservation of themselves, and the propagation of their Kind; and these Gifts being originally granted, constitute as it were the first lineaments or groundwork of practical Knowledge, with which the Soul of Brutes are wont to be imbued: then an acquired Cognition being superadded to those rudiments, fills up the vacuities of those things drawn forth, and adds a perfection to the former foundation. 
 For Secondly, besides the natural Instincts, living Brutes are wont to be taught by sen∣sible 2. Brutes, in some things, are taught by the Impressions of sensible things. species, to wit, to profit in the Knowledge of several things, and to acquire certain habits of practice: But this happens not equally to all nor at all times. For in many A∣nimals newly brought forth, natural Instinct is of some force, but then the Impressions of sensible things little or nothing affect the sensitive soul: Because, altho the flamy part of the Soul is enough inkindled in the Brain, yet because the Brain and its Appendix, abounds with much humidity, therefore the Spirituous Effluvias, or the lucid part of the Soul which ought to irradiate these Bodies, is very much obscured, as the beam of theSun passing thorow a thick Cloud: Wherefore at this time, the strokes of sensible things, being not dee∣ply fixed, are presently obliterated, and in them local motions hardly follow: yea in some Beasts, in whom the Blood being continually and habitually thick, and who have a less Clear Brain, tho through their whole Life some acts of the Exterior Senses and Motions are performed, yet few Characters are left, of any interiour Knowledg. Where∣fore, we shall here inquire only concerning Brutes, that are more docil, to wit, in whom are besides local motions, and the five Exterior Senses, Memory, and Imagination; and in these we may conceive this kind of Introduction, or Method of Institution, concerning the Exquisite Knowledge, by the sense with which they are wont to be imbued. 
 Therefore, as soon as the Brain in the more pefect Brutes grows Clear, and the Con∣stitution The direct sensi∣ble Species crea∣tes in them th Phantasie and the Memory. of the Animal Spirits becomes sufficiently lucid and defecated, the exterior Ob∣jects being brought to the Organs of the Senses, make Impressions, which being from thence transmitted, for the continuing the Series or Order of the Animal Spirits in∣wards, towards the streaked Bodies, affect the Common Sensory; and when as a sensible Impulse of the same, like a waving of Waters, is carried further into the Callous Body, and thence into the Cortex or shelly substance of the Brain, a Perception is brought in, concerning the Species of the thing admitted, by the Sense, to which presently succeeds the Imagination, and marks or prints of its Type being left, constitutes the Memory; The reflected be Appetit e. But in the mean time, whilst the sensible Impression being brought to the common Sen∣sory, effects there the Perception of the thing felt; as some direct Species of it, tending further creates the Imagination and Memory; so other reflected Species of the same Ob∣ject, as they appear either Congruous or Incongruous, produce the Appetite, and local motions its Executors; that is, the Animal Spirits looking inwards, for the Act of Sen∣sion, being struck back, leap towards the streaked Bodies; and when as these Spirits pre∣sently possessing the Beginnings of the Nerves, irritate others, they make a desire of flying from the thing felt, and a motion of this or that member or part, to be stirred up: Then, because this Kind, or that Kind of Motion succeeds once or twice, to this or to that Sension, afterwards, for the most part, this Motion follows that Sension as the Effect follows the The Appetite stirs up local Motion. Cause: and according to this manner, by the admitting the Idea ' s of sensible things, both the Knowledg of several things, and the habits of things to be done, or of local Motions, are by little and little produced: For indeed, from the beginning, almost every Motion of the animated Body is stirred up by the Contact of the outward Object; to wit, the Animal Spirits residing within the Organ, are driven inward, being strucken by the Object, and so (as we have said) constitute Sension or Feeling; then, like as a Flood sliding along the Banks of the shore, is at last beaten back, so, because this waving or inward turning down of the Animal Spirits, being partly reflected from the Common Sensory, is at last directed outwards, and is partly stretched forth even into the in∣most part of the Brain, presently local Motion succeeds the Sension; and at the same time, a Character being affixed on the Brain, by the sense of the thing perceived, it im∣presses there, Marks or Vestigia of the same, for the Phantasie and the Memory then affected, and afterwards to be affected; but afterwards, when as the Prints or Marks of very many Acts of this Kind of Sensation and Imagination, as so many Tracts or Ways, are ingraven in the Brain, the Animal Spirits, oftentimes of their own accord, Which being of∣ten stirred up produce an ha∣bit of Acting. without any other forewarning, and without the presence of an Exterior Object, being stirred up into Motion, for as much, as the Fall into the footsteps before made, repre∣sent the Image of the former thing; with which, when the Appetite is affected, it de∣siring the thing objected to the Imagination, causes spontaneous Actions, and as it were drawn forth from an inward Principle. As for Examples sake, The Stomach of an Horse, feeding in a barren Ground or fallow Land, being incited by hunger, stirs up and variously agitates the Animal Spirits flowing within the Brain; the Spirits being thus moved by accident, because they run into the footsteps formerly made, they call to mind the former more plentiful Pasture fed on by the Horse, and the Meadows at a great di∣stance, then the Imagination of this desirable thing, (which then is cast before it, by no outward Sense, but only from the Memory,) stops at the Appetite: that is, the Spi∣rits implanted in the streaked Bodies, are affected by that Motion of the spirits flowing within the middle part or Marrow of the Brain; who from thence presently after their former accustomed manner, enter the origines of the Nerves, and actuating the Nervous System after their wonted manner by the same Series, produce local Mo∣tions, by which the hungry Horse is carried from place to place, till he has found out the Imagined Pasture, and indeed enjoyes that good the Image of which was painted in his Brain. 
 After this manner, the sensible Species being intromitted, by the benefit of the Ex∣terior Organs, in the more perfect Brutes, for that they affix their Characters on the Brain, and there leave them, they constitute the Faculties of Phantasie and Memory, as it were Store-houses full of Notions; further, stirring up the Appetite into local Moti∣ons, agreeable to the Sensions frequently, they produce an habit of Acting; so that some Beasts being Taught or Instructed for a long time, by the assiduous Incursion of the Objects, are able to know and remember many things, and further learn manifold works; to wit, to perform them by a Complicated and Continued series and succession of very many Actions. Moreover, this Kind of acquired Knowledg of the Brutes, and the Practical habits introduced through the Acts of the Senses, are wont to be promoted by some other means, to a greater degree of perfection. 3. Brutes are also taught by experience. 
 For in the third place, it happens to these by often Experience that the Beasts are not only made more certain of simple things, but it teaches them to form certain Propo∣sitions, and from thence to draw certain Conclusions. Because, draught Beasts, having sometimes found water to be Cooling, they seek it far as a remedy of too much heat; wherefore, when their Precordia grow hot, running to the River they drink of it, and if they are hot in their whole Body they fearlesly lye down in the same. In truth, many Actions which appear admirable in Brutes came to them at first by some accident, which being often repeated by Experience, pass into Habits, which seem to shew very much of Cunning and Sagacity; because, the sensi∣tive soulis is easily accustomed to every Institution or Performance, and its Actions begun by Chance, and often repeated, pass into a Manner and Custom. So it happens some∣times by Chance, among Hounds, that one had caught the prey, not exactly but by following a Shorter way; this Dog afterwards, as if he were much more Cunning than the rest, leaves the Hare making her turnings a d windings, and runs directly to meet her another way. 
 Living Brutes are taught by Example, by the Imitation and Institution of others of the 4. By Example, Imitation, and Institution also same or of a divers Kind, to perform certain more excellent Actions. Hence it is that the Ape so plainly imitates Man, that by some, it is thought a more imperfect Species of him. For this Animal being extreamly mimical, as it is indued with a most Capacious and hot Brain, it imitates to an hair, almost all the Gestures that it happens to see, presently with a ready and expeditious Composing of its Members, and is furnished with a notable Memory, and retains all its tricks which it has once acted very firmly afterwards, and is wont to repeat them at its pleasure. They are very admirable habits, which Horses, Doggs, and Birds get, being carefully instructed by the Discipline of Man; and not only from Men but being taught first by their Companions, they imbibe altogether new and more Excellent Customs: so one Dog ordinarily teaches another to hunt, and one Bird another to compose harmonious notes and various tunes. It were an Easy matter to bring very many Instances of this Kind. But we shall hasten to other things. 
 Having thus enumerated the Chief Helps from Nature and Art, by which living How far it is that Brutes are able to Know. Brutes do profit in the Knowledg of things, and are instructed by the Habits of Acting, we shall now inquire, to what hight most of them or all of them put together, can arrive. 
 First, from what we have said ' tis clear, that Living Brutes are directed to all things which belong to the Defence and Conservation of the Individuum, and that are to be done for the propagation of their Kind, by a natural Instinct, as it were a Law or Rule fixed in their Hearts: when as therefore we behold for these ends, ordained by Divine Provi∣dence, Brutes to order their matters wisely, and as it were by Council, no man Esteems this the work of Reason, or of any liberal faculty; yea they are led into these enterpri∣ses, by a certain Praedestination, rather than by any proper Virtue or Intention. 
 Secondly, The Natural Instinct of Brutes, happens, not rarely, with notions ac∣quired by the sense, and being Complicated with them conduces to the Propositions or How natural Instinct is wont to be Compa∣ted with acqui∣red Notions. Assumptions to be done, Concerning many things, and the Deductions to be drawn from thence. A Dog being by a staff struck, or by the flinging of a stone, perceives the hurt received by the senses, and easily retains the Idea in his Memory, but the Instinct di∣ctates to him that the like stroke may be shunned afterwards, wherefore, when he sees a With the Im∣pressions of sensi∣ble things. staff held out before his eyes, or a stone taken up, fearing thence the like hurt, he hastily flies away. 
 Thirdly, sometimes Instincts, and also all other acquired Knowledges, are mixed toge∣ther, With Habits learnt from Ex∣ample or Insti∣tution. either with the Example of Habits, or with the general Institution of things learnt: And when as notions so arising from one faculty or power, answer to Actions drawn from another, from thence is produced a certain Kind of Discourse or Ratiocination, and often times it is continued by a certain Series or Thrid of Argumentation. Many ad∣mirable Histories are reported, concerning the Subtilties and Craft of the Fox, which he is wont to perform for the getting of his living. This Creature, that he might allure the Hens within the Compass of his Chain, with which he was tyed, lying all along, his legs stretched forth, feigns as if he were dead, then they coming near him, he readily leaps upon them. Moreover, I have heard it told, that a wild Fox, that he might get into his clutches a Turkie Cock roosting in a Tree, running round the Body of the Tree, with a swift Motion, continually beheld the Bird with an intentive Eye, by which Means, as the Turkie still followed the Fox thus running Round with his eye, carrying his head about till being infected with a giddiness, he fell down from the top of the Tree, into the mouth of his Enemy: I fay, it was natural to the Fox, that he should desire domestick Fowl, as his prey; but that he should frame these Kind of Snares for them, his he must have by former acquired Knowledges, from Sence, Experi∣ence, and Imitation, and complicated with natural Instinct. It is very likely that the Fox had learnt by former Experience, that the Hens did not fear him lying as dead, With notions learnt from Ex∣perience and Imitation. which might happen by Chance, when being wearied, or to sleep, he had lay ' d himself on the ground: In like manner, perhaps, when he had run about the Tree, seeking some way to get up into it, the Prey might fall down into his mouth; Wherefore afterwards when he would take his prey, he repeated the Series of the same Actions; because, what he had known to be done before, he presumed might be done again. In both Cases, and in others like them, the reason of the whole thing done, or the Endeavour, is resolved into these Propositions; The Fox thinking, now to take the Prey, that is before his eyes, after what manner he may, remembers how he had taken the same formerly, by these or those sort of Cunning ways or Crafts, found out by some chance; These are the The Syllogisms of Beasts. Premises, the former of which is suggested from Nature, and the second from Sense and Experience, from whence a Conclusion follows, Therefore Foxes for the taking of their Prey, use again the same Wiles. According to this sort of Analyzing, the most Intricate Actions of Brutes, which seem to contain Ratiocination, may be explained, and reduced into Competent notions of the sensitive Soul. 
 CHAP. VII. The Corporeal Soul, or that of the Brutes, is Compared with the Rational Soul. FRom what we have said is to be understood, how much it is that Brute Animals are wont to do with the whole furniture of the Corporeal Soul, and to obtain to∣wards the use of Reason: But now we shall endeavour to shew, how far they are below it, and how much less they are able to do than Man, endued with a Rational Soul. The means of observing the difference between these Souls are commonly to be had, being Three heads of this Discourse viz. 1. It is shown that the Rational Soul far excels the Brutal. noted by divers Authors both Ancient and Modern and both Philosophers and Theolo∣gists, till it is almost worn thread-bare, yet we will take leave to shew you only some few select things, which for Methods sake, we shall reduce to these three Heads: viz. 1st. It is shown, That man using expeditiously and freely the Powers of the Superiour Soul, of the Intellect, Judgment, Discourse, and other Acts of Reason, shews them far excelling any Faculty or Science of the Brute, and the whole power of the Corporeal Soul. 2. By 2. How both Souls are joyned in Man, and what Knitting the Corporeal Soul, and the Rational are joyned together, in the Hu∣mane Body, by what means they agree in the same habitation; also what offices they perform each. 3. Shall be declared, for what means, and for what occasions these Souls 3. How they frequently disa∣gree among themselves. differ among themselves, yea sometimes are wont to dissent and move more than Civil Wars. 
 The eminency of the Rational Soul above the Brutal or Corporeal, shines clearly by The Priority of the Rational Soul as to comparing either, both as to the Objects, and to the chief Acts or Modes of Know∣ing. As to the former, when as every Corporeal Faculty is limited to sensible things, and every one of these to certain Kinds of things, the object of the humane Mind is eve∣ry 1. The Objects which are E∣very Ens. Ens, whether it be above, or sublunary, or below the Moon, Material or Immaterial, true or fictitious, real or Intentional; wherefore Aristotle, who seemed to hesitate some∣thing about the Nature of the Rational Soul, hinting its acting Intellect as if it were Im∣material and Immortal, doth pronounce it not only separable and without Passion, but also unmixt because it understands all things. Lib. de Animâ 3. Cap. 4. 
 Secondly, The Acts or degrees of Knowledge, Common to either Soul, are Vulgar∣ly 2. The Acts of Knowing. The first Act of either Soul is simple Appre∣hension. accounted these three. To wit, simple Apprehension, Enunciation, and Discourse; how much the Power of the Rational, excells the other Corporeal in each, we shall consider: 
 First, The Knowing Faculty of the Corporeal Soul is Phantasie or Imagination, which being planted in the middle part of the Brain, receives the Sensible Species, first The power of this in Brutes is Phantasie or Imagination. only impressed on the Organs of sense, and from thence by a most quick Irradiation of the spirits delivered inwards, and so apprehends all the several corporeal things, accor∣ding to their Exterior Appearances; which notwithstanding, as they are perceived only Which is often deceived. by the sense (which is often deceived) they are admitted under an appearing, and not always under a true Image or Species. For so we Imagine the Sun no bigger than a Bushel, the Horizon of the Heaven and the Sea to meet, and then th Stars not to be far distant from us in the Horizon, and that in respect of us, there are no Antipodes; fur∣ther we may think the Image in the Glass, or in a Fountain delineates it self, that the Eccho it self is a Voyce coming from some other place, that the shore moves being on the water, yea and many other things, being received by the Sensories, whilst Phantasie is the only guide seem far other ways than indeed they are: But indeed, the Intell ct presi∣ding In man it is the Intellect presi∣ding or ' e the I∣ agination. or ' e the Imagination, beholds all the Species deposited in it self, discerns and corrects their obliquities or hypocrisies the Phantasie there drawn forth sublimes, and divesting it from matter formes universal things from singulars; moreover, it frames out of these some other more sublime Thoughts, not Competent for the Corporeal Which discerns the errors of this. Soul: so it speculates or Considers both the nature of every substance, and abstracted from the Individuals of Accident, viz: Humanity, Rationality, Temperance, Fortitude, Corporeity, Spirituallity, Whiteness, and the like; besides, being carried higher, it Con∣templates Sublimates its notions, &amp; di∣vests them from Matter. God, Angels, It self, Infinity, Eternity, and many other notions, far remote from Sense and Imagination. And so as our Intellect, in these kind of Metaphysical Conceptions, makes things almost wholly naked of matter, or carrying it self beyond every sensible Species, consider or beholds them wholly immaterial, this argues c rtainly, that the Substance or Nature of the Rational Soul is Immaterial and Immortal: Because, Contemplates immaterial Substances. if this Aptness or Disposition were Corporeal, as it can conceive nothing Incorporeal by Sence, it should suspect there were no such thing in the World.
Secondly, It appears clearly, from what was said before, that Phantasie, or the Know∣ing facultie of the Corporeal Soul, doth not only apprehend simple things, but also The Second Act of either Soul is Enunciation. Compose or Divide many things at once, and from thence to make enuntiations: Be∣cause living Brutes, in various objects together, which are for food, discern things Con∣venient from others Inconvenient or unfit; moreover, they choose out of these, things grateful before others less grateful, and get them sometimes by Force, sometimes by Cunning, and as it were by stealth. A Dog knows a Man at a great distance; if he be a Friend, he runs to him and fawns on him; If an Enemy and fearful, he barks at him or flies at him, but if armed or threatning him, he flyes away from him. These kind of Propositions the Brutes easily conceive, for as much as some Species of the sensible What and how slender this is in Brutes. thing being newly admitted, meets with Species of one thing or other before laid up in the memory, or being suggested by a Natural Instinct, associates with them or repulses them. But indeed, how little is this, in respect of the humane Intellect? which not only beholds all enunciations conceived by the phantasie, but judges them, whether they be true or false, Congruous or Incongruous; orders and disposes them into Series of Notions, accommodated to speculation or practice: Moreover, it restrains the phan∣tasie it self, being too instable and apt to wander through various phantasies; it calls it away from these or those Conceptions, and directs it to others, yea it keeps it within The rational judges, discerns, and directs the propositions of the Phantasie. certain limits at its pleasure, lest it Should expatiate or divert too much from the thing proposed: Which out of doubt is a sign that there is a Superior Soul in Man, that moderates and governs all the faculties and Acts of the Corporeal. But the Intellect, not only eminently Contains every Virtue of the phantasie; but from the Species per∣ceived It deduces from these others more sublime thoughts. in it, deduces many other thoughts altogether unknown to the sense, and which the Phantasie of it self could no way Imagine. For Besides, that it conceives the for∣mal notions of Corporeal things, abstracted from all matter, and attributes to them prae∣dicates meerly Intentional yea and understands axioms or first principles alone, and as it were by a proper Instinct, without recourse to Corporeal Species; the humane mind It beholds it self by a reflect∣ed Action. also beholds it self, by a reflected Action, it supposes it self to think, and thence Know∣ing a proper existency, not to be perceived neither by Sense nor by Phantasie; when in the mean time, neither Sense nor Imagination (of which no Images are extant) do per∣ceive it self to know or imagine: Besides these, the Rational Soul comprehends, as it were by its own proper light, God to be Infinite and Eternal, that he ought to be Wor∣shipped, And Contem∣plates other things remote from sense, as God &amp;c. that Angels or Spirits do inhabit the World, Heaven, and places beneath the Earth, that there are places of Beatitude, and Punishment, and many other notions meerly Spiritual, by no means to be learnt from Sense or Phantasie. 
 3. The perogatives of the Rational Soul, and the differences from the other Sensi∣tive The Ratiocina∣tion of the Brute, what and how vile. or Corporeal, may be yet further noted, by Comparing the Acts of Judgment and Discourse, or Ratiocination, which it puts forth more perfectly, and often time demonstra∣tively, when these Kind of Acts, from this power in the Brutes, are drawn forth imper∣fectly, and only analogically, we have already declared the utmost that Brutes can do, and how far they can go towards the exercise of Reasoning and Deliberation, through innate faculties, and acquired habits; which truly, if the whole be compared with the functions of the humane Intellect, and its Scientifick Habits, it will hardly seem greater The humane Mind immensly more excellent. than the drop of a Bucket, to the Sea. For to say nothing of that natural Logick, by which any one endoued with a free and perspicacious mind, probably and sometimes most Is imbued with a natural Lo∣gick. certainly concludes, Concerning all doubtfull things, or things sought after, if that we mind how much the humane mind being adorned by Learning, and having learnt the Sciences and liberal Arts, is able to work, understand, and search out; it would be thought, tho in an Humane Body, to be rather living with Gods or Angels. For indeed here may be Considered, the whole Encyclopaedia or Circle of Arts and Sciences, which excepting Divinity) hath been the Product or Creature of the Humane Mind, and in∣deed argues the Workman if not divine, at least to be a particle of Divine Breath, to wit, It hath Crea∣ted all Arts &amp; Sciences (except Theologie) a Spiritual Substance, wonderfully Intelligent, Immaterial, and which therefore for the future is Immortal. It would be tedious here to rehearle the Subtil Wiles of Logick, and the extremely curious web of Notions, or of the Reason of Essences, or Beings, where the things of Natural Philosophy being unfolded by their Causes, are dissected as it were Logick. to the Life; the most pleasant Speculations, the profound Theorems or rather Cele∣stial, Physick. of the Metaphysicks or supernatural things; yea and the grand Mysteries of other Metaphysicks. learning first found out by humane Industry. But above the rest, is it not truly ama∣zing to see the most certain Demonstrations of the Mathematicks, and therefore a-Kin Mathematicks. and greatly alluding to the Humane Mind, its Problems and Riddles how difficult soever to be extricated, with no labour, yea and many things of it attained, and most glorious Inventions. What is it below a Prodigy, that Algebra from one Number or Dimensi∣on, Algebra. which at first was uncertain and unknown, being placed, should find out the quantity of another altogether unknown? What shall I say concerning the Proportions of a Circle, a Triangle, a Quadrangle, and other Figures, and of their Sides or Angles various∣ly measurable among themselves, being most exactly computed? what besides, that the Humane Intellect having learnt the Precepts of Geometrie and Astronomie, takes the spaces of inaccessible places, and their heights, the floor or breadth of any superficies, Admirable things of Geo∣metry and A∣stronomy. and the contents of solids, yea the dimensions of the whole Earthly Globe: measures ex∣actly the spaces of hours and days, the times of the year, the Tropicks, by the progress only of a shadow? yea it measures the Orbs, Magnitudes, and Distances of the Sun and Starrs, for a long time to come, Calculates, and exactly Foretells, their risings and set∣tings, motions, declinations, and Aspects one to another; we should want time, should we go about to enumerate the several portentous things, either of the practice or specula∣tion in the Mathematicks. Then, if passing over to Mechanical things, We shall consi∣der the several Works and Inventions of Workmen, and the artificial Smiths-Works won∣derfully The humane Mind does wonders in me∣chanicalThings. made, there will be no place for doubting, but that the humane Soul, which can so famously understand, invent, and find out, and effect, I had almost said, Create things so stupendious, must needs be far above the Brutal, Immaterial and Immortal; especially because Living Brutes obtain only a few and more simple Notions and Intentions of Acting, yea and those always of the same Kind, and not determinated but to one Thing, altogether ignorant of the Causes of things, and know not Rights or Laws of political Society: further, they make no Fires or Houses, nor find out any me∣chanical Arts, they put not on cloaths, nor dress their food, yea unless taught by Imita∣tion, they know not how to number Three. When therefore we have plainly detected In respect of Man, how little is it that the Soul of a Brute Can do? in Man, besides the Corporeal Soul, such as is Common with Brutes, the prints of ano∣ther superiour, meerly spiritual, we shall next seek out by what bond, and by what necessitude, these twins are conjoyned, and intimately come together, in the same Body. 
 Some of those, who have shew ' d the difference, between the Souls of the Brute and of Man, affirming the Irrational or Corporeal peculiar to them, would have the Ratio∣nal Soul of Man, to perform not only the Offices of the Intellect and Discourse, but also the other Offices of Sense and Life, yea to do and administer the whole Oeconomy of Nature: To which opinion (however it may have prevailed in our Schools) the opinions of most That there are two distinct Souls in Man besides many other of latter Time there are for Authors learned men of every Age has been clearly opposite. That I may not be tedious, in rehear∣sing of many, I shall cite only two Authors (but either of which is worth a Multitude) in the Confutation of this Assertion. One is, that famous Philosopher, Peter Gassendus, who Physic. Sect. 3. lib. 9. Cap. 11. differencing the Mind of Man, as much as he could, from that other Sensitive Power of his, by many and very remarquable notes of discrimi∣nation, yea (as  ' tis said in the Schools) by Specifick Differences, he has (as they say) divided the whole Heaven between: Because when he had shewed this to be Corporeal, Gassendus Extensive, and also Nascible or that may be born, and Corruptible, he saith that the other was an Incorporeal Substance, and therefore Immortal, which is Created mediately by God, and infused into the Body; which opinion he shews Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and many ancient Philosophers, besides Epicurus, very much to have favoured; excepting how∣ever, that they, for as much as they not knowing the beginning of the Soul they judged Immortal, affirmed it, taken from the Soul of the world, to slide into the humane Body, and it to be refunded again either immediately into that Soul of the World, or mediately at length, after a Transmigration thorow other Bodies. The other suffrage concerning this matter is, of the most Learned Divine, our Dr Hammond, who unfolding that Text of St Paul to the Thessalonians, 1 chap. 5. v. 23. The whole Body Soul and Spirit: says, that man is And Hammond. divided into three parts, to wit, First into the body, which is the Flesh and Members: Secondly, Into an Animal Life, which also being Animal and Sensitive, is common to Man with the Brutes; And Thirdly, into Spirit, by which is signified the rational Soul, at first Created by God, which being also Immortal, returns to God, Lib. Annot. on the New Testament, p. 711. He Confirms this his Exposition, by Testimonies taken from Ethnick Authors, also from the Fathers. And truly it is most evidently plain, from what hath been said, That Man is made, as it were an Amphibious Animal, or of a mid∣dle Nature and Order, between Angels and Brutes, and doth Communicate with both, with these by the Corporeal Soul, from the Vital Blood, and heap of Animal Spirits, and with those by an intelligent, immaterial, and immortal Soul. And indeed, Reason This also Rea∣son dictates. persuades us plainly that  ' tis so, to wit, for as much as we find in our selves, as by and by shall be more fully shown, the Strifes and Dissentions of one Soul with another, sometimes this, and sometimes that getting the Rule, or being in Subjection. But as it The Rational Soul does not exercise the A∣nimal Faculties. is said, That the Rational Soul doth exercise of it self all the Animal Faculties, is most improbable; because the Acts and Passions of all the Senses, and Animal Motions are Corporeal, being divided and extended to various Parts; to the performing which im∣mediately, the incorporeal and indivisible Soul seems unable, so that it would be finite. Then as to what respects that Vulgar Opinion, that the Sensitive Soul is subordinate to the Rational, and is as it were swallow ' d up of it, as that which in Brutes is the Soul, is mere Power in Man; these are trifles of the Schools. For how should the Sensitive Soul of Man, which subsisting at first in Act, was material and extended, foregoing its Essence Obliterates not the Sensitive Soul by its Com∣ing. at the coming of the Rational Soul, degenerate into a mere Quality? if that it should be asserted, That the Rational Soul by its coming, doth introduce also Life and Sensa∣tion, Nor transmutes it into a mere Power. then Man doth not generate an animated Man, but only an inform Body, or a rude lump of Flesh. 
 Therefore, supposing that the Rational Soul, doth come to the Body first animated by another Corporeal Soul, we shall inquire, by what Bond or Knitting, since it is pure By what Bond the Rational Soul is united to the Body. Spirit, it can be united to it, for as much as it hath not Patts, by which it might be ga∣thered to, or cohere with this whole, or any of its Parts. Concerning this, I think we may say, with the most Learned Gassendus, That the Corporeal Soul is the immediate Subject That the Corpo∣real Soul is the Subject of the Rational. Gass-Physic. Sect. 3. Memb. Post l. 9. c. 11. of the Rational Soul, of which, as she is the Act, Perfection, Complement, and Form by her self, the Rational Soul also effects the Form, and Acts of the humane Body. But for as much, as it seems not equal nor necessary, that the whole Corporeal Soul, should be employed by the whole Rational; therefore we may asfirm, this purely Spiritual, to sit as in its Throne, in the principal Part or Faculty of it, to wit, in the Imagination, made out of an handful of Animal Spirits, most highly subtil, and seated in the Middle or Marrowie part of the Brain: Because, when as the Species, or every sensible Im∣pression, of which we are any ways Knowing, being inflicted any where on the Humane Body, is carried to the Imagination or Phantasie, and there all the Appetites or Spon∣taneous Conceptions, or Intentions of things to be done, are excited, the Intellect or Humane Mind, presiding in this Imperial seat, easily performs the Government of the whole Man. For (as Gassendus properly has it) As there is no necessity for a King, to be in his whole Kingdom, but only in his Palace, to which place, are carried whatever happens in the Gassend. Ibid. Kingdom; so the Phantasie is the Kingly Palace of the Intellect, to which may be brought what∣soever The Seat or Pa∣lace of the Hu∣mane Mind, is in the Phantasie. are acted Spontaneously and to our Knowledge, in the whole Body. But as to what has relation to the Functions merely Natural, which being done by a constant manner of Oeconomy, as it were by a Law from the Creator, are performed unknown to the Ani∣mal, it were not fit, that the Imagination, much less the Intellect, should attend on these lower Offices: althô also, the faults of these, as often as they are amiss, lying hid to the Imagination, the Intellect most often finds them out, and procures them to be amended. As to the Mode of the Intellect, by which the Phantasms of all sensible Things being drawn in the Imagination, is beheld, it may be said, That this is done The manner by which the Phan∣tasms are be∣held by the In∣tellect, viz. In∣tuition, not Per∣culsion. not by perculsion from the Corporeal Species, (for this is repugnant to the Corporeal Faculty) but by an Intuition into it self, expressed in the Phantasie. But as the Rational Soul, will stay and preside in the Court of the Phantasie, there is no need that she should be shut out from thence, or bound by any Bond; because destinated to this by the most high Creator, to wit, that it should be the informing Form of Man; and also her self is very much inclined, to the Inhabiting this House; because, whil ' st in the Body, it de∣pends The Rational Soul is inclined to the Body. very much, as to its Operation, on the Phantasie, without the help of which, it can know or understand nothing. For it draws its first Species and fundamental Idaea ' s, by which it rears all its manner of Knowledge, from the Imagination; wherefore, The Intellect de∣pends upon the Phantasie. that the Mind of one Man understands more, and reasoneth better, than that of ano∣ther, it does not thence follow, that Rational Souls are inequal, but every disparity, concerning the Intellect, proceeds immediately from the Phantasie, but mediately and principally from the Brain, being variously disposed. For as this being affected, by an Intemperate or Evil Conformation, the Spirits being made more dull, or hindred, can∣not By reason of the various Consti∣tution of this, and the Brain, Souls seem un∣equal. irradiate and actuate in their due manner; therefore the Phantasms are diffi∣cient or distorted, and the Faults or Vices of these infects the Intellect. Hence it very often happens, by reason of some hurt coming to the Brain, that the Faculties or Habits, or Ratiocination or Reasoning, howsoever strong, are diminished or taken away: Be∣cause, as the most Skilful Gassendus tell us, That the acquisition and loss of an habit, stands in the Power of the Brain and Phantasie, a subject purely Corporeal; but that the Intellect, it wants Parts, cannot be wrought upon by Parts, but that it is from the beginning, and of its own Nature, a full and perfect power of understanding; which understands, not more by the coming of any Habit, but is rather it self an Habit, always ready to understand: where∣fore he says, that Aristotle has hit the mark, when he says, that his Agent having its Intel∣lect, How the Ha∣bits of Reason∣ing are acqui∣red and perfor∣med. as it were a Light, had it therefore as it were a certain Hahit: to w t, when this Intel∣lect, as it were a Light, is ever ready to illustrate; therefore it would have it self like to an Habit, in a Workman or Artist, to whom, when you give an Organ or Instrument, as an Harp to an Harper, he is presently ready to Play; by which it comes to pass, as he says, the Intellect also to come under such a Reason, like as Art comes under Reason, as to Matter; So we may say, As an Harper has in himself the Skill of Playing on the Harp, and if he shews not his Art, there is a defect, not of himself, but by reason of the absence or Gassendus, Ib. the depraved disposition of the Harp; after the same manner, the Intellect is aboundantly In∣structed, in its own Nature, that it understands, and uses Phantasies, and if it may not do it, the cause is not in it self, but is either in the absence of the Phantasms, or their Imperfection. For indeed, as the same Author afterwards adds, The chief Function of the Humane Intel∣lect seems to be like that of the Angels, that it is of its own Nature, merely Intelligent, that is, Knowing things by a simple Sight, not by Ratiocination; But that darkness is poured on it dwelling in the Body, that it doth not perceive all that it understands, simply, nakedly, and as it were through the means of Intuition; but attains it very much by reasoning, that is, successively, and proceeding as it were by degrees. 
 From these we may probably Conclude, or at least Conjecture, after what manner the Rational Soul remains in the other Corporeal, and using as it were its Eyes, and other Powers, understands; yea, and this mediating or coming between, she is said to be united to the Body, and to be its informing Form. As to the first yoaking of the one Soul with the other, thô the Rational Soul it self, and this, is altogether ignorant of its Birth, we may affirm notwithstanding, what is Consonant to Holy Faith, right Reason, and to the Authority of Divines, who were of the chiefest note; That this immaterial Soul, That the Ratio∣hal Soul is Cre∣ated and poured inio the formed Body. for as much as it cannot be born, as soon as all things are rightly disposed for its Recep∣tion, in the Humane formation of the Child in the Womb, it is Created immediately of God, and poured into it. 
 But that some have said, That the Rational Soul is propagated Ex traduce or of its Kind, for as much as oftentimes the Son, in respect of Wit, Temperament, Ingenui∣ty, Not propagated Ex traduce. the Affections, and other Animal Faculties, is exactly like the Father, it follows not; because these Gifts and Offices proceed immediately from the Corporeal Soul, which we grant to be begotten by the Father, together with the Body, but not the Rational Soul. In what State this at last exists, being freed from the Body, and what Kind of Understanding and Knowledge it enjoys, is not easie to be determined; but since we shall be like the Angels, we may think, that the separated Soul doth see all Ob∣jects Separate States. with a Simple sight, and by no Corporeal Species, and wants no Ratiocination, for the discovering any thing lying hid in them. But this Speculation being let alone, as too airy, we shall further Consider, other Gestures and Manners of the Rational Soul, whil ' st it lives in the Body; and as hitherto we have seen the Marrying together of it, with the Corporeal Soul, and the mutual Commerces and Friendships as to the Knowing Faculties of either, we will now consider the Disputes and Wranglings of these, which in respect of their Powers, often happen: because the Intellect and Imagi∣nation, A Plurality of Souls in Man, is manifest by their differen∣ces. do not agree in so many things; but that it, and the Sensitive appetite, are wont to disagree in more: from which Strifes may further be argued, the distinct mea s of the aforesaid Souls, both as to their subsisting and working. 
 3. As there is said to be in Man a twofold Knowing Power, viz. The Intellect and the Imagination, so it is commonly affirmed, that there is a twofold Appetite, viz. The Will, In Man a two∣fold Knowing Power, and a twofold Appe∣tite. which proceeding from the Intellect, is the Handmaid of the Rational Soul; and the Sen∣sitive Appetite, which cleaving to the Imagination, is the Hand or Procuress of the Cor∣poreal Soul. Which Opinion, thô it be founded on the Sayings of the Ancient Philo∣sophers; for that by Plato and Aristotle, The Will is attributed to the Rational Part, and to the Irrational Lust and Wrath; yet it ought not to be so taken, as if the Rational Soul, for that it is immaterial, and therefore esteemed without Affection, should be obnoxious to the Affections of desires or aversations, from every shaking approach of Good or Evil, of that being turbulent; for this indeed is repugnant to its incorporeal Nature, The Rational Soul of it self without Affe∣ctions; how it governs and or∣ders the Phan∣tasie and Affe∣ctions. and to its Dignity and Prerogative above other Powers. Without doubt, in the Con∣templation of Truth and Goodness, and especially of that which is the sum of either, in the doing of good Works, in the Knowledge of things by their Causes; and in the Exercises of Habits, both Scientifick and Practical, great Complacency happens to this; and on the contrary a certain displeasure for the want of these. Moreover, the Love of God, of Virtue, and of all that is good, and the detestation of Vices, and of wick d Men; yea, and other pure Affections, and such as are Simple, coming without pertur∣bation or trouble, belong to the Rational Soul: In the mean time, That she (according to Plato) like the top of Olympus, might enjoy a perpetual Serenity, hath the whole heap of Perturbations below it self, and in the irrational part, placed like Clouds, Winds, and Thunder, in an inferior Region, and under its feet. And truly, all the vehement Affections or Per∣turbations of the Mind, by which it is wont to be moved, and inclined hither and thither, for the Prosecuting the Good, or shunning Evil, belong wholly to the Corporeal Soul, and are seen to obtain the same seat with the Phantasie, within the middle or marrowy part of the Brain: (by what means the Passions also affect the Praecordia by consent, shall be declared afterwards) in the mean time, the Intellect, even as it beholds all the Phan∣tasms, and Orders and Rules them at its pleasure; so it not only perceives, but whil ' st it is its self, governs and moderates, all Concupiscences, and Floods of Passions, that are wont to be moved also within the Phantasie; and so, as it approves these Affe∣ctions, and rejects those, now excites others, now quiets them, or directs them to their right ends, the Rational Soul it self is said to exercise certain Acts of the Will or Power, by these kind of Dictates of hers, and that she her self wills or wills not, the same thing, which by her Permission or Command, the Sensitive Appetite desires or hates. 
 But the Corporeal Soul does not so easily obey the Rational in all things, not so in In things to be Known, the Cor∣porealSoul obeys the Rational, but not in things to be done. things to be desired, as in things to be known: for indeed, she being nearer to the Body, and so bearing a more intimate Kindness or Affinity towards the Flesh, is tied wholly to look to its Profit and Conservation: to the Sedulous Care of which Office, it is very much allured, by various Complacences, exhibited through the Objects of every Sense: Hence she being busied about the Care of the Body, and apt by that pretext, its natural The Corporeal Soul inclining her self to the Flesh, Inclination, and indulging Pleasures, most often grows deaf to Reason, perswading the contrary. Further, the lower Soul, growing weary of the yoak of the Other, if occa∣sion serves, frees it self from its Bonds, affecting a License or Dominion; and then there may plainly be seen the Twinns striving in the same Womb, or rather a Man clearly distracted or drawn several ways, by a double Army planted within himself; to wit, 
 —Where Ensigns Ensigns meet, Fights against the Rational. And where with Arms, they one another threat; This Kind of Int stine Strife, does not truly cease, till this or that Champion becoming Superior, leads the other away clearly Captive. Althô in the mean time, to the Esta∣blishing the Empire of the Rational Soul, also for the Vindicating of its Right and Prin∣cipality, from the Usurpation of the Sensitive Soul, the Precepts of Philosophers, and Moral Institutes are framed; and when these can do little, Sacred Religion gives far more potent helps, whose Laws and Precepts being rightly observed, are able to carry Man, not only beyond the Brutes, but himself, to wit, above his Natural State; for as much as they subject the Sensitive Soul to the Rational, and both to the most high God. How it is re∣duced to Obe∣dience. But yet, such a Divine Politie is not erected in Man, without great Contention: Be∣cause, whil ' st Reason using its proper force, and also Institutes and Sacred Ethicks, en∣deavours to draw the Faculties of the Corporeal Soul to its Party, fhe rising against it, adheres pertinaciously to the Flesh, and is hardly pull ' d away from its Blandishments; yea, what is to be lamented, it seduces in us the Mind or Chief Soul, and snatches it It often seduces the Mind. away with it self, to role in the Mud of Sensual Pleasures: So that Man becomes like the Beast, or rather worse; to wit, for as much as Reason becoming Brutal, leads to all manner of Excess. But indeed,  ' tis not always so with the Empire of the Mind, but that she returning at length, sometimes on her own accord, or awakened by some occasion, and knowing of its tall, arises up against the Sensitive Soul, as against an Enemy or Traitor, casting her out of her Throne, commands her to Servitude; yea, sometimes by Wars are between them. reason of some wickedness committed, it compels it to torment it self, and its Lover the Flesh, and so to expiate as much as it may, its faults, by inflicting on it proper Pu∣nishments. Indeed, these kind of Acts and Affections of Conscience, near to Man, Affections of Conscience nigh to Man. plainly shews, that there is in him either two Souls subordinately, or at least the Parts of the same are far different; to wit, when one of which oppos s the other, and either strives for the obtaining of Proselytes, it happens that Man is hurried into contrary En∣deavours, and is acted little less than like a Daemoniack possess ' d with a Legion. But having proposed these things, concerning the Rational Soul, (which we have touch ' d only by the by, as besides our purpose) we will return to the Corporeal, and as we have illustrated its Essence, Hypostasis, and Integral Parts, we shall now descend to the Ex∣plaining of its Affections, or Passions. 
 But in the mean time, as we have shewn, by comparing the Corporeal Soul of the Brute, with the Rational of Man, what vast difference there is between them, perhaps it might be to the purpose, to compare the Brains of either, and to observe their diffe∣rences. But this Anatomy being elsewhere made, we have noted little or no difference, in the Head of either, as to the Figures and Exterior Conformations of the Parts, the Bulk only excepted; that from hence we concluded, the Soul Common to Man with the Brutes, to be only Corporeal, and immediately to use these Organs. But as we have shewn he description of a Sheeps Brain, dissected within the Cortex, and as it were made bare of Flesh, whereby all the Interior Parts might appear, we shall here also, to Crown the work, give you the Figure of an Humane Brain; so as all the inward Parts may be laid open. 
 The Eighth Table, Contains a new Anatomy of the Humane Brain, where, by a Dissection with an Instru∣ment made thorow the Bill, the Callous Body, and the Fornix or Arch, and their Parts being taken away and separated; the streaked Bodies, also the Optic and Orbicular Prominences, one side erased, and the other whole and plain, are Ex∣hibited. 
 A. A. A. A. The Hemisphear of the Brain divided and separated by themselves. B. B. B. B. Portions of the Callous Body with the Fornix cut off, and removed apart. C. The Basis of the Fornix, with its Roots, which cohered with its Trunk Y Y; divided Por∣tions of which, with Cuttings off of the Callous Body, are laid apart on the right and left hand. D. One streaked Body scraped or Erased, that the Medullary streakes or nervous Tracts may appear. E. The formost border of this Body, sticking to the right Hemisphear of the Callous Body. F. G. The Basis and the Cone, of the same Body. H. The hinder Border of the same, in which the Optick streaks, yea and other Medullary Pro∣cesses, are sent from the Orbicular Prominences. I. The streaked Body of the left-side plain, with the Vessels creeping thorow them; whose Borders and Ends are made after the same as in the right. K. The right Optick Chamber erased, whose Medullary streaks, being strait and thick set, K. K. are stretch ' d forth, into the Border of the streaked Body. L. The right Nati-form Prominence in like manner erased, with streaks stretched forth into the Medullary Process M. M. The Medullary Process, which proceeding from the Testes, and compassing about the Nates, sends from thence other Medullary passages into the streaked Body, as more plainly ap∣pears in the left side being whole. N. The Pineal Kirnel in its proper place. O. O. The Orbicular Prominences called Testes, Marrowy thorow the whole. P. The left Nati-form Prominence plain and whole, which is smaller in Man, and for the most part Marrowy. Q. A Medullary Process, Compassing the Nates, from which is sent one Medullary Pipe or passage R. towards the Cone of the streaked Body, and another S. towards its Basis; of which by and by a forked branch goes forth, one r. to the middle of the streaked Body, the others, to the corner of its Basis. T. A Transvers shoot knitting together the aforesaid Branches. V. The hinder Borders of the streaked Bodies, joyned together among themselves. W. The Gap or Chink leading to the Tunell. X. The Gap or Chink, leading into the Cavity, lying under the Orbicular Prominences. Y. A Medullary Process, leading from the Oblong Marrow, into the Cerebel, which seems to be the root of this. Z. Z. Separated Portions of the Cerebel cut off., that its Tracts both Marrowy, and Cortical or Barkie, may be seen. X. The Cavity or hollowness lying under the Cerebel. page 44 Tabula VIII CHAP. VIII. Of the Passions or Affections of the Corporeal Soul in General. The whole Corporeal Soul, so long as she is quiet and undisturbed, she is fittted to her A Twofold state of the Corporeal Soul: Tranquil or Quiet, proper Body equally, as to a certain Chest or Cabbinet, and waters all its Parts gently, both with little Rivulets of Blood Circulating, and actuates and inspires them every where with a gentle falling down of the Animal Spirits; But it sometimes happens, that the whole Constitution of this same Soul, is so shaken and moved, that both the Blood being interrupted in its equal Circule, is compelled into irregular Excursions, and Recursions, and various Fluctuations; and also, that the Animal Spirits being snatched And Disturbed. hither and thither, inordinately perform the Acts of their Functions: yea, the Animal In which either part of the Soul is moved. Spirits themselves, whil ' st being moved irregularly, do shake the Praecordia, and flow into them in an undue manner, cause the Course of the Blood more to be perverted. Fur∣ther, from the Corporeal Soul being disturbed, not only the Animal Spirits, and Rivers of the Blood, are driven into disorders, but they induce alterations both to the other Hu∣mors, and to very many Parts and Members of the Body, and to the Rational Soul it self, in Man. As there are manifold Examples of these kind of Perturbations, by which, the Corporeal Soul being too much swell ' d up, or Contracted, or otherways distorted, it becomes as it were unequal, and not Conformable to the Body, the Chief of them may be referred to these two Heads. To wit, First, Sometimes this Soul, as it were leaping forth, erects and stretches out it self beyond measure, and so dilating its Hypo∣stasis, And is either too much inlarged, desires to reach it self beyond the bound of the Body: Hence the Animal Spirits, being respectively moved, in the Brain, enlarge the Sphear of their Irradiation, and as they so shake the Praecordia, by a more full inflowing, they Compel the Blood therefore to be snatched together, and to be poured forth more freely into all the Parts. Se∣condly, Or Contracted. Sometimes on the contrary, this Soul being struck, is more narrowly Compressed within it self; so that being drawn inwardly, and sinking down within its wonted Com∣pass of Emanation, becomes less than the Body; wherefore, the Animal Faculties won∣derfully flagg, and their Acts are either sluggishly or perversly performed: Moreover, the Praecordia also being destitute of their due influx of Spirits, almost sink down, and suffer the Blood to stay too long there, and to stagnate oftentimes. There are besides some other Gestures of the aforesaid Soul, by which the same departing from its equal Expansion, becomes not Congruous to the Body; and in these kind of Cases, chiefly the Sensitive Power, according to the received Impressions, affects a new Species, and brings the Brain and Imagination into its Party: Then by and by, by the passage of the Nerves, The Trouble of the Soul, im∣pressed on the Sensitive Part, by and by is Communicated to the Blood. it affects the Praecordia, as it were with a certain stroke, and determinates them after her measure; so that according to the Idea received from the Imagination, the Motion of the Blood is Composed, as it were after the measures of a Dance: we shall add anon Instances and Examples of these, when we shall treat of the Passions parti∣cularly. 
 In the mean time, that we may inquire into the Causes of the Passions in general, it plainly appears from what hath been said, that the Corporeal Soul is found under a two∣fold state, to wit, either of Quiet or Commotion: That she is like a Calm Sea, with a smooth Superficies, and squared altogether gentle and serene; or she becomes trou∣bled, like water shaken into various Circles, and wavings by the blasts of the Winds, or by some solid things cast into it. The former state of the Soul is perceived, not only in Sleep, when the Spirits are bound up, or lye quiet of themselves; but often in Waking, to wit, as often as objects or sensible things, being brought from without, or imaginary The quiet of the Soul happens not only in sleep, but often waking, when pleasing or unhurtful things are met with. things conceived within, do import nothing of Good or Evil to us, and that we only know and apprehend them: for so, without any Trouble or Molestation, they pleasantly side into the common Sensory and Imagination, and thence quickly pass away; but if the object is offer ' d under the Species of Good or Evil, presently the Sensitive Soul pre∣pares for the embracing or the avoiding it; and not only procures to its Endeavors the On the Contrary when from the Objects, Good or Evil is promi∣sed: Then first the Imagination af∣terwards the Appetite is m ∣ved. Animal Spirits, but also the Blood and Humors; yea, draws the solid Parts to help her. For as soon as the Imagination conceives any thing that is to be embraced or shuned, presently the Appetite is formed by the Spirits inhabiting the Brain, ordered into a Se∣ries; then by an impression sent to the Praecordia, as they are either dilated or contracted, the Blood is carried into various Motions of Fluctuations, and then by an instinct of the Appetite transmitted to the proper Nerves, the respective Motions are drawn forth: And upon these kind of Furnitures and Affection of the Spirits and Humors, and of the solid Parts, the Affections or Passions of the Mind w olly depend, we have elsewhere shewed, after what manner, and by what Trajection or Irradiation of the Spirits, with∣in the Nervous Processes, such quick Commerces are made, between the Brain and the Praecordia, and between both these and other Motive Parts. 
 But that we may yet more fully describe the Affections or Passions of the Corporeal Soul, as they are chiefly to be found in Man, it is here to be noted, That not every Spe∣cies or Appearance of Good or Evil, does excite these Commotions of the Soul: because we behold undisturbed the prosperous or adverse things of others, not related to us: But further,  ' tis requisite that the Goodness or the Malice of the Object belongs properly to a Man, altho what happens to our Friends or Relations, is as if it happened to our selves. Also besides, Good and Evil happen to the same Man after various ways, and under a di∣verse The Reason of Good and of E∣vil, either con∣cerns, reason, both in respect of the Object, and also in respect of the Subject. Concern∣ing the former we shall speak anon: As to the other, Good or Evil being brought to Man, either respect the Corporeal Soul by it self, and as it were abstracted from any other Relation; or they respect her as conjoyned to the Body, and intimately dear to her: The Corporeal Soul by it self. Or her united to the Body, Or lastly, they respect her, as subdued by the Rational Soul; so indeed, altho the Affe∣ction is continually poured into the Corporeal Soul, yet it respects Good or Evil, either of this, or that, or of another Subject, and is excited for the sake of that: And accord∣ing Or her subjected to the Rational Soul. to this threefold Relation of the Sensitive Soul, the Passions by which she is affected, are called either Physical, or Metaphysical, or Corporeal or Moral; we shall discourse Hence Passions are called either Physical, Meta∣physical, or Cor∣poreal. singly, and a little more plainly of these. 
 First, Therefore, as to the Passions merely Physical, we say, That the Sympathies and Antipathies of a diverse Kind, which are as it were proper and intimate Affections, seem to belong to the Corporeal Soul by it self, and abstracted from all Relation: Besides, the highly attractive Species of Beauty and Fairness, by the sight of which this Soul is wont Passions merely Physical, are Sympathies and Antipathies. to be insnared, most certainly; so that neglecting the Care of the Body, and laying aside the dictates of Reason, cleaves most closely to her Lover: Also sometimes less fair things which every whole Man would forsake, snatches this Soul, drawn as it were by Witch∣craft, and leads it Captive; as indeed, lost Lovers, though they see better things and approve them, yet follow the worse; the reason of which is, that the Sensitive Soul en∣ters into Friendships, of which the Affections are not knowing, with certain things in Secret, and inseparably and firmly loves them. Concerning Antipathies we meet with many things to be admired, as some sensible Objects, innocent of themselves, yea and grateful enough to many Men, and sought with delight, become most horrid to some o∣thers, and more Killing than the Head of Medusa at the sight only: So some abhor the presence of a Cat, others an Eel, or Toad, and others this or that Dish of meat made Some Instances of Passions mere∣ly Physical. ready. Nor do they only fly things by the sight, but also received by the smell, yea, when they lye hid, and are not at all suspected, they suffer Swounings and Fainting of their Spirits, by their secret Influence: These Kind of Affections without doubt, pro∣ceed from occult Enmities of the Sensitive Soul; for when it happens this Systasis or Disposition of the Animal Spirits, by the meeting of some Object, to be driven into Confusion, it ever after that abhors the coming of the same, or its Contact by its Effluvia ' s. 
 Secondly, Sometimes the Sensitive Soul receives the Superior Rational Passions, which we call Metaphysical; and solicitously busying it self concerning their Good and Evil, it Passions Meta∣physical. either draws forth or shortens the Compass of its Expansion. For indeed, the Rational Soul relying on the help and familiarity of the Spirits dwelling in the Brain, aspires to Metaphysical Notions, which having more fully learnt, it not only falls upon higher Speculations, but also exerts a certain Superior Appetite, to wit, the Will, and impli∣cates it with certain Affections, as it were inspired of God; the exercise of which sort of Sacred Affections are not performed by the mere Conceptions of the Mind: But their Acts being delivered from the Rational Soul into the Sensitive, do first employ the Brain By these first the Rational Soul. with the Phantasie, then being transmitted from the Brain into the Breast, there, for that they produce in the Heart and Blood variety of Motions, receive their Complement or Perfection: Wherefore, in the Worship of God, Piety and Devotion are attributed Then the Sensi∣tive and San∣guineous part of the other are af∣fected. very much to the Heart: Hence Repentance, the Love of God, and Hate of Sin, Hope of Salvation, Fear of Divine Vengeance, and many other acts of Religion, are wont to be ascribed to the work and endeavour of the Heart. The reason of which seems to be, for as much as the whole Corporeal Soul is Commanded by the Rational Power, that in Adoring God, she should very much bow her self before the Deity, and as it were lye prostrate on the Ground; therefore, presently both Parts of it, viz. both the Sen∣sitive and Flamy, do repress themselves, and restrain their wonted Emanations; hence plenty of Animal Spirits being drawn from the Phantasie, for the more full actuating the Organs of the Senses, they bestow the Operations of the Nerves on the Praecordia, which whil ' st they are more straitly drawn together, and as it were constrain ' d, cause the Blood to stay longer within the bosomes of the Heart; and so inhibit it, lest it should be too much inkindled within the Lungs, and lest being inkindled by the Heart, in the whole Body, and chiefly should be carried rapidly into the Brain. For indeed, the Blood containing Life as a most precious Jewel in it self, is not only heaped up more plentifully about the Praecordia, in all Fear and Danger, and is there lay ' d up as it were for defence fake, that it might better preserve its Flame: But further, in devout Affections, whil ' st the Rational Soul orders the Spirits inhabiting the Brain into sacred Conceptions and No∣tions; Wherefore, and how the Prae∣cordia are e∣steemed the seat of Holy Affe∣ctions. by the Influence of the same Spirits, the Bosomes of the Heart are also so affe∣cted, that they cause the Blood to Centre, and to be more fully drawn into them, and the e longer retain it, as it were an Holocaust to be offered to God: so as often as we Pr most earnestly, we endeavour nothing less, than that our Life with the Blood, be laid upon the Altar of the Heart. For truely, almost every body experiences in himself that in strong Prayer, the Blood is more and more heaped up in the Bosomes of the swelling Heart: wherefore, that the Vacuities of the Lungs might be supplied, we breath deeply, and so the Air being more fully drawn in, the Muscles of the Breast, and the Diaphragma, are detained almost in a continual Systole, or more often iterated; to wit, for this end, that the Vital Blood, to be offered as it were a Sacrifice to God, should be there kept, nor suffer ' d to go from thence, or to be inlarged, till as it were by a long im∣molation, together with Prayer, lieve may be had from the Godhead. Yea,  ' tis to be observed, that those religiously affected, are apt at all times to call back the Blood to∣wards the Praecordia, and to repress it from a more plentiful Excursion, which may give a loose to Delights or Mirth: Because  ' tis just, that this Vital Humor should be Conserved, even Holy and Pure for God; and as it is so restrained in the Praecordia, lest it should grow too luxucious, nor be carried towards the Brain with too impetuous a Rapture, the Conceptions also of the Mind, without much heat and distraction of thoughts con∣cerning Divine things: Hence it is, that Drinking of Wine, Banquetting, and every What it is to have the Heart hardened. Kind of Dissolute Life, because they render the Blood lawless, and not able to be re∣strain ' d or bridl ' d, are said to make hard the Heart, and to obstruct the Duties of Reli∣gion. Further, not only the devout Acts of Religion, and Pious Affections, are attri∣buted to the Breast and Praecordia; but also the sober Counsels of Wise men, yea, and the Exercises of Virtues and Moral Habits, are ordinarily ascribed by Philosophers to this Seat or Subject: Hence Wise men are said to be Cordati, Hearty, or sage of Heart; but when one that is unwise or plainly foolish, doth a thing, it is said, That there is nothing leaps in the left part of his Breast: The reason of which seems to be, that when as the Wherefore the Praecordia are called also the seat of Prudence and Wisdom. Animal Spirits (which are the immediate Instruments of thoughts) are procreated alto∣gether from the Blood, not only their more excellent disposition, but their right and timely Dispensation, depends chiefly on the Praecordia. For to these are owing, that the Blood be inkindled in its due manner, and also Eventilated, that it may give to the Brain firm and stable Animal Spirits, which however Subtil and Active, yet may not be vola∣tile beyond measure; and hence the Solidity of the Mind, and the sharpness of Judgment are produced: When on the contrary, by reason of the Blood more slowly passing tho∣row the Praecordia, or more swiftly than it should do, the Animal Spirits become too fixed, or volatile above measure, and therefore either a stupidity or lightness of Mind arises. But in truth, Wisdom is much rather ascribed to the Heart, for as much as from thence reins areins areins areins areins arr fiercenesses and Impetuosities, lest that rush∣ing into the Brain, with an inordinate rapture, should not only disturb its serious Co∣gitations, but stir up enormous Motions of the Appetite, and mad Lusts. For truely, whilst the Spirits inhabiting the Brain, are disposed by the Intellect, from thence pre∣siding within the Imagination nto Series and Orders of Notions, the Blood about to break forth from the Heart, ought very much to be restrained, lest that growing luxu∣rious, it should confound all things by an importune evasion of the Brain, and should agitate the Spirits, called away from this work into Commotions, and various Fluctua∣tions; wherefore, from the immoderate drinking of Wine, for as much as by it the Blood is made more head-strong, and will not be repressed or contained by the Heart, Men become not only unable for Exercising the Acts of Judgment and Reason; but are found very prone to all manner of Wickedness and most filthy Desires. 
 As to the Moral Passions, or by us called Corporeal, we may observe, that the Sensi∣tive Soul is more often and ea lyer affected, by reason of Good or Evil, which is of its Three Corporeal or Moral Pas∣sions. Subject, that is of its Body, which includes its good Habit. Altho also, she hath her proper and occ lt Loves and Aversations, and is bound to shew due obsequiousness to the Rational Soul▪ for as much as it is united to the Body, as it were by a Conjugal Compact; therefore, all other relations being lay ' d aside, it minds only this; Con∣cerning the Care of it  ' tis mostly solicitous, and by reason of its prosperous or adverse Affairs, it is wont to be affected with Pleasure or Grief, and other Passions depending on either of these. 
 For indeed (as we mentioned before) there are two Chief and Primary Gestures of the Sensitive Soul, as often as it is moved from its wonted and Natural State or Condition; to wit, either she stretches forth her self into a greater Compass, by profuse Pleasure, as if it affected to be dilated beyond the bounds of the Body: or be∣ing overthrown by Sorrow or Grief, she is contracted more narrowly, and runs her self within the wonted Sphear of her Emanations: from this twofold Affection of the Sen∣sitive Soul, all the other Passions take their Origine. For truly Pleasure, or an Elation of the Soul, is its most pleasing Constitution, which desiring to gain for it self by any means, it follows all Objects promising it, with Love, Desire, Hope, Faithfulness, Bold∣ness, and other means of getting it; On the contrary, Sadness or a Contraction or De∣jection of this Soul, is a Gesture most ungrateful to it; what things then soever threaten The two Pri∣mary Gestures or Affections of the Soul, are Pleasure and Grief. or induce it, we endeavour to remove away far, by Fear, Hatred, Anger, Desperation, Shame, Pusillanimity, and other motions of shuning it. In the first place therefore, we will speak briefly of Pleasure and Grief, which are according to Aristotle, as it were a forked measure of the Sensitive Appetite, for the double Ladder of Affections, flowing thence, by which she is carried to this or that. 
 First, Pleasure and Grief, because they bend or incline the whole Corporeal Soul after a diverse manner; therefore its two roots, to wit, the Brain and Praecordia, are chiefly affected. When the Soul is stretched forth in Pleasure, and is drawn to its utmost Sphear of Irradiation, the Animal Spirits being carried within the Brain, stir up most They affect the two Roots of the Soul, to wit, the the Brain and the Praecordia. pleasant and pleasing Imaginations; and further, they actuating lively the Nervous Sy∣stem, Cause the Eyes, Face, Hands, and all the Members to shine, and as it were leap forth; Further, then more fully shaking also the Praecordia, by the Influence of the Brain, delivered by means of the Nerves, they thrust forth the Blood more rapidly, and as a Flame more brightly inkindled, they pour it forth with strength thorow the whole Body. On the contrary in Grief, whil ' st the Soul sinks down, contracted into a more narrow space, the Spirits inhabiting the Brain, as it were struck down by flight, and troubled, put on only sad and fearful Imaginations, from whence the Countenance is cast down, the Limbs grow feeble, and the Praecordia being contracted or bound together, by reason of the Nerves carrying the same affection from the Brain, restrain the Blood from its due Excursion, which being therefore heaped up in the same place, with a weight, brings in a troublesome oppression of the Heart, and in the mean time, the Exterior Parts being deprived of its wonted afflux, languish and Contract a paleness. 
 The aforesaid Affections of Pleasure and Sadness, which is wont, the Imagination be∣ing employed, to be poured from thence on the Praecordia, and by and by from that dou∣ble Grief and Plea∣sure first of all arise from the Sense. Root into the whole Corporeal Soul; as to their first Originals, wholly depend upon the Sense. For from the beginning, Sensible Objects affect the Sensory with a certain sweet∣ness or asperity, and there bring to the Spirits a certain Ovation or Triumph, or Confu∣sion: from whence presently the Impression, like a waving of Waters, being Commu∣nicated to the Brain, excites the Spirits inhabiting it, into a consent either of the delight or trouble; and this Affection, being delivered from the Sensory to the Imagination, if it be short, there ends, and is not carried to the Praecordia: but if the stroke, being car∣ried from the Sensible Object, is, like a more strong waving of Waters, impressed more vehemently, it reaches from the Sensory to the Brain, and presently thence to the Breast, that the Motions of the Heart and Blood, are intangled together with the disorder of the Animal Spirits, so as to the first Conceptions of the Affections, as well as Notions, there is nothing in the Imagination, or I may rather say, there is nothing in the Brain or Heart, that was not first in the Sense: But afterwards, when many Idea ' s of Pleasures and Griefs, are impressed on the Phantasie and Memory; then very often without any Afterwards, both from this, and also from the Phantasie, and Memory. previous Sense, or feeling of Pleasure or Sadness, the Imagination being repeated, is wont to excite a Passion of the pleasant or troublesome thing; for when at any time we con∣ceive in our Mind Good or Evil things belonging to us, not only present, but also past, or to come, that Conception employs the Phantasie, and not rarely very much exercises it: Further, being thence transmitted to the Breast, it inordinately either Contracts or Dilates the Breast, and so pours forth the Affection, together with the disturbed Blood, on the whole Body. A Wise and Strong man easily moderates the passions of Pleasure or Grief, lest these being brought, either from the Sensories, or suggested from the Me∣mory, should affect the Phantasie and the Praecordia, by too great a waving; For the Brain and Heart, which are the supports of the Soul, ought not to be moved much, by Some are more Pathetical, or moved than others. the more light Objects of the Senses; nor are these principal Powers, at leisure to be pre∣sent at every small thing: Hence some have born the torture of the Body, or the cut∣ting off a Member, beyond Stoical Patience, undisturbed; whil ' st others (in whom the sensible Species, being above measure increased, vehemently shakes the Praecordia) the Skin scarce wounded, swoon away, or fall into fainting Fits. In like manner it is ob∣served, that some are carried away by a most light Pleasure of the Senses into softness and Luxury, in the mean time others are scarce moved with any Pomp of Delights, or Ex∣quisite Blandishments of Pleasures. It is observ ' d in the fruition of a pleasing Object (which also holds of the appulse of a pleasant, or a painful sensible thing) there happens a certain reciprocation, between the Spirits of the Brain, and the Inhabitants of the Sen∣sory. We imagine the Drinking of excellent Wine, with a certain Pleasure, then we indulge it; the Imagination of its Pleasure is again sharpned by the taste, and then by a reflected Appetite drinking is repeated: So as it were in a Circle, the Throat or Appe∣tite provokes the Sension, and the Sension causes the Appetite to be sharpned, and ite∣rated; this Kind of mutual reciprocation of the Animal Spirits from the Brain to the Sensory, and on the contrary, persists for some time, till the same, like waving of Wa∣ter, How the Affe∣ctions are wont to be iterated, also how allay∣ d or oblitera∣ted. either leisurely vanishes, or is obliterated, by the exciting of a new waving: So in∣deed, Passions and Desires wear out themselves, or are consumed by time, or they are blotted out by the coming of some other Passion. When the Animal Spirits, desiring too much a sensible Delight, do often, and for a long time iterate and intend the Appetite, and Act of the pleasurable Sension, there is need of Reason to come be∣tween, whereby they being changed into Sacred and Moral Meditations, may be called away from their Carnal Genius; which Avocation however, they obey not but difficult∣ly and unwillingly; for as much as to be expanded, and to enjoy pleasing Objects, is the Recreation and Food of the Spirits; and to be restrained or kept in, and very much to be employed about the works of the Mind, is to them a Labour, a d a diffi∣cult task.
CHAP. IX. Of the Passions Particularly. COncerning the Number of the Passions, as it hath been variously disputed among Phi∣losophers, so in famous Schools, this Division into Eleven Passions, long since grew The Number of the Passions un∣certain. of use; to wit, the Sensitive Appetite is distinguished into Concupiscible and Irascible▪ to the first, are co nted commonly six Passions, viz. Pleasure and Grief, Desire and Aversion, Love and Hatred; but to the latter five, viz. Anger, Boldness, Fear, Hope, and Desperation, are wont to be attributed: But this distribution of the Affections is not only incongruous, for that Hope is but ill referred to the Irascible Appetite, and Hatred and Aversion, seem rather to belong to this, than to the Concupisci le: But it is also very insuffi ient, because some more noted Affections, as Shame, Pity, Emulation, Envy, and many others, are wholly omitted▪ Wherefore, the Ancient Philosophers did determinate the Primary to a certain Number, then they placed under their several Kinds, very many indefinite Species. Truely the Sensitive Soul, like a Proteus, is wont to be so diversly disturbed and altered, into manifold Kinds, with the various Fluctuation, and divers sorts of Inclination of the Animal Spirits, Blood, and other Humors, that a cense, or view of all the Passions, can scarce be had; But however, that these, if not all, Pleasure and what Affections are subordinate to it. at least the chief of them, may be in some measure discovered; we will her ordain Pleasure and Grief fo the extreams, or the opposite bounds of the Inclinations of the Corporeal Soul, then we will consider, after what manner, the Objects belonging to ei∣ther▪ Love, Hope, Boldness, &amp;c. by what means soever may be applied, and what sorts of Impressions they are wont to fix on the Spirits, Blood, and solid Parts. The Corporeal Soul therefore, affecting Pleasure as the greatest height of its felicity, in which it would acquiesce, is moved at the appearance of any Good: if it be to come, and contrary to opinion, by and by for the getting it, Desire or Love arises; if with Opinion, Hope and Boldness; if Opinion esteems Fruition hopeless, Desperation is raised up; if this Good be past, or should be lost by our default, Shamefacedness or Repentance is brought in; if it be possess d by others, Emulation, and Envy; Love is busied about it being taken absolute, without respect to time or possession. Besides also there are other respects and habitudes of appearing Good, able to excite many other Affections with ease. In like manner on the contrary side, Grief or Trouble, is a Sickness of the Sensitive Soul, and a Disposition very much in∣grateful Grief with the Affections sub∣ordinate to it. to it; Wherefore, at all the Objects apparently threatning its Induction, the Soul variously Contracts her self, and is inclined hither and thither, that she might shun the approaches of the threatning Evils: wherefore there are so many Affections respecting Grief, and Subordinate to it, as there are means by which the Sensitive Soul, or the Disposition of the Spirits, composes her self for the shaking off or the shunning of any Evil. Hatred is busied about Evil taken absolutely; that being absent, we prosecute with Aversion, by and by about to come with Fear; and unworthily brought, with An∣ger; Hatred, Aver∣sion, Fear, &amp;c. falling upon our selves, we sustain it with sadness; inflicted on our Friends, with Pity. There are besides, many other Appearances of approaching Evil; for the shun∣ing of which, the Soul is compelled into many Metamorphoses, and at the same time draws into the like Gestures, as it were Mimical, the Humors and Members of the Body, and oftentimes the Rational Soul it self: As it would be a business very tedious, and of immense Labour, to rehearse all the Kinds of Passions, and to unfold them, we have designed therefore to speak only of the Chief Species of the Passions, with their manner of affecting, in respect both of the Body, and also of the Superior Soul. 
 Love and Hate follow next, and as it were at the back of Pleasure and Grief: because the Sensitive Soul, being greatly prone, as hath been said, to Pleasure, Prosecutes all Next to Plea∣sure and Grief, are Love and Hatred. things apparently Good, without respect to Circumstances, with an Universal and most ample Affection of Love; in like manner, shunning Grief or Trouble; it hates and de∣tests all things apparently Evil, which may seem to induce Evil by any manner of way. 
 The Good exciting Love, is objected after a twofold manner; to wit, either to the Sense, or the Opinion: As to the first, Objects which consist of Particles Congruous The Objects of these, are Sen∣sible or Imagi∣nary things. and Curiously fitted to the Sensory, so that they stroke gently the Spirits there flowing, and cause them to run and to rejoyce together, these bring forth a desirable Sension, whose Impression being transmitted, by the passage of the Nervous Processes to the Brain, by pleasing there in like manner the Spirits, stirs them up into a pleasant apprehension of the sensible thing, and a desire of it: Hence these Spirits inhabiting the Brain, for the fruition of this Object, try several or manifold Endeavours, viz. Some being reflected towards the Sensory, desire to cleave more closely, and to be united to this Good▪ in the mean time, others flowing towards the Breast, sometimes dilate and open the Bosoms of the Heart, that they may more plentifully receive the Blood, imbued with a certain Virtue of the Object, and enjoy it; and sometimes the Spirits draw together these receptacles By what means desirable things affect the Spi∣rits, and the Blood. of the Heart, and drive outwardly the Blood, as if about to seek something more large∣ly of Good, from the Object, with which being filled at last, it is received by the heart, by and by dilated. Further, in this Affection of Love, concerning the sensible Object, if that it be very strong, the whole Sensitive Soul, or the whole Systasis of the Spirits is inclined towards the beloved thing, lifts up to it the whole Nervous System, and to∣gether with the solid Parts, draws, and leads the Humours; so, when we are indulged with a fair Aspect or Melody, the whole Soul seems to go out at the Eye or the Ear, and A Pleasant Sen∣sation is descri∣bed. neglecting the other Sensories, Conspire with their proper Offices into those Acts of Sension. 
 It is somewhat otherways in Love excited through Opinion, because in this, the Spe∣cies of the Object being represented by the Imagination, is erected as an Idol in the Brain; Love is excited by Opinion. about this many Spirits being employed, at first they weigh the noted Beauty, and its various Ornaments, then they worship it; for whatsoever we love, we imagine it fair, profitable, pleasant, and far above what in truth it is; then by reason of these kind of feigned Attributes, we more earnestly fall in love with the thing beloved; Further, the Spirits inhabiting the Brain, invite all the rest, flowing in the whole Nervous stock, to the worship of the Idol erected by themselves: wherefore the Inhabitants of every Sen∣sory, The Object of this, is set up, like an Idol, in the Phantasie, watching for the works of the Senses, look hither; here also they wait for the Mo∣tions, Executors of the Limbs and Members; but they chiefly inspire the Praecordia with the Love of this Imaginary Good; wherefore, these being variously dilated, and thrust . together, greedily receive, sometimes the Blood imbued as it were with the Character of the thing loved, and as it were imbibe its Influence, sometimes they cast forth that Humor from themselves, towards the Brain, as it were to pick out something from the Image of the Good: This Kind of Image exciting Love, is impressed on the Imagina∣tion, either from the Intellect, or from the Memory and Phantasie, to wit, one of them only, or both together; and from thence a Passion of Love is brought in, either Meta∣physical, or merely Sensitive, or mixt. 
 Much after the same manner as we have said of Love, the evil Appearances also, which excite Hatred or the Aversation of the Soul, are objected to the Sense or Imagination: Hatred excited, by the Sensible or Imaginary Species. As to the former, when any incongruous and improportionate Object, is brought to any Sensory, that distracts and drives the Animal Spirits into a certain Confusion; there∣fore afterwards, when such an Object comes again to the same Sensory, the Spirits mind∣ful of their former hurt, abhor the Contact and approach of this Evil, Contract as much as they can the Organ, and shut up the Passages and Doors; if they are strong they endeavour to remove the Enemy from themselves, by sudden and iterated Excur∣sions; How the first of these Affects the Spirits and Blood. but if they are not able for such Assaults, they convey and hide themselves within, and rej ct the embraces of the hateful thing, by every manner of way. A rejection of the sensible Object happens, when stinking Odors of very unsavoury Meat strike the Pa∣late, or Nostrils; and the like when incongruous things are offer ' d to the sight, or hear∣ing: But especially, when the breaking of the Unity happens to be inflicted by Fire, or a Sword, on the Skin or Flesh. Concerning these repulses of the approaching Object, not only the Spirits flowing in the Sensory, but oftentimes also by the consent of these; others inhabiting the Brain, are irritated into Fury; so that the Imagination conceives a detestation of the thing; and the Praecordia being therefore disturbed, sometimes draws back the Blood, sometimes drives it outward towards the driving away the Evil, and stirs it up to its Expulsion. 
 When an Object apparently Evil, appears therefore hateful to the Imagination, pre∣sently the Phantasie fixes on it a Monstrous and very deformed Image; then stirs up all The Imaginary Evil affects both the Blood, and Spirits. the Spirits, implanted both in the Brain and the Nervous Appendix, into a Detestation of this Imaginary Spectre, from hence the Brows are contracted, the Teeth gnash to∣gether, and the Face is writhed; but especially the Praecordia, variously open and shut themselves, that they might Eventilate the Blood, by driving in up and down, and Conserve it free from every Influence or Tincture of this Object. 
 After this manner, the Passions of Love and Hatred are employed about Good and Evil, taken absolutely, and almost Indifferently; or rather about their Idea ' s: to wit, the Sensitive Soul, beholding the Image of appearing Good, received from the Sense or the Imagination, and admitting it into it self, presently she embraces it with a certain strictness, as it were with open and infolded Arms, and endeavours to be intimately united to it: But it rests not long in this fruition; for if this Image of Good be only Love and Hate, are transitory Passions. Imaginary, and being embraced, vanishes like a Cloud, taken for Juno, the Soul, sensi∣ble of her Error, quickly lets go her empty Embraces: yea, if that Good were solid, after some time, its fruition brings forth a loathing, and the Complacency of the Ob∣ject at first amiable, grows cold, by the enjoyment; and it is esteemed troublesome. For indeed it is so order ' d, that we esteem nothing long in this Life, but being always wanting, whatsoever is obtain ' d, we esteem less, seeking after new things; wherefore, we are perpetually incited to the desiring of absent Good, and to the flying from Evils hanging over us. Love or lasting Charity, is a Divine Passion, almost proper only to Quickly chang∣ed into Desire, and Aversion. Heaven, as Hatred, standing and endless, is an Affection merely Diabolical, and ought to be esteemed peculiar to Hell. But in most Mortals, these are presently changed into Desires or Aversions; because the desire of any absent Good, which we seem to want, or the declining of any approaching Evil, obliterate the Idea of any Good or Evil be∣fore affixed to the Sensitive Soul, and adhering to it; even as the following waves sup up the former. 
 In truth the Sensitive Soul is chiefly employed with Desires and Aversions; these are The Soul is chiefly employed by these. perpetually suggested by heaps from our wants, either true or imaginary, and a very infinite Company or Succession of them exist. Concerning our Indigencies, from which these Passions are drawn, it is to be observed, that they proceed either from the Sense, or from Opinion, and so peculiar Desires or Aversions are excited: As to the former, Both proceed, either from the Sense, or Opi∣nion. the Animal Spirits in every Sensory, watch as so many hungry Guests expecting the Ap∣proach of an Object congruous to them, as it were food; to the meeting and snatching of which, they are often wont to go as it were to meet it, and be carried quite beyond the Confines of their Subject. But that the Spirits residing in the Organ of every of the The desire of a sensible thing, is excited, either from Natural Instinct, or from Custom. Senses, do greedily Covet after this manner the sensible Object, as their Prey, happens by the mere Instinct of Nature, or is procured by Custom: The former is discerned, when hunger or thirst require the Supplies of Meat and Drink, and when the Coldness of a naked Body requires Cloathing: These sort of Desires, which Necessity puts upon Nature, are easily satisfied, and what are sufficient for the maintaining of Life, and ob∣tained after this manner; to wit, the Animal Spirits labouring under a defect, in this or The former is moderate, and easily satisfied. that part, do variously Contract, and so affect with a sense of trouble the Nervous Bodies, in which they flow, which Impression being presently Communicated to the Brain, it stirs up the Spirits inhabiting it into an Appetite or Desire, and then an in∣flowing being made into the appropriate Nerves; into a Prosecution of the desired thing; all this is performed without the Image of the Object, increased by the Imagination, also without any Perturbation known in the Praecordia, or the Blood. 
 It is much otherwise concerning sensible Desires got by Custom; for when as a Frui∣tion Desire got through Custom, despising mode∣rate things a∣spires to new things. once happens to the Spirits inhabiting this or that Sensory, of a more pleasant Ob∣ject, having moderate things in Contempt, afterwards desire the same, and being not long Content therewith, still aspire to others more pleasant; so the Palate being ac∣customed to more delicate Victuals, loaths every thing unless spiced Aliments, and pre∣pared with most exquisite Sawce: In like manner may be observed, concerning the Smel∣ling, Sight, Hearing, and other Sensitive Functions; to wit, that the Appetite, proper to any of them, (for as much as it once exceeded what sufficed Nature) is always carried to more excellent Objects, and they for the most part only fresh; the reason of this seems to be, that the chief Pleasure of the Sensitive Soul, consists in a more lively Mo∣tion, and larger Expansion of the Spirits implanted in every part; but such a Motion of them, depends very much upon the Excellency, also the Variety, and Change of the Ob∣jects. For whatsoever moderate or too familiar thing happens to the Spirits, it little The reason de∣clared, Because the A∣gent and Pa∣tient, ought to be unlike. affects them; for every motion supposes a Superior, and a Virtue of the Object, some∣what unlike to the Agent; wherefore, when any Object by daily use obtains a Simili∣tude, or Equality with the Spirits, that is less apt to move them: therefore that the Acti∣vity, or the lively unfolding of the Spirits (which is the Effectress of Pleasure) may be continued a long time, leaving the Fruition of every old and worn-out Good, it always tends to new and more high things: After this manner, thô every Organ of Sense puts forth Desires, peculiar and proper to themselves, it reiterates them with a perpetual change; but for as much as Objects applied through Corporeal Contact, rather than by Effluvia, affect more vehemently the Sensory; therefore the greatest Company of De∣sires, arising from the Sense, are wont to be referred to Luxury, or Lust. The Desires of the Spirits dwelling in the other Sensories, for as much as they take only the Spe∣cies, or the little Bodies, falling off from sensible things, and less thick Em∣braces; The Desires of sensible things, tend chiefly to Luxury or Lust. therefore they are more temperate, and are often directed to bet∣ter uses. 
 But our wants are chiefly Imaginary, and proceed from Opinion, and from hence a most plentiful Crop of Desires grows up. For indeed, every Man breaths after Felicity, Phantastic De∣sires are im∣mense. or after a certain Divine State; wherefore, it seeks very much things apparently Good, which are said to Conduce to this State, and endeavours to obtain them; But having followed certain Goods, it finds not the desired Satisfaction in them; therefore it seems to want others, and then again others. So, for as much as Men always tend to the high∣est Good, or last end, and that he attains it not in his life-time, there is a Necessity of in∣finite Wishes, and Desires concerning the intermediate Goods: Hence it is, that what∣soever another has, yea, whatsoever of Good the Phantasie can conceive or feign, pre∣sently we believe we have need of it, and therefore we desire it, and wish for it. So, though there is an immense Company of Concupiscible things, yet as most Men place But are chiefly carried to Ri∣ches or Honors. their felicity in Riches or Honours, hence the Chief Species of Desires arising from Opi∣nion; and therefore not to be satisfied, are Covetousness and Ambition. 
 As to Aversion, this Passion seems only to be the former inversed, and in like manner, to take its Original, either from a certain Defect, perceived by the Sense, or taken Aversion is ex∣cited either from the Sense, or from Opinion. from Opinion; for a Sense or Opinion of want, calls to either, a declination of the same manner of State: Wherefore, when the Animal Spirits in the Sensories, are de∣prived of the Enjoyment of a necessary Good, or of what they were before accustomed to, they either conceive, or set before them the approach of its Contrary, and these being very unquiet, let go the Embraces of every present Object, and set themselves to perform, or enter into a new Confederation; until either the Sense or the Opinion, shall detect some apparent Good, to the desire and following of which, the same Spi∣rits are busied; And so Aversion, being for the most part a Passion of it self Vain, and This Passion be∣ing frail, is soon hanged into De∣sire. quickly perishable, terminates in the desire of Good, that may supply the Defect so Carefully shun ' d. 
 Having shown after this manner for what Causes, and upon what Preparations or fore Occasions, the Sensitive Soul enters into Passions of Desire and Aversion: Let us now see after what manner or ways of Gesticulations or Gestures, she is Composed in ei∣ther Affection. As to Desires begun from the Organs of the Senses, it is observed, that whil ' st the Spirits there implanted, are carried towards the absent Object, all frui∣tion Sensible Desire affects both the Spirits and the Blood. being left, they, as it were naked and destitute of all helps, like Beggars ask an Alms, which as they most greedily desire, as it were about to take by force that Good, they exceed the limits of their Subject; and oftentimes, when the Desire is vehement, almost the whole Soul is drawn into Parties, and by a certain going out from the Body, wanders towards the desired thing, or at least emits a Portion of it self. That it is fo, it plainly appears, in that mad affection of Lust, in which the genital Humor, contain∣ing Fragments picked from the whole Soul is poured forth. In like manner, in a pleasant Sight, Sweet Odor, and most pleasing Harmony, the Animal Spirits, as it were lifted up, role together out of the Sensories towards their Objects: but on the contrary in Aversion, they betake themselves inward, and sometimes forsake the Senso∣ries themselves. 
 As to desires excited by reason of the Opinion of want, the Sensitive Soul being im∣patient What Altera∣tions Imaginary Desire brings upon them. of a Lot so poor, becomes very instable and unquiet, all the acquired Goods of its Body, it neglects and disesteems, also refuses to hearken to the dictates of Reason; yea being altogether precipitate in desires, she always looks outward, and as it were with wings is ready to fly to this or that apparent Good; hence, by the disorder of the Spi∣rits, flying hither and thither th Nervous Parts are variously distracted, and Men betray their desires by their Countenance, and going; also the Breast and the Praecordia being moved together, the Blood, like the Sea working with the winds, is compelled into va∣rious Fluctuations, that those affected sometimes grow Pale, and sometimes are over∣spread with redness; also, from the same Blood, entring inequaily and impetuously the Confines of the Brain, succeed inconstancy of Judgment, and frequent Changes of a The Fluctua∣tion of the Mind. thing proposed; as sometimes they will do this, anon that, as if ten Minds were together by the Ears in one Man. Plant. Hope and Fear. 
 According to the aforesaid Characters or Scheams, the Sensitive Soul is composed, about absent Good and Evil, and not quickly about to come; but when these seem to be at the Doors, the Soul alters her Position, and is respectively urged with Hope or Fear: Concerning which, First it is observed, that these Passions do not as the forementioned proceed equally from the Sense and the Imagination, but are founded only on Opinion; from whence, after entring into the desire of any thing, the Spirits being Solicitous concerning the following of it, and as it were depressed, when they upon some other Occasion, as the Drinking of Wine, are a little elevated with the fruition of another pleasing Object, and they begin to strengthen Opinion, forthwith doubtful desire is changed into a certain Confidence, that we hope shortly to possess the desired Good: In like manner, when as Av rsion beholds the absent Evil a long way off, the depression of the Spirits places it near, and by and by Causes a fear of its being about to come upon Succeed to De∣sire, and Aver∣sion. them. Indeed, Hope and Fear, are very near of Kin to Desire and Aversion, and either of these Symbolical Affections, denote only the more near, or more remote approach of the same Object. 
 As to what appertains to the Provision and Exercise of Hope, when we desire greatly The Provision of Hope. any absent Good, and that an Opinion arises, that we shall shortly obtain it, presently the Animal Spirits, who first like Soldiers sent before, carefully seek after, and observe the willed thing, forthwith returning towards the Soul, bring News of the Coming of its Guest, and prepare a Reception for it; wherefore the whole Soul is presently brought into an Expectation of its coming; all the Doors of the Senses are opened, that this Good, with all its Train, might enter thorow open Gates: In the mean time, the Its Object, both the Sense, and the Imagination. Spirits inhabiting every Sensory, are prepared to go forth to salute this approaching; the Imagination doth forestall its Entrance; to wit, this frames an Idea of the wish ' d for and coming Good, which it places within its Borders, as in a Throne, and confers on it Adornments and Splendor, borrowed from the Phantasie. Moreover, the are Careful for a part of its Reception; for they being actuated with a more full Influx of Spirits, send forth the Blood more lively into the Exterior Parts, as it were for the meet∣ing of this new Guest; hence, any one being full of Hope, feels in his whole Body, a certain Inflation, with the Spirit and Heat plentifully poured forth: Then, if by any ac∣cident, Affects both the Spirits and the Blood. an occasion of fear or doubting is brought in, presently a sudden girding toge∣ther in the whole, with a certain putting down of the Spirits, and a sinking of the whole Soul, ensues. 
 For in the Passion of Fear, the Sensitive Soul being first stretched out, being struck by A Character of Fear. the nearness of the approaching Evil, and being as it were prickt on every side, for as much as she conceiving her self taken by the Enemy, cannot fly away into this or that Part, she enters into her self, and that the Animal Spirits may be pressed together, she is Contracted most strictly; if the Affection be vehement, whil ' st the Animal Spirits sud∣denly go back, from the Superficies of the Body, they greatly bind up at the same time the Pores and Passages, as it were fastning the Doors, to shut out the Enemy: from this Constriction, the Pores of the Skin being drawn inward, oftentimes succeeds an erection How it Affects the Spirits, and all the Facul∣ties. of the hairs, or the hair standing an end; then the same Spirits being acted into Confu∣sion, they are inhibited from performing the wonted Offices of their Functions, and not only want the helps of Reason; but sometimes the Locomotive Faculties fail, yea by a resolution or loos ' ning of the Nerves, made in the Bowels, oftentimes the Excrements involuntarily flow out. Further, when the Animal Faculty languishes so much, the Mo∣tion of the Praecordia is tyred; hence the Blood stagnating within the Bosoms of the How the Blood. Heart, oftentimes a swouning follows: and when therefore it is not carried lively enough into the outward Parts, a Coldness and Paleness succeeds in them. In a sudden fear, we feel a certain stiffness, whence  ' tis commonly said, that the Blood is curdled in the Body; but this happens, because, whil ' st the Nervous Parts compassing about the Blood-carrying Vessels, are suddenly bound together, they at the same time repress the Blood from its Excursion, and so stop or plainly invert its Cir∣culation. 
 In the mid ' st of fear, lest the Spirits being driven too much into flight, the Sensitive Soul should be wholly loosned, Reason is wont to interpose something of Hope, and so It often passes into Despera∣tion. by degrees to lift up the dejected Spirits, and to animate them to stay, so that this Pas∣sion being alleviated by such a remedy, may more easily pass over; but if by the strong Evil falling on one, all means of Hope be cut off, then a greater Affection, to wit, Desperation, comes in the place of Fear, in which for the most part, this Soul yielding her self overcome, wholly sinks down, and being half dead, is drowned in her proper Body, as in a Sepulcher, or if she retains any strength, presently being carried into Confusion, all things being turned upside down, she Contracts, Melancholy, or Madness. 
 As Desperation follows Fear, all helps being cut off; so Hope, when it is joyned to more, and more certain, of the same, passes in Audaciousness: And in this Affection, In like manner Hope into Au∣daciousness. the Sensitive Soul swells up, and opposes her self dauntless to any ensuing Evil; where∣fore, the Spirits Guardian, by a more strong Connexion of themselves, every where ex∣tend the Muscles, and strengthen them, by a more full Inspiration, to the bearing or resisting any thing; hence the Breast being inlarged, and then strongly bound together, a bigger Voice is sent forth; the Fists being Contracted, the Arms lifted up, the Head erected, the Face grim and threatning, the Neck swollen, and the rising up, or the stretchings forth of other Parts, shew the Animal Spirits in the whole Body, unfolded and prepared for Battel, as if about to enter into Conflict: In the mean time, the Prae∣cordia being moved most strongly, by a more full influx of the same Spirits, notably ra∣rifie the Blood, and like Lightning, send it forth impetuously, and drive it into the out∣ward Parts. 
 Anger is of some Kin to Boldness, in which the Sensitive Soul, by reason of the Evil unworthily brought to it, at the same time is made sad, and grows hot; wherefore, as To which An∣ger is of Kin. she Contracts her self by reason of Sadness, so presently girding her self for Revenge, she is dilated; therefore, as here divers Contractions come together, this Passion is per∣formed with a mighty Perturbation of Spirits, and of the Blood: for those affected, at the beginning wax Pale, by and by they are overspread with Red; the Forehead is The Character of Anger. wrinkled, the Lips quiver, the Tongue murmurs, the Countenance is sometimes cast down, sometimes lifted up, and threatning, but the Praecordia are especially agitated, with a notable heat and boyling up of the Blood: which kind of Various, and sometimes Contrary Symptoms, may easily be resolved; to wit, that the Soul at once conceiv∣ing Sadness and Indignation, like the Sea working with opposite winds, has Floods excited from every Coast, and striking one against another among themselves. 
 Besides the Eleven Affections even now recited and unfolded, according to the Vul∣gar Opinion, there remains some others, excited according to the other manifold Affe∣ctions There are more than Efeven Affections. and Gestures of the Corporeal Soul; the chief of which are Pity and Envy, Glory or Boasting, and Shame; which however are very near related to the afore re∣cited, or are Composed out of them. For Pity is made out of Love and Sadness, by reason of the Evils of a Friend: On the contrary, Envy out of Hatred and Sorrow, by Pity, Envy, Boasting, reason of the Good things of an Enemy: Glory or Boasting, is a certain kind of Joy and Exultation, conceived by reason of an Opinion of our Good, had from others; and Shame, &amp;c. Shame is a certain Sadness and Consternation of the Soul, by reason of an Opinion of our ills conceived by others. Further, Concerning this Passion  ' tis observable, that A Character of Shame. when the Corporeal Soul being abashed, is enforced to repress its Compass, she not∣withstanding being desirous, as it were to hide this Affection, drives forth outwardly the Blood, and stirs up a redness in the Cheeks, to wit, the Sensitive part of the Soul, as it were hiding its head, puts before her self a Portion of the Vital or the Bloody Soul, under whose wings somewhat stretched forth, the Confusion might be hid.
Besides we take notice, that the Corporeal Soul is not only affected by Objects, and their Impressions, and compelled into various Gestures, and the aforesaid Passions; but besides, she hath certain innate Dispositions, by reason of which, by the mere instinct of Nature, without any Influence of the Object, she puts forth her self, and is excited into certain Emanations or Spontaneous forces: Of which sort are first an amplification or Innate Affe∣ctions. inlarging the Individual Person, and then a Propagation of its Kind. It is Natural for every Animal without example or teaching, to seek for, and swallow down its food, both that the Body may be daily increased to its due Magnitude, and also that the Soul, being daily supplied with a new Store of Spirits, may be co-extended to the Body, and Viz. An Inlarge∣ment of the In∣dividual, be able lively to perform the Acts of her Functions. Then, as soon as the Li eaments both of the Body and Soul being sufficiently drawn forth, and the Bulk and Compass of either are Compleated; some Animal Spirits flowing over from the work of the Indivi∣dual, A begetting of its Kind. begin to abound, and then being separated into the Genital Parts, with a subtil Hu∣mor picked from the whole Body, destinated for the Propagating the Species, as it were in a Store-house, and there layed up, they form there the Idea of a new Animal; which afterward is transferred into a convenient Womb, to be perfectly formed. When the Seeds of a new Animal are so lay ' d, the whole Corporeal Soul is drawn with all its Pow∣ers into this work of Propagating the Species, more than of the Conserving of the Indi∣vidual: wherefore the Blood supplies the Testicles, no less than the Brain, with a most subtil and noble Matter for the store of Animal Spirits: and when after too great Ex∣pence, the Spirits are deficient in them, that presently the loss may be made up, often∣times the Brain and Nerves are defrauded of their due Pension, and are suffered to lan∣guish, that in the mean time the Blood may pour forth more plentifully spirituous Parti∣cles Venus an Ene∣my to the Brain and Nerves. into the Spermatic Vessels. Yea it is thought, that it doth sometimes snatch the Animal Spirits from the Brain it self, which it bestows on the Genitals, in the Act of Venery: For it appears so, when by immoderate Venery, the Brain presently labcurs with a want of Spirits; for as much as from thence there is no passage for them, to the Spermatick Vessels, but by the Blood; if that the Animal Spirits superabound with a Prolifick Humour, Swelling up within the Genital Parts, presently the whole Corporeal Soul, as it were incited, to the begetting of a young one, is inclined to Concupiscence or Lust: The Incentives of Lust, even against the Mind, are sought for, and they are The madness or fury of Lust, lay ' d hold on, however brought by any Sense; the Blood boils up, the Marrow in the Back grows hot, the Eyes are inflamed, the Genitals are inflated, so that there wants little (unless Reason coming between recalls her, and Prohibits her from the Beastliness of it) but that the whole Corporeal Soul, on every occasion, should be dissolved in Lust. In these kind of Affections of Concupiscence, may be most clearly discerned the di∣stinct Strivings, and contrary Endeavours of two Souls: because, whil ' st the Corpo∣real Soul being incited to Lust, inclines her self wholly towards the Genital Members, and Compels thither greater floods of the Blood, and greater store of the Animal Spi∣rits, the Heart and Brain being left wanting of Provision; on the contrary, the Supe∣rior Reason suppres∣ses its flowing. Mind, rising up, and shewing the Commands of Reason and Religion, shews a receipt to the other, and Commands that the Animal Spirits return to their tasks, to be performed within the Brain, and also that the raging Blood should be recalled towards the Praecordia, and being there suppressed, might be restrained from disorderly Excur∣sions; Hence, the flame of Lust being re-extinct for a time, and the Powers of the In∣ferior Soul being reduced into Order, the Acts of Sobriety, Prudence, and of other Sci∣ence, and Discipline may be exercised; but if the reins of Reason be let loose, or new in∣centives of Lust are brought, the Corporeal Soul, shaking off the yoak, snatches her self again to the like Enormities. 
 There remain yet some other Affections of the Corporeal Soul, as Sleep and Watch∣ing, Grief and Pleasure, excited in private Members; which, for as much as they respect not the whole Soul at once, but this or that Portion of the Body, or Peculiar Powers of it, and chiefly the Sensitive or Locomotive; therefore we shall handle these anon, and shall next proceed to the Sense and its Kinds. 
 CHAP. X. Of the Sense in General. THe Vital or Flamy part of the Corporeal Soul, being rooted in the Blood, seems not much to know or perceive what things are offer ' d outwardly to, or acted inwardly The Blood is a∣nimated, but hardly sensible. in the Body: So, altho the Blood have life, yet  ' tis scarce sensible or knowing, for this which ought to be always employed, with a perpetual Motion, and even inkindling, for the Offices for the sustaining of Life, cannot be at leisure to mind any smaller Matters, or outward Accidents. Indeed great Passions also in some measure disturb the Blood, and pervert and variously drive it from its wonted Course, and like violent Blasts, shake not only the Leaves or Body of the Tree, but also sometimes pull up the Roots out of the Earth: So whatsoever mutations o alterations happen to the Blood, proceed e her from the Complexion of its Liquor being changed, or from the mpulse or incitat of the containing Bodies. But the other Sensitive part of this Soul, which being diffused within the Brain and stock of Nerves, is Co-extended or equally forth with The lucid part of the Soul, feels or perceives the impulse of all Objects, and is moved by them. the Organical Body, and almost with all its Parts, is affected with every Contact, or with the meeting of other Bodies, she perceives all Impressions either outwardly objected, or raised up within; and as she is moved by these, every where diversly inflicted, she indues according to the various impulse of the Objects, various Gestures and Species in her self, and also draws the Members and Parts of the Body it self, with her wholly into the same Figures and Motions. For indeed it is the Energie or the Actio the Soul it self, from which every Function of the animated Body primarily and chiefly If at any time any Stroke or Impression be inflicted any where to the animated Body, presen ly a certain Fluctuation or waving is stirred up in the Hypostas s of the whole Soul, or of the struck Member; by which, some Animal Spirits of subtil Particles, shut up in the Organical Parts, as a blast of Wind in a Machine, being struck, run hi her and thither, and so produce the Exercises of Sense and Motion in the whole Body, or respective Parts. 
 Truly, among the various Gestures of the Corporeal Soul, by which, she altering her Species or Hypostasis, brings a change to the containing Body, the Sensitive and Loco∣motive Powers obtain the chief place; for as much as they are Common almost to all living Creatures, at least to the more perfect, to which also all the resh of the Faculties may easily be reduced. These are the chief Advancers of the animated Body, Sense and Mo∣tion, are the chief Advancers of the animated Body. upon which all the other Wheels of this Self-moving Divine Machine depend. 
 But the Internal and next efficient Cause, both of Sense and Motion, are the Hypostasi of the Sensitive Soul, or the Animal Spirits, instilled from the inkindled Blood into the Brain, and from thence diffused into the Nervous Stock▪ which being distributed from The efficient Cause of either, are the Animal Spirits. the Brain, as the Fountain thorow the Nerves to the whole Body imbue, irradiate, and blow up all the Parts, and bring a certain Tensity or stretching forth to each; so that the passages of the Nervous Bodies, like Cords stretched forth straitly on every side, from the Brain and its dependencies, reach forth into all the Exterior Parts, by which, so stretch ' d forth, and actuated by a certain Continuity of the Soul, if one end be struck, presently the stroke is perceived through the whole, so that every Intention conceived within the Brain, presently performs the designed work, in every Member or Part; and on the other side, every impulse or stroke, which is inflicted from without to any Mem∣ber, or to the Sensitive Body, is communicated instantly to all the Parts within the Head. If that an Impression or force tends from the Brain outwards, thorow the A most swist Communication of them, im∣planted within all the Parts. Nerves into the moving Parts, Motion is produced; but if they being made outwardly, are directed inwards towards the Brain, Sense arises. But whil ' st either of these are performed, it is not so to be understood, (as is commonly asserted) asi the fame Spirits make hast, and leap back presently, as it were from one end of the Course or Circuit to the other; but as the Soul is stretched forth, thorow the whole, with a certain Conti∣nuity, its Particles, viz. the Spirits contiguous one with another are set like an in Array; for they after a Military fashion, whil ' st they move not from their station, and keep Order, perform their Offices; and whether they be set in Battel Array, or on the Watch, they perform the Commands carried outward from the Brain, themselves being almost immoveable, and effect Motion, and deliver presently to the Brain the news of any sensible thing impressed, whereby Sensation is made. So indeed, the same Ani∣mal Spirits, thô with an opposite and inverse tendency, and aspect of them, cause Mo∣tion An opposite ten∣dency of them, effect both Sense and Motion. and Sense: But both Faculties, as to the Exercises of their Acts, require something divers Organs; yea, the Animal Spirits planted within the same; for the performing the divers Offices of their Faculties, are ordered with a various Affection, and with a different manner of Orders. That each of these may be the more clearly illustrated, we shall first of all speak of the Sense, and of whatsoever belongs to it both in General and in Special, and then afterwards concerning Motion. 
 The Sense, as it is taken in a more strict acceptation (viz for the proper Function in animated Bodies, and by which they are distinguished from inanimates) is wont to be What the Sense is. described after this manner; That it is the faculty of perceiving Sensible objects. Becau e The approach of the sensible Ob∣ject, is made ei∣ther by contact, or by Effluvia ' s sent forth, or by reflected and e∣percussed Parti∣cles of the Air, Breath, or Light. the Sensitive soul, as hath been said, being apt to be affected or moved by every Cont ct or Impulse of an exterior Body, forces its constitution to vary in the whole, or in part, according as it is struck: But exterior Bodies, because they consist of Particles, of a various Kind, and diversly figured, therefore, when some are applied to others, their approaches one among another, are not always made after one and the same manner, but after a manifold manner, and with notable variety; to wit, either by Corporeal Con∣tacts, or by Effluvia ' s falling from them, or by Particles of Air, Breath, or Light, reflected from them, issuing from them on every side like Darts. Further, and to every one of these Kinds, many Species are attributed: Because, not only Concretes, but also various little Bodies of the same Subject, shew and impress manifold Types of their Contacts; several of which, as they are received and so known distinctly, by living Creatures, the Sensitive Soul using Corporeal Organs, hath many Sensories, fitted for such variety of Objects, and divers representations of things; in which several, both As these several are made ma∣nifold, they re∣quire divers Sensories. the Conformation of the Pores, as also the disposition of the Animal Spirits, are pro∣portionated to the little Bodies, sent in from the Object, which are only of one Kind, fitly to be received. By this means sensible Impressions, at least that may be of use to any Animal, are perceived, and from this manifold way of Sension, proceeds the Know∣ledge of all things, according to that of the Philosopher, All Knowledge is made by the Sense; when on the contrary, if Bodies and their Particles, should strike the Systasis of All Knowledge from Sense. the naked Soul, or part of it, always after one and the same manner, nothing at all would be known, because one thing or parts, from another, or these from those Members, would not be distinguished. Wherefore, that all the chief Objects and their Accidents, might be distinctly noted, it is so provided, that some Particles strike this Organ and not that; so that they affect their several respective Sensories only, the rest being un∣touched. 
 From hence it is clear, that  ' tis necessary that there should be many Sensories in per∣fect In Perfect Ani∣mals, there ought to be ma∣ny Senses. Animals; which may perform divers Actions, both for the preserving of Life, and propagating the Kind, and also for the knowing many things, and chiefly for the em∣bracing of what things are Congruous to themselves, and for the shunning all incon∣gruous things; for these things  ' tis needful, that the Sensitive Soul should be affected by the Objects, after a various manner, and so perceive their manifold Influencies. How vile their Condition is, and how hard their Lot, that are gifted with the only sense of the Touch, appears from the Life and Operation of the more imperfect Animals, as That one of the Touch or Feel∣ing, suffices not. Oysters and Lympins; then besides, how alse is the Opinion of some, who say, That every Sense in all Animals is the feeling only; for althô every Affection is made by Contact, from e Object to the Soul; yet neither is the same thing still employed, nor received after the same manner; but how many types soever of sensible things are to be found, so many Counterfeits remain in the Sensories. 
 Nevertheless it may here be rightly Quaeried, How it may be? for as much as the whole Hypostasis or Contexture of the Soul, is made up of most subtil and also most highly moveable Particles, that every one of them wheresoever implanted, are not indifferently How the same Spirits receive sensible Species so very divers. moved, by every sensible stroke; when especially the Interior frame of the Soul, which is Common to all the Sensories, receives ths Affections of every one, and so is me∣diately affected by every sensible thing: I say, why the Spirits implanted in the Eye, do not equally perceive Sounds and Smells, as they do Colours? for as much as they in∣habiting the streaked Bodies, discern both these, and all other sensible things. 
 For the resolving of this Problem, these two things are to be supposed, to wit, first, That this may be done are re∣quired, That the Structure of every Sensory is so made, according to its Pores and Passages, that Particles only proportionate to them may be admitted in: wherefore as Light, and the Images of thing , pass thorow Glass, and clear Bodies▪ not dark Bodies; so the same are received only by the Eyes, and not by the other Sensories: The same Reason holds of all the rest. For we may observe, when in the Circumambient Air, or in the At∣mosphere, First a Stru∣cture of the Or∣gan after a di∣verse manner. there are Bodies of a various Nature, and of a divers Configuration, that some things affect this, others that Sensory, and so the things which are of a several Kind af∣fect the particular Organ of the Sense. As for Example, the Particles of most thin Air or Light, which seem to be of a Sulphureous Nature, being reflected from Bodies, Con∣vey (as was said) their Images into the Organs of the Sight or Seeing; the little Bodies of Air which seem to be saline, being repercussed from Solids, shake the Drum of the Ear, by their leaping back; yea, and the same being made clammy by a sweet dew, or moistned, affect the taste; the Particles of the same Air, filled with sweet Exhalations, strike the Nostrils: And lastly, The same stuffed with warm or cold Effluvia ' s, move the Sense of Feeling: But in the mean time, the Particles of the same Air or Element, which are proportionate to one Sensory, are incommunicable to the rest. 
 But Secondly, the Animal Spirits themselves, which reside in the Organs of the Senses, Secondly, a Va∣rious Constitu∣tion of the Ani∣mal Spirits. and that are like Watchmen, are furnished for the respective meetings of the Objects, with a certain peculiar Provision, and an appropriate manner of Disposition: for when some Spirituous Particles, more pure than others, and more subtle exist, some more dull or blunt, others notably moveable, these Naked, those smered with Humor, and marked with many other Affections; it is so provided, that as the Naked Spirits, or those less gifted suffice for the Sense of Feeling, these without any farther indowment are disposed every where in the Membranes, and fibrous Flesh; but the most pure Spirits, and as it were Chrystalline for the Sight, flow into the Eyes; those that are highly moveable are fitted for the Hearing, and the more Viscous, which are fused with a requisite Humour, for the Taste, and Smell. 
 These things being thus premised, concerning the Multiplicity and Difference of the Senses, and the Organs, we will now inquire into Sension it self; by what means, and After what manner Sension is made. after what manner it is performed: Concerning these we thus say in general, that the Object being applied to the Sensory, (whether it be done immediately, or the Particles of the Air or Element coming between) doth impress its Idea or Character on the Spi∣rits implanted in that place; and in the same instant, by a continued Series of the Ani∣mal Spirits, as it were an Irradiation, the Type of its Impression doth pass from the Sensory to the Head; and whil ' st the Spirits actuating the streaked Bodies, are in like manner affected by it, a perception of Sense, begun from the Organ, is formed. 
 That Sight is so performed, Dioptrick Experiments do plainly shew, by which, the All sensible Im∣pressions do beam sorth from all the Organs, into the streak∣ed Bodies. same Species of any Body, by a Glass artificially placed, may be Carried or Reflected hither or thither, and may be figured and beheld at once in several places: why in like manner, may we not Conceive the Image of the Object represented in the Eye, as in a Glass, to propagate its likeness from thence further to the streaked Bodies? But as to the other Sensories the Business seems more hard to be unfolded, because the sensible Spe∣cies, for as much as they are more Corporeal or thicker, cannot be conveyed to the Head with so quick a passage, and almost unperceiveable like Lightning; but as to these, it is to be understood, that althô the Smell, Touch, and Taste, require more near and more Corporeal approaches of the Object, than either the Sight or Hearing; yet the Animal Spirits, which as it were internuncii, are placed within every Organ, and the chief Sen∣sory, equally and as easily transmit the stroke or impulse of every Kind; Because as the Spirits are diffused thorow the whole Nervous System, and thorow the Head it self, as it were with a continued beaming, every Impression by the stroke of the Eye gets sooner from one bound to the other; yet the Character of the Object, is onveyed by the like Motion of their Neighbors, and as it were by a certain waving, even to the streaked Bodies. 
 Hence it follows, that for the Act of Sension, these two things are required. First, That the sensible Species be expressed, so as it may be impressed on the Sensory: And Secondly, In every Sension is required, First, That the Species be im∣pressed on the Sensory. That the Idea of the same Impression, be carried thence, by a like Affection and Motion, by the Spirits flowing in the intermediate passages, to the Common Sensory; for otherwise Sension is not performed, as it appears, when being intent on other things, we take not any notice of any Objects, thô they approach near to the Eyes, Secondly, That it be carried thence, by the passage of the Spirits to the Common Sensory. or the other Organs. 
 But here we may have a Cause of Doubting, how the manifold Species of sensible things, for the receiving of which, many Organs, and those diversly framed, are re∣quired; do all come together within, and are discerned in the same Common Sensory; For it is a wonderful thing, that the same streaked Body, consisting of a make not much unlike, should admit, and know distinctly in it self, the universal Idea ' s of Objects. As How the divers sensible Species are distinctly represented, in the same Com∣mon Sensory. to this we may say, that the Images of things to be perceived by the Sense, are not di∣stinctly painted in the Common Sensory, as on a Table; but every Impression there shown, depends on the Motion, as it were by a certain waving, of some Spirits separate from others, and within these or those peculiar Tracts of them: Nor is it irrational to affirm, that some Spiritual Particles are moved within the Hypostasis of the Sensitive Soul, and her the same Portion of it, whil ' st others lye quiet, lying between them; for it plainly appears, and which afterwards is more largely shown, that within the Body of the Air, the lucid Particles are agitated, whil ' st the rest lye at ease; yea also, that It is shown by an example of the Air, whose divers Parti∣cles have divers carryings forth. Sonorifick, yea and odorous little Bodies, and perhaps many others of another Kind, are moved by a distinct and peculiar Agitation apart by themselves, from the other texture of the Air; for both Images pass thorow, Sounds are poured out, Odors flow, warm or cold Effluvia ' s, and other little Bodies are variously carried; yet notwithstanding, others in the mean time are neither driven by force by some others, nor is the Consi∣stency of the whole Air disturbed by some Singulars. Yea, various Impressions, not on∣ly pass thorow the Air unchanged, but also the Superficies of the Water; for we have Also by the ex∣ample of Water, in which, many wavings be∣ing at once made, are all distinct. observed in a River, or a Fish-pond, when many wavings have been stirr ' d up, by va∣rious and divers strokes together, that all of them, however they meet one another, pass thorow, or cut one another, continue still distinct, and inconfused; why then may we not suppose, that in the Airy Systasis of the Soul, (which also is founded in a Watry Humor) there are Particles of a various and unlike make, and that manifold Species, by their passing thorow, may be at once brought to the Common Sensory, without Con∣fusion? As for Example, Suppose that for seeing most Subtil and as it were Aetherial Particles, others almost Saline and notably moveable for the Hearing, and so for the The like is in the Airy Hy∣postasis of the Corporeal Soul. other Senses, Spirits endowed after this or that manner, to be interwoven together, and every peculiar Sension to be produced, by a particular affection of them; to which it happens, that for the various passing thorow of the Spirits of so diverse a Nature, divers Tracts or Paths are produced, both in the Organ it self, and in the Common Sensory: and so, when the Animal Spirits are affected, which are of this or that Nature apart from others, which are of another Nature, and as there are beamings forth of several For the divers Perceptions of which, together, in the Common Sensory, there are many and distinct. Tracts produced. kinds, as it were within various Inlets or Passages;  ' tis no wonder, if in divers Organs, distinct Acts of Sensions are performed; and that all of them, however different in Kind, and coming together from many ways, are shewn within the same Common Sen∣sory, to wit, the streaked Bodies; because in this Marrowy Part, Spirits of every kind abound, and also passages of every sort of Conformation are found; therefore, every Impression impressed on any Organ from without, may be distinctly represented in this same Body. That it is so, it more clearly appears from hence, because both the streaked Bodies, and the way leading to these, consist of many white Ligatures, which seem as so many soft Nerves, or marrowy Tracts, for the divers ways of receiving the Impressions of sensible Species. 
 When a sensible Impression is brought through the Animal Spirits, being affected by Sensible Impres∣sions, as they are strong or weak, stir up other Powers, either more or fewer. a continued Series, from the Organ to the Common Sensory, if it be light it is there terminated, and the perception of the External Sense quickly vanishes, without any other Affection; but if (which more often happens) the impulse of the Object be stronger, the Sense excited from thence, like the vehement waving of waters in a Whirl-pool, both partly passes thorow the streaked Bodies, and going forward to the Callous Body, it oftentimes raises up two other Internal Senses, to wit, the Imagination and Memory, either one or both of them; and also is partly reflected from them, and from thence, by a declining of the Spirits, leaping into the Nerves, local Mot ons are made. 
 For indeed Impressions of sensible things, from the beginning, furnish both the Ima∣gination, with the Memory and Appetite, and induce the first attempts of local Mo∣tions. All the other Powers of the Soul proceed at first from Sen∣sion. It is first effected, for as much as the sensible Impulse, is often propagated beyond the streaked Body, into the marrowy part of the Brain, or the Cortex, or the extream Confines of it. But local Motions ordinarily succeed to Sension, for as much as the Ani∣mal Spirits being struck back from the bolt or stay of the streaked Bodies, spring up out∣wardly, and as they enter these or those Nerves, by a certain Consequence, or by chance, they excite fortuitous local Motions, or depending on the previous Sense; for in the re∣ciprocal exercise of these Faculties, to wit, of Sense and local Motion, (before Animals are imbued with Phantasie and Memory) almost the whole Animal Function consists; be∣cause Brutes or Men, whil ' st they as yet know not things, want Spontaneous Appetite. So long therefore, they being destitute of the Internal Principle of Motion, move them∣selves or Members, only as they are excited from the impulse of the External Object, and so sension preceding Motion, is in some manner the Cause of it. 
 Therefore in every Sension, the Animal Spirits are moved; and their Motion being excited, in the utmost Sensory, from the approach of the Object, and harmonised accor∣ding The Animal Spi∣rits pass thorow the sensible Spe∣cies; and not the Effluvia of the Object, pe∣netrate even to the head. to its Impression, turns inwards, and (as hath been said) is conveyed to the first or Common Sensory: wherefore it is not to be thought, that the little Body ' s sent from the Object, do penetrate deeply, and enter the inward parts of the Brain it self (as some have asserted); but it suffices, that they being cast forth like Darts from the sensible thing, do affect the Spirits placed in the fore-front; and then, they from thence most swiftly pass thorow, by their Irradiation, the impressed Motion. As to the Parts, with∣in which the Animal Spirits dwelling, do carry thorow, as it were by Pipes and Dioptrick Glasses, the impressed Species of sensible things; they are the Fibres, Nerves, and the Oblong Marrow, and chiefly the tops of it, to wit, the streaked Bodies. The Fibres The bounds and passages, by which, and into which the Spe∣cies pass tho∣row. being stretched forth in every Sensory, as it were Nets spread abroad, take the Particles of the Object, diffused and entring here and there, from which, whil ' st the Spirits im∣planted in those Fibres, are affected, and are marked with the type or shaddow of the Objected thing, forthwith the same Character being expressed, by a continued Series of Spirits, passes forward, thorow the little Pipes of the Nerves, and the Medullary Trunk, into the streaked Bodies, and is there represented as upon a white wall; But the Rational Soul, easily beholds the Image of the thing there painted; or perhaps car∣ried forward beyond into the Callous Body, the Imagination and Phantasie being excited, But after what manner Brutes perceive themselves to feel, and by reason of that Sension, they either imprint it in their Memory, or draw forth the Acts of the Appetite, we have shewn elsewhere. 
 Concerning the number of the outward Senses, we shall not recede from the vulgar The Number of the Senses is well affirmed to be Five. Opinion, affirming them to be Five; for althô in some imperfect Animals, perhaps one Sense or two are only found; and thô it may seem, that the more perfect living Creatures may exercise many more than Five; because it is possible, that the Kinds of sensible things, far exceed that Number; yet it is seen, that those Five Organs of the Senses do abundantly enough supply the wants of all living Creatures: at least it seems good to the great Creator, not to grant to Man more than these, nor perhaps better than brute Beasts have obtained: Hence we may argue, that whereas the first Notions of all Sim∣ple So many, and not more, are requisite. things, are acquired only by the showing of the Sense, and that Man, notwithstand∣ing, is wont from thence to form Complicated Orations and Discourses, beyond what Brutes are able to do, that this is done by the Virtue and Operation of the Rational Soul in him, of which indeed Beasts are wholly destitute. 
 As to the Order or Method, by which we should treat of the Senses, particularly to be consider ' d, if their worth or dignity be respected, it is confessed by all, that Seeing, and then Hearing should by right have the Prerogative; but indeed, because Knowledge more easily, and always more happily, proceeds from more Known things, to things less Known; therefore, I think to begin with the Touch or Feeling, as the most Com∣mon Sense; also for that the formal Reason of which seems to be most easily unfolded. 
 CHAP. XI. Of the Senses in Particular, and first of the touch or Feeling. THe Touch or Feeling, thô it seems a Faculty of a lower Order, and as it were of a more gross Nature, because it apprehends not the object, unless it be brought near, The Sense of Feeling is more thick, but the most ample or large. and as it were pressed with its Arms; yet in some respect, it is more excellent by far than the rest; because this Sense beyond all others, receives and knows the Impressions of many sensible things, and those inflicted with greater variety; and so obtains a most large, and as it were a general Province. For since that the Sensible Qualities so called, are manifold and divers, to wit, Heat and Cold, Moisture and Dryness, Hardness, and Softness, and other Modifications of Bodies, their Make, Motions, Influences and Types, or Figures of Appearance, which is Concretes result from the mixtures and divorces, or the various Transpositions of the Elements, the greatest part of them by much, are the proper Objects of Feeling, and are discerned only by its Judgment, and as it were by its Will. Further  ' tis observ ' d, That the Touch or Feeling, gives notes of Judgment to all the other Senses concerning uncertain Objects: for when the Sight cannot distinguish a Exhibits Signs of Judgment to the rest of the Senses. Ghost or Spectre, from a solid Body, by the tryal of Feeling, presently the thing is put out of doubt; so likewise of the Smelling and Taste, which oftentimes put away sen∣sible things brought to them, and fear their near Embrace, unless first tryed by handling.
But this Power, as it enjoys great variety, as to its Objects, so it hath a most ample Sensory, and equally extended almost with the whole Body; That indeed few Parts, It hath a migh∣ty diffusrve Sen∣sory or Organ. either within or without, but partake of this Sense. Further, this Faculty, for that  ' tis of a general and common use, insinuates it self into the Organs of the other Senses, de∣stinated to the private Office of every one: For both the Tongue and Nostrils, also the Eyes and Ears, perceive heat and cold, hardness and Softness, and other tangible quali∣ties, no less than their proper Objects. If that we should further inquire, what the im∣mediate Organ of Feeling is, in the several Members, or Parts? it may be said, that it is the Nervous Fibres, every where stuffed, and as it were distended with a Company of Animal Spirits; which as the Strings of a Lute, as often as they are struck by the strokes of Tangible things, propagate the Impulse every where received, by the passages of the Which are the Nervous Fibres. Nerves, forthwith to the Common Sensory. For as such Fibres being thickly set, are interwoven in the Skin, the fleshly Pannicle, the Membranes, and Mus ulous Flesh, yea, and with some of the Inwards, so that the Approaches of outward Tangible things, are not only felt in the Palm of the Hand, or the Superficies of the Body, but as often as sharp Humors are brought within into the Bowels, or that Preternatural Contents cause a pulling or hawling; a troublesome Sense of it is felt; wherefore the proper Organ In all the Parts, both External and Internal. of Feeling, is neither the Skin, nor the Flesh, nor the Membranes, as hath been asserted after this manner by some, and after that manner by others; but the Fibres are that Organ, implanted in the whole frame or make of these or those Parts. 
 Althô many sensible Fibres are placed every where thorow the whole Body, also, thô there are divers and manifold Tangible qualities; yet it is not to be thought that these Fibres, that they may be the better fitted for those qualities, are of a different Kind or Which Fibres, thô every where of the same Con∣formation; Conformation; for neither are there some Fibres, by which heat, or others by which cold, or others different from either, by which other Tangible things are perceived; but the same Fibres, are every where alike, and receive and distinctly carry the approa∣ches of every Object, for neither do the sensible Fibres, planted in divers places or parts, acquire a diversity of Office, so that one Member should be the Index of heat, another of cold, or another of a several Tangible thing, but every one indifferently feel almost all Tangible things, from every Fibrous Part. The reason of the difference Yet Exhibit va∣rious Species, according to the various approa∣ches of tangible things. is, because the Fibres, thô of the same nature and frame, enter into divers ways of Con∣tractions or wrinklings, from the various strokes of sensible things; even as the strings of an Harp, from the various strokes of the Musitian, give forth different Sounds; so also, the Fibres, which are the Instruments of Touching, are affected after a different manner, by the various impulse of Tangible things. For it seems, that these are irri∣tated or provoked one way, with heat, and another way with cold, and so from the rest of the Qualities, after a manifold manner; therefore, the Animal Spirits implanted in them, enter into a peculiar way of Gyration or turning round, or of undulation or waving, according to which, the Spirits being harmonized, which flow within the pas∣sage of the Nerve belonging to those Fibres, do dropagate the sa e Figure or Type of their carrying forth, to the Medullary Stock, and by its means, to the Common Sensory. 
 The Tangible Species being impressed after this manner, on the Nervous Fibres, or Tangible Species immediately carried either to the Cerebel, or to the streaked Bodies. the outward Organ of the Touch, are not always carried from thence, or at least not immediately to the same Common Sensory; for we have shewed elsewhere, that some Nerves spring from the Parts of the Brain, and others from those of the Cerebel; where∣fore, when they direct the Impulse, hap ' ning outwardly immediately to the striated or streaked Bodies, these latter convey the Sension from the Fibres, which are planted some∣where more inwards about the Viscera to the Cerebel; from which (without Knowledge of the Animal) oftentimes involuntary Motions are retorted: as when Vomiting follows upon an Emetick Medicine, unknown, and against our Minds. If that this private Sen∣sion belonging to the Cerebel be a little stronger, and vehement passing thorow the same Cerebel, goes further even to the streaked Bodies; as when Medicines provoking the Stomach, more sharply, induce a Sension or trouble about the Heart, or otherways mole∣stious, which they plainly give notice of. 
 Further, when the Tangible Impression arrives first and immediately at the streaked Bodies, if the same be light, it is there terminated, and the sensi le Species presently And from thence goes forward, sometimes to the other Faculties, Viz. the Imag ∣nation, Memory, and Appe e. vanishes; but if the Impulse of the Object be somewhat stronger, it passes further to the Callous Body, and oftentimes to the Shell of the Brain; and therefore their Affections, Imagination, and sometimes Memory, gather ' d from the touch of the thing, succeed: and when, the sensible Species being also dilated to the Common Sensory, a divergency or bending down of the Spirits, from thence is reflected into the same Nerve, or others related to it, so it stirs up local Motions. These sort of Effects are sufficiently known by the Common Proverb, Where the Pain is, there the Finger will be: for it is implanted by Nature in every Animal, to rub or press the place with its finger or foot, where any sense of Trouble or Pain is. 
 As to the Kinds and Differences of Feeling, both are taken, either from the Objects, or from the various affection of the Sensory: the ways or means of the former, are so The Kinds and Differences of Feeling, are ei∣ther, In respect of the Object; manifold, that they cannot easily be recounted; for hither ought to be referred (as we said but now) the universal Tangible Qualities; By Tangible Qualities we understand here, the various habitudes of Natural Bodies, which arise from the Crasis and Dispo∣sition of the Elements, of which they are made; as also from their Intestine Motion, or Effluvia ' s variously appearing in themselves; which kind of Modifications of Bodies, the Sense of Feeling chiefly finds out, and makes their knowledge or marks so certain, that when we do not believe the Scrutiny of the other Senses, we are wont to rest satisfied with the Examination of this. 
 Concerning the Species of Feeling, Constituted in respect of the Sensory, we shewed even now, that the sensible Impression was immediately derived from the External Or∣gan, In respect of the Sensory. either to the streaked Bodies, or to the Cerebel: Therefore, for that Reason, Sen∣sion is either manifest, and knows plainly every thing; or private of which the Animal And so it is ei∣ther manifest or private. is scarce knowing: but the Consequence declares this Kind of Sension to have been stir∣red up: for a Motion being made in any inward unseen, argues a previous sense of it to have been; as from the change of the Pulse, or a failure of Spirits, shews a certain Malig∣nity to have affected the Praecordia, or the Cerebel. 
 In either of the aforesaid Kinds of Sension, to wit, whether the same be manifest or Pleasant or Sad. private, the Tangible Impression, either coming pleasantly to the Fibres, gathers toge∣ther the Spirits implanted in them, and more nearly delights them, and strokes them with a soft and gentle rubbing, whence pleasure arises; or the Impulse of the same, pulling and wrinkling the Fibres, distracts and dissipates the Spirits one from another, and so Grief, Pain, or Trouble Succeeds: But concerning these Affections, viz. Grief and Pleasure, we shall have hereafter a more fit place to speak of them; so that it next remains, for us to proceed, from the Sense of Feeling, to its nearest Neighbor and Re∣lation the Taste. 
 CHAP. XII. Of the Taste. THe Taste is so like to the Sense of Feeling, that it seems to be a certain Species of The Taste a Kin to Feeling. it; and certainly the Object, in either Organ, ought to be brought near, and laid upon it; yea in tasting, to be admitted more deeply within the Pores and its passa∣ges. Upon this Sense, depends chiefly both the Life and Vegetation of Animals; for The Sensory of the Tast discerns its Objects, and is delighted with those things that are Convenient. this chooses and takes in Juice for nourishment convenient, and that by this Office it might be constantly and rightly performed, it is furnished with a faculty, or a certain implanted Judgment, whereby some wholesome and agreeable Aliments, fit for every Individual, are discerned from those that are disagreeable and hurtful; also further, as it were in reward of its work, it is delighted after a notable manner, with the Exercise of its Function; For unless convenient agreeable things, fit to be Eaten, move Spittle, and as it were prickle them with a most grateful pleasantness of Taste, the appetite of desiring or taking of Food is quickly extinguished, with oblivion or tediousness; so Venus or Plea∣sure is necessary for the preserv∣ing of the Indi∣vidual. for the preserving the Individual, no less than the Species, Desire and Pleasure ought to be had. 
 The Sensory of the Taste is not so diffusive, and almost Co-extended with the whole Body, as that of Feeling, but is limitted to one part only: yea, and its Sensible is of one Kind only, to wit, a Savoury thing, nor does it include, as the Tangible Quality, the Subjects of many Catagorical things. Indeed the chief and almost only Organ of the Taste is the Tongue; to which, after a manner, but obscurely, do confent the Pa∣late and the Upper part of the Throat; But in all of them, the Nervous Fibres are the immediate Instruments of Sension; wherefore  ' tis observed, that the Tongue is notedly The Organ of the Taste, is the Tongue, with the Palate, and Throat. more Fibrous than any other part, also consists of a very porous Contexture; for this end, that the savory Particles of the thing, might be more plentifully, and more deep∣ly admitted, into the passages of the Sensory, and so meeting at once with many Fi∣bres, might excite a more acute Sension: yea, it may be suspected, that whil ' st the subtil Particles of the savory Humor are imbibed so deeply by the Tongue, the Eating is a cer∣tain Solution; Animal Spirits do in some measure snatch the same, for their nourishment, and convey them inwardly, by the passages of the Nerves, towards the Brain; for it plainly appears, that in great Fastings or want of Food, and swouning or failure of Spirits, that a refreshment of them immediately follows, upon the first tasting of any noble Liquor. 
 Eating is a certain Kind of Solution, whereby the savory Particles may be the better taken in, from the Food by the Sensory: Because, whil ' st solid eatable things are redu∣ced Wherefore one savour, often∣times excludes another. into bits, by Chawing, the Tongue, and other parts of the Mouth, and Throat, pour forth as it were a certain Menstruum, which washing and as it were Elixivating the savory little Bodies, carries them into the Sensory, and insinuates them into the Pores of the Tongue: Further, The savory Particles, because so impacted in the Sen∣sory, do employ its passages, hence it comes to pass, that one savour not rarely ex∣cludes another; so sweet things being tasted, because they are clammy, and very ob∣structing, hinder or pervert the more exact taste of Wine; wherefore, that the hindred Faculty might be again restored, salt or sharp things are eaten, which may open the Pores of the Tongue, and clear away the sticking Viscousness. 
 As to the Nerves, which serve to the Fibres of the Tongue, thickly interwoven with The Nerves, sent to the Organs of the Taste, proceed partly from the Fifth pair. it, and which carry the Impressions of Savours, to the chief Sensory, it seems, that they are of a double Kind: for as Nerves are inserted in the Tongue from both the Fifth, and the Ninth pair, and are every where distributed thorow its whole frame, with a most thick Series of shoots, it is very likely, that they are both Sensitive. Concerning the Nerves sent hither from the Fifth pair, the thing is out of doubt; and as from the same pair, other shoots are sent into the Nostrils, hence we may say, the reason is, of that Consent, which is between both these Sensories; but indeed, as to the Nerves bestowed also on the Tongue, from the Ninth pair, it may be something doubted, because it is commonly believed, that the Office of these serve to the Motion of the Tongue, and to Speech; wherefore, from the same pair are sent certain branches into the Muscles of Partly from the Ninth also, which serve for the Motions of the Tongue. the Tongue, and of the Bone called Hyoides, which without doubt are destinated for their Motion: Nevertheless, thô it be granted, that the Nerves of the Tongue and its Appendix, inserted from the Ninth pair, do bestow on them the moving Power (which indeed is necessary to this Part, as well for Tasting as for speaking; to wit, as the Tongue is very versatile, it takes in with delight the Savours from every corner or recess of the Mouth) yet what hinders, that however the same Nerves should not serve for both, It is in like manner observ∣ed of the Touch, that the same Nerves serve both for Sense, and Motion. to wit, Motion and Sense? For it appears, that many Nerves which serve for the Sense of Feeling, do in like manner serve for the performing of the Motions of those Parts to which they belong. Wherefore, as Tasting is a certain Species of Feeling, it is pro∣bable, that it enters in some measure through the moving Nerves of the Tongue it self; neither does it appear otherwayes, for what end Branches of the Nerves, derived from the Ninth pair into the Tongue, disperse such thick-set shoots into its whole frame, un∣less they should serve for the receiving of the Particles of Savours, coming from every Part. But for as much as after this manner, two Nerves of a distinct Original belong to the Tongue, and one of them arises from the Parts of the Brain, and the other from the Wherefore from the Taste of a pleasant thing, the Imagination and the Prae∣cordia, are wont to be affected. Cerebel: Hence a Sension being carried inwards by the same, it is stay ' d from either at the Common Sensory, and so according to the diverse Nature of the Object, a pleasant and delectable fruition, or an ingrateful and sad Aversion, at once in either Govern∣ment the Imagination and the Praecordia are affected. 
 There is a sufficient indulgement to the Taste, for a reward of its necessary work, to wit, Eating; therefore its Objects are sought far and near, through the Regions of the whole World, yea and all the Elements are imployed. Further, as to its Ministry, all the rest of the Senses serve to this, for nothing pleases the Palate unless the Sight, and The rest of the Senses, wait up∣on the Taste. Hearing, Smell, and Touch approve it.  ' Tis fit it should be so, for this Sensory, by which Food is conveyed for Humane Life, and that it might enjoy great variety, for the shunning of nauseous things; and use a guard upon the rest, for Discrimination; lest instead of Food, it might unawares take Poison. 
 The Speculation of Savours, (which are the next Object of Taste) contains in it self Savours the O ∣ject of Tasting. Simple or Com∣pound: A ThreefoldCon∣sideration of them, to wit, which are, 1. Whose Origi∣nal are natural. 2. Artificial. 3. The Altera∣tion or Abolition of either. very many Pleasant, and no less Profitable things; wherefore I think it will not be from the Matter, to turn aside here a little into this Theory; and as we shall divide all Sa∣vours into Simple and Compound: First, we shall rehearse what Nature suggests of that Kind particularly, according to their several differences, both of themselves, and of the Subjects in which they are; Then Secondly, we shall add the Parallels, by what means, and by what service of Art, the same Savours in Subjects are produced anew, in which they are not by Nature; Thirdly, After what manner Savours both Natural and Artificial, are any way altered and changed in their Subjects, or wholly perish. It will be worth our while to discourse briefly concerning these, and lastly, somewhat of Compounded Savours. 
 Savours called Simple, are commonly counted to be Nine, viz. Sharp, Bitter, Salt, Nine Simple Savours. Acid or Tart, Astringent or Biting, Sowre, Sweet, Oyly, insipid or without Taste. 
 The first is sharp or biting Savour, such as is felt in Pepper or Pellitory, being chewed; Sharp Savour. which probably arises, as often as the Particles of any Body are smooth, and sharpned, and after that manner figured, like the stings of Nettles, that they may prick and very much dig into the Sensory. In Subjects indued with a sharp biting Savour, a volatile Salt, or an Alchalisat, or suffering a Flux from Fire, very much exceeds other Elements. 
 First, Concretes, which have by Nature Particles so figured, are accounted among 1. Which are sharp or biting of their own Na∣ture. Vegetables Hearts-ease, or Trinity-Herb, Pepper, Aron, Country-Mustard, Sea-Lettice, or Milk-thistle, Mustardseed, Pellitory, Ranunculus, &amp;c. Of Minerals Arsneck, Sanda∣rach, &amp;c. Among Animals it is scarcely met with, nor among their Parts, a favour of this Kind, unless perhaps some Insects, as Cantharides, &amp;c. 
 Secondly, Sharp biting Bodies produced by the help of Art, are Mercury Sublimate, 2. Which are so produced by Art. Butter of Antimony, Strong-Waters, and Causticks, the fixed Salts of Herbs, made by burning to Ashes, Calcined Vitriol, the Rust of Brass, &amp;c. The oftner things suffer Calcination, and Fusion in the Fire, the more biting sharp they are made; because, by this means, the Pricks and Spears of the Particles are sharpned. An Example is in the fixed Salts of Herbs, calcined Vitriol, the Infernal Stone, &amp;c. Bodies which are biting sharp, and Corrosives mixt together, and committed to the Fire, acquire a most sharp force of burning. An example is in Mercury Sublimate, and Stygian Waters, the rea∣son of which is, because Salts of a like Kind, being mixed together, joyn their forces or edges, and are at the same time very much sharp ' ned by the fire. It happens otherwise to Salts of a divers Kind, as are Spirits of Vitriol, and Salt of Tartar, mixed together; Sugar and Honey subjected to distillation, exhale a Caustick Water; also the Spirit of Wine highly rectified becomes biting sharp, and burning; because the Saline or Spiri∣tuous Particles, in both Substances being deprived of the sweetness of the others, put forth their Spears and Pricks. 
 Thirdly, Which was the Third Proposition, the biting sharpness in Bodies, both 3 By what means the biting sharpness is wont to be ta∣ken away, or al∣tered. Natural and Artificial is put away or altered after various wayes. Mercury Sublimate highly Corrosive, if another quantity of live Mercury be added and sublimed, it takes away all acritude or biting sharpness, and it becomes insipid or without taste. The reason of which is, that when the Particles of the added Mercury, do grow to the little Spears of the Salts, they do thereby become more thick and obtuse. The Spirit of Vitriol and Salt of Tartar, being melted (which two are biting sharp and corrosive of them∣selves apart) if they be put together, lose all acritude; to wit, these Salts being of a divers Kind, viz. Fluid and Alchalisat; being put together, work mutually one upon another, by which means, the little Spears and Pricks of both are broken; even as if the edge of one Knife, should be rubbed against the edge of another. Plants and Herbs, which are naturally biting sharp, if they be macerated in White-wine, (or perhaps in any other Liquor) put away all their sharpness; and yet the Liquor becomes not at all sharp. In these sort of Concretes, all the acritude depends upon the volatile Salt, which being loosned, by the mixture, presently flyes away. For the same Reason, these sort of Herbs, being subjected to distillation, exhale almost an insipid water, and the dreggs of the Herbs remaining after distillation, is also insipid: Hence also some Herbs, which being green, abound with a sharp biting juice, being dryed, lose very much of their acritude; as Scurvy-grass, Water-cresses, and Brooklime, &amp;c. 
 Secondly, The bitter Savour or Taste, such as is principally in Gall and Wormwood, seems to be made, for as much as the Particles of its Body are planted with forked Pricks, 2. Bitter Sa∣vour. which digging into the Sensory, not deeply, but only on the Superficies, cause a sad or sorrowful Sense; just as if the sharp-pointed fruit of the Teas , should be sharply hand∣led with ones hands. In Subjects indued with a bitter Savour, Salt, associated with Sul∣phur, and suffering an Adustion with it, Predominates. 
 First, Subjects which exhibit this kind of Savour naturally, among Vegetables, are 3. Which are bitter of their own Nature. Wormwood, Southernwood, Centaury, Colocynthida, Agaric, Fumitary, and almost all Herbs which grow in dry and mountany places; then Gumms, and Concrete juices, as Myrrh, Aloes, Opium, Ammoniac, &amp;c. Among Minerals they are not easily met with. The Excrements of living Creatures, as the Gall, and Dung, the Liquor contained in the Bladder of the Gall; and so the Skins of some Birds are bitter.
Secondly, As to the second, Things which draw bitterness anew, they are Compound∣ed Liquors; if in Cooking they are burnt, or are made too thick by Evaporation; hence 2. After what manner, the bit∣terness may be produced anew. Soot is bitter, and whatever things suffer adustion or burning. Sugared Aliments and sweet things are most easily Corrupted in the Stomach, and degenerate into a most high∣ly bitter Humor. 
 Thirdly, As to the Third, a bitter Savour is most difficultly taken away, without the 3 By what means it is wont to be taken a∣way, or altered. Destruction of the Subject, in which it is; as appears in Aloes, and Colocynthida, and Medicines prepared out of them. Yet New Beer, being something bitterish, by the boyling of Hops in it, grows sweet by clearing and a long fermentation: the reason of this we have shewed elsewhere. Further, Liquors, which grow bitter by reason of their Contracting an Empyreuma or burning to, if they be exposed for a long while in a moist Air, or distilled over again, mixed with Calcined Salt, they will partly lose their Empyreu∣ma, or smatch of Fire, and bitterness. 
 3. Because Experience shews, that Salts for the most part do grow together, into 3. Salt Savour. many pointed, and diversly corner ' d Figures, it is most likely, that the Salt savour is produced, when Particles of any Body, pointed with many Angles and Edges on all sides, do as it were cut into the Sensory, like as if little bits of broken Glass be strictly pressed in ones hand. In these Kind of Subjects, the Saline Principle excells the other Elements. 
 First, Bodies naturally Salt, are scarce met with in the family of Vegetables, altho Salt things na∣turally. Plants and Herbs, almost all, owe their rise and growth to Salt. It is seen however that Sea Scurvigrass, and Capers have something of a salt Savour. Salt obtains the chief place among Minerals, and salsitude or saltness is chiefly eminent in Sea-Salt, in Salt that is dug up, Nitre, and Sal Gemmae. The Excrements of Animals, to wit, the Dung, the Swet, the Serum, are Salt; Blood also participates something of the Nature of Saltishness. 
 Secondly, Those Salts which are made by an artificial means, are the fixed Salts of 2. Things which are so made by Art. Herbs, made by incineration or burning to Ashes: Compounded Salts, to wit, Borax, Sal Ammoniac. A volatile Salt is drawn forth of Amber, Bones, Horns, and also out of the Blood of Animals, by Sublimation, 
 Thirdly, As to the Third, all natural Salts, if they be distilled often over again, 3. By what means saltness is wont to be taken away or altered. pass into acetous or tart Liquors: The reason of which is, because these kind of Con∣cretes suffer a divorce of the other Principles, by the fire, and so come more near to the Simple and Elementary Nature of Salt. Volatile Salts, at first white, if exposed to the Moisture of the Air, do melt into a reddish Liquor, not very Salt, and besides smelling like the stink of smoak or soot; because the mixture being loosned by the moist Air, the Saline Particles, for that they are volatile, many of them fly away, but in the mean time, the Sulphureous Particles, before subjugated, get the Do∣minion. 
 Fourthly, The Acid, or sour, or tart Savour or Taste, seems to be made, when the 4. The Acid or tart savou . Particles of any Body are four pointed or corner ' d (to wit, which appear with a smooth and acute point, and with a sharp Body, like a wedge made into a bigger bulk) so that which way soever applyed to the Sensory, they prick it, and by pressing it, something bind it up; and therefore they leave in it larger Incisions than any other Savour. This Kind of Savour, for the most part depends upon a fixed Salt, car ied forth into a Flux. 
 First, Bodies naturally acid or sower, are among Vegetables, Pomecitrons, Oringes, 1. Natural A∣cids. Lemons, Berberries, Sorrel, Tamarinds, &amp;c. Among Minerals scarce any to be met with, as I remember, nor is it easily to be found among Animals, unless perhaps the Melancholly Juice, the ferments of the Stomach, and Spleen, the Pancratic Juice, and also the fasting spittle of a Man, may be said to be something Acid. 
 Secondly, Made Acids, are Vinegar, and the Spirit of it, or the Liquor distilled: 2. Made Acids. The Melanchollic Humor preternaturally begotten in the Body, which often like the Spirit of Vitriol, becomes Acid, and almost Corrosive. Vitriol, Salt, and Sulphur, be∣ing whole, and tasted in their solid substance, shew no kind of acidity, if they be made subject to Chymical Operation, send forth a Liquor highly acid; the reason of which was shewed but now. 
 Thirdly, As to the Third, Chymists say, that acetous Spirits, to wit, of Sulphur, 3. By what means an Acid savour is wont to be taken a∣way, or altered. Salt, Vitriol, &amp;c. by a long Digestion and Circulation, do grow sweet. All acetous Mineral Spirits, also distilled Vinegar, and the juice of Vegetables; if they dissolve any Body, by knawing or corroding it, as Corals, Pearls, or any Precious Stones, put away their acidness; because the Particles of the fluid Salt, in the acid Stagma or Menstruum, are fixed to the Alchali Salt in the mixture. Moreover, these Kinds of Spirits, and ace∣tous Liquors, if they are mixed, either with Oil of Tartar, or with the fixed Salts of Herbs, loosed by Deliquium, loose their acidity. The Spirit of Vinegar being poured upon Salt of Tartar, and drawn off by distillation, becomes insipid. Spirit of Vitriol po red upon Quick-silver, and drawn off by distillation, putting away its acidity, acquires a taste like Allum; and if we may believe Helmont, passes by Coagulation into true Alum. Distilled Vinegar impregnated with the solution of Minium, or red Lead, grows wonderfully sweet. 
 5. The Sower, austere, or binding or astringent Savour, arises in Bodies, whose 5. Austere or sower Taste. Particles are stuffed with very many little Spears and Hooks, which in chewing, being rolled upon the Sensory, are fixed to it, and greatly draw together, and pull its Fibres; not much unlike, as if a Comb, which Cards Wool, should be drawn up and down upon the hands. In substances indned with an austere savour, a fixed Salt, enwrapped with the Particles of the earthy Element, predominates. 
 First, Bodies naturally austere, among Vegetables, are the Fruit of the Medlar-Tree, 1. Naturally austere things. of the Dog-Bryer, of the Cypress-Tree, Flowers of Pomeg anat, Galls, Slows, Sumach, &amp;c. Among Minerals Alum, Iron, Vitriol. Among living Creatures, or among their Parts, there is not as I remember, any austere savour to be met with. 
 Secondly, odies Artificially produced, which have an austere, sower or rough sa∣vour, 2. Made au∣stere savours. are all made Vitriols, to wit, the Vitriol of Silver, of Steel, of Tin, of Cop∣per, &amp;c. The reason of which is, because in these Minerals, the Saline Particles, are very uch intangled with Terrene, and they continue in the same state, when they are drawn forth from their Substances, by the soluted Mixtion. Spirit of Vitriol being drawn from Mercury, by frequent Cohobations, acquires a Pontick or Aluminous Savour. 
 Thirdly, As to the Instances, by which an austere, sower, or rough taste, may be taken away out of all Substances, it is to be observed, that Vitriol of every Kind, by 3. By what means an au∣stere or rough Taste, is wont to be taken away, or altered. long distillation and circulation with the Spirit made of Wine, grows sweet, and loses its astringent force. If waters impregnated with Vitriol, be poured into Oil of Tar∣tar, there will be precipitated a certain thickish Matter wonderfully sweet. Steel, Tin, or Lead, being dissolved in Vinegar, and Coagulated by Evaporation, go into sweet Salts. Further, it is a common Experiment: If having before tasted Vitriol, you take the fume of Tobacco at your Mouth, the austere taste at first impressed on the Sense, is changed into a plainly honied sweetness; the reason of which is, because the Sea-salt Particles, such as are in Vitriol, being mingled with the Sulphureous, out of the burnt Tobacco, create a sweet Savour: from whence also we may Collect, that Sugar and Honey, are of a Sulphureous-saline Nature; which also clearly appears, by their distillation, for as much as they, like Salt Minerals, yield an Acid and very Corrosive Stagma. 
 6. Of Kin to the austere, is the acerb or sower taste, the Particles of whose subject, are indued with little Tenters or Hooks, or Claws, but which are more dull and blunt, VI. A sower Taste. and with which they strike the Sensory, and stop up its little Pores, and being once fixed, they are not easily removed; whence a stupor or numness in the Teeth and Palat is caused; not unlike Burdocks, which being fixed to the Skin, become troublesome, and are not easily shaken off. In acerb or sower biting Bodies, a fluid Salt, implicated with an earthy Matter, excells. 
 First, Bodies naturally sower among Vegetables, are unripe Fruits; as Grapes, Pears, and Apples, and most of all Wildings, Crabs, or wild Apples, thô kept till they are 1. Bodies na∣turally acerb or sower. mellow: also sower Herbs: Among Minerals, or Animals, there is nothing easily to be met with, that has a sower Taste. 
 Secondly, Bodies that are made sower anew, are chiefly Wine and Beer, degenerating into a deadness, through Age or Thunder; also Leaven, or Bread too much leavened. 2. Made sower things. Broths and Milk-meats, if they Contract a settlement and hoariness, become sower: because in all those Concretes disposed to Corruption, the Saline Particles being ex∣alted, and tending towards a Flux, carry forth also earthy Particles involved with themselves. 
 Thirdly, As to the taking away of this Taste, we have observed, That sower Fruits do grow sweet, either by the goodness of the Air, and Sun; in sower Fruits brought to 3. By what means the sower Taste, is wont to be taken a∣way, or altered. maturity: or by the goodness of the Ground or Soil, as when wild Apples translated to a good Soil grow sweet; the reason of either is, because the Spirituous and Sulphu∣reous Particles before subjugated, at length Predominate over the Saline. If Wine de∣generated into deadness, is impregnated with new Lees of Tartar, it shall recover its Vigor: The like happens, if a Can of good Wine be poured into a Vessel of sower Beer or Ale. Wine growing dead, if it be distilled, often yields a sweet Spirit, and in no less quantity, than if the Wine had been in its full strength: because the Spirits be∣fore subjugated in that Mixture, recover their Dominion by distillation. 
 Seventhly, The sweet favour seems to be made, for as much as the Particles of any Body are so figured, into soft prickles, that they tickle the Sensory, with a soft rub∣bing, VII. The sweet favour. and from thence stir up a delightful Sense of Pleasure; like as if feathers were applyed to the Sides, or the Soles of the Feet. In these the Saline Principle seems to be associated, with Sulphureous and Spirituous, and when they are, in like manner are carried forth. 
 First, Those which are naturally sweet, are among Vegetables, first Sugar, and Man∣na; then Cassia, ripe Fruits, Grapes, Raisons, some Roots, as Par nips, &amp;c. Among 1. What are na∣turally sweet. Animals, some ascribe Honey, but others more rightly, say that is swet out of Plants, and gathered by Bees. Among Minerals nothing (that I know) hath naturally a sweet Savour.
Secondly, The things which have a sweet Taste, and are made by Art, are the Sugar of Lead, Salt of Steel, Lythargires, yea, and out of many other Bodies, Vinegar extracts 2. Sweets pre∣pared by Art. a sweet Salt. Tasting Vitriol before-hand (as was said) and then taking a Pipe of To∣bacco, the smoke grows sweet like Honey. In this, and in the former instances, whil ' st the Saline little darts grow to the Sulphureous Particles, or Saline of another Kind, both of them become more blunt. An Alchalisat Spirit, and the fixed Sal of any Body, being mixed, and circulated by a long digestion, acquire a sweetness. Barley soaked in Water, when it begins to sprout, and dried with a gentle fire, grows exceeding sweet: And Wheat in like manner also, if being wet, it sprouts yields a wonderfully sweet Meal; the reason of which is, because by that Artifice, the Sulphureous and Spi∣rituous Particles, overthrown by the Earthy, get their Liberty. 
 Thirdly, There are many Instances, by which sweetness is abolished; for all sweet 3. By what means sweetness is taken away, or altered. things too much boiled, grow bitter. Sugar on Honey, by distillation, yield at first an insipid Phlegm, then sharp and burning Spirits; In the dead Head remaining after di∣stillation, is a burning Salt, and an insipid Earth, and whatever is sweet perishes. Fur∣ther, Sugar or Honey being mixed with a great quantity of Common Water, and di∣stilled through a Bladder, yield a burning Water, like the Lees of Wine distilled after the same fashion. In both these, and in the following Instance, the additional sweet∣nesses are bruised, by the saline little darts, Sugar of Lead b ing fused by the fire, melts into meer Lead; if it be distilled in a Retort, if we may believe Beguinus, it will produce a burning and sweet smelling Spirit. 
 8. The unctuous or oyly savour, seems to be produced, when the Particles of any Bo∣dy VIII. An Oyly Taste. are very Spherical and round, which neither hawl, prick, nor tickle the Sensory, but only stroke it with a gentle and soft coming to it. In these, the Sulphureous Principle predominates. 
 First, Bodies naturally Unctuous or oyly, among Vegetables, are ripe Olives, the 1. In which it is by Nature. Turpentine-Tree. The Larix, and some sweet smelling Gums naturally sweating forth. Among Minerals, Asphaltum, Bitumen, Amber, Sperma Ceti, and some fat Earths, and Ochers: Of Animals, and their Parts, the Sewet, Marrow, and Fat. 
 Secondly, Unctuous things prepared by Art, are Butter, Cream, Oyls, press ' d out of 2. In what things it is wont to be produced by Art. Fruits and Seeds, as Oyl of Nuts, of sweet Almonds, also Oyls drawn out of Seeds, Woods, Gums, and Resines by distillation. 
 Thirdly, Althô unctuosity is most difficultly taken away from the Subjects, yet it is wont to be lessen ' d: for so Unctuous Bodies, if they grow stale, or are too much boiled, 3. How it is ta∣ken away or al∣ter ' d. or otherways grow hot by shaking, losing their smoothness, become rank, and prick and dig the Sensory, Further, Sewet and Fat, if they be long exposed to a moist Air, contract a settlement, and become hoary, and then are resolved into Water, or a cor∣rupt Earth. In this, and in the former instance, whil ' st the mixture of the Body is re∣solved, some Sulphureous Particles fly away, in the mean time the remaining lose their Dominion. 
 9. An insipid Savour or Taste, seems to be made, when the Particles of any Body, IX. An insipid Savour. are indued with superficial little Darts, not at all sharp, but smooth and discharged; which enter not into the Pores of the Sensory, and no ways dig or hawl it. In these, the Principle either of Water, or Earth, predominate over the rest. 
 First, Bodies naturally insipid or tastless, are Common Water, especially Rain Wa∣ter, 1. In what things it is by Nature. some cold Herbs, the raw white of an Egg, &amp;c. Althô in the whole there is nothing insipid simply, yet Speech is wont to apply it to them things, in which some one of those Savours, are not eminently, which we have before recounted. 
 Secondly, That Savory things may become Unsavory, the more acute Particles ought wholly to fly away, or be very much broken. Herbs long kept, also many more 2. How it is wont to be pro∣duced. things, if they be distilled by a moderate heat, yield almost an insipid Liquor. 
 Thirdly, Insipidness it self, sometimes is taken away; for insipid Water, if it stand 3. By what means it is ta∣ken away. long, that it putrifie, acquires a stink and mouldy Savour: The white of an Egg boiled hard, has something a sharp taste. In these kind of Instances, fome active Elements, be∣ing before subjugated, get strength. 
 Besides these Kinds of simple Savours, which are as it were the Elements of the rest, there remain yet many Complications of these simple ones, as the Savours rehearsed are Compounded Savours. conjoyned one among another: And for as much as by the Wisdom of Nature, to satis∣fie all Palates, and by the Luxury of Art, that she might please the Throats of some, ma∣nifold mixtures of Savours have been produced, that almost nothing to be eaten, is found simple and without Sawce or Condiment. The several Compositions of these, is a thing almost impossible to enumerate; it shall suffice for the present, that we note some of the more noted Conjugations, and their Affections, as they are grateful or ingrateful to the Palate. 
 The first Conjugation, and that most grateful to the Palate, is of acid and sweet, of Compositions of Savours, which are more or less grateful. which sort are generous Wine, Confections prepared out of Citron, Wood-Sorrel, Berberries, &amp;c. Sugar ' d things, and sharp things pickl ' d, with Sugar. Secondly, Sweet and Astringent, as also sweet and sower, are well Consociated: as in Marmalade of Quinces, Candied Bulloes, Cyder drunk with Sugar, &amp;c. Thirdly, Sweet and oyly yield a grateful Savour to the Palate, but that brings a nauseousness to the Stomach, as in Milk-meats, Sugar ' d-meats, and Pasty-crust, &amp;c. Fourthly, Sweet agrees not with biting, bitter, or salt Savour. Fifthly, nor doth a bitter Savour of it self, agree with any other: it is grateful to the Palate, well-tempered with the sweet. Sixthly, Salt∣savour best agrees with the biting sharp, as in flesh seasoned with Salt and Pepper, it is an ingrateful Sawce with the oyly. Seventhly, The Acid, Astringent and Sower, are well afsociated with the sweet, not with the rest. 
 There are more Kinds of some other Compounded Savours, which we have no time now to recount. But there are in respect of the Taste, as the Compounded Tunes of Harmony in respect of Hearing, in both sensible not simple Species of one Kind, but are carried manifold, and variously Complicated to the Sensory. It now remains for us to pass from the Taste, the Object of which we have largely handled, to the other Species of the Senses. 
 CHAP. XIII. Of the Sense of Smelling. IT seems that the Smell is a more Excellent, and a little more Sublime Faculty, than either Tasting, or Touching; to wit, because its Object is more subtle, and comes to the Sensory, with a thinner Consistency: for there is no need to put upon the Or∣gan, the more thick substance of the mixture; but it suffices, that the Effluvia ' s or Breath, sent from odorous Bodies, thô at something a remote distance, be inspired into the Nostrils, together with the Air. 
 Living Creatures are furnished with the Sense of Smelling for this end, to wit, that agreeable and wholesom Aliments may be known, and discerned from disa greeable and hurtful; for because it were an incongruous and dangerous thing, to take in pre∣sently The use of the Smell, to discern Aliments a a distance. into the Mouth, all things offered to be eaten, and to be examined by the Taste, lest perchance Venomous and Stinking things, carelesly taken in by the Palate, should bring loathing or hurt to it, the Smell examines first the thing at a distance, and refuses those rotten things, or guilty of any other very infestous quality, without receiving any hurt by the Contagion. 
 This Kind of Primary use is seen more excellently in brute Animals, than in Man; for they by this Index only, most certainly know the Virtues of Herbs, and of other This is more ex∣cellent in Brutes than in Man. Bodies, before unknown, yea hunt out, and easily find their absent Food, thô hidden from them, by the Smell. But that the Noses of Men are less quick or sagacious, it ought not (as some would have it) to be ascribed to the abuse of the Faculty, but the Cause lyes in the defect of the Organ it self; for this is not so accurately required for the distinction of Humane Food, where Reason and the Intellect are present: For that Reason the inferior Powers in Man, exist less perfect by Nature, that there might be a place left, for the exercise and dressing of the more superior. 
 As to what belongs to the Organ of Smelling, we have largely enough unfolded it in The Organ of the Smell de∣scribed. our Discourse of the Nerves; to wit, we have shewed, that within the Caverns of the Nostrils, are placed tubulated Membranes or like Pipes, which contain sensible Fibres, most thickly interwoven. Into these membranes, very many small Nerves are sent from either Mamillary Process, passing thorow the holes of the Seive-like Bones; but those Mamillary Processes, as they are plainly soft Nerves, arise in the Medullary Trunk, nigh the streaked Bodies; wherefore, when the odorous steams, strike upon the Fibrous, and very sensible Membranes, forthwith an impression of the sensible thing, is carried by the passage of the Nerves into the Mamillary Processes, and from thence into the streaked Bodies. 
 Further, We have formerly declared, why the Smelling Nerves, divided without the Skull are harder, but united within it are not only softer, but also tubulated or like Pipes, and for the most part in Brutes, filled with clear Water: There is no need to repeat it here again, nor what we have declared there, concerning other Nerves, coming from the Fifth pair, and inserted also into the Organ of Smelling: Of which certainly the Office is, to cause a certain Sympathy and consent of action, between the Smell and Taste, and something also between the Sight and it. 
 I know some attribute the office of Smelling altogether to these Nerves, arising from Nerves of a se∣veral Kind, serve for S el∣ling. the Fifth pair, denying it to the Mamillary Processes, and from hence they render a rea∣son, not only of that consent, between the Nose and the Palate, from whence it comes to pass, that the same Objects are embraced or refused, but also, wherefore it happens, that one Sense being lost, that oftentimes the other perishes; to wit the Cause of this they say is nothing else, than that both Sensories do borrow the branches of their Nerves, from the same Trunk of the Fifth pair. But this Objection is easily overthrown, be∣cause the Nerves of a twofold Original, are bestowed not only on the Sensory of the Smell, but also of the Taste. For the Tongue receives more and greater Branches from the Ninth pair, than from the Maxillary Trunk of the Fifth pair: to wit, that if the Nerves of one Kind be obstructed, the Animal Function may be performed, by those of the other Kind. Concerning this then we may say, that the Principle Nerves serving to the Organ of Smelling, are derived from either Mamillary Process, also, that the Nerves on which the Sense of Tasting chiefly depends, are sent from the Ninth pair: Nevertheless, some secondary Nerves, or that are as it were taken in, are distributed to either Sensory, (as also to the Eye) far fetch ' d from the Fifth pair: for this end, that there might be an affinity or mutual respect, between the Taste and the Smell, and be∣tween both and the Sight: hence therefore the Taste almost admits of no Object, unless that the Smell first approves of it: but both Faculties do require, that sensible things do first stand to the examination of the Eyes. 
 But that the loss of one of them, oftentimes brings in the defect of the other, as it is sometimes observed in a Pose, or Stopping of the Head, that losing the Smell, the Taste Hence the rea∣son is had, of that Consent, be∣tween the Smell and the Taste. is lost also: the reason of it is, because either Sensory, being planted near, are both at once overthrown by the same serous Matter, poured forth from the Blood, and apt to be too much stopped: for both the tubulated Membranes of the Nose, and the frame or substance of the Tongue it self, are made of a very rare, and as it were spongy Tex∣ture: wherefore, the Pores and Passages of either Organ, are wont to be overflown by Why one being wanting, the o∣ther for the most part is Defe∣ctive. the serous flood, and the sensible Fibres in both, in like manner to be obstructed, which happens, because when as the Nostrils and Tongue ought to be moistned, with a conti∣nual Humor, either of them are punished more grievously than other Parts, by the shower of the Serum issuing forth, so both on every light Cause, become obnoxious to the same Evil.
