Steamed potatoes  The sweet potato, description of  Preparation and cooking  _Recipes_:  Baked sweet potatoes  Baked sweet potatoes No 2  Boiled sweet potatoes  Steamed sweet potatoes  Browned sweet potatoes  Mashed sweet potatoes  Potato hash  Roasted sweet potatoes  Turnips, description of  Preparation and cooking  _Recipes_:  Boiled turnips  Baked turnips  Creamed turnips  Chopped turnips  Mashed turnips
stings," craves something less insipid than pure cold water to keep up  the fever the food has excited. Again, condiments, like all other  stimulants, must be continually increased in quantity, or their effect  becomes diminished; and this leads directly to a demand for stronger  stimulants, both in eating and drinking, until the probable tendency is  toward the dram-shop.    A more serious reason why high seasonings leads to intemperance, is in  the perversion of the use of the sense of taste. Certain senses are  given us to add to our pleasure as well as for the practical, almost  indispensable, use they are to us. For instance, the sense of sight is  not only useful, but enables us to drink in beauty, if among beautiful  surroundings, without doing us any harm. The same of music and other  harmonics which may come to us through the sense of hearing. But the  sense of taste and was given us to distinguish between wholesome and  unwholesome foods, and cannot be used for merely sensuous gratification,  without debasing and making of it a gross thing. An education which  demands special enjoyment or pleasure through the sense of taste, is  wholly artificial; it is coming down to the animal plane, or below it  rather; for the instinct of the brute creation teaches it merely to eat
to live.    Yet how wide-spread is this habit of sensuous gratification through the  sense of taste! If one calls upon a neighbor, he is at once offered  refreshments of some kind, as though the greatest blessing of life came  from indulging the appetite. This evil is largely due to wrong  education, which begins with childhood. When Johnnie sits down to the  table, the mother says, "Johnnie, what would you like?" instead of  putting plain, wholesome food before the child, and taking it as a  matter of course that he will eat it and be satisfied. The child grows  to think that he must have what he likes, whether it is good for him or  not. It is not strange that an appetite thus pampered in childhood  becomes uncontrollable at maturity; for the step from gormandizing to  intoxication is much shorter than most people imagine. The natural,  unperverted taste of a child will lead him to eat that which is good for  him. But how can we expect the children to reform when the parents  continually set them bad examples in the matter of eating and drinking?    The cultivation of a taste for spices is a degradation of the sense of  taste. Nature never designed that pleasure should be divorced from use.
our land supplied with good, nutritious, well-baked bread, there would  upon their unsuspecting customers an inferior article. Much of the  so-called Graham flour is nothing more than poor flour mixed with bran,  and is in every way inferior to good white flour. Fine flour or made  from the entire wheat may generally be distinguished from a spurious  article by taking a small portion into the mouth and chewing it. Raw  flour made from the entire grain has a sweet taste, and a rich, nutty  flavor the same as that experienced in chewing a whole grain of wheat,  and produces a goodly quantity of gum or gluten, while a spurious  article tastes flat and insipid like starch, or has a bitter, pungent  taste consequent upon the presence of impurities. This bitter taste is  noticeable in bread made from such flour. A given quantity of poor flour  will not make as much bread as the same quantity of good flour, so that  adulteration may also be detected in this way. Doubtless much of the  prejudice against the use of whole-wheat flour has arisen from the use  of a spurious article.    As it is not always possible to determine accurately without the aid of  chemistry and a microscope whether flour is genuine, the only safe way  is to purchase the product of reliable mills.
  BITTER YEAST.--It sometimes happens that an excessive use of hops  in the making of yeast gives to it so bitter a flavor as to communicate  a disagreeable taste to the bread. To correct this bitterness, mix with  the yeast a considerable quantity of water, and let it stand for some  hours, when the thickest portion will have settled at the bottom. The  water, which will have extracted much of the bitterness, can then be  turned off and thrown away. Yeast also sometimes becomes a bitter from  long keeping. Freshly burnt charcoal thrown into the yeast is said to  absorb the odors and offensive matter and render the yeast more sweet;  however, we do not recommend the use of any yeast so stale as to need  sweetening or purifying. Yeast that is new and fresh is always best; old  and stale yeast, even though it may still possess the property of  raising the dough, will give an unpleasant taste to the bread, and is  much less wholesome.    TESTS FOR YEAST.--Liquid yeast, when good, is light in color and  looks foamy and effervescent; it has a pungent odor somewhat similar to  weak ammonia, and if tasted will have a sharp, biting flavor. Yeast is  poor when it looks dull and watery, and has a sour odor. Compressed
THE GRAPE FRUIT.--This fruit, a variety of shaddock, belongs to the  great _citrus_ family, of which there are one hundred and sixty-nine  known varieties. The shaddock proper, however, is a much larger fruit,  frequently weighing from ten to fourteen pounds. Although a certain  quantity of grape fruit is brought from the West Indies, our principal  supply is derived from Florida. It is from two to four times the size of  an ordinary orange, and grows in clusters. It is rapidly gaining in  favor with fruit lovers. Its juice has a moderately acid taste and makes  a pleasing beverage. The pulp, carefully separated, is also much  esteemed.    THE POMEGRANATE.--This fruit has been cultivated in Asia from  earliest antiquity, and is still quite generally grown in most tropical  climes. In the Scriptures it is mentioned with the vine, fig, and olive,  among the pleasant fruits of the promised land. It is about the size of  a large peach, of a fine golden color, with a rosy tinge on one side.  The rind is thick and leathery. The central portion is composed of  little globules of pulp and seeds inclosed in a thin membrane, each seed  being about the size of a red currant. It is sub-acid, and slightly  bitter in taste. The rind is strongly astringent, and often used as a
medicine.  cultivated in gardens during the Middle Ages. The gooseberry is a  wholesome and agreeable fruit, and by cultivation may be brought to a  high state of perfection in size and flavor.    THE CURRANT.--This fruit derives its name from its resemblance to  the small grapes of Corinth, sometimes called Corinthus, and is  indigenous to America, Asia, and Europe. The fruit is sharply acid,  though very pleasant to the taste. Cultivation has produced white  currants from the red, and in a distinct species of the fruit grown in  Northern Europe and Russia, the currants are black or yellow.    THE WHORTLEBERRY AND BLUEBERRY.--These are both species of the same  fruit, which grows in woods and waste places in the North of Europe and  America. Of the latter species there are two varieties, the high-bush  and the low-bush, which are equally palatable. The fruit is very sweet  and pleasant to the taste, and is one of the most wholesome of all  berries.    THE CRANBERRY.--A German writer of note insists that the original
    PINEAPPLES.--The pineapple when fresh and ripened to perfection, is  as mellow and juicy as a ripe peach, and needs no cooking to fit it for  the table. Of course it must be pared, and have the eyes and fibrous  center removed. Then it may be sliced in generous pieces and piled upon  a plate, or cut into smaller portions and served in saucers. No  condiments are necessary; even the use of sugar detracts from its  delicate flavor. Pineapples found in our Northern markets are, however,  generally so hard and tough as to require cooking, or are valuable only  for their juice, which may be extracted and used for flavoring other  fruits. When sufficiently mellow to be eaten raw, they are usually so  tart as to seem to require a light sprinkling of sugar to suit most  tastes. Pineapples pared, cut into dice or small pieces, lightly  sprinkled with sugar, to which just before serving, a cup of orange  juice is added, form a delicious dish.    PLUMS.--Plums make a most artistic fruit piece, served whole and  arranged with bunches of choice green grapes, in a basket or glass dish.  A fine edge may be made from the velvety leaves of dark purple foliage
if divided and stoned before paring, can be much more easily kept whole.    Cook in a small quantity of boiling water, and if economy is a point to  be considered, do not add sugar until the fruit is done. Sugar boiled  with an acid will be converted into glucose, two and one half pounds of  which only equal one pound of cane sugar in sweetening properties. It  will require a much larger amount of sugar to sweeten fruit if added  before the cooking process is completed. Fruit should be cooked by  stewing, or by gentle simmering; hard boiling will destroy the fine  flavor of all fruits, and especially of berries and other small fruits.  Cinnamon, cloves, or other spices, should not be added, as their  stronger flavors deaden or obliterate the natural flavor, which should  always be preserved as perfectly as possible. If desirable to add some  foreign flavor, let it be the flavor of another fruit, or the perfume  of flowers. For Instance, flavor apple with lemon, pineapple, quince, or  rose water.    Unripe fruit is improved by making the cooking quite lengthy, which acts  in the place of the ripening process, changing the starchy matter to  saccharine elements. In cooking fruit, try to preserve its natural form.
The more nearly whole it is, the better it looks, and the more natural  will be its flavor.    Apples are best cooked by baking. Pears and quinces are also excellent  baked. The oven should be only moderately hot; if the heat is too great,  they brown on the outside before they are done throughout. In cooking  fruit by any method, pains should be taken to cook together such as are  of the same variety, size, and degree of hardness; if it is to be cut in  pieces, care should be taken to have the pieces of uniform size.      _RECIPES._    BAKED APPLES.--Moderately tart apples or very juicy sweet ones are  best for baking. Select ripe apples, free from imperfections, and of  nearly equal size. Wipe carefully and remove the blossom ends. Water  sufficient to cover bottom of the baking dish, should be added if the  fruit is not very juicy. If the apples are sour and quite firm, a good  way is to pare them before baking, and then place them in an earthen pie  dish with a little hot water. If they incline to brown too quickly,
beans do not at any time get dry enough to brown over the top till they  are tender. When nearly done, add salt to taste, and a half cup of  cream. They may be allowed to bake till the milk is quite absorbed, and  the beans dry, or may be served when rich with juice, according to  taste. The beans may be parboiled in water for a half hour before  beginning to bake, and the length of time thereby lessened. They should  be well drained before adding the milk, however.    STEWED BEANS.--Soak a quart of white beans in water over night. In  the morning drain, turn hot water over them an inch deep or more, cover,  and place on the range where they will only just simmer, adding boiling  water if needed. When nearly tender, add salt to taste, a tablespoonful  of sugar if desired, and half a cup of good sweet cream. Cook slowly an  hour or more longer, but let them be full of juice when taken up, never  cooked down dry and mealy.    MASHED BEANS.--Soak over night in cold water, a quart of nice white  beans. When ready to cook, drain, put into boiling water, and boil till  perfectly tender, and the water nearly evaporated. Take up, rub through  a colander to remove the skins, season with salt and a half cup of
  DESCRIPTION.--The sweet potato is a native of the Malayan  Archipelago, where it formerly grew wild; thence it was taken to Spain,  and from Spain to England and other parts of the globe. It was largely  used in Europe as a delicacy on the tables of the rich before the  introduction of the common potato, which has now taken its place and  likewise its name. The sweet potato is the article referred as potato by  Shakespeare and other English writers, previous to the middle of the  seventeenth century.    PREPARATION AND COOKING.--What has been said in reference to the  common potato, is generally applicable to the sweet potato; it may be  prepared and cooked in nearly all the ways of the Irish potato.    In selecting sweet potatoes, choose firm, plump roots, free from any  sprouts; if sprouted they will have a poor flavor, and are likely to be  watery.    The sweet potato is best cooked with the skin on; but all discolored  portions and the dry portion at each end, together with all branchlets,
dime) from the top of a loaf of whole-wheat bread, in one quart of  water. The crust must not be burned or blackened, and must not include  any of the soft portion of the loaf. When the potatoes are tender, mash  all through a colander. Flavor with a cup of strained, stewed tomatoes,  a little salt, and return to the fire; when hot, add a half cup of  cream, and boiling water to make the soup of proper consistency, and  serve at once. If care has been taken to prepare the crust as directed,  this soup will have a brown color and a fine, pungent flavor exceedingly  pleasant to the taste.    CANNED GREEN PEA SOUP.--Rub a can of green peas through a colander  to remove the skins. Add a pint of milk and heat to boiling. If too  thin, thicken with a little flour rubbed smooth in a very little cold  milk. Season with salt and a half cup of cream. A small teaspoonful of  white sugar may be added if desired.    Green peas, instead of canned, may be used when procurable. When they  have become a little too hard to serve alone, they can be used for soup,  if thoroughly cooked.  
CANNED CORN SOUP.--Open a can of green corn, turn it into a  given on page 215. Allow them to dry thoroughly, and pound in a mortar  to a smooth paste. They can be reduced much easier if dried for a day or  two after blanching. During the pounding, sprinkle with a few drops of  cold water, white of egg, rose water, or lemon juice, to prevent them  from oiling.    COCOANUT FLAVOR.--Cocoanut, freshly grated or desiccated, unless in  extremely fine particles, is a very indigestible substance, and when its  flavor is desired for custards, puddings, etc., it is always better to  steep a few tablespoonfuls in a pint of milk for twenty minutes or a  half hour, and strain out the particles. The milk should not be allowed  to boil, as it will be likely to curdle. One tablespoonful of freshly  grated cocoanut or two of the desiccated will give a very pleasant and  delicate flavor; and if a more intense flavor is desired, use a larger  quantity.    ORANGE AND LEMON FLAVOR.--Orange or lemon flavor may be obtained by  steeping a few strips of the yellow part of the rind of lemon or orange  in milk for twenty minutes. Skim out the rind before using for desserts.
first.  mixture into the hot milk and stir until it thickens. Flavor with a  little grated lemon rind, vanilla, or, if preferred, flavor the milk  with cocoanut before using. Fill the tart shells, and meringue with the  white of the egg beaten stiff with a tablespoonful of sugar.    GRAPE TART.--Into one pint of canned or fresh grape juice, when  boiling, stir two tablespoonfuls of cornstarch braided with a little  water, and cook for five minutes. Sweeten to taste, and fill a baked  crust.    LEMON FILLING.--Into one cup of boiling water stir one  tablespoonful of cornstarch previously braided smooth with the juice of  a large lemon. Cook until it thickens, then add one half cup of sugar  and a little grated yellow rind of the lemon.    TAPIOCA FILLING.--Soak one tablespoonful of tapioca over night in  one cup of water; mash and stir the tapioca, simmer gently until clear  and thick, adding enough water to cook it well; add half a cup of white  sugar and a tablespoonful each of lemon and orange juice. If desired, a
it with a tablespoonful of sugar and the white of an egg beaten to a  as small a quantity of water as possible. When done, rub through a  colander; they should be about the consistency of fruit jam; if not, a  little flour may be added. Sweeten to taste, fill under crusts with the  mixture, and bake. If lemon flavor is liked, a few pieces of the yellow  rind may be added to the apples a little while before they are tender.  If the apples are especially tasteless, lemon juice or some sour apple  jelly should be added after rubbing through the colander. The crusts may  first be baked, and filled with the mixture when needed; in which case  the sauce should be simmered lightly till of the desired consistency.  The top may be ornamented with strips or rings of crust, if desired.    DRIED APPLE PIE WITH RAISINS.--Rub a quart of well-stewed dried  apples through a colander, add a cupful of steamed raisins, sugar to  sweeten, and bake with two crusts. This is sufficient for two pies.    DRIED APRICOT PIE.--Stew together one third dried apricots and two  thirds dried apples or peaches. When soft, rub through a colander, add  sugar to sweeten, and if very juicy, stew again until the juice is  mostly evaporated; then beat until light and bake in a granola crust.
an egg beater till the froth begins to rise, then add to it the cold  sloppy food.    The milk of diseased animals should never be used for food. There is no  way by which such milk can invariably be detected, but Prof. Vaughan, of  Michigan University, notes the following kinds of milk to be avoided:    1. Milk which becomes sour and curdles within a few hours after it has  been drawn, and before any cream forms on its surface. This is known in  some sections as    '   curdly   '    milk, and it comes from cows with certain  inflammatory affections of the udder, or digestive diseases, or those  which have been overdriven or worried.    2. "Bitter-sweet milk" has cream of a bitter taste, is covered with   '   blisters,   '    and frequently with a fine mold. Butter and cheese made from  such milk cannot be eaten on account of the disagreeable taste.    3.    '   Slimy milk   '    can be drawn out into fine, ropy fibers. It has an  unpleasant taste, which is most marked in the cream. The causes which  lead to the secretion of this milk are not known.
