The cherries called Zawerkersen, are reasonable great, but sower. And the other kind called Wildkersen, is little and sweete, but hath a blacke iuyce, vnpleasing to the taste. They haue little store of peares or apples, and those they haue are little, and of small pleasantnesse, onely the Muskadel peare is very delicate, especially when it is dried. And the Germans make good vse of those fruits they haue, not so much for pleasure when they are greene, as for furnishing the table in Winter. For their Peares, and Apples, they pare them, and drie them vnder the Ouen of the stoue, and then dresse them very fauorly with Cynamon and Butter. In like sort they long preserue their cheries drie, without sugar, and the greater part of their cheries they boyle in a brasse cauldron, full of holes in the bottome, out of which the iuce falles into another vessell, which being kept, growes like marmalade, and makes a delicate sauce for all roasted meates, and will last very long, as they vse it. The Italians haue a Prouerb, Dio da i panni secondo i freddi; that is, God giues cloathes according to the colds, as to the cold Muscouites hee hath giuen futtes, to the English wooll for cloth, to the French diuers light stuffes, and to Southerlie people stoore of silkes, that all Nations abounding in some things, and wanting others, might be taught, that they haue neede of one anothers helpe, and so be stirred vp to mutuall loue, which God hath thus planted betweene mankind by mutuall trafficke. For this must be vnderstood not onely of clother, but also of all other things necessary for human life. 
  
  
 The Cities that are one the Sea-coast on the North side of Germany, haue very great * ships, but more fit for taking in great burthen, then for sayling or fighting, which the Netherlanders more commonly fraught with their commodities, then the Germans themselues, neither are the German Marriners much to bee commended. The German Sea in good part, and the Baltick Sea altogether, are free from Pyrats, which is the cause that their ships are little or not at all armed, onely some few that trade into Spaine, carry great Ordinance, but are generally made large in the ribs, rather fit for burthen, then fight at Sea. 

 And herein they deserue to be praysed aboue the Holanders, in whose ships a man shall heare no mention of God or his worship. The said free Cities of Germany lying on the Sea-coast, are called Hansen-stetten, that is, free Cities, because they had of old in all neighbour Kingdoms great priuiledges, of buying any wares as wel of strangers as Citizens, and of selling or exchanging their own wares to either sort at pleasure, and to bring in or carry out all commodities by their owne shippes, with like immunities equall to Citizens in all the said Dominions, and no lesse preiudiciall to them, then aduantageous to themselues. 
    
 For the English Merchants had their Staple first at Emden, the Count whereof vsed them well, yet in the warre betweene England and Spaine, this place grew dangerous for them, for the enemie often tooke their goods, and made them prisoners, at the very mouth of the Harbour. Whereupon they remoued to Hamburg, where being oppressed with new impositions, and being denied the publike exercise of their Religion, they went from thence, and settled their Staple at Stoade. In like sort the English Merchants trading for Poland and those parts, first had their Staple at Dantzk in Prussen (by Staple I meane their residence in a City, giuing them priuiledge to stop any forraigne wares, intended to be carried further, and to force the Merchant to sell them there, except hee had rather returne with them to the place from whence hee came.) But when the Dantzkers vnder pretence of the Sueuian warre, exacted of them a doller for each woollen cloath, and asmuch for a last of any other goods, and after when the warre was ended, would remit nothing of this imposition. And further when they forbad the English by a Law to dwell in Poland, the commodities whereof were onely sold there, left they should learne the language, and find the mysteries of the trade.
  
 The diet of the Germans is simple, and very modest, if you set aside their intemperate drinking: For as they are nothing sumptuous, but rather sparing in their apparell * and houshold stuffe, so they are content with a morsell of flesh and bread, so they haue store of drinke, and want not wood to keepe their stoaues warme. And in generall, since they affect not forraigne commodities, but are content with their own commodities, and are singular as well in the Art as industry of making manuall workes, they easily draw to them and retaine with them forraigne Coynes. The free Cities vse to haue alwaies a yeeres prouision of victuals laid vp in publike houses, to serue for homely food for the people, in case the City should happen to be besieged. They commonly serue to the Table sower Cabbages, which they call Crawt, and beere (or wine for a dainty) boyled with bread, which they call Swoope. In vpper Germany they moreouer giue veale or beefe in little quantities, but in lower Germany they supply the meale with bacon and great dried puddings, which puddings are sauory and so pleasant, as in their kind of mirth they wish prouerbially for Kurtz predigen, lange worsten, that is; Short sermons and long puddings. Sometimes they also giue dried fishes, and apples or peares first dried, then prepared with cinamon and butter very sauourily. They vse many sawces, and commonly sharpe, and such as comfort the stomacke offended with excessiue drinking: For which cause in vpper Germany the first draught commonly is of wormewood wine, and the first dish of little lampreys, (which they call mine augen, as hauing nine eyes) serued with white vineger; and those that take any iourney, commonly in the morning drinke a little Brant wein, (that is, their Aquauita) and eate a peece of Pfeffer kuchen, (that is, Ginger-bread) which vseth to be sold at the gates of the City. They haue a most delicate sawce (in my opinion) for rosted meats, of cherries sod and brused, the iuice whereof becomes hard like Marmalade, but when it is to be serued to the Table, they dissolue it with a little wine or like moisture. And as they haue abundance of fresh fish in their Ponds and Riuers, so they desire not to eate them, except they see them aliue in the Kitchen, and they prepare the same very sauourly, commonly vsing anniseeds to that purpose, especially the little fishes, wherof they haue one most delicate kinde, called Smerling, which in Prussen I did eate, first choked, then sodden in wine, and they being very little, yet sixty of them were sold for nineteene grosh. 

 The foresaid sawce of cherries, they thus prepare and keepe, They gather a darke or blackish kind of cherry, and casting away the stalkes, put them into a great cauldron of brasse set vpon the fier, til they beginne to be hot, then they put them into a lesse cauldren full of holes in the bottome, and presse them with their hands, so as the stones and skinnes remaine in this cauldron, but the iuice by the foresaid holes doth fall into another vessell. Then againe they set this iuyce vpon the fier, continually stirring it, lest it should cleaue to the bottome, and after two howers space, they mingle with it the best kind of peares they haue, first cut into very small peeces, and so long they boile it and continually stirre it, till it waxe hard, and notwithstanding the stirring beginne to cleaue to the vessell. This iuyce thus made like a Marmalade, may long be preserued from moulding in this sort. They which desire to haue it sweete, mixe sugar with it, and others other things according to the taste they desire it should haue. Then they put it into earthen pitchers; and if it beginne at any time to waxe mouldie, they put these pots into the Ouen, after the bread is baked and taken out. Also these pitchers must be close stopped, that no aire may enter, & must be set where no sunne or continuall heate comes. Lastly, when they will make ready this sawce, they cut out a peece of the said iuice, and mingle with it a little wine to dissolue it, (with vineger, or sugar, or spices, according to their seuerall appetites), and so boile it againe some halfe hower. 
      
 Touching this peoples diet, Butter is the first and last dish at the Table, whereof they make all sawces, especially for fish, and thereupon by strangers they are merrily * called Butter-mouths. They are much delighted with white meats, and the Bawers drinke milke in stead of beere, and as well Men as Weomen, passing in boates from City to City for trade, carry with them cheese, and boxes of butter for their foode, whereupon in like sort strangers call them Butter boxes, and nothing is more ordinary then for Citizens of good accompt and wealth to sit at their dores, (euen dwelling in the market place) holding in their hands, and eating a great lumpe of bread and butter with a lunchen of cheese. 

 Lombardy also affoords sheepe to Toscany, and other parts of Italy, as Sicily doth Corne, whereby of old it deserued to be called the Garner of Rome. Italy hath great store of Goates, the milke whereof is so nutritiue, as they giue it to the weakest bodies for a restoratiue. 

 They haue like plenty of Citron, Limon, and Cedar trees, which in Lombardy grow vpon the bricke wals of Gardens, as Vines doe with vs, and are kept in earthen vessels, but vpon the mountaines and hils of vpper Italy, the fields abound with these Trees, which both in body and fruit are as bigge as our Appletrees, and they transport great store of these fruites into forraigne parts. There be many woods of Chesnuts, which they little esteeme, onely poore people eating them, and with the rest they feed Hogges, as with Acornes. The Chesnut tree is not vnlike the Oake tree, but that it is more small, high, and straight There be some woods of Pine trees, which are high, without any boughs or leaues to the very top, where they haue a round tuft, and they beare at one time the fruit of three veeres, one pine Apple round and sharpe at the top, hauing some hundreth or more knobs like hasell nuts, in which knob the kernell is of little bignesse, but of such vertue to prouoke wantonnesse, as they serue it at all feasts. All the fields are full of figtrees, not small as with vs, but as big in the body as some Appel-trees, and they haue broad leaues. The fruite hath the forme of a long , and a blacke skinne, and a red iuyce, being to be sucked like sugar in taste. Neither doe I thinke any fruite to bee more pleasant then this pulled from the tree, I say pulled from the tree, because the drie figges exported are not in taste comparable thereunto. 

 In the fields of vpper Italy are great plenty of Almond trees, so as you would say, that a whole Prouince is but one Garden. Like plenty haue they of O iue trees, which yeeld a sweet oyle, vsed by them in stead of butter, and in sorraigne parts for wholsomnesse, yet I cannot think that it can be whok some when it is heated, as the Italians vse it to fry meates. They haue some, but not to great plenty of Pomegranates, which tree is not vnlike that of the white Role, but the leaues are little, and the flowers and the buds of a red colour. The Husbandmen make ditches about the rootes of all these fruite trees, and the inhabitants of pleasant taly are notable in all kind of husbandrie. The Cypresse, Popler and Oake trees, grow in many places, but are little esteemed, as bearing no fruite. Italy vpon the Hilles and Mountaines lying towards the Sunne, yeelds rich Wines, and very nourishing, yet some out of experience say they are not wholsome for fat men, as causing obstructions, and hindring the passage of the vrine, and other cuacuations: but I am sure they are more pleasant in taste, then any other wine whatsoeuer brought into England that euer I tasted. But of all the kinds of Wine to be named in my following discourse, I haue spoken more at large in the first Part, writing my iournall through Italy. 
    
 The Gulfe of Venice affoards fishing to serue that City in good plenty, the Sea of Rome affoards lesse, and that of Genoa none at all. But in the Sea of Genoa neare the Ilands Sardinia and Corsica, they fish Cora  '  s, sold at Genoa for three lyres the ownce. In the markets at Venice they haue great ovsters, but in no great plenty, and diuers kinds of shel-fish, as Cockles, Scalops, and Rasers, called in the Italian tongue Cape tonde, (round Cape) Cape Sante (holy Cape) and Cape longe (long Cape), and these they haue in more plenty, then in most parts of England: but the Oysters are very deare, some twenty for a lyre; and I doe not remember to haue seene shelfish in any other City of Italy, but onely in Venite. Neither haue the Italians any store of fresh-water fish, so as most of their Markets are furnished in very Lent-time with salted and dried fishes, or at least newly dead, which the Germans cannot indure, vsing to see them aliue before they will cate them. 

 They haue at certaine times of the yeere reasonable plentie of birds, but not great in number or variety of kinds, but Hens, and especially those of Turkey or the Indies seeme more plentifully serued in the Markets, because the common sort feedes onely vpon rootes, diuers kinds of pulse, hearbs, and small meates dried or salted. I remember not to haue seene any Storkes in Italy, no not in the free Cities and States, where fabulous Writers say, they most willingly liue, as vnder more They seldome make feasts, but if they make any, then out of their innated pride, disdaining to be surpassed by any, they make them sumptnous, and that much more then ours, alwaies making the comparison equal of one degree against the other. And this is most certaine, that they infinitely passe vs in the expences about their Gardens, in fitting places for birding, in drawing water to them, and adorning the Conduits head with Imagry, in Chapels, and other buildings, of which things some yeeld them fruite, the other last perpetually: for they bestow their money in stable things, to serue their posteritie, where as our greatest expences end in the casting out of excrements, which makes me lesse commend our expences in great prouisions of meate, as well at feasts as daily diet. 
  
 And giue me leaue to hold this paradox, or opinion against that of the common sort; that the English were neuer more idle, neuer more ignorant in manuall Arts, neuer more factious in following the parties of Princes or their Landlords, neuer more base (as I may say) trencher slaues, then in that age, wherein great men keept open houses for all commers and goers. And that in our age, wherein we haue better learned each man to liue of his owne, and great men keepe not such troopes of idle seruants, not onely the English are become very industrious, and skilfull in manuall Artes, but also the tyranny of Lords and Gentlemen is abated, wherby they nourished priuate dissentions and ciuill Warres, with the destruction of the common people. Neither am I moued with the vulgar opinion, preferring old times to ours, because it is apparant, that the Cloysters of Monkes (who spoiled all, that they might bee beneficiall to few), and Gentlemens houses (who nourished a rabble of seruants in idlenesse, and in robbing by the high waies) lying open to all idle people for meate and drinke, were cause of greater ill then good to the Commonwealth. 
      
 For the most part at table they vse blacke or bay salt, which the Venetians hauing of their owne; for bid the vse of any white salt brought into the territory, so as it is onely sold by stealth, and with danger of penaltie. The Magistrate daily vseth to set the price of flesh, and all things sold in the Market, especially in the vpper parts of Italy, and namely at Sienna, where strangers liue very commodiously, and by this custome, a stranger can no more be deceiued, then one of the Country. In the State of Florente, and especially at Sienna, a stranger may liue more commodiously, then in any other part of Italy, because the inhabitants are most curteous (so as at Sienna they admit strangers to conuerse and dance with the chiefe Gentlewomen of the Citie), and because the language, especially at Sienna, is held the most pure, as also for that victuale are very cheape, and strangers neede not stand in feare of being murthered, as in Lombardy they doe. In the State of Milan, there is plenty of all kinds of flesh, especially of mutton, and abundance of whittmeates, being commended aboue all other parts of Italy for delicate butter (not to be had otherwhere, except in some few large Valleys), and excellent cheeses (whereof great quantity is transported into forraigne parts.) And they no lesse then the Netherlanders, serue in butter and cheese euery meale for the first and last dishes. In the Market places of Venice, there is plenty of mutton and veale, sold in little portions and by weight (there as in all Italy), and there is also plenty of fish, hennes, egges, Turkey hennes, and some store of birds, with great abundance of red herrings and pickled herrings, Sardelle, anchone, and like pickled fishes, of Cauiale (a salt liquor made of fish) and Botargo (as I thinke the rone of a fish), of Piacentine cheese, and cheese of Parma, of mushroms, snailes, the hinder parts of frogs (all held for great dainties). And these things are to be had in more abundance, because the common sort eate little or no flesh, or fish, or birds, but onely hearbs, pulse, snailes, and rootes, with white bread. I haue spoken formerly of their fishing at Sea, and their shell-fishes (which they much esteeme), and Sea-fishes are indeed rarely found, but onely at Venice. Also they haue little store of fresh-water fish, onely there is great aboundance of eeles, where the Riuer Po endes in a Lake, neere the Adriatick Sea, in the Dukedome of Feraria. The vpper parts of Italy yeeld the same things, but in a farre lesse quantity, and in Toscany they frequently eate young Goates flesh, which is very good and sauory, and sometimes there will be wild Bores to be sold, and they delight much in fresh curds newly pressed, and made into little cheeses. The Italians sell al kinds of flesh in little pieces, and all things for diet in little portions, that the meaner sort, if they list, may at least taste the greatest dainties. The inner parts of Goates (vulgarly Animale), and the stones of Rammes and Regles, (vulgarly Granella), are esteemed great dainties, especially in Toscany, which we cast away, being very good meate fried. And because the land is more populous then plentifull in victuals, they eate layes and other birdes, which we esteeme vnwholsome. 
  
 In generall the Italians, and more specially the Florentines, are most neare at the Table, and in their Innes from morning to night the Tables are spread with white cloathes, strewed with flowers and figge leaues, with Ingestars or glasses of diuers coloured wines set vpon them, and delicate fruits, which would inuite a Man to eat and drink, who otherwise hath no appetite, being all open to the sight of passengers as they ride by the high way, through their great vnglased windowes. At the Table, they touch no meate with the hand, but with a forke of siluer or other mettall, each man being serued with his forke and spoone, and glasse to drinke. And as they serue small peeces of flesh, (not whole ioints as with vs), so these peeces are cut into small bits, to be taken vp with the forke, and they seeth the flesh till it be very tender. In Summer time, they set a broad earthen vessel full of water vpon the Table, wherein little glasses filled with wine doe swimme for coolenesse. They vse no spits to roast flesh, but commonly stew the same in earthen pipkins, and they feed much vpon little fishes and flesh cut and fried with oyle. They haue no skill in the Art of Cookery, and the meate is serued to the table in white glistering and painted dishes of earth (wherof the finest are much esteemed with vs.) They are not willingly inuited to eate with other men, esteeming basely of those, who liue at other mens trenchers, calling them vulgarly seroccatori d  '  ipasti, shifters for meales. 

They thinke it best to cherrish and increase friendship by meetings in Market places and Gardens, but hold the table and bed vnfit for conuersation, where men should come to eate quickly, and sleepe soundly. Thus not provoking appetite with variety of meates, or eating with others for good fellowship, they must needes be more temperate, then others intised by these meanes to eate beyond hunger. In Cities, where many take chambers in one house, they eate at a common table, but each man hath his owne meat prouided, the Hostesse dressing it, and seruing each man with his owne napkin, glasse, forke, spoone, knife, and ingestar or glasse of wine, which after meate are seuerally and neately laid vp by the Hostesse. And at the table, perhaps one man hath a hen, another a piece of flesh, the third potched egges, and each man seuerall meat after his diet: but it is no courtesie for one to offer another part of his meate, which they rather take to be done in pride, as if he thought that he that had a sallet or egges, could not haue a hen or flesh if hee listed for want of money. To conclude, they hold it no honour or disgrace to liue plentifully or sparingly, so they liue of their owne, and be not in debt, for in that case they are esteemed slaues. Thus liuing of their owne, they giue due honour to superiours, so they returne due respect to them, otherwise they dispise him that is richer, saying in scorne, Let him dine twise a day, and weare two gounes if he will, it is enough for mee to haue conuenient diet and apparrell. They haue a very delicate sauce for rosted meates, called Sauore, made of slices of bread, steeped in broath, with as many Walnuts, and some few leaues of Marioram, beaten in a morter, and mingled therewith, together with the iuyce of Gooseberries, or some sharpe liquor put in when it is set on the table. 
  
 
For the point of drinking, the English at a Feast will drinke two or three healths in remembrance of speciall friends, or respected honourable persons, and in our time some Gentlemen and Commanders from the warres of Netherland brought in the custome of the Germans large garaussing, but this custome is in our time also in good measure left. Likewise in some priuate Gentlemens houses, and with some Captaines and Souldiers, and with the vulgar sort of Citizens and Artisans, large and intemperate drinking is vsed; but in generall the greater and better part of the English, hold all excesse blame worthy, and drunkennesse a reprochfull vice. Clownes and vulgar men onely vse large drinking of Beere or Ale, how much soeuer it is esteemed excellent drinke euen among strangers, but Gentlemen garrawse onely in Wine, with which many mixe sugar; which I neuer obserued in any other place or Kingdome, to be vsed for that purpose. And because the taste of the English is thus delighted with sweetenesse, the Wines in Tauernes, (for I speake not of Merchants or Gentlemens Cellars) are commonly mixed at the filling thereof, to make them pleasant. And the same delight in sweetnesse hath made the vse of Corands of Corinth so frequent in all places, and with all persons in England, as the very Greekes that sell them, wonder what we doe with such great quantities thereof, and know not how we should spend them, except we vse them for dying, or to feede Hogges. 
  
 Touching the Irish dyet, Alwases I except the Fruits, Venison, and some dainties proper to England, and rare in Ireland. And we must conceiue, that Venison and Fowle seeme to be more plentiful in Ireland, because they neither so generally affect dainty foode nor so diligently search it as the English do Many of the English-Irish, haue by little and little been infected with the Irish filthinesse, and that in the very cities, excepting Dublyn, and some of the better sort in Waterford, where the English continually lodging in their houses, they more retaine the English diet. The English-Irish after our manner serue to the table ioynts of flesh cut after our fashion, with Geese, Pullets, Pigges and like rosted meats, but their ordinary food for the common sort is of Whitmeates, and they eate cakes of oates for bread, and drinke not English Beere made of Mault and Hops, but Ale. At Corck I haue seene with these eyes, young maides starke naked grinding of Corne with certaine stones to make cakes thereof, and striking of into the tub of meale, such reliques thereof as stuck on their belly, thighes and more vnseemely parts. 
  
 And for the cheese or butter commonly made by the English Irish, and English man would not touch it with his lippes, though hee were halfe starued; yet many English inhabitants make very good of both kindes. In Cities they haue such bread as ours, but of a sharpe fauour, and some mingled with Annisseeds, and baked like cakes, and that onely in the houses of the better sort. 
  
 At Dublyn and in some other Cities, they haue tauerns, wherein Spanish and French Wines are sold, but more commonly the Merchants sell them by pintes and quartes in their owne Cellers. The Irish Aquauitae, vulgarly called Vsquebagh, is held the best in the World of that kind; which is made also in England, but nothing so good as that which is brought out of Ireland. And the Vsquebagh is preferred before our Aquavita, because the mingling of Raysons, Fennell seede, and other things, mitigating the heate, and making the taste pleasant, makes it lesse in name, and yet refresh the weake stomake with moderate heate, and a good relish. These Drinkes the English-Irish drink largely, and in many families (especially at feasts) both men and women vse excesse therein. And since I haue inpart seene, and often heard from others experience, that some Gentlewomen were so free in this excesse, as they would kneeling vpon the knee, and otherwise garausse health after health with men; not to speake of the wiues of Irish Lords, or to referre it to the due place, who often drinke tell they be drunken, or at least till they voide vrine in full assemblies of men, I cannot (though vnwilling) but note the Irish women more specially with this fault, which I haue obserued in no other part to be a womans vice, but onely in Bohemia: Yet so as accusing them, I meane not to excuse the men, and will also confesse that I haue seene Virgins, as well Gentlewomen as Citizens, commanded by their mothers to retyre, after they had in curtesie pledged one or two healths.
  
 The foresaid wilde Irish doe not thresh their Oates, but burne them from the straw, and so make cakes thereof, yet they seldome eate this bread, much lesse any better kind especially in the time of warre, whereof a Bohemian Baron complained, who hauing scene the Courts of England and Scotland, would needes out of his curiosity returne through Ireland in the heate of the Rebellion; and hauing letters from the King of Scots to the Irish Lords then in Rebellion, first landed among them, in the furthest North, where for eight dayes space hee had found no bread, not so much as a cake of Oates, till he came to eate with the Earle of Tyrone, and after obtaining the Lord Deputies Passe to come into our Army, related this then want of bread to vs for a miracle, who nothing wondred thereat. Yea, the wilde Irish in time of greatest peace impute couetousnesse and base birth to him, that hath any Corne after Christmas, as if it were a point of Nobility to consume all within those festiuall dayes. They willingly eate the hearb Schamrock, being of a sharpe taste, which as they runne and are chased to an fro, they snatch like beasts out of the ditches. 
  
 
