Oliues, if they be ripe, are temperately hot, they are ea∣ten with salt, of the inhabitants where they grow; but they Oliues. are neither good for sawce, nor for meate, for they weaken the stomacke, and breed a putrible and vnwholsome nou∣rishment. But the greene and vnripe Oliues are cold and dry, of an astringent facultie, and these are the Oliues, which are vsually eaten with meate to excite the appetite. They are gathered while they be greene, preserued in pickle, and so transported. They excite the appetite, clense phlegme from the stomacke, corroborate the mouth of it, and stay vomiting; but they are hardly digested, excite thirst, breed grosse and melancholicke humors, and being abundantly eaten, they cause headach and make the belly cosliue, especially those that are preserued onely in salt: wherefore they are not so wholsome a sawce as they are esleemed. They are preserued onely in salt or in a pickle of salt and vinegar. Those that are preserued in salt, are hotter then the other, for they are hot in the second de∣gree, and of greater force in clensing of phlegme from the stomacke: and therefore they are best for them that be phlegmaticke; and worst for the cholericke. But those that are preserued in a pickle of vinegar and salt are of a more temperate nature; they represse choler, and stay vo∣miting more then the other doe, and are conuenient for euery age and constitution, especially for the cholericke, and therefore they are to be preferred before them. But which way socuer they are preserued, the greene or gree∣nish Oliues are to be chosen, and the yellowish or blackish rejected as abhominable for sawce or meate: for the yel∣low ones were too ripe before they were gathered, and the blackish are putrified. The salt liquor or pickle, wherein they are preserued, is an excellent remedie against sof and flagging gummes, and loose teeth, if they be washed and rinsed therewith somewhat hot. 
 Capers are very necessarie for the preseruation of health: they are preserued in vinegar, or in salt, or in a pickle or Capers. brine made of them both, which is the best way: Being thus preserued, they are hot in the first degree, and dry in the second: they are of an abstersiue and opening facultie, they giuevery litle nourishment; but they excite the appe∣tite, notably clense away phlegme adhering to the stomack and guts, kill wormes of the belly, and open the obstructi∣ons of the liuer, but especially of the melt: wherefore the often vse of them with meat is very profitable to phleg∣maticke and melancholicke bodies, to such as haue moyst and waterish stomacks, that are short breathed, that haue hard and ill spleenes, and subiect vnto quartaine feuers. Before they be vsed, the salt must be washed off cleane from them, and they a litle while steeped in cleane water, and after that eaten (as other sallads be) with vinegar, and oyle also if it shall like the eater; or if they be eaten with Oximell, they will not onely be the more acceptable to the taste, but more effectuall also for the purposes afore∣said. 
 The young tender buds of Broome are in the spring Buds of Broome. time gathered and preserued in pickle, in the same manner as Capersare: they excite the appetite, and open the ob∣structions of the melt and liuer no lesse then Capers doe, and are also very profitable in obstructions of the kidneys: wherefore they may well be vsed with meate as Capers are. 
 Sampier is in the like manner preserued in pickle, and Sampier. eaten with meats: it is a very pleasant and familiar sauce, well agreeing with mans bodie. It is hot and dry, of an abstersiue and diureticke facultie: it exciteth the appetite, comforteth the stomacke, openeth the obstructions of the liuer, melt, and especially of the kidneys and bladder, by prouoking vrine: wherefore it is a necessarie sauce, for them that are subiect to the stone, and conuenient for eue∣ry age and constitution of bodie. 
 Radish is also vsed as sauce with meats, but it is a very hard one, and vnwholsome: it is hot and dry, and of an Radish. extenuating facultie. Those that are very tart in taste, are hot in the third degree, and dry in the second. They are accounted the best, that are cleare, tender, and tart in taste, and so they are, because they are of easier concoction, and doe more delight the pallate. Some Physitions com∣mend the eating of Radishes before meat, because they ex∣cite the appetite; and some after meate, because (as they say) they helpe the concoction by depressing the meats; Radish neither good before meat, nor after meat, nor to∣gither with meat. but I constantly affirme, howsoeuer they oblectate the pallate, depresse the meats, or excite the appetite, that they are neither good before meat, nor after meat, nor togither with meat. They are not good to be eaten before meate, for because that they are with much difficultie digested, and make long stay in the stomacke, they hinder both the descension and concoction of the meat that is taken after them, and are also the cause of stinking belchings, which are far greater hurts, then the exciting of the appetite is a com∣moditie. Neither are they good to be eaten after meate, for by reason of the hardnes of their substance, they ra∣ther oppresse the stomacke, then any way helpe the dige∣stion, breed windinesse, and cause noysome belchings, yea though they be taken (euen as we doe cheese) in small quantitie. But our vsuall manner in England is to eat them togither with meat as a sawce, which is the worst way of all; for being in such manner taken, they greatly oppresse the stomacke, ingender raw humors, &amp; aboundance of winde, cause loathsomnes, disturbe and hinder the concoction of the meate that is taken with them, raise vp noysome fumes and most offensiue belchings, which are very hurt∣full to the eyes and head. Wherefore I conclude, that they are vnwholesome any way to be eaten (especially for them that haue weake stomacks) except for them that be pallate-pleasers, and that they are onely good to be vsed in the way of physicke: for they heat, cut, and attenuate grosse humors, prouoke vrine, and procure vomiting. And verily this their heating, cutting, attenuating and vomitorie Why Radishes breed much windinesse &amp; belchings. facultie, is the principall cause, by working vpon the hu∣mors and meate in the stomacke, that they breake, or ra∣ther breed and raise vp so much winde, and auoide it by belchings. 
 Oyle Oliue, which we commonly call Sallet Oyle, if it Oyle. be of the ripe Oliues is moderately hot, and maketh the belly soluble; but by reason of the vnctuous substance and nauseous sweetnesse of it, it deiecteth the appetite, anoyeth the stomacke, impinguateth the liuer, and increa∣seth the substance of it: wherefore it is in no wise to be vsed as a sauce with meats. But the Oyle that is made of the vnripe Oliues, which is called Oyle Omphacine, is not Oyle Om ha∣cine. so grosse and fattie, as the other, and inclineth to a greenish colour: it is somewhat of a cooling and astringent facul∣tie, by reason whereof, it strength eth the stomacke, and represseth the too-much tenuitie, and fluxibilitie of the bloud in cholericke and sanguine bodies: wherefore the vse of it for them that are healthy is very conuenient. Of Butter, which is of great vse in sawces, I haue spoken in the precedent section. 
 Honie is hot and dry in the second degree, and of an Honie, abstersiue and soluble facultie: wherefore it is very whole∣some for them that be old, for such as are phlegmaticke, and of a cold and moyst constitution, especially in the cold seasons of the yeare. It is very profitable for such as be asthmaticke or short breathed, and that are subiect vnto rheumes, so that they be not of a cholericke consti∣tution, because it doth notably clense and mundifie the breast, and lungs, of phlegmaticke and rheumaticke hu∣mors. Wherefore I wish all such as are of a phlegmatick The eating of Honie mor∣nings fasting very profitable for phlegma∣tick bodies, constitution, to accustome the eating of honie mornings fasting, and to walke an houre after it; but it must not be immoderately taken, for, not withstanding that it is of a clensing and opening facultie; yet for all that, if it be ta∣ken in too large a quantitie, it will obstruct and cloy the stomacke, because it consisteth of a grosse substance. But the vse of honie is hurtfull to them that are of hot com∣plexion, because it inflameth the bloud, and is quickly (by Honie for whom vn∣wholsome. reason of the acrimonie of it) conuerted into choler; it is also hurtfull to such as abound with winde, especially the crude and vnclarified honie, because there is in it a windie and excrementall moysture. The way to clarifie it, is to put vnto it a litle water, and so to boyle it and scum it so Clarified Ho∣nie. long as any froth ariseth: for by this meanes the tartnesse and flatulent moysture of it, is for the most part taken away, and consequently becommeth a more wholesome medicinable nourishment. That is the best honie, which is hard in the vessell and curded like sugar, and which is Notes of the best Honie. also of a true and delectable sweetnes, of good smell, and of a cleare yellowish colour; or if it shall be of a whitish colour, so that none of the said notes of goodnesse be wan∣ting in it, it is neuer the worse. New honie is better then olde, because some of the moysture of it is in continuance New Honie why better then olde. consumed, whereupon it becommeth more dry, and tarte in taste. 
 Sugar is temperately hot and moyst, of a detersiue fa∣cultie, and good for the obstructions of the breast and Sugar. lungs; but it is not so strong in operation against phlegme as honie. And here it may be demanded whether Sugar or Honie be the better? Wherevnto I answer, that Su∣gar Whether Su∣gar be whole∣somer then Honie. is generally more wholsome then Honie: for it is of a better temperature, of pleasanter taste, not so fulsome as Honie, and therefore more acceptable to the stomack, and consequently farre better for sauce, and nourishment. It may be giuen in feuers, because it doth not inflame the bodie, nor so soone turne into choler as honie doth; and to conclude all in a word, Sugar agreeth with all ages, and all complexions; but contrariwise Honie anoyeth many, especially those that are cholerick, or full of winde in their bodies. Onely Honie is better for them that haue very cold and moyst stomacks, and that haue their breasts stuf∣fed with phlegme. Water and fine Sugar onely brewed togither, is very good for hot, cholericke, and dry bodies, that are affected with phlegme in their breast: for through the coldnes and moysture of it, it excellently tempereth the heate and siccitie of the breast and stomack, and clea∣reth them of phlegme. Sugar by how much the whiter it is, by so much the purer and wholsomer it is, which is eui∣dent by the making and refining of it. It is made much after the same manner and forme as white salt is. The Su∣gar is nothing else but the iuyce of certaine Canes or Reedes, which is extracted by boyling them in water, euen after the same manner and fashion as they doe Salt. This first extracted Sugar is grosse, and of red colour: it is hot and dry, somewhat tart in taste, and of a detersiue facultie: by longer boyling, it becommeth hard, which we call Red Sugar Candie, which is only good in glysters, for to clense and irritate the expulsiue facultie. This grosse reddish Red Sugar Candie. Sugar is againe mixed with water, and boyled, and com∣meth to be of an whitish colour, lesse hot, more moyst, and more acceptable to the taste and stomacke. This kinde of second Sugar, we call common or kitchin Sugar. This being the third time diluted, and decocted, is of an excel∣lent temperament, most white, and of a singular pleasant taste: this is the best, purest, and wholsomest Sugar, which giueth a grace vnto whatsoeuer it be mixed. And this by The best Su∣gar. rather boyling becommeth hard, and of a resplendent white colour, which we commonly call White Sugar Candie: this is the best Sugar for diseases of the breast, White Sugar Candie. for it is not altogither so hot as the other Sugar, and is also somewhat of a more pure and subtile moysture. Where∣fore it excellently asswageth and moystneth the asperitie and siccitie of the tongue, mouth, throat, and winde-pipe; and is very good for a dry cough, and other infirmities of the lungs: it is most accommodate for all hot and dry constitutions. 
 There are diuers kinds of mixt sauces deuised &amp; com∣posed Compound sauces. by the skill of Cookes, to oblectate the pallate and throat, to excite the appetite, and to adde a grace vnto bad meats, which of ingurgitating belly-gods are greatly estee∣med. But I aduise all such as are respectiue of their health, to refraine the vse of all confused saucs; or to be very circumspect, not onely in the vse of them, because they al∣lure the stomacke to a gluttenous taking of meate; but also in the choise of them: for they onely are wholsome, that are somewhat of a soure taste, by putting to them a conuenient quantitie of vinegar, veriuce, or of the iuyce of Orenges or Limmons. But let temperate men, and such as are studious of their health, content themselues with the simpler kinds of sauces, because they are for the sto∣macke and health of the bodie most conuenient. 
 Whether Cinnamon be the best and wholesomest of all spices? CInnamon is hot and dry in the third degree, and of an excellent aromaticall substance: for fragrancie of smell and iucunditie of taste, it excelleth all other spices: it strengthneth the stomacke, preuenteth and correcte h putrefaction of humors, resisteth poysons, exceedingly comforteth the principall parts, especially the heart and liuer, and reviueth the spirits. It also openeth obstructions, and strengthneth the retentiue facultie of all the parts, by drying vp and consuming the crude and excrementall moysture. It is conuenient for all bodies, especially for them that are of cold and moyst temperature, and that haue weake stomacks; but the ouer-much vse of it, is hurtfull to such as are by constitution cholericke. Of one pound of Cinnamon grossely bearen, a pound of white Sugar, a gallon of Sacke, and a quart of Rosewater, Cinnamon water. steeped togither 24 houres, is drawne by distillation, a water of singular efficacie against sowning, debilitie of the spirits, and principall parte. Wherefore I wish euery man, that is respectiue of his health and life, especially such as are of weake nature, neuer to be without it, and to take now and then a spoonfull or two, especially when occasion shall instant the vse of it. 
 Next vnto Cinnamon, for goodnes and aromaticall Cloues. substance, are Cloues: they are hot and dry in the third degree, they are not of so penetrating a force as Cinna∣mon, but more drying; they consume, and dissolue crude and windie humors, comfort, and corroborate all the prin∣cipall parts of the bodie, especially the stomack, &amp; heart, excite Venus, helpe the concoction, discusse winde, make the breath sweet, stay vomiting, and fluxes of the belly proceeding of a cold cause, or weaknes of the retentiue facultie: And as they are very good for a weake, cold, and windie stomacke, so are they also for a liuer collapsed by cold. They are very profitable for the aged, for such as are phlegmaticke, and subiect to rheumes, especially in the winter; but the often and much vse of them is hurtfull vnto cholericke and dry bodies. 
 Nutmeg and Mace are of one and the same facultie: Nutmegs and Mace. they are hot and dry in the second degree, somewhat of an astringent facultie: they strengthen the stomacke, especi∣ally the Mace: they comfort the braine and animall fa∣culties, especially the Nutmeg: they stay seminall fluxes, and are good for cold vterine affects, especially the Nut∣meg: they discusse winde, and inhibit fluxes of the belly, proceeding from a cold cause or weaknes of the retentiue facultie. They are good for olde, cold, and phlegmaticke bodies; but the much vse of them, by reason of their dry temperature, and astrictiue facultie, is hurtfull to cholerick and melancholick constitutions, and them that haue co∣stiue bellies. Nutmegs con∣dited. 
 Nutmegs preserued in Sugar, as soone as they be taken from the tree, are of a very pleasant and delightsome taste, and of most profitable vse, for comforting of the stomack and braine, to be eaten now and then, especially in the mor∣nings fasting, and presently after meales: and because they are of a lesse drying and binding facultie; they are very good for euery state and constitution of bodie. Where∣fore I aduise all those that haue weake stomacks, and that liue a studious kinde of life, neuer to be without them, that they may take of them at their pleasure. 
 All the sorts of Pepper are hot and dry in the height of Pepper. the third degree, if not in the beginning of the fourth: they are of an heating, and resoluing facultie: they excite the appetite, comfort the stomacke, helpe the concoction, and all cold diseases of the breast and stomacke, by con∣cocting, dissipating, exiccating, and expelling crude and flatuous humors: they also strongly heat the sinewes and muscles, and all cold parts. The round blacke Pepper is in greatest vse for sauce and seasonings of meats. It must be moderately vsed, for otherwise, by reason of the acrimonious heat that it hath, it will quickly inflame the bowels, adure the bloud, and consume the genitall seede. By reason of the tenuitie of its substance, it must be but grossely beaten, that the heat thereof may longer continue and operate in the stomacke: for being smally beaten, it will make lesser stay in the stomacke, and mesaraick veines, and by reason of the penetrating force of it, sooner ouer∣heat and dry the liuer, prouoke vrine, in flame the bloud, and the reines. It is a spice, most conuenient for cold, moist, and grosse meats, for cold and moist seasons, for the aged, for the phlegmaticke, for them that haue cold, weake, and windie stomacks, and that are subiect to distillations. But to hot, cholericke, and dry bodies, the much or often vse thereof is very hurtfull, especially in hot and dry seasons. 
 Ginger is the roote of a certaine plant growing in Bar∣barie Ginger. and other hot countries: being greene and newly digged vp, it is hot in the third degree, and moyst in the first; but when it is growne dry, because that the moysture of it is consumed, it is dry in the second degree, if not in the third: it is of an heating and digesting quality; but it heateth with a more durable heat then pepper doth, and therefore it is more conuenient for a cold and moyst sto∣macke, for which it is of singular efficacie, it discusseth winde, helpeth the digestion, and consumeth crude and phlegmaticke humours. It is very profitable for the aged, such as are phlegmaticke, and full of crude, flatulent moy∣sture in their stomacks, especially in cold and moyst sea∣sons; but the vse of it is not so good in hot seasons, nor for them that are by constitution cholericke, because the often and much vse of it will enflame, and distemper hot and dry bodies. 
 The greene roots preserued, which wee commonly call greene ginger, or ginger condite, are of pleasant taste, very Greene Ginger. good to be eaten often times, especially mornings fasting, of them that haue weake stomacks, and bad memories, and that are subiect vnto rheumes: for they greatly comfort the stomacke and head, and are also very accommodate for all the purposes aforesayd. Wherefore the vse of them is for old men and Students most profitable. They also in∣crease the geniture. They are preserued two wayes, either in a syrupe of sugar, or couered ouer and incrustated accor∣ding Candied Ginger. to art with sugar, which wee commonly call Candied Ginger: this is best for them that be very phlegmatick, and rheumatick, and that haue very cold and moyst stomacks, because they are of a more exiccating nature; but the Gin∣ger that is preserued in syrupe, is more conuenient for all other bodies, and for the two purposes last aboue recited, because it drieth not, as the candied ginger doth, but is ra∣ther hot and moyst in quality, by reason of a substantiall moysture, that it receiueth from the syrupe, wherein it is preserued. The roots that are preserued in syrupe, while they be fresh, greene, and full of iuyce, are of soft and ten∣der substance, and of a most pleasant taste: whereby you may detect the fraud of them, that boyle the dry Ginger, to make it soft, and afterward put it into a syrupe, and sell it for greene condite Ginger: for it is somewhat blackish, tough, and hard in biting, and not so delectable in taste. 
 Saffron is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first: Saffron. the moderate vse of it, wonderfully refresheth, comforteth, strengthneth, and exhilarateth the heart, for there is so great societie betwixt it and the heart, that it is without delay car∣ried thither, and for that cause it is mixed with all cardiacall medicines. It expelleth and preserueth from all pestilen∣tiall infections, it openeth the obstructions of the liuer and gall, and is therefore good against the yellow Iaundise: it prouoketh the menstruall courses, and birth, and therfore women with childe must carefully shun the vse of it: it also dilateth the breast, openeth the obstruction of the lungs, and is for them that bee short and thicke breathed, the last and greatest remedie. But if it bee not moderately vsed, and that in very small quantity at a time, it is hurtfull and dangerous: for it causeth the head-ach, and offendeth the braine and senses, by sending vp sharpe fumes: it also deiecteth the appetite, and causeth faintnesse, by too much relaxing the hearr, and pouring out the spirits. 
 OF FRVITS, ROOTS, and HEARBES, that serue for meat, and are vsually eaten. SECT. VII. Whether new fruits eaten raw, yeeld any wholsome or pro∣sitable nourishment to the bodie? A Lthough all new fruits that abound with moysture, as most doe, may seeme to be iudged vnwhosome to be eaten raw, by reason that they fill the body with crude and waterish humours, that di∣spose the bloud vnto putrefaction; yet the moderate and tempestiue vse of them, may be very good and profitable, for such as vse to heat and dry their bodies with great labour and exercise, for all hot constitutions, especially for the cholericke, be∣cause they extinguish thirst, coole and moysten the body, and represse the vehement heat and ebullition of choler. But to the phlegmatick, and such as haue crude stomacks, all raw fruits, especially those that abound with moysture, are greatly hurtfull, as heereafter shall bee particularly de∣monstrated. 
 And here, before I begin to discourse of alimentary sim∣ples, I will aduertise the Reader somwhat, for his better vn∣derstanding, concerning the fouredegrees of qualities, that Foure degrees in the quali∣ties of Sim∣ples. Physicians constitute and define to be in Simples: as those are sayd to be hot or cold, &amp;c. in the first degree, that alter a temperate bodie; yet if they be hot or cold, &amp;c. but in the beginning of the degree (for euery degree hath so ample a latitude, that in euery one we constitute three stations, and therefore of those things that are in the first degree, some are sayd to be in the beginning of the degree, some in the middle, and some in the end) they doe not so euidently alter, but that some consideratiue examination is needfull for discerning of the alteration. In the second degree are those that doe so manifestly alter, as that there is no more neede of examination, or coniecture, for vnderstanding of the alteration: &amp; of this sort are hony &amp; figs for heat, and lettuce for coldnesse and moystnesse, &amp;c. Of the third de∣gree are those that doe strongly alter, as Hyssop, Time, Cloues, Sacke, if it bee not new: and in the same degree you shall finde Time to exceede Hyssop in heat. Of the fourth degree are those, that doe very greatly and vehe∣mently alter, such as in heating, are of a burning force, and in cooling of a stupefying. Wherefore that may bee sayd to be hot or cold, &amp;c. in the first degree, which is but slen∣derly perceiued of the gustatiue sense: that in the second, which is very manifestly perceiued: that in the third, which is so strongly perceiued, as that it somewhat offen∣deth the sense: and that in the fourth, which very greatly affecteth and annoyeth both the sence and bodie. And thus much concerning the vnderstanding of the foure de∣grees in the primary qualities of Simples. And now be∣cause that all fruits, roots, and hearbes, haue for the most part some medicinable facultie, and are also oftentimes of∣fensiue vnto man, because they engender crude, grosse, and flatulent humours, I will particularly write of such as be in vse among vs in England, declaring their hurtfull qualities with their good, and how they may be rightly vsed, and of whom, with most profit, and least hurt: And first of all of Apples, because of all fruits they are most plentifull a∣mong vs. 
 Apples are of a cold and moyst temperature, abounding Apples. with a superfluous, crude, and windie moysture: yet more, or lesse, according to the different kindes of them: for there are many and sundry sorts of Apples, whose diuers natures and faculties, may by the difference of their sub∣stance and taste bee best knowne and described. For those apples that are of a solid substance, giue a more plentifull and durable nourishment; but they are more hardly dige∣sted, and more slowly distributed. Those that are of a soft substance, are easily digested, and distributed; but they giue a thin, waterish, and excrementall nourishment. But those that are of a mixt substance, that is, neither too hard, nor too soft, are both for concoction, and also for nutri∣ment the best. Now, as concerning the taste: some apples are sweet, some soure, some of a middle taste, both sweet and soure. The sweet apples are not so cold as the other be, but are rather hot in the first degree: wherfore they yeeld more nourishment then other apples doe, and the same not so moyst; but they are not so pleasant to the taste, nor so acceptable to the stomacke. The soure apples are cooling, and therefore they yeeld little nourishment, and the same cold and crude; but the raw iuyce of them, by reason that it is of a cooling, cutting, and penetrating faculty, with some small astriction also adioyning, is good for an hot cholericke stomacke, because it mightily represseth the fer∣uent acrimonie of choler. But those apples that bee of a middle taste, that is, such as are both sweet and soure, are for pleasantnesse of taste, acceptablenesse to the stomacke, goodnesse of iuyce, and wholsomnesse of nourishment, be∣side their medicinable quality against melancholie, and melancholike affects, the best and wholsomest: for they attemper the siccity of that humour, and corroborate the heart by their comfortable sauour, and the stomacke, by their light astrictory faculty. Such are our Queene-apples and Russelings, as the principallest, and next our Rosiars, Pearemaines and Pippins, Deusans, &amp;c. There are also some Apples that are insipid, or without taste: they are of a waterish substance, altogether vnpleasant to the stomack, and vnprofitable for meat. All apples generally are vn∣wholsome in the regiment of health, to bee eaten raw, or before they be full ripe, or soone after they be gathered, ex∣cept of them that haue hot cholericke stomacks, because they engender crude, waterish, and flatulent humors; but if they bee baked, or rosted, by reason that their flatuous cruditie is by the heat consumed, they become more dige∣stible, more wholsome, more pleasant to the taste, and more acceptable to the stomacke. Apples may bee eaten raw with least detriment in the winter, and all the yeere fol∣lowing, according to the durablenesse of them (for they doe soonest rot, that are of soft substance, by reason that Why some apples putrifie sooner then other? they haue greatest store of moysture, and those are longer kept which are of harder substance, because there is in them lesse store of moysture: for the aboundance of excremen∣tall moysture is the cause why they putrifie) because by that time they lose much of their waterish and excrementall moysture. And they are best to bee eaten last after meat, because they confirme the stomacke, make good digestion, especially in a cholericke stomacke. And they are also good to bee eaten at going to bed, of them that haue hot and cholericke stomacks, or that are distempered by drin∣king much wine, or other strong drinke, because they coole the stomacke, and represse the vapours that ascend to the head. Wherefore I conclude, that apples are most conue∣nient for young men, for them that be cholericke, and that haue hot strong stomacks; but to old men, to them that be phlegmaticke, that haue cold and weake stomacks, and that are subiect to aches of the sinewes and ioynts, they are very hurtfull, especially if they be eaten raw.
Peares are much of the nature of Apples, and of the Peares. same temperature; but they are somewhat of a binding qualitv, especially those that be of an harsh and soure taste. The difference of them must be discerned by their taste and substance, euen as of Apples. Those are the best, which are of a pleasánt soure sweet taste: for they comfort the heart, the stomacke, and asswage thirst. Peares make a wa∣terish and corrupt bloud, and engender the windie collick: wherefore they are very hurtfull to the aged, to them that be phlegmatick, that haue colst stomacks, and that are sub∣iect to the windie collick; but they are wholsome enough, or at leastwise lesse hurtfull for hot, dry and cholericke bo∣dies, especially if they eat them not immoderately. They are most hurtfull to bee eaten before meat, because they binde the belly, especially those that bee somewhat soure, and fill the stomacke with crude and flatulent humours. They are best to bee eaten after meat, because they fortifie the digestion, represse the ascending of superfluous vapors to the head, by strengthning and shutting vp the mouth of the stomacke, and by reason of their compressiue faculty, being eaten after meat, they make the belly soluble, and helpe the subduction of excrements. Baked Peares are much wholsomer then raw, and more agreeable to euery age and constitution, especially to the phlegmaticke: they are acceptable to the taste and stomacke, easily digested, and giue a good and wholsome nutriment. 
 Peare-Wardons, in regard of the solidnesse of their Wardons. substance, may bee longest kept: they are of all sorts of Peares the best and who som st. They are not to be eaten raw, because that, in regard of the duritie of their substance, they are very hardly digested, and breede a crude and fla∣tulent humour; yet they may be to an hot and cholericke stomacke well liking and agreeable, especially after the drinking of much strong wine or beere, because by sigil∣lating the mouth of the stomacke, and also by reason of their cold and crude substance, they represse and infrigi∣date the hot fumes that vaporate to the head. But being baked or rosted, they are a delicate meat, and not onely good for them that be healthy, but also for such as be sick∣ly, or sicke, because they are very pleasant to the taste, and acceptable to the stomacke, easily digested, greatly comfort and refresh a weake stomacke, and giue vnto the bodie very good and wholsome nutriment. 
 Quince-Pearea are of a verie hard and wooddish sub∣stance: Quince-Peares. as they are very vnacceptable to the taste and sto∣macke: so they giue vnto the bodie a verie vnwholsome and earthie nourishment. They are onely good for them that affect strange varieties, and that doe loue with great expence, to metamorphize meats of bad iuyce. 
 Quinces are cold and dry, and of a binding faculty, they Quinces. a e good to stay vomitings, and all kindes of fluxes. Those that are a little sweet are not so cold, nor so binding, as those that be soure: for the soure ones are cold and dry in the se∣cond degree, and of a strong binding facultie. To be eaten raw, they are no better then raw Beefe, for they are of verie hard concoction, of vnpleasant taste, and of most vnwhol∣some nourishment. But the iuyce of raw Quinces taken by it selfe, or with a little sugar, especially of the soure ones, may be very good for an hot and cholericke stomacke, for cholericke vomitings and fluxes, and for cardiacall paines of the stomacke, because it quencheth the thirst, and migh∣tily represseth the acrimonie of choler. Quinces baked with Sugar, Cynamon, &amp;c. or preserued, are pleasant, wholsome, and comfortable, especially to bee eaten after meales, because they helpe the digestion, by closing and shutting vp the mouth of the stomacke, and represse the ascending of superfluous vapours to the head. Being ta∣ken before meales, they binde the bellie, and after meales, if they be taken in too large a quantitie, they loose and mol∣lifie the same, by a forceable depressing of the meats: and therefore some commend the much vse of them after meales, for such as are commonly costiue; but they great∣ly erre, because by reason of their compressiue and depres∣siue force, they protrude and driue downe the meats from the stomack, before they be digested. The Cotiniate, Marmalade. or Marmalade made of Quinces, if it be well and accurate∣ly done, is verie delectable to the taste and stomack, it com∣forteth the heart, and wonderfully refresheth a weake sto∣macke, and maketh it strong to retaine the meat, vntill it be perfectly digested, and is also verie good and profitable for the staying of all kindes of fluxes, both of the bellie and other parts. Quinces baked, or preserued, or the Cotiniate made of them, taken in a moderate quantitie, are verie good and wholsome for all ages and bodies, espe∣cially by reason of their comfortatiue &amp; astrictiue facultie, for them that haue weake and loose stomacks; except for such as are wont to be costiue, or affected with too much astriction of the stomacke; for whom by reason of their astringent facultie they are not conuenient. 
 The iuicie substance of the Pomegranet is wholesome and profitable for the stomacke, and therefore good to be Pomegranet. eaten, notwithstanding that it yeeldeth a thin and small nourishment. Some Pomegranets are sweet, some soure, and some of a middle sauour, both sweet and soure. The sweet ones are not cold as the rest, but rather hot in the first degree, and temperately moyst: they clense the mouth of the stomacke, moysten the breast and spirituall parts, and make the belly soluble; but they breede winde, and in a cholerick stomacke, they are quickly conuerted into cho∣ler. In feuers (by reason of their heat and flateousnes) they are not to be admitted. They are most conuenient for them that are of a melancholick temperature, &amp; most hurt∣full to the cholerick. The soure ones are cold in the second degree, and of a stiptick facultie: they are more medicina∣ble, &amp; more fit for physicke vses, then the other sorts are: they quench thirst, extinguish the burning heat of choler, corroborate the mouth of the stomacke, stay fluxes and cholericke vomitings, inhibit the ascending of vapors to the head, and are very profitable in acute feuers, and the Car∣diacall Passion proceeding of choler. By reason of their acerbitie, they are soone offen siue to the sinewes, teeth, and gummes; but the sourenes of them is well mitigated with sugar, or the soure may be eaten togither with the sweet, for so the one doth correct the hurts of the other. They are good for an hot stomacke and liuer, and there∣fore very conuenient for them that are of a cholericke temperature; but for a cold stomacke, and especially for them that be olde and phlegmatick they are very hurtfull, because they constringe and coarctate the breast. The Pomegranets that are of a middle taste are almost of the same force and efficacie: they are not altogither so cold, nor so binding, by reason whereof they are more plersant to the taste, and more acceptable to the stomack, and there∣fore more fit for vse in time of health. They are best to be taken after meales to strengthen the mouth of the sto∣macke, and to stop the rising vp of vapors, especially in them that haue hot stomacks. They are also good to be eaten in the way of physick about foure houres after meals, or in the morning fasting, of them that haue hot stomacks, and also weake a d subiect to vomiting through the di∣stemperance of choler: for they haue a small abstersion, with some astriction and refrigeration; by reason where∣of they purifie and corroborate the stomacke, preuent the corruption of the meat, quench thirst, and extinguish the heat of choler. Wherefore the vse of them is most pro∣fitable for them that are cholericke, and that haue hot sto∣macks and liuers, and most hurtfull to them that be phle∣gmaticke, or that haue cold stomacks. The rinds, kernels, and flowers of Pomegranets are all of a binding nature, and of much vse in physicke. 
 Peaches and Aprecocks are of one and the same nature: they are cold and moyst in the second degree: they yeeld Peaches and Aprecocks, a cold, crude and vnwholsome nourishment; they ingen∣der winde, make the bloud waterish, and subiect to putre∣faction. They are more hurtfull to be eaten after other meats then before; for if they be eaten after other meats, they, floting in the higher parts of the stomacke, are both quickly corrupted, and doe also corrupt the other meats; but being eaten before other meats, they excite the appe∣tite, quench thirst, and by reason of their moyst and slippery substance, easily and quickly descend, and also cause the mea s that are taken after them to passe downe the sooner. Wherefore it is not good to eat them, but when the sto∣macke is empty; and by reason of the corruptiblenes of their substance, a good draught of Sacke, or such like strong wine must be sent presently after them to digest and correct their crude and flateous moysture. But I hold it best for such as respect their health, and can subiect their appetite, vtterly to eschew the vse of these and such like horarie and quickly perishing fruits, that fill the bodie with crude, phlegmaticall, and corruptible humors. They are conuenient, or lesse hurtfull for young men that haue hot and strong stomacks, and for such as are of a cholerick and sanguine temperature; but for olde men, for them that be phlegmaticke, and that haue weake stomacks, and sub∣iect to winde, they are very hurtfull. 
 Medlars and Seruices are of one and the same nature: they are cold and dry in the second degree, and of an Medlars and Se uices. astringent facultie: wherefore they must not be eaten be∣fore, but after meats, in like manner as all other things ought that are of a binding facultie to close vp and cor∣roborate the stomacke: and they must be moderately ea∣ten, for otherwise they will oppresse the stomacke, hinder the concoction, and engender a cold, grosse, and melan∣cholicke iuyce. But in case of binding they are best to be eaten before meat, or at any other time when the stomack is empty: they strongly represse choler, and stop chole∣ricke vomitings and egestions. They are not fit for meat, vntill by keeping they become soft and tender; but the iuyce of them (being greene and hard) is very profitable for physicke vses, when as their is much neede of binding. Medlars and Seruice berries are conuenient for young men that haue strong stomacks, for them that be ouer laxatiue, or subiect to vomiting, and that are by constitu∣tion cholericke; but to olde men, to them that are of a phlegmaticke or melancholicke temperature, and that are commonly costiue, they are very hurtfull. 
 The vnripe Mulberies are cold and dry almost in the Mulber ies. third degree and doe mightily binde: they are profitable for medicine, but not for meate. The ripe and new gathe∣red Mulberries are moyst in the second degree, they are also cooling, notwithstanding the modicum of heate in them, and a litle binding, which is euident by their taste. They are acceptable to the stomacke, but they yeeld litle nourishment; they excite the appetite, represse choler, and by reason of their much moysture, greatly moysten the in∣ward parts, quench thirst, helpe the asperitie of the throat, quickly descend from the stomacke, and make the belly soluble. They must be taken, by reason of the moysture and slipperinesse of their substance, before meat, or at any other time when the stomacke is empty; for they are quickly corrupted, and are offensiue to the stomacke, vn∣lesse they speedily descend: and therefore they are not good to be taken after meat, because the meat will hinder their passage. And for the same cause they are very hurt∣full for them that haue impure stomacks, for in such, they greatly engender winde, and increase crude and corrupti∣ble humors. They are conuenient for an hot season, for young men, for such as are of a cholericke and sanguine temperature; but hurtfull for olde men, and them that be phlegmaticke. 
 The greene and ripe Figs are hot and moyst in the first Figgs. degree: the dry or barrell Figs are hot and dry in the se∣cond degree, and withall somewhat sharpe and biting. They are of an abstersiue and diureticke facultie; they are easily digested, and do nourish more then other Autumne fruits. They are best to be eaten in the morning fasting, and at any other time when the stomacke is empty; for so they breed the better iuyce, and are the more medicina∣ble for clensing of the breast and lungs, which is a speciall vertue that Figs haue: being taken after meate, or before the stomacke be empty, especially the new ripe Figs; they quickly corrupt in the stomacke, and fill the bodie with crude and flatulent humors. The new ripe Figs doe giue a more moyst and flateous nourishment, then the dry ones doe, which puffeth vp the esh, and filleth the belly with winde; and yet by their windinesse they little offend, because they quickly descend and make the belly soluble, by reason wherof the winde that they breed doth soone passe away; and in this respect, they are lesse hurt∣full then other Autnmne fruicts. They cheifly annoy their stomacks that are subiect to the winde collicke: and therefore it is good for such to refraine the vse of them. The dry barrell Figs are of a stronger clensing, cutting, extenuating, resoluing, and concocting facultie, and there∣fore more effectuall for clensing of phlegme from the breast and stomacke, and for olde infirmities of the lungs. They engender cholericke and siticulous humors; and therefore they are very hurtfull to the bowels that are in∣flamed, or full of choler. The much vse of them, not only because they engender ebullient humors, but also by rea∣son of their propertie of carrying forth corrupt humors, that reside in the bodie, vnto the skin, causeth itching, and scabbinesse, and oftentimes also the lowsie euill. They are conuenient and wholsome for them that be olde, that be phlegmatick, that are subiect to obstructions of the breast, and for cold and moyst seasons; but to the cholerick, and them that haue hot liuers they are hurtfull, especially the often and immoderate vse of them. 
 The greene and ripe Dates are hot and moyst in the Dates. first degree; but if they be olde their heat is increased, and moysture abated. The soft, moyst, and sweet ones are to be chosen, because they giue a more restoratiue and com∣fortable nourishment. Those that are somewhat soure and of an vnpleasant taste are more binding, and altogi∣ther vnprofitable for nourishment; and so are also those that are ouer dry or putrified. All Dates are of an astrin∣gent facultie, they yeeld a grosse, clammie, and an impin∣guating nourishment, by reason whereof they are very good for such as are in a consumption, or haue weake li∣uers, or subiect vnto any fluxe, or waste. But by reason of their grosse and obstructiue iuyce, they are hurtfull to such as are subiect to obstructions, especially of the liuer and spleene. They must be boyled in broths, or added vnto other physicall confections, that are made to strengthen &amp;c: for to be eaten they are not fit for any age or consti∣tution, because they breede winde, offend the head, and corrupt the teeth. Moreouer the greene and ripe Dates doe fill the bodie with crude humors; and the dry ones are of hard concoction, cause gnawings in the stomacke, and doe breede a iuyce which is quickly conuerted into choler. 
 There are diuers sorts of Plums, both of the garden, and also of the field, and of sundry colours, and of very diffe∣rent Plums. faculties. The greene and ripe ones of what sort soeuer they are, doe coole and moysten, and fill the bodie with crude and corruptible humors; yet some are more wholsome, or at least lesse hurtfull then other: they may best be distinguished by their taste: for some are sweete, some soure, and some of a middle taste, both sweet &amp; soure. The sweet Plums doe giue more nourishment then the rest, and doe more loose the belly; but by reason of their ouer-much moysture (for they are completely moyst in the third degree) they relaxe and weaken the stomacke, and for the same reason also the nourishment which they yeeld is nothing good at all, but excrementall. They are most hurtfull to them that be phlegmatick, and are only conuenient for those that would moysten and keepe their bodies soluble; for by their excessiue moysture and slip∣perinesse, they doe moysten the bodie, and mollifie the belly. But they must be eaten before meales, or when the stomacke is empty; for if they be eaten after meales, as our manner is to eat them, or before that the meat is de∣scended from the stomacke, they spoyle the concocti∣on, and fill vp the stomacke with crude and corruptible humors. 
 The soure and harsh Plums, as Bullasis and other that Wilde Plums. grow wilde, and also the vnripe Plums, of what sort soe∣euer, whiles they are sharpe and soure, are cold &amp; binding, and the more harsh they are, the more binding: they quench thirst, excite the appetite, binde the belly, represse choler, and extinguish the burning heat of it; but they are not meete for meat, esp cially those that are harsh, because they yeeld to the bodie litle or no nourishment at all, and are by reason of their astriction, and duritie of substance very hurtfull to the breast and stomacke; yet neuerthelesse the moderate vse of them may be, as Phy∣sicke, very profitable to a cholericke stomacke. The iuyce of them, especially of Sloes boyled with a small quantitie of Sugar, and so kept, is of excellent efficacie for stopping of the laske and bloudy flixe, and all other issues of bloud whatsoeuer. The Plums that are of a middle rellish, such as are our Damsons &amp;c. are the best Damsons. and wholsomest: they are cold and moyst in the second degree, they are more acceptable to the taste and stomack, and yeeld (although little, yet) better nourishment then the rest: they excite the appetite, quench thirst, re∣presse choler, and somewhat also loose the belly: they must also be eaten before meales, or when the stomacke is empty. These, as also all other sorts of Plums, are best for them that are young, that are by constitution cholerick, and that haue hot and strong stomacks; but to them that are olde, that are phlegmaticke, that haue weake and cold stomacks, and that are subiect to the winde collicke, they are very hurtfull, because they breede waterish and flatu∣lent humors. Plums stewed and eaten with Sugar are somewhat wholsomer then the raw ones, and more conue∣nient for the stomacke. 
 Dryed Plums, which are commonly called Prunes, are Prunes. wholsomer and more pleasant to the stomacke, then the greene and dry Plums: they yeeld much better nourish∣ment, and such as cannot easily putrifie, by reason that their crude and superfluous moysture is dryed vp and consumed. The Dammaske and Spanish Prunes are the best, because they are the sweetest: being boyled in broths they loose the belly and excrete out choler: being stewed and eaten betweene or before meales, they are most plea∣sant to the taste, excellently refresh a weake stomacke, and doe also mollifie the belly. They are most conuenient for them that are of a cholericke and sanguine constitution. French Prunes, and all such as are somewhat soure in taste, are also somewhat of a binding, and not of a soluble facultie. 
 Grapes, for that they are pleasant to the taste, and also Grapes. nourish much, may haue the preheminence among the Autumne fruicts. As they are diuers in taste, so are they also in qualitie: for sweet Grapes are hot in the first degree, and moyst in the second: they nourish most, and most of all make the bodie soluble; but the nourishment which commeth of them is ouer-moyst and windie, which troubleth the belly, and puffeth vp the whole bodie. Soure Grapes are cold and moyst, they quench thirst, and migh∣tily extinguish the ouer much heate of the stomacke and liuer, represse the sharpnesse of choler, and cholericke vo∣mitings, excite the appetite, and strengthen the stomacke that is weakned through the distemperance of choler. They are hurtfull to euery age and constitution, except to them that are young, and of an hot and cholericke temperature. The Grapes that are harsh in taste, either by nature, or (as all Grapes are of what sort soeuer) before they be ripe, are very cold and astringent: the iuyce of them is onely profitable in the way of physicke to coole, and to represse cholericke vomitings and egestions. Those Grapes that are of a soure sweet taste, are for temperature and facultie in a meane betweene the soure and the sweet: they excite the appetite, coole the heat of the stomack and liuer, quench thirst, represse the heat of choler, and excrete it thorow the belly. But all Grapes that are newly ga∣thered, and eaten raw, doe yeeld vnto the bodie an ouer∣moyst and excrementall nourishment, they trouble the belly, fill the stomacke with winde, and inflate the melt, especially if they be immoderately eaten. But of all the sorts of Grapes, the soure and austere in taste are for meat the worst: for such kinde of Grapes doe very much hin∣der the concoction of the stomacke, and engender a cold and raw iuyce, which is seldome or neuer conuerted into good bloud. The sweet Grapes, and such also as are a little soure, being thorow ripe, are lesse hurtfull: for their iuyce is hotter, and is easilier dispersed through the liuer, and veines. And if they be kept two or three dayes after they be gathered, and then eaten, they doe nourish the better, and are the lesse windie, and troublesome to the belly, by reason that some part of their superfluous moy∣sture is in that space consumed. But in the eating of Grapes this Caution must be obserued, that neither the skins, nor the kernels or stones in them be swallowed A caution concerning the eating of Grapes. downe, but onely the succulent pulpe, because they are vnprofitable to the bodie: for by reason of their duritie and siccitie of substance, they offend the stomack, receiue no alteration in the bodie at all, or very litle, and also hin∣der the concoction and distribution of the medulline part of the Grape thorow the bodie, which is only nourishing. It is best earing of them when the stomacke is empty, and not after meat; for if they be eaten vpon a full stomacke, they spoyle the concoction, abundantly breedewinde, and fill vp the stomacke with crude and corruptible humors. They are, so they be moderately eaten, conuenient for euery constitution and age, except for the phlegmaticke, and them that are olde; for in these they excessiuely in∣crease cold, crude, and flatulent humors, which vitiate the bloud, cause rheumes, inflate the melt, and disturbe the belly. But Grapes boyled in butter, and sops of bread added thereto, and Sugar also, if they be somewhat soure, are a very pleasant meat, and agreable for euery age and constitution: for they are lesse windie, more acceptable to the stomacke, and yeeld more and better nourishment to the bodie. 
 Of Grapes dryed through the heat of the Sunne are Raysons. made Raysons: the greatest, sweetest, and fattest are the best and wholsomest, and those we commonly call Raisons of the Sunne: for they are of the greatest and fairest Grapes. They are hot in the first degree, and moyst in the second: they yeeld to the bodie much nourishment, and the same very good, for there is in them no ill iuyce at all. They are passing good for the liuer, and as it were by Nature appropriated to that part: they concoct raw humors, and by reason of their lenifying and detersiue fa∣cultie, clense phlegme from the stomacke and lungs, leui∣gate the roughnesse of the winde-pipe; and are therefore very good for the cough, and other infirmities of the breast: they doe also a little mollifie and loose the belly; but the stones in them must be taken forth, which by rea∣son of their astringent qualitie, and duritie of substance, are offensiue to the breast and stomack. They are very whol∣some and good for euery season, euery age and constituti∣on. The lesser and common sort of Raisins are not so sweet in taste, but haue rather a little pleasing sourenesse adioy∣ned to them, by meanes whereof they are more gratefull to the stomacke; but they yeeld lesse nourishment to the bo∣die, and by reason of a small astriction that is in them, they are not so profitable for the breast; but for the same cause, they are more conuenient for them that are too so∣luble, or subiect to fluxes, through the weaknesse of there∣tentiue faculty. 
 The small Raisins of Corinth, which we commonly call Currants. Currants, are much vsed in meats, and that for good cause: for beside their pleasantnes in taste, they excite the appe∣tite, strengthen the stomack, comfort and refresh weak bo∣dies, and are profitable for the melt. They are verie good and wholsome for euerie season, age, and constitution. 
 All the kindes of Cherries are generally of a cold and Cherries. moyst temperature; they breede winde in the stomacke, and fill the bodie with crude and putrible humours. But some are farre more wholsome then other: the best principallest are those that are of a red colour, and and of a soure sweet taste, for they delight the pallate, excite the appetite, and are more acceptable to the sto∣macke: they doe moderately coole, quench thirst, at∣temper the heat of the stomacke and liuer, represse choler, and giue to the body a more commendable iuyce. Being preserued, they are a most choyce medicinable nourish∣ment: and being boyled with butter, slices of bread and su∣gar betweene two dishes, they delight the pallate, excite the appetite, and yeeld a good and wholsome nourishment, especially for hot and dry bodies. The distilled water of these, and also of the soure ones, is very good in feuers and inward inflammations. The Cherries that bee very sweet, doe deiect the appetite, relax the stomacke, and engender grosse and phlegmaticke humours. Those that are soure, doe giue vnto the body no nourishment at all; but they excite the appetite, cut grosse and clammie humours in the stomacke, represse the heat of choler, and are onely good for an hot cholericke stomacke. Cherries must bee eaten fresh and newly gathered, because they quickly corrupt, and that not insteed of meat, but for quenching of thirst, and attempering the heat of the stomacke and liuer; and for the same purposes they must not be eaten after meales, as our common preposterous vse is to eat them; but when the stomacke is emptie, as an houre or two before meales, because they prowoke appetite, quickly descend from the stomacke, and make the belly soluble. They are conueni∣ent for them that are young, and for such as are of a chole∣rick temperature; but hurtfull to the aged, and them that abound with phlegme. 
 The greene and vnripe Goose berries are cold and dry Goose-beries. in the second degree, and of an astringent faculty: the iuyce of them is vsed in diuers sauces for meat, insteed of ver∣juce, which maketh them not onely pleasant to the taste, but also very profitable to such as abound with choler, and are afflicted with hot, burning, and malignant feuers: for it extinguisheth the vehement heat of choler, verie greatly resisteth the corruption of humours, and labefaction of the vitall and naturall parts. The Goose-berries that are indif∣ferently ripe, are cold in the first degree, and moyst in the second, &amp; are lesse binding, then when they are altogether greene and vnripe. They are of a pleasant soure taste, and therefore being boyled betweene two dishes, with but∣ter, sops of bread and sugar, or as those that are skilfull in Cookerie can best tell, they make a most excellent and de∣lightsome sauce for most kindes of meats, which yeeldeth to the bodie somewhat a cold and small nourishment; but it exciteth the appetite, quencheth thirst, represseth choler, and addeth a singular grace vnto the meats, and a corre∣ctorie relish also vnto such as are hot and dry, or fulsome in taste. Being eaten raw, they are very hurtfull to a cold and weake stomacke, and for them that are aged, because they encrease cold and crude humours: contrariwise they are profitable to an hot stomacke, because they excite the ap∣petite deiected by ouermuch heat, and greatly coole the in∣flammations both of the stomacke and liuer: they are also verie good for women with childe, because they helpe their picarie affections, and notably preserue them from abor∣tion. But if they are immoderately eaten, they exasperate and lode the stomacke, binde the belly, and inhibit all fluxes, except they happen to be taken into a cold stomack, for then they oftentimes rather oppresse and trouble the same by some manner of flux. To conclude, they are so much profitable to the cholericke and sanguine, as they are hurtfull to the melancholike and phlegmaticke. The Goose-berries that be throughly or ouer-ripe, are not, by reason of their fulsome sweetnesse, vsed in sauces, neither are they any way good to bee eaten, for they fill the sto∣macke and whole bodie with grosse, crude, and corrupti∣ble humours. 
 Ribes, which with vs are commonly knowen by the name of Red Currants, are deemed to bee of the same na∣ture Ribes. that Goose-berries are. Indeede there is a great parity of nature betweeene the ripe Ribes, and the Goose-berries that are a little ripe; but betweene the ripe Goose-berries, and the ripe Ribes, there is no comparison to bee made at all: for whereas the ripe Goose-berries consist of a very grosse and fulsome substance, the Ribes are of a most plea∣sant and profitable iuyce. They are cold in the first degree, and moyst in the second, with a little siccity also concur∣ring: they delight the pallate, excite the appetite, quench thirst, coole the inflammations of the stomacke and liuer, and wonderfully refresh and strengthen the stomacke, that is debilitated with heat: they also stay cholericke vomi∣tings, helpe the Cardialgicke paines of the stomacke, and excellently represse all cholericke excretions and exhalati∣ons. Wherefore they are very profitable for them that are young, and that are of an hot and cholericke temperature; but they are greatly hurtfull to the aged, to all cold consti∣tutions, and to such as are subiect to obstructions of the breast. The Rob, that is, the iuyce of the berries boyled with a third part, or somewhat more of sugar added vnto it, The Rob of Ribes. till it become thicke, and so preserued, is for all the afore∣sayd purposes preferred before the raw berries themselues, except for such as are of a very cholericke and ardent tem∣perature. 
 Barberies are of the same nature and force that the Ribes are, and so is also the Conserue, or rather the Rob that is Barberies. made of them, which is in very common vse against hot, burning and cholericke distemperatures.
