It is very good for Lazer people and Lepers if they vse to eate it, &amp; drinke the whay of sweete milke after. 
 The same eaten rawe or sodde with meates, or dronke with salte and hony, sleeth and driueth foorth al kindes of worines, in what part of the bodie soeuer they be. The same vertue hath the iuyce dronken, &amp; layde to any place whereas wormes are. 
 Also it taketh away scarres, and blacke and blewe markes, whan it is boy∣led in wine and the places often wasshed therewith, or else the herbe it self fresh gathered, pounde and layde vpon. 
 Of Costemary / or Galsamynte. Chap. lxvij. ❀ The Kyndes. BAlsamynte is of two sortes, great and small, resembling one an other in sa∣uour, leaues and seede. 
 Balsamita maior. Costemary. 
 Balsamita minor. Mawdeleyn. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE great Balsamynt hath slender stalkes, round and harde: the leaues be long and meetely large, of a white or light greene colour, very finely hackte or snipt about the edges. The floures grow in tuftes, or bun∣dels like Nosegayes, and are nothing else like but to small yellow buttons, ve∣ry like the floures of Tansie, sauing that they be smaller. The roote is threddy and beareth diuers stalkes and branches, and putteth vp yearely new springs. The whole herbe is of a strong sauour, but yet pleasant, and in tast bitter. 
 The small Balsamynte is much like to the first &amp; great Balsamynte, aswell in stalkes, floures and seede, as in smell and sauour, but altogither smaller and not so high of groweth, his leaues be a great deale smaller and narrower, and much deeper snipt or cut about the edges. The roote also is threddie and put∣teth vp yearely many new springs. 
 ❀ The Place. They are both planted in the gardens of this coūtrie, but especially the first, the whiche is very common in all gardens. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Balsamynte floureth in Iuly and August. 
 ❀ The Names. The first kinde is called in Latine Balsamita maior: in the Shoppes of Bra∣bant Balsamita, of some Menta Graeca, Saluia Romana, Lassulata, and Herba diuae Mariae: in English Cooste Marie, and of some Balsamynte: in French Coq, or du Coq: in high Douch Frauwenkraut: in base Almaigne Balseme. It should seeme to be that Panax Chironia, whiche Theophrastus describeth in his ix. Booke. 
 The seconde kinde is called of some Balsamita minor: in Languedoc Herba diuae Mariae: in English Mawdelein, and of some small Balsamynte: in Italie Herba Giulia: And some take it for , Ageratum of Dioscorides: others take it to be , Elichrysum: and others for Eupatorium Mesue. But in mine o∣pinion it is none of them three, for I thinke it an herbe not described of any of the Auncients vnlesse it be a kinde of Panaces Chironium Theophaasti. 
 ❀ The Nature. These two herbes be hoate and dry in the second degree, as their smell, and bitter taste doth declare. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The leaues of Costemarie alone, or with Parsenip seede boyled in wine &amp; dronken cureth the trenches of the belly, that is a griping payne and torment in the guttes or bowels, and it cureth the bloudie flixe. 
 The conserue made of the leaues of Costemarie and Suger, doth warme and dry the brayne, and openeth the stoppings of the same, and it is very good to stoppe all superfluous Catarrhes, Reumes, and distillations, to be taken in quantitie of a Beane. 
 This herbe is also vsed in meates as Sage and other herbes, especially in Salades and sawces, for whiche purpose it is excellent, for it yeeldeth a proper sent and taste. 
 As Mawdelein herbe or small Balsaminte, is like to Costemary or great Balsamynte in taste and sauour, so is it like in vertues and operations, &amp; may be alwayes vsed in steede of the great Balsaminte. 
 Of Sage. Chap. lxxvij. ❀ The Kyndes. THere be two sortes of Sage, the one is small &amp; franke, &amp; the other is great. The great Sage is of three sortes, that is to say, greene, white, and redde. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE franke Sage hath sundry wooddie branches, and leaues growing vpon long stemmes whiche leaues be long, narrow, vneuen, hoare, or of a grayishe white colour, by the sides of the sayde leaues at the lower ende, there groweth two other small leaues, like vnto a payre of little eares. The floures growe alongst the stalkes in proportion like the floures of Dead Nettell, but smaller and of colour blewe. The seede is blackishe, and the roote wooddie. 
 The great Sage is not much vnlike the small or franke Sage, sauing it is larger: the stalkes are square and browne. The leaues be rough, vn∣euen and whitishe, like to the leaues of franke Sage, but a greate deale larger, rougher, and without eares. The floures, seede, and roote are like vnto the other.
❀ The Names. This kinde of pulse is called in Greeke : in Latine and in Shoppes, Lupinus: in Frenche Lupin in English Lupines: in high Douche Feigbonen: in base Almaigne Lupinen, and Vijchboonen. 
 The first kinde is called Lupinus satiuus, that is to say, The manured or garden Lupine. 
 The three other sortes are called Wilde Lupines, in Latine Lupini sylue∣stres: and these be not vsed in medicine. 
 ❀ The Nature. The garden Lupine is hoate and drie in the seconde degree, it hath vertue to digest, make subtil, and to clense. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The meale of Lupines taken with hony, or els with water and vineger, doth kill and driue foorth by siege al kindes of wormes. The same vertue hath the decoction of Lupines, when it is dronken. And for the same purpose men vse to lay Lupines stamped vpon the nauel of young children fasting. 
 Men giue the decoction of Lupins, boyled with Rue and Pepper, to drinke to open the stoppinges of the liuer and melt. 
 Apessarie made of Lupins, Mirrhe, and Hony mingled togither, moo∣ueth womens natural sicknesse or flowers, and expelleth or deliuereth the dead birth. 
 She decoction of Lupines doth beautifie the colour of the face, and driueth away all frekles, and spottes like lentils. The meale thereof is of the like ver∣tue, mingled with water and layde therto. 
 The flower or meale of Lupines, with the meale of parched barley &amp; water swageth all impostumations and swellinges. 
 The same with vineger, or boyled in vineger, swageth the payne of the Sciatica, it digesteth, consumeth and dissolueth the kinges euill or swelling in the throte, it openeth and bursteth wennes, botches, boyles, and pestilential or plague sores. 
 Lupins may be eaten, when as by long soking in water they are become sweete, and haue lost their bitternesse: for when they be so prepared, they take away the lothsomnesse of the stomacke, and the desyre to vomit, and do cause good appetite. Yet for all that this kinde of foode or nourishment, engendreth grosse blood, and grosse humours. For Lupins are harde to digest, and vneasie to descende, as Galen saith. 
 The wilde Lupins haue the lyke vertue, but more strong. 
 Of the bitter Veche called in Greeke Orobos, and in Latine Eruum. Chap. xxiiij. ❀ The Description. E Ruum or the bitter Fetche is nowe vnknowen, and therefore we can geue none other description, but so much as is written in Dioscorides and Galen. They say that Orobos, or Eruilia is a small plant, bearing his fruit in coddes, round, of a white or yellowish colour, of a strange and vnpleasant taste, so that they serue not to be eaten, but of cattel, neither wil cattell feede vpon them, before that with long soking or stieping in water, their vnpleasant taste be gone and lost: wherefore it is very easie to iudge, that the flat Pease called in Greeke Lathyri, and described in the xxj. Chapter of this booke, are not Ers or Eruilia, as some haue thought: for those flat Peason are in taste lyke the common Peason, as we haue before declared. 
 ❧ The Names. This pulse is called in Greeke : in Latine Eruum: and the Frenchmen folowing the Latine name, do cal it Ers: in Douche Eruen: in Englishe Bitter Vetche, or Ers. 
 ❀ The Nature. Ers are hoate in the first degree, and drie in the seconde. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The meale of Eruum often licked in with hony in maner of a Lohoch, clen∣seth the breast, and cutteth and ripeth grosse and tough humours, falling vpon the lunges. 
 It loseth the belly, prouoketh vrine, maketh a man to haue a good colour, if it be taken in reasonable quantitie: for to muche thereof is hurtfull. 
 With honie it scoureth away lentiles or freckles from the face, and all o∣ther spottes and scarres from the bodie. It stayeth spreading vlcers: it doth soften the hardnesse of womens breastes, it breaketh Carboncles and impo∣stumes. 
 Being kneded or tempered with wine, it is layde very profitably vnto the bitinges of dogges, of men, and wilde beastes. 
 The decoction of the same, helpeth the itche, and kibed heeles, if they be wa∣shed therein.
Rapum syluestre paruum. Litle Rampions. 
 Rapum syluestre aliud. Wilde Rampions. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE smal common Rampion, his first leaues be roundishe, almost lyke the leaues of the March Violet, afterward it bringeth foorth a round harde stalke of two foote long, set about with long narrowe leaues, at the top of the stalkes growe pleasant flowers, very much lyke to the wild Bel flowers described in the seconde booke the xxiij. Chap. after the flowers come long cornered or square huskes, wherin the sede is inclosed which is very smal. The roote is long and white, sometimes as bigge as a mans litle finger, in tast almost like the Nauew gentle, the whiche in y e winter season is vsed in salades. 
 The other Rampion, the whiche is not yet very well knowen his first leaues be brode, and they that grow vp afterward about y e stalke are narrowe: it hath one or two straight holow stems, in the top of the sayd stems groweth a great thicke bushie eare, ful of litle long smal flowers, which before their ope∣ning, are lyke litle crooked hornes, &amp; being openly spread, are parted into foure litle narrowe leaues, of a blewe colour, purple, gray, or white. The flowers fallen, there appeare many rounde little huskes, ioyning one to another, lyke to the huskes or cuppes of the other Rampion, but much smaller. The roote is great white &amp; full of sap, in fashion &amp; taste like the roote of the other Rampion. 
 The Marians Violet, and the Gauntelet, described in the second booke, are also of the kindes of Rampions. 
 ¶ The Place. The little Rampion groweth in feeldes and pastures of this Countrie vn∣der hedges and bushes. 
 The other Rampion groweth most cōmonly in wooddes, in clay groundes, and other fat, moyst and darke places. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The litle Rampion flowreth in Iune and Iuly. 
 The other flowreth in May. 
 ❀ The Names. Rampion is called in Greeke : in Latine, Rapa syluestris, that is to say, Wilde Rapes. 
 The first kinde, is nowe called of the writers in these dayes, Rapontium, Rapunculum, and Rapunculum paruum: in French, Raiponce, and Petite Raiponce: in high Douche, Klein Rapuntzeln: in base Almaigne, Cleyn or ghemeyne Ra∣poncelen: in Englishe, Rampions and the litle Rampion. 
 The seconde is lykewise a kinde of Rampion; or wilde Rapes. 
 ❀ The Nature. Rampion is of nature somewhat like the Turnep. 
 ❀ The Vertues. The Rampion eaten with vineger and salt stirreth vp appetite or meate lust, and prouoketh vrine, especially when it is but a litle boyled or parboyled. 
 Rampions mengled with the meale of Lupines or Iuray, doth clense and beautifie the face and all other partes of the body, being layde therevnto. 
 The iuyce of the stalkes &amp; leaues of Rampions, especially of the lesser kind, dropped into the eyes with womens milke, cleareth the fight. 
 Of Radishe. Chap. xxxvi. ¶ The Kindes. THere be two kindes of Radish, the tame, and the wilde, whereof the tame or garden Radish is of two sortes, the one with a round roote, like the Na∣uew or garden Rape, and is not very commō in Brabant. The other hath a very long white roote and is the common Radish of this Countrie. To this may be ioyned a thirde kinde of garden or tame Radishe, with the blacke roote whiche of late yeeres hath ben brought into Englande, and now beginneth al∣so to waxe common. 
 ❀ The Description. T He common Radishe hath great brode rough leaues, muche clouen or deepely cut in vpon both sides, not muche vnlyke the Turney leaues. The stalkes be round, with many flowers of a purple or wan colour, euery flower parted into foure small leaues, the whiche being fallen, there come in their steede, long, rounde, sharpe poynted huskes, sometimes as bigge as ones little fingar, wherein is inclosed a rounde krowne seede. The roote of the one kind of garden Radishe, is of a foote or foote and a halfe long, white both without and within, and of a sharpe taste. The roote of the other is short, and as bigge as a Nauew, and of a stronger and sharper taste then the longer roote. The third roote is blacke without and white within, in taste like to the others. 
 The wilde Radishe hath leaues like the common Radishe, but smaller and fuller of cuttes or iagges. The stalke is of a foote and a halfe long, or more, vpon which grow many yellow flowers, and afterward smal huskes, wherein the seede, which is very smal, is inclosed. The roote is as bigge as ones finger, in taste very lyke to a young Radishe, but stronger. 
 Radicula satiua. Garden Radish.
❧ The Vertues. Lycium whiche is made of the bran∣ches, rootes, or seede of Boxe thorne, or prickley Boxe, helpeth them that haue the laske, and blooddy flixe, as also those that spet blood, and haue the cough. 
 It stoppeth the inordinate course of the flowers, taken either inwardly, or applyed outwardly. 
 It is good against corrupt vlcers, and running scabbes, and sanious running eares, the inflammation of the gummes and kernelles, called the Almondes vnder the tongue, and against the choppes of the lippes, and fundament, to be layde thereto. 
 Pyxacantha, Lycium. 
 It cleareth the sight, and cureth the scurffie festered sores of the eye liddes, and corners of the eyes. 
 Of Holme / Holly / or Huluer. Chap. xxxiiij. ❀ The Description. H Olme groweth sometimes after the maner af a hedge plant, amongst other thornes and bushes, and somtimes also it groweth vpright and straight, and becommeth a tall high and great tree, with a big stemme or body, and limbes and branches according to the same. The tymber of this tree is harde and heauie, and sinketh to the bottome of the water lyke Guaiacum, or Lignum sanctum, wherevnto our Holly in figure is not much vn∣lyke. The leaues of Holly are thicke and harde, of the quantitie of a Bay leafe, but full of sharpe poyntes or prickley corners. The whiche leaues remayne greene both winter and sommer, as the leaues of Boxe and Bay, and doo not lightly vade or wither. The beries or fruite of Holme is rounde, of the quanti∣tie of a Pease, of colour red, and of an euill vnpleasant taste. 
 ❀ The Place. Holme groweth much in this Countrie in rough, stony, barraine &amp; vntoyled places, alongst the wayes and in wooddes. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The same fruite or beries of Holme, are ripe in September, and hang fast vpon the tree a long tyme after without falling of. 
 ❀ The Names. Holme is called of some late writers in Greeke : in Latine, Rus∣cus syluestris: in high Douch, Walddistel oder Stehpalmen: in base Almaigne, Hulst: in Italian, Agrifolium, as Mat∣thiolus writeth. And in sight it appea∣reth to be much lyke Plinies Aquifoliū, whiche is called of Theophrastus in Greeke , and , as wit∣nesseth Plinie lib. 27. Cap. 7. Neither can it be Paliurus, as some do esteeme it: but it seemeth to be somwhat lyke . Oxycanthus of Theophrastus, the which is alwayes greene: in Englishe it is cal∣led Holme, Holly, and Husuer. 
 ❀ The Nature. The beries of Holme or Holly, are hoate. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Some boasting of their experience vpon Holme, do affirme that fiue beries therof taken inwardly, are good against the cholique, and prouoke to go to the stoole. 
 Agrifolium. 
 With the barkes of Holme they make Birdlyme: the order of making therof is very wel knowen, but if any be yet desirous to learne the same, let him seeke the thirde booke of Maister Turners herball Chap. lxxxj. 
 They vse the smal branches and leaues of Holme to clense and sweepe chim∣neyes, as they vse to do in Burgundie and other places, with Kneeholme or Butchers broome. Other then this we dare not affirme of Holme, bycause it serueth not in Physicke. 
 Of the Apple tree. Chap. xxxv. ❀ The Kyndes. THere be diuers sortes of Apples, not onely differing in figure and propor∣tion of making, but also in taste, quantitie, and colour, so that it is not pos∣sible, neither yet necessarie, to recite or number al the kindes, consydering that all Apple trees are almost lyke one another: and all sortes of Apples may be comprehended in a few kindes, for the playner declaration of their natures, faculties, or powers: as into sweet, sower, rough, astringent, waterish apples, and apples of a mixt temperature, as betwixt sweete and sower, &amp;c. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE Apple trees in continuance of time, do for the most part become high and great trees, with many armes &amp; branches spread abroade. The leaues be greene and roundishe, more rounde then the Peare-tree leaues, and do fall of a litle before winter, and do spring and re∣new agayne in May. The flowers for the most part are white, and vpon some apple trees chaungeable, betwixt white and redde. The fruite is round and of many fashions, in colour &amp; taste as is abouesayde. In the middle of the apples are inclosed blacke kernels couered ouer with hard pilles or skinnes. 
 ❀ The Place. Apple trees are planted in gar∣dens and Orchardes, and they delight in good fertil grounde. 
 ❀ The Tyme. Apple trees do most common∣ly blow, at the ende of April and beginning of May. The fruit is ripe, of some in Iuly, of some in August, and of the last sorte in September. 
 ¶ The Names. The Apple tree is called in Greeke : in Latine, Malus, &amp; Pomus: in high Douche, Apffel∣baum: in base Almaigne, Appel∣boom: in Frenche, Pommier. The fruite is called in Greeke, : in Latine, Pomum, and Malum: in English, an Apple: in French, Pomme: in high Douch, Apffel: in base Almaigne, Appel. 
 Malus.
❀ The Nature. All sortes of Apples be colde and moyst, yet some more thē the rest: those that be sower or sharpe, do dry more then the rest, especially if they be astringent or binding. Sweete Apples are not so colde, but rather of a meane temperature. The waterishe apples are moystiest, especially those that are ney∣ther sower nor sweete but taking part of both tastes. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Apples do coole and comfort the hoate stomacke, especially those that be sow∣rish and astringent of taste, and they may be vsed in hoate agues, and other in∣flammations or heates of the stomacke, and against thirste: but otherwise they are hurtful to the stomacke, causing windinesse and blastinges in the belly. 
 Sower Apples boyled &amp; eaten colde before meate, do lose the belly gently. 
 Apples eaten before meate do nourishe very litle, and do yeelde a moyst and noughty iuyce or nourishment: for they are soone corrupted in the stomacke, and turne to noughtie humours, especially the waterishe Apples. 
 The leaues of the Apple tree are good to be layde vpon the beginninges of phlegmons (that is hoate simple tumours or swellinges) and are good to be layde vpon woundes to keepe them from euyll heate and a postumation. 
 Of Orenges / Citrons / and Limons. Chap. xxxvi. ¶ The Kindes. There be at this present, three sortes of Apples or rather fruites, which of the Auncientes in times past were cōprehended vnder the name of Citrium, wher∣of the first is called an Orenge, the seconde a Citron, the thirde a Limon. 
 ❀ The Description. T He trees y t bring foorth Orenges, Citrons, and Limons, growe as high as other trees do, with many greene branches, in some places set with stiffe prickles, or sharpe thornes. The leaues be alwaies greene and thicke, not much vnlyke the Bay leaues. The fruite hath a very thicke pyl or rinde, within the rinde is a cleare through shining pulpe or moyst substance, full of iuyce &amp; liquor, a∣mongst the which is the seede or kernels. 
 The Orēge is round as an apple, with a thicke pyll, at the first greene without, but after when they be ripe, of a faire red or pleasant tawnie colour, or browne yel∣lowe lyke Saffron, but the sayde pill is white within &amp; spongious or somewhat open. The pulpe or inner pith is through shining cleare and ful of iuyce, the whiche in some is sower, &amp; in others sweete. The seede or kernelles are most commonly as bigge as wheate cornes, &amp; bitter in taste. 
 The Citron is long almost lyke a Cu∣cumber, or somwhat longer and rugged, or wrinckled, the rinde or pil is thicke, yel∣low without, &amp; white within. The inner part or substance is also cleare &amp; through shining, like y e pulpe of the Orenge, wher∣in is also the seede or kernelles not much vnlyke Orenge kernelles. 
 The Limon in fashion is longer then the Orenge, but otherwayes not muche vnlike, sauing that the outsyde of the Li∣mon pill is paler and smother, and the kernels smaller. 
 Aurantia Mala. Medica Mala. Limonia Mala. Orenge. Citrons. Limons. 
 ¶ The Place. These fruites do now grow in Italy, Spayne, and some places of Fraunce. In this Countrie the Herboristes do set and plante the Orenge trees in their gardens, but they beare no fruite without they be wel kept and defended from colde, and yet for all that they beare very seldome. 
 ❧ The Names. The tree that beareth these fruites, is called in Greeke : in Latine, Malus medica, and Malus citria. And albeit the Citron and eche of the other are seuerall trees one from another, as it is playnely to be seene in Matthiolus Commentaries vpon Diosc. li. j. where also it is to be noted in the Citron tree, that his leafe is finely snipt about y e edges or toothed lyke a saw, but the Limō and Orenge trees, whose leaues be euer greene lyke the Bay tree, are not in∣dented, but smothe about the edges, so that at the first sight Citron, Orenge and Limon trees, do shew lyke Bay trees, but the pleasant sauour and smell of the leaues, be farre vnlyke the smell of the Bay leaues: these three trees, I say, be of the Auncientes, all contayned vnder the Citron tree. 
 The fruites also be all called of the Auncientes by one Greeke name : in Latine, Mala citria. 
 The first kinde is also called of the Auncientes in Greeke : in La∣tine, Aureū malum, &amp; Malum Hespericum, of some also Nerantzium, of the later writers Anarantium, and Arantium: in Englishe, an Orenge: in French, Pomme d ' Orenge▪ in high Douche, Pomerantsen: in base Almaigne, Arangie appelen: in Spanish, Naranzas, the whiche name seemeth to be taken from the worde, Narantzium, by the which the Apples were once called, as witnesseth, Nicāder. 
 The seconde kinde is called Cedromelon, and in this Countrie Citrones, &amp; Mala citria: in Frenche, Citrons: in Englishe, Citrons: in high Douche, Citrina∣ten: in base Almaigne, Citroenen. This kind is called of the Italians, as Musa writeth, Limones. 
 The thirde kinde is called in the Shoppes of this Countrie Limones, and Malum Limonium: in Englishe, Limons, in Douche, Limoenen: in Frenche, Limons: Antonie Musa writeth, that the Italians doo call this fruite Citrium malum. 
 ❀ The Nature. The pill, especially the outwarde parte thereof is hoate and drie. 
 The pulpe with the iuyce is colde and drie in the thirde degree. 
 The seede is hoate and dry in the second degree, and the leaues be almost of the same nature.
❀ The Vertues. Almondes taken before meate, do stop the belly and nourishe but litle, espe∣cially being blanched or made cleane from their skinnes or huddes. 
 Bitter Almondes doo open the stopping of the lunges or lightes, the liuer, the melt, or splene, the kidneyes, &amp; of al other inwarde partes: therefore they be good against the cough, the shortnes of wind, the inflammation &amp; exulceration of lunges, to be mingled with Turpentine &amp; licked in, as Dioscorides writeth. 
 Almondes are good for them that spet blood, to be taken in with the fine flower called Amylum. 
 The bitter Almondes taken with a litle sweete wine, as Muscadel or Ba∣starde, prouoke vrine, and do cure the hardnesse of the same, and painefulnes in making water, &amp; are good for thē that are troubled with the grauel &amp; stone. 
 They vse to take fiue or sixe bitter Almondes fasting, to be preserued from dronkennesse al the same day. 
 They take away headache to be applied to the forehead with oyle of Roses, and vineger. 
 They are with great profite layde to with hony, vpon corrupt and noughty spreading sores, and the bitinges of mad Dogges. 
 They clense the skinne and face from al spottes, pimples and lentiles. 
 Of the Peare tree. Chap. xlij. ❀ The Kindes. THere be diuers sortes of Peares, aswell as there be kindes of Apples, whereof some be rathe ripe, some haue a later riping, and some be winter Peares, some perish quickly, some last a longer time and may be wel kept: some be sweete and full of sap or iuyce, some fat and grosse, and some harde and drie, &amp;c. so that it is not possible to recite all the kindes of Peares: wherefore we do aduise the Readers to consyder the taste more then the proportion, or the time of the riping of Peares: for the taste doth best declare and giue notice of the qualitities and temperature of Peares. 
 ❀ The Description. T HE Pearetree is as great or greater thē the Apple tree, and higher, with a great body or stemme, and manye great bran∣ches, the which for the most parte doo shute or mount vpright, &amp; not one ouer another, as the branches of the Apple tree. The leaues be roundish, smoth, and very greene aboue: but vnderneath most com∣monly they be whitish. The fruite for the most part is long, brode be∣neath, and narrowe, and sharpe vpwarde towardes the stemme, very diuers or cōtrary, in colour, quantitie, proportion, and taste, as is abouesayde. In the middle of the fruite there is a coare with kernels or peppins, lyke as in the middest of the Apples. 
 ❀ The Place. The Peare tree is planted in gardens and Orchardes: also it groweth sometimes in woods &amp; wild vntoyled places, but they be none otherwyse esteemed, but as wildings or wild hedge Peares. 
 Pirus. The Peare tree. 
 ❀ The Tyme. The Pearetree flowreth in Aprill or May, and the fruite is ripe in sommer and Autumne. 
 ❧ The Names. The Pearetree is called in Greeke : in Latine, Pirus: in Frenche, Vng Poirier: in high Douch, Byrbaum: in base Almaigne, Peerboom. 
 The fruite is called in Greke : in Latine, Pira, or as some do write Pyra: in French, Poyres▪ in high Douch, Byren: in base Almaigne, Peeren, in English, Peares. 
 ¶ The Nature. All kindes of Peares are of a colde temperature, and the most part of them be drie and binding, but not all alyke: for the wilde Peares, and others that be rough, binding, and chokely, do drie &amp; stop a great deale more then the others. The sweete &amp; grouse Peares, are moystier and very litle astringent or nothing at all. The middle sorte of Peares whiche are betwixt sweete and sower, are of complexion or temperature nearest to them vnto whom their taste draweth nearest. 
 The Pearetree leaues are colde of complexion, drie and astringent, as Ga∣len saith. 
 ❀ The Vertues. Peares taken before meate, do nourish but litle, yet they nourish more then Apples, especially those that be grouse and sweete. 
 The sower, rough, and chokely Peares, and others that are not waterie, to be eaten rawe or backte before meale, do stop the common laske or flowing of the belly, and do fortifie and strengthen the mouth of the stomacke. 
 They be also good to be laide to the beginnings of hoate tumours or phleg∣mons, and greene woundes.
In the selfe same maner they are very good for the reynes of the backe, the kidneyes, and the bladder, whether they be exulcerated or inflamed, or vexed with any sharpe and salt humour. 
 Of Cherries. Chap. l. ¶ The Kindes. THere be two sortes of Cherries, great and small: the small Cherries doo growe vpon high trees, and the greater Cherries vpon meane trees. And of euery kinde there be two fortes, some red, some blacke. Bysides these kindes there are Cherries that grow, three, foure, and fiue vpon a stemme, and also that hang in clusters lyke grapes, whereof of the learned Matthiolus hath giuen vs the figures. 
 ❀ The Description. T Hat tree which beareth the common small Cherries, or Mazars, is most commonly great, high, and thicke, lyke to other trees. The barke of this tree is playne &amp; smooth of colour lyke the barke of the Chesnut tree, three or foure fold double, the which will suffer to be scaled, rinded, stripte, and pylde, like to the barke of the Birche tree. The leaues be great and somewhat long, hackt about the edges with teeth lyke a sawe. The flowers be white and parted into fiue or sixe small leaues. The fruite hath a sweete smak or taste, of colour sometimes redde, sometimes browne, in proportion like the greater Cherries, but smaller, yea sometimes very small. In the same there is founde a small stone, with a kernell therein closed. 
 The tree that beareth the great Cher∣ries, is not very high, but most commonly of a meane stature, in al thinges els like y e other, both in leaues and flowers. The fruite is a litle long and rounde, and of a pleasant sweete taste, of colour somtimes of a faynt red, and almost halfe white and halfe red, sometimes browne, &amp; wel neareall blacke, whereof the iuyce stayneth purple, or a faire Crimsen lyke to Brasill. 
 Cerasia. Sweete Cherries. Cerasa Racemosa. Cluster Cherries. Cerasa austera. Sower Cherries. 
 The sower Cherries are to be be accounted amongst the rest. This tree is most commonly weake and tender, neither high nor great: and therefore of no long continuance. The leaues be also smaller, but other wayes lyke the leaues of the sweete Cherries, the flowers be white, the fruite is rounde and sower, sometimes red, and somtimes blacke, lyke the Mazar or Hurtel Cherries, this Cherrie hath also a stone in the middle of the fruite, but smaller and rounder then the Guyan or sweete Cherries. 
 Out of al these Cherrie trees, there issueth gumme like that of the Plumme trees, or Peache trees, especially when the rinde or barke is any wayes hurt or brused. 
 ❀ The Place. The tree that beareth the sweete Guyan Cherries, or the great Frenche Cherries is planted in gardens and Orchardes. But that whiche beareth the Mazars, or y e smal Cherries groweth in some places very plentifully in feeldes and wooddes. 
 Matthiolus writeth that about Trent a Citie in Italy, about the Citie of Prage in the Coūtrie of Bohem, &amp; about Vienna in the Countrie of Austrige, there growe naturally wilde Cherries vpon lowe bushes or shrubbes, of little more then halfe a fa foote high, and their fruite is in all respectes aunswerable to the other small Cherries. 
 ❀ The Time. The great French Cherries, &amp; the common Cherries do commonly flower in Aprill. The redde Cherries are rype in Iune, and continue vntyll Iuly: but the blacke waxe ripe in Iuly, and they may be kept fresh &amp; whole vnto the ende of August. 
 ¶ The Names. The Cherrie tree is called in Greeke : in Latine, Cerasus: in high Douch, Kirschenbaum: in base Almaigne, Kerseboō: in Frēch, Cerisier: &amp; Guisnier. 
 The fruite lykewise is called , Cerasa: in English, Cherries, in French, Guinnes in high Douche, Kirschen: in base Almaigne, Kersen. 
 And for the better declaration both of the names and kindes of Cherries, I haue thought good to giue you to vnderstande, what I haue conceiued of this matter. I reade in Matthiolus, that the common people of Italy doo call the waterishe Cherries Acquaiuola. The famous learned man Robertus Ste∣phanus in his Frenche Dictionarie, doth turne this French worde Guisnes into Latine, as foloweth (Aquitanica cerasa) whiche soundeth in English, Guyan Cherries, now whether the people of Italy do cal Guyan Aquitan, I referre that to them that be expert in that language. But the French word seemeth to haue his first originall of the Countrie Guyan, for they expound Cerasia, Guisnes doul∣ces, Sweete Cherries. 
 Grosses guisnes, Duracina cerasa, Harde Cherries. 
 Guisnes noires, Cerasia Actiana, Small Cherries lyke Eldren beries. 
 Guisnes fort rondes, Cerasia Caeciliana, Rounde Cherries. 
 Guisnes fort rouges, Cerasia Aproniana, Grape or cluster Cherries: so that Guisnes is their proper worde for all sortes of Cherries, except sower Cherries, which they call Griotes: in Latine, Cerasia acida. 
 The first kind, especially that which beareth the smallest fruite, is the Cher∣rie tree described by Theophrastus. 
 The other is called of some , Chamaecerasus: yet it is not that Chamaecerasus whereof Asclepiades Myrleanus writeth, the fruite whereof maketh men dronken like wine. The Brabanders name this tree Spaensche Kerselaer, and the fruite Spaensche Kersen, that is to say, Spanish Cherries, or Cherrie tree: in Frenche, Guinnier, and Guinnes: in English, Frenche Cherries, and Spanish Cherries: they be also called in Frenche, Cueurs: and they that be halfe white Bigarreans. 
 The common sower Cherries is of the later writers taken to be a kinde of Cerasus, and therefore the fruite is lykewise called Cerasa, of some Merendae, or Marenae: Platina writeth of one Moretum ex Merendis, Cordus writeth of one compounde named Diamarenatum, and both these are made of Cherries.
