low land, nineteen of them being Surprise, the other varieties being, 
 according to numbers, Terry, Ocheeda, Stoddard, Hawkeye, Bursota, Wolf, 
 Omaha also a few Jewell, DeSoto, Forest Garden, American and Stella. The 
 Surprise trees bore a crop in 1913, again in 1914, and 1915, making it 
 to the present time not only the most productive but the most profitable 
 variety on our place. While we did not keep an accurate record of the 
 exact yield in 1913 and 1914, some of the trees produced fully five 16 
 quart cases in 1913. A fair average would perhaps be about four cases 
 per tree. In 1914 the crop was somewhat lighter, yielding an average of 
 three cases per tree. This year we picked and sold eighty-five cases, 
 which brought us a gross revenue of $79.60. We lost part of the crop on 
 account of continual rain in the picking season, or we would have had 
 fully 100 cases. Nine of the trees being in a more sheltered location 
 than the other ten held their fruit better during the growing season, 
 and produced a relatively heavier crop than the ten that were exposed to 
 our fierce winds all summer. 
  
 We have never been able to supply the demand for them, at good prices, 
 while other varieties went begging at any kind of a price. Among their 
 good qualities with us are productiveness, good size, extra fine quality
and attractive color. They are delicious to eat out of hand just as they 
 are ripe enough to drop from the tree. They are fine for canning, 
 preserving or jelly. They are practically curculio proof, and have never 
 been affected with brown rot as have some other varieties. Aphis never 
 bothers them, while Terry and some other varieties nearly had the whole 
 crop ruined by this pest in 1914. The branches form good, strong 
 shoulders at the trunk and do not split or break down in heavy storms or 
 under their heavy loads of fruit, as the Terry and Forest Garden do. The 
 flower buds and fruit form as freely on the new growth as on the old 
 spurs. The crop is therefore about evenly distributed all over the tree, 
 and while we picked almost eight cases from one tree this year it did 
 not appear to be overloaded, as some varieties frequently are, the 
 Surprise tree always being capable of maturing all the fruit that sets. 
  
 We have shipped them 300 miles by freight with perfect success, but we 
 pick them from the tree before fully ripe. If allowed to ripen on the 
 tree they drop badly, which bruises and damages them. The trees are 
 thrifty, vigorous growers with beautiful glossy foliage that can be 
 distinguished from all other varieties. 
 
You would note on examination of the buds that we have promise of 
 another crop next year, but this will depend somewhat on the weather 
 during the blooming season. We attribute one of the reasons for our 
 success with the Surprise plum to the fact that they are planted among 
 and alongside of varieties that have the same season of blooming, and 
 which undoubtedly are good pollenizers, namely the Bursota, Wolf, 
 Ocheeda and Omaha. The bloom of Surprise being almost sterile, they 
 will not be a success planted alone. 
  
 [Illustration: A Surprise plum tree growing on the place of Prof. A.G. 
 Ruggles. It bore in 1914 four bushels, having been well sprayed with 
 arsenate of lead and bordeaux mixture.] 
  
 You will perhaps ask if there are no faults or diseases they are subject 
 to, and we will state, for one thing, the fruit drops too easily when 
 ripe, and you will either have to pick them before fully matured or find 
 a good many of them on the ground. They are also occasionally subject to 
 blossom blight, which was rather a benefit, as it thinned the crop out 
 to about the proper proportion. We also had considerable plum pocket and 
 fungous growth one season about ten years ago. Such has been our
consisted of year old stock (purchased the year preceding and set in 
 nursery rows) and included these six varieties: Duchess, Patten  '  s 
 Greening, Okabena, Wealthy, Hibernal, Anisim. Good growth was made the 
 past season and the stock went into winter quarters in good shape. 
 However, 20 per cent died, the loss being in this order: Wealthy, 
 Anisim, Hibernal, Pattens  '   Greening--Okabena and Duchess were tied for 
 smallest loss. In addition to the above, we made a considerable planting 
 of small fruits, principally currants and gooseberries, together with a 
 limited quantity of blackberries and raspberries. Twelve varieties of 
 strawberries were set out, each including 100 plants. All made a 
 splendid growth this season. An interesting test is under way in the 
 dynamiting work. Alternate trees have been set in blasted holes, a stick 
 about one and one-half inches long being sufficient to make a hole three 
 feet in diameter and perhaps twenty inches in depth. It is yet too early 
 to measure the results of this work, but owing to the nature of the 
 subsoil in this region, we are looking for splendid results. With regard 
 to the stock secured from the Fruit Farm, we have not been uniformly 
 successful. Much of the stock seems to be weak and dies readily from 
 some cause unknown to us. Next season we should be able to render a more 
 complete report, as our work will then be fairly started.
 
  
  
  
 Annual Report, 1915, West Concord Trial Station. 
  
 FRED COWLES, SUPT., WEST CONCORD. 
  
  
 [Illustration: Fred Cowles at home.] 
  
 Of the new varieties of plums that I received from the Fruit-Breeding 
 Farm most all have done well. The only one that has borne is No. 21. 
 This one had two plums on last season, and several this. They were a 
 medium size red plum, very good flavor, and seem to come into bearing 
 very young. No. 17 is a very thrifty grower, but when it bears that will 
 tell what it is worth. Hansen  '  s plums are doing well, but we believe 
 they are more adapted to a better drained soil than we have here, as we 
 are on a heavy prairie soil. But these varieties are very thrifty and 
 bear so young.
 
 The grapes have all stood the winter with no protection and have not 
 killed back any. We expect some fruit next season. 
  
 The raspberries that we received have all done well. No. 4 seems to take 
 the lead for flavor and is a good grower. 
  
 Notwithstanding the cold season our strawberry crop was very good, and 
 we are much impressed with No. 3, it is so strong and healthy; it is 
 just the plant for the farmer, as it will thrive under most any 
 condition. I believe it will fight its way with the weeds and come out 
 ahead. 
  
 We reported very favorably on the Heritage when it was in bloom, but it 
 does not set enough fruit to pay for its space. The berries are large 
 but very few on my grounds. I will discard it. 
  
 Our apple crop was very good, especially Duchess, Wealthy and 
 Northwestern Greening. We have been trying some of the tender varieties 
 top-worked. Northern Spy gave us five nice apples on a two year graft.
We also have Jonathan, Talman Sweet and King David doing well. Delicious 
 grafted three years ago has not fruited yet. 
  
 This has been a splendid summer for flowers, and they seemed to enjoy 
 the damp, cool season, especially the dahlia. If you have not tried the 
 Countess of Lonsdale you should; it is a cactus dahlia and a very free 
 bloomer. Everblooming roses did well--we had them in October. 
  
 *       *       *       *       * 
  
 PLANT LICE ON BLOSSOMS.--Aphids infesting the apple buds 
 appeared in serious numbers during the present season in the Illinois 
 University orchards when the buds began to swell. They were also 
 observed in neighboring orchards. In 1914, apple aphids caused serious 
 damage in certain counties in Illinois, and some damage was reported 
 from many sections of the state. 
  
 The aphids attack the opening buds, the young fruits, the growing 
 shoots, and the leaves, sucking the plant juices from the succulent 
 parts by means of long, very slender, tube-like beaks, which they thrust
top to bottom and spray twice each season. However, the past season half 
 the orchard only was sprayed twice, the other half only once, the second 
 spraying being applied about two weeks after the first, when we use lime 
 and sulphur only, and then five gallons instead of six, in each tank of 
 water. We use angle nozzles, the better to direct the spray into the 
 calyxes. 
  
 The orchard was mowed twice during the summer, early in June and the 
 middle of July. A heavy growth of clover covers most of the orchard, and 
 none is ever removed, all is left to decay just as it is left by the 
 mowers. 
  
 The next thing in line to take our attention is thinning the fruit. The 
 past season we thinned the Wealthy and top-worked varieties only; 
 another season, we expect to carry this work to every tree in the 
 orchard. The trees were gone over twice in the season, although the bulk 
 of the work is done at the first operation. We use thinning shears made 
 expressly for the purpose. 
  
 By the end of July the trees in many instances were carrying maximum
from the first crop until the last one of the past season. 
  
 [Illustration: Apples by the carload at Howard Lake.] 
  
 In packing we aim to use the kind of package the market demands. The 
 crop this season was all barreled. The pickers have been on the job long 
 enough so that they are as able to discriminate as to what should go 
 into a barrel and what should not as I am myself. However, our system is 
 to always have about twice as many barrels open ready for the apples as 
 there are pickers. The barrels are all faced one layer at least, and two 
 layers if we have the time, and as the pickers come in with 
 approximately half a bushel of apples in the picking sack, they swing 
 the sack over the barrel, lower it, release the catch and the apples are 
 deposited without bruising in any way. 
  
 The next picker puts his in the next barrel, and so on, so that each 
 succeeding picker deposits his apples in the next succeeding barrel. In 
 that way I personally have the opportunity to inspect every half bushel 
 of apples, or, I might say, every apple, as a half bushel of apples in a 
 barrel is shallow, making inspection a very simple matter. When the
barrels are filled they are headed up, put in the packing shed until 
 sufficient have accumulated, and when that point is reached they are 
 loaded out, billed to Minneapolis, where practically all our apples have 
 been sold for years. All fruit up to date has been sold on a commission 
 basis, the crop for the past season aggregating five carloads, or 
 approximately 800 barrels. 
  
 We feel that we have worked out a fairly good method to handle both our 
 trees and our apples, but we have not reached the conclusion that our 
 methods in any way guarantee us a crop of apples, although in ten years, 
 or since the orchard came into bearing, we have never had a season that 
 we did not have a fair crop of apples. In 1913 we sold seven carloads, 
 in 1914 four carloads, in 1915 five carloads, and the trees as far as 
 they are concerned promise us a fair crop for 1916. We are working as 
 though this is assured, but in the final analysis it is up to the 
 weather man. 
  
 A Member: I would like to ask Mr. Simmons in regard to his wiring. We 
 are raising our trees in the same manner, the open-headed trees, and I 
 wanted to ask him where the central ring is placed, in the crotch of the
of typhoid fever every year than die of smallpox, ten to one. I haven  '  t 
 the statistics but I have that in mind, that it is a fact that they do, 
 and yet there isn  '  t half the fuss made about typhoid fever that there is 
 about smallpox. 
  
 Now, that is so about the scab fungous disease. In Illinois, to 
 illustrate, we have what is called the bitter rot fungus in the southern 
 part of the state. If any one has the bitter rot they are scared to 
 death, they think they are suffering untold misfortune. The bitter rot 
 attacks the apples when nearly grown. The ground is covered with the 
 rotted apples, and you can see them in the trees, but this little bit of 
 scab fungus, they do not seem to notice that. 
  
 The reason is this, that scab comes from very minute spores that appear 
 upon the apples in May or June, and as the summer advances they spread 
 more and more. It depends, of course, upon the amount of moisture there 
 is present, but it begins its work when the apples are very small. If it 
 gets upon the stem of the apple it works around the stem and the apple 
 drops off, and you have apples dropping from the time they are the size 
 of peas until the very last of the fall, and while it looks in the month
Growing Beans and Sweet Corn. 
  
 P. B. MARIEN, ST. PAUL. 
  
  
 Since it is one thing to grow beans and sweet corn and another to make 
 money on them, I think from a market gardener  '  s point of view my heading 
 should have been "growing beans and sweet corn at a profit." 
  
 I will talk of beans first, because while the two are planted at about 
 the same time, beans make their appearance on the market long before 
 sweet corn. 
  
 Beans have a nitrogen gathering power and are therefore a soil-improving 
 crop. They are to the gardener what clover is to the farmer. For early 
 beans we have found that sandy soil well fertilized is by far the best. 
 If possible it should be sloping toward the south, although we have had 
 good success on level land well drained. One should have the best seed 
 possible, and if you get hold of a good strain of seed that produces 
 nice, velvety beans earlier than your neighbor, save as much of that
found two extra bushels, making eighteen instead of sixteen bushels. I 
 concluded that someone had despaired of selling them and perhaps had 
 poor success in trying to give them away and so forced them on me. 
 However we consider we did well on our beans, as the first two pickings 
 brought from $2.00 to $3.50 per bushel. 
  
 Now a few words about sweet corn. Along about the 6th to the 12th of 
 July the truck gardener should load his first sweet corn. Sweet corn is 
 of American origin, having been developed from field corn, or maize. No 
 large vegetable is so generally grown throughout the country, the 
 markets of the cities taking large quantities, and immense areas being 
 grown for canning purposes. 
  
 Seed that fails entirely is not often found, but when one has a good 
 strain that produces early corn it is best to save some. 
  
 We generally have sweet corn to sell every day from about the middle of 
 July until the first frost. To do this we plant every ten days from 
 about the 20th of April to the 20th of June. Our early variety is the 
 Peep-O  '  Day, which is planted about the same time as the early beans. We
also plant the Golden Bantam at this time. This is followed by Red Cob 
 Cory, Pocahontas and some more Bantam. Then about May 15th to 20th we 
 plant early and late Evergreen, Bantam and Country Gentleman. 
  
 [Illustration: A load of vegetables at Marien  '  s ready for market.] 
  
 Soil well adapted to common field corn will produce good sweet corn, 
 thriving best on well fertilized land. Sandy soil is best for the early 
 varieties. 
  
 Sweet corn is often grown in drills, but we prefer the hills three feet 
 apart, as it is easier to get an even stand, and cultivating both ways 
 will push the crop. It should be cultivated shallow and never deep 
 enough to hurt the roots. It is well to hoe it once. 
  
 Sweet corn is one of the few vegetables which is quite free from serious 
 injury from either insects or diseases. 
  
 Sweet corn may be divided into three classes: early, medium and late. It 
 is very important that the various kinds come in as early as possible,
 
 The summer of 1915 will long be remembered as the summer with no warm 
 weather. There was a heavy frost the morning of June 10th. The season  '  s 
 rainfall was very heavy, but trees at the best made only a normal 
 growth, and with many varieties, especially of forest trees, the growth 
 was much less than the usual growth of even a dry season. 
  
 Some fruit trees blossomed quite early, and the young fruit formed 
 during a warm spell, and these trees were heavily loaded with fruit. 
 This was especially noticeable with Wealthy, Duchess, Okabena and 
 Whitney No. 20 apples, and with some of the Hansen hybrid plums. Other 
 trees, fully as good bearers, blossomed a few days later and set no 
 fruit at all, the frost killing the blossoms while not severe enough to 
 harm the fruit already set. 
  
 The cool weather of this past season has probably helped fruit growers 
 more than it has hindered them, for had it been as hot as it usually is 
 when we have such a tremendous rainfall, blight would most certainly 
 have caused much trouble, but as it was we have had practically no 
 blight at all.
 
 This season has again demonstrated very plainly the advantages of 
 top-working, such trees making a better growth, and the fruit being more 
 even, and less troubled with spots, scab, etc. 
  
 The plums sent to this station the spring of 1913 bore no fruit at all 
 this season, but the trees made a fair growth and all appear healthy 
 except a few that froze back the winter of 1913-14. 
  
 The plum trees sent from the central station the spring of 1914 made a 
 very poor growth that season, owing undoubtedly to the fact that the 
 roots were dry when reaching here, but this last season all but one made 
 a splendid growth, and one No. 10, to my surprise, produced five plums 
 that for beauty and eating qualities would place this variety in the 
 front rank with the best in the state. We shall watch these trees with 
 great interest and will report on their actions as they develop. 
  
 The four trees of No. 1 plum, sent here the spring of 1915 from the 
 central station, made a splendid growth, each tree developing fruit buds 
 in abundance.
 
 On November 5th our strawberry beds were all given a mulching with loose 
 oat straw for a winter protection. 
  
 The several varieties of grape vines originating at the Minnesota State 
 Farm on trial here have all made a vigorous growth. We have them all 
 pruned and laid on the ground, and we intend to give them no other 
 winter protection. They are in a sheltered location. In spite of the 
 various freezes early in the season we got samples of fruit from most of 
 the varieties. Minnesota No. 8 seems to be the earliest to ripen its 
 fruit. The wild grape flavor is noticeable in all these varieties. 
  
 The various varieties of plum trees sent here from the State Farm made 
 vigorous growth the past season and are looking healthy with the 
 exception of Minnesota No. 21. Of the five trees of this variety each 
 one has a great many galls on the body of the tree. It is probably what 
 is termed black knot, only the galls have not turned black yet. They are 
 apparently of too recent growth for that. It is probable that we will 
 plant other trees in their places next spring. 
 
effectively enough, for the fruit all rotted. We shall try more thorough 
 spraying next season. 
  
 Patten  '  s Greening, Oldenburg, Okabena and Simbrish No. 1 produced a good 
 crop of apples. With us Okabena is undersized, of poor flavor and an 
 extremely poor keeper. 
  
  
  
  
 The Growing of Vegetables for Canning. 
  
 M. H. HEGERLE, PRES. CANNING FACTORY, ST. BONIFACIUS. 
  
  
 The state authorities, through the Agricultural Farm and other sources, 
 are doing good work promoting and encouraging the growing of vegetables, 
 but it seems more could be done towards the marketing and conservation 
 of these vegetables after they are grown. 
 
so-called fresh vegetables shipped in from a distance at best require 
 several days to make the rounds through the grower, the shipper, the 
 jobber, the retailer--to our tables and are really not fresh. They have 
 become stale, and by coming in contact with different kinds of material 
 have lost their delicate flavor. Therefore to insure real fresh 
 vegetables for our tables, at least during the winter months, we must 
 take the canned article. 
  
 All of us remember how most everything in the grocery line was handled 
 in bulk, dried fruits, cereals of all kinds, coffee, tea, etc., was 
 displayed on the counters, along the aisles and even outside along the 
 sidewalk, handled and examined by any one and exposed to dust and flies. 
 Just about the same way are vegetables in bulk handled today. Where is 
 the grocer who would go back to those days, and where is the public that 
 would patronize him? 
  
 Mrs. Glenzke: What vegetables do you can? 
  
 Mr. Hegerle: We can corn; beans, string and wax; apples, tomatoes, etc. 
 
our fruit--not even the neighborhood boys, as they are our best 
 friends. What they buy we charge them a good fair price for and never 
 fail to give all new customers a few choice samples of best varieties. 
  
 By the latter part of the plum season our big red Wolf River apples 
 commence to show up and cook well; also Wealthy and McIntosh commence to 
 get ripe enough to eat, and the demand each year has far exceeded the 
 supply. 
  
 So far we have had very few poor apples, but we always sort them into 
 three grades, the third grade being made up into cider to sell while 
 sweet. The second grade we sell as such for immediate use. The firsts of 
 the McIntosh we have sold at $2.00 to $2.50 per bushel, Wealthy, 
 Jonathan and Grimes at $1.50 to $2.00, while Wolf, N. W. Greening, 
 Salome, Winesap, Milwaukee, etc., have averaged us $1.25 per bushel. We 
 are always very careful not to have any bruised, diseased or ill shaped 
 specimens in our first grade. 
  
 The President: Can you tell us something more about your experience in 
 marketing direct? Do you sell all the fruit you raise on the place?
 
 Mr. Street: We sell about all the fruit that we raise direct to the 
 consumer. When we first started we started with strawberries, and about 
 half of our crop went to the merchants, and he would retail it for 20 
 per cent, but to any one that came there for it we would charge the full 
 retail price, same as he had to charge, and we never had any trouble 
 with any of the stores that we dealt with. If we have any seconds or 
 anything we don  '  t like to put out to the stores we sell them to our 
 customers and charge them whatever we think would be right for them. 
  
 As to plums, about two-thirds of those would sell right direct to 
 customers coming there, the rest we supplied to the stores at 20 per 
 cent discount so that they could retail them at the same price that we 
 retail them for. Since the apples have begun to bear it seems that 
 two-thirds of the people want the McIntosh, and almost everyone is 
 satisfied with its flavor. They average a little larger with us than the 
 Wealthy, and some of them you can hardly tell from the Wealthy unless 
 you know just about what the fruit is. Last year we kept them until 
 about February or possibly later, but an apple with as good a flavor as 
 that you cannot keep from being eaten up.
few of the Beta seedlings that are very good. One red variety compares 
 favorably with any of the cultivated varieties. It is perfectly hardy so 
 far. And we have two or three varieties of black nearly as large as 
 Moore  '  s Early or Concord. 
  
 "We also have a number of seedlings of pears, but we are not very far 
 advanced with them yet. Pears stand the winter fairly well, although 
 they winter-kill to a certain extent. When they are weakened through the 
 winter and growth starts in the spring they blight. Blight is the worst 
 part of our work with pears." 
  
 Prof. R. S. Mackintosh, of University Farm, was caught on the floor, and 
 as usual took opportunity to tell people they ought to eat more apples 
 and something about how to get them. This seems to be a subject that is 
 ever in his mind and which he is persistently working to good advantage. 
  
 "You folks that are hungry and want apples or apple pie want to get busy 
 about the middle of August and eat up your surplus apples in Minnesota. 
 It is a shame that farmers, fruit growers, etc., have spent years trying 
 to grow apples in Minnesota and then we cannot get enough people to eat
allowed to do the cross-fertilizing. In the fall of 1899 the first seed, 
 amounting in all to about a peck, was harvested and planted. This seed 
 was allowed to dry and was planted just before it froze up, directly 
 into the field where the plants were to remain and bloom. 
  
 The seed was planted about two inches deep, in rows two feet apart, with 
 the seeds six inches apart in the row. Immediately after the ground 
 froze a two-inch mulch of coarse slough hay was spread all over the 
 field. This was removed in the spring and the field kept perfectly clean 
 that season by hand weeding, as cultivation could not be practiced. No 
 seed germinated that year. That fall the ground was again mulched, and 
 this mulch removed early the next, or second, spring. 
  
 This second season just as soon as nature began to quicken the little 
 peonies began to pierce the soil. Standing at one end of the field and 
 looking down the rows one could fairly see the little fellows burst 
 forth from their long confinement and thrust their little red heads in 
 serried ranks through the brown earth. They reminded one of line upon 
 line of miniature red-coated soldiers on parade. 
 
A fourteen-tooth Planet Jr. horse cultivator was immediately started 
 amongst them, and intense cultivation given the bed that season. By the 
 end of the growing season the little plants were from two to four inches 
 high. 
  
 The next spring, the third from the planting of the seed, the young 
 plants burst through the ground strong and robust. Cultivation was 
 started immediately, as during the season before, and the plants made 
 rapid growth. By the middle of May, most of them were eight inches high 
 with an abundance of foliage. 
  
 We noticed a few buds appear this season. The strong, vigorous 
 development of the buds, of one plant in particular, continued to claim 
 our attention, and we watched it with intense interest. Day by day the 
 buds grew larger, and then finally a day came when the first petal 
 lifted, and the next morning the petals spread forth in all their glory. 
 It was a gem, we realized we had something first class. My father said 
 after he had studied it a while, "It pays me for all my time, and money, 
 and work. If I never get another as good I shall be satisfied." It was a 
 beautiful dark red, very early, as good a red as Terry  '  s Rachel. We
named it Richard Carvel. 
  
 Six other plants bloomed that season. One was of the Japanese type. The 
 others singles. 
  
 By the next spring the small plants were well established, and we knew 
 by their vigorous growth that we might expect the most of them to bloom 
 that season. 
  
 Thorough cultivation was given from the start, and by the middle of May 
 the bed was covered with a mass of buds. June came. The blooming season 
 was at hand. Slowly the buds began to show color. Here and there over 
 the field a petal began to lift. A short space of anxious waiting, and 
 then a day came when it seemed as if the bed had been touched by a hand 
 of magic, for from one end to the other it was one solid blaze of color. 
 Before us were thousands upon thousands of flowers and no two alike. 
  
 As quick as the flowers began to open we started to grade and mark them. 
 It took two men working steadily for a week to inspect and mark this 
 bed. Everything that looked choice was marked No. 1. Everything that
season. If allowed to fruit the first season but little fruit could be 
 expected at best, and it would leave the plant dwarfed if indeed it were 
 not killed outright. 
  
 The suckers that come up the first season will produce the next season  '  s 
 crop, after which they die down and should be removed, other suckers 
 taking their places annually. Not over two or three suckers should be 
 allowed to each plant the first year; after the first year leave five to 
 eight in each hill, depending on the kind of soil, fertility, etc. 
  
 When plants are cheap and plentiful it is customary to use two in each 
 hill to insure a good stand the first year, but it is reasonable to 
 expect, however, where there are two root systems in each hill instead 
 of one that in after years there would be more troublesome suckers to 
 remove than if there was but one root in each hill, and this is no small 
 matter with some varieties. 
  
 To obtain planting stock large clusters of roots may be divided to 
 propagate from, but these usually have but few fibrous roots and are not 
 as good as first year  '  s growth suckers, springing from roots near the
You can cut these off, so that the stub of the fruit stem will show that 
 it has sent up a flower stalk. You can see the stub. In this way in a 
 small patch you can easily keep track of them. If some plants do not 
 throw out fruit stems, mark them so you can tell them, and if they pass 
 the season without trying to fruit, you must refrain from setting out 
 any of the runners that appear, or there is liability of trouble. Let 
 such plants alone for another year  '  s trial. Then if they do no better, 
 dig them up and destroy them. Once in a while they prove to be all 
 right, but often they are worthless. 
  
 Learn to tell a variety by a careful examination of the plant at 
 different times during the season. Fix the general color of the leaf in 
 your mind, its shape and size. Notice whether the fruit stems are long 
 or short, whether the blossoms are above the leaves, in plain sight, or 
 are hidden below. Are there many fruit buds to the stalk, or but few? 
 Are the blossoms pistillate or staminate? Are the petals large or small? 
 Are the stamens long or short? Are the anthers well or poorly formed? 
 They should be plump and well filled before they are ready to open. 
  
 Is the receptacle on which the pistils sit well formed and capable of
being developed into a perfect berry, or do they look ungainly in shape? 
 Are the petals pure white or slightly crimson? Are there many runners, 
 or few, or none? Do the new runners bear blossoms and fruit? If so, when 
 do they commence to bud and bloom? When do the berries begin to ripen? 
 Notice the size and shape of the fruit, also the color. You can tell 
 much from the taste of the berry. No two varieties taste exactly alike. 
 Some are real sweet and some kinds real sour. Then there are all grades 
 between. 
  
 The perfume, or fragrance, of the fruit of the common strawberry when 
 fully ripened under proper conditions of sunlight and moisture has long 
 been esteemed and highly appreciated by mankind in general, and in this 
 respect the fall-bearing strawberry varies greatly. The most of the 
 varieties excel all common kinds as to perfume and that delicate 
 strawberry flavor which nearly everybody loves so well. Once in a while 
 a musk-scented variety is developed, like the Milo on our grounds, which 
 as yet has never been sent out. By paying close attention to these 
 things you can soon learn to distinguish many varieties at any time 
 during the growing season. 
 
In 1898 Mr. Cooper found his seedling which he called the Pan American. 
 From that small beginning there are now many varieties, perhaps 
 thousands, that excel the parent plant, and perhaps a hundred varieties 
 of great value. Some varieties have very superior merit. I will mention 
 a few: Progressive, Peerless, Advance, Danville, Forward, Prince, Will, 
 Milo, Nathaniel, 480, and there are others which might be mentioned. 
 Good reports have reached me of kinds produced at your Horticultural 
 Experiment farm by Prof. Haralson, but I have never tried them. My 
 private opinion is that several kinds I have not mentioned will very 
 soon take a back seat, as the saying is. The best varieties are bound to 
 come to the front. 
  
 The best advertisement one can have is the ability to ship thousands of 
 quarts during the whole autumn. This season we shipped 22,565 quarts, 
 mostly sold in pint boxes. They netted us from 12-1/2 to 18 cents per 
 pint. At home we kept them on the market during the whole season at 15 
 cents per quart. We lost as many as 5,000 quarts by violent storms 
 during the season. It was a fair season for growing plants, but there 
 was too much water to grow the best of fruit. 
 
First comes the orange lilium elegans, then scarlet lychnis and later, 
 tiger lilies. Another bit is gorgeous from the first of August until 
 frost; it is made up of blue and white campanula pyramidalis, that grow 
 quite five feet high, and Mrs. Francis King gladioli. 
  
 An important thing to think of is the line of vision from each point of 
 vantage of the house--the endwise view of a multicolored bed of fairy 
 columbines against a light green willow from the sewing room window, 
 from the library the blue of a Juniata iris swaying four feet up in the 
 air in front of a sweet briar, from the front porch pale yellow 
 Flavescens iris through a mist of purple sweet rockets. 
  
 The garden is in its glory during the iris season. At a conservative 
 estimate we have about twenty-five hundred of them in our little garden, 
 ranging through all the colors of the rainbow and blooming from April 
 until late June. They may easily make such an increase that it is 
 baffling to cope with, but they are so beautiful and so amenable to the 
 experimenting of an amateur that we feel as though we couldn  '  t get 
 enough of them. Last summer a wonderful effect was achieved by putting 
 dark blue and mahogany-colored pansies beside Jacquesiana and Othello
household with more delicious fresh fruit and juice for six months of 
 the year than five times the space of ground devoted to currants, 
 gooseberries or any other fruit, and if you have from 50 to 100 plants 
 you can afford to pick the first stalk that sprouts up in April and 
 still figure on having an abundance to keep you well supplied all 
 summer. 
  
 Do you really know what a delicious beverage can be made from the juice 
 of rhubarb mixed in cool water? Take it along in the hayfield a hot 
 summer day. And even if you can not keep it cool the acid contained in 
 the juice still makes it a delicious and stimulating drink where you 
 would loathe the taste of a stale beer. There are about a hundred other 
 ways to prepare rhubarb, not forgetting a well cooled rhubarb mush 
 served with cool milk in the evening or for that matter three times a 
 day; nothing cheaper, nor healthier. The fresh acid contained in the 
 rhubarb purifies the blood and puts new vigor in your body and soul, is 
 better and cheaper than any patent medicines, and from the growth of 50 
 to 100 plants you can eat every day for six months and preserve enough 
 in fresh, cool water in airtight jars to last you all winter. But you 
 can do still better with your rhubarb. You can add three months more and
