 The cherries called Zawerkersen, are reasonable great, but sower. And the other kind called Wildkersen, is little and sweete, but hath a blacke iuyce, vnpleasing to the taste. They haue little store of peares or apples, and those they haue are little, and of small pleasantnesse, onely the Muskadel peare is very delicate, especially when it is dried. And the Germans make good vse of those fruits they haue, not so much for pleasure when they are greene, as for furnishing the table in Winter. For their Peares, and Apples, they pare them, and drie them vnder the Ouen of the stoue, and then dresse them very fauorly with Cynamon and Butter. In like sort they long preserue their cheries drie, without sugar, and the greater part of their cheries they boyle in a brasse cauldron, full of holes in the bottome, out of which the iuce falles into another vessell, which being kept, growes like marmalade, and makes a delicate sauce for all roasted meates, and will last very long, as they vse it. The Italians haue a Prouerb, Dio da i panni secondo i freddi; that is, God giues cloathes according to the colds, as to the cold Muscouites hee hath giuen futtes, to the English wooll for cloth, to the French diuers light stuffes, and to Souther?lie people stoore of silkes, that all Nations abounding in some things, and wan?ting others, might be taught, that they haue neede of one anothers helpe, and so be stirred vp to mutuall loue, which God hath thus planted betweene mankind by mutuall trafficke. For this must be vnderstood not onely of clother, but also of all o?ther things necessary for human life. 
    
  
 The Cities that are one the Sea-coast on the North side of Germany, haue very great * ships, but more fit for taking in great burthen, then for sayling or fighting, which the Netherlanders more commonly fraught with their commodities, then the Germans themselues, neither are the German Marriners much to bee commended. The German Sea in good part, and the Baltick Sea altogether, are free from Pyrats, which is the cause that their ships are little or not at all armed, onely some few that trade into Spaine, carry great Ordinance, but are generally made large in the ribs, rather fit for burthen, then fight at Sea. I neuer obserued them to haue any common prayers mor?ning or euening, as our English ships haue while they bee at Sea, but the Marriners of their owne accord vse continually to sing Psalmes, and they are punished by the purse who sweare, or so much as once name the diuell, from which they ab?horre. 
  
 And herein they deserue to be praysed aboue the Holanders, in whose ships a man shall heare no mention of God or his worship. The said free Cities of Germany lying on the Sea-coast, are called Hansen-stetten, that is, free Cities, because they had of old in all neighbour Kingdoms great priuiledges, of buying any wares as wel of strangers as Citizens, and of selling or exchanging their own wares to either sort at pleasure, and to bring in or carry out all commodities by their owne shippes, with like immuni?ties equall to Citizens in all the said Dominions, and no lesse preiudiciall to them, then aduantageous to themselues. 
 
In England they were wont to dwell together at London, in the house called the Stil?yard, and there to enioy these liberties, which long since haue laine dead, the Germans seldome bringing ought in their ships into England, and the English hauing now long time found it more commodious to vse their owne shipping, and iustly com?plaining, that the English had not the like priuiledges in the said free Cities; for which cause the priuiledges of the Germans were laid dead in England, though not fully taken away. Caesar witnesseth, that the Schwaben inhabiting Suenia, then containing great part of Germany, admitted Merchants not to buy any thing themselues, but onely to sell the spoyles they got in warre. But Munster a German writes, that these Sueuians or schwaben are now the onely forestallers of all things sold in faires or Markets, and that for this cause they are excluded from buying any thing through Germany, except it bee sold in their owne Townes of trafficke. 
  
  
 For the English Merchants had their Staple first at Emden, the Count whereof vsed them well, yet in the warre betweene England and Spaine, this place grew dange?rous for them, for the enemie often tooke their goods, and made them prisoners, at the very mouth of the Harbour. Whereupon they remoued to Hamburg, where being oppressed with new impositions, and being denied the publike exercise of their Religion, they went from thence, and settled their Staple at Stoade. In like sort the English Merchants trading for Poland and those parts, first had their Staple at Dantzk in Prussen (by Staple I meane their residence in a City, giuing them priuiledge to stop any forraigne wares, intended to be carried further, and to force the Merchant to sell them there, except hee had rather returne with them to the place from whence hee came.) But when the Dantzkers vnder pretence of the Sueuian warre, exacted of them a doller for each woollen cloath, and asmuch for a last of any other goods, and after when the warre was ended, would remit nothing of this imposition. And further when they forbad the English by a Law to dwell in Poland, the commodities whereof were onely sold there, left they should learne the language, and find the mysteries of the trade. And lastly when they exacted as much weekely of an Englishman dwel?ling in the City, as they did of a Iew dwelling there. The English made agreement with the Senate of Meluin for eleuen yeeres, to pay them sixe grosh for each cloth, or other last of goods, and to pay as much more in the Citie Kettle, to the Duke of Prus?sen, for his giuing them free passage to Meluin, and so they settled their Staple there. Wherupon the Dantzkers being offended with the Citizens of Meluin, and the Ham?burgers no lesse with those of Stoade, procured the free Cities by a publike writing to outlaw, not onely Meluin and Stoade for receiuing the English, to the common preiu?dice of the rest, but also Koingsperg (the seate of the Duke of Prussen), and the free Citie Lubeck, for fauouring the English in this course, and permitting them being strangers to sell their goods to any other, then the Citizens of each seuerall Citie. 
    
 The diet of the Germans is simple, and very modest, if you set aside their intempe?rate drinking: For as they are nothing sumptuous, but rather sparing in their apparell * and houshold stuffe, so they are content with a morsell of flesh and bread, so they haue store of drinke, and want not wood to keepe their stoaues warme. And in generall, since they affect not forraigne commodities, but are content with their own commo?dities, and are singular as well in the Art as industry of making manuall workes, they easily draw to them and retaine with them forraigne Coynes. The free Cities vse to haue alwaies a yeeres prouision of victuals laid vp in publike houses, to serue for homely food for the people, in case the City should happen to be besieged. They commonly serue to the Table sower Cabbages, which they call Crawt, and beere (or wine for a dainty) boyled with bread, which they call Swoope. In vpper Germany they moreouer giue veale or beefe in little quantities, but in lower Germany they supply the meale with bacon and great dried puddings, which puddings are sauory and so plea?sant, as in their kind of mirth they wish prouerbially for Kurtz predigen, lange worsten, that is; Short sermons and long puddings. Sometimes they also giue dried fishes, and apples or peares first dried, then prepared with cinamon and butter very sauourily. They vse many sawces, and commonly sharpe, and such as comfort the stomacke of?fended with excessiue drinking: For which cause in vpper Germany the first draught commonly is of wormewood wine, and the first dish of little lampreys, (which they call mine augen, as hauing nine eyes) serued with white vineger; and those that take any iourney, commonly in the morning drinke a little Brant wein, (that is, their Aquauita) and eate a peece of Pfeffer kuchen, (that is, Ginger-bread) which vseth to be sold at the gates of the City. They haue a most delicate sawce (in my opinion) for rosted meats, of cherries sod and brused, the iuice whereof becomes hard like Marmalade, but when it is to be serued to the Table, they dissolue it with a little wine or like moisture. And as they haue abundance of fresh fish in their Ponds and Riuers, so they desire not to eate them, except they see them aliue in the Kitchen, and they prepare the same very sauourly, commonly vsing anniseeds to that purpose, especially the little fishes, wher?of they haue one most delicate kinde, called Smerling, which in Prussen I did eate, first choked, then sodden in wine, and they being very little, yet sixty of them were sold for nineteene grosh. The foresaid sawce of cherries, they thus prepare and keepe, They gather a darke or blackish kind of cherry, and casting away the stalkes, put them into a great cauldron of brasse set vpon the fier, til they beginne to be hot, then they put them into a lesse cauldren full of holes in the bottome, and presse them with their hands, so as the stones and skinnes remaine in this cauldron, but the iuice by the foresaid holes doth fall into another vessell. Then againe they set this iuyce vpon the fier, continu?ally stirring it, lest it should cleaue to the bottome, and after two howers space, they mingle with it the best kind of peares they haue, first cut into very small peeces, and so long they boile it and continually stirre it, till it waxe hard, and notwithstanding the stirring beginne to cleaue to the vessell. This iuyce thus made like a Marmalade, may long be preserued from moulding in this sort. They which desire to haue it sweete, mixe sugar with it, and others other things according to the taste they desire it should haue. Then they put it into earthen pitchers; and if it beginne at any time to waxe mouldie, they put these pots into the Ouen, after the bread is baked and taken out. Also these pitchers must be close stopped, that no aire may enter, & must be set where no sunne or continuall heate comes. Lastly, when they will make ready this sawce, they cut out a peece of the said iuice, and mingle with it a little wine to dissolue it, (with vineger, or sugar, or spices, according to their seuerall appetites), and so boile it againe some halfe hower. 
  
 In Saxony, Misen, and those parts, they sometimes serue to the Table a calues head whole and vndeuided into parts, which to vs strangers at the first sight seemed a terri?ble dish gaping with the teeth like the head of a Monster, but they so prepare it, as I neuer remember to haue eaten any thing that more pleased my taste. They vse not for common diet any thing that comes from the Cow, neither haue I obserued them to haue any butter in Saxony, or the lower parts of Germany, but they vse a certaine white matter called smalts in stead of it, not tasting like our butter. They doe not common?ly eate any cheese, neither remember I that I euer tasted good cheese there, excepting one kind of little cheese made of Goats milke, which is pleasant to eate: but salt and strong cheeses they sometimes vse to prouoke drinking, for which purpose the least crum is sufficient. These Cheeses they compasse round with thred or twigges, and they beginne them in the midst of the broade side, making a round hole there, into which hole, when the cheese is to be set vp, they put some few drops of wine, that it may putrifie against the next time, when they eate the mouldy peeces and very cree?ping maggots for dainety morsels, and at last the cheese becomes so rotten and so full of these wormes, that if the said binding that compasseth it chance to break, the cheese fals into a million of crums no bigger then moates. They haue a kind of bread brow?nish & sowrish, and made with anniseeds, which seemed very sauoury to me. They serue in stead of a banquet, a kind of light bread like our fritters, saue that it is long, round, & a little more solid, which they call Fastnacht kuchen, Shroftide baking, because then and vpon S. Martini day, and some like Feasts they vse to make it. They vse not in any place almost, to offend in the great number of dishes, onely some few Innes of chiefe Cities giue plentifull meales. And for the Saxons, they for the most part set on the pot or roast meate once for the whole weeke: Yet in the golden bull they haue a law, that Hosts shall not serue in more then foure dishes, the price of them to be set by the Magistrate, & that they should not gaine in the reckoning more then the fourth or at most the third penny, and that the guests should pay seuerally for their drinke, the Germans drinking so largely as it was vnpossible to prescribe the rate thereof. It were to be wished by strangers, that not onely drinke shouid be paid for a part from meate, but that each man should pay the share himselfe drinkes, and no more, so the charges of sober passengers in Germany, hauing all things reasonably cheape, would not in such measure increase, as otherwise they doe through their companions intem?perancy. The said Saxons set the dishes on the Table one by one, for the most part grosse meates, whereupon I haue heard some merrily compare them to the Tyrants of Sirily, of whom one being dead, stil a more terrible Monster succeeded him. 
 
 The foresaid trade of the vnited Prouinces, hath at home much commodity and increase by the Riuers, (as the Rheine bringing downe the commodities of Germany), and by the standing or little mouing waters, which are most frequent, and by channels or ditches wrought by hand, and bearing at least little boates for passage to each City and Village: but these waters for the most part ending in standing pooles, by reason they fall into a low ground neere the Sea, the Ayre is vnholsome, the waters are nei?ther of good smell nor taste, neither doe they driue Mils, as running waters doe else?where, of which kind they haue few or none. My selfe in a darke rainy day passing one of these said narrow channels, numbered an hundred little boates at least, which passed by vs, (and are hired at a low rate) whereby the great trade and singular indu?stry of the Inhabitants may be coniectured. Adde that besides, the German Sea, lying vpon diuers of these Prouinces, they haue many Armes of the Sea, that runne farre within Land. All the Riuers fall from Germany, which in this lower soyle often ouer?flowing, haue changed their old beds, and falling into ditches made by hand, doe no more runne with their wonted force, but (as I haue said in the description of Holland) doe end (as it were) in lakes. By reason of the foresaid industry of the people inhabi?ting the vnited Prouinces, the number of their ships, and the commodity of their Seas and waters, howsoeuer they want of their owne many things for necessity and de?light, yet there is no where greater abundance of all things, neither could any Nation indowed with the greatest riches by nature, haue so long borne as they haue done a ciuell warre, and intollerable exactions and tributes, much lesse could they by this mischiefe haue growne rich, as this people hath done. One thing not vsed in any other Countrey, is here most common, that while the Husbands snort idly at home, the Weomen especially of Holland, for trafficke sayle to Hamburg, and manage most part of the businesse at home, and in neighbour Cities. In the shops they sell all, they take all accompts, and it is no teproch to the men to be neuer inquited after, about these af?faires, who taking money of their wiues for daily expences, gladly passe their time in idlenesse. 
  
 Touching this peoples diet, Butter is the first and last dish at the Table, whereof they make all sawces, especially for fish, and thereupon by strangers they are merrily * called Butter-mouths. They are much delighted with white meats, and the Bawers drinke milke in stead of beere, and as well Men as Weomen, passing in boates from City to City for trade, carry with them cheese, and boxes of butter for their foode, whereupon in like sort strangers call them Butter boxes, and nothing is more ordinary then for Citizens of good accompt and wealth to sit at their dores, (euen dwelling in the market place) holding in their hands, and eating a great lumpe of bread and butter with a lunchen of cheese. They vse to seeth little peeces of flesh in Pipkins, with rootes and gobbets of fat mingled therewith, without any cutiosity; and this they often seeth againe, setting it each meale of the weeke on the Table, newly heated, and with some addition of flesh rootes or fat morsels, as they thinke needfull, and this dish is vulgar?ly called Hutspot. They feed much vpon rootes, which the boyes of rich men de?uoure raw with a morsell of bread, as they runne playing in the streetes. They vse most commonly fresh meates, and seldome set any salt meates on the board, except it beat Feasts to prouoke drinking. They vse no spits to roast meat, but bake them in an earthen pipkin as in an ouen, and so likewise seeth them: And these meates being cold, they often heat and serue to the Table, so as I haue come into an Inne, and being in the Kitchen, could see nothing ready for supper, yet presently called to supper, haue seene a long Table furnished with these often heated meats, which smoaked on the outside, yet were cold on the inside. 
  
 Lombardy also affoords sheepe to Toscany, and other parts of Italy, as Sicily doth Corne, whereby of old it deserued to be called the Garner of Rome. Italy hath great store of Goates, the milke whereof is so nutritiue, as they giue it to the weakest bodies for a restoratiue. Great Heards of cattle are brought into Italy out of Hungary, and from diuers Countries of the Alpes, but the Hungarian Oxen growing leane with driuing farre, and finding in Italy no Pastures wherein they may be fatted, this makes Italians basely to esteeme of Beefe. Out of Lombardy the Italians haue few or no Ca?tle, all Italy being like a most pleasant Garden, and hauing few Pastures: And this makes the Italians so tender towards the few Cattle they haue, as for feare of cold for?sooth in that hot Clime, they leade them into stables, when they are to bring forth their young. In the plaine Countrey of Lombardy they vse Horses, and especially Mares, (of an exceeding little race) to ride vpon, and for bearing of burthens; and Oxen to draw Carts, and sometimes Caroches, (vulgarly Carozzi): but in the Mountaines and hilly Countries they vse Asses and Mules, seldome Horses to ride vpon, and for burthens. In the Roman territory I haue seene mauy Beasts called Buffols, like Oxen, but greater and more deformed, hauing great hornes with foule nostrels cast vp into the Ayre: It is a slow and dull Beast, yet being prouoked, hath malice enough, and the backe thereof is commonly bare of haire, and euer almost galled. They eate not the flesh thereof, but trade with the hides, as with those of Oxen, and this beast is held commodious for Husbandry and patient of labour. They haue no race of Horses for beauty or seruice, but onely in the Kingdome of Naples. Asses are commonly sold for 10 crownes a peece, and a Mule for 50 or 60 gold crownes, which Beasts are onely vsed in all Italy, excepting onely Lombardy. Of the Mule I obserued, that he will goe vnder a heauy burthen from day-breake in Summer, to darke night, without any ba?ting or rest by the way, onely his meate is tied in a net before his mouth, so as he eates while he goes, and his pace is slow, and when his burthen is taken off at night, he tum?bles and rubs his backe in the dust to coole it, and is thereby more refreshed from wea?rinesse, then a Horse can be with lying halfe the night, otherwise he lies not downe in the stable scarcely once in sixe moneths. A Mule is begotten betweene a Horse ??? & a shee Asse, but a Mule mounting a she Mule, an Asse, or any beast whatsoeuer, doth neuer in gender of them, and the heate of his seed is yeelded for cause thereof. Narrow Italy cannot beare red or fallow Deare, onely the woods of Toscany yeeld some few wild Boares, which are preserued for the great Dukes game, otherwise a few wild beasts might soone make great spoile in so rich and well tilled fields, as be these of Italy. 
  
 They haue like plenty of Citron, Limon, and Cedar trees, which in Lombardy grow vpon the bricke wals of Gardens, as Vines doe with vs, and are kept in earthen vessels, but vpon the mountaines and hils of vpper Italy, the fields abound with these Trees, which both in body and fruit are as bigge as our Apple?trees, and they transport great store of these fruites into forraigne parts. There be ma?ny woods of Chesnuts, which they little esteeme, onely poore people eating them, and with the rest they feed Hogges, as with Acornes. The Chesnut tree is not vnlike the Oake tree, but that it is more small, high, and straight There be some woods of Pine trees, which are high, without any boughs or leaues to the very top, where they haue a round tuft, and they beare at one time the fruit of three veeres, one pine Apple round and sharpe at the top, hauing some hundreth or more knobs like hasell nuts, in which knob the kernell is of little bignesse, but of such vertue to prouoke wanton?nesse, as they serue it at all feasts. All the fields are full of figtrees, not small as with vs, but as big in the body as some Appel-trees, and they haue broad leaues. The fruite hath the forme of a long ???, and a blacke skinne, and a red iuyce, being to be suck?ed like sugar in taste. Neither doe I thinke any fruite to bee more pleasant then this pulled from the tree, I say pulled from the tree, because the drie figges exported are not in taste comparable thereunto. In the fields of vpper Italy are great plenty of Al?mond trees, so as you would say, that a whole Prouince is but one Garden. Like plen?ty haue they of O iue trees, which yeeld a sweet oyle, vsed by them in stead of butter, and in sorraigne parts for wholsomnesse, yet I cannot think that it can be whok some when it is heated, as the Italians vse it to fry meates. They haue some, but not to great plenty of Pomegranates, which tree is not vnlike that of the white Role, but the leaues are little, and the flowers and the buds of a red colour. The Husbandmen make ditches about the rootes of all these fruite trees, and the inhabitants of pleasant taly are notable in all kind of husbandrie. The Cypresse, Popler and Oake trees, grow in many places, but are little esteemed, as bearing no fruite. Italy vpon the Hilles and Mountaines lying towards the Sunne, yeelds rich Wines, and very nourishing, yet some out of experience say they are not wholsome for fat men, as causing obstructi?ons, and hindring the passage of the vrine, and other cuacuations: but I am sure they are more pleasant in taste, then any other wine whatsoeuer brought into England that euer I tasted. But of all the kinds of Wine to be named in my following discourse, I haue spoken more at large in the first Part, writing my iournall through Italy. 
  
 I haue seene Pease, Artichokes, cloued Gilly flowers, and other flowers of the best kinds, sold in the Market-place of Saint Marke in Venice all the moneth of Februarie, but they had not the odoriferous smell of Summer-flowers. Also at Genoa in the moneth of December, I did see the same flowers and fruits sold, and many of them for one bolineo, yea the flowers were odoriferous in smell, and newly gathered, which made me thinke, that those I did see at Venice, were preserued by Art, and not newly gathered. And they of Genoa acknowledge, that they learned the art to make flowers grow in Winter, of Cowes by chance nipping-offsome budds in Summer, which they obserued to bud and put forth againe in Winter for the Gareners vpon this obser?uation, did themselues nip offsome buds newly put forth in Summer, and forbearing to water that roote all Summer time, did vpon approach of Winter digge about the route, and sow cloues about it, to make the Winter-flowers haue the better ???, and then couering the roote with earth, began daily to water it, and with this Art sooner or later vsed, they make the earth yeeld Roses, or any flowers in what moneth of the yeere they will, to that the ground lye vpon the South Sunne, and fenced from cold windes. 
  
 The Gulfe of Venice affoards fishing to serue that City in good plenty, the Sea of Rome affoards lesse, and that of Genoa none at all. But in the Sea of Genoa neare the Ilands Sardinia and Corsica, they fish Cora ' s, sold at Genoa for three lyres the ownce. In the markets at Venice they haue great ovsters, but in no great plenty, and diuers kinds of shel-fish, as Cockles, Scalops, and Rasers, called in the Italian tongue Cape tonde, (round Cape) Cape Sante (holy Cape) and Cape longe (long Cape), and these they haue in more plenty, then in most parts of England: but the Oysters are very deare, some twenty for a lyre; and I doe not remember to haue seene shelfish in any other City of Italy, but onely in Venite. Neither haue the Italians any store of fresh-water fish, so as most of their Markets are furnished in very Lent-time with salted and dried fishes, or at least newly dead, which the Germans cannot indure, vsing to see them aliue be?fore they will cate them. They haue at certaine times of the yeere reasonable plentie of birds, but not great in number or variety of kinds, but Hens, and especially those of Turkey or the Indies seeme more plentifully serued in the Markets, because the com?mon sort feedes onely vpon rootes, diuers kinds of pulse, hearbs, and small meates dri?ed or salted. I remember not to haue seene any Storkes in Italy, no not in the free Ci?ties and States, where fabulous Writers say, they most willingly liue, as vnder more They seldome make feasts, but if they make any, then out of their innated pride, disdaining to be surpassed by any, they make them sumptnous, and that much more then ours, alwaies making the comparison equal of one degree against the other. And this is most certaine, that they infinitely passe vs in the expences about their Gardens, in fitting places for birding, in drawing water to them, and adorning the Conduits head with Imagry, in Chapels, and other buildings, of which things some yeeld them fruite, the other last perpetually: for they bestow their money in stable things, to serue their posteritie, where as our greatest expences end in the casting out of ex?crements, which makes me lesse commend our expences in great prouisions of meate, as well at feasts as daily diet. 
  
 And giue me leaue to hold this paradox, or opinion against that of the common sort; that the English were neuer more idle, neuer more ignorant in manuall Arts, neuer more factious in following the parties of Princes or their Landlords, neuer more base (as I may say) trencher slaues, then in that age, wherein great men keept o?pen houses for all commers and goers. And that in our age, wherein we haue better learned each man to liue of his owne, and great men keepe not such troopes of idle ser?uants, not onely the English are become very industrious, and skilfull in manuall Artes, but also the tyranny of Lords and Gentlemen is abated, wherby they nourished priuate dissentions and ciuill Warres, with the destruction of the common people. Neither am I moued with the vulgar opinion, preferring old times to ours, because it is apparant, that the Cloysters of Monkes (who spoiled all, that they might bee be?neficiall to few), and Gentlemens houses (who nourished a rabble of seruants in idlenesse, and in robbing by the high waies) lying open to all idle people for meate and drinke, were cause of greater ill then good to the Common?wealth. 

 Yet I would not bee so vnderstood, as if I would haue the poore shut cut of dores, for I rather desire, that greater workes of charitie should be exercised towards them, to which wee should bee more inabled by honest frugalitie, then by foolish pro?digalitie; I call it foolish, and thinke the vulgar sort of prodigals worthy of all igno?miny, who with huge expences keepe many kennels of dogs, and casts of hawkes, and entertaine great numbers of strangers, sometimes not knowne by name, often scof?fing at the entertainer, alwaies ingratefull, and so not only vse them to liue vnlawfully without labour or sweate of their browes, but also in the meane time themselues will haue a brother for their Buttler, and are so niggardly towards their kinsmen, yea, chil?dren and wiues, as they prouide not necessaries for them, and haue no care of their ad?uancement, education, and meanes to liue, but preferre vaine-glory before these reli?gious cares. How much better were it for these prodigall men to lay aside some good part of their reuenue to nourish learned men, to procure good Preachers for their companions and guides, to relieue vertuous men in their wants, and to spend the same to like noble and princely ends. 
  
 But I returne to my purpose. A stranger may liue in Italy with lesse expence, then in Germany, where he must beare the charge of his consorts excessiue drinking. And if any obiect the dearth of victuals, and wickednesse of Hosts in Italy, he shal find, that this is his owne want, not any ill of the Country; and when he hath experience to do his owne affaires there, he will be of my opinion. The Italians haue small moneys of brasse, and for the least of them a man may buy bread, little papers of spice, or any such thing that is to be sold. These small moneys, the aboundance of people in a nar?row land, and the common peoples pouerty, but most of all their innated pride, such as they had rather starue for want, then beg, these things make them doe any seruice for a stranger for a small reward, and make the passages of Riuers, or Channells (as at Venice), and all necessaries, to be affoorded for a small piece of money. Neither is it a small commoditie of these little brasse moneys, that it makes the meaner sort more ready to giue almes. This benefit the English may well know by the want of like mo?neys, whereby the hire of Porters, all rewards and each almes being giuen in siluer money, and the small pieces thereof being rare, all expences are much increased. The women of Italy know not the price of any thing, or euer goe to Markets (scarce are al?lowed to go to Church) neither do they trust their seruants to make their market, but the richest of all Italy, and most noble (especially in Venice) daily buy their owne vi?ctuals and other necessaries. And in all Market-places stand little boyes with baskets, to carry any thing that is bought to their houses, which they easily find, knowing all streetes and allyes, and neuer faile to performe this honestly, though the buyer leaue them, and (according to their custome) goe about his other affaires; for if they should fayle, they cannot escape punishment, being easily to be found in the Markets where they vse daily to stand, and well knowne by face and name. Yet in truth the Italians dyet is so sparing, as almost strangers alone vse these little Porters, and the very Gentle?men of Venice (which notwithstanding arrogate to themselues a preheminence aboue all Gentlemen of Italy with the singular title of Clarissimi), carry home what they buy to eate, either in the sleeues of their gownes, or in a cleane handkercher. They spend much bread and oyle, and the very Porters feede on most pure white bread, almost without any other meat, except it be some roots. And those that are richer, do for the most part feede on bread, neither remember I to haue euer seene brown bread in Italy, only they eate sailets of hearbs with their bread, and mingle them with oyle. And I remember that I saw a barrell of oyle sold for twenty lyres, and a bushell of Wheate (containing forty eight measures, called Sata by the Latines, & vsed by the Hebrews) for 120 lyres, but the very Gentlemen buy their bread of the Bakers. Many times, es?pecially in short dayes of Winter, they will breake their fasts with a bit of cake-bread or sweet bread (called vulgarly pasta reale, ciambolini, and generally Gentilezze), and a cup of sweete Wine, and so abstaine from dinner. 
  
 For the most part at table they vse blacke or bay salt, which the Venetians hauing of their owne; for bid the vse of any white salt brought into the territory, so as it is onely sold by stealth, and with danger of penaltie. The Magistrate daily vseth to set the price of flesh, and all things sold in the Market, especially in the vpper parts of Ita?ly, and namely at Sienna, where strangers liue very commodiously, and by this cu?stome, a stranger can no more be deceiued, then one of the Country. In the State of Florente, and especially at Sienna, a stranger may liue more commodiously, then in any other part of Italy, because the inhabitants are most curteous (so as at Sienna they ad?mit strangers to conuerse and dance with the chiefe Gentlewomen of the Citie), and because the language, especially at Sienna, is held the most pure, as also for that victuale are very cheape, and strangers neede not stand in feare of being murthered, as in Lom?bardy they doe. In the State of Milan, there is plenty of all kinds of flesh, especially of mutton, and abundance of whittmeates, being commended aboue all other parts of Italy for delicate butter (not to be had otherwhere, except in some few large Valleys), and excellent cheeses (whereof great quantity is transported into forraigne parts.) And they no lesse then the Netherlanders, serue in butter and cheese euery meale for the first and last dishes. In the Market places of Venice, there is plenty of mutton and veale, sold in little portions and by weight (there as in all Italy), and there is also plenty of fish, hennes, egges, Turkey hennes, and some store of birds, with great abundance of red herrings and pickled herrings, Sardelle, anchone, and like pickled fishes, of Cauiale (a salt liquor made of fish) and Botargo (as I thinke the rone of a fish), of Piacentine cheese, and cheese of Parma, of mushroms, snailes, the hinder parts of frogs (all held for great dainties). And these things are to be had in more abundance, because the com?mon sort eate little or no flesh, or fish, or birds, but onely hearbs, pulse, snailes, and rootes, with white bread. I haue spoken formerly of their fishing at Sea, and their shell-fishes (which they much esteeme), and Sea-fishes are indeed rarely found, but onely at Venice. Also they haue little store of fresh-water fish, onely there is great a?boundance of eeles, where the Riuer Po endes in a Lake, neere the Adriatick Sea, in the Dukedome of Feraria. The vpper parts of Italy yeeld the same things, but in a farre lesse quantity, and in Toscany they frequently eate young Goates flesh, which is very good and sauory, and sometimes there will be wild Bores to be sold, and they de?light much in fresh curds newly pressed, and made into little cheeses. The Italians sell al kinds of flesh in little pieces, and all things for diet in little portions, that the meaner sort, if they list, may at least taste the greatest dainties. The inner parts of Goates (vul?garly Animale), and the stones of Rammes and Regles, (vulgarly Granella), are estee?med great dainties, especially in Toscany, which we cast away, being very good meate fried. And because the land is more populous then plentifull in victuals, they eate layes and other birdes, which we esteeme vnwholsome. 
  
 In generall the Italians, and more specially the Florentines, are most neare at the Table, and in their Innes from morning to night the Tables are spread with white cloathes, strewed with flowers and figge leaues, with Ingestars or glasses of diuers co?loured wines set vpon them, and delicate fruits, which would inuite a Man to eat and drink, who otherwise hath no appetite, being all open to the sight of passengers as they ride by the high way, through their great vnglased windowes. At the Table, they touch no meate with the hand, but with a forke of siluer or other mettall, each man being serued with his forke and spoone, and glasse to drinke. And as they serue small peeces of flesh, (not whole ioints as with vs), so these peeces are cut into small bits, to be taken vp with the forke, and they seeth the flesh till it be very tender. In Summer time, they set a broad earthen vessel full of water vpon the Table, wherein little glas?ses filled with wine doe swimme for coolenesse. They vse no spits to roast flesh, but commonly stew the same in earthen pipkins, and they feed much vpon little fishes and flesh cut and fried with oyle. They haue no skill in the Art of Cookery, and the meate is serued to the table in white glistering and painted dishes of earth (wherof the finest are much esteemed with vs.) They are not willingly inuited to eate with other men, esteeming basely of those, who liue at other mens trenchers, calling them vulgar?ly seroccatori d ' ipasti, shifters for meales. And the reason hereof is, that they would not be tied to inuite others againe, which in their pride they would doe, if they should be inuited to them, and this is the chiefe cause that makes them nice to conuerse with strangers. Of the Florentines, though most courteous, yet sparing, other Italians ieast, saying, that when they meete a man about dinner time, they aske Vos '  Signoria ha desinato, Sir, haue you dined? and if he answer, I, they replie as if they would haue in?uited him to dinner: but if he answere no, they reply Andate Signor, ch ' èotta, Goe Sir, for it is high time to dine. They thinke it best to cherrish and increase friendship by meetings in Market places and Gardens, but hold the table and bed vnfit for conuer?sation, where men should come to eate quickly, and sleepe soundly. Thus not prouo?king appetite with variety of meates, or eating with others for good fellowship, they must needes be more temperate, then others intised by these meanes to eate beyond hunger. In Cities, where many take chambers in one house, they eate at a common table, but each man hath his owne meat prouided, the Hostesse dressing it, and seruing each man with his owne napkin, glasse, forke, spoone, knife, and ingestar or glasse of wine, which after meate are seuerally and neately laid vp by the Hostesse. And at the table, perhaps one man hath a hen, another a piece of flesh, the third potched egges, and each man seuerall meat after his diet: but it is no courtesie for one to offer ano?ther part of his meate, which they rather take to be done in pride, as if he thought that he that had a sallet or egges, could not haue a hen or flesh if hee listed for want of mo?ney. To conclude, they hold it no honour or disgrace to liue plentifully or sparingly, so they liue of their owne, and be not in debt, for in that case they are esteemed slaues. Thus liuing of their owne, they giue due honour to superiours, so they returne due respect to them, otherwise they dispise him that is richer, saying in scorne, Let him dine twise a day, and weare two gounes if he will, it is enough for mee to haue conuenient diet and apparrell. They haue a very delicate sauce for rosted meates, called Sauore, made of slices of bread, steeped in broath, with as many Walnuts, and some few leaues of Marioram, beaten in a morter, and mingled therewith, together with the iuyce of Gooseberries, or some sharpe liquor put in when it is set on the table. 
 
  
 The fertilitie of the soyle generally through this Empire, is exceeding great, and the goodnesse and varietie of the fruits, equalleth and in some places passeth Italy.* The wines of Greete, of Mount Libanus, and especially of Palormo in Natolia, are ex?ceeding rich and good. Yet haue the Turkes lesse plenty of all things then Europe, for they very sparingly and onely to serue necessity, either set plant or sow, great part of the people being wasted with warres, and they that remaine, hauing not free fruition of their owne goods, in the great tyranny vnder which they liue, aswell of the Empo?rour, as of vnder-Gouernours changed at least once a yeere, and the generall rapacity and licentiousnesse of the souldiers. Hence it is that there be vast solitudes and vntil?led Desarts on all sides, where yet the ground of it selfe brings forth diuers wild fruits without tillage. They haue diuers kinds of graine, Wheate, the graine called Milet, Barly, Oates, Rye, Pease, and al kinds of Pulse, which for the kinds are like those of Eu?rope, but the Wheate for the bignesse of the graine, and so the rest, are to bee preferred before them. There is great abundance of Rice, Flax and Cotton growing in the fields. They haue good plenty of all kinds of Cattell, yet are no more industrious in grasing and feeding heards, then in sowing or planting, and so they haue Egges, Hennes, Rice, Hony (which in a composition they drinke), Fruits and Bread for dai?ly foode, they desire no other dainties or greater riches, since they can neither inioy their goods while they liue, nor yet bequeath them at death, and nothing is more dan?gerous, then to be accounted rich. The Caloiri or Greeke Monkes in Candia, with whom I abode for a time, shewed mee sields, which the yeere past had yeelded them ninety fiue measures of graine for one sowed: but Candia, though it lie in the compasse of the Turkish Empire almost on all sides, yet is subiect to the State of Ve?nice. 
  
 The Iland Chios (vulgarly Zio) is subiest to the Turkes, and is famous for the plea?santnesse, as also for the fertilitie, yeelding Mastick (the fruit of the tree Lentiscus), and hauing abundance of Patridges, & of all kinds of foule. I haue in my Iornal of the first Part spoken of the most fertile Ilands, Cyprus and Mettilene. 
  
  
 The Turkes haue great plenty of sea and fresh water fish, and of birds and all foule, and for Christian buyers (whereof are great multitudes, especially at Constantinople) they furnish their markets therewith. And in truth at Constantinople, there is as great varietie and goodnesse of these kinds as can be wished. Onely the Oystors, though pleatifull, yet haue not the delicate salt taste that ours haue, the Mediterranean Sea be?ing nothing so salt as the Ocean. But in generall, the Turkes, by reason of the foresaid tyranny, and of their temperance in diet, doe little vse fishing or fowling, or any like exercise. 
  
  
 Among other Cities of trade, they haue two very famous, one in Asia, the other in Affrick. That of Asia is called Haleppo, and it being within-land, the Port thereof is called scanderona by the Turks, and Alexandretta, by the Christians, whence the com?modities of Merchants are carried vpon Cammels, and the fifth day arriue at Haleppo, whether the commodities of Persia are brought by the Riuer Euphra?tes, and vpon Cammels backes, from the Citie Taurus; of old subiect to the Persians, but in our age subdued by the Turkes. The Indian commodities are brought thither by the red sea, and the Gulfe of Arabia. The famous Citie for trade in Affricke was called Babylon, and now is named Alcatero, whence the commodities of India, Egypt, and all Affricke are exported. Moreouer, vpon the mouth of the greatest arme of the Riuer Nilus, the City Alexandria is seated vpon the Sea, some few dayes saile from Aleaiero.
 
 The Turkes when they haue eaten, not while they eate, goe like good fellowes to?gether, and like Horses at once drinke for that meale, as greedily as if the water were turned into wine, which kind of drinke those that are zealous of their Law, and those that iourney by the high way, more specially, and all Turkes in generall most com?monly vse, for which cause, those that iourney vse to pitch their tents, vpon the banks of pure fountains or running waters, which they no lesse know, or as curiously search out, as we doe the best Innes or Tauernes: Besides commonly they haue a cup (if I may so call it, being a purse of leather that opens or shuts with strings) hanging at their Horses saddle pomell, which as they sit on Horsebacke, they put downe into the foun?taines, and draw water to drinke, not omitting to taste a good spring of water, no more then we would a peece of rare Wine. Their water, especially in Prouinces ly?ing neere the Sunne, is in this property contrary to ours, that it loosens the body no lesse, then the rice binds it. In Cities diuers kinds of drinkes are to be sold, some estee?med as much as wine with vs. One kind I remember presented vnto vs in Palestine by the Sobasha of Ramma, which was made of medicinall hearbs, to purifie and coole the blood, and they drinke it hot, so as it seemes a very physicall potion. They drinke sugar or hony mingled with water, and water sodden with grapes, rosewater, and ho?ny: and they haue whole Tunnes of the iuyce of Cytrons and Limons, which they willingly drinke; and all these kinds are to be sold in their Ctties, Wine is forbideen by Mahomets law, which permits Aquauite vulgarly called Harech, which Aqua?uite they often drinke euen to drunckennes.
  
  
 In this vast Empire I did see no Iunes, no not in their Cities, and a man shall rarely find any beds among Christians, and if he doe, yet the sheetes are made of cotten, in?tollerable for heate: For in Turkey generally they lie vpon Tapestry Carpets, and sometimes in Cities vpon a mattresse, with a quilt to couer them, and by the high way they lye vpon straw, hey, or grasse. And in all places neere Palestine, they either by night lie vpon the house tops on a plastered floare, or in yards vpon the earth and in open Ayre, hauing the spangled Heauens for their Canopy. And not onely passen?gers, but all Turkes daily weare linnen breeches, so as in these Prouinces not subiect to cold, a man may better endure this poore kind of lodging: But the Turkish passen?gers, in stead of Innes, haue certsine Hospitals, built of stone with Cloysters after the manner of Monasteries, where by charitable legacy of Almes, all passengers may haue meate for certaine meales or dayes, especially the Pilgrims towards Mecha, for whose sake they were especially founded: And these houses are vulgarly called Kawne (or as others pronounce Cain) and the couered Cloysters of them, (built after their manner but one roofe high), are common as well to Turkes as any other passengers to lodge in openly, and like good fellowes altogether, vpon such mattresses as they carry, or vpon the bare ground, if straw be not to be had. For Christian passengers carry such mattresses and necessary victuals, which failing, they supply them in Cities and euery day in Villages may buy fresh meates, but they must dresse their owne meate. 
  
 Neither is the Art of Cookery greater in Turkey then with vs in Wales, for toasting of Cheese in Wales, and seething of Rice in Turkey, will enable a man freely to professe the Art of Cookery. 
  
 CHAP. II. Of France, touching the particular subiects of the first Chapter. 
 THE Longitude of France extends thirteene degrees from the Meridian of sixteene degrees to that of twenty nine degrees, and the Latitude extends eight degrees from the Paralell of forty two degrees to that of fifty degrees. France of old was deuided into Cisalpina and Transalpina. In the description of Italy I haue formerly spoken of Ci?salpina, which was also called Togata of Gownes the In?habitants wore, and Tonsa because they had short haire. 
  
 1 Transalpina, was subdeuided into Comata and Narbonersis. Comata so called of their long haire, was againe subdeuided into Belgica, (of which I haue spoken former?ly * in the description of Netherland), into Aquitanica and Celtica, or Lugdunensis. Aqui?tanica the second Part of Comata, was of old called Aremorica, lying vpon the Moun?taines Pyrenei, and they differ in Language from the French, being more like to tie Spaniards: next to the Pyreni dwelt the Ansi or Ansitani, called vulgarly Guascons, com?ming from Spaine. Their chief City is Tolouse, where is a famous Vniuersity, & the Par?liament of that Prouince. Another City called Bordeaux, hath also an Vniuersity, but is more famous by the generall concourse of Merchants trading for French Wines. Beyond the Riuer Garumna running through the midst of Aquitania, dwell the San?tones, an ancient people, whose Countrey is called Santoigne. Next lie the Pictones or Pictaui vpon the Riuer Loyer, whose Countrey is called Posctou, abounding with Fish, Fowle, and all Game for Hunting and Hawking. It hath three chiefe Cities, all seates of Bishops, Poictiers, Lusson, and Maillezais. The necke of Land adioyning is called Aulone, and the Ilands, Noir de Chauet, De Dieu, and Nosire Dame De Bouin, &c. yeeld great quantity of Salt to be transported. The Countrey of the Bituriger is called Berry, and the chiefe City Burges, of old called Auaricum, being an Vniuersity, and the Citizens at sixe Faires in the yeere, sell great quantity of woollen cloath: for the Countrey hath rich pastures, feeding many flockes of sheepe, of whose wooll this cloath is made, besides that it aboundeth also with Wine, Corne, and all kinds of cat?tell. The City is within Land, and is called in Lattin Biturigum of two Towers. Next the same lies the Dukedome Burbonois, and other small territories. 
 
 
 The French are commended and said to excell others in boyled meates, sawces, and made dishes, vulgarly called Quelques choses, but in my opinion the larding of their meates is not commendable, whereby they take away all variety of taste, making all meates sauor of Porke; and the French alone delight in mortified meates. They vse not much whitmeates, nor haue I tasted there any good Butter, which our Ambas?sadours cause to be brought vnto them out of England, and they haue onely one good kinde of Cheeses called Angelots, pleasing more for a kind of sharpenesse in taste, then for the goodnesse. As well the Gentlemen as Citizens liue more sparingly then the English in their ordinary priuate diet, and haue not their Tables so furnished with va?riety and number of dishes. They dine most with sodden and liquid meates, and sup with roasted meates, each hauing his seuerall sawce: but their Feasts are more sump?tuous then ours, and consist for the most part of made fantasticall meates and sallets, and sumptuous compositions, rather then of flesh or birds. And the cookes are most esteemed, who haue best inuention in new made and compounded meats. And as in al things the French are chearefull and nimble, so the Italians obserue that they eate or swallow their meate swiftly, and adde, that they are also slouenly at meate, but I would rather say they are negligent or carelesse, and little curious in their feeding. And to this purpose I remember an accident that happened to a Frenchman, eating with vs at the Masters table in a Venetian ship gouerned by Greekes, and sailing from Venice to Ilierusalem, who turning hir foule trencher to lay meat on the cleane side, did so of?fend the Master and all the Marriners, as well the best as common sort, as they hardly refrained from offering him violence. For Marriners in generall, but especially the Greekes are so superstitious, as they tooke this his negligence in turning his trencher, (being of like opinion for the turning of any thing in the ship vpside downe) as if it had been an ominous signe, that the ship should be cast away. 
  
 In a Village of Normandy halfe way betweene Roane and Diepe called Totes, and in like sort in all the Innes of those parts, before the ciuill warre, assoone as passengers lighted from their horses, the Hoast gaue them water to wash, and bread and wine; for the French haue not the patience to expect their supper without some refection. Then at supper the table was serued with Mutton, a Capon or Pul?let, Patridges and like meates, with a kind of banquet, as in Summer, Apples, Cherries, and Grapes, and in Winter, Chessenuts, Rice, Raysons, and stewed Prunes. Then they gaue their guests cleane sheetes, drying them at the fier in their presence, and in the morning gaue them for breakfast some buttered tostes, or motsell of meate, and for all this together with horsemeate, each man paid some twenty two or twenty fiue soulz; as likewise the bating at noone for horse and man, cost each some ten soulz. After the ciuill warre I passed through these parts, and commonly each meale paid twelue or fifteene soulz, with worse interertain?ment, and for breakefasts paid seuerally, but no great rate. Towards the confines of Flanders, the Hoasts onely couer the table, and a side table, vpon which euerie passenger hath his glasse, for the French are curious not to drinke in another mans cup, and the Hoasts are onely to bee paid for this seruice. Otherwise at times of eating, they call the Cookes dwelling neere the Innes, who bring the best meates they haue, and when the guests haue chosen their meate, and agreed for the price, they carry it backe to dresse it, and so send it warme with sawces. In generall, through the Cities of France, passengers seldome dine at their Innes, but with some companions goe to the Tauernes or Cookes shops: but at night they must eate with the Hoast that giues them beds, where they shall haue cleane sheetes, and see them dried before their faces, but they are of course cloth, and very few cham?bers are priuate, but most haue three or foure beds, wherein they lye not single, but for the most part with bedfellowes. Also the guests as well Merchants and Gen?tlemen, as those of common sort, eate at an ordinary table, and for supper commonly large with diuers roasted meates, each man payes some fifteene soulz. He that hiers a chamber in Cities, which he may haue well furnished at Paris for some two Crownes a moneth, he must buy his meate at Cookes shops, which are frequent and very clean?ly, neither is it any disgrace, as with vs, to buy a morsell of meate there, and to agree for the price before it bee eaten. And they that hier chambers can haue no better conueniency for diet, either at Paris, or in other Cities. But hee that stayes long in a Citie, may agree in a Citizens house, or an Inne for his diet and lodging by the yeere, which hee may haue at Paris in extraordinary sort for some one hundred fifty Crownes yeerely, and ordinarily for lesse; and at Rone for one hundred twenty, or one hundred Crownes, and in many Cities for eighty Crownes, and in many good Innes for sixty Crownes yeerely. Drunkennesse is reprochfull among the French, and the greater part drinke water mingled with wine, and alwaies French wines, not Sacke or Spanish wines (which are sold as Phisicke onely by Apothecaries) or other forraigne Wines, whereof I remember not to haue seene any in the Northerne parts of France. Yet Marriners, Souldiers and many of the common sort vsed to drinke Perry and Syder to very drunkennes, yea, I haue seene many drink wine with like intemperance, and when these kinds of men sit at drinking, they vse much mirth and singing (in which art they take great delight), as the French in generall are by na?ture chearefull and liuely. Women for the most part, and virgins alwaies (except by stealth they offend against the custome) vse to drinke water, except it be in the Pro?uinces yeelding Perry and Syder, which all sorts vse to drinke without exception. And at Paris I remember to haue seene a poore woman to beg a cup of water, which being giuen her, she drunke it off, and went away merily, as if she had receiued a good almes. 

31 Shropshire had of old the same inhabitants, and was a fortified and manned fron?tyer against the Welsh then diuided from the English and their enemies, and thereup?on was named the Marches. Ludlow is a Towne of more beauty then antiquity, beau?tified with the Pallace of the King (or rather of the Prince of Wales), and there is a Counsell or Court of Iustice erected for Wales & the borders, not vnlike to the French Parliaments, and instituted by Henry the eight. It consists of the President of Wales there residing, of a Secretary, an Atturney, a Solicitor, and foure Iustices of the Coun?ties of Wales, and as many Counsellers as the King shall please to appoint. In Hack?stow 
 2 
  
 Forrest, at the hill Stiperstons, are great heapes of stones, which the vulgar sort dreame to haue been the diuels bridge. Wrockceter of old the chiefe Citie burt by the Romans, is now a pretty village, and from the decay therof grew the well knowne Citie Shrewesburie, now the chiefe Citie, fortified by art and nature, rich by making wollen cloth, and trading with the neighbouring Welchmen, where Henry Percy the younger with his forces, was ouerthrowne by Henrie the fourth. 
  
 32 Cheshire is a great County of Gentlemen, no other County hauing so many Knights houses. Westchester is a faire Citie, where the twentieth Legion called victrix lay in Garison, in the time of Vespasian the Roman Emperor. Most white Salt is made at Nantwich, and lesse white made at Middlewich and Norwich. It is rich in Pastures, and sends great quantitie of cheeses to London. I know that Worcester cheeses are most esteemed, but there is not such quantitie to transport them. I know that Suffolke and the Fennes of Essex yeeld huge cheeses in great number to bee exported, but they are not so pleasing to the taste as these. I know that in all the Counties, some quantity of very good cheeses is made for priuate mens vses, but not in proportion to bee expor?ted. Whereas Cheshire yeelds great quantity of very good cheeses, comparable to those of Holland, seruing the greatest part of London therewith, and exporting the same into other parts. When the heyres males of this County faced, Henry the third ad?ded this large patrimony to the Crowne, so as the Kings eldest sonne should be Earle of Cheshire. And Richard the second, of a County made it a Principality, and himselfe was called Prince of Cheshire: but Henry the fourth reduced it againe to a Countie Palatine, and at this day it hath Palatine iurisdiction, administred by a Chamber?laine, a speciall Iudge, two Exchequer Barons, three Serieants at Law, a Sheriffe, an Atturney, an Escheator, &c. 
  
 33 Herefordshire was of old inhabited by the Silures, and it so much abeundeth with all things necessarie for the life of man, as it is not content in that respect to haue the second place among all the Counties of England. Hereford is the chiefe Citie thereof, Lemster iustly boasteth of the Sheepes wooll feeding in those grounds, with which no part of Europe can compare, excepting Apulia and Tarentum. It yeelds excellent Fiax, and so good Wheate, as the bread of Lemster, and drinke of Weabley (a neighbour Towne) are prouerbially praised before all others. 
  
 34 Radnoxshire had of old the same inhabitants, and is the first County of Wales,* whereof Radnox is the chiefe Towne. 
  
 35 Brechnocshire the second County of Wales, had of old the same inhabitants, and hath the name of the chiefe Towne, seated in the middest thereof, where Henry the eight instituted a Collegiate Church. 
  
 36 Monmouthshire had of old the same inhabitants, and is so called of the chiefe Towne, no way so glorious, as in that Henry the fifth Conquerer of France was borne there. It hath also another faire Towne called Chepstow. 
  
 37 Glamorganshire the fourth County of Wales, had of old the same inhabitants, and the chiefe Citie Caerdiffe hath a commodious Hauen. 
  
 38 Caermardenshire the fifth County of Wales, was of old inhabited by the Dimetae, and is fruitefull in Corne, abounds in Sheepe, and in some places yeelds Pit-coale. It hath the name of the chiefe Citie, where Merlin was borne, begot?ten by an Incubus Deuill, whom the common people tooke for a most famous Prophet. 
  
 39 Pembrookeshire the sixth County of Wales, had of old the same inhabitants. Here a long neck of land makes an Hauen, called Milford hauen, then which Europe hath not a more noble Hauen, or more safe, or more large, with many creekes and safe roades, made more famous by the landing of H. the seuenth. Pembrook is the chiefe Towne of the County. The Flemming hauing their Townes drowned by the Sea, had a Territo?rie of this County giuen them to inhabit by Henry the first, before Wales was subdued, and they euer remained most faithfull to the Kings of England.
 
 Next lies 11 Mona, (that is the shadowed or dusky Iland) which after many yeeres being conquered by the English, was by them called Anglesey, (as the Iland of the En?glish). It is a most noble Iland, the old seate of the Druides (Priests so called of old), and so fruitfull, as it is vulgarly called the Mother of Wales, the cheefe Towne whereof is Beaumarish. Neere that lies 12 Prestholme, (that is, the Priests Iland), whereof the Inhabitants and Neighbours make incredible reports for the multitude of Sea Fowle there breeding. 
  
 Next followes 13 Mona or Monoeda, (as the farther Mona), which we call the Ile of Man, the Inhabitants whereof are like the Irish in language and manners, but haue something of the Norway men. It yeeldes abundantly Flaxe and Hempe, hath plea?sant Pastures and Groues, and is fruitfull of Barly, Wheate, and especially of Oates, the people feeding on Oaten bread, in all parts are multitudes of Cattle, but it wants wood, and for fier vseth a kind of Turffe. Russia which of the Castle we call Castle-Towne, is the cheefe Towne, and hath a Garrison of Souldiers; but Duglas is the most frequented and best inhabited Towne, because it hath an excellent Hauen easie to be entered. In the Westerne part Bala-curi is the seate of the Bishop vnder the primacy of the Archbishop of Yorke, and there is the Fort called the Pyle, wherein a garrison of Souldiers is kept. Vpon the Southerne Promontory lies a little Iland, called the Calfe of Man, which aboundeth with Sea Birds, called Puffins, and a kind of Duckes en?gendered of rotten wood, which the English call Barnacles. In generall the Inhabi?tants haue their proper Tongue and Lawes, and had their proper Coyne. They ab?horre from stealing, and from begging, and are wonderfully religious generally, and most readily conforming themselues at this day to the Church of England, and the people in the Northerne part speake like Scots, and in the Southerne part like Irish. Edwin King of Northumberland, subdued the Northerne people, and subiected them to the Crowne of England, yet with many changes of Fortune, this Iland long had their owne Kings, euen since the Normans conquered England, and since the time that Iohn King of England passing into Ireland, by the way subdued this Iland about the yeere 1210, till the Kingdome came to the Scots in the yeere 1266. After that time, Mary the daughter of Reginald the last, laid claime to the Iland before the King of Eng?land, as supreme Lord of Scotland, and when sheecould not preuaile, William Monta?gue her Kinseman tooke the Iland of Man by force, which his Heire sold for a great summe of money in the yeere 1393, to William Scroope, who being beheaded for Trea?son, the Iland fell by right to Henry the fourth King of England, who assigned the same to Henry Pearcy Earle of Northumberland, with prouiso that he and his Heires at the coronation of the Kings of England, should carry the Sword, (vulgarly called Lanca?ster Sword) before the King, but the same Persey being also killed in ciuill warre, the 
 6 
  
 King gaue that Iland to Stanlye, from whom discend the Earles of Darby, who kept the same, till Ferdinand Earle of Darby dying without heire male, and the Earledome fal?ling to his Brother, but this Iland to his Daughters, as Heires generall, Queene Eliza?beth thinking it vnfit that Women should bee set ouer her Souldiers there in garrison, gaue the keeping thereof to Sir Thomas Gerrard. But King Iames the foureteenth of August in the fifth yeere of his Raigne, granted by Letters Pattents this Iland with all things thereunto appertaining, to Henry Earle of Northampton, and Robert Earle of Sa?ltsbury, their Heires and Assignes for euer, they vpon doing homage for the same, pre?senting his Maiesty with two Falcons, and his Heires and Successours at their Coro?nation in like sort with two Falcons. And howsoeuer no vse or intent of this grant be mentioned in these Letters Pattents, yet no doubt the grant was made to the vse of those vpon whose humble petition to his Maiesty the Letters Pattents were granted, as therein is expressely declared, namely of William Lord Stanly, Earle of Darby, heire male to Iohn Lord Stanly, and of Elizabeth Countesse of Huntington, Anne wife to the Lord Chandois, and Francis wife to Sir Iohn Egerton Knight, being the Heires gene?rall of the said Iohn Lord Stanly. 
  
 The famous Riuer Thames fals into the German Ocean ouer against Zeland, and before it fals into the same, makes the (14) Iland Canuey vpon the Coast of Essex, so low as it is often ouerflowed, all but some higher hils, to which the sheepe retire, being some foure thousand in number, the flesh whereof is of delicate taste, and they are mil?ked by young men. Neere that is the (15) Iland Sheppey, so called of the sheepe, where?in is Quinborrough a most faire Castle kept by a Constable. Without the mouth of Thames, lie the shelfes or sands dangerous to Sea men, which of the greatest, are all cal?led Goodwin sands, where they say an Iland the patrimony of the same Earle Goodwinn was deuoured by the Sea in the yeere 1097. 
  
 In the Britan Sea lies the (16) Ile of Wight, hauing in the Sea most plentifull fishing, and the Land being so fruitfull, as they export Corne, besides that in all parts it hath plenty of Conies, Hares, Partridges, and Feasanes, and hath also two Parkes of Fal?low Deare. Also the sheepe feeding there vpon the pleasant hils, yeeld wool in good?nesse next to the Fleeces of Lemster and Cotswold Flockes. It hath sixe and thirty Townes and Castles, and the Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction thereof belongs to the Bi?shop of Wintchester. Towards the West lie other Ilands pretented to be French, but subiect to England, namely, (17) Gerzey (whither condemned men were of old banish?ed) & (18) Garnsey, neither so great nor so fruitful, but hauing a more commodious Ha?uen, vpon which lies the Towne of Saint Peter: both Ilands burne a weede of the Sea, or Sea coales brought out of England, and both speake the French Language. I omit the seuen Iles called Siadae, and others adioyning, and will onely adde that the Ilands lie neere Cornewall, which the Greekes called Hesperides, the English call Silly, and the Netherlanders call Sorlings, being in number some 145 more or lesse, whereof some yeeld Wheate, all abound with Conies, Cranes, Swannes, Hirnshawes, and other Sea Birdes. The greatest of them is called Saint Mary, and hath a Castle wherein Soul?diers lie in Garrison, committed in our time to the keeping of Sir Francis Godolphin, and after to his sonne Sir William Godolphin, being of a noble Family in Cornewall. Al?so many of the said Ilands haue vaines of Tynne, and from hence was Leade first car?ried into Greece, and the Roman Emperours banished condemned men hither, to worke in the Mines of mettall. 
  
 The ayre of England is temperate, but thicke, cloudy and misty, and Caesar witnes?seth, * that the cold is not so piercing in England as in France. For the Sunne draweth vp the vapours of the Sea which compasseth the Iland, and distills them vpon the earth in frequent showers of raine, so that frosts are somewhat rare; and howsoeuer Snow may often fall in the Winter time, yet in the Southerne parts (especially) it sel?dome lies long on the ground. Also the coole blasts of Sea winds, mittigate the heat of Summer. 
  
 By reason of this temper, Lawrell and Rosemary flourish all Winter, especially in * the Southerne parts, and in Summer time England yeelds Abricots plentifully, Muske 
 7 
  
 melons in good quantity, and Figges in some places, all which ripen well, and happi?ly imitate the taste and goodnesse of the same fruites in Italy. And by the same reason all beasts bring forth their young in the open fields, euen in the time of Winter; and England hath such aboundance of Apples, Peares, Cherries, and Plummes, such varie?ty of them, and so good in all respects, as no countrie yeelds more or better, for which the Italians would gladly exchange their Citrons and Oranges. But vpon the Sea coast, the winds many times blast the fraites in the very flower. 
  
 The English are so naturally inclined to pleasure, as there is no Countrie, wherein the Gentlemen and Lords haue so many and large Parkes onely reserued for the plea?sure of hunting, or where all sorts of men alot so much ground about their houses for pleasure of Gardens and Orchards. The very Grapes, especially towards the South and Westare of a pleasant taste, and I haue said, that in some Countries, as in Gloster?shire, they made Wine of old, which no doubt many parts would yeeld at this day, but that the inhabitants forbeare to plant Vines, aswell because they are serued plenti?fully, and at a good rate with French wines, as for that the hilles most fit to beare Grapes, yeeld more commoditie by feeding of Sheepe and Cattell. Caesar writes in his Commentaries, that Britany yeelds white Leade within land, and Iron vpon the Sea-coasts. No doubt England hath vnexhaustible vaines of both, and also of Tinne, and yeelds great quantitie of Brasse, and of Allom and Iron, and abounds with quar?ries of Free-stone, and Fountaines of most pure Salt; and I formerly said that it yeelds some quantity of Siluer, and that the Tinne and Leade is mingled with Siluer, but so, as it doth not largely quit the cost of the labour in seperating or trying it. Two Cities yeeld medicinall Baths, namely, Buxstone and Bathe, and the waters of Bathe especially, haue great vertue in many diseases. England abounds with Sea-coales vpon the Sea-coast, and with Pit coales within land. But the Woods at this day are rather frequent and pleasant then vast, being exhausted for fier, and with Iron-milles, so as the quan?tity of wood and charcoale for fier, is much deminished, in respect of the old abun?dance; and in some places, as in the Fennes they burne Turffe, and the very dung of Cowes. Yet in the meane time England exports great quantity of Seacoale to for?raine parts. In like sort England hath infinite quantity, as of Mettalls, so of Wooll, and of VVoollen cloathes to be exported. The English Beere is famous in Netherland and lower Germany, which is made of Barley and Hops; for England yeelds plenty of Hops, howsoeuer they also vse Flemish Hops. The Cities of lower Germany vpon the sea, forbid the publike selling of English Beere, to satisfie their owne brewers, yet pri?uately swallow it like Nectar. But in Netherland, great and incredible quantity there?of is spent. England abounds with corne, which they may transport, when a quarter (in some places containing sixe, in others eight bushels) is sold for twenty shillings, or vnder; and this corne not onely serues England, but also serued the English Army in the ciuil warres of Ireland, at which time they also exported great quantity thereof in?to forraigne parts, and by Gods mercy England scarce once in ten yeeres needes sup?ply of forraigne Corne, which want commonly proceeds of the couetousnesse of pri?uate men, exporting or hiding it. Yet I must confesse, that daily this plenty of Corne decreaseth, by reason that priuate men finding greater commoditie in feeding of Sheepe and Cattell, then in the Plough, requiring the hands of many seruants, can by no Law be restrained from turning corne fields into inclosed Pastures, especially since great men are the first to breake these Lawes. England abounds with all kinds of foule, aswell of the Sea, as of the land, and hath more tame Swannes swimming in the Ri?uers, then I did see in any other part. It hath multitudes of hurtfull birds, as Crowes, Rauens, and Kytes, and they labor not to destroy the Crowes, consuming great quan?tity of Corne, because they feede on wormes and other things hurting the Corne. And in great Cities it is forbidden to kill Kytes or Rauens, because they deuoure the filth of the streetes. England hath very great plenty of Sea and Riuer fish, especiallie aboue all other parts abundance of Oysters, Makrell, and Herrings, and the Eng?lish are very industrous in fishing, though nothing comparable to the Flemmings therein.
 
 8 
  
 The English export into Italy great quantity of red Herrings, with gaine of two or three for one, (not to speake in this place of other commodities which they export with great gaine), and in this fishing they are very industrious, as well in the Sea vpon the coasts, as in the Northerne Ilands. To conclude, they export in great quantity all kinds of salted fishes, and those dried in the smoke and pickled, as Pilchards Poore Iohn, Cauiale, Botargo, and the like, which they sell in Italy, and those parts at a deare rate. England abounds with pulse of all kinds, and yeelds great quantitie of Saffron and of Flax, wherof they haue also great quantitie fro? Dantzke, whence also they haue like plentie of Pitch, and of Firre trees for Masts of ships, which two things if England wanted not, I durst say that this Iland (or part of an Iland) abounds with all things necessary for honest clothing, large and dainty feeding, and for warre by land and sea. As for warre, it hath not onely the aforesaid mettalls, but also great quantity of Salt?peter. Besides the famous Broad cloth, it yeelds for clothing many Stuffes, whereof great quantitie is also exported. And I will not omit, that howsoeuer it hath silke from forraigne parts, yet the English silke stockings are much to bee preferred before those of Italy, Spaine, or any part in the World. 
  
 England abounds in Cattell of all kinds, and particularly hath very great Oxen, the flesh whereof is so tender, as no meate is more desired. The Cowes are also great with large vdders, yeelding plenty of Whitmeates, no part in the World yeelding greater variety, nor better of that kind. And the hides of Oxen are (contrary to the common good) exported in great quantity by vniustifiable licenses, though strictly forbidden by many Statutes. The flesh of Hogges and Swine is more sauoury, then in any other parts, excepting the bacon of Westphalia, and of the Southerne Ilands, where they commonly feede on Rootes and Chesnuts. The goodnesse of the Sheepe may be coniectured by the excellency of the wooll, and wollen clothes, which Sheepe are subiect to rotting, when they feede on low wet grounds, excepting the Marshes ouerflowed by the sea, which for the saltnesse are held very wholsome for them, and these rots often destroy whole stocks, for they seldome drinke, but are moistned by the dewes falling in the night. And the feeding of Sheepe, vpon like accident of dis?cases, often vndoes the ownet in his estate, but more commonly preferued from that ill, they inrich many, so as it is prouerbially said, He whose Sheepe stand, and wiues die (the husbands gaining their dowries) must needs be rich. 
  
 The Kings Forrests haue innumerable heards of Red Deare, and all parts haue such plenty of Fallow Deare, as euery Gentleman of fiue hundreth or a thousand pounds rent by the yeere hath a Parke for them inclosed with pales of wood for two or three miles compasse. Yet this prodigall age hath so forced Gentlemen to improue their reuenews, as many of these grounds are by them disparked, and conuerted to feede Cattell. Lastly (without offence be it spoken) I will boldly say, that England (yea per?haps one County thereof) hath more fallow Deare, then all Europe that I haue seene. No Kingdome in the World hath so many Doue-houses. 
  
 I formerly said, that the Wolues were altogether destroied in England and Wales, so as the Sheepe feede freely in the fields and Mountaines. England hath much more Dogges aswell for the seuerall kinds, as the number of each kind, then any other Ter?ritorie of like compasse in the World, not onely little Dogges for beauty, but hunting and water-Dogges, whereof the bloud-Hounds and some other haue admirable qua?lities. It hath infinite number of Conies, whereof the skinnes (especially black and siluer haired) are much prised, and in great quantity transported, especially into Tur?key. The Nagges and Gueldings are singular for the Gentle ambling pace, and for strength to performe great iournies. So are the hunting Horses of exceeding swiftnes, much esteemed in forraigne parts, especially in France and Scotland, and of both kinds the number is infinite. The great Horses for seruice, and to draw Coaches and carts, are of like number and goodnes, and one kinde for seruice, called the Corser (as bred of the Neapolitan Corsers and English Mares) yeelds not for brauery of race to the Neapolitan Corsers, or Spanish Gennets. I said that they are all strong, and the hor?ses for iornies in defatigable, for the English, especially Northerne men, ride from day 
 9 
  
 breake to the euening without drawing bit, neither sparing their hories nor ???, whence is the Prouerb, that England is the Hell of Horses, the Purgatory of Seruants, and the Paradise of Women; because they ride Horses without measure, and vse their Seruants imperiously, and their Women obsequiously. 
  
    
 Caesar in the fourth Chapter and fifth booke of his Commentaries, writes thus of * the Britans dyet. It is vnlawfull for them to taste Hares, Geese, or Hennes, yet they keepe them all for their pleasure, and the inward parts sow no Corne, but liue vpon milke and flesh. At this day the English inhabitants eate almost no flesh more com?monly then Hennes, and for Geese they eate them in two seasons, when they are fat?ted vpon the stubble, after Haruest, and when they are greene about Whitsontide, at which time they are held for dainties; and howsoeuer Hares are thought to nourish melancoly, yet they are eaten as Venison, both rosted and boyled. They haue also great plenty of Connies, the flesh whereof is fat, tender, and much more delicate then any I haue eaten in other parts, so as they are in England preferred before Hares, at which the Germans wonder, who hauing no Venison (the Princes keeping it proper to themselues, and the hunting of Hares being proper to the Gentlemen in most parts), they esteeme Hares as Venison, and seldom eate Connies, being there somewhat rare, and more like rosted Cats then the English Connies. 
 
The English Husbandmen eate Barley and Rye browne bread, and preserre it to white bread as abiding longer in the stomack, and not so soone disgested with their la?bour, but Citizens and Gentlemen care most pure white bread, England yeelding (as I haue said) all kinds of Corne in plenty. I haue formerly said, that the English haue a?boundance of Whitmeates, of all kindes of Flesh, Fowle and Fish, and of all things good for foode, and in the ducourle of the French dyet, I haue shewed, that the Eng?lish haue some proper daintics, not knowne in other parts, which I will in a word re?peate. The Oysters of England were of old carried as farre as Rome, being more plenti?full and lauorie, then in any other part. England hath aboundance of Godwits, and many Sea-fowles, which be rare, or altogether vnknowne elsewhere. In the seasons of the yeere the English eate Fallow deare plentifully; as Bucks in Summer, and Does in Winter, which they bake in Pasties, and this Venison Pasty is a dainty, rarely found in any other Kingdome. Likewise Brawne is a proper meate to the English, and not knowne to others. They haue strange variety of Whitmeates, and likewise of preser?ued banquetting stuffe, in which Preserues France onely may compare with them. It is needelesse to repeate the rest, and I should bee tedions, if I should search particularly like dainties, which the English haue only, or in greater abundance the? other Nations. In generall, the Art of Cookery is much esteemed in England, neither doe any sooner finde a Master, then men of that profession, and howsoeuer they are most esteemed, which for all kinds are most exquisite in that Art; yet the English Cookes, in com?parison with other Nations, are most commended for roasted meates. 
  
 As abundance of all things makes them cheape, so riches (preferring a gluttonous appetite before Gold), and the prodigalitie of Gentlemen (who haue this singular fol?ly, to offer more then things are worth, as if it were a point of dignity to pay more then others), and lastly the great moneys of siluer, and the not hauing small coynes or brasle monies to pay for small matters, these things (I say) in this great plenty make vs poore, and greatly increase the prices of all things. Also the said abundance, and the riches vulgarly increased, and the old custome of the English, make our tables plentifully furnished, whereupon other Nations esteeme vs gluttons and deuourers of flesh, yet the English tables are not furnished with many dishes, all for one mans di?er, but seuerally for many mens appetite, and not onely prepared for the family, but for strangers and reliefe of the poore. I confesse, that in such plenty and variety of meates, euerie man cannot vse moderation, nor vnderstandeth that these seuerall meates are not for one man, but for seuerall appetites, that each may take what hee likes. And I confesse, that the English custome, first to serue grosse meates, on which hunger spares not to seede, and then to serue dainties, which inuite to eate without hunger, as likewise the longe sitting and discoursing at tables, which makes men vnawares eate more, then the Italians can doe at their solitary tables, these things (I say) giue vs iust cause to cry with Socrates, God deliuer mee from meates, that inuite to eate beyond hunger. But the Italian Sansouine is much de?ceiued, writing, that in generall the English care and couer the table at least foure times in the day; for howsoeuer those that iourney, and some sickly men stay?ing at home, may perhaps take a small breakfast, yet in generall the English eate but two meales (of dinner and supper) each day, and I could neuer see him that vseth to eate foure times in the day. And I will professe for my selfe and other Englishmen, passing through Italy so famous for temperance, that wee often ob?seraed, that howsoeuer wee might haue a Pullet and some flesh prepared for vs, eating it with a moderate proportion of bread, the Italians at the same time, with a Charger full of hearbs for a sallet, and with rootes, and like meates of small price, would each of them eate two or three penny-worth of bread. And since all fulnesse is ill, and that of bread worst, I thinke wee were more temperate in our dyet, though eating more flesh, then they eating so much more bread then wee did. It is true that the English prepare largely for ordinarie dyet for them?selues and their friendes comming by chance, and at feastes for inuited friendes are so excessiue in the number of dishes, as the table is not thought well fur?nished, except they stand one vpon another. Neither vse they to set drinke on the Table, for which no roome is left, but the Cuppes and Glasses are ser?ued 
 1 
  
 in vpon a side Table, drinke being offered to none, till they call for it. That the old English Hospitality was (I will boldly say) a meere vice, I haue formerly showed in the discourse of the Italian diet, which let him reade, who shall thinke this as disso?nant from truth, as it is from the vulgar opinion. 
  
 If any stranger desire to abide long in a City or Vniuersity, he may haue his Table with some Citizen of the better sort, at a conuenient rate, according to his quality, from ten pound to twenty pound yeerely. 
  
 I haue heard some Germans complaine of the English Innes, by the high way, as well for dearenesse, as for that they had onely roasted meates: But these Germans lan?ding at Granesend, perhaps were iniured by those knaues, that flocke thither onely to deceiue strangers, and vse Englishmen no better, and after went from thence to Lon?don, and were there entertained by some ordinary Hosts of strangers, returning home little acquainted with English customes. But if these strangers had knowne the Eng?lish tongue, or had had an honest guide in their iournies, and had knowne to liue at Rome after the Roman fashion, (which they seldome doe, vsing rather Dutch Innes and companions), surely they should haue found, that the World affoords not such Innes as England hath, either for good and cheape entertainement after the Guests owne pleasure, or for humble attendance on passengers, yea, euen in very poore Villa?ges, where if Curculio of Plautus, should see the thatched houses, he would fall into a fainting of his spirits, but if he should smell the variety of meates, his starueling looke would be much cheared: For assoone as a passenger comes to an Inne, the seruants run to him, and one takes his Horse and walkes him till he be cold, then rubs him, and giues him meate, yet I must say that they are not much to be trusted in this last point, without the eye of the Master or his Seruant, to ouersee them. Another seruant giues the passenger his priuate chamber, and kindles his fier, the third puls of his bootes, and makes them cleane. Then the Host or Hostesse visits him, and if he will cate with the Host, or at a common Table with others, his meale will cost him sixe pence, or in some places but foure pence, (yet this course is lesse honourable, and not vsed by Gentle?men): but if he will eate in his chamber, he commands what meate he will according to his appetite, and as much as he thinkes fit for him and his company, yea, the kit?chin is open to him, to command the meat to be dressed as he best likes; and when he sits at Table, the Host or Hostesse will accompany him, or if they haue many Guests, will at least visit him, taking it for curtesie to be bid sit downe: while he eates, if he haue company especially, he shall be offred musicke, which he may freely take or refuse, and if he be solitary, the Musitians will giue him the good day with musicke in the mor?ning. It is the custome and no way disgracefull to set vp part of supper for his breake?fast: In the euening or in the morning after breakefast, (for the common sort vse not to dine, but ride from breakefast to supper time, yet comming early to the Inne for bet?ter resting of their Horses) he shall haue a reckoning in writing, and if it seeme vnrea?sonable, the Host will satisfie him, either for the due price, or by abating part, especi?ally if the seruant deceiue him any way, which one of experience will soone find. Ha?uing formerly spoken of ordinary expences by the high way, aswell in the particular iournall of the first Part, as in a Chapter of this Part purposely treating thereof, I will now onely adde, that a Gentleman and his Man shall spend as much, as if he were ac?companied with another Gentleman and his Man, and if Gentlemen will in such sort ioyne together, to eate at one Table, the expences will be much diminished. Lastly, a Man cannot more freely command at home in his owne House, then hee may doe in his Inne, and at parting if he giue some few pence to the Chamberlin & Ostler, they wish him a happy iourney. 
  
 England hath three publike Feasts of great expence and pompous solemnity, name?ly the coronation of the Kings, the Feast of S. George, as well vpon his day yeerely, as at all times when any Knight of the Order is installed, and the third when Seriants at the Law are called. The Lord Mayor of the City of London, vpon the day when he is sworne & enters his Office, keeps a solemne Feast with publike shewes of great mag?nificence, besides that hee and the Sheriffes of the Citie, daily keepe well fur?nished 
 2 
  
 Tables, to entertaine any Gentleman or stranger that will come to them, to the great honour of the City, in this particular passing all other Cities of the World knowne to vs. 
  
 For the point of drinking, the English at a Feast will drinke two or three healths in remembrance of speciall friends, or respected honourable persons, and in our time some Gentlemen and Commanders from the warres of Netherland brought in the custome of the Germans large garaussing, but this custome is in our time also in good measure left. Likewise in some priuate Gentlemens houses, and with some Captaines and Souldiers, and with the vulgar sort of Citizens and Artisans, large and intempe?rate drinking is vsed; but in generall the greater and better part of the English, hold all excesse blame worthy, and drunkennesse a reprochfull vice. Clownes and vulgar men onely vse large drinking of Beere or Ale, how much soeuer it is esteemed excellent drinke euen among strangers, but Gentlemen garrawse onely in Wine, with which many mixe sugar; which I neuer obserued in any other place or Kingdome, to be vsed for that purpose. And because the taste of the English is thus delighted with sweete?nesse, the Wines in Tauernes, (for I speake not of Merchants or Gentlemens Cellars) are commonly mixed at the filling thereof, to make them pleasant. And the same delight in sweetnesse hath made the vse of Corands of Corinth so frequent in all pla?ces, and with all persons in England, as the very Greekes that sell them, wonder what we doe with such great quantities thereof, and know not how we should spend them, except we vse them for dying, or to feede Hogges.
 
 of great circuit, yeelding great plenty of fish. And the sea on all sides yeelds like plen?tie of excellent fish, as Salmonds, Oysters (which are preferred before the English,) and shel-fishes, with all other kinds of Sea-fish. So as the Irish might in all parts haue abundance of excellent sea and fresh-water fish, if the fisher men were not so possessed with the naturall fault of slothfulnesse, as no hope of gaine, scarsely the feare of autho?ritie can in many places make them come out of their houses, and put to sea. Hence it is, that in many places they vse Scots for Fisher-men, and they together with the English, make profit of the inhabitants sluggishnesse. And no doubt if the Irish were industrious in fishing, they might export salted and dried fish with great gaine. In time of peace the Irish transport good quantity of Corne, yet they may not transport it without license, left vpon any sudden rebellion, the Kings forces and his good sub?iects should want Corne. Vlster and the Westerne parts of Mounster yeeld vast woods, in which the Rebels cutting vp trees, and casting them on heapes, vsed to stop the pas?sages, and therein, as also vpon fenny & Boggy places, to fight with the English. But I confesse my selfe to haue been deceiued in the common fame, that all Ireland is woo?dy, hauing found in my long iourney from Armah to Kinsale, few or no Woods by the way, excepting the great Woods of Ophalia, and some low shrubby places, which they call Glinnes. Also I did obserue many boggy and fenny places, whereof great part might be dried by good and painefull husbandry. I may not omit the opinion com?monly receiued, that the earth of Ireland will not suffer a Snake or venimous beast to liue, and that the Irish wood transported for building, is free of Spiders and their webs. My selfe haue seene some (but very few) Spiders, which the in habitants deny to haue any poyson: but I haue heard some English of good credit affirme by experi?ence the contrary. The Irish hauing in most parts great Woods or low shrubs and thickets, doe vse the same for fier, but in other parts they burne Turfe, and Sea coales brought out of England. They export great quantity of wood to make barrels, called Pipe-staues, and make great gaine thereby. They are not permitted to build great ships for warre, but they haue small ships in some sort armed to resist Pirats, for trans?porting of commodities into Spaine and France yet no great number of them. Ther?fore since the Irish haue small skill in Nauigation, as I cannot praise them for this Art, so I am confident, that the Nation being bold and warlike, would no doubt proue braue Sea-men, if they shall practise Nauigation, and could possibly bee industrious therein. I freely professe, that Ireland in generall would yeeld abundance of all things to ciuill and industrious inhabitants. And when it lay wasted by the late Rebellion, I did see it after the comming of the Lord Montioy daily more and more to flourish, and in short time after the Rebellion appeased, like the new Spring to put on the won?ted beauty. 
  
 Touching the Irish dyet, Some Lords and Knights, and Gentlemen of the English-Irish, * and all the English there abiding, hauing competent meanes, vse the English dyet, but some more, some lesse cleanly, few or none curiously, and no doubt they haue as great and for ??? part greater plenty then the English, of flesh, fowle, fish, and all things for food, if they will vse like Art of Cookery. Alwases I except the Fruits, Venison, and some dainties proper to England, and rare in Ireland. And we must con?ceiue, that Venison and Fowle seeme to be more plentiful in Ireland, because they nei?ther so generally affect dainty foode nor so diligently search it as the English do Many of the English-Irish, haue by little and little been infected with the Irish filthinesse, and that in the very cities, excepting Dublyn, and some of the better sort in Waterford, where the English continually lodging in their houses, they more retaine the English diet. The English-Irish after our manner serue to the table ioynts of flesh cut after our fa?shion, with Geese, Pullets, Pigges and like rosted meats, but their ordinary food for the common sort is of Whitmeates, and they eate cakes of oates for bread, and drinke not English Beere made of Mault and Hops, but Ale. At Corck I haue seene with these eyes, young maides starke naked grinding of Corne with certaine stones to make cakes thereof, and striking of into the tub of meale, such reliques thereof as stuck on their belly, thighes and more vnseemely parts. 
  
 And for the cheese or butter commonly made by the English Irish, and English man would not touch it with his lippes, though hee were halfe starued; yet many English inhabitants make very good of both kindes. In Cities they haue such bread as ours, but of a sharpe fauour, and some mingled with Annisseeds, and baked like cakes, and that onely in the houses of the better sort. 
  
 At Dublyn and in some other Cities, they haue tauerns, wherein Spanish and French Wines are sold, but more commonly the Merchants sell them by pintes and quartes in their owne Cellers. The Irish Aquauitae, vulgarly called Vsquebagh, is held the best in the World of that kind; which is made also in England, but nothing so good as that which is brought out of Ireland. And the Vsquebagh is preferred before our Aqua?vita, because the mingling of Raysons, Fennell seede, and other things, mitigating the heate, and making the taste pleasant, makes it lesse in name, and yet refresh the weake stomake with moderate heate, and a good relish. These Drinkes the English-Irish drink largely, and in many families (especially at feasts) both men and women vse ex?cesse therein. And since I haue inpart seene, and often heard from others experience, that some Gentlewomen were so free in this excesse, as they would kneeling vpon the knee, and otherwise garausse health after health with men; not to speake of the wiues of Irish Lords, or to referre it to the due place, who often drinke tell they be drunken, or at least till they voide vrine in full assemblies of men, I cannot (though vnwilling) but note the Irish women more specially with this fault, which I haue obserued in no o?ther part to be a womans vice, but onely in Bohemia: Yet so as accusing them, I meane not to excuse the men, and will also confesse that I haue seene Virgins, as well Gentle?women as Citizens, commanded by their mothers to retyre, after they had in curtesie pledged one or two healths. In Cities passengers may haue featherbeds, soft and good, but most commonly lowsie, especially in the high waies; whether that came by their being forced to lodge common souldiers, or from the nastie filthinesse of the nation in generall. For euen in the best Citie, as at Corck, I haue obserued that my owne & other English mens chambers hyred of the Citizens, were scarce swept once in the week, & the dust then laid in a corner, was perhaps cast out once in a month or two. I did neuer see any publike Innes with signes hanged out, among the English or English-Irish; but the Officers of Cities and Villages appoint lodgings to the passengers, and per?haps in each Citie, they shall find one or two houses, where they will dresse meate, and these be commonly houses of Englishmen, seldome of the Irish: so as these houses ha?uing no signes hung out, a passenger cannot challenge right to be intertained in them, but must haue it of courtesie, and by intreaty. 
  
 The foresaid wilde Irish doe not thresh their Oates, but burne them from the straw, and so make cakes thereof, yet they seldome eate this bread, much lesse any better kind especially in the time of warre, whereof a Bohemian Baron complained, who ha?uing scene the Courts of England and Scotland, would needes out of his curiosity re?turne through Ireland in the heate of the Rebellion; and hauing letters from the King of Scots to the Irish Lords then in Rebellion, first landed among them, in the furthest North, where for eight dayes space hee had found no bread, not so much as a cake of Oates, till he came to eate with the Earle of Tyrone, and after obtaining the Lord De?puties Passe to come into our Army, related this then want of bread to vs for a mira?cle, who nothing wondred thereat. Yea, the wilde Irish in time of greatest peace im?pute couetousnesse and base birth to him, that hath any Corne after Christmas, as if it were a point of Nobility to consume all within those festiuall dayes. They willingly eate the hearb Schamrock, being of a sharpe taste, which as they runne and are chased to an fro, they snatch like beasts out of the ditches. 
  
 
