New York City, where she made a special study of diet and the chemistry 
 of foods. She was Instructor in Cooking and Domestic Science in the 
 Young Women  '  s Hebrew Association of New York, and is now Instructor and 
 Lecturer for the Association of Jewish Home Makers and the Central 
 Jewish Institute, both under the auspices of the Bureau of Jewish 
 Education (Kehillah). 
  
 Mrs. Greenbaum knows the housewife  '  s problems through years of personal 
 experience, and knows also how to economize. Many of these recipes have 
 been used in her household for three generations and are still used 
 daily in her home. There is no one better qualified to write a Jewish 
 Cook Book than she. 
  
 Suggestions and additional recipes, for inclusion in later editions of 
 the book, will be gratefully accepted by 
  
 THE PUBLISHERS. _New York, February, 1918_. 
  
  
 
 
  
 *PREFACE* 
  
  
 In compiling these recipes every effort has been made to bear in mind 
 the resources of the Jewish kitchen, as well as the need of being 
 economical and practical. 
  
 The aim throughout has been to lay special emphasis on those dishes 
 which are characteristically Jewish--those time-honored recipes which 
 have been handed down the generations by Jewish housewives (for the 
 Sabbath, Passover, etc). But the book contains a great many other 
 recipes besides these, for the Jewish cook is glad to learn from her 
 neighbors. Here will be found the favorite recipes of Germany, Hungary, 
 Austria, France, Russia, Poland, Roumania, etc.; also hundreds of 
 recipes used in the American household. In fact, the book contains 
 recipes of every kind of food appealing to the Jewish taste, which the 
 Jewish housewife has been able to adapt to the dietary laws, thus making 
 the Cook Book truly _International_.
 
 The manner of presentation is clear and simple, and if directions are 
 followed carefully, will insure success to the inexperienced housewife. 
 For the book has been largely planned to assist her in preparing 
 wholesome, attractive meals; to serve the simplest as well as the most 
 elaborate repast--from appetizer to dessert--without transgressing the 
 dietary laws. At the same time the book offers many valuable suggestions 
 and hints to the most expert cook. 
  
 In this book are also directions for making meat substitutes and many 
 economies of the hour, which have been added to meet the needs of the 
 present day. 
  
  
  
  
 *REMARKS* 
  
  
 The Jewish housewife enjoys the enviable reputation of being a good
cook; in fact she is quite famous for her savory and varied dishes. Her 
 skill is due not so much to a different method of cooking as to her 
 ingenuity in combining food materials. The very cuts of meat she has 
 been always accustomed to use, are those which modern cooks are now 
 advising all to use. The use of vegetables with just enough meat to 
 flavor, as for instance in the Shabbos Shalet, is now being highly 
 recommended. 
  
 While it is not given to each and every woman to be a good cook, she can 
 easily acquire some knowledge of the principles of cooking, namely: 
  
 1. That heat from coal, charcoal, wood, gas or electricity is used as a 
 medium for toasting, broiling or roasting. 
  
 2. That heat from water is used as a medium for boiling, simmering, 
 stewing or steaming. 
  
 3. That heat from fat is used as a medium for deep fat frying. 
  
 4. That heat from heated surfaces is used in pan-broiling, sauté,
Chop one yellow onion very fine, add four tablespoons of chicken fat 
 (melted), salt to taste. Serve on slices of rye bread. If desired, a 
 hard-boiled egg chopped very fine may be mixed with the onions. 
  
  
 BRAIN (APPETIZER) 
  
 Cook brains, let cool and add salt; beat up with chopped onions, juice 
 of one and a half lemons and olive oil. Serve on lettuce leaves. 
  
  
 BLACK OLIVES 
  
 Pit black olives, cut them very thin, and prepare as brain appetizer; 
 beat well with fork. 
  
  
 CHICKEN LIVER PASTE, No. 1 
  
 Wash thoroughly several fowls  '   livers and then let them simmer until
tender in a little strong soup stock, adding some sliced mushroom, 
 minced onion, and a little pepper and salt. When thoroughly done mince 
 the whole finely, or pound it in a mortar. Now put it back in the 
 saucepan and mix well with the yolks of sufficient eggs to make the 
 whole fairly moist. Warm over the fire, stirring frequently until the 
 mixture is quite thick, taking care that it does not burn. 
  
 It should be served upon rounds of toast on a hot dish garnished with 
 parsley. 
  
  
 IMITATION PATE DE FOI GRAS 
  
 Take as many livers and gizzards of any kind of fowl as you may have on 
 hand; add to these three tablespoons of chicken or goose fat, a finely 
 chopped onion, one tablespoon of pungent sauce, and salt and white 
 pepper to taste. Boil the livers until quite done and drain; when cold, 
 rub to a smooth paste. Take some of the fat and chopped onion and simmer 
 together slowly for ten minutes. Strain through a thin muslin bag, 
 pressing the bag tightly, turn into a bowl and mix with the seasoning;
slices, wash well, salt and set aside in a cool place for a few hours. 
 When ready to cook, wash slightly so as not to remove all salt from 
 fish. Take heads and set up to boil with a whole onion for twenty-five 
 minutes, then add the other pieces and two cups of vinegar, one cup of 
 water, four bay leaves and twelve allspice, a little pepper and ginger. 
 Cook for thirty-five minutes longer. Taste fish, add a little water or a 
 little more vinegar to taste. Then remove fish carefully so as not to 
 break the pieces and let cool. Strain the sauce, return fish to same, 
 adding a few bay leaves and allspice. Set in a cool place until sauce 
 forms a jelly around the fish. Can be kept covered and in a cool place 
 for some time. 
  
  
 SOUSED HERRING 
  
 Split and half three herrings, roll and tie them up. Place them in a pie 
 plate, pour over them a cup of vinegar, add whole peppers, salt, cloves 
 to taste and two bay leaves. Bake in a slow oven until soft (about 
 twenty minutes). 
 
Brown some fat in a spider, stir in a tablespoon of flour; stir until it 
 becomes a smooth paste; then add hot soup, stirring constantly; add a 
 handful of raisins, some pounded almonds, a few slices of lemon, also a 
 tablespoon of vinegar; brown sugar to taste: flavor with a few cloves 
 and cinnamon, and if you choose to do so, grate in part of a stick of 
 horseradish and the crust of a rye loaf. Very nice for fat beef. 
  
  
 HORSERADISH SAUCE, No. 1 
  
 Grate a good-sized stick of horseradish; take some soup stock and a 
 tablespoon of fat, salt and pepper to taste, a little grated stale 
 bread, a few pounded almonds. Let all boil up and then add the meat. 
  
  
 HORSERADISH SAUCE, No. 2 
  
 Heat one tablespoon of fat in a frying-pan, when hot cut up one-quarter 
 of an onion in it, and fry light brown, then brown one tablespoon 
 cracker meal or flour and add two tablespoons of grated horseradish;
let this brown a bit, then add some soup stock, one tablespoon of brown 
 sugar, two cloves, two bay leaves, salt, pepper and two tablespoons of 
 vinegar. Let cook a few minutes then add one more tablespoon of 
 horseradish and if necessary a little more sugar or vinegar. Lay the 
 meat in this sauce and cover on back of stove until ready to serve. If 
 gas stove is used, place over the simmering flame. 
  
  
 KNOBLAUCH SAUCE (GARLIC) 
  
 Heat a tablespoon of drippings, either of meat or goose in a frying-pan; 
 cut up one or two cloves of garlic very fine and let it brown slightly 
 in the heated fat; add a tablespoon of flour, a cup of soup stock or 
 warm water, salt, pepper to taste. 
  
  
 MAÎTRE D  '  HÔTEL SAUCE 
  
 Take a heaping tablespoon of drippings or goose-fat, heat it in a 
 spider, stir two teaspoons of flour into this, then add gradually and
PICKLED BEEF TONGUE 
  
 Select a large, fresh beef tongue. Soak in cold water one-half hour. 
 Crush a piece of saltpetre, size of walnut, one teacup of salt, one 
 teaspoon of pepper, three small cloves of garlic cut fine; mix 
 seasoning. Drain water off tongue. With a pointed knife prick tongue; 
 rub in seasoning. Put tongue in crock; add the balance of salt, etc.; 
 cover with plate and weight. Allow to stand from four to five days. 
 Without washing off the seasoning, boil in fresh water until tender. 
  
  
  
  
 *MEATS* 
  
  
 The majority of the cuts of meat which are kosher are those which 
 require long, slow cooking. These cuts of meat are the most nutritious 
 ones and by long, slow cooking can be made as acceptable as the more 
 expensive cuts of meat; they are best boiled or braised.
 
 In order to shut in the juices the meat should at first be subjected to 
 a high degree of heat for a short time. A crust or case will then be 
 formed on the outside, after which the heat should be lowered and the 
 cooking proceed slowly. 
  
 This rule holds good for baking, where the oven must be very hot for the 
 first few minutes only; for boiling, where the water must be boiling and 
 covered for a time, and then placed where it will simmer only; for 
 broiling, where the meat must be placed close to the red-hot coals or 
 under the broiler flame of the gas stove at first, then held farther 
 away. 
  
 Do not pierce the meat with a fork while cooking, as it makes an outlet 
 for the juices. If necessary, to turn it, use two spoons. 
  
  
 PAN ROAST BEEF 
  
 Take a piece of cross-rib or shoulder, about two and one-half to three
pounds, put in a small frying-pan with very little fat; have the pan 
 very hot, let the meat brown on all sides, turning it continually until 
 all sides are done, which will require thirty minutes altogether. Lift 
 the meat out of pan to a hot platter, brown some onions, serve these 
 with the meat. 
  
  
 AN EASY POT ROAST 
  
 Take four pounds of brisket, season with salt, pepper and ginger, add 
 three tablespoons of tomatoes and an onion cut up. Cover with water in 
 an iron pot and a close-fitting cover, put in oven and bake from three 
 to four hours. 
  
  
 POT ROAST. BRAISED BEEF 
  
 Heat some fat or goose fat in a deep iron pot, cut half an onion very 
 fine and when it is slightly browned put in the meat. Cover up closely 
 and let the meat brown on all sides. Salt to taste, add a scant half
teaspoon of paprika, half a cup of hot water and simmer an hour longer, 
 keeping covered closely all the time. Add one-half a sweet green pepper 
 (seeds removed), one small carrot cut in slices, two tablespoons of 
 tomatoes and two onions sliced. 
  
 Two and a half pounds of brisket shoulder or any other meat suitable for 
 pot roasting will require three hours slow cooking. Shoulder of lamb may 
 also be cooked in this style. 
  
 When the meat is tender, remove to a warm platter, strain the gravy, 
 rubbing the thick part through the sieve and after removing any fat 
 serve in a sauce boat. 
  
 If any meat is left over it can be sliced and warmed over in the gravy, 
 but the gravy must be warmed first and the meat cook for a short time 
 only as it is already done enough and too much cooking will render it 
 tasteless. 
  
  
 BRISKET OF BEEF (BRUSTDECKEL)
so reduce the temperature that a longer time will be needed. In no case, 
 however, should the corn be left too long in the water, as overcooking 
 spoils the delicate flavor. 
  
  
 CORN OFF THE COB 
  
 Corn is frequently cut from the cob after it is cooked and served in 
 milk or butter; but by this method much of the flavor and juke of the 
 corn itself is wasted; It is better to cut the corn from the cob before 
 cooking. With a sharp knife cut off the grains, not cutting closely 
 enough to remove any of the woody portion of the skins. Then with a 
 knife press out all the pulp and milk remaining in the cob; add this to 
 the corn; season well with salt, pepper and butter; add a little more 
 milk if the corn is dry; cook, preferably in the oven, for about ten 
 minutes, stirring occasionally. If the oven is not hot, cook over the 
 fire. 
  
  
 SUCCOTASH
Wash, peel and cut the Kohl-rabi root in dice and cook in salt water 
 until tender. Cook the greens or tops in another pan of boiling water 
 until tender, drain and chop very fine in a wooden bowl. Heat butter or 
 fat, add flour, then the chopped greens, and one cup of liquor the 
 Kohl-rabi root was cooked in or one cup of soup stock. Add the 
 Kohl-rabi, cook altogether, and serve. 
  
 Use same quantities as for turnips. 
  
  
 KALE 
  
 Remove all the old or tough leaves; wash the kale thoroughly and drain. 
 Put it into boiling water to which has been added salt in the proportion 
 of one-half tablespoon to two quarts of water. Boil rapidly, uncovered, 
 until the vegetable is tender; pour off the water; chop the kale very 
 fine; return it to the kettle with one tablespoon of drippings and two 
 of meat stock or water to every pint of the minced vegetable. Add more 
 salt if necessary; cook for ten minutes and serve at once. The entire 
 time for cooking varies from thirty to fifty minutes.
 
 The leaves are sweeter and more tender after having been touched by the 
 frost. The same is true of Savoy cabbage. 
  
  
 SWISS CHARD 
  
 This vegetable is a variety of beet in which the leaf stalk and midrib 
 have been developed instead of the root. It is cultivated like spinach, 
 and the green, tender leaves are prepared exactly like this vegetable. 
 The midribs of the full-grown leaves may be cooked like celery. 
  
  
 STEWED TOMATOES 
  
 Pour boiling water over the tomatoes; remove the skins; cut into small 
 pieces and place in a saucepan over the fire. Boil gently for twenty or 
 thirty minutes and season, allowing for each quart of tomatoes one 
 generous teaspoon each of salt and sugar and one tablespoon of butter. 
 If in addition to this seasoning a slice of onion has been cooked with
the tomatoes from the beginning, the flavor will be greatly improved. 
  
  
 CANNED TOMATOES, STEWED 
  
 Salt, pepper; add a lump of butter the size of an egg and add one 
 tablespoon of sugar. Thicken with one teaspoon of flour wet with one 
 tablespoon of cold water, stir into the tomatoes and boil up once. 
  
  
 FRIED TOMATOES 
  
 Cut large, sound tomatoes in halves and flour the insides thickly. 
 Season with a little salt and pepper. Allow the butter to get very hot 
 before putting in the tomatoes. When brown on one side, turn, and when 
 done serve with hot cream or thicken some milk and pour over the 
 tomatoes hot. 
  
  
 FRIED GREEN TOMATOES
 
 Cut into thin slices large green tomatoes, sprinkle with salt and dip 
 into cornmeal, fry slowly in a little butter till well browned; keep the 
 frying-pan covered while they are cooking, so they will be perfectly 
 tender. These are very delicately flavored, and much easier to fry than 
 ripe tomatoes. They make an excellent breakfast dish. 
  
  
 TOMATO PURÉE 
  
 Scald the tomatoes, take off the skins carefully and stew with one 
 teaspoon each of butter and sugar; salt and pepper to taste. This is 
 enough seasoning for a quart of tomatoes. When the tomatoes are very 
 soft strain through a coarse sieve and if necessary thicken with one 
 teaspoon of flour. 
  
  
 SCALLOPED TOMATOES 
  
 Drain off part of the juice from one quart of tomatoes and season with
pepper, salt, and onion juice. Cover the bottom of a baking dish with 
 rolled crackers, dot over with dabs of butter, pepper, and salt, then 
 another layer of tomatoes, then of crumbs, and so on until a layer of 
 crumbs covers the top. 
  
 If fresh tomatoes are used bake one hour, if canned, 1/2 hour. 
  
 If the crumbs begin to brown too quickly cover the dish with a tin 
 plate. 
  
  
 STUFFED TOMATOES 
  
 Select tomatoes of uniform size, cut a slice from the stem end and scoop 
 out a portion of the pulp. Have in readiness a dressing made from grated 
 bread crumbs, parsley, a slice of minced onion, a high seasoning of salt 
 and paprika and sufficient melted butter to moisten. Fill this into the 
 tomatoes and heap it up in the centers. Place a bit of butter on top of 
 each and bake in a quick oven until the vegetables are tender and the 
 tops are delicately browned.
a little flour, and put them into the pan with skin-side down to cook 
 partially, then turn them once; they must cook over a slow fire. Then 
 sprinkle one tablespoon of chopped parsley over them, pour in one cup of 
 thick cream and when this has become thoroughly hot, and has been 
 combined with the other ingredients, the tomatoes are ready to serve. 
  
 They have not been disturbed since the first turning and have retained 
 their shape. Half a tomato is placed on a slice of toast, with 
 sufficient gravy to moisten. At the season of the year, when tomatoes 
 are hard and firm, they may be peeled before cooking. Later they will 
 likely fall to pieces unless the skin is left on. This is one method of 
 cooking tomatoes in which they lose the sharp acid taste, disagreeable 
 to so many persons. 
  
  
 STRING BEANS WITH TOMATOES 
  
 Cut off both ends of the beans, string them carefully and break into 
 pieces about an inch in length and boil in salt water. When tender drain 
 off this brine and add fresh water (boiling from the kettle). Add a
of tenderness. For stewed and baked beans the cooking must stop when the 
 skins begin to crack. For beans served with a sauce they should cook 
 until perfectly tender, but they must not be broken or mushy. For purées 
 and soups they should be cooked until very soft. 
  
  
 SWEET SOUR BEANS AND LINZEN 
  
 Soak overnight and drain the beans, boil in salted water until tender; 
 drain and prepare by adding salt and pepper to taste, thicken with one 
 tablespoon of drippings in which has been browned one tablespoon of 
 flour and some soup stock. If the beans are to be made sweet sour add 
 two tablespoons of vinegar and two tablespoons of brown sugar; boil for 
 a few minutes and serve. 
  
  
 BAKED BEANS WITH BRISKET OF BEEF 
  
 Wash, pick over and soak overnight in cold water, two cups of navy 
 beans. In the morning, drain and cover with fresh water, heat slowly and
let cook just below the boiling point until the skins burst. When done, 
 drain beans and put in a pot with one and one-half pounds of brisket of 
 beef. Mix one-half tablespoon of mustard; one teaspoon of salt, one 
 tablespoon of molasses, two tablespoons of sugar, one-half cup of 
 boiling water and pour over beans, and add enough more boiling water to 
 cover them. Cover pot and bake slowly six or eight hours. 
  
  
 HARICOT BEANS AND BEEF 
  
 Wash two cups of haricot beans and leave them covered with two pints of 
 water overnight. Next day brown one coarsely chopped onion in a little 
 fat and put it with the beans and their water into a casserole or 
 stew-jar. 
  
 Cook closely covered and rather slowly in the oven or by the side of the 
 fire one hour, then put in a pound of beef in fairly large pieces. 
  
 An hour later add one carrot cut into dice, half as many dice of turnip, 
 and salt and pepper to taste. Continue the slow cooking until these
vegetables are tender, and a few minutes before serving thicken the stew 
 with pea meal or flour previously baked to a fawn color. Flavor with 
 vinegar. 
  
 Owing to its concentrated nutriment this stew should be served sparingly 
 with an abundance of potatoes and green vegetables. 
  
  
 BEANS AND BARLEY 
  
 Soak one-half cup of navy beans in cold water overnight. Drain and cook 
 in one quart boiling water with one teaspoon of salt until tender but 
 not broken, add one-half cup of barley and let cook slowly until barley 
 is tender, about one-half hour. Add fat soup stock as the water 
 evaporates. Season to taste and bake in medium oven about one-half hour 
 or until dry but not browned. 
  
  
 DRIED LIMA BEANS, BAKED 
 
alternately one-half cup of sweet milk, yolks of two eggs which you have 
 previously beaten until quite light, add whites of two, and one-half cup 
 of sifted flour. Make a custard of one-half cup of milk, with one cup of 
 grated chocolate, one-half cup of granulated sugar; boil until thick, 
 add the yolk of one egg, then remove from the fire; stir until cool, add 
 this to the cake batter, add one and one-half cups of sifted flour, two 
 teaspoons of baking-powder and one of vanilla flavoring. Bake in layers 
 and ice between and on top with plain white icing flavored to taste. You 
 may substitute almond or colored icing. 
  
  
 CARAMEL LAYER CAKE 
  
 Place one-half cup of sugar in pan over fire. Stir until liquid smokes 
 and burns brown. Add one-half cup of boiling water and cook into syrup. 
 Take one cup butter, one and one-half cups of sugar, yolks of two eggs, 
 over one cup of water and two cups of flour. Beat all thoroughly. Add 
 enough of the burnt sugar to flavor, also one teaspoon of vanilla, 
 another half cup of flour, two teaspoons of baking-powder and whites of 
 two eggs. Bake in two layers, using remainder of burnt sugar for icing.
three times, and keep the blanket cold and wet with the brine from the 
 freezer. 
  
  
 VANILLA ICE CREAM, No. 1 
  
 Take one pint of milk, two cups of sugar, one large tablespoon of flour 
 rubbed smooth in cold milk, two eggs beaten light, one teaspoon of 
 vanilla extract, and one quart of sweet cream, well beaten. Heat the 
 milk in a double boiler, and when it is at boiling point add the flour, 
 eggs and one cup of sugar. Cook about twenty minutes, stirring very 
 often. Let the mixture get cold, then add the remaining sugar and the 
 vanilla and cream, and freeze. A more novel flavoring is made with a 
 mixture of vanilla, lemon and almond extracts. The quantities given in 
 this recipe make about two quarts of ice cream. 
  
  
 VANILLA ICE CREAM, No. 2 
  
 Beat three whole eggs very light with one cup of granulated sugar until
all grain is dissolved and mass is a light yellowish color. Whip one 
 pint of cream until stiff, add to eggs and sugar, then add one cup of 
 sweet milk, flavor with vanilla to taste, and put in freezer and turn 
 until hard. This is a basis for almost any kind of cream. 
  
  
 CHOCOLATE ICE CREAM, No. 1 
  
 Make same as Vanilla Ice Cream, No. 2, only omitting the milk. Dissolve 
 on stove one-half pound of sweet chocolate, in one cup of sweet milk, 
 rub smooth and thick, let get cold, and add to the eggs, just before 
 putting in cream. Flavor with vanilla. 
  
  
 CHOCOLATE ICE CREAM, No. 2 
  
 Take one quart of cream, one pint of new milk, two eggs, one teacup of 
 grated chocolate (double vanilla), two cups of pulverized sugar, one 
 teaspoon of cornstarch and one of extract of vanilla. Beat the yolks of 
 the eggs, sugar and let them come to a boil. Then take them quickly from
the fire, dissolve the chocolate in a little milk over the fire, stir it 
 all the time. When smooth mix with the milk and eggs, add the cream and 
 vanilla. Freeze when cold. 
  
  
 COFFEE ICE CREAM 
  
 Make same as Vanilla Ice Cream No. 2. Flavor with one and one-half 
 tablespoons of mocha extract, add one cup of grated walnuts. Freeze. 
  
  
 FROZEN CUSTARD 
  
 One quart of milk, yolk of five eggs, sweeten to taste, and flavor with 
 vanilla to taste. Boil the milk first, and after the yolks of eggs are 
 beaten stir into the milk. When cold add the beaten whites and vanilla; 
 put in freezer and turn. Canned strawberries are very nice in this. 
  
  
 APRICOT, PEACH, STRAWBERRY, BANANA OR PINEAPPLE CREAM
 
 Use a small earthenware tea-pot, thoroughly clean. Put in two teaspoons 
 of tea leaves, pour over it boiling water to one-fourth of the pot, and 
 let it stand three minutes. Then fill the pot entirely with boiling 
 water and let it stand five minutes. In serving dilute with warm water 
 to suit taste, or serve cold, but always without milk. A thin slice of 
 lemon or a few drops of lemon juice is allowed for each cup. Preserved 
 strawberries, cherries or raspberries are considered an improvement. 
  
  
 RUSSIAN ICED TEA 
  
 Make tea for as many cups as desired, strain and cool. Place in ice-box, 
 chill thoroughly and serve in tall glass with ice and flavor with loaf 
 sugar, one teaspoon of rum or brandy, one slice of lemon or one teaspoon 
 preserved strawberries, raspberries, cherries or pineapple, or loaf 
 sugar may be flavored with lemon or orange and packed and stored in jars 
 to be used later to flavor and sweeten the tea. Wash the rind of lemon 
 or orange and wipe dry, then rub over all sides of the sugar. 
 
