"Art going, sir? Wilt not try me once again? Methinks I might do a 
 little better this time, an so God wills." 
  
 "Aye, so thou shalt, sweet youth," cried the stranger, clapping him 
 upon the shoulder, "yet not now, for I must begone, yet shall I 
 return." 
  
 "Then I pray you leave with me the sword till you be come again." 
  
 "The sword--ha! doth thy soul cleave unto it so soon, my good, sweet 
 boy? Leave the sword, quotha? Aye, truly--some day. But for the nonce-- 
 no, no, thy hand is not fitted to bear it yet, nor worthy such a blade, 
 but some day, belike--who knows? Fare thee well, sweet youth, I come 
 again to-morrow." 
  
 And so the tall, grim stranger turned him about, smiling his wry smile, 
 and strode away through the green. Then Beltane went back, minded to 
 finish his painting, but the colours had lost their charm for him, 
 moreover, the light was failing. Wherefore he put brushes and colours 
 aside, and, stripping, plunged into the cool, sweet waters of a certain
"Unless I know thy name thou shalt not fare forth of the greenwood." 
  
 So the proud lady of Mortain looked down upon Beltane in amaze, for 
 there was none in all the Duchy, knight, noble or princeling, who dared 
 gainsay her lightest word; wherefore, I say, she stared upon this bold 
 forest knave with his golden hair and gentle eyes, his curved lips and 
 square chin; and in eyes and mouth and chin was a look of 
 masterfulness, challenging, commanding. And, meeting that look, her 
 heart leapt most strangely with sudden, sweet thrill, so that she 
 lowered her gaze lest he should see, and when she spake her voice was 
 low and very sweet: 
  
 "Tell me I pray, why seek you my name, and wherefore?" 
  
 Quoth Beltane, soft and slow as one that dreams: 
  
 "I have seen thine eyes look at me from the flowers, ere now, have 
 heard thy laughter in the brook, and found thy beauty in all fair 
 things: methinks thy name should be a most sweet name." 
 
beauty of her, and clenched his hands hard and fierce and thereafter 
 spake: 
  
 "Thou art so wondrous fair," said he again, "and belike of noble 
 birth, but--as for me, I am a smith!" 
  
 Awhile she stood, turning the flower in gentle fingers yet looking upon 
 him in his might and goodly youth, beholding his averted face with its 
 strong, sweet mouth and masterful chin, its curved nostrils and the 
 dreaming passion of his eyes, and when she spake her voice was soft 
 and very sweet. 
  
 "Above all, thou art--a man, messire!" 
  
 Then did my Beltane lift his head and saw how the colour was deepened 
 in her cheek and how her tender eyes drooped before his. 
  
 "Tell me," he said, "is there ever a woman to love such a man? Is there 
 ever a woman who would leave the hum and glitter of cities to walk with 
 such as I in the shadow of these forest-lands? Speak, Oh speak I do
beseech thee!" Thus said he and stopped, waiting her answer. 
  
 "Nay, Beltane," she whispered, "let thine own heart speak me this." 
  
 All blithe and glorious grew the world about him as he stooped and 
 caught her in his arms, lifting her high against his heart. And, in 
 this moment, he forgot the teaching of Ambrose the Hermit, forgot all 
 things under heaven, save the glory of her beauty, the drooping languor 
 of her eyes and the sweet, moist tremor of her mouth. And so he kissed 
 her, murmuring   '  twixt his kisses: 
  
 "Fairer art thou than all the flowers, O my love, and sweeter thy 
 breath than the breath of flowers!" 
  
 Thus Helen the Proud, the Beautiful, yielded her lips to his, and in 
 all the world for her was nought save the deep, soft voice of Beltane, 
 and his eyes, and the new, sweet ecstasy that thrilled within her. 
 Surely nowhere in all the world was there such another man as this, so 
 strong and gentle, so meet for love and yet so virginal. Surely life 
 might be very fair here in the green solitudes, aye, surely, surely--
foul and base, traitor to me and to his own sweet name, and   '  tis for 
 this I will requite thee!  '   But the Duchess spake not, nor blenched even 
 when the dagger gleamed to strike--O sweet God of mercy, to strike! 
 But, in that moment, came Benedict of Bourne and leapt betwixt and took 
 the blow upon his cheek, and, stanching the blood within his tattered 
 war-cloak, cried:   '  Lord Duke, because I love thee, ne  '  er shalt thou do 
 this thing until thou first slay me!  '   A while the Duke stood in amaze, 
 then turned and strode away down the great stair, and coming to the 
 courtyard, beheld his brother Johan armed at all points and mounted, 
 and with another horse equipped near by. So the Duke laughed and closed 
 his vizor and his laughter boomed hollow within his rusty casque, and, 
 leaping to the saddle, rode to the end of the great tilt-yard, and, 
 wheeling, couched his lance. So these brethren, who had loved each 
 other so well, spurred upon each other with levelled lances but, or 
 ever the shock came--O my son, my son!--Johan rose high in his stirrups 
 and cried aloud the battle-cry of his house   '  Arise! Arise! I shall 
 arise!  '   and with the cry, tossed aside his lance lest he might harm the 
 Duke his brother--O sweet clemency of Christ!--and crashed to earth-- 
 and lay there--very still and silent. Then the Duke dismounted and, 
 watched by pale-faced esquires and men-at-arms, came and knelt beside
bursting, and the quaking ooze yearning to engulf him. Then my Beltane 
 knew the bitter agony of coming death, and strove no more; but in that 
 place of darkness and horror, a clammy something crawled upon his face, 
 slipped down upon his helpless body, seized hold upon his belt and 
 dragged at him fierce and strong; slowly, slowly the darkness thinned, 
 grew lighter, and then--Ah, kind mercy of God! his staring eyes beheld 
 the orbed moon, his famished lungs drank deep the sweet, cool air of 
 night. And so he gasped, and gasping, strove feebly with arm and leg 
 while ever the strong hand grasped at his girdle. And now he heard, 
 faint and afar, a sound of voices, hands reached down and drew him up-- 
 up to good, firm earth, and there, face down among the grass, he lay 
 awhile, content only to live and breathe. Gradually he became aware of 
 another sound hard by, a sharp sound yet musical, and in a little, knew 
 it for the "twang" of a swift-drawn bow-string. Now, glancing up, 
 Beltane beheld an ancient tree near by, a tree warped and stunted 
 wherein divers arrows stood, and behind the tree, Giles o  '   the Bow, 
 who, as he watched, drew and loosed a shaft, which, flashing upward, 
 was answered by a cry; whereon Giles laughed aloud. 
  
 "Six!" he cried, "six in seven shots:   '  tis sweet archery methinks, and
Black Rogerkin, down at the brook yonder, a-sprawl upon their bellies 
 busily a-tickling trout for breakfast, while I, whose good yew bow 
 carrieth death in every twang, toasting deer-flesh on a twig, am mocked of 
 wanton warblers i  '   the green: and thou, who art an Achilles, a Hector, 
 an Ajax--a very Mars--do sleep and slumber, soft and sweet as full-fed 
 friar--Heigho! Yet even a demi-god must nod betimes, and Titans eat, 
 look ye." 
  
 Now looking from sun to earth and beholding the shortening of the 
 shadows, Beltane leapt up. Quoth he: 
  
 "Sluggard that I am,   '  tis late! And Roger was wounded last night, I 
 mind--" 
  
 "Content you, brother,   '  twas nought," said Giles bending above his 
 cooking, "the kiss of a pike-head i  '   the thick o  '   the arm--no more." 
  
 "Yet it must be looked to--" 
  
 "I did it, brother, as I shoot--that is to say I did it most excellent
well:   '  twill be healed within the week." 
  
 "How then--art leech as well as bowman?" 
  
 "Quite as well, brother. When I was a monk I learned two good things, 
 _videlicit_: never to argue with those in authority over me, and to 
 heal the hurts of those that did. So, by my skill in herbs and 
 leechcraft, Roger, having a hole in his arm, recks not of it--behold 
 here he cometh, and Walkyn too, and _Laus Deo!_ with a trout! Now shall 
 we feast like any pampered prelate." 
  
 So when Beltane had stripped and bathed him in the brook, they 
 presently sat down, all four together, and ate and talked and laughed 
 right merrily, the while lark and thrush and blackbird carolled lustily 
 far and near. 
  
 "Now eat, brothers," cried the bowman, full-mouthed, "eat and spare 
 not, as I do, for to-day I smell the battle from afar: Ho! Ho! the 
 noise of captains and the shouting! Yesterday were we heroes, to-day 
 must we be gods--yet cautious gods, for, mark me, I have but twelve
aquiline; lips, red and full, that parted but to meet again in sweet 
 and luscious curves; a chin white, and round, and dimpled. 
  
 This Beltane saw   '  twixt hood and wimple, by aid of the torch that 
 flickered against the wall; and she, conscious of his look, stood with 
 white hands demurely crossed upon her rounded bosom, with eyes abased 
 and scarlet lips apart, as one who waits--expectant. Now hereupon my 
 Beltane felt himself vaguely at loss, and finding he yet held the 
 dagger, set it upon the table and spake, low-voiced. 
  
 "Reverend Mother--" he began, and stopped--for at the word her dark 
 lashes lifted and she stared upon him curiously, while slowly her red 
 lips quivered to a smile. And surely, surely this nun so sweet and 
 saintly in veiling hood and wimple was yet a very woman, young and 
 passing fair; and the eyes of her--how deep and tender and yet how 
 passionate! Now beholding her eyes, memory stirred within him and he 
 sighed, whereat she sighed also and meekly bowed her head, speaking him 
 with all humility. 
  
 "Sweet son, speak on--thy reverend mother heareth."
creeping plants whose luxuriant foliage tempered the sun  '  s rays to a 
 tender green twilight very grateful and pleasant. 
  
 Now pendant from the opening was a ladder of cords, and upon this 
 ladder, just beneath the cleft, Beltane beheld a pair of lusty, 
 well-shaped legs in boots of untanned leather laced up with leathern 
 thongs; as for their owner, he was hidden quite by reason of the leafy 
 screen as he leaned forth of the fissure. Looking upon these legs, 
 Beltane knew them by their very attitude for the legs of one who watched 
 intently, but while he looked, they stirred, shifted, and growing lax, 
 became the legs of one who lounged; then, slow and lazily, they began 
 to descend lower and lower until the brown, comely face of Giles 
 Brabblecombe o  '   the Hills smiled down upon Beltane with a gleam of 
 white teeth. Cried he: 
  
 "Hail, noble brother, and likewise the good God bless thee! Hast slept 
 well, it lacketh scarce an hour to sundown, and therefore should  '  st 
 eat well. How say ye now to a toothsome haunch o  '   cold venison, in 
 faith, cunningly cooked and sufficiently salted and seasoned--ha? And 
 mark me! with a mouthful of malmsey, ripely rare? Oho, rich wine that I
filched from a fatuous friar jig-jogging within the green! Forsooth, 
 tall brother,   '  tis a wondrous place, the greenwood, wherein a man shall 
 come by all he doth need--an he seek far enough! Thus, an my purse be 
 empty, your beefy burgher shall, by dint of gentle coaxing, haste to 
 fill me it with good, broad pieces. But, an my emptiness be of the 
 belly, then sweet Saint Giles send me some ambulating abbot or 
 pensive-pacing prior; for your churchmen do ever ride with saddle-bags 
 well lined, as I do know, having been bred a monk, and therefore with 
 a rare lust to creature comforts." 
  
 Now while he spake thus, the archer was busily setting forth the viands 
 upon a rough table that stood hard by, what time Beltane looked about 
 him. 
  
 "  '  Tis a wondrous hiding-place, this, Giles!" quoth he. 
  
 "Aye, verily, brother--a sweet place for hunted men such as we. Here be 
 caves and caverns enow to hide an army, and rocky passage-ways, narrow 
 and winding i  '   the dark, where we four might hold all Black Ivo  '  s 
 powers at bay from now till Gabriel  '  s trump--an we had food enow!"
Now Beltane, yet astride the mighty roan that snuffed the fragrant air 
 and stooped to crop the tender herbage, looked upon the youthful 
 paladin   '  neath wrinkled brow, and pulled his lip as one in doubt. Anon 
 he sighed and therewith smiled and shook his head. 
  
 Quoth he: 
  
 "O Fidelis, now do I see that I must needs love thee some day. Fidelis, 
 art a fool, but a right sweet fool, so do I humbly sue thy foolish 
 pardon, and, as to Helen, may she prove worthy thy sweet faith and I 
 thy love and friendship. So, fair knight, put up thy sword--come, mount 
 and let us on. Sir Mars, methinks, doth snuff water afar, and I do 
 yearn me for the cool of it." 
  
 So in a while they rode on again, yet presently Sir Fidelis, meek-voiced, 
 preferred a sudden question, thus: 
  
 "Lord, fain would I know why thou dost contemn her so--" 
  
 "Nay," sighed Beltane, "here is a tale un-meet thy tender years. Speak
we of other things--as thus, wherefore didst keep our lives in jeopardy 
 to bring away the wallet that cumbereth thy hip?" 
  
 "For that within doth lie, first--our supper--" 
  
 "O foolish youth, these woods do teem with food!" 
  
 "A neat  '  s tongue, delicately seasoned--" 
  
 "O!" said Beltane. 
  
 "  '  Twixt manchets of fair white bread--" 
  
 "Ah!" said Beltane. 
  
 "With a small skin of rare wine--" 
  
 "Enough!" quoth Beltane. "These be things forsooth worth a little 
 risk. Now do I thirst and famish, yet knew it not." 
 
"An thou wilt eat, my lord?" 
  
 "Nay, first will we find some freshet where we may bathe awhile. Ha, to 
 plunge naked within some sweet pool--  '  tis a sweet thought, Fidelis?" 
  
 But hereupon the young knight made answer none and fell into a reverie 
 and Beltane also, what time they rode by murmuring rills, through 
 swampy hollows, past brake and briar, until, as evening began to fall, 
 they came unto a broad, slow-moving stream whose waters, aglow with 
 sunset glory, split asunder the greeny gloom of trees, most pleasant to 
 behold. Then, sighing for very gladness, Beltane checked his horse and 
 spake right gleefully: 
  
 "Light down, light down, good Fidelis; ne  '  er saw I fairer haven for 
 wearied travellers! We have ridden hard and far, so here will we tarry 
 the night!" and down to earth he sprang, to stride up and down and 
 stretch his cramped limbs, the while Sir Fidelis, loosing off the 
 great, high-peaked saddle, led the foam-flecked war-horse down to the 
 water. 
 
hand, whereat he but groaned again. 
  
 "God pity me!" quoth he, "I am in sooth so changed, meseemeth some vile 
 demon doth possess me betimes!" and, sighing deep, he gazed upon the 
 rippling waters wide-eyed and fearful. And, as he sat thus, abashed 
 and despairing, Sir Fidelis, speaking no word, bathed and bound up his 
 wound, and, thereafter brought and spread forth their remaining viands. 
  
 "Eat," said he gently, "come, let us break our fast, mayhap thy sorrows 
 shall grow less anon. Come, eat, I pray thee, Beltane, for none will I 
 eat alone and, O, I famish!" 
  
 So they ate together, whiles the war-horse Mars, pawing impatient 
 hoof, oft turned his great head to view them with round and wistful 
 eye. 
  
 "Fidelis," quoth Beltane suddenly, "thou didst name me selfish, and 
 verily, a selfish man am I--and to-day! O Fidelis, why dost not 
 reproach me for the evil I purposed thee to-day?" 
 
death." 
  
 But when Beltane would have questioned him further he smiled sad and 
 wistful and went forth to the fire. Up rose the moon, a thing of glory 
 filling the warm, stilly night with a soft and radiant splendour--a 
 tender light, fraught with a subtle magic, whereby all things, rock and 
 tree and leaping brook, found a new and added beauty. 
  
 And in some while comes Sir Fidelis to set out their viands, neat and 
 orderly, as was ever his custom, and thereafter must needs chide 
 Beltane, soft-voiced, for his lack of hunger, and cut dainty morsels, 
 wooing him thereby to eat. 
  
 "Fidelis," says Beltane, "on so fair a night as this, methinks, the old 
 fables and romances might well be true that tell of elves that dance on 
 moony nights, and of shapely nymphs and lovely dryads that are the 
 spirits of the trees. Aye, in the magic of so fair a night as this 
 aught might happen--miracles and wonders." 
  
 "Save one thing, dear my lord."
 
 "Sweet Cuthbert--gentle saint--behind me in the shadows lieth my 
 master--a-weeping in his slumber. So needs must I weep also, since I do 
 love him for that he is a man. Good Saint Cuthbert, I have wrought for 
 him my best as thou hast seen--tended his hurt thrice daily and 
 ministered the potion as I was commanded. I have worked for him--prayed 
 for him--yet doth he weep great tears within his sleep. So now do I 
 place him in thy care, good saint, for thou dost know me but poor rogue 
 Roger, a rough man and all unlearned, yet, even so, I do most truly 
 love him and, loving him, do fear--for meseemeth his hurt is deeper 
 than hurt of body, he doth pine him and grieve for lack of his heart  '  s 
 desire--a young man, sweet saint, that doth yearn for a maid right fair 
 and noble, _pars amours,_ good saint, as is the custom. But alack, she 
 is far hence and he lieth here sick and like to perish and I am but 
 poor Roger--a very sinful man that knoweth not what to do. So do I call 
 on thee, sweet saint--achieve me a miracle on his behalf, bring him to 
 his heart  '  s desire that he may wax hale and well and weep no more 
 within his sleep. And this do I ask for his sake and his lady  '  s sake 
 and for the sake of Pentavalon Duchy--not forgetting poor Roger that 
 doth plague thee thus for love of him. Amen!"
 
 Now behold! even as the prayer was ended came a faint stir and rustle 
 amid the leaves hard by, and, lifting startled head, Black Roger beheld 
 a radiant vision standing in the pale glory of the moon, whereat he 
 knew fear and a great awe. 
  
 "O, good Saint Cuthbert, and is it thou indeed?" he whispered, "Sweet 
 saint, I thought not to win thee down from heaven thus, though forsooth 
 I did pray right lustily. But, since thou art come--" 
  
 "Hush, good Roger!" spake a voice soft and wondrous sweet to hear; and, 
 so speaking, the shining figure raised the vizor of its helm. "O hush 
 thee, Roger, for he sleepeth. All day, unseen, have I watched over him, 
 nor can I leave him until his strength be come again. And sleep is life 
 to him, so wake him not. Come your ways, for I would speak thee many 
 things--follow!" 
  
 As one that dreams, Roger stared into the eyes beneath the vizor, and 
 as one that dreams he rose up from his knees, and, sheathing his sword, 
 followed whither the gleaming vision led; yet betimes he blinked upon
alley or passage-way leading downwards into the earth, lighted by a 
 soft, mellow beam that brightened as he advanced and presently showed 
 him a fair-sized chamber cunningly hollowed within the rock and adorned 
 with rich furs and skins. And behold one who reclined upon a couch of 
 skins, a slender, youthful figure with one foot wondrously be-wrapped 
 and swathed, who, beholding Beltane  '  s gleaming mail, sprang up very 
 nimbly and fronted him with naked sword advanced. 
  
 "Nay, hast forgot thy friend, Sir Jocelyn?" 
  
 Incontinent the sword was tossed aside, and with a joyous cry Sir 
 Jocelyn sprang and caught him in close embrace. 
  
 "Now by sweet Venus her downy dove--  '  tis Beltane!" he cried. "Now 
 welcome and thrice welcome, my lordly smith, thou mighty son of noble 
 father. Ah, lord Duke, I loved thee that day thou didst outmatch Gefroi 
 the wrestler in the green. Since then much have I learned of thee and 
 thy valiant doings, more especially of Barham Broom--how thou didst 
 slay the vile Sir Gilles   '  neath the eyes of Ivo and all his powers and 
 thereby didst snatch from shame and cruel death one that is become the
very heart of me, so needs must I love and honour and cherish thee so 
 long as I be Jocelyn and thou thy noble self. Come, sit ye--sit ye 
 here, for fain am I to question thee--" 
  
 "But," said Beltane, wrinkling puzzled brow, "how came you hither--and 
 art wounded, Jocelyn?" 
  
 "Aye, my lord, to desperation--O direly, Beltane. I do languish night 
 and day, sleep doth bring me no surcease and music, alack, abatement 
 none. Food--base food repelleth me and wine no savour hath. Verily, 
 verily, wounded deep am I." 
  
 "Forsooth," said Beltane, "thy foot doth wear bandages a many, but--" 
  
 "Bandages?" cried Jocelyn, staring. "Foot? Nay, nay, my torment is not 
 here," and he flourished his beswathed foot in an airy, dancing step. 
 "Indeed, Beltane, herein do I confess me some small artifice, yet, mark 
 me, to a sweet and worthy end. For my hurt lieth here,--sore smit am I 
 within this heart o  '   mine." 
 
swung and smote, while came hands strong yet tender, that bare Beltane 
 into the city. 
  
 Now beyond the gate of the city was a well and beside the well they 
 laid Beltane and bathed him with the sweet cool water, until at length 
 the mist vanished from his sight and thus he beheld the White Abbess 
 who lay upon a pile of cloaks hard by. And beholding the deadly pallor 
 of lip and cheek, the awful stains that spotted her white robe and the 
 fading light in those sad-sweet eyes, Beltane cried aloud--a great and 
 bitter cry, and fell before her on his knees. 
  
 "Mother!" he groaned, "O my mother!" 
  
 "Dear my Beltane," she whispered faintly, striving to kiss his hand, 
 "death is none so--painful, so grieve not thine heart for me, sweet 
 son. And how may a mother--die better than for her own--beloved son? 
 Beltane, if God--O if God in His infinite mercy--shall think me worthy 
 --to be--one of His holy angels, then will I be ever near thee when thy 
 way proveth dark--to comfort thee--to aid thee. O dear my son--I 
 sought thee so long--so long--  '  tis a little hard to leave thee--so
 
 "My lord, thou hast learned my life  '  s secret, but, ere thou dost judge 
 me, hear this! Long ere thy princely father met thy mother, we loved, 
 she and I, and in our love grew up together. Then came the Duke thy 
 father, a mighty lord; and her mother was ambitious and very guileful-- 
 and she--but a maid. Thus was she wed. Then rode I to the foreign wars 
 seeking death--but death took me not. So, the wars ended, came I home 
 again, burning ever with my love, and sought her out, and beholding the 
 sadness in her eyes I spake my love; and forgetful of honour and all 
 save her sweet soul and the glory of her beauty, I tempted her--aye, 
 many times!--tempted her in fashion merciless and cruel insomuch that 
 she wept many bitter tears, and, upon a day, spake me thus:   '  Benedict, 
  '  tis true I loved thee, for thou wert a noble knight--but now, an thy 
 love for me be so small that thou canst bring me to this shame, then-- 
 take me where thou wilt--but--ne  '  er shall all thy love nor all my 
 tears thereafter cleanse us from the shame of it.  '   Thus went I from 
 her, nor have I looked on woman since. So followed I thy father in all 
 his warring and all my days have I fought much--fierce foes within me 
 and without, and lived--a very solitary life. And to-day she lieth 
 dead--and I am here, old and worn, a lonely man and sinful, to be
 
 "Verily, lord, and with a most sweet grace--" 
  
 "And her shoes--" 
  
 "Her shoes, tall brother, O methinks her sweet shoe doth kiss the earth 
 so sweet and light poor earth must needs love and languish as doth poor 
 Giles! Her shoe--" 
  
 "Is it aught like to this, Giles?" and forthwith Beltane took out the 
 little shoe. 
  
 "Aye,   '  tis her very own, master!" groaned Giles. "Ah, woe is me, for if 
 she hath given to thee rose and therewith her pretty shoe--thou hast, 
 belike, her heart also, and with her heart--" 
  
 "Nay, take it, Giles,--take it!" quoth Beltane, sighing. "I did but 
 find it in my going, and this rose--I found also, but this will I keep. 
 Methinks thy love is what thy heart telleth thee--a maid very gentle 
 and sweet--so God prosper thy wooing, Giles!"
and beyond all words amazed. 
  
 Now as Beltane went very deep in thought there met him Friar Martin, 
 who bore upon his arm a great basket full of green vegetables and 
 sweet herbs. Quoth Beltane: 
  
 "Good friar, what do ye abroad so early?" 
  
 "Sweet son, I praise the good God for His mercies and pant by reason of 
 this my weighty basket." 
  
 "Indeed   '  tis a something well-laden basket," said Beltane, relieving 
 the friar of his burden with gentle force. 
  
 "Why, verily, my children are hungry children and clamour to be filled. 
 And see you, my son, I have a secret of a certain broth whereof these 
 lentils and these sweet herbs do so tickle their palates that to 
 satisfy them is a hard matter--more especially Orson and Jenkyn--who 
 being nigh cured of their hurts do eat like four men and vaunt my 
 cooking full-mouthed, insomuch that I must needs grow heedful of vain
 
 "Wilt not give a poor maid her shoe again, messire?" 
  
 "O Genevra, beseech thee, who was she did wear it yesterday--speak!" 
  
 "Nay, this--this I may not tell thee, lord Beltane." 
  
 "And wherefore?" 
  
 "For that I did so promise--and yet--what seek you of her, my lord?" 
  
 "Forgiveness," said Beltane, hot and eager, "I would woo her sweet 
 clemency on one that hath wrought her grievous wrong. O sweet Genevra, 
 wilt not say where I may find her?" 
  
 A while stood the maid Genevra with bowed head as one in doubt, then 
 looked on him with sweet maiden eyes and of a sudden smiled 
 compassionate and tender. 
  
 "Ah, messire," said she, "surely thine are the eyes of one who loveth
something fearful.   '  Tis foolish in me to fear thee and yet--I do--a 
 little, Beltane!" So saying, she looked on him with eyes full sweet 
 and troubled, wherefore he would have kissed her, but steps drew nigh 
 and lo! without the arbour stood the white friar with Giles and Roger 
 in the shadows behind. 
  
 Now came Beltane and took the friar  '  s hand. 
  
 "Holy father," said he, "O good Friar Martin, though I am but what I 
 am, yet hath this sweet and noble lady raised me up to be what I have 
 dreamed to be. To-night, into my care she giveth her sweet body and 
 fair fame, of which God make me worthy." 
  
 "Sweet children," spake the friar, "this world is oft-times a hard and 
 cruel world, but God is a gentle God and merciful, wherefore as he hath 
 given to man the blessed sun and the sweet and tender flowers, so hath 
 he given him love. And when two there be who love with soul as well as 
 body, with mind as well as heart, then methinks for them this world may 
 be a paradise. And, my children, because I do love thee for thy sweet 
 lives and noble works, so do I joy now to bind ye one to another."
profound and sonorous!" 
  
 "Lord Duke, right puissant and most potential, I would but tell thee 
 this, to wit, that I did keep faith with thee, that I, by means of this 
 unworthy hand, did set thee beyond care, lift thee above sorrow, and 
 gave to thee the heaven of thy most warm and earnest desires." 
  
 "How mean you, Pardoner?" 
  
 "Lord Duke, when thou didst bestow life on two poor rogues upon a time, 
 when one rogue stole away minded to betray thee to thine enemy, the 
 second rogue did steal upon the first rogue, and this second rogue bare 
 a small knife whereof the first rogue suddenly died. And thus Duke Ivo, 
 thine enemy, came not before Belsaye until thou and thy company were 
 safe within its walls. So by reason of this poor second rogue, 
 Pentavalon doth rejoice in freedom. To-day is singing on every village 
 green--happiness is in the very air, for   '  tis Pentavalon  '  s Beltane, and 
 Beltane is a sweet season; so doth this poor second rogue find him 
 recompense. Verily art well named, lord Beltane, since in thee 
 Pentavalon  '  s winter is passed away and spring is come--O happy season
of Beltane, O season of new beginnings and new hopes! So, my lord 
 Beltane, may it ever be Beltane with thee, may it be sweet spring ever 
 within thy noble heart. God keep thee and farewell." 
  
 So saying the Pardoner turned about, and plunging into the dense green, 
 was gone. 
  
 "A pestilent wordy fellow, lord," quoth Giles, "one of your windy 
 talkers that talketh that no other talker may talk--now give me a good 
 listener, say I." 
  
 "And yet," said Beltane, swinging to saddle, "spake he truly I wonder? 
 Had Ivo been a little sooner we had not been here, methinks!" 
  
 On they rode, through sun and shadow, knee and knee, beneath leafy 
 arches and along green glades, talking and laughing together or plunged 
 in happy thought. 
  
 Quoth Beltane of a sudden: 
 
"Helen," said he, "O my   '  Helen the Beautiful  '  --our wars be ended, our 
 time of waiting is done, I thank God! So am I here to claim thee, 
 beloved. Art glad to be in mine arms--glad I am come to--make thee mine 
 own at last, Helen?" 
  
 "I had died without thee, Beltane--I would not live without thee now, 
 my Beltane. See, my lord, I--O how may I speak if thus you seal my 
 lips, Beltane? And prithee how may I show thee this gown I wear for 
 thee if thou wilt hold me so--so very close, Beltane?" 
  
 And in a while as the moon rose she brought him into that bower he well 
 remembered and bade him admire the beauty of her many flowers, and he, 
 viewing her loveliness alway, praised the flowers exceeding much yet 
 beheld them not at all, wherefore she chid him, and yet chiding, 
 yielded him her scarlet mouth. Thus walked they in the fragrant garden 
 until Genevra found them and sweet-voiced bid them in to sup. But the 
 Duchess took Genevra  '  s slender hands and looked within her shy, sweet 
 eyes. 
  
 "Art happy, sweet maid?" she questioned.
only suffer that I--I leave thee a while, I pray." 
  
 "Must I bide here alone, sweet wife?" 
  
 "But indeed I will--call thee anon, my lord." 
  
 "Nay, first--look at me, my Helen!" 
  
 Slowly, slowly she lifted her head and looked on him all sweet and 
 languorous-eyed. 
  
 "Aye, truly--truly thine eyes are not--a nun  '  s eyes, Helen. So will I 
 wait thy bidding." So he loosed her and she, looking on him no more, 
 turned and hasted into the further chamber. 
  
 And after some while she called to him very soft and sweet, and he, 
 trembling, arose and entered the chamber, dim-lighted and fragrant. 
  
 But now, beholding wherefore she had left him, his breath caught and he 
 stood as one entranced, nor moved, nor spake he a while.
