Costmarie is to be set of rootes, the leaues are vsed with some in their Broths, but with more in their Ale. 
 Pot Marierome is set of rootes, being separated in sunder. 
 Penniroyall is to be set of the small heads that haue rootes, it creepeth and sprea∣deth quickly. 
 All isanders are to be sowne of seede, the tops of the rootes with the greene leaues are vsed in Lent especially. 
 Parsley is a common herbe, and is sowne of seede, it seedeth the next yeare and dyeth: the rootes are more vsed in broths then the leaues, and the leaues almost with all sorts of meates. 
 Fennell is sowne of seede, and abideth many yeares yeelding seede: the rootes al∣so are vsed in broths, and the leaues more seldome, yet serue to trimme vp many fish meates. 
 Borage is sowne of seede, and dyeth the next yeare after, yet once being suffered to seede in a Garden, will still come of it owne shedding. 
 Buglosse commeth of seede, but abideth many yeares after it hath giuen seede, if it stand not in the coldest place of the Garden. 
 Marigolds are sowne of seede, and may be after transplanted, they abide two or three yeares, if they be not set in too cold a place: the leaues and flowers are both vsed. 
 Langedebeefe is sowne of seede, which shedding it selfe will hardly be destroyed in a Garden. 
 Arrach is to be sowne of seede, this likewise will rise euery yeare of it owne seed, if it be suffered to shed it selfe. 
 Beetes are sowne of seede, and abideth some yeares after, still giuing seede. 
 Blites are vsed but in some places; for there is a generall opinion held of them, that they are naught for the eyes: they are sowne euery yeare of seede. 
 Bloodwort once sowne abideth many yeares, if the extremity of the frosts kill it not, and seedeth plentifully. 
 Patience is of the same nature, and vsed in the same manner. 
 French Mallowes are to be sowne of seede, and will come of it owne sowing, if it be suffered to shed it selfe. 
 Ciues are planted onely by parting the rootes; for it neuer giueth any seede at all. 
 Garlicke is ordered in the same manner, by parting and planting the rootes euerie yeare. 
 These be all the sorts are vsed with vs for that purpose, whereas I said before, none vseth all, but euery one will vse those they like best: and so much shall suffice for pot∣herbes. 
 CHAP. VI. The manner and ordering of many sorts of herbes and rootes for Sallets. IF I should set downe all the sorts of herbes that are vsually gathered for Sallets, I should not onely speake of Garden herbes, but of many herbes,   that growe wilde in the fields, or else be but weedes in a Garden; for the vsuall manner with many, is to take the young buds and leaues of euery thing almost that groweth, as well in the Garden as in the Fields, and put them all together, that the taste of the one may amend the rellish of the other: But I will only shew you those that are sown or planted in gardens for that purpose. Asparagus is a principall &amp; delectable Sallet herbe, whose young shootes when they are a good handfull high aboue the ground, are cut an inch within the ground, which being boyled, are eaten with a little vinegar and butter, as a Sallet of great delight. Their ordering with the best Gardiners is on this wise: When you haue prouided seede of the best kinde, you must sowe it either before Christmas, as most doe, or before the end of February; the later you sowe, the later and the more hardly will they spring: after they are growne vp, they are to be transplanted in Au∣tumne on a bed well trenched in with dung; for else they will not bee worth your la∣bour, and set about a foote distance in sunder, and looke that the more carefull you are in the replanting of them, the better they will thriue, and the sooner great: af∣ter fiue or six yeares standing they vsually doe decay; and therefore they that striue to haue continually faire and great heads, doe from seede raise vp young for their store. 
 You must likewise see that you cut not your heads or young shoote too nigh, or too much, that is, to take away too many heads from a roote, but to leaue a sufficient num∣ber vncut, otherwise it will kill the heart of your rootes the sooner, causing them to dye, or to giue very small heads or shootes; for you may well consider with your selfe, that if the roote haue not head enough left it aboue the ground to shoote greene this yeare, it will not, nor cannot prosper vnder ground to giue encrease the next yeare. The ordering of Lettice I haue spoken of before, and shall not neede here to repeate what hath beene already said, but referre you thereunto for the sowing, planting,   onely I will here shew you the manner of ordering them for Sallets. There are some sorts of Lettice that growe very great, and close their heads, which are called Cab∣bage Lettice, both ordinary and extraordinary, and there are other sorts of great Let∣tice that are open, and close not, or cabbage not at all, which yet are of an excellent kinde, if they be vsed after that especiall manner is fit for them, which is, That when they are planted (for after they are sowne, they must be transplanted) of a reasonable distance in sunder, and growne to be of some bignesse, euery one of them must bee tyed together with bast or thread toward the toppes of the leaues, that by this meanes all the inner leaues may growe whitish, which then are to be cut vp and vsed: for the keeping of the leaues close doth make them taste delicately, and to bee very tender. 
 And these sorts of Lettice for the most part are spent after Summer is past, when o∣ther Lettice are not to be had. Lambes Lettice or Corne Sallet is an herbe, which abi∣ding all Winter, is the first Sallet herbe of the yeare that is vsed before any ordinarie Lettice is ready; it is therefore vsually sowne in August, when the seede thereof is ripe. Purslane is a Summer Sallet herbe, and is to be sowne in the Spring, yet some∣what late, because it is tender, and ioyeth in warmth; and therefore diuers haue sowne it vpon those beddes of dung, whereon they noursed vp their Cowcum∣bers,  after they are taken away, which being well and often watered, hath yeel∣ded Sallet vntill the end of the yeare. Spinach is sowne in the Spring, of all for the most part that vse it, but yet if it be sowne in Summer it will abide greene all the Win∣ter, and then seedeth quickly: it is a Sallet that hath little or no taste at all therein, like as Lettice and Purslane; and therefore Cookes know how to make many a good dish of meate with it, by putting Sugar and Spice thereto. Coleworts are of diuers kinds, and although some of them are wholly spent among the poorer sort of people, yet some kindes of them may be dressed and ordered as may delight a curious palate, which is, that being boyled tender, the middle ribs are taken cold, and laid in dishes, and vinegar and oyle poured thereon, and so eaten. Coleflowers are to be had in this Countrey but very seldome, for that it is hard to meete with good seede: it must bee sowne on beds of dung to force it forward, or else it would perish with the frost be∣fore it had giuen his head of flowers, and transplanted into verie good and rich ground, lest you lose the benefit of your labours. 
 Endiue is of two sorts, the ordinary, and an∣other that hath the edges of the leaues curld or crumpled; it is to be whited, to make it the more dainty Sallet, which is vsually done in this manner: After they are grown to some reasonable greatnesse (but in any case before they shoote forth a stalke in the midst for seede) they are to be taken vp, and the rootes being cut away, lay them to dry or wither for three or foure houres, and then bury them in sand, so as none of them lye one vpon another, or if you can, one to touch another, which by this meanes will change whitish, and thereby become verie tender, and is a Sallet both for Au∣tumne and Winter. Succorie is vsed by some in the same manner, but because it is more bitter then Endiue, it is not so generally vsed, or rather vsed but of a verie few: and whereas Endiue will seede the same yeare it is sowne, and then dye, Succorie abi∣deth manie yeares, the bitternesse thereof causing it to be more Physicall to open ob∣structions; and therefore the flowers pickled vp, as diuers other flowers are vsed to be now adaies, make a delicate Sallet at all times when there is occasion to vse them. Of red Beetes, the rootes are onely vsed both boyled and eaten cold with vinegar and oyle, and is also vsed to trimme vp or garnish forth manie sorts of dishes of meate: the seede of the best kinde will not abide good with vs aboue three yeares, but will dege∣nerate and growe worse; and therefore those that delight therein must be curious, to be prouided from beyond Sea, that they may haue such as will giue delight. Sorrell is an herbe so common, and the vse so well knowne, both for sawce, and to season broths and meates for the sound as well as sicke persons, that I shall not neede to say anie more thereof. Cheruill is a Sallet herbe of much vse, both with French and Dutch, who doe much more delight in herbes of stronger taste then the English doe: it is sowne early, and vsed but a while, because it quickly runneth vp to seede. 
 Sweete Cheruill, or as some call it, Sweete Cis, is so like in taste vnto Anise seede, that it much delighteth the taste among other herbes in a Sallet: the seede is long, thicke, blacke, and cornered, and must be sowne in the end of Autumne, that it may lye in the ground all the Winter, and then it will shoote out in the Spring, or else if it be sowne in the Spring, it will not spring vp that yeare vntill the next: the leaues (as I said be∣fore) are vsed among other herbes: the rootes likewise are not onely cordiall, but also held to be preseruatiue against the Plague, either greene, dryed, or preseru d with sugar. Rampion rootes are a kinde of Sallet with a great many, being boyled tender, and eaten cold with vinegar and pepper. Cresses is an herbe of easie and quick growth, and while it is young eaten eyther alone, or with parsley and other herbes: it is of a strong taste to them that are not accustomed thereunto, but it is much vsed of strangers. Rocket is of the same nature and qualitie, but somewhat stronger in taste: they are both sowen in the Spring, and rise, seede and dye the same yeare. Tarragon is an herbe of as strong a taste as eyther Rocket or Cresses, it abideth and dyeth not euery yeare, nor yet giueth ripe seede (as far as euer could bee found with vs) any yeare, but maketh sufficient increase within the ground, spreading his roots all abroad a great way off. Mustard is a common sawce both with fish and flesh, and the seed thereof (and no part of the plant besides) is well knowne how to be vsed being grownded, as euery one I thinke knoweth. The rootes of horse Radish likewise beeing grownd like Mustard, is vsed both of strangers and our owne nation, as sawce for fish. 
CHAP. XI. Costmary or Alecoast is a sweet herbe, bearing many broad and long pale green leaues, snipped about the edges, euery one vpon a long foote-stalke; among which rise vp many round greene stalkes, with such like leaues on them, but lesser vp to the toppe, where it spreadeth it selfe into three or foure branches, euery one bearing an vmbell or tuft of gold yellow flowers, somewhat like vnto Tansie flowers, but lesser, which turne into small heads, containing small flat long seede: the roote is somewhat hard and stringy, and being diuided, is replanted in the Spring of the yeare for increase. 
 Maudeline hath somewhat long and narrow leaues, snipt about the edges: the stalks are two foot high, bearing many yellow flowers on the tops of the branches, in an vm∣bell or tuft like vnto Tansie: the whole herbe is sweete, and somewhat bitter, and is replanted by flipping. 
 The Vse of Costmary and Maudeline. Costmary is of especiall vse in the Spring of the yeare, among other such like herbes, to make Sage Ale, and thereupon I thinke it tooke the name of Alecoast. 
 It is also vsed to be put among other sweete herbes, to make sweete wa∣shing water, whereof there is great store spent. 
 The leaues haue an especiall vertue to comfort both the stomack and heart, and to warme and dry a moist braine. The seede is much vsed in the Country, to be giuen to children for the wormes, in the stead of wormseed, and so is the seede of Maudeline also. 
 Maudeline is much vsed with Costmary and other sweet herbes, to make sweete washing water: the flowers also are tyed vp with small bundels of Lauender toppes, these being put in the middle of them, to lye vpon the toppes of beds, presses,   for the sweete sent and sauour it casteth. It is generally accounted of our Apothecaries to be the true Eupatorium of Aui∣cen, and the true Ageratum of Dioscorides; but Dodonaeus seemeth to con∣tradict both. 
 CHAP. XII. Tansie or Garden Tansie hath many hard greene leaues, or rather wings of leaues; for they are many small ones, set one against another all along a middle ribbe or stalke, and snipt about the edges: in some the leaues stand closer and thic∣ker, and somewhat crumpled, which hath caused it to be called double or curld Tan∣sie, in others thinner and more sparsedly: It riseth vp with many hard stalks, whereon growe at the tops vpon the seuerall small branches gold yellow flowers like buttons, which being gathered in their prime, will hold the colour fresh a long time: the seede is small, and as it were chaffie: the roote creepeth vnder ground, and shooteth vp a∣gaine in diuers places: the whole herbe, both leaues and flowers, are of a sharpe, strong, bitter smell and taste, but yet pleasant, and well to be endured. 
 The Vse of Tansie. The leaues of Tansie are vsed while they are young, either shred small with other herbes, or else the iuyce of it and other herbes fit for the pur∣pose, beaten with egges, and fryed into cakes (in Lent and the Spring of the yeare) which are vsually called Tansies, and are often eaten, being taken to be very good for the stomack, to helpe to digest from thence bad humours that cleaue thereunto: As also for weak raines and kidneyes, when the vrine passeth away by drops: This is thought to be of more vse for men then for women. The seed is much commended against all sorts of wormes in chil∣dren. 
 CHAP. XIII. Burnet hath many winged leaues lying vpon the ground, made of many small, round, yet pointed greene leaues, finely nicked on the edges, one set against an∣other all along a middle ribbe, and one at the end thereof; from among which rise vp diuers round, and sometimes crested browne stalkes, with some few such like leaues on them as growe belowe, but smaller: at the toppes of the stalkes growe small browne heads or knaps, which shoote forth small purplish flowers, turning into long and brownish, but a little cornered seede: the roote groweth downe deepe, being small and brownish: the whole plant is of a stipticke or binding taste or quality, but of a fine quicke sent, almost like Baulme. 
 The Vse of Burnet. The greatest vse that Burnet is commonly put vnto, is to put a few leaues into a cup with Claret wine, which is presently to be drunke, and giueth a pleasant quicke taste thereunto, very delightfull to the palate, and is ac∣counted a helpe to make the heart merrie. It is sometimes also while it is young, put among other Sallet herbes, to giue a finer rellish thereunto. It is also vsed in vulnerary drinkes, and to stay fluxes and bleedings, for which purposes it is much commended. It hath beene also much commended in contagious and pestilentiall agues. 
 The Vse of Patience, and of the Rubarbe. The leaues of Patience are often, and of many vsed for a pot-herbe, and seldome to any other purpose: the roote is often vsed in Diet-beere, or ale, or in other drinkes made by decoction, to helpe to purge the liuer, and clense the blood. The other Rubarbe or Rhaponticum, wherof I make men∣tion, and giue you here the figure, I haue tryed, and found by experience to purge gently, without that astriction that is in the true Rubarbe is brought vs from the East Indies, or China, and is also lesse bitter in taste; whereby I coniecture it may bee vsed in hot and feauerish bodies more effe∣ctually, because it doth not binde after the purging, as the East India Ru∣barbe doth: but this must bee giuen in double quantitie to the other, and then no doubt it will doe as well: The leaues haue a fine acide taste: A syr∣rupe therefore made with the iuice and sugar, cannot but be very effectuall in deiected appetites, and hot fits of agues; as also to helpe to open obstructi∣ons of the liuer, as diuers haue often tryed, and found auaileable by expe∣rience. 
 CHAP. XV. Lapathum sanguineum. Blood-wort. AMong the sorts of pot-herbes Blood-worte hath alwayes beene accounted a principall one, although I doe not see any great reason therein, especially see∣ing there is a greater efficacie of binding in this Docke, then in any of the o∣ther: but as common vse hath receiued it, so I here set it downe. Blood-worte is out of the sorts of Dockes, and hath long leaues like vnto the smaller yellow Docke, but striped with red veines, and ouer-shadowed with red vpon the greene leafe, that it see∣meth almost wholly red sometimes: the stalke is reddish, bearing such leaues, but 1 Tanacetum. Tansie. 2 Pimpinella. Burnet. 3 Rhaponticum verum seu potius Rhabarbarum verum. True Raponticke or rather true Rubarbe. 4 Lapithum sativum seu Patientia. Monkes Rubarbe or Patience. 5 Lapathum sanguineum. Bloudwort. 6 Acetosa. Sorrell. depiction of plants smaller vp to the toppe, where it is diuided into diuers small branches, whereon grow purplish flowers, and three square darke red seede, like vnto others: the roots are not great, but somewhat long, and very red, abiding many yeares, yet sometimes spoiled with the extremitie of winter. 
 The Vse of Blood-worte. The whole and onely vse of the herbe almost, serueth for the pot, among other herbes, and, as I said before, is accounted a most especiall one for that purpose. The seede therof is much commended for any fluxe in man or wo∣man, to be inwardly taken, and so no doubt is the roote, being of a stipticke qualitie. 
 CHAP. XVI. Oxalis siue Acetosa. Sorrell. SOrrell must needes bee reckoned with the Dockes, for that it is so like vnto them in all things, and is of many called the sower Docke. Of Sorrels there are ma∣ny sorts, but I shall not trouble you with any other in this place, then the com∣mon Garden Sorrell, which is most knowne, and of greatest vse with vs; which hath tender greene long leaues full of iuice, broade, and bicorned as it were, next vnto the stalke, like as Arrach, Spinach, and our English Mercurie haue, of a sharpe sower taste: the stalkes are slender, bearing purplish long heads, wherein lye three square shining browne seede, like, but lesser then the other: the root is smaller then any of the other Dockes, but browne, and full of strings, and abideth without decaying, hauing greene leaues all the winter, except in the very extremitie thereof, which often taketh away all or most of his leaues. 
 The Vse of Sorrell. Sorrell is much vsed in sawces, both for the whole, and the sicke, cooling the hot liuers, and stomackes of the sicke, and procuring vnto them an ap∣petite vnto meate, when their spirits are almost spent with the violence of their furious or fierie fits; and is also of a pleasant rellish for the whole, in quickning vp a dull stomacke that is ouer-loaden with euery daies plenty of dishes. It is diuers waies dressed by Cooks, to please their Masters stomacks. 
 The Vse of Langdebeefe. The leaues are onely vsed in all places that I know, or euer could learne, for an herbe for the pot among others, and is thought to bee good to loo∣sen the belly. 
 CHAP. XVIII. Atriplex siue Olus Aureum. Arrach. THere be diuers kindes of Arrach, or Orach, as some doe call them; some of the Garden, whereof I meane to entreate in this place; others wilde of the Fieldes,   and others of the Sea, which are not to bee spoken of in this worke, but referred to a generall historie. The white garden Arrach, or Orach, hath diuers leaues, standing vpon their seuerall footestalkes, broade at the bottome, ending in two points like an arrow, with two feathers at the head, and small pointed at the end of the leafe, of a whitish yellow greene colour, and as it were strewed ouer with flower or meale, especially while they are young: the stalke likewise is mealy, bearing many branches with small yellow flowers on them, which turne into small leafie seeds: the rooote groweth somewhat deepe in the ground, with many small threds fastened thereto: it quickly springeth vp of the seede, groweth great, and fadeth away as soon as it hath borne seede. 
 The purple Arrach is in all things like vnto the white, sauing onely in the colour of the leafe, stalke, seede,   which are all of a mealy dusty purplish colour.
The Vse of sweete Parsley. The Venetians vse to prepare it for meate many waies, both the herbe and the roote eaten rawe, as many other herbes and rootes are, or boyled or fryed to be eaten with meate, or the dryed herbe poudered and strewed vpon meate; but most vsually either whited, and so eaten rawe with pepper and oyle, as a dainty Sallet of it selfe, or a little boyled or stewed: the taste of the herbe being a little warming, but the seede much more, helpeth cold windy stomackes to digest their meate, and to expell winde. 
 CHAP. XXIII. Petrosolinum &amp; Apium. Parsley and Smalledge. WE haue three sorts of Parsley in our Gardens, and but one of Smalladge: Our common Parsley, Curld Parsley, and Virginia Parsley; which last, although it be but of late knowne, yet it is now almost growne common, and of as good vse as the other with diuers. Our common Parsley is so well knowne, that it is almost needlesse to describe it, hauing diuers fresh greene leaues, three alwaies placed together on a stalke, and snipt about the edges, and three stalkes of leaues for the most part growing together: the stalkes growe three or foure foote high or better, bearing spikie heads of white flowers, which turne into small seede, somewhat sharpe and hot in taste: the roote is long and white. 
 Curld Parsley hath his leaues curled or crumpled on the edges, and therein is the onely difference from the former. 
 Virginia Parsley is in his leafe altogether like vnto common Parsley for the forme, consisting of three leaues set together, but that the leaues are as large as Smallage leaues, but of a pale or whitish greene colour, and of the same taste of our common Parsley: the seede hereof is as the leaues, twice if not thrice as bigge as the ordinary Parsley, and perisheth when it hath giuen seede, abiding vsually the first yeare of the sowing. 
 Smallage is in forme somewhat like vnto Parsley, but greater and greener, and lesse pleasant, or rather more bitter in taste: the seede is smaller, and the root more stringy. 
 The Vse of Parsley. Parsley is much vsed in all sorts of meates, both boyled, roasted, fryed, stewed,   and being greene it serueth to lay vpon sundry meates, as also to draw meate withall. It is also shred and stopped into poudered beefe, as also into legges of Mutton, with a little beefe suet among it,   
 The rootes are often vsed to be put into broth, to helpe to open obstru∣ctions of the liuer, reines, and other parts, helping much to procure vrine. 
 The rootes likewise boyled or stewed with a legge of Mutton, stopped with Parsley as aforesaid, is very good meate, and of very good rellish, as I haue proued by the taste; but the rootes must bee young, and of the first yeares growth, and they will haue their operation to cause vrine. 
 The seed also is vsed for the same cause, when any are troubled with the stone, or grauell, to open the passages of vrine. 
 Although Smallage groweth in many places wilde in moist grounds, yet it is also much planted in Gardens, and although his euill taste and sauour doth cause it not to be accepted into meates as Parsley, yet it is not without many speciall good properties, both for outward and inward diseases, to helpe to open obstructions, and prouoke vrine. The iuyce cleanseth vlcers; and the leaues boyled with Hogs grease, healeth felons on the ioynts of the fingers. 
 CHAP. XXIIII. Foeniculum. Fenell. THere are three sorts of Fenell, whereof two are sweete. The one of them is the ordinary sweete Fenell, whose seedes are larger and yellower then the common, and which (as I said before in the Chapter of sweete Parsley) doth soone degenerate in this our Country into the common. The other sweete Fenell is not much knowne, and called Cardus Fenell by those that sent it out of Italy, whose leaues are more thicke and bushie then any of the other. Our common Fenell, whereof there is greene and red, hath many faire and large spread leaues, finely cut and diuided into many small, long, greene, or reddish leaues, yet the thicker tufted the branches be, the shorter are the leaues: the stalkes are round, with diuers ioynts and leaues at them, growing fiue or six foot high, bearing at the top many spoakie rundels of yellow flowers: the Common, I meane, doth turne into a darke grayish flat seede, and the Sweete into larger and yellower: the roote is great, long, and white, and endureth diuers yeares. 
 The sweete Cardus Fenell being sent by Sir Henry Wotton to Iohn Tradescante, had likewise a large direction with it how to dresse it; for they vse to white it after it hath been transplanted for their vses, which by reason of the sweetnesse by nature, and the tendernesse by art, causeth it to be the more delightfull to the taste, especially with them that are accustomed to feede on greene herbes. 
 CHAP. XXV. Anethum. Dill. DIll doth much growe wilde, but because in many places it cannot be had, it is therefore sowne in Gardens for the vses whereunto it serueth. It is a smaller herbe then Fenell, but very like, hauing fine cut leaues, not so large, but shor∣ter, smaller, and of a stronger and quicker taste: the stalke is smaller also, and with few ioynts and leaues on them, bearing spoakie tufts of yellow flowers, which turne into thinne, small, and flat seedes: the roote perisheth euery yeare, and riseth againe for the most part of it owne sowing. 
 The Vse of Dill. The leaues of Dill are much vsed in some places with Fish, as they doe Fenell; but because it is so strong many doe refuse it. 
 It is also put among pickled Cowcumbers, wherewith it doth very well agree, giuing vnto the cold fruit a pretty spicie taste or rellish. 
 It being stronger then Fenell, is of the more force to expell winde in the body. Some vse to eate the seed to stay the Hickocke. 
 CHAP. XXVI. Myrrhis siue Cerefolium maius &amp; vulgare. Sweet Cheruill and ordinary Cheruill. THe great or sweete Cheruill (which of some is called Sweete Cicely) hath diuers great and faire spread winged leaues, consisting of many leaues set to∣gether, deeply cut in the edges, and euery one also dented about, very like, and resembling the leaues of Hemlockes, but of so pleasant a taste, that one would verily thinke, he chewed the leaues or seedes of Aniseedes in his mouth: The stalke is reaso∣nable great, and somewhat cornered or crested about three or foure foote high, at the toppe whereof stand many white spoakie tufts of flowers, which change into browne long cornered great seede, two alwaies ioyned together: the roote is great, blackish on the outside, and white within, with diuers fibres annexed vnto it, and perisheth not, but abideth many yeares, and is of a sweete, pleasant, and spicie hot taste, delight∣full vnto many. 
 The common Cheruill is a small herbe, with slender leaues, finely cut into long peeces, at the first of a pale yellowish greene colour, but when the stalke is growne vp to seede, both stalkes and leaues become of a darke red colour: the flowers are white, standing vpon scattered or thin spread tufts, which turne into small, long, round, and sharpe pointed seedes, of a brownish blacke colour: the roote is small, with diuers long slender white strings, and perisheth euery yeare. 
 The Vses of these Cheruils. The common Cheruill is much vsed of the French and Dutch people, to bee boyled or stewed in a pipkin, eyther by it selfe, or with other herbes, whereof they make a Loblolly, and so eate it. It is vsed as a pot-herbe with vs.
CHAP. IX. Mespilus. The Medlar tree. THere are three sorts of Medlers: The greater and the lesser English, and the Neapolitan. 
 The great and the small English Medlar differ not one from the other in any thing, but in the size of the fruit, except that the small kinde hath some prickes or thornes vpon it, which the great one hath not, bearing diuers boughes or armes, from whence breake forth diuers branches, whereon are set long and somewhat narrow leaues, many standing together; in the middle whereof, at the end of the branch, com∣meth the flower, which is great and white, made of fiue leaues, broad at the ends, with a nicke in the middle of euery one; after which commeth the fruit, being round, and of a pale brownish colour, bearing a crowne of those small leaues at the toppe, which were the huske of the flower before, the middle thereof being somewhat hollow, and is harsh, able to choake any that shall eate it before it be made mellow, wherein there are certaine flat and hard kernels. 
 The Medlar of Naples groweth likewise to bee a reasonable great tree, spreading forth armes and branches, whereon are set many gashed leaues, somewhat like vnto Hawthorne leaues, but greater, and likewise diuers thornes in many places: the flow∣ers are of an herbie greene colour, and small, which turne into smaller fruit then the former, and rounder also, but with a small head or crowne at the toppe like vnto it, and is of a more sweete and pleasant taste then the other, with three seeds only therein ordinarily. 
 The Vse of Medlars. Medlars are vsed in the same manner that Seruices are, that is, to be eaten when they are mellowed, and are for the same purposes to binde the body when there is a cause: yet they as well as the Seruices, are often eaten by them that haue no neede of binding, and but onely for the pleasant sweet∣nesse of them when they are made mellow, and sometimes come as a dish of ripe fruit at their fit season, to be serued with other sorts to the table. 
 CHAP. X. Lotus. The Lote or Nettle tree. THe first kinde of Lote tree, whereof Dioscorides maketh mention, is but of one kinde; but there are some other trees spoken of by Theophrastus, that may be referred thereunto, which may bee accounted as bastard kindes thereof, of which I meane to entreate in this Chapter, hauing giuen you before the description 1 Sorbus legitima. The true Seruice tree. 2 Sorbus vulgaris siue Torminalis. The ordinary Seruice tree. 3 Mespilus vulgaris. The common Me lar tree 4 Me∣spilus Aronia. The Medlar of Naples. 5 Lotus arbor. The Nettle tree. 6 Lotus Ʋirginiana. The Pishamin or Virginia Plumme. 7 Cornus mas. The Cornell Cherry tree. depiction of plants of another kinde hereof (by the opinion of good Authors) vnder the name of Lauro∣cerasus. 
 The first or true Lote tree groweth to be a tree of a great height, whose bodie and elder branches are couered with a smooth darke greene barke, the leaues are somewhat rough in handling, of a darke greene colour, long pointed, and somewhat deepe den∣ted about the edges, somewhat like vnto a Nettle leafe, and oftentimes growe yellow toward Autumne: the flowers stand here and there scattered vpon the branches; after which come round berries like vnto Cherries, hanging downewards vpon long foot-stalkes, greene at the first, and whitish afterwards; but when they are ripe they become reddish, and if they be suffered to hang too long on the branches, they grow blackish, of a pleasant austere taste, not to be misliked, wherein is a hard round stone. 
 The second, which is a bastard kinde, and called Guatacum Pataninum, groweth to bee a faire tree, with a smooth darke greene barke, shooting out many faire great boughes, and also slender greene branches, beset with faire broad greene leaues, al∣most like vnto the leaues of the Cornell tree, but larger: the flowers growe along the branches close vnto them, without any or with a very short foote-stalke consisting of foure greene leaues, which are as the huske, containing within it a purplish flower, made of foure leaues somewhat reddish: the fruit standeth in the middle of the green huske, greene at the first, and very harsh, but red and round when it is ripe, and some∣what like a Plumme, with a small point or pricke at the head thereof, and of a reasona∣ble pleasant taste or rellish, wherein are contained flat and thicke browne seeds or ker∣nels, like vnto the kernels of Cassia Fistula, somewhat hard, and not so stonie, but that it may somewhat easily be cut with a knife. 
 The third is called in Virginia Pishamin, The Virginia Plumme (if it be not all one with the former Guaiacana, whereof I am more then halfe perswaded) hath growne with vs of the kernels that were sent out of Virginia, into great trees, whose wood is very hard and brittle, and somewhat white withall: the branches are many, and grow slender to the end, couered with a very thinne greenish bark, whereon doe grow many faire broad greene leaues, without dent or notch on the edges, and so like vnto the for∣mer Guaiacum, that I verily thinke it (as I before said) to bee the same. It hath not yet borne flower or fruit in our Countrey that I can vnderstand: but the fruit, as it was sent to vs, is in forme and bignesse like vnto a Date, couered with a blackish skinne, set in a huske of foure hard leaues, very firme like vnto a Date, and almost as sweete, with great flat and thicke kernels within them, very like vnto the former, but larger. 
 The Vse of these Lote trees. The first sort is eaten as an helper to coole and binde the body: the last, as Captaine Smith relateth in the discouery of Virginia, if the fruit be eaten while it is greene, and not ripe, is able by the harsh and binding taste and quality to draw ones mouth awry (euen as it is said of the former Guaiaca∣na) but when it is thorough ripe it is pleasant, as I said before. 
 CHAP. XI. Cornus mas. The Cornell tree. THe Cornell tree that is planted in Orchards, being the male (for the female is an hedge bush) is of two sorts, the one bearing red, the other whiter berries, which is very rare yet in our country, and not differing else. 
 It groweth to a reasonable bignesse and height, yet neuer to any great tree, the wood whereof is very hard, like vnto horne, and thereof it obtained the name: the body and branches are couered with a rugged barke, and spreadeth reasonable well, hauing somewhat smooth leaues, full of veines, plaine, and not dented on the edges: the flow∣ers are many small yellow tufts, as it were of short haires or threads set together, which come forth before any leafe, and fall away likewise before any leafe bee much open: the fruit are long and round berries, of the bignesse of small Oliues, with an hard round stone within them, like vnto an Oliue stone, and are of a yellowish red when they are ripe, of a reasonable pleasant taste, yet somewhat austere withall. 
 The white (as I said) is like vnto the red, but onely that his fruit is more white when it is ripe. 
 The Vse of the Cornelles. They helpe to binde the body, and to stay laskes, and by reason of the pleasantnesse in them when they are ripe, they are much desired. 
 They are also preserued and eaten, both for rarity and delight, and for the purpose aforesaid. 
 CHAP. XII. Cerasus. The Cherry tree. THere are so many varieties and differences of Cherries, that I know not well how to expresse them vnto you, without a large relation of their seuerall formes. I will therefore endeauour after one generall description (as my cu∣stome is in many other the like variable fruits) to giue as briefe and short notes vpon all the rest, as I can both for leafe and fruit, that so you may the better know what the fruit is, when you haue the name. 
 The English Cherrie tree groweth in time to be of a reasonable bignesse and height, spreading great armes, and also small twiggy branches plentifully; the leaues whereof are not varie large or long, but nicked or dented about the edges: the flowers come forth two or three or foure at the most together, at a knot or ioynt, euerie one by it selfe, vpon his owne small and long footestalke, consisting of fiue white leaues, with some threds in the middle; after which come round berries, greene at the first, and red when they are through ripe, of a meane bignesse, and of a pleasant sweete taste, somew hat tart withall, with a hard white stone within it, whose kernell is somewhat bitter, but not vnpleasant. 
 The Flanders Cherrie differeth not from the English, but that it is somewhat larger, and the Cherry somewhat greater and sweeter, and not so sower. 
 The early Flanders Cherry is more rathe or early ripe, almost as soone as the May Cherry, especially planted against a wall, and of many false knaues or Gardiners are sold for May Cherrie trees. 
 The May Cherrie in a standard beareth ripe fruite later then planted against a wall, where the berries will be red in the verie beginning of May sometimes. 
 The Arch-Dukes Cherrie is one of the fairest and best cherries wee haue, being of a very red colour when it is ripe, and a little long more then round, and somewhat poin∣ted at the end, of the best rellish of any Cherrie whatsoeuer, and of a firme substance; scarce one of twentie of our Nurserie men doe sell the right, but giue one for another: for it is an inherent qualitie almost hereditarie with most of them, to sell any man an ordinary fruit for whatsoeuer rare fruit he shall aske for: so little they are to be trusted.
Mulberries are not much desired to be eaten, although they be somewhat pleasant, both for that they staine their fingers and lips that eate them, and doe quickly putrefie in the stomacke, if they bee not taken before meate. 
 They haue yet a Physicall vse, which is by reason of the astringent qua∣lity while they are red, and before they bee ripe, for sore mouthes and throats, or the like, whereunto also the Syrup, called Diamoron, is effectuall. 
 Corollarium. A COROLEARIE To this Orchard. T Here are certaine other trees that beare no fruit fit to bee eaten, which yet are often seene planted in Orchards, and other fit and conuenient places bout an house, whereof some are of especiall vse, as the Bay tree   others for their beauty and shadow are fit for walkes or arbours; some being euer green are most fit for hedge-rowes; and some others more for their raritie then for any other great vse, wherof I thought good to entreat apart by themselues, and bring them after the fruit trees of this Orchard, as an ornament to accomplish the same. 
 1. Laurus. The Bay tree. THere are to bee reckoned vp fiue kindes of Bay trees, three whereof haue been entreated of in the first part, a fourth wee will only bring hereto your consi∣deration, which is that kinde that is vsually planted in euery mans yard or orchard, for their vse throughout the whole land, the other we will leaue to bee con∣sidered of in that place is fit for it. 
 The Bay tree riseth vp oftentimes to carry the face of a tree of a meane bignesse in our Countrey (although much greater in the hoter) and oftentimes shooteth vp with many suckers from the roote, shewing it selfe more like to a tall shrubbe or hedge∣bush, then a tree, hauing many branches, the young ones whereof are sometimes red∣dish, but most vsually of a light or fresh greene colour, when the stemme and elder boughes are couered with a darke greene barke: the leaues are somewhat broad, and long pointed as it were at both the ends, hard and sometimes crumpled on the edges, of a darke greene colour aboue, and of a yellowish greene vnderneath, in smell sweet, in taste bitter, and abiding euer greene: the flowers are yellow and mossie, which turne into berries that are a little long as well as round, whose shell or outermost peele is greene at the first, and blacke when it is ripe; wherein is contained an hard bitter ker∣nell, which cleaueth in two parts. 
 The Vse of Bayes. The Bay leaues are of as necessary vse as any other in Garden or Orchard; for they serue both for pleasure and profit, both for ornament and for vse, both for honest Ciuill vses, and for Physicke, yea both for the sicke and for the sound, both for the liuing and for the dead: And so much might be said of this one tree, that if it were all told, would as well weary the Reader, as the Relater: but to explaine my selfe; It serueth to adorne the house of God as well as of man: to procure warmth, comfort and strength to the limmes of men and women, by bathings and annoyntings outward, and by drinkes   inward to the stomacke, and other parts: to season vessels   wherein are preserued our meates, as well as our drinkes: to crowne or en∣circle as with a garland, the heads of the liuing, and to sticke and decke forth the bodies of the dead: so that from the cradle to the graue we haue still vse of it, we haue still neede of it. 
 The berries likewise serue for stitches inward, and for paines outward, that come of cold eyther in the ioynts, sinewes, or other places. 
 2. Laurea Cerasus, siue Laurus Virginiana. The Virginian Bay, or Cherry Baye. THis Virginian (whether you will call it a Baye, or a Cherrie, or a Cherrie Bay, I leaue it to euery ones free will and iudgement, but yet I thinke I may as well call it a Bay as others a Cherrie, neither of them being answerable to the tree, which neyther beareth such berries as are like Cherries, neither beareth euer greene leaues like the Bay: if it may therefore bee called the Virginia Cherry Bay, for a di∣stinction from the former Bay Cherry that beareth faire blacke Cherries, it will more fitly agree thereunto, vntill a more proper may be imposed) riseth vp to be a tree of a reasonable height, the stemme or bodie thereof being almost as great as a mans legge, spreading forth into diuers armes or boughes, and they againe into diuers small bran∣ches, whereon are set without order diuers faire broade greene leaues, somewhat like vnto the former Bay leaues, but more limber and gentle, and not so hard in handling, broader also, and for the most part ending in a point, but in many somewhat round pointed, very finely notched or toothed about the edges, of a bitter taste, very neere resembling the taste of the Bay leafe, but of little or no sent at all, either greene or dry∣ed, which fall away euery autumne, and spring a fresh euery yeare: the blossomes are small and white, many growing together vpon a long stalke, somewhat like the Bird Cherry blossomes, but smaller, and come forth at the ends of the young branches, which after turne into small berries, euery one set in a small cup or huske, greene at the first, and blacke when they are ripe, of the bignesse of a small pease, of a strong bitter taste, and somewhat aromaticall withall, but without any fleshy substance like a Cherry at all vpon it; for it is altogether like a berry. 
 The Vse of this Virginia Cherry Bay. Being a stranger in our Land, and possessed but of a very few, I doe not heare that there hath beene any triall made thereof what properties are in it: let this therefore suffice for this present, to haue shewed you the descrip∣tion and forme thereof, vntill we can learne further of his vses. 
 The Vse of the Ilex or euer-greene Oake. Seeing this is to be accounted among the kindes of Oake (and all Oakes by Dioscorides his opinion are binding) it is also of the same qualitie, but a little weaker, and may serue to strengthen weake members. The young tops and leaues are also vsed in gargles for the mouth and throate. 
 6 Cupressus. The Cypresse tree. THe Cypresse tree that is noursed vp by vs, in our Country, doth grow in those places where it hath beene long planted, to a very great height, whose bodie and boughes are couered with a reddish ash-coloured bark; the branches grow not spreading, but vpright close vnto the bodie, bushing thicke below, and small vp∣wards, spire fashion, those below reaching neere halfe the way to them aboue, where∣on doe grow euer greene leaues, small, long and flat, of a resinous sweete smell, and strong taste, somewhat bitter: the fruit, which are called nuts, grow here and there a∣mong the boughes, sticking close vnto them, which are small, and clouen into diuers parts, but close while they are young, of a russetish browne colour; wherein are con∣tained small browne seede, but not so small as motes in the Sunne, as Matthiolus and others make them to be. 
 The Vse of the Cypresse tree. For the goodly proportion this tree beareth, as also for his euer-greene head, it is and hath beene of great account with all Princes, both beyond, and on this side of the Sea, to plant them in rowes on both sides of some spatious walke, which by reason of their high growing, and little spreading, must be planted the thicker together, and so they giue a goodly, pleasant and sweet shadow: or else alone, if they haue not many, in the middle of some quarter, or as they thinke meete. The wood thereof is firme and durable, or neuer decaying, of a brown yellow colour, and of a strong sweete smell, whereof Chests or Boxes are made to keepe apparell, linnen, furres, and o∣ther things, to preserue them from moths, and to giue them a good smell.
