qualities the same. The general virtues of these oils are, to blunt 
 acrimonious humours, and to soften and relax the solids: hence their use 
 internally, in tickling coughs, heat of urine, pains and inflammations: 
 and externally in tension and rigidity of particular parts. 
  
  
  
 168. ANCHUSA tinctoria. ALKANET-ROOT. E. D.--Alkanet-root has little or 
 no smell: when recent, it has a bitterish astringent taste, but when 
 dried scarcely any. As to its virtues, the present practice expects not 
 any from it. Its chief use is for colouring oils, unguents, and 
 plasters. As the colour is confined to the cortical part, the small 
 roots are best, these having proportionally more bark than the large. 
  
  
  
 169. ANETHUM graveolens. DILL. The Seeds. L.--Their taste is moderately 
 warm and pungent; their smell aromatic, but not of the most agreeable 
 kind. These seeds are recommended as a carminative, in flatulent colics 
 proceeding from a cold cause or a viscidity of the juices. The most
The flavour of the seeds and leaves is very perishable, particularly 
 that of the latter, which, on being barely dried, lose greatest part of 
 their taste and smell: the roots are more tenacious of their flavour, 
 though even these lose part of it upon keeping. The fresh root, wounded 
 early in the spring, yields and odorous yellow juice, which slowly 
 exsiccated proves an elegant gummy resin, very rich in the virtues of 
 the Angelica. On drying the root, this juice concretes into distinct 
 moleculae, which, on cutting it longitudinally, appear distributed in 
 little veins: in this state they are extracted by pure spirit, but not 
 by watery liquors. 
  
 This resin is considered one of the most elegant aromatics of European 
 growth, though little regarded in the present practice, and is rarely 
 met with in prescription; neither does it enter any officinal 
 composition. 
  
  
  
 172. ANTHEMIS nobilis. CHAMOMILE. The Flowers. L.E.D.--These have a 
 strong not ungrateful, aromatic smell, but a very bitter nauseous taste.
immediate relief in all cases of that malady. 
  
  
  
 174. APIUM Petroselium. COMMON PARSLEY. The Root. E.--Both the roots and 
 seeds of Parsley are directed by the London College for medicinal use: 
 the former have a sweetish taste, accompanied with a slight warmth of 
 flavour somewhat resembling that of a carrot; the latter are in taste 
 warmer and more aromatic than any other part of the plant, and also 
 manifest considerable bittenress. 
  
 These roots are said to be aperient and diuretic, and have been 
 employed in apozems to relieve nephritic pains, and obstructions of 
 urine. 
  
 Although Parsley is commonly used at table, it is remarkable that facts 
 have been adducted to prove, that in some constitutions it occasions 
 epilepsy, or at least aggravates the epileptic fit in those who are 
 subject to this disease. It has been supposed also to produce 
 inflammation in the eyes.--Woodville  '  s Med. Bot. p. 43. A variety which
herbaceous, and astringent; and the powdered leaves act as a strong 
 sternutatory. 
  
 This plant, according to Bergius, is an emetic, errhine, diuretic, 
 diaphoretic, emmenagogue; and from its supposed power of attenuating the 
 blood, it has been esteemed so peculiarly efficacious in obviating the 
 bad consequences occasioned by falls and bruises, that it obtained the 
 appellation of Panacea Lapsorum.--Woodville  '  s Med. Bot. p. 43. 
  
  
  
 177. ARTEMISIA Absinthium. WORMWOOD, The Herb. L.--Wormwood is a strong 
 bitter; and was formerly much used as such against weakness of the 
 stomach, and the like, in medicated wines and ales. At present it is 
 rarely employed in these intentions, on account of the ill relish and 
 offensive smell which it is accompanied with. These it may be in part 
 freed from by keeping, and totally by long coction, the bitter remaining 
 entire. An extract made by boiling the leaves in a large quantity of 
 water, and evaporating the liquor with a strong fire, proves a bitter 
 sufficiently grateful, without any disgustful flavour.
 
  
  
 178. ARTEMISIA Abrotanum. SOUTHERNWOOD. Leaves. D.--Southernwood has a 
 strong, not very disagreeable smell; and a nauseous, pungent, bitter 
 taste; which is totally extracted by rectified spirit, less perfectly by 
 watery liquors. It is recommended as an anthelmintic; and in cold 
 lencophlegmatic habits, as a stimulant, detergent, aperient, and 
 sudorific. The present practice has almost entirely confined its use to 
 external applications. The leaves are frequently employed in discutient 
 and antiseptic fomentations; and have been recommended also in lotions 
 and unguents for cutaneous eruptions, and the falling off of the hair. 
  
  
  
 179. ARTEMISIA maritima. SEA WORMWOOD. Tops. D.--In taste and smell, it 
 is weaker and less unpleasant than the common worm-wood. The virutes of 
 both are supposed to be of the same kind, and to differ only in 
 strength. 
 
 
  
  
 188. CENTAUREA benedicta. BLESSED THISTLE. The Leaves. E. D.--The herb 
 should be gathered when in flower, great care taken in drying it, and 
 kept in a very dry airy place, to prevent its rotting or growing mouldy, 
 which it is very apt to do. The leaves have a penetrating bitter taste, 
 not very strong or very durable, accompanied with an ungrateful flavour, 
 which they are in great measure freed from by keeping. 
  
 The virtues of this plant seem to be little known in the present 
 practice. We have frequently experienced excellent effects from a light 
 infusion of carduus in loss of appetite, where the stomach was injured 
 by irregularities. A stronger infusion made in cold or warm water, if 
 drunk freely, and the patient kept warm, occasions a plentiful sweat, 
 and promotes all the secretions in general. 
  
 The seeds of this plant are also considerably bitter, and have been 
 sometimes used for the same purposes as the leaves. 
 
effect. Saffron imparts the whole of its virtue and colour to rectified 
 spirit, proof spirit, wine, vinegar, and water: a tincture used to be 
 drawn with vinegar, but it looses greatly its colour in keeping. There 
 can be little use for preparations of saffron, as the drug itself will 
 keep good for any length of time. 
  
  
  
 196. CUMINUM Cymini. CUMMIN. The Seeds. L.--Cummin seeds have a 
 bitterish warm taste, accompanied with an aromatic flavour, not of the 
 most agreeable kind. They are accounted good carminatives, but not very 
 often made use of. An essential oil of them used to be kept in the 
 shops, and they gave name to a plaster and cataplasm.--Lewis  '  s Mat. Med. 
  
  
  
 197. CYNARA Scolymus. ARTICHOKE. The Leaves. E.--The bitter juice of the 
 leaf, mixed with an equal part of Madeira wine, is recommended in an 
 ounce dose night and morning, as a powerful diuretic in dropsy. An 
 infusion of the leaf may likewise be used.
Similar Plants.--Verbascum nigrum; V. Thapsus; Cynoglossum officinale, 
 or, after the above mistake, any other plant with a lanceolate leaf, we 
 fear, may be confounded with it. 
  
  
  
 205. ERYNGIUM maritimum. SEA-HOLLY. Roots. D.--The roots are slender, 
 and very long; of a pleasant sweetish taste, which on chewing for some 
 time is followed by a light degree of aromatic warmth and acrimony. They 
 are accounted aperient and diuretic, and have also been celebrated as 
 aphrodisiac: their virtues, however, are too weak to admit them under 
 the head of medicines. The candied root is ordered to be kept in the 
 shops.--Lewis  '  s Mat. Med. 
  
  
  
 206. FERULA assafoetida. ASSAFOETIDA. Gum. L. E. D.--This drug has a 
 strong fetid smell, somewhat like that of garlick; and a bitter, acrid, 
 biting taste. It looses with age of its smell and strength, a 
 circumstance to be particularly regarded in its exhibition. It consists
bitter, and, as such, very frequently made use of in practice: in taste 
 it is less exceptionable than most of the other substances of this 
 class: infusions of it, flavoured with orange peel, are sufficiently 
 grateful. It is the capital ingredient in the bitter wine; and a 
 tincture and infusion of it are kept in the shops. 
  
 Lewis mentions a poisonous root being mixed among some of the Gentian 
 brought to London; the use of which occasioned in some instances death. 
 This was internally of a white colour, and void of bitterness. There is 
 no doubt but this was the root of the Veratrum album, a poisonous plant 
 so similar, that it might readily be mistaken for it.--Lewis  '  s Mat. Med. 
  
  
  
 210. GEUM urbanum. COMMON AVENS. Root. D.--This has a warm, bitterish, 
 astringent taste, and a pleasant smell, somewhat of the clove kind, 
 especially in the spring, and when produced in dry warm soils. Parkinson 
 observes, that such as is the growth of moist soils has nothing of this 
 flavour. This root has been employed as a stomachic, and for 
 strengthening the tone of the viscera in general: it is still in some
esteem in foreign countries, though not taken notice of among us. It 
 yields, on distillation, an elegant odoriferous essential oil, which 
 concretes into a flaky form.--Lewis  '  s Mat. Med. 
  
 Similar Plants.--Geum rivale; G. intermedium. 
  
  
  
 211. GLYCYRRHIZA glabra. LIQUORICE. Root. L. D.--This is produced 
 plentifully in all the countries of Europe: that which is the growth of 
 our own is preferable to such as comes from abroad; this last being 
 generally mouldy, which this root is very apt to become, unless kept in 
 a dry place. 
  
 The powder of liquorice usually sold is often mingled with flower, and, 
 I fear, too often with substances not quite so wholesome. The best sort 
 is of a brownish yellow colour (the fine pale yellow being generally 
 sophisticated) and of a very rich sweet taste, much more agreeable than 
 that of the fresh root. Liquorice is almost the only sweet that quenches 
 thirst.
218. HYSSOPUS officinalis. HYSSOP. The Herb. L. E. D.--The leaves of 
 Hyssop have an aromatic smell, and a warm pungent taste. Besides the 
 general virtues of aromatics, they are particularly recommeded in 
 humoral asthmas, coughs, and other disorders of the breast and lungs; 
 and said to notably promote expectoration. 
  
  
  
 219. INULA Helenium. ELECAMPANE. Root. D.--Elecampane root possesses the 
 general virtues of alexipharmics: it is principally recommended for 
 promoting expectoration in humoural asthmas and coughs; in which 
 intention, it used to be employed in the Edinburgh Pharmacopoeia: 
 liberally taken, it is said to excite urine, and loosen the belly. In 
 some parts of Germany, large quantities of this root are candied, and 
 used as a stomachic, for strengthening the tone of the viscera in 
 general, and for attenuating tenacious juices. Spiritous liquors extract 
 its virtues in greater perfection than watery ones: the former scarce 
 elevate any thing in distillation: with the latter, an essential oil 
 arises, which concretes into white flakes; this possesses at first the 
 flavour of the elecampane, but is very apt to lose it in keeping.
 
  
  
 220. JUNIPERUS Sabina. SAVINE. The Tops. L. E. D.--Savine is a warm 
 irritating aperient medicine, capable of promoting all the glandular 
 secretions. The distilled oil is one of the most powerful emmenagogues; 
 and is found of good service in obstructions of the uterus, or other 
 viscra, proceeding from a laxity and weakness of the vessels, or a cold 
 sluggish indisposition of the juices. 
  
 Similar Plants.--Juniperus oxycedrus; J. Phoenicea. These should be 
 particularly distinguished, as Savine is attended with danger when taken 
 immoderately. 
  
  
  
 221. JUNIPERUS communis. JUNIPER. Berries. L. E. D.--Juniper berries 
 have a strong, not disagreeable smell; and a warm, pungent sweet taste, 
 which, if they are long chewed, or previously well bruised, is followed 
 by a bitterish one. The pungency seems to reside in the bark; the sweet
in the juice; the aromatic flavour in oily vesicles, spread through the 
 substance of the pulp, and distinguishable even by the eye; and the 
 bitter in the seeds: the fresh berries yield, on expression, a rich, 
 sweet, honey-like, aromatic juice; if previously pounded so as to break 
 the seeds, the juice proves tart and bitter. 
  
  
  
 222. LACTUCA virosa. WILD LETTUCE. Leaves. E.--Dr. Collin at Vienna 
 first brought the Lactuca virosa into medical repute; and its character 
 has lately induced the College of Physicians at Edinburgh to insert it 
 in the Catalogue of the Materia Medica. More than twenty-four cases of 
 dropsy are said by Collin to have been successfully treated, by 
 employing an extract prepared from the expressed juice of this plant, 
 which is stated not only to be powerfully diuretic, but, by attenuating 
 the viscid humours, to promote all the secretions, and to remove 
 visceral obstructions. In the more simple cases proceeding from 
 debility, the extract in doses of eighteen to thirty grains a-day, 
 proved sufficient to accomplish a cure; but when the disease was 
 inveterate, and accompanied with visceral obstructions, the quantity of
with water, the leaves of bay yield a small quantity of very fragrant 
 essential oil; with rectified spirit, they afford a moderately warm 
 pungent extract. The berries yield a larger quantity of essential oil: 
 they discover likewise a degree of unctuosity in the mouth; give out to 
 the press an almost insipid fluid oil; and on being boiled in water, a 
 thicker butyraceous one of a yellowish-green colour, impregnated with 
 the flavour of the berry. An infusion of the leaves is sometimes drunk 
 as tea; and the essential oil of the berries may be given from one to 
 five or six drops on sugar, or dissolved by means of mucilages, or in 
 spirit of wine.--Woodville  '  s Med Bot. p. 680, 681. 
  
  
  
 225. LAURUS Sassafras. SASSAFRAS-TREE. Bark. L. E. D.--Its medical 
 character was formerly held in great estimation; and its sensible 
 qualities, which are stronger than any of the woods, may have probably 
 contributed to establish the opinion so generally entertained of its 
 utility in many inveterate diseases: for, soon after its introduction 
 into Europe, it was sold at a very high price, and its virtues were 
 extolled in publications professedly written on the subject. It is now,
heartily subscribe. Medicines indeed in general, which act with violence 
 in a small dose, require the utmost skill to manage them with any 
 tolerable degree of safety: to which may be added, that the various 
 manners of making these kinds of preparations, as practised by different 
 hands, must needs vary their power. 
  
  
  
 239. MORUS nigra. MULBERRY. Fruit. L.--It has the common qualities of 
 the other sweet fruits, abating heat, quenching thirst, and promoting 
 the grosser secretions; an agreeable syrup made from the juice is kept 
 in the shops. The bark of the roots has been in considerable esteem as a 
 vermifuge; its taste is bitter, and somewhat astringent.--Lewis  '  s Mat. 
 Med. 
  
  
  
 240. NICOTIANA Tabacum. TOBACCO. Leaves. L. E. D.--Tobacco is sometimes 
 used externally in unguents for destroying cutaneous insects, cleansing 
 old ulcers, &c. Beaten into a mash with vinegar or brandy, it has
sometimes proved serviceable for removing hard tumours of the 
 hypochondres. 
  
  
  
 241. ORIGANUM Majorana. SWEET MARJORAM. Herb. L. E.-It is a moderately 
 warm aromatic, yielding its virtues both to aqueous and spirituous 
 liquors by infusion, and to water in distillation. It is principally 
 celebrated in disorders of old people. An essential oil of the herb is 
 kept in the shops. The powder of the leaves proves an agreeable errhine. 
  
  
  
 242. ORIGANUM vulgare. POT MARJORAM. Herb. L. D.--It has an agreeable 
 aromatic smell approaching to that of marjoram, and a pungent taste much 
 resembling thyme, to which it is likewise thought to be more nearly 
 allied in its medicinal qualities than to any of the other verticillatae, 
 and therefore deemed to be emmenagogue, tonic, stomachic, &c. 
  
 The dried leaves used instead of tea are said to be extremely grateful.
 
  
  
 262. ROSMARINUS officinalis. ROSEMARY. Tops. L. E. D.--Rosemary has a 
 fragrant smell and a warm pungent bitterish taste, approaching to those 
 of lavender: the leaves and tender tops are strongest; next to these the 
 cup of the flower; the flowers themselves are considerably the weakest, 
 but most pleasant. Aqueous liquors extract great share of the virtues of 
 rosemary leaves by infusion, and elevate them in distillation: along 
 with the water arises a considerable quantity of essential oil, of an 
 agreeable strong penetrating smell. Pure spirit extracts in great 
 perfection the whole aromatic flavour of the rosemary, and elevates very 
 little of it in distillation: hence the resinous mass left upon 
 abstracting the spirit, proves an elegant aromatic, very rich in the 
 peculiar qualities of the plant. The flowers of rosemary give over great 
 part of their flavour in distillation with pure spirit; by watery 
 liquors, their fragrance is much injured; by beating, destroyed. 
  
  
 
character which it bore at first, it is in some cases of considerable 
 use as a sudorific, where more acrid medicines are improper. 
  
  
  
 276. SOLANUM Dulcamara. BITTERSWEET. Stalk. L. D.--The taste of the 
 twigs and roots, as the name of the plant expresses, is both bitter and 
 sweet; the bitterness being first perceived, and the sweet afterwards. 
 They are commended for resolving coagulated blood, and as a cathartic, 
 diuretic, and deobstruent. 
  
  
  
 277. SOLIDAGO Virga aurea. GOLDEN ROD. Flowers and Leaves. D.--The 
 leaves have a moderately astringent bitter taste, and hence prove 
 serviceable in debility and laxity of the viscera, and disorders 
 proceeding from that cause. 
  
  
 
bitterish taste; and, when rubbed betwixt the fingers, a quick pungent 
 smell, which soon affects the head, and occasions sneezing: distilled 
 with water, they yield a very acrid, penetrating essential oil, 
 resembling one obtained by the same means from scurvy-grass. These 
 qualities sufficiently point out the uses to which this plant might be 
 applied; at present, it is little otherwise employed than in cephalic 
 snuffs. 
  
  
  
 282. TEUCRIUM Chamaedrys. GERMANDER. Herb. D.--The leaves, tops, and 
 seeds, have a bitter taste, with some degree of astringency and aromatic 
 flavour. They were recommended as sudorific, diuretic, and emmenagogue, 
 and for strengthening the stomach and viscera in general. With some they 
 have been in great esteem in intermittent fevers; as also in scrophulous 
 and other chronic disorders. 
  
  
  
 283. TORMENTILLA erecta. TORMENTIL, or UPRIGHT SEPTFOIL. Root. L. E. D.
--The root is the only part of this plant which is used medicinally; it 
 has a strong styptic taste, but imparts no peculiar sapid flavour. This 
 has been long held in great estimation as an astringent. Dr. Cullen has 
 used it with gentian with great effect in intermittent fevers. Lewis 
 recommends an ounce and a half of the powdered root to be boiled in 
 three pints of water to a quart, adding towards the end of the boiling a 
 dram of cinnamon. Of the strained liquor, sweetened with an ounce of any 
 agreeable syrup, two ounces or more may be taken four or five times a-day. 
  
  
  
 284. TUSSILAGO Farfara. COLTSFOOT. Herb. L. E. D.--Tussilago stands 
 recommended in coughs and other disorders of the breast and lungs: the 
 flowers were an ingredient in the pectoral decoction of the Edinburgh 
 Pharmacopoeia. 
  
  
  
 285. VALERIANA officinalis. VALERIAN. Root. L. E. D.--Valerian is a 
 medicine of great use in nervous disorders, and is particularly
than those of the thinner; all sweet wines, as Canary, abound with a 
 glutinous nutritious substance; whilst the others are not nutrimental, 
 or only accidentally so by strengthening the organs employed in 
 digestion: sweet wines in general do not pass off freely by urine, and 
 heat the constitution more than an equal quantity of any other, though 
 containing full as much spirit: red port, and most of the red wines, 
 have an astringent quality, by which they strengthen the tone of the 
 stomach and intestines, and thus prove serviceable for restraining 
 immoderate secretions: those which are of an acid nature, as Renish, 
 pass freely by the kidneys, and gently loosen the belly: it is supposed 
 that these last exasperate, or occasion gout and calculous disorders, 
 and that new wines of every kind have this effect. 
  
 The ripe fruit of grapes, of which there are several kinds, properly 
 cured and dried, are the raisins and currants of the shops: the juice of 
 these also, by fermentation, affords wine as well as vinegar and tartar. 
  
 The medical use of raisins is, their imparting a very pleasant flavour 
 both to aqueous and spiritous menstrua. The seeds or stones are supposed 
 to give a disagreeable relish, and hence are generally directed to be
291. ACANTHUS mollis. SMOOTH BEARS-BREECH. The Leaves.--Are of a soft 
 sweetish taste, and abound with a mucilaginous juice: its virtues do not 
 seem to differ from those of Althea and other mucilaginous plants. 
  
  
  
 292. ACHILLA Ptarmica. SNEEZEWORT. The Root.--The roots have and acrid 
 smell, and a hot biting taste: chewed, they occasion a plentiful 
 discharge of saliva; and when powdered and snuffed up the nose, provoke 
 sneezing. These are sold at the herb-shops as a substitute for pellitory 
 of Spain. 
  
  
  
 293. ACHILLEA Ageratum. MAUDLIN. The Leaves and Flowers.--This has a 
 light agreeable smell; and a roughish, somewhat warm and bitterish 
 taste. These qualities point out its use as a mild corroborant; but it 
 has long been a stranger in practice, and is now omitted both by the 
 London and Edinburgh Colleges. It is however in use by the common 
 people.
 
  
  
 294. ACHILLEA Millefolium. YARROW. The Leaves.--The leaves have a rough 
 bitterish taste, and a faint aromatic smell. Their virtues are those of 
 a very mild astringent, and as such they stand recommended in 
 haemorrhages both internal and external, diarrhoeas, debility and laxity 
 of the fibres; and likewise in spasmodic hysterical affections. 
  
  
  
 295. AJUGA reptans. BUGLE. The Leaves.--These have at first a sweetish 
 taste, which gradually becomes bitterish and roughish. They are 
 recommended as vulnerary medicines, and in all cases where mild 
 astringents or corroborants are proper. 
  
  
  
 296. ALCHEMILLA vulgaris. LADY  '  S MANTLE. The Leaves.--These discover to 
 the taste a moderate astringency, and were formerly much esteemed in
 
  
 308. ASPERULA odorata. SWEET WOODROOF. The Flowers.--It has an 
 exceedingly pleasant smell, which is improved by moderate exsiccation; 
 the taste is sub-saline, and somewhat austere. It imparts its flavour to 
 vinous liquors. Asperula is supposed to attenuate viscid humours, and 
 strengthen the tone of the bowels: it was recommended in obstructions of 
 the liver and biliary ducts, and by some in epilepsies and palsies: 
 modern practice has nevertheless rejected it. 
  
  
  
 309. ASPLENIUM Ceterach. SPLEENWORT.--It is recommended as a pectoral, 
 and for promoting urine in nephritic cases. The virtue which it has been 
 most celebrated for, is that which it has the least title to, i. e. 
 diminish the spleen. 
  
  
  
 310. ASPLENIUM Scolophendrium. HARTS-TONGUE. The Leaves.--These have a
 
  
  
 313. BELLIS perennis. DAISIES. The Leaves.--They have a subtile subacrid 
 taste, and are recommended as vulneraries, and in asthmas and hectic 
 fevers, and such disorders as are occasioned by drinking cold liquors 
 when the body has been much heated. 
  
  
  
 214. BERBERIS vulgaris. BERBERRY. The Bark and Fruit.--The outward bark 
 of the branches and the leaves have an astringent acid taste; the inner 
 yellow bark, a bitter one: this last is said to be serviceable in the 
 jaundice; and by some, to be an useful purgative. 
  
 The berries, which to the taste are gratefully acid, and moderately 
 restringent, have been given with good success in bilious fluxes, and 
 diseases proceeding from heat, acrimony, or thinness of the juices. 
  
 
319. CALENDULA officinalis. MARIGOLD. The Flowers.--These are supposed 
 to be aperient and attenuating; as also cardiac, alexipharmic, and 
 sudorific: they are principally celebrated in uterine obstructions, the 
 jaundice, and for throwing out the small-pox. Their sensible qualities 
 give little foundation for these virtues: they have scarcely any taste, 
 and no considerable smell. The leaves of the plant discover a viscid 
 sweetishness, accompanied with a more durable saponaceous pungency and 
 warmth: these seem capable of answering some useful purposes, as a 
 stimulating, aperient, antiscorbutic medicine. 
  
  
  
 320. CANNABIS sativa. HEMP. The Seeds.--These have some smell of the 
 herb; their taste is unctuous and sweetish; on expression they yield a 
 considerable quantity of insipid oil: hence they are recommended (boiled 
 in milk, or triturated with water into an emulsion) against coughs, heat 
 of urine, and the like. They are also said to be useful in incontinence 
 of urine; but experience does not warrant their having any virtues of 
 this kind. 
 
335. CYPERUS longus. LONG CYPERUS. The Root.--This is long, slender, 
 crooked, and full of knots: outwardly of a dark-brown or blackish 
 colour, inwardly whitish; of an aromatic smell, and an agreeable warm 
 taste: both the taste and smell are improved by moderate exsiccation. 
 Cyperus is accounted a good stomachic and carminative, but is at present 
 very little regarded. 
  
  
  
 336. DICTAMNUS albus. WHITE or BASTARD DITTANY. The Root.--The cortical 
 part of the root, dried and rolled up into quills, is sometimes brought 
 to us. This is of a white colour, a weak, not very agreeable smell; and 
 a durable bitter, lightly pungent taste. It is recommended as an 
 alexipharmic. 
  
  
  
 337. EQUISETUM palustre. HORSE-TAIL. The Herb.--It is said to be a very 
 strong astringent: it has indeed a manifest astringency, but in a very 
 low degree.
water elevates somewhat of it in distillation, but scarcely any 
 essential oil can be obtained from them: the distilled water, kept for a 
 little time, loses its odour. 
  
  
  
 354. IRIS Pseudoacorus. FLOWER-DE-LUCE. The Root.--The roots, when 
 recent, have a bitter, acrid, nauseous taste, and taken into the stomach 
 prove strongly cathartic; and hence the juice is recommended in 
 dropsies, in the dose of three or four scruples. By drying they lose 
 this quality, yet still retain a somewhat pungent, bitterish taste: 
 their smell in this state is of the aromatic kind. 
  
  
  
 355. IRIS florentina. FLORENTINE IRIS, OR ORRIS-ROOT.--The roots grown 
 in this country have neither the odour nor the other qualities that 
 those possess which are grown in warmer climates: so that, for the 
 purposes of medicine, they are usually imported from Leghorn. 
 
The root in its recent state is extremely acrid, and, when chewed, 
 excites a pungent heat in the mouth which continues several hours; but 
 on being dried, this acrimony is almost wholly dissipated, the taste 
 becomes slightly bitter, and the smell approaching to that of violets. 
 It is now chiefly used in its dried state, and ranked as a pectoral or 
 expectorant. The principal use of the roots is, however, for the 
 purposes of perfumery, for which it is in considerable demand. 
  
  
  
 356. LACTUCA sativa. GARDEN LETTUCE. The Leaves and Seeds.--It smells 
 strongly of opium, and resembles it in its effects; and its narcotic 
 power, like that of the poppy heads, resides in its milky juice. An 
 extract from the expressed juice is recommended in small doses in 
 dropsy. In those diseases of long standing proceeding from visceral 
 obstructions, it has been given to the extent of half an ounce a-day. It 
 is said to agree with the stomach, to quench thirst, to be greatly 
 laxative, powerfully diuretic, and somewhat diaphoretic. 
  
 
 
 357. LAMIUM album. WHITE ARCHANGEL, OR DEAD NETTLE. The Flowers.--The 
 flowers have been particularly celebrated in female weaknesses, as also 
 in disorders of the lungs; but they appear to be of very weak powers. 
  
  
  
 358. LAVENDULA Stoechas. ARABIAN STOECHAS, OR FRENCH LAVEN-DER. The 
 Flowers.--They have a very fragrant smell, and a warm, aromatic, 
 bitterish, subacrid taste: distilled with water, they yield a 
 considerable quantity of a fragrant essential oil; to rectified spirit 
 it imparts a strong tincture, which inspissated proves an elegant 
 aromatic extract, but is seldom used in medicine. 
  
  
  
 359. LEONURUS Cardiaca. MOTHERWORT. The Leaves.--These have a bitter 
 taste, and a pretty strong smell: they are supposed to be useful in 
 hysteric disorders, to strengthen the stomach, to promote urine; and 
 indeed it may be judged from their smell and taste, that their medical
 
  
 378. PRIMULA officinalis. COWSLIP. The Flowers.--The flowers appear in 
 April; they have a pleasant sweet smell, and a subacrid, bitterish, 
 subastringent taste. An infusion of them, used as tea, is recommended as 
 a mild corroborant in nervous complaints. A strong infusion of them, 
 with a proper quantity of sugar, forms an agreeable syrup, which for a 
 long time maintained a place in the shops. By boiling, even for a little 
 time, their fine flavour is destroyed. A wine is also made of the 
 flowers, which is given as an opiate. 
  
  
  
 379. PRUNELLA vulgaris. SELFHEAL. The Leaves.--It has an herbaceous 
 roughish taste, and hence stands recommended in haemorrhages and alvine 
 fluxes. It has been principally celebrated as a vulnerary, whence its 
 name; and in gargarisms for aphthae and inflammations of the fauces. 
  
  
 
intention, it is said by Haller to be frequently used in Switzerland, in 
 the dose of a dram. 
  
  
  
 389. SANICULA officinalis. SANICLE. The Leaves.--These have an 
 herbaceous, roughish taste: they have long been celebrated for sanative 
 virtues, both internally and externally; nevertheless their effects, in 
 any intention, are not considerable enough to gain them a place in the 
 present practice. 
  
  
  
 390. SAPONARIA officinalis. SOAPWORT. The Herb and Root.--The roots 
 taste sweetish and somewhat pungent; and have a light smell like those 
 of liquorice: digested in rectified spirit they yield a strong tincture, 
 which loses nothing of its taste or flavour in being inspissated to the 
 consistence of an extract. This elegant root has not come much into 
 practice among us, though it promises, from its sensible qualities, to 
 be a medicine of considerable utility: it is greatly esteemed by the
German physicians as an aperient, corroborant, and sudorific; and 
 preferred by the College of Wirtemberg, by Stahl, Neumann, and others, 
 to sarsaparilla. 
  
  
  
 391. SAXIFRAGA granulata.--Linnaeus describes the taste of this plant to 
 be acrid and pungent, which we have not been able to discover. Neither 
 the tubercles of this root, nor the leaves, manifest to the organs of 
 taste any quality likely to be of medicinal use; and therefore, though 
 this species of Saxifraga has been long employed as a popular remedy in 
 nephritic and gravelly disorders, yet we do not find, either from its 
 sensible qualities or from any published instances of its efficacy, that 
 it deserves a place in the Materia Medica.--Woodville  '  s Med. Bot. p. 
 551. 
  
  
  
 392. SCABIOSA succisa. DEVIL  '  S BIT. The Leaves and Roots.--These stand 
 recommended as alexipharmics, but they have long given place to
never been much regarded in practice. 
  
  
  
 395. SEMPERVIVUM tectorum. GREATER HOUSE-LEEK. The Leaves.--These are 
 principally applied in cases of erysipelatous and other hot eruptions of 
 the skin, in which they are of immediate service in allaying the pain 
 arising therefrom: great quantities are cultivated in Surrey, and 
 brought to the London markets. It is remarkable of this plant, that its 
 juice, when purified by filtration, appears of a dilute yellowish colour 
 upon the admixture of an equal quantity of rectified spirit of wine; but 
 forms a beautiful white, light coagulum, like the finer kinds of 
 pomatum: this proves extremely volatile; for when freed from the aqueous 
 phlegm, and exposed to the air, it altogether exhales in a very little 
 time. 
  
  
  
 396. SENECIO Jacobaea. RAGWORT. The Leaves.--Their taste is roughish, 
 bitter, pungent, and extremely unpleasant: they stand strongly
recommended by Simon Pauli against dysenteries; but their forbidding 
 taste has prevented its coming into practice. 
  
  
  
 397. SOLANUM nigrum. COMMON NIGHTSHADE. The Leaves and Berries.--In the 
 year 1757, Mr. Gataker, surgeon to the Westminster Hospital, called the 
 attention of the Faculty to this plant, by a publication recommending 
 its internal use in old sores, srophulous and cancerous ulcers, 
 cutaneous eruptions, and even dropsies; all of which were much relieved 
 or completely cured of it. 
  
  
  
 398. SPIRAEA Ulmaria. MEADOW-SWEET. The Leaves and Flowers.--The flowers 
 have a very pleasant flavour, which water extracts from them by 
 infusion, and elevates in distillation. 
  
  
 
having come under his notice, and being apprized of it, by a well 
 applied corrective medicine he recovered the patient. It should, 
 therefore, be made a general observation, under such circumstances, and 
 those are not the most unpleasant we meet with in our researches,   '  never 
 to eat horse-radish on an empty stomach.  '  " 
  
  
  
 461. RAMPION. Campanula Rapunculus.--This plant is remarkable for its 
 milky juice. In France, it is cultivated for its roots, which are boiled 
 and eaten with salads; but in England it is little noticed, except by 
 the French cooks, who use it as an ingredient in their soups and 
 gravies. It is propagated by planting its roots in the spring. 
  
  
  
 462. RHAPONTIC RHUBARB. Rheum Rhaponticum.--The radical leaf-stalks of 
 this plant being thick and juicy, and having an acid taste, are 
 frequently used in the spring as a substitute for gooseberries before 
 they are ripe, in making puddings, pies, tarts, &c. If they are peeled
with care, they will bake and boil very well, and eat agreeably. 
  
  
  
 463. ROCAMBOLE. Allium sativum.--The rocambole is merely the bulbs on 
 the top of the flower-stalk of the garlic, it being a viviparous plant. 
 The flavour of this being somewhat different, is used in the kitchen 
 under the above name. 
  
  
  
 464. SAGE. Salvia officinalis.--Of this we have two varieties, green and 
 red. The latter is considered the best for culinary purposes: it is the 
 well-known sauce for geese and other water-fowl. It is propagated by 
 cuttings in the spring. 
  
  
  
 465. SALSAFY. Tragopogon porrifolium.--A biennial, sown in March, and is 
 usually in season during winter. The roots are the parts used, which are
very sweet, and contain a large quantity of milky juice: it is a good 
 vegetable plain boiled, and the professors of cookery make many fine 
 dishes of it. 
  
  
  
 466. SAVORY, SUMMER. Satureja hortensis. 
  
 467. SAVORY, WINTER. Satureja montana. 
  
 Both sorts are used for the same purposes, as condiments among other 
 herbs for stuffing, and are well known to cooks. The former is an 
 annual, and raised by sowing the seeds in March and April. The other, 
 being perennial, is propagated either by the same means or by cuttings 
 in the spring of the year. It is also dried for winter use. 
  
  
  
 468. SAVOY CABBAGE. Brassica oleracea, (var.) 
 
liquorice, and in this state they are eaten as a delicacy. 
  
 The Russians, not content with eating the stalks thus prepared, contrive 
 to get a very intoxicating spirit from them, by first fermenting them in 
 water with the greater bilberry (Vaccinium uliginosum), and then 
 distilling the liquor to what degree of strength they please; which 
 Gmelin says is more agreeable to the taste than spirits made from corn. 
 This may, therefore, prove a good succedaneum for whisky, and prevent 
 the consumption of much barley, which ought to be applied to better 
 purposes. Swine and rabbits are very fond of this plant.---Lightfoot  '  s 
 Fl. Scot. 
  
  
  
 495. DANDELION. Leontodum Taraxacum.--This is a good salad when blanched 
 in the spring. The French, who eat more vegetables than our country 
 people do, use this in the spring as a common dish: it is similar to 
 endive in taste. 
  
 
 
 496. DEWBERRY. Rubus caesius.--The dewberry is very apt to be mistaken 
 for the blackberry; but it may be easily distinguished by its fruit 
 being not so large, and being covered with blue bloom similar to that 
 seen on plums: it has a very pleasant taste, and is said to communicate 
 a grateful flavour to red wine when steeped in it. 
  
  
  
 497. EARTH-NUT. Bunium Bulbocastanum.--The roots are eaten raw, and 
 considered a delicacy here, but thought much more of in Sweden, where 
 they are an article of trade: they are eaten also stewed as chesnuts. 
  
  
  
 498. ELDER. Sambucus nigra.--The young shoots of elder are boiled with 
 other herbs in the spring and eaten; they are also very good pickled in 
 vinegar. Lightfoot says, in some countries they dye cloth of a brown 
 colour with them. 
 
 
  
  
 505. HOPS. Humulus Lupulus.--Independently of the great use of hops in 
 making beer, and for medicinal uses, where the plant grows wild, it 
 affords the neighbours a dainty in the spring months. The young shoots, 
 called hop-tops, when boiled, are equal in flavour to asparagus, and are 
 eagerly sought after for that purpose. 
  
  
  
 506. LADIES-SMOCK. Cardamine pratensis.--This is good as a salad herb. 
  
  
  
 507. LAVER. Fucus esculentus.--This is collected by sailors and people 
 along the sea-coasts; is eaten both raw and boiled, and esteemed and 
 excellent antiscorbutic. The leaves of this Fucus are very sweet, and, 
 when washed and hanged up to dry, will exude a substance like that of 
 sugar.
 
 627. PRUNUS Lauro-cerasus. THE COMON LAUREL.--The leaves of the laurel 
 have a bitter taste, with a flavour resembling that of the kernels of 
 the peach or apricot; they communicate an agreeable flavour to aqueous 
 and spirituous fluids, either by infusion or distillation. The distilled 
 water applied to the organs of smelling strongly impresses the mind with 
 the same ideas as arise from the taste of peach blossoms or apricot 
 kernels: it is so extremely deleterious in its nature, and sometimes so 
 sudden in its operation, as to occasion instantaneous death; but it more 
 frequently happens that epileptic symptoms are first produced. This 
 poison was discovered by accident in Ireland in the year 1728: before 
 which, it was no uncommon practice there, to add a certain quantity of 
 laurel water to brandy, or other spirituous liquors, to render them 
 agreeable to the palate. At that time three women drank some 
 laurel-water; and one of them a short time afterwards became violently 
 disordered, lost her speech, and died in about an hour. 
  
 A gentleman at Guildford, some few years back, also, by making an 
 experiment as he intended on himself, was poisoned by a small dose: he 
 did not survive the taking it more than two hours.
 
 In consequence of the above poisonous principle existing in the laurel, 
 it has been recommended to persons to be cautious hwo they make use of 
 the leaves of that shrub, which is a usual practice with cooks for 
 giving flavour to custards, blanch-mange, and other made-dishes, lest 
 the narcotic principle should be also conveyed, to the detriment of the 
 health of persons who eat of them. 
  
 And the same may be said of the kernels of all stone-fruits; for the 
 flavours given to noyau, ratafia, and other liquors which are highly 
 prized by epicures, are all of them derived from the same principle as 
 laurel-water, and which, on chemical investigation, is found to be 
 prussic acid. This exists in considerable quantities in the bitter 
 almond, and which when separated proves to be the most active poison 
 known, to the human as well as all other animal existence. This 
 principle, and its mode of extraction, should not be made more public 
 than the necessity of scientific research requires. We cannot with 
 propriety accuse either this tree or the laurel as being poisonous, 
 because the ingenuity of mankind has found out a mode of extracting this 
 active acidulous principle, and which is so very small in proportion to
