 
 And these ideas, thus associated into tribes, not only make up the parts of the trains of volition, sensation, and irritation; but the same idea composes a part of many different tribes and trains of ideas. So the simple idea of whiteness composes a part of the com|plex idea of snow, milk, ivory; and the complex idea of the letter A composes a part of the several associated trains of ideas that make up the variety of words, in which this letter enters. 
  
 The numerous trains of these associated ideas are divided by Mr. Hume into three classes, which he has termed contiguity, causa|tion, and resemblance. Nor should we wonder to find them thus connected together, since it is the business of our lives to dispose them into these three classes; and we become valuable to ourselves and our friends, as we succeed in it. Those who have combined an extensive class of ideas by the contiguity of time or place, are men learned in the history of mankind, and of the sciences they have cultivated. Those who have connected a great class of ideas 
 Page  53 
  
 of resemblances, possess the source of the ornaments of poetry and oratory, and of all rational analogy. While those who have connected great classes of ideas of causation, are furnished with the powers of producing effects. These are the men of active wisdom, who lead armies to victory, and kingdoms to prosperity; or discover and improve the sciences, which meliorate and adorn the condition of humanity. 
  
 Page  54 
 SECT. XI. 
 ADDITIONAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE SENSORIAL POWERS. 
 I. Stimulation is of various kinds adapted to the organs of sense, to the muscles, to hollow membranes, and glands. Some objects irritate our senses by repeated im|pulses. II. 1. Sensation and volition frequently affect the whole sensorium. 2. Emotions, passions, appetites. 3. Origin of desire and aversion. Criterion of voluntary actions, difference of brutes and men. 4. Sensibility and volunta|rity. III. Associations formed before nativity, irritative motions mistaken for associated ones. 
  
 Irritation. 
 I. THE various organs of sense require various kinds of stimula|tion to excite them into action; the particles of light penetrate the cornea and humours of the eye, and then irritate the naked retina; sapid particles, dissolved or diffused in water or saliva, and odorous ones, mixed or combined with the air, irritate the extremities of the nerves of taste and ← smell → ; which either penetrate, or are expanded on the membranes of the tongue and nostrils; the auditory nerves are stimulated by the vibrations of the atmosphere communicated by means of the tympanum and of the fluid, whether of air or of water, behind it; and the nerves of touch by the hardness of surrounding bodies, though the cuticle is interposed between these bodies and the medulla of the nerve. 
  
 As the nerves of the senses have each their appropriated objects, which stimulate them into activity; so the muscular fibres, which are the terminations of other sets of nerves, have their peculiar ob|jects, 
 Page  55 
  
 which excite them into action; the longitudinal muscles are stimulated into contraction by extension, whence the stretching or pandiculation after a long continued posture, during which they have been kept in a state of extension; and the hollow muscles are excited into action by distention, as those of the rectum and bladder are in|duced to protrude their contents from their sense of the distention rather than of the acrimony of those contents.
 
 There are other objects adapted to stimulate the nerves, which terminate in variety of membranes, and those especially which form the terminations of canals; thus the preparations of mercury particu|larly affect the salivary glands, ipecacuhana affects the sphincter of the anus, cantharides that of the bladder, and lastly every gland of the body appears to be indued with a kind of taste, by which it se|lects or forms each its peculiar fluid from the blood; and by which it is irritated into activity. 
  
 Many of these external properties of bodies, which stimulate our organs of sense, do not seem to effect this by a single impulse, but by repeated impulses; as the nerve of the ear is probably not excit|able by a single vibration of air, nor the optic nerve by a single par|ticle of light; which circumstance produces some analogy between those two senses, at the same time the solidity of bodies is perceived by a single application of a solid body to the nerves of touch, and that even through the cuticle; and we are probably possessed of a pe|culiar sense to distinguish the nice degrees of heat and cold. 
  
 The senses of touch and of hearing acquaint us with the mechani|cal impact and vibration of bodies, those of ← smell → and taste seem to acquaint us with some of their chemical properties, while the sense of vision and of heat acquaint us with the existence of their peculiar fluids. 
  
 Page  56 
 Sensation and Volition. 
 II. Many motions are produced by pleasure or pain, and that even in contradiction to the power of volition, as in laughing, or in the strangury; but as no name has been given to pleasure or pain, at the time it is exerted so as to cause fibrous motions, we have used the term sensation for this purpose; and mean it to bear the same analogy to pleasure and pain, that the word volition does to desire and aversion. 
  
 1. It was mentioned in the fifth Section, that what we have termed sensation is a motion of the central parts, or of the whole sensorium, beginning at some of the extremities of it. This appears first, because our pains and pleasures are always caused by our ideas or muscular motions, which are the motions of the extremities of the sensorium. And, secondly, because the sensation of pleasure or pain frequently continues some time after the ideas or muscular motions which excited it have ceased: for we often feel a glow of pleasure from an agreeable reverie, for many minutes after the ideas, that were the subject of it, have escaped our memory; and frequently experi|ence a dejection of spirits without being able to assign the cause of it but by much recollection. 
  
 When the sensorial faculty of desire or aversion is exerted so as to cause fibrous motions, it is termed volition; which is said in Sect. V. to be a motion of the central parts, or of the whole sensorium, terminating in some of the extremities of it. This appears, first, because our desires and aversions always terminate in recollecting and comparing our ideas, or in exerting our muscles; which are the mo|tions of the extremities of the sensorium. And, secondly, because desire or aversion begins, and frequently continues for a time in the central parts of the sensorium, before it is peculiarly exerted at the 
 Page  57 
  
 extremities of it: for we sometimes feel desire or aversion without immediately knowing their objects, and in consequence without im|mediately exerting any of our muscular or sensual motions to attain them: as in the beginning of the passion of love, and perhaps of hun|ger, or in the ennui of indolent people. 
  
 Though sensation and volition begin or terminate at the extremities or central parts of the sensorium, yet the whole of it is frequently in|fluenced by the exertion of these faculties, as appears from their ef|fects on the external habit: for the whole skin is reddened by shame, and an universal trembling is produced by fear: and every muscle of the body is agitated in angry people by the desire of revenge. 
 
There is another very curious circumstance, which shews that sen|sation and volition are movements of the sensorium in contrary di|rections; that is, that volition begins at the central parts of it, and proceeds to the extremities; and that sensation begins at the extre|mities, and proceeds to the central parts: I mean that these two sen|sorial faculties cannot be strongly exerted at the same time; for when we exert our volition strongly, we do not attend to pleasure or pain; and conversely, when we are strongly affected with the sensation of pleasure or pain, we use no volition. As will be further explained in Section XVIII. on sleep, and Section XXXIV. on volition. 
  
 2. All our emotions and passions seem to arise out of the exertions of these two faculties of the animal sensorium. Pride, hope, joy, are the names of particular pleasures: shame, despair, sorrow, are the names of peculiar pains: and love, ambition, avarice, of particular desires: hatred, disgust, fear, anxiety, of particular aversions. Whilst the passion of anger includes the pain from a recent injury, and the aversion to the adversary that occasioned it. And compassion is the pain we experience at the sight of misery, and the desire of re|lieving it. 
  
 There is another tribe of desires, which are commonly termed ap|petites, and are the immediate consequences of the absence of some 
 Page  58 
  
 irritative motions. Those, which arise from defect of internal irrita|tions, have proper names conferred upon them, as hunger, thirst, lust, and the desire of air, when our respiration is impaired by noxi|ous vapours; and of warmth, when we are exposed to too great a degree of cold. But those, whose stimuli are external to the body, are named from the objects, which are by nature constituted to ex|cite them; these desires originate from our past experience of the pleasurable sensations they occasion, as the ← smell → of an hyacinth, or the taste of a pine-apple. 
  
 Whence it appears, that our pleasures and pains are at least as vari|ous and as numerous as our irritations; and that our desires and aver|sions must be as numerous as our pleasures and pains. And that as sensation is here used as a general term for our numerous pleasures and pains, when they produce the contractions of our fibres; so volition is the general name for our desires and aversions, when they produce fibrous contractions. Thus when a motion of the central parts, or of the whole sensorium, terminates in the exertion of our muscles, it is generally called voluntary action; when it terminates in the exertion of our ideas, it is termed recollection, reasoning, determining. 
  
 3. As the sensations of pleasure and pain are originally introduced by the irritations of external objects: so our desires and aversions are ori|ginally introduced by those sensations; for when the objects of our pleasures or pains are at a distance, and we cannot instantaneously possess the one, or avoid the other, then desire or aversion is pro|duced, and a voluntary exertion of our ideas or muscles succeeds. 
  
 The pain of hunger excites you to look out for food, the tree, that shades you, presents its odoriferous fruit before your eyes, you ap|proach, pluck, and eat. 
  
 The various movements of walking to the tree, gathering the fruit, and masticating it, are associated motions introduced by their connection with sensation; but if from the uncommon height of the tree, the fruit be inaccessible, and you are prevented from quickly 
 Page  59 
  
 possessing the intended pleasure, desire is produced. The consequence of this desire is, first, a deliberation about the means to gain the ob|ject of pleasure in process of time, as it cannot be procured immedi|ately; and, secondly, the muscular action necessary for this purpose. 
 
3. Of the Penetrability of Matter. 
 The impossibility of two bodies existing together in the same space cannot be deduced from our idea of solidity, or of figure. As soon as we perceive the motions of objects that surround us, and learn that we possess a power to move our own bodies, we experience, that those objects, which excite in us the idea of solidity and of figure, op|pose this voluntary movement of our own organs; as whilst I endea|vour to compress between my hands an ivory ball into a spheroid. And we are hence taught by experience, that our own body and those, which we touch, cannot exist in the same part of space. 
  
 But this by no means demonstrates, that no two bodies can exist together in the same part of space. Galilaeo in the preface to his works seems to be of opinion, that matter is not impenetrable; Mr. Michel, and Mr. Boscowich in his Theoria. Philos. Natur. have espoused this hypothesis: which has been lately published by Dr. Priestley, to whom the world is much indebted for so many impor|tant discoveries in science. (Hist. of Light and Colours, p. 391.) The uninterrupted passage of light through transparent bodies, of the elec|tric aether through metallic and aqueous bodies, and of the magnetic effluvia through all bodies, would seem to give some probability to this 
 Page  114 
  
 opinion. Hence it appears, that beings may exist without possessing the property of solidity, as well as they can exist without possessing the properties, which excite our ← smell → or taste, and can thence occupy space without detruding other bodies from it; but we cannot be|come acquainted with such beings by our sense of touch, any more than we can with odours or flavours without our senses of ← smell → and taste. 
  
 But that any being can exist without existing in space, is to my ideas utterly incomprehensible. My appeal is to common sense. To be implies a when and a where; the one is comparing it with the mo|tions of other beings, and the other with their situations. 
  
 If there was but one object, as the whole creation may be consider|ed as one object, then I cannot ask where it exists? for there are no other objects to compare its situation with. Hence if any one denies, that a being exists in space, he denies, that there are any other beings but that one; for to answer the question, "Where does it exist?" is only to mention the situation of the objects that sur|round it. 
  
 In the same manner if it be asked—"When does a being exist?" The answer only specifies the successive motions either of itself, or of other bodies; hence to say, a body exists not in time, is to say, that there is, or was, no motion in the world. 
  
 4. Of the Spirit of Animation. 
 But though there may exist beings in the universe, that have not the property of solidity; that is, which can possess any part of space, at the same time that it is occupied by other bodies; yet there may be other beings, that can assume this property of solidity, or disrobe themselves of it occasionally, as we are taught of spirits, and of an|gels; 
 Page  115 
  
 and it would seem, that THE SPIRIT OF ANIMATION must be endued with this property, otherwise how could it occasionally give motion to the limbs of animals?—or be itself stimulated into motion by the obtrusions of surrounding bodies, as of light, or odour? 
 
If the spirit of animation was always necessarily penetrable, it could not influence or be influenced by the solidity of common matter; they would exist together, but could not detrude each other from the part of space, where they exist; that is, they could not communicate mo|tion to each other. No two things can influence or affect each other, which have not some property common to both of them; for to influence or affect another body is to give or communicate some property to it, that it had not before; but how can one body give that to another, which it does not possess itself?—The words imply, that they must agree in having the power or faculty of possessing some common pro|perty. Thus if one body removes another from the part of space, that it possesses, it must have the power of occupying that space itself: and if one body communicates heat or motion to another, it follows, that they have alike the property of possessing heat or motion. 
  
 Hence the spirit of animation at the time it communicates or re|ceives motion from solid bodies, must itself possess some property of solidity. And in consequence at the time it receives other kinds of motion from light, it must possess that property, which light pos|sesses, to communicate that kind of motion; and for which no lan|guage has a name, unless it may be termed Visibility. And at the time it is stimulated into other kinds of animal motion by the particles of sapid and odorous bodies affecting the senses of taste and ← smell → , it must resemble these particles of flavour, and of odour, in possessing some similar or correspondent property; and for which language has no name, unless we may use the words Saporosity and Odorosity for those common properties, which are possessed by our organs of taste and ← smell → , and by the particles of sapid and odorous bodies; as the 
 Page  116 
  
 words Tangibility and Audibility may express the common property possessed by our organs of touch, and of hearing, and by the solid bodies, or their vibrations, which affect those organs. 
  
 5. Finally, though the figures of bodies are in truth resembled by the figure of the part of the organ of touch, which is stimulated into motion; and that organ resembles the solid body, which stimulates it, in its property of solidity; and though the sense of hearing re|sembles the vibrations of external bodies in its capability of being sti|mulated into motion by those vibrations; and though our other organs of sense resemble the bodies, that stimulate them, in their ca|pability of being stimulated by them; and we hence become ac|quainted with these properties of the external world; yet as we can repeat all these motions of our organs of sense by the efforts of voli|tion, or in consequence of the sensation of pleasure or pain, or by their association with other fibrous motions, as happens in our reveries or in sleep, there would still appear to be some difficulty in demonstrating the existence of any thing external to us. 
  
 In our dreams we cannot determine this circumstance, because our power of volition is suspended, and the stimuli of external objects are excluded; but in our waking hours we can compare our ideas belonging to one sense with those belonging to another, and can thus distinguish the ideas occasioned by irritation from those excited by sensation, volition, or association. Thus if the idea of the sweetness of sugar should be excited in our dreams, the whiteness and hardness of it occur at the same time by association; and we believe a material lump of sugar present before us. But if, in our waking hours, the idea of the sweetness of sugar occurs to us, the stimuli of surround|ing objects, as the edge of the table, on which we press, or green colour of the grass, on which we tread, prevent the other ideas of the hardness and whiteness of the sugar from being exerted by associ|ation. Or if they should occur, we voluntarily compare them with the irritative ideas of the table or grass above mentioned, and detect 
 Page  117 
  
 their fallacy. We can thus distinguish the ideas caused by the stimuli of external objects from those, which are introduced by association, sensation, or volition; and during our waking hours can thus acquire a knowledge of the external world. Which nevertheless we cannot do in our dreams, because we have neither perceptions of external bodies, nor the power of volition to enable us to compare them with the ideas of imagination. 
  
 III. Of Vision. 
 OUR eyes observe a difference of colour, or of shade, in the pro|minences and depressions of objects, and that those shades uniformly vary, when the sense of touch observes any variation. Hence when the retina becomes stimulated by colours or shades of light in a certain form, as in a circular spot; we know by experience, that this is a sign, that a tangible body is before us; and that its figure is resembled by the miniature figure of the part of the organ of vision, that is thus stimulated. 
  
 Here whilst the stimulated part of the retina resembles exactly the visible figure of the whole in miniature, the various kinds of stimuli from different colours mark the visible figures of the minuter parts; and by habit we instantly recall the tangible figures. 
  
 Thus when a tree is the object of sight, a part of the retina re|sembling a flat branching figure is stimulated by various shades of co|lours; but it is by suggestion, that the gibbosity of the tree, and the moss, that fringes its trunk, appear before us. These are ideas of sug|gestion, which we feel or attend to, associated with the motions of the retina, or irritative ideas, which we do not attend to.
The motions of the atmosphere, which we become acquainted with by the sense of touch, are combined with its solidity, weight, or vis inertiae; whereas those, that are perceived by this organ, depend alone on its elasticity. But though the vibration of the air is the immediate object of the sense of hearing, yet the ideas, we receive by this sense, like those received from light, are only as a language, which by ac|quired associations acquaints us with those motions of tangible bodies, 
 Page  120 
  
 which depend on their elasticity; and which we had before learned by our sense of touch. 
  
 V. Of ← Smell → and of Taste. 
 THE objects of ← smell → are dissolved in the fluid atmosphere, and those of taste in the saliva, or other aqueous fluid, for the better dif|fusing them on their respective organs, which seem to be stimulated into animal motion perhaps by the chemical affinities of these particles, which constitute the sapidity and odorosity of bodies with the nerves of sense, which perceive them. 
  
 Mr. Volta has lately observed a curious circumstance relative to our sense of taste. If a bit of clean lead and a bit of clean silver be sepa|rately applied to the tongue and palate no taste is perceived; but by applying them in contact in respect to the parts out of the mouth, and nearly so in respect to the parts, which are immediately applied to the tongue and palate, a saline or acidulous taste is perceived, as of a fluid like a stream of electricity passing from one of them to the other. This new application of the sense of taste deserves further investiga|tion, as it may acquaint us with new properties of matter. 
  
 VI. Of the Sense of Heat. 
 THERE are many experiments in chemical writers, that evince the existence of heat as a fluid element, which covers and pervades all bodies, and is attracted by the solutions of some of them, and is de|truded from the combination of others. Thus from the combinations of metals with acids, and from those combinations of animal fluids, 
 Page  121 
  
 which are termed secretions, this fluid matter of heat is given out amongst the neighbouring bodies; and in the solutions of salts in wa|ter, or of water in air, it is absorbed from the bodies, that surround them; whilst in its facility in passing through metallic bodies, and its difficulty in pervading resins and glass, it resembles the properties of the electric aura; and is like that excited by friction, and seems like that to gravitate amongst other bodies in its uncombined state, and to find its equilibrium. 
  
 There is no circumstance of more consequence in the animal eco|nomy than a due proportion of this fluid of heat; for the digestion of our nutriment in the stomach and bowels, and the proper qualities of all our secreted fluids, as they are produced or prepared partly by animal and partly by chemical processes, depend much on the quantity of heat; the excess of which, or its deficiency, alike gives us pain, and induces us to avoid the circumstances that occasion them. And in this the perception of heat essentially differs from the perceptions of the sense of touch, as we receive pain from too great pressure of solid bodies, but none from the absence of it. It is hence probable, that nature has provided us with a set of nerves for the perception of this fluid, which anatomists have not yet attended to. 
  
 There may be some difficulty in the proof of this assertion; if we look at a hot fire, we experience no pain of the optic nerve, though the heat along with the light must be concentrated upon it. Nor does warm water or warm oil poured into the ear give pain to the organ of hearing; and hence as these organs of sense do not perceive small excesses or deficiences of heat; and as heat has no greater ana|logy to the solidity or to the figures of bodies, than it has to their colours or vibrations; there seems no sufficient reason for our ascrib|ing the perception of heat and cold to the sense of touch; to which it has generally been attributed, either because it is diffused beneath the whole skin like the sense of touch, or owing to the inaccuracy of our observations, or the desect of our languages. 
 
All these motions of the muscles, that are thus naturally excited by the stimulus of distending bodies, are also liable to be called into strong action by their catenation, with the irritations or sensations produced by the momentum of the progressive particles of blood in the arteries, as in inflammatory fevers, or by acrid substances on other sensible organs, as in the strangury, or tenesmus, or cholera. 
  
 We shall conclude this account of the sense of extension by observ|ing, that the want of its object is attended with a disagreeable sensa|tion, as well as the excess of it. In those hollow muscles, which have been accustomed to it, this disagreeable sensation is called faint|ness, emptiness, and sinking; and, when it arises to a certain degree, is attended with syncope, or a total quiescence of all motions, but the internal irritative ones, as happens from sudden loss of blood, or in the operation of tapping in the dropsy. 
  
 VIII. Of the Appetites of Hunger, Thirst, Heat, Extension, the want of fresh Air, animal Love, and the Suckling of Children. 
 HUNGER is most probably perceived by those numerous ramifica|tions of nerves that are seen about the upper opening of the stomach; and thirst by the nerves about the fauces, and the top of the gula. The ideas of these senses are few in the generality of mankind, but are more numerous in those, who by disease, or indulgence, desire particular kinds of foods or liquids. 
  
 A sense of heat has already been spoken of, which may with pro|priety be called an appetite, as we painfully desire it, when it is de|ficient in quantity. 
  
 The sense of extension may be ranked amongst these appetites, since the deficiency of its object gives disagrecable sensation; when this happens in the arterial system, it is called faintness, and seems to 
 Page  125 
  
 bear some analogy to hunger and to cold; which like it are attended with emptiness of a part of the vascular system. 
  
 The sense of want of fresh air has not been attended to, but is as distinct as the others, and the first perhaps that we experience after our nativity; from the want of the object of this sense many diseases are produced, as the jail-fever, plague, and other epidemic maladies. Animal love is another appetite, which occurs later in life, and the females of lactiferous animals have another natural inlet of pleasure or pain from the suckling their offspring. The want of which either owing to the death of their progeny, or to the fashion of their country, has been fatal to many of the sex. The males have also pectoral glands, which are frequently turgid with a thin milk at their nativity, and are furnished with nipples, which erect on titilla|tion like those of the female; but which seem now to be of no fur|ther use, owing perhaps to some change which these animals have undergone in the gradual progression of the formation of the earth, and of all that it inhabit. 
  
 These seven last mentioned senses may properly be termed appetites, as they differ from those of touch, sight, hearing, taste, and ← smell → , in this respect; that they are affected with pain as well by the defect of their objects as by the excess of them, which is not so in the latter. Thus cold and hunger give us pain, as well as an excess of heat or satiety; but it is not so with darkness and silence. 
  
 IX. Before we conclude this Section on the organs of sense, we must observe, that, as far as we know, there are many more senses, than have been here mentioned, as every gland seems to be influenced to separate from the blood, or to absorb from the cavities of the body, or from the atmosphere, its appropriated fluid, by the stimulus of that fluid on the living gland; and not by mechanical capillary ab|sorption, nor by chemical affinity. Hence it appears, that each of 
 Page  126
 
 these glands must have a peculiar organ to perceive these irritations, but as these irritations are not succeeded by sensation, they have not acquired the names of senses. 
  
 However when these glands are excited into motions stronger than usual, either by the acrimony of their fluids, or by their own irrita|bility being much increased, then the sensation of pain is produced in them as in all the other senses of the body; and these pains are all of different kinds, and hence the glands at this time really become each a different organ of sense, though these different kinds of pain have acquired no names. 
  
 Thus a great excess of light does not give the idea of light but of pain; as in forcibly opening the eye when it is much inflamed. The great excess of pressure or distention, as when the point of a pin is pressed upon our skin, produces pain, (and when this pain of the sense of touch is slighter, it is termed itching, or tickling,) without any idea of solidity or of figure: an excess of heat produces smarting, of cold another kind of pain; it is probable by this sense of heat the pain produced by caustic bodies is perceived, and of electricity, as all these are fluids, that permeate, distend, or decompose the parts that feel them. 
  
 Page  127 
 SECT. XV. 
 OF THE CLASSES OF IDEAS. 
 I. 1. Ideas received in tribes. 2. We combine them further, or abstract from these tribes. 3. Complex ideas. 4. Compounded ideas. 5. Simple ideas, modes, substances, relations, general ideas. 6. Ideas of reflexion. 7. Memory and imagination imperfectly defined. Ideal presence. Memorandum-rings. II. 1. Ir|ritative ideas. Perception. 2. Sensitive ideas, imagination. 3. Voluntary ideas, recollection. 4. Associated ideas, suggestion. III. 1. Definitions of per|ception, memory. 2. Reasoning, judgment, doubting, distinguishing, comparing. 3. Invention. 4. Consciousness. 5. Identity. 6. Lapse of time. 7. Free|will. 
  
 I. AS the constituent elements of the material world are only per|ceptible to our organs of sense in a state of combination; it follows, that the ideas or sensual motions excited by them, are never received singly, but ever with a greater or less degree of combination. So the colours of bodies or their hardnesses occur with their figures: every ← smell → and taste has its degree of pungency as well as its peculiar fla|vour: and each note in music is combined with the tone of some in|strument. It appears from hence, that we can be sensible of a num|ber of ideas at the same time, such as the whiteness, hardness, and coldness, of a snow-ball, and can experience at the same time many irritative ideas of surrounding bodies, which we do not attend to, as mentioned in Section VII. 3. 2. But those ideas which belong to the same sense, seem to be more easily combined into synchronous tribes, than those which were not received by the same sense, as we can 
 Page  128 
  
 more easily think of the whiteness and figure of a lump of sugar at the same time, than the whiteness and sweetness of it. 
  
 2. As these ideas, or sensual motions, are thus excited with greater or less degrees of combination; so we have a power, when we repeat them either by our volition or sensation, to increase or diminish this degree of combination, that is, to form compounded ideas from those, which were more simple; and abstract ones from those, which were more complex, when they were first excited; that is, we can repeat a part or the whole of those sensual motions, which did constitute our ideas of perception; and the repetition of which now constitutes our ideas of recollection, or of imagination. 
  
 3. Those ideas, which we repeat without change of the quantity of that combination, with which we first received them, are called complex ideas, as when you recollect Westminster Abbey, or the planet Saturn: but it must be observed, that these complex ideas, thus re-excited by volition, sensation, or association, are seldom per|fect copies of their correspondent perceptions, except in our dreams, where other external objects do not detract our attention.
 
 The word memory includes two classes of ideas, either those which are preceded by voluntary exertion, or those which are suggested by their associations with other ideas. 
  
 2. Reasoning is that operation of the sensorium, by which we ex|cite two or many tribes of ideas; and then re-excite the ideas, in which they differ, or correspond. If we determine this difference, it 
 Page  132 
  
 is called judgment; if we in vain endeavour to determine it, it is called doubting. 
  
 If we re-excited the ideas, in which they differ, it is called dis|tinguishing. If we re-excite those in which they correspond, it is called comparing. 
  
 3. Invention is an operation of the sensorium, by which we volun|tarily continue to excite one train of ideas, suppose the design of raising water by a machine; and at the same time attend to all other ideas, which are connected with this by every kind of catenation; and combine or separate them voluntarily for the purpose of obtaining some end. 
  
 For we can create nothing new, we can only combine or separate the ideas, which we have already received by our perceptions: thus if I wish to represent a monster, I call to my mind the ideas of every thing disagreeable and horrible, and combine the nastiness and glut|tony of a hog, the stupidity and obstimacy of an ass, with the fur and awkwardness of a bear, and call the new combination Caliban. Yet such a monster may exist in nature, as all his attributes are parts of nature. So when I wish to represent every thing, that is excellent, and amiable; when I combine benevolence with cheerfulness, wis|dom, knowledge, taste, wit, beauty of person, and elegance of manners, and associate them in one lady as a pattern to the world, it is called invention; yet such a person may exist,—such a person does exist!—It is _____ _____ , who is as much a monster as Caliban. 
  
 4. In respect to consciousness, we are only conscious of our ex|istence, when we think about it; as we only perceive the lapse of time, when we attend to it; when we are busied about other objects, neither the lapse of time nor the consciousness of our own existence can occupy our attention. Hence, when we think of our own ex|istence, we only excite abstracted or reflex ideas (as they are termed), of our principal pleasures or pains, of our desires or aversions, or of the 
 Page  133 
  
 figure, solidity, colour, or other properties of our bodies, and call that act of the sensorium a consciousness of our existence. Some philoso|phers, I believe it is Des Cartes, has said, "I think, therefore I exist." But this is not right reasoning, because thinking is a mode of existence; and it is thence only saying, "I exist, therefore I exist." For there are three modes of existence, or in the language of grammarians three kinds of verbs. First, simply I am, or exist. Secondly, I am acting, or exist in a state of activity, as I move. Thirdly, I am suffering, or exist in a state of being acted upon, as I am moved. The when, and the where, as applicable to this existence, depends on the successive motions of our own or of other bodies; and on their respective situa|tions, as spoken of Sect. XIV. 2. 5. 
  
 5. Our identity is known by our acquired habits or catenated trains of ideas and muscular motions; and perhaps, when we compare in|fancy with old age, in those alone can our identity be supposed to exist. For what else is there of similitude between the first speck of living entity and the mature man?—every deduction of reasoning, every sen|timent or passion, with every fibre of the corporeal part of our system, has been subject almost to annual mutation; while some catenations alone of our ideas and muscular actions have continued in part un|changed.
By a due attention to these circumstances many of the actions of young animals, which at first sight seemed only referable to an inex|plicable instinct, will appear to have been acquired like all other ani|mal actions, that are attended with consciousness, by the repeated efforts of our muscles under the conduct of our sensations or desires. 
  
 The chick in the shell begins to move its feet and legs on the sixth day of incubation (Mattreican, p. 138); or on the seventh day, (Langley); afterwards they are seen to move themselves gently in the liquid that surrounds them, and to open and shut their mouths, (Harvei, de Generat. p. 62, and 197. Form de Poulet. ii. p. 129). Puppies before the membranes are broken, that involve them, are seen to move themselves, to put out their tongues, and to open and shut their mouths, (Harvey, Gipson, Riolan, Haller). And calves lick themselves and swallow many of their hairs before their nativity: which however puppies do not, (Swammerden, p 319. Flemyng Phil. Trans. Ann. 1755. 42). And towards the end of gestation, the foetus of all animals are proved to drink part of the liquid in which they swim, (Haller. Physiol. T. 8. 204). The white of egg is found 
 Page  138 
  
 in the mouth and gizzard of the chick, and is nearly or quite con|sumed before it is hatched, (Harvei de Generat. 58). And the liquor amnii is found in the mouth and stomach of the human foetus, and of calves; and how else should that excrement be produced in the in|testines of all animals, which is voided in great quantity soon after their birth; Gipson, Med. Essays, Edinb. V. i. 13. Halleri Physiolog. T. 3. p. 318. and T. 8). In the stomach of a calf the quantity of this liquid amounted to about three pints, and the hairs amongst it were of the same colour with those on its skin, (Blasii Anat. Animal, p. m. 122). These facts are attested by many other writers of credit, besides those above mentioned. 
  
 III. It has been deemed a surprising instance of instinct, that calves and chickens should be able to walk by a few efforts almost immedi|ately after their nativity: whilst the human infant in those countries where he is not incumbered with clothes, as in India, is five or six months, and in our climate almost a twelvemonth, before he can safely stand upon his feet. 
  
 The struggles of all animals in the womb must resemble their mode of swimming, as by this kind of motion they can best change their attitude in water. But the swimming of the calf and chicken re|sembles their manner of walking, which they have thus in part ac|quired before their nativity, and hence accomplish it afterwards with very few efforts, whilst the swimming of the human creature re|sembles that of the frog, and totally differs from his mode of walking. 
  
 There is another circumstance to be attended to in this affair, that not only the growth of those peculiar parts of animals, which are first wanted to secure their subsistence, are in general furthest advanced before their nativity: but some animals come into the world more completely formed throughout their whole system than others: and are thence much forwarder in all their habits of motion. Thus the colt, and the lamb, are much more perfect animals than the blind 
 Page  139 
  
 puppy, and the naked rabbit; and the chick of the pheasant, and the partridge, has more perfect plumage, and more perfect eyes, as well as greater aptitude to locomotion, than the callow nestlings of the dove, and of the wren. The parents of the former only find it ne|cessary to shew them their food, and to teach them to take it up; whilst those of the latter are obliged for many days to obtrude it into their gaping mouths. 
  
 IV. From the facts mentioned in No. 2. of this Section, it is evinced that the foetus learns to swallow before its nativity; for it is seen to open its mouth, and its stomach is found filled with the liquid that sur|rounds it. It opens its mouth, either instigated by hunger, or by the irksomeness of a continued attitude of the muscles of its face; the liquor amnii, in which it swims, is agreeable to its palate, as it con|sists of a nourishing material, (Haller Phys. T. 8. p. 204). It is tempted to experience its taste further in the mouth, and by a few efforts learns to swallow, in the same manner as we learn all other animal actions, which are attended with consciousness, by the repeated efforts of our muscles under the conduct of our sensations or volitions. 
  
 The inspiration of air into the lungs is so totally different from that of swallowing a fluid in which we are immersed, that it cannot be acquired before our nativity. But at this time, when the circula|tion of the blood is no longer continued through the placenta, that suffocating sensation, which we feel about the precordia, when we are in want of fresh air, disagreeably affects the infant: and all the muscles of the body are excited into action to relieve this oppression; those of the breast, ribs, and diaphragm are found to answer this pur|pose, and thus respiration is discovered, and is continued throughout our lives, as often as the oppression begins to recur. Many infants, both of the human creature, and of quadrupeds, struggle for a minute after they are born before they begin to breathe, (Haller Phys. T. 8. p. 400. ib. pt. 2. p. 1). Mr. Busfon thinks the action of the dry air upon the nerves of ← smell → of new-born animals, by producing an en|deavour 
 Page  140
 
 to sneeze, may contribute to induce this first inspiration, and that the rarefaction of the air by the warmth of the lungs contributes to induce expiration, Hist. Nat. Tom. 4. p. 174. Which latter it may effect by producing a disagreeable sensation by its delay, and a consequent effort to relieve it. Many children sneeze before they respire, but not all, as far as I have observed, or can learn from others. 
  
 At length, by the direction of its sense of ← smell → , or by the officious care of its mother, the young animal approaches the odoriferous rill of its future nourishment, already experienced to swallow. But in the act of swallowing, it is necessary nearly to close the mouth, whether the creature be immersed in the fluid it is about to drink, or not: hence, when the child first attempts to suck, it does not slight|ly compress the nipple between its lips, and suck as an adult person would do, by absorbing the milk; but it takes the whole nipple into its mouth for this purpose, compresses it between its gums, and thus repeatedly chewing (as it were) the nipple, presses out the milk; ex|actly in the same manner as it is drawn from the teats of cows by the hands of the milkmaid. The celebrated Harvey observes, that the foetus in the womb must have sucked in a part of its nourishment, because it knows how to suck the minute it is born, as any one may experience by putting a finger between its lips, and because in a few days it forgets this art of sucking, and cannot without some difficulty again acquire it, (Exercit. de Gener. Anim. 48). The same observa|tion is made by Hippocrates. 
  
 A little further experience teaches the young animal to suck by ab|sorption, as well as by compression; that is, to open the chest as in the beginning of respiration, and thus to rarefy the air in the mouth, that the pressure of the denser external atmosphere may contribute to force out the milk. 
  
 The chick yet in the shell has learnt to drink by swallowing a part of the white of the egg for its food; but not having experienced how 
 Page  141 
  
 to take up and swallow solid seeds, or grains, is either taught by the solicitous industry of its mother; or by many repeated attempts is enabled at length to distinguish and to swallow this kind of nutri|ment. 
  
 And puppies, though they know how to suck like other animals from their previous experience in swallowing, and in respiration; yet are they long in acquiring the art of lapping with their tongues, which from the flaccidity of their cheeks, and length of their mouths, is after|wards a more convenient way for them to take in water. 
  
 V. The senses of ← smell → and taste in many other animals greatly ex|cel those of mankind, for in civilized society, as our victuals are ge|nerally prepared by others, and are adulterated with salt, spice, oil, and empyreuma, we do not hesitate about eating whatever is set before us, and neglect to cultivate these senses: whereas other animals try every morsel by the ← smell → , before they take it into their mouths, and by the taste before they swallow it: and are led not only each to his proper nourishment by this organ of sense, but it also at a maturer age directs them in the gratification of their appetite of love. Which may be further understood by considering the sympathies of these parts de|scribed in Class IV. 2. 1. 7. While the human animal is directed to the object of his love by his sense of beauty, as mentioned in No. VI. of this Section. Thus Virgil. Georg. III. 250. 
  
 Nonne vides, ut tota tremor pertentat equorum 
 Corpora, si tantum notas odor attulit auras? 
 Nonne canis nidum veneris nasutus odore 
 Quaerit, et erranti trahitur sublambere linguâ?
Page  144 
  
 is however at this time an old monkey shewn in Exeter Change, London, who having lost his teeth, when nuts are given him, takes a stone into his hand, and cracks them with it one by one; thus using tools to effect his purpose like mankind. 
  
 The beaver is another animal that makes much use of his hands, and if we may credit the reports of travellers, is possessed of amazing ingenuity. This however, M. Buffon affirms, is only where they exist in large numbers, and in countries thinly peopled with men; while in France in their solitary state they shew no uncommon in|genuity. 
  
 Indeed all the quadrupeds, that have collar-bones, (claviculae) use their fore-limbs in some measure as we use our hands, as the cat, squirrel, tyger, bear and lion; and as they exercise the sense of touch more universally than other animals, so are they more sagacious in watching and surprising their prey. All those birds, that use their claws for hands, as the hawk, parrot, and cuckoo, appear to be more docile and intelligent; though the gregarious tribes of birds have more acquired knowledge. 
  
 Now as the images, that are painted on the retina of the eye, are no other than signs, which recall to our imaginations the objects we had before examined by the organ of touch, as is fully demonstrated by Dr. Berkley in his treatise on vision; it follows that the human crea|ture has greatly more accurate and distinct sense of vision than that of any other animal. Whence as he advances to maturity he gradually acquires a sense of female beauty, which at this time directs him to the object of his new passion. 
  
 Sentimental love, as distinguished from the animal passion of that name, with which it is frequently accompanied, consists in the desire or sensation of beholding, embracing, and faluting a beautiful object. 
  
 The characteristic of beauty therefore is that it is the object of love; and though many other objects are in common language called beauti|ful, 
 Page  145 
  
 yet they are only called so metaphorically, and ought to be termed agreeable. A Grecian temple may give us the pleasurable idea of sublimity, a Gothic temple may give us the pleasurable idea of va|riety, and a modern house the pleasurable idea of utility; music and poetry may inspire our love by association of ideas; but none of these, except metaphorically, can be termed beautiful, as we have no wish to embrace or salute them. 
  
 Our perception of beauty consists in our recognition by the sense of vision of those objects, first, which have before inspired our love by the pleasure, which they have afforded to many of our senses; as to our sense of warmth, of touch, of ← smell → , of taste, hunger and thirst; and, secondly, which bear any analogy of form to such objects. 
  
 When the babe, soon after it is born into this cold world, is applied to its mother ' s bosom; its sense of perceiving warmth is first agree|ably affected; next its sense of ← smell → is delighted with the odour of her milk; then its taste is gratified by the flavour of it; after|wards the appetites of hunger and of thirst afford pleasure by the pos|session of their objects, and by the subsequent digestion of the ali|ment; and, lastly, the sense of touch is delighted by the softness and smoothness of the milky fountain, the source of such variety of hap|piness.
