 There  are  three  kinds 
 of  cardamoms  known  in  commerce : the  1 st  has  a small  capsule, 
 not  very  triangular,  and  plump ; it  is  the  most  esteemed,  and  is 
 known  under  the  name  — shorts  : the  2d  larger,  both  in  length  and 
 breadth,  and  more  triangular  than  the  former,  called  — short-longs : 
 and  the  3d  more  than  three-quarters  of  an  inch  long,  2 to  3 lines 
 broad,  sharply  triangular;  elongated  and  accuminate;  pale  and 
 more  finely  ribbed  than  the  former  sorts  — long-longs. 
  
 Qualities.  — Cardamom  seeds,  which  are  rough  and  of  a brown 
 colour,  have  an  agreeable,  aromatic,  camphoraceous  odour,  and  a 
 warm  spicy  taste.  They  are  easily  separated  from  the  capsule,  and 
 are  pulverulent.  According  to  TrommsdorfF they  contain  4*6  of  volatile oil;  
 10*4  fixed  oil;  2*5  of  colouring  matter,  with  a salt  of  potassa  ; 
 3 ' Qfecula  ; 1*8  azotized  mucilage  and  phosphate  of  lime  ; 0*4  yellow 
 colouring  matter;  and  77*3  lignin  = 100  00.1  Water,  alcohol, 
 and  ether  extract  their  virtues ; the  two  latter  most  completely. 
 The  watery  infusion  has  a turbid  appearance ; and  lets  fall  floccu- 
 lent  precipitates  on  the  addition  of  alcohol,  the  acids,  solutions  of 
 salts  of  iron,  bichloride  of  mercury,  and  acetate  of  lead ; but  the 
 sulphate  of  iron  does  not  alter  its  colour.  The  alcoholic  tincture  is 
 rendered  milky  by  water.  The  ethereal  tincture  has  a yellowish- 
 green  hue,  and,  when  evaporated  on  the  surface  of  water,  it  leaves 
 neither  resin  nor  extractive ; and  only  a considerable  portion  of 
 essential  oil,  which  has  the  flavour  and  taste  of  the  seeds  in  perfec- 
 tion. Cardamoms  owe  any  medicinal  virtue  they  possess  to  the 
 volatile  oil  which  they  contain.  Dr.  Pereira  states,  from  private 
 information,  that  about  six  and  a half  drachms  of  this  oil  were  ob- 
 tained from  good  Malabar  cardamoms,  which  is  colourless  at  first, 
 but  becomes  yellow ; sp.  gr.  0*943,  hot  taste  and  has  a composition 
 analogous  to  that  from  lemons  or  turpentine  (Ci0  H8). 
  
 Medical  properties  and  uses . — Cardamom  seeds  are  carminative
The  two  varieties  of  the  amygdalus  communis  are  not  distin- 
 guished from  each  other  but  by  the  taste  of  the  kernel  of  their 
 fruit.  Nees  von  Esenbeck  informs  us  that  in  the  Palatinate  bitter 
 and  sweet  almonds  are  sometimes  found  on  the  same  tree. 
  
 There  are  several  varieties  of  sweet  almonds . The  Valentia  al- 
 mond is  a sweet,  large,  flat  almond,  round  at  one  extremity,  pointed 
 at  the  other,  and  compressed  in  the  middle,  as  if  with  the  thumb. 
 The  Italian  almond  resembles  the  Valentia,  but  it  is  not  so  sweet, 
 is  smaller,  and  less  depressed  in  the  middle.  The  Jordan  almond, 
 which  comes  from  Malaga,  and  is  the  best  sweet  almond  brought 
 to  England,  is  said  to  be  the  produce  of  a distinct  species  of  amyg- 
 dalus. They  are  longer,  flatter,  less  pointed  at  one  end,  and  less 
 round  at  the  other,  and  have  a paler  cuticle  than  those  which  we 
 have  described. 
  
 Sweet  almonds  in  the  shell,  both  hard  and  soft,  are  imported  in 
 baskets  from  Spain,  and  also  in  mats,  casks,  serons,  and  cases. 
 The  bitter  almonds,  which  come  chiefly  from  Mogadore,  arrive  in 
 boxes.  They  are  smaller  than  the  sweet  almond,  and  much  thicker;
they  taste  bitter,  and  when  rubbed  in  water  give  out  the  odour  of 
 peach-blossoms. 
  
 When  the  almond  is  not  well  preserved,  it  is  preyed  on  by  an 
 insect  that  eats  out  the  internal  part : or,  if  this  does  not  happen, 
 the  oil  it  contains  is  apt  to  become  rancid. 
  
  
 It  was  cultivated  in  England  by  Lobel  before  1570. 
  
  
 126 
  
  
 Materia  Medica.  — Amygdalus  communis,  part  it. 
  
  
 Qualities.  — The  cuticle  of  both  kinds  of  almonds  has  an  un- 
 pleasant, bitterish,  austere  taste ; but  it  is  easily  detached  by 
 putting  the  almonds  into  boiling  water.  When  thus  decorticated,
they  are  said  to  be  blanched ; and  display  the  cotyledons  with  the 
 embryo  at  the  pointed  end. 
  
 The  blanched  sweet  almond  is  inodorous  ; has  a sweet,  pleasant, 
 bland  taste  ; and  consists  of  about  54  parts  of  fixed  oil , 24  of 
 emulsin , 3 of  gum , 6 of  uncry stalliz able  saccharine  matter , a trace 
 of  acetic  acid , and  4 parts  of  icoody  fibre  and  water , with  5 of  testa 
 = 100*00.  When  eaten  as  food  it  is  not  very  digestible,  unless  it 
 be  well  masticated.  The  bitter  almond  is  also  inodorous  when 
 entire,  but  when  triturated  with  water  it  has  the  odour  of  the 
 peach-blossom ; and  the  taste  is  the  pleasant  bitter  of  the  peach 
 kernel.  It  contains  only  28  parts  of  fixed  oil , but  the  oil  is  as 
 bland  as  that  of  the  sweet  almond,  and  keeps  better ; 30  parts  of 
 emulsin , and,  besides  the  other  components  of  the  sweet  almond,  a 
 principle  which  has  been  named  Amygdalin ; which,  when  in 
 contact  with  water  and  the  emulsin,  forms  a volatile  oil  and  hydro- 
 cyanic acid.  The  volatile  oil  of  bitter  almonds,  which  contains 
 hydrocyanic  acid,  is  prepared  from  the  cake  remaining  after  the 
 expression  of  the  fixed  oil,  by  submitting  it  to  distillation  with 
 water.  One  hundred  weight  of  the  cake  generally  yields  from  two
either  universal  or  partial  involucrum ; the  corolla  consists  of  five 
 ovate,  obtuse,  concave,  yellow  petals,  with  the  apexes  inflected ; 
 the  filaments  are  yellow,  and  longer  than  the  corolla ; with  an 
 inferior  germen,  covered  by  the  nectary,  and  supporting  two  short 
 styles,  terminated  by  obtuse  stigmas. 
  
 The  fruit  of  dill,  which  is  the  part  of  the  plant  medicinally  used, 
 is  about  the  length  of  a carraway,  but  broader  and  flatter.  It  is 
 oval,  concave  on  one  side,  convex  and  striated  on  the  other ; of  a 
 brown  colour,  and  surrounded  with  a dull  pale-yellow  or  straw- 
 coloured  membranous  expansion.  The  vittse  are  broad,  one  in 
 the  channel,  and  two  on  the  commissure.  When  good,  dill  fruit 
 is  heavy,  and  of  a bright  colour ; and  it  has  an  aromatic  odour. 
  
 Qualities.  — The  dried  fruit,  or  seed  as  it  is  usually  called,  has 
 an  aromatic,  sweetish  odour,  not  very  agreeable,  nor  yet  unpleasant; 
 the  taste  is  moderately  warm  and  pungent.  These  qualities  depend 
 on  a volatile  oil,  which  is  extracted  by  distillation  with  water 
 (according  to  Mr.  Brande,  in  the  proportion  of  2 lbs.  to  1 cwt.  of 
 the  fruit1).  The  colour  and  taste  are  imparted  to  alcohol  by
 
 The  roots  of  angelica,  when  wounded  in  the  spring,  yield  an 
 odorous  yellow  juice,  which  being  slowly  desiccated,  proves  an 
 elegant  gum-resin,  very  rich  in  the  qualities  of  the  plant.  For 
 medicinal  purposes,  the  roots  should  be  dug  up  in  the  autumn  of 
 the  first  year,  as  they  are  less  liable  to  spoil  than  when  they  are 
 taken  up  in  the  spring  ; for  when  gathered  at  that  season,  they 
 become  mouldy,  and  are  preyed  on  by  insects.  They  should  be 
 thoroughly  dried,  and  kept  in  a well-aired,  dry  place ; and  in  order 
 to  secure  their  preservation,  Lewis  suggests  “ the  dipping  them 
 in  boiling  spirit,  or  exposing  them  to  steam,  after  they  are  dried.’* 
 The  leaves  and  fruit  do  not  retain  their  virtues  when  kept.  The 
 stems  are  cut,  when  tender,  in  May,  and  made  into  an  agreeable 
 sweetmeat  by  the  confectioners.1 
  
 Qualities.  — The  odour  of  every  part  of  the  recent  plant  is  fra- 
 grant and  aromatic ; the  taste  sweetish  at  first,  then  aromatic,  warm, 
 and  slightly  bitter.  The  dried  root  is  corrugated,  and  of  a greyish- 
 brown  colour  externally ; breaks  short  with  a starchy  fracture,  and 
 presents  a firm  interior,  whitish,  with  many  resinous  brown  and
yellow  points.  It  has  the  same  odour  and  taste  as  the  recent  plant ; 
 and  yields  these  qualities  to  alcohol,  and  in  some  degree  to  boiling 
 water.  Brande  states  that  angelica  root  contains  volatile  oil , a 
 soft  acrid  resin , bitter  extractive , gum,  starch , oxidized  extractive , 
 albumen , and  chloride  of  sodium. 
  
 Medical  properties  and  uses.  — The  leaves  and  fruit,  or  seeds, 
 when  recent,  and  the  root  both  in  the  fresh  and  dried  state,  are 
 tonic  and  carminative ; but  although  the  most  elegant  aromatic  of 
 northern  growth,  yet  they  are  scarcely  ever  prescribed  in  modern 
 practice.  The  dose  in  substance  is  from  3ss.  to  3j.,  which  may 
 be  given  three  or  four  times  a day. 
  
 ANIS1  OLEUM.  See  Preparations,  Part  III. 
  
  
 ■b  The  Icelanders  eat  the  stems  and  roots  of  angelica  raw  with  butter. — Vide  Sir 
 George  Mackenzie '  s Travels  in  Iceland , 4to.  p.  2 55. 
  
 
and  containing  five  angular  seeds,  in  an  insipid  mealy  substance. 
  
 The  plant  should  be  procured  in  autumn ; and  “ the  green  leaves 
 alone  selected  and  picked  from  the  twigs,  and  dried  by  a moderate 
 exposure  to  heat.”1  The  leaves  are  sometimes  adulterated  with 
 those  of  the  box,  which  contain  no  tannic  acid ; and  those  of 
 Y accinium  Vitis  Idcea , red  whortleberry ; which,  however,  are 
 easily  detected  by  their  wanting  the  reticulated  surface  of  the  Uva 
 Ursi  leaves,  by  their  edges  being  revolute,  sparsely  and  finely 
 serrated,  and  dotted  beneath ; and  by  their  infusion  not  displaying 
 the  presence  of  tannic  acid  on  either  the  addition  of  a solution  of 
 isinglass,  or  of  sulphate  of  iron. 
  
 Qualities.  — The  fresh  leaves  are  inodorous,  and  have  a slightly 
 bitter,  astringent  taste,  leaving  a sweet  sensation  in  the  mouth. 
 When  properly  dried  and  powdered,  they  acquire  an  odour  similar 
 to  that  of  Hyson  tea ; but  the  taste  remains  the  same,  the  degree 
 of  bitterness  only  being  increased.  The  colour  of  the  powder  is  a 
 light  brown,  with  a shade  of  greenish  yellow.  Both  water  and 
 alcohol  extract  its  virtues,  and  the  watery  infusion  strikes  a deep
 
 part  ii.  Materia  Medica . — Atropa  Belladonna. 
  
  
 173 
  
  
 ternally  brownish-grey,  internally  white  : it  has  a faint  odour  and 
 a sweetish-bitter  taste.  It  should  be  taken  up  either  in  autumn 
 or  in  early  spring,  before  the  stems  begin  to  appear.  The  leaves  of 
 belladonna  are  inodorous : the  taste  is  slightly  nauseous,  sweetish- 
 bitter,  and  subacrid  ; they  do  not  lose  their  active  properties  by 
 drying,  unless  much  heat  be  used>  Vauquelin  found  that  the  ex- 
 pressed juice  contains  albumen,  salts  with  a base  of  potassa,  and  a 
 bitter  principle,  soluble  in  alcohol1  2 ; this  was  afterwards  found  by 
 M.  Brandes  to  be  an  alkaloid,  which  he  named  Atropia^  and  on 
 which  the  narcotic  quality  of  the  plant  depends ; an  opinion  which 
 was  confirmed  by  M.  Bunge,  Geiger,  Hesse,  and  Mein,  and  is  now 
 fully  established.  The  root  yields  the  largest  proportion  of  this 
 principle,  but  it  is  also  obtained  from  the  seeds,  and  exists  in  the
leaves.  Atropia , when  pure,  occurs  in  the  form  of  white  trans- 
 parent needles,  which  generally  arrange  themselves  in  stellate  groups 
 on  crystallizing:  it  is  without  odour  and  has  a strong  acrid  taste.  At 
 194°  F.  it  fuses  into  a transparent  oily  looking  substance,  and 
 crystallizes  again  on  cooling  ; it  is  partially  volatile,  without  change, 
 at  284°  F. ; at  a higher  temperature  it  burns  with  a white  flame. 
 It  is  soluble  in  about  300  parts  of  cold  water,  very  soluble  in 
 alcohol,  less  so  in  ether ; the  solutions  possess  a strong  alkaline  re- 
 action. Atropia  neutralizes  acids,  and  forms  with  them  salts,  some 
 of  which,  as  the  sulphate,  can  be  crystallized,  but  with  difficulty. 
 From  the  solutions  of  its  salts,  atropia  is  precipitated  by  chloride 
 of  gold,  tannic  acid,  and  astringent  solutions. 
  
 It  has  been  analyzed  by  Liebig  and  Yon  Planta,  who  assign 
 to  it  the  following  formula,  C34  H23  N 06.  The  yellow  precipitate 
 produced  by  the  gold  solution  (the  double  chloride  of  gold  and 
 atropia)  has  the  formula  C34  H23  N 06  + H Cl  + Au  C1.3 
  
 Besides  atropia,  which  exists  in  the  plant  in  the  state  of  a 
 supermalate  (?),  Brandes  discovered  two  other  substances,  namely,
pseudotoxin , an  azotized  principle  of  a gummy  nature ; and  phy- 
 teumacol , of  a similar  nature. 
  
 Every  part  of  the  plant  is  poisonous  ; and  children  and  the 
 ignorant  have  often  suffered  from  eating  the  berries,  the  beautiful 
 appearance  and  sweet  taste  of  which  render  them  very  alluring. 
 The  symptoms  which  they  induce  resemble  those  of  intoxication, 
 accompanied  with  fits  of  laughter  and  violent  gestures 2 ; great 
 thirst,  difficulty  of  deglutition,  nausea,  dilatation  of  the  pupil,  with 
 the  eyelids  drawn  down ; redness  and  tumefaction  of  the  face. 
  
  
 1 Ann.  de  Chim.  lxxii.  53. 
  
 2 Buchanan,  the  Scottish  historian,  states  that  the  victory  of  Macbeth  over  the 
 Danes  was  obtained  chiefly  by  mixing  this  plant  in  a donation  of  wine  and  ale,  which 
 was  sent  by  the  Scots  to  Sweno  during  a truce.  He  describes  very  accurately  the 
 botanical  characters  of  the  plant;  and  adds,  “vis  fructui,  radici,  ac  maxixne  semini 
 somnifera,  et  quae  in  amentiam,  si  largius  sumantur,  agat.” — Rerum  Scot,  Hist.  lib.  vii, 
 sect.  6.
bag  is  always  the  best.  The  goodness  of  the  castor  is  determined 
 by  its  sensible  qualities ; that  which  is  quite  black  is  insipid,  in- 
 odorous, oily,  and  unfit  for  use.  Castor  is  said  to  be  sometimes 
 counterfeited  by  a mixture  of  some  gummy  and  resinous  substances 
 with  a little  real  castor,  artificially  interspersed  with  membranes, 
 and  stuffed  into  the  scrotum  of  the  goat.2  The  fraud  is  easily  de- 
 tected by  comparing  the  smell  and  taste  with  those  of  real  castor, 
 and  by  the  deficiency  of  the  sebaceous  follicles,  which  are  always 
 attached  to  the  real  follicles. 
  
 Qualities.  — The  odour  of  castor  is  strong,  heavy,  and  aromatic  ; 
  
  
 river  Teivi.  Giraldus  Cambrensis  mentions  it  in  1188.  Sibbald  has  the  following 
 sentence,  “Boethius  dicit  fibrum  seu  castorem  in  Scotia  reperiri.”  — Prod.  p.  ii. 
 1.3.  p.  10. 
  
 1 It  is  asserted  that  the  European  and  the  American  beavers  are  distinct  species  : 
 the  former  burrows,  the  latter  builds. — Pereira. 
 
2 Duncan ' s  New  Edinburgh  Dispensatory , 5th  edit.  p.  220. 
  
  
 220 
  
  
 Materia  Medica. — Castoreum. 
  
  
 PART  II. 
  
  
 the  taste  bitter,  sub- acrid,  and  nauseous.  It  feels  slightly  unctuous, 
 and  is  of  a red-brown  colour.  Its  odorous  principle  is  dissipated 
 by  coction  with  water;  but  when  it  is  simply  infused  in  boiling 
 water,  its  sensible  qualities  are  in  a small  degree  imparted  to  the 
 infusion,  which  has  a yellow  colour,  and  shows  the  presence  of  an 
 alkali,  by  changing  to  green  the  vegetable  blues.  Alcohol  and 
 sulphuric  ether  dissolve  the  resinous  part  of  the  castor,  which 
 remains  after  the  evaporation  of  the  menstrua,  and  retains  all  the
odour  and  taste  of  the  drug.  A ccording  to  the  analysis  of  Bouillon 
 Lagrange,  Russian  castor  contains  the  carbonates  of  potassa,  of  lime , 
 and  of  ammonia , iron,  resin , a mucilaginous  extractive  matter , and  a 
 volatile  oil ; Canadian  castor  contains  the  same,  with  benzoic  acid, 
 both  free  and  combined.1  Bonn,  who  examined  Russian  castor, 
 found  in  it  a volatile  oil , adipocire,  resin , and  lime .2  M.  Brandes 
 found  in  it  a peculiar  principle  which  he  termed  Castorine ; which 
 crystallizes  in  long,  semi-transparent,  white  prisms,  with  the  smell 
 of  castor,  and  having  a coppery  taste  ; insoluble  in  cold  water  and 
 cold  alcohol,  but  soluble  in  boiling  alcohol  and  in  the  volatile  oils. 
 It  is  procured  by  boiling  castor  in  alcohol : the  castorine  precipitates 
 as  the  solution  cools.  The  resin  which  he  procured  was  dark 
 brown,  acrid,  bitter ; insoluble  in  ether,  but  soluble  in  alcohol.3 
 Castor  also  contains  an  oily  acid,  named  carbolic  acid. 
  
 Medical  properties  and  uses.  — Castor  is  anti  spasmodic,  and  em- 
 menagogue.  It  was  formerly  given  in  combination  with  myrrh  as 
 a specific  in  quartans4;  and  is  still  prescribed,  with  seeming  ad- 
 vantage, in  low  nervous  fevers,  hysteria,  epilepsy,  and  spasmodic 
 affections : and  from  the  idea  of  its  action  being  particularly
retained  on  the  stomach,  this  is  a good  form  of  the  remedy.2  If  it 
 excite  nausea  or  vomiting,  or  operate  as  a cathartic,  or  occasion 
 costiveness,  these  inconveniences  may  in  some  degree  be  obviated 
 by  combining  it  with  aromatics,  opium,  or  a cathartic,  as  circum- 
 stances direct ; or  its  salts,  or  some  of  the  lighter  preparations,  in 
 which  its  active  principles  are  supposed  to  be  extracted,  free  from 
 the  grosser  parts,  may  be  employed.  The  powder  is  given  mixed 
 in  wine3  or  in  water ; or,  when  the  taste  is  an  objection,  in  milk 
  
  
 1 Pearson . 
  
 2 Fabroni  says,  “ Cinchona  loses  its  solubility,  and  consequently  its  activity,  by  long 
 exposure  to  the  air,  and  by  pulverisation  long  protracted  with  the  view  of  rendering  it 
 as  fine  as  possible.  From  Tj*g  to  ^ parts  of  soluble  matter  are  obtained  from  bruised 
 cinchona,  which  in  fine  powder  yields  only  -jjC  or  ^ to  water.”  Practitioners  ought 
 never  to  purchase  bark  in  the  state  of  powder,  for  in  this  state  it  is  always  found  more 
 or  less  adulterated.  Dr.  Paris  ( Pharmacologia ) mentions  that,  in  the  official  inspection 
 of  the  shops  of  apothecaries  and  druggists,  “ the  censors  have  repeatedly  met  with  pow- 
 dered cinchona,  having  a harsh  metallic  taste’ '   This  may  arise  from  the  admixture  of  a
and  the  footstalks  thrown  away.  The  picked  leaflets  are  then  to 
 be  properly  dried  (vide  Poivders , Part  III.) ; and  as  exposure  to 
 the  air  and  light  destroys  the  fine  green  colour  of  the  plant,  the 
 loss  of  which  is  supposed  to  injure  its  active  qualities,  the  dried 
 leaflets  must  be  preserved  in  boxes  completely  filled  by  gently 
 pressing  down  the  leaves,  then  covering  the  box  with  a closely- 
 fitted  lid,  wrapping  it  in  paper  ; and  sealing  the  envelope.  If  the 
 leaves  be  powdered,  the  powder  may  be  preserved  good  in  closely- 
 stopped  opaque  phials,  for  many  years. 
  
 Qualities . — The  odour  of  properly  dried  hemlock-leaves  is  strong, 
 heavy,  and  narcotic,  but  not  so  disagreeable  as  that  of  the  fresh 
 leaves  : the  taste  is  slightly  bitter  and  nauseous.  They  are  easily 
 pulverized ; and  the  powder  should  retain  the  beautiful  green 
 colour  of  the  leaves.  The  acrimony  only  of  the  fresh  leaves  is  lost 
 in  drying  ; but  the  narcotic  principle  remains  uninjured  if  the 
 operation  be  well  performed.  The  fruit  is  small,  ovate,  striated 
 with  five  ribs,  and  of  a greyish-green  colour.  It  has  little  or  no 
 odour,  and  a somewhat  bitterish  taste.  The  fruit  may  be  kept  a 
 much  longer  time  than  the  leaves  without  losing  activity.  The
virtues  of  conium  are  extracted  by  alcohol  and  ether.  To  ether 
 the  leaves  communicate  a very  deep  green  colour ; and  when  the 
 etherial  tincture  is  evaporated  on  the  surface  of  water,  a rich 
 dark-green  resin  remains,  in  which  the  narcotic  principle  of  the 
 plant  appears  to  reside  ; it  contains  the  odour  and  taste  in  per- 
 fection; and  half  a grain  produces  headach  and  slight  vertigo.  To 
 this  principle,  which  I discovered,  Dr.  Paris  proposed  to  give  the 
 name  of  Coneird ; but  it  is  not  Conia,  and  merely  contains  it  as 
  
  
 1 The  Chaerophylium  bulbosum,  bulbous-rooted  cow  parsley,  lias  a spotted  stem,  but 
 the  joints  are  swelled,  and  the  seeds  rough. 
  
 2 In  Ray’s  Synopsis,  Conium  maculatum  is  named  Cicuta, — a name  still  retained  by 
 the  Dublin  College ; and  owing  to  which  the  water  hemlock,  Cicuta  virosa,  has  some- 
 times been  confounded  with  it,  and  improperly  used. 
  
 3 Pharmacologia,  p.  185. 
  
 
 
 Qualities.  — The  roots  are  covered  with  a brown  bark,  are 
 woody  and  white  within,  have  scarcely  any  odour,  and  only  a 
 slightly  sweetish  taste,  with  very  little  aromatic  warmth ; but  the 
 fruit  has  a fragrant  odour,  and  a sweet,  warm,  aromatic  taste. 
 These  qualities  depend  on  a volatile  oil,  which  is  dissipated  by 
 decoction  in  water,  and  separated  by  distillation  ; they  are  com- 
 pletely imparted  to  alcohol,  but  only  imperfectly  to  boiling  water 
 by  infusion.  The  fruit  contains  also  a fixed  inodorous,  insipid  oil. 
 The  oil  of  fennel  usually  employed  is  obtained  from  the  fruit  of  F. 
 dnlce:  it  is  more  agreeable  both  in  odour  and  taste  than  that  of  F. 
 vidgare.  Nineteen  cwts.  of  the  fruit  yield  78  lbs.  of  the  oil. 
  
 Medical  properties  and  uses.  — Fennel  was  formerly  esteemed  as 
 a remedy:  and  supposed  to  be  resolvent,  diuretic,  carminative,  and 
 stomachic ; but  even  as  a carminative  it  is  not  superior  to  anise- 
 seed  and  caraway ; and  it  is  therefore  now  seldom  employed.  The 
 dose  of  the  bruised  fruit  may  be  from  9 j.  to  £j. 
  
 Officinal  preparations.  — Aqua  Fceniculi , E.  D.  Oleum  Seminum
termed  the  offal,  are  dried  and  ground  to  powder ; the  latter  are 
 packed  up  and  sold  to  the  druggists.”2 
  
 Qualities.  — This  root  is  inodorous,  and  the  taste  sweet  and 
 mucilaginous,  leaving,  when  it  is  chewed  without  being  peeled,  a 
 slight  degree  of  bitterness  in  the  mouth.  The  powder,  if  good, 
 is  of  a brownish  yellow  colour,  and  has  a rich  sweet  taste,  more 
 agreeable  than  that  of  the  fresh  root ; but  it  is  said  to  be  often 
  
  
 1 Very  little  is  now  grown  at  Godaiming,  where  it  was  formerly  cultivated  to  some 
 extent. — Vide  Stevenson ' s  Survey  of  Surrey , p.  380.  It  was  first  cultivated  in  England 
 in  1558.  — Stow. 
  
 2 The  price  of  the  best  roots  is  about  31.  per  cwt.  — Stevenson , 1.  c. 
  
  
 PART  II. 
  
 
oil  procured  from  10  lb.  of  the  cinnamon  is  one  ounce.  Both  the 
 light  and  the  heavy  is  equally  prized ; and  they  bring  the  same 
 price  in  the  Colombo  bazaars.  Oil  of  cinnamon  is  adulterated 
 with  oil  of  cassia,  or  with  alcohol,  or  expressed  oil.  The  distilled 
 water  is  kept  for  repeated  distillations.  Cinnamon  which  has  been 
 kept  yields  two  ounces  of  light  oil  for  every  five  of  heavy  oil. 
  
 Good  cinnamon  is  sometimes  intermixed  with  cinnamon  from 
 which  the  oil  has  been  drawn,  and  with  cassia.  The  former  is  de- 
 tected by  the  weakness  of  its  odour  and  taste ; and  the  latter  by 
 its  thickness,  smooth  fracture,  and  remarkably  slimy  taste. 
  
 Cinnamon  from  China  is  imported  under  the  name  of  cassia.  It 
 is  usually  in  single  quills,  which  are  thicker,  rougher,  denser,  and 
 break  with  a shorter  fracture  than  the  fine  Ceylon  cinnamon.  It 
 is  thus  readily  distinguished,  but  the  distinction  is  rendered  more 
 evident  when  it  is  made  into  infusion.  The  infusion  of  real  good 
 cinnamon  affords  no  blue  tint  on  the  addition  of  tincture  of  iodine; 
 that  of  cassia  becomes  blue,  owing  to  the  cellular  part,  which  con- 
 tains fecula,  being  left  on  the  bark.
 
 Qualities.  — Cinnamon  has  a very  pleasant  fragrant  odour,  and 
 a pungent,  aromatic,  sweetish  taste ; and  the  pieces,  when  chewed, 
 soften  in  the  mouth.  When  it  is  very  hot,  without  sweetness,  and 
 leaves  a mawkish  taste  in  the  mouth,  it  is  of  an  inferior  quality. 
 The  best  is  rather  pliable,  but  breaks  in  splinters;  is  as  thin  as 
 paper,  and  of  a light  yellowish-fawn  colour ; thickness  and  a dark 
 or  brown  colour  are  marks  of  inferiority.  What  is  called  Chinese 
 cinnamon,  or  cassia , is  lighter  coloured,  rougher,  denser,  and  breaks 
 shorter.  The  taste  is  harsher,  more  pungent  and  ligneous,  without 
 the  sweetness  of  the  Ceylon  cinnamon.  The  age  of  the  tree  from 
 which  the  bark  is  taken  influences  much  the  character  of  the  cin- 
 namon : it  should  be  five  years  old  in  dry  places,  and  nine  in  moist 
 and  shady  situations.  The  trees  on  elevated  sandy  localities,  ex- 
 posed to  the  direct  rays  of  the  sun,  have  the  sweetest  odour,  and 
 furnish  the  most  valuable  bark.  These  qualities  depend  on  the 
 volatile  oil , which  may  be  separated  by  macerating  the  bark  in 
  
  
 1 The  bark  of  the  roots  yields  an  aromatic  volatile  oil,  denominated  oil  of  camphor,
which  is  used  in  Ceylon  as  a rubefacient  in  painful  affections  of  the  joints,  and  in  sprains. 
 Oil  of  cinnamon  has  always  been  dear.  Alston  says  that  he  saw  the  finest  Oriental  sold 
 in  Holland,  in  1721,  at  50  stivers  the  drachm,  “ or  the  common  price  of  the  pound  of 
 cinnamon  at  Amsterdam.”  — Led.  on  Mat.  Med.  vol.  ii.  p.  7. 
  
  
 430 
  
  
 Materia  Medica.  — Laurns  Cassia. 
  
  
 PART  II. 
  
  
 alcohol,  and  distilling  the  tincture ; in  which  process  the  oil  does 
 not  rise  with  the  spirit,  but  remains  in  the  retort.  From  ^ xvj.  of 
 the  bark,  Neumann  obtained,  by  this  means,  only  two  scruples  and 
 a half  of  oil.1  This  oil  has  a pale  gold  colour,  is  heavier  than 
 water,  perfectly  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  has  the  odour  and  taste  of
the  cinnamon  concentrated.  It  is  violently  acted  upon  both  by 
 nitric  and  sulphuric  acid.  The  longer  the  bark  is  kept  the  less 
 volatile  oil  it  yields,  the  oil  being  gradually  oxidized  and  partly 
 converted  into  resin  and  cinnamic  acid.  For  properties  and  com- 
 position of  this  oil,  see  Cinnamomi  Oleum , Part  III. 
  
 Medical  properties  and  uses.  — Cinnamon  bark  is  astringent,  cor- 
 dial, and  tonic.  It  has  been  supposed  to  possess  also  antiperiodic 
 properties ; but  this  opinion  requires  support.  Hence  it  is  found 
 to  be  efficacious  in  diarrhoea  proceeding  from  a weakened  and  lan- 
 guid state  of  the  intestines,  atonic  dyspepsia,  and  chronic  nervous 
 debility : and  when  given  in  the  form  of  watery  infusion,  it  re- 
 moves nausea,  and  checks  vomiting.  But  the  principal  use  of 
 cinnamon  is  to  cover  the  disagreeable  taste  of  other  remedies.  The 
 oil  is  a powerful  stimulant  and  stomachic  ; and  is  used  as  such  in 
 cramps  of  the  stomach,  flatulent  colic,  hiccough,  and  nervous 
 languors.  It  is  sometimes  inserted  into  the  hollow  of  a decayed 
 tooth  to  allay  the  pain  of  toothach. 
  
 The  dose  of  the  bark  in  powder  is  from  grs.  x.  to  9 j. : that  of
 
 Qualities. — Turpentines. — Although  these  are  produced  from 
 different  species  of  the  Pine  tribe,  and  one  sort  from  the  Pistacia 
 terehinthus , yet  all  of  them  possess  the  same  general  physical  and 
 chemical  properties.  They  have  a peculiar,  somewhat  aromatic 
 odour,  and  a warm,  pungent,  bitterish  taste : are  semifluid,  tena- 
 cious, translucent,  combine  readily  with  fixed  oils  and  are  inflam- 
 mable, burning  with  a white  flame  and  much  smoke.  Alcohol  and 
 ether  dissolve  them  entirely,  leaving  the  impurities ' ,  but  water 
 takes  up  only  their  flavour.  When  distilled  with  water  a volatile 
 oil  comes  over,  and  towards  the  end  of  the  operation  succinic  acid 
 rises 1 ; resin  remains  in  the  retort ; the  turpentines  therefore  are 
 compounds  of  these  three  substances.  They  are  partially  saponi- 
 fied by  solution  of  pure  potassa : but  a part  of  the  resin  and  the 
 greater  part  of  the  volatile  oil  remain  unchanged.  Each  sort  of 
 turpentine  has  characteristic  qualities  which  require  to  be  noticed. 
 1.  Common  Turpentine  has  a strong,  somewhat  fragrant  odour, 
 and  a bitter,  disagreeable  taste  ; its  consistence  is  greater  than 
 that  of  honey  ; its  colour  is  dirty  yellow,  and  it  is  more  opaque 
 than  the  other  sorts.  Strasburg  turpentine,  according  to  Caillet,
consists  of  53*5  of  volatile  oil,  6*2  resin , 10*8  abietin,  46*4  abietic 
 acid , and  0 ' 9  of  succinic  acid.  2.  Venice  Turpentine  is  more  fluid. 
  
  
 1 Annales  de  Chim.  xxi.  328. 
  
  
 part  ii.  Materia  Medic  A.  — Pinus  ( Terebinthinae).  541 
  
 having  the  consistence  of  new  honey,  a yellowish  colour,  and  is 
 less  unpleasant  to  the  smell  and  taste  than  the  common.  3.  Ca- 
 nadian Balsam  (or  more  correctly  Turpentine)  has  a strong,  not 
 disagreeable,  odour,  and  a bitterish  taste  ; is  transparent,  whitish, 
 and  has  the  consistence  of  copaiva.  4.  Chian  or  Cyprus  Turpentine 
 (see  Pistacia)  is  very  fragrant,  but  almost  insipid,  nearly  transpa- 
 rent, thick,  tenacious,  and  of  a whitish  colour. 
  
 Oil  of  turpentine  has  a strong,  penetrating,  peculiar,  odour,  and 
 a hot,  pungent,  bitterish  taste.  It  is  perfectly  limpid  and  colour- 
 less: extremely  light,  volatile,  and  inflammable  ; it  congeals  at
+ 14°  Fahr.,  its  boiling  point  is  312°  Fahr. : it  dissolves  com- 
 pletely in  six  parts  of  sulphuric  ether ; but  although  hot  alcohol 
 readily  dissolves  it,  yet  it  again  separates  in  drops  as  the  spirit 
 cools,  and  is  very  sparingly  soluble  in  the  cold  in  the  strongest 
 alcohol : one  hundred  parts  in  volume,  however,  unite  with  twenty 
 of  alcohol,  and  form  a homogeneous  solution,  which  does  not 
 become  turbid  by  water.1  In  all  other  respects  it  agrees  with  the 
 other  volatile  oils.  Its  formula  is  C20  H16.  In  this  state  it  is 
 named  Camphene.  When  a stream  of  hydrochloric  acid  gas  passed 
 through  it,  a crystallized  mass  is  formed,  which  is  regarded  as 
 artificial  camphor.  It  consists  of  a solid  matter  which  is  the  cam- 
 phor; and  a fluid,  which  differs  from  the  former  only  in  being  liquid. 
 Formula  C20  H16,  II  Cl.  I found  that  an  imperfect  camphor  is 
 also  formed  when  a stream  of  oxygen  gas  is  passed  through  the 
 pure  oil  of  turpentine. 
  
 Tar  has  a strong  odour,  familiar  to  every  person ; a resinous, 
 subacid,  bitterish  taste ; and  a coarse,  thick  consistence,  with  a 
 deep  brown  colour,  approaching  to  blackness,  derived  from  the 
 charring  of  the  wood  during  its  formation.  It  consists  principally
of  empyreumatic  oil,  resin,  and  acetic  acid ; is  partially  soluble  in 
 water ; and  is  inspissated  by  boiling  into  pitch.  In  the  empyreu- 
 matic oil,  many  substances  have  been  found  by  Dr.  Reichenbach, 
 amongst  which  are  Creasote,  Paraffine,  Eupione,  Picamer,  &c.  & c. 
  
 Yellow  and  white  resin  are  varieties  of  the  same  substance. 
 They  are  nearly  inodorous  when  cold ; but,  when  heated,  emit  a 
 slight  terebinthinate  odour.  Their  taste  is  slightly  acrid  and 
 bitterish;  and  their  colour  a dull  whitish  yellow,  or  a greenish 
 yellow.  The  mass  of  resin  is  semipellucid,  brittle,  breaks  with  a 
 true  vitreous  fracture,  and  adheres  moderately  to  the  fingers.  Its 
 specific  gravity  is  1*0742.  It  melts  when  heated,  then  inflames, 
 and  burns  with  a yellow  flame,  giving  out  much  smoke.  It  is 
 insoluble  in  water,  but  entirely  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  the  fixed 
 oils,  and  the  alkalies.  The  mineral  and  the  acetic  acids  also  dis- 
 solve resin,  and  the  nitric  converts  it  into  artificial  tannin.  When 
 sulphuric  acid  is  employed,  charcoal,  in  the  proportion  of  forty- 
  
  
 1 Ure,  Phil.  Trans.  1822.
 
  
 542  Materia  Medica. — Pinus  ( Terebinthind).  part  n. 
  
 three  per  cent,  of  the  resin  acted  on,  is  produced.1  Resin  consists 
 of  at  least  two  acids,  isomeric,  but  distinguished  from  each  other 
 by  their  different  solubilities  in  alcohol ; the  one  soluble  in  cold 
 alcohol  is  called  Pinic  acid ; the  other  Sylvie  acid.  Their  formula 
 is  C40  H30  04.  Another  acid  occurring  in  resin  and  produced 
 by  the  action  of  heat  on  the  above  acids,  is  called  Colophonic 
 acid,  to  which  the  brown  colour  of  common  resin  or  rosin  is  due.  It 
 is  very  sparingly  soluble  in  alcohol.  The  resin  of  the  Norway 
 Spruce  possesses  nearly  the  same  properties.  It  is  in  the  form  of 
 solid  brittle  tears,  of  a brownish-yellow  colour  on  the  outside, 
 and  internally  white  : and  emits  a very  agreeable  odour  when 
 burning. 
  
 Burgundy  pitch  has  a terebinthinate  odour  and  taste,  is  brittle, 
 opaque,  and  of  a light  yellow  or  reddish-brown  colour.  It  softens 
 moderately  in  the  heat  of  the  hand,  appears  unctuous,  and  has  a
a lengthened  period. 
  
 Sugar  was  originally  brought  from  Asia,  about  the  period 
 of  the  Crusades,  but  was  for  a long  time  only  employed  as  a 
 medicine. 
  
 Qualities . — Raw  or  muscovado  sugar  is  odorous,  and  sweet  to 
 the  taste.  It  is  in  concreted  masses,  consisting  of  small,  dry, 
 sparkling,  irregular  crystals  of  a yellowish-brown  colour.  It  has 
 the  odour  of  honey  ; and,  beside  pure  cane  sugar , contains  colouring 
 matter , lime , and  malic  acid . Refined  sugar  is  inodorous,  and  sweet 
 to  the  taste.  Its  colour  is  pure  white ; and  the  mass  or  loaf,  in 
 which  it  is  concreted  in  small  cohering  crystals,  should  be  hard, 
 extremely  brittle,  pulverulent,  and  persistent  in  the  air:  the 
 crystals  are  modified,  oblique,  rhombic  prisms.  Cane  sugar  re- 
 quires only  one  third  of  its  own  weight  of  water  at  60°  for  its 
 solution : when  united  at  a higher  temperature  with  a smaller 
 quantity  of  water,  it  remains  dissolved,  forming  syrup . Sugar  is 
 sparingly  soluble  in  cold  alcohol : it  requires  four  parts  of  boiling 
 spirit  of  wine,  of  sp.  gr.  0*880,  for  its  solution  ; and  by  rest  a
moiety  of  the  sugar  again  separates  in  crystals.  Volatile  oils  also 
 readily  combine  with  it,  and  form  oleo-sacchara , which  are  miscible 
 with  water.  Lime  and  the  fixed  alkalies  unite  with  sugar,  and 
 form  compounds  without  any  sweetness  of  taste.  The  concen- 
 trated strong  acids  act  differently  upon  sugar.  The  sulphuric  acts 
 violently  upon  it,  sulphurous  acid  being  disengaged,  and  the  sugar 
 carbonized ; nitric  acid  converts  it  into  oxalic  acid.  By  the  action 
 of  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  cane  sugar  is  converted  into  grape  sugar ; 
 and  by  the  action  of  alkalies  cane  sugar  is  changed  first  into  grape 
 sugar  before  it  undergoes  further  changes.  Cane  sugar,  when 
 boiled  with  a caustic  alkali  and  oxide  of  copper,  very  slowly  re- 
 duces the  metal  to  the  state  of  the  red  suboxide ; whereas  by  grape 
 sugar  this  change  is  instantly  effected : hence  these  two  kinds  of 
 sugar  are  readily  distinguished  from  each  other.  The  alkaline 
 and  earthy  hydrosulphurets,  sulphurets,  and  phosphorets  decom- 
  
 S S 2 
  
  
 628
 
  
 Materia  Medica.  — Saccharum  Lactis. 
  
  
 PART  II. 
  
  
 pose  it,  and  resolve  it  into  a substance  resembling  gum.1  The 
 formula  of  anhydrous  cane  sugar  is  C24  H18  018. 
  
 Molasses  has  a peculiar  odour,  and  a sweet,  empyreumatic  taste. 
 It  is  of  a brown  or  black  colour,  thick,  and  viscid  ; and  is  constit  uted 
 chiefly  of  the  uncrystallizable  part  of  the  juice  of  the  sugar-cane, 
 which  Prout  has  denominated  liquid  sugar,  combined  with  saline, 
 acid,  and  other  vegetable  matters.  It  is  more  soluble  in  alcohol 
 than  sugar.2 
  
 Medical  properties  and  uses. — Paw  sugar  and  molasses  are  laxa- 
 tive ; and  refined  sugar  externally  applied  is  escharotic.  All  the
kinds  are  extremely  nutrient  when  eaten  along  with  other  food ; 
 and  they  are  more  generally  used  as  articles  of  diet  than  for 
 medicinal  purposes ; except  it  be  to  cover  the  taste  of  nauseous 
 drugs.  Sugar  is  useful  in  preventing  chemical  changes  from  taking 
 place  in  the  solutions  of  the  iodide  of  iron,  iodide  of  zinc,  carbonate 
 of  iron,  and  protoxide  of  iron.  In  a therapeutical  point  of  view, 
 sugar  is  said  to  be  a preventive  of  worms,  and  to  prove  useful  in 
 scurvy  ; but  it  is  hurtful  to  those  of  bilious,  hypochondriacal,  and 
 dyspeptic  habits.  Milk  boiled  with  fine  sugar  will  keep  good 
 for  a considerable  time.  It  is  said  to  be  an  antidote  to  the  poison 
 of  verdigris  ; but  as  it  does  not  decompose  the  salts  of  copper  under 
 such  conditions,  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  antidote  of  cupreous 
 poisons.  It  is  well  adapted  for  preserving  animal  and  vegetable 
 matter. 
  
 Officinal.  — Syrupus , L.  Sirujms  Simplex , E.  D.  Sugar  is  contained 
 in  all  syrups,  Trochisi,  and  confections,  and  in  the  Ferri  Carbonas  cum 
 Saccharo,  L.  E.D.  Treacle  forms  an  ingredient  of  many  pill  masses,  L. 
  
 SACCHARUM  LACTIS,  Dub.  Sugar  of  Milk.  Lactine.
 
 This  sugar  has  recently  been  made  officinal  by  the  Dublin 
 College.  It  is  prepared  very  largely  in  Switzerland,  where  it  is 
 employed  as  an  article  of  food.  It  is  very  readily  made  from 
 milk  by  the  following  process  : — An  acid  is  first  added  to  coagulate 
 the  caseine  ; the  fluid  is  then  filtered,  evaporated  to  a thin  syrup, 
 and  set  aside.  The  milk-sugar  slowly  crystallizes  out,  and  may 
 be  purified  by  animal  charcoal  and  re-crystallization. 
  
 Qualities.  — When  pure  it  occurs  in  the  form  of  four-sided 
 prisms,  which  are  white,  translucent,  and  very  hard.  It  is  fre- 
 quently found  in  cylindrical  masses,  the  crystals  having  been 
 deposited  on  cords  or  sticks.  It  is  sweetish  tc  the  taste,  but  much 
 less  so  than  either  cane  or  grape  sugar.  It  is  soluble  in  about  six 
  
  
 1 Rollo  on  Diabetes , 452.  Thomson ' s  Chemistry , 4th  edit.  vol.  iv.  660. 
  
 2 A sugar  in  every  respect  resembling  common  sugar  is  obtained  from  the  maple,  the 
 roots  of  the  beet,  carrots,  the  roots  of  marshmallows,  and  many  other  plants.
the  mode  of  conducting  the  fermentation,  modify  the  flavour  and 
 taste  of  wine.  The  odour  and  flavour  in  the  more  fully-fermented 
 wines,  seems  to  depend  on  the  vinous  process,  as  it  bears  little  re- 
 semblance to  the  natural  flavour  of  the  fruit ; from  which,  how- 
 ever, in  the  sweet  and  half- fermented  wines,  it  is  immediately 
 derived ; but  flavouring  ingredients,  as  bitter  almonds  and  orris 
 root,  are  also  used  in  the  manufacturing  of  wines.  Malaga,  Fron- 
 tignac,  Tokay,  Vino  tinto,  Montefiuscone,  Schiras,  and  the  Malmsey 
 wines  of  the  Greek  islands,  are  sweet  to  the  taste,  and  consequently 
 the  result  of  imperfect  fermentation  ; Champagne,  Gooseberry, 
 and  all  sparkling  wines,  owe  their  briskness  to  carbonic  acid  gas : 
 Hock,  Khenish,  Mayne,  Barsac,  Burgundy,  Claret2,  and  Her- 
 mitage contain  a certain  quantity  of  uncombined  acid,  and  are 
 termed  light  and  dry  ; while  Marsala,  Madeira,  Sherry3,  and  Port, 
 are  dry  and  strong.  The  odour  of  sherry  is  pleasant  and  aromatic ; 
 the  taste  warm,  with  some  degree  of  the  agreeable  bitterness  of 
 the  peach  kernel ; the  taste  of  port  is  austere  and  bitterish : claret 
 is  less  rough,  thinner,  slightly  acidulous,  and  higher  flavoured ; 
 and  hock,  although  frequently  acidulous,  yet,  when  good,  is  free 
 from  acid.  Of  the  common  white  wines,  marsala  is  undoubtedly
the  sulphate  is  dissolved,  but  the  mannite,  which  is  soluble  in 
 water,  is  left  and  has  a sweet  taste.  The  sugar  is  readily  detected 
 by  dissolving  the  suspected  salt  in  water,  and  precipitating  the 
 quina  by  liquor  potassae : as  this  destroys  the  bitterness  of  the  so- 
 lution, the  presence  of  the  sugar  becomes  obvious  by  its  taste. 
 Gum  is  detected  by  digesting  the  salt  in  strong  alcohol : the  sul- 
 phate is  dissolved  and  the  impurities  are  left.  Starch  is  detected 
 by  boiling  the  salt,  and  when  cold  testing  the  solution  with  tinc- 
 ture of  iodine.  If  salicine  be  present,  sulphuric  acid  turns  the  salt 
 red.  The  sulphate  and  acetate  of  lime  are  detected  by  exposing 
 the  suspected  salt  to  a strong  heat ; the  disulphate  of  quina  is  to- 
 tally consumed,  whilst  the  lime  of  the  adulterating  salts  remains. 
 Alcohol  also  detects  these  salts  of  lime  by  not  dissolving  them. 
  
 Qualities . — The  sulphate  or  more  properly  the  disulphate  of 
 quina  crystallizes  in  delicate  acicular  crystals,  inodorous,  and  im- 
 pressing an  intensely  bitter  taste  on  the  palate.  The  crystals  lose 
 three-fourths  of  their  water  of  crystallization  when  exposed  to  the 
 air.  They  melt  at  240°,  and  are  charred  and  destroyed  at  a red 
 heat.  They  require  for  their  solution  740  parts  of  water  at  60°,
and  30  parts  at  212°:  but  80  parts  only  of  cold  alcohol,  of  sp. 
 gr.  850.  They  dissolve  freely  in  alcohol  at  212°.  The  constituents 
 of  the  salt  are  2 eq.  of  quina,  1 eq.  of  acid,  8 eq.  of  water.1  The 
 neutral  sulphate  is  more  soluble,  and  crystallizes  in  small  needles.  '  
  
 The  London  College  gives  the  following  characters  of  this  salt: 
 — “ It  is  dissolved  by  water,  especially  when  mixed  with  an  acid, 
 and  quina  is  precipitated  on  the  addition  of  ammonia;  the  liquor 
 after  evaporation  should  not  taste  of  sugar.  From  100  grains  of 
 disulphate  of  quina,  8 to  10  grains  are  expelled  by  a gentle  heat. 
 It  is  destroyed  by  heat : recently  prepared  chlorine  being  added  to 
 it,  and  then  ammonia,  it  becomes  green.  From  100  grains  dis- 
 solved in  water,  mixed  with  hydrochloric  acid,  26*6  grains  of  sul- 
 phate of  baryta,  dried  at  a red  heat,  are  obtained.” 
  
 Disulphate  of  quina  is  incompatible  in  prescriptions  with  alkalies 
 and  their  carbonates,  lime-water,  chloride  of  calcium,  chloride  of 
 barium,  the  salts  of  baryta,  those  of  the  oxide  of  lead,  and  astrin- 
 gent vegetable  infusions  and  decoctions.  It  may  be  administered 
 with  sulphate  of  iron,  and  all  the  sulphates,  and  with  acetate  and
choose  a remedy  of  the  same  class,  but  less  likely  to  have  a sudden  or  a violent  effect. 
 Thus,  in  prescribing  for  ascites  under  such  circumstances,  squill  or  acetate  of  potassa, 
 or  bitartrate  of  potassa,  should  be  preferred  to  elaterium ; for  intermittent  fever,  cin- 
 chona bark  to  the  arsenical  solution ; and  so  in  other  cases,  when  the  patient  is  not 
 under  the  eye  of  the  prescriber. 
  
 2.  Of  the  Form  and  Composition  of  extemporaneous  Prescriptions.  — In  every  prescription 
 simplicity  should  be  kept  in  view,  and  when  one  medicine  will  answer  the  intention 
 of  the  prescriber,  it  ought  to  be  preferred.  The  nauseous  taste,  however,  and  the  other 
 qualities  of  the  great  majority  of  drugs,  require  the  addition  of  others  to  modify  their 
 action ; but,  although  medicines  are  more  generally  prescribed  in  a compound  form, 
 yet  the  practice  of  accumulating  a great  variety  of  ingredients  in  one  prescription  must 
 be  avoided. 
  
 Medicines  exhibited  in  the  fluid  form  operate  sooner,  and  with  more  certainty  than 
 in  the  solid  state ; but  in  choosing  the  vehicle  or  solvent,  the  taste  of  the  patient  ought 
 not  to  be  overlooked.  Thus,  for  those  to  whom  peppermint-water  is  not  disagreeable, 
 the  nauseous  taste  of  sulphate  of  magnesia  is  more  completely  concealed  by  that  vehicle 
 than  any  other ; if  cinchona  bark  in  powder  be  ordered,  milk  effectually  covers  its 
 taste,  provided  the  dose  be  taken  the  moment  it  is  mixed.
