boil. To carve it, first run the knife down and along the upper side ƒof the fish from 1 to 2, then again on the lower side from 3 to 4. 
Serve the thick part, cutting it lengthwise in slices in the direction 
of the line from 1 to 2, and the thin part breadthwise, or in the 
direction from 5 to 6. A slice of the thick with one of the thin, 
where lies the fat, should be served to each guest. Care should be 
taken when carving not to break the flakes of the fish, as that 
impairs its appearance. The flesh of the salmon is rich and delicious 
in flavor. Salmon is in season from the first of February to the end 
of August. 
 
 
 
 
SOUPS. 
 
Consommé, or Stock, forms the basis of all meat soups, and also of all 
principal sauces. It is, therefore, essential to the success of these 
culinary operations to know the most complete and economical method of 
extracting from a certain quantity of meat the best possible stock or
broth. Fresh, uncooked beef makes the best stock, with the addition of 
cracked bones, as the glutinous matter contained in them renders it 
important that they should be boiled with the meat, which adds to the 
strength and thickness of the soup. They are composed of an earthy 
substance--to which they owe their solidity--of gelatine, and a fatty 
fluid, something like marrow. _Two ounces_ of them contain as much 
gelatine as _one pound_ of meat; but, in them, this is so encased in 
the earthy substance, that boiling water can dissolve only the surface 
of the whole bones, but by breaking them they can be dissolved more. 
When there is an abundance of it, it causes the stock, when cold, to 
become a jelly. The flesh of old animals contains more flavor than the 
flesh of young ones. Brown meats contain more flavor than white. 
 
Mutton is too strong in flavor for good stock, while veal, although 
quite glutinous, furnishes very little nutriment. 
 
Some cooks use meat that has once been cooked; this renders little 
nourishment and destroys the flavor. It might answer for ready soup, 
but for stock to keep it is not as good, unless it should be roasted 
meats. Those contain higher fragrant properties; so by putting the
remains of roast meats in the stock-pot you obtain a better flavor. 
 
The shin bone is generally used, but the neck or "sticking-piece," as 
the butchers call it, contains more of the substance that you want to 
extract, makes a stronger and more nutritious soup, than any other 
part of the animal. Meats for soup should always be put on to cook in 
_cold_ water, in a covered pot, and allowed to simmer slowly for 
several hours, in order that the essence of the meat may be drawn out 
thoroughly, and should be carefully skimmed to prevent it from 
becoming turbid, never allowed to _boil fast_ at any time, and if more 
water is needed, use boiling water from the tea-kettle; cold or 
lukewarm water spoils the flavor. Never salt it before the meat is 
tender (as that hardens and toughens the meat), especially if the meat 
is to be eaten. Take off every particle of scum as it rises, and 
before the vegetables are put in. 
 
Allow a little less than a quart of water to a pound of meat and bone, 
and a teaspoonful of salt. When done, strain through a colander. If 
for clear soups, strain again through a hair sieve, or fold a clean 
towel in a colander set over an earthen bowl, or any dish large enough
Scotch barley, pearl barley, wheat flour, mushroom, or mushroom 
catsup, parsnips, beetroot, turnips, leeks, garlic, shallots and 
onions; sliced onions fried with butter and flour until they are 
browned, then rubbed through a sieve, are excellent to heighten the 
color and flavor of brown sauces and soups. The herbs usually used in 
soups are parsley, common thyme, summer savory, knotted marjoram, and 
other seasonings, such as bay-leaves, tarragon, allspice, cinnamon, 
nutmeg, cloves, mace, black and white pepper, red pepper, lemon peel 
and juice, orange peel and juice. The latter imparts a finer flavor 
and the acid much milder. These materials, with wine, and the various 
catsups, combined in various proportions, are, with other ingredients, 
made into almost an endless variety of excellent soups and gravies. 
Soups that are intended for the principal part of a meal certainly 
ought not to be flavored like sauces, which are only intended to give 
relish to some particular dish. 
 
 
STOCK. 
 
Six pounds of shin of beef, or six pounds of knuckle of veal; any
Stock is the basis of many of the soups afterwards mentioned, and this 
will be found quite strong enough for ordinary purposes. Keep it in 
small jars, in a cool place. It makes a good gravy for hash meats; 
one tablespoonful of it is sufficient to impart a fine flavor to a 
dish of macaroni and various other dishes. Good soups of various kinds 
are made from it at short notice; slice off a portion of the jelly, 
add water, and whatever vegetables and thickening preferred. It is 
best to partly cook the vegetables before adding to the stock, as much 
boiling injures the flavoring of the soup. Season and boil a few 
moments and serve hot. 
 
[Illustration: FRANCES FOLSOM CLEVELAND.] 
 
 
WHITE STOCK. 
 
White stock is used in the preparation of white soups, and is made by 
boiling six pounds of a knuckle of veal, cut up in small pieces, 
poultry trimmings, and four slices of lean ham. Proceed according to 
directions given in STOCK, on opposite page.
near the boil, add the seasoning, then the oysters. Cook about five 
minutes from the time they begin to simmer, until they "ruffle." Stir 
in the butter, cook one minute, and pour into the tureen. Stir in the 
boiling milk and send to table. Some prefer all water in place of 
milk. 
 
[Illustration: IDA SAXTON McKINLEY.] 
 
OYSTER SOUP. No. 2. 
 
Scald one gallon of oysters in their own liquor. Add one quart of rich 
milk to the liquor, and when it comes to a boil, skim out the oysters 
and set aside. Add the yolks of four eggs, two good tablespoonfuls of 
butter, and one of flour, all mixed well together, but in this 
order--first, the milk, then, after beating the eggs, add a little of 
the hot liquor to them gradually, and stir them rapidly into the soup. 
Lastly, add the butter and whatever seasoning you fancy besides plain 
pepper and salt, which must both be put in to taste with caution. 
 
Celery salt most persons like extremely; others would prefer a little
marjoram or thyme; others again mace and a bit of onion. Use your own 
discretion in this regard. 
 
 
CLAM SOUP. (French Style.) 
 
Mince two dozen hard shell clams very fine. Fry half a minced onion in 
an ounce of butter; add to it a pint of hot water, a pinch of mace, 
four cloves, one allspice and six whole pepper corns. Boil fifteen 
minutes and strain into a saucepan; add the chopped clams and a pint 
of clam-juice or hot water; simmer slowly two hours; strain and rub 
the pulp through a sieve into the liquid. Return it to the saucepan 
and keep it lukewarm. Boil three half-pints of milk in a saucepan 
(previously wet with cold water, which prevents burning) and whisk it 
into the soup. Dissolve a teaspoonful of flour in cold milk, add it to 
the soup, taste for seasoning; heat it gently to near the boiling 
point; pour into a tureen previously heated with hot water, and serve 
with or without pieces of fried bread--called _croutons_ in kitchen 
French. 

 
CLAM SOUP. 
 
Twenty-five clams chopped fine. Put over the fire the liquor that was 
drained from them, and a cup of water; add the chopped clams and boil 
half an hour; then season to taste with pepper and salt and a piece of 
butter as large as an egg; boil up again and add one quart of milk 
boiling hot, stir in a tablespoon of flour made to a cream with a 
little cold milk, or two crackers rolled fine. Some like a little mace 
and lemon juice in the seasoning. 
 
 
 
 
MODES OF FRYING 
 
 
The usual custom among professional cooks is to entirely immerse the 
article to be cooked in boiling fat, but from inconvenience most 
households use the half-frying method of frying in a small amount of
fat in a frying pan. For the first method a shallow iron frying 
kettle, large at the top and small at the bottom, is best to use. The 
fat should half fill the kettle, or an amount sufficient to float 
whatever is to be fried; the heat of the fat should get to such a 
degree that, when a piece of bread or a teaspoonful of the batter is 
dropped in it, it will become brown almost instantly, but should not 
be so hot as to burn the fat. Some cooks say that the fat should be 
smoking, but my experience is, that is a mistake, as that soon ruins 
the fat. As soon as it begins to smoke it should be removed a little 
to one side, and still be kept at the boiling point. If fritters, 
crullers, croquettes, etc., are dropped into fat that is too hot, it 
crusts over the outside before the inside has fully risen, making a 
heavy, hard article, and also ruining the fat, giving it a burnt 
flavor. 
 
Many French cooks prefer beef fat or suet to lard for frying purposes, 
considering it more wholesome and digestible, does not impart as much 
flavor, or adhere or soak into the article cooked as pork fat. 
 
In families of any size, where there is much cooking required, there
FISH. 
 
In selecting fish, choose those only in which the eye is full and 
prominent, the flesh thick and firm, the scales bright and fins stiff. 
They should be thoroughly cleaned before cooking. 
 
The usual modes of cooking fish are boiled, baked, broiled, fried and 
occasionally stewed. Steaming fish is much superior to boiling, but 
the ordinary conveniences in private houses do not admit of the 
possibility of enjoying this delicate way of cooking it. Large fish 
are generally boiled, medium-sized ones baked or boiled, the smaller 
kinds fried or broiled. Very large fish, such as cod, halibut, etc., 
are cut in steaks or slices for frying or broiling. The heads of some 
fish, as the cod, halibut, etc., are considered tidbits by many. Small 
fish, or pan-fish, as they are usually called, are served without the 
heads, with the exception of brook-trout and smelts; these are usually 
cooked whole, with the heads on. Bake fish slowly, basting often with 
butter and water. Salmon is considered the most nutritious of all 
fish. When boiling fish, by adding a little vinegar and salt to the 
water, it seasons and prevents the nutriment from being drawn out; the
vinegar acting on the water hardens the water. 
 
Fill the fish with a nicely prepared stuffing of rolled cracker or 
stale bread crumbs, seasoned with butter, pepper, salt, sage and any 
other aromatic herbs fancied; sew up; wrap in a well-floured cloth, 
tied closely with twine, and boil or steam. The garnishes for boiled 
fish are: for turbot, fried smelts; for other boiled fish, parsley, 
sliced beets, lemon or sliced boiled egg. Do not use the knives, 
spoons, etc., that are used in cooking fish, for other food, as they 
will be apt to impart a fishy flavor. 
 
Fish to be boiled should be put into _cold water_ and set on the fire 
to cook very gently, or the outside will break before the inner part 
is done. Unless the fish are small, they should never be put into warm 
water; nor should water, either hot or cold, be poured _on_ to the 
fish, as it is liable to break the skin; if it should be necessary to 
add a little water while the fish is cooking, it ought to be poured in 
gently at the side of the vessel. 
 
Fish to be broiled should lie, after they are dressed, for two or
answers for all fish cut into steaks. Season well with salt and 
pepper. 
 
 
SALMON AND CAPER SAUCE. 
 
Two slices of salmon, one-quarter pound butter, one-half teaspoonful 
of chopped parsley, one shallot; salt and pepper to taste. 
 
Lay the salmon in a baking dish, place pieces of butter over it, and 
add the other ingredients, rubbing a little of the seasoning into the 
fish; place it in the oven and baste it frequently; when done, take 
it out and drain for a minute or two; lay it in a dish, pour caper 
sauce over it and serve. Salmon dressed in this way, with tomato 
sauce, is very delicious. 
 
 
BROILED SALT SALMON OR OTHER SALT FISH. 
 
Soak salmon in tepid or cold water twenty-four hours, changing water
several times, or let stand under faucet of running water. If in a 
hurry, or desiring a very salt relish, it may do to soak a short time, 
having water warm, and changing, parboiling slightly. At the hour 
wanted, broil sharply. Season to suit taste, covering with butter. 
This recipe will answer for all kinds of salt fish. 
 
 
PICKLED SALMON. 
 
Take a fine, fresh salmon, and, having cleaned it, cut it into large 
pieces, and boil it in salted water as if for eating. Then drain it, 
wrap it in a dry cloth, and set it in a cold place till next day. Then 
make the pickle, which must be in proportion to the quantity of fish. 
To one quart of the water in which the salmon was boiled, allow two 
quarts of the best vinegar, one ounce of whole black pepper, one 
nutmeg grated and a dozen blades of mace. Boil all these together in a 
kettle closely covered to prevent the flavor from evaporating. When 
the vinegar thus prepared is quite cold, pour it over the salmon, and 
put on the top a tablespoonful of sweet oil, which will make it keep 
the longer.
 
Cover it closely, put it in a dry, cool place, and it will be good for 
many months. This is the nicest way of preserving salmon, and is 
approved by all who have tried it. 
 
 
SMOKED SALMON. 
 
Smoked salmon to be broiled should be put upon the gridiron first, 
with the flesh side to the fire. 
 
Smoked salmon is very nice when shaved like smoked beef, and served 
with coffee or tea. 
 
 
FRICASSEE SALMON. 
 
This way of cooking fresh salmon is a pleasant change from the 
ordinary modes of cooking it. Cut one and one-half pounds of salmon 
into pieces one inch square; put the pieces in a stewpan with half a
well and send it to the table. Covering it while broiling gives it a 
more delicious flavor. 
 
 
BAKED SHAD. 
 
Many people are of the opinion that the very best method of cooking a 
shad is to bake it. Stuff it with bread crumbs, salt, pepper, butter 
and parsley, and mix this up with the beaten yolk of egg; fill the 
fish with it, and sew it up or fasten a string around it. Pour over it 
a little water and some butter, and bake as you would a fowl. A shad 
will require from an hour to an hour and a quarter to bake. Garnish 
with slices of lemon, water cress, etc. 
 
_Dressing for Baked Shad._--Boil up the gravy in which the shad was 
baked, put in a large tablespoonful of catsup, a tablespoonful of 
brown flour which has been wet with cold water, the juice of a lemon, 
and a glass of sherry or Madeira wine. Serve in a sauce boat. 
 

SHELL-FISH 
 
 
STEWED WATER TURTLES, OR TERRAPINS. 
 
Select the largest, thickest and fattest, the females being the best; 
they should be alive when brought from market. Wash and put them alive 
into boiling water, add a little salt, and boil them until thoroughly 
done, or from ten to fifteen minutes, after which take off the shell, 
extract the meat, and remove carefully the sand-bag and gall; also all 
the entrails; they are unfit to eat, and are no longer used in cooking 
terrapins for the best tables. Cut the meat into pieces, and put it 
into a stewpan with its eggs, and sufficient fresh butter to stew it 
well. Let it stew till quite hot throughout, keeping the pan carefully 
covered, that none of the flavor may escape, but shake it over the 
fire while stewing. In another pan make a sauce of beaten yolk of egg, 
highly flavored with Madeira or sherry, and powdered nutmeg and mace, 
a gill of currant jelly, a pinch of cayenne pepper, and salt to taste, 
enriched with a large lump of fresh butter. Stir this sauce well over 
the fire, and when it has almost come to a boil take it off. Send the
 
LOBSTER Á LA NEWBURG. 
 
Take one whole lobster, cut up in pieces about as large as a hickory 
nut. Put in the same pan with a piece of butter size of a walnut, 
season with salt and pepper to taste, and thicken with heavy cream 
sauce; add the yolk of one egg and two oz. of sherry wine. 
 
Cream sauce for above is made as follows: 1 oz. butter, melted in 
saucepan; 2 oz. flour, mixed with butter, thin down to proper 
consistency with boiling cream. 
 
_Rector  '  s Oyster House, Chicago._ 
 
 
BAKED CRABS. 
 
Mix with the contents of a can of crabs, bread crumbs or pounded 
crackers. Pepper and salt the whole to taste; mince some cold ham; 
have the baking pan well buttered, place therein first a layer of the
crab meat, prepared as above, then a layer of the minced ham, and so 
on, alternately until the pan is filled. Cover the top with bread 
crumbs and bits of butter, and bake. 
 
 
DEVILED CRABS. 
 
Half a dozen fresh crabs, boiled and minced, two ounces of butter, one 
small teaspoonful of mustard powder; cayenne pepper and salt to taste. 
Put the meat into a bowl and mix carefully with it an equal quantity 
of fine bread crumbs. Work the butter to a light cream, mix the 
mustard well with it, then stir in very carefully, a handful at a 
time, the mixed crabs, a tablespoonful of cream and crumbs. Season to 
taste with cayenne pepper and salt; fill the crab shells with the 
mixture, sprinkle bread crumbs over the tops, put three small pieces 
of butter upon the top of each, and brown them quickly in a hot oven. 
They will puff in baking and will be found very nice. Half the 
quantity can be made. A crab shell will hold the meat of two crabs. 
 

OYSTERS FRIED IN BATTER. 
 
_Ingredients._--One-half pint of oysters, two eggs, one-half pint of 
milk, sufficient flour to make the batter; pepper and salt to taste; 
when liked, a little nutmeg; hot lard. 
 
Scald the oysters in their own liquor, beard them, and lay them on a 
cloth to drain thoroughly. Break the eggs into a basin, mix the flour 
with them, add the milk gradually, with nutmeg and seasoning, and put 
the oysters in a batter. Make some lard hot in a deep frying pan; put 
in the oysters one at a time; when done, take them up with a sharp 
pointed skewer and dish them on a napkin. Fried oysters are frequently 
used for garnishing boiled fish, and then a few bread crumbs should be 
added to the flour. 
 
 
STEWED OYSTERS. (In Milk or Cream.) 
 
Drain the liquor from two quarts of oysters; mix with it a small 
teacupful of hot water, add a little salt and pepper and set it over
_New York Style._ 
 
 
PAN OYSTERS. No. 2. 
 
Lay in a thin pie tin or dripping-pan, half a pint of large oysters, 
or more if required; have the pan large enough so that each oyster 
will lie flat on the bottom; put in over them a little oyster liquor, 
but not enough to float; place them carefully in a hot oven and just 
heat them through thoroughly--do not bake them--which will be in three 
to five minutes, according to fire; take them up and place on toast; 
first moistened with the hot juice from the pan. Are a very good 
substitute for oysters roasted in the shell, the slow cooking bringing 
out the flavor. 
 
_French Restaurant, New Orleans, La._ 
 
 
OYSTER FRITTERS. 

 
Fowls, and also various kinds of game, when bought at our city 
markets, require a more thorough cleansing than those sold in country 
places, where as a general thing the meat is wholly dressed. In large 
cities they lay for some length of time with the intestines undrawn, 
until the flavor of them diffuses itself all through the meat, 
rendering it distasteful. In this case, it is safe, after taking out 
the intestines, to rinse out in several waters, and in next to the 
last water, add a teaspoonful of baking soda, say to a quart of water. 
This process neutralizes all sourness, and helps to destroy all 
unpleasant taste in the meat. 
 
Poultry may be baked so that its wings and legs are soft and tender, 
by being placed in a deep roasting pan with close cover, thereby 
retaining the aroma and essences by absorption while confined. These 
pans are a recent innovation, and are made double with a small opening 
in the top for giving vent to the accumulation of steam and gases when 
required. Roast meats of any kind can also be cooked in the same 
manner, and it is a great improvement on the old plan. 

By the use of a little acid there will be a considerable saving of 
fuel, as well as shortening of time. Its action is beneficial on old 
tough meats, rendering them quite tender and easy of digestion. 
Tainted meats and fowls will lose their bad taste and odor if cooked 
in this way, and if not used too freely no taste of it will be 
acquired. 
 
 
POTTED CHICKEN. 
 
Strip the meat from the bones of a cold roast fowl; to every pound of 
meat allow a quarter of a pound of butter, salt and cayenne pepper to 
taste; one teaspoonful of pounded mace, half a small nutmeg. Cut the 
meat into small pieces, pound it well with the butter, sprinkle in the 
spices gradually and keep pounding until reduced to a perfectly smooth 
paste. Pack it into small jars and cover with clarified butter, about 
a quarter of an inch in thickness. Two or three slices of ham minced 
and pounded with the above will be an improvement. Keep in a dry 
place. A luncheon or breakfast dish. 

half a lemon. Mix well, make it hot, remove from the fire and stir in 
a teaspoonful of made mustard. Pour into a hot gravy boat. 
 
_California Style, Lick House._ 
 
 
WILD DUCKS. 
 
Most wild ducks are apt to have the flavor of fish, and when in the 
hands of inexperienced cooks are sometimes unpalatable on this 
account. Before roasting them, parboil them with a small peeled carrot 
put within each duck. This absorbs the unpleasant taste. An onion will 
have the same effect, but unless you use onions in the stuffing the 
carrot is preferable. Roast the same as tame duck. Or put into the 
duck a whole onion peeled, plenty of salt and pepper and a glass of 
claret, bake in a hot oven twenty minutes. Serve hot with the gravy it 
yields in cooking and a dish of currant jelly. 
 
 
CANVAS-BACK DUCK.
 
The epicurean taste declares that this special kind of bird requires 
no spices or flavors to make it perfect, as the meat partakes of the 
flavor of the food that the bird feeds upon, being mostly wild celery; 
and the delicious flavor is best preserved when roasted quickly with a 
hot fire. After dressing the duck in the usual way by plucking, 
singeing, drawing, wipe it with a wet towel, truss the head under the 
wing; place it in a dripping-pan, put it in the oven, basting often, 
and roast it half an hour. It is generally preferred a little 
underdone. Place it when done on a hot dish, season well with salt and 
pepper, pour over it the gravy it has yielded in baking and serve it 
immediately while hot. 
 
_Delmonico._ 
 
 
ROAST PIGEONS. 
 
Pigeons lose their flavor by being kept more than a day after they are 
killed. They may be prepared and roasted or broiled the same as
burned. An onion sliced and put on top of a roast while cooking, 
especially roast of pork, gives a nice flavor. Remove the onion before 
serving. 
 
Larding meats is drawing ribbons of fat pork through the upper surface 
of the meat, leaving both ends protruding. This is accomplished by the 
use of a larding needle, which may be procured at house-furnishing 
stores. 
 
Boiling or stewing meat, if fresh, should be put into _boiling_ water, 
closely covered and boiled _slowly_, allowing twenty minutes to each 
pound, and, when partly cooked, or when it begins to get tender, 
salted, adding spices and vegetables. 
 
Salt meats should be covered with _cold_ water, and require thirty 
minutes _very slow_ boiling, from the time the water boils, for each 
pound; if it is very salt, pour off the first water and put it in 
another of boiling water, or it may be soaked one night in cold water. 
After meat commences to boil the pot should _never stop_ simmering and 
always be replenished from the _boiling_ tea-kettle.
THAWING FROZEN MEAT, ETC. 
 
If meat, poultry, fish, vegetables, or any other article of food, when 
found frozen, is thawed by putting it into _warm water_ or placing it 
before the fire, it will most certainly spoil by that process, and be 
rendered unfit to eat. The only way to thaw these things is by 
immersing them in _cold_ water. This should be done as soon as they 
are brought in from market, that they may have time to be well thawed 
before they are cooked. If meat that has been frozen is to be boiled, 
put it on in cold water. If to be roasted, begin by setting it at a 
distance from the fire, for if it should not chance to be thoroughly 
thawed all through to the centre, placing it at first too near the 
fire will cause it to spoil. If it is expedient to thaw the meat or 
poultry the night before cooking, lay it in cold water early in the 
evening, and change the water at bed-time. If found crusted with ice 
in the morning, remove the ice, and put the meat in fresh cold water, 
letting it lie in it till wanted for cooking. 
 
Potatoes are injured by being frozen. Other vegetables are not the 
worse for it, provided they are always thawed in cold water.
The first consideration in broiling is to have a clear, glowing bed of 
coals. The steak should be about three-quarters of an inch in 
thickness, and should be pounded only in extreme cases, _i.e._, when 
it is cut _too_ thick and is "stringy." Lay it on a buttered gridiron, 
turning it often, as it begins to drip, attempting nothing else while 
cooking it. Have everything else ready for the table; the potatoes and 
vegetables dished and in the warming closet. Do not season it until it 
is done, which will be in about ten to twelve minutes. Remove it to a warm 
platter, pepper and salt it on both sides and spread a liberal lump of 
butter over it. Serve at once while hot. No definite rule can be given 
as to the _time_ of cooking steak, individual tastes differ so widely 
in regard to it, some only liking it when well done, others so rare 
that the blood runs out of it. The best pieces for broiling are the 
porterhouse and sirloin. 
 
 
BEEFSTEAK. No. 2. 
 
Take a smooth, thick-bottomed frying pan, scald it out with hot water, 
and wipe it dry; set it on the stove or range, and when _very_ hot,
furnish a tidbit for a few. To dress it whole, proceed as follows: 
Washing the piece well, put it in an oven; add about a pint of water, 
and chop up a good handful of each of the following vegetables as an 
ingredient of the dish, _viz._, Irish potatoes, carrots, turnips and a 
large bunch of celery. They must be washed, peeled and chopped up 
raw, then added to the meat; blended with the juice, they form and 
flavor the gravy. Let the whole slowly simmer, and when nearly done, 
add a teaspoonful of pounded allspice. To give a richness to the 
gravy, put in a tablespoonful of butter. If the gravy should look too 
greasy, skim off some of the melted suet. Boil also a lean piece of 
beef, which, when perfectly done, chop fine, flavoring with a very 
small quantity of onion, besides pepper and salt to the taste. Make 
into small balls, wet them on the outside with eggs, roll in grated 
cracker or fine bread crumbs. Fry these force meat balls a light 
brown. When serving the dish, put these around the tenderloin, and 
pour over the whole the rich gravy. This dish is a very handsome one, 
and, altogether, fit for an epicurean palate. A sumptuous dish. 
 
 
STEWED STEAK WITH OYSTERS.
If you do not wish to eat it hot, let it remain in the pot after you 
take it from the fire until nearly cold, then lay it in a colander to 
drain, lay a cloth over it to retain its fresh appearance; serve with 
horse-radish and pickles. 
 
If vegetables are to accompany this, making it the old-fashioned 
"boiled dinner," about three-quarters of an hour before dishing up 
skim the liquor free from fat and _turn part of it out into another 
kettle_, into which put a cabbage carefully prepared, cutting it into 
four quarters; also half a dozen peeled medium-sized white turnips, 
cut into halves; scrape four carrots and four parsnips each cut into 
four pieces. Into the kettle with the meat, about half an hour before 
serving, pour on more water from the boiling tea-kettle, and into this 
put peeled medium-sized potatoes. This dinner should also be 
accompanied by boiled beets, sliced hot, cooked separate from the 
rest, with vinegar over them. Cooking the cabbage separately from the 
meat prevents the meat from having the flavor of cabbage when cold. 
The carrots, parsnips and turnips will boil in about an hour. A piece 
of salt pork was usually boiled with a "New England boiled dinner." 

into balls, when cooled flatten each; dip them in egg and bread 
crumbs, and fry in a wire basket, dipped in hot lard. 
 
 
BROILED VEAL CUTLETS. (Fine.) 
 
Two or three pounds of veal cutlets, egg and bread crumbs, two 
tablespoonfuls of minced savory herbs, salt and pepper to taste, a 
little grated nutmeg. 
 
Cut the cutlets about three-quarters of an inch in thickness; flatten 
them, and brush them over with the yolk of an egg; dip them into 
bread crumbs and minced herbs, season with pepper and salt, and fold 
each cutlet in a piece of white letter paper well buttered; twist the 
ends, and broil over a clear fire; when done remove the paper. Cooked 
this way, they retain all the flavor. 
 
 
VEAL POT-PIE. 

Procure a nice breast or brisket of veal, well jointed, put the pieces 
into the pot with one quart of water to every five pounds of meat; put 
the pot over a slow fire; just before it comes to a boil, skim it well 
and pour in a teacupful of cold water; then turn over the meat in 
order that all the scum may rise; remove all the scum, boil quite 
hard, season with pepper and salt to your taste, always remembering 
that the crust will take up part of the seasoning; when this is done 
cut off your crust in pieces of equal size, but do not roll or mould 
them; lay them on top of the meat, so as to cover it; put the lid on 
the pot closely, let the whole boil slowly one hour. If the lid does 
not fit the pot closely, wrap a cloth around it, in order that no 
steam shall escape; and by no means allow the pot to _stop boiling_. 
 
The crust for pot-pie should be raised with yeast. To three pints of 
flour add two ounces of butter, a little salt, and wet with milk 
sufficient to make a soft dough; knead it well and set it away to 
rise; when quite light, mould and knead it again, and let it stand, in 
winter, one hour, in summer, one-half hour, when it will be ready to 
cut. 

as the quarter, and should be served in the same manner. 
 
Make the gravy from the drippings, thickened with flour. 
 
The mint sauce is made as follows: Take fresh, young spearmint leaves 
stripped from stems; wash and drain them or dry on a cloth, chop very 
fine, put in a gravy tureen, and to three tablespoonfuls of mint add 
two of finely powdered cut-loaf sugar; mix, and let it stand a few 
minutes, then pour over it six tablespoonfuls good cider or white-wine 
vinegar. The sauce should be made some time before dinner, so that the 
flavor of the mint may be well extracted. 
 
 
TO BROIL THE FORE-QUARTER OF LAMB. 
 
Take off the shoulder and lay it upon the gridiron with the breast; 
cut in two parts, to facilitate its cooking; put a tin sheet on top of 
the meat, and a weight upon that; turn the meat around frequently to 
prevent its burning; turn over as soon as cooked on one side; renew 
the coals occasionally, that all parts may cook alike; when done,
season with butter, pepper and salt--exactly like beefsteak. It takes 
some time to broil it well; but when done it will be found to be equal 
to broiled chicken, the flavor being more delicate than when cooked 
otherwise. Serve with cream sauce, made as follows: Heat a 
tablespoonful of butter in a saucepan, add a teaspoonful of flour and 
stir until perfectly smooth; then add, slowly stirring in, a cup of 
cold milk; let it boil up once, and season to taste with salt and 
pepper and a teaspoonful of finely chopped fresh parsley. Serve in a 
gravy boat, all hot. 
 
 
LAMB STEW. 
 
Cut up the lamb into small pieces (after removing all the fat) say 
about two inches square. Wash it well and put it over the fire, with 
just enough cold water to cover it well, and let it heat gradually. It 
should stew gently until it is partly done; then add a few thin slices 
of salt pork, one or two onions sliced up fine, some pepper and salt 
if needed, and two or three raw potatoes cut up into inch pieces. 
Cover it closely and stew until the meat is tender. Drop in a few made
minutes. To prepare the crust, work into light dough a _small_ bit of 
butter, roll it out thin, cut it in small, square cakes, and lay them 
on the moulding-board until very light. No steam should possibly 
escape while the crust is cooking, and by no means allow the pot to 
cease boiling. 
 
 
ROAST SPARERIB. 
 
Trim off the rough ends neatly, crack the ribs across the middle, rub 
with salt and sprinkle with pepper, fold over, stuff with turkey 
dressing, sew up tightly, place in a dripping-pan with a pint of 
water, baste frequently, turning over once so as to bake both sides 
equally until a rich brown. 
 
 
PORK TENDERLOINS. 
 
The tenderloins are unlike any other part of the pork in flavor. They 
may be either fried or broiled; the latter being drier, require to be
more of the seasoning, only be sparing of the nutmeg. Continue this 
till the dish is full. Now pour into the dish a cupful of stock or 
water, and a spoonful or two of catsup. Put a little paste around the 
edge of the dish; put on the cover and place the pie in a rather hot 
oven. When the paste has risen and begins to take color, place the pie 
at the bottom of the oven, with some paper over it, as it will require 
to be baked at least two hours. Some prefer to cook the meat until 
partly done, before putting into the crust. 
 
_Palmer House, Chicago_. 
 
 
PORK POT-PIE. 
 
Take pieces of ribs of lean salt pork, also a slice or two of the fat 
of salt pork; scald it well with hot water so as to wash out the briny 
taste. Put it into a kettle and cover it with cold water, enough for 
the required want. Cover it and boil an hour, season with pepper; then 
add half a dozen potatoes cut into quarters. When it all commences to 
boil again, drop in dumplings made from this recipe:--
cool, dry cellar. If you wish to keep them more than a week, rub 
ginger or pepper on the outside, then wash it off before using. This 
is eaten without further cooking. Cut in round slices and lay sliced 
lemons around the edge of the dish, as many like to squeeze a few 
drops upon the sausage before eating. These are very nice smoked like 
hams. 
 
 
COUNTRY PORK SAUSAGES. 
 
Six pounds lean fresh pork, three pounds of chine fat, three 
tablespoonfuls of salt, two of black pepper, four tablespoonfuls of 
pounded and sifted sage, two of summer savory. Chop the lean and fat 
pork finely, mix the seasoning in with your hands, taste to see that 
it has the right flavor, then put them into cases, either the cleaned 
intestines of the hog, or make long, narrow bags of stout muslin, 
large enough to contain each enough sausage for a family dish. Fill 
these with the meat, dip in melted lard, and hang them in a cool, dry, 
dark place. Some prefer to pack the meat in jars, pouring melted lard 
over it, covering the top, to be taken out as wanted and made into
small round cakes with the hands, then fried brown. Many like spices 
added to the seasoning--cloves, mace and nutmeg. This is a matter of 
taste. 
 
_Marion Harland_. 
 
 
TO FRY SAUSAGES. 
 
Put a small piece of lard or butter into the frying pan. Prick the 
sausages with a fork, lay them in the melted grease, keep moving them 
about, turning them frequently to prevent bursting; in ten or twelve 
minutes they will be sufficiently browned and cooked. Another sure way 
to prevent the cases from bursting is to cover them with cold water 
and let it come to the boiling point; turn off the water and fry them. 
Sausages are nicely cooked by putting them in a baking-pan them in the 
oven, turning them once or twice. In this way you avoid all smoke and 
disagreeable odor. A pound will cook brown in ten minutes in a hot 
oven. 

 
Mix two tablespoonfuls of flour with half a teacupful of butter; have 
ready a pint of boiling milk; stir the flour and butter into the milk; 
take three heads of celery, cut into small bits, and boil for a few 
minutes in water, which strain off; put the celery into the melted 
butter, and keep it stirred over the fire for five or ten minutes. 
This is very nice with boiled fowl or turkey. Another way to make 
celery sauce is: Boil a head of celery until quite tender, then put it 
through a sieve; put the yolk of an egg in a basin, and beat it well 
with the strained juice of a lemon; add the celery and a couple of 
spoonfuls of liquor in which the turkey was boiled; salt and pepper to 
taste. 
 
 
CAPER SAUCE. 
 
Chop the capers a very little, unless quite small; make half a pint of 
drawn butter, to which add the capers, with a large spoonful of the 
juice from the bottle in which they are sold; let it just simmer and 
serve in a tureen. Nasturtiums much resemble capers in taste, though
fine sieve. Of course a larger quantity can be prepared at once than 
is mentioned here. 
 
 
MUSHROOM SAUCE. 
 
Wash a pint of small button mushrooms, remove the stems and outside 
skins, stew them slowly in veal gravy or milk or cream, adding an 
onion, and seasoning with pepper, salt and a little butter rolled in 
flour. Their flavor will be heightened by salting a few the night 
before, to extract the juice. In dressing mushrooms only those of a 
dull pearl color on the outside and the under part tinged with pale 
pink should be selected. If there is a poisonous one among them, the 
onion in the sauce will turn black. In such a case throw the whole 
away. Used for poultry, beef or fish. 
 
 
APPLE SAUCE. 
 
When you wish to serve apple sauce with meat prepare it in this way:
 
 
RADISHES. 
 
All the varieties are generally served in the same manner, by scraping 
and placing on the table in glasses containing some cold water to keep 
them fresh looking. 
 
 
PEPPERGRASS AND CRESS. 
 
These are used mostly as an appetizer, served simply with salt. 
Cresses are occasionally used in making salad. 
 
 
HORSE-RADISH. 
 
Horse-radish is an agreeable relish, and has a particularly fresh 
taste in the spring; is scraped fine or grated, and set on the table 
in a small covered cup; much that is bottled and sold as horse-radish
long as any scum rises; bottle when cool; put in each bottle two 
cloves and a pepper-corn. Cork and seal, put in a dry place, and it 
will keep for years. 
 
 
GOOSEBERRY CATSUP. 
 
Ten pounds of fruit gathered just before ripening, five pounds of 
sugar, one quart of vinegar, two tablespoonfuls each of ground black 
pepper, allspice and cinnamon. Boil the fruit in vinegar until reduced 
to a pulp, then add sugar and the other seasoning. Seal it hot. 
 
Grape catsup is made in the same manner. 
 
 
CUCUMBER CATSUP. 
 
Take cucumbers suitable for the table; peel and grate them, salt a 
little, and put in a bag to drain over night; in the morning season to 
taste with salt, pepper and vinegar, put in small jars and seal tight
teaspoonful of whole pepper-corns, a teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, 
salt to taste and a tablespoonful of sugar; add a tablespoonful of 
good brandy. Put all into a jar, and cover it well; let it stand for 
three weeks, then strain and bottle it well. Useful for flavoring 
salad and other dishes. 
 
 
 
 
PICKLES. 
 
 
Pickles should never be put into vessels of brass, copper or tin, as 
the action of the acid on such metals often results in poisoning the 
pickles. Porcelain or granite-ware is the best for such purposes. 
 
Vinegar that is used for pickling should be the best cider or 
white-wine, and should never be boiled more than five or six minutes, 
as it reduces its strength. In putting away pickles, use stone or 
glass jars; the glazing on common earthenware is rendered injurious by
Sufficient vinegar to cover the mushrooms; to each quart of mushrooms 
two blades pounded mace, one ounce ground pepper, salt to taste. 
Choose some nice young button mushrooms for pickling and rub off the 
skin with a piece of flannel and salt, and cut off the stalks; if very 
large, take out the red inside, and reject the black ones, as they are 
too old. Put them in a stewpan, sprinkle salt over them, with pounded 
mace and pepper in the above proportion; shake them well over a clear 
fire until the liquor flows and keep them there until it is all dried 
up again; then add as much vinegar as will cover them; just let it 
simmer for one minute and store it away in stone jars for use. When 
cold tie down with bladder and keep in a dry place; they will remain 
good for a length of time, and are generally considered excellent for 
flavoring stews and other dishes. 
 
 
PICKLED CABBAGE. (Purple.) 
 
Cut a sound cabbage into quarters, spread it on a large flat platter 
or dish and sprinkle thickly with salt; set it in a cool place for 
twenty-four hours; then drain off the brine, wipe it dry and lay it in
the sun two hours, and cover with cold vinegar for twelve hours. 
Prepare a pickle by seasoning enough vinegar to cover the cabbage with 
equal quantities of mace, allspice, cinnamon and black pepper, a cup 
of sugar to every gallon of vinegar, and a teaspoonful of celery seed 
to every pint. Pack the cabbage in a stone jar; boil the vinegar and 
spices five minutes and pour on hot. Cover and set away in a cool, dry 
place. It will be good in a month. A few slices of beetroot improves 
the color. 
 
 
PICKLED WHITE CABBAGE. 
 
This recipe recommends itself as of a delightful flavor yet easily 
made, and a convenient substitute for the old-fashioned, tedious 
method of pickling the same vegetable. Take a peck of quartered 
cabbage, put a layer of cabbage and one of salt, let it remain over 
night; in the morning squeeze them and put them on the fire, with four 
chopped onions covered with vinegar; boil for half an hour, then add 
one ounce of turmeric, one gill of black pepper, one gill of celery 
seed, a few cloves, one tablespoonful of allspice, a few pieces of
plums and boil carefully until they are cooked tender. Before cooking 
the plums they should be pierced with a darning needle several times; 
this will prevent the skins bursting while cooking. 
 
 
SPICED GRAPES. 
 
Take the pulp from the grapes, preserving the skins. Boil the pulp and 
rub through a colander to get out the seeds; then add the skins to the 
strained pulp and boil with the sugar, vinegar and spices. To every 
seven pounds of grapes use four and one-half pounds of sugar, one pint 
of good vinegar. Spice quite highly with ground cloves and allspice, 
with a little cinnamon. 
 
 
PICKLED CHERRIES. 
 
Select sound, large cherries, as large as you can get them; to every 
quart of cherries allow a large cupful of vinegar, two tablespoonfuls 
of sugar, a dozen whole cloves, and half a dozen blades of mace; put
done, thoroughly drained, and served immediately while hot. 
 
Onions, cabbage, carrots and turnips should be cooked in a great deal 
of water, boiled only long enough to sufficiently cook them, and 
immediately drained. Longer boiling makes them insipid in taste, and 
with _too little_ water they turn a dark color. 
 
Potatoes rank first in importance in the vegetable line, and 
consequently should be properly served. It requires some little 
intelligence to cook even so simple and common a dish as boiled 
potatoes. In the first place, all defective or green ones should be 
cast out; a bad one will flavor a whole dish. If they are not uniform 
in size, they should be made so by cutting after they are peeled. The 
best part of a potato, or the most nutritious, is next to the skin, 
therefore they should be pared very thinly, if at all; then, if old, 
the cores should be cut out, thrown into _cold_ water salted a little, 
and boiled until soft enough for a fork to pierce through easily; 
drain immediately, and replace the kettle on the fire with the cover 
partly removed, until they are completely dried. New potatoes should 
be put into boiling water, and when partly done salted a little. They
Peel and slice raw potatoes thin, the same as for frying. Butter an 
earthen dish, put in a layer of potatoes, and season with salt, 
pepper, butter, a bit of onion chopped fine, if liked; sprinkle a 
little flour. Now put another layer of potatoes and the seasoning. 
Continue in this way till the dish is filled. Just before putting into 
the oven, pour a quart of hot milk over. Bake three-quarters of an 
hour. 
 
Cold boiled potatoes may be cooked the same. It requires less time to 
bake them; they are delicious either way. If the onion is disliked it 
can be omitted. 
 
 
STEAMED POTATOES. 
 
This mode of cooking potatoes is now much in vogue, particularly where 
they are wanted on a large scale, it being so very convenient. Pare 
the potatoes, throw them into cold water as they are peeled, then put 
them in a steamer. Place the steamer over a saucepan of boiling water, 
and steam the potatoes from twenty to forty minutes, according to the
full, putting bread crumbs last; add milk or cream until full. Bake 
twenty minutes or half an hour. 
 
A little onion is not an injurious article of food, as many believe. A 
judicious use of plants of the onion family is quite as important a 
factor in successful cookery as salt and pepper. When carefully 
concealed by manipulation in food, it affords zest and enjoyment to 
many who could not otherwise taste of it were its presence known. A 
great many successful compounds derive their excellence from the 
partly concealed flavor of the onion, which imparts a delicate 
appetizing aroma highly prized by epicures. 
 
 
CAULIFLOWER. 
 
When cleaned and washed, drop them into boiling water, into which you 
have put salt and a teaspoonful of flour, or a slice of bread; boil 
till tender; take off, drain and dish them; serve with a sauce spread 
over and made with melted butter, salt, pepper, grated nutmeg, chopped 
parsley and vinegar.
adding two tablespoonfuls of vinegar. Very good. 
 
 
FRENCH WAY OF COOKING CABBAGE. 
 
Chop cold boiled white cabbage and let it drain till perfectly dry: 
stir in some melted butter to taste; pepper, salt and four 
tablespoonfuls of cream; after it is heated through add two 
well-beaten eggs; then turn the mixture into a buttered frying pan, 
stirring until it is very hot and becomes a delicate brown on the 
under side. Place a hot dish over the pan, which must be reversed 
when turned out to be served. 
 
 
SOURCROUT. 
 
Barrels having held wine or vinegar are used to prepare sourcrout in. 
It is better, however, to have a special barrel for the purpose. 
Strasburg, as well as all Alsace, has a well-acquired fame for 
preparing the cabbages. They slice very white and firm cabbages in
pepper to taste; let them stew fifteen minutes longer and serve hot. 
Some prefer to thicken tomatoes with a little grated bread, adding a 
teaspoonful of sugar; and others who like the flavor of onion chop up 
one and add while stewing; then again, some add as much green corn as 
there are tomatoes. 
 
 
TO PEEL TOMATOES. 
 
Put the tomatoes into a frying basket and plunge them into hot water 
for three or four minutes. Drain and peel. Another way is to place 
them in a flat baking-tin and set them in a hot oven about five 
minutes; this loosens the skins so that they readily slip off. 
 
 
SCALLOPED TOMATOES. 
 
Butter the sides and bottom of a pudding-dish. Put a layer of bread 
crumbs in the bottom; on them put a layer of sliced tomatoes; sprinkle 
with salt, pepper and some bits of butter, and a very _little_ white
TO PREPARE TOMATOES. (Raw.) 
 
Carefully remove the peelings. Only perfectly ripe tomatoes should 
ever be eaten raw and if ripe the skins easily peel off. Scalding 
injures the flavor. Slice them and sprinkle generously with salt, more 
sparingly with black pepper, and to a dish holding one quart, add a 
light tablespoonful of sugar to give a piquant zest to the whole. 
Lastly, add a gill of best cider vinegar; although, if you would have 
a dish yet better suited to please an epicurean palate, you may add a 
teaspoonful of made mustard and two tablespoonfuls of rich sweet 
cream. 
 
 
FRIED AND BROILED TOMATOES. 
 
Cut firm, large, ripe tomatoes into thick slices, rather more than a 
quarter of an inch thick. Season with salt and pepper, dredge well 
with flour, or roll in egg and crumbs, and fry them brown on both 
sides evenly, in hot butter and lard mixed. Or, prepare them the same 
as for frying, broiling on a well-greased gridiron, seasoning
into cold water and when they are all scraped and very clean, tie them 
in bunches of equal size; cut the large ends evenly, that the stems 
may be all of the same length, and put the asparagus into plenty of 
boiling water, well salted. While it is boiling, cut several slices of 
bread half an inch thick, pare off the crust and toast it a delicate 
brown on both sides. When the stalks of the asparagus are tender (it 
will usually cook in twenty to forty minutes) lift it out directly, or 
it will lose both its color and flavor and will also be liable to 
break; dip the toast quickly into the liquor in which it was boiled 
and dish the vegetable upon it, the heads all lying one way. Pour over 
white sauce, or melted butter. 
 
 
ASPARAGUS WITH EGGS. 
 
Boil a bunch of asparagus twenty minutes; cut off the tender tops and 
lay them in a deep-pie plate, buttering, salting and peppering well. 
Beat up four eggs, the yolks and whites separately to a stiff froth; 
add two tablespoonfuls of milk or cream, a tablespoonful of warm 
butter, pepper and salt to taste. Pour evenly over the asparagus
mixture. Bake eight minutes or until the eggs are set. Very good. 
 
 
GREEN PEAS. 
 
Shell the peas and wash in cold water. Put in boiling water just 
enough to cover them well and keep them from burning; boil from twenty 
minutes to half an hour, when the liquor should be nearly boiled out; 
season with pepper and salt and a good allowance of butter; serve very 
hot. 
 
This is a very much better way than cooking in a larger quantity of 
water and draining off the liquor, as that diminishes the sweetness, 
and much of the fine flavor of the peas is lost. The salt should never 
be put in the peas before they are tender, unless very young, as it 
tends to harden them. 
 
 
STEWED GREEN PEAS. 

parsley. Cook in the oven fifteen minutes, baste with butter. Arrange 
on a dish and pour the gravy over them. Serve with sauce made by 
heating a cup of cream, two ounces of butter, a tablespoonful of 
chopped parsley, a little cayenne pepper, salt, a tablespoonful of 
white sauce and two tablespoonfuls of lemon juice. Put in a saucepan 
and set on the fire. Stir until thick, but do not let boil. Mushrooms 
are very nice placed on slices of well-buttered toast when set into 
the oven to bake. They cook in about fifteen minutes. 
 
 
STEWED MUSHROOMS. 
 
Time, twenty-one minutes. Button mushrooms, salt to taste, a little 
butter rolled in flour, two tablespoonfuls of cream or the yolk of one 
egg. Choose buttons of uniform size. Wipe them clean and white with a 
wet flannel; put them in a stewpan with a little water and let them 
stew very gently for a quarter of an hour. Add salt to taste, work in 
a little flour and butter, to make the liquor about as thick as cream, 
and let it boil for five minutes. When you are ready to dish it up, 
stir in two tablespoonfuls of cream or the yolk of an egg; stir it
 
The truffle belongs to the family of the mushrooms; they are used 
principally in this country as a condiment for boned turkey and 
chicken, scrambled eggs, fillets of beef, game and fish. When mixed in 
due proportion, they add a peculiar zest and flavor to sauces that 
cannot be found in any other plant in the vegetable kingdom. 
 
 
ITALIAN STYLE OF DRESSING TRUFFLES. 
 
Ten truffles, a quarter of a pint of salad oil, pepper and salt to 
taste, one tablespoonful of minced parsley, a very little finely 
minced garlic, two blades of pounded mace, one tablespoonful of lemon 
juice. 
 
After cleansing and brushing the truffles, cut them into thin slices 
and put them in a baking-dish, on a seasoning of oil or butter, 
pepper, salt, parsley, garlic and mace in the above proportion. Bake 
them for nearly an hour, and just before serving add the lemon juice 
and send them to the table very hot.
grocers and is prepared as follows: Put into a double saucepan or 
porcelain-lined pan a quart of boiling water, add a saltspoonful of 
salt, and when it is boiling add, or rather stir in gradually, three 
ounces of flakes. Keep stirring to prevent burning. Let it boil from 
fifteen to twenty minutes and serve with cream and sugar. 
 
Ordinarily oatmeal requires two hours  '   steady cooking to make it 
palatable and digestible. Wheaten grits and hominy one hour, but a 
half hour longer cooking will not injure them and makes them easier of 
digestion. Never be afraid of cooking cereals or preparations from 
cereals too long, no matter what the directions on the package may be. 
 
 
STEAMED OATMEAL. 
 
To one teacupful oatmeal add a quart of cold water, a teaspoonful of 
salt; put in a steamer over a kettle of cold water, gradually heat and 
steam an hour and a half after it begins to cook. 
 

risen very high; when cool, cover it with plain white icing flavored 
with rose-water, or with almond icing. With sweet almonds always use a 
small portion of bitter; without them, _sweet_ almonds have little or 
no taste, though they add to the richness of the cake. 
 
Use two heaping teaspoonfuls of baking powder in the flour. 
 
 
OLD-FASHIONED SPONGE CAKE. 
 
Two cups of sifted white sugar, two cups of flour measured before 
sifting, ten eggs. Stir the yolks and sugar together until perfectly 
light; add a pinch of salt; beat the whites of the eggs to a very 
stiff froth and add them with the flour, after beating together 
lightly; flavor with lemon. Bake in a _moderate_ oven about forty-five 
minutes. Baking powder is an improvement to this cake, using two large 
teaspoonfuls. 
 
 
LEMON SPONGE CAKE.
Beat the yolks of four eggs together with two cups of fine powdered 
sugar. Stir in gradually one cup of sifted flour and the whites of 
four eggs beaten to a stiff froth, then a cup of sifted flour in which 
two teaspoonfuls of baking powder have been stirred, and, lastly, a 
scant teacupful of boiling water, stirred in a little at a time. 
Flavor, add salt and, however thin the mixture may seem, do not add 
any more flour. Bake in shallow tins. 
 
 
BRIDE  '  S CAKE. 
 
Cream together one scant cup of butter and three cups of sugar; add 
one cup of milk, then the beaten whites of twelve eggs; sift three 
teaspoonfuls of baking powder into one cup of cornstarch mixed with 
three cups of sifted flour and beat in gradually with the rest; flavor 
to taste. Beat all thoroughly, then put in buttered tins lined with 
letter paper well buttered; bake slowly in a _moderate_ oven. A 
beautiful white cake. Ice the top. Double the recipe if more is 
required. 

One cup of cornstarch, one of butter, two of sugar, one of sweet milk, 
two of flour, the whites of seven eggs; rub butter and sugar to a 
cream; mix one teaspoonful cream of tartar with the flour and 
cornstarch; one-half teaspoonful soda with the sweet milk; add the 
milk and soda to the sugar and butter, then add flour, then the whites 
of eggs; flavor to taste. Never fails to be good. 
 
 
SILVER, OR DELICATE CAKE. 
 
Whites of six eggs, one cupful of sweet milk, two cupfuls of sugar, 
four cupfuls of sifted flour, two-thirds of a cup of butter, flavoring 
and two teaspoonfuls of baking powder. Stir the sugar and butter to a 
cream, then add the milk and flavoring, part of the flour, the beaten 
whites of eggs, then the rest of the flour. Bake carefully in tins 
lined with buttered white paper. 
 
When using the whites of eggs for nice cakes, the yolks need not be 
wasted; keep them in a cool place and scramble them. Serve on toast or 
with chipped beef.
swell them; chop them in the morning and put them on the fire with 
three cups of molasses; stew until almost soft; add a cupful of nice 
raisins (seedless, if possible) and stew a few moments; when cold, 
add three cupfuls of flour, one cupful of butter, three eggs and a 
teaspoonful of soda; bake in a steady oven. This will make two 
good-sized panfuls of splendid cake; the apples will cook like citron 
and taste deliciously. Raisins may be omitted; also spices to taste 
may be added. This is not a dear but a delicious cake. 
 
 
CAKE WITHOUT EGGS. 
 
Beat together one teacupful of butter and three teacupfuls of sugar, 
and when quite light stir in one pint of sifted flour. Add to this one 
pound of raisins seeded and chopped, then mixed with a cup of sifted 
flour one-teaspoonful of nutmeg, one teaspoonful of powdered cinnamon 
and lastly one pint of thick sour cream or milk in which a teaspoonful 
of soda is dissolved. Bake immediately in buttered tins one hour in a 
_moderate_ oven. 

 
CHEAP CREAM CAKE. 
 
One cup of sugar, one egg, one cup sweet milk, two cups flour, one 
tablespoonful butter, two heaping teaspoonfuls of baking powder; 
flavor to taste. Divide into three parts and bake in round shallow 
pans. 
 
_Cream._--Beat one egg and one-half cup sugar together, then add 
one-quarter cup flour, wet with a very little milk and stir this 
mixture into one-half pint of boiling milk, until thick; flavor to 
taste. Spread the cream when cool between the cakes. 
 
 
SOFT GINGER CAKE. 
 
Stir to a cream one cupful of butter and half a cupful of brown sugar; 
add to this two cupfuls of cooking molasses, a cupful of sweet milk, a 
tablespoonful of ginger, a teaspoonful of ground cinnamon; beat all 
thoroughly together, then add three eggs, the whites and yolks beaten
 
One cup powdered sugar, one-half cup of butter creamed with the sugar, 
one-half cup of milk, four eggs, the whites only, whipped light, two 
and one-half cups prepared flour. Bitter almond flavoring, spinach 
juice and cochineal. Cream the butter and sugar; add the milk, 
flavoring, the whites and flour. Divide the batter into three parts. 
Bruise and pound a few leaves of spinach in a thin muslin bag until 
you can express the juice. Put a few drops of this into one portion of 
the batter, color another with cochineal, leaving the third white. Put 
a little of each into small, round pans or cups, giving a light stir 
to each color as you add the next. This will vein the cakes prettily. 
Put the white between the pink and green, that the tints may show 
better. If you can get pistachio nuts to pound up for the green, the 
cakes will be much nicer. Ice on sides and top. 
 
 
CORNSTARCH CAKES. 
 
One cupful each of butter and sweet milk and half a cup of cornstarch, 
two cupfuls each of sugar and flour, the whites of five eggs beaten to
a stiff froth, two teaspoonfuls of cream of tartar and one of soda; 
flavor to taste. Bake in gem-tins or patty-pans. 
 
 
SPONGE DROPS. 
 
Beat to a froth three eggs and one teacup of sugar; stir into this one 
heaping coffeecup of flour, in which one teaspoonful of cream of 
tartar and half a teaspoonful of saleratus are thoroughly mixed. 
Flavor with lemon. Butter tin sheets with washed butter and drop in 
teaspoonfuls about three inches apart. Bake instantly in a very quick 
oven. Watch closely as they will burn easily. Serve with ice cream. 
 
 
SAVORY BISCUITS OR LADY FINGERS. 
 
Put nine tablespoonfuls of fine white sugar into a bowl and put the 
bowl into hot water to heat the sugar; when the sugar is thoroughly 
heated, break nine eggs into the bowl and beat them quickly until they 
become a little warm and rather thick; then take the bowl from the
IRISH APPLE PIE. 
 
Pare and take out the cores of the apples, cutting each apple into 
four or eight pieces, according to their size. Lay them neatly in a 
baking dish, seasoning them with brown sugar and any spice, such as 
pounded cloves and cinnamon, or grated lemon peel. A little quince 
marmalade gives a fine flavor to the pie. Add a little water and cover 
with puff paste. Bake for an hour. 
 
 
MOCK APPLE PIE. 
 
Crush finely with a rolling pin, one large Boston cracker; put it into 
a bowl and pour upon it one teacupful of cold water; add one teacupful 
of fine white sugar, the juice and pulp of one lemon, half a lemon 
rind grated and a little nutmeg; line the pie-plate with half puff 
paste, pour in the mixture, cover with the paste and bake half an 
hour. 
 
These are proportions for one pie.
 
 
APPLE AND PEACH MERINGUE PIE. 
 
Stew the apples or peaches and sweeten to taste. Mash smooth and 
season with nutmeg. Fill the crusts and bake until just done. Put on 
no top crust. Take the whites of three eggs for each pie and whip to a 
stiff froth, and sweeten with three tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar. 
Flavor with rose-water or vanilla; beat until it will stand alone; 
then spread it on the pie one-half to one inch thick; set it back into 
the oven until the meringue is well "set." Eat cold. 
 
 
COCOANUT PIE. No. 1. 
 
One-half cup desiccated cocoanut soaked in one cupful of milk, two 
eggs, one small cupful of sugar, butter the size of an egg. This is 
for one small-sized pie. Nice with a meringue on top. 
 

 
Six eggs half a cupful of sugar, one quart of new milk. Beat the eggs 
and the sugar and milk, and any extract or flavoring you like. Fill 
your custard cups, sift a little nutmeg or cinnamon over the tops, set 
them in a moderate oven in a shallow pan half filled with hot water. 
In about twenty minutes try them with the handle of a teaspoon to see 
if they are firm. Judgment and great care are needed to attain skill 
in baking custard, for if left in the oven a minute too long, or if 
the fire is too hot, the milk will certainly whey. 
 
Serve cold with fresh fruit sugared and placed on top of each. 
Strawberries, peaches or raspberries, as preferred. 
 
 
BOILED CUSTARD. 
 
Beat seven eggs very light, omitting the whites of two; mix them 
gradually with a quart of milk and half a cupful of sugar; boil in a 
dish set in another of boiling water; add flavoring. As soon as it 
comes to the boiling point remove it, or it will be liable to curdle
and become lumpy. Whip the whites of the two eggs that remain, adding 
two heaping tablespoonfuls of sugar. When the custard is cold heap 
this on top; if in cups, put on a strawberry or a bit of red jelly on 
each. Set in a cold place till wanted. 
 
_Common Sense in the Household._ 
 
 
BOILED CUSTARD, OR MOCK CREAM. 
 
Take two even tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, one quart of milk, three 
eggs, half a teaspoonful of salt and a small piece of butter; heat the 
milk to nearly boiling and add the starch, previously dissolved in a 
little cold milk; then add the eggs well beaten with four 
tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar; let it boil up once or twice, 
stirring it briskly, and it is done. Flavor with lemon, or vanilla, or 
raspberry, or to suit your taste. 
 
A good substitute for ice cream, served _very_ cold. 

 
FRENCH CUSTARD. 
 
One quart of milk, eight eggs, sugar and cinnamon to taste; separate 
the eggs, beat the yolks until thick, to which add the milk, a little 
vanilla, and sweeten to taste; put it into a pan or farina kettle, 
place it over a slow fire and stir it all the time until it becomes 
custard; then pour it into a pudding-dish to get cold; whisk the 
whites until stiff and dry; have ready a pan of boiling water on the 
top of which place the whites; cover and place them where the water 
will keep sufficiently hot to cause a steam to pass through and cook 
them; place in a dish (suitable for the table) a layer of custard and 
white alternately; on each layer of custard grate a little nutmeg 
with a teaspoonful of wine; reserve a layer of white for the cover, 
over which grate nutmeg; then send to table and eat cold. 
 
 
GERMAN CUSTARD. 
 
Add to a pint of good, rich, boiled custard an ounce of sweet almonds,
 
Stew some fine-flavored sour apples tender, sweeten to taste, strain 
them through a fine wire sieve and break into one pint of strained 
apples the white of an egg; whisk the apple and egg very briskly till 
quite stiff and it will be as white as snow; eaten with a nice boiled 
custard it makes a very desirable dessert. More eggs may be used if 
liked. 
 
 
QUINCE SNOW. 
 
Quarter five fair-looking quinces and boil them till they are tender 
in water, then peel them and push them through a coarse sieve. Sweeten 
to the taste and add the whites of three or four eggs. Then with an 
egg-whisk beat all to a stiff froth and pile with a spoon upon a glass 
dish and set away in the ice box, unless it is to be served 
immediately. 
 
 
ORANGE TRIFLE.
 
Whites of four eggs beaten to a stiff froth, two tablespoonfuls each 
of sugar, currant jelly and raspberry jam. Eaten with sponge cakes, it 
is a delicious dessert. 
 
 
GRAPE TRIFLE. 
 
Pulp through a sieve two pounds of ripe grapes, enough to keep back 
the stones, add sugar to taste. Put into a trifle dish and cover 
with whipped cream, nicely flavored. Serve very cold. 
 
 
APPLE TRIFLE. 
 
Peel, core and quarter some good tart apples of nice flavor, and stew 
them with a strip of orange and a strip of quince peel, sufficient 
water to cover the bottom of the stewpan, and sugar in the proportion 
of half a pound to one pound of fruit; when cooked, press the pulp 
through a sieve, and, when cold, dish and cover with one pint of
Put the gooseberries into a jar, with sufficient moist sugar to 
sweeten them, and boil them until reduced to a pulp. Put this pulp at 
the bottom of a trifle dish; pour over it a pint of custard, and, when 
cold, cover with whipped cream. The cream should be whipped the day 
before it is wanted for table, as it will then be so much firmer and 
more solid. This dish may be garnished as fancy dictates. 
 
 
LEMON HONEY. 
 
One coffeecupful of white sugar, the grated rind and juice of one 
large lemon, the yolks of three eggs and the white of one, a 
tablespoonful of butter. Put into a basin the sugar and butter, set it 
in a dish of boiling water over the fire; while this is melting, beat 
up the eggs, and add to them the grated rind from the outside of the 
lemon; then add this to the sugar and butter, cooking and stirring it 
until it is thick and clear like honey. 
 
This will keep for some days, put into a tight preserve jar, and is 
nice for flavoring pies, etc.
 
 
FLOATING ISLANDS. 
 
Beat the yolks of five eggs and the whites of two very light, sweeten 
with five tablespoonfuls of sugar and flavor to taste; stir them into 
a quart of scalded milk and cook it until it thickens. When cool pour 
it into a glass dish. Now whip the whites of the three remaining eggs 
to a _stiff_ froth, adding three tablespoonfuls of sugar and a little 
flavoring. Pour this froth over a shallow dish of boiling water; the 
steam passing through it cooks it; when sufficiently cooked, take a 
tablespoon and drop spoonfuls of this over the top of the custard, far 
enough apart so that the "little white islands" will not touch each 
other. By dropping a teaspoonful of bright jelly on the top or centre 
of each island, is produced a pleasing effect; also by filling 
wine-glasses and arranging them around a standard adds much to the 
appearance of the table. 
 
 
FLOATING ISLAND.
 
One quart of milk, five eggs and five tablespoonfuls of sugar. Scald 
the milk, then add the beaten yolks and one of the whites together 
with the sugar. First stir into them a little of the scalded milk to 
prevent curdling, then all of the milk. Cook it the proper thickness; 
remove from the fire, and, when cool, flavor; then pour it into a 
glass dish and let it become very cold. Before it is served beat up 
the remaining four whites of the eggs to a _stiff_ froth and beat into 
them three tablespoonfuls of sugar and two tablespoonfuls of currant 
jelly. Dip this over the top of the custard. 
 
 
TAPIOCA BLANC MANGE. 
 
Half a pound of tapioca soaked an hour in one pint of milk and boiled 
till tender; add a pinch of salt, sweeten to taste and put into a 
mold; when cold turn it out and serve with strawberry or raspberry 
jam around it and a little cream. Flavor with lemon or vanilla. 
 

Take one quart of sweet milk and put one pint upon the stove to heat; 
in the other pint mix four heaping tablespoonfuls of cornstarch and 
half a cupful of sugar; when the milk is hot, pour in the cold milk 
with the cornstarch and sugar thoroughly mixed in it and stir 
altogether until there are no lumps and it is thick; flavor with 
lemon; take from the stove and add the whites of three eggs beaten to 
a stiff froth. 
 
_A Custard for the above._--One pint of milk boiled with a little salt 
in it; beat the yolks of three eggs with half a cupful of sugar and 
add to the boiling milk; stir well, but do not let it boil until the 
eggs are put in; flavor to taste. 
 
 
FRUIT BLANC MANGE. 
 
Stew nice, fresh fruit (cherries, raspberries and strawberries being 
the best), or canned ones will do; strain off the juice and sweeten to 
taste; place it over the fire in a double kettle until it boils; while 
boiling, stir in cornstarch wet with a little cold water, allowing two
tablespoonfuls of cornstarch to each pint of juice; continue stirring 
until sufficiently cooked; then pour into molds wet in cold water and 
set away to cool. Served with cream and sugar. 
 
 
ORANGE CHARLOTTE. 
 
For two molds of medium size, soak half a box of gelatine in half a 
cupful of water for two hours. Add one and a half cupfuls of boiling 
water and strain. Then add two cupfuls of sugar, one of orange juice 
and pulp and the juice of one lemon. Stir until the mixture begins to 
cool, or about five minutes; then add the whites of six eggs, beaten 
to a stiff froth. Beat the whole until so stiff that it will only just 
pour into molds lined with sections of orange. Set away to cool. 
 
 
STRAWBERRY CHARLOTTE. 
 
Make a boiled custard of one quart of milk, the yolks of six eggs and 
three-quarters of a cupful of sugar; flavor to taste. Line a glass
fruit-dish with slices of sponge cake dipped in sweet cream; lay upon 
this ripe strawberries sweetened to taste; then a layer of cake and 
strawberries as before. When the custard is cold pour over the whole. 
Now beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth, add a tablespoonful 
of sugar to each egg and put over the top. Decorate the top with the 
largest berries saved out at the commencement. 
 
Raspberry charlotte may be made the same way. 
 
 
CHARLOTTE RUSSE. (Fine.) 
 
Whip one quart of rich cream to a stiff froth and drain well on a nice 
sieve. To one scant pint of milk add six eggs beaten very light; make 
very sweet; flavor high with vanilla. Cook over hot water till it is a 
thick custard. Soak one full ounce of Cox  '  s gelatine in a very little 
water and warm over hot water. When the custard is very cold beat in 
lightly the gelatine and the whipped cream. Line the bottom of your 
mold with buttered paper, the side with sponge cake or lady-fingers 
fastened together with the white of an egg. Fill with the cream, put
till it is stiff enough to put on without running off and flavor with 
vanilla. If you beat it after it is stiff it will come to butter. Put 
between the cakes and on top. 
 
 
DESSERT PUFFS. 
 
Puffs for dessert are delicate and nice; take one pint of milk and 
cream each, the whites of four eggs beaten to a stiff froth, one 
heaping cupful of sifted flour, one scant cupful of powdered sugar, 
add a little grated lemon peel and a little salt; beat these all 
together till very light, bake in gem-pans, sift pulverized sugar over 
them and eat with sauce flavored with lemon. 
 
 
PEACH CAKE FOR DESSERT. 
 
Bake three sheets of sponge cake, as for jelly cake; cut nice ripe 
peaches in thin slices, or chop them; prepare cream by whipping, 
sweetening and adding flavor of vanilla, if desired; put layers of
Two quarts of cream, one pound of sugar; beat up, flavor and freeze. 
 
For family use, select one of the new patent freezers, as being more 
rapid and less laborious for small quantities than the old style 
turned entirely by hand. All conditions being perfect, those with 
crank and revolving dashers effect freezing in eight to fifteen 
minutes. 
 
 
FRUIT ICE-CREAM. 
 
_Ingredients._--To every pint of fruit juice allow one pint of cream; 
sugar to taste. 
 
Let the fruit be well ripened; pick it off the stalks and put it into 
a large earthen pan. Stir it about with a wooden spoon, breaking it 
until it is well mashed; then, with the back of the spoon, rub it 
through a hair-sieve. Sweeten it nicely with pounded sugar; whip the 
cream for a few minutes, add it to the fruit, and whisk the whole 
again for another five minutes. Put the mixture into the freezer and
freeze. Raspberry, strawberry, currant, and all fruit ice-creams are 
made in the same manner. A little powdered sugar sprinkled over the 
fruit before it is mashed assists to extract the juice. In winter, 
when fresh fruit is not obtainable, a little jam may be substituted 
for it; it should be melted and worked through a sieve before being 
added to the whipped cream; and if the color should not be good, a 
little prepared cochineal may be put in to improve its appearance. In 
making berry flavoring for ice-cream, the milk should never be heated; 
the juice of the berries added to _cold_ cream, or fresh rich milk, 
mixed with _cold_ cream, the juice put in just before freezing, or 
when partly frozen. 
 
 
CHOCOLATE ICE-CREAM. No. 1. (Very fine.) 
 
Add four ounces of grated chocolate to a cupful of sweet milk, then 
mix it thoroughly to a quart of thick sweet cream; no flavoring is 
required but vanilla. Sweeten with a cupful of sugar; beat again and 
freeze. 

CUSTARD ICE-CREAM. 
 
Sweeten one quart of cream or rich milk with half a pound of sugar and 
flavor to taste; put it over the fire in a farina-kettle; as soon as 
it begins to boil, stir into it a tablespoonful of cornstarch or rice 
flour which has been previously mixed smooth with a little milk; after 
it has boiled a few minutes, take it off the fire and stir in very 
gradually six eggs which have been beaten until thick; when quite 
cold, freeze it as ice-cream. 
 
 
STRAWBERRY ICE-CREAM. 
 
Mix a cupful of sugar with a quart of ripe strawberries, let them 
stand half a day, then mash and strain them through a coarse towel, 
then add to the juice a full cupful of sugar and when dissolved, beat 
in a quart of fresh thick cream. Raspberries, pineapple and other 
fruits made the same. 
 

FRUIT CREAM. 
 
Make a rich, boiled custard; flavor with wine and vanilla; pour it 
into a freezer. When half frozen, add pounded almonds, chopped citron 
and brandy, peaches or chopped raisins. Have the freezer half full of 
custard and fill up with the fruit. Mix well and freeze again. Almost 
any kind of fruits that are preferred may be substituted for the 
above. 
 
 
TUTTI FRUTTI ICE-CREAM. 
 
Take two quarts of the richest cream and add to it one pound of 
pulverized sugar and four whole eggs; mix well together; place on the 
fire, stirring constantly, and just bring to boiling point; now remove 
immediately and continue to stir until nearly cold; flavor with a 
tablespoonful of extract of vanilla; place in freezer and, when half 
frozen, mix thoroughly into it one pound of preserved fruits, in equal 
parts of peaches, apricots, gages, cherries, pineapples, etc.; all of 
these fruits are to be cut up into small pieces and mixed well with
One heaping pint of flour, half a cupful of sugar, one cupful of milk, 
one teaspoonful of soda dissolved in the milk, one tablespoonful of 
butter, two teaspoonfuls of cream of tartar rubbed dry in the flour; 
flavor with nutmeg; bake in a _moderate_ oven; cut in slices and serve 
warm with wine or brandy sauce, or sweet sugar sauce. 
 
 
FRENCH COCOANUT PUDDING. No. 1. 
 
One quart of milk, three tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, the yolks of 
four eggs, half a cupful of sugar and a little salt; put part of the 
milk, salt and sugar on the stove and let it boil; dissolve the 
cornstarch in the rest of the milk; stir into the milk and while 
boiling add the yolks and a cupful of grated cocoanut. Flavor with 
vanilla. 
 
_Frosting._--The whites of four eggs beaten to a stiff froth, half a 
cupful of sugar, flavor with lemon; spread it on the pudding and put 
it into the oven to brown, saving a little of the frosting to moisten 
the top; then put on grated cocoanut to give it the appearance of
 
ROYAL SAGO PUDDING. 
 
Three-quarters of a cupful of sago washed and put into one quart of 
milk; put it into a saucepan, let it stand in boiling water on the 
stove or range until the sago has well swelled. While hot, put in two 
tablespoonfuls of butter with one cupful of white sugar and flavoring. 
When cool, add the well-beaten yolks of four eggs, put in a buttered 
pudding-dish, and bake from half to three-quarters of an hour; then 
remove it from the oven and place it to cool. Beat the whites of the 
eggs with three tablespoonfuls of powdered white sugar till they are a 
mass of froth; spread the pudding with either raspberry or strawberry 
jam, and then spread on the frosting; put in the oven for two minutes 
to slightly brown. If made in summer, be sure and keep the whites of 
the eggs on ice until ready for use and beat them in the coolest place 
you can find, as it will make a much richer frosting. 
 
The small white sago called pearl is the best. The large brown kind 
has an earthy taste. It should always be kept in a covered jar or box. 

 
Make cornstarch pudding with a quart of milk, three tablespoonfuls of 
cornstarch and three tablespoonfuls of sugar. When done, remove about 
half and flavor to taste, and then to that remaining in the kettle add 
an egg beaten very light, and four tablespoonfuls of vanilla chocolate 
grated and dissolved in a little milk. Put in a mold, alternately the 
dark and light. Serve with whipped cream or boiled custard. This is 
more of a blanc mange than a pudding. 
 
 
CHOCOLATE PUDDING. No. 2. 
 
One quart of sweet milk, three-quarters of a cupful of grated 
chocolate; scald the milk and chocolate together; when _cool_, add the 
yolks of five eggs, one cupful of sugar; flavor with vanilla. Bake 
about twenty-five minutes. Beat the five whites of eggs to a stiff 
froth, adding four tablespoonfuls of fine sugar, spread evenly over 
the top and brown slightly in the oven. 
 

thick; remove from the fire and flavor with vanilla; pour the mixture 
in a dish; beat the whites of the three eggs to a stiff froth and add 
a little sugar; cover the top of the pudding with a meringue and set 
in the oven until a light brown. Serve cold. 
 
 
TAPIOCA PUDDING. 
 
Five tablespoonfuls of tapioca, one quart of milk, two ounces of 
butter, a cupful of sugar, four eggs, flavoring of vanilla or bitter 
almonds. Wash the tapioca and let it stew gently in the milk on the 
back part of the stove for a quarter of an hour, occasionally stirring 
it; then let it cool, mix with it the butter, sugar and eggs, which 
should be well-beaten, and flavor with either of the above 
ingredients. Butter a dish, put in the pudding and bake in a moderate 
oven for an hour. If the pudding is boiled, add a little more tapioca 
and boil it in a buttered basin one and a half hours. 
 
 
STRAWBERRY TAPIOCA.
one quart of new milk, the well-beaten yolks of three eggs, three 
tablespoonfuls of white sugar and a little nutmeg, or flavor with 
lemon or vanilla; pour into a baking dish and bake about half an hour. 
Let it get cold; beat the whites of the eggs, add two tablespoonfuls 
of sugar, flavor with lemon or vanilla; drop or spread it over the 
pudding and slightly brown it in the oven. 
 
 
RICE LEMON PUDDING. 
 
Put on to boil one quart of milk, and when it simmers stir in four 
tablespoonfuls of rice flour that has been moistened in a little milk; 
let it come to a boil and remove from the fire; add one quarter of a 
pound of butter, and, when cool, the grated peel with the juice of two 
lemons, and the yolks and beaten whites of four eggs; sweeten to 
taste; one wine-glassful of wine, put in the last thing, is also an 
improvement. 
 
 
RICE PUDDING WITHOUT EGGS.
one of milk, with a little salt; if the rice is not tender when the 
milk and water are absorbed, add a little more milk and water; when 
the rice is tender, flavor with vanilla, form it into balls, or mold 
it into a compact form with little cups; place these rice balls around 
the inside of a deep dish, fill the dish with a rich soft custard and 
serve either hot or cold. The custard and balls should be flavored 
with the same. 
 
 
PRUNE PUDDING. 
 
Heat a little more than a pint of sweet milk to the boiling point, 
then stir in gradually a little cold milk in which you have rubbed 
smooth a heaping tablespoonful of cornstarch; add sugar to suit your 
taste, three well-beaten eggs, about a teaspoonful of butter and a 
little grated nutmeg. Let this come to a boil, then pour it in a 
buttered pudding-dish, first adding a cupful of stewed prunes, with 
the stones taken out. Bake for from fifteen to twenty minutes, 
according to the state of the oven. Serve with or without sauce. A 
little cream improves it if poured over it when placed in saucers.
 
 
FRUIT PUDDING. 
 
This pudding is made without cooking and is nice prepared the day 
before using. 
 
Stew currants or any small fruits, either fresh or dried, sweeten with 
sugar to taste and pour hot over _thin_ slices of bread with the crust 
cut off, placed in a suitable dish, first a layer of bread, then the 
hot stewed fruit, then bread and fruit, then bread, leaving the fruit 
last. Put a plate over the top and, when cool, set it on ice. Serve 
with sugar and cream. 
 
This pudding is very fine made with Boston crackers split open and 
placed in layers with stewed peaches. 
 
 
BOILED CURRANT PUDDING. 

Five cupfuls of sifted flour in which two teaspoonfuls of baking 
powder have been sifted, one-half a cupful of chopped suet, half a 
pound of currants, milk, a pinch of salt. Wash the currants, dry them 
thoroughly and pick away any stalks or grit; chop the suet finely; mix 
all the ingredients together and moisten with sufficient milk to make 
the pudding into a stiff batter; tie it up in a floured cloth, put it 
into boiling water and boil for three hours and a half. Serve with 
jelly sauce made very sweet. 
 
 
TRANSPARENT PUDDING. 
 
A small cupful of fresh butter warmed, but not melted, one cupful of 
sifted sugar creamed with the butter, a teaspoonful of nutmeg, grated, 
eight eggs, yolks and whites beaten separately. Beat the butter and 
sugar light and then add the nutmeg and the beaten eggs, which should 
be stirred in gradually; flavor with vanilla, almond, peach or 
rose-water; stir _hard_; butter a deep dish, line with puff paste and 
bake half an hour. Then make a meringue for the top and brown. Serve 
cold.
of boiling milk and one cup of strawberries. 
 
 
SPONGE CAKE PUDDING. No. 1. 
 
Bake a common sponge cake in a flat-bottomed pudding-dish; when ready 
to use, cut in six or eight pieces, split and spread with butter and 
return them to the dish. Make a custard with four eggs to a quart of 
milk; flavor and sweeten to taste; pour over the cake and bake 
one-half hour. The cake will swell and fill the custard. Serve with or 
without sauce. 
 
 
SPONGE CAKE PUDDING. No. 2. 
 
Butter pudding-mold; fill the mold with small sponge cakes or slices 
of stale plain cake that have been soaked in a liquid made by 
dissolving one-half pint of jelly in a pint of hot water. This will be 
of as fine a flavor and much better for all than if the cake had been 
soaked in wine. Make a sufficient quantity of custard to fill the mold
flavor with a little wine, and pour over it. Beat the whites of the 
eggs to a stiff froth and heap over the whole. 
 
Peaches cut up, left a few hours in sugar and then scalded, and added 
when cold to thick boiled custard, made rather sweet, are a delicious 
dessert. 
 
 
DRIED PEACH PUDDING. 
 
Boil one pint of milk and while hot turn it over a pint of 
bread-crumbs. Stir into it a tablespoonful of butter, one pint of 
dried peaches stewed soft. When all is cool, add two well-beaten eggs, 
half a cupful of sugar and a pinch of salt; flavor to taste. Put into 
a well-buttered pudding-dish and bake half an hour. 
 
 
SUET PUDDING, PLAIN. 
 
One cupful of chopped suet, one cupful of milk, two eggs beaten, half
 
Line a deep dish with rich thick crust; pare and cut into halves or 
quarters some juicy, rather tart peaches; put in sugar, spices and 
flavoring to taste; stew it slightly and put it in the lined dish; 
cover with thick crust of rich puff paste and bake a rich brown; when 
done, break up the top crust into small pieces and stir it into the 
fruit; serve hot or cold; very palatable without sauce, but more so 
with plain rich cream or cream sauce, or with a rich brandy or wine. 
Other fruits can be used in place of peaches. Currants are best made 
in this manner:-- 
 
Press the currants through a sieve to free it from pips; to each pint 
of the pulp put two ounces of crumbed bread and four ounces of sugar; 
bake with a rim of puff paste; serve with cream. White currants may be 
used instead of red. 
 
 
HOMINY PUDDING. 
 
Two-thirds of a cupful of hominy, one and a half pints of milk, two
 
MINUTE PUDDING. No. 2. 
 
One quart of milk, salt, two eggs, about a pint of flour. Beat the 
eggs well; add the flour and enough milk to make it smooth. Butter the 
saucepan and put in the remainder of the milk well salted; when it 
boils, stir in the flour, eggs, etc., lightly; let it cook well. It 
should be of the consistency of thick corn mush. Serve immediately 
with the following simple sauce, _viz_: Rich milk or cream sweetened 
to taste and flavored with grated nutmeg. 
 
 
SUNDERLAND PUDDING. 
 
One cupful of sugar, half a cupful of cold butter, a pint of milk, two 
cupfuls of sifted flour and five eggs. Make the milk hot; stir in the 
butter and let it cool before the other ingredients are added to it; 
then stir in the sugar, flour and eggs, which should be well whisked 
and omit the whites of two; flavor with a little grated lemon rind and 
beat the mixture well. Butter some small cups, rather more than half
of two; stir until all the orange juice is absorbed; grate nutmeg upon 
the sauce and serve on a flat dish. 
 
 
COLD CREAM SAUCE. 
 
Stir to a cream one cupful of sugar, half a cupful of butter, then add 
a cupful of sweet, thick cold cream, flavor to taste. Stir well and 
set it in a cool place. 
 
 
CREAM SAUCE, WARM. 
 
Heat a pint of cream slowly in a double boiler; when nearly boiling, 
set it off from the fire, put into it half a cupful of sugar, a little 
nutmeg or vanilla extract; stir it thoroughly and add, when cool, the 
whites of two well-beaten eggs. Set it on the fire in a dish 
containing hot water to keep it warm until needed, stirring once or 
more. 

boiling water; stir it constantly, put into a saucepan and let it boil 
until clear; then strain. 
 
 
OLD STYLE SAUCE. 
 
One pint of sour cream, the juice and finely grated rind of a large 
lemon; sugar to taste. Beat hard and long until the sauce is very 
light. This is delicious with cold "Brown Betty"--a form of cold 
farina--cornstarch, blanc mange and the like. 
 
 
PLAIN COLD, HARD SAUCE. 
 
Stir together one cupful of white sugar and half a cupful of butter 
until it is creamy and light; add flavoring to taste. This is very 
nice, flavored with the juice of raspberries or strawberries, or beat 
into it a cupful of ripe strawberries or raspberries and the white of 
an egg beaten stiff. 

 
CUSTARD SAUCE. 
 
One cupful of sugar, two beaten eggs, one pint of milk, flavoring to 
taste, brandy or wine, if preferred. 
 
Heat the milk to boiling; add by degrees the beaten eggs and sugar, 
put in the flavoring and set within a pan of boiling water; stir until 
it begins to thicken; then take it off and stir in the brandy or wine 
gradually; set, until wanted, within a pan of boiling water. 
 
 
MILK SAUCE. 
 
Dissolve a tablespoonful of flour in cold milk; see that it is free 
from lumps. Whisk an ounce of butter and a cupful of sugar to a cream 
and add to it a pinch of salt. Mix together half a pint of milk, one 
egg and the flour; stir this into the butter and add a dash of nutmeg, 
or any flavor; heat until near the boiling point and serve. Very nice 
in place of cold cream.
 
One pound of fruit, one pound of sugar; pare off the peeling thin. 
Make a nice syrup of nearly one cupful of water and one pound of 
sugar, and when clarified by boiling and skimming put in the pears and 
stew gently until clear. Choose rather pears like the Seckle for 
preserving, both on account of the flavor and size. A nice way is to 
stick a clove in the blossom end of each pear, for this fruit seems to 
require some extraneous flavor to bring out its own piquancy. Another 
acceptable addition to pear preserves may be found instead, by adding 
the juice and thinly pared rind of one lemon to each five pounds of 
fruit. If the pears are hard and tough, parboil them until tender 
before beginning to preserve, and from the same water take what you 
need for making their syrup. 
 
If you can procure only large pears to preserve, cut them into halves, 
or even slices, so that they can get done more quickly, and lose 
nothing in appearance, either. 
 
 
PINEAPPLE PRESERVES.
STICK CANDY. 
 
One pound of granulated sugar, one cupful of water, a quarter of a 
cupful of vinegar, or half a teaspoonful of cream of tartar, one small 
tablespoonful of glycerine. Flavor with vanilla, rose or lemon. Boil 
all except the flavoring, without stirring, twenty minutes or half an 
hour, or until crisp when dropped in water. Just before pouring upon 
greased platters to cool, add half a teaspoonful of soda. After 
pouring upon platters to cool, pour two teaspoonfuls of flavoring over 
the top. When partly cool, pull it until very white. Draw it into 
sticks the size you wish, and cut off with shears into sticks or 
kiss-shaped drops. It may be colored if desired. (See page 444, for 
coloring.) 
 
 
CHOCOLATE CARAMELS. 
 
One cupful of grated chocolate, two cupfuls of brown sugar, one cupful 
of West India molasses, one cupful of milk or cream, butter the size 
of an egg, boil until thick, _almost_ brittle, stirring constantly.
Turn it out on to buttered plates, and when it begins to stiffen, mark 
it in small squares so that it will break easily when cold. Some like 
it flavored with a tablespoonful of vanilla. 
 
 
GRILLED ALMONDS. 
 
These are a very delicious candy seldom met with out of France. They 
are rather more trouble to make than other kinds, but well repay it 
from their novel flavor. Blanch a cupful of almonds; dry them 
thoroughly. Boil a cupful of sugar and a quarter of a cupful of water 
till it "hairs," then throw in the almonds; let them fry, as it were, 
in this syrup, stirring them occasionally; they will turn a faint 
yellow brown before the sugar changes color; do not wait an instant 
once this change of color begins, or they will lose flavor; remove 
them from the fire, and stir them until the syrup has turned back to 
sugar and clings irregularly to the nuts. 
 
These are grilled almonds. You will find them delicious, as they are 
to alternate at dinner with the salted almonds now so fashionable.
Sweeten one pint of milk to taste, and when boiling, throw in two 
wine-glasses of sherry; when the curd forms, strain the whey through a 
muslin bag into tumblers. 
 
 
LEMON SYRUP. 
 
Take the juice of twelve lemons; grate the rind of six in it, let it 
stand over night; then take six pounds of white sugar and make a 
thick syrup. When it is quite cool, strain the juice into it, and 
squeeze as much oil from the grated rind as will suit the taste. Put 
in bottles, securely corked, for future use. A tablespoonful in a 
goblet of water will make a delicious drink on a hot day. 
 
 
FOR A SUMMER DRAUGHT. 
 
The juice of one lemon, a tumblerful of cold water, pounded sugar to 
taste, half a small teaspoonful of carbonate of soda. Squeeze the 
juice from the lemon; strain and add it to the water, with sufficient
The private dinners menus are either printed or written on a plain 
card and placed on each cover. 
 
Liquors, cordials, cigars are served on a separate table after the 
ladies have retired to the parlor. 
 
[Illustration] 
 
 
 
 
FOR THE SICK. 
 
 
Dishes for invalids should be served in the daintiest and most 
attractive way; never send more than a supply for one meal; the same 
dish too frequently set before an invalid often causes a distaste, 
when perhaps a change would tempt the appetite. 
 
When preparing dishes where milk is used, the condition of the patient
should be considered. Long cooking hardens the albumen and makes the 
milk very constipating; then, if the patient should be already 
constipated, care should be taken not to heat the milk above the 
boiling point. 
 
The seasoning of food for the sick should be varied according to the 
condition of the patient; one recovering from illness can partake of a 
little piece of roast mutton, chicken, rabbit, game, fish, simply 
dressed, and simple puddings are all light food and easily digested. A 
mutton chop, nicely cut, trimmed and broiled, is a dish that is often 
inviting to an invalid. As a rule, an invalid will be more likely to 
enjoy any preparation sent to him if it is served in small delicate 
pieces. As there are so many small, dainty dishes that can be made for 
this purpose, it seems useless to try to give more than a small 
variety of them. Pudding can be made of prepared barley, or tapioca, 
well soaked before boiling, with an egg added, and a change can be 
made of light puddings by mixing up some stewed fruit with the 
puddings before baking; a bread pudding from stale bread crumbs, and a 
tiny cup-custard, boiled in a small basin or cup; also various drinks, 
such as milk punch, wine, whey, apple-toddy, and various other
season with salt and a very little pepper. The yolk of an egg beaten 
light and added, is very nourishing. 
 
 
OATMEAL GRUEL. 
 
Put four tablespoonfuls of the best grits (oatmeal coarsely ground) 
into a pint of boiling water. Let it boil gently, and stir it often, 
till it becomes as thick as you wish it. Then strain it, and add to it 
while warm, butter, wine, nutmeg, or whatever is thought proper to 
flavor it. Salt to taste. 
 
If you make a gruel of fine oatmeal, sift it, mix it first to a thick 
batter with a little cold water, and then put it into the saucepan of 
boiling water. Stir it all the time it is boiling, lifting the spoon 
gently up and down, and letting the gruel fall slowly back again into 
the pan. 
 
 
CORN MEAL GRUEL.
 
Two tablespoonfuls of fine Indian meal, mixed smooth with cold water, 
and a saltspoonful of salt; add one quart of boiling water and cook 
twenty minutes. Stir it frequently, and if it becomes too thick use 
boiling water to thin it. If the stomach is not too weak, a 
tablespoonful of cream may be used to cool it. Some like it sweetened 
and others like it plain. For very sick persons, let it settle, pour 
off the top, and give without other seasoning. For convalescents, 
toast a piece of bread as nicely as possible, and put it in the gruel 
with a tablespoonful of nice sweet cream and a little ginger and 
sugar. This should be used only when a laxative is allowed. 
 
 
EGG GRUEL. 
 
Beat the yolk of an egg with one tablespoonful of sugar; pour one 
teacupful of boiling water on it, add the white of an egg, beaten to a 
froth, with any seasoning or spice desired. Take warm. 
 

ARROWROOT BLANC MANGE. 
 
One large cupful of boiling milk, one even tablespoonful of arrowroot 
rubbed to a paste with cold water, two teaspoonfuls of white sugar, a 
pinch of salt, flavor with rose-water. Proceed as in the foregoing 
recipes, boiling and stirring eight minutes. Turn into a wet mold, 
and, when firm, serve with cream and powdered sugar. 
 
 
TAPIOCA JELLY. 
 
Soak a cupful of tapioca in a quart of cold water after washing it 
thoroughly two or three times; after soaking three or four hours, 
simmer it in a stewpan until it becomes quite clear, stirring often; 
add the juice of a lemon, and a little of the grated peel, also a 
pinch of salt. Sweeten to taste. Wine can be substituted for lemon, if 
liked. 
 
 
SLIPPERY-ELM BARK TEA.
rice begins to look soft and dry, turn over it a cupful of milk and 
let it simmer until the rice is done and nearly dry; take from the 
fire and beat in a well-beaten egg. Eat it warm with cream and sugar. 
Flavor to taste. 
 
 
CUP PUDDING. 
 
Take one tablespoonful of flour, one egg, mix with cold milk and a 
pinch of salt to a batter. Boil fifteen minutes in a buttered cup. Eat 
with sauce, fruit or plain sugar. 
 
 
TAPIOCA CUP PUDDING. 
 
This is very light and delicate for invalids. An even tablespoonful of 
tapioca, soaked for two hours in nearly a cup of new milk; stir into 
this the yolk of a fresh egg; a little sugar, a grain of salt, and 
bake it in a cup for fifteen minutes. A little jelly may be eaten with 
it.
TOAST WATER, OR CRUST COFFEE. 
 
Take stale pieces of crusts of bread, the end pieces of the loaf, 
toast them a nice, dark brown, care to be taken that they do not burn 
in the least, as that affects the flavor. Put the browned crusts into 
a large milk pitcher, and pour enough boiling water over to cover 
them; cover the pitcher closely, and let steep until cold. Strain, and 
sweeten to taste; put a piece of ice in each glass. 
 
This is also good, drank warm with cream and sugar, similar to coffee. 
 
 
PLAIN MILK TOAST. 
 
Cut a thin slice from a loaf of stale bread, toast it very quickly, 
sprinkle a little salt over it, and pour upon it three tablespoonfuls 
of boiling milk or cream. Crackers split and toasted in this manner, 
are often very grateful to an invalid. 
 

1 Double kettle for cooking custards, grains, etc. 
2 Sugar boxes, one for coarse and one for fine sugar. 
1 Waffle iron. 
1 Step ladder. 
1 Stove, 1 coal shovel. 
1 Pair of scales. 
2 Coal hods or buckets. 
1 Kitchen table, 2 kitchen chairs. 
1 Large clothes basket. 
1 Wash boiler, 1 wash board. 
8 Dozen clothes pins. 
1 Large nail hammer and one small tack hammer. 
1 Bean pot. 
1 Clothes wringer. 
 
An ingenious housewife will manage to do with less conveniences, but 
these articles, if they can be purchased in the commencement of 
housekeeping, will save time and labor, making the preparation of food 
more easy--and it is always economy in the end to get the best 
material in all wares, as, for instance, the double plate tin will
last for years, whereas the poor kind has to be replaced in a short 
time; the low-priced earthenware is soon broken up, whereas the strong 
stoneware, costing but a trifle more, lasts almost a lifetime. 
 
In relation to the economy and management of the kitchen, I might 
suggest that the most essential thing is cleanliness in cooking, and 
also cleanliness with your person as well as in the keeping of the 
kitchen. 
 
The hands of the cook should be always thoroughly cleansed before 
touching or handling anything pertaining to the cooking. Next there 
should never be anything wasted or thrown away that can be turned to 
account, either for your own family or some family in poor 
circumstances. Bread that has become hard can be used for toasting, or 
for stuffing and pudding. In warm weather any gravies or soups that 
are left from the preceding day should be boiled up and poured into 
clean pans. This is particularly necessary where vegetables have been 
added to the preparation, as it then so soon turns sour. In cooler 
weather, every other day will be often enough to warm up these things. 
In cooking, clear as you go; that is to say, do not allow a host of
basins, plates, spoons, and other utensils, to accumulate on the 
dressers and tables whilst you are engaged in preparing the dinner. By 
a little management and forethought, much confusion may be saved in 
this way. It is as easy to put a thing in its place when it is done 
with, as it is to keep continually moving it to find room for fresh 
requisites. For instance, after making a pudding, the flour-tub, 
paste-board, and rolling-pin, should be put away, and any basins, 
spoons, etc., should be neatly packed up near the sink, to be washed 
when the proper time arrives. Neatness, order and method should be 
always observed. 
 
Never let your stock of spices, salt, seasoning, herbs, etc., dwindle 
down so low that some day, in the midst of preparing a large dinner, 
you find yourself minus a very important ingredient, thereby causing 
much confusion and annoyance. 
 
After you have washed your saucepans, fish-kettle, etc., stand them 
before the fire for a few minutes to get thoroughly dry inside, 
before putting them away. They should then be kept in a dry place, in 
order that they may escape the deteriorating influence of rust, and
thereby be quickly destroyed. Never leave saucepans dirty from one 
day  '  s use to be cleaned the next; it is slovenly and untidy. 
 
Do not be afraid of hot water in washing up dishes and dirty cooking 
utensils. As these are essentially greasy, luke-warm water cannot 
possibly have the effect of cleansing them effectually. Do not be 
chary also of changing and renewing the water occasionally. You will 
thus save yourself much time and labor in the long run. 
 
Keep a cake of sapolio always on hand in the kitchen--always 
convenient for rubbing off stains from earthenware, tin, glass, in 
fact, almost everything but silver; it is a cheap and valuable 
article, and can be purchased at nearly every grocery in the United 
States. 
 
 
 
 
DYEING OR COLORING. 

as much as the palate. 
 
All dishes should be arranged in harmony with the decorations of the 
flowers, such as covers, relishes, confectionery, and small sweets. 
Garnishing of dishes has also a great deal to do with the appearance 
of a dinner-table, each dish garnished sufficiently to be in good 
taste without looking absurd. 
 
Beside each plate should be laid as many knives, forks and spoons as 
will be required for the several courses, unless the hostess prefers 
to have them brought on with each change. A glass of water, and when 
wine is served glasses for it, and individual salt-cellars may be 
placed at every plate. Water-bottles are now much in vogue with 
corresponding tumblers to cover them; these, accompanied with dishes 
of broken ice, may be arranged in suitable places. When butter is 
served a special knife is used, and that, with all other required 
service, may be left to the judgment and taste of the hostess, in the 
proper placing of the various aids to her guests  '   comfort. 
 
The dessert plates should be set ready, each with a doily and a
 
After dishes have been passed that are required no more, such as 
vegetables, hot sauces, etc., the dishes containing them may be set 
upon the side-board, ready to be taken away. 
 
Jellies and sauces, when not to be eaten as a dessert, should be 
helped on the dinner-plate, not on a small side dish as was the former 
usage. 
 
If a dish be on the table, some parts of which are preferred to 
others, according to the taste of the individuals, all should have the 
opportunity of choice. The host will simply ask each one if he has any 
preference for a particular part; if he replies in the negative, you 
are not to repeat the question, nor insist that he must have a 
preference. 
 
Do not attempt to eulogize your dishes, or apologize that you cannot 
recommend them--this is extreme bad taste; as also is the vaunting of 
the excellence of your wines, etc., etc. 

