
 Corrigates and conftricls the pulmonary Veficles, 
 that a Jarge Quantity of vifcid Blood is eafily re- 
 tained in them. « 
  
 This Difeafe, as alfo Inflammations of the Lungs, 
 are more incident to the Nobility and People of Di- 
 ftindHon and Opulence, than to the meaner Sort; 
 becaufe the former indulge themfelves in Delicacy, 
 Idlenefs, and Luxury, eat the moft rich and lufci- 
 ous Flemes, and drink large Quantities of gene- 
 rous Wines ; by which Means Nature, efpecially 
 in weak and fpongious Habits, is rendered incapable 
 of managing the too Jarge Quantity of Blood, and 
 carrying on the Secretions which ought to be made
latter confift of Beef, Pork, and Cabbage, which" 
 the Inhabitants feed on in large Quantities. 
  
 The Venetians are fubjecl: to the Hemorrhoids ancf 
 their feveral Confequences, fuch as painful, blind 
 Hemorrhoids, Varices, and Fici, for which Reaforl 
 Leeches are fo much ufed by them, that they fre- 
 quently contract Fiftulas of the Anus. The Caufe 
 of thefe Diforders is juftlv afcribed to the liberal 
 L r e cf Italian Wine. And in general, we may 
 sBferve, that the Inhabitants of thofe Countries in 
 w: iich Wines, efpecially of the fweet Kind, ar^ 
 fpontaneoufiy produced, are more fubjecl to the 
 bleeding Hemorrhoids, than thofe who live in barren 
 Climates, in which only Water and Malt-liquors 
 are drank; for Wines of this Kind generate large 
 Quantities of Blood, and eafiiy throw it into Or- 
 gan ns, or preternatural Commotions, Hence, m 
 confluence of the Diftention of the Veffels, the 
 Blood moves (lowly through all the abdominalVifce-
Ufe of Chocolate. But it is remarkable, that the 
 Itch and Scurvy are not known in Spain, tho* 
 they daily eat large Quantities of frefli Pork ; for 
  
  
  
 12 On Endemial DiilempefS. 
  
 the Air of that Kingdom is highly fubtile and 
 penetrating, their Water pure and light, and thfe 
 Food ufed without Salt. In confequenCe there- 
 fore of a free Perforation, and an open and 
 unobftrucled State of the cutaneous Pores, thfc 
 coarfeand thick Particles of the Serum are exhaled, 
 which, when ftagnating in the Pores and Glands cf 
 the Skin, produce thofe Eruptions that appear in- 
 the Itch and Scurvy. 
  
 We now come toconfider theDiforders endemial 
 to the United Provinces, and efpecially Holland,
attended with a violent Pain of the Head, obiti- 
 nate Watching, a Cardialgia, Delirium, and an 
 Angina. Soldiers, who lie on the Ground, and 
 eat irregularly, are highly fubjeel: to this Species of 
 Fever. Befides, in this Kingdom the Heat is very 
 intenfe during the Day, and the Cold very pinching 
 during the Night: Hence, Perforation being ob- 
 ftru fled, , the Blood muft of eourfe be difpofed to* 
 Corruption. There is alfo another Difeafe peculiar 
 to the Hungarians, which they call Cremer, and 
 with which, when they are feized in confequence 
 of immoderate Eating arid Drinking, they imme- 
 diately fall a rubbing the Palms of their Hands, and 
 complain of a Pain in them : But this Diforder 
 immediately difappears, upon the Patient ' s taking, 
 a Dram of any Cordial-water. They are alfo 
 highly fubjecl: to another Diforder, which they call 
 Strint, and by which they mean every Tumour or 
 Inflammation, whether in the Mouth, theThroat, or 
 the Anus. Ephim. Nat, Curiof Decad. i. Anno r.
analytical Enquiry or other into the Nature of hu- 
 man Urine. For it being, by the Confent of all, 
 pofleffed of a deterfive and foapy Quality, by Vir- 
 tue of the various Salts of all Kinds which are 
 lodged in it, it is not fo eafy to determine which 
 of them has the afcendant. For while the Serum y 
 or watery Part of the Blood, circulates in the 
 Blood- veflels, it abforbs Salts of various Kinds, in 
 Proportion to the Diverfity of Things we eat and 
 drink, which have fo many various Taftes ; thefc 
 Salts it carries along with it, through the Renal T 
 bult\ to the Bladder ; and from thence it comes, 
 that the Urine has various and different Taftes, 
 though, generally fpeaking, a faltim Tafte with 
 fome Bitternefs is the moft predominant. 
  
 Dr. Willis wrote a very pretty Treatife of U- 
 rines, in which he allots to human Urine a great 
 Proportion of Serum, a lefTer Proportion of Salt, 
 Su-phur and Earth, and a fmall Quantity of Spirit.
ments calculated againft the Itch be applied, even 
 when the Body is unpurged ; for the Diforder pro- 
 ceeds not from a vitious Collection of Humours in 
 the Body, but from the Contadt and perpetual 
 Handling of the Children, fo that we have no- 
 thing to fear from extinguifhing out of hand the 
 fcabby Miafmata which flick in the Skin. Indeed, 
 if the Itch or Scab take rife from a Caoochymy, 
 occafioned by long Suckling, we mull take another 
 Courfe : For then the peccant Humours mufl be 
 purged off, before the Application of the external 
 Topics. But I have known a great many Nurfes 
 perfectly cured without any Remedies, in a few 
 Months after they gave over Suckling ; and that 
 of a very foul Scab which was only catched by con - 
 tinually handling fcabby Children. Nurfes ought 
 therefore to be very cautious in handling the 
 Children they fuckle, and endeavour as much 
 as poflible to keep both themfelves and the Children 
 clean and fweet ; for if that Caution w r ere duly ob-
ferved, Children would not be fo liable to foul 
 ulcerous Eruptions, as they commonly are; neither 
 would they wafte and pine away fo often in perpe- 
 tual crying and yelling. Galen * has a Story of a 
 Child who had cried all day, and would not be 
 appeafed neither by the Breaft, nor Dandling, nor 
 any other ufual Way; till by Galen ' s Orders the 
 Child ' s Linnen was ihifted, and itfelf wafhed in 
 a fweet Bath, upon which it was flill and flept 
 a long while. 
  
 Before 
  
  
  
 * * 2 De San. Tu. c. 8. 
  
  
  
 158 . Of the Difeafes
172 Of the Difeafcs 
  
 Pliny reckons up a great many Things for pre- 
 venting Drunkennefs, which are commonly known ; 
 fuch as bitter Almonds, Colewort, and all fweet 
 Things. To thefe the late Authors have added a 
 great many more, and particularly Platerus, who 
 bewailing the Cuftom of the Country, which 
 made Civility and Hofpitality to confift in drink- 
 ing hard, gives a tedious Lift of Remedies to pre- 
 vent Drunkennefs j fuch as Wormwood, Rue, 
 Milk, the Lungs of Animals roafted, Pofcae, Vine- 
 gar, and Water, four Apples, and feveral com- 
 pound Electuaries, Mixtures and other Preparati- 
 ons. 
  
 To fuch Workmen, as by reafon of their nar- 
 row Circumftances, cannot procure fuch coftly 
 Remedies, we muft prefcribe the Ampler Medicines, 
 and fuch as are more eafily prepared, Cole wort, the
Oil of Sweet-almonds, Emulfions of Melon- feeds, 
 Barley-ptifans, Treacle- Waters, Draughts of ge- 
 nerous Wine, and fmelling to the Spirit of Sal- 
 ammoniac. 
  
 Now, that I am upon this Subject, I fhall take 
 occafion to enquire a little narrowly into the Na- 
 ture of Starch, which I reckon to be fomewhat 
 different from what the Phyficians generally take it 
 to be. By the unanimous Confent both of the 
 Ancients and Moderns, Starch is fuppofed to pof- 
 fefs a Virtue of qualifying ftiarp Humours, flopping 
 Fluxes, and healing Ulcers. Pliny * commends 
 it in a Spitting of Blood and Pains of the Bladder. 
 Gakh\, cries it up mightily in a Loofenefs, in 
 Inflammations of the afpera arteria^ in a running 
 of the Eyes, and in all Cafes where ulcerated Parts 
 want to be foftened and fmoothed. Valiefius in 
 his Book, dc Sacra Pbilofcphia^ prefers it before 
 all other Remedies for the Cure of a Dyfentery,
and correcting any Sort of Acrimony. The fame 
 are the Sentiments of all who have wroteof Starch. 
  
 This Opinion may feem very probable, i i poa 
 the Confideration, that Starch is infipid as to the 
 Tafte, and confequently an excellent Abforber of 
 ftiarp Matter, and likewife, that what Acrimony or 
 Acidity was in the fermented Wheat, is fuppofed 
 to exhale in the Preparation, and the watery Hu- 
 mour which partakes of the Sharpnefs, is fuppofed 
 to be wafted during the Exficcation of the Starch 
 before the Summer-Sun : For, as Gorr&us % has it, 
  
 Starch 
  
  
  
 * Lib. 22. c. z;. H. N. f De Jimp, med.fac, 
  
 2, c. 36. [| Dt Cmp. med. 2. he* % Defn* Mid.
 
  
  
 1 82 Of the Difeafes 
  
 Starch muft: be dried with a very hot Sun, left, if 
 any Moifture be left, it mould contract an Acidity. 
 But the frequent Obfervations made by the Wo- 
 men, who commonly ufe Starch in this Country 
 to whiten and ftiffen the Linnen, have taught me 
 to fufpecl: the Nature of Starch, and not to trufl; 
 altogether to its Whitenefs. For they obferve, 
 that, when Linnen lies in Starch for any Time, 
 it quickly wears out; and to avoid that Incon- 
 veniency, as foon as they have fouled it, they wafh 
 off the Starch with fair Water, and fo keep the 
 Linnen till they have occafion to wafh it. This 
 is fufficient Evidence of a confiderable Acrimony 
 in Starch, which is not fo obvious to the Tafte: 
 For, if Starch wears out and corrodes Linnen,
 
  
 Tradesmen. 203 
  
 notice of theUlcers, to whichFifliermen are fubjeft, 
 and orders them to be warned with Sea- water. 
 It is true, fome may think that Sea- Water is 
 an improper Fomentation for fuch Ulcers, becaufe 
 its biting, pungent Nature irritates and provokes 
 a Flux of Humours ; but Martianus, in his Com- 
 ment upon this Place, juftifics the Prefcription of 
 Hippocrates very judiclou fly, becaufe the Ulcers of 
 Fifhermen that live in maritime Places, are fqualid 
 and dry, and by the Application of irritating 
 Things, may be brought to Suppuration, without 
 which it is impoffible to care them. Galen || made 
 the fame Obfervation, that the Ulcers of Fifher- 
 men are dry and fordid, as if they were pickled 
 v ith Salt : But after all, we muft think that the 
 Ulcers of fuch Fifhermen as fifh in frefh Water
and Lakes, are of a different Nature from thofe 
 of the Fifhermen who are ufed to the Sea ; for 
 1 they abound with too much Humidity, and are 
 to be cured after a different Manner, by fuch 
 drying Things as are accompunved with no 
 pungent Sharpnc fs : For Hippocrates \ tells us, 
 that a dry Ulcer is more likely to be cured than a 
 wet one. 
  
 Upon this Occ.ifion I cannot but take Notice 
 of that divine Caution of Hippocrates^ whofpeaking 
 in the Place above quoted, of the Ufe of Sea -Wa- 
 ter in theUlcers of Fifhermen, (ays, If you ufe it 
 fp ' drvigly it irritant and provokn. but ff you ufe it 
 liberally it does gjod : So that when we have Occa- 
 fion for lharp '  Medicaments, as in fordid Uleer>, 
 for taking off thecorrupt Matter and putriried Flefb, 
 we ought to ufe them in a convenient Quantity 
 til! the peccant Matter is confumed, and the Ul- 
 cer dried : For this I perceive is a frequent En^r
 
 2o6 Of the Difeafes 
  
 paid a Vifit to that Place, but my Bufinefs would 
 not permit me. However, I took care to procur e 
 due Information by Letters, which I owe to the 
 Humanity of the famous Jofeph Lanzonius^ Pro- 
 fefTor of Phyfic : But his Letters did not arrive foon 
 enough to enable me to rank this Chapter among 
 the Artificers who work upon Minerals. He in- 
 formed me, that, in that City and the Salt-pits be- 
 longing to it, the Air is fo impregnated with, cor- 
 rofive Spirits, as to corrode Iron, which thereupon 
 foftens like Wax and moulders into Powder ; that 
 all the Workmen are chachectic, dropfical, and 
 troubled with fordid Wounds in their Legs; that 
 they-eat and drink prodigioufly,and their Appetite is 
 in a manner never fatisfied ; that fudden Deaths hap- 
 pen frequently among them; that theMcthod of Cure 
 is various, there being divers Phyfician^ frequently
fent for from various Places ; that there . / r 7 
 little Place for any fort of Remedies, especially in 
 their acute Difeafes, which are always accompany- 
 ed with lethargic Symptoms ; and that by Rcafon 
 of the vaft Quantity, or rather the verv jWountains 
 of Salt, which Leander Albertus fays, he often be- 
 held with Admiration. It is probable, that^ gr eat 
 Quantities of the Spirit of the Salt are elevated 
 to the Air, which they overftock with a corrofive 
 Acid which corrodes Iron, and at the fame time 
 makes the Blood of the Workmen highly acid ; 
 which gives Rife to Cachexies, Dropfies, and Ul- 
 cers of the Limbs, thefe being naturally produced 
 by a luxuriant Acid. 
  
 Their boundlefs and infatiable Appetite may be 
 reafonably imputed to the fame acid Spirit of the 
 Salt which whets the Ferment of the Stomach. 
 The very Ancients knew, that the canine Hun- 
 ger which Hippocrates* fays is cured by Wine,
prefemng and promoting Perfpiration ; and tc 
 bathe in fweet Water, efpecially in Summer, ai 
 which time they are moll apt to be choleric j foi 
 by that Means the Acrimony of the Humours is 
 corrected, and the rough Vifcera are foftened. 
 The moft convenient Time for bathing is the E- 
 vening ; after which it would be proper to eat, 
 and fo go to Bed ; for fuch was the Cuftom among 
 the Antiems : And accordingly Homer fays, 
  
 Ut lay it y fumpfitque cibum dat membra fopori. 
  
 The Morning is ufually recommended as the 
 moft convient Time for Study, as the Night Hours, 
 and efpecially thofe after Supper, are improper for 
 that Exercife. is a monjlrous Waylays Ficinus *, 
 to fit up late a Nights^ and fo to be forced to lie tf) 
 Bed after the Sun rife ; and this he fays is the Fault! 
 of many Students ; the Pernicioufnefs of which 
 he confirms by feveral Reafons ; fome drawn from
y Ctlfus ' s Caution * mull: always be minded, 
 which is, that ihey ought not to lludy immediate- 
 y after Eating, but after the Concoction is over. 
 The eminent Cardinal Sfortia Pallavicivus, a Man 
 of great Learning, ufed to dedicate the whole 
 Day to his Study without Eating, after which he 
 eat a little Supper, and, laying a fide his Studies, 
 fct apart the whole Night for Sleep, and the Re- 
 pairing of his Strength. 
  
 But, after all, there are fome Men who prefer 
 the Night to the Day, and account the fee ret Re- 
 ceiTes and Silence of the Night more favourable 
 for Study. Gtl/ius writes f, that Euripides^ the 
 Author of the Tragedies, ufed. when he was 
 compofing any Tragedy, to mew MmfHf up in 
 fome dark dilrnal Cave in the lii.«rdcf Sdiami.g* 
 In like manner \ D*m#f»ws i tlm gieat Ora tor, 
 ufed to retire to a Place wrerc he could neither fee 
 nor hear any thing, for fear his Eyes (hould divert
Silk Weavers are exempted from one Difadvan- 
 tage to which Cloth Weavers are fubjedted, and 
 which axifes from the ungrateful Smell of the Oil 
  
  
  
 of Perfons employed in Weaving. 407 
  
 with which the Wool is moiften ' d. Thus their 
 Bodies fmell ftrong, their Breath fometimes ftinks* 
 and their Eyes become red, which alfo happens 
 to all thofe employ ' d in handling Wool moiften ' d 
 with Oil. 
  
 Weavers of all kinds, for the Prefervation of 
 Health, ought to work but moderately, and not 
 to Excefs ; and in order to remove the Wearinefs* 
 gentle Fri£lions of the Thighs, Legs and Arms* 
 with Oil of fweet Almonds, are to be ufed. Cloth 
 Weavers ought alfo to keep themfelves as clean as
that Lippitudes and Inflammations of the Eyes are 
 cured by working in Brafs Mines ; for which 
 Reafon  ' tis cuftomary with fome Perfons to pre- 
 pare Colly viums with Brafs. 
  
 The Ears may be fill ' d with Cotton, in order 
 to hinder their internal Parts from being injur ' d by 
 the Noife ; and when they are weaken ' d and con- 
 cufs ' d, they may be anointed with Oil of fweet Al- 
 monds. As for the Diforders of the Lungs pro- 
 duced by infpiring the Air impregnated with the 
 Metalic Exhalations, they are moft effe&ually 
 remov ' d by Emulfions cf fweet Almonds, or of 
 Melon and Gourd Seeds, in Water of Violets, 
 or Barley- Water. Whey and Milk Meats are 
 alfo recommended for the fame Purpofe. But if 
 a Brafier is naturally of a dry Conftitution, and 
 fubjedt to Diforders of the Lungs, nothing is 
 more expedient than his quitting the Bufinefs and 
 applying to fome other ; for Gain ought never to
tirely of Wood, is not improbable ; for Seneca 
 informs us, that it was totally burnt in one Night ; 
 fo that next Morning the Country People in the 
 Neighbourhood miffing it, were furprized what 
 was become of it ; and Seneca on this Occafion 
 commiferating the Calamities incident to Man- 
 kind, exclaims, diu Sylva^ moment Cinis ! The 
 Town which had long been a Wood, was in a 
 Moment laid in Afhes. And even at prefent in 
 fome northerly Countries whole Towns are built 
 of Wood : Thus in Mufcovy^ for inftance, there 
 are immenfely large Shops fill ' d with finifh ' d 
 Wooden Houfes of all Sizes, according to the 
 Purchafer ' s Tafte ; fo that a Perfon may there 
 have a compleat Houfe in a few Days convey '  d to 
 the Situation he intends* 
  
 Tbo* 
  
 
