 
  
  
 SOUPS AND STEWS 
  
  
 ARTICHOKE SOUP. 
  
 1 lb. each of artichokes and potatoes, 1 Spanish onion, 1 oz. of 
 butter, 1 pint of milk, and pepper and salt to taste. Peel, wash, and 
 cut into dice the artichokes, potatoes, and onion. Cook them until 
 tender in 1 quart of water with the butter and seasoning. When the 
 vegetables are tender rub them through a sieve. Return the liquid to 
 the saucepan, add the milk, and boil the soup up again. Add water if 
 the soup is too thick. Serve with Allinson plain rusks, or small dice 
 of bread fried crisp in butter or vege-butter. 
  
  
 HARICOT SOUP. 
 
1 lb. of haricot beans, 1/2 lb. of onions, 1 lb. of turnips, 2 
 carrots, 2 sticks of celery, 1 teaspoonful of mixed herbs, 1/2 oz. of 
 parsley, 1 oz. of butter, 2 quarts of water, pepper and salt to taste. 
 Cut up the vegetables and set them to boil in the water with the 
 haricot beans (which should have been steeped over night in cold 
 water), adding the butter, herbs, and seasoning. Cook all very gently 
 for 3-1/2 to 4 hours, stirring occasionally. When the beans are quite 
 tender, rub the soup through a sieve, adding more water if needed; 
 return it to the saucepan, add the parsley chopped up finely, boil it 
 up and serve. 
  
  
 BARLEY SOUP. 
  
 8 oz. of pearl barley, 2 onions, 4 potatoes, 1/2 a teaspoonful of 
 thyme, 1 dessertspoonful of finely chopped parsley, 3-1/2 pints of 
 water, 1/2 pint of milk, 1 oz. of butter. Pick and wash the barley, 
 chop up the onions, slice the potatoes. Boil the whole gently for 4 
 hours with the water, adding the butter, thyme, pepper and salt to 
 taste. When the barley is quite soft, add the milk and parsley, boil
the soup up, and serve. 
  
  
 BREAD SOUP. 
  
 1/2 lb. of stale crusts of Allinson wholemeal bread, 4 onions, 2 
 turnips, 1 stick of celery, 1 oz. of butter, 1/2 oz. of finely chopped 
 parsley, 8 pints of water, 1/2 pint of milk. Soak the crusts in the 
 water for 2 hours before they are put over the fire. Cut up into small 
 dice the vegetables; add them to the bread with the butter and pepper 
 and salt to taste. Allow all to simmer gently for 1 hour, then rub the 
 soup through a sieve, return it to the saucepan, add the milk and 
 parsley, and, if the flavour is liked, a little grated nutmeg; boil 
 the soup up and serve at once. 
  
  
 CABBAGE SOUP. 
  
 1 fair-sized cabbage, a large Spanish onion, 1-1/2 oz. of butter, 
 pepper and salt to taste, 1/2 saltspoonful of nutmeg, 1-1/2 pints of
milk, 2 tablespoonfuls of Allinson fine wheatmeal. After preparing and 
 washing the cabbage, shred up very fine, chop up the onion, set these 
 two in a saucepan over the fire with 1 quart of water, the butter and 
 seasoning, and let all cook gently for 1 hour, or longer it the 
 vegetables are not quite tender. Add the milk and thickening when the 
 vegetables are thoroughly tender, and let all simmer gently for 10 
 minutes; serve with little squares of toasted or fried bread, or 
 Allinson plain rusks. 
  
  
 CABBAGE SOUP (French). 
  
 1 medium-sized cabbage, 1 lb. of potatoes, 1 oz. of butter, 3 pints of 
 milk and water equal parts, pepper and salt to taste, 1 
 dessertspoonful of finely chopped parsley, and 2 blades of mace, and 1 
 dessertspoonful of Allinson fine wheatmeal. Wash the cabbage and shred 
 it finely, peel the potatoes and cut them into small dice; boil the 
 vegetables in the milk and water until quite tender, adding the mace, 
 butter, and seasoning. When quite soft, rub the wheatmeal smooth with 
 a little water, let it simmer with the soup for 5 minutes, add the
parsley, and serve. 
  
  
 CAPER SOUP. 
  
 2 pints of water, 1 pint of milk, 1 large tablespoonful of capers, 1/2 
 lemon, 2 eggs, 1-1/2 oz. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1/2 oz. of 
 butter, pepper and salt to taste. Boil the milk and water and butter, 
 with seasoning to taste; thicken it with the wheatmeal rubbed smooth 
 with a little milk. Chop up the capers, add them and let the soup cook 
 gently for 10 minutes; take it off the fire, beat up the eggs and add 
 them carefully, that they may not curdle; at the last add the juice of 
 the half lemon, re-heat the soup without allowing it to boil, and 
 serve. 
  
  
 CARROT SOUP (1). 
  
 4 good-sized carrots, 1 head of celery, 1 onion, 3 oz. of Allinson 
 wholemeal bread without crust, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and salt, and 1
blade of mace. Wash, scrape, and cut the carrots into dice. Prepare 
 and cut up the onions and celery. Set the vegetables over the fire 
 with 3 pints of water, adding the mace and seasoning. Let all cook 
 until quite soft, which will probably be in 1-1/2 hours. If the 
 carrots are old, they will take longer cooking. When the vegetables 
 are tender, rub all through a sieve, return the soup to the saucepan, 
 add the butter, allow it to boil up, and serve with sippets of toast. 
  
  
 CARROT SOUP (2). 
  
 4 good-sized carrots, 1 small head of celery, 1 fair-sized onion, 1 
 turnip, 3 oz. of breadcrumbs, 1-1/2 oz. of butter, 1 blade of mace, 
 pepper and salt to taste. Scrape and wash the vegetables, and cut them 
 up small; set them over the fire with 3 pints of water, the butter, 
 bread, and mace. Let all boil together, until the vegetables are quite 
 tender, and then rub them through a sieve. Return the mixture to the 
 saucepan, season with pepper and salt, and if too thick add water to 
 the soup, which should be as thick as cream, boil the soup up, and 
 serve.
 
  
 CAULIFLOWER SOUP. 
  
 1 medium-sized cauliflower, 1-1/2 pints of milk, 1 oz. of butter, 2 
 oz. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, pepper and salt to taste, a little 
 nutmeg, and the juice of a lemon. Prepare the cauliflower by washing 
 and breaking it into pieces, keeping the flowers whole, and boil in 
 1-1/2 pints of water, adding the butter, nutmeg, and seasoning. When 
 the cauliflower is quite tender add the milk, boil it up, and thicken 
 the soup with the wheatmeal, which should first be smoothed with a 
 little cold water. Lastly, add the lemon juice, and serve the soup 
 with sippets of toast. 
  
  
 CLEAR SOUP. 
  
 1 large Spanish onion, 1 teaspoonful of mixed herbs, 1/2 head of 
 celery, 1-1/2 oz. butter, 1 carrot, 1 turnip, and pepper and salt to 
 taste. Chop the onion up fine, and fry it brown in the butter, in the
saucepan in which the soup is to be made, and add 5 pints of water. 
 Prepare and cut into small pieces the carrot, turnip, and celery; add 
 these, the nutmeg, herbs, and pepper and salt to the water, with the 
 fried onions. When the vegetables are tender drain the liquid; return 
 it to the saucepan, and boil the soup up. 
  
  
 CLEAR SOUP (with Dumplings). 
  
 2 large English onions, 1 teaspoonful of herbs, 1/2 teaspoonful of 
 nutmeg, 1 carrot, 1 turnip, pepper and salt to taste, 1 oz. of butter, 
 3 pints of water. Chop up finely the onions and fry them brown in the 
 butter in the saucepan in which the soup is to be made; add the water. 
 Cut up in thin slices the carrot and turnip, add these, with the 
 herbs, nutmeg, and seasoning to the soup. Let it boil for I hour, 
 drain the liquid, return it to the saucepan, and when boiling add the 
 dumplings prepared as follows: 1/2 pint of clear soup, 4 eggs, a 
 little nutmeg, pepper and salt to taste. Beat the eggs well, mix them 
 with the soup, and season the mixture with nutmeg, pepper, and salt. 
 Pour it into a buttered jug; set it in a pan with boiling water, and
2 cocoanuts grated, 2 blades of mace, 1 saltspoonful of cinnamon, 3 
 pints of water, the juice of a lemon, 2 eggs, 1 oz. of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, pepper and salt to taste. Boil the cocoanut in the water, 
 adding the mace, cinnamon, and seasoning. Let it cook gently for an 
 hour; strain the mixture through a sieve and then return the soup to 
 the saucepan. Make a paste of the eggs, wheatmeal, and lemon juice, 
 add it to the soup and let it boil up before serving; let it simmer 
 for 5 minutes, and serve with a little plain boiled rice. 
  
  
 CORN SOUP. 
  
 1 breakfastcupful of fresh wheat, 1 quart of water, 1/2 pint of milk, 
 1/2 oz. of butter, 1/2 oz. of finely chopped parsley, 1 oz. of 
 eschalots, seasoning to taste. Steep the wheat over night in the water 
 and boil it in the same water for 3 hours, add the butter, the 
 eschalots, chopped up very fine, and pepper and salt. Let the whole 
 simmer very gently for another 1/2 hour, add the milk and parsley, 
 boil the soup up once more, and serve. 
 
 
 LEEK SOUP (1). 
  
 2 bunches of leeks, 1-1/2 pints of milk, 1 oz. of butter, 1 lb. of 
 potatoes, pepper and salt to taste, and the juice of a lemon. Cut off 
 the coarse part of the green ends of the leeks, and cut the leeks 
 lengthways, so as to be able to brush out the grit. Wash the leeks 
 well, and see no grit remains, then cut them in short pieces. Peel, 
 wash, and cut up the potatoes, then cook both vegetables with 2 pints 
 of water. When the vegetables are quite tender, rub them through a 
 sieve. Return the mixture to the saucepan, add the butter, milk, and 
 seasoning, and boil the soup up again. Before serving add the lemon 
 juice; serve with sippets of toast. 
  
  
 LEEK SOUP (2). 
  
 1 dozen leeks, 1-1/2 pints of milk, 1 lb. of potatoes, 1 oz. of 
 butter, pepper and salt to taste, and the juice of a lemon (this last 
 may be omitted if not liked). Prepare the leeks as in the previous
recipe, cut them into pieces about an inch long. Peel and wash the 
 potatoes and cut them into dice. Set the vegetables over the fire with 
 1 quart of water, and cook them until tender, which will be in about 1 
 hour. When soft rub all through a sieve and return the soup to the 
 saucepan. Add the milk, butter, and seasoning, boil up, and add the 
 lemon juice just before serving. Should the soup be too thick add a 
 little hot water. Serve with Allinson plain rusks. 
  
  
 LENTIL SOUP. 
  
 1 lb. each of lentils and potatoes, 1 large Spanish onion, 1 
 medium-sized head of celery (or the outer pieces of a head of celery, 
 saving the heart for table use), 1 breakfastcupful of tinned tomatoes 
 or 1/2 lb. of fresh ones, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste. 
 Chop the onion up roughly, and fry it in the butter until beginning to 
 brown. Pick and wash the lentils, and set them over the fire with 2 
 quarts of water or vegetable stock, adding the fried onion. Peel, 
 wash, and cut up the potatoes, prepare the celery, cut it into small 
 pieces, and add all to the lentils. When they are nearly soft add the
tomatoes. When all the ingredients are quite tender rub them through a 
 sieve. Return the soup to the saucepan, add pepper and salt, and more 
 water if the soup is too thick. Serve with sippets of toast. 
  
  
 MACARONI STEW. 
  
 6 oz. of cold boiled macaroni, 1 large Spanish onion, 1 carrot, 1/2 
 lb. of tomatoes, 1/4 lb. of mushrooms, 2 oz. of grated cheese, 1 oz. 
 of butter, pepper and salt to taste. Wash, prepare, and cut up the 
 vegetables in small pieces. Cover them with water and stew them until 
 tender, adding the butter and seasoning. When tender add the macaroni 
 cut into finger lengths, and the cheese. 
  
  
 MILK SOUP. 
  
 2 onions, 2 turnips, 1 head of celery, 3 pints of milk, 1 pint of 
 water, 2 tablespoonfuls of Allinson fine wheatmeal, pepper and salt 
 to taste. Chop up the vegetables and boil them in the water until
for 2 hours. Rub the mixture well through a sieve, adding hot water it 
 necessary. Return the soup to the saucepan, add the butter and pepper 
 and salt, and let it boil up. The soup should be of a smooth, creamy 
 consistency. Serve with sippets of toast or Allinson plain rusks. 
  
  
 ONION SOUP (French). 
  
 1/2 lb. onions, 3 oz. grated cheese, 2 oz. butter, some squares of 
 Allinson wholemeal bread, pepper and salt to taste. Peel and chop the 
 onions, and fry them a nice brown in the butter. When brown add to it 
 the cheese and 3 pints of water. Boil all up together and season to 
 taste. Place the bread in the tureen, pour the boiling soup over it, 
 and serve. 
  
  
 PARSNIP SOUP. 
  
 3 parsnips, 1 onion, 1 head of celery, 1/2 oz. of butter, 1/2 pint of 
 milk, 1 quart of water, 1 tablespoonful of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1
tablespoonful of vinegar, pepper and salt. Scrape the parsnips and cut 
 them up finely, cut up the celery and onion, and set the vegetables 
 over the fire with the water, butter, and pepper and salt to taste: 
 when they are quite tender rub them through a sieve. Return the soup 
 to the saucepan, add the milk and the thickening, boil up for five 
 minutes, and before serving add the vinegar. This latter may be left 
 out if preferred. 
  
  
 PEA SOUP. 
  
 1 lb. of split peas, 1 lb. of potatoes, peeled, washed, and cut into 
 pieces, 1 Spanish onion, 1 carrot, 1 turnip, 1/2 head of celery or a 
 whole small one, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste, Pick and 
 wash the peas, and set them to boil in 2 quarts of water. Add the 
 potatoes and the other vegetables, previously prepared and cut into 
 small pieces, the butter and seasoning. When all the ingredients are 
 soft, rub them through a sieve and return them to the saucepan. If the 
 soup is too thick, add more water. Boil it up, and serve with fresh 
 chopped mint, or fried dice of Allinson wholemeal bread. Allow 3 to 4
over it, cover, and let it stand for 10 minutes to allow the bread to 
 soak; sprinkle the cheese over before serving. 
  
  
 POTATO SOUP. 
  
 2 lbs. of potatoes, 1/2 stick of celery or the outer stalks of a head 
 of celery, saving the heart for table use; 1 large Spanish onion, 1 
 pint of milk, 1 oz. of butter, a heaped up tablespoonful of finely 
 chopped parsley, and pepper and salt to taste. Peel, wash, and cut in 
 pieces the potatoes, peel and chop roughly the onion, prepare and cut 
 in small pieces the celery. Cook the vegetables in three pints of 
 water until they are quite soft. Rub them through a sieve, return the 
 fluid mixture to the saucepan; add the milk, butter, and seasoning, 
 and boil the soup up again; if too thick add more water. Mix the 
 parsley in the soup just before serving. 
  
  
 RICE SOUP. 
 
3 oz. of rice, 4 oz. of grated cheese, a breakfastcupful of tomato 
 juice, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste. Boil the rice till 
 tender in 2-1/2 pints of water, with the butter and seasoning. When 
 quite soft, add the tomato juice and the cheese; stir until the soup 
 boils and the cheese is dissolved, and serve. If too much of the water 
 has boiled away, add a little more. 
  
  
 RICE AND GREEN-PEA SOUP. 
  
 2 oz. of rice, 1 breakfastcupful of shelled green peas, 1 pint of 
 milk, 1 quart of water, 1 oz. of butter. Boil the rice in the water 
 for 10 minutes, add the peas, the butter and pepper and salt to taste. 
 Let it cook until the rice and peas are tender, add the milk and boil 
 the soup up before serving. 
  
  
 RICE AND ONION SOUP. 
  
 4 onions, 3 oz. of rice, 1-1/2 oz. of butter, 3 pints of water, pepper
and salt. Chop the onions up very finely, and fry them with the butter 
 until slightly browned; add the rice, seasoning, and water, and let 
 the whole cook gently until quite soft. A tablespoonful of finely 
 chopped parsley may be added. 
  
  
 ST. ANDREW  '  S SOUP. 
  
 4 large potatoes, 1 pint of clear tomato juice (from tinned tomatoes), 
 1 pint of milk, 1 pint of water, 2 eggs, 1 oz. of butter, seasoning to 
 taste. Boil the potatoes in their skins; when tender peel and pass 
 them through a potato masher. Put the potatoes into a saucepan with 
 the butter, tomato juice, and water, adding pepper and salt to taste. 
 Allow the soup to simmer for 10 minutes, then add the milk; boil up 
 again, remove the saucepan to the cool side of the stove and stir in 
 the eggs well beaten. Serve at once with sippets of toast, or Allinson 
 plain rusks. 
  
  
 SCARLET RUNNER SOUP.
 
 1-1/2 lbs. of French beans or scarlet runners, 1 onion, 1 carrot, 1 
 stick of celery, 1/2 oz. of butter, 1 teaspoonful of thyme, 2 quarts 
 of water, pepper and salt to taste, and 2 oz. of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal. String the beans and break them up in small pieces, cut up 
 the other vegetables and add them to the water, which should be 
 boiling; add also the butter and pepper and salt. Allow all to cook 
 until thoroughly tender, then rub through a sieve. Return the soup to 
 the saucepan (adding more water if it has boiled away much), and 
 thicken it with the wheatmeal; let it simmer for 5 minutes, and serve 
 with fried sippets of bread. 
  
  
 SORREL SOUP (1). 
  
 1/2 lb. of sorrel, 1-1/2 lbs. of potatoes, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and 
 salt, 3 pints of water. Pick, wash, and chop fine the sorrel, peel and 
 cut up in slices the potatoes, and set both over the fire with the 
 water, butter, and seasoning to taste; when the potatoes are quite 
 tender, pass the soup through a sieve. Serve with sippets of toast.
 
  
 SORREL SOUP (2). 
  
 1 lb. of sorrel, 1 large Spanish onion, 3 pints of water, 1 oz. of 
 butter, pepper and salt to taste, 1/2 lb. of Allinson wholemeal bread 
 cut into small dice. Pick, wash, and chop up the sorrel, chop up the 
 onion, and boil both with the water, butter, pepper, and salt until 
 the onion is quite tender. Place the bread in the soup-tureen and pour 
 the soup over it. Cover it up, and let the bread soak for a few 
 minutes before serving. 
  
  
 SORREL SOUP (French) (3). 
  
 1 lb. of sorrel, 1 oz. of butter, 2 tablespoonfuls of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, 2 quarts of water, pepper and salt, 2 eggs. Pick and wash 
 the sorrel and drain the water. Set it over the fire with the butter 
 and stew for 5 minutes, add the wheatmeal, and stir it with the sorrel 
 for 5 minutes; add the water, pepper and salt to taste, and let the
soup simmer for 1/2 an hour; before serving add the eggs well beaten, 
 but do not allow them to boil, as this would make them curdle; serve 
 with sippets of toast. 
  
  
 SPANISH SOUP. 
  
 3 pints of chestnuts peeled and skinned, 2 Spanish onions, 6 potatoes, 
 2 turnips cut up in dice, 1 teaspoonful of thyme, 1 dessertspoonful of 
 vinegar, 2 oz. of grated cheese, 1 oz. of butter, 2 quarts of water, 
 pepper and salt to taste. Boil the chestnuts and vegetables gently 
 until quite tender, which will take 1-1/2 hours. Rub them through a 
 sieve and return the soup to the saucepan; add the butter; vinegar, 
 and pepper and salt to taste. Let it boil 10 minutes, and sift in the 
 cheese before serving. 
  
  
 SPINACH SOUP. 
  
 2 lbs. of spinach, 1 chopped up onion, 1 oz. of butter, 1 pint of
milk, the juice of 1 lemon, 1-1/2 oz. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, and 
 pepper and salt to taste. This will make about 3 pints of soup. Wash 
 the spinach well, and cook it in 1 pint of water with the onion and 
 seasoning. When the spinach is quite soft, rub all through a sieve. 
 Mix the wheatmeal with the melted butter as in the previous recipe, 
 stir into it the spinach, add the milk; boil all up, and add the lemon 
 juice last of all. If the soup is too thick, add a little water. 
  
  
 SPRING SOUP. 
  
 2 carrots, 1 turnip, 1/2 head celery, 10 small spring onions, 1 
 tea-cup of cauliflower cut into little branches, heart of small white 
 cabbage lettuce, small handful of sorrel, 1 leaf each of chervil and 
 of tarragon, 1/4 pint of peas, 1/4 pint asparagus points, 1/4 pint 
 croutons, 1 quart of water. Cut the carrots and turnip into small 
 rounds, or to shape; add them with the chopped-up celery, whole 
 onions, and cauliflower, to a quart of water, and bring to the boil; 
 simmer for 1/2 an hour. Stamp the sorrel and lettuce into small round 
 pieces, and add them with the leaf of chervil and tarragon to the
of herbs, 1 blade of mace, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste, 
 and 3 pints of water. Peel, wash, and cut up finely the vegetables and 
 stew them in the butter for 10 minutes. Add the water, the tomatoes 
 skinned and cut in slices, the herbs and seasoning to taste; when the 
 soup is boiling, sprinkle in the tapioca, let all cook until quite 
 tender, pass the soup through a sieve, return it to the saucepan, and 
 boil it up before serving. 
  
  
 TOMATO SOUP (1). 
  
 1-1/2 lbs. of tomatoes (or 1 tin of tomatoes), 1 oz. of butter, 3 
 pints of water (only 2 if tinned tomatoes are used), 2 oz. of rice, 1 
 large onion, 1 teaspoonful of herbs, pepper and salt to taste. Cut the 
 tomatoes into slices, chop fine the onion, and let them cook with the 
 water for about 20 minutes. Strain the mixture, return the liquid to 
 the saucepan, and add the other ingredients and seasoning. Let the 
 soup cook gently until the rice is tender. 
  
 
TOMATO SOUP (2). 
  
 1 tin of tomatoes, or 2 lbs. of fresh ones, 1 large Spanish onion or 2 
 small ones, 2 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste, 1 oz. 
 vermicelli, and 2 bay leaves (these may be left out it desired). Peel 
 the onion and chop it up roughly. Fry it brown with the butter in the 
 saucepan in which the soup should be made. When the onion is browned 
 add the tomatoes (the fresh ones should be sliced), the bay leaves and 
 3 pints of water; let all cook together for 1/2 an hour. Then drain 
 the liquid through a strainer or sieve without rubbing anything 
 through; return the soup to the saucepan, add seasoning and the 
 vermicelli, and allow the soup to cook until the vermicelli is soft, 
 which will take from 5 to 10 minutes. 
  
  
 VEGETABLE SOUP. 
  
 2 large turnips, 2 large carrots, 2 Spanish onions, 1 teacupful of 
 pearl barley, 1-1/2 oz. butter, 1/2 pint of milk, salt and pepper to 
 taste. Cover the vegetables with cold water and allow them to boil
mace simmer in the water and milk for 1/2 of an hour, remove the mace, 
 add pepper and salt to taste, and the vermicelli. Let the soup cook 
 gently until the vermicelli is soft, and serve. 
  
  
  
  
 BATTERS 
  
  
 These dishes take the place of omelets and frequently of pies, to both 
 of which they are in many particulars similar. The batter is used to 
 keep the ingredients together, and adds to their wholesomeness. 
  
  
 BATTER CELERY. 
  
 1 large head of celery, 1 pint of milk, 3 eggs, 6 oz. Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, 2 oz. butter, 1 English onion, pepper and salt to taste. 
 Prepare the celery, cut it into small pieces, chop up the onion pretty
fine, and stew both gently in half the milk and the butter and 
 seasoning. Make a batter meanwhile with the rest of the milk, the eggs 
 and the wheatmeal. When the celery and onion are quite tender mix the 
 batter with them; grease a pie-dish, pour the mixture into it, and 
 bake the savoury for 1-1/2 hours. Eat with potatoes and tomato sauce. 
  
  
 BATTER POTATO. 
  
 1-1/2 lbs. of potatoes, two good-sized English onions, 1 pint of milk, 
 1/2 lb. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 3 eggs, 2-1/2 oz. of butter, 
 pepper and salt to taste. Peel and wash the potatoes, and slice them 
 1/4 inch thick, then dry them on a cloth. Chop fine the onions. Put 
 the butter into the frying-pan, and let it get boiling hot, turn into 
 it the potatoes and onions, and fry them together, stirring frequently 
 until the vegetables begin to brown and get soft. Make a batter of the 
 milk, meal, and eggs, stir the fried potatoes and onions into it, and 
 season with pepper and salt. Grease a pie-dish, turn the mixture into 
 it, and bake the savoury for 1-1/2 hours. Serve with vegetables and 
 tomato sauce. This is a very tasty dish.
2 lbs. of artichokes, 1-1/2 lbs. of tomatoes (or three parts of a tin 
 of tomatoes), 1 oz. of Allinson fine wholemeal, 1 oz. of butter, 
 pepper and salt to taste, 1/2 dozen eschalots. Parboil the artichokes, 
 drain them, and cut them into slices. Make tomato sauce as follows: 
 Chop the eschalots up very finely, slice the tomatoes and stew both in 
 3/4 pint of water for 20 minutes, adding seasoning and the butter; 
 thicken the sauce with the wheatmeal, rub through a sieve, pour it 
 over the artichokes and stew both gently until the artichokes are 
 quite tender; serve with potatoes. 
  
  
 BEAN PIE. 
  
 This is made from boiled beans, which are put in a pie-dish, soaked 
 tapioca, flavouring herbs, pepper, salt, and butter are added, a cup 
 of water is poured in to make the gravy, a crust is put on the top, 
 and then baked for 1 hour or so. This is a tasty dish. Cold beans are 
 very nice if warmed in a frying-pan with oil or butter, and may be 
 eaten with potatoes, vegetables, and sauce. Mashed beans, flavoured 
 with pepper, salt, and mace, and put into pots make an excellent
 
 Pick the beans, wash them, and steep them over night in boiling water, 
 just covering them. Allow 2 or 3 oz. of beans for each person. In the 
 morning, let them cook gently in the water they are steeped in with 
 the addition of a little butter, until quite soft, which will be in 
 about 2 hours. The beans should be cooked in only enough water to keep 
 them from burning, therefore, when it boils away, add only just 
 sufficient for absorption. The sauce is made thus: 1 pint of milk, 1 
 tablespoonful of Allinson fine wheatmeal, a handful of finely chopped 
 parsley, the juice of 1/2 a lemon, pepper and salt to taste. Boil the 
 milk and thicken it with the flour, which should first be smoothed 
 with a little cold milk, then last of all add the lemon juice, the 
 seasoning, and the parsley. This dish should be eaten with potatoes 
 and green vegetables. 
  
  
 CARROTS AND RICE. 
  
 1 breakfastcupful of rice, 6 medium-sized carrots, 2 oz. of butter, 1 
 tablespoonful of finely chopped Parsley, 1 tablespoonful of Allinson
fine wheatmeal, pepper and salt to taste. Boil the rice in 1 quart of 
 water until quite tender and dry; meanwhile slice the carrots and stew 
 them in 1 pint of water and 1 oz. of butter until quite tender, 
 thicken them with the meal, add seasoning and the parsley. Set the 
 rice in the form of a ring on a dish, pile the carrots in the centre, 
 sprinkle a few breadcrumbs over the whole, also the butter cut into 
 little bits, and bake the dish in a moderate oven for 20 minutes. 
  
  
 CAULIFLOWER AND POTATO PIE. 
  
 1 fair-sized boiled (cold) cauliflower, 1 lb. of cold boiled potatoes, 
 1 pint of milk, 3 eggs, 8 oz. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1-1/2 oz. of 
 butter, 4 oz. of grated cheese, pepper and salt to taste. Cut up the 
 cauliflower and potatoes, sprinkle half the cheese between the 
 vegetables, make a batter of the milk and eggs and meal, add seasoning 
 to it, place the vegetables in a pie-dish, pour the batter over them, 
 cut the butter into little bits and put them on the top of the pie, 
 sprinkle the rest of the cheese over all, and bake for 1 hour. 
 
 
 CAULIFLOWER PIE. 
  
 1 small cauliflower, 3/4 lb. of potatoes, 1/2 lb. of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, 3 eggs, 3/4 pint of milk, 1 oz. of butter, 1 saltspoonful 
 of nutmeg, pepper and salt. Parboil the cauliflower and potatoes, cut 
 the former into pieces and slice the potatoes; place both in a 
 pie-dish with the butter and seasoning; make a batter of the meal, 
 milk, and the eggs, well beaten; pour it over the vegetables, mix 
 well, and bake 1-1/2 hours. 
  
  
 CELERY À LA PARMESAN. 
  
 2 heads of celery, 1 pint of milk, 2 oz. of Parmesan, or any other 
 cooking cheese, 2 tablespoonfuls of breadcrumbs, 1 oz. of butter. Cut 
 the celery into pieces 3 inches long, stew it in the milk until 
 tender; drain the milk and make a sauce of it, thickening with 
 Allinson fine wheatmeal, and adding the cheese and seasoning to taste. 
 Put the celery into a pie-dish, pour the sauce over it, sprinkle the
chestnuts until partly tender, and remove the skins; cut the celery 
 into pieces, removing the outer very hard pieces only, slice the onion 
 and stew until tender in 1 pint of water; mix all the ingredients 
 together, adding 1 oz. of the butter and seasoning to taste; make some 
 pastry of the meal, 3 oz. of butter, and a little cold water; turn the 
 vegetables into a pie-dish, cover the dish with the pastry, and bake 
 the pie for 1 hour; serve with brown gravy. 
  
  
 COLCANON. 
  
 1 large cabbage, 1 pint of mashed potatoes, 2 oz. of grated cheese, 2 
 eggs, 1 oz. of butter, 1/2 saltspoonful of nutmeg, pepper and salt to 
 taste. Boil the cabbage in 1 pint of water until quite tender, drain 
 the water off to keep for stock, chop the cabbage up fine; mix it with 
 the mashed potatoes, the butter and seasoning and the grated cheese; 
 beat up the eggs, and mix these well with the rest; press the mixture 
 into a greased mould, heat all well through in the oven or in a 
 steamer, turn out and serve with a white sauce. This can be made from 
 cold potatoes and cold cabbage.
 
  
 CORN PUDDING. 
  
 1 tin of sweet corn, 1 pint of milk, 4 eggs, 1 oz. of butter, 8 oz. of 
 Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1/2 saltspoonful of nutmeg, pepper and salt 
 to taste. Make a batter of the meal, eggs and milk, add the other 
 ingredients, pour the mixture into a pie-dish, and let it bake 1 hour. 
  
  
 CURRY BALLS. 
  
 8 oz. of rice, 1/2 oz. of butter, 1 good teaspoonful of curry, 2 eggs, 
 pepper and salt to taste, some oil or butter for frying, and 1 
 teacupful of raspings. Boil the rice in 1 pint of water, adding the 
 butter and seasoning. When the rice is dry and tender mix in the 
 curry, beat up 1 egg, and bind the rice with that. Form into balls, 
 dip them in the other egg, well beaten, then into the raspings and 
 fry them a nice brown in oil or vege-butter. 
 
 
 CURRY SAVOURY. 
  
 1 breakfastcupful of rice, 1 ditto of Egyptian lentils, 1 lb. of 
 tomatoes, 1 dessertspoonful of curry, 2 eggs well beaten, 1 oz. of 
 butter, salt to taste. Boil the rice and lentils together until quite 
 tender, and let them cool a little. Slice the tomatoes into a 
 pie-dish, mix the curry, eggs, and salt with the rice and lentils, add 
 a little milk if necessary; spread the mixture over the tomatoes, with 
 the butter in bits over the top, and bake the savoury from 1/2 to 1 
 hour. 
  
  
 FAVOURITE PIE. 
  
 3 oz. of macaroni, 2 breakfastcupfuls of Allinson breadcrumbs, 2 
 onions, chopped very fine, 2 breakfastcupfuls of tinned tomatoes, 3 
 eggs, well beaten, 3 oz. of butter, 1 dessertspoonful of curry, salt 
 to taste. Boil the macaroni until tender, and cut it up into pieces 1 
 inch long; fry the onion brown in the butter, mix the breadcrumbs with
2 oz. of wheatmeal, 1 oz. of rolled oatmeal, 1 egg, 1/2 oz. of oiled 
 butter, 1/2 lb. small sago, 3 eggs, 1 large Spanish onion, 1 
 dessertspoonful of mixed powdered herbs, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and 
 salt to taste, and a little milk if needed. Swell the sago over the 
 fire with as much water as it will absorb; when quite soft put into it 
 the butter to melt, and, when melted, mix in the oatmeal and 
 wheatmeal. Grate the onion, and whip up the eggs; mix all the 
 ingredients together, not forgetting the herbs and seasoning. The 
 whole should be a thick porridgy mass; if too dry add a little milk. 
 Butter a pudding basin, pour into it the mixture, place a piece of 
 buttered paper over it, tie a pudding cloth over the basin, and steam 
 the haggis for 3 hours. 
  
  
 HERB PIE. 
  
 1 handful of parsley, 1 handful of spinach, and 1 of mustard and 
 cress, 2 lettuce hearts sliced fine, 2 small onions, and a little 
 butter, 3 eggs, 1 pint of milk, and 1/2 lb. of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal. Chop all the vegetables up finely, and mix them with a
batter made of the milk, meal, and eggs; season it with pepper and 
 salt; mix well; pour the mixture into a buttered pie-dish, place bits 
 of butter over the top, and bake it for 1-1/2 hours. 
  
  
 HOT-POT. 
  
 2 lbs. of potatoes, 3/4 lb. of onions, 1 breakfastcupful of tinned 
 tomatoes, or 1/2 lb. of sliced fresh ones, 1 teaspoonful of thyme, 
 1-1/2 oz. butter, pepper and salt to taste. Those who do not like 
 tomatoes can leave them out, and the dish will still be very savoury. 
 The potatoes should be peeled, washed, and cut into thin slices, and 
 the onions peeled and cut into thin slices. Arrange the vegetables and 
 tomatoes in layers; dust a little pepper and salt between the layers, 
 and finish with a layer of potatoes. Cut the butter into little bits, 
 place them on the top of the potatoes, fill the dish with hot water, 
 and bake the hot-pot for 2 hours or more in a hot oven. Add a little 
 more hot water if necessary while baking to make up for what is lost 
 in the cooking. 
 
 
 LEEK PIE. 
  
 1 bunch of leeks, 1 lb. of potatoes, 1/2 teaspoonful of herbs, a 
 little nutmeg, 1 pint of milk, pepper and salt to taste, 8 oz. of 
 Allinson fine wheatmeal, 3 eggs, 1 oz. of butter. Cut up into dice the 
 potatoes and leeks, parboil them in 1 pint of water, adding the herbs, 
 butter, and seasoning; place the vegetables in a pie-dish, make a 
 batter with the milk, eggs, and meal, pour it over the vegetables, mix 
 all well, and bake the pie 1-1/2 to 2 hours in a moderate oven. 
  
  
 LENTIL PIE. 
  
 1/2 lb. of lentils, 1 lb. of potatoes, 1 lb. of tomatoes, 1 Spanish 
 onion, 1 heaped-up teaspoonful of herbs, 3 hard-boiled eggs, 1-1/2 oz. 
 of butter, pepper and salt to taste. Have the lentils cooked 
 beforehand. Peel, wash, and cut into dice the potatoes and onion, and 
 fry them in the butter until nearly soft. Scald and slice the 
 tomatoes, and mix the fried vegetables, lentils, tomatoes, herbs, and
seasoning well together. Turn the mixture into a pie-dish, and pour 
 over as much water or vegetable stock as may be required for gravy. 
 Quarter the eggs and place them on the top. Cover with a short crust, 
 and bake the pie for 1 to 1-1/2 hours. 
  
  
 LENTIL RISSOLES. 
  
 1/2 lb. of lentils, 1 finely chopped onion, 1 breakfastcupful of 
 breadcrumbs, 1 breakfastcupful of tinned tomatoes, 1-1/2 oz. of 
 butter, 2 eggs, pepper and salt to taste, some raspings, butter, 
 vege-butter or oil for frying. Pick and wash the lentils, and boil 
 them in enough water to cover them; when this is absorbed add the 
 tomatoes, and if necessary gradually a little more water to prevent 
 the lentils from burning. Fry the onion in 1-1/2 oz. of butter, mix it 
 with the lentils as they are stewing, and add pepper and salt to 
 taste. When the lentils are quite soft, and like a pureé (which will 
 take from 1 to 1-1/2 hours), set them aside to cool. Mix the lentils 
 and the breadcrumbs, beat up one of the eggs and add it to the 
 mixture, beating all well together. If it is too dry, add a very
little milk, but only just enough to make the mixture keep together. 
 Form into rissoles, beat up the second egg, roll them into the egg and 
 raspings, and fry the rissoles a nice brown in boiling butter or oil. 
 Drain and serve. 
  
  
 LENTIL TURNOVERS. 
  
 6 oz. of lentils, 6 oz. of mushrooms, 1 English onion chopped very 
 fine, 1 ounce of butter, 1 dessertspoonful of lemon juice, pepper and 
 salt to taste. Pick and wash the lentils, and cook them in only as 
 much water as they will absorb. Peel, wash, and cut up the mushrooms, 
 chop fine the onion, and fry both in the butter. Add them to the 
 lentils now cooking; also the lemon juice and seasoning. When the 
 lentils are quite soft, the whole should be a fairly firm pureé. Let 
 it cool, and meanwhile make a paste of 6 oz. of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal and 2 oz. of butter or vege-butter and a little water. Roll 
 the paste out thin, cut into squares of about 4 inches. Place some of 
 the lentil mixture in each, moisten the edges, turn half over, and 
 press the edges together. Bake for 15 minutes in a floured tin, and
 
 1/2 lb. of lentils, 1 English onion, 1/2 a cupful of tinned tomatoes, 
 1 blade of mace, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste. Pick and 
 wash the lentils, and set them over the fire to cook, only just 
 covered with water, adding the mace, pepper, and salt. Chop fine the 
 onion and fry it a nice brown in the butter; add the fried onions and 
 tomatoes to the lentils, stir them sometimes to prevent burning, and 
 let the lentils cook gently until they have become soft and make a 
 fairly firm purée. If too dry, add a little more water as may be 
 required. When they are done remove the mace and turn the lentils out 
 to get cold. Then use for making sandwiches with very thin bread and 
 butter. 
  
  
 MINESTRA. 
  
 1 breakfastcupful of potatoes cut into small dice, 2 breakfastcupfuls 
 of flagolet beans, onions, carrots, and celery mixed (the latter cut 
 up small), 1/4 lb. of rice, 2 oz. of butter, 2 oz. of grated Parmesan 
 cheese, pepper and salt to taste. Boil the vegetables in 1 quart of
 
 1-1/2 lbs. of mushrooms, 1-1/2 lbs. of potatoes, 1 Spanish onion, 1 
 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste, 1 teaspoonful of mixed herbs, 
 and 3 hard-boiled eggs. Peel and wash the mushrooms, and cut them into 
 2 or 4 pieces, according to their size. Peel and wash the potatoes, 
 and cut them into pieces the size of walnuts; parboil them with 1 pint 
 of water, and turn them into a pie-dish with the water. Chop up the 
 onion, and cook the mushrooms and onion for 10 minutes with the butter 
 in 1/2 pint of water, adding the herbs and seasoning. Mix all well in 
 the pie-dish, quarter the eggs, and place them on the top, cover with 
 a short crust, and bake the pie for 3/4 of an hour to 1 hour. 
  
  
 MUSHROOM SAVOURY. 
  
 4 ounces of Allinson plain rusks 3 eggs, 1 pint of milk, 2 oz. of 
 butter, 1 lb. of mushrooms, 1 small onion chopped fine, and pepper and 
 salt to taste. Crush the rusks and soak in the milk; add the eggs well 
 whipped. Peel, wash, and cut up the mushrooms, and fry them and the 
 onion in the butter. When they have cooked in the butter for 10
minutes add them to the other ingredients, and season with pepper and 
 salt. Pour the mixture into a greased pie-dish, and bake the savoury 
 for 1 hour. Serve with green vegetables, potatoes, and tomato sauce. 
  
  
 MUSHROOM TARTLETS. 
  
 1/2 lb. of mushrooms, 1 oz. of butter, 1 small English onion, 1 
 tablespoonful of vermicelli broken up small, pepper and salt to taste. 
 Peel and wash the mushrooms and cut them up; chop up the onions very 
 fine, melt the butter in the frying-pan and fry the mushrooms and 
 onion in it, adding pepper and salt to taste; a good deal of liquid 
 will run from the mushrooms, stir into it the vermicelli, which let 
 cook in the juice until tender; let the mixture cool, line some 
 tartlet tins with Allinson wholemeal crust, fill with the mixture, 
 cover with crust, and press the edges well together; bake in a 
 moderate oven. 
  
  
 MUSHROOM TART AND GRAVY.
 
 1 lb. of mushrooms, 1/2 lb. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 4 oz. of 
 butter or Allinson frying oil, pepper and salt to taste. Pick and wash 
 the mushrooms, remove the stalks, dry them and cut them into pieces; 
 make pastry with the meal, 3 oz. of the butter, and a little cold 
 water; roll it out, line a large plate and heap the mushrooms upon it, 
 dredge well with pepper and salt, and cut the rest of the butter into 
 bits to be scattered over the mushrooms; when you line the plate, keep 
 a little of the paste, cut this into thin strips and lay them in 
 diamond shape across the pie; bake the pie 3/4 hour in a moderate 
 oven. 
  
 The Gravy.--The stalks of the mushrooms, 4 eschalots chopped very 
 fine, 1 teaspoonful of Allinson cornflour, 3 bay leaves, 1/2 oz. of 
 butter, pepper and salt to taste. Fry the stalks and eschalots in the 
 butter, then gently cook them in 3/4 pint of water for 1/2 hour, 
 adding seasoning and the bay leaves; strain, return the sauce to the 
 saucepan, and thicken it with the cornflour. 
  
 
 
  
 ONION TART. 
  
 1 lb. of Spanish onions, 1 lb. of English onions, 4 oz. of butter, 3 
 eggs, 1/2 pint of cream, pepper and salt to taste, 1/2 lb. of Allinson 
 fine wheatmeal. Slice the onions, and stew them with 1-1/2 oz. of 
 butter without browning them. When tender let the onions cool, mix 
 with them the eggs, well beaten, and the cream, also the seasoning. 
 Make a paste with the meal and the rest of the butter, line with it a 
 baking-tin, keeping back a small quantity of the paste; pour the 
 mixture of onions, eggs, and cream into the paste-lined tin, cut the 
 rest of the paste into thin strips, and lay these crossways over the 
 tart, forming diamond-shaped squares; bake the tart in a moderate oven 
 until golden brown. 
  
  
 ONION TURNOVER. 
  
 2 medium-sized Spanish onions, 1 oz. of butter (or Allinson frying
oil), 3 eggs, pepper and salt. For the pastry, 6 oz. of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, 2-1/2 oz. of butter or oil. Chop the onions fine, boil them 
 a few minutes in a little water, and drain them; stew them in the 
 butter for 10 minutes, adding the seasoning beat up the eggs and mix 
 them well with the onions over the fire, remove the mixture as it 
 begins to set. Have ready the pastry made with the meal, butter, and a 
 little cold water, roll it out, place the onions and eggs on it, fold 
 the pastry over, pinching the edges over, and bake the turnover brown. 
 Serve with gravy. This is a Turkish dish. 
  
  
 POTATO PIE. 
  
 Slice potatoes and onions, stew with a little water until nearly done, 
 put into a pie-dish, flavour with herbs, pepper, and salt, add a 
 little soaked tapioca and very little butter, cover with short 
 wheatmeal crust, and bake 1 hour. To make a very plain pie-crust use 
 about 2 oz. of butter or a proportionate quantity of Allinson frying 
 oil to 1 lb. of wheatmeal. Roll or touch with the fingers as little as 
 possible, and mix with milk instead of water. Eat this pie with green
 
 POTATOES AND MUSHROOM STEW. 
  
 1-1/2 lbs. of potatoes, 1 Spanish onion, 1/2 lb. of mushrooms, 1 oz. 
 of butter, pepper and salt, and 1 teaspoonful of Allinson cornflour 
 for thickening. Peel, wash, and cut into pieces the potatoes; chop up 
 the onion, and set both over the fire with 1 pint of water, the butter 
 and seasoning; let cook until the potatoes are about half done. 
 Meanwhile skin, wash, and cut into pieces the mushrooms, add them to 
 the other ingredients, and let all stew together until tender. Thicken 
 the liquid with the cornflour, boil up, and serve. 
  
  
 QUEEN  '  S APPLE AND ONION PIE. 
  
 3 breakfastcupfuls of Allinson breadcrumbs, 3 eggs, 1-1/2 lbs. of 
 apples, 2 lbs. of Spanish onions, 2 oz. of butter, 1/2 teaspoonful of 
 spice, pepper and salt to taste, and a little hot milk; cut into 
 slices the onions and apples, stew them gently (without adding-water) 
 with 1 oz. of the butter, the spice and seasoning until quite tender.
Mix the breadcrumbs with the eggs, well beaten, and enough hot milk to 
 smooth the breadcrumbs; butter a pie-dish with 1/2 oz. of butter, 
 place a layer of breadcrumbs in your dish, a layer of apple and onion, 
 repeat this until your dish is full, finishing with breadcrumbs. Place 
 the rest of the butter on the top in little bits, and bake the pie for 
 1 hour. Serve with brown gravy. 
  
  
 QUEEN  '  S ONION PIE. 
  
 3 lbs of Spanish onions, 3 breakfastcupfuls of Allinson breadcrumbs, 3 
 eggs, 3 oz. of butter, 1 teaspoonful of mixed herbs, 1 tablespoonful 
 of finely chopped parsley, pepper and salt to taste, and a little hot 
 milk. Stew the onions in 2 oz. of butter, adding the herbs and 
 seasoning. Prepare the breadcrumbs in the same way as for "Queen  '  s 
 Onion and Apple Pie," place the onions and breadcrumbs in layers as in 
 the previous recipe, and bake 1 hour. 
  
  
 QUEEN  '  S TOMATO PIE.
 
 8 breakfastcupfuls of Allinson breadcrumbs, 3 eggs, 2 lbs. of 
 tomatoes, 2 finely chopped onions, 1/2 oz. of butter, pepper and salt 
 to taste, a little boiling milk; 1 dessertspoonful of finely chopped 
 parsley. Cut the tomatoes into slices, and stew them gently with 1 oz. 
 of the butter, the onions and seasoning for 10 minutes, then add the 
 parsley. Soak the breadcrumbs with enough hot milk to just moisten 
 them through, add the eggs beaten up. Grease a pie-dish, place in it 
 first a layer of breadcrumbs, then one of tomatoes and so on until 
 full, finishing with breadcrumbs. Put the rest of the butter in little 
 bits on the top of the pie, and bake it until lightly brown. 
  
  
 SAVOURY CUSTARD. 
  
 1 quart of milk; 6 eggs, 6 oz. of grated cheese, Parmesan is the best, 
 but any kind of cooking cheese can be used; 1/2 a saltspoonful of 
 nutmeg, pepper and salt to taste. Heat the milk; meanwhile whip the 
 eggs well, and mix the cheese and seasoning with them. Mix well with 
 the hot milk, pour the mixture into a buttered pie-dish, and bake in a
moderately hot oven until set. Serve with green vegetables and 
 potatoes. 
  
  
 SAVOURY CUSTARD (Another way). 
  
 1 quart of milk, 6 eggs, pepper and salt to taste, 1 tablespoonful 
 each of finely chopped parsley and spring onion. Proceed as above; mix 
 the herbs and onion with the custard, and bake until set. 
  
  
 SAVOURY FRITTERS (1). 
  
 1 teacupful of mashed potatoes, 1/2 lb. of breadcrumbs, 1 large 
 English onion, 2 eggs, 1 oz. of butter, 1 teaspoonful of powdered 
 sage, 1/2 saltspoonful of nutmeg, pepper and salt to taste. Chop the 
 onion up fine and fry it brown in the butter. Whip up the eggs and mix 
 both ingredients with the breadcrumbs; add the mashed potatoes, herbs, 
 and seasoning, and mix all well together. Form into fritters, dredge 
 with flour, and fry them a nice brown. Serve with vegetables,
potatoes, and sauce. 
  
  
 SAVOURY FRITTERS (2). 
  
 12 oz. of onions, 6 oz. of breadcrumbs, 1 teaspoonful of dried sage, 2 
 eggs, 1-1/2 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste. Chop the onions 
 up small and fry them in the butter, or oil a nice brown, then add the 
 sage to them. Mix a third of the onions with the breadcrumbs, add the 
 eggs well beaten, pepper and salt; mix all well, form into fritters, 
 and fry in butter or oil. The remainder of the onions place round the 
 fritters on the dish. Serve with apple sauce. 
  
  
 SAVOURY PICKLED WALNUT. 
  
 1/2 lb. of Allinson bread, 1 pint of milk, 3 eggs, 4 pickled walnuts 
 and the vinegar to taste, 1 tablespoonful of finely chopped parsley, 1 
 teaspoonful of powdered mixed herbs, 1 grated English onion, 2 oz. of 
 butter, pepper and salt to taste. Soak the bread in the milk, add the
parsley, herbs, onion, eggs and seasoning. Mash up the pickled 
 walnuts, dissolve part of the butter on the stove and add both to the 
 other ingredients; mix all well. Butter a pie-dish with the rest of 
 the butter, pour in the mixture, and bake. 
  
  
 SAVOURY PIE. 
  
 6 oz. of haricot beans, 1/2 lb. of onions, 1 lb. of tomatoes, 1/2 lb. 
 of parboiled potatoes, 2 hard-boiled eggs, 1 teaspoonful of herbs, 4 
 oz. of butter, 1/2 lb. of fine wheatmeal, pepper and salt to taste. 
 Have the beans boiled the previous day, place them in a pie-dish, chop 
 up the onions and boil them in a little water until soft, cut the 
 potatoes in small dice, slice the tomatoes, cut up the eggs, and mix 
 all the ingredients thoroughly in the pie dish, adding the herbs, 1 
 oz. of butter, and seasoning. Pour over the mixture 1 pint of water, 
 and let it cook for 1 hour in the oven. Make a paste of the wheatmeal, 
 the rest of the butter and a little cold water, cover the vegetables 
 with it, and bake the pie 1 hour in a moderate oven. 
 
 
 SAVOURY TARTLETS. 
  
 4 eggs, 4 oz. grated cheese, 1 oz. of butter, 1 teaspoonful of 
 mustard, 1 gill of cream, pepper and salt to taste. For the crust 6 
 oz. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, and 2 oz. of butter. Whip up the eggs 
 and add to each egg 1 dessertspoonful of water. Dissolve the mustard 
 in a little water; mix this, the cheese and seasoning with the eggs. 
 Heat the butter in a frying-pan, and when boiling stir in the eggs and 
 cheese mixture, stirring it with a knife over the fire until set. Turn 
 the mixture into a bowl to cool. Meanwhile have ready the paste for 
 the pastry. Rub the butter into the flour, add enough water to make it 
 hold together, mixing the paste with a knife. Roll it out thin, line 
 small patty pans, fill with the egg and cheese mixture. Moisten the 
 edges of the paste in the patty pans, cover with paste, and press the 
 edges together. Bake the little tartlets in a moderately hot oven 
 until done; they will take from 15 to 20 minutes. 
  
  
 SPAGHETTI AUX TOMATOES.
in as stock for soup or stew. Make the sauce as follows: 1/2 pint of 
 milk, 1 oz. of butter, 1 heaped teaspoonful of cornflour, pepper and 
 salt to taste. Boil the milk with the butter and seasoning, and 
 thicken it with the cornflour. Boil the sauce up again and pour it 
 over the onions, which should be ready on a hot dish on slices of 
 toast. 
  
  
 SPANISH STEW. 
  
 2 lbs. of potatoes, 1 lb. of Spanish onions, 1 lb. of tomatoes, 2 oz. 
 of vermicelli, 1/2 pint of milk, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and salt. Cut 
 up into dice the potatoes and onions, and stew them with the butter 
 and very little water; when they are tender, add the tomatoes cut in 
 slices, and cook the vegetables 10 minutes longer. Add seasoning, the 
 milk and vermicelli, and a little more water if necessary; let the 
 whole simmer for another 10 minutes, and serve. 
  
  
 SPINACH DUMPLINGS.
 
 2 lbs. of spinach, 3 eggs, 1 oz. of butter, 2 finely chopped onions, 
 juice of 1/2 a lemon, pepper and salt, and some Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal. Pick and wash the spinach, boil it with the onions without 
 water until quite tender; drain it dry, chop the spinach fine, and mix 
 it with the eggs well beaten, the lemon juice, butter, and seasoning. 
 Add as much of the meal as necessary to make the mixture into a soft 
 paste. Form into balls, flour them, drop them into boiling water, and 
 boil them 5 to 10 minutes; serve with potatoes and gravy. 
  
  
 STEWED MUSHROOMS. 
  
 1 lb. of mushrooms, 1 small English onion, 1 oz. of butter, 1 
 dessertspoonful of Allinson cornflour, 1/2 pint of milk, 1/2 pint of 
 water, pepper and salt to taste. Peel, wash, and dry the mushrooms--if 
 big, quarter them--chop fine the onion, and fry both in the butter for 
 10 minutes. Add the water, milk, and seasoning, and let it all simmer 
 for 20 minutes; thicken with the cornflour, boil up and serve with 
 curried or plain boiled rice.
SWEET CORN FRITTERS. 
  
 1/2 tin of sweet corn, 2 eggs, 1/2 pint of milk, 1/2 oz. of Allinson 
 fine wheatmeal, pepper, and salt, 1/2 saltspoonful of nutmeg, and some 
 oil or butter. Make a batter of the meal, milk, and the eggs well 
 beaten, adding the seasoning and the sweet corn. Have some oil 
 (vege-butter) boiling in the frying-pan, drop spoonfuls of the batter 
 into the boiling fat, and fry the fritters a golden brown. Serve with 
 slices of lemon or tomato sauce. 
  
  
 TOMATO PIE. 
  
 1-1/2 lbs. of tomatoes, 1/2 lb. of onions, 1 oz. of butter, 2 oz. of 
 vermicelli, 2 hard-boiled eggs. For the crust, 8 oz. of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, 3 oz. of butter. Cut up the potatoes and onions into dice, 
 and parboil them in 1 pint of water, adding the butter and seasoning. 
 Turn them into a pie-dish, add the tomatoes and eggs cut in slices, 
 mix all the ingredients, and add the vermicelli broken up small. Make 
 a paste with the meal, butter, and a little cold water, cover the pie
with the crust, and bake for 1 hour. 
  
  
 TOMATO TORTILLA. 
  
 1 lb. of tomatoes, 1 oz. of butter, 4 eggs, pepper and salt to taste. 
 Scald, skin, and slice the tomatoes. Melt the butter in a frying-pan. 
 Add it to the tomatoes with seasoning, and stew in the butter until 
 quite tender and until a good deal of the liquid has steamed away. 
 Whip the eggs and stir them into the cooked tomatoes; keep stirring 
 until the mixture has thickened. Serve on hot buttered toast. This 
 mixture can also be used cold for sandwiches. 
  
  
 TOMATOES À LA PARMESAN. 
  
 4 large tomatoes, 1 oz. of butter, 3 oz. of Parmesan cheese, 3/4 pint 
 of milk, 1 dessertspoonful of Allinson fine wheatmeal, pepper and salt 
 to taste. Bake the tomatoes in a tin with the butter and a dredging of 
 pepper and salt. Make a sauce with the milk, meal, and cheese,
seasoning it with a little cayenne pepper if handy. When the tomatoes 
 are baked, place them on hot buttered toast, pour the sauce over, and 
 serve hot. 
  
  
 TOMATOES AND ONION PIE. 
  
 Cut tomatoes and Spanish onions in slices, put into a pie-dish in 
 alternate layers, add a little soaked tapioca, pepper and salt, and a 
 little butter to taste. Put in sufficient water to make gravy, cover 
 with wholemeal crust, bake 1-1/2 hours; eat with baked potatoes and 
 bread. 
  
  
 TOMATOES AU GRATIN. 
  
 8 medium-sized tomatoes, 1 breakfastcupful of breadcrumbs, 1 
 teaspoonful each of finely chopped parsley, mint, and eschalot, 1 egg, 
 pepper and salt, 1 oz. of butter. Make a stuffing of the breadcrumbs, 
 parsley, mint, and eschalots, adding the egg well beaten, and
seasoning. Make a small opening in the tomato and take out the seeds 
 with a teaspoon; fill the tomatoes with the stuffing, put them into a 
 tin, place a bit of butter on each, pour 1/2 a teacupful of water in 
 the tin, and bake the tomatoes 15 minutes. 
  
  
 VEGETABLE BALLS. 
  
 These are an excellent addition to stews. Boil till soft, and mash up 
 together equal quantities of potatoes, turnips, carrots, lentils, 
 vegetable marrow, and haricot beans, and season nicely with pepper, 
 salt, nutmeg, and mixed herbs. Bind with beaten eggs, dip in frying 
 batter, and fry the balls in vege-butter or oil till golden brown. 
  
  
 VEGETABLE MOULD. 
  
 2 breakfastcupfuls of mashed potatoes, 2 ditto of parboiled finely cut 
 turnips, carrots, celery, onion, and green peas all mixed, 2 eggs, 1 
 teaspoonful of mixed herbs, pepper and salt to taste. Beat the eggs up
 
 1/2 lb. each of carrots, turnips, onions, potatoes, 1 small 
 cauliflower, 2 good sized tomatoes or a cupful of tinned ones, 2 
 hard-boiled eggs, 1 teaspoonful of mixed herbs, 1 oz. of butter, 1 
 dessertspoonful of sago, pepper and salt to taste. Wash and prepare 
 the vegetables, cut them into pieces the size of nuts; if fresh 
 tomatoes are used, scald and skin them. Let all the vegetables stew 
 gently with the butter and 1 pint of water until they are nearly 
 tender; add the herbs, and seasoning; pour the whole into a pie-dish, 
 sprinkling the sago between the vegetables; add water if more is 
 required for the pie to have sufficient gravy; cut up the eggs in 
 quarters, place the pieces on the top of the vegetables, and cover all 
 with a crust. These vegetable pies can be varied according to the 
 vegetables in season; cooked haricot or kidney beans, lentils, green 
 peas, French beans may be used, and vermicelli or tapioca substituted 
 for the sago. 
  
  
 VEGETABLE STEW. 
 
grated cheese, 1 tablespoonful of finely chopped parsley, pepper and 
 salt to taste. Boil the macaroni till tender in 2 pints of water, to 
 which the butter has been added. When soft add seasoning, the cheese, 
 and the parsley. Beat the eggs well in the dish in which the macaroni 
 is to be served, pour over the mixture of macaroni and other 
 ingredients, mix all well with the eggs, and serve. If neither 
 spaghetti nor vermicelli are handy, use Naples macaroni. 
  
  
 MACARONI CHEESE. 
  
 1/2 lb. of macaroni, 8 oz. of grated cheese, some breadcrumbs, pepper 
 and salt to taste, and 1 oz. of butter. Boil the macaroni in slightly 
 salted water until soft. Then place a layer of it in a pie-dish, 
 sprinkle some of the grated cheese over it, dust with pepper, and 
 repeat the layers of macaroni and cheese, finishing with a sprinkling 
 of cheese, and the breadcrumbs. Cut the butter in pieces, and place 
 them here and there on the top. Bake it in a moderately hot oven until 
 brown. Eat with vegetables and tomato sauce. For those who have a weak 
 digestion plain boiled macaroni with grated cheese added at table is
better and lighter. Macaroni requires from 25 minutes to 1/2 an hour 
 cooking. The Genoa macaroni takes longer, the thin spaghetti kind is 
 done in from 15 to 20 minutes, and vermicelli and Italian paste are 
 done in a few minutes. Macaroni should be thrown into boiling water 
 and be kept boiling, as the pipes or pieces otherwise stick together. 
 The Italian paste is mostly used as an addition in clear soup. 
  
  
 MACARONI CREAM. 
  
 6 oz. of macaroni, 3 oz. of cheese, 1/2 oz. of butter, 3/4 pint of 
 milk, 1 teaspoonful of Allinson cornflour, pepper and salt to taste. 
 Boil the macaroni until tender in only as much water as it will 
 absorb. Make a sauce of the milk, cornflour, and cheese (you can use 
 Parmesan, Gruyère, or Canadian cheese). Place the macaroni in a 
 pie-dish, pour the sauce over it, grate some more cheese over the top, 
 and let the macaroni brown in the oven. 
  
  
 MACARONI SAVOURY.
curry, 1 oz. of butter, and salt to taste. Wash the rice, mix the 
 curry with the proper quantity of water, and set the rice over the 
 fire with it, adding the butter and seasoning. Let the rice come to 
 the boil slowly, and stir it a few times to prevent it sticking to the 
 saucepan. When the rice boils, cover it with a piece of buttered 
 paper, and let it cook very gently, not stirring it again. When all 
 the water is absorbed, serve the rice. Do not allow it to get very 
 soft; the rice will take from 15 to 20 minutes  '   cooking only. 
  
  
 CURRIED RICE AND TOMATOES. 
  
 1/2 lb. of Patna rice, 1 dessertspoonful of curry powder, salt to 
 taste, and 1 oz. of butter. Wash the rice; mix 1 pint of cold water 
 with the curry powder, put this over the fire with the rice, butter, 
 and salt. Cover the rice with a piece of buttered paper and let it 
 simmer gently until the water is absorbed. This will take about 20 
 minutes. Rice cooked this way will have all the grains separate. For 
 the tomatoes proceed as follows: 1 lb. of tomatoes and a little 
 butter, pepper and salt. Wash the tomatoes and place them in a flat
tin with a few spoonfuls of water; dust them with pepper and salt, and 
 place little bits of butter on each tomato. Bake them from 15 to 20 
 minutes, according to the size of the tomatoes and the heat of the 
 oven. Place the rice in the centre of a hot flat dish, put the 
 tomatoes round it, pour the liquid over the rice, and serve. 
  
  
 PORTUGUESE RICE. 
  
 1 teacupful of rice, 3 medium-sized onions, 3 tomatoes, 2 oz. of 
 grated cheese, 1/2 teaspoonful of herbs, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and 
 salt to taste. Peel and slice the onions and tomatoes and fry them in 
 the butter for 15 minutes; place the rice over the fire with 1 pint of 
 water; add the onions, tomatoes, herbs, and seasoning, and let all 
 cook until the rice is quite soft; serve in a vegetable dish with the 
 grated cheese sprinkled over. 
  
  
 RICE AND LENTILS. 
 
Boil the rice as above; stew Egyptian lentils with chopped onions, 
 pepper, salt, and a little butter, until well done. Put the rice on a 
 dish, pour over the stewed onions and lentils, serve, and eat with 
 green vegetables. 
  
  
 RICE AND ONIONS. 
  
 Boil whole onions in water until done quite through, remove them from 
 the water, and put in it washed rice with a little pepper, salt, and 
 butter. When done, serve with the onions and eat with a green 
 vegetable. 
  
  
 SAVOURY RICE (Italian). 
  
 1 breakfastcupful of rice, 4 tablespoonfuls of grated cheese (Parmesan 
 or other cheese), 1 oz. of butter, a pinch of saffron, pepper and salt 
 to taste. Boil the rice with water as above, then add the cheese, 
 butter, saffron, and seasoning; mix all well, and serve.
seasoning, 1-1/2 cupfuls of rice, butter. Fry the onions and tomatoes 
 in butter until well browned, then place them with the seasoning into 
 the cold stock, and add the rice. When all have boiled slowly for 20 
 minutes, the rice should have absorbed the stock. Serve with cheese 
 grated over. 
  
  
  
  
 OMELETS 
  
  
 CHEESE OMELET. 
  
 4 slices of Allinson bread toasted, or Allinson rusks, 3 eggs, 1/4 lb. 
 of grated cheese, 1 saltspoonful of nutmeg, 1 pint of milk, 2 oz. of 
 butter, pepper and salt to taste. Beat up the eggs, and mix them with 
 the milk; crush the toast or rusks with your hands, and soak them in 
 the egg and milk. Add the cheese, nutmeg, and seasoning. Dissolve half 
 of the butter and mix it with the other ingredients. Butter a
pie-dish, pour in the mixture, cut the rest of the butter in little 
 pieces, and scatter them over the top. Bake the savoury for 1 hour or 
 a little longer until well set. Serve hot or cold. 
  
  
 FRENCH BEAN OMELET. 
  
 3 tablespoonfuls of cut boiled French beans, 4 eggs, 1 dessertspoonful 
 of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1/2 a teacupful of milk, 2 tablespoonfuls 
 of grated cheese (Gruyère or Parmesan), pepper and salt to taste, some 
 vege-butter or oil for frying. Smooth the meal with the milk, beat up 
 the eggs and add them, the cheese and seasoning to the meal and milk; 
 mix thoroughly with the beans, and fry the omelet in boiling butter or 
 Allinson frying oil. 
  
  
 FRENCH OMELET WITH CHEESE. 
  
 3 eggs, 1 oz. of grated cheese, 3 dessertspoonfuls of water, pepper 
 and salt to taste, and 1 oz. of butter. Beat the yolks of the eggs,
add to them the water and seasoning; whip the whites of the eggs to a 
 stiff froth, and mix it lightly with the yolks. Meanwhile have the 
 butter boiling hot in an omelet pan, pour the mixture into it, and let 
 it fry over a gentle fire. Pass a heated salamander or coal-shovel 
 over the top of the omelet. When it has risen, scatter the cheese over 
 it; let the omelet cook a little longer, fold over when the top is 
 still creamy, and serve immediately. 
  
  
 GARDENER  '  S OMELET. 
  
 1 breakfastcupful of cold boiled vegetables, minced fine (green peas, 
 carrots, turnips, potatoes, &c.), 4 eggs, 1 tablespoonful of Allinson 
 fine wheatmeal, 1/2 a gill of milk, pepper and salt, and a little 
 nutmeg to taste, 1 oz. of butter. Beat the eggs and milk well 
 together, rub the meal smooth with it, add the vegetables and 
 seasoning, and fry as an omelet. Serve with sauce. 
  
  
 OMELET HERB.
 
 4 slices of Allinson bread, 1 pint of milk, 1 finely chopped English 
 onion, 1 good tablespoonful of finely chopped parsley, 1 teaspoonful 
 of dried mixed herbs, 3 eggs, 2 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to 
 taste. Soak the bread, fry the onion in 1-1/2 oz. of butter, and mix 
 it with the soaked bread. Add the herbs, parsley, and seasoning, and 
 mix all well. Butter a pie-dish with the rest of the butter, pour the 
 mixture into it, and bake. 
  
  
 OMELET LENTIL. 
  
 It you have any cold boiled lentils, for instance, some sandwich 
 mixture you wish to use up, proceed as follows: To 1 teacupful of 
 boiled lentils take 3 well-beaten eggs, and pepper and salt to taste. 
 Add 1 dessertspoonful of water to each egg, and mix the lentils and 
 eggs smooth. Fry the mixture as an omelet in boiling butter. 
  
  
 OMELET MACARONI.
 
 3 oz. of boiled cold macaroni, 3 eggs, 1 dessertspoonful of finely 
 chopped parsley, 1-1/2 oz. of grated cheese, 1/2 a saltspoonful of 
 nutmeg, pepper and salt to taste, 1-1/2 oz. of butter. Cut the 
 macaroni into little pieces; beat the eggs well, and mix them with the 
 macaroni. Add the seasoning, parsley, cheese, and nutmeg; mix all 
 well, and fry the omelet with the butter in a large frying-pan. 
  
  
 OMELET ONION. 
  
 4 medium-sized English onions, 1-1/2 oz. of butter, 2 oz. of Allinson 
 breadcrumbs, 4 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls of milk, pepper and salt to 
 taste. Peel and slice the onions, bake them in a pie-dish with the 
 butter and seasoning, until quite soft. Whip the eggs up, mix them 
 with the milk, breadcrumbs, and the baked onions. Put the mixture into 
 a greased pie-dish, and bake in a moderately hot oven. Serve with 
 tomato sauce. 
  
 
of in milk and water. 
  
  
 OMELET TOMATO (2). 
  
 1 lb. of tomatoes, 1/2 lb. of breadcrumbs, 1 large Spanish onion, 3 
 eggs, 2 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste. Stew the finely 
 chopped onions in the butter for 20 minutes in a covered-up saucepan, 
 add pepper and salt, cut the tomatoes up, add these to the other 
 ingredients. Let all simmer for 20 minutes; pour the mixture over the 
 breadcrumbs, add the eggs well beaten, mix all up thoroughly, and turn 
 the mixture into one or more well-buttered shallow tins. Bake the 
 omelet in a quick oven for 10 to 15 minutes. 
  
  
 OMELET TRAPPIST. 
  
 4 oz. of fine breadcrumbs, 2 eggs, 1-1/2 oz. of butter, 1/2 
 teaspoonful of powdered herbs, pepper and salt to taste, 1/2 gill of 
 boiling milk. Moisten the breadcrumbs with the milk, add the eggs well
beaten, the herbs and seasoning. Mix all well and smoothly. Melt the 
 butter in the frying-pan, spread the mixture in it, and fry the omelet 
 a golden brown both sides. 
  
  
 SWEET OMELET (1). 
  
 3 eggs, 2 oz. of butter, sugar to taste, 1 lemon, and 1/2 a teacupful 
 of new milk. Whip the yolks of the eggs well, adding the grated rind 
 of the lemon, half the butter melted, the milk, and sugar. Just before 
 frying the omelet, add the lemon juice and the whites of the eggs 
 whipped to a stiff froth. Make the rest of the butter boiling hot in 
 an oval omelet pan, the size of the dish on which it is to be served, 
 and fry till lightly browned. Sift sugar over it, and serve 
 immediately. 
  
  
 SWEET OMELET (2). 
  
 1/2 pint of new milk, 4 eggs, cinnamon and sugar to taste, 1 oz. of
 
 GREEN VEGETABLES (General Remarks). 
  
 I have not given recipes for the cooking of plain greens, as they are 
 prepared very much alike everywhere in England. There are a number of 
 recipes in this book giving savoury ways of preparing them, and I will 
 now make a few remarks on the cooking of plain vegetables. The English 
 way of boiling them is not at all a good one, as most of the soluble 
 vegetable salts, which are so important to our system, are lost 
 through it. Green vegetables are generally boiled in a great deal of 
 salt water; this is drained off when they are tender, and the 
 vegetables then served. A much better way for all vegetables is to 
 cook them in a very small quantity of water, and adding a small piece 
 of butter (1 oz. to 2 lb. of greens) and a little salt. When the 
 greens are tender, any water which is not absorbed should be thickened 
 with a little Allinson fine wheatmeal and eaten with the vegetables. A 
 great number of them, such as _Cabbages, Savoys, Brussel sprouts, 
 Scotch kail, turnip-tops, &c., &c._, can be prepared this way. 
  
 In the case of vegetables like _asparagus, cauliflower, sea kale,
cracked in some way, otherwise they very soon become sodden. A very 
 palatable way of serving potatoes, is to peel them and bake them in a 
 tin with a little oil or butter, or vege-butter; they should be turned 
 occasionally, in order that they should brown evenly. This is not a 
 very hygienic way of preparing potatoes. From a health point of view 
 they are best baked in their skins, or steamed with or without the 
 skins. A good many vegetables may be steamed with advantage; for 
 instance, _cabbage, sprouts, turnips, parsnips, swedes, Scotch kail, 
 &c._ Any way of preparing greens is better than boiling them in a 
 large saucepanful of water and throwing this away. I may just mention 
 that Scotch kail, after being boiled in a little water, should be 
 treated exactly as spinach, and is most delicious in that way; an 
 onion cooked with it greatly improves the flavour. 
  
  
 ARTICHOKES À LA SAUCE BLANCHE. 
  
 2 lbs. of artichokes, 1 oz. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 3/4 pint of 
 milk, 1 egg, juice of 1/2 a lemon, pepper and salt to taste. Peel the 
 artichokes, and boil them in water until tender; cut them into slices
1/2 an inch thick and place them on a dish. Make a sauce of the milk 
 and meal with seasoning; when the sauce has thickened, remove it from 
 the fire, beat up the egg with the lemon juice and add both to the 
 sauce, pour it over the artichokes, and serve. 
  
  
 ARTICHOKES À LA PARMESAN. 
  
 2 lbs. of artichokes, 3/4 pint of milk, 1 tablespoonful of Allinson 
 fine wheatmeal, 1 egg, juice of 1/2 a lemon, 2 oz. of grated Parmesan 
 or any other cooking cheese. Proceed as in the recipe for "Celery à la 
 Parmesan," add the cheese to the sauce, and serve the same with sauce 
 as above. 
  
  
 ASPARAGUS (BOILED). 
  
 Scrape the white parts of the stalks quite clean, and put them into 
 cold water as they are done. Tie them up into bundles, and cut them 
 all the same length. Now put them into a saucepan, cover with boiling
2 heads of celery, 1/2 pint of milk, 1 oz. of butter, 1 egg, 1 cupful 
 of breadcrumbs, pepper and salt to taste. Cut up the celery into 
 pieces, boil it in water for 10 minutes; drain it and put it into the 
 stewpan with the milk, 1/2 oz. butter, pepper and salt. Simmer the 
 celery gently until tender, put it aside to cool a little, and add the 
 egg well beaten. Butter a shallow dish, strew it well with some of the 
 breadcrumbs, and pour in the celery, sprinkle the rest of the 
 breadcrumbs over the top, put the butter over it in little bits, and 
 bake the celery until brown. 
  
  
 CELERY (STEAMED) WITH WHITE CHEESE SAUCE. 
  
 Prepare the celery as in previous recipe, leaving it in long pieces, 
 and place it in a vegetable steamer, which consists of a large 
 saucepan over which is fitted a perforated top. Add a little pepper 
 and salt, and let the celery steam for 1-1/2 hours. For the sauce you 
 need: 1 pint of milk, 1 oz. of butter, 1 dessertspoonful of Allinson 
 cornflour, 1-1/2 oz. of grated cheese, pepper and salt to taste. Boil 
 the milk with the butter, thicken it with the cornflour smoothed first
with a spoonful of water, and last add the grated cheese and 
 seasoning; let the sauce simmer, stirring it until the cheese is 
 dissolved. Have ready some Allinson plain rusks on a flat dish, place 
 the celery on it, pour the sauce over, and serve very hot. 
  
  
 CELERY (STEWED) WITH WHITE SAUCE. 
  
 2 or 3 heads of celery (according to quantity required), 2 oz. of 
 butter, 1 dessertspoonful of flour, 1/2 pint of milk, pepper and salt 
 to taste. Remove the outer hard pieces from the celery, saving them 
 for flavouring soups or sauces; wash well and cut up in pieces about 3 
 inches long. Set over the fire with 1/2 pint of water, the butter and 
 seasoning. Let cook gently until the celery is quite tender, which 
 will take about 1 hour; add the thickening and the milk. Let all 
 gently simmer for a few minutes, and serve. 
  
  
 LEEKS. 
 
Remove the coarse part of the green stalks of the leeks. If the leeks 
 are gritty cut them right through and wash them well, and if necessary 
 use a brush to get out the sand. Tie the leeks in bunches and steam 
 them until tender, which will take about 1-1/2 hours. Make a white 
 sauce as for the cauliflower. Put the leeks on pieces of dry toast on 
 a flat dish, pour the sauce over them, and serve. 
  
  
 MUSHROOMS (STEWED). 
  
 1 lb. of mushrooms, 1 oz. of butter, 1/2 pint of water, 1/2 
 teaspoonful of herbs, 1/2 saltspoonful of nutmeg, pepper and salt to 
 taste, juice of 1/2 a lemon, the yolk of 1 egg, 1 dessertspoonful of 
 Allinson cornflour. Peel and clean the mushrooms, and wash them in 
 water with a dash of vinegar in it. Wipe them dry with a cloth; have 
 the water and butter ready in a saucepan with the herbs, and 
 seasoning. Stew the mushrooms in this for 10 to 15 minutes. Thicken 
 with the cornflour, then stir in the yolk of egg with the lemon juice, 
 and serve. 
 
the yolks from the whites of the eggs; beat the yolks well, and mix 
 them with the apple mixture. Whisk the whites to a stiff froth, mix 
 them lightly with the rest, and pour the whole into a buttered soufflé 
 tin. Bake for 20 minutes in a moderately hot oven, and serve at once. 
  
  
 CHEESE SOUFFLÉ. 
  
 8 oz. of Parmesan or other good dry, cooking cheese, 4 eggs, 1 oz. of 
 Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1 gill of milk, 1 oz. of butter, mustard, 
 pepper, and salt to taste. Melt the butter in a saucepan, stir in the 
 wheatmeal, season with mustard, pepper, and salt. Pour in the milk, 
 and stir until the mixture is set and comes away from the sides of the 
 saucepan. Turn into a basin, and let the mixture cool. Grate the 
 cheese and stir it in; separate the yolks of the eggs from the whites, 
 and drop the yolks of the eggs, one by one, into the mixture, beating 
 all well. Whip the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth, mix it 
 lightly with the other ingredients; turn the mixture into a buttered 
 soufflé tin, and bake the soufflé for 15 minutes. 
 
 
 CHOCOLATE SOUFFLÉ. 
  
 5 eggs, 2 oz. of butter, 3 oz. of castor sugar, 2 large bars of 
 chocolate, 6 oz. of the crumb of the bread, and vanilla essence to 
 taste. Cream the butter, and stir into it gradually the yolks of the 
 eggs, the sugar, and chocolate. Previously soak the bread in milk or 
 water. Squeeze it dry, and add to it the other ingredients. Add 
 vanilla and the whites of the eggs whipped to a stiff froth, and pour 
 the mixture into a buttered pie-dish or cake tin. Bake 3/4 of an hour, 
 and serve immediately. If the soufflé is baked in a cake tin, a 
 serviette should be pinned round it before serving. 
  
  
 CURRIED EGGS. 
  
 6 hard-boiled eggs, 1 medium-sized English onion, 1 cooking apple, 1 
 teaspoonful of curry powder, 1 dessertspoonful of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, 1 oz. of butter, and salt to taste. Prepare the onion and 
 apple, chop them very fine, and fry them in the butter in a stewpan
until brown. Add 1/2 pint of water and a little salt. Smooth the curry 
 and wheatmeal with a little cold water, and thicken the sauce with it. 
 Let it simmer for 10 minutes, then rub through a sieve. Return the 
 sauce to the stewpan, shell the eggs, and heat them up in the sauce; 
 serve very hot on a flat dish. 
  
  
 EGG AND CHEESE. 
  
 6 eggs, 1 teacupful of milk, thickened with 1 dessertspoonful of 
 Allinson fine wheatmeal, 2 oz. of grated cheese, pepper and salt to 
 taste. Butter a pie-dish, pour into it the thickened milk, break the 
 eggs over it, sprinkle the cheese over them, and season to taste. Bake 
 in a moderate oven until the eggs are just set. 
  
  
 EGG AND CHEESE FONDU. 
  
 To each egg 1/2 its weight in grated cheese and a 1/2 oz. of butter 
 (if only 1 egg is prepared 1/2 oz. of butter must be used); mustard,
EGG AND TOMATO SANDWICHES. 
  
 4 eggs, 1 teacupful of tinned tomatoes or 1/2 lb. fresh ones, pepper 
 and salt, 1 oz. of butter. Melt the butter in a frying-pan, and cook 
 the tomatoes in it until most of the liquid is steamed away; set aside 
 to cool. If fresh tomatoes are used, they should be scalded and 
 skinned before cooking. Beat up the eggs and stir them into the cooled 
 tomatoes, adding seasoning to taste. Stir the eggs and tomatoes with a 
 knife until set, then turn the mixture into a bowl to get cold, and 
 use for sandwiches. 
  
  
 EGG SALAD WITH MAYONNAISE. 
  
 1 lb. of cold boiled potatoes, 6 hard-boiled eggs, the juice of 1/2 a 
 lemon, pepper and salt to taste. Cut the potatoes and eggs into 
 slices, dust them with pepper and salt, add the lemon juice, and mix 
 all well together. Make the mayonnaise as follows; 1-1/2 gills of good 
 salad oil, the yolks of 2 eggs, 1 saltspoonful of mustard, lemon 
 juice, pepper, and salt to taste. Take a clean cold basin, and place
in it the yolks of the eggs beaten up. Drop the oil into them, drop by 
 drop, stirring with a wooden spoon quickly all the time. Great care 
 should be taken, especially in the beginning, as the eggs easily 
 curdle when the oil is stirred in too fast. When the mayonnaise gets 
 very thick add carefully a little lemon juice to thin it down, then 
 add again oil and lemon juice alternately until all the oil is used 
 up. Smooth the mustard with a little lemon juice, and stir it in last 
 of all with sufficient pepper and salt. Taste the mayonnaise, and add 
 lemon juice or seasoning as required. Vinegar may be used instead of 
 lemon juice if the latter is not conveniently had. The mayonnaise 
 should be made in a cold room, as it may curdle if made in a hot room. 
 Should an accident happen, beat up another yolk of egg and start 
 afresh with a little fresh oil, and when going on well stir in, drop 
 by drop, the curdled mayonnaise. Mix part of it with the eggs and 
 potatoes, and pour the rest over the salad; garnish with watercress. 
  
  
 EGG SALMAGUNDI WITH JAM. 
  
 4 eggs, 1 oz. of butter, the juice of 1/2 a lemon, 1/2 a teacupful of
EGGS À LA BONNE FEMME. 
  
 4 eggs, 1 Spanish onion, 1 oz. of butter, 1 teaspoonful of vinegar, 
 and 2 tablespoonfuls of breadcrumbs; pepper and salt to taste. Peel 
 and slice the onion, and fry it brown in the butter; add the vinegar 
 and seasoning when done. Spread the onion on a buttered dish, break 
 the eggs over them, dust these with pepper and salt, and sprinkle with 
 breadcrumbs. Place a few bits of butter on the top, and bake until the 
 eggs are set, which will only take a few minutes. 
  
  
 EGGS À LA DUCHESSE. 
  
 1 quart of milk, 6 eggs, 1 tablespoonful of Allinson cornflour, sugar 
 to taste, a piece of vanilla 2 inches long. Splice the vanilla and let 
 it boil with the milk and sugar; smooth the cornflour with a spoonful 
 of water, thicken the milk with it, and let it cook gently for 2 or 3 
 minutes; remove the vanilla. Have ready the whites of eggs whipped to 
 a stiff froth, drop it in spoonfuls in the boiling milk; let it simmer 
 for a few minutes until the egg snow has got set, remove the snowballs
EGGS AU GRATIN. 
  
 3 hard-boiled eggs, 1-1/2 oz. of grated cheese, 1 oz. of butter, 2 
 tablespoonfuls of breadcrumbs, a little nutmeg, and pepper and salt to 
 taste. Slice the eggs, place them on a well-buttered flat baking dish, 
 sprinkle them thickly with the grated cheese, and dust with nutmeg, 
 pepper, and salt. Spread the breadcrumbs over the top, and scatter the 
 butter in bits over the breadcrumbs. Bake until the breadcrumbs begin 
 to brown. 
  
  
 FORCEMEAT EGGS. 
  
 6 eggs, 1 small English onion, a few leaves of fresh sage, or 1/2 
 teaspoonful of dried powdered sage, a few sprigs of Parsley, pepper 
 and salt to taste, and some paste rolled thin, made of 6 oz. of 
 Allinson fine wheatmeal, 2 oz. of butter or vege-butter, and a little 
 cold water. Boil the eggs for 10 minutes, set them in cold water, and 
 take off the shells. Cut them in half lengthways, remove the yolks, 
 and proceed as follows: Chop up the onion very fine with the sage and
parsley, and season with pepper and salt. Pound the yolks very fine, 
 and add the onion and herbs; fill the whites of the eggs with the 
 mixture. Put the halves together, enclose them in paste, brush them 
 over with the white of egg, and bake until the pastry is done, which 
 will take about 15 minutes. Serve with vegetables and sauce. 
  
  
 FRENCH EGGS. 
  
 6 hard-boiled eggs, 1/2 pint of milk, 1 oz. of butter, 1 
 dessertspoonful of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1 dessertspoonful of 
 finely chopped parsley, nutmeg, pepper, and salt to taste. Boil the 
 milk with the butter, thicken it with the flour, smoothed previously 
 with a little cold milk; season to taste. When the milk is thickened 
 shell the eggs, cut them into quarters lengthways, and put them into 
 the sauce. Last of all, put in the parsley, and serve with sippets of 
 toast laid in the bottom of the dish. 
  
  
 MUSHROOM AND EGGS.
ratafias. Melt the butter in a saucepan, stir in the flour, mix well, 
 and then add the milk, stirring all until the mixture is quite smooth 
 and thick and comes away from the sides of the saucepan. Let it cool a 
 little, then stir in the yolks of the eggs well beaten, the lemon 
 rind, the sugar, and lastly, the whites of the eggs whipped to a stiff 
 froth. Turn the mixture into a buttered pie-dish or cake tin, with 
 alternate layers of ratafias. Bake from 1/2 an hour to 3/4 of an hour 
 in a moderately hot oven, and serve immediately with stewed fruit. 
  
  
 RICE SOUFFLÉ. 
  
 6 eggs, 2 oz. of rice, 1 pint of milk, sugar to taste, vanilla essence 
 or the peel of 1/2 a lemon, and 1 oz. of butter. Stew the rice in the 
 milk with the butter, sugar, and the lemon peel, if the latter is used 
 for flavouring. When the rice is tender remove the peel; or flavour 
 with vanilla essence, and let all cool. Separate the yolks of the eggs 
 from the whites, and beat each separately into the rice for 2 or 3 
 minutes. Whip the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth, and stir them 
 lightly into the mixture. Have ready a buttered soufflé tin, pour the
mixture into it, and bake the soufflé for 20 minutes in a hot oven. 
 Sprinkle with castor sugar, and serve at once. 
  
  
 SAVOURY CREAMED EGGS. 
  
 To each egg take 2 tablespoonfuls of cream or milk, a little chopped 
 parsley, nutmeg, pepper, and salt to taste, and a slice of hot 
 buttered toast. Butter the cups as in the last recipe, sprinkle well 
 with parsley, beat up the eggs, season with nutmeg, pepper, and salt, 
 and proceed as in "Sweet Creamed Eggs." Serve hot. 
  
  
 SAVOURY SOUFFLÉ. 
  
 4 eggs, 1 oz. Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1 gill of milk, 1 tablespoonful 
 of finely chopped parsley, 1 dessertspoonful of finely minced spring 
 onions, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste. Proceed as in 
 Cheese Soufflé, adding (instead of cheese) the parsley and onion. 
 
 
 SCALLOPED EGGS. 
  
 1/2 dozen hard-boiled eggs, 1/2 pint of milk, 1 dessertspoonful of 
 Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1 oz. of cheese, 3 tablespoonfuls of brown 
 breadcrumbs, and 1 oz. of butter. Shell and quarter the eggs; grease a 
 shallow dish with part of the butter, and put the eggs in it. Make a 
 thick sauce of the milk, wheatmeal, and cheese, adding seasoning to 
 taste. Pour it over the eggs, cover with breadcrumbs; cut the rest of 
 the butter in little pieces, and scatter them over the breadcrumbs. 
 Bake till nicely browned. 
  
  
 SCOTCH EGGS. 
  
 5 hard-boiled eggs, 1 breakfastcupful of Allinson breadcrumbs, 1 
 Spanish onion, 1 teaspoonful of powdered sage, 1 dessertspoonful of 
 finely chopped parsley, 1 egg, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to 
 taste, some oil, vege-butter, or butter for frying. Grate the onion, 
 melt the butter, beat up the eggs, and mix them together with the
breadcrumbs, herbs, and seasoning. Beat the forcemeat smooth, shell 
 the eggs, cover them completely with a thick layer of forcemeat, and 
 fry them a nice brown. Serve with brown gravy. 
  
  
 SPINACH TORTILLA. 
  
 4 eggs, 1 oz. of butter, a teacupful of boiled chopped spinach, lemon 
 juice and pepper and salt to taste. Sprinkle the lemon juice over the 
 spinach, and season well with pepper and salt, and fry it lightly in 
 the butter. Beat the eggs and pour them into the mixture, let the 
 tortilla set, then turn it with a plate, and set the other side. Serve 
 hot. 
  
  
 STIRRED EGGS ON TOAST. 
  
 4 eggs, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and salt, 3 slices of hot buttered 
 toast. Whip the eggs up well, add a dessertspoonful of water for each 
 egg, and pepper and salt to taste. Heat the butter in a frying-pan,
 
 To each egg allow 2 tablespoonfuls of cream, or new milk, 1 
 teaspoonful of strawberry or raspberry and currant jam, 1 thin slice 
 of buttered toast, sugar and vanilla to taste. Butter as many cups as 
 eggs, reckoning 1 egg for each person. Place the jam in the centre of 
 the cup; beat up the eggs with the cream or milk, sugar and vanilla, 
 and divide the mixture into the cups. Cover each cup with buttered 
 paper, stand the cups in a stew-pan with boiling water, which should 
 reach only half-way up the cups, and steam the eggs until they are 
 set--time from 8 to 10 minutes. Turn the eggs out on the buttered 
 toast, and serve hot or cold. 
  
  
 SWISS EGGS. 
  
 4 eggs, 3 oz. of Gruyère cheese, 1 oz. of butter, 1 teaspoonful of 
 finely chopped parsley, pepper and salt to taste. Spread the butter on 
 a flat baking dish; lay on it some very thin slices of the cheese. On 
 these break the eggs, keeping the yolks whole; grate the rest of the 
 cheese, mix it with the parsley; strew this over the eggs, and bake
them in a quick oven for 5 to 7 minutes. 
  
  
 TARRAGON EGGS. 
  
 4 hard-boiled eggs, 1/2 pint white sauce, 1 teaspoonful chopped 
 tarragon, 1 tablespoonful tarragon vinegar, 2 yolks of eggs. Boil the 
 eggs for 7 minutes, and cut them into slices. Lay them in a buttered 
 pie-dish, have ready the sauce hot, and mix it into yolks, tarragon, 
 and tarragon vinegar. Pour over the eggs, and bake for 10 minutes; 
 serve with fried croûtons round. 
  
  
 TOMATO EGGS. 
  
 To each egg take 2 tablespoonfuls of tomato juice, which has been 
 strained through a sieve; pepper and salt to taste. Batter a cup for 
 each egg. Beat up the eggs, mix them with the tomato juice, season to 
 taste, and divide into the buttered cups. Cover each cup with buttered 
 paper, place them in a saucepan with boiling water, and steam the eggs
POTATO BIRD  '  S NEST. 
  
 A plateful of mashed potatoes, 2 lbs. of spinach well cooked and 
 chopped, 3 hard-boiled eggs, 1 oz. of butter. Fry the mashed potatoes 
 a nice brown in the butter, then place it on a dish in the shape of a 
 ring. Inside this spread the spinach, and place the eggs, shelled, on 
 the top of this. Serve as hot as possible. 
  
  
 POTATO CAKES 
  
 3 fair-sized potatoes, 1 egg, 2 tablespoonfuls of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, pepper and salt to taste, and a pinch of nutmeg. Peel, 
 wash, and grate the raw potatoes; beat up the egg and mix it with the 
 potatoes, flour, and seasoning. Beat all well together, and fry the 
 mixture like pancakes in oil or butter. 
  
  
 POTATO CHEESE. 
 
6 oz. of mashed potatoes, 2 lemons, 6 oz. of sugar, 2 oz. of butter. 
 Grate the rind of the lemons and pound it well with the sugar in a 
 mortar, add the potatoes very finely mashed; oil the butter and mix 
 this and the lemon juice with the rest of the ingredients; when all is 
 very thoroughly mixed, fill the mixture in a jar and keep closely 
 covered. 
  
  
 POTATO CHEESECAKES. 
  
 1 lb. of mashed potatoes, 4 oz. of grated cheese, 1 oz. of butter, 2 
 eggs, some bread raspings, 2 tablespoonfuls of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, 1/2 a teaspoonful of mustard, pepper and salt to taste. 
 Melt the butter and mix it with the mashed potatoes, add the cheese, 
 flour, seasoning, mustard, and 1 of the eggs well beaten. Mix all 
 well, and form the mixture into cakes. Beat up the second egg, turn 
 the cakes into the beaten egg and raspings, and fry them in oil or 
 butter until brown. Serve with tomato sauce and green vegetables. 
  
 
 
 1 pint of mashed potatoes, 2 oz. of butter, 3 eggs, 1/2 pint of milk, 
 1/2 a saltspoonful of nutmeg, pepper and salt to taste, and a 
 dessertspoonful of finely chopped parsley. Beat the butter with a fork 
 until it creams, mix the potatoes with the butter, whip the yolks of 
 the eggs well with the milk, and stir in the other ingredients. Add 
 the nutmeg, parsley, and seasoning, and last of all the whites of the 
 eggs, beaten to a stiff froth. The potatoes, butter, eggs, and milk 
 should be well beaten separately before being used, as the success of 
 the dish depends on this. Turn the mixture into a buttered pie-dish, 
 and bake it for 1 hour in a hot oven. 
  
  
 POTATO ROLLS (BAKED). 
  
 2 lbs. of cold mashed potatoes, 1 boiled Spanish onion, 1 oz. of 
 butter, the yolk of 1 egg, a little nutmeg, pepper and salt to taste, 
 and a teaspoonful of powdered thyme. Chop up the onion fine, and mix 
 it with the mashed potatoes. Warm the butter until melted, and add 
 this, the yolk of egg, and the thyme. Mix all well, make the mixture
into little rolls 3 inches long, brush them over with a pastry brush 
 dipped in Allinson nut-oil or hot butter and bake them on a floured 
 tin until brown, which will take from 10 to 20 minutes. Serve with 
 brown sauce and vegetables. 
  
  
 POTATO ROLLS (Spanish). 
  
 3 teacupfuls of mashed potatoes, 3 tablespoonfuls of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, 18 olives, 1 egg well beaten; seasoning to taste. Stone the 
 olives and chop them up fine, mix the meal, mashed potato, olive, and 
 egg well together, season with pepper and salt; add a little milk if 
 necessary, make the mixture into rolls, and proceed as in "Potato 
 Rolls." 
  
  
 POTATO SALAD (1). 
  
 4 medium-sized cold boiled potatoes, 1 small onion minced very fine, 1 
 dessertspoonful of finely chopped parsley, oil and lemon juice, pepper
and salt to taste. Slice the potatoes, let them soak with 3 
 tablespoonfuls of water, mix them with the onion and parsley, and 
 dress like any other salad. Any good salad dressing may be used. 
  
  
 POTATO SALAD (2). 
  
 1-1/2 pints of mashed potatoes, 2 hard-boiled eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls 
 of Allinson salad oil, 1/2 a teacupful of milk, 1 teaspoonful of 
 mustard, pepper, salt, and lemon juice to taste. Make a dressing of 
 the oil, milk, mustard, and seasoning. Mash the yolks of the eggs and 
 mix them with the lemon juice, and add this to the dressing. Chop the 
 whites of the eggs up fine. Mix the mashed potatoes, dressing, and 
 chopped whites of eggs well together. Turn the mixture into a salad 
 bowl or glass dish, and garnish with parsley or watercress and 
 beetroot. 
  
  
 POTATO SALAD (MASHED). 
 
1/2 pint of mashed potatoes, 2 hard-boiled eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls of 
 Allinson salad oil, 1 dessertspoonful of sugar, 1 teaspoonful of 
 mustard, pepper and salt to taste, 2 tablespoonfuls of lemon juice and 
 seasoning; mash the yolks of the eggs quite fine and mix them smooth 
 with the lemon juice, and add this to the dressing. Chop the whites of 
 the eggs up very fine, mix all together; turn the mixture smoothly 
 into a salad bowl or glass dish, and garnish with watercress and 
 beetroot. 
  
  
 POTATO SAUSAGES. 
  
 1 pint of mashed potato, 2 eggs well beaten, 1 breakfastcupful of 
 breadcrumbs, 2 oz. of butter (or Allinson nut-oil), 1/2 a saltspoonful 
 of nutmeg, pepper and salt. Mash the potatoes well with one of the 
 eggs, add seasoning, form the mixture into sausages, roll them in egg 
 and breadcrumbs, and fry them brown. 
  
  
 POTATO SNOW (a Pretty Dish).
POTATO WITH CHEESE. 
  
 1 pint of finely mashed potatoes, 1/2 oz. of butter, 3 oz. of grated 
 cheese, a little nutmeg, pepper and salt to taste. Mix all well with 
 the seasoning, grease some patty pans, fill them with the mixture, and 
 bake them in a moderate oven until golden brown. Serve with vegetables 
 and any savoury sauce. 
  
  
 POTATOES À LA DUCHESSE. 
  
 Prepare potatoes as in "Milk Potatoes," leaving out the parsley; beat 
 up, 1 egg with the juice of 1 lemon, let the potatoes go off the boil, 
 add the egg and lemon juice carefully; re-heat the whole again but do 
 not allow it to boil, to avoid the egg curdling. 
  
  
 POTATOES (BROWNED). 
  
 1 pint of mashed potato, 1 large English onion, 1 oz. of butter,
pepper and salt. Mince the onion very fine and fry it a golden brown 
 in the butter, mix it well with the mashed potato, and add seasoning 
 to taste; form the mixture into cakes, flour them well, place them in 
 a greased baking tin, with little bits of butter on the top of the 
 cakes, and bake them a nice brown. 
  
  
 POTATOES AND CARROTS. 
  
 1-1/2 lbs. of boiled potatoes, 3/4 lb. of boiled carrots, 2 eggs, 1 
 oz. of butter pepper and salt to taste, some Parsley. Mash the 
 potatoes and carrots together, beat the eggs well and mix them with 
 the vegetables, add seasoning; butter a mould, fill it with the 
 mixture, spread the butter on the top, bake the whole for 1/2 hour, 
 turn out, and garnish with parsley. 
  
  
 POTATOES (CURRIED). 
  
 6 good-sized potatoes parboiled, 1 oz. of butter, 1 teaspoonful of
curry powder, 3/4 pint of milk, 1 dessertspoonful of fine wheatmeal, 
 salt and lemon juice to taste. Slice the potatoes into a saucepan and 
 pour the milk over them; smooth the curry powder with a little water, 
 pour this over the potatoes, and add the butter and seasoning. Let the 
 potatoes cook gently until soft; then thicken with the meal, which 
 should be previously smoothed with a little milk or water. Let all 
 simmer for 2 or 3 minutes; add lemon juice, and serve. 
  
  
 POTATOES (MASHED). 
  
 To mash potatoes well they should be drained when soft and steamed dry 
 over the fire; then turn them into a basin and pass them through a 
 potato masher back into the saucepan; add a piece of butter the size 
 of a walnut (or more according to quantity of potatoes), and a little 
 hot milk, and mash all well through over the fire with a wooden spoon, 
 adding hot milk as required until it is a thick, creamy mass. 
  
  
 POTATOES (MASHED) (another way).
 
 1 finely chopped English onion to 1 pound of potatoes, piece of butter 
 the size of a walnut, pepper and salt to taste. Fry the onion a nice 
 brown in the butter, taking care not to burn it. When the potatoes 
 have been passed through the masher back into the saucepan, add the 
 fried onion and seasoning and a little hot milk. Mash all well 
 through, and serve very hot. 
  
  
 POTATOES (MILK). 
  
 Boil or steam potatoes in their skins; when soft, peel and slice them. 
 Make a sauce of milk, thickened with Allinson fine wheatmeal, and 
 season with pepper and salt. Let the potatoes simmer in the sauce for 
 10 minutes. Before serving mix into the sauce a spoonful of finely 
 chopped parsley. 
  
  
 POTATOES (MILK) WITH CAPERS. 
 
1 lb. of potatoes, 3/4 pint of milk, 1 tablespoonful of finely chopped 
 capers, 1 teaspoonful of vinegar, pepper and salt to taste, 1 
 tablespoonful of Allinson wholemeal, boil the potatoes till nearly 
 tender; drain them and cut them in slices. Return them to the 
 saucepan, add the milk and seasoning, and when the milk boils add the 
 wheatmeal. Let all simmer until the potatoes are tender, add the 
 capers and vinegar. Then simmer a few minutes with the capers, and 
 serve. 
  
  
 POTATOES (SAVOURY). 
  
 1-1/2 lbs. of small boiled potatoes, 1 oz. of butter, 1 
 dessertspoonful of finely chopped onion, 3 eggs, 1 dessertspoonful of 
 vinegar, pepper and salt to taste, 1 clove of garlic. Slice the 
 potatoes into the saucepan and let them stew gently for 15 minutes 
 with the butter, onion, and seasoning, shaking them occasionally to 
 prevent burning. Rub the inside of a basin with the garlic, break the 
 eggs into it, beat them well with the vinegar, and pour them over the 
 potatoes, shake the whole well over the fire until thoroughly mixed,
the other ingredients, adding a very little milk it the stuffing 
 should be too dry; fill the potatoes with it, tie the halves together, 
 and bake them until done. Serve with brown sauce. 
  
  
 POTATOES (STUFFED) (2). 
  
 6 large potatoes, 1 Spanish onion, 1 large apple, 1 oz. of butter, 1/2 
 teaspoonful of allspice, 1 dessertspoonful of sugar, pepper and salt 
 to taste, a cupful of breadcrumbs. Chop the onion and apple fine and 
 stew them (without water) with the butter, allspice, sugar, and 
 seasoning. When quite tender sift in enough breadcrumbs to make a 
 fairly stiff paste. Scoop the potatoes out as in previous recipe, fill 
 them with the mixture, tie, bake the potatoes till tender, and serve 
 them with brown sauce and vegetables. 
  
  
 POTATOES (STUFFED) (3). 
  
 6 large boiled potatoes, 1-1/2 ozs. of grated Gruyère or Canadian
cheese, 1 egg well beaten, pepper and salt to taste, a piece of butter 
 the size of a walnut. Halve the potatoes as before, scoop them out, 
 leaving 1/2 inch of potato wall all round. Mash the scooped out potato 
 well up with the cheese, add the egg, butter, and seasoning, also a 
 little milk if necessary; fill the potatoes, tie them together, brush 
 over with a little oiled butter, and bake them 10 to 15 minutes. Serve 
 with vegetables and white sauce. 
  
  
 POTATOES (STUFFED) (4). 
  
 6 large boiled potatoes, 1 large English onion, 1/2 oz. of butter, 1 
 egg well beaten, pepper and salt to taste. Halve the potatoes as 
 before, scoop out most of the soft part and mash it up. Mince the 
 onion very finely and fry it a nice brown with the best part of the 
 butter, mix all up together, adding the egg and seasoning, fill the 
 potato skins, tie the halves together, brush them over with the rest 
 of the butter (oiled), and put them in the oven until well heated 
 through. Serve with vegetables and brown sauce. 
 
condition no sauces are required, but when food is changed by cooking 
 many persons require it to be made more appetising, as it is called. 
 The use of sauces is thus seen to be an aid to help down plain and 
 wholesome food, and being fluid they cause the food to be more 
 thoroughly broken up and made into a porridgy mass before it is 
 swallowed. From a health point of view artificial sauces are not good, 
 but if made as I direct very little harm will result. 
  
 Brown Gravy, Fried Onion Sauce, or Herb Gravy must be used with great 
 caution, or not at all by those who are troubled with heartburn, 
 acidity, biliousness, or skin eruptions of any kind. 
  
 The water in which vegetables (except cabbage or potatoes) have been 
 boiled is better for making sauces than ordinary water. 
  
  
 APPLE SAUCE. 
  
 1 lb. of apples, 1 gill of water, 1-1/2 oz. of sugar (or more, 
 according to taste), 1/2 a teaspoonful of mixed spice. Pare and core
 
 Put a tablespoonful of butter or olive oil into a frying-pan or 
 saucepan, make it hot, dredge in a tablespoonful of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, brown this, then add boiling water, with pepper and salt to 
 taste. A little mushroom or walnut ketchup may be added it desired. 
 Eat with vegetables or savouries. 
  
  
 BROWN SAUCE (1). 
  
 1 oz. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1 oz. of butter, the juice of 1/2 a 
 lemon, a blade of mace, pepper and salt to taste. Melt the butter in a 
 frying-pan over the fire, stir into it the meal, and keep on stirring 
 until it is a brown colour. Stir in gradually enough boiling water to 
 make the sauce of the thickness of cream. Add the lemon juice, the 
 mace, and seasoning, and let the sauce simmer for 20 minutes. Remove 
 the mace, and pour the sauce over the onions. If the sauce should be 
 lumpy, strain it through a gravy-strainer. 
  
 
BROWN SAUCE (2). 
  
 2 tablespoonfuls of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1 oz. of butter, 6 
 eschalots chopped fine, 3 bay leaves, 1/2 a lemon (peeled) cut in 
 slices, pepper and salt to taste. Brown the meal with the butter; add 
 water enough to make the sauce the thickness of cream; add the 
 eschalots, lemon, bay leaves, and seasoning. Let all simmer 15 to 20 
 minutes; strain, return the sauce to the saucepan, and boil it up 
 before serving. 
  
  
 CAPER SAUCE. 
  
 Leave out the onions, otherwise make as "Wheatmeal Sauce." Add capers, 
 and cook 10 minutes after adding them. This goes very well with plain 
 boiled macaroni, or macaroni batter, or macaroni with turnips, &c. 
  
  
 CHOCOLATE SAUCE. 
 
1 bar of Allinson chocolate, 1/2 pint of milk, 1/2 teaspoonful of 
 cornflour, 1/2 teaspoonful of vanilla essence. Melt the chocolate over 
 the fire with 1 tablespoonful of water, add the milk, and stir well; 
 when it boils add the cornflour and vanilla. Boil the sauce up, and 
 serve. 
  
  
 CURRANT SAUCE (RED & WHITE). 
  
 1/2 pint of both white and red currants, 2 ozs. of sugar, 1 gill of 
 water, 1/2 a teaspoonful of cornflour. Cook the ingredients for 10 
 minutes, rub the fruit through a sieve, re-heat it, and thicken the 
 sauce with the cornflour. Serve hot or cold. 
  
  
 CURRY SAUCE (1). 
  
 3 English onions, 1 carrot, 1 good cooking apple, 1 teaspoonful of 
 curry powder, 1/2 oz. of butter, 1 dessertspoonful of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, salt to taste. Chop up the onions, carrot, and apple, and
tablespoonful of vinegar, a pinch of mint and sage, and salt to taste. 
 Fry the onions in the butter until nearly brown, add the meal, and 
 brown; add as much water as required to make the sauce the consistency 
 of cream; add the curry, vinegar, and seasoning. Let the whole simmer 
 for 5 to 10 minutes, strain the sauce, return to the saucepan, beat it 
 up, and serve. 
  
  
 EGG CAPER SAUCE. 
  
 The same as "Egg Sauce," adding 1 tablespoonful of finely chopped 
 capers before the egg is stirred in, and which should simmer a few 
 minutes. 
  
  
 EGG SAUCE. 
  
 3/4 pint of half milk and water, 1 egg, 1 teaspoonful of Allinson 
 cornflour, juice of 1/2 lemon, 1/2 oz. of butter, pepper and salt. 
 Boil the milk and water, add the butter and seasoning. Thicken the
sauce with the cornflour; beat the egg up with the lemon juice. Let 
 the sauce go off the boil; add gradually and gently the egg, taking 
 care not to curdle it. Warm up the sauce again, but do not allow it to 
 boil. 
  
  
 EGG SAUCE WITH SAFFRON. 
  
 1/2 pint of milk and water, 1 egg, 1 teaspoonful of cornflour, a pinch 
 of saffron, pepper and salt to taste. Boil the milk and water with the 
 saffron, and see that the latter dissolves thoroughly. Add seasoning, 
 and thicken with the cornflour; beat up the egg, and after having 
 allowed the sauce to cool a little, add it gradually, taking care not 
 to curdle the sauce. Heat it up, but do not let it boil. To easily 
 dissolve the saffron, it should be dried in the oven and then 
 powdered. 
  
  
 FRENCH SAUCE. 
 
1 oz. of butter, 2 oz. each of carrot, turnip, onion, or eschalots, 1 
 tablespoonful of vinegar, 1 dessertspoonful of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, pepper and salt to taste, a little thyme. Chop the 
 vegetables up fine, and fry them in the butter, adding the thyme. When 
 slightly browned add 3/4 pint of water, into which the meal has been 
 rubbed smooth. Stir the sauce until it boils, then add the vinegar and 
 seasoning. Let all simmer for 1/2 an hour, rub the sauce through a 
 sieve, return it to the saucepan, boil up, and serve. 
  
  
 FRIED ONION SAUCE. 
  
 Chop fine an onion, fry, add Allinson fine wheatmeal, and make into a 
 sauce like brown gravy. 
  
  
 HERB SAUCE. 
  
 Make like "Brown Gravy," and add mixed herbs a little before serving. 
 
to taste. Chop the onions up fine, and cook them in the water until 
 tender, add the milk, butter and seasoning. Smooth the meal with a 
 little water, thicken the sauce, let it simmer for five minutes, and 
 serve. 
  
  
 ORANGE FLOWER SAUCE 
  
 Make a sweet white sauce, and flavour it with 2 tablespoonfuls of 
 orangeflower water. 
  
  
 ORANGE FROTH SAUCE. 
  
 The juice of 2 oranges, 2 eggs, sugar to taste, 1 teaspoonful of white 
 flour (not cornflour), add to the orange juice enough water to make 
 1/2 pint of liquid; mix this well with the sugar, the eggs previously 
 beaten, and the flour smoothed with a very little water; put the 
 mixture over the fire in an enamelled saucepan, and whisk it well 
 until quite frothy; do not allow the sauce to boil, as it would then
Make a sweet white sauce, and flavour with 2 tablespoonfuls of 
 rosewater. 
  
  
 SAVOURY SAUCE. 
  
 1 onion, 3 carrots, 1 oz. butter, a teaspoonful of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, a little nutmeg, pepper and salt to taste. Chop up the 
 onion and fry it a nice brown; cut up the carrots into small dice, 
 cook them gently in 1 pint of water with the onion and seasoning until 
 quite soft; then rub the sauce through a sieve, return it to the 
 saucepan, heat it up and thicken it with the meal, if necessary. 
  
  
 SORREL SAUCE. 
  
 Make a white sauce, and add to it a handful of finely chopped sorrel; 
 let it simmer a few minutes, and serve. 
  
 
SPICE SAUCE. 
  
 Make a sweet white sauce, and add 1/2 teaspoonful of mixed spice 
 before serving. 
  
  
 TARTARE SAUCE. 
  
 1 lb. of mushrooms, 1 small onion, 1/2 oz. of butter, 1 
 dessertspoonful of Allinson fine wheatmeal, pepper and salt to taste, 
 juice of 1/2 a lemon. Cook the mushrooms and onion, chopped fine, in 
 1/2 pint of water for 15 minutes; adding the butter and seasoning. 
 Strain the sauce and return it to the saucepan, thicken it with the 
 meal, add the lemon juice, let it simmer 2 or 3 minutes, and serve. 
  
  
 TOMATO SAUCE (1). 
  
 1/2 a canful of tinned tomatoes or 1 lb. of fresh ones, a 
 tablespoonful of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1/2 oz. of butter, pepper
Mix milk and water together in equal proportions, add a grated onion, 
 and boil; rub a little Allinson fine wheatmeal into a paste with cold 
 water. Mix this with the boiling milk and water, and let it thicken; 
 add a little pepper and salt to taste. Eat this with vegetables. 
  
  
 WHITE SAUCE (1). 
  
 3/4 pint of milk, 1 dessertspoonful of Allinson fine wheatmeal, sugar 
 to taste. Boil 1/2 pint of the milk with sugar, mix the meal smooth in 
 the rest of the milk, add this to the boiling milk and keep stirring 
 until the sauce has thickened, cook for 3 to 4 minutes, strain it 
 through a gravy strainer, re-heat, and flavour with vanilla or almond 
 essence. 
  
  
 WHITE SAUCE (2). 
  
 1/2 pint of milk, a dessertspoonful of Allinson cornflour or potato 
 flour, a little vanilla essence, 1 teaspoonful of sugar. Boil the
milk, thicken it with the cornflour previously smoothed with a little 
 water, add sugar and vanilla, boil up, and serve with the pudding. 
  
  
 WHITE SAUCE (SAVOURY). 
  
 3/4 pint of milk, 1 good dessertspoonful of Allinson fine wheatmeal, a 
 small piece of butter, size of a nut, pepper and salt to taste. Bring 
 part of the milk to the boil, mix the meal smooth with the rest, add 
 the butter and seasoning, and thicken the sauce. Let it cook gently a 
 few minutes after adding the meal, and serve. 
  
  
  
 PUDDINGS 
  
  
 ALMOND PUDDING (1). 
  
 4 eggs, 3 oz. of castor sugar, 4 oz. of ground sweet almonds, 1/2 oz.
 
 1/2 lb. of rice, 2-1/2 pints of milk, 1 oz. of butter, 3 oz. of ground 
 sweet almonds and a dozen bitter ground almonds, sugar to taste, 1 
 teaspoonful of cinnamon, some raspberry jam. Cook the rice, butter, 
 milk, sugar, and almonds until the rice is quite tender, which will 
 take from 40 to 50 minutes; butter a mould, sift the cinnamon over it 
 evenly, pour in the rice, let it get cold, turn out and serve with 
 sauce made of raspberry jam and water. Dip the mould into hot water 
 for 1/2 a minute, if the rice will not turn out easily. 
  
  
 APPLE CHARLOTTE. 
  
 2 lbs. of cooking apples, 1 teacupful of mixed currants and sultanas, 
 1 heaped up teaspoonful of ground cinnamon, 2 oz. of blanched and 
 chopped almonds, sugar to taste, Allinson wholemeal bread, and butter. 
 Pare, core, and cut up the apples and set them to cook with 1 
 teacupful of water. Some apples require much more water than others. 
 When they are soft, add the fruit picked and washed, the cinnamon, and 
 the almonds and sugar. Cut very thin slices of bread and butter, line
 
 Soak a 1d. French roll in 1/2 pint of boiling milk; for 1 hour, then 
 add 1/4 lb. of sultanas, 1/4 lb. of currants, 3 oz. of sugar, 4 
 chopped apples, a little chopped peel, the yolks of 3 eggs, a little 
 grated nutmeg and zest of lemon. Mix in lastly the whites of the 3 
 eggs whisked to a stiff froth, pour into a mould, and boil for 2 
 hours. Serve with a sweet sauce. 
  
  
 BIRD-NEST PUDDING. 
  
 6 medium-sized apples, 5 eggs, 1 quart of milk, sugar, the rind of 1/2 
 a lemon and some almond or vanilla essence. Pare and core the apples, 
 and boil them in 1 pint of water, sweetened with 2 oz. of sugar, and 
 the lemon rind added, until they are beginning to get soft. Remove the 
 apples from the saucepan and place them in a pie-dish without the 
 syrup. Heat the milk and make a custard with the eggs, well beaten, 
 and the hot milk; sweeten and flavour it to taste, pour the custard 
 over the apples, and bake the pudding until the custard is set. 
 
BREAD SOUFFLÉ. 
  
 5 oz. of Allinson wholemeal bread, 1 pint of milk, 2 tablespoonfuls of 
 orange or rosewater, sugar to taste, 4 eggs. Soak the bread in the 
 milk until perfectly soft; add sugar and the rose or orange water; 
 beat the mixture up with the yolks of the eggs; beat the whites of the 
 eggs to a stiff froth, and mix them lightly with the rest; pour the 
 whole into a well-buttered pie-dish and bake the soufflé for 1/2 an 
 hour in a brisk oven; serve immediately. 
  
  
 BUCKINGHAM PUDDING. 
  
 1/4 lb. of ratafias, 4 or 5 sponge cakes, 3 eggs, 3/4 pint of milk, 
 sugar to taste, vanilla flavouring. Butter a mould, press the ratafias 
 all over it, and lay in the sponge cakes cut in slices; then put in 
 more ratafias and sponge cakes until the mould is almost full. Beat 
 the yolks of the eggs well together and the whites of 2 eggs. Boil the 
 milk and pour it on the eggs, let it cool a little, add sugar and 
 flavouring. Pour into the mould. Cover it with buttered paper and
sugar to taste, and vanilla or other flavouring. Proceed as for a 
 blancmange; when the ingredients are cooked, let them cool a little, 
 beat up the eggs, and mix them well with the rest, and bake all for 20 
 or 30 minutes in a moderate oven. 
  
  
 CUSTARD PUDDING WITHOUT EGGS. 
  
 One dessertspoonful of flour, one packet of Allinson custard powder, 1 
 oz. of butter, 1 pint of milk, and sugar to taste. Mix the flour and 
 custard powder to a smooth, thin paste, with a few tablespoonfuls of 
 the milk, boil the rest of the milk with the sugar and butter; when 
 quite boiling pour it into the powder, &c., in the basin, stir 
 briskly, then pour into a greased pie-dish and brown slightly in the 
 oven; before serving decorate the top with some apricot or other jam. 
  
  
 EMPRESS PUDDING. 
  
 1/2 lb. of rice, 2-1/2 pints of milk, the rind of 1/2 a lemon, 3 eggs,
fine wheatmeal, 3 eggs, 1 pint of milk, 1/2 lb. of golden syrup. Make 
 a batter with the meal, eggs, and milk; grease a pudding basin, pour 
 into it first the golden syrup, then the batter without mixing them; 
 put over the batter a piece of buttered paper, tie up with a cloth, 
 and steam the pudding in boiling water for 2-1/2 hours, taking care 
 that no water boils into it. If liked, the juice of 1/2 lemon may be 
 added to the syrup and grated rind put in the batter. Before turning 
 the pudding out, dip the pudding basin in cold water for 1 minute. 
  
  
 GOOSEBERRY SOUFFLÉ. 
  
 3 pints of gooseberries, castor sugar to taste, 1/2 pint of milk, 4 
 eggs. Stew the gooseberries with 1/2 a teacupful of water until quite 
 soft, adding sugar to taste; rub the fruit through a coarse sieve and 
 place it into a pie-dish; beat the yolks of the eggs well, mix them 
 with the milk previously heated, and pour them over the gooseberries, 
 mixing all well. Bake the mixture in a moderate oven until set; 
 meanwhile beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth, adding a 
 little castor sugar, lay this over the soufflé a few minutes before
Boil the milk, stir it into the ground rice, previously smoothed with 
 some of the cold milk. Let the mixture cook gently for 5 minutes, stir 
 frequently, draw the saucepan to the side, and when it has ceased to 
 boil add the egg well whipped, and mix well. Pour half of the mixture 
 into a pie-dish, spread a layer of jam over it, then pour the rest of 
 the pudding mixture over the jam, and let it brown lightly in the 
 oven. 
  
  
 HASTY MEAL PUDDING (1). 
  
 1 pint of milk, 2 oz. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, sugar to taste, a 
 few drops of almond flavouring, 3 eggs, well beaten, some marmalade or 
 other preserve. Boil the milk and meal as for a blancmange, flavour 
 with the sugar and almond essence; let the mixture cool, add the eggs, 
 spread a layer of marmalade or preserve in the bottom of the pie-dish, 
 pour the mixture over, and bake it from 20 to 30 minutes. 
  
  
 HASTY MEAL PUDDING (2).
ingredients. For instance, use 2 oz. of giant sago and 2 oz. of 
 wheatmeal to 1 quart of milk; or for semolina pudding, the same 
 quantities of wheatmeal and semolina; and for vermicelli pudding the 
 same, with sugar and flavouring to taste. 
  
  
 MINCEMEAT PANCAKES. 
  
 4 oz. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1/2 pint of milk, 3 eggs, some 
 butter, and some mincemeat. Make the batter, fry the pancakes, and 
 place a spoonful of mincemeat on each pancake, fold them up, and serve 
 with sifted sugar. 
  
  
 NEWCASTLE PUDDING. 
  
 1/2 lb. of candied cherries, 3 eggs, Allinson wholemeal bread and 
 butter in thin slices, sugar to taste, 1 pint of milk, a few drops of 
 almond flavouring. Butter a pudding mould and line it with the 
 cherries, fill it with slices of bread and butter; sweeten the milk to
the usual way. These are very good, and eat very short. Serve with 
 lemon and castor sugar. 
  
  
 OATMEAL PUDDING. 
  
 6 oz. of Allinson breakfast oats, 3 eggs, 2 oz. of soaked sago, 1 gill 
 of milk, 2 oz. of sultanas, 2 oz. of currants, 1 even teaspoonful of 
 cinnamon, sugar to taste, 1 oz. of butter. Mix the Allinson breakfast 
 oats with the soaked sago, add the eggs, well beaten, the fruit, 
 sugar, butter, cinnamon, and milk; stir all well, butter a mould, pour 
 the mixture into it, cover with a cloth, and steam the pudding for 3 
 hours. 
  
  
 OMELET SOUFFLÉ (1). 
  
 4 eggs, 6 macaroons, 1 teaspoonful finely minced citron peel, 1 
 dessertspoonful of cornflour, and sugar to taste. Separate the whites 
 and yolks of the eggs, crush up finely the macaroons and mix well the
chopped up, 1 teaspoonful of cinnamon, and sugar to taste. Wash the 
 rice, mix it with the other ingredients, and tie all in a cloth, 
 allowing plenty of room for swelling. Let the pudding boil sharply in 
 plenty of boiling water until the rice is soft; time 1-1/2 hours. 
  
  
 PANCAKE PUDDING. 
  
 5 or 6 thin cold pancakes, 3 or 3 stale sponge cakes, some jam, 1 pint 
 of milk, 2 eggs, 2 oz. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, vanilla flavouring. 
 Spread the pancakes with jam, roll them up and cut them across into 
 slices. Butter a mould, form a circle of slices round the bottom of 
 the mould against the sides, overlapping each other, and work these 
 circles right up the mould, fill the centre with the sponge cakes 
 broken into pieces. Make a batter of the meal, milk and eggs, adding 
 vanilla to taste; pour this over the rest and steam the pudding for 
 1-1/2 hours, turn out, and serve. 
  
  
 PANCAKES.
STUFFED SWEET ROLLS. 
  
 4 Allinson wholemeal rolls, 3 cooking apples, 2 oz. of ground sweet 
 almonds, 4 oz. of macaroons crushed, 2 oz. of currants, picked and 
 washed, 2 eggs, a little milk, cinnamon, 1 oz. of butter, sugar to 
 taste. Halve the rolls lengthways and remove the crumb; soak the 
 crusts for a few minutes in a little cold milk when the stuffing is 
 ready. Pare and core the apples, cook them with 1/3 teacupful of 
 water, 1/2 oz. of the butter, and 1 tablespoonful of sugar, and mash 
 them up to a pulp with a wooden spoon; then add the currants, almonds, 
 macaroons, 1 egg well beaten, and the yolk of the other. Mix all well, 
 and add some of the breadcrumbs to make the whole into a fairly firm 
 mass. Fill the crusts of the rolls with the mixture, press the two 
 halves of each roll together, place the rolls into a baking tin, 
 sprinkle them with sugar and powdered cinnamon, scatter bits of butter 
 over the crusts, and bake the rolls for 1/2 hour. Serve with white 
 sauce. 
  
  
 TAPIOCA PUDDING.
 
 1 oz. of tapioca, 1 egg, 1/2 pint of cold milk, 1 gill of cold water, 
 1/4 oz. of butter, 1/2 oz. of moist sugar, cinnamon to taste. Put the 
 tapioca into a basin, and cover it with water. Let it soak for 1 hour, 
 until it has absorbed all the water. Add the milk and sugar. Bring to 
 a boil, and simmer till quite soft and clear. Draw to the side of the 
 fire, to cool it a little. Break the egg and beat it slightly; mix 
 well with the tapioca; pour into a greased dish, and bake in a 
 moderate oven until it is a golden colour. Serve either hot or cold. 
  
  
 VANILLA CHESTNUTS (for Dessert). 
  
 1 lb. of chestnuts, 1/2 lb. of sugar, 1 teacupful of water, vanilla to 
 taste. Boil the chestnuts in plenty of water until tender, but not too 
 soft, that they may not break in peeling. Peel them; simmer the sugar 
 and the teacupful of water for 10 minutes, then add the chestnuts. 
 Allow all to cook gently until the syrup browns, add vanilla and 
 remove the chestnuts from the fire; when sufficiently cool, turn the 
 whole into a glass dish.
CHOCOLATE CREAM. 
  
 1 quart of milk, 6 oz. of Allinson chocolate, 4 eggs, 1 tablespoonful 
 of Allinson corn flour, essence of vanilla, sugar to taste. Dissolve 
 the chocolate in a few tablespoonfuls of water, stirring it over the 
 fire until a thick, smooth paste; add the milk, vanilla, and sugar. 
 When boiling thicken the milk with the cornflour; remove the mixture 
 from the fire to cool slightly, beat the eggs well, stir them into the 
 thickened chocolate very gradually, and stir the whole over the fire, 
 taking care not to allow it to boil When well thickened let the cream 
 cool; serve in custard glasses or poured over sponge cakes or 
 macaroons. 
  
  
 CHOCOLATE CREAM (French) (1). 
  
 Use the whites of 3 eggs to 2 large bars of chocolate; vanilla to 
 taste. Break the chocolate in pieces, and melt it in a little 
 enamelled saucepan with very little water; stir it quite smooth, and 
 flavour with Allinson vanilla essence. Set the chocolate aside until
ORANGE CREAM. 
  
 6 oranges, 1 lemon, 7 eggs, 4 to 6 oz. of sugar (according to taste), 
 1 dessertspoonful of cornflour, some water. Take the juice of the 
 oranges and the juice and grated rind of the lemon. Add enough water 
 to the fruit juice to make 1-1/2 pints of liquid; let this get hot, 
 adding the sugar to it; mix the cornflour smooth with a spoonful of 
 cold water, and thicken the fruit juice with it, letting it boil up 
 for a minute, set aside and let it cool a little; beat the eggs well, 
 and when the liquid has cooled mix them carefully in with it; return 
 the whole over a gentle fire, keep stirring continually until the 
 cream thickens, but take care not to let it boil, as this would curdle 
 it. When cold, serve in custard glasses, or in a glass dish poured 
 over macaroons. 
  
  
 RASPBERRY CREAM. 
  
 1 quart of raspberries, sugar to taste, 1/2 pint of cream. Proceed as 
 in "Blackberry Cream."
 
  
 RUSSIAN CREAM. 
  
 Lay 6 sponge cakes on a glass dish, and soak them with any fruit 
 syrup; then add 1 pint of blancmange. When nearly cold cover the top 
 with ratafia biscuits and decorate with angelica and cherries. 
  
  
 STRAWBERRY CREAM. 
  
 1 quart of strawberries, sugar to taste, 1/2 pint of cream. Proceed as 
 in "Blackberry Cream." 
  
  
 SWISS CREAM. 
  
 1/2 pint of cream, 1/2 pint of milk, 1 tablespoonful of Allinson 
 cornflour, 1/4 lb. of macaroons, 2 oz. of ratafias, vanilla, and sugar 
 to taste. Put the cream and milk over the fire, adding a piece of
vanilla 2 inches long, and sugar to taste; smooth the cornflour with a 
 tablespoonful of cold milk, mix it with the milk and cream when nearly 
 boiling, stir the mixture over the fire until it has thickened and let 
 it simmer 2 minutes longer, always stirring; remove the vanilla, 
 arrange the macaroons and ratafias on a shallow glass dish, let the 
 cream cool a little, then pour it over the biscuits and serve cold. 
 This makes a delicious dish. 
  
  
 WHIPPED CREAMS. 
  
 Quantity of good thick cream according to requirement. The white of 1 
 egg to 1/4 pint. Whip it well with a whisk or fork until it gets quite 
 thick; in hot weather it should be kept on ice or standing in another 
 basin with cold water, as the cream might curdle. Add sugar to taste 
 and whatever flavouring might be desired, this latter giving the cream 
 its name. When whipped cream is used to pour over sweets, &c., flavour 
 it with stick vanilla; a piece 1 inch long is sufficient for 1/2 pint 
 of cream; it must be split and as much as possible of the little 
 grains in it rubbed into the cream.
 
  
 BAKED APPLE CUSTARD. 
  
 8 large apples, moist sugar to taste, half a teacupful of water and 
 the juice of half a lemon, 1 pint of custard made with Allinson 
 custard powder. Peel, cut and core the apples and put into a lined 
 saucepan with the water, sugar, and lemon juice, stew till tender and 
 rub through a sieve; when cold put the fruit at the bottom of a 
 pie-dish and pour the custard over, grate a little nutmeg over the 
 top, bake lightly, and serve cold. 
  
  
 BAKED CUSTARD. 
  
 1 quart of milk, 6 eggs, sugar, and flavouring to taste. Heat the milk 
 until nearly boiling, sweeten it with sugar, and add any kind of 
 flavouring. Whip up the eggs, and mix them carefully with the hot 
 milk. Pour the custard into a buttered pie-dish, and bake it in a 
 moderately hot oven until set. If the milk and eggs are mixed cold and
 
 CARAMEL CUP CUSTARD (French). 
  
 Make the custard as in the recipe for "Cup Custard." Take 4 oz. of 
 castor sugar; put it over a brisk fire in a small enamelled saucepan, 
 keep stirring it until quite melted and a rich brown. Then cautiously 
 add 2 tablespoonfuls of boiling water, taking care not to be scalded 
 by the spluttering sugar. Gradually stir the caramel into the hot 
 custard. Let it cool, and serve in custard glasses. 
  
  
 CUP CUSTARD. 
  
 6 whole eggs or 10 yolks of eggs, 1 quart of milk, sugar and vanilla 
 to taste. Beat the eggs well while the milk is being heated. Use 
 vanilla pods to flavour--they are better than the essence, which is 
 alcoholic; split a piece of the pod 3 or 4 inches long, and let it 
 soak in the milk for 1 hour before it is set over the fire, so as to 
 extract the flavour from the vanilla. Sweeten the milk and let it 
 come nearly to boiling-point. Carefully stir the milk into the beaten
dessertspoonful of flour with the contents of a packet of Allinson 
 custard powder, out of a pint of milk take 8 tablespoonfuls and mix 
 well with the flour, custard powder, &c., boil the remainder of milk 
 with sugar to taste and 1 oz. of butter and when quite boiling pour on 
 to the custard powder, stir quickly for a minute, then pour into the 
 pastry case, grate a little nutmeg on the top and bake till of a 
 golden brown; serve either hot or cold. 
  
  
 FRUMENTY. 
  
 1 quart of milk, 1/2 pint of ready boiled wheat (boiled in water), 1/4 
 lb. of sultanas and currants mixed, sugar to taste, 4 eggs, a stick of 
 cinnamon. Mix the milk with the wheat (which should be fresh), the 
 sugar and fruit, adding the cinnamon, and let all cook gently over a 
 low fire, stirring frequently; when the mixture is nicely thickened 
 remove it from the fire and let it cool; beat up the eggs and 
 gradually mix them with the rest, taking great care not to curdle 
 them. Stir the frumenty over the fire, but do not allow to boil. Serve 
 hot or cold. The wheat should be fresh and soaked for 24 hours, and
 
 GOOSEBERRY FOOL. 
  
 Top and tail 1 pint of gooseberries, put into a lined saucepan with 
 sugar to taste and half a small teacupful of water, stew gently until 
 perfectly tender, rub through a sieve, and when quite cold add 1 pint 
 of custard made with Allinson custard powder, which should have been 
 allowed to become cold before being mixed with the fruit. Serve in a 
 glass dish with sponge fingers. 
  
 N.B.--Apple fool is made in exactly the same way as above, 
 substituting sharp apples for the gooseberries. 
  
  
 MACARONI CUSTARD. 
  
 4 oz. of Allinson macaroni, 3 eggs, 1 tablespoonful of sugar, 1 even 
 dessertspoonful of Allinson cornflour, vanilla to taste. Boil the 
 macaroni in 1 pint of milk, and add a little water it needed; when 
 quite tender place it on a glass dish to cool; make a custard of the
rest of the milk and the other ingredients; flavour it well with 
 vanilla; when the custard is cool pour it over the macaroni, and serve 
 with or without stewed fruit. 
  
  
 MACAROON CUSTARD. 
  
 1/2 lb. of macaroons, 1 quart of milk, 6 eggs, 1 dessertspoonful of 
 Allinson cornflour, sugar and vanilla essence to taste. Boil the milk 
 and stir into it the cornflour smoothed with a little of the milk; 
 whip up the eggs, and carefully stir in the milk (which should have 
 been allowed to go off the boil) without curdling it; add sugar and 
 vanilla to taste, and stir the custard over the fire until it 
 thickens, placing it in a jug into a saucepan of boiling water. 
 Arrange the macaroons in a glass dish, and when the custard is cool 
 enough not to crack the dish, pour it over them and sprinkle some 
 ground almonds on the top. Serve cold. 
  
  
 ORANGE CUSTARD.
of it 1/4 inch thick, and line a flat buttered tin with it. Pare, 
 core, and cut the apples into thin divisions, arrange them in close 
 rows on the paste point down, leaving 1 inch of edge uncovered; sift 
 the sugar and cinnamon over the apples; roll out thinly the rest of 
 the paste, cover the apples with it, turn up the edges of the bottom 
 crust over the edges of the top crust, make 2 incisions in the crust, 
 and bake the cake until brown in a moderately hot oven; when cold sift 
 castor sugar over it, slip the cake off the tin, cut into pieces, and 
 serve. 
  
  
 APPLE CHARLOTTE. 
  
 2 lbs. of good cooking apples, 2 oz. of chopped almonds, 4 oz. of 
 currants and sultanas mixed, 1 stick of cinnamon about 3 inches long, 
 sugar to taste, the juice of 1/2 a lemon, and Allinson bread and 
 butter cut very thinly. Pare, core, and cut up the apples, and stew 
 them with a teacupful of water and the cinnamon, until the apples have 
 become a pulp; remove the cinnamon, and add sugar, lemon juice, the 
 almonds, and the currants and sultanas, previously picked, washed, and
oven well spread out; of course they require frequent turning about, 
 both in the sun and on the stove. Next day they may again be spread in 
 the sun, and will probably be quite dry in the course of the day. 
 Should the weather be rainy, the apples must be dried indoors only, 
 and extra care must then be taken that they are neither scorched nor 
 cooked on the stove. Whilst cooking is going on they will dry nicely 
 on sheets of paper on the plate-rack. When the apples are quite dry, 
 which is when the outside is not moist at all, fill them into brown 
 paper bags and hang them up in an airy, dry place. The apples will be 
 found delicious in flavour when stewed, and most acceptable when fresh 
 fruit is scarce. I have dried several bushels of apples in this way 
 every year. 
  
  
 APPLE DUMPLINGS. 
  
 Core as many apples as may be required. Fill the holes with a mixture 
 of sugar and cinnamon; make a paste for a short crust, roll it out, 
 and wrap each apple in it. Bake the dumplings about 30 or 40 minutes 
 in the oven, or boil them the same time in plenty of water, placing
the dumplings in the water when it boils fast. Serve with cream or 
 sweet white sauce. 
  
  
 APPLE FOOL. 
  
 2 lbs. of apples, 1/2 lb. of dates, 3/4 pint of milk, 1/4 pint of 
 cream, 6 cloves tied in muslin, and a little sugar. Pare, core, and 
 cut up the apples, stone the dates, and gently stew the fruit with a 
 teacupful of water and the cloves until quite tender; when 
 sufficiently cooked, remove the cloves, and rub the fruit through a 
 sieve; gradually mix in the milk, which should be boiling, then the 
 cream; serve cold with sponge-cake fingers. 
  
  
 APPLE FRITTERS. 
  
 3 good juicy cooking apples, 3 eggs, 6 oz. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 
 1/2 pint of milk, and sugar to taste. Pare and core the apples, and 
 cut them into rounds 1/4 inch thick; make a batter with the milk,
apples, and cut them in thin slices, mix them with the batter, add 
 sugar and cinnamon to taste, a little lemon juice if liked, and fry 
 the pancakes in the usual way. 
  
  
 APPLE PUDDING. 
  
 1-1/2 lbs. of apples, 1 teaspoonful of ground cinnamon, sugar to 
 taste, 1/2 lb. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, and 2-1/2 oz. of butter or 
 vege-butter. Pare, core, and cut up the apples; make a paste of the 
 meal, butter and a little cold water; roll the paste out, line a 
 pudding basin with the greater part of it, put in the apples, and 
 sprinkle over them the cinnamon and 4 oz. of sugar--a little more 
 should the apples be very sour; cover the apples with the rest of the 
 paste, and press the edges together round the sides; tie a cloth over 
 the basin and boil the pudding for 2-1/2 to 3 hours in a saucepan with 
 boiling water. 
  
  
 APPLE PUDDING (Nottingham).
 
 6 baking apples, 2 oz. of sugar, 1 heaped up teaspoonful of ground 
 cinnamon, 3/4 pint of milk, 3 eggs, 6 oz. of Allinson wholemeal, and 1 
 oz. of butter. Core the apples, mix the sugar and cinnamon, and fill 
 the hole where the core was with it; put the apples into a buttered 
 pie-dish; make a batter of the milk, eggs, and meal, melt the butter 
 and mix it into the batter; pour it over the apples, and bake the 
 pudding for 2 hours in a moderate oven. 
  
  
 APPLE SAGO. 
  
 5 oz. of sago, 1-1/2 lbs. of apples, the juice of a lemon, a 
 teaspoonful of ground cinnamon, and sugar to taste. Wash the sago and 
 cook it in 1-1/2 pints of water, to which the cinnamon is added; 
 meanwhile have the apples ready, pared, cored, and cut up; cook them 
 in very little water, just enough to keep the apples from burning; 
 when they are quite soft rub them through a sieve and mix them with 
 the cooking sago, adding sugar and lemon juice; let all cook gently 
 for a few minutes or until the sago is quite soft; put the mixture
into a wetted mould, and turn out when cold. 
  
  
 APPLE SAUCE. 
  
 1 lb. of good cooking apples, sugar to taste. Pare, core, and cut in 
 pieces the apples, cook them in a few spoonfuls of water to prevent 
 them burning; when quite soft rub the apple through a sieve, and 
 sweeten the sauce to taste. Rubbing the sauce through a sieve ensures 
 the sauce being free from pieces should the apple not pulp evenly. 
  
  
 APPLE TART (OPEN). 
  
 2 lbs. of apples, 1 cupful of currants and sultanas, 2 oz. of chopped 
 almonds, sugar to taste, 1 teaspoonful of ground cinnamon or the rind 
 of 1/2 lemon (which latter should be removed after cooking with the 
 apples), 12 oz. or Allinson fine wheatmeal, and 4-1/2 oz. of butter. 
 Pare, core, and cut up the apples; stew them in very little water, 
 only just enough to keep from burning; when nearly done add the
1 pint of thick apple sauce, sweetened and flavoured to taste (orange 
 or rosewater is preferable), the whites of 3 eggs, beaten to a stiff 
 froth. Mix both together, and serve. 
  
  
 CAULIFLOWER AU GRATIN. 
  
 A fair-sized cauliflower, 1 pint of milk, 1-1/2 oz. of dried Allinson 
 breadcrumbs, 3 oz. of cheese, 1-1/2 oz. of butter, 1 heaped-up 
 tablespoonful of Allinson wholemeal flour, a little nutmeg, and pepper 
 and salt to taste. Boil the cauliflower until half cooked, cut it into 
 pieces, and place them in a pie-dish. Boil the milk, adding the 
 seasoning, 1/2 oz. of the butter, and 1/2 a saltspoonful of the 
 nutmeg. Thicken with the wholemeal smoothed in a little cold milk or 
 water. Stir in the cheese and pour the sauce over the cauliflower. 
 Shake the breadcrumbs over the top, cut the rest of the butter in 
 bits, and place them over the breadcrumbs. Bake for 20 minutes to 1/2 
 an hour, or until the cauliflower is soft. 
  
 
sugar, and drop spoonfuls of the froth into the boiling milk. Allow to 
 boil until the balls are well set, turning them over that both sides 
 may get done. Lift the balls out with a slice, and place them in a 
 glass dish. Beat up the yolks of the eggs, stir them carefully in the 
 hot milk; let the custard cool, and pour it into the glass dish, but 
 not over the snowballs, which should remain white. 
  
  
 SPONGE MOULD. 
  
 9 stale sponge cakes, some raspberry jam, 2 pints of milk, 8 oz. of 
 Allinson cornflour, sugar to taste, a few drops of almond essence. 
 Halve the sponge cakes, spread them with jam, arrange them in a 
 buttered mould, and soak them with 1/2 pint of the milk boiling hot. 
 Boil the rest of the milk and thicken it with the cornflour as for 
 blancmange; flavour with the essence and sugar; pour the mixture over 
 the sponge cakes, and turn all out when cold. 
  
  
 STEWED PEARS AND VANILLA CREAM.
 
 TOMATO SOUP. 
  
 1 tin of tomatoes or 2 lbs. of fresh ones, 1 large Spanish onion or 
 1/2 lb. of smaller ones, 2 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste, 1 
 oz. of vermicelli and 2 bay leaves. Peel the onions and chop up 
 roughly; brown them with the butter in the saucepan in which the soup 
 is made. When the onion is browned, add the tomatoes (the fresh ones 
 must be sliced) and 3 pints of water. Let all cook together for 1/2 an 
 hour. Then drain the liquid through a sieve without rubbing anything 
 through. Return the liquid to the saucepan, add the seasoning and the 
 vermicelli; then allow the soup to cook until the vermicelli is soft, 
 which will be in about 10 minutes. Sago, tapioca, or a little dried 
 julienne may be used instead of the vermicelli. 
  
  
 VEGETABLE PIE. 
  
 1/2 lb. each of tomatoes, turnips, carrots, potatoes, 1 tablespoonful 
 of sago, 1 teaspoonful of mixed herbs, 3 hard-boiled eggs, 2 oz. of
sufficient for absorption. The sauce is made thus: 1 pint of milk, 1 
 tablespoonful of Allinson wholemeal, a handful of finely chopped 
 parsley, the juice of 1/2 a lemon, pepper and salt to taste. Boil the 
 milk and thicken it with the meal, which should first be smoothed with 
 a little cold milk, then last of all add the lemon juice, the 
 seasoning, and the parsley. This dish should be eaten with potatoes 
 and green vegetables. 
  
  
 GROUND RICE PUDDING. 
  
 1 quart of milk, 6 oz. of ground rice, 1 egg, and any kind of jam. 
 Boil the milk, stir into it the ground rice previously smoothed with 
 some of the cold milk. Let the mixture gook gently for 5 minutes, stir 
 frequently, draw the saucepan to the side, and when it has ceased to 
 boil add the egg well whipped, and mix well. Pour half of the mixture 
 into a pie-dish, spread a layer of jam over it, then pour the rest of 
 the pudding mixture over the jam, and let it brown lightly in the 
 oven. 
 
 
 1/2 lb. of Patna rice, 1 dessertspoonful of curry powder, salt to 
 taste, and 1 oz. of butter. Wash the rice, put it over the fire in 
 cold water, let it just boil up, then drain the water off. Mix 1 pint 
 of cold water with the curry powder, put this over the fire with the 
 rice, butter, and salt. Cover the rice with a piece of buttered paper 
 and let it simmer gently until the water is absorbed. This will take 
 about 20 minutes. Rice cooked this way will have all the grains 
 separate. For the tomatoes proceed as follows: 1 lb. of tomatoes and a 
 little butter, pepper, and salt. Wash the tomatoes and place them in a 
 flat tin with a few spoonfuls of water; dust them with pepper and 
 salt, and place little bits of butter on each tomato. Bake them from 
 15 to 20 minutes, according to the size of the tomatoes and the heat 
 of the oven. Place the rice in the centre of a hot flat dish, put the 
 tomatoes round it, pour the liquid over the rice, and serve. 
  
  
 APPLE CHARLOTTE. 
  
 2 lbs. of cooking apples, 1 teacupful of mixed currants and sultanas,
juice, 1 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste. Boil the rice till 
 tender in 2-1/2 pints of water, with the butter and seasoning. When 
 quite soft, add the tomato juice and the cheese; stir until the soup 
 boils and the cheese is dissolved, and serve. If too much of the water 
 has boiled away, add a little more. 
  
  
 HOT-POT. 
  
 2 lbs. of potatoes, 3/4 lb. of onions, 1 breakfastcupful of tinned 
 tomatoes or 1/2 lb. of sliced fresh ones, 1 teaspoonful of mixed 
 herbs, 1-1/2 oz. butter, pepper and salt to taste. Those who do not 
 like tomatoes can leave them out, and the dish will still be very 
 savoury. The potatoes should be peeled, washed, and cut into thin 
 slices, and the onions peeled and cut into thin slices. Arrange the 
 vegetables and tomatoes in layers; dust a little pepper and salt 
 between the layer, and finish with a layer of potatoes. Cut the butter 
 into little bits, place them on the top of the potatoes, fill the dish 
 with hot water, and bake the hot-pot for 2 hours or more in a hot 
 oven. Add a little more hot water if necessary while baking to make up
for what is lost in the cooking. 
  
  
 CABINET PUDDING. 
  
 4 slices of Allinson bread toasted, 1-1/4 pints of milk, 8 eggs, 1 oz. 
 of butter, sugar to taste, 2 oz. of chopped almonds, 1 teacupful of 
 mixed currants and sultanas and any kind of flavouring--cinammon, 
 lemon, vanilla, or almond essence. Crush the toast in your hands, and 
 soak it in the milk. Whip the eggs up, melt the butter, and add both 
 to the soaked toast. Thoroughly mix all the various ingredients 
 together. Butter a pie-dish and pour the pudding mixture into it; put 
 a few bits of butter on the top, and bake the pudding for 1 hour in a 
 moderately hot oven. 
  
  
  
  
 _MENU V._ 
 
 
 LEEK SOUP. 
  
 2 bunches of leeks, 1-1/2 pints of milk, 1 oz. of butter, 1 lb. of 
 potatoes, pepper and salt to taste, and the juice of 1 lemon. Cut off 
 the coarse part of the green ends of the leeks, and cut the leeks 
 lengthways, so as to be able to brush out the grit. Wash the leeks 
 well, and see no grit remains, then out them in short pieces. Peel, 
 wash, and cut up the potatoes, then cook both vegetables with 2 pints 
 of water. When the vegetables are quite tender, rub them through a 
 sieve. Return the mixture to the saucepan, add the butter, milk, and 
 seasoning, and boil the soup up again. Before serving, add the Lemon 
 juice; serve with sippets of toast or Allinson rusks. 
  
  
 MUSHROOM SAVOURY. 
  
 4 slices Allinson bread toast, 8 eggs, 1 pint of milk, 3 oz. of butter, 
 1 lb. of mushrooms, 1 small onion chopped fine, and pepper and salt to 
 taste. Crush the toast with your hand and soak it in the milk; add the[||||                ]	1  	eggs well whipped. Peel, wash, and out up the mushrooms, and fry them 
 and the onion in the butter. When they have cooked in the butter for 
 10 minutes add them to the other ingredients, and season with pepper 
 and salt. Pour the mixture into a greased pie-dish and bake the 
 savoury for 1 hour. Serve with green vegetables, potatoes, and tomato 
 sauce. 
  
  
 CHOCOLATE MOULD. 
  
 1 quart of milk, 2 oz. of potato flour, 2 oz. of Allinson fine 
 wheatmeal, 1 heaped-up tablespoonful of cocoa, 1 dessertspoonful of 
 vanilla essence, and sugar to taste. Smooth the potato flour, 
 wheatmeal, and cocoa with some of the milk. Add sugar to the rest of 
 the milk, boil it up and thicken it with the smoothed ingredients. Let 
 all simmer for 10 minutes, stir frequently, add the vanilla, and mix 
 it well through. Pour the mixture into a wetted mould; turn out when 
 cold, and serve plain or with cold white sauce. 
  
 
 
  
 _MENU VI._ 
  
  
 ARTICHOKE SOUP. 
  
 1 lb. each of artichokes and potatoes, 1 Spanish onion, 1 oz. of 
 butter, 1 pint of milk, and pepper and salt to taste. Peel, wash, and 
 cut into dice the artichokes, potatoes, and onion. Cook them until 
 tender in 1 quart of water with the butter and seasoning. When the 
 vegetables are tender rub them through a sieve. Return the liquid to 
 the saucepan, add the milk and boil the soup up again. Add water it 
 the soup is too thick. Serve with small dice of bread fried crisp in 
 butter or vege-butter. 
  
  
 YORKSHIRE PUDDING. 
  
 4 eggs, 1/2 lb. of Allinson fine wheatmeal, 1 pint of milk, pepper and
salt to taste, 1 oz. of butter. Thoroughly beat the eggs, make a 
 batter of them with the flour and milk, and season it. Well butter a 
 shallow tin, pour in the batter, and cut the rest of the butter in 
 bits. Scatter them over the batter and bake it 3/4 of an hour. Serve 
 with vegetables, potatoes, and sauce. To use half each of Allinson 
 breakfast oats and wheatmeal flour will be found very tasty. 
  
  
 BAKED CARAMEL CUSTARD. 
  
 1-1/2 pints of milk, 5 eggs, vanilla essence, 4 oz. of castor sugar 
 for the caramel, and a little more sugar to sweeten the custard. Heat 
 the milk, whip up the eggs, and carefully stir the hot milk into the 
 beaten eggs; flavour with vanilla and sugar to taste. Meanwhile put 
 the castor sugar into a small enamelled saucepan and stir it over a 
 quick fire until it is quite melted and brown. Add about 2 
 tablespoonfuls of hot water to the caramel, stir thoroughly, and pour 
 it into a tin mould or a cake tin. Let the caramel run all round the 
 sides of the tin; pour in the custard, and bake it in a moderate oven, 
 standing in a larger tin of boiling water, until the custard is set.
Let it get cold, turn out, and serve. This is a very dainty sweet 
 dish. 
  
  
  
  
 _MENU VII._ 
  
  
 POTATO SOUP. 
  
 2 lbs. of potatoes, 1/2 a stick of celery or the outer stalks of a 
 head of celery, saving the heart for table use, 1 large Spanish onion, 
 1 pint of milk, 1 oz. of butter, a heaped-up tablespoonful of finely 
 chopped Parsley, and pepper and salt to taste. Peel, wash, and cut in 
 pieces the potatoes, peel and chop roughly the onion, prepare and cut 
 in small pieces the celery. Cook the vegetables in 8 pints of water 
 until they are quite soft. Rub them through a sieve, return the fluid 
 mixture to the saucepan; add the milk, butter, and seasoning, and boil 
 the soup up again; if too thick, add more water. Mix the parsley in
than if longer in preparation. Pour it into a mould to set. 
  
  
 BARLEY PORRIDGE. 
  
 Take 3 tablespoonfuls of Allinson  '  s barley, mix smoothly with 1/2 pint 
 of cold water, add 1/2 pint of boiling milk, and boil 5 to 10 minutes. 
 Pour on shallow plates to cool, then eat with Allinson wholemeal 
 bread, biscuits, rusks, or toast, or stewed fruits. 
  
  
 BARLEY PUDDINGS. 
  
 Take 2 tablespoonfuls of Allinson  '  s barley, mix smoothly with a little 
 milk, pour upon it the remainder of 1 pint of milk, flavour and 
 sweeten to taste, boil 2 or 3 minutes, then add 2 eggs lightly beaten, 
 pour into a pie-dish, and bake to a golden brown. Eat with stewed, 
 fresh, or dried fruits. 
  
 
be added to it. 
  
  
 BRUNAK. 
  
 Take 1-1/2 or 2 teaspoonfuls of Brunak for each large cupful required, 
 mix it with sufficient water, and boil for 2 or 3 minutes to get the 
 full flavour, then strain and add hot milk and sugar to taste. Can be 
 made in a coffee-pot, teapot, or jug if preferred. May be stood on the 
 hob to draw; or if you have any left over from a previous meal it can 
 be boiled up again and served as freshly made. 
  
  
 COCOA. 
  
 Put 1 teaspoonful of N.F. cocoa into a breakfast cup; make into a 
 paste with a little cold milk. Fill the cup with milk and water in 
 equal parts, pour into lined saucepan, and boil for 1 minute, stirring 
 carefully. This is best without sugar, and should be given cool. 
 
into a saucepan and bring to the boil, stirring all the time to 
 prevent it getting lumpy. It is best without sugar, and should be 
 given cool. 
  
  
 FOR INVALIDS AND ADULTS. 
  
 Use 3 teaspoonfuls of the food to 1/2 a pint of milk and water, and 
 prepare as above. 
  
  
 BLANCMANGE. 
  
 Mix 6 large tablespoonfuls of the food to a thin paste with a little 
 cold milk, then add 1 quart of milk, flavour with vanilla, lemon or 
 almonds, sweeten to taste; boil 2 or 3 minutes, and pour into wetted 
 mould. Eat with stewed, fresh, or dried fruits, and you have a most 
 nutritious and satisfying dish. 
  
 
shallow plates to cool, then eat with Allinson wholemeal bread, 
 biscuits, rusks, toast, or stewed fruits. 
  
  
 PUDDINGS. 
  
 Take 2 tablespoonfuls of the food, mix smoothly with a little milk, 
 pour upon it the remainder of 1 pint of milk, flavour and sweeten to 
 taste; boil 2 or 3 minutes, then add 2 eggs lightly beaten, pour into 
 a pie-dish, and bake to a golden brown. Eat with stewed, fresh, or 
 dried fruits. 
  
  
  
  
 WHOLESOME COOKERY 
  
  
 I. 
 
 
  
  
  
 VI. 
  
 DRINKS. 
  
  
 LEMON WATER is made by squeezing the juice of 1/2 a lemon into a 
 tumbler of warm or cold water; to this is added just enough sugar to 
 take off the tartness. Some peel the lemon first, then cut in slices, 
 pour boiling water over the slices, grate in a little of the peel, and 
 add sugar to taste. 
  
 BRUNAK.--Take 1-1/2 to 2 teaspoonfuls of Brunak for each large cupful 
 required, mix it with sufficient water, and boil for 2 or 3 minutes to 
 get the full flavour, then strain and add hot milk and sugar to taste. 
 Can be made in a coffee-pot, teapot, or jug if preferred. May be stood 
 on the hob to draw; or it you have any left over from a previous meal
 
  
  
  
 WHOLEMEAL COOKERY 
  
  
 Most of my readers have received great benefit from eating wholemeal 
 bread instead of white, and they may all gain further good it they 
 will use Allinson wholemeal flour in place of white for all cooking 
 purposes. Those who are at all constipated, or who suffer from piles, 
 varicose veins, varicocele, back pain, &c., should never use white 
 flour in cooking. Those who are inclined to stoutness should use 
 wholemeal flour rather than white. Hygienists and health-reformers 
 should not permit white flour to enter their houses, unless it is to 
 make bill-stickers  '   paste or some like stuff. Toothless children must 
 not be given any food but milk and water until they cut at least two 
 teeth. 
  
 Every kind of cookery can be done with wholemeal flour. In making
salt to taste, and a 1/4 of an hour before serving, pour in a cupful 
 of the "Sweet Batter," and you get a thick, nourishing soup. To make 
 it more savoury, fry your vegetables before making into soup. 
  
  
  
  
 _A MONTH  '  S MENUS FOR ONE PERSON_. 
  
  
 No. 1. 
  
  
 CAULIFLOWER SOUP. 
  
 1/2 small cauliflower, 1/2 pint milk and water, small piece of butter, 
 1 teaspoonful of fine wholemeal, pepper and salt to taste. Wash and 
 cut up the cauliflower, cook till tender with the milk and water, add 
 butter and seasoning; smooth the meal with a little water, thicken the 
 soup with it, boil up for a minute and serve.
 
  
 WHOLEMEAL BATTER. 
  
 2 oz. wholemeal, 1 gill of milk, 1 egg, seasoning to taste. Make a 
 batter of the ingredients, butter a flat tin or a small pie-dish, turn 
 the batter into it, and bake it from 20 to 30 minutes. Eat with 
 vegetables. 
  
  
 BLANCMANGE. 
  
 1 even dessertspoonful of wheatmeal, 1 ditto cornflour, 1/4 pint milk, 
 sugar and vanilla to taste. Smooth the meal and cornflour with a 
 little of the milk, bring the rest to the boil, stir in the mixture, 
 add flavouring, let it all simmer for 5 to 8 minutes, stirring all the 
 time. Pour into a wetted mould, and turn out when cold. 
  
  
 
No. 2. 
  
  
 ARTICHOKE SOUP. 
  
 1/4 lb. artichokes, 1/4 lb. potatoes, 3/4 pint milk and water (equal 
 parts), 1/4 oz. butter, pepper and salt to taste. Peel, wash, and cut 
 up small the vegetables, and cook them in the milk and water, until 
 tender. Rub them through a sieve, return to saucepan, add butter and 
 seasoning, boil up and serve. 
  
  
 FLAGOLETS. 
  
 3 oz. of flagolets, 1/4 pint parsley sauce. Cook the flagolets till 
 tender, season with pepper and salt, and serve with the sauce. Make it 
 as follows; 1 gill of milk, 1 teaspoonful of cornflour, 1 teaspoonful 
 of finely chopped parsley, pepper and salt, and a small bit of butter. 
 Boil up the milk, thicken with the cornflour, previously smoothed with 
 a spoonful of water; boil up, season, and mix with the parsley before
serving. 
  
  
 WHEATMEAL PUDDING. 
  
 2 oz. of fine wheatmeal, 1 egg, 1/2 gill of milk, 1 tablespoonful 
 sultanas washed and picked, 1/2 oz. of oiled butter, a little grated 
 lemon peel, sugar to taste. Beat up the egg and mix well all 
 ingredients; butter a small pie-dish, and bake the pudding about 1/2 
 hour. 
  
  
  
 No. 3. 
  
  
 CARROT SOUP. 
  
 1 carrot, 1 potato, and 1 small onion cut up small, 1 pint of water, a 
 little butter, and pepper and salt to taste. Cook the vegetables in
the water till quite tender, rub them through a sieve, adding a little 
 water if necessary; return to saucepan, add seasoning and butter, boil 
 up and serve. 
  
  
 LENTIL CAKES. 
  
 2 oz. of picked and washed Egyptian lentils, 1 small finely chopped 
 and fried onion, 1 dessertspoonful of cold boiled vermicelli, 1 egg, 
 some breadcrumbs, seasoning to taste. Stew the lentils with the onion 
 in just enough water to cover them; when cooked, they should be a 
 thick purée. Season to taste, add the vermicelli, and form into 1 or 2 
 cakes, dip in egg and breadcrumb, and fry in vege-butter, or butter. 
 Serve with potatoes and green vegetables. 
  
  
 TAPIOCA PUDDING. 
  
 1 oz. small tapioca, 1/2 pint of milk, sugar to taste. Put the tapioca 
 into a small pie-dish, let it soak in a very little water for half an
hour, pour off any which has not been absorbed. Pour the milk over the 
 soaked tapioca, and bake it in the oven until thoroughly cooked. Eat 
 with or without stewed fruit. 
  
  
  
 No. 4. 
  
  
 CLEAR SOUP (Julienne). 
  
 3/4 pint vegetable stock, 1 tablespoonful dried Julienne (vegetables), 
 a little butter, pepper and salt to taste. Cook the Julienne in the 
 stock until tender, add butter and seasoning and serve. 
  
  
 HAGGIS. 
  
 2 oz. of wheatmeal, 1 oz. of rolled oatmeal, 1 egg, 1/4 oz. of oiled 
 butter, 1/2 gill milk, a teaspoonful of grated onion, a pinch of
herbs, pepper and salt to taste. Beat up the egg, mix it with the 
 milk, and add the other ingredients. Turn the mixture into a small 
 greased basin, and steam the haggis 1-1/2 hours. Serve with 
 vegetables. 
  
  
 GROUND RICE PUDDING. 
  
 1 oz. of ground rice, a scanty 1/2 pint of milk, sugar and flavouring 
 to taste, 1/2 egg. Boil the milk, stir the ground rice into it; let it 
 simmer for 10 minutes, then add sugar and flavouring and the 1/2 egg 
 well beaten; turn the mixture into a small pie-dish, and bake in the 
 oven until a golden colour. 
  
  
  
 No. 5. 
  
  
 CLEAR TOMATO SOUP.
 
 2 tablespoonfuls of tinned tomatoes, or 1 fair-sized fresh one, 1 
 small finely chopped and fried onion, a teaspoonful of vermicelli, 
 pepper and salt to taste, 1/2 pint of water. Boil the tomatoes with 
 the onion and water for 5 to 10 minutes, then drain all the liquid; 
 return to the saucepan, season and sprinkle in the vermicelli, let the 
 soup cook until the vermicelli is soft, and serve. 
  
  
 MACARONI WITH CHEESE. 
  
 2 oz. of macaroni or Spaghetti, a little grated cheese, pepper and 
 salt to taste. Boil the macaroni in as much water as it will absorb 
 (about 1/2 pint). Season to taste. When tender serve with grated 
 cheese and vegetables. 
  
  
 WHEATMEAL BATTER. 
  
 2 oz. of meal, 1 oz. of desiccated cocoanut, 1 gill of milk, 1 egg,
sugar to taste, 1/4 oz. of oiled butter. Make a batter of the egg, 
 milk, and meal, add the other ingredients, and bake the batter in a 
 small buttered pie-dish. 
  
  
  
 No. 6. 
  
  
 LENTIL SOUP. 
  
 2 oz. of Egyptian lentils, 2 oz. each of carrots and turnips cut up 
 small, 1/2 oz. of onion chopped fine, 1/2 oz. of butter, seasoning to 
 taste, 1 pint of water. Cook the vegetables and lentils in the water 
 until quite tender, then rub them through a sieve. Return to the 
 saucepan, add butter and seasoning, boil up, and serve with sippets of 
 toast. 
  
  
 RICE AND TOMATOES.
 
 1/4 lb. rice, 1/2 pint water, 1/4 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to 
 taste, 1 large tomato or two small ones. Set the rice over the fire 
 with the water (cold) and the butter and seasoning; let it simmer 
 until the water is absorbed and the rice fairly tender. It will take 
 20 minutes. Meanwhile place the tomatoes in a small dish, sprinkle 
 with pepper and salt, place a little bit of butter on each, a few 
 spoonfuls of water in the dish, and bake them from 15 to 25 minutes. 
 Spread the rice on a flat dish, place the tomatoes in the middle, pour 
 the juice over, and serve. 
  
  
 WHEATMEAL AND SAGO PUDDING. 
  
 1 dessertspoonful of sago, 1 ditto of wheatmeal, 1/2 pint milk, sugar 
 and flavouring to taste. Boil the sago and wheatmeal in the milk until 
 the sago is well swelled out. Flavour to taste, pour the mixture into 
 a little pie-dish, and bake the pudding until a golden colour. 
  
 
 
 No. 7. 
  
  
 POTATO SOUP. 
  
 1/2 lb. of potatoes, 1 pint of water, 1 small onion, a piece of 
 celery, a little piece of butter, a teaspoonful of chopped parsley, 
 pepper and salt to taste. Peel, wash, and cut up small the vegetables, 
 and cook them in the water till quite tender. Rub the mixture through 
 a sieve, add the butter and seasoning, boil up, mix in the parsley, 
 and serve. 
  
  
 CAULIFLOWER AU GRATIN. 
  
 1 small cauliflower, 1 oz. of grated cheese, 1 tablespoonful of 
 breadcrumbs, 1/2 oz. of butter, pepper and salt. Boil the cauliflower 
 until tender, cut it up and arrange it in a small pie-dish; sprinkle 
 over the cheese and breadcrumbs, dust with pepper and salt, place the
butter in little bits over the top, and bake the cauliflower until 
 golden brown. Serve with white sauce. (See "Sauces.") 
  
  
 APPLE PIE. 
  
 2 medium-sized cooking apples, sugar and cinnamon or lemon peel to 
 taste. Some paste for short crust. Pare, core, and cut up the apples, 
 and fill a small pie-dish with them; add sugar and cinnamon to taste, 
 and a little water. Cover with paste, and bake in a fairly quick oven 
 until brown, then let cook gently for another 1/4 hour in a cooler 
 part of the oven. 
  
  
  
 No. 8. 
  
  
 POTATO SOUP (2). 
 
2 medium-sized potatoes, 1 small onion chopped fine, and fried a nice 
 brown in butter or vege-butter, 1/4 pint milk, 3/4 pint water, 1 piece 
 of celery, pepper and salt to taste. Peel, wash, and cut up the 
 potatoes, and cut up the celery. Boil with the water until tender. Rub 
 the vegetables through a sieve, return the soup to the saucepan, add 
 seasoning, milk, and onion; boil up and serve. 
  
  
 SWEET CORN TART. 
  
 2 tablespoonfuls of tinned sweet corn, 1/4 oz. of butter, pepper and 
 salt to taste, 1 egg, some paste for crust. Beat up the egg and mix 
 with the sweet corn, season to taste. Roll out the paste and line a 
 plate with it, turn the sweet corn mixture on to the paste, and bake 
 the tart until a light brown. Serve with brown sauce or tomato sauce. 
  
  
 RICE PUDDING. 
  
 1 oz. of rice, 1/2 pint of milk, sugar and flavouring to taste. Wash
the rice and put it into a pie-dish. Bring the milk to the boil, pour 
 it over the rice, add the sugar and any kind of flavouring, and bake 
 the pudding till the rice is tender. 
  
  
  
 No. 9. 
  
  
 RICE CHEESE SOUP. 
  
 1 dessertspoonful of rice, 3/4 pint water, 1/4 pint milk, 1 oz. grated 
 cheese, 1/4 oz. butter, seasoning to taste. Cook the rice in the milk 
 and water until tender, then add the cheese, butter, and seasoning, 
 and let the soup boil up until the cheese is dissolved. 
  
  
 VEGETABLE PIE. 
  
 2 oz. each of potato, carrot, turnip, celery, tomato (or any other
vegetable in season), a small onion, 1/2 oz. of butter, pepper and 
 salt to taste, 1 teaspoonful of sago. Chop fine the onion and fry it. 
 Boil all the vegetables, previously washed and cut up, in 1/2 pint of 
 water. When they are quite tender, put all in a pie-dish, adding 
 seasoning to taste. Add enough water for gravy, and sprinkle in the 
 sago. Cover with short crust, and bake in a moderately hot oven. 
  
  
 STEWED PRUNES AND GRATED COCOANUT. 
  
 Stew some Californian plums in enough water to cover them well. If 
 possible, they should be soaked over night. Grate some fresh cocoanut, 
 after removing the brown outer skin, and serve separately. 
  
  
  
 No. 10. 
  
  
 ASPARAGUS SOUP.
 
 1/2 dozen sticks of asparagus, 1/2 pint water, 1/4 pint milk, 1 level 
 dessertspoonful of cornflour, 1/4 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to 
 taste. Boil the asparagus in the water till tender, add the seasoning, 
 and the cornflour smoothed in the milk, boil up and serve. 
  
  
 MACARONI WITH CAPER SAUCE. 
  
 2 oz. macaroni, 1/4 pint white sauce (see "Sauces"); 1 teaspoonful 
 capers chopped small, enough of the caper vinegar to taste. Boil the 
 macaroni in 1/2 pint of water until tender. Make the white sauce, then 
 add the capers and vinegar. Serve with vegetables. 
  
  
 PRUNE BATTER. 
  
 8 or 10 well-cooked Californian plums, with a little of the juice, 2 
 oz. of fine wheatmeal, 1/2 oz. of butter, 1 gill of milk, and 1 egg. 
 Make a batter of the milk, meal, and egg, oil the butter, and stir it
 
 One slice of Wholemeal bread, a small finely chopped onion, a little 
 milk, half an egg beaten up, pepper and salt, a little piece of 
 butter. Dip the bread in milk, then in egg; melt the butter in a 
 frying pan, fry the bread and onion a nice brown, sprinkle with 
 seasoning and serve with potato and greens. 
  
  
 SEMOLINA PUDDING. 
  
 1 oz. of semolina, 1/2 pint of milk, sugar and vanilla to taste. Boil 
 the semolina in the milk until well thickened, add sugar and 
 flavouring, pour the mixture into a little pie-dish, and bake until a 
 golden colour. 
  
  
  
 No. 12. 
  
 
BREAD SOUP. 
  
 1 slice of Allinson bread, 1 small finely chopped onion fried brown, a 
 pinch of nutmeg, pepper and salt to taste. Boil the bread in 3/4 pint 
 of water and milk in equal parts, adding the onion and seasoning. When 
 the bread is quite tender, rub all through a sieve, return soup to the 
 saucepan, boil up, and serve. 
  
  
 RICE AND MUSHROOMS. 
  
 1/4 lb. of rice, 1/4 lb. of mushrooms, a little butter and seasoning. 
 Cook the rice in 1/2 pint of water, as directed in recipe for "Rice." 
 Peel and wash the mushrooms, place them in a flat tin with a few 
 spoonfuls of water, a dusting of pepper and salt and a bit of butter 
 on each. Bake them from 15 to 20 minutes, spread the rice on a flat 
 dish, place the mushrooms in the middle, pour over the gravy, and 
 serve. 
  
 
BREAD PUDDING. 
  
 3 oz. of bread, 1 oz. sultanas, 1/2 doz. sweet almonds chopped fine, 1 
 well-beaten egg, cinnamon and sugar to taste, 1/2 oz. of butter, a 
 little milk. Soak the bread in milk, and squeeze the surplus out with 
 a spoon. Mix all the ingredients together, add the butter oiled, pour 
 the mixture into a buttered pie-dish, and bake the pudding from 30 to 
 45 minutes. 
  
  
  
 No. 13. 
  
  
 ONION SOUP. 
  
 1 small Spanish onion, 1 medium-sized potato, 1/4 oz. of butter, 
 pepper and salt and a pinch of mixed herbs, a little milk. Cut up the 
 vegetables and cook them in 1/2 pint of water, adding a little herbs. 
 When tender, rub the vegetables through a sieve, return the soup to
the saucepan, add the butter and seasoning, and serve. 
  
  
 MACARONI AND TOMATOES. 
  
 2 oz, of macaroni, 1/2 teacupful tinned tomatoes, 1-1/2 gills of 
 water, a little grated cheese. Cook the rice in the water and tomatoes 
 until tender, add seasoning, and serve with grated cheese and 
 vegetables. 
  
  
 STEAMED PUDDING. 
  
 2 oz. wheatmeal, 1 oz. of sago, 1 egg, 1/2 oz. of oiled butter, 1 oz. 
 sultanas, 1/2 saltspoonful of cinnamon, sugar to taste. Soak the sago 
 over the fire in a little water; when almost tender drain off any 
 water that is not absorbed, mix it with the other ingredients, pour 
 the mixture into a soup-or small basin, tie with a cloth, and steam 
 the pudding for an hour. Serve with white sauce. 
 
 
  
 No. 14. 
  
  
 GREEN PEA SOUP. 
  
 1/2 teacupful green peas, 1/4 oz. of butter, 1 spray of mint, a 
 teaspoonful of fine meal, a little milk, pepper and salt to taste. 
 Boil the green peas in 1/2 pint of water, adding seasoning and the 
 mint. When the peas are tender, take out the mint, add the butter, 
 smooth the meal with a little milk, and thicken the soup. Let it cook 
 for 2 to 3 minutes, and serve. 
  
  
 VERMICELLI RISSOLES. 
  
 2 ozs. of vermicelli, 1 oz. of grated cheese, 1 egg well beaten, a few 
 breadcrumbs, seasoning to taste, 1 gill of water, a little butter, or 
 vege-butter. Boil the vermicelli in the water until tender and all the
 
 2 oz. of split peas cooked overnight, 3 oz. of potatoes cut into 
 pieces, a piece of celery, a slice of Spanish onion chopped up, 
 seasoning to taste. Soak the peas in water overnight, after picking 
 them over and washing them. Set them over the fire in the morning, and 
 cook them with the vegetables till quite tender. Then rub all through 
 a sieve. Return to the saucepan, add pepper and salt, and a little 
 water if necessary; boil up, and serve with sippets of toast. 
  
  
 HOT-POT. 
  
 1/2 lb. potatoes, 3 oz. Spanish onion peeled and sliced, 1/2 teacupful 
 tomatoes, 1/2 oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste. Arrange the 
 potatoes, onions, and tomatoes in layers in a small pie-dish, and 
 sprinkle pepper and salt between the vegetables. Cut the butter in 
 little bits, and scatter them over the top. Fill the dish with boiling 
 water, and boil the hot-pot for 1 to 1-1/2 hours, adding a little hot 
 water if needed. 
 
 
 BAKED APPLES AND WHITE SAUCE. ƒ  
 Wash and core a good-sized apple, fill the core with 1 or 2 stoned 
 dates, and bake it in the oven in a dish or tin with a few spoonfuls 
 of water until well done. Serve with sauce. 
  
  
  
 No. 16. 
  
  
 LEEK SOUP. 
  
 1 leek, 1/4 lb. potatoes, 1/2 pint water, 1 gill of milk, 1/4 oz. of 
 butter, pepper and salt to taste. Peel, wash, and cut up the leek and 
 potatoes, and cook them till tender in the water. Then rub the 
 vegetables through a sieve. Return to the saucepan, add the milk, 
 butter, and seasoning, boil up, and serve. 
 
 
 SAVOURY CUSTARD. 
  
 1-1/2 gills of milk, 1 egg, 1 oz. of grated cheese, a pinch of nutmeg, 
 pepper and salt to taste. Proceed as in savoury custard, and serve 
 with potatoes and greens. 
  
  
 CHOCOLATE BLANCMANGE. 
  
 1/2 pint of milk, 1 teaspoonful N.F. cocoa, 1 oz. of half cornflour 
 and fine wheatmeal, sugar and vanilla essence to taste. Bring the 
 milk to the boil, mix cocoa, flour, and wheatmeal, and smooth them 
 with a little water. Stir the mixture into the boiling milk, sweeten 
 and flavour, keep stirring, and allow to cook 5 minutes. Pour into a 
 wetted mould, and allow to get cold. Turn out, and serve. 
  
  
  
 No. 17.
 
  
 TURNIP SOUP. 
  
 1/4 lb. turnip, a small onion, and 2 oz. of potato, a little butter 
 and seasoning, 1/2 pint water. Wash, peel, and cut up the vegetables, 
 and cook them in the water until tender. Rub them through a sieve, 
 return the mixture to the saucepan, add butter and seasoning, boil up, 
 and serve. 
  
  
 POTATO BATTER. 
  
 1 gill of milk, 1 egg, 2 oz. wheatmeal, 1 oz. of vege-butter, 6 oz. 
 cold boiled potatoes. Fry the potatoes in the butter, make a batter of 
 the milk, meal, and egg, mix it with the potatoes, add seasoning, pour 
 the mixture in a little pie-dish, and bake the savoury for half an 
 hour. 
  
 
LEMON MOULD. 
  
 1 oz. of tapioca, 1/2 pint of water, juice and rind of 1/4 lemon, 1 
 large tablespoonful of golden syrup. Boil the tapioca until quite 
 tender, with the Lemon rind, in the water. Take out the rind, add the 
 syrup and lemon juice, mix well, pour the mixture into a wetted mould, 
 turn out when cold, and serve. 
  
  
  
 No. 18. 
  
  
 APPLE SOUP. 
  
 1 large cooking apple, 1 small finely chopped onion, seasoning and 
 sugar to taste, a little butter, 1 teaspoonful of cornflour, 1/2 pint 
 of water. Peel and cut up the apple, and cook with the onion in the 
 water till quite tender. Rub the mixture through a sieve, return to 
 the saucepan, add the butter, seasoning and sugar, thicken the soup
with the cornflour, and serve. 
  
  
 RICE CHEESECAKES. 
  
 2 oz. rice, 1 gill water, 1 oz. of grated cheese, seasoning, a pinch 
 of nutmeg, 1 egg, a little wheatmeal, and some vege-butter, or butter. 
 Cook the rice in the water until quite dry and soft, mix the egg--well 
 beaten--seasoning, and cheese with the rice, and form the mixture into 
 small cakes. Roll in wheatmeal, and fry them a golden brown. Serve 
 with vegetables and brown sauce. 
  
  
 PLUM PIE. 
  
 1/2 lb. ripe plums, sugar to taste, some paste. Wash the plums and put 
 them in a small pie-dish, pour 1/2 teacupful of water over them, add 
 sugar, cover the plums with a short crust, and bake the pie a golden 
 brown. 
 
onion cut up small, 2 oz. carrot, 2 oz. celery, 1/2 oz. butter. Cook 
 all the vegetables until tender, adding water as it boils away. When 
 all is tender, rub the vegetables through a sieve, return to the 
 saucepan, season with pepper and salt, add the butter, boil up the 
 soup, and serve. 
  
  
 SAUSAGES. 
  
 1 teacupful of breadcrumbs, 1 egg well beaten, 1/2 small onion chopped 
 fine, 1/2 saltspoonful of herbs, 1/2 oz. butter, seasoning to taste. 
 Oil the butter and mix it with the breadcrumbs, egg, onion, herbs, and 
 seasoning. Make the mixture into sausages, roll them into a little 
 breadcrumb, and fry them brown in a little vege-butter. 
  
  
 ROLLED WHEAT PUDDING. 
  
 1 oz. rolled wheat, 1/2 pint milk, 1 tablespoonful of currants and 
 sultanas mixed, sugar to taste. Cook the rolled wheat in the milk for
sugar to taste, and a few finely chopped almonds. Mix all the 
 ingredients, pour the mixture into a small buttered basin, cover and 
 steam for 1 hour. Serve with sweet sauce. 
  
  
  
 No. 24. 
  
  
 MUSHROOM SOUP. 
  
 2 oz. mushrooms cut up small, 1/2 small onion chopped fine, 1 
 dessertspoonful of fine wheatmeal, pepper and salt, 1/2 oz. of butter, 
 a little milk. Stew the mushrooms and onions together in the butter 
 until well cooked, add 1/2 pint of water, and cook the vegetables for 
 10 minutes. Add seasoning, and the meal smoothed in a little milk. Let 
 the soup thicken and boil up, and serve with sippets of toast. 
  
  
 BUTTER BEANS RISSOLES.
 
 2 oz. butter beans, 1 tablespoonful of cold mashed potatoes, 1/2 small 
 onion chopped fine, a pinch of herbs, 1/2 oz. of butter, seasoning to 
 taste. Soak the beans in butter over night, fry the onion in the 
 butter. Boil the beans in as much water as they absorb until quite 
 tender. Then pass them through a nut-mill or mash them up, and mix 
 with the fried onion, mashed potatoes, herbs, and seasoning; form into 
 little rissoles, roll in breadcrumbs, place them on a buttered tin, 
 place a few bits of butter on the top, and bake in the oven until a 
 nice brown. Serve with vegetables. 
  
  
 RATAFIA CUSTARD. 
  
 1/2 pint hot milk, 1 egg well beaten, 1 oz. ratafia broken up, sugar 
 and flavouring to taste. Mix the ingredients, pour the mixture into a 
 small buttered pie-dish, and bake the custard in a moderate oven until 
 set. 
  
 
 
 No. 25. 
  
  
 CLEAR SOUP WITH DROPPED DUMPLINGS. 
  
 Make 3/4 pint of clear soup, and proceed for dumplings as follows: 1 
 egg, 1 tablespoonful of milk, 1 teaspoonful of fine wheatmeal. Beat up 
 the egg, add the milk and smooth the meal with it, flavour with 
 nutmeg. Gradually drop the mixture into the boiling soup, let cook for 
 a minute, and serve. 
  
  
 SAVOURY SAUSAGES. 
  
 1/2 teacupful of breadcrumbs, 1 well-beaten egg, 1/2 teacupful cold 
 lentil purée 1 small finely chopped onion tried brown. Mix the 
 ingredients, adding seasoning. Form into sausages, roll them in a 
 little wheatmeal, and bake them a nice brown in the oven. Serve with 
 vegetables and sauce.
 
  
 BAKED CUSTARD. 
  
 1/2 pint hot milk, 1 egg, a little sugar and flavouring. Beat the egg, 
 mix it with the milk, sweeten and flavour to taste; pour the custard 
 into a small pie-dish, and bake until set. 
  
  
  
 No. 26. 
  
  
 PARSNIP SOUP. 
  
 1/2 lb. parsnip, 1/4 lb. potato, 1/2 small onion, 1/4 oz. butter, 
 pepper and salt, a little milk. Cut up the vegetables, cook them until 
 tender, then rub through a sieve, return the mixture into a saucepan, 
 add butter and seasoning, and as much milk as needed to make up the 
 quantity of soup. Boil up and serve.
 
 No. 27. 
  
  
 CHESTNUT SOUP. 
  
 1/2 lb. chestnuts, 1/2 small grated onion, pepper and salt to taste, 
 1/4 oz. butter, 1/4 pint milk, 1 teaspoonful of cornflour. Boil, peel, 
 and mash the chestnuts, and set them over the fire with the onion, 
 milk, 1/2 pint of water, and the butter. When it has boiled up, bind 
 the soup with the cornflour, boil up, and serve. 
  
  
 MACARONI SAVOURY. 
  
 2 oz. of cold boiled macaroni cut small, 1/2 oz. grated cheese, 1 gill 
 milk, 1 egg, 1 oz. fine wheatmeal, 1/2 oz. butter, seasoning to taste. 
 Make a batter with the milk, egg, and meal, mix together with the 
 macaroni, cheese, and the butter, previously oiled, season to taste; 
 turn the mixture into a small pie-dish, and bake until a golden brown.
 
  
 APPLE PUDDING. 
  
 1/2 lb. apples, 1 saltspoonful of cinnamon, sugar to taste, and some 
 paste as for a short crust. Peel, core, and out up the apples. Line a 
 pudding basin with paste, fill the basin with the apples, add sugar 
 and cinnamon, cover with paste, and steam the pudding for 1 to 11/2 
 hours. 
  
  
  
 No. 28. 
  
  
 SEMOLINA SOUP. 
  
 1/2 gill of milk, 1 gill water, 1/2 oz. semolina, a very small piece 
 of mace, 1/4 oz. butter, 1/2 oz. grated cheese, pepper and salt to 
 taste. Bring the milk and water to the boil with the mace, thicken
with the semolina; cook gently for 10 minutes, remove the mace, add 
 cheese, butter, and seasoning, and serve. 
  
  
 MACARONI CUTLETS. 
  
 2 oz. cold boiled macaroni, 1 egg, a pinch of herbs, halt a small 
 grated onion, pepper and salt, breadcrumbs, and butter, or 
 vege-butter. Beat the egg well, and mix it with the macaroni cut in 
 small pieces. Add the herbs, onion, seasoning, and as much breadcrumb 
 as needed to keep the mixture together. Shape into cutlets, dip in egg 
 and breadcrumb, and fry a nice brown. Serve with vegetables. 
  
  
 GOOSEBERRY POOL. 
  
 6 oz. gooseberries, 1 tablespoonful of cream, sugar to taste. Cook the 
 goose-berries in 1/2 gill of water; when soft enough to pulp, add 
 sugar to taste; rub the fruit through a sieve, let get cold, and mix 
 the gooseberries with the cream. Serve with rusks.
 
  
  
 No. 29. 
  
  
 CURRY RICE SOUP. 
  
 1 oz. rice, 1 pint milk and water (equal parts), 1 saltspoonful of 
 curry, 1/4 oz. butter, 1 oz. finely chopped onion, salt to taste. Cook 
 the rice with the onion, curry, and seasoning in the milk and water, 
 until the rice is quite tender; add the butter, and serve. 
  
  
 SWEET CORN AND TOMATOES. 
  
 1 teacupful of sweet corn, 1/2 teacupful tinned tomatoes, 1/2 oz. 
 butter, seasoning to taste. Stew together, and serve with baked 
 potatoes. 
 
to taste; smooth the meal with part of the milk, add the rest and 
 thicken the soup; boil it up for a few minutes before serving. 
  
  
 BEETROOT FRITTERS. 
  
 1 small beet, 1 egg, 2 tablespoonfuls of meal, 1 gill of milk, pepper 
 and salt, a little Lemon juice. Cut the beetroot into small dice, make 
 a batter with the milk, meal, and egg, mix the beet with it, adding 
 seasoning to taste. Let some butter or oil boil in the frying-pan, 
 drop the batter by spoonfuls into the boiling fat; fry a golden brown, 
 and serve the fritters with vegetables and brown sauce. 
  
  
 BANANA PUDDING. 
  
 3 bananas, 1 gill of milk, 1 egg, a teaspoonful of lemon juice. Peel 
 and slice the bananas, and cook in the milk until they will mash up 
 well. Rub them through a sieve, add the egg, well beaten, and the 
 lemon juice; pour the mixture into a small pie-dish, and bake in a
