 CHAP. XIV. Of the several Tasts of Plants. I. What Tast or Savor is, and wherein consists. BY the word Tast or Savor, we understand that virtue in Bodies, whereby they are able to produce in us the sense of Tast. Which vir∣tue consists in the Particles of Bodies, inasmuch as they are sufficiently diluted, subtil and agitated to enter the pores of our Tongue, and to move those Nerves, wherewith the Instrument of Tasting is is furnish ' d. For tho '  Taste be properly in the Mouth, and that the Tongue or Palat is formally that which tastes; yet it may be said, that the things themselves, which are taken into our Mouths, are the Causes of the said Taste, and according to their several magnitude, figure and motion, do produce different tastes or savours. So that things savoury, or endued with taste, are said to be such, only because they move the Filaments of the Nerves of our Tongue in such a manner, as is necessary to produce in them the sense of Tasting. And forasmuch as sensible Objects cannot affect those Nerves, except they be endued with a cer∣tain motion, figure, and magnitude; therefore to these three we must assign all the diversity of Tastes or Savours we meet with in any Ob∣jects. 
 II. Why some Fruits are insipid. This is evident from the Insipidness we some∣times find in Plants, and their several parts. For if we enquire into the Reason why some of them are Insipid, and do not affect the Tongue or Palat, we shall find the Reason to be, because they do not furnish such Particles, as by the assistance of Moisture can enter the Tongue, and strike its Nerves. Thus we find, that when Grapes are first knotted, they impress no affection upon the Tongue, and do only touch the outside of it, without entring its pores; because the particles of Juice, which come up from the Root to compose them, do stick close together, and are not easily separated. Daily Experience also teacheth us, that Water is in a manner wholly insipid, because its Particles are so thin and subtil, that they can affect the Organ of Taste very little or nothing. In like manner Air is void of all Taste, because it floats only upon the Spittle, and the Parts of it, by rea∣son of their extream lightness and subtilty, can make no impression upon the Tongue. 
 III. What is required to make a thing sapid or savoury. That a thing be savoury, it is necessary for its Parts to be separated from each other, that so joyning themselves to the Spittle in our Mouths, they may variously affect the Nerves of our Tongue. Now this is done by means of Heat, the Property whereof is, to resolve Bodies, open their pores, and to make a ready way for the Moisture to enter. Whence it is, that when Fruits tend to Maturity, by means of the heat of the Sun, recon∣ciling their driness and moisture together, various Tastes are imprest upon them, according to their different degrees of Maturity: First, an Astringent taste, then a Harsh taste, afterwards a Sowr, and last of all, a Sweet taste; and if the Heat be too great a smart or biting, and bitter Taste. 
 IV. Why Sloes have an Astringent taste. An Astringent taste we find in all unripe Fruit, and more especially in Sloes, which with great harshness and astringence affect the Tongue, as if they prick ' d it with Pins and Thorns; because they consist of keen and stiff Parts. For the Juice whereof they consist being not well strained, con∣tains many stiff and inflexible little Bodies, such as are the particles that compose Salt; so that it is no wonder that they exasperate the Tongue, and astringe or contract the same. 
 V. Onions and Pepper have a smart and biting Taste. In Onions, Ginger, Pepper, Mustard-seed, &amp;c. we perceive a smart and biting Taste; because the particles of these Objects do prick the Tongue, and cause the same Division in it, which Fire would, if applied to it. The Reason is, because they consist of long, thin, and stiff particles, which make the Bodies whereto they belong dry and stiff. But being boil ' d in Water, they lose their Acrimony; for that the Moisture penetrating them, dissolves their Salt and other smart little Bodies, and opening their pores, carries them away. Yea, some of these may be so macerated or soaked, as that by quitting all their Biting and Harsh par∣ticles, they may become sweet, and at last in∣sipid. 
 VI. How Sweet∣ness is pro∣duc ' d in Ripe fruits. We meet with a Sweet taste, almost in all Ripe Fruits, which with great smoothness and evenness affect the Tongue. For in Ripe Fruits, by the continual heat of the Sun, the Alimental Juice is very exactly and throughly strained, and the par∣ticles that before were entangled, are resolved, by which means they readily enter the pores of the Tongue, and affect it with a pleasing Titillation. This Taste is most pleasant and grateful to young Children, the small strings of whose Nerves are more fine, small and subtil; but is not so accepta∣ble to those who have a thicker Texture of Nerves, being affected by what is acrimonious, and there∣fore look upon a sweet Taste, to be unpleasant. 
 VII. A Sowr taste proper to Limons. A Sowr taste is found in Limons, Sorrel, and the like, which do prick and cut the Tongue. It is felt somewhat in the same manner, as a smart or biting Taste, saving only that Sowr things are accompanied with a sense of constringent Cold. The Reason is, because this Savour consists in subtil and sharp Particles, which do easily penetrate the Organ of Taste, and pierce it like so many Thorns. And therefore we must conclude, that these Bodies consist of longish and stiff particles, somewhat like Needles: Which we shall readily admit, if we consider that all Fruits, before that they come to their full Ripeness, are of a Sowr taste; which could not be, if that Taste did not include something that is common to them all. Now we can meet with nothing that is common to them all, except that Disposition of Parts, seeing they consist of an Earthy Juice, which did cleave to the long and thin pores of the small Twigs, whence these Fruits do grow. 
 VIII. Whence that Bit∣terness that is observed in Rotten Apples, doth pro∣ceed. A Bitter Taste is perceived in some rotten Pears and Apples, &amp;c. in the eating whereof the strings of the Nerves are unduly affected, and unplea∣santly vellicated. For Pears and Apples, when they begin to putrifie, get rough, uneven, and prickly particles; because then the more subtil and refined particles fly away, leaving none but the grosser and thicker behind them. For Putrefaction is such a Resolution of Parts, by which things be∣come worse than they were before. Hence it is that they who drink Wine, immediately after they have eaten a tainted Apple, and tending to putre∣faction, do perceive a Bitter taste; because the Wine mingling it self with those putrid particles, conveighs them to the inmost pores of the Tongue. This Bitterness is sometimes occasion ' d by too great Heat, when it is continual, and acts for a long time together upon Fruit. So that if Fruits, after their full Maturity, should continue long upon the Trees, it is not to be question ' d, but that by being too long expos ' d to the Heat of the Sun, their particles would become so rugged and twisted, that none would be left in them, to affect the Tongue with a Sweet taste, but would all ex∣asperate and bite it. A confirmation whereof we have in Flesh, which by too great heat of the Fire becomes scorched and burnt, and by this means acquires a Bitter taste, as doth also the Crust of Bread that is burnt, by being baked in an over∣heated Oven.
 CHAP. XIII. Of the Sense of Tasting. I. What the Tast is. THE Tast is an External Sense, whereby an Animal, with the help of his Tongue and Palat, which are furnisht with the Nerves sub∣servient to this Sense, perceives the several diffe∣rences of Tasts and Savours. Or according to others, the Tast is a sensation, by means whereof, after that the Savoury Object hath made a due im∣pression of it self upon the prominent and porous little Nipples of the Tongue, the Soul residing in the Brain, perceives and judges of the difference of the Savour or Rellish. For according to the sentiment of our Modern Anatomists the Organs of Tast are the foresaid prominent and porous Nipples of the Tongue, or small Strings which proceed from its inmost membran. 
 VII. Whence the Diversity of Savours and Re∣lishes doth arise. Which will easily be done, if we remember that the Faculty of perceiving Tastes in us, is not un∣like to that whereby we are sensible of Pain; that is, to the actuating of this Power nothing else is required, but that the savoury Bodies do move the slender filaments of the Nerves of the Tongue, or the prominent Nipples before mentioned, in such a manner, as Nature hath ordained for the effect∣ing of the sense of Tasting. In like manner as to the production of the sense of Pain it is suffi∣cient, that the Nerves subservient to the Touch be moved after such a particular manner: So that all the difference of savoury Bodies doth depend on the Thickness, Figure and Motion of their Parts. This may be evidenced by some instances; for let us suppose the foresaid Fibres of the Tongue to be agitated 4 several ways, viz. by Salt, Vinegar, or any other sour Liquor, Common Water and Brandy, so as that the Soul thence is stirred up to perceive 4 distinct Tastes. We shall easily conceive that Salt doth therefore prick, and as it were cut the Organ, because it consists of long, stiff and various corner ' d Particles, which with their points prick the small Fibres of the Tongue, and enter the same without the least bending or plying. Vinegar applied to the Organ, doth as it were slash and cut it, and by compression somewhat contract it, be∣cause the particles thereof by entring obliquely in∣to the Nerves, do slash the thin particles thereof, and dashing against the thicker parts they become bended, and so enter the pores slantingly. Com∣mon Water doth not enter the pores of the Tongue at all, and therefore doth neither prick nor pierce it, because its particles do only softly flow upon the Tongue, and lying sideways, because of their easie pliableness and bending, are scarcely percepti∣ble by the Taste, and therefore Water is lookt up∣on as insipid. Brandy doth bite and vellicate the Tongue, because the particles thereof penetrate most deeply, and are most swiftly moved. And the like account may be given of all other savoury Bodies, which according to the different disposition of their parts, can make different impressions upon the Organ of Tasting. 
 X. Deceptions of the Taste, and the Causes of them. Sometimes the Taste happens to be mistaken, not about the Affection imprest upon the Organ, but about the Cause from whence it proceeds. Thus they who are sick of the Jaundies, are not mistaken in that they suppose themselves to per∣ceive a bitter taste; for they do so, because the Gall is mingled with their Spittle; but they are deceived in attributing that bitter Taste to the Food they eat: In the same manner as they suppose the Objects they behold to be yellow, when indeed it is the Gall that depraves their Organ, and makes all the Objects they behold to appear of that Colour. And in like manner, sometimes our Meat seems to taste bitter to us, whereas indeed the said sense of Bitterness proceeds either from some Hu∣mour, wherewith the Tongue or Palat is tinged; or from the Vitiating of the Nerves, that are assistant to the Fibres of the Tongue. Yea, it happens sometimes, that we seem to perceive a Taste, without receiving any food, which cannot proceed from any other Cause, but from the de∣fluxion of some Humour that hath such a kind of taste, or from some fault in the Blood, that is conveyed to the Organ of Tasting; as may be demonstrated by many Examples. 
 Because the particles of Hard Bodies cannot be separated from each other, and consequently be mingled with the Spittle in our Mouths. For when Bodies are so compact that they cannot dis∣solve and furnish those particles, which by the Vehicle of Moisture, may be conveyed into the pores of our Tongue, no wonder if they be insipid. For tho '  Sugar, when melted, affords a sweet taste; yet when the same is brought into solid and compact pieces, it affords no taste at all, because its parts cannot readily be separated, to impress any taste upon the Organ. So for the same Reason Pills, when they are swallowed whole, are scarcely per∣ceived, because they do not stay long enough to have their outward parts dissolved, without which they cannot affect the Organ of Taste. 
 Thus Turpentine boiled, and made into Pow∣der, is lookt upon to be insipid; because the more subtil parts of it cannot be diffused or mingled with the Spittle: Whereas in its Liquid form, it exhibits a bitter taste. So that Experience teach∣eth us, that nothing else is wanting in these Bodies, to make them Savoury, but only the division of their parts; seeing that the Salts which enter the Composition of Glass, were savoury before they were compacted into that hard consistence, and that Metals reduc ' d into very small powder, tho '  before they were insipid, do now yield a most strong and intolerable taste. 
 II. VVhy Bo∣dies are distinguisht by Taste. Almost all Bodies are distinguishable by their tastes; as Honey is sweet, Wormwood bitter, &amp;c. 
 The general Cause of all Tastes and Savours depends on the greatness and figures of the parts of savoury Bodies, which are capable of being diversified after an infinite manner of ways: And forasmuch as Bodies are in a manner all of them composed of parts that are of a different bigness and figure, it must not seem strange to us, that we meet with so great a variety of Tastes. 
 III. Hot Meat is more savoury than cold Meat. This difference of Tastes, is sometimes caused by the various agitation of the parts of Bodies; for we experience that hot Meat is more savoury than cold, because heat increaseth the motion ofthe parts of the Body; and besides, it is certain, that the more any Body is moved, the more fit it is to move another Body that toucheth it: And there∣fore it connot seem strange, that Meats, when hot, are a great deal more savoury to us, than when they are cold. This is the Reason also why dressed Meats are far more savoury than raw, because the heat of the fire that dresseth them, divides them into lesser parts, whereby their figures are changed, and so make them to be of a very different Taste from what they were, when Raw. 
 IV. Sweet things do sooner cloy the Sto∣mach, than Meat of a sharp taste. Sweet things do sooner fill than sharp. Thus we find that Milk-meats, Sweet-meats, Butter, Honey, &amp;c. do sooner satisfie our Appetite, than sowre and sharp things. 
 Some suppose the Cause hereof to be, because Sharp things do afford little Nourishment, and much Excrement; but this Reason seems of no force, because Digestion does not immediately follow upon the taking down of our food: But the Cause why Sweet things do sooner glut the Appetite, than sharp and sowre things is, because these latter are made up of parts whose surface is very rough and rugged, that is, which have many Angles or Inequalities, which make them fit to twitch and vellicate the Bodies they touch or apply to; and by this their vellicating of the Stomach, do stir up the Appetite: Whereas Sweet things consisting of smooth Bodies, and such as gently affect the Stomach, without exciting of the Appetite, do presently fill and satiate. 
 V. The Fire excites a sharp taste in Meat drest by it. Fire procures a sharp Taste to Meat; for we find that Rost-meat doth with more sharpness strike the Tongue, and affords a more grateful taste. 
 For it is evident that there is no food, but con∣tains some Salt, which is in a manner equally diffused throughout the whole Mass of it. Whence it is, that when Meat is agitated by the heat of fire, some part of this Salt is carried to the outside, and exhales with the other Liquid parts, and constitutes that Smoak which we see proceeds from Meat that is a Roasting. But whereas they are only the insipid particles that fly into the Air, those of the Salts can scarcely rise 2 or 3 fingers high; but that by their weight they are forced down again to the surface of the Meat, and there produce that sharp taste which we experience in Roast-meat. 
 VI. Sowre and Harsh things set the Teeth on edge. Things harsh and sowre, set the Teeth on edge; as unripe Fruits, harsh Wines, Verjuice, and the like. 
 The Reason is, because the fixt Salts that are in these Bodies, being entangled in a gross Sul∣phur, compose together with it parts, whose Surface is bristled with many Hairs variously bent, which entring into the pores of the Tongue, shut up the parts thereof.
VII. VVhy Bit∣ter things do heat, and Sowre, cool. Bitter things, as Orange-Peel, Venice-Treacle, and many purging Medicins do heat; but Sowre things, such as Juice of Orange, Sowre Grapes, &amp;c. do cool. 
 Because Bitter things consist of sharp Salts, and gross Oils, which being agitated together, do excite and preserve heat; whereas the parts of Sowre things are long, stiff and pointed, and rather stop the motion of the fiery particles, than promote it, and for that Reason are esteemed of a Cooling Nature. 
 VIII. Why un∣ripe Grapes and Fruits are harsh. Unripe Fruits seem very harsh at the first taste, and cause a Roughness on the Tongue; but after∣wards they turn sweet, and acquire a pleasant relish. 
 The Reason is, for that Fruits, before that they are ripe, do consist of longish parts, which by their motion do, as it were, cut the fibres of the Tongue, and contract them; and afterwards they grow ripe by means of the fire or the heat of the Sun, which digests their raw Juice, and by ex∣haling the Heterogeneous parts, reduceth it to sweetness. For it is evident, that there is a con∣tinual resolution and division of parts in Fruits that tend to maturity, by means whereof they lay aside their hardness and harshness, and after perfect Concoction become soft and pleasant. 
 IX. A Tongue that is either too dry, or too moist, can taste nothing. A Tongue that is parch ' d and over-dry, hath little or no taste; and so likewise when it abounds with over-much moisture. 
 The Reason is, because Taste doth not only consist in moisture or driness apart, but in a mixture of them both. And therefore it is no wonder, if a too dry and parched Tongue, cannot perceive the taste of solid food, seeing that the same cannot be macerated or dissolved without moisture, which is necessary in order to the Sense of Tasting. For the Tongue being a spongy and porous part, stands in need of moisture, which is the vehicle of Savours. Moreover, in a dry Tongue the fibres are too much contracted, an thereby are made unfit to receive that affection, which the savour of things doth impress on it. And on the other hand, a Tongue too moist, i not fit for the reception of Tastes, forasmuch as the Tongue, which is loose and spongy, having its pores already filled with Humour, cannot well admit that which conveys the Savoury particles of the food, and by this means cannot perceive the taste of it. And it is for this very Reason, that we cannot relish Wine after having eaten some sweet thing, and that in order to recove our taste we eat salt meat, that may open the pores of our Tongue. 
 X. Why we find no relish in those things which we eat often. Some find that they lose the relish of those things, which they feed too frequently upon, and that either because these common Aliments do leave some of their particles in the Tongue, which render the little Nipples of it immoveable; or, because the Soul gives less heed to those motions that are ordinary and common, than to those which are new and unfiequent. 
 XI. Why we can better discern Tastes in the Morn∣ing. Tastes are better discerned in the Morning, especially before we have eaten or drank any thing, that can byass the Tongue to a mistaken Verdict. 
 Because at that time the Tongue is like fair Paper, and as yet unting ' d by any Savours. For that which receives, must be free from a Taint of the thing received. Which is true not only in the Taste, but also in Hearing, Smelling, and all the other Senses: For by right, the Sense of Hearing is sharpest, and Blind men do better retain things than others. 
 XII. Persons sick of the Jaundise, cannot rightly discern the taste of things. Men sick of the Jaundise, suppose all things to taste bitter. 
 The Reason is, because the Gall is diffused through their Tongues, which infects their Spittle; for the Gall consisting of sharp particles, doth so corrupt the Spittle, that it communicates a bit∣ternessand an ungrateful taste to all the Food that is eaten, as if something of Soot were mixt with it. The Cause of which Depravation is, because the Raw humour, which runs through the Veins and Arteries, betakes it self to the Tongue, because of its loose and spongy Flesh, and filling the pores of it, vitiate the taste of all received Aliments. Which is the Reason why Physicians commonly order their Patients to put out their Tongues, that they may view the colour and disposition of it; for seeing that that Member, proportionable to its bulk, contains abundance of Blood, it accordingly also admits a considerable deal of the morbifick Matter, which there discovers it self by its Colour, and consequently also the Sickness which disturbs the Body. 
 XIII. Whence the Harsh taste of Verjuice doth pro∣ceed. The Juice of unripe Grapes constitutes that which is called Verjuice, which is of a sowre and somewhat harsh taste; whereas the Juice of ripe Grapes is sweet, and with a pleasant briskness accosts the Palat. 
 The harshness of Verjuyce proceeds from the Roughness and Inequality of its parts; for be∣cause the Juice of unripe Grapes is not sufficiently concocted, they retain a great deal of Crudity, which is owing to their long and inflexible par∣ticles. 
 Hence it is that the Verjuice which is made of Crabs, is a good Medicine to help the weakness of the Eyes; because its particles being like so many little grains of Sand, do wipe off the filth of the Eyes, and by this means restore the Visive faculty to its former clearness. And the same Reason may be given of the Water of some particular Fountains, which by reason of their Acrimony do not only purge the Eyes, but also the Optick Nerves, that so the Rays of Light may be the more freely transmitted. 
 XIV. Why New Wine is sweet. But New Wine is sweet, because it hath been sufficiently decocted by Heat, and all its parts are smooth and even. And as to its muddiness, that is only caused by those Heterogeneous parts, which are not yet separated from it; which as soon as they are either precipitated to the bottom, or raised up to the top, by fermentation, the Wine becomes elear, by admitting the Heavenly Glo∣buli. 
 XV. What is the Cause of that variety of Tastes which is in Fruits. All Fruits are distinguishable by their taste, some of them having a harsh bitter taste, others a harsh sowre, other a sowre, and all of them a sweet taste after they attain to their full ma∣turity. 
 This difference of Tastes in Fruits, proceeds from the various Texture of the particles, and the different structure of the Plants that bear them. For grafted Trees bear more delicate Fruits than others, because the Alimentary Juice is more ex∣actly strained through the double twisting and weaving of their fibres. The Harsh-sowre taste therefore of Fruits proceeds from this, that their Parts are not yet sufficiently straitned and digested; and because the surface of them, as was said, is bristled with many little Hairs, diversly bending this way and that way, which entring into the pores of the Tongue, do shut them up. As we find in the taste of Quinces, Medlars, and generally of all unripe Fruits. Other Fruits afford a smart or sharp taste to the Palat, because their particles are long, stiff, and very subtil; by which means they Book. 2. Part. 2. Chap. 6▪ 
