"Well, let them operate," returned Fred; "we will not enter into
competition with them at present. But come in and eat supper with us,
for we have many things to talk about."

"I accept the invitation with more pleasure than you are aware of,
because the exquisite flavor of the pickled salmon that I ate for
breakfast is still lingering in my mouth, and I long for another taste."

We humored our friend by complying with his hint, and after we had
finished our tea, we lighted our pipes, talked business, and broached a
subject to Smith, which we had entertained ever since we had decided to
go into business.


There was no response for a moment, and then the slow, cautious movement
began again.

"Strike a light," whispered Fred, "and let us see what this means."

Among the effects which we had found in the store was a large lamp for
burning alcohol; this Fred had cleansed and trimmed the day before, and
filled with spirits of turpentine, for the purpose of using it in
cooking. I knew where it was placed; so I crept carefully along on my
hands and knees, and suddenly lighted it with a lucifer. As the huge
wick took fire, I hastily glanced over my shoulder, for fear that an
assassin should strike a blow before I could be on my guard.

A startling yell from Fred caused me to spring to my feet, and as I did
so, a long, dark object flashed before my eyes, and narrowly missed my
head. The next instant my yell of terror was added to Fred  '  s, for in the
middle of the floor, with waving tail, and eyes that blazed like coals
of fire, was a monstrous snake of a jet black hue; the huge mouth of the
reptile was thrown open to its widest extent, and was armed with fangs
This circumstance required our movements to be prompt if we wished to
surprise the ruffians, but Mr. Wright was not a man to be hurried by
such trifles. He had a peculiar idea of how such matters should be
conducted, and neither Mr. Brown nor myself were disposed to interfere
with his plans.

Suddenly, when within twenty rods of the place where the bushrangers
were camped we saw a light, and for a few minutes Mr. Wright was
uncertain whether to advance or retreat, thinking that the light was
intended as an ambush to draw us under fire.

In vain I explained that the bushrangers had kindled a fire for the
purpose of cooking a sheep, or a portion of one, and Mr. Brown
entertained the same idea, but Mr. Wright said we were young men, and
rash at that, and that we were not to be trusted.

We were more amazed than indignant, knowing that our host regarded our
safety more than his own, for he was as brave as a lion, and would have
willingly fought the whole gang had it been necessary to prove his
courage.

At length I volunteered to act the part of a scout, and investigate
matters, but for a long time Mr. Wright would not listen to my advances,
until I saw that there was a prospect of our remaining on the ground all
night, and then I tore myself away, and requested my friends to remain
quiet until my return.

This they promised to do, and I started on my mission, not a dangerous
one, as I knew full well, for the ruffians did not suspect the presence
of our force, and I felt certain that they had no sentinels posted.

The result justified my expectations, for when I had crawled as
noiselessly as a cat to within a rod of the light, I saw that the
robbers had in some way managed to kindle a fire, which, by the way,
attracted myriads of flies and mosquitoes, and they were biting as only
Australian flies and mosquitoes know how to bite, much to the rage of
the bushrangers, who were cooking meat, and endeavoring to beat off the
cloud of insects by threshing their heavy hands about their heads, and
uttering oaths that were frightfully original and emphatic.

They were coarse-looking fellows, but dressed better than bushrangers
usually were, and I accounted for it by supposing that they had made a
successful plundering expedition, and got new suits from their victims;
and such I afterwards found to be the case.

I endeavored to get a view of the faces of the women, and by changing my
position I succeeded. The youngest one was not more than twenty-five
years of age, but she looked careworn and weary, and seldom removed her
hands from her face, except, to answer a question addressed to her by
her companion, who seemed about forty years of age, and by the
flickering light of the fire I read determination upon every line of her
countenance, weather-beaten and grim as it was.

The bushrangers were broiling their meat upon sticks, and eating it with
a relish that smacked of a long fast; and while the women were seated
near the fire on saddles taken from the horses, which were tied to a
tree, and were browsing upon the tender branches, the men did not offer
them food, until one fellow, whose appetite seemed sated, offered the
younger one his stick, upon which was a huge lump of flesh nearly raw.

She declined the tempting morsel with a shudder, and the action produced
an oath from the ruffian, and an insulting gesture, so vile that I could
hardly keep my hand from seeking the lock of my revolver and shooting
him on the spot.

"O, well, Miss Dainty, you  '  ll come to your appetite one of these days,
see if you don  '  t. Mark what I tell you;" and the other ruffians smiled
at their companion  '  s wit.

"There  '  s blood on the hand that offered her food--her husband  '  s blood.
How do you suppose she can touch what you feel disposed to give?" cried
the elderly woman, who was called Nancy.

"Hullo, old croaker, I thought that you were asleep," the bushranger
said; but still I noticed that he glanced at his hand, and wiped it on
his clothes, as though the stain was burning his flesh like a coal of
fire.

"Come, rouse up," he said, "or you will have no appetite for supper. You
are the soundest sleepers that ever saw, for I made some noise in hopes
of awakening you, but I found that was an impossibility, so I thought I
would try tobacco smoke."

"What o  '  clock is it?" I asked, rubbing my eyes, and trying to think
where I was.

"Near four. Come, get up, and help me entertain the women. They have got
their proper clothes on, and don  '  t look so bad as they might. The young
one still wails for her husband, although I tell her to keep up her
spirits, and think of something else."

"Advice which she is certain not to follow. Did you ever know of a woman
that would be advised under any circumstances? No, I thought not."

"You are always grumbling about the women," I said, addressing Mr.
Brown. "If the truth was known, I suppose that it would show that you