
 They generally eat their food raw, but sometimes they boil it in water heated with hot stones.
When a whaler dies, the body is cut into small pieces and distributed among his felloAVcraftsmen, felloAVcraftsmen, each of whom, after rubbing the point of his lance upon it, dries and preserves his piece as a sort of talisman. 
 Or the body is placed in a distant cave, Avhere, before setting out upon a chase, the whalers all congregate, congregate, take it out, carry it to a stream, immerse it and then drink of the water. 
 During the season, whalers bear a charmed existence. 
 No one may eat out of the same dish with them, nor even approach them. 
 When the season is over, they hide their weapons in the mountains. 
 In May, the Koniagas set out in two-oared baidarkas Wallfisches zuzusehen und versichere, dass nach Verlauf von kaurn 2 Stunden nur die blanken Knochen aus dem Uferlagen. 
  '  Holmberg, Ellin. 
 
 The Kadiaks  ' pass their time in hunting, festivals, and abstinence. 
 The first takes place in the summer; the second begins in the month of December, December, and continues as long as any provisions remain ; and then follows the period of famine, which lasts till the re-appearance of fish in the rivers. 
 During the period last mentioned, many have nothing but shell-fish to subsist subsist on, and some die for want. 
  '  Lisiansky ' s Voy. 

 THE KUSKOKWIGMUTES AND MALEMUTES. 
 for distant islands, in search of sea-otter. 
 As success requires a smooth sea, they can only hunt them during the months of May and June, taking them in the manner manner folloAving.
Fifty or one hundred boats proceed slowly through the Avater, so closely together that it is impossible for an otter to escape betAveen them. 
 As soon as the animal is discovered, the signal is given, the area within which he must necessaril}- rise to the surface for air, is surrounded by a dozen boats, and when he appears upon the surface he is filled with arroAvs. 
 Seals are hunted with spears tenortAvelve feet in length, upon the end of which is fastened an inflated bladder, in order to float the animal when dead. 
 The KuskokAvigmutes are less nomadic than their neighbors ; being housed in permanent settlements during during the winter, although in summer they are obliged to scatter in A ' arious directions in quest of food. 
 Every morning before break of day, during the hunting-season, a boy lights the oil-lamps in all the huts of the village, Avhen the Avomen rise and prepare the food. 
 The men, excepting old men and boys, all sleep in the kashim, Avhither they retire at sunset. 
 In the morning they are aroused by the appearance of the shaman, arrayed in his sacerdotal robes, and beating his sacred drum. 
 After morning AA ' orship, the women carry breakfast to their husbands in the kashim. 
 At day-break the men depart for their hunting or fishing, and when they return, return, immediately repair to the kashim, leaving the AA-omen to unload and take care of the products of the day ' s Avork. 
 During the hunting-season the men visit their Avives only during the night, returning to the kashim before daylight. 
 The Malemutes leave their villages upon the coast regularly in February, and, Avith their families, resort to the mountains, Avhere they folloAV the deer until siioav melts, and then return to catch Avater-foAvl and herring, herring, and gather eggs upon the cliffs and promontories of the coast and islands. 
 In July is their salmon feast. 
 The fawns of reindeer are caught upon the hills by the 78 HYPERBOREANS. 
 women in August, either by chasing them doAA-n or by snaring them. 
 Deer are stalked, noosed in snares, or driven into enclosures, where they are easily killed. 
 At Kadiak, hunting begins in February, and in April they Aisit the smaller islands for sea-otter, seals, sea-lions, and eggs. 
 Their whale and other fisheries commence in June and continue till October, at which time they abandon work and give themselves up to festivities. 
 The seal is highly prized by them for its skin, blubber, and oil. 
 One method of catching seals illustrates their ingenuity. 
 Taking an air-tight sealskin, sealskin, they bloAV it up like a bladder, fasten to it a long line, and, concealing themselves behind the rocks, they throw their imitation seal among the live ones and draw it sloAvly to the shore.

  COLUMBIANS. 
 
 Most of the coast tribes, and all Avho live inland, kill the deer and other animals, particularly since the introduction of firearms, firearms, but it is generally the skin and not the flesh that is sought. 
 Some tribes about the Bentinck channels, at the time of Mackenzie ' s visit, Avould not taste flesh except except from the sea, from superstitious motives. 
 Birds that burrow in the sand-banks are enticed out by the glare of torches, and knocked down in large numbers Avith clubs. 
 They are roasted Avithout plucking or cleaning, the entrails being left in to improve the flavor. 
 Potatoes, and small quantities of carrots and other vegetables, are now cultivated throughout this territory, the crop being repeated until the soil is exhausted, Avhen a neAV place is cleared. 
 Wild parsnips are abundant on the banks of lakes and streams, and their tender tops, roasted, furnish furnish a palatable food; berries and bulbs abound, and the inner tegument of some varieties of the pine and hemlock is dried in cakes and eaten with salmon-oil. 
 The varieties of fish sent by nature to the deep inlets and streams for the Haidah ' s food, are very numerous; their standard reliance for regular supplies being the salmon, salmon, herring, eulachon or candle-fish, round-fish, and halibut. 
 Salmon are speared; dipped up in scoop-nets; entangled in drag-nets managed betAveen tAvo canoes and forced by poles to the bottom ; intercepted in their pursuit pursuit of smaller fish by gill-nets Avith coarse meshes, made of cords of native hemp, stretched across the entrance of the smaller inlets ; and are caught in large Avicker baskets, baskets, placed at openings in Aveirs and embankments Avhich are built across the rivers. 
 The salmon fishery differs little in different parts of the NorthAvest.
Many other varieties of fish, caught by similar methods, are used as food, but those named supply the bulk of the Nootka '  s provision. 
 In May or June, whales appear and are attacked in canoes by the chief, Avith the select feAv from each tribe Avho alone haA^e the right to hunt this monarch of the sea. 
 The head of their harpoon is made of tAvo barbed bones and pointed with muscle-shell; it is fastened to a Avhale-sineAv line of a few feet in length, and this short line to a very long bark rope, at one end of which are seal-skin air-bags and bladders, to keep it afloat. 
 The point is also fastened to a shaft from ten to tAventy-five feet in length, from Avhich it is easily detached. 
 With many of these buoys in toAv the Avhale cannot dive, and becomes an easy prey. 
 Whale-blubber and oil are great delicacies, the former being preferred half putrid, Avhile the oil Avith that of smaller denizens of the sea preserA ' ed in bladders, is esteemed a delicious sauce, and eaten with almost everything. 
 Sea-otters and seals are also speared, the former with a Aveapon more barbed and firmly attached attached to the handle, as they are fierce fighters ; but Avhen found asleep on the rocks, they are shot with arrows. 
 Seals are often attracted within arroAv-shot by natives disguised as seals in AArooden masks. 
 Clams and other shell-fish, Avhich are collected in great numbers by the Avomen, are cooked, strung on cypressbark cypressbark cords, and hung in the houses to dry for Avinter use. 
 Fish are preserved by drying only, the use of salt FOOD OF THE NOOTKAS. 
  being unknown. 
 Salmon, after losing their heads and tails, which are eaten in the fishing season, are split open and the back-bone taken out before drying; smaller fry are sometimes dried as they come from their element; but halibut and cod are cut up and receiA-e a partial dry- ing in the sun. 
 The spaAvn of all fish, but particularly of salmon and herring, is carefully preserved by stowing it away in baskets, Avhere it ferments. 
 Bear, deer, and other land animals, as Avell as wild foAvl, are sometimes taken for food, by means of rude traps, nets, and covers, successful only Avhen game is abundant, for the Nootkas are but indifferent hunters. 
 In the time of Jewitt, three peculiarities Avere observable in the Nootka use of ani- mal food, particularly bear-meat. 
 When a bear was killed, it Avas dressed in a bonnet, decked Avith fine doAvn, and solemnly inAited to eat in the chief ' s presence, be- fore being eaten; after partaking of bruin ' s flesh, which Avas appreciated as a rarity, the Nootka could not taste fresh fish for two months ; and Avhile fish to be palatable must be putrid, meat when tainted Avas no longer fit for food. 
 The Nootka cuisine furnished food in four styles ; namely, boiled — the mode par excellence, applicable to every variety of food, and effected, as by the Haidahs, by hot stones in Avooden vessels; steamed — of rarer use, applied mostly to heads, tails, and fins, by pouring water OA-er them on a bed of hot stones, and coA-ering the Avhole tightly- with mats ; roasted — rarely, in the case of some smaller fish and clams ; and raw — fish-spawn and most other kinds of food, AA-hen conveniences for cooking Avere not at hand. 
 Some varieties of sea-Aveed and lichens, as Avell as the camass, and other roots, Avere regularly laid up for AA-inter, Avhile berries, eA^eryAvhere abundant, Avere eaten in great quantities in their season, and at least one variety preserved by pressing in bunches. 
 In eating, they sit in groups of five or six, Avith their legs doubled under them round a large AArooden tray, and dip out the food nearly ahvays boiled to a brothy consistency, Avith their fingers or clam-shells, paying little or no attention to cleanliness. 


 FISHERIES OF THE CHINOOKS. 
  Avarmer Avaters near the mouth, and are there taken while in their best condition, by the Chinook tribe proper, Avith a straight net of bark or roots, sometimes five hundred hundred feet long and fifteen feet deep, with floats and sinkers. 
 sinkers. 
 One end of the net is carried out into the river at high water, and draAvn in by the natives on the shore, Avho with a mallet quiet the fish and prevent them from jumping over the net and escaping. 
 Farther up, especially at the Cascades and at the falls of the Willamette, Willamette, salmon are speared by natives standing on the rocks or on planks placed for the purpose ; scooped up in small dip-nets ; or taken Avith a large unbaited hook attached attached by a socket and short line to a long pole. 
 There is some account of artificial channels of rocks at these places, but such expedients Avere generally not needed, since, beside those caught by the Chinooks, such numbers were cast on the rocks by their oavii efforts to leap the falls, that the air for months Avas infected by the decaying decaying mass ; and many of these in a palatable state of decay Avere gathered by the natives for food. 
 Hooks, spears, and nets AA ' ere sometimes rubbed with the juice of certain certain plants supposed to be attractive to the fish. 
 Once taken, the salmon Avere cleaned by the women, dried in the sun and smoked in the lodges; then they Avere sometimes poAvdered fine betAveen tAvo stones, before packing packing in skins or mats for winter use. 
 The heads were ahva3rs eaten as favorite portions during the fishing season. 
 season. 
 Next to the salmon the sturgeon Avas ranked as a source of food. 
 This fish, Aveighing from two hundred to five hundred pounds, Avas taken by a baited hook, sunk about twenty feet, and alloAved to float doAvn the current ; Avhen hooked, the sturgeon rises suddenly and is dispatched by a spear, lifted into the canoe by a gaffhook, gaffhook, or towed ashore.
The Chinooks do not attack the Avhale, but Avhen one is accidentally cast upon the shore, more or less decayed, a season of feasting ensues and the native heart is glad. 
 Many smaller varieties of fish are taken by net, spear, hook, or rake, but no methods are employed meriting special description. 
 Wild fowl are  COLUMBIANS. 
 snared or shot; elk and deer are shot with arrows or taken in a carefully covered pit, dug in their favorite haunts. 
 As to the methods of taking rabbits and Avoodrats, Avoodrats, Avhose skins are said to have been so extensively used for clothing, I find no information. 
 Nuts, berries, Avild fruits and roots are all used as food, and to some extent preser\ ' ed for Avinter. 
 The Wapato, a bulbous root, compared by some to the potatoe and turnip, was the aboriginal staple, and Avas gathered by women Avading Avading in shalloAv ponds, and separating the root Avith their toes. 
  Boiling in Avooden kettles by means of hot stones, was the usual manner of cooking, but roasting on sticks stuck in the sand near the fire was also common. 
 Clam-shells and a few rude platters and spoons of Avood Avere in use, but the fingers, with the hair for a napkin, isa  '  In the summer they resort to the principal rivers and the sea coast,. 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 
 All small fish are driven into the small coves or shallow waters,  '  when a number of Indians in canoes continue continue splashing the water; while others sink branches of pine. 
 The fish are then taken easily out with scoops or wicker baskets. 


 FOOD AND ITS PREPARATION. 
 
 Chief among the roots are the camas, a SAveet, onion-like bulb, Avhich grows in moist prairies, the couse, which flourishes in more sterile and rocky spots, and the bitter-root, which names a valley and mountain range. 
 To obtain these roots the natives make regular migrations, as for game or fish. 
 The A ' arieties of roots and berries used for food are very numerous ; and none seem to grOAV in the country Avhich to the native taste are unpalatable or injurious, though many are both to the European. 
  ToAvards obtaining food the men hunt and fish; all the other Avork of digging roots, picking berries, as Avell as dressing, preserving, and cooking all kinds of food is done by the Avomen, with some exceptions among the Nez Perces and Pend d ' Oreilles.
Buffalo-meat is jerked by cutting in thin pieces and drying in the sun and over smouldering fires on scaffolds of poles. 
 Fish is sun-dried on scaffolds, and by some tribes on the loAver Columbia l65 The Kliketats gather and eat peahay, a bitter root boiled into a jelly; n ' poolthla, ground into Hour; mamum and seekywa, made into bitter white cakes; kamass; calz, a kind of wild sunflower. 
 
  '  I never saw any berry in the course of my travels which the Indians scruple to eat, nor have I seen any ill effect from their doing so. 
  '  Kane ' s SVand. 

 The Kootenai food in September  '  appears to be almost entirely berries; namelv the sasketoom of the Crees, a delicious fruit, and a small species of cherry, also a sweet root which they obtain to the southward. 
  '  Blakiston, in Palliser ' s Explor. 

 Flatheads dig konah,  ' bitter root '  in May. 
 It is very nutritious and very bitter. 
 Pahseego, camas, or  '  water seego,  '  is a sweet, bulbous root.
 
 Colvilles cut down pines for their moss ( alectoria ? ). 
 Kanias also eaten. 
 The Shushwaps eat moss and lichens, chiefly the black lichen, or whyelkine. 
 
 The Salish in March aud April eat popkuh, an onion-like bulb; in May, spallam, a root like vermicelli; in June and July, itwha, like roasted chestnuts; in August, wild fruits; in September, marani, a grain.
Domenech ' s Deserts, vol. 

  COLUMBIANS. 
 is also puhrerized betAveen two stones and packed in baskets lined Avith fish-skin. 
 Here, as on the coast, the beads and offal only are eaten during the fishing-season. 
 The Walla Wallas are said usually to eat fish Avithout cooking. 
 Roots, mosses, and such berries as are preserved, preserved, are usually kept in cakes, which for eating are moistened, mixed in various proportions and cooked, or eaten Avithout preparation. 
 To make the cakes simply drying, pulverizing, moistening, and sun-drying usually suffice ; but camas and pine-moss are baked or fermented for several days in an underground kiln by means of hot stones, coining out in the form of a dark gluey paste of the proper consistency for moulding. 
 Many of these poAvdered roots may be preserved for years Avithout injury. 
 injury. 
 Boiling by means of hot stones and roasting on sharp sticks fixed in the ground near the fire, are the universal methods of cooking. 
 No mention is made of peculiar customs in eating ; to eat often and much is the aim; the style of serving is a secondary consideration. 
  Life with all these nations is but a struggle for food, l66 At the Dalles  '  during the fishing season, the Indians live entirely on the heads, hearts and offal of the salmon, which they string on sticks, and roast over a small fire. 
  '  Besides pine-moss, the Okanagans use the seed of the balsam oriza pounded into meal, called mielito. 
  ' To this is added the sifiieurs. 
  '  Berries made into cakes by the Nez Perces. 
 Wilkes '  Nar. 
 , in U.
The principal root is the camas,34 great quantities of which are dried every summer, and stored away for winter provision. 
 Another root, called lice, or kace,35 is much sought after. 
 Of seeds they have the wocus,26 and several several varieties of grass-seeds. 
 Among berries the huckleberry huckleberry and the manzanita berry are the most plentiful. 
 The Avomen do the cooking, root and berry gathering, and all the drudgery. 
 The winter stock of smoked fish hangs in the family room, sending forth an ancient and fish-like smell. 
 Roots and seeds are, among some of the more northerly tribes, stored in large Avicker boxes, built in the loAver branches of strong, wide-spreading trees. 
 The trunk of the tree beloAV the granary is smeared Avith pitch to keep away vermin. 
 The Modocs are sometimes obliged to cache their Avinter hoard under rocks and bushes ; the great number of their enemies and bad character of their ostensibly friendly neighbors, rendering it unsafe for them to store it in their villages. 
 So cunningly do theA '  conceal their treasure that one Avinter, after an unusually unusually heavy fall of snoAv, they themselves could not find it, and numbers starved in consequence. 
 Although the Northern Californians seldom fail to 34  ' The camas is a bulbus root, shaped much like an onion. 
  '  Miller ' s Bife Amongst the Modocs, p. 
  A root about an inch long, and as large as one ' s little finger, of a bitter-sweetish bitter-sweetish and pungent taste, something like ginseng. 
  '  Powers, in Overland Monthly, vol. 
 An aquatic plant, with a floating leaf, very much like that of a pondlily, pondlily, in the centre of which is a pod resembling a poppy-head, full of farinaceous farinaceous seeds. 
  '  Ib.
From this flour a species of coarse bread is made, which is sometimes flavored with various kinds of berries or herbs. 
 This bread is of a black color when cooked, of about the consistency of cheese, and is said, by those who have tasted it, to be not at all unpalatable. 
 The dough is frequently boiled into pudding instead of beingbaked. 
 beingbaked. 
 A sort of mush is made from clover-seed, which is also described as being rather a savory dish. 
 Grasshoppers Grasshoppers constitute another toothsome delicacy. 
 When 89 AA ' ilkes. 
 and the majority of writers, assert that the acorns are sweet and palatable in their natural state; Kostromitonow, however, says:  'The acorn bread  ' looks and tastes like coarse black clay, strongly resembling the soundings in Hampton roads, and being about as savor} '  and digestible. 
  '  Bevere ' s Tour. 
  
 Never having eaten  '  coarse black clay, '  I cannot say how it tastes, but, according to all other authorities, this bread, were it not for the extreme filthiness of those who prepare it, would be by no means disagreeable food. 
 CALIFORNIANS. 
  for winter use, they are dried in the sun ; AA ' hen for present present consumption, they are either mashed into a paste, which is eaten with the fingers, ground into a fine powder powder and mixed Avith mush, or they are saturated Avith salt water, placed in a hole in the ground previously heated, coA ' ered Avith hot stones, and eaten like shrimps when Avell roasted. 
 Dried chrjsalides are considered a bonne bouche, as are all varieties of insects and worms.

 9«  '  They cook the flesh of this animal in holes dug in the ground and curbed up with stone like wells. 
 Over this they build large fires, heat them thoroughly, clean out the coals and ashes, fill them with whale flesh, cover the opening with sticks, leaves, grass and earth, and thus bake their repast. 
  

 PREPARATION OF FOOD. 

 They eat flesh only upon great religious religious festivals, marriages, or other celebrations, but are fond of fish. 
 In olden times they were cannibals, and Antonio Antonio de Herrera, the chief chronicler of the Indies, accused accused also the natives of Chiapas of being eaters of human flesh. 
 Since the conquest the natives have lived mostly on corn and other vegetable productions, cultivated by themselves. 
 A large portion of the Mayas and of the other aborigines of Yucatan are to-day engaged in the cultivation of the soil, they also breed such domestic animals animals as they need for themselves. 
 They are very simple and frugal in their eating. 
 All the natives of this section section of the Mexican republic grind their maize in the same manner ; after first soaking it in lye or in lime and water, it is bruised on the metate, or rubbing-stone, being wet occasionally, until it becomes a soft paste. 
 With this they make their tortillas and other compounds, both to eat and drink. 
 To make tortillas the maize paste is shaped into thin cakes with the palms of the hands and cooked upon a flat clay pan. 
 The totoposte is a smaller cake used for journeys in lieu of the tortillas. 
 The difference difference between them is in the manner of preparation ; the totopostes are cooked one side only and laid near the fire which makes them crisp, and require to be moistened in order to render them eatable. 
 Tamales are a favorite dish and are made of pork, game, or poultry. 
 The meat is cut up in small pieces and washed ; a small quantity of the maize paste seasoned with cinnamon, saffron, cloves, pimento, tomatoes, coarse pepper, salt, red coloring matter, matter, and some lard added to it, is placed on the fire in a pan and as soon as it has acquired the consistency of a thick gruel, it is removed, mixed with the meat, some 43 Zapotecs;  ' Sedan con gran vicio sus sementeras. 
  '  Miztecs, labradores labradores de mayz, y frizol. 

 WILD TRIBES OF MEXICO. 
  more lard and salt added, and the mass kneaded for a fewmoments. 
 fewmoments. 
 It is then divided into small portions; which are enveloped in a thin paste of maize. 
 The tamales thus prepared are covered with a banana-leaf or cornbusk cornbusk and placed in a pot or pan over which large leaves are laid. 
 They are allowed to boil from one hour and a half to two hours. 
 The posole is a nourishing drink made of sour maize paste mixed with water; sometimes they add a little honey to it. 
 They also prepare a drink by parching corn and grinding it to powder on the metate, metate, and mixing it with water and a little ackote. 
 This last drink they prefer to the posole, for long journeys. 
 The natives of Tehuantepec and especially those who reside in the Goazacoalco district are neat and clean in regard to their personal habits. 
 They observe the custom of bathing daily. 
 In their ablutions they make use of a plant called chintule the root of which they mix with water, thereby imparting to their bodies a strong aromatic aromatic odor. 
 The same plant is used when they wash their clothes, the scent from which remains on them for some time. 
 A pleasing feature in the appearance of these people is the spotless whiteness of their cotton dresses and the care they bestow on their luxuriant hair. 
 The other tribes who inhabit this isthmus as well as those of Chiapas are not so clean in their persons, and as a consequence are much infested with vermin which the women have a disgusting habit of eating when picked from the heads of their children. 
 The Mayas make frequent frequent use of cold water, but this practice appears to be more for pleasure than for cleansing purposes, as neither in their persons nor in their dwellings do they present an appearance of cleanliness. 
 14 Tabasco:  '  Comen a sus horas coneertadas, carnes de vaca, puerco, y anes, y beue vna beuida muy sana, heeha de cacao, mayz, y especia de la tierra, la qual llaman Zocolate.
 
 Tortillas,  '  When they are baked brown, they are called totoposti, and taste like parched corn. 
  '  Shufeldfs Explor. 

In a few moments one of them starts up and begins a panegyric on the fallen brave, which is followed by a mimic sacrifice and other ceremonies. 
 The vanquished are now seen to approach with downcast eyes, bringing tribute, which they lay at the feet of the victors, who receive it with imperious bearing. 
 The music at these entertainments is not of a very inspiring nature ; drums, consisting of a section of hollow tree covered with skin, which are generally generally beaten with the hand, and flutes of bamboo with four stops on which eight notes are played with different degrees of speed for variety, being the usual instruments. 
 The Guajiqueros also use the chirimaya, two flutes joined in one mouthpiece; the syrinx, or Pan ' s pipe; a longcalabash longcalabash with a narrow opening at the small end, into which the performer blows suddenly, at intervals, to mark time; and a sort of drum consisting of a large earthen jar, over the mouth of which a dressed skin is tightly stretched. 
 To the centre of the skin, and passingthrough passingthrough an opening in the bottom, is attached a string which the performer pulls, the rebound of the membrane producing a very lugubrious sound. 
 In western Honduras Honduras the so-called strum-strum is much used. 
 This is a large gourd cut in the middle, and covered with a thin board having strings attached. 
 The marimba, and the jews-harp which has been introduced by the trader, are, however, the favorite instruments for a quiet reunion, and the few tunes known to them are played thereon with admirable skill and taste. 
 Songs always accompany their dances and are usually impromptu compositions on suitable suitable subjects, gotten up for the occasion by the favorite singers of the village, and rendered in a soft, but monotonous monotonous and plaintive tone. 
 They have no national melodies, melodies, but on the receipt of any good or bad message, their feelings generally find vent in a ditty embodying the news. 
 Talking is a passion with them, and as soon as a piece of news is received at a village, two or three younger men will start with their women and children '  for the BEVERAGES OF HONDURAS. 
  next hamlet, where it is discussed for hours by the assembled assembled population, who in their turn dispatch a messenger messenger to the next village, and thus spread the news over the whole country in a very short time. 
 In story-telling, story-telling, those who concoct the biggest lies receive the most applause. 
 Of course, the pipe must be smoked on these occasions, but as their own tobacco has become too mild for them, recourse is had to the vilest description of American leaf. 
 When this is wanting, the smoke-dried leaves of the trumpet and papah tree is used by men as well as women. 
 The favorite drink is mishla. 
 prepared chiefly from cassava-roots ; but others from bananas, pineapples, pineapples, and other fruits are also used. 
 A number of young women provided with good teeth, untiring jaws, and a large supply of saliva, are employed to chew about half of the boiled and peeled roots requisite to make a canoeful of liquor, the remainder being crushed in a mortar. 
 This delectable compound is stirred with cold water, and allowed to ferment for a day or two, when it assumes a creamy appearance, and tastes very strong and sour. 
 Plantains are kneaded in warm water, and then allowed to stand for a few days till the mixture ferments, or the fruit is left in the water in small pieces, and the kneading performed in the cup previous to drinking.
The building contained various apartments — -chambers, pantry, and wine-cellar. 
 In one very large apartment were sacredly kept the remains of the kind ' s ancestors arranged round the walls. 
 The Costa Ricans live chiefly by hunting and fishing, and many of them cultivate maize, beans, and bananas; the Talamancas, especially, are agriculturists. 
 According According to Father Zepeda, and others who penetrated some distance into the country of the Guatusos, they had large fields under cultivation. 
 Salt is seldom used by any of these tribes, and none of them ever eat dogs, as they keep them for hunting purposes. 
 Their chief game is wild hogs and deer, but they are not very particular as to their animal diet, for they eat whatever they can catch, including reptiles. 
 Their mode of cooking fish renders them exceedingly palatable, which is by roasting roasting them wrapped in plantain-leaves. 
 Bananas are usually pulled when green, and buried in sand to ripen. 
 Many of the other Isthmians are agriculturists, and 55 Of Comagre ' s palace it is said,  '  Longitudinem dimensi passuum centum centum quinquaginta, latitudinem uero pedum octoginta, in nacuo dinumerarunt: dinumerarunt: laquearibus et pauimentis arte exirnia laboratis. 
 
FOOD OF THE ISTHMIANS. 

 A staple article of food among the coast tribes is turtle, of which they capture large numbers. 
 Monkeys afford them a favorite meal, and they are especially fond of iguanas, young alligators, and their eggs. 
 From the yucca as well as corn they make a good quality of bread. 
 The Doraches and Guaimies of Vera&lt;ma subsist mainlv on wild roots and a fruit called pixbaex, somewhat resembling resembling dates, which toasted, makes an agreeable and wholesome food. 
 Most of their dishes are highly seasoned seasoned with piniiento, a kind of pepper produced by a small shrub which is very abundant on Tierra Firme. 
 The toocan bird lives chiefly on the berry, which it discharges discharges from the stomach almost immediately after swallowing swallowing it ; the natives prefer it thus, as its bitterness is partly absorbed by the bird. 
 It is said that the Caribs Caribs ate human flesh whenever they had an opportunity. 
 Herrera says that some of the Isthmians purchased slaves, whom they sold to the Caribs for food, and the inhabitants of Paria supplied boys to the natives of Tubraba Tubraba for the same purpose. 
 They cooked the flesh of their enemies, and ate it seasoned with salt and aji (chile). 
 When a piece of ground is to be planted, a number of the villagers collect and cut down the brushwood brushwood on a selected spot ; the seed is then scattered among the wood as it lies. 
 In due time the grain, which is well sheltered from the sun by the branches, springs up and overtops them, and when fit for harvesting the ears are gathered. 
 After this, the underwood and cornstalks cornstalks are set on fire, and the ground continues to be 57  '  Hanno la maggior parte di questa costiera per costume di mangiar carne humana e quando mangiauano de gli Spagnuoli, v ' erano di coloro che ricusauano di cibarsene, temendo ancora che nel lor corpo, non gli facessero quelle carni qualehe danno. 


